THE HISTORY Of the Wicked PLOTS and CONSPIRACIES OF Our Pretended Saints:
REPRESENTING The Beginning, Constitution, and Designs of the JESUIT. WITH THE
Conspiracies, Rebellions, Schisms, Hypocrisy, Perjury, Sacrilege, Seditions,
and Vilefying humor OF SOME PRESBYTERIANS: PROVED By a Series of Authentic
Examples, as they have been Acted IN GREAT BRITAIN, From the beginning of that
Faction to this Time.

By HENRY FOULIS, Mr. of Arts, and Fellow of Lincoln-Colledge in Oxford.

Quid verba audiam, cum Facta videam? LONDON: Printed by E. Cotes, for A. Seile
over against St. Dunstans-Church in Fleetstreet. M. DC. LXII.

To his Loving Brother Sr. DAVID FOULIS BARONET; Of Ingleby-Mannor in
Cleaveland, in the North Riding of Yorkshire: And his Virtuous Consort, the
LADY Catharine Foulis.
Dear BROTHER, and MADAM,
IF it had not been the Custom, to eeke out every Pamphlet, with some
Dedicatory Paper; I should have done, as some people do with their Brats, let
them lie to the Patronage of any, that would take them up. For I could never
yet understand, the Advantage of the Common Cry, viz the craving and desiring
Protection: since a Good Book is its own Patronage; and no man will have a
better Opinion of the Bad, for a few Epistolary lines to a Third person;
Especially of late Times, when I have known some Presbyterians dedicate
Wickedness it self to God Almighty, Treason to the King, Sacrilege and Schism
to Bishops, and the worst of Villainies to Good Men.

Though I love good Company, yet me thinks there is no Perfect Enjoyment, with
those, whose Greatness is rather an Awe than Society to the rest; where Flatery
is an Obligation, though the Object merit nothing but Pity or Scorn.

But here the Case is altered, the Neerness of Relation, Familiarity and
Acquaintance, making all Commendations, Ridiculous; and Complements, Odious.
Which is the Reason, that, at This Time, your Names are here Prefixed, by

Linc. Coll. Oxford, 23. April, 1662. Your ever loving Brother, Hen. Foulis.

The PREFACE.
READER,
NOt to trouble thee with a long and tedious Courtship and Complement
(according to the common practice) nothing to the purpose: I shall only tell
thee two or three things relating to the following Papers.

Some three years ago, viz. 1659. through the dissension and obstinacy of two
wicked Parties, the Rump and Army, the Nation was almost ruined; sometimes
this, and some times that, and other times God knows what, being chief Lords of
mis-Rule: Insomuch, that in one Fortnight, viz. in October, we laid under the
lash of three several Authorities; every Party pretending nothing but Zeal, the
Good of the People, and the Power of Godliness, yet designed to destroy all
before them. And having formerly got the Revenues of the King, Church, Loyal
Nobility and Gentry; began to gape after the Lands of the Universities: This
one action being able to pleasure them in two respects, The fingering of some
Riches, [though King Henry VIII. said, they were too small to wipe out the
reproach]; And the overthrow of Learning.

To this purpose, Sir Henry Vane, and others, employed several Pulpiteers and
Penmen, to thunder out the Vanity of Humain Learning. And at the same time, as
well as before, Baxter and other Presbyterians, made it their business to throw
what Aspersions they could, upon the Episcopal Party: all which were presently
confuted, by the Learned and Loyal Champions of the King and Church, the famous
Dr. Hammond, Dr Heylin, and Mr. Pierce.

Yet the Brethren began to associate themselves into Bands, getting what Gentry
and others they could to join with them, vilifying and abusing the Reverend
Church, whilst the other Phanaticks persecuted them with their hellish
Authority.

The Nation being thus entised to prejudice by the multitude of Pamphlets,
which daily multiplied and flew about the Cities and Country, the Poet came
into my head:

Semper ego auditor tantum, nunquamne reponam? Juven. Sat. 1.

Since all the World is madd why should not I? So, getting some Ink and Paper,
to it I go; and the better to put the People into their right wits again,
presently drew up above thirty sheets by way of History, whereby they might see
the Villainies, Perjury, Tyranny, Hypocrisy, etc. of the Presbyterian as well
as the other Sectaries, [as it is in the first two Books, only some small
things added since the happy Restoration of his Majesty]. And this Collection
(with some other things in Vindication of the Universities, Humain Learning,
the Church, etc.) I had finished before the end of the Committee of Safeties
Dominion, as I showed to several Friends in the University.

In the mean time up comes the Worthy General Monk, and Re-inthrones the
Secluded Members; which made me throw by any farther thoughts of my Papers,
perceiving the Nation resolved for Kingship, and the Government being then
again turned Presbytery; A small vexing those Gentlemen, might have been a
prejudice to his Majesty, and a punishment to my self, not forgetting their
Imprisonment of Dr. Griffith.

And for ever might they have laid unregarded and in Oblivion, had not the
wickedness of the Covenanters, even since the Kings coming in, clamoured them
into my Remembrance, by their perpetual railing against the Bishops; Preaching,
Prating, and Pamphleting up Sedition and Faction, and by endeavoring to make
the People believe them to be the only Saints, and men of Honesty: which made
me think it not amiss, to publish these following sheets, somewhat to undeceive
the Ignorant, the better to keep them from joining with these Sectaries, and to
show them what small reason they have to cry Persecution, and Trumpet out their
own Commendations.

You may perceive, by the brevity of some Chapters, that I did not intend to
make a large History of these men's Rogueries, but only a short Essay for the
Peoples satisfaction; for, had I otherwise resolved, I had Materials enough to
raise up a far greater Fabric. I have been exact in Timing the Actions; and
in the Quotations, not being ashamed, as some of late, to tell from what
Storehouses, I fetched the Matter: For some things I name two or three
Authors, or more; thereby endeavoring to do the Reader a Courtesy, who
through this variety, may probably have one of the Books, where he may see the
passage it self, which is not to be laid to mine account as long as I name mine
Author. The Third Book I added (whilst the other two were Printing), in some
snaps and pieces of Time, which now and then I could borrow from my beloved
Idleness.

As for the Style, you must do with it as Men do with their Wives, take it as
you find it, for better or for worse: yet will the Brethren censure me beyond
Redemption, call me a Bolsec, a Gretser, a Feu-ardentius, and what not? Look
upon me as a Shimei, a Rabshakeh, a Thersites, and such like; and all this,
because I speak truth, giving things their proper Titles, not dwindling the
wickedness of Rebellion, Perjury, Murder, etc. under the notion of Gods Cause,
the Covenant, and Justice: and in this an honest Poet, with a favorable
Translation, will defend me; Inven sat. 1.


Difficile est Satyram non scribere; nam quis iniquae
Tam patiens Urbis, tam ferreus, ut teneat se?
We must be angry; Who can choose but frown,
When Traitors thrive by a Rebellious Town?
If my fault be only speaking tartly, the then Dr. Reynolds, will assure this
to be no such crime, by telling them, that there is sometimes a His Epist.
Pref. to Mr. Barlee's Corrept. Correct.
Necessity of sharp Rebukes: and Mr. Hickman in this, will stiffly plead mine
Innocence, when he tells the World, in these words, that -- c If at any time, I
seem to depart from that meekness of spirit which is required in a Minister, b
Justif. of Fathers in Epist. Dedicat.
I shall desire that it may be considered, not only what is fit for me to
speak, but what is meet for them to hear. If I were to mention their fact, who
took the Relics of Peter Martyr' s Wife's carkase out of the Grave, and after
buried them in a Dunghill, would you not allow me to call it Unchristian, and
Inhumane? etc. And in another place, either himself, or his Friends, have
bestirred themselves notably to plead the necessity and justness of my
keenness, by declaring to all people, that -- Th. Chapter Review of the Certam.
Epist. in Epist. Dedicat.
If any where I have used more sharpness then is pleasing to men, -- I shall
only say, that their hard grateing has sharpened my style, and made it more
keen and piercing, than I could have allowed my self to use toward a
good-natured Adversary. It Is almost morally impossible for him who contends
with a fiery and furious Antagonist, sometimes not to be a little overheated.

But yet I am very willing to lie under the lash of their severest Titles,
provided, they will be so Ingenious, as to distribute Justice with an equal
hand. If they look upon me as an hotheaded Rayler, for calling them Rebels and
Traitors (and what can be more true?) I wonder how they can quit John Calvin
from the same Epithet, who called those who could not agree to his will,
Profane, Impudent, Brasen-faced, Impostours, See H. Grotii Votum pro Pace. p.
17, 18. And Mr. Pierce' s New Discoverer. p. 258.
Fools, wicked Forgeries, Perfidious, Uncharitable, Peevish, Hangman, Plague,
void of Grace, Knaves, Serpents, Devils, Filthy Dog, etc.

If they censure me as-an impudent and saucy Fellow, for calling them
Hypocrites, I hope, they will give the same Title to John Knox, the Father of
the Scotch Presbytery, and a great assistant to these in England. This man had
so got the knack of villifying, that his Tongue could be no Slander. Passing by
those of Inferior Rank, take some of his Complements to Queen Mary, calling her
several times a Apellar. Edit. 1644. p. 31, 61, 67.
wicked Woman, tells her, that Admon. p. 59.
she was not sober, merciful, but cruel and wicked, Page 6.
Mischievous, false, dissembling, unconstant, proud and a Breaker of Promises,
an open Traitoress to the Imperial Crown of England. Nor is this all, but he
calls her Reign, Appel. p. 31.
The Monstriferous Empire of a wicked Woman, the yoke of the Devil, Adm. p. 60.
her most Tyrannical Iniquity, Page 67.
that most unhappy and wicked Woman's Authority, that reigns in Gods wrath,
Page 61.
an usurped Government, etc. and calls his own Queen- Regents actions, Page 91.
Idolatry, Avarice, and Cruelty.

If they think me malepert for calling them Schismatics, they cannot
handsomely quit Marshal, Calamy, Young, Newcomen, and Spurstow, of the same
guilt, for terming the Reverend Bishop Hall, Smectymnuus, Edit. 1641. page 2.
false and confident, Page 15.
self-confounding-man, and of a confident boldness, and that his Book is full
of falsities and contradictions: For ranting against Episcopacy as an Iron and
Insupportable yoke, unjust Opposition, Page 18.
uttering words bordering upon Blasphemy. Page 30.
A Stirrup for Antichrist to get into the Saddle, Page 53. g. 2.
Corrupt Prelates, that they Page 67.
discountenance, discourage, oppose, blaspheme Preaching, that they are Page
68, 69.
Rotten Members, Sons of Belial. And then thunders out strange things of their
Page 67.
Intolerable Oppressions, and Tyrannies, Page 68.
Drunkennsss, Profaness, Superstition, Popishness of the English Clergy; and
then talks of their Page 71.
Cruelty, Page 72.
Tyranny, Page 74.
scandalous Sins, hateful Enormities; and that the Bishops do Page 80.
increase Popery, Superstition, and Profaneness. And to make their malice
complete, would gladly bear the people in hand, that it has been the Page 93,
94.
Bishops great design, to hinder all farther Reformation, to bring in Popery,
and Libertinism, to keep out and beat down the Preaching of the Word, to
silence the faithful Preachers, to oppose and persecute the most zealous
Professors, and to turn all Religion into a pompeous outside, and to tread down
the Power of Godliness.

If they think me uncivil for hinting at their Perjury, they cannot but be as
angry with their Brethren in Scotland, the Committee of Estates for calling
that Famous, Loyal, and Religious Marquess of Montross, several times Extract.
of their Declar. 1649. against Montross, printed at London by Matt. Simmons, p.
7.
Excommunicate Traitor, Viperous brood of Satan, Page 12.
declared Traitor, whom the Church has delivered into the hands of the Devil,
and the Nation does generally detest and abhor, Impudent braggard, Page 8.
liar and malicious man, perfidious Traitor, a Child of the Devil, Dissembling
Hypocrite, of a mean and desperate Fortune, Page 10.
vain man, Page 11.
miserable miscreant, malicious man; and accuses him of wickedness, Page 9.
base treacherous practices, Rebellion and Treason; and then fairly concludes
that he is a Page 12.
person justly excluded from civil Society for his Treasonable Practices, and
Excommunicated from the Church for his abominable Transgressions. And this way
of Presbyterian slandring is bravely imitated by their good Kirk, who call the
same noble General, Page 14.
That Excommunicated and forfeited Traitor, That wretched man, Page 16.
that Monster of men Page 17.
that excommunicate wretch, Page 19.
unnatural Man, Page 18.
that perfidious and proud Atheist; and then also concludes their Charity, that
he is Page 17.
delivered into the hands of the Devil.

If they have a bad opinion of me, for giving them now and then, some names,
which they think are attributed by way of Reproach, they can have no better
thoughts of Mr. Hickman, for scornfully calling, the learned Dr. Pierce a
Justif. of Fathers. Edit. 2. Epist. Dedicat.
wanton wit, Page 5. 73.
uncharitable, one that Page 4.
tumbles out his ugly Tropes, and rowls himself in his railing Eloquence, a
Page 68.
deplorable Dilemmatist, a Page 102.
doughty Disputant; accuses him of Page 13.
Malice, Page 14.
Railing, Page 45.
Impudence and Page 73.
Nonsense. That his Book is full of Epist. Dedic.
bitter girds and scurrilous gibes, and that himself Laud. Apost. Pref.
foams out of his own shame, and waxes worse and worse. The same party calls
Mr Hobs a Justif. p. 8.
Prodigious Writer, and Id. p. 7.
Commune Dei hominum que Odium. And terms the learned and ingenious Author of
Tilenus Junior, an Page 21.
Ethiopian scribler, poor fellow, and accuses him of Impudence. Nor is this
all: but throws his venom upon the late Supporter of Learning, the Reverend
Archbishop Laud, by affirming that the Preface.
flourishing of him was the decaying and languishing of Church and State. Nor
could either body well recover, but by spewing out such evil instruments as he
and Buckingham. So that it seems, in his opinion, there was a necessity of
murdering them both.

The same Gentleman can also tell you, who sufficiently abused and T. C.
Reveiw. p. 3. 27, 23, 113, 122, 123, 155, 162, 171, 173.
vilified the Learned Dr. Heylin and Mr. Pierce, and, at last, threw his malice
to the purpose upon the poor sequestrated Episcopal Divines, telling the World
that a greater part of them were Page 153.
unsavory salt, fit only to be cast upon the Dunghill. And, if reports be true,
he can also tell you who not long since called the Bishops R. A. Letter to a
Friend against Reordination. p. 10.
Schismatics, and threw great Page 55.
reproaches upon that party.

I could also tell you, how Mr. White, once a great Brother in Authority,
scandalized those who Centurie Epist. to the Reader. A. 3.
adhered to the King in the late Wars. And what wicked Epithets, another
Brother threw upon the Sea Mr. Ed. Fisher's Christian Caveat. p. 12. Edit. 4.
Book of Common Prayer, and several others, as Prynne, Vicars, Leyton, and
others mentioned in this Book: But that it would be too tedious both for my
self and Reader.

Should I tell you of the abominable railing, scolding and brawling of See Mr.
Pierce's Divine Philanth. defended.
Barlee, See Mr. Pierce's New Discoverer. p. 204, 226. Mr. R. L'estrange's
Whip. Edit. 2. p. 3. 56.
Bagshaw, and See Mr. Pierce's New Discovery. p. 50, 53, 55, 90, 142, 166, 210,
217, 242.
Baxter, (three noted B's), you would bless your self, to see these people, who
pretend to all Sanctity and Holiness, to have so much of the Devil in their
mouths.

Thus have I stopped their rage against me, by making them more angry: And, if
this do not satisfy them, I shall treble it the next time; yet might all this
have been spared, if they would as patiently permit others to tell them the
Truth, as they will impatiently throw Lies and Scandals upon their betters. But
these People do not love to be touched on their sores, though it be to cure
them. They say, it is one way to find a Thief, to note who blusheth at the
discourse of stealing; but these men are far from that sign of Grace.

Tell them but of the sins belonging to their Religion, as Treason, Schism,
Perjury, etc. they will presently fly in your face, though take no great notice
of other Peccadiglio's; like Facet. Bebel. page 178.
the Baker in the Play, who took all names and reproaches without any offense:
but, being once by chance called Mealstealer, was so enraged, that he would
have spoiled all their sport, unless they had left off such close Reflections.
And thus much in part, to pay them home with their own Coin.

As for the Author, whilst a Schoolboy, he was too much swayed to Presbytery,
and delighting in the Stories of our Times, had none to peruse, but May,
Vicars, Ricraft, and such like partial Relators: By which means, believing with
the Ignorant, all things in Print to be true, was persuaded to incline to the
wrong side.

But, a little before his going to the University, lighting by chance upon Dr.
Bate's Judicious Book Elenchus Motuum, he found the Laws and true Government to
be opposite to his former Readings, and therein the knavery and juggling of
their Opposers, strange things which he had never heard of before. Which, with
some other assistance, so far prevailed with him, that in a short time he
threw off Father Schism, and ever since, like little Loyal John in the Epitaph,
For the King, Church, and Bloud-Royal,
He went as true as any Sun-Dial.


As for the Learned in History, neither Preface nor Book was intended for them;
And as for those who are not somewhat studied this way, though they are not
able of themselves to search out the Truth, yet are they not obliged to believe
all in Print. If they find something in these Papers not agreeable to the
Canting Tales of every zealous Brother, let them not censure mine as false,
because the other pretends himself to be a Saint: These People, though they
make a great deal of noise, being commonly the most ignorant and partial in
Humane Story.

To say no more: If we believe every thing in Mr. Sam. Clarke's Story-Books, we
shall with him, make wicked men, Saints; Rebels, good Subjects; and
Schismatics, the best Churchmen; which, all should desire to be really
performed, who wish the Honor of his Majesty, Peace of the Church, Prosperity
and Happiness of the Nation.

St. George's day. 1662.
The Contents of the Chapters,
BOOK. I.
CHAP. I. Nothing so wicked, but some will undertake, and vindicate. Page 1.
CHAP. II. The Life of Ignatius Loyola, the first founder of the Jesuits. Page
6. CHAP. III. Some Observations of the Jesuits Political Constitution, Temper,
and Actions; especially relating to our late Troubles. Page 10. CHAP. IV. The
helps and assistance, which the Calvinist, Presbyterian, and Jesuit afford one
another, for the ruin and alteration of Kingdoms; with their Plots to destroy
the Government and Tranquillity of England. Page 15. CHAP. V. The Original of
the Commons in Parliament. That the Clergy is one of the three Estates, and the
King supreme above all. Page 30. CHAP. VI. The Privileges of Parliament, and
that in some Cases they are null and void. Page 38. CHAP. VII. The beginning of
the Presbyterians, with the wicked Principles of the Ringleaders of that
factious Sect. Page 42. CHAP. VIII. The Rebellious Actions of the Presbyterians
in Scotland, till the death of King James. Page 45. CHAP. IX. The illegal,
malepert and impious plots and designs of our Schismatical Presbyterians in
England, in the Raigns of Q. Elizabeth, King James, and K. Charles, till the
beginning of the Wicked Long Parliament. Page 59.
BOOK. II.
CHAP. I. THe mischievous and impudent contrivances and innovations of the
wicked Long Parliament. 1. Their false slanders thrown upon the Court and
Church. 2. Their affection to, and siding with, the chief of the Schismatical
Incendiaries. 3. The impudence and seditiousnesse of the Lecturers, thrust
amongst the simple people by the power and cunning of the Parliament. 4. Their
designs to alter the frame of the Civil Government. 5. Their plots to overthrow
Episcopacy, Divine service, and the Orthodox Clergy. 6. Their stirring up the
people to Tumults, whereby they frighted the King and Queen from London. 7. The
small esteem, which the Commons had of the King and Nobility, whereby it is
plain that it was not the King, but the Parliament which occasioned and began
the Wars. Page 73. CHAP. II. The Abominable Hypocrisy and juggling of the
Parliament, and Army, till the horrid murder of his Majesty. Page 106. CHAP.
III. The inconstancy, villainy, and monstrous Tyranny of the wicked Army, till
the happy Restoration of the King. Page 119. CHAP. IV. The grand perjury of
the Parliament and Army. Page 130. CHAP. V. The wicked Sacrilege of the
Parliament and Army. Page 133. CHAP. VI. That some, through ignorance and
acredulous disposition (prompting them to embrace their specious pretenses)
might be charmed to side with the Parliament, though really designed no damage
either to the Kings person or Authority. Page 141.
BOOK. III.
THat the Presbyterians were not willingly and actively instrumental for the
uncapitulated Restoration of his Majesty. Page 149 CHAP. II. The wickedness
of our Presbyterians in throwing Aspersions upon his Majesty, and instigating
the People to Rebellion, by assuring them in the Lawfulness of Subjects
fighting against their Kings. Page 171. CHAP. III. The small, or rather, no
Authority that the Presbyterians allow the King to have over them. Page 197.
CHAP. IV. THat the Presbyterians are but Conditional Subjects; no longer
obedient to their King, or acknowledging Him, then he serves their turns, and
is subservient to their fancies. Page 207. CHAP. V. I. The wicked Reproaches
the Presbyterians cast upon the present Episcopal Church. 2. What small reason
they have to desire Toleration from the King and Episcopal Party, since they
deny the same to them: with their scandals upon the Church as Popish, which are
wiped off. 3. Their slanders upon the late King; and his Vindication from his
own Enemies. 4. Their endeavors to beggar the Episcopal Church. 5. Their
stories of Gods judgments retorted. Page 218. CHAP. VI. Some short Observations
upon their Covenant. 235.
THE HISTORY Of the Wicked PLOTS and CONSPIRACIES OF OUR Pretended Saints.
CHAP. I.
Nothing so Wicked, but some will Undertake and Vindicate.

ALl things at first were sweetened with Goodness; Peace being cherished,
because the Contrary as then was not apprehended. For, Ovid. Met. 1.


-- Vindice nullo,
Sponte sua sine Lege fidem rectumque colebat,
Paena metusque aberant --
Nor fear, revenge, nor punishment were then:
Without all Laws, even all were honest men.
But after, when this Golden Age with Astraea had withdrawn it self from this
corruptible Earth, then Deceit by the Devils Trapanning, seized so much upon
the temper of humanity, that self-ended Interest began to take root; The
benefit of which, joined with the sweetness of Revenge, so entangled the
disposition of mankind in the Art of Knavery, that his time was judged to be
best spent, who got most cunning to defraud his Neighbor.

This Selvish Policy, though acted by every one according to his abilities in
some sense or other; yet its chiefest Theater is amongst those, who (scorning
to dwindle away their days in Petit hazards) lay nothing at stake, but whole
Kingdoms, or their own ruins: The greater their venture, the more their glory,
if they come off with gain or safety. And that they may with more boldness and
celerity attempt any thing conducible to their designs, they ease themselves of
the two supposed grand burdens, Religion and Conscience; lest these should
pinion or shackle them, within the circle of honest employments.

These men, like Cambyses, never look upon Churches, but with inward Herodot.
lib. 3.
scorn and laughter, though with an outward show, tending most to the advantage
of Sanctity; as if by the ruin, reviling, and hypocritical abusing of that
place, where God said, he would be worshipped, were the readiest way to do him
most service. And though they have the Impudence to act Sacrilege to the full;
yet they speak themselves most happy, because Satan infuseth into them so much
roguery, as to deceive the people, by coloring over their wickedness by some
canting excuse or other, not wanting a sting of holiness in its tail. Thus
Julian, that politic Apostate, having robbed the Church of her Treasury,
varnished over his Sacrilege with this profane Sarcasm. That he did it, that
Christians might go Se, Christianos expeditiores facere ad Regnum Coelorum:
quia Galilaeus Magister ipsorum dixerit; Beatos esse pauperes, quoniam talium
est Regnum Coelorum, Pezel. Mel. Hist. Part. 2. page 273.
the sooner to Heaven, because Christ said, Blessed are the Poor, for of such
is the Kingdom of Heaven. And after this manner did Dionysius of Sicily, when
he took away a Golden Cloak from Jupiter, saying, That Cloth was warmer for
Winter, and lighter for Aestate grave amiculum Aureum esse, Hyeme frigidum;
Laneum autem ad utrumque tempus Anni aptius. Val. Max. cap. 1. Sect. 23.
Summer: And so having cut off Aesculapius his Golden Beard, excused it, by
affirming, That it was not fit for him to have a long Beard, since his Father
Apollo Non convenire, Patrem Apollinem imberbem, ipsum barbatum conspici. Val.
Max. 16.
had none. And with reasons of no more validity, did our late Statesmen
vindicate their Actions, either throwing false aspersions in the faces of them
who opposed their destructive Principles, or being bolstered up by Faction,
used no Law nor Arguments but their own pleasure. For their pretensions could
have nothing of truth in them. For alas! it was not the bare walls of Churches,
or Collegdes, which lay, as a stumbling block, in their way: There being
somewhat else as a mark against which their Army was intended; Brennus had not
gone against the Temple of Delphos; nor Alexander's Justin. l. 24. Lactant.
divinar. Institut. l. 2. c. 8.
Soldiers violated that of Ceres in Milesia, had there not been something of
more import then the outside. Lactant. 16.
Pyrrhus and Val. Max. 6. 1. sect. 21.
Pleminius possibly had a reverence toward Temples; but made it palpable, that
they had more respect for their Riches, when for the one, they sacrilegiously
abused the other; as appears by that of Proserpina.

Nor need the chief Ingeneers trouble themselves both to act and vindicate,
since they may entertain many Journey-men, who for a moderate content
(naturally delighting in troubled waters) are ready to sell their Consciences
to the compliance of any thing; and so far inslave themselves to raise another
Interest, that they will order and change their Pens and Styles, according as
Dame Fortune, whirls about the wheel of Government to the advantage of an
usurped Authority: so that the vicissitudes of these peoples fancies (as if St.
Vitus his dance, or the rambling Tarantula had taken possession of their
Brains) do outstrip Proteus, Polypus, or the more knavish Camelion, who can
partake of all colors but those of Innocence. These State-hirelings are the
first which shake the Foundation of Prosperity. By their scurrilous Pens,
spreading Infection into the Vulgar; which at last, will rise up into such
boyls of Confusion, that no cure can give ease to the distracted Nation, but
Phlebotomy.

And what mischief these Scriblers (who merit a Roasting out of this world, as
a French Statesman determines,) have caused in England, is L'homine d'estat.
peg. 8.
too obvious to be here related; But, though I shall not at this time trouble
my self with their names, no question but that they know themselves by a more
natural Instinct, then Sir John Falstaff knew the Prince on Gads-hill, in
Shakespeer: nor can others be ignorant of them, who know any thing of domestic
Transactions, and the powerfulness of Spankers amongst such wretches, who will
maintain any Cause or Religion, so they grease their fists by it; their actions
affirming that the most Orthodox, from which they suck most worldly
nourishment. For many of them being but the By-casts of Fortune, and destitute
of such preferment and conveniences as others have, freely lay themselves open
to the silver bait, thereby to mend the condition of their livelihood, and
triumph over need and necessity.

And this greediness is the cause why the late Ranters, winked at all
wickedness and pocketted up all shame; not unlike Galba, who counterfeited
Erasm. Adag. Non omnibus dormio. Lud. Cael. Rodogin. Lect. Antiq. lib. 12. c.
16. Infoelix! an nesciebas me soli Mccaenati dormire?
himself asleep, that Mecaenas might with more facility give him the horns, and
himself gain by her prostration; yet, when a Servant endeavored to steal but a
little Wine, cried out, O wretch! Do thou not know, that I sleep only to
pleasure Mecaenas? And thus Capius used to fancy himself into a seeming
slumber, whilst other men actually voted him into the Society of Fumblers
Hall; thus by their silence yielding consent to their own ignominy.

But as some men only tacitly allow of wickedness for their own security; so
others are framed of such combustible humors, that they will not only assert
any action, though never so heinous, and blaze it to the world as good and
just: but also, to set their wickedness into the Saddle of Superiority, will
kindle the World into a flame. John Petie (though otherwise famous for his
learning) suborned by the Duke Sir H. Wotton's State of Christ. p. 241.
of Burgondy, publicly commended and allowed the said Dukes murdering the
Duke of Orleance. The Duke of Buckingham and Dr. Shaw, in set speeches,
justified the usurpation and actions of Richard the third. Stow. p. 453, 454.
Mariana asserted the murdering of Haeretical Kings (though his Book was burnt
for it by order of the Sorbonists at Paris, 1610.) Anthony Gilby, and a great
Presbyterian Divine (if reports be true) under the title of Steven Junius
Brutus, (with many others of his complexion of late days) have maintained the
lawfulness of Rebellion against their faithful Monarchs. Baxter can defend the
late long Treason, and glory himself in fighting against his King, yet bemoan
the fall of an usurping Richard. And the unparalled murder of his Sacred
Majesty, could not want vindications, whilst Milton, Goodwin, and their
associates, could command the Press: The horrible slaughter of Amboyna has
found an Apologer; nor does the Parisian Massacre, [1572.] want Defendants. If
it be convenient to do anything pleasing and acceptable to God; then will John
Knox assure his Companions, that nothing is more grateful, then the
over-throwing of Monasteries, Churches, and such like places of Devotion and
Prayer. And if the sins of a Nation must be washed away; the Sectaries will
assure you, nothing more convenient then the Blood of Kings and Nobles, if well
mixed with Sacrilege, Perjury, and Rebellion: And for the propagation of the
Church, the Covenanters (a sort of people, whose wickedness ore-tops all
Epithets) will tell you, that the first step must be the murder of an
Archbishop: And if Henry III. of France, be slain by a Friar, rather then
Will. Warrington's Moderate defense of the Oath of Allegiance, p. 128.
that Traiterous Assasinat should want a Vindication, Pope Sextus the fifth,
himself, will commend it, as an action pleasing to God, and the Wretch set on
work by a divine Inspiration.

Though it is no great wisdom to jest with the edged tools of State-Mysteries;
yet Paradoxes are tolerable, when the Authors intentions are merely Ingenuity:
It Is far from any man to check Virgil, for commending a Flea, Heinsius a
Louse, or to think much with the learned Erasmus, for writing the praise of
Foolishness. Caussin, by his smooth style, may mitigate the reproach of Nero,
and Diocles may extol a Rape; let Salerius, or Hegedorpius, sing in the praise
of drunkenness; or Dedekindus of nastiness, or slovenly manners. Archippus, or
Passeratus, may please themselves in their Commendations of an Ass; so may
Glaucus of Injustice, or a late Poet in his Encomium of Don Podex. But for John
Casa, the Popes Secretary, seriously to magnify the horrible sin of Sodomy, as
a divine work, and very pleasing to himself; or for any to put their
Consciences to be so far mercenary, as to vindicate any wickedness, is not only
Base, Knavish, and Tyrannical in their wicked Patrons, but unmanly and
unchristian in themselves; yet such Apologizing Scriblers there are, of whom I
may sing, as another did formerly of the Popes Pen-slaves.

Hi de Palponum, Colacumque, and stirpe Gnathonum, Georg. Goodwin. Melissa
Religionis. Pontif. elig. 10. page 121.

Impinguant oleo, Pontificale caput:
Hi sunt Pontifici quasi serva cadavera; motu
Quos insensatos fingit agitque suo.
These flattring, pick-thank, scribbling Hirelings, frame
Smooth balm to cure their Masters blasted fame;
Slaves to their Patrons pleasure, who commands,
To work his will, their Consciences and Hands.
The Grandees of Faction having unjustly got large Revenues, do as impiously
employ them amongst their Pagan-Creatures; that their Instruments might with
more agility be tuned to their own Commendations, such is the magnifick virtue
of refined metal! This is the pure Siderite, which has power to make variance
amongst almost the best of men, but especially those whose spirits are like the
Asbestus, once inflamed with Golden beams will never be quenched: This is the
best Tempter, and the Bait to which all people shoal, and the only Lure to
intise those who seek after prey. This made Pygmalion, King of Tire, kill his
Brother in Law Sichaeus: For this, Achilles basely sold the carcass of valiant
Hector. And it was this sordid Avarice, P. Boistuau le Theater du Monde. l. 3.
page 157.
which made Cardinal Angelot use to go into the Stable in the night without a
Candle, and steal the Hay and Oats from his own Horses, which he practiced so
long, till his Horses becoming lean, his Groom watched and caught the Cardinal,
and thinking it had been some other Thief, cudgelled him so sore, that he was
forced to carry him to his Chamber; a good reward for such covetous wretches.
This polisht-dross has betrayed many honest men, and over-thrown many a good
cause. This strengthens Treason to Loyalty, and is the Golden hook which
catches all things: 'Twas this in a shower robbed Danae of her Virginity, and
has done many more; and it is this, though upon an Asses back, will take the
strongest City in Europe; so, that one of the best of our English Poets sung
not amiss, when thus:

Puissant Gold! red Earth, at first made Man, Clt. Alleyn' s Hist. Hen. 7. p. 5.

Now it makes Villain; this refined clod
Can, what nor Love, nor Time, nor Valor can;
Jove could do more in Gold, than in a God.
Destruction surer comes, and rattles louder,
Out of a Mine of Gold, than one of Powder.
He who like the Amiantus, or the Carbuncle, will never suffer his Fame to be
endamaged by the scorching desires of Avarice; may justly think himself an
honest man: but the world will deem him of no great judgment, to be thus an
Enemy to his own good, upon the score of such trifling things as Conscience,
Honor, or Religion.

But let these Caterpillars, or State-hirelings, boast themselves the greatest
Wits, because they can enrich their Pockets, by a small Vindication of the
Treasonable and Sacrilegious Actions of their full-handed Patrons; or let the
Grandees think their conditions most ingenious, and sure, because from Beggars
they may raise themselves above Gentility, by a more than Sword-craft; yet, if
they had but so much Religion as the Heathen Poet: Theocrit. Idyl. 10. v. 17.


(...) --
-- God will find
The sinner out, and pay him to his kind.
might deterr them from such wickedness, by assuring them, that what is evil
got, will be soon spent; and, though not in their days, yet their Children may
repent that they sprung from such Parents, by whose means they must not only
return to beggary, but perpetual ignominy for their Fathers faults: whilst
Honesty, Loyalty, Obedience, and true Religion, shall flourish, to the shame
and reproach of all wicked Sectaries and Rebellion.

CHAP. II.
The Life of Ignatius Loyola, the first Founder of the Jesuits.

SInce the Jesuit, by many, has been thought, not only a Spectator, but
somewhat an Actor, in the Stage of our late Sufferings; it will not be amifs,
if in the first place, the Original of this Political Order be briefly related.
Though it is far from my intention to throw any dirt, either upon all of this
Society (some of them, possibly, being of honest inclinations) or those of the
Romish persuasion; since experience has proved many of them to be men, really
practicing honesty and loyalty: And that Religion is most wicked, which
opposes Civil Obedience.

The first Founder of the Jesuits, was one Ignatius Loyola, [by the Spaniards
called Inigio, or Ynigo de Loyola] born of a good and ancient De Maperne Hist:
d'Espaign. l. 27. Sect. 16.
Family (as his friends report) in the year 1491. in Guipuscoa, (a Province in
Spain betwixt Biscay and Navarre), at a place called Loyola [where is a little
pleasant Chapel dedicated to him] betwixt Fournier Geogr. Orb. Notit. l. 7.
cap. 5. p. 342.
Ascotia and Aspetia upon rio Urrola.

He lived according to the delights and pleasures of the world, till he was
about 29. years old. About which time, the French besieging Pamplona, and he
there a defendant, he had the fortune to have both his legs grievously hurt;
the left by a stone, and the right broke by a bullet. After this, the French
having mastered the City, Ignatius was conveyed to the aforesaid Casa de
Loyola, where he was cured, yet not so well, but that he halted on both feet;
And this deformity Hasenmuller. Hist. Jesuit. cap. 1. p. 5.
caused him to make such Iambicks in his going, that he became a laughing stock
to the spectators; which (as some observe) made him withdraw himself to a
solitary life, where he had time and convenience to lay a ground-plot to his
future Order. But the Jesuits will inform us of other pretty stories (fit to
be stitcht up with Villegas, Ribadeneira vita del Ignal. Jo. Pet. Masseius vita
Ignat.
de Natalibus, de Voragine, Cantiprotanus, and such like old wife taletellers);
as that he was cured by St. Peter, and put in mind of his Order by the Virgin
Mary: and tell you of many pretty Miracles done by this lame Soldier, who had
the virtue of Chastity given him by the Virgins fiat.

After his Conversion (howsoever it was) for the more strengthening of him in
his goodly opinion, he goes to Monserrat in Catalonia, (a Narrative of which
wonderful Mountain, you may read in De Espana cap. 142.
Pedro de Medina, Hispan. cap. 87.
Lud. Nonius, out of whom De Mirac. Not. Europ. l. 1. c. 40.
Nierembergius has taken (as in other places) his description verbatim, a
place sufficiently famous to Pilgrims. From this Hill, with an intention to
visit the Holy Land, and convert the Turks, he goes to Barcelona, thence sails
into Italy; where they say, our Savior appeared to him, and helped him very
strangely into Padoa and Venice; and when he 1523.
wanted a lodging, something from Heaven, bespoke one for him. From Italy he
sayls to Palestine, where he viewed Jerusalem, and the adjacent places; nor
did. Christ forget to appear to him here also, as his own friends relate.

From the Holy Land he returns to Venice, thence goes to Genua, 1524.
where he carried himself so clownishly and irreverently, that he was taken for
a madman; and thence sails to Barcelona, where he endeavors to learn his
Grammar, and began to read a little Book made by Erasmus: But the perusing of
it (if you will believe the Jesuits), so Enchirid. Milit; Christ.
cooled his former zeal, that he threw it away, and would never look on it
again, whereupon the General afterward of this Order, forbad any of Des.
Erasmus his Books should be perused. Having read his Maffcius l. 1. c. 16.
Grammar here two years, he goes to Alcala de Henares, where he and his
companions, from the length of their Coats, obtained an answerable denomination
from the University-wits: such pride did they take in singularity, and for such
like prancks was he cast into Prison, though at last released with a severe
check. Having stayed seven months here, (in which time he got some skill in
Logic, Physics, and Divinity; a quick Scholar as they would have him); he
passes to Salamanca, where he behaved himself so discreetly, that he was
imprisoned again, with the honorable addition of a Chain, though after got his
release.

In Spain, perceiving himself to be only derided, he thought it not conducible
to his designs to abide there: wherefore he intends to visit France; for which
purpose having procured an Ass to carry his Books and other things, he himself
foots it to Barcinona, and thence 1528.
to Paris, where he reenters himself into a Grammer-School, either forgetting
what formerly he learned, or through dullness wanting a consistent apprehension,
and this was when he was near 40. years old. Here for his simple
nonconformity, he had like to have been whipped in a public manner, but escaped
that scouring by his own confidence, and the Primars or Masters folly. But
after that, he (or some other higher Authority for him), acted his part so
well, that of a Scholar, he became not only a Master, but also gained the
esteem of some Sanctity. Those who at first submitted themselves to his way of
life, were Peter Faber, Francis Xavier, (who first went to convert the Indies,
where he did many pretty tricks, if you credit Horat. Turselin, de vita. Fr.
Xaverii.
Turselinus, one of his own Society). Diego [or James] Lanes, Alfonso Salmeron;
a learned man, and well known to Scholars, Simon Rodrigues, and Nicolas
Bobadilla; these six, with their Founder Ignatius, an Author compares to the
seven wandering Stars; nor is Christ. Sin. Lithus Misenus in vita Ignat. p. 56.
he much amiss, since the influence of this Order, agitates Europe more than
the Planets: so, that a good Jesuit-loger might prognosticate it, more certain
than the best Star-gazer. After these six, came in other three, viz. Claude
Jay, John Coduri, and Pasqual Braetus, or Brovet. And whether it is probable,
that men of such parts as Salmeron, should submit themselves to the government;
poverty, and ignorance of a lame Soldier, rather by divine instinct (as
themselves relate) Mass. l. 1. c. 21. page 128.
or by the agitation of some more worldly, powerful, and politic consultation
and design, shall be left to the judgment of the ingenious.

Having thus got his desires in France, he resolves to visit his own Country.
In the mean time, appointing Peter Faber to be 1535.
chief over those of his Society at Paris in his absence, and to meet him such
a day, two years after at Venice: he marches over the Pyraenean Mountains into
Guipuscoa, where he visits his friends at Loyola, and the adjacent places, who
were not able to persuade him from his beggarly humor. Having stayed here a
little while, he views Navarre and Castile, and at Valentia takes Ship for
Italy, and almost ship-wrackt arrives at Genoa, and thence, through I know not
what dangers, foots it to Bonona, where by his tumbling into a dirty Ditch, and
through idleness not cleansing himself, he was hooted at by all the City; nor
any thing given him, though he heartily begged it, till at last he got a
lodging in the Spanish College. Thence he goes to Venice, to expect his
associates from France, where he was accused for a Heretic, that rambled over
the world to spread his Errors, for which purpose he and his associates had
fled Spain and France, to escape due punishment: But from this accusation he
got himself cleared by favor and greatness, who could not be ignorant what a
profitable Plant this bold Company would be in the Romish Wilderness.

Here his Companions met him, as formerly appointed; where they employ
themselves in charitable uses. Franc is Xavier, endeavoring to cure the French
Pox by very loathsome means, viz. by sucking out the corrupted matter with his
delicate mouth; as the virtuous and loving Queen Eleanor preserved King Edward
the first, by sucking Sir R. Baker's Chron. p. 204.
the poison out of his wounds. After they had entered into Orders, they intend
for Rome; but to prepare way for the rest, Ignatius with Faber and Laynes go
thither first, whilst the rest distribute themselves into other places of
Italy, to gain Proselytes. The Jesuits tell a story, which you may believe as
you please, since many such tales you read in the life of Saint Francis, Saint
Benit, and others, whose legendary actions afford more thwacking stories then a
Coffee-house. And thus it was; That near Rome, Ignatius being praying in a
Church, saw God the Father; desiring Jesus Christ to take Ignatius and his
Sociates into his Protection, to which he consented, telling Loyola that he
would assist him and his in their endeavors at Rome. And from this accident he
nominated Ego vobis Romae Propitius ero. Masf. l. 2 c. 5.
(as they say) his Order the Society of Jesus, or Jesuits. Here Cardinal
Contarenus favors Ignatius and his friends; nor without reason, since this
Spanish Saint was so clear-sighted as to see Hozius his soul carried into
Heaven. At Rome, according to appointment, 1538.
his Companions met him, who with himself were highly accused; yet, after a
long trial, by the Popes command were released, and suffered to prosecute their
Order of livelihood: For advancement of which; they consult, what Vows and
Articles were to be observed; if the Pope thought fit to confirm them: the
which after some advisements they agree of.

From Rome, Fr. Xaver is sent into the Indies; and what he did there, you may
see in Horatius Tursellinus. In his absence, Pope Paul III. (famous in History
for all manner of wickedness) confirmed Ignatius and 1540. October.
his friends into a Society, provided that their number should not be above 60.
And to this Barth. Guidicionius (a godly man, as the Jesuits confess), was
glad to give his consent; though he had wrote a Book against having any more
Orders in Religion.

The Order being thus constituted, Ignatius was chosen General over them,
though (as you may believe) he was very modest, earnestly 1541.
declining so great Honor. Yet, for all this modesty, he played his cards so
well, that he procured the former Order to be cancelled; and liberty given to
augment the number of his Society to as many as he could; though he utterly
excluded all women-kind, 1543.
(forgetting that Elizabeth Rosella was the chief help and support of his
former beings). Though many examples assure us, that they are not altogether
haters of that sex; but this must be imputed more to their Manhood, than
Order. Yet a late Writer informs us of an Order of shee-Jesuites called
Jesuitrices, begun in Flanders Wilson' s Hist. of Great Brit. page 152.
by Mrs Ward, and Mrs Twittie, two English Gentlewomen; The first (by the Popes
Indulgence) in short time becoming Mother-General of 200. English Damsels, whom
she sent abroad to Preach, as my Author tells us.

Ignatius, at last, having seen a great increase of his Order; honored with
diverse Colleges and Indowments, took an occasion to 1556. August.
dye of a Fever; and was many years after, though with much ado, The Bull of
whose Canonization by Pope Urban VIII. was printed at Rome. 1626. which you may
see in the Bodlecan Library in Oxon. M. 9. 9. Jur.
Canonized for a Saint. I might here relate some pretty stories of his
Miracles, confidently written by the Jesuits: But, because they are nothing to
my purpose, and I question much your believing them, I shall leave you for
satisfaction to other Authors.

CHAP. III.
Some Observations of the Jesuits Political Constitution, Temper and Actions,
especially relating to our late Troubles.

HAving thus seen the Original of the Jesuit, it will not be amiss briefly to
hint at their Temper and Activeness, especially in relation to Politic
designs: Though, by the By, we may observe, that he is not the same with the
more ancient Order of the Jesuati, begun some 300. years ago, by St. John
Columbine of Seen: concerning which I referr you to Paolo Morigia, one of the
same Order. Nor were Hist. del. Relig. l. 1. c. 38, 39.
they the same (though mistaken at first to be so in Italy) with the Theatins,
corrupted from the Chietins, so called from Chieti: of which place John Peter
Carrafa, (afterward Pope Paul IV.) the head of this Order, was Bishop.

In Portugal they are called los Apostoles; in Arragon, los Iniguistos; but in
other places Jesuits, or, those of the Society of Jesus. A Title (as many
Catholics themselves confess) too high and general, Insolitam nominis Jesu
appellationem, etc. Decret. de Sorbone. An. 1554.
to be only applied to this Order. But seeing they have the confidence to make
this name peculiar to themselves; and Pope Pius VI. in his Letters in their
behalf to Maximilian King of Hungary, to the Archbishop of Ments, to Albert
Duke of Bavaria, and others, do appropriate this Name to them, and so does the
Council of Trent, and it is the Title by which they are best known; I shall not
stick to Sess. 25. cap. 16.
pleasure them so far as to nominate them according to their own desires.

The Jesuits, though at first they had but a small Foundation, have since so
industriously increased their number, that they have above 60. Colleges in
Italy, and more in Spain; in Germany and the Netherlands near the same number;
in Poland and Transylvania about 20. and in the East Indies above 12. and in
the West some 20. and many in France.

They are especially sworn to three things; The first is Poverty, the which
they observe so gallantly, that I must subscribe to that Noble German, who
professed, That if he were to beg, he would beg with the Si mendicare vellem, cum
Jesuitis mendicarem. Hasenmul. c. 6. p. 149.
Jesuits.

Their second vow is, Chastity, which they keep with as much tenderness as the
former, as is obvious to any who is converst amongst them; and for the farther
testimony of this point, I shall referr you to the writings of Peter Jarrigius,
one that was formerly a Jesuit himself, and in high esteem amongst them in
France, but at Rochel Cap. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.
embraced the Calvinist persuasion, [anno 1647.] and thence went to Leyden;
though afterward [viz. 1650.] upon what account he knew best, renounced the
Reformed Religion, and returned to the Jesuits, at Antwerp.

Their third vow is Obedience to the Pope and their General of which none in
the World can be more observant; so that by their punctual keeping of this,
they may somewhat mitigate the offense of their negligence in the two former.
And this is (as one of themselves confesses) Quae virtus, praecipuum Societat
is Jesu decus. Turcel. vit. Fr. Xav. l. 6. c. 8 p. 533.
the chief honor of their Society. How beneficial this Vow has been to the
Roman Catholic Cause, may be easily imagined, if a man may suppose (as I know
nothing to the contrary), that many bloody actions perpetrated in France,
England, and other places, has been the result of this Obediential State-Vow.
Which binds this Order strictly to the Obedience of their General, and to
ackowledge him as in the place of Christ; and that with all reverence and love,
doing and performing Summar. Constitut. Societ. Jes. Reg. 31.
fully, readily, valiantly, humbly, without any reasonings or excusings those
things which he shall command; although they be difficult, and against all
sense and reason, or your own judgment, since your will is to be conformable
to your Superior, where it does not appear visibly sinful.

This last clause might seem to palliate very well this Article of Obedience,
to those who are not acquainted with their Writings and Actions; but they who
have any knowledge with their Casuists, cannot be ignorant, how they annihilate
and jest with sin, by their sociable Doctrine of Probable Opinion, of
Directing the Intention, and such like; as you may see more at large in the
Mystery of Jesuitism, of Les Provinciales.
which, the last Edition with its Additionals will yield you more satisfaction.

With these things I should be very unwilling to charge them, did I not know;
that the Agitators of these Political evasions from Sin, were the chief
Casuists amongst them, and their Books printed and reprinted by the consent of
their Superiors. For those men are very much to blame, who scandalize a
General Religion with the fancies and extravagancies of some private Writers;
for by this means might Rebelling-Presbyterianism, King-killing Independentism,
deluded Quakerism, and other Heresies be thrown upon the famous Church of
England, and several absurdities upon the Romanists, which cannot be found in
the Tridentine Council.

How obsequious this Order is to their Superiors Commands, may be seen in many
stories related by Hasenmullerus, and others. Ignatius Hist. Jesuit. c. 6 p.
200, 201, 202, etc. Masf. l. 3. c. 7.
himself being willing to throw away his life, rather than disobey an ignorant
Physician. Nor had it been handsome in him to have been refractory, who was the
Author of this obedient Constitution, and wrote a long Letter from Rome, to
those of his Order in Portugal, to In April. 1553.
persuade them to it, which is yet extant. What other Articles they have, I
need not relate, these three being a sufficient taste, and the rest of their
Order may be had either in Italian, or Latin.

To give a true Character of the Jesuit at large, would be too tedious, since
one of themselves, viz. Alexander Haius has performed Hist. des Derniers
Troubles. de France. l. 5. p. 54.
it well enough in few words, viz. Jesuita est omnis homo, one as fit to act
any thing as he is able to comply with every condition, merely Tales quales, as
themselves were pleased to term Lans. Consult. Orat. contra Hispan. p. 379.
it more publicly at Paris. They are generally a sort of people more skilful
in the causes and motions of the Body Politic, than the Philosopher in the
Natural; being Richelieu's for plotting, as quicksighted as Lynceus, as
restless as the Bird of Paradise, as insinuating and flattering as Clisophus or
Charisophus; more cruel than the illnatur'd Barbarian; and like the old woman
Ptolomais, never in their own Trade, but when stirring up mischief; and the
best Actors on the Political Stage, fit to undertake and finish any wickedness,
for which they have formerly been reproachfully banished France, Bohemia,
Hungaria, Moravia, Turkey, and Venice, though since with much ado restored.
Several of them have suffered in China, England, Scotland, and other places for
their villainies; nor has Germany suffered them to go unpunished; nor could
they expect more favor from many in that Country, since the misery of it; And
the loss of the Palatinate (if you believe Sir Simond D'ewes) had its source
from their In his Speech, July 7. 1641.
Brains: And one of this Society who suffered at Strasburg, confessed that he was
one of the thirty Jesuits, who were employed to be Agents for the Roman Cause
in the late German Wars; and that their Orders Epistle to the Reader, before
Gregorius his Letter relating the Martyrdom of Queen Ketaban.
were to poison, and make away the chiefest Officers, or others, who opposed
the Emperor, as my Author assures us. And Teimurases, Prince of the Georgeans,
(a people lying upon the Caspian Sea), will have none of them in his
Territories, (whence they were forced to fly), for that notorious Imposture of
theirs, concerning the head of that Martyred Queen Ketaban; a story so commonly
known, that I do not a little admire at de S. Lazare, for passing by the fraud
and juggling Hist. Tragiques. hist. 16.
of the Jesuits with silence and untruths.

Mendoza, hotheaded Gret-serus, and others of the same Society, Viridar. l. 6.
Orat. 14.
are as parties, bound to commend the Honesty and Religion of this Order. But
the Ingenious Thuanus, Recherches de la France. l. 3.
Pasquier, (who affords you Pleadings and Reasons against them) and Tho. Bel's
Anatomy of Papists.
others (though Roman Catholics) think it not fit to attribute any goodness to
the Jesuit, knowing, that he is a Subject too dangerous to live in Liberty, in
any well settled State, Spain excepted; these two reciprocally maintaining each
other, more through politic ends, than true love of Religion.

I am confident, Great Britain and Ireland have felt the force of their active
brains; as the Reign of Queeen Elizabeth, and the dangerous beginning of King
James, can testify. Nor were they any more beneficial to King Charles, doing
what they could to foment our Dissentions, as the Long Parliament could not
deny; As appears by their Articles against Father Philips, one of which was
this:

The damnable Doctrine, which he, and other Jesuits have taught, 1. November.
1641. 3. Artic.
to destroy and depose Kings, has been the cause of the Civil Wars, like to
befall these Kingdoms, if God in his mercy did not prevent it.

And his Seditiousness is somewhat apparent by his Letter sent to Mr. Mountague
in France, and produced to the House of Commons, June, 25, in which was this
expression.

Can the wise Cardinal endure England and Scotland to unite, and not Dated May
6. 1641.
be able to discern, In the end, it is like, they will join together, and turn
head against France.

And how vigilant the Cardinal was to keep the two Nations from uniting, is
visible from the presence and great endeavors of Mr. Thomas Chamberlain, a
Scotch-man, Chaplain and Almoner to Richelieu amongst Dr. Heylias Observe. on
Hist. of King Charles. p. 163.
the Scots, (who played likewise his Cards well in England) before our late
Rebellion, with Order not to depart from Scotland, till (things succeeding as
the Cardinal wished), he might return into France with good news of a perfect
dissension betwixt England and Scotland.

And to this may be added, the Industry of the Cardinal's Secretary in the said
Nation, where he carried himself so cunningly, that he was taken into
Consultation with the Heads of the Covenanters. And what good counsel, could
spring from such a Fountain, cannot be ignorant to any, who either understood
the experience, or knew the political biass of the said Cardinal; which might
well move him to say concerning our late Troubles, That 'twas easy for one
Howel's Life of Card. Rich. page 164.
with half an eye to have foreseen them: Whereby it seems strange to me, that
he would never employ a Jesuit, if we may credit Mr. Howell, though it may be,
that he supposed them too much Ib page 165.
linked to the Interest of Spain, to do him or France any good.

Nor is the multitudes of them in England, any small probability of their bad
Intentions, being unwilling to hazard their lives, (as here they do), unless
upon some grand Design. Jarrigius, one of In Epist. Dedicat. to the States
Gener.
their own Society, affirms, that fifty of them, clad in several habits, kept
Council in London, whence they deputed a General Agent to Rome. And Oliver
Cromwell professed, that he could prove Speech to the Parl. 1654. Sep. 4. p. 16;
17.
by witness, that they had a Consistory and Council, that ruled all the affairs
in England, as he could prove by the Particular Instrument then in his power.
And how formerly they swarmed in England, Mr. Gee will at large inform you; And
King James could Foot out of the Snare.
never forget the miseries he suffered whilst King of Scotland, by domestic
dissentions stirred up against him by Hay, Creighton, Bruce, Sandersoe's Hist.
K. James; p. 146, 147, etc.
Graham, and other Jesuits, who furnished, the Rebellious Nobility with moneys
from Spain to carry on their designs. Nor has Ireland reason to rejoice in
their acquaintance; where the Seminary Friars Scrinia Sacra. page 241.
of late days had gone so far, as, in Dublin it self, not only to appear in
their habits, but also to affront the Archbishop and Mayor of that City; nor
were they wanting to the erection of Colleges and Societies, maintained by
good Benefactors, as appears by a Letter from the Council in England, to that
in Ireland. Yet for all Dated 31. Jan. 1624.
this, has their rebellious favorites dealt mildly with them, (though the Laws
be severe enough) and 20. years ago, looked upon this kind of mercy, as a crime
fit to be thrown in the face both of King and Bishop; but, how deservedly, let
any judge but Prynne, whose malice and partiality is well enough known.

Nor need we much trouble our selves to prove the Jesuit, somewhat meddling;
their familiarity with the Anabaptists, Quakers, and such like Phanaticks,
being suspicious. Of which many examples might here be shown, but that their
common knowledge would make the Relation tedious; only take notice, that the
very Weekly Gazet, Perfect Proceed. 1655. March 27.
suspects Mr. Rogers, and those of his Fraternity, to have some Jesuit or
Priest at the Helm with them: And Mr. Rogers takes no good course to clear
himself, by endeavoring to vindicate the Jesuit, from having any hand in our
late Wars: which this following Story is sufficient to confute.

When the late King was murdered, Mr. Henry Spotteswood, riding Prynne's Brief
Necessary Vindicat. p. 45.
casually that way, just as his Head was cut off, espied the Queens Confessor
there on Horseback, in the habit of a Trooper, drawing forth his Sword, and
flourishing it over his own head in Triumph (as others then did): At which Mr.
Spotteswood being much amazed, and being familiarly acquainted with the
Confessor, road up to him, and said; O Father! I little thought to have found
you here, or any of your Profession, at such a sad spectacle. To which he
answered, that, There were at least forty, or more, Priests and Jesuits there
present on Horseback besides himself. The resultancy of this Story is home and
pat; and for the truth of it, I referr you to Mr. Prynne.

Nor need we here relate the great correspondency betwixt the late Grandees and
Cardinal Mazarini, of which Mr. Walker gives us a Hist. Independ. Part. 1.
Sect. 104.
hint; and experience can proclaim the rest. Nor is it probable, that they
should have no hand in the promotion of our late distractions, as most
beneficial to the Catholic Cause, since they have been the chief fomenters of
all other Wars in Christendom, leaving nothing un-essay'd, that may bring all
into confusion; as Ludovicus Lucius, and Histor. Jesuit.
others, can inform you more at large.

Besides all this, we might give some Extracts out of the Plot discovered by
Andreas ab Habernfield [1640. September] to Sir William H. L'estraage Hist. K.
Chapter page 180, 181. Pryan' s Romes Masterpiece. page 18.
Boswell, the Kings Agent at the Hague; and by him to the Archbishop, and so to
his Majesty. A design managed abroad by the Pope and Cardinal Barbarino; and in
England, chiefly by George Con a Scotch-man, and the Pope's Nuncio. The
substance of which was, that the Roman Catholics here, should stir up the
Puritans to revenge themselves of the Bishops; and the Scots should also be
persuaded to Arms, whence the English should so adhere, that the King remaining
Inferior in Forces, should be constrained to crave aid from the Papists, which
should be denied, unless he favored them with a Toleration; which if
absolutely denied, it was contrived by sudden death to remove him. But, because
we find the Reality of the Plot questioned, Vindiciae Caroli Regis. p. 33. in
the margin. and page 56.
by an understanding Gentleman; we shall referr you to L'estrange, and Prynne's
Relation.

But let this Plot be as it will, it is more then suspicion, that our Phanaticks
have been beholden in many things to the Jesuit, of which one example may
somewhat satisfy. They caused the Book written by Parsons, Anno 1524. (under
the feigned name of Doleman, and Hist. Independ. Part. 1. Sect. 105.
called A Conference about the Succession of the Crown; which Book was
condemned by Act of Parliament, 35. Elizab.) to be published Prynne's Speech to
the Commons, page 108.
again under the title of Several Speeches delivered at a Conference concerning
the Power of Parliaments to proceed against their King for Mis-government. The
Arguments and Precedents are merely the same, though the fashion of the Book be
a little altered; Parsons having made it a Dialogue, and these men into
Speeches. And how agreeable to this Rule of King-killing, they steered their
course, is impossible to be forgot, as long as Memory or Record can be had in
this World.

CHAP. IV.
The helps and assistance which the Calvinist Presbyterian, and Jesuit, afford
one another, for the ruin and alteration of Kingdoms; with their Plots to
destroy the Government and Tranquillity of England.

THat the Independents should only be beholden to the Jesuits, or these Fathers
the sole Ingeneers of Wickedness, would mainly over-cloud the Reputation of the
Presbyterians, who look upon themselves as active for any mischief, and as
cunning contrivers. And therefore it is best for them to go hand in hand, each
discovering to other what new Plots they have found out for the subversion of
Governments. By which Club, they have afforded certain Rules to Politicians,
which have exactly been observed and followed by our late Schismatics, as is
palpable by the following Observations.

And first we shall begin with the Plots of the Calvinists, a people never
negligent to promote their own Interests. Of whose Sect (as Letter to Balthaz.
de Zuniga. 1621. Scrinia Sacra. page 123. Bas. dor. l 2.
the Emperor Ferdinand affirmed) the proper genius is, To hold nothing either
Fraud or Wickedness, which is undertaken for the Religion; No sanctity of Oath,
nor fear of Dishonor hinders them. A Chararacter like that given by the
experienced King James to the Puritans, the same with our Nonconforming
Presbyterians; of whom one Cabala. p. 225.
gives this sentence, Puritans and all other Sectaries; who though scarce two
of them agree in what they would have; yet, they all in general are haters of
Government. And to this purpose was the judgment of the wise Secretary
Walsingham, when to Monsieur Critoy, Secretary of France, he assured them to be
dangerous and very popular; Id. Part. 2. p. 40, 41.
not Zeal nor Conscience, but mere Faction and Division: and besides this,
gives a short description of their Cunning, Juggling, and Rebellion; for which,
with the Jesuit, they start strange Doctrines, to be as an Umbrella to their
Illegal proceeding. Of which the learned Bancroft, Mr. David Owen, and an
Ingenious Epistle Congratulatory, under the Name of Lysimachus Nicanor, will
afford you many Instances. Whereby you may see, that the Presbyterians in their
Principles and Actions have more of Rome, than the late reverend Archbishop
Land, or his favorites. Let Bailey, and the spurious Irenaeus Philalethes, or
Histor. Mot uum in Regn. Scot. page 502, etc.
any others, collect or steal out of him what they please.

The Calvinists being resolved to root the Lutherans out of the Palatinate,
took this following Method to bring their ends about, as they are delivered to
us by Adam Contzenus, a deep observing Jesuit; which our late English
Law-choppers have observed to a hair, as is obvious by the sequent Rules.

I.
The Intent of the Calvinists in altering Religion in the Palatinate, Ad
Contzen Polit. lib. 2. c. 18. Sect. 6.
by extirpating the Lutherans, was concealed, lest the vulgar having knowledge
of it, should tumultuate. After this manner, were the Orthodox Divines in
England weakened. The Presbyterians at their Initiation into this Kingdom, not
going openly like honest men, but skulking up and down to private Conventicles,
(which they called Synods, or Assemblies), according to the directions of their
great Mustaphi's, such as Cartwright, Snape, Gibby, Travers, Gillebrand,
Whittington, Goodman, etc. But having once increast the number of their
Disciples into a formidable body, took the impudence to affront, King, Queen,
Laws, and all their Superiors. Nor of all these many Opinions (we have had two
pregnant and powerful amongst us), few were observed how they took root, till
(like Cadmus his Soldiers) they showed themselves so potent, that they might
scorn a resistance.

Nor could we dream of any intentions lurking in the breasts of our pretended
Potentates, tending any way to the introducing of a motley-Babylonick Herd of
Religions (since Prelacy was murdered out, by a drove of Villains), seeing they
so solemnly protested against any such endeavor, as you may see by these
following words:

And we do here declare, that it is far from our purpose or desire, to
Remonstrance, 15. December. 1642.
let loose the Golden Reyns of Discipline and Government in the Church: to
leave private persons, or particular Congregations, to take up what Form of
Divine Service they please. For we hold it requisite, that there should be
throughout the whole Realm a conformity to that Order, which the Laws enjoin
according to the Word of God.

This Protestation is something serious. But alas! it may be, (they looking
upon themselves as our Lords and Masters), Dissimulation is a thing permitted
them by a Isan de Marnix Resolut. Polit. Sect. 7. Res. 10. ib. Res. 6.
French Statesman: though I believe in equality they are more our Neighbors,
and so could not demand the same privilege granted by de Marnix to Kings.

What they meant by the Laws of the Land, I know not; but it is certain, they
favored Episcopacy more than any other Government: And it is as true what the
old Poet sung.

(...)
Whilst we are ruled by wilful power and might,
Laws cannot do so much as do us right.
And what validity can we expect in a Declaration, from those, who can swallow
down Oaths with more content and celerity, than Lazarello de Tormes could a
Saucidge, or a little Sack? Who look upon Allegiance to others, as a nicety of
State; yet make it Treason, if not observed to themselves. But, if our own Laws
cannot be in force, I wish, the Egyptians might; who held perjury a double
offense, Diod. Sicul. de Reb. Antiq. l. 1. c. 3.
against God and Man, and so rewarded the guilty with death.

II.
Some more craftily suborned, humbly to petition the Prince (though he
earnestly longed for the change himself; and so possibly might prompt them to
it), that the Exercise of their Religion might be granted. None can be ignorant
of the same manner of Juggling in England for these many years last past, in so
much, that we have had scarce any Levem plebeculam ad Petitiones commovendo,
vel potius Populi nomen Petitionibus (a duobus tribusue suae factionis
coacinnatis) affigendo. Elench. Mot. p. 81, 82.
Petition concerning Religion or the Change of Government: but what trucking,
collogueing, and running about to get peoples hands to it! most of them being
either Servants, or such mean Handy-craftmen, that want brains to apprehend
either the advantage or damage of any Public concern; but are driven on with
such hasty fury, that nothing can satisfy them but a present performance:
though with as much ignorance and envy, as those who railed against the
Innocent Aristides, because he was too just and honest to live amongst such
wretches.

Of this manner of cheating up Petitions, the famous Dr. Hammond View of the
Directory, p 90. Sect. 28.
takes special notice; And that great Prop of Learning, the late Archbishop of
Canterbury, gave a large hint in his Speech upon the Scaffold, in these words:

Here has been of late a fashion taken up to gather hands, and then to go to
the great Court of this Kingdom, (the Parliament), and clamor for Justice: as
if that great and wise Court, before whom the causes come, (which are unknown
to the many), could not, or would not do justice, but at their appointment. A
way which may endanger many an Innocent man, and pluck his blood upon their own
heads, and perhaps upon the Cities also. And this has been lately practiced
against my self, the Magistrates standing still, and suffering them openly to
proceed from Parish, without check; -- many well-meaning people are caught by
it.

Of this clandestine way of Juggling up Petitions, several Counties did
publicly complain (about the beginning of these Wars), to the Parliament, in
their Petitions for Episcopacy; but to small purpose: the Members resolving to
break the Laws, did not like that, which would confirm them. This way of
begging was used above a dozen years ago by some Privado's in the County of
Buckingham, Essex, Oxford, Hist. Independ. Part. 1. Sect. 50.
and Barks, to decide and lessen the Parliament, and promote an Independent
Army and Faction against them. And thus (as it was thought), did the well-known
Committee of Derby-house employ Col. Rainsborough, to go up and down, and
solicit the common sort of Mariners Id. Sect. 97.
to subscribe and present the House of Commons with a Petition against a
Personal Treaty with the King; (which other places Petitioned for). And, to
make them more complying, gave 12 d. a piece to those who would subscribe it.
And this way of hudling up requests, was used by those Bloodthirsty Canabals,
for the bringing of his Majesty, and others to the Block.

In this Art of State-craft, Oliver Cromwell was excellently well seen, and
made it one of his main blinds to deceive an easy believing multitude, which
he thought both lawful and commendable in himself; but, when once raised to a
Protector, thought it little less then Treason In his Speech, 22. Jan. 1654.
page 15.
in others, greatly complaining of such actions, to his mock-Parliament. Thus
the Priest forgets that ever he was Clerk, every man thinking himself in the
right: and so did the three poor Nuns of Mergate, when they drew up their
Innocent Petition, (as here follows by the By), though now converted to a
wrong sense.

We three poor Nuns of Mergate, Weaver's Fun. Monuments, page 585.

Piteously compleineth to your good Estate,
Of one Sir Johnne of Whipesuade,
Who has stopped our Watergate,
With two Stons and a Stake,
Help us Lord for Christ his sake.
These poor women, through their simplicity, dreamed of nothing but what was
honest, desired nothing but what was just; a reparation of their wrongs, being
the only thing they aimed at: not like our self-ended Time-servers, who from
the Noddles of three or four, like a Multiplying-Glass, can produce you many
thousands. Thus five or six in December. 1653. when Oliver was scarce warm in his
Protectorship, to make True Catalogue, page 4, 7, 8, 9.
his footing the more sure, drew up an Address to him, and sent it through the
three Kingdoms as a pattern for the rest to follow, and what effect it took, is
not ignorant to any, who remember the Glorious and almost Almighty (profane)
Titles thrown upon him by such Proselytes. Thus have I heard, and read, of a
Great man, who made Books in his own Fame and Vindication in these late Wars,
and put them forth in other men's names; (as some suppose Annius threw his
Labors upon Chaldaick Authors): And somewhat to this, a Writer prompts us to
this Quaere, Whether the Petition of July 1659. was The Grand concernment of
England. p. 5.
penned by the Parliament, and addressed to the Parliament; and so the
Parliament gave the Parliament thanks? However, this is more than probable,
That those who delivered the Hartfordshire Petition Ex. Coll. p. 537.
at the beginning of these Wars, abused all the simple Subscribers; the
Petition that was delivered, taking notice of several things done in Parliament
the very night before its delivery: in which time it was impossible to get so
many Thousand hands, and then travel to London on that Errand, (of which abuses
the King himself took special notice), unless their Messengers had been as
swift as the Spirit Orthon-Mercury Froissart. Vol. 2. sol. 173. Wier. de
Praestig. Daem. l 2. c. 29. p. 250.
to Corasse, and the Count de Foix; or those who carried the Noble Lombard from
Egypt to Pavia in one night.

III.
But because a mere Exercising of their Religion was not sufficient, unless
they might have Public places for such duties; they earnestly desire and
Petition, that they might have but one Church or two allotted them for such
Public Duties, thereby to appear as the face of a Congregation. All things at
first have but a small beginning: Those who endeavor the hopes of their
Towering Expectations at the first onset, may, like Phaeton, bring a ruin to
themselves and designs; which the Independents knew well enough; and so desired
(as the case then stood), rather to grow up by degrees, than by too hasty
swelling, to burst, with the Toad, to their own Confusion.

What Petitions have been pressed to the Parliament, by self-ended
Schismatics, to have places allotted them for Preachments, is troublesome to
remember at this time; yet Mr. Edwards informs us of diverse Reasons against
Independent Government, in in the Introduction.
drawn up twenty years ago, for a Toleration of some Congregations to enjoy an
Independent Government, and to be exempted from that which should be established
by Law. And some two years after this, [1643.] the Independents in their
Apologetical Narrative, presented to the Parliament, showed themselves so
humble, that they might thereby gain Pity and Toleration; that they concluded,
that they pursued Fuller's Chapter Hist. Book. XI. page 212.
no other Interest, or Design, but a Subsistence (be it the poorest and
meanest) in their own Land, etc. But how well this self-denying desire, agreed
with their after usurping Encroachments, is known well enough: Phil. Nigh, and
Tom. Goodwin, the main contrivers of this Petition, stealing to themselves the
best Preferments in the Nation, and the richest Indowments both in University
and Country, being divided amongst the rest; so that the Proverb was now
verified, Give an Inch, and take an Ell.

IV.
The Calvinists having now got liberty to exercise their faculty in Preaching,
and that publicly; so that that they seemed to keep equal pace with the
Lutherans; an Edict (as if only for quietness sake) was published, that neither
Party should cast aspersions upon one another. Which at length proved no small
lift to throw the Lutherans first out of favor, and then their places; for
then they durst not contradict the Calvinists, who were now Favorites; and, by
consequence, might with some liberty throw dirt in their Antagonists faces.
Besides, this degrading of the Lutherans, was a sufficient disgrace to them
amongst the Vulgar, who are commonly so politic, as to side with the strongest
party, so they rest secure; as experience has told us at home. King James in
his Directions concerning Preachers, strictly prohibited 14. Aug. 1622. Sect. 5.
them from using any bitter invectives, or undecent railing speeches. But this
was not long observed in King Charles his reign; for what could not handsomely
be acted in the Pulpit, was in the Press; though at last, the former was not a
little abused by scolding Burton, and such like hotheaded Cushion-thumpers:
and Paper grew scant with the swarms of Invective Pamphlets against both Church
and State. Than which scandalous Libels, nothing brings more detriment to a
Nation, as a French Statesman observes. They drawing, like Orpheus, the
L'homine d'estat. p. 62, 63.
brutish Vulgar (a thing most capable of Sedition) to dance after whatsoever
they are tuned to; especially, if skrew'd up to the hopes of high preferment. A
design most wicked, as being composed of horrid L' Artifice est mali cieux, on
propose des Remonstrances d'unfacon, and on les entend de l'autre; le Pretexte
est prius de la Reformation du Royaume, l'effect ^ute a sa ruin, etc. lb.
juggling; really intending one way, though they seem to carry fair for
another: the pretense pointing at the Reformation of, when the effect brings
destruction, to the Kingdom. By this means, the Parliament and Presbyterian got
applause from the people, who are apt to believe and remember falsehood, more
than truth: whereby, the number and confidence of their Proselytes, increast to
such an height, that they were able to maintain and vindicate their
Pamphleteers with a strong hand, though not by Reason and Law. So that it was
more than a common danger to write any thing (though truth) against the
Parliament; but to vilify the King, was no small hopes of preferment and
credit, as appears by the multitude of Pamphlets, and the licensed Gazets
weekly flying about in 1648. where Tyranny, Hypocrisy, and Perfidiousness were
commonly attributed to his Majesty. When as the Ingenuous Mr. Walker must end
his days in the Tower, for telling true tales abroad. But when a great part of
the Parliament it self, must be looked upon as rotten Members, for adhering to
the King; and the rest of them shackled, for demanding their privileges and
freedom, [1648.] which they had so long pretended to fight for: What punishment
might poor people expect for presuming to pry into such Great-mens Errors? If a
whole Army will undertake to vindicate the words and wishes of Symbal, Wade,
and White, whereby the Murder of his Majesty was desired; that man can expect
no great encouragement, who endeavors lay to open the Villainies of such
Sectaries.

V.
Then, as if to give some content, a Disputation was held; but a Calvinist
appointed Moderator, who was afterward made Professor. It Is nothing here to my
purpose, to discourse, whether these Polemical Exercises, upon a public
account, brought either Satisfaction to the Auditors, or Tranquillity to the
Nation; and few are like that betwixt the two Reynolds's, where both conquered,
both turned and yielded. I shall therefore let that rest, since the thing self
as yet is sub judice.

The subtle Calvinists in Germany will make themselves Moderators, in their
own Cause, and their Brethren in England, must either be Umpire betwixt the
King and themselves, or else all the fat is in the fire; and, God knows, what
unheard of Privileges lost. When the King, at their desire, upon hopes of
Peace, yields to call in all his Proclamations against them, and Essex, as
Traitors, if they would take off Malignancy from his followers; they would not
yield to Overtures of Reconciliation upon that Condition, taking themselves to
be Supreme, (forsooth); and so the King obliged to pardon them, but not they
him, or his. If the King and Country have any desire of Peace, his
Propositions are neglected, he being tied either to hearken and consent to
their malapert Proposals, or trust to the misery of War, or utterly thrown by,
as unworthy any more Addresses.

Must the Reverend and Ancient Church Government be violently plucked down,
(though the Bill, with that concerning the Militia, several times rejected by
the Peers), and some other up-start Invention plodded out, to instruct Boys in
the mode of prattling; then where must we hunt, for this pretty young thing, but
in Scotland? And who must be the Masters of the Game, but a crew of domineering
Zealots thrust up into a Rebellious Authority? And, for a small piece of
Formality, was jumbled up a pack of stiff Presbyterians, (under the Title of an
Assembly), dapled Synodique sua autoritate coactae (ad omnibus quidem
Provinciis, hominibus praefervidis, concionandique peritis, sed minoris ut
plurimum literaturae, regiminique Ecclesiastico insensis) constitutionibus
commendant, non autem huic libere res even i will ndas permittunt ultra metas ab
ipsis statutas. Elenc. Mot. page 64.
here and there with Independency and Anabaptism; and a little to allay the
censures of some people, two or three were added to them, of good Learning and
Principles; though quickly jugled out thence, and other preferments, (as the
Reverend Dr. Featly,) to make way for some sweet-soul'd Myrmidon. And what
these praepossest-Teachers constitute concerning a praejudged Government, must
be confirmed by their Taskmasters the Parliament, as if performed by a grave
and learned Convocation of Divines.

Must his Majesty, or any of his true Subjects, be tried for their lives, and
martyred? None must be their Judges, but those who are his and their mortal
Enemies; and bring with them a Sentence, resolved upon, long before the Trial;
nor are the Prisoners permitted to question any of them, though the Laws grant
liberty to the errantest Rogue in England, to except against 35. Jurymen,
without showing any reason why.

If the Royal Family of the Stuarts be exstirpated, Kingship Voted and Enacted
unnecessary, burthensom and dangerous; and an ancient flourishing Monarchy
sprouted into a many-headed Commonwealth: None more fit to be the contrivers
of this Confusion, than those who acted, not for a public Benefit, but a
private Interest; having run so far into Rebellion, that self-preservation
prompted them to be Judges, as was a party in our domestic broyls: it being
not solid reason, but, because they were Moderators which changed the frame.

And if the Reverend Clergy must be outed their Livings, then none must be
their Tryers or Examiners, but those Juglers of Peter's and Nye's Fraternity; a
sort of frantic people, sworn Enemies to all Learning and Church Government,
and therefore the more fit to pass judgment against the other as Antagonists.
Thus, like the Calvinists, must we be Judges in our own Cause; and that in
things against all Law, and then we are certain to remain Conquerers.

VI.
When the People of Hildelberg, (who were neither satisfied with these new
Teachers, or Plots), did Petition that the Lutheran Preachers, might be settled
and restored again amongst them; no notice is taken of any such thing by the
Superiors, and so no satisfactory Answer happened to their desires. But rather
on the contrary, those Ministers, in whose favor the people petitioned, were
frowned upon, and censured as too hasty, furious and heady. Answerable to the
Palatinate, has the affairs in England been carried on; all our Petitions
working small effect, unless scribled according to Parliamentary Interest.

The several Petitions from the two Universities, and most Counties of the
Nation, at the beginning of these Wars, in the behalf of Episcopacy, Liturgy,
Church-Revenues, and suppression of Schismatics, prevailed nothing with the
Parliament, though subscribed by the chief Nobility and Gentry in the Kingdom:
Nor had that of Worcestershire, 22. December. 1652.
about 10. years after, in the behalf of an able Ministry and the Universities
any better luck, only obtaining the formality of thanks from the Speakers
mouth; and after this fashion has been the exit of others. And yet with what
alacrity and cheerfulness did the same men receive that Impudent Petition,
(taken notice of by the King) Ex. Coll p. 548.
of a company of beggarly Rascals in London; who desired that the Lords and
Commons might be jumbled into one House, that they might subdue the pride of
the King; of all which, if they had not a speedy remedy, they would take the
cure into their own hands, and destroy the disturbers of the Peace. These
frantic demands were pleasant to the Commons, because agreeable to their
desires, if not set on foot by themselves; the which is something probable,
because they owned it so far, as to present it to the Lords.

However it must be granted some favor, that the People are permitted to
present their desires: though the Army themselves professed, that it was the
undoubted right of the People to Petition; (as in truth Representat. 5. October.
1659. page 6.
it is), yet afterward they denied the same liberty to the London Prentises,
knowing their desires to be more for the Public benefit than the Armies
satisfaction: so that Mr. Wharton sung not amiss; when thus: -- Petitioning the
Birthright of the Saints.


VII.
After all these Revolutions, nothing appearing to harbor any signs of Tumult
[the people perceiving no harm done to themselves, little regarded the concerns
of the Church, though it and the State should suffer reciprocally] the
Lutherans were outed of their Parochial Churches and Benefices, all being
delivered to the Calvinists. The traceing of this Observation is not unknown to
any, that has heard of a Persecution. How many famous Divines were sequestered
and thrust from their Livings in these unnatural Wars? London should lament the
expulsion of so many learned men from her, and the supplying of their Places by
a Band of hot-braind, long-winded and Schismatical Presbyterians. And, as if
this were not enough, Oliver must add to their afflictions, by one Order
forbidding them to Preach, or Teach School; as if, like the Italian, he gloryed
not only to kill their Bodies, but Souls also. And all this done, because
[prompted by their steadfast and sure Consciences], they would not swallow, like
our Temporizers, Contradictory Oaths. Whereby I may well raise this Quaere.

Whether those, who after they have with much consideration, once made a lawful
Vow, will keep it: or those, who as the Tide serves, will swear point-blanck
one Oath against another, rather than be kept from the shore of Preferment, or
thrown from that, which they have unlawfully got, are most godly and honest?

To all these who have been put out of their Places by show of Public Command,
I might add these, who were kept back by the seared Consciences of their
ignorant and malicious Examiners, a sort of people, not so much fearing God and
hating Covetousness, if Mr. Sadler may have credit; whither I referr you for
satisfaction.

VIII.
The Scholars of the University, who were Lutherans, if they would not turn
Calvinists, were turned out, and the Calvinists put into their places. The
Parallel of this is too palpable to discourse much of. Oxford Quod Posterorum
quoque odia accenderet, Academias visitandi specie, doctissimos quosque in
Exilium amandare. El. Mot. p. 91.
will never forget the Lord Pembroke's Visitation; nor Cambridge, that of the
Earl of Manchester: In which two Universities, there was a thorough Purge, to
the perpetual reproach and ignominy of the Undertakers; many famous and learned
Doctors, Heads of Houses, Masters of Arts, and others, were turned out of their
Fellowships, and Colleges, because they would not submit to that, which was
contrary to their Oaths and the Privileges of both places; imposed upon them
by those, who had no more authority in such things, than they had to behead, or
rebel against their Master.

IX.
Contzenus says, these Revolutions must be done moderately, and with abundance
of cunning; the first step being to make the followers and abetters of the
contrary Opinion odious, and as it were, a scorn in the Country; and this by
disgracing them, especially, with things which seem most ridiculous, absurd,
and hate full to the common people, either by nick-naming, or any way else. The
scandalous Reports and Pamphlets thrown against both King and Bishop, as
Popish, though they thought nothing less, may be some sign, what good use has
been made of Contzen's Observation. What disgrace cast upon the decent Habits
of Church and University? though the first, according to the Canons; and the
other, appointed by the Statutes of the place. What unseemly Titles given to
Organs, as Bag-pipes; and what irreverent names to Churches, as Steeple Houses?
How were the Clergy nicknamed with the title of Hirelings; Humane Learning as
Heathenish; and Scholars as professing enmity against the Gospel?

How Cromwell's Faction spread abroad Pamphlets against King, City, Hist.
Independ. Part. 1. Sect. 19, 20, 21.
and Parliament, [1647.] that the people might take the Army for honest men, is
somewhat pointed at by Mr. Walker. And since that, What scurrilous Books has
been contrived by Needham, Goodwin, Milton, Rogers, and such like Billingsgate
Authors, is not unknown to to any.

Nor is it forgot, what impertinent Reports the Long-Parliament spread amongst
the People, to make the King odious, as that he was a Favorite to the
Catholics, and those called Arminians; which sufficiently demonstrated a
Presbyterian malice, since the first was false, and the other no crime. And
this must also be laid in the dish of Archbishop Laud, though Prynne, and they
knew, that he wrote more against the Romanists, than all our Britain
Presbyterians; who have spent more time in the commendation of Rebellion, than
in the Service of God. And certainly, I may as well call Prynne a Stage Player
for writing his Histriomastix; as he the Archbishop, Papistical, because he
wrote so learnedly against them.

And as if this were not mischief enough, the People must now and then be
alarmed with strange Reports of Forces from Denmark, Lorraign, and other
strange places; as if the Nation were to be conquered, and the Natifs throats
cut; which if we yield, yet will the ignominy only fall upon the Presbyterian
Party, who by their want of Allegiance would bring the King to such straits,
that his own Subjects were not able to defend him from their Tyranny. They
thought it fit for us, to send aid into the Palatinate; and, yet unlawful for
Denmark, to assist his own Kinsman against his Rebellious Subjects. It was
convenient, they thought, to give help to the French against their lawful King;
yet held it abominable for Forraigners to give a good wish to the King of
England, against his rebellious people. The Covenanters in Scotland, might with
honesty, crave aid from the French King, though a Roman Catholic against their
Anointed Sovereign: But so must not the King of England from the Duke of
Lorraign, though his life endangered by his bloodthirsty Subjects. The
Parliament, forsooth, may make a Pacification with the Irish Catholics; but
the King must not harbor such a thought, without grand aspersions. If the King
but march toward Scotland, the malignity of envious tongues endeavors to
blast his Reputation, as not fit to wear the Crown: But many thousands of the
Scotch-Covenanters may come into England, fight against their King, kill his
faithful Subjects, and enrich themselves by their plundering and stealing from
the honest People; and for their villainies, receive large rewards, with the
Epithet of Brethren, and so they were, but in Iniquity: being guilty of
High Treason, because marched and acted against the Kings consent, who is the
Supreme Authority of the three Nations.

And that the Supreme Head may, when rebelled against, for his own security and
defense, desire help of his Neighbors, (though of a different persuasion in
Religion), I think, needs no dispute. He that would lose his Kingdom quietly,
is as simple as the Rebel's wicked; and if his own Sword be not long enough for
the trial, he may lawfully borrow his Friends: If the Parliament stood so much
upon their Privileges, I know no reason, but that the King might maintain his
Prerogative; and if any Contradiction be betwixt these two, they are obliged to
yield to their betters. Nor does it thwart the practice of former times, for
the Supreme Authority to desire assistance from people of a contrary Religion:
as may be seen by the following examples, as I find them set down to my hand in
a late French Treatise. Recueil des Traictes and de France, and les Princes,
and Estats de Estrangers, page 123, 124.
Aza, the good King of Judaea, procured assistance from Benhadad the Idolatrous
King Syria. And so did the Great Constantine employ, in his Armies, many
Heathenish Goths. So were the wicked Vandals called into Africa by good
Boniface. And after this manner did Narses, under the Emperor Justinian,
employ the Pagan Lombards. The good Arcadius, Emperor of Constantinople,
though a Christian, delivered the tuition of his young son Theodosius, and the
Government of the Empire till his Son came to age, into the hands of Isdigerdis
King of Persia, a Heathen; who accordingly kept his promise with the Emperor.
Heraclius the Emperor was beholden to the Saracens: as Basilius and
Constantine's sons to John Emperor of Constantinople, were to Ostelzi. And by
these people were also Henry and Frederick, Brothers to the King of Castile,
mainly benefited in their Wars against the French. Ludouick Sforza, Duke of
Milan, and others, begged assistance from the Turk against the French, as
Maximilian of Austria did against the Venetians. And if it be lawful to procure
aid from Heathens; certainly a Christian may seek help from those who profess
Jesus Christ, though in every thing they cannot absolutely agree. But enough of
this: since the Presbyterian commits ten times more sin in Rebelling, than the
wickedst man can do in defending his own right, though by the assistance of
Turks and Infidels.

X.
What a great stickler Robert Parsons, the Jesuit, was to overthrow both
England, and the Protestant Religion in it, is well known: the great Statesman
Cardinal D'Ossat takes notice several times of his Letr. l. 7. let. 268. page
552. let. 291. p. 617, etc.
designs against these Kingdoms. Some of his Plots and Contrivances, shall
follow as they were published by W. Clarks Reply to Fa. Parsons Libel. fol. 74.
W. Watson's Quodlibets of Religion and State, p. 92, 93, 94, 95, 286.
some Roman Catholics.

One of his means, is, to alter the Municipal Laws of the Land, that the Civil
Laws might have sway. It Is needless to relate how the Laws have been chopped
and changed by diversity of Governments, (not knowing where to find a
settlement amongst our selves), and all as the Sword pleased; and how
conducible such repealing actions are to overthrow our settled and fundamental
Laws, is plain.

XI.
That the Clergy in England be put to Pensions. This is a rule of as much
concern as any in the Body Politic. This is the way to make the Clergy slaves
to every Usurper, and so by their Preachments to gain Proselytes. By this
means, none should receive any Preferment but pure Hirelings; those who would
hold forth to their Auditors every thing that their Pay-Masters thought good,
which would make them all like Clisophus, belonging to Philip of Macedon, to
halt when their Masters were lame, and in all things to comply with the
Grandees.

Thus like Alexander's Apes, that imitated his Army in Martial discipline, have
our Schismatical hot-heads with a Curse ye Meros, ecchoed an Alarm answerable
to the strokes of their Bloodthirsty Patrons. Who like Father Time, delighted
not only to pull down men, but also ruin the Foundations of famous Structures,
the eminent Monuments of our Forefathers Charity: of which we have had some
tastes, and were in a fair way, to see the work completed; as was probable, by
the great Petitioning and Writing against Tithes and other maintenance of, and
small encouragements to an Orthodox Clergy.

XII.
That all Colleges in Oxford and Cambridge be deprived of their Lands and
Revenues; and that the Scholars of them become Pensioners. This is the thing
which they have actively failed in, and I hope, will for ever: Though what
their intentions have been, may be evidently drawn from their pernicious
actions to discourage both Learning, and the Ministry, by scandals cast upon
them and their studies as needless: with whom some ignorant Boobies formerly
agreed; as John Ludgate Monk of St. Edmondsbury informs us, and in his way
confutes.

Craft of langage and of prudent spech, Fall of Princis. lib. 6. fol. 156. b.
2.

Causes prechours by spiritual doctrine
Uertuously the people for to tech,
How they shall live by Moral Discipline,
Langage techeth men to plant Uine.
Enformeth folk to worship holy Church,
The Artificer trewely for to wyrche.
Yet there be sum that pleynly tech and preche,
Have of Language this Opinyon.
God has not most reward unto speech,
But to the heart and to the affection,
Best began guyrdon the inward intencion,
Of every man, not after the visage,
But like the moveing of their inward carage, etc.
The form of Preaching of late, was come to that pass, that unless he decryed
Learning as useless, or either saved or damned all, (though the latter was held
the more plausible, such was the peoples love to extremes), he was held to want
both gifts and a discerning spirit. To shake hands with the Text, and take no
more notice of it, then when it was named, was a great sign of some
extraordinary Inspiration: but a good and solid Sermon was reproached with
Humane Learning; as if Literature were no more advantage to a Divine, then the
ancient Ship Argo to defend the great Stones upon Salisbury-Plain from being
stolen away by the Parrots in Magellinica.

And this way, they used to make Learning seem unnecessary and odious to the
Vulgar, that so with more plausibleness, they might alienate their Lands. For
nothing else could be their intentions to cherish up Ignorance, by suffering
and encouraging Pratlers, who had never seen a College, sacrilegiously to
abuse Pulpits; by which, intimating to the People, that a Cobbler or
Taylors-stall, was as good a Nurcery for a Divine as either University. And to
make this more fesible, a Band of Itinerants were foisted up in Wales, under
the Conduct of Vavasor Powell, one (if reports be true), more fit to rub Horses
heels, than enter a Pulpit: where they turned out the settled Ministry, and so
locked up the Church-doors, that a Sermon was as rare there, as they were too
common in England. It was another man's Concordance, and their own Impudence,
that were their chief Interpreters of Scriptures. The Fathers, and other
Commentators, being held too much Popish, and knowing, to have any credit
amongst such Illuminato's: And thus was Learning openly trod down, and
Colledge-Lands thereby tacitly gaped after.

Thus have a wretched sort of people, (who like the Shark, often swallow that,
which was never intended them), endeavored what in them lay, to root up the
Foundation of Learning. And this more pardonable, than a late wicked crew of
Matricides, who have had not only their breeding, but the best part of (if not
all) their livelihood from the Charity of Colledge-Founders; yet have made it
their business to scrible whole Books, to incite the Rabble to lay these
ancient Fabrics equal with the ground, so that the University might well
complain;

Heu! patior telis vulnera facta meis!
-- Woe's me! how I am cursed,
Despised and vilifi'd by those I nursed!
These, like the Viper, delight to live by the destruction of their Mother; as
if their greatest Triumph would be, like the wanton Queen, to carrouse in their
Parents skull. But of these, I may speak hereafter, and shall now only tell
you, that the Long-Parliament at their beginning, took notice, that courses had
been taken to suppress Learning: 5. December. 1640.
But a new Broom sweeps clean; and though a child at first be careful of his
new shoes, yet at last he will delight in their pollution.

It Is a sign of unspeakable malice and covetousness, for people to grudge the
benefit of others, since it takes nothing from them. Those who repine at the
Lands of the Clergy and Colleges, might have some reason, if they were taken
from them: But when charitable people, (no way related to these Grumblers),
shall give this, or that, to the encouragement of Learning, or Piety; you may
as lawfully desire the Charters, Lands, and Commons, belonging to Corporations,
as the Privileges and Maintenance from the former; and then Hell may as as soon
plead sanctity, as this covetous Varlet honesty.

XIII.
That Spain has had real thoughts of the Conquest of England, is probable, not
only by their 88. Invasion, but their often endeavor upon Ireland; And Dr.
Sharp assured the Duke of Buckingham of the Cabala. p. 260, 261. De Monarch.
Hisp. cap. 25. p. 203, 204.
same. And for the bringing of this Design about, Thomas Campanella tells the
Catholic King, that nothing is more conducible, than to foment discords
amongst themselves, the which may be done with their own money.

The same advice the great Politic Cardinal Richelieu, upon his Deathbed,
communicated to the King of France, as the only means Gal. Gualdo Hist. part.
3. lib. 3. p. 176.
to aggrandize the French Kingdom, as a Venetian informs us. And some wise
men think, that our late distractions were but the result of his Brains. And,
that either Party was assisted with Moneys from Beyond-Seas, I know not: But
rather on the contrary, do believe, that the War was maintained by our own
Cash; and besides, that no small Sums have been jugled over the Water, by some
sinful Grandees, that had run so far into wickedness, that their Consciences
told them, that they had lived Islanders long enough, and so must court the
Continent for self-preservation, where they must provide for a rainy-day. And
what is become of all our Gold, I know not, unless it has traveled too.

XIV.
Another means to overthrow England, Campanella thinks, is to set them and the
Dutch together by the Ears. The fulfilling of which is fresh in every ones
memory.

XV.
After all Campanella's pumping to undo England, and root out the Protestant
Religion, he can imagine no way more conducible to such ends, then the reducing
of that Kingdom into a Commonwealth.

Of which Observation there needs no Remarks, but Experience not yet forgot.

CHAP. V.
The Original of the Commons in Parliament; That the Clergy is one of the Three
Estates, and the King Supreme above all.

WHen I find God himself calling Rebellion, the sin of Witchcraft; for me to
speak against it, by endeavoring to aggravate the Iniquity, would be to as
small purpose to an Ingenious man, as the pains and expenses of Calvisius
Sabinus, to attain to the height of Learning, Seneca. Epist. 27.
since his memory was so weak, that it could scarce retain the Names of
Ulysses, Achilles, and Priamus. Yet, were it nearer allied to Hell then it is,
it would not want both daring and knowing Patrons, which does something
mitigate my admiration, when I consider, what Paper, Time, besides too much
Blood, has been spent by some men of late days, to Apologize for the greatest
Wickedness; and thereby to strengthen themselves, through their Actions in the
Peoples Affections.

These, though they had the worst Plea, yet came off with the best Success; by
which they clamourously declared the Justness of their Cause, hinting to the
Royalists, that it was owned by a Supernatural Power. But

-- Careat successibus opto,
Quisquis ab eventu facta notanda putat.
-- Let him never gain applause,
That from the event, states the goodness of the cause.
And how Orthodox such Arguments are, is obvious, if we do but consider the
often prosperity of the wicked, who are sometimes permitted to conquer, more
for a scourge to others, than any justness in themselves: And, I dare be
confident, in our case it holds; the unlawfulness of these late domestic
Commotions, being rightly more appropriated to the Parliament than his Majesty,
as in it is due place shall be shown.

But first, to make the way more plain and easy to those who call themselves
the weak Brethren, (the first fomenters of this Rebellion); we shall in brief
consider, the Antiquity, Subordination, and Privileges of Parliaments, as they
now stand; whereby it is plain, they had no power given them thus to raise Wars
against, and imprison [much less behead] their Sovereign: For, what I here
speak, is intended chiefly against the Long-Parliament.

The most ancient Government in this Island, that Records can instruct us of,
is Monarchy, and that in its Antiquity, the most absolute; the higher we go,
finding our Kings more free and powerful. That reciprocal Compact between King
and People, so much boasted of by our Common-wealths-men, and others, being but
a mere dream, and Chamaera; as that great Soul of Reason and Divinity the
Reverend Bishop His Preface before Bishop Usher's Book, The Power of the
Prince. Sect. 15, 16, 17, 18.
Sanderson has compendiously and fully evinced.

That the ancient Kings of this Island had Meetings for Consultations, reason
prompts me to believe; though I do not remember after what certain fashion:
yet, since Christianity was settled here, the Kings used to employ the
Archbishops, Bishops, and Nobility, by way of Advice and Counsel: Ethelbert,
the famous King of our Kentish Saxons, being converted unto the Christian
Faith, about the year 596. some nine years after [viz. 605.] summons a Council,
in which were, not only the Laity, but the Clergy also. After which time, the
Reverend Archbishops, and Bishops, have sat, as a part of those grand Meetings,
[till the late Exclusion by the Long-Parliament], as the well-read Dr. Heylin,
(who though under a great decay of sight, sees Stumblingblock, Chap. 5. Sect.
6, 7, 8, etc.
more than a whole Nation of Presbytery), has sufficiently asserted.

These Lords Spiritual and Temporal, were the only Parliament known to former
Kings, and so but one House: However, sometimes Sir G. Buck's Third University,
in John Stow's Chron. p. 1068. col. 2.
upon great concerns, the King would, when himself best pleased, have some of
the Commoners joined with them; but then, they were not as now elected, but
particularly chosen, according to the Kings desire; and these were of more than
ordinary savor and discretion, and therefore called Wisemen.

The first time, that, in History, we can meet with a Parliament, consisting of
the Clergy, Nobility, and Commons, is in King Henry the firsts days, at
Salisbury, Anno 1116. and so the Clergy were 500. years before the Commons in
Parliaments. But, why this King should be the first, that threw this favor so
generally upon the Commons, was (as some are pleased to affirm), grounded upon
his own Usurpation. For, he being but the younger Son of William the
Conqueror, following the President of William Rufus, seized upon the Crown, in
the absence of his eldest Brother Robert, and afterward most cruelly put out
his eyes. This, they say, moved many Discontents amongst the Nobility, against
whom to strengthen himself, he thought it best to pleasure the Commons; which
was done, by calling them to this Parliament at Salisbury, whereby his
Usurpation became more formidable against his Enemies.

But though the Commons were called to Counsel at this time, [if Historical
Collect. of Ancient Parl. Part. 1. p. 17, 18.
at this time, since Prynne denies it], yet were they not thereby made or
esteemed necessary: since in several Kings raigns successively after,
Parliaments were held (as Prynne, their chief Patron, does acknowledge),
consisting only of the Spiritual and Temporal Barons. And, when afterward they
did really sit, is as uncertain, as after what manner, or when they had their
first Speaker: The first, by that Title upon Record, being Sir Thomas
Hungerford, [Anno 1376.] Hackwell' s Modus tenend. Parl. p. 200.
though the year before, John Stow calls Sir Peter de la More their Prolocutor.
And before these two, but three [viz. Petrus de Mountford, Scroope, and Sir
William Trussel; the first of these, viz. Mountford being in the 44th. year of
Henry III.] that are known, are supposed, to officiate as Speakers; for, in
what nature they were of, is not yet known: [though for certain, if the Commons
sat by themselves, they could not want some such like Officer]. It being many
years afterward, [viz. Anno 1401.] that the King [Henry IV.] required the
Commons to choose a Speaker; before which time, no such Command being recorded.
Thus, we see the small Antiquity of Parliaments, as they now stand with us
representing the three Estates, the Clergy, Nobility, and Commons.

This I write, to show, how strangely confident, the Commons were of late
days; who, (if you will believe Prynne, one of themselves), Plea for the Lords.
had really no such Power and Judicatureship, as they did in the least pretend
to. Nor would I be thought in this, or any thing in the sequent Discourse, to
invalid the true and real Authority of Parliaments, or to lessen the Credit of
the Commons House, holding it now to be an Essential part of Parliament; but,
yet not so much, as some of late have done. Nor can I subscribe to, (till I be
better informed), that Privilege given to the Commons, by I know not whom;
yet, I suppose, of no vulgar apprehension: viz. That the The sorm and manner of
keeping of the Parliament of England. c. 23. page 521. a M. S. in the Bodleian
Library of Oxford.
King may hold his Parliament for the Communalty of the Realm, without Bishops,
Earls, and Barons; so, that they have lawful Monitions, or summons, albeit they
come not. Yet the same Book affirms, that, the King, with his Bishops, Earls,
and Barons, cannot hold a Parliament without the assistance of the Commons. And
his reason for all this assertion, is, because, Sometime there was neither
Bishop, Earl, ne Baron; and, yet the King did keep and hold his Parliaments. To
which, I shall only answer, in brief, thus; That if he mean, that our Kings
have kept Parliaments, when there was no such thing, as, or distinction, in
this Nation of, Priest, or Nobility, or some such Rank, above the common
People; I shall utterly deny his Proposition: Or, if he understand, that
Parliaments have been held only by the King and Commons, I shall not yield to
him, till I be assured where, and when; yet, if both were allowed, it can be no
good consequence, that it may be done so now, if custom have any sway in
England, which is now a main Card of the Commons Game.

And because, some of late, (more through malice than judgment), have not only
asserted the King to be one of the Estates [by which plot they will equal
themselves to him, and so overthrow his Rule and Government, of which Sir
Edward Deering does a little hint], Book of Speeches. page ult.
but also exclude the Clergy. It will not be amiss, in this place, to right
both, by one or two authentic Instances. The first, shall be the Parliaments
Bill, presented to King Richard III. when, but Duke of Gloucester, to desire him
to take upon him the Kingship, the which is very long; but in it, you shall
find these words; -- Us the Speed' s Chron. Rich. 3. p. 912, 913, 914.
Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons of this Realm of England --
according to the Election of us the three Estates of this Land. -- -- Therefore
at the request, and by the assent of the three Estates of this Realm: That is
to say, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons, of this Land assembled,
in this present Parliament. Here we have Three Estates, the Clergy being one
and the King none. My second Instance shall be taken out of one Titus Livius de
Frulonisiis, [a Book quoted several times by Stow, M. S. in the Bodleian
Library of Oxford. page 88.
in Henry V. which Manuscript, is also in Latin, in St. Benit's College
Library in Cambridge], where having related the life and death of Henry V. he
tells us, that, After all these things and Ceremonies of his burying, were
solemnly finished, as is to-fore rehearsed, the Three Estates of the Realm of
England, assembled them together, in great number, to take advice and
deliberation amongst them, what was most necessary to be done for the Regiment
and Government of the said Realm of England: where they concluded to take for
their King the only Son of the late King Henry, whose name was also Henry,
which was the VI. of that Name since the Conquest of England. But, because some
may slight this, as only the judgment of a private Historian; we will
strengthen our Assertion by the Laws of our Land. In Queen Elizabeth's time, an
Act of Parliament affords us these words; -- We your said most loving, faithful
and obedient subjects, representing 1 Elizab. c. 3.
the Three Estates of your Realm of England, as thereunto constrained by Law of
God and Man, etc. Here are again Three Estates, and the Queen none: and that
the Clergy are one, another Act of Parliament will inform us in these words; --
The State of the 8 Elizab. c. 1.
Clergy, being one of the greatest States of this Realm.

And after this same manner was the Clergy in Scotland, one of the Estates, as
may also appear by their own Acts of Parliament, one of which runs thus; --
That the Three Estates, especially Sanderson's Hist. K. James. page 111.
considering the persons exercising the Offices, Titles, and Dignities of
Prelates, which persons have ever represented one of the Estates -- And in
another Parliament, some thirteen years before this [viz. 1584.] it was thus
Enacted; -- That none presume to impugn Id. page 110. 292.
the Dignity and Authority of the Three Estates, or to seek, or procure the
innovation or diminution of their Power and Authority, or any of them in time,
coming under pain of Treason. And whether the Scots have of late, behaved
themselves according to these Laws, is well known. And it seems strange to me,
that they durst be so impudent against their King, who, considering his power
in choosing Parliaments, was one of the most absolute Monarchs in the World,
till the modern Rebellious Retrenchments.

These things are convincing to me, that the King never was one, or part of,
but above, the Three Estates; it being ridiculous, that his Majesty should
Petition himself, and call himself subject to himself. Nor see I any reason, to
doubt, that the Clergy was one, having Acts of Parliament for it, who knew
their own Constitution best.

It Is true, of late, the Clergy have had no Representatives in Parliament; the
Reverend Lords Spiritual, being, I do not know how, thrown out of the
Upper-House; and the action, at last, by threats and other villainies, procured
to be signed by the Royal Assent: for which (and seeing they are since happily
restored again), I shall not at this time presume to question; though many who
are learned in our Fundamental Laws, suppose that reasons might be shown, and
that grounded upon law, of it is nullity; to which purpose, the learned Dr.
Heylin has given a short Essay; both, from the binding Stumbling Block, Chap.
5. Sect. 12. p. 212.
of Magna Charta, [the darling too of our Presbyterian Parliaments], which,
especially provides for the Privileges of the Clergy, as also by the voiding
of all actions done by the King by compulsion, and not of his free will. And
that Kings may be so wrought upon, appears by King James, who, when King of
Scotland, was by his unruly Subjects, constrained to declare, several times,
quite contrary to his judgment; and, so was King Edward III. as appears by the
Revocation of a Statute made the 15. year of his reign. And how unwilling, King
Charles the first, was to sign this Bill, is not unknown: the Parliament having
got a new Art of getting their ends about, viz. by Tumults, and Threats, so
that the King was rather fought, than reasoned out of it. And, what impudence
the Commons were brasoned with, to presume, thus, to extirpate the Spiritual
Lords, whose Antiquity in Parliament was double to theirs, is experimentally
beyond expression. But they, and so did the Puritanical Faction of the Nobility
(for such Animals were amongst them too) know well enough, that the King would
not only be weakened, but themselves strengthened, by annihilation of 26. such
sound, Royal and Orthodox Votes, for which qualifications the Schismatical
Lords and Commons hated them.

But enough of this: only I shall leave some Quaeries to the consideration of
the Presbyterian mad-caps (Lord or Common), of the wicked Long-Parliament.

I.
Whether or no, if the King and two Estates can extirpate the third, then, the
King, Lords Spiritual and Temporal cannot turn out the Commons, as well as the
King, Lords Temporal and Commons, exclude the Bishops?

II.
Whether or no, when the King and two Estates have turned out the third, the
King with another Estate cannot also turn out the second; And lastly, when only
the King and one Estate remains, the King as Supreme cannot seclude that also?

III.
And, if these things will bear a good Consequence, Whether the Presbyterians
(whose chiefest confidence was in the Long-Parliament; but esecially the
Commons), have not brought their Hoggs to a fair Market?

But these People did not only overthrow Episcopacy, but struck also at the
root of Monarchy it self, by their pleadings against the King's Supremacy;
making themselves not only equal to, but above The Parliaments Remonstrance to
the King, 2. November. 1642.
him. And this, not only when assembled in Parliament, but when they are so far
from having any Authority there, [there being no such thing then sitting], that
they are separately, so many private Subjects, obliged only to follow their own
occasions; for in this capacity, I suppose, they make themselves, when they
allege for a Rule, Rex est major singules, minor Vniversis, considering they
place this in their Remonstrance as distinct from Parliaments.

But how weak this Position is, let Parliaments themselves be our Judges. And I
do not love to reason against Authentic Records. When God tells us expressly,
that Whoredom is a grievous sin; 'twas blasphemy in John de Casa, to write in
the vindication of Sodomy. When Ignatius, Irenaeus, and other ancient and
authentic Authors, assure us, that Presbytery was subordinate to Episcopacy in
the first Century, it is folly in our late Schismatics to dream of, or
introduce, a Parity. When Parliaments acknowledge themselves Subjects to his
Majesty, for any to conclude thence, their Supremacy, are, in my judgment, no
less guilty of ignorance than that simpleton of Athens, who fancied all the
ships and other things to be his, when he had no more interest in them, then I
have relation to the Crown of Castile. The Lords and Commons tell us plainly,
what little signs they have of Superiority in these words; -- Where by diverse
24 Hen. 8. c. 12.
sundry old authentic Histories and Chronicles, it is manifestly declared and
expressed, that this Realm of England is an Empire, and so has been accepted in
the World, governed by one Supreme Head and King, having the Dignity and Royal
Estate of the Imperial Crown of the same, unto whom a Body Politic, compact of
all sorts and degrees of people, and divided in terms and by names of
Spiritualty and Temporally, been bounden, and ought to bear next to God, a
natural and humble obedience, etc. And in many other Statutes, do they
acknowledge themselves the King's most humble, faithful, and obedient Subjects.
But more especially, in those two, of Supremacy, and Allegiance, in which they
acknowledge the King the Supreme under God, both of Civil and Ecclesiastical
affairs, and so swear Allegiance to him, each Parliament Man before he sit,
taking both the Oaths, as all other Subjects do. Whereby they clearly renounce
not only Priority, but Parity; by which, all their Cavils bring nothing upon
themselves but Perjury. Against this Supremacy of our Kings, though it be under
God and Christ, Qui initio tantopere extulerunt Henricum Regem Angliae, certe
fuerunt inconsiderati homines; dederwit illi summam rerum omnium potestatem,
and hoc me semper graviter vulneravit. Erant enim Blasphemi, quum votarunt
ipsum Summum Caput Ecclesiae sub Christo, etc. Jo. Calvin. in Amos cap. 7.
verss. 13. page 282.
John Calvin rants in his usual hot-spurr'd zeal, calling them Blasphemers, and
Fools, who durst first presume to give such a title to a King: And in obedience
to this Supreme Head of Geneva, and Presbytery, does his dear Subject and
Disciple Admonition to England and Scotland. fol. 70. a.
Anthony Gilby, and others, of that Fraternity, shoot their Wildfire against
the same Statutes of England: by which they show their Schism and Madness, more
than Christian Prudence.

Besides all this, our Laws make it Treason, to compass, or imagine, the death
of the King, Queen, or his eldest Son, -- to leavy War 25 Edw. 3. cap. 2. 1
Mariae, c. 1.
against the King, or any way adhere to, or assist his Enemies. But, for any to
commit Treason against the Parliament, especially for those, who have the King
on their side, I see little reason; because I have express Law to the contrary,
which tells us, that any one who shall attend upon the King in his Wars, and
for his Defense, shall in no ways 11 Hen. 7. c. 1.
be convict or attaint of High Treason, ne of other offenses for that cause, by
Act of Parliament, or otherwise by any process of Law, whereby, he or any of
them, shall loose or forfeit Life, Lands, Tenements, Rents, Possessions,
Hereditaments, Goods, Chattels, or any other things: but to be for that deed
and service utterly discharged of any vexation, trouble, or loss. And, if any
Act or Acts, or other process of the Law, here after thereupon for the same
happen to be made contrary to this Ordinance, that then that Act, or Acts, or
other process of the Law, whatsoever they shall be, stand and be utterly void.

How this Act has been since violated, Compounders, Sequestrators, and
Decimators, will best inform you. And, what a pitiful, ridiculous and extorted
Comment the Noddles of the Long-Parliament made upon this Act, may be seen in
their Declarations, by which you may Ex. Coll. p. 280, 724, 725.
view both their ignorance and their malice.

These are Presidents enough, to satisfy any man in the Parliaments subjection
to the King; it being in his power to constitute them, not they him; in him
being the only Authority to call, and dissolve them, not any such being in
themselves: He can pardon Malefactors, not they without his consent. The death
of the King dissolves the Parliament, though their breaking up reflects nothing
upon him: He can call them where he pleases; but they, not remove his Court.
They Petition him, by way of Subjects, not he them. The King of England, can do
no wrong, and never dies, being always of 7 Edw. 6. c. 3.
full age; the breath of the former being no sooner expired, but the next Heir
is de facto King, without the Ceremony of Proclamation or Coronation: And,
whether a Parliament can do no wrong or no, I leave to many men now in England
to judge? The Kings power has been such, that he has called a Parliament with
what limitations he pleased; as King Henry the fourth's Parliament at Coventry,
in Anno Dom. 1404.
which no Lawyer was to sit: And whether too many Lawyers in a Parliament, does
more good, or bad, has been often discoursed of in late times. And it is the King
has the power of the Sword, not the Parliament, as their own Laws tell us: for
in the year 1271. October. 30. We find this Statute, -- To us [i. e. the King] it
belongs, 7 Edw. 1. Stat. 1.
and our part is through our Royal Seignory straightly to defend, [i. e. to
prohibit or stop], force of Armor, and all other force against our Peace, at
all times, when it shall please us, and to punish them who shall do contrary
according to the Laws and Usages of our Realm. And hereunto they are bound to
aid us, as their Sovereign Lord, at all seasons, when need shall be.

And the meaning of this Statute has several times since been made good, by
practice on the part of the Commons. For in King Edward J. H's. Sober
Inspections. page 33, 34.
the third's days, a Parliament was summoned to consult about the security of
the Marches of Scotland, and the Seas; and, the advice of the Commons was
desired about these things. But they humbly declined it, submissively desiring,
that they might not be put to consult of those things whereof they had no
cognizance. And in the same King's reign, when their advice was asked, touching
a Prosecution of a War with France; after four days consultation, they
returned their Answer by Justice Thorpe: That their humble desire to the King,
was, that he would be advised therein by the Lords, being of more experience
then themselves in such affairs.

And in the sixth year of King Richard the second, a Parliament was called to
consult, Whether the King should go himself to rescue Gaunt, or send an Army?
The Commons humbly answered by their Speaker Sir Thomas Puckering, That the
Council of War did more belong to the King and his Lords. And the next year,
their advice being asked, concerning the Articles of Peace with France, they
modestly excused themselves, as too weak to counsel in so weighty matters; and
being more earnestly pressed to show their own opinions, they humbly advised
rather for Peace than War. For in those days the Knights and Burgesses made
it their only care, to study the welfare of, and complain of the grievances
which afflicted, those places for which they served. Those of Lin, would
consult the advancement of the Trade of Fishing; those of Norwich, the making
of Stuffs; he of Teverston, of Kersies; those of Suffolk, what conduced to the
benefit of Clothing; those of Cornwall, for their Stanneries; and never pry into
those things which were far above many of their Intellectuals. Many of them
being but of inferior Trades: and so almost as unfit to apprehend the
Intrigues of State, and manage such grand Concerns, Pezel. Mellif. Hist. Part.
2. p. 142.
as Caligula's Horse to Officiate in Divine Service, though made a Priest by
the said Emperor; or those Priests a hundred years ago, to compile a Body of
Divinity, or a Church History; whose ignorance Spotswood's Hist. p. 75, 76.
was such, as to think, that the New Testament was composed by Martin Luther.
Such was the modesty and discretion of former Parliaments. And, if these of
later date have any more Privileges than the ancient, it is so far unknown to
me, that I despair of ever finding them.

Of this, I need say no more, but that, as a Parliament in Queen Mary's days,
supplicated, That the Pope's Supremacy over them, Stow' s Chron. p. 625. col 2.
might be restored, greatly repenting them of their former Schism, by which
means they got their absolution from Cardinal Pool So had it been well for many
of our late Members, to have acknowledged the King's Authority, and reduced
themselves betimes to his Obedience.

Much more might be said in the behalf of the Prerogative Royal. But this shall
suffice, since it has been so well done, formerly, by the learned and constant
true-hearted Judge Jenkins, the Ingenious Mr. Diggs, and others.

CHAP. VI.
The Privileges of Parliament; and that in some Cases they are Null and Void.

THough these things before specified, might satisfy a Rational Subject: yet,
as a cloud to obscure this Regal Supremacy, the Commons have found out a way,
to cry, Privilege of Parliament. And with this clamorous plea, they have
lately thought to save their Bacon, in the multitude of their bewitched
Proselytes, be their Actions never so notorious; And these Privileges, they
are gloriously pleased to call, Their ancient and undoubted Rights and
Inheritance. But King James, (a Prince, too wise and learned, to submit to, or
Sanderson's Hist. of King James, p. 519, 520.
wink at, a popular fury), informed them plainly and truly, that he should
rather desire them to say, That their Privileges were but derived from the
grace and permission of their Kings, most of them growing but from Presidents,
which shows rather a Toleration than Inheritance. And therefore, could not
endure, Subjects to use such Anti-Monarchical words, unless subjoyned with
acknowledgement of grace and favor.

What their Privileges are, they have been very unwilling to show in a
particular way: But be they what they will, these two following, they have most
made use of, and embraced, viz.

1. Liberty of Speech. 2. Freedom from Arrest and Imprisonment.
As for the first, it is true, that Sir Arnold Savage, [1404]. Speaker Hackwell'
s Mod. tenend. Parl. p. 203.
to the Commons, humbly desired King Henry the fourth, that they might freely
make complaint of any thing amiss in the Government: And, that the King, by the
sinister Information of any person, would not take it offensive. The which the
King was royally pleased to grant. And, after this, Sir Thomas More, their
Speaker, [1523]. prayed King Henry the Eighth, That, If in Communication and
Reasoning, any man Stow' s Chron. p. 518. col. 2. Baker' s Chron. page 288.
in the Common-House should speak more largely, then of duty they ought to do,
that all such offenses might be pardoned; the which, the King was pleased to
grant. And, the same favor was also yielded to The Speakers Petition for
freedom of Speech, is not recorded before this time, as Hen. Elsynge says, p.
139.
Thomas Moyle, Esquire their Speaker, some twenty years after. And Queen Elizabeth,
at the entrance of her reign, was graciously pleased to allow the same to the
Speaker, Sir Thomas Gargrave, before which man's time, 'twas very seldom asked,
and therefore not granted. The Speakers commonly, only desiring liberty for
themselves, not including the rest of the Members; though since Gargrave's
time, it has always been humbly desired, and also favorably granted.

But, what of all this, the King permits them Liberty of speech, or rather
winks at some slips, which in heat of discourse, or debates, they may, through
unadvisedness let fall: Therefore they may speak Treason, revile Authority,
entrench upon Prerogative, and what not: But, if this be a Logical Consequence,
then is a Kings condition, as miserable, as uncertain. And, this is something
like the Long-Parliaments plea for a perpetual Session. The King agrees, that
they shall not be dissolved without their own consent; therefore they would
sit, till called to Judgment by the last Trumpet: though their Treasonable
Actions against the King, did not only by the Law dissolve them, but left them
capable of severe punishments.

But, how weak this pretended Consequence is, may appear by a continued
practice. The Bishop of Carlisle, for his bold Speech in Parliament, was
imprisoned by King Henry the Fourth. And Queen Elizabeth, Baker. p. 170, 171.
who was as great a favorite and darling in the eyes of her Subjects, as any
since the Creation; tells her first Parliament, (at a public meeting at
White Hall, where they desired her to marry), that, if they had limited her
either to place, or person, she would then have thought it Stow. p. 636. col. 2.
in you a great presumption, being unfitting, and altogether unmeet, for you,
to require them that command; or those to appoint, whose parts are to desire;
or such to bind, and limit, whose duties are to obey; or to take upon you, to
draw my love to your likings; or, to frame my will to your fantasy.

How severely did she check the Parliament, in the 23. year of her Dr. Heylin's
Exam. Histor. Part. 2. p. 62.
reign, for presuming to Vote a Fast to be solemnized at the Temple-Church, for
such of their own Members as could conveniently be present there? telling them
by her Messenger, Sir Thomas Henneage, then Vice-Chamberlain, With what
admiration she beheld that Incroachment on her Royal Authority, in committing
such an apparent Innovation without her privaty, or pleasure, first known. Upon
which they desired Sir Thomas, to present their Submission to the Queen, and to
crave her pardon. Nor would she suffer her Parliaments to Baker. page 420.
meddle in Ecclesiastical affairs. And plainly used to tell them, that their
Privileges were but the free pronouncing these two words, Yea, and No. And
King James, perceiving his last Parliament but one, to soar somewhat high, told
their Speaker, Sir Thomas Richardson, in a Letter from New Market, That some
fiery and popular spirits Sanderson's Hist. K. James. page 510.
of the Lower House, did debate matters above their capacity, to our dishonor
and Prerogative Royal. These are therefore to make known to them, That none
shall hereafter presume to meddle with any thing concerning our Government, or
matters of State; with our Sons match with the Daughter of Spain; nor to touch
the Honor of that King, or any other our Friends or Confederates. Nor with any
man's particulars, which have their due Motion in our Ordinary Courts of
Justice. -- But to put them out of doubt of any question hereafter of that
nature, We think our self very free and able to punish any man's misdemeanour in
Parliament, as well sitting there, as after, which we mean not to spare,
hereafter, upon any occasions of any man's.

And that King James, had good grounds for what he wrote, I am apt to believe,
not only considering his own Learning and Knowledge in State Affairs: But,
that, if a Parliament man, by their own Orders, is not abusively to reflect
upon any of their own Members, to me, it seems very irrational, to think, that
they may openly vilify the Crown, and throw dirt upon Regal Authority.
Therefore, I shall persuade my self, that Sir Henry Ludlow, who said there,
that Ex. Coll. p. 550.
King Charles was not worthy to be King of England; was far more unfit to live.

As for the other Privilege, which the Parliament does vigorously demand as
their due and right; we shall find their clamor to be not unlike some Bills in
Chancery, where many thousand pounds are demanded, when scarce twenty is due:
Or the towering expectations of Lambert Simnell, a Bakers son, who under a
Princely Vizard, required Bacon' s Hist. Hen. 7. p. 20, 36.
the Crown of England, as his Birthright; yet, after all the bloodshed in his
behalf, was happy to be a Turn-spit to King Henry the Seventh.

It Is true, for Debt, and such private and peculiar Engagements, a Member
cannot be Imprisoned; for, if so, a plot might be framed to shrink the Houses
again, though in a more plausible method, to a New Rump. And this was the case
of Mr. George Ferrers, Burgess for Plymouth, [1542.] who being arrested for
debt, was, at the desire Stow. p. 583. col. 1. lin. 58.
of the Commons, released; and the Sheriff of London, sent to the Tower for two
days. But yet, the best of them may be imprisoned, though then actually in
Parliament, either for Treason, Felony, or refusing to give security for the
Peace. And, for this cause, was Thomas Hackwell's mod, tenend. Parl. p. 93.
Thorp, Speaker to the Commons, arrested, and put into Prison, in the 31. year
of King Henry the Sixth. And the learned Judges of the Land declared, he was
not capable of a Release; which being made known to the Commons by Walter
Moyle, one of the Kings Sergeants at Law, they presently chose themselves
another Speaker, viz. Sir Thomas Charleton, and never clamoured, that the
Privileges of Parliament were broken. In Queen Elizabeth's time, nothing was
more common J. H's. Sober Inspections, page 54, 56, 60, 61.
then to serve Subpoena's upon, and imprison, extravagant Members. Witness the
two upon Mr. Knevet, [An. Reg. 39.] one upon Mr. Coke, [An. Reg. 127.] and Mr.
Peter Wentworth, was committed to the Tower, and Sir Henry Bromley, Mr.
Stevens, Mr. Welsh, to the Fleet, [35. Elizab.] for desiring the Intailment of
the Crowns Succession. And in the 35. of her reign, she sent into the House of
Commons, and took out Mr. Morris, and committed him to Prison, with diverse
others, for some speeches in the House; and, when the rest of the Commons
petitioned her Majesty for their release, she sent them a severe check, telling
them, that they were not to discourse of things of such high nature. And the
same Answer did King James return Sanderson's Hist. K. James. page 510.
them, [1621.] when they endeavored to know the reason of Sir Edwin Sandis,
his restraint. And, though he was a merciful and peaceful King; yet, when they
presumed to incroach upon him, he would make them learn more manners in the
Tower and other Prisons, witness Wilson' s Hist. p. 77, 78.
the committment of several of them, in the 12. year of his reign.

And, though never any King was more afflicted and bandied with Parliaments,
than the late King Charles, yet, the sweetness of his temper, made him wink at
many insolent Indiscretions, till at last, their Impudence grew so high, as not
to permit the Sergeant of the Mace L'Strange. page 100, 101, 105.
to go to the King upon his Command; to lock the Parliament-door, and deny the
Kings Messenger entrance; to hold by force the Speaker in the Chair, swearing
deep Oaths, that he should sit still as long as they pleased, though the King
command the contrary; to deny the Kings Power to dissolve them by Proxy; that
they are not bound to give an account to the King, but to their own House, of
their actions be they what they will, in Parliament; upon which several of them
were imprisoned, the Judges delivering their Opinions positively, that their
crimes were within cognizance out of Parliament, affirming, that, if it were
not so, if a Parliament Man should commit murder in time of Parliament, he
could not be tried and arraigned until a new Representative; and, for
confirmation of their Opinions, they alleged many Presidents, as that of
Plowden in Queen Mary's time, who was fined in the King's Bench, for words
spoken in Parliament against the dignity of the Queen. And, to be brief, though
the Long-Parliament made great hubbubs, and brags, about the five Members; yet
afterward, when they were in their Ex. Coll. p. 727.
height of pride, they in print, did acknowledge and confess, that Members
might be arrested and detained for Treason, Felony, and other crimes; though
they would gladly smooth it up so far, as to make 8 Hen. 6. Abridg. of
Statutes in the word Convocdtion.
themselves Judges. I shall say no more, but, that what Privilege soever they
have, the Laws of our Land allow the same to the Clergy, [and their Servants
and Familiars, for, that is the word in the Statute] when called to a
Convocation, and this, either in coming, carrying, or going home again.

CHAP. VII.
The beginning of the Presbyterians; with the wicked Principles of the
Ringleaders of that Factious Sect.

HAving thus hinted upon the Kings Prerogative, the Origin of the Commons, and
their Privileges, by which it is plain, that the King is Supreme, and, by
Consequence and good Law, Treason 25 Edw. 3. c. 2. 1 Phil. and Mar. cap. 1.
to war against him: I shall now show, that the Parliament, and not himself,
was the first beginners of these late Confusions; the true rise of which, I
must fetch higher, than the Presbyterian Party will give me thanks for.

And as a leading Card to this Discovery, we must observe, that a rebellious
itching humor of incroaching upon, and railing against lawful Authority, was
the main foundation of our miseries; the source of which frantic temper, I
must draw from Geneva, whose Disciples are commonly carried on with more
violence than the furirious Rhosne, upon which the City boasts her situation.

In this City, John Calvin confirmed his Presbyterian-Discipline, in the same
year, that Ignatius Loyola, the first Founder of the Jesuits, was chosen their
first General in a solemn manner, viz. 1541. And 1541. Nov. 20.
just a hundred years after, [1641.] was the famous and reverend Church of
England, overrun and clowded by the Calvinistical Proselytes. And, as these
two Orders of Presbytery, and Jesuitism, took their rise together; so have they
gone hand in hand through a blind zeal, not only to derogate from, but
extirpate all Civil Authority not conducible to their Interests. And, as
Calvin's Presbytery, at first, was begot by Rebellion and Treason, [they
expelling from Geneva, their lawful Prince and Magistrate]: So have their
Children (following the footsteps of their Parents, (as, what is in the bone,
will never out of the flesh), made it their business, to terrify the World
with this truth, that, as Schism, so Sedition and they, are inseparable. And in
this, they have been no way hindered, by their Lord and Master John Calvin,
whose inconsiderate zeal, in some things, was such, that it was so far from
sparing any, that it would throw its fury at Kings and Queens: Witness his
irreverent expression, thrown against Queen Mary, calling of her Proserpine,
telling -- Proserpinae, quae body illic superat omnes Diabolos. Calv. in Amos
cap. 7. verss. 13. page 282.
us, that she outstrips all the Devils in Hell. And in this way of Rhetoric,
do other of his dear sons follow him; as, John Knox calls the same Queen wicked
Jezabel, and Devil, Knox's Appellation. sol. 44. a.
and her Rule the monstriferous Empire of a wicked Woman. And another Brother,
viz. Anthony Gilby, calls her a Monster, and one wanting Gilb. Admonition to
England and Scotland. fol. 68. a. b.
no will to wickedness. And yet this Lady, whom they so much abuse and vilify,
was (as our Authentic Chronicles assure us), a Woman truly pious, merciful,
and of most chaste and modest behavior, and every Martin's Chron. p. 422.
way to be praised, if you consider not her Error in Religion. A charracter so
glorious, that I fear few of our Disciplinarians dare pretend to. But, their
only railing against Princes, does not show half their malice; for, they have
found out fine ways, not only to dethrone, but murder their Kings, by their
not only approving of such wickedness, but persuading thereto. And this power
Calvin acknowledges to Institut. lib. 4. cap. 20. Sect. 31.
lie in the Parliament, consisting of the Three Estates in each Kingdom,
telling them, that they are perfidious, and betrayers of their Trust, if they
do not restrain the Enormities of Kings. And with him agrees one of our English
Non-conformists, Dudlie Fenner, and allows the King to be taken -- Hunc tollant
vel Pacifice vel cum Bello. -- Fenner. Sacra Theolog. lib. 5. cap; 13. fol. 80.
b.
away, either by Peace, or War. And, what a stiff Enemy he was to our English
Church, you may imagine, by the Education of his two Scholars, Tho. Cartwright,
and Walter Trevers. And Robert Rollock, one of the Scottish Roll. Com. in
Daniel, cap. 5. verse. 18. p. 122.
Brethren, confirms this way of King-killing, under the notion of Tyrants. But,
How furiously does John Knox, his Countryman, incite Knox to the Communalty.
fol. 49. b. 55. b.
the people to Rebellion? telling them, that Reformation of Religion belongs as
well to the Commonalty, as Kings, and other Magistrates. And, that the common
people, may demand of their Kings true Preachers; and, that others [i. e. in
his sense, Bishops], may be expelled: But, if the Rulers will not, then they
may provide themselves, which they may defend and maintain against all that
shall oppose them. And, that they may withold the fruits, and profits, from
their false Bishops and Clergy. And he tells them, that their Princes, Rulers,
Id. sol. 57. a.
and Bishops, are criminal of Idolatry, and Innocent Blood and Tyranny. And,
that no person, whatsoever, is exempted from punishment, Id. Appellation fol.
30. a.
if he can be manifestly convicted, to have provoked, or led the people to
Idolatry: And, that the punishment of Idolatry, Blasphemy, and such like, does
appertain to the people as well as others. And all these incitements, are,
because the Queen was a Roman Catholic, of which, he tells the Lords; that, if
they grant Privilege, or Liberty, they Id. fol. 31. b.
shall assuredly drink the Cup of Gods Vengeance, and shall be reputed before
his presence, Companions of Thieves, and maintainers of Murderers: And, that
he might make them more willingly throw off all Obedience, he persuades them;
that, It is not Birth, nor Propinquity Id. fol. 77. b. Hist. Reformat. of
Scotl. p. 220, 225, 226, 311.
of Blood, that makes a King Lawful; and plainly tells them, that the Rule of a
Woman is unlawful. And these brave Doctrines he got printed at Geneva, 1558.
July 14. from whence he sends them into Britain, to move the people into
Rebellion. From the same place does Beza afterward Epist. 79.
write to Knox, then in Scotland, to persuade him to extirpate Episcopacy,
though the being of it might cause Peace and Unity. And of this mind, was his
Patron, John Calvin, who professed, that he could not Exercise the Office of
Testaretur imprimis, se non posse Ministerio suo fungi, nisi una cum Doctrina
Ch^^^^ana Presbyterium quoque legitimum cum (...) Ecclesiastica reciperetur.
Bez. vit. Calv.
a Minister, unless the Presbyterian Government was confirmed and settled in
Geneva. From this City, did Beza write into England, to persuade them from all
Formalities Epist. 12.
and Ceremonies used in our Church: and, from this place sprang all our
Troubles about Nonconformity. All this, which has been said, as the Opinion
of private men, was publicly concluded on as Orthodox in Scotland, if you will
give credit to one of their chief Patrons, Buchanan, one who has done an
irreparable mischief to Hist. lib. 15. page 590.
Princes, by his villainous and wretched Book De Jure Regni apud Scotos, a
poisonous Well, from whence the Long-Parliament, and our late
Common-wealths-men, have drawn most of their Pleas and Arguments. And is no
small demonstration of the Authors Impudence, to dedicate it to King James,
too good a Master for such a wretched Servant. Nor was these things any way
denied in the same Nation, of late days, when 1638. August 27. it was ordered,
That the ablest Lysimach. Nican. Epist. Congrat. page 18.
man, in each Parish, should be provided to dispute of the King's Power in
calling Assemblies; and, what they meant by this, is no hard matter to discern,
considering, that not only they had, the month before, maintained the power of
Convocating to lie in themselves; but also, the same year, had actively derided
at the King's Authority; and, the next year, bid him Battle. And, how little
many of their Presbyters have since mended their manners, may appear by that
impudent piece of Nonsense, Malice, and Treason, spoken by one of their
Grandees, Mr. Robert Duglas, at our King's Coronation in Scotland, and by him
called a Sermon; but, how unbefitting that name (as we now take the word to
signify) is appropriated, let any, that dare call himself loyal and rational,
be judge. And truly, what itching ears for Innovation, and against Regal
Authority, some of the foreign Presbyters have, is something palpable from the
Letter of Gisbertus Voetius, wherein, he does not only commend Prynne's
Sovereign Prynn's Speech in the House of Commons, anno 1648. page, 28.
Power of Parliaments; but says, that it ought to be translated into Latin and
French, for the benefit of the Reformed Divines, and Politicians: And Prynne
himself tells us, that it is translated into several Languages. And, what Pleas
they may suck out of such Books against Monarchy, cannot be ignorant to those
who have seen what mischief the counterfeit Name of Junius Brutus, (a fit name
for such a murtherous mind), though the true Author is supposed to be Beza,)
and that printed in diverse Languages, has laid open to those who are willing
to perpetrate wickedness. And how consentaneous to the Doctrines laid down in
these Pamphlets, their actions have been, their often Rebellions in France,
but, more especially, in the days of Lewis the 13th. will show us, whom,
though he had pardoned several times, yet would they never keep Articles; but
upon every advantage, fly to their Arms again; looking upon Regal Authority,
only as a Bugbear to afright Children, hoping in time, by dwindling it to
nothing, to raise themselves to Superiority.

And, how many men, by these false Positions, may be drawn to Schism and
Rebellion, is manifest from this one Example: In King James his time, one
Knight, a young Divine, Preached at St. Peter's Dr. Heylin's Answer to Burton,
c. 6. p. 119.
in Oxford, and in his Sermon, maintained the Presbyterian Doctrines above
specified; for which, being called in question, he laid the fault upon some
late Divines in foreign Churches, who had misguided him in that point,
especially, on David Paraeus, who had asserted Comment. in Romans cap. 13. col.
1381, 1382, 1383.
these Doctrines; upon which, his Comment on the Romans, was publicly and
solemnly burnt at Oxford, [1622. June, 6th.] Cambridge, and St. Paul's- Cross
in London. The famous University of Oxford, in a full Convocation, concluding
[25. June, 1622.] That such assertions were contrary to Scripture, Councils,
Fathers, the Faith and Profession of the Primitive Church, and Monarchy it
self, and therefore condemned them as false, wicked, and seditious. And did
also affirm, That according -- Necnon docet and defendit secundum Canonem
Sacrarum Scripturarum, subdilos nullo modo vi and armis Regi vel Principi, suo
resistere debere, nec illius arma vel offensiva vel defensiua in causa
Religionis, vel alia in re quacunque contra Regem, vel Principem suum capescere
licere. Decretum Universit, Oxon. 1622.
to the Scriptures, it is not lawful for Subjects, upon any terms, to resist
their King or Prince; no, not to take up Arms against him, either for Religion,
or any other account whatsoever. And for more sureness, they did also Decree,
that every one before he took a Degree, should swear to this. The Opinion
delivered in the sentence of these two famous Universities, I shall value more,
than of an Assembly or Classis made up of all the Presbyterians in the World.
The consideration of these Disciplinarian Maxims, I believe, did make our
ingenious Satyrist cry out, -- Our Zeal-drunk-Presbyters cry down
All Law of Kings and God, but what is their own. Cleaveland, to the Hectors.



If you desire to see any more of their wild and extravagant Principles, you
may consult Archbishop Bancroft's Industrious Book, a piece that I am sorry, is
so scarce as it is, and that for want of Re-printing; while Giles Calvert's
shop daily labors with the multitude of Fanatic Pamphlets, and such Books, as
Smectymnuus, must be printed and printed again; and that, with the addition of
a long Preface by a great Time-serving Divine.

CHAP. VII.
The Rebellious Actions of the Presbyterians in Scotland, till the Death of
King James.

HOw agreeable the practice of the Brethren have been to these Treasonable
Notions before specified, shall here in brief, be laid down by their tumultuous
Carriages in Scotland. Whither these Principles, kindled with a fiery zeal,
(enough to eat up whole Kingdoms), were carried, and the furiousness of them
greatly augmented at the return of John Knox, (that great Incendiary of the
Nation, and Kirk Heylin' s Hist. Quinque Articular. part. 3. cap. 16. page 5.
of Scotland, as a learned Doctor calls him) from Geneva, [1559.] A man that
still had the misfortune to carry War and Confusion along with him; as if,
like Hippocrates's Twins, he and they were inseparable; witness the Combustions
he made at Franckfort, amongst the Troubles of Franckford. Edit. 1642.
poor English Protestants, fled thither for Religion, where he was not
undeservedly accused of High Treason against the Emperor, by comparing him, in
print, to Nero, and calling of him Enemy to Christ, etc. For Sanderson's Hist.
K. James. p. 15.
which crimes he was forced to sculk away to Geneva, thence to Deep in France,
and after that to Scotland; whence after few weeks stay, he fled back to
Geneva; but not settling there, he returns to Deep again: from which place, he
wrote diverse Letters to the Scots, to stir them up to Rebellion; and having by
that means wrought some confidence among them, returned to Scotland again.

By these Principles distilled amongst them by this wandering Brother; and the
deadly Feuds, of old, betwixt the Nobility, the Nation became miserably
distracted. The Kings and Queens thinking it hard measure, to have their
undoubted Rule and Sovereignty plucked from them, by such inferior Instruments
and Vassals: And, on the other side, the Congregators, [for so they then called
themselves], backed on by several Hot-spurs, scorned to yield subjection to any
but themselves; so, that the disturbed Kingdom appeared to be governed by two
distinct Authorities; like Caesar, and Pompey, one party disdaining an Equal,
whilst the other denied a Supreme. The Presbyters so far extolling their own
Privileges, as Christ's Ambassadors: that many thought there was no
Antichrist, but Kings, and such Civil Authority; which cogitations nursed in
them such a small esteem of their Rulers, or Laws, that they did not only
think, that to be their right, which was most agreeable to their own humors,
but also, that they might gain such things to themselves by the Sword: As if
Subjects need any more Privilege then the course of Law?

At the beginning of the Reformation in Scotland, the Queen-Regent favorably,
because contrary to her Religion, allowed them the Bible in their own Language:
But they not content with this, use their wonted Master-peice of Reviling; upon
which, she was constrained to send for some of their Preachers, to appear
before her, who accordingly came; but with such a multitude of favorites and
attendants, that through fear of her own Person, she was obliged to order, by
Proclamation, all to depart, who came unsent for; a thing always usual in the
best of Governments: yet was this so offensive to the Brethren, that they
throng in Tumults into her Privy-chamber, and there threaten her with their
weapons, (an act quite contrary to the Apostles and Primitive Christians); so
that she was constrained to pleasure them.

Afterward she allows them liberty to use their Prayers and Service 1558.
in the Vulgar Tongue, provided, they kept no Public Assemblies in Edenbourgh,
or Leith, for avoiding Tumults. And in their Petition to her for the obtaining
these favors, they acknowledge, that the Redress of all Enormities, both
Ecclesiastical and Civil, did orderly belong to her. But, this acknowledging of
her Authority, lasted not long: for, when presently afterward, they demanded
more liberty, with a bob at Bishops, and not receiving a Positive Answer
according to their Intentions; They publicly protest to stand to their
Tenants, and that they will defend all those who shall violate such Acts and
Rites which are commanded by their Adversaries, (i. e. the Queens Party). And,
that if any Tumult and Uproar shall rise, or abuses be violently reformed, or
whatsoever inconvenience shall happen to ensue, that these crimes be not
imputed to them, but to those who will not hearken to our Petitions. At these
actions, the Queen-Regent was so moved, as to profess, she could not keep
promise with them; upon which they reply, -- We cannot any longer acknowledge
your Authority, and will henceforth renounce all Obedience to you. Thus do they
acknowledge and deny Supremacy, as each action will serve for their turn. And
to this purpose, King James, (who had most reason to know these people), thus
tells us; That John Knox, wrote to the Queen-Regent, Conference at Hampton*
Court, page 82, 83, 84.
telling her, that she was the Supreme Head of the Church, and therefore
charged her to suppress the Popish Bishops. But this lasted no longer, than
till they had got their desires, and then they made small account of her
Authority, but took all into their own hands; and, how they used that poor
Lady, my Mother, (says King James), is not unknown; and how they dealt with me
in my minority, you all know it was not done secretly.

As they told the Queen Regent, that they would renounce all Obedience 1559.
to her; so were they as good as their words: For away go they in Tumults, and
ruin all before them, pulling down the Monasteries and Cathedral Churches at
Perth, St. Andrews, Scone, Sterling, Edenbourgh, and other places; John Knox
inciting them to it, by his Sermon Spotswood. page 124.
upon our Saviors Purging the Temple. And in another of his Sermons preached
at Craile, he encouraged the people to Wars, telling Id. page 123.
them, There was no Peace to be hoped for at the Regents hands; because no
truth could be given to her, and that there could be no quietness till one of
these Parties were Masters; therefore, he wished them to prepare themselves,
either to dye like men, or to live victorious. Upon this, the Congregators
growing more numerous and strong than the Queen-Regent, she was forced to fly
to Dunbar; yet a Treaty was after begun at Preston, where she offered them free
use of their Religion, but, where her own Court was: but this they would not
accept of. And a little after, with the consent of John Willock, and Knox,
their two Ministers, they depose her, [who not long after dyed of grief and
displeasure, June, 1560.] though a little before, not only by Letters to her
self, but also by Proclamation, they declare, that they would never do it: And
this way of protesting one way, and working another, (as if their actions
looked a squint, like Argile) have our late English Grandeesand Army followed.

The Presbyters in Scotland, having hitherto gone under the Name of Sanderson's
Hist. of Q. Mary of Scotland, page 21.
Congregators, or those of the Congregation; did now, to comply with England,
(hoping from thence to gain some assistance, as Queen Elizabeth, in truth,
through a private policy, did not only too much countenance, but help them),
change that Title, and brought themselves under the general denomination of
Protestants.

A little after this, they played their Cards so well, that they obtained the
1560.
Mass, and Popes Authority in that Nation in that Nation to be nulled in
Parliament; and by the same authority, with the assistance of the Lords of the
Articles, they got the Confession of their Faith ratified, which they sent to
be confirmed by their King and Queen in France, the which was refused, and the
King dyed presently after. Then they send and desire their young Widdow-Queen
to return into Scotland, the which she intends; but, before her arrival, it was
publicly ordered by them, that all Cloisters and Abbey Churches should be
pulled down to the ground, John Knox inciting them to it in a Sermon, by
telling them, That the sure way to banish the Rooks, was to pull down their
Nests. And, this order was so furiously put in execution, that, under the
pretense of demolishing of these, all other Churches suffered, either being
defaced or quite destroyed; so that of such buildings a pitiful devastation
happened throughout the whole Land, holy Vessels, Timber, Lead, and Bells sold;
the very Sepulchers of the dead not spared, the Registers and Libraries burnt,
and, in a word, all ruined; And all this, so much the worse, because committed
under the color and warrant of Public Authority.

The Queen being come over, and though being bred a Roman Catholic, 1561.
yet condiscended to alter nothing of the Protestant Religion, as she found it
then established, thinking thereby to live peacebly and gain their affections;
only she would use her own Service apart, and hear Mass in private; but this,
(and, What more favorable then this?) the Preachers in their Sermons did
publicly condemn as intolerable and unlawful, and the Earl of Arrane protested
against it; and, so uncivil were some, as to break the Wax-tapers intended for
her Chapel. Nor was this all, but the Ministers oppose and dispute in
Conventicles, the case of Obedience to Sovereigns; the which, Sanderson's.
Hist. p. 26.
because some disliked it, Knox, and Row, do not only urge it more eagerly, but
(forsooth) they would have it resolved by their Fellow Laborers in the Church
of Geneva.

The Reformers being grown to this height, enter into a pretty malepert 1562.
Id. page 28.
Covenant, That whosoever shall molest, trouble, or hurt any of their Members,
the fact shall be reputed heinous against the whole Body of them all. By this
pretty device, they got to their Party several of the unruly Nobility, who were
like to make good use of this Doctrine by way of Protection. And, some years
before [1558.] some of the Nobility did bind themselves together, by Oaths and
Subscriptions, to assist one another with their lives and substance, for the
advancement of their Religion. Thus are they resolved to carry all things with
a high hand, let the Laws of God, or the Land, say what they will to the
contrary.

Nay, so pragmatical were they, that the Queen and her Ladies 1563.
being dressed in too fine Clothes, as they thought, they never rested till they
had presented Articles for Reformation therein; for which Sanderson. p. 31.
curiosity, being a little checked by Earl Murray, Knox in a rage, by writing,
forbids him to meddle with the Kirk, or his affairs. But, this is nothing to
the Insolency they used to their Sovereign Queen; for, when it was noys'd
about, that she intended to marry Henry Lord Darnly, Son to Lenox: Knox rails
to the purpose, against this match, affirming, that it would bring Plagues upon
the Nation, and the Kirks Curse to boot: for this, the Queen sends for him in
private, where, with trickling tears, she tells them. How low her Princely
nature had descended, in often Conferences with them, advising them to
moderation, and she would consult for their quiet establishment; and truly told
him, That the more she restrained the punishment of their disorders against her
Person and Authority, the more liberty they took to offend. To this, Knox
impudently answers, That his patience in suffering abominations, made him not
guilty of any fault; and, if his tongue took liberty in Pulpit, she might take
it as she pleased, since in the Pulpit he had no Superior but God; and, that
his gifts made him equal to any of her Peers: And, as for her weeping, he said,
He could better sustain her tears, than the trouble of his Cause, or to betray
the Commonwealth. Nor durst the Queen question him for his saucy replies,
knowing the strength of his Faction; which being uot unhid to Knox, made him
more Insolent, as afterward publicly to affirm; That, For her sins the Land
must lament; and, that it was absolute Rebellion 1564.
in her not to turn Protestant, and compared her to Simon Magus, thinking it
impossible, that her sins could be forgiven her. Nor did others of his
Fraternity hold their peace. And having got thus sure footing, nothing would
satisfy them, but to have all; for which purpose, at a General Assembly at
Edinburgh, they draw up a Petition of several Heads, the first of which was,
That the Queen her self, with all her Family, should not only forsake Mass and
Popish Idolatry; but, that all, none excepted, should be punished, who
transgrest this Article. To this she answered, (being then at St. Johnstons),
That, as she freely gave every one Liberty of Conscience; so she hoped, that
her Subjects would not press her to do against her Conscience, and, that she
did not only think, that there was no impiety in the Mass, but, that her
Religion was true, and grounded upon the Word of God. But this gave them no
full satisfaction.

Henry Stewart Lord Darnley, being now married to the Queen, 1565.
[July, 1565.] and proclaimed King, the Knoxian Lords fly to their Arms, and so
does the King also; but, before his march, hears Knox preach at Edinburgh at
St. Giles Kirk, where he railed against the present Government, reflectively
saying, That for the sins of the People, God gives them Boys [the King was
about 21. years old], and Women to rule over them: After which, the King
marches against the Lords, who fly into England; yet, through Intercession,
all was reconciled.

Not long after this, the Queen was brought to Bed in Edinburgh Castle [betwixt
9. and 10. at night, July 19.] of a Son, which was afterward 1566.
Christened at Sterling, and called James, who became at last the happy Uniter
of the two Crowns. At the latter end of the same year, John Knox, intending to
visit his sons at Cambridge, moved the Assembly to write to the English
Bishops, in favor of the Non-conformists, then buzzing in England. The which
they do, but in their wonted language, railing against the Surplice,
Square-Caps, Tippets, and calling them Badges and Garments of Idolatry, Romish
Rags, vain Trifles; telling them, (as if the serious Bishops need take advice
from such Hair-brains), That they may boldly oppose all such Authority, which
dare command such things; brave language, and anew way of begging to get
courtesies by!

Some few weeks after this, the King was most barbarously murdered, [9th.
February] but, by whom, and how, (because History will 1567.
not tell us the truth at large) I think it not convenient to relate by
peice-meal. Then was the Queen (whether willing or constrained, is nothing to
me), married to Bothwell, against whom the Lords raise an Army, and forced him
to fly into Denmark, where he was imprisoned: and they also seize on the
forsaken Queen, whom they secure in the Island of Lochlevin, where by threats
and fear, they forced her to resign (tears trickling down her face abundantly)
her Interest in the Crown, to her young Son, few days above a year old, who was
Crowned few days after, at Sterling, [July, 29.] And, if you will believe a
late Historian, Sanderson's Hist. of King James. p. 52.
Knox, and other Ministers were not satisfied with this Resignation of hers,
but would have her also deprived of life: nor is this Treasonable cruelty
contradictory to his forementioned Principles.

Now could the Knoxians desire nothing more, having their King young in his
Cradle, and so, capable of what impression they pleased, and their Queen in
close Prison, so that they appeared Lords and Masters: Yet she presently
escapes out of Prison, gets some Forces, fights Murray the Regent: but being
beat, fled into England, where 1568.
Queen Elizabeth imprisoned her, till she was, to the astonishment of many,
beheaded [1586.] after 18. years close Imprisonment.

The next year the Regent Murray was slain at Lithgow, by one Hamilton. And
then Lenox, the Kings Grandfather, obtained that dignity, against whom the
Lord Hamilton, in behalf of the Queen, raises a War, in which Lenox was slain
at Sterling. Then was the Earl of Mar chosen, who not long after dyed of a
Feavour. After whom the Earl of Morton succeeded as Regent; after which, the
Queens 1572.
Party, by degrees, lost all Authority. In this year did John Knox dye at
Edinburgh, [Novemb. 27.] one that (as I am apt to believe, all things
considered), gained more esteem amongst the people by the reverence of his
long-beard, reaching down to his middle, than any real wisdom or discretion
that could be appropriated to him.

And now comes Andrew Melvil, burning from Geneva, against 1575.
Bishops, denying the lawfulness of their Function, laboring for the absolute
Presbyterial Discipline, according to the Geneva mode, which raised some
Tempests in the Church, insomuch, that some of the Presbytery forbad Mr.
Patrick Adamson, (lately by the Regent presented (and by the Chapter chosen) to
the Sea of St. Andrews) to Exercise any part of his Jurisdiction, till he had
acknowledged and satisfied them.

After this, Argyle and Athol not affecting the Regent, go to the young 1577.
King at Sterling, complaining against Morton, and desiring him to take the
Rule upon himself. And so the King does at 12. years old; and thus the Regency
fell.

The young King being brought up in the Reformed way, confirms 1579.
the Religion in Parliament; but not their Discipline: he affecting the
Episcopal Government, and, ever since he was ten years old, as Conference at
Hampton Court, page 20. Edit. 1638.
himself confesses, disliked the Presbyterian way. And truly, Experience gave
him good reason for it. But to make all sure, a Negative Oath, by way of a
Confession of Faith, wherein all the Romish 1580.
Ceremonies and Doctrines were abjured, was drawn up by Mr. John Craig, and
this the King himself took; and this he reflected upon in the Conference at
Hampton Court. Page 39.


Having thus tied his Conscience, as they thought, his Body must 1582.
be secured too, and so at Ruthen they seize upon him, and that with so much
inhumanity and irreverence, that he burst forth into tears, for which he got
nothing but this Answer from the Master of Glammis; It is no matter for his
tears, better that Barns should weep, then Bearded-men. Upon this, the Earl of
Arran going to know the Kings condition, was secured, and his Brother sore
wounded: And none being suffered to speak with the King, but whom they pleased;
he cried out to some Noblemen, whom the Duke of Lenox had sent to see him;
that he was a Captive, and desired his good Subjects to release him. But this
his Jaylors forced him presently to recant, by setting forth a Proclamation in
his Name, that all things were done according to his own desire. Then is the
King carried to Edinburgh, where the Estates, and Assemblies of Ministers,
justify this bold action, singing in triumph, as they went up the High Street,
the 124. Psalm, Now Israel may say, etc. Whilst the King lay under this
constraint, from France came two Ambassadors, Monsieur la Motte, and Menevel,
Spotswood. page 324.
to get the King released, and a Treaty betwixt the two Crowns. Against these
the Ministers declaim in their Sermons most bitterly; but especially, against
La Motte, who being Knight of the Order du Saint Esprit, (an Order constituted
at Paris by Henry the third, King of France, and Poland, 1579.) did wear,
according to the custom of his Order, the Badge of a White-Cross upon his
shoulder. This they call the Badge of Antichrist, and him the Ambassador of a
bloody Murderer; brave language to those who knew the Authority of such
Persons, and whom they represented. These daily outcries, and perceiving
nothing to be done, moved the Ambassadors to depart: But, the King being
willing to dismiss them with some content, desired the Magistrates of Edinburgh
to Feast them before their parting; for he, for his part, was not suffered to
do any thing; the which they did the next next Monday. But the Ministry, to
show their rebellious Authority, and Devilish crossness; proclaim a Fast to be
kept upon the next Monday, the day appointed for the Ambassadors
Entertainment; at this Fast, the Ministers thundered out against the Magistrates
and other Noblemen, that waited upon the Ambassadors by the Kings directions:
Nor was this all; but they pursued the Magistrates with the Censures of the
Church, and could scarce be stayed from Excommunicating them, for not observing
the Fast they proclaimed.

The King not liking his Restraint, and perceiving how Imperious 1583.
his Subjects grew, whilst he was under hatches, consults an Escape, which was
performed by the means of Col. Stewart, Captain of the Guard; upon which, those
who would not now submit to his Majesty, were proclaimed Traitors, he also
declaring, that however his Proclamation came forth, yet it was extorted from
him by violence, and therefore of no validity. But, for all this, the Ministers
in their Pulpits vindicate the late Imprisoning of the King, for which Andrew
Melvil, was charged to enter his person at Blackness; but he, instead of
obedience, fled to Barwick: which proceedings against Melvil, caused great
grumblings amongst the Brethren, who affirmed, that neither King, nor Council,
can censure men for words in Pulpit, but their own Associates, the Presbytery
only.

The next year the Earl of Gowry, with whom joined some of the Ministers, run
into open Rebellion; but, the Earl being taken, was beheaded, 1583.
and the Ministers fled for it.

The Nation being thus rent into distractions, by a company of babbling malepert
Boute-feus; the Parliament hoped by giving Caesar his due, and gagging his
Enemies mouths, all things would then tend to Peace and Settlement. For which
purpose, they confirm his Majesty's Authority, over all Persons, and in all
Causes. And, that to decline the Kings Judgment, and the Councils, in any
thing, should be High Treason; and, that any thing whatsoever, not approved of
by the King, and the Three Estates, should be null. And, that no person
whatsoever, should either privately, or publicly, either in Sermon,
Declamation, or Discourse, utter any false, untrue, or slanderous speeches, to
the reproach, dishonor, hurt, or prejudice of the King, or any of his Parents,
or Progenitors, or his Council: nor meddle with the affairs of the King or
State.

These good and honests Acts, made the Presbyters Horn-madd, who, 1584.
like our bordering Moss-Troopers, are never content, but when doing mischief
to others. They protest against these wholesome Statutes, many of them fly away
into England, scorning to live in such subjection; and Libels and Pamphlets fly
plentifully against the King and Court: And by Letter, protest those Acts to be
against the Word of God, and therefore, if they submit to them, they should
then be Traitors to God; reviling Bishops, whom they call Gross Libertines,
Belly-gods, and Infamous; and such like charitable stuff as this. This
turbulent spirit flowing amongst them, made many of them be imprisoned, and
others suspended from their Livings.

But, this lasted not long: for the next year the Scales turned, the banished
Lords being come again into Scotland, they join Forces, and 1585.
march to Sterling, where they seize upon the Kings Person again, whom they
constrain, by Proclamation, to pardon them all. Now did the Court put on a new
face, the old Officers are turned out, and others put in. This imboldens the
Ministers, who fled, to return again; but much of their intended malice was
stopped by a Parliament, who order, that none shall reproach his Majesty's
Person, State, or Government. This incensed the Ministry so much, as to stir up
one Watson, in his Sermon, to rail to the Kings face of his evil Government,
for which he was imprisoned at Blackness. This man's mouth being thus stopped,
another of that gang, called James Gibson, in his Sermon at Edinburgh,
affirmed, the King to be the Persecutour of the Church, and calls him to his
face, Jeroboam, pronouncing this Curse against him, That He should dye
childless, and be the last of his Race. For this, because before the Council he
maintained the same again, he was committed; yet afterward, [1587.] upon
better advice, he acknowledged his fault, and was ordered publicly to do the
same in his next Sermon, the which he promised to do, yet did not; whereupon
being charged for breaking his promise, he stubbornly answered; That out of
infirmity and weakness he had confessed a fault, but now his Conscience told
him, that his words were innocent. The Chancellor perceiving the man's
inconstancy, put it to the Assembly, whether Gibson had done well or no; where,
though many were ready to vindicate him, yet at last, a majority found him
slanderous and offensive; but he not appearing in the afternoon to receive his
censute, after much bandying to and fro, he was only suspended during the
pleasure of the Assembly, and this lasted but to the next August, when without
ever acquainting the King, he was by his Brethren quitted; the which
Countenancing of such Seditious Actions, did so incense his Majesty, that
Gibson was forced to fly into England, where he was entertained by the
hot-brained Non-conformists.

The Presbytery to show themselves more formidable, call a Synod 1586.
at St. Andrews, where they accuse the Bishop of the same place, for having had
a hand in the late Acts against the unruliness of the Brethren, (as Melvil
accused him). The Bishop appeals to the King and three Estates, and denies
their Judicatory, not being called by the Kings consent; but for all this, they
judge him fit to be Excommunicated, yet none would pronounce the Sentence
against him, till at last, many of them being departed, a young fellow, named
Andrew Hunter, said, that he was warned by the Spirit, to pronounce the
sentence, and so ascending the chair, read the same out of a Book. This boiling
humor of the Ministers, troubled King James not a little: which greatly
augmented, when they insolently refused to pray for the Queen his Mother, then
near herend, though he had earnestly commanded them. But the greatest of all,
was the execution in England, how handsomely I know not, though he greatly
endeavored to stop it.

But the King thinking to put an end to all tumults, thought fit to reconcile
1587.
the Nobility, which at last he did, Feasting them all at Haly-rudhouse, thence
causing them to walk hand in hand, two and two, to the Market Cross at
Edinburg, where they sealed their Concord by drinking one to another. The same
peace he thought to have made with the Ministers; but this not fadging, all
fell to nothing.

After this, Huntley, Bothwell, Crawford, Montross, and Athol, agitated by the
Jesuits, rebel; but upon their submission were pardoned. 1589.
Yet though the King was so easy to show favor, so was not the Presbytery,
who deprive the Bishop of Saint Andrews, of all spiritual function, for
marrying the King's Cozen, the Duke of Lenox his Sister, to the Earl of Huntly,
though he did it by the King's express Command; yet was the King forced to
dissemble his dislike of their insolency, knowing their power and stubborness;
and having another thing in hand, viz. his marriage with Ann the King of
Denmark's Daughter; whom to to fetch, he presently took ship, and married her
in Upslo in Norway; thence, through part of Swedeland and Denmark, he returned
with her 1590.
into Scotland, where she was crowned, though the accustomary unction was much
opposed by the Ministry, calling it a Jewish Rite abolished at Christ's coming,
and introduced by the Pope.

After this, Bothwell and some others conspire against the King, endeavoring
1591. 1592.
to seize upon his person at Haly-rood-house and Faulkland; but without
success, and so was glad to fly into England. The Presbytery taking advantage
against the King in these troubles, Petition that the Acts made 1584. to
restrain the insolences of these hot heads, should be abrogated, which the
King was constrained (fearing lest they should also rebel against him upon a
denial), in some sort, to consent to. Though the next year he assures them,
that he would not suffer the 1593.
Privileges of his Crown to be lessened, nor Assemblies to meet without his
Order; but this they slightly answer, by telling him, that they will keep to
the benefit allowed them the year before: Nor shall they hold their tongue in
the Pulpit, upon just and necessary causes. Such small esteem had they for
their Sovereign, though they would humble themselves to inferior people in
greater matters. For when they had, with the consent of the Council of
Edinburgh, made an Act, that the Monday Market in that City should be altered
to Tuesday: The Shoomakers whom it most concerned, gathered together before the
Ministers doors, threatening to chase them out of Town, if they harp'd upon that
string any more; which was the reason of this Saying, there: Rascals and
Sowters can obtain from the Ministers, what the King could not in matters more
reasonable.

Bothwell as aforesaid, having fled to England, for Treason, returns again, and
being assisted with other Nobles, and by the cunning of the Lady Atholl,
seizes upon the King at Haly-rood-house, where he constrains the King to
pardon all, and that several persons of quality, should be turned from the
King's service. But the King getting to Sterling, the Estates there decreed
Bothwels actions to be Treasonable, and the King not obliged to performance,
because forced; whereupon, Bothwell falling to open Rebellion, is pronounced
Rebel.

If the King's Authority could do this, the Kirk thought they had as much power
to excommunicate the Catholic Lords; which the King (the Lord offering
themselves to Trial) endeavored to stop, telling them, that they had nothing
to do in such affairs; but this denial so troubled and vexed the Assembly, that
they order all of their fraternity to be in Arms: For this insolency the King
checking them, they replied, That it was the Cause of God, and in the defense
thereof, they could not be deficient. Hereupon, the King puts forth a
Proclamation, prohibiting all meetings; yet, for all this, they kept on their
Course, so that the King was forced to yield. Yet this procured him no peace,
[though the birth of Prince Henry rejoiced him.] For Bothwell falls 1594.
again into Rebellion, assisted by Argile, Arrol, etc. Nay, the Presbytery
were so active in this Treason, as to carry on his designs; they give him the
moneys collected for the relief of their then distressed Brethren at Geneva: By
this means, having got some forces together, he fights the King's Party, in
which, though he was not beaten, yet shifts for himself, dissolving his
Soldiers. Yet after this, having joined himself with some Catholic Lords to
surprise the King again; but being discovered, flies to open Rebellion, and
having, with nine hundred men, under the Command of Huntly, beat Argile, who
had above 10000. upon Composition, are pardoned, but banished. And Bothwell
gets himself to France, thence to Naples, where he dyed miserably poor, about
the year, 1624.

The King for peace-sake and good policy, had a mind to pardon and 1596.
call home the banished Lords; to which, at last Mr. Robert Bruce the Minister
consents, provided, that Huntly should not return; but the King reasoning with
him for Huntly too, he imperiously answered, I see Sir, that your resolution is
to take Huntly into favor; which if you do, I will oppose; and you shall
choose whether you will lose Huntly, or Me; for us both, you cannot keep. This
is that Bruce, whose popularity outvyed the King's; who seeing one time, what a
multitude conducted him into Edinburgh, said, By my sale, Bruce puts me down in
his Attendants. And this is he, who had preached many years without Ordination,
nor would he be ordained, which was the occasion of some disputes, 1598.

Yet for all this self-conceited pratler, the Lords return; which mads the
Ministry, who meet about it, proclaim a Fast, order inquiry to be made into
their Favorites, against whom, they proceed with Censures, and clamor, as if
the Kirk had been singing her Requiem. The King troubled at these turbulent
actions under his very nose, by Proclamation dissolves them: Whereupon they
Petition him, not to incroach upon the Limits of Christ's Kingdom. And these
hubbubs were the more heightened by the Sermon of Mr. David Blake, in which he
ranted against the King, Queen, and Lords, and called Queen Elizabeth an
Atheist, and a Woman of no Religion: of which the English Ambassador
complained, and demanded satisfaction: Upon this, Blake is summoned before the
Council, which so incensed Andrew Melvill, that he labored to make it a
Public Cause; and did so much, That they declare, it would be ill to question
Ministers; and boldly told King James, (who asked them, if they had seen the
Conditions of Huntly's Pardon), That both he, and the rest, should either
satisfy the Church in every point, or be pursued with all extremity, so as
they should have no reason to complain of the oversight of Papists; And as for
Blake, they gave him a Declinator, affirming, it was the Cause of God,
whereunto it concerned them to stand at all hazard; and this Declinator was
sent to all the Presbyteries in the Kingdom, who were desired not only to
subscribe it, but to commend the Cause in their private and public Prayers to
God; by which means they fancyed themselves so strong, that they deny the King
to have power to judge a man for speaking in Pulpit; and, that the King, in
what he had already done, had so wronged Christ's Kingdom that the death of many
men could not be so grievous to them. And therefore they ordain a Fast for
averting the Judgments then threatening the Kirk. This action so vexed his
Majesty, that he forbad all Convocatings and Meetings; but they little cared
for him, or his Orders: for Mr. Walter Balcanquall, did not only forthwith rail
against the Court, naming several of the chief Courtiers; but desired all the
well-affected to meet in the Little Church to assist the Ministry, who did
accordingly, and Petition the King in behalf of the Kirk. But the King asking
them, who they were that durst convene against his Proclamation, was
worshipfully replied by the Lord Lindesey, That they durst do no more then so,
and, that they would not suffer Religion to be over-thrown. Multitudes
unmannerly thronging into the room, the King departed, and they went to the
little Church again, where Lindesey told them, No course but one, let us stay
together that are here, and promise to take one part, and advertise our
friends, and the favorers of Religion to come unto us; for it shall be either
theirs, or ours. Upon which, great clamours, shoutings, and lifting up of hands
followed, some crying to Arms, others to bring out Haman, [for whilst the Lords
were with the King, being sent as abovesaid, from the Little-Church Mr.
Cranstone read to the People that story] others cried out, The Sword of the
Lord and of Gideon: and so great were the Peoples fury raised on a sudden,
That, if the Provost, by fair words, and others by threats, had not tamed them,
they had done some violence. These actions of the Kirkers makes the King leave
the Town, and go to Linlithgow, whereupon they resolve for War, the Ministers
agitating them: Amongst the rest, one John Welsh, in his Sermon, railed
pitifully against the King, saying, He was possessed with a Devil, and compared
him to a Madd-man; and affirmed, That Subjects might lawfully rise, and take
the Sword out of his hand. In this fiery zeal, they write a Letter to the Lord
Hamilton, desiring him to be their General, telling him in it, That the People,
animated by the Word and Motion of Gods Spirit, had gone to Arms. But all came
to nothing, Hamilton refusing such rebellious honor carries the Letter to the
King, who orders the guilty Ministers to be apprehended, who escape by flying
into England, and the Magistrates of Edinburgh are pardoned. The overthrow of
this one business strengthened the Kings Authority mightily, which was also
confirmed by the Assembly at Perth, [now better known by the name of St.
John's- Town].

The Ministry being now pretty quiet, Ruthen Earl of Gowry, conspired 1600.
to kill the King, but to his own ruin. His Majesty for this Preservation,
orders, that Thanks should solemnly be rendered to God; but in this, he found
the Presbyters cross-grained, denying to do any such thing for such a
deliverance, whereupon they were silenced; yet afterward, showing their
willingness, were restored. In this year was King James his third son [his
second, viz. Robert, dying young] Charles born, afterward King of England.

The next year was kept an Assembly at Burnt-Island, whither 1601.
Mr. John Davidson wrote a railing Letter, checking them for their cowardice,
in not opposing the ungodly; telling them, that the King was not sound, and,
that War was more commendable than a wicked Peace: But the graver sort, rather
pittyed and smiled at the man's madd zeal, then troubled themselves to vex at
him.

And now, Queen Elizabeth dying, King James the undoubted next 1603.
Heir to the English Crown, is at London Proclaimed accordingly, whither he
went to receive his Crown; having thus happily united the two Kingdoms. And
here I shall leave off from prosecuting the Presbyterian Story in Scotland any
further, though I might tell you of their calling (against the Kings consent)
an Assembly at Aberdeen, 1605.
to rant against Episcopal Government; nor would they dissolve at the Kings
command, till they were proclaimed Traitors; and, yet did some of them scorn to
acknowledge their Error, and were by some of their Brethren vindicated to King
James face in England, the next year: And many more instances of their Waspish
humor, in denying the Kings Authority, might be shown out of their own
Historians, who abound in such Spotswood' s Hist. page 317, 318, 319, 330, 384*
327.
examples; but, if Symmetry will tell us the stature of the man, by the
proportion of his foot; these may serve so much at this time to satisfy, that
I fear they will rather nauseate.

And really, those who thought it a hard case, that Mr. Blake should Spotswood.
page 423, 424.
be punished, for affirming in a Sermon, [1596.] That all Kings were the Devils
Barns; that the Kings heart was treacherous, and, that the Devil was in the
Court, and the guiders of it: That the Queen of England was an Atheist, and a
wicked Woman: That the Nobility and Lords were miscreants, bribers,
degenerated, godless, dissemblers, and Enemies to the Church: That the Council
were Holliglasses, Cormorants, and men of no Religion. And in his Prayer for
Queen Anne, he said, We must pray for her for the fashion, but we have no
cause, she will never do us good. Nor did he word it only, but also raised Arms
both Horse and Foot against the Kings consent. These men, I say, who thought it
unjust to have him questioned for such rebellious actions, may also (for ought
I know) think it strange, with Buchanan, De. Jure Regni.
that our Laws do not provide ample and honorable rewards, for those who can
boldly murder their Prince. And, yet must this Buchanan and Motus Britan. verax
cushi. P. 23.
Knox, be cried up as valiant, noble, bold and publick-spirited men; and this
present world scorned, because we have no such firebrarnds. And, whether this
title is rashly thrown upon them, let any ingenious man judge; not only by
their forementioned tenets and actions against their Kings, but by the
answerable nurturing up of their Disciples, who at the University of St.
Andrews, instead of Divinity Lectures, Spotswood. P. 447. Sanderson' s Hist p.
213.
had these Political (or rather a ruin to Policy) Questions used to be discust.

1. Whether the Election or Succession of Kings, were the better Form of
Government? 2. How far the Royal Power extended? 3. Whether Kings might be
censured for abusing their Power; and deposed by the Estates of the Kingdom?
And how they stated these Questions, let their deeds be judge, as they are
most proper; and then let any man tell me, if men of such turbulent spirits can
be good Subjects, and, by consequence, good Christians; for I believe, the
World can scarce parallel, in one Kingdom, so many treasonable and impudent
actions in so short a time, as less then fifty years: let but our late English
madness (of which theirs and our Presbytery were the Original), be at this time
excepted. And most of these Actions you will find confirmed and owned, though
in a different style, by the History of The Scots Reformation, wrote by whom, I
know not: for a late Reverend Author denies it to be Knox's. And it is the
custom of men of this persuasion, to Father Spotswood. P. 85. 146, 267.
their Brats upon others, witness Wilson's History of King James; a Book not to
be believed in all things. Nor is it all the Nation has these spots,
Cleaveland. P. 46.

There is a Church as well as Kirk of Scots.


And to vilify the whole Kingdom, because it has nursed up some hot-spurs,
would be implacable malice, and to bring all the World into Ignomy. If the
Proverb assure us, That it is a good Family, which has neither Whore nor Thief
in it; 'twill be a difficult thing to expel Vice from a whole Nation. The
Virgin-City Venice, esteemed one of the Glories of the World, and whose
Government for Exactness yields to none, abounds with more Venerian pleasures
than any of her Christian Neighbors. The Spaniards are famous for loyal
Subjects; yet a Rebel is no Monster in Castile her self. Scotland has been the
Mother of as famous men as any other Kingdom, if Denmark, Germany, Poland, and
the Low Countries may testify their valor; whilst France will assure you of
their fidelity, whose Kings have altogether trusted their persons to their
Guardship. But enough, De Scotorum fortitudine, doctrina, pietate, etc.
since David Camerarius has writ a whole Volume in the Commendation of the
Scottish Nation.

CHAP. IX.
The illegal, malepart and impious Plots and Designs of our Schismatical
Presbyterians in England, in the Raigns of Queen Elizabeth, King James, and
King Charles, till the beginning of the wicked Long-Parliament.

NOr was this hot-braind humor fostered alone in Scotland; but England also
tasted the fiery trial of their madd pranks: Queen Elizabeth no sooner settled
in her Throne, but the Zealots deface all Monuments and Pictures in Churches
they met withal; nor did the ashes of the dead lie undisturbed, which caused
the Queen to set forth a Proclamation against such violations.

But these men, having their malice stopped against Stones and Glasswindores,
will vent it against those, who can be sensible of injuries. Goodman,
Whittingham, Gilbie, and others, having learned their lessons at Geneva, came
roaring over against our English Church; venting their venom not only by their
Preachments and Conventicling, but also in Print. The latter of these, viz.
Anthony Gilby, [of whom formerly, born in Lincolnshire, and of Christ's College
in Cambridge], termed our Ceremonies, Liveries of Antichrist, accursed Leaven
of the blasphemous Popish Priesthood, cursed patches of Popery and Idolatry.

Nor must the Ceremonies alone suffer, but the Reverend Bishops too, by others
of the same gang, as Throgmorton, Penry, Fenner, Udal, Heylin' s Exam. Hist.
part. 1 page 157.
and such like Bravado's, calling them Antichristian, Petty-Popes, Bishops of
the Devil, cogging and cozening Knaves, dumb Dogs, Enemies of God, etc. And,
for our Worship, they affirmed it to be an impious Martin' s Chron. p. 526. 593.
thing to hold any thing common with Rome, and from this Argument they refused
to come to Divine Service. But at last, such was the vigilance of the Queens
Council, that the fautours of these seditious Non-conformists were found out:
and Sir Richard Knightly, and Sir -- Wigston, were fined in the Starr-Chamber,
for receiving the Fuller. Book. 9. Sect. 7. sect. 17. 20.
Printers and Publishers of such Schismatical Books; the celler of one of the
Gentlemen bringing forth, like Lucian, some foul mouthed Pamphlets against the
Church, or other. Sanderson's History of K. James. p. 138.


Neither do these men mount their Battery only against the Church, but also
throw their wildfire and indignation against the Queen and their Supreme
Authority: witness Mr. Edward Deering of Kent's Sermon, Fuller. Lib. 9 Sect. 3.
sect. 22.
in which (how unworthily, let others judge) he compared her Highness to an
untamed Heifer; and Christopher Goodman in a Book, Id. Lib. 9. p. 77.
publicly vindicated Wiat's Rebellion, affirming, All who took not his part,
were Traitors to God, his People, and their Country.

And as some Common-Lawyers, towl'd away by enticing tongues, and Gold of the
Non-conformists, wrote against the Authority of Bishops; Martin's Chron p. 783.
so some pretending to the Civil and Canon Law, were obliged to oppose and deny
the Queens Supremacy in Causes Ecclesiastical. Nor might these forementioned
things seem strange, since they were easily to be vindicated from some of the
Geneva Notes upon our Bible, where you may find the Disciplinarians highly to
complain against Asa, because he did not kill his Mother, furiously calling of
it 2 Chronicles. 15. 16.
lack of zeal and foolish pity: And maliciously to compare our Archbishops,
Bishops, Doctors, and such like degrees, with the Locusts, though Revel. 9. 3.
they carelessly seem to quit themselves in the exit. And, yet these are the
very same men who professed to Queen Elizabeth, That their Applications Id.
Epist. Dedicat. to Queen Elizab.
are such as may most appertain to Gods glory, though how hidebound they were
at the same time from Charity, may appear by their then slandering the Reverend
and Learned Bishops with the ignominious title of ambitious.

Thus was Authority begun to be blasted by the Puritans; a name now almost an
hundred years old, beginning in 1564. as Fuller thinks, Church-Hist. Lib. 9. p.
76. Exam. Hist. p. 149.
though Dr. Heylin out of Genebrard, makes it two years younger, though in a
Id. Hist. Reform. 172. Chron. p. 1166.
later History he seems to moderate its original between both, viz. 1565. And
these were so denominated, as the word implies, and Genebrard, and experience
tells us, because they thought themselves so much purer then other Christians,
that they would not perform Divine Service with them; utterly rejecting all
Forms used in the Primitive Ages, and looking upon all decent Garbes to be
unlawful in Church Affairs, if different from the common wear, or rather if not
according to the Geneva-cut. The Antiquity of this Name is very ancient, as we
may see in the old Heretics, who presumptuously called themselves Caethari,
[i. e. Puritans] the same Gab. Praicol. p. 124. 382.
with the Novatiani, with whom the Parmenianistae in supposed purity did
something agree; and by this Name of Cathari, I find Johnstonus in his large
History to signify our Non-conformists.

The Queen perceiving these men to slight both her and the Bishops, and to act
only by the advice of private persons, as Mr. Tho. Cartwright, [who affirmed,
That we ought rather to conform our selves in Confer. Hamp. Court. p. 27.
Orders and Ceremonies to the fashion of the Turks, then to the Papists] Mr.
Travers, etc. who had their inspirations and commands from Geneva; thought fit,
for example sake and fear, to let the Law, so much by them violated, take her
course; whereby Copping and Thacker were hanged at Saint Edmondsbury in
Suffolk, Barrow and Greenwood were executed Heylins Ex. Hist. page 166.
at Tyburn, Coppinger dyed in Prison, and Hacket was hanged by the Cross in
Cheapside; the two last were more extravagant then the rest, falling to open
blasphemy. Nor did John Penry a Welshman escape: this was the man who made
those scurrilous Pamphlets against our Church under the title of Martin Mar
Prelate; a man so much guilty of his own villainies, that, with Cain, he feared
death from every man's hand, and therefore was forced to sculk and ramble
amongst his brethren for protection: so that his Antagonist was not amiss,
when he sang of him thus.

Qui tantum constans in knavitate sua est. Pap of the Hatchet.

He was taken at Stepney, and condemned for felony, and hanged at Saint Thomas
Waterings: Upon whose death, an honest Northern Rimer made these Couplets.

The Welshman is hanged, Weaver's Fun. Mon. page 56.

Who at our Kirk flanged,
And at our state banged, Alex. Gil in his Logonomia Anglica, does something
vary from this copy, cap. 23. p. 122.

And brened are his buks.
And though he be hanged,
Yet he is not wranged,
The De'ul has him fanged
In his kruked kluks.
Besides these, Udal, Billot, Studley, and Bouler were condemned; yet, through
the Queens mercy, were reprieved: and Cartwright, and some others were
imprisoned.

These round dealings did a little terrify the rest of them, and gave a check
to the furiousness of the wiser sort. But yet having some of the Nobility
their Patrons, (whether for Conscience or Policy, let others judge:) as
Leicester, Lord North, Burleigh, Shrewsbury, Warwick, Walsingham, Sir Francis
Knollys, Mr. Beal, Clerk of the Council, and others, they took heart again, and
proceeded in their Consultations and Actions, as formerly: Nor was Archbishop
Grindal thought to be so vigilant, as his place required: for which, he got the
Queens displeasure.

Yet formerly, had they kept meetings of some of their Ministers, to carry on
their intended innovations, but privately for fear of discovery. The first
known to be kept in England, was at Wandsworth in Surry, 1572. November. 20.
Another they had at Cockfield in Suffolk, where threescore of their Ministers
met, 1582. May 8. where they consulted concerning our Common Prayer Book,
Canonical Apparel, and other Ceremonies of the Church, though they had no call,
but their own presumption.

And because they resolved to be vigilant, they had another Synod, [passing by
one, also the same year at Cambridge,] where was drawn up a form of Discipline,
(scorning to submit to Ours, or Anthority) by which they were to be guided; of
which, thus a painful and learned Antiquary will inform us: Inventing out of
their own corky brains, a Weevers Fun. Mon. page 54.
new, certain, no-form of Liturgy to themselves, thereby to bring into the
Church all disorder and confusion. And in the same Assembly, they made a
Collection for their Scottish brethren, who fled into England, for their guilt
of high Treason; and what loyalty can be expected from such traitorous
Assistants, let moderate men judge: though I am apt to give some credit to one
of our old English Versifyers. Nor Queen in her Kingdom can or ought to sit
fast, Pet. Frarius' s orat. in English, fine.

If Knox or Goodman's books blow any true blast.


After this, another Synod was held at Coventry, 1588. June 10. where they
imperiously condemned the reading of Homilies, Cross in Baptism, that Bishops
ordination by them and their autherity are all unlawful: and that a Bishop is
neither Doctor, Elder, nor Deacon. And besides all this, they decree, that
occasions are to be sought to bring the people in liking to their Discipline,
and that those of deeper apprehensions shall be drawn to it by all private
allurements possibly. And these positions with others, were carried cunningly
abroad to be subscribed by all, to make their faction more unanimous.

And many other Meetings and Assemblies they had at London, Oxford, Cambridge,
and other places, to carry on their designs: as appears by the confession of
Mr. Thomas Stone, and the Collections of the Fuller, book 9. Sect. 7. 39.
Right Reverend Bancroft.

And so powerful were they grown amongst some of the Nobility and Gentry, that
at the Parliament at Westminster, [1585.] they were so vigilant by their
whispering with the Members day and night, that if the Queen had not interposed
her authority, they might have given the Bishops a scurvy lift, by the
assistance of their Schismatical Brethren, by them voted into the House. To
this Parliament, the Non-conformists having framed another Book, by them
called, A Book of the Form of Bancrosts dangerous Positions, p. 96.
Common Prayers, etc. in which, was contained the substance of their pretended
Discipline. To this Representative, I say, in them having great hopes, they
presented this book; With this Petition, -- May it therefore please your
Majesty -- that it may be Enacted -- that the Book hereunto annexed --
Entitled, A Book of the Form of Common Prayers, Administratien of Sacraments
-- and every thing therein contained, may be from henceforth authorized, put in
ure, and practiced throughout all your Majesty's Dominions. By this, they
showed themselves no enemies to set Forms of Prayer; but only that they, not
others, should have the honor of making it: Like the Cardinal, who confess't
that Reformation was necessary, but was vexed, that Luther should undertake it.
And at the Dissolution of this Parliament, Queen Elizabeth takes special notice
of our Innovators, for finding Stow, p. 702, 703.
fault with our orderly Church Government; the which humor she not unfitly
terms, New fanglednesse.

I might here tell you of many more bold actions in this Queen's time, used by
these Renegadoes, as a very serious and learned Gentleman Weaver's Fun. Mon.
page 54.
calls them: But only one shall instance for an hundred, to show you how
partial they were in all their dealings, as to make the Proverb true, that
Kissing goes by favor; and this shall be of one of their grand Masters, viz.
Mr. Snape: and thus it was in brief. Mr. John Nelson Bancroft. p. 82.
of Northampton, one of their Elders or Deacons, had his Worship's daughter
classically got with child, by his serving-man, [nor durst the Elders maid
associate with the same species, that the Mistress doth]; For this, Snape brings
the poor man to public repentance and ignominy amongst his neighbors: nor do
I blame him, if he had used the Gentlewoman so too, and empowered to do it; but
she, O she! was the Daughter of a rich Brother; and Sectaries were of old,
observed to gain most by pleasuring simple women, and colloguing with those who
had full coffers. She therefore, good soul! was esteemed to run counter to the
Primitive Fall; there the woman, but here the man, or rather poverty, is judged
the tempter: But because the Country had both eyes and ears, therefore a
marriage was thought most plausible to vindicate the Brethren; the which was
accordingly performed by a lame Soldier of Barwick, by the appointment of
Snape; by whose order, the same Soldier had married many others at the same
place. And it may be, Barebone's Parliament drew their new model of coupling,
from this Swashbuckler.

These, and many other innovating and cross grained actions, you may find
storied down by their almost-own Fuller: for so may I well take the boldness
to call him, since they could never desire a more complyable Historian: And
therefore these may carry the more probability with the Reader, let his
education be either sound or rotten.

KING JAMES succeeding upon the death of Queen Elizabeth, the Non-conformists
thought to gain ground apace, having to deal with a Prince, as they thought,
bred up in their own way, and a stranger not only to England, but, as they
hoped, to her government also. It Is true, He had been nursed up in the
Presbyterian way in Scotland, but their insolences and encroachments to get
all the power into their own hands, (as a stiff Presbyterian, under the fained
name of Wilson, Hist. Great. Brit. page 7.
does confess) gave him so much experience, as not only to allow of no
alteration, or that very small in the Church of England, but also publicly to
testify his happiness in ruling over, and amongst people so sweetly united,
in such a Church Government: whereas in Scotland, He was a a King without
State, without Honor, without Order, where beardlesse Conf. Hampt. Court. page
4.
boys would brave him to his face: As himself did word it.

Yet to satisfy their clamours, He gave them a conference at Hampior-Court;
where their Objections seemed so trivial, that Self will and an erroneous
Conscience was thought to be more predominant then Reason: Upon which, the King
put forth a Proclamation for Uniformity; to which, all the Ministers in
England, (and they are above nine thousand) submitted, except forty nine; such
a noise will a few disturbers cause in any society, when tolerated. Nor need
this seem strange to those, who Spotswood. page 479.
know, that in the first year of Queen Elizabeth, the number of our Clergymen,
who refused the Oath of Supremacy, did not amount to Heylin's Hist. of
Reformat. page 115.
200. though they had all not only been bred up in the Romish Religion, but
also for some few years before, had violently asserted the Pope's authority in
England; And we now see those who have been the Chief-tains of the
Non-conformists, to turn tail, and acknowledge Episcopal government; the which,
I hope, they do more for Conscience then Covetousness.

Yet for all this, though King, Law, and all things else, were against the
Disciplinarian Interest, they grow resolute, and as one says, starkmaa,
Sanderson's Hist. of K. Ja. page 321.
and send to their Brethren in Scotland, informing them of all which had
happened, and that they in Scotland, must expect to conform too; and then, God
wot, would follow the utter destruction of Sion. Upon which, some of them take
an Alarm, and meet at Aberdeen, in spite of the King and his Authority,
intending to declare against, and root out all the footsteps and memory of
Episcopacy: for which, some of them afterward were forced to acknowledge their
fault. And Andrew Melvil for writing Libels against our English Church, [he
then being at London,] was called before the Council, where, behaving himself
insolently, and like a mad man, he was committed to the Tower.

By these actions our Non-conformists easily perceived, that they could gain
nothing but their own shame and destruction, whilst they acted only as private
men; whereupon they resolve underhand to blow up the Parliaments against
Prerogative; to which purpose by their industry, they never wanted a good party
in the House, who carried themselves so resolutely and cunningly, that for the
future, Westminster only rung with the clamours of Grievancies, liberty of
Subject, and Privilege of Parliament: A Parliament never sitting, but some
Member or other throwing dirt in his Majesty's face, and this conscionably done
by freedom of speech; never, or very seldom, satisfying the King, in what he
conveniently required; for when his pleasure for any reasonable thing, was any
time made known to them, then they grumble and reply, that God must be served
before man; and then for a month or two, nothing is done in the House, but the
uttering of long-winded speeches against Arminianism and Popery. And this to as
little purpose, as Cardinal Rapacciolus his prayer, that the Devils fins and
Conclave Alexand. 7. p. 41.
transgressions might be forgiven him, that so he might receive some comfort,
and be of good cheer. For any thing or reason, besides bitter Invectives, is as
difficult to be found amongst them as Coach horses at Venice, or a Gondola in
Themes, as is obvious to any who have seen the Speeches in the two last Kings
raigns. It Is true, all were not carried on with the same Spirit, for the House
was still composed of two different tempers. Like Orense, a Town in Gallaecia
of Spain, one Lud. Non. Hispan. cap. 53. Mart. Zeillerus. Hispan. page 362.
side of which in Winter is covered with Snow, and num'd by the fury of frozen
blasts, whilst the other side does not only want these white Robes, but is
favored with a continual warmth, arising from the adjacent medicinal hot
Baths: yet the more wicked party, obliged by being so, to be more industrious,
will commonly gain advantages, whilst the good People trusting in their
honesty, act altogether too supinely.

I shall not now trace the Extravagancies of private men, but show you some of
their hotheaded prancks in Parliament; because they have now made that the
Stage on which they intended to act for the future; and in this I shall study
brevity, and pass by many notorious insolences.

In the first Parliament of King James, which was drawn out into several
Sessions; one of the Members bid the rest take heed, lest they gave too much to
the King, lest they endanger their own throats cutting when they went home;
Others bob'd his Majesty in his teeth for rewarding some of his own
Countrymen, affirming, that their silver and gold abounded at Edinburgh. And
one Piggot, after he had spoken disgracefully Heylin's Ex. Hist. part. 2. page
71.
of the Scots, added withal, That it would never be well with England, till a
Sicilian Vesper was made of the Scottish Nation, as if he had not known what
Countryman the King was: Words of such high nature, that Queen Elizabeth
would have shown her Prerogative. But having now to deal with a King, whom they
thought might have been trampled upon here as well as beyond the Tweed, they
left nothing unturned whereby they might strengthen their own Faction. And this
spirit of Contradiction and Contention ruling amongst them, is pointed at by
one of their own Brethren, though clad in more favorable Wilson's Hist. page
51, 52.
words; these bickerings, and the Members unrestless humor forced the King to
dissolve the Parliament, having sat long enough in all Conscience to do any
good if they intended any.

Afterward another Parliament being called, and consisting of the same
Temperature, was presently dissolved. In the next Parliament, the King desires
some Moneys, [having not had any assistance from his People, for several years;
so, that he was constrained to lessen his Houshold]. This necessary request the
Parliament hears, but never intend to grant: And the better to lay it aside,
they first begin with the spacious and specious subject of Complaints, and with
a high hand fall upon the Grievances of the Subject, in which having spent some
time, they drew up a Remonstrance, though they not only knew, that the things
therein contained would be highly displeasing to his Majesty, but also, that
the King had expressly forbad them to meddle with any such Concerns: And in this
Paper, they greatly bragged what their Privileges were, and how they were their
undoubted Right and Inheritance. These actions the King, who above all things
loved Peace, did a little resent, and gave them a small check in a Letter; upon
which, the discontented part of the Members grumble; and, having plotted a thin
House, and a late hour, [six a clock at night, in December] not a third part of
the number being there, drew up a Protestation in behalf of their Liberty,
Privileges, and Jurisdiction as they pretended, and recorded it in their
Journal Book [19. December. 1621.] thereby declaring their supposed valor to
Posterity: Nor can we imagine, but that such Presidents as these inflamed our
late rebellious Spirits with presumption: The King thus perceiving, that the
longer they satt, the prouder they grew, dissolved them by Proclamation; so
unwilling were these men to satisfy the King, with any reasonable supply; and
this is somewhat hinted at by a Nonconformist himself, by observing out of Sir
Robert Cotton's History, that Henry the third, was so pestered Wilson' s Hist.
page 155.
with Parliaments, that he would rather pawn his Crown-Jewels, give over his
House, and feed himself with the benevolence of Monks, than be beholden to his
People; and this he tells us, was thought to be a Parallel for King James his
time. This wise and peaceful King by dear-bought Experience, will farther tell
you, in his Excellent Book to (...). Book 2. p. 33, 34.
Prince Henry, how pernicious the Puritans were to good Government, and what
small trust is to be had in them.

KING CHARLES succeeded his Father King James, (who dyed at Theobalds, 27.
March, 1625.) and was as much (or rather more) tormented, by his Presbyterian
Subjects, as his Father: for this Nonconforming humor, once advanced into a
Parliament, never left working till they had barbarously brought their King
upon the Scaffold, and delivered him over to his Independent Executioners.

These Politic Whirl-winds having begun the Storm, and presumed to bluster
against the Father, resolve never to cease the Tempest, till they had blown up
the Children and Church Government, Root and Branch; And to leave off from what
they had begun, they thought would bespeak them Cowards. Let the Honor and
Title of good Subjects, be attributed to those who want Courage and Conscience
to be bold Villains.

In a Parliament in the first year of this Kings Reign, instead of Supplies
desired by the King, for the guarding of the Seas, defending our Coasts, and
molesting our Enemies; many of the Members fly very high in opposition, and
that with unseemly language, Mr Clement Coke, (son to Sir Edward), affirming,
That it is better to dye by a foreign Enemy, then be destroyed at home: and
Turner, a Doctor of Physic, seconded him by more then ordinary reflections
upon the Kings Government; and, though the King complained of them, yet the
House rather hugged then reproved such actions.

In the next Parliament, the King had great hopes, that all things would work
for the good of the Nation, and be carried on without any discontents. But in
this he found himself greatly deceived. It Is true, at the beginning they freely
Vote the King five Subsidies: whereof 1627/8
he being informed by Secretary Cook, and that the House was so unanimous
therein, that they made but one voice; the King is said, by some, to have wept
for joy, hoping now he had a Parliament free from any turbulent humors; but
this was but a bitter Pill covered over with Gold. For never was there any man
more deceived since the first temptation then He: They no sooner had given this
Supply, but frame the Petition of Right, and desire the Kings consent to it,
[for know, they never gave the King any thing, but they receive as good from
him; a new way of Merchandize], the which, because they had publicly
questioned, whether they might trust his Royal word, he solemnly confirms, the
Houses thereat testifying their joy with a mighty shout, and other people by
ringing of Bells and Bon-fires.

Yet scarce had the King graciously granted this, but they, not yet content,
drew up a Remonstrance, ranting against the Innovation and Alteration in
Religion, against the Arminians and some of our Bishops, and other things;
which was highly disliked by the King, which so much incensed the Commons, that
they (over Boots, over Shoes) fell to draw up another against Tonnage and
Poundage; but the King not liking them to meddle after this manner, prorogued
the Parliament. But being returned again, they fall very heavy upon the
Customers, from which severity the King endeavoring to persuade them, worked
such a contrary effect upon them, that in a high passion and distaste they
adjourned themselves for some days as if their sitting there would be to no
purpose, seeing they could not command the King. His Majesty being informed,
that they had adjourned themselves, thought fitting to allow them some more
play-dayes, and so Adjourns them to the 2. of March, and then again for 8 days
longer. But they met the second day, and fell a ranting against the
mis-government; whereupon their Speaker Sir John Finch, informed them of the
Kings Order to adjourn them till the tenth; at this the House storms,
affirming, the Speaker had nothing to do to deliver such messages, and, that
Adjournment properly belonged to them; and so they took fire, and fell
presently into an hubbub, whether without fighting, I know not, though a Member
was Rusworth's Collect and Appendix.
afterward accused for striking. The Speaker, according to his Majesty's
command, endeavors to leave the House, but is violently held in his Chair by
Mr. Denzil Hollis, and Mr. Benjamin Valentine, and after watching his
opportunity, having got a little out of his Chair, was by them two thrust back
again, and there held, the first of the couple, as an Author tells us,
swearing a deep Oath, that he should sit still as long as they pleased: And to
make all cock-sure, Sir Miles Hobart, locks the door, and puts the Key in his
pocket, (which afterward was called an Imprisonment of the Parliament.) These
Figgaries H. L'Strange. page 101.
continued so long, that the King heard of them, and sends for the Sergeant of
the Mace [Grimston], but he was not suffered to go; upon which contempt he
sends Maxwell, Usher of the Black-Rod; but they so little regarded such
Summons, that they neither admitted him nor his message; which refusals so much
incensed his Majesty, that he sent for the Captain of the Pensioners, and the
Guard, resolving rather to force an entrance, than be thus out-braved by his
Subjects. But the Members, perceiving what danger their passion had brought
upon them, nimbly quitted the House; though before their departure, they had
noys'd out a Protestation against Tonnage and Poundage, Arminianism, Popery,
and Church-Innovations: And this was done by the Instigation of Sir John Eliot,
(a great stickler in such things) who also read it, the Speaker and Clerk
denying to do it.

These Actions may well be brought to savor of a Nonconforming Spirit of
Contradiction, and as a Glass, more really to observe their humors by. It is
not unworth the notice, by what artifices they did really endeavor to make the
King odious to his Subjects, of which I shall only hint upon one grand
Imposture, fobb'd about by many of these chief Ring-leading Members. And this
was, of a Papet by them carefully and plantifully spread abroad, to discover
the impertinence of Parliaments, and how by the Subjects Purses to keep the
Nation in a good defense against the Kings Enemies. And this was suggested,
that the King had not only such a Design a foot, but, that by him, or his
means, this Plot first took birth; whereas it was discovered by Sir David
Foulis, (one not ignorant of State Affairs, being thereunto L'Strange. page 111.
several times employed by King James of blessed memory), that this Paper was
contrived several years before, viz. about 1613. by Sir Robert Dudley, [then
living at Florence, under the title of Duke of Northumberland]. By which means,
it seems, some men would not leave any stone unturned, rather than fail of
their intended ends. Nor can I quit him from the same ignorance and malice, who
long afterward published it under the name of Strafford's Plot discovered,
etc. endeavoring thereby to make him odious to the simple people, as if he had
been the Composer of it; and this only, because a Copy of it Heylin' s Ex.
Hist. part. 2. page 94, 95.
was found in his Study, an argument by which I might be proved the Compiler of
it, and other Memoires of State, if Transcripts could make Syllogisms.

The Actions of this Parliament countenanced many Puritans to show their teeth:
and amongst the rest, one Leighton, a Doctor in Physic, and a hotheaded
Scotch-man, put forth a Book, called Sions Plea, and dedicated it to this
Parliament; wherein he did not only rail against, but endeavored, as much as
in him lay, to stir up the People to kill all the Bishops; and stormed highly
against the Queen, calling her the Daughter of Heth, a Canaanite, and
Idolatress, and with such like language was his Book stuffed; for these, and
other things he was sentenced in the Starr-chamber to be punished, to quit
which, he made an escape, but being taken again, felt the smart accordingly.
And whether or no, such Incendiaries did not deserve severe punishments, let
any moderate man judge. Yet the Long-Parliament afterward, did so much pity
his case, forsooth, because he seemed by it to be an asserter of their Cause,
that they ordered him for requital 10000 l. and this a great while before the
wars; whence a consequence may be drawn, April 21. 1641.
that that Presbyterian body did not only permit, but encourage Villains to
scribble both against Church and State; which denotes them the Authors of our
following mischiefs, and therefore will be a brand upon those Members to
eternity.

After this, the Scots who had a long time been stuffing themselves with
discontents, took an occasion to vent it upon the Divine servicebook, 1637.
sent to them by the King, in some things differing from our English one,
especially in those most agreeable to that Nation, viewed over first by some
learned Bishops; but not, as that impudent and maliciously lying wretch, that
Protean Gage, would make some believe, a New Survey of the West Indies, cap.
22. page 208.
man unworthy the Relation of such a noble Brother as he had. This book no
sooner began to be read in Saint Giles Church in Edinburgh, by the Dean of that
City, but the people in a fury threw their stools, Bibles, and any thing that
came in their way, at the Dean, who was rescued from their hands, by the
Provost and Bailiffs, but not from their malice; who all the while, pelted the
Church-windows with stones, and so violently assaulted the Bishop going home,
that if he had not been rescued, he had probably been murdered: And in the
afternoon sell upon the Bishop again.

These tumults with much ado, were a little pacified, but broke out again: For
the Council observing multitudes of people from most parts of the kingdom, to
haste to Edinburgh, and when there, to keep Conventicles and rant against
Bishops, and the book; by Proclamation, command upon pain of Rebellion, all
people to depart to their own homes, but those who could show reason of Lawful
business; which incensed the Kirk-party so much, that the next day, they
pursue the Bishop of Galloway into the Council-house, which they beset, and
with threatenings demanded his Person; upon which, the Lord-Treasurer, and the
Earl of Wighton, going to pacify the people, were most barbarously set upon by
them, and with that fury that they pulled down the Lord-Treasurer, took away
his hat, cloak, and white wand, and so haled him to the Council-house; and this
Tumult lasted, till they were pacified by some of the Nonconforming Lords and
Gentlemen, who were desired by the assaulted Nobility, to quiet their brethren.

Upon this, the Lords of the Council, by Proclamation forbid any tumults for
the time following; and another from the King to the same purpose; and for
adjourning the Term to Sterling: but the King's Proclamation was no sooner read
at Edinburgh, but the Earl of Hume, Lord Lindsey, and others, caused their
Protestation against it to be read, and in despite of the King's Proclamation,
gathered four Tables: The first for the Nobility: Second, for the Gentry.
Third, for the Buroughs. Fourth, for the Ministers. These four prepared what
they thought fit to propound to the General Table, consisting of several
Commissioners chosen from the rest. And having thus ordered themselves to make
all more strong, they unite themselves by entering into a Covenant, a thing
exceeding like the Coward Clinias, in Sir Philip Sydney, viz. The very Fritter
of fraud, and seething pot of iniquity. And yet this Imp, for all its
wickedness, raised it self to an high esteem amongst many, as if it had been
something related to Tereus in the Poet, as probably it was, which is, Ovid.
Metam. lib. 6.


-- Ipso sceleris molimine --
Creditur esse pius, laudemque a crimine sumit.
Praised for its sin, and, as some think, and trust,
Is in its very wickedness most just.
The chief Promoters of the Covenant, were these three Ministers, Henderson,
Dickson, and Cant; who with their Covenant, were learnedly repulst by the
Orthodox Divines of Aberdeen.

The King not liking these Combinations, sent the Marquess of Hamilton, as
High-Commissioner, to pacify them; but took no effect, they declaring to
renounce their Baptism, rather then Covenant: though, to give them content, the
King nulled the Service Book, and gave them an Assembly and Parliament. The
Assembly was held at Glascow, November. 21. 1638. In which, the Presbytery were
so far from suffering Bishops to sit, (as if they had not been Clergymen) that
they would have had them to appear before their Kirkships as guilty persons,
and so to be proceeded against: But this the Bishops denied, and put in a large
Declinator and Protestation against their proceedings. By these and other
cross-grained humors of the Presbytery, the Duke, perceiving the longer they
sat, the wider the breaches would grow, dissolved the Assembly; they opposing
the King in all things, though he had granted them all convenient requests. To
the dissolving of this Assembly, all the Council consented and subscribed, but
the Earl of Argtle; who ever after proved an instrument of mischief to both
Kingdoms. Against this dissolution, the Covenanters protest and act
accordingly, but especially against Bishops, whom they afterward by their
goodly Authority deposed, and alienate their Lands: no great matter, God wot,
the Rents of all the Bishops in Scotland, not amounting to seven thousand
pounds sterling, per Annum, as a Native informs us. And yet this small
Maintenance of the Sanctuary, or a Declarat. of the Church of Scotland, p. 58.
pittance amongst so many grave and hospitable Bishops, was a great eyesore to
the Covenanters, though several private Presbyterians might be nominated, whose
estate surmount this. And not content with these actions, they began to gird
themselves to their Arms. Against whom the King marches, and both Armies draw
up near Barwick, where a peace was concluded; by which means, Aberdeen escaped
a scouring, the Earl of Montross, (then misled) a General of the Covenanters,
marching then against it with a Commission to burn it.

This peace lasted not long, the Covenanters not sticking close to the Articles
of agreement; and which was more, a great part of the walls of
Edinburgh-Castle, falling one night down, and the King ordering the Governor
and others, to see it rebuilt; the Covenanters would not suffer it, by
forbidding any materials to be carried to its reparation. And, which was most
of all, they perceiving the King incensed at their actions; and therefore
fearing some checks, address themselves to their old Ally, the King of France,
from whom they desired aid and assistance; an action so strange, for subjects
to appeal from their own King to Forrainers, and that against their King too,
that it will easily silence the old story of the King's German horse. Yet
whether their Letter and Messenger was sent, or no, it matters not; that it was
drawn up, and subscribed to be sent, is certain, which is as much. By these
affronts, the King being sufficiently provoked, raises an Army, and marches
against the Scotch Covenanters, who with a great force had entered England, and
that with cheerfulness, having more friends than the King: they having some
twenty eight Lords and Earls: Whereas the King had not above twenty: besides,
they had the good wishes of the English Prebyterians, who by their Sermons,
Discourses, and Pamphlets, had made the King's actions and friends so odious to
the people, that many of the Royal Army marched unwillingly against the Scots,
wishing them victorious, hoping by that means, to work their malice upon our
Bishops, and other persons of quality. And accordingly it fell out, a part of
the English being routed, the Scots possess all Northumberland, and the
Bishopric of Durham, with Newcastle. This Prosperity of the Covenanters cheers
up our Nonconformists, who in this, joining themselves with the Scots,
presently get the King assaulted for a Parliament, which was granted, and to
sit November. 3. at London: and a cessation between the two Armies was made, and
orders taken for a further Treaty. In the mean time, the Scots Army miserably
tormenting the Northern Counties of Cumberland, Westmorland, Northamberland,
and the Bishopric of Durham, from which they raised a Contribution of 850. li.
per diem, for their assistance: a thing by many thought very strange, that an
enemies Army should thus, by compact, be maintained by those who wished them
farther off. This Covenanting Army kept correspondency with the Parliament,
having a safe convoy granted by the King for their Letters, by which means,
many an odd design was, probably, nursed up; the Parliament giving them thanks,
and moneys to boot, for their good service.

But must the Scotch Covenanters be only guilty in affronting their King? No,
that would derogate much from the zeal and forwardness of our English
Presbyterians: who had so far countenanced their Caledonian brethren, as to
have beseeched them into a native conspiracy, and then beckoned them to a
Southern march. And therefore to show their answerable forwardness, they
bestirred themselves to the purpose, to get nonconforming Members chosen,
which accordingly answered their expectation 1640,
in the short Covenant sympathizing Parliament: whose refractory humors
occasioned their sudden dissolution. Our English Presbyterians perceiving now,
what a great stroke they had in choosing members, thought it fitting to see
what metal their Proselytes were made of: to which purpose, several were
instigated to murder that great Prop of Learning, the Archbishop of
Canterbury, then the main eyesore to our factious splrits, and to carry on
this design more unanimously, a Paper was posted upon the Old Exchange, May 9.
exhorting all Prentices to rise and sack his house at Lambeth, the Monday
following; supposing they had as much authority to tumultuate against the
Reverend Bishops, as the Covenanters had. Of this plot, the Archbishop having
intelligence, prepared for his defense, and well was it, that he did so; for
accordingly, on the following Monday, in the dead time of the night, above 500.
men well armed for the purpose, assaulted his Palace, endeavoring by all the
strength and force they had, to break open his Gates, thereby to come to his
person; but he had so well provided for his security, that all their attempts
only showed their devilish malice, and murtherous intentions, which was also
demonstrated by their railing and cursing tongues. The next day, several of
them were apprehended, and imprisoned in the White-Lion prison, who were
violently released within three days by some of their wicked accomplices, by
breaking open the prison: so unanimous were some of the Anti-episcopal men to
intolerable villainy. Nevertheless one of their Chief-tains was re-taken, and
for this rebellious riot was condemned, and, for example-sake, hanged and
quartered; which so terrified the rest of the Nonconforming brethren, that a
kind of a peace was outwardly kept for a while. And as no small incendiaries to
these intolerable practices, were the wicked Pamphlets spread abroad to delude
the vulgar by diverse seditious persons; but especially, by Prynn, Burton,
Bastwick, and John Lilburn, people of such implacable spirits, that no
government could satisfy them. And were so hot-headedly led by their erroneous
and spightful Principles, that as they took a pride in their own deserved
sufferings, so nothing could satisfy them but the Confusion of others. Yet
these men afterward took such opposite interests, that they became utter
enemies, endeavoring what in them lay, not only to vilify, but ruin one
another; though Prynn still held up his head above the rest. Thus were these
Presbyterians the authors of our after-miseries, that I may well sob with a
time serving Poet, Page Fisher. Irenodia Gratulat.


Eheu! Turba rapax! primique miserrima belli
Perfida gens Auctrix. --
Alas! the first promoters of our stirs,
Were the perfidious, hot-spurr'd Presbyters.
THE HISTORY Of the Wicked PLOTS and CONSPIRACIES OF OUR Pretended Saints. BOOK
II.
CHAP. I.
The mischievous and impudent Contrivances and Innovations of the wicked
long-Parliament. 1. Their slandering of the Court and Church. 2. Their
Affection to the Schismatic Incendiaries. 3. The Impudence and
seditiousnesse of their Lecturers. 4. Their designs to alter the frame of
Civil Government. 5. Their Plots to overthrow Episeopacy. 6. Their stirring up
the people to Tumults. 7. The small esteem the Commons had of the King, and
Nobility; Whereby it appears, that it was not the King, but the Parliament that
occasioned, and began the Wars.

HAving now, and that as succinctly as I could, somewhat discovered the
peace-consuming zeal of our Presbyterians, I shall come to the subject
intended, to wit, our late unhappy Distractions; The seeds of which was not
only before sown by the Nonconformists but began a little to take root and
sprout forth through the temper of our English Parliament [1628.] and the after
actions of the Scottish Covenanters, by whom the King was cajoled to call a
Parliament to fit, November the third 1640. A day ominous to the Clergy by a
former president upon that day the 20. year of King Henry the Eighth, that
Parliament beginning which began the ruin of Cardinal Woolsey, the power of
the Clergy, and the dissolution of those famous Monuments of Charity, the
Abbeys, and such like hospitable buildings.

England has afforded us many Parliaments, yet but one of them Bakers Chron.
page 138. F,
honored with the Epithet of Good, and that some hundred years ago; though
since his Majesty has been pleased to memorize one with the character of the
healing, and blessed Parliament; as many of our former Representatives have had
several names added to them, as the Parliament that wrought wonders, The great
Parliament, The mavelous Parliament, Id. p. 158. B. p. 161. E. p. 167. A. p.
177. B. E. Tho. Walsingham Hist. Ang. Anno 1404.
The Laymens Parliament, because no Lawyer was to be in it; The unlearned
Parliament; either for the unlearnedness of the Members, or for their malice to
learned men, Barebones Parliament, The short Parliament, and in the same year
[1640.] did our long wicked Parliament commence, and I have heard of a Stow's
Chro. page 191. col. 1.
Mad Parliament.

No sooner did the long Parliament sit, but their proceedings were hurryed on
with that fiery zeal, that if distractions had not followed thereupon, it would
have been as strange to the discreeter sort, as Margaret Countess of Hollands
year-like birth at Lusdunen to our Countrywomen; or the story of the womanly
girl, who at six years old was Relat. du voyage. de Mosc. Tart. and de Per.
page 516, 517. in the letter du sieur de Mandesto.
brought to bed of a son in Indostain. For instantly they fell upon grievances,
abuses in Religion, violation of laws, liberties, and what not? Concerning
which their speeches flew plentifully about, and released the grand
Incendiaries Prynne, Burton, Bastwick, and Dr. Leighton, and giving them great
rewards. Some of them being triumphantly guarded into London by many thousands
of horse and foot, with rose-mary and bays in their hands and hats [Novemb.
28.] which was not only an high affront to the Kings Authority, but a political
glass to the Nonconformists, through which they might see the strength and
unanimity of their own Faction, who were grown so valiant that a little before
this upon the fast day [Novemb. 17.] where Dr. Burgess and Marshall preached
above 7 hours before the Commons, and before the Lords, two Bishops; but, as
the second service was reading, a Psalm was struck up by some of the Brethren,
which presently disturbd the Divine service, to the amazement of the civil and
orthodox Auditors, who could little expect any such thing, without an express
order by authority,

But this is no great matter in respect of their after actions, which are so
many against the King and Kingdom, and that too before his Majesty's horrid
murder, that it is impossible for me in this Compendium to decimate them into
a relation, their very printed Acts and Ordinances in that time amounting to
above 530. Besides their Declarations, Petitions, Remonstrances, Votes,
Proclamations, Messages, Speeches, and such like passages; and all stuffed with
some worshipful thing or other, by which their pretty actions were confirmed.
Yet, as far as brevity will allow me, I shall endeavor to speak out and as
plain as I can: yet must I not accuse all, nor half, it may be, of the members;
many of them, spurred on by their Loyalty following his Majesty, and sitting in
Parliament in the Schools at Oxford: after whose departure, the House at
Westminster seemed like Pandora's box, from whence all our future mischiefs and
diseases flew over the Nation.

The Parliament, a little after its beginning, having triumphed over diverse
persons of quality, whom they knew to be opposers of their intended Presbytery,
thought it fitting to seek some absolute way of security to themselves for the
future; And to this nothing could be thought more conducible (considering how
they had gul'd an odium of Reverend Episcopacy into the simple people) than by
the certainty of Parliaments, for which purpose they procured of the King (who
dreamt nothing of their after-games and fetches) an Act for Triennial
Parliaments: And that their own actions might appear of more grandeur by the
stability of their own foundation, they also obtained from his Majesty (who was
never wanting to grant any thing to his Parliaments, pretended to be for the
good of his subjects) an Act whereby themselves should not be dissolved,
prorogued, or adjourned but by their own consent. By which means, they were
fancied by many of the Kingdom to be of such high Authority, that neither
King, law, or any power else could have any influence over them, let their
actions be never so treasonable or wicked: And so might Phaeton suppose, when
his Father had given him the command of his refulgent Chariot, though his
indiscreet authority brought ruin to himself and destruction to some parts of
the world. And well may any one in this, turn their own weapons against
themselves, and yet not be deemed too meddling. Such a continuing-Commission is
freely given, yet cunningly procured, to the Captain of a ship: But when this
Governor falls so far distracted, as to endeavor nothing more then the ruin
of his Vessel; by their own popular consequence, his Commission is void, as
being no more able to govern his charge to the best. This instance I quote,
more because often alleged against Regal authority, than for any similitude it
carries, unless upon our perpetual Parliamentary account. And therefore the
reviving of this long-Parliament by a modern Writer seems to be to as small
purpose, as Don Quixot's martial endeavors to retrive the I know not what
Knight-errantry, by his paper helmet, his windmill, and claret-butts
encounters; or Hortensius the self-conceited Schoolmaster in du Parques
Franchion, to obtain the Crown and Kingdom of Poland.

The King having as he thought pacifyed his Subjects in England, having granted
them what they desired; thought it likewise expedient to settle all things in
Scotland in a peaceable temper, for which purpose he August. 1641.
put himself to the trouble of a journey thither; yet not without some notable
observators; No sooner he being departed, but our Parliament ordering some
members to go also into Scotland in notion of a Committee, to inform them of
all passages in Scotland.

Yet when the King went into Scotland the Parliament adjourned, though
appointed a Committee of the Commons consisting of 50; of and over which Mr.
Pym was the chief Lord and Master of mis-rule; and him I find nominated at the
very beginning of this Parliament with the Emphasis of the great parliament man.

And the truth of it is, that he was so far the dominus fac totum in Diurn.
Occur. page 7.
this juncto that his words were laws, all things being acted according to his
desire: Here many things of Church matters were by these Gentlemen purely
innovated, and then prosecuted with such violence that the Episcopal clergy
durst not gainsay him, as Dr. Fuller, Mr. Hutton, Mr. Fletcher and others of
St. Giles Cripplegate, Mr. Booth the Minister of St. Botolphs Aldersgate, Dr.
Heywood of St. Giles, the Ministers of St. George Southwark, of Margarets new
Fish-street, etc. could very well testify by experience. Although the house of
Lords would not consent in these things to join with the Commons, yet did they
so far supinely wink at the others actions; that their Authority was now so
much entrenched upon, by the Commons, that their privileges slipped from them
unperceived: though without all question the presbyterian party both understood
and smiled at such proceedings. About this time there was a great deal of noise
and clamor about a Letter forsooth against Mr. Pym, with I know not what
plaster in it, and written, God 25 October 1641.
wot when, and delivered by no body knows whom, but a Gentleman forsooth in a
gray-coat on horseback; and great searching and inquiring for this man in the
moon was made, but all to as little purpose as the Northwest passage or the
philosophers stone: And many times has it been printed and spread abroad, to
let the good people see the wickedness forsooth of Malignants, and with such
chafe as this, have many of our old fools been taken. Yet when that impudent
Libel, stuffed with as much malice as either this letter or hell could afford,
was vented against that great prop of learning the Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury, Laud, no notice was in the least wise taken of it, nor did he
himself any thing regard it, though it thus threatened his destruction.

Laud, look to thy self, be assured thy life is sought, as thou art the
fountain of wickedness; Repent of thy monstrous sins before thou be taken
Rushworth's History, Collect. page 672.
out of the World, etc. And assure thy self, neither God nor the world can
endure such a vile Councellor, or Whisperer, to live.

Than this, what more implacable, destructive, and abominable? considering
Prynn's breviate of his life. page 15.
his nearness to the Kings person, his trust, and beneficial endeavors for the
public good. Yet, had he been better, or, if I may say here, the best, and the
designs against him more devilish; yet would our Non-conformists have hugged
and blessed themselves at this opposition, had it been (as after malicious
experience proved) to his ruin: and all this because he was an absolute
opposer of the Presbyterian innovations, who though but of a very little body,
yet had a soul more large and vast for the good of Church and Literature, then
a whole Parliament of Disciplinarians.

But let us now think of his Majesty's return from Scotland, in whose absence
some of the Parliament had raised large reports of strange and terrible plots
and designs against John an Oaks, and John a Styles, by which means many people
were endeavored to be whispered into dissatisfaction of the King; and such a
jealousy was grown by the noise of this Chimaera, that many did, according as
they were bid, think that things were not then well carried: and this was
cunningly aimed at the King and his Favorites, by those who had their
Coy-ducks in such obedience, that their Commands was not unlike that of Madam
Fame to Aeolus, in our ingenious Chaucer. House of Fame. lib. 3 fol. 320. b.


Bring eke his other claviown
That hight Sclaunder in every Town,
With which he wont is to diffame
Them.
Hem that me list and do * hem shame.
But these Alarums served the Parliaments turn, being a Cloak under which they
might deceive the People in their pretenses for raising a Guard; the which they
did, and it may be to defend them from a Pedicularie disease, of which possibly
they saw some symptoms then in the House. Of these Romantic Jealousies,
Frights, Alarums and 2. December. 1641.
unheard of Plots and Designs, his Majesty tells the Parliament, and of the
evil consequences of such slanders, in his first Speech to them after his
return from Scotland. And in his next, earnestly desires them to 14. December.
prosecute the Irish affairs; and perceiving them considering about pressing of
Soldiers, with a check at his Prerogative, He desires that the bounds of his
ancient and undoubted Authority, might not then fall into debate; however, that
it may pass with a Salvo jure, he is willing, rather then such disputes should
take up time in such an hour of extremity; for whilst the Grass grows, the
Horse may sterve. Upon this they clamor against his Majesty's dealings,
professing the Privileges of Parliament were broken, by these his Exceptions;
for which they demand satisfaction, and earnestly desire his Majesty, not only
to declare the names of, but also to deliver up to punishment, those persons,
who had given such counsel. Nor was this mode of dealing one of their least
Plots, upon all occasions desiring the King to betray his faithful Counselors;
by that means, not only to leave him naked, but to the discretion of the Houses.

But these things carried no great show of unhandsomness, (though like the
Apples of Sodem, beautiful without, yet stuffed with filthiness), in respect of
their after Thunderclaps, which, like Brutus, showed their malice in their
fronts. For the next day after their Petition, 15. December. 1641.
they welcome him home with a Remonstrance, (as they call it), in which
maliciously they endeavor to rip up all the faults (and none is good but God)
of his Majesty's Reign, and that, in as civil a way as their zeal could allow
them, as you may see in the Paper it self: for in it (through his actions) they
tax him with Cruelty, Injustice, Oppression, Violence, and what not? They
out-braid him for putting forth untrue, scandalous, false, and impudent
Declarations; in it they highly commend the Schismatical Non-conformists,
blaming the King for punishing them; Nor is this all, but the Scotch Invasion
of England too is extolled and defended, and the King scandalized, as if he
endeavored to root out the true Religion, and bring in Popery; nor are they
silent against the Bishops and their Orthodox Divines, (by which it is plain,
the Presbyterian ruled the Parliament); nor must the Innocent Ceremonies, and,
forsooth, Superstition escape a scouring; And yet, in this very same Hoch end
mogende-Paper, they confess they must acknowledge that his Majesty has passed
more good Bills to the advantage of the Subjects, then have been in many ages.
Yet for all these good Ex. Coll. p. 529.
turns done them by the King, do they Print (though the King earnestly desired
the contrary) and sedulously; spread abroad this Remonstrance, thereby to make
him odious, and themselves as Patrons to the people: a fair requital for such
large benefits; and sufficiently to show their ingratitude, (and, What more
wicked then that, amongst our virtuous Ancestors?) The Heathen Heraclians were
more noble to Justin. lib. 16. Plin. Hist. Not. lib. 8. cap. 16. A. Gel. l. 5.
c. 15.
their Athenian Enemies; and the savage Lions, for their thankfulness to
Mentor, Helpius, and Androdus, will be a reproach, upon record, to these
Puritanical Members: And Alexander was more ingenuous to his Horse, than these
to their King.

Yet never was there any who desired Peace and the Subjects good more than He,
for the obtaining of which, he consented to them in such things, that he parted
with many Jewels from his Crown [as Queen Elizabeth used to call such
Priviledges] granting them Triennial Parliaments, abolishing the Star Chamber,
High-Commission-Court, Writs for Ship Money, Bishops-Votes in Parliament,
Temporal power of the Clergy, slipped away Tunnage and Poundage, and gave the
Parliament leave to sit as long as they pleased; and, that they might see, he
privately acted nothing against them, he admitted into his Privy Council,
several Lords, which were great Favorites and Correspondents with the
Parliamentary Party; and in many other things, besides these, has this King
valed Observar. on Hist. K. Chapter page 29, 30, 31.
his Crown, as a Learned Doctor phraseth it. Yet could not all this please some
men, being like the Sea, insatiable. Though a moderate Member of the Parliament
asked what they could desire more of the King, seeing he had granted them so
much, he was answered by Mr. Hambden, (as a Sanderson's Hist. K. Chapter p. 505.
late Historian tells us), To part with his Power, and trust it to us.

And, that some of them had higher thoughts, than the Loyalty of a Subject, or
the trust of Parliament, could dispense withal, I could easily be persuaded to;
and those especially, who by their former actions in Parliaments, had drawn
some displeasure upon themselves; and knew well enough, that the more
Prerogative and Power the King lost, the more they gained, which at last would
more then preserve them. But this Faction (as the King tells us) was only of a
few Ex. Coll. p. 517.
ambitious, discontented, and seditious persons, who, under strange pretenses,
had entered into a Combination to alter the Government both of Church and
State. And so that this might be done, they did not care after what manner, nor
who perished, so their own heads were but held up; that, methinks, I hear them
threat and encourage like Tasso's Tyrant Aladin. Gierusalem liberuta. Cant. 2.


Purche'l Reo non si salvi il guisto pera,
El'innocente. --
Su su, fideli mei, su via prendete
Le flamme, e'l ferro; ardete, and uccidete.
-- So I
Obtain my wish, let just with wicked dye.
Come, come, rouse up, my faithful friends, and show
How bravely you can burn and murder too.
And what courses they steered to arrive at their hoped for Authority, may in
part be seen in these following Observations.

One of their first steps was to make the Court and Church odious I.
amongst the Vulgar, under the Title of Popish and Arminians; a wickedness
quite contrary to the Laws of our Land, which make special provision 3 Edw. 1.
33. 2 Rich. 2. c. 33. 12 Rich. 2. c. a 1.
against the publishers of such rumors, whereby discord, or occasion of
discord or slander, may arise between the King and his People, or the Nobility
or Bishops; yet neither Law nor Gospel can have any any sway with these men,
who had used this knack of reviling in several former Parliaments, and may be
seen in the multitude of their long-winded Speeches, and printed too forsooth,
the better to spread the Infection about the Nation; yet you may take all the
Reason amongst them, and never grow madd with too much Learning; though the
multitude of words are enough to choke the largest Leviathan: nor could much be
expected, many of the Members being so ignorant, that I dare boldly say, that
they did not know what the five Controverted Points signified, and I believe
would have taken, and voted too Jacob van Harmine, and the Remonstrants for
Calvinists, though have damned Arminius for a wicked Heathen. Thus the Priests
in Spain told the people, (to make them hate the Reformed Religion) that
Protestants were not like other men, had heads like Dogs and such like Beasts.

They also restored into favor all those who had opposed the Peace II.
of the Nation, as Prynne, Burton, Bastwick, Leighton, Lilburn, and such like,
who were stiff men to raise their Interests as far as Pen, Ink, or Brawling
could do; and, that their Interest might be the more strengthened in the
Country, they put into Offices and Employments of trust, all those whom they
either found, or were by them made discontented against the Court and Religion;
by which trick, they twisted their Obligations so close together, that they
made good use of this afterward.

And to make their Cause more favorable to the People, and to III.
blast the Reputation of their Enemies, they promoted abundance of bawling
Lecturers, most of them of no great Learning or Conscience, but as furious as
Orlando, and with throats, O heavenly wide! who could scold excellently against
Bishops and Government, and vomit out a Lesson with as much ease, as a Matron
of Billingsgate, both being composed of the same materials, and to the same
purpose, viz. strife, and for their dexterity and quickness they out-did a
Mountebank; being always as ready for the Pulpit, as a Knight Errant for
combat, never out of his way, let the Text be what it will; like the Sompners
Friar in Chaucer, (but nothing related to the honest Parson in the same Poet)
that it is beyond admiration, how they can conjure such an Olla Podrida of
Sermon-Notes from such good Texts, and that of so little coherence, that their
extraction seems as miraculous, as the generation of the Cadmian armed
Soldiers from Serpents teeth.

To raise up Rebellion and Sedition, there cannot be a better Trumpet in the
World, then the mouths of such Hirelings, as has been proved by long
experience. Wat Tyler, and Jack Straw's Rebellion could not want encouraging
Sermons, as long as John Ball lasted, who Stow' s Chron. page 293.
cheered up that Levelling Army at Black Heath, with a long Preachment,
beginning with this Proverb; When Adam dolve, and Eve span,
Who was then a Gentleman?
And it is observed by Mr. Howell, that the Preaching Friars and Hist. Lewis.
13. page 128.
Monks, were the chief Incendiaries of the Catalonians to their late Revolt.
And we have it from Authentcik Authority, how that Hernando Prud. de Sandoval.
Hist. del Emp. Carlos V. lib. 5. Sect. 20.
de Avalos, and Juan de Padilla, in the Spanish Civil Wars against the Emperor
Charles V. in the first place employed some Friars to rail against the
Government in their Pulpit, and so to incite the people to War, which,
according to expectation, took fire in Toledo; these Id. Sect. 4.
men being the first thunderers of Seditions into the Castillians: and to Lib.
8. Sect. 20.
this purpose, the famous Spanish Historian Prudencio de Sandoval, tells us a
memorable passage of the Conde de Salvatierra, who sent a Priest to Vittoria,
the Metropolis of Alava, [a little Province in old Castile], only as it were to
have some discourse with the Junta; but upon suspicion was presently put in
Prison by Diego Martinez, and searched, where they found Letters to the Friars
and some other people, desiring them to persuade the people to Rebellion. The
Scotch Stories are plentiful of Pulpit-Treasons; nor must our English
Tub-thumpers be exempted, a sort of people more antic in their Devotions than
Don Buscos Fencing-Master, and can so wrincle their faces with a religious (as
they think it) wry-Look, that you may read there, all the Persian or Arabic
Alphabet, and have a more lively view of the Egyptian Hieroglyphics, then
either Kircherus or Pierius will afford you. Yet, for all this outward zeal,
experience has told us, that the chief of them, were but Time-serving
Pratlers, acting more for their own Interest than the Public good; and,
according to the prosperity of their favorites, so was their passion
transported, and apt to be cooled again from the least dissatisfaction of a
Grandee: that I look upon many of them, to be not only as simple; but as
inconsistent as that Biscayner Priest, Prud. de Sandoval. lib. 6. sect. 10.
in Charles the V. time; who, when the Commonalty rebelled against the
Emperor, took so much their part, that he used to pray publicly for it, and
Juan de Padilla, and his Wife Maria Pacheco [the chief promoters of that warre]
by the name of King and Queen, affirming all other Kings to be but Tyrants: yet
this zeal kept not long heat, for afterward Padilla and his Soldiers marching
by where the Priest lived, and some of them being quartered in his house, drank
him up a little barrel of wine, took away a wench which he kept, and did other
soldier-like extravagancies, which turned his stomach so much against them and
their cause, that the next Sunday, he thus bespake his Parishioners. You know
my brethren, how that Juan de Padilla marching by this place, his soldiers left
me not one Hen, they eat up my Bacon, and drank me up a whole barrel of Wine,
and have taken away my Catharine with them; Therefore for the future, I charge
you not to pray Catclina in Spanish.
to God for him, but for King Charles, and his Queen Juana, which are our true
Kings.

As for the Antiquity of Lecturers, if looked into, it will be found to be but
upstart, to wit, in the latter end of Queen. Elizabeth's time, and this fashion
too stolen from Geneva, and here introduced by those who had no Authority,
unless you allow Trevers and his companions to have the sway of the English
Church. And what law they have for their vindicarion I know not, unless they
plead an Order of the Commons, 22 Feb. 1640.
whereby any Minister was permitted to use weekly Lectures in his own Church;
But whether any such Authority was entrusted with the Commons, or, if it were,
whether this permitted them to thump in other peoples Pulpits, lies out of my
study; though a novice in Law is able to satisfy any man in this: Yet were
many of these Lecturers, Ex Coll. p. 526, 527.
though never in orders recommended, cherished, and held up in their bold and
seditious railing against the Church, Book of common Prayer, and the King and
his Government, and license publicly given to their Pamphlets; whereby many of
the people were drawn to take part against their King; For they having the sway
over the Conscience which is the rudder that steers the astions, words, and
thoughts of the rational Creature, they transport and snatch it away whither
they will; making the beast with many heads, conceive according to the color
of those rods they use to cast before them, as Mr. Howell very ingeniously
Hist. Lewis 13. page 128.
says. And for this cause it is, that the state of Venice, have a special care
of the Pulpit and Press, that the Priests dare not temper in their Sermons with
the designs and transactions of State, which the same Survay of Venice page 7.
Gentleman allows to be one reason why that Republic has lasted so long in
such a flourishing condition: and to the benefit of this, the wise and peaceful
King James did agree in the Hampton Court Conference: yet for all this so
resolved were the Commons to carry on their page 58.
designs, that in 1641. they by a strong hand put several Lecturers into other
men's pulpits, and put the true Ministers of those Churches into abundance of
trouble, because they did not at first consent to such innovations and
intruders, as many parishes in London are able to testify; and into what good
humors that great City was preached, by these thunderers, experience has
sadly told us. Nor in plain English, is there any such need of these Lecturers,
as is pretended to by our Non-conformists; for, consider our Sunday-sermons
with those upon our Festivals, with the appointed and accidental Fasts, and
Thanksgiving ones, and I am confident, there will be as many in a year as are
either well made use of, or well preached.

Another mode they had, to drive on their designs of altering the government
of England confirmed by so many wholesome Laws, was to get the Lords and Commons
jumbled together into one house; for which purpose they put several agitators
to draw up a Petition against Ex Coll. p. 547. 548.
a malignant faction, and that the Peers who were agreeable to them would
remove, and sit, and vote with the Commons, professing unless some speedy
remedy were taken for their satisfaction, they would lay hold on the next
remedy that was at hand, and not to leave any means for their relief; and that
those who agreed not to them, might be publicly declared and removed. And this
worshipful petition was accordingly framed, and by the Commons presented to the
Lords. This extravagant paper, was presented with the like words of a Commoner
the same day, that those Lords who would concur with the Commons about the
Militia would make themselves known, that the dissenting Peers might be made
known to the Commons; These threats I say, as a Royal pen informs us, did so
astonish many of the Lords, that so many of them with indignation departed that
the vote against the Kings Militia passed, though it had several times been
denied before. And by such like unhandsome juggling tricks as this, were the
rest of their designs promoted. And that they really had an intent to have but
one House, by making the Lords sit with them, a Dr. well-skilld in these times,
assures Observat. on the Hist. K. Chapter p. 61.
us out of Sr. Edward Deering's Speeches; and besides this, that the King
himself should be but as one of the Lords, and then their work was done.

Besides these, the Presbyrerian faction had other ways to make themselves
Lords and Masters; especially one, without which the rest though obtained
would not relish well with them. And this it was, they having often heard from
King James, and he learnt it by good experience, No Bishop, no King, cast about
how to ruin the first, and then the latter they thought (as it fell out
accordingly afterward) would fall to their obedience with the more ease.

To bring this great thing about, all their art was employed. But the chief of
all, was their old true friend and soldier Calumny; by this to make the
orthodox episcopal party odious to the people, a way which Contzenus the
Jesuit looks upon as so excellent, that it is very fitting it should be
endeavored. And in this trade of vilifying, our Nonconformists Polit. lib. 2.
cap. 18. Sect. 8.
were so expert and sedulous, that in a short while they had innumerable lying
pamphlets and reports spread about the Nation, that in the first year or two of
this Long Parliament, the hearers and believers, with the relatours of these
slanders, were so many, and all performed with that care and celerity, that
Dame Report in England outvapour'd Queen Fame in Chaucer, who

Had also feel up standing ears
And tongues, as on be ben hears, House of Fame Fol. B. 319.

And on her fete woxen saw I
Partriche wings redily.
Yet are these fictions against our reverend Church Government quite contrary
to the sound and true Law of our land, which will thus tell us. 8 Eliz. cap. 1.
For as much as diverse questions by overmuch boldness of speech and talk
amongst many of the common sort of people, being unlearned, have lately grown
upon the making and consecrating of Archbishops and Bishops within this Realm,
whether the same were and be orderly done according to the Law or not, which is
much tending to the slander of all the state of the Clergy, being one of the
greatest states of this Realm, etc. Yet let the Laws say what they will, these
men will oppose, and that in Ritaing ways, rather then not get their end,
above 2000. of this faction October 22. 1640.
making a tumult in London, crying out, they would have no Bishop nor no high
Commission, a bad omen to the peace of the Kingdom, but a great encouragement
to the Long Parliament, who first sat within a fortnight after this hurry: And
had presently a sympathizing Petition brought them by Alderman Pennington,
laden with the scrawling December 11. 1640.
hands of 15000 Londoners, and this forsooth against Archbishops, Bishops, and
our Church-ceremonies, though I believe, if none had been subscribers but those
who understood what they set their hands to, that neither the Alderman, nor
15000 of the rest, had listed their faith and themselves in that paper, which
the Lord Digby called very well contemptible, irrational, and presumptious. Yet
did the Presbyterian faction in Parliament joy themselves thus to have brought
that great City to the subjection and reverence of their new found
Disciplinarian slavery; and perceiving themselves thus backed by such riches
and so many men, went boldly on to pull down our Reverend Church, and set up
their golden calves in its stead. And all this pains, hurly-burly, Sueton. in
Call. cap. 46.
alarums, and war, must only be, like Caligula's Army, to fight for empty
cochle-shels, in respect of the truth, glory, and sincerity, swaying in the
English Church.

The first employment of note against the Church, that the Commons put
themselves upon, was against the Convocation, contemporary with the short
Parliament, which they condemned as seditious, dangerous against King, Law, and
Subject, though the King acknowledged no such thing, and December. 16, 1640.
one of their main reasons against this Convocation, was because the clergy
therein assembled] perceiving how the Scots did covenant and swear against our
Church Government, and that our English Non-conformists were grown strong, and
not only corresponded with the Scots, but tended the same way, which would
ruin our Church at last, as experience proved] did frame an Oath for the
maintaining of our Church Government, against all Popery, and its Superstition.
And this was called the Oath, etc. though the words following this etc. to wit,
as it stands now established, makes not the Oath so contemptible, as our
Presbytery clamoured. Against this Oath the Cornmons ranted, affirming the
Clergy, though assembled by the King's command, had no power to make an Oath:
the which whether they had or no, I shall not now dispute. Only I shall have
leave to think, that every one thinks the best of themselves: And so, I
suppose, did the Commons, when they framed the Protestation, and ordered all in
their own May 3. and 4. 1641.
House, to take it; and did also recommend it to be taken all England over,
though the King did never consent to it, nor as then had the Lords; and whether
the Commons by themselves, have power to impose an Oath, I shall not determine,
though report speaks the Negative. And as for the Protestation it self, it is
composed of such uncertain juggling materials, (considering the Presbyterian
Notion which imposed it) that a true understanding Conscience would never
embrace it; for these following rational Doubts, waving the dispute of the
Imposers authority.

I promise, vow, and protest to maintain -- with my life -- the true, reformed,
Protestant Religion, expressed in the Doctrine of the Church of England,
against all Popery, and Popish Innovations within this Realm.

Dub. 1. What the Presbyterian Imposers and Framers here mean, by the Doctrine
of the Church of England? If the Thirty nine Articles, why do they not
subscribe them? if any thing else, why do they not mention it, that men might
know what they swear?

Dub. 2. What they mean by Popery? If their Articles; in what sense they meant
the Points held against the Calvinists, by some learned men of our Church and
Holland.

Dub. 3. What they meant by Popish Innovations within this Realm? for their
Writings affirm our Church Government by Bishops, and Innocent Ceremonies, to
be so: The which if they meant, then none but Schismatics would take it; if
otherwise, why did they not explain themselves, that people might not swear
ignorantly. -- As also the power and privileges of Parliament, The lawful
Rights and Liberty of Subject, -- and shall never relinquish this Promise, Vow,
and Protestation.

Dub. 4. What are the power, privileges of Parliament, and Rights and Liberty
of Subject? As for the Parliamentary privileges, they themselves never yet
undertook to declare what they are: And for men to swear to defend they know
not what, is not unlike that Messenger, who swore to observe his Masters
Instructions in his sealed Commission, which when he had opened, he found no
command but to hang himself.

Dub. 5. Whether it is lawful to swear never to relinquish this Protestation,
though the King and State should afterward have some reasons to revoke, or
alter all, or any clause, in the said Protestation? as none can question their
Authority in such things.

And then eight days after, was a piece of paper, as if dropping May 12.
from its Posteriors, joined to the rump of this Protestation; wherein was
declared, that nothing in this Oath was to be extended to the maintaining of
any form of worship, discipline or government, nor of any rites or ceremonies
of the said Church of England. By which, the Hauntghost of Presbytery, is
easily perceived to be there domineering; and it is the humor of these men, to
love that in themselves, what they hated in others: December. 30. 1641.
Witness their accusing the Bishops of Treason, December. 27.
for putting in their protestation against the others proceedings, seeing they
were kept out by violence and tumults: And yet when it was, after, the Commons
case, the Army expelling them, they also put in their Protestation December. 6.
1648.
to the same purpose: Thus are men often paid in their own coin.

But to return to the Convocation, which, I suppose, had as much lawful Power,
as a Presbyterian Assembly; and, I am confident, have used it with more
discretion. In what little esteem, the Kirkers of Scotland had the civil
Authority, their own Histories will tell you: and in the Scotch troubles,
[before our late Wars], it appears by their own True Representation, etc. page
10. 13, 14.
Commissioners, as if it were the Kirk's right, to determine all Ecclesiastical
affairs by their Assemblies. And it is the opinion of our English
Non-conformists, declared in their Book of Discipline, [in Queen Elizabeth's
Bancroft's dangerous Positions, p. 111.
days,] That their Presbyterian Synods are to handle and decide, both
Doctrine, Discipline, and Ceremonies of the Church: and accordingly were all
their actions steered.

The House of Commons having thus voted against the Convocation, made it a
Coy-duck to draw in the rest of their designs. And in the first place, they
fall heavy upon the Archbishop of Canterbury, as a promoter of the former
Canons, and so accuse him of High Treason; December. 18. 1640.
though as then they had laid no Articles against him, but promised to do it,
to the Lords, upon which he was secured; and the third day after, was fined
five hundred pounds, which he was forced to borrow, December. 21.
and to sell plate to repay it: such a liberal Benefactor was he to the
advancement of Learning, that he left himself nothing; and if the severe stroke
of injustice, had not untimely sequestrated and cut him off, Saint Paul's
Cathedral had silenced the fame of the ancient wonders: our English Clergy had
been the glory of the World; the Bodleian in Oxford, had daily more and more
out-stript the Vatican; and his public Structures had ore'topt the Escurial:
and all this by his own munificence; in which, he so far excelled his
neighbors, that he was not unlike the good Emperor, Titus Vespasian, whose
liberal soul made Sueton. 8.
him think that he had lost that day, in which, he had not given something.

The next day that they accused the Archbishop, they also accused Bishop Wren
of the same crime. And a little after, voted highly against December. 19.
the Learned and Reverend [as the French Churches beyond sea, can testifie]
Jan. 23. 16
Dr. Cousins; March 4.
and the next day, receive Petitions against Dr. Jan. 24.
Duck, and Sir John Lamb. And a week after, received a Remonstrance, pretended
to be laden with seven hundred Ministers hands against Bishops; the which if
true, yet that number bears no proportion Jan. 31.
with above nine thousand, which were the number of our English Clergy: and
however it was, Mr. Seldom himself did declare, that very day, that the House
of Commons had nothing to do with Church Affairs in that nature: And reason tells
us, that it is not only hard but unjust, that men should be accused for acting
according to the known Laws of the Land, they not being as then repealed.

But what care the Commons for this? seeing they are resolved, come what will
of it, to have Sir Jack Presbyter to bear the sway; and therefore they fall
heavy upon Episcopal government, and after a whole Feb. 7. March 7, 9, 10.
April. 2. May 19, 24, 27. June, 3. 4, 7, 12.
day's debate, the Majority against both Law and Reason, did agree to take away
Lordly Prelacy, their meddling with temporal affairs, their jurisdictions and
Courts, and a great part of their Means and Estates; and afterward enlarged
upon these things. And that the Country might not be ignorant also of their
enmity to Church government, they therefore appoint Commissioners to go into
all places of the Kingdom, Febr. 11.
and there remove all Altars, Images, and Rayls about the Communion Table, and
sell them, and punish those who shall endeavor to set them up again. Nor was
this all, but they also question Sir John Lamb, Febr. 21. March 4.
and Sir Nathaniel Brent, for getting Organs repaired, and setting up some new
Organs in Churches. Though I do not know against what Law these two Gentlemen
had offended; though I know against what, the latter did afterward.

And having gone thus far, away they in a fury hurry Arch bishop Laud March 1.
to the Tower, whither he was followed and railed at by the (then) significant
rabble of the Anti-church-government Puppies. And some few days after, they
appointed a (forsooth) Committee for Religion, of ten Earls, ten Bishops, and
ten Barons; by which means, the Lay-votes March. 21.
were not only double to the Clergy, but, in fine, none of the latter left;
they knowing now their own intentions and power so far, that they were more
then confident, to have the Clergymen in short time to be but as Ciphers.

To obtain which, they endeavored all ways that malice or industry could
propose to them: And as a means to encourage others to oppose Bishops and
Church Government, they not only released the scribbling April 20, 21.
firebrarnds of the Nation, as Burton, Prynn, Leighton, Lilburn, etc. but also
as a reward for their good service, voted them many thousand pounds a piece;
And the next week fined the Members of the Convocation April. 27.
house, two hundred thousand pounds. And afterward voted that not only the
Bishops, but all other Clergymen, that did either send their Proxies, or
execute the said Canons, were guilty. August 4.


But if the Lords have a Religious Committee, the Commons must have one too, or
else they think themselves out-vapoured. And so they jumble up a Company of
Ministers together, giving them authority to consult the Canons and Liturgy,
and also to draw up a platform May 5.
or model for Reformation, to be settled in the Kingdom: and by what rule these
men were to work, is no difficult business to collect, from the Commons Votes
some few days after, that it was necessary to have 17. May.
an Uniformity of Religion with Scotland: as also from their kindness to the
Armed Covenanters, not long before, by Voting for them 300000 pounds, with the
goodly title of Brethren. And all this, because they 2. February.
marched into England, with a numerous Army, protesting, swearing, and fighting
against Episcopal Government; for, that was the thing now also aimed at in
England, so that Mr. Pym, speaks the hearts of others as well as his own, when
he reproved one of the Lords, saying, That it was not enough to be against the
Persons of the Bishops, if he Ex. Coll. p. 521.
were not against the Function.

And according to this Maxim, the Commons by their former Votes, having made
the way more facile, boldly Vote the Government 11. June.
of the Church of England by Archbishops, Bishops, Chancellors, Deans,
Archdeacons, etc. to be prejudicial to both Church and State; and the next day
Voted also, that from that time there should be no 12. June.
such things as Archbishops, Bishops, etc. in England. Nor was this all, but
presently after, they also expunged all Deans and Chapters, Prebendaries, 15.
June.
etc. So that, in four days time, the hasty Commons overthrow, as much as in
them lay, the Reverend Church of England; which had continued many hundreds of
years a flourishing glory to the Nation.

The Commons, for their parts, having thus pulled down the pale of our Church,
fastened and strengthened by so many Authentic and Fundamental Laws, as old
again as the House of Commons, will not leave Religion without some Government.
No, good souls! they were more kind-hearted. And therefore in the first place,
they Vote, that all the Lands and Means belonging to Deans and Chapters,
Chancellors, or 15. June.
Commissaries, Archdeacons, Deans, Prebendaries, Chapter, Canon, etc. shall be
taken away and disposed of to the advancement of Learning and Piety. That is,
(if their after-actions may be taken for Expositors) to maintain Rebellion,
Heresy, Sacrilege, and ruin Universities; for these men's promises, like
Hebrew, must still be read backwards: and after this rule, did they send a
request to the King by Secretary Vain, That 16. December. 1640.
he would give them leave to look into his Revenues and Expenses, and they
would make him the richest King in Christendom.

But the Parliament will not spend their time only in selling Lands, but
something must be considered of a Church Government too; and, therefore they
Vote, that all Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction fit to be 12. June. 1641.
exercised in England, shall be committed to such a number of persons, and in
such a manner, as their Worships shall think fit. Nor were they long without
making the Nation happy with the discovery of their Intellectuals, which was,
That six of the Clergy, and six of 21. June.
the Laity, should be appointed in every County for the settling of
Church Government. But, this was a little shaken by an after conclusion, viz.
That nine of the Laity, and three of the Clergy, in every Diocese, should 9.
July.
have power to exercise all Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, as shall be ordered by
Parliament; and to have their Monthly meetings for that purpose. And the next
day, to make this hotch-potch Model more complete, they Vote, That there shall
be several select Committees of the Clergy, 10. July.
appointed for the Ordination of Clergymen into the Ministry. But, yet this
Presbyterian Brat would not come to perfection: And, therefore to give more
encouragement to the Covenanting-admirers, they conclude, That all
Archiepiscopal and Episcopal Jurisdiction, shall be exercised 15. July.
in this Kingdom by the Commissioners, as there was by Bishops. And the same
day read the Bill for the using of Lectures, taking away Cross in Baptism,
Surplis, bowing at the Name of Jesus, standing up at the Gospel, Gloria Patri,
Pictures in Churches, etc. and conclude the day with the appointing of a
Committee for the Propagation of the Gospel. And the next day they give further
power to their nine Commissioners, to wit, That after the first of August, any
five of them shall 16. July.
be a Quorum, and have full power to try all Ecclesiastical Causes, and to
appoint Deputies under them in several places. And after this, they further
agreed, That, if any of the nine Commissioners should dye, 17. July.
that five, or more of them, are to choose another presently, and so if any of
them resign; and, that if any came to take Orders, that these Commissioners
shall appoint five Clergy men to grant Ordinations. And, for the more speedy
putting of this medly in practice, the Knights 31. July.
and Burgesses of every Shire are commanded, to bring in the Names of the nine
Commissioners for their several Counties to be appointed, and that no
Clergyman be of the Commission.

Thus far had the Commons thrown (I cannot say built) up this their confused
Babylon: when on a sudden, an unexpected Remora was joined to their further
proceedings, by some fallings out betwixt the Lords and them about the
Protestation. For the Commons, having ordered, 30. July.
that it should be taken all over the Kingdom, were in this opposed by the
Peers, who threw it out of their House; which so incensed the Commons, that
they presently Vote, That what person soever shall not take the Protestation,
is unfit to bear Office in Church or Commonwealth. And thinking that the
Bishops were the reason of the Lords dissent, appoint a Committee for
impeaching them about the late Canons, who accordingly Voted thirteen Bishops
to be Delinquents, whom the 3, 4. August. 17. Aug.
Lords also suspended their house, till a further hearing. And so violently
were these good men persecuted by the Presbyters, that they never left
plotting, till they had got them Voted Traitors, and sent to the 30. December.
Tower. Nor could they have any outward content any where, considering the
reproaches, threats, and curses daily thrown against them by the wicked, the
danger of their lives by Tumults, and their Lands Voted from them long before
by their, and Religions Enemies, the 9. July. 10. July.
Nonconforming Commons: though they agreed to allow them a liberal allowance
during life; and how unhandsomly the Parliament in this neglected this promise,
the Reverend Bishop Hall will satisfy Remains.
you.

The Commons now having, as they thought, bridled the Bishops and their Party,
are resolved to root out the Common Prayer Book too: to 1. September.
which purpose, some of them desire, that it might be altered, and some thing
added to it; the which, after some speeches, being put to the Vote, it
appeared, that there were then but 55. Disciplinarians in the House, no more
voting for Alterations, so, that the Book came off with credit; the Orthodox
Party knowing well enough, that, if that House once fell to alter it, (it
rather belonging to able and lawful Divines), they would equal the Tinker, who
made two holes for mending one. The Anti-Episcopalians being thus baffled, fall
to it again, getting it to be moved again in the House the next week, where
they came off 6. September.
with the like success. And the next day, (being a Thanksgiving day for the
Peace between the two Nations), to show their malice to Church Government, and
countenance the Schismatics; the Commons would not go to St. Margarets
Westminster, as was by them appointed, 7. September.
because the Bishop of Lincoln, had caused a set Form of Prayer for that
occasion to be printed and used in the Church; the news of which, so started
their Worships, that they turned tail, and went to the preachment at Lincolns
Inn.

But, if the Commons were troubled at this, they were after out of their wits,
and all stark-madd against the Lords: Because they had 9. September.
put forth an Order, and sent it all over the Nation, strictly injoyning the
reading of the Common Prayer; against which, and many other Church Affairs, the
Commons the same day put forth a Declaration, ordering it to be printed and
sent over the Kingdom; and with them they also got the nine dissenting Lords,
to protest against the Order made by the House of Peers. This cross-graind
action of the Commons so incensed the Lords, that they left off sitting for a
while, causing the Hangings of their House to be taken down: Nor did this any
way vex the Commons, who neither cared for them nor their sitting, nor any
else, that would not dance after them and Geneva: For they are resolved for
Jack Presbyter, and therefore being informed, that the 28. Sepeemb.
Lords Order for the Common Prayer had been read in Churches, and not their
Declaration; they drew up an Order and sent it to be printed, enjoining, that
their aforesaid Declaration should be read in all Churches.

And so severe were they in this point, that they put Dr. Haywood of St. Giles,
to some trouble, for not permitting their Order to be read, though he had not
only his own Conscience, and the Lords Order, but the Law of the Land to
testify his justness: And, what more ridiculous, then to astonish the people
into discontents and sidings, by reading to them, at the same time, two
contrary Orders; and that of the Commons being quite against the Laws of the
Land.

Thus did the Commons batter down Religion, as Captain Jones in the Poet, did
the Jesuits; more, by strong hand then reason: yet had they left one thing
undone, which was the extirpation of Episcopacy root and branch; to bring which
villainy about, they Voted them to have no place in the House of Lords, nor to
meddle with any secular affairs. 23. October.
But here, before they went any further, they were somewhat troubled at the
King, because he (being then in Scotland), had sent Mr. Warwick Orders to draw
up five Conge d'Eslire's, for five new Bishops, there being then so many Sees
vacant; but in this strait, Mr. Stroud 26. October.
thinks it fitting to Petition the King, to stop these five, till they had
dispacht the charge against the other Bishops. Yet, what need they care,
whether the King make Bishops or no? since they are resolved never to
acknowledge them to be so; for, they can with the same ease cut off all, as
one: Therefore, seeing the King for Bishops, they bend themselves more
resolutely against them, and so prepare their charge against those formerly
accused; and, for the Champions to manage this Combat, Pymme and St,-John's by
the commendations of 27. October.
one another, are chosen. The death of the first is noys'd by report, and the
honesty of the latter is not unknown to any.

The Parliament was something stopped in their proceedings against Bishops, by
the Irish Rebellion; yet, having taken some breath, they sent a message to the
Lords, desiring, that the 13. Bishops, might 6. December.
speedily come to answer. And not long after, as an encouragement to the
factious, they released Simmonds a Printer, who had been in 20. December.
custody for printing a Book against the Common Prayer; yet the very same day
was Walker the Iremonger imprisoned, only for Printing a Book concerning Mr.
Prynne, though the first deserved as much hanging as the latter Imprisonment;
and from these men, the Bishops might well expect good justice. But still they
sit and Vote in the House of Lords; which vexed the Sectaries to the guts,
because they could not tell how to get them out handsomely, for they had no
great confidence in their Articles of Canons and Constitutions, and whilst
they Voted there, the Orthodox Party would still exceed. At last, some ill
spirit or other, put it into the noddles, of Isaac Pennington, Captain Ven, and
such combustible humors, to raise such tumults against the Reverend Fathers,
the fear whereof should either keep them from the House, or bring some ruin
sacrilegiously to be acted upon them. And accordingly up comes the Rabble of
London to the Parliament 27. December.
House, crying out No Bishops, no Bishops! And at last got the Bishop of
Lincoln (then going to the House with the Earl of Dover), into the midst of
them, where they had like to have squeezed him to death. And having thus begun,
many hundreds of them come again the same day, with Swords and Staves, causing
great uproars both in Westminster and London, not only to the affrightment of
the Bishops, but the King and Queen; and the next day also assaulted
Westminster Abbey. These Tumults obtained the end of their Contrivers, keeping
the Bishops from the House, pelting of them with stones as they endeavored to
go. By which, they drew up a Petition to the King, how that the Tumults kept
them out, and therefore protested against all things, that should be done in
the House of Peers in time of their thus violent seclusion. Which did trouble
the Parliament so much, that one Mr. Weston of the Commons House, thought he
had spoke bravely, 30. December.
when he moved that the Bishops might be sent to Bedlam: But Glyn and others
were clearly for High Treason, which accordingly was done, and ten of them sent
to the Tower and two to the Black Rod. And thus their business being don, the
great tumults ceased, the Presbyterians sang Victoria, whilst the reverend
Church of England lay in the dust, miserably trod upon by a Schismatical zeal;
yet had they they nothing to accuse the Bishops of, and so were forced to
release them all but two: against one of which they could say nothing (for if
they could they would) and whether the cry of the others blood be yet stopped I
know not.

How were the Country cheated with swarms of Petitions against this
Ecclesiastical Order, yet in this, none more ridiculous then the 31 Jan. 1641/2
Londoners. One troup of Tradesmen petition against Bishops, and their reason
was because their being, was the decay of trading; and in the clause of all
gave a notable lash at the House of Lords. Nor is this all, but the very
Porters [15000 said to be in number] Petition too; and affirm that they cannot
endure the weight of Episcopacy any 2 Feb.
longer, and therefore must have redress. Nay the very women, by the pushing on
of their hotheaded associates, thought themselves so much concerned in these
Church Affairs, that they must petition too. And these as fit persons to
apprehend Chuch-government, as the simple 1. 4. Feb.
Cockney country-businesse, who thought a bush hung about with black moles
skins, to be a black pudding tree; yet these sort of Fanatics are apt to have
abominable discretions: for thus the Scots some years before in their Petition
against the Common Prayer Book, begun Large Declar. Anno. 1637. p. 41.
it thus, We, Men, Women, and Children, and Servants, having considered etc.
Most miraculous Children! Born like Adam at the top of understanding. O the
happiness to spring from the loins of a Covenanter, who, as it was said of the
Lady Margaret, can bring forth men instead Bacons Hist. Hen. 7. p. 128.
of children! Certainly these children were akin to that boy of Cracovia in
Poland, which had not only teeth, but spoke the first day of its birth, but
when he received Christianity, lost that faculty. And Coor. Lycosth. de
Prodigiis etc. Chron. Gualther Tom. 4. p. 279.
probably had these covenanting Children, women, and such like, known more of
Christianity then these did, they had never acted so violently against
Church Government. Or, it may be they were somewhat related to that other child
born in the same City, which spoke distinctly at half a year old, yet nothing
but mischief was by it uttered, destruction to all Poland, and that by the
invading Tartars. Nor could such a Government handsomely desire any longer
footing, when rustic women, servants, and little children, were able to evince
its rationality. Nor must such learned Petitions as these be discountenanced,
but the Commons shall know of it, who severely chid the Lord Major and Sheriffs
of London, because they gave some check to a tumultuating paper, carrying 24
December. 1641.
on the Commons Presbyterian design.

These actions might well move the late martyred King, thus to expostulate with
his and their enemies.

How often was the business of Bishops enjoying their ancient places, and
undoubted privileges of the House of Peers, carried (...), cap. 9.
for them by far the Major part of Lords; Yet after five repulses, contrary
to all order and custom, it was by tumultuary instigations obtruded again, and
by a few carried, when most of the Peers were forced to absent themselves.

In like manner was the Bill against Root and Branch, brought in by Tumultuary
clamours, and Schismatical terrors, which could never pass, till both Houses
were sufficiently thinned, and overawed.

For though the Commons, as abovesaid, had a great while ago, voted the
Bishops to have no Votes in the Lords House, yet the Peers would never consent
to it till they were not only threatened by Petitions, but unheard of Tumults.
And when the Lords by these unlawful and extravagant courses had been forced to
agree with the Commons against 6 Feb. 16
the Bishops, good God! How did the Sectaries triumph! What bonefires? What
bells ringing? What yelling and roaring in the streets? That the noise made by
the neighbors, when Don Russel took Madam Chaunteclere away toward the Wood,
was but a silence in respect of this Thundering Triumph; So strongly did
malice, carried on by industry, Chaucer fol. 164.
work amongst the giddy multitude, as if Presbytery had given philters about
the Nation; or the people madded themselves with too much Hemlocks, and
acknowledged no curing Hellebore, but the extirpation of Bishops, and the
violation of Laws.

Yet if it had been only the sottish multitude who had thrown dirt in the face
of Episcopacy, their ignorance had been some pardon for their malice; But when
men that pretend to great learning do join with the rabble in their revilings,
I may have some cause to think that their unbounded malice led them to act
either contrary to their principles or learning.

Yet might these also be born withal, there being repentance (with the
Proverb) on this side Heaven. But when people after twenty years meditation of
our former miseries, are nothing moved, but as stubborn as ever, Pharoahs
obstinacy must be confessed to yield to theirs.

This resolvednesse, or it may be, the scorn to be baffled (like Mr. Knewstub's
friends in Suffolk) possessing some people, makes me the less Conf. Hamp.
Court. page 104.
wonder at those who yet defy Episcopacy; So that I am nothing astonished when
I see Prynns Titus unbish. reprinted with a worshipful preface, knowing the
hotheaded zeal of the Author. Nor am I troubled when I see Mr. Baxter (one
that would be thought sober) not long since flirting against Episcopacy,
telling them, That the best of Baxters Grotian Religion Discov. Sect. 76. p.
113, 114.
the Clergy, and the best of the people would disown them; so that the most
ignorant, drunken, profane, unruly, with some civil persons, would be at
first their Church or Diocese. For the cause of the peoples love to
Episcopacy, is because it was a shadow (if not a shelter) to the profane.
Passing over his comparison of a Prelatical Church to an Alehouse or Tavern
(to say no worse) where some honest men may be. These things I say from Baxter
are no offense to me; for had he said much more, he had not said more, then
might be expected from one of his Principles, not fitting to be allowed in a
settled Kingdom. For he confesses himself (though with some repentance, for
just then his hopes Holy Common wealth. page 485.
were dashed by the deposing of his friend Richard) that he was one of them that
blew the coals of our unhappy distractions. Nor need we doubt it, seeing he not
only acknowledges the Parliament to be the highest Power, whereby he was so
far obliged to join with them against the Kings party, that if he had been
for the King he had incurred the danger of the Condemnation threatened by God
against resisters Id. p. 477. Sect. 15.
of the higher powor. And if his opinion had only then been so, his fault might
have received a mitigation, as well as others who have seriously repented of
their former actions. But he is yet so far against the King, as to profess
publicly, if it were to do again, he would do it. Id. p. 486. Sect. 2.
For, if I should do otherwise, I should be guilty of Treason, or disloyalty
against the Sovereign power of the Land, and of perfidiousnesse to the
Commonwealth: And again, I had been a Traitor, and guilty of resisting the
highest powers. I give you his own very words. And his opinion Id. p. 488.
of the Kings Army is far from that charity, which his proselytes would needs
cloathe him with, calling them Impious and Popish Armies, and whether this
following rule of his, alludes to them or no Id. p. 478. Sect. 17.
let others judge: That all those that by wickedness, have forfeited their
Liberties, may neither choose nor be chosen [to sit in Parliaments].
Independants and Anabaptists he can not mean; because he joins them Id. Preface
page 14. Sect. 3. Id. Pref. p. 24.
with Godly men, nor would he; the Presbyterians being of his own party: and
what the words [have forfeited their Liberties] signify, is not unknown.

But no more of this grating discourse. Let who will rail against the
Gangraena. Part. 1. p. 162. 164.
Reverend Bishops, yet Mr. Edwards, a stiff Presbyterian, (and one, as his
acquaintance assures us, that was often transported beyond due bounds with the
keenness and eagerness of his Spirit) does highly commend Fullers Appeal
part. 3. p. 58.
both them and their Chaplains, as zealous and courageous against errors and
false doctrines.

Having thus infused into the Rabble a spirit of opposition both to VI.
Church and Court: The next thing was, to try how forward they would be in
action: For which purpose nothing could be thought more convenient for their
designs then the agitation of Tumults, and such like unlawful uproars. Which
are commonly one of the first steps to the ruin of a Nation, and therefore
held most wicked and odious by all Countries and Ages; So that for such
seditious persons the Laws have every where provided severe punishments. The
ancient Romans did not Alex. ab Alex. lib. 2. cap. 13. Mat. Paris. Anno. 1222.
page 315.
only use to punish the Ringleaders with death, but sometimes also every tenth
man of the too often abused multitude. Nor has the English been less severe
against the tumultuating disturbers of the peace, not only hanging the
Chief-tains, but cutting off the feet or hands of the inferior rabble; nor has
this been looked upon as satisfactory, but all the Magistrates of London, have
been deposed, and others put in. Nay, so odious have these people been to
society, that the Roman Orator looks upon the murdering of Id facinus
pulcherrimum esse arbitramur. Tul. Orat. 18. Sect. 94.
a seditious person, to be (if wicked) yet glorious and truly noble.

And I shall so far agree with the same Orator, that though it be no good
Definition as in his Latin, yet may we pick a sound truth of it in English,
That a seditious person is both Seditiosus est Is, qui malus atque inutilis est
civis. Id. de Invent. lib. 1. Sect. 59.
an evil and unuseful Member in the Commonwealth.

Yet, were this vice more wicked then it is, it would never want admirers, as
long as Idleness is permitted: the former being inseparable from the latter, if
we will believe the Historian. Seditiosissimus quisque ignavus. Tacit. Hist. 4.
cap. 34.
And whether did leasurely foment our discontents, or no, I know not; though I
believe by this, our turbulent spirits obtained many Proselytes; who, if they
had had any thing else to do, would never have spent so much time in an
obstinate schism; running daily into more enormities, under some pretense or
other, but never thinking of a return. And they that are unwilling to amend,
Sam. Daniel, Letter to Octavia. Sect. 27.

Will take offense, because they will offend.


Which was the true temperature of our Non-conformists; not that they had any
real cause of such disgusts, but what they brought forth themselves. And they
having once taken fire, found it no great difficulty, to allure the multitude
into their Nullo vero facto verbo, nulla concione, nulla lege concitatam
nocturaam Seditionem quis audivit? Tull. Orat. 32. Sect. 20.
faction, by their preachments, whisperings, pamphleting, and such like
rumors, without which, it is impossible to get a party molded to act such
destructive wickedness: For though the people like the bounded Ut mare quod sua
natura tranquillum sit, ventorum vi agitari, atque turbari; sic and populum --
sua sponte esse placatum, hominum seditiosorum vocibus, ut violentissimis
tempestatibus concitari. Tull. Orat. 14. Sect. 46.
Ocean, do naturally affect ease, tranquillity, and such like peaceable
virtues; yet are they apt by the seditious blusterings and malicious
insinuations of some factious Grandees, or neighbors, to be persuaded and
agitated into turbulent extravagancies and Rebellion.

The minds of the irrational multitude, (as one calls them) being Irrationale
vulgus. Mat. Paris. p. 315. Sect. 32.
thus seasoned and tempered with the principles of discontent and sedition, are
now ordered to put in practice what they have been taught, and they so long
meditated upon; and these proceedings must run parallel to those of their good
brethren the Covenanters in Scotland. For, as one ingeniously observes, the
English did derive from them, not only the rudiments, but the method also of
revolt. Our first probationary H. Lestrange. page 191.
Tumult commencing in a rude assault upon the Archbishop of Canterbury, as
theirs upon the Archbishop of Saint Andrews: Above five hundred of the Rabble,
one night assaulted the Archbishop's 11. May. 1640.
house at Lambeth; and to what purpose, is easy to conjecture.

And a little after, about two thousand Sectaries made a tumult in 22. October.
London, where they tore down the benches in the Consistory of Saint Paul's,
crying out, they would have no Bishop, nor no high Commission: actions so
inconsistent with good Subjects, that the obedient Neremberg. Hist. Not. page
227.
Parret in Brasil, will be as a reproach to these irrational Rebels. Nor did
their sury end here; for when they perceived the execution of the Earl of
Strafford, was not so hasted on, as their hot heads expected; and when the
Court dreamed of nothing but joy, the Princess Mary being then married to the
Prince of Orange, the very next morning after the wedding, above five thousand
Londoners, most of them girded to their 3. May 1641.
swords, came yelling for justice against the said Earl; affirming, for want of
it, they were like to perish, having no bread (an excellent Nonconforming
consequence) calling the Earl of Bristol, an Apostate, and vilifying his son
the Lord Digby; one of them balling out, If we get not satisfaction of the
Lieutenant, we will have it of the King; or, as some affirm, If we have not the
Lievtenants life, we will have the King's: And posted up a Paper in
Westminster, with the names of 55. Lords, Knights, and Gentlemen, with the
Title of Straffordians, with this underwritten, This and more, shall be done
to the enemirs of justice, afore-written. Thus was this Earl rather murdered
by malice, then condemned by Law or Reason: yet so impatiently wicked was the
Rabble and Presbytery, that as Darius appointed a man every day to prompt him
with a, Sir, Remember to be revenged Pezel. Mellif. Hist. part. 1. page 48.
on the Athenians: so had these men their daily agitators and contrivers,
by-jugled up Petitions, and such like monitors, to mind them of three things;
the destruction of this Earl, the Extirpation of Episcopacy, and the abolishing
of the Common Prayer Book and Ceremonies. The which at last, by God's
permission, and Satan's assistance, they obtained.

And immediately before, they had assaulted the Spanish Embassador's 29. April.
house, with a great deal of violence, and their pretended reason for so doing,
was, because Mass was there said, A Privilege, used by all Ambassadors, to
exercise their own Religion, be what it will, and this allowed them by the Law
of Nations; yet was their malice such, that if they had not been prevented by
the Lord Mayor, they might have done abundance of mischief; though what they
did, was no small blemish to the civility of a Nation.

These actions by the Sectaries, were looked upon, as a blessing to the Nation;
and to keep the hands of these Myrmidons in use, the City and Kingdom must now
and anon too, be alarmed with false rumors, and un-heard of plots and designs
against something or other. Now must the Houses of Parliament be said to be on
fire, and together 5. Maj.
by the ears, and the City for sorrow thereof, like to tumult and uproar
themselves into Bedlam. Then must strange plots, come from unknown parts of the
world, be discovered; at which the careful Commons take fears and jealousies,
and order the Archbishop's House at Lambeth, to be searched for arms; as if the
Archbishop then in the Tower, should pelt the Parliament from Lambeth, cross
the 10. May.
water. Then must there be a strange thing in Scotland, agitating against Duke
Hamilton, and their true friend Argyle, and this discovered and seen by Mr. Pym
at Westminster; upon which, the Members are in a October.
hubbub, and in great fear of their lives, forsooth; and therefore a strong
guard under Essex, is provided for the security of their Worship's against
temptations: And the Burgesses of Westminster, and the Knights for Middlesex,
are ordered in all haste to provide bullets and match, and to shoot like little
John at the Sun and Moon, being resolved for the future, to work altogether in
darkness. Yet, were all these, and many more, acted with as much seriousness
and gravity, as Sancho Panca governed the Island Barataria; so that the abused
people did not only believe such stories, but feared their events; which being
once settled in their noddles, is impossible to be removed: the people being
like the lineage of the Panca's, all headstrong.

These juggling Transactions were enough to persuade the King and his friends to
look about them; but being innocent, seemed also fearless. Yet for prevention
of disorders and tumults, some people were ordered to keep watch near the
Parliament, thereby to keep off the Rabble, which used daily to tumble out by
thousands in great disorder, ranting and railing against something or other in
government, according to the Items of their Patrons, very beneficial to, and
desirable by the Commons. Who took it so ill, that their good friends, the
Multitude, should thus be kept back, that they did not only question the
Justices of peace of Middlesex, who by Order, had commanded those men to keep
watch, but sent one of them, viz. Justice Long, to the 12. December.
Tower.

This favor of the Commons, so animated the people, that they thought sedition
was then lawful, and those tumults a glory to the City, because they showed its
strength. And therefore many thousands of them, run crowding to Westminster,
crying out, No Bishops, no Bishops: and having thus ranted it in the morning,
they come again in 27. December.
the afternoon, armed with swords, and staves, and other weapons: and then they
domineer to the purpose, running up and down Westminster, inquiring for the
Bishops, protesting, they would pull them in pieces: whereupon, they were
desired by the Marquess of Hertford, to stay in the house all night, the people
vowing to watch their going out, and to search every Coach with Torches [it
being then dark] that they might not escape: And when the Lords sent down to
the Commons, that an order might be taken with the tumult, and care of the
Bishops lives, they would do nothing in the business, laughing in their
sleeves, that they had thus brought that great City to worship them, and
Villainy. Yet, were the Bishops some way or other, cunningly stolen out of the
house; to the great grief of the blood thirsty Rebels, that they had thus lost
their sacralegiously intended sacrifice.

Yet what they mist then, they hoped to obtain the next day; and 28. December.
therefore away they hurry again to Westminster, having Sir Richard Wisman for
their Captain. And being thus spurred on, they assault the Abbey, where the
Archbishop of York was then; but the doors being Bishop Hall's Remains. p. 47.
Fuller. Book. 11. p. 185. Sect. 14.
strongly locked and barred, and good opposition made, they gained nothing to
boast of, and Sir Richard's head was so broke with a tyle thrown from the
Leads, that he dyed of it; nor did John Lilbourn (one well known) depart
without the loss of some rebellious blood, being with some others pelted with
stones to the purpose. This repulse did something discourage them, yet the next
day they were coming again, but at White Hall were stopped by the Train-Band, and
forced to return 29. December.
back, some of them being well cudgelled; which action was highly resented by
the Parliament, who therefore ordered, that those who stopped the Londoners
coming to Parliament, should be found out and examined before a Committee;
which Order was a good New-years-gift 1. Jan.
to the seditious Schismatics.

Such is the malice of Presbytery against Bishops, as if they were all inspired
with the same spirit of venom and hatred, that he had, who long ago cried out,
Short red, God red, shea we the Bishop, Mat. Paris. Anno 1075. p. 10.

And accordingly was the Bishop with a hundred men murdered. And not inferior
to the former was he in London, when the Tumult was; railing against the
Reverend and Learned Bishop Morton, some crying, Pull him out of his Coach,
others acting so violently, that the Bishop Dr. Barwick's life of the Bishop.
p. 103.
believed he should never have escaped alive, if a leading man amongst the
rabble had not cried out, Let him go, and hang himself; words wicked enough,
and vomitted with as much malice; though by Providence, they saved the good
Bishop's life.

The chief men tampered withal by some of the factious Members, to stir up
these Tumults were, Alderman Pennington, and Venne, two King-Tryers, and
Manwaring, nominated one of the Kings Judges, and other such like Instruments
they could not want; Venne pleading, to the people, That the worser Party was
like to have the better of the good Party, and used to employ his Wife as a
Mercury, to run about and stir up the people. And it is an old Note, that
Sectaries used in the first place to tamper with such soft-hearted Creatures.

The truth on it is, the audaciousness of these men was intolerable, being like
one of their Predecessors Constantinus, who is branded for a Mat. Paris. page
315.
lover of Tumults, and then confidently to glory in such villainies. Yet had his
Majesty but stripped himself of so much mercy, as to have eased the Nation of the
Ringleaders of these disorders by some meritorious exemplary punishment, it
may be, the rest of the rabble would have learned better manners by the
Precedent of such an execution. But the Nihil ausuram plebem principibus
amotis. Tacit. An. lib. 1. cap. 55.
Kings tenderness made them more audacious, so that they never left murmuring
and tumultuating, till they had terrified the King from White Hall, where he
could neither stay with safety nor honor, having his power so much scorned;
that, when he went into London, the Rabble rung nothing in his ears, but
Privileges of Parliament, Privileges 5. January. 1641/2.
of Parliament; Alderman Fowke, (one that went under the notion of one of the
Kings Judges, as long as the Times were accordingly; but they no sooner change,
but then he denies, and 28. March. 1660.
publicly clears himself), this man, made a worshipful Speech to the King,
taking upon him to vindicate the accused Members, and to give his Majesty
advice concerning Fears and Jealousies. Nor was this all, but, that City also
protects the accused Members, and brings them again to the Parliament House, in
the greatest triumph that their wit could imagine, with Guns, Trumpets, flying
colors, and such like bravado's, which was not only an absolute defying, but
contempt of his Majesty. So, that Hugh Peter's, (that scandal to the Pulpit)
spoke no false Doctrine, when he affirmed in Alhallows Church in Lumbardstreet,
That, Edwards Gangr. Part. 1. p. 183.
If ever this Kingdom was brought into slavery, this City would be the cause of
it.

These Tumults, though confessed by the Common Council of London, 31 December. 1641.
to be the great trouble and affrightment of his Majesty's good Subjects, and
experience also proved it, yet must they not be suppressed, though the Lords
earnestly persuaded the Commons to it, because, as they affirmed, They must not
discourage their Friends, this being a time they Ex. Coll. p. 531, 532.
must make use of their Friends: Mr. Pym, saying, God forbid, that the House of
Commons should proceed in any way to dishearten people, to obtain their just
desires in such a way: The favourablest construction of which words must be by
Petition; and, yet this way was not then acted without Tumults, it being then
grown to a custom, (as their own Historian confesses) for a Petition to be
backed by great multitudes Tho. May' s Hist. Parliament. lib. 2. p. 29.
to Westminster, or White Hall: As that was from Kent, which was brought to
Westminster, by about 5000. all a Horseback; and all this noise was to thank
the Lords for their acting so bravely against Bishops. And with such like
Presbyterian trash were most of their Papers 8. February. 1641/2.
stuffed, and in so plentiful a manner; that, if Visions had been then in
frequent use, that as the Priests formerly saw St. Peter's Church Th.
Cantipratan. lib. 2. c. 10. Sect. 25.
in Rome full of Serpents, so might England, but London especially, have been
viewed cramb'd full of Devils: But where the Albertus Magnus would be, I know
not.

And, yet the simple people are easily drawn to fancy, that Tumults are the
only way to make a Nation happy; though the ingenuous Tasso will assure them in
the contrary. Gierusal liber. Cant. 1.


Quando sia poi di si gran moti il fine,
Non fabriche di Regni, ma ruin.
These rabble factious Tumults never mend
A Nation, but its ruin does portend.
The Neapolitans will never forget the miseries brought upon them by a sordid
Fisherman, Thomas Anello. And Munster, and other parts of Germany, do yet
remember with sadness their Anabaptistical tumults. The great Turk no sooner
hears of the Seditious Rabble, but he fears his own neck: And Tyler with his
rustic Clowns, made King Richard submit to their unbounded impudence. Nor can
it be denied, but, that the Londoners, and others, set up the first post of the
Kings Scaffold, when by these out-ragious Tumults they began the wicked War.

The Tumults (of which his Sacred Majesty gives the best character Cap. 4. and
6.
in his incomparable Book), favored the Parliament with a twofold courtesy:
one was, they forced him from London, there being no safety for his Royal
Person, whilst such unbelieving miscreants did domineer: The other was, they
having learned the knack to cry Thief first, horribly exclaimed, that
themselves were thereby only in danger, and therefore desired not only a Guard
to defend their Worships, (though they punished those appointed to protect
them), but very modestly to have the disposal of the whole Militia in England.
And this claim, rather then desire, of theirs, they call just and necessary,
and for Ex. Coll. p. 80, 710, 715, 716.
the ease, benefit, safety, and security of the people; and, that his Majesty
could neither in Honor, Justice, or Conscience, deny, he having it not legally
before. And this small request is but to command the Militia; Thus the Wolf,
only desired the Dogs to be divided from the Sheep. Thus Alexander would but
command the whole World. Thus would Calvin, only have his Contrymen, and
Creatures, mingled with the Geneva Senate. Thus did Nero desire, that Rome
might have but one neck: And, thus the crafty Friar in the Sumpners tale,
desired to Chaucer. fol. 50. a.
his dinner only the liver of a Capon, and a roasted Pigs-head, knowing full
well, that if he got those, he should not want his part of the Pigg and Capon
too. And thus the Parliament only desired the Militia, that they might only
command the King and all England. All small requests; which might have been
augmented, if the modest Supplicants had had more confidence. But an old Scotch
Poet would have taught them better manners and discretion, if their wicked
policy would have given them leisure to have consulted either Morality, or
Divinity, but what is in the Covenant.

Thou art ane great fuil soune (said he) Sir David Lyndesay. Buke 1.

Thing to desire, quhilk may nocht be.
This of the Militia, though the King deny, yet they seize upon it, not only in
London, but in all England and Wales; some Countries being so forward at the
Parliaments beck, that they had begun their Militia as soon as Petitioned for;
and this, before the Queen imbarqued for Holland. And, what little account they
made of the King, is visible by their Ordinance for the Militia, in which, the
People are commanded February. 1641.
to act nothing, but as the Parliament would, and, that if they did, they
should be tried by none but the Parliament; and, that this should be as long,
and no longer, then the Parliament pleased. These actions the King might well
wonder at; which astonishment may be increast, when they tell him, they can
endure no longer his denyals; And the 5. March.
same day vindicate those who had armed themselves, though contrary to the
Kings express Command and Order, the day before. But the Kings Authority is of
no force with these men, who proceeded farther, by Voting, That all Commissions
granted under the Great Seal, and 14. March.
by the Kings Consent, to the Lieutenants in several Counties, are illegal and
void; and, that those who act by them, shall be disturbers of the Peace: But
yet, that all such persons as shall be nominated by the 15. March.
Parliament, shall be cock-sure in their Authority. And, that their former
Ordinance by some Law or other does oblige the People. This the King, the same
day, forbids to be obeyed, because against his consent; and this command of
his, the Parliament Votes to be a high breach of the Privileges of Parliament.
16. March.


Thus went, or rather ran, the sturdy members in opposition to the King, as if
their malice had excelled Hamilcar's the Carthagenian against the Romans. And by
this fury they engaged themselves so far, that they thought it not safe to
retreat, and so brought it to the trial of the Bloodthirsty Sword, by which
was miserably acted

-- The Civil Wars, tumultuous Broyls,
And bloody Factions of a mighty Land;
Whose People haughty, proud with foreign spoils,
Upon themselves turn back their conquering hand:
Whilst Kin their Kin, Brother the Brother foils,
Like-Ensigns all against like-Ensigns Band:
Bows against Bows, -- against the Crown,
Whilst, all pretending right, all Rights fall down.
Yet for all these, and many more miseries of War, the Parliament could not
doubt of many partakers, since the Commons had made themselves such a Bugbear
and Terror to the Nation, that the power of the King was even shrunk into a
Duke of Venice.

Nor were the Authority and Privilege of the Peers regarded with any more
favorable Aspect, being now rather become an other House, VII.
then a House of Lords. If the Peers think it not convenient, that the
Protestation should be taken all England over, the Commons will not only judge
the contrary, but command it to be done. If the Lords Order the Common Prayer
and other Ceremonies confirmed by act of Parliament to be used and read in all
Churches; in this, the Commons will oppose both King and Lords, and order the
quite contrary, and punish those who do not obey them. If the Peers refuse to
join with them to Petition the King for a Guard against the Tumults, knowing
them to be the fomenters of them; They will Petition themselves, and think much
if the King do deny them, though he knew, If he gave them an Inch, they would
take an Ell. If the Lords, at first, refuse to join with them to obtain the
Militia, yet will the Commons not only demand it, but threaten the dissenting
Nobility, one of them Ex col. p. 548.
desiring that a Catalogue might be taken of their names, who consented not to
them; that so they might be known to the Commons. Goodly! goodly! has not the
Peers brought themselves unto a fine pass? But I believe they know best, whom
they may thank for it. Certainly, the dapper Commons thought they might as well
spurn at King and Lords, as the old Giants fight against Jupiter: for I believe
from Ovid they took a Scheme of many of their mutations. But these men wrought
by action, as well as words and thoughts, which was a high token of the Commons
strength, who had so much influence amongst the Sectaries (a word good enough
for him, Lord or Clown, that takes exception at it) and power over the Lords,
that they got 9 of the Peers voted never to sit again in Parliament, because
they were obedient to his Majesty, so that Mr. Pym's Item to the Earl of Dover
Ex coll. p. 530.
(one of the 9 Lords) was not unsignificant viz. That if he looked for any
preferment he must comply with them in their ways, and not hope to have it by
serving the King. Words of such a Mandrake-sound, that they would have
astonished a Roman ear, whose generosity and virtue made them raise a Temple to
Fidelity.

But all bonds of obedience and loyalty were hurld off by these sons of
contradiction, and Majesty it self so far disrepected, that Martin could with
confidence wipe his lips with the whore in the Proverb and think he had done no
wrong, when he affirmd that the Kings Office Ex coll. p. 552.
is forfeitable, and that the happiness of this Kingdom does not depend upon
him, or any of the Royal branches of that stock, and this was seconded by that
worshipful Champion Sir Henry Ludlow who peremptorily said, that he was not
worthy to be King of England. Nor are these words unbefitting the Father of
such a known Son as Edmud Ludlow, one of the Kings noted Tryers, and an
immortal Enemy to all goodness, Church Government and literature. Nor did the
whole Parliament speak little less, then the former, when they affirmed he had
no negative vote, called all his Actions illegal, and his Letters,
Declarations, and Proclamations scandalous and false; forbidding people to be
obedient to him upon pain of displeasure, declaring all such as did to be
Traitors. Taxing him with an intention toward Popery; O implacable August.
Malice? foisted into the world by these his back-friends, and spread abroad
with abundance of impudence and malice, by their zealous Du. Avity, ^le Monde,
Asia, p. 527.
Myrmidon, and Journy-work-jobber Prynne, one that if he had lived amongst the
Malabars [in the East-Indies] where long ears is a Token of honor,
comeliness, and bravery, would have been held a Vindiciae Caroli Regis, or a
Royal Vindication of the King, 1645. 40.
man of no great credit. But the best on it is, Pryn's scandalous pamphlet
called the Popish Royal Favorite [i. e. the King] was many years ago
learnedly and industriously answered to the Honor of his Majesty, honesty of
the undertaker, and discredit and confusion of the Mercury-admiring accuser.
And therefore Mr. Baxter was somewhat Grotian Religion discovered Sect. 73, p.
105.
to blame to cull such false trifles out of Prynne, to prove the King
reconcilable to Rome, though he believes he was no Papist, and this ten years
after the Kings Beheading.

But to return to the Parliament, who will yield to none in bitterness against
his Majesty, who protest to him [when no nearer York, then 9 March 1641/2
New-Market] That they would make use of that power which they had for their
security, and professing in the same paper that it was not words that could
secure them. And what their intention was in this, may be gathered by voting
some few days before, That the Nation should 2. March.
be put into a posture of Defense, and only by Authority of Parliament. And all
those Extravagancies were acted by the Parliament in opposition and discredit
to the King, before his Majesty had so much as one man either in offensive, or
defensive Arms, in a public way; So that he might well admire at those, who
charged him to be the first King Portrait. cap. 10.
beginner and raiser of this War.

Thus the Kings mildness gave encouragement to those furious spirits, who
never left plotting till they had filled England with more villainies then Rome
is, in the vacancy of her Popedom; or Tacitus could Hist. lib. 1. c. 2.
reckon up in the front of his History: and this by their unjust dealings with
him by war and such like wickednesses, though they might have consulted the
Apothegm of that great Goth, Athanaricus, being good Divinity, Law, and Reason,
that A King is a earthly God, and Deus terre nus est Imperator, contra quem
quicunque manus levare nisus fuerit, ipse sui sanguinis reus existit. Paul.
Diacon. de gestis Romans lib. 11. in vita Gratiani.
whosoever rebels against him is guilty of his own death. Nor does the great
August confess. lib. 3. cap. 8.
Father of the Church intimate to us less obedience to our Kings then the
former. But these men cared little for reason or authority in any but
themselves, as appears by those impudent and irrational Propositions sent to
the King 1646.
at New Castle, when they were Masters and had him in hold, whereby he would be
but a King of clouts, and the Nobility and Gentry of his party bound to hop
headless. Articles so palpably wicked that an Gal. Gualdo. Prior. Hist. part.
4. lib. 1. page 8.
Italian, through his Majesty, looks upon them as distructive both to Church
and State.

Nor could less be expected from these men in the height of their Pride and
prosperity, when, at the beginning of these wicked Wars long before the
stroke at Edghill; The good King weeping, as it were, over the approaching
ruin of his Subjects, earnestly endeavors to persuade the Parliament to a
Reconciliation, in the lamentable breathings of Tancredi to the violent
Rinaldo. Tasso. Cant. 5.


Dimmi, che pensi far? vorrai le mani
Del civil sangue tu dunque bruttarte?
E con le piaghe ind egnede' Christiani
Trafiger Cristo, ond'ei son membra, e perte, etc.
Ah, non per Dio vinci te stesso.
Tell me, what mean you now? Will you yet stain
Your hands in your friends blood by Civil War,
And, by your killing Christians, now again
Pierce Christ his side, of whom we members are, etc.
Ah no, for Gods sake conquer your passion.
Desiring that they might both lay down their Arms, and recall all Ex coll. p.
583. 584.
their papers against each other upon an appointed day, and so enter into a
Treaty. But they being carried along with a Spirit of contradiction, like the
Scotch Presbyter, who railing against King, Church, and Government, and being
commanded by King James to speak either sense or come down, replied like
himself, I say man, I'se nowther speak sense, nor come down. They I say,
resolved to run counter, absolutely declare that they will not think of peace,
till the King have taken down his Standard, left his Armies, repaired to the
Parliament, that so justice Id. p. 584, 585.
might be done upon those who had adhear'd to them: and how by this his Majesty
himself could escape, they having some few days before taxed him with most
mischievous Tyranny, I know not: And in the same paper the lands of all those
who were of the Kings party Id. p. 575.
were forfeited, and I think it is not unknown how they were disposed on
afterward. Nor need we doubt but those men who without Blushing could Vote the
Queen a Traitor, would not care to draw up some blood into their faces, so
they might have their revenge on his 23 May. 1643.
Majesty: And whether this clause For the preservation of his Majesty's person,
was voted to be left out in the New modled Commission, the 24 March 1644/5
Commons and my Lord Fairfaz know best, and what the meaning of such a
seclusion was, the revolution of a few years did fully import.

Thus did the English use the King, as the Scots did their James Hist. of
Scotl. page 107. 113.
the third, who hated him, as Mr. Drummond informs us, because he got the love
of his people, by Piety, and Justice; and having taken Bacons Hist. Hen. 7. p.
70.
up arms against him, would not hearken to any terms of reconciliation,
unless he freely resigned the title of his Crown and Realm in favor of his
Son [then in theirs Hands] and voluntarily deposed himself, leaving the
Government of all, to the Lords of his Parliament. Which impudence of theirs
hurryed them on so far, that they never left fighting till their King was
murdered; but how, uncertain. Thus are the best men violently opposed by the
wicked, though the virtue and patience of the former might in reason mollify
the latter to obedience. How wishedly will some pity the case of Argalus and
Parthenia: the patience of Gryseld in Chaucer; the misery, and troublesome
adventures of the Phanatick Lovers in Cleopatra, Cassandra, Amadis de Gaul,
Sidney, and such like? Yet all these as mere Romantic as Rablaise his
Garagantua. And yet with an unmoved apprehension can peruse the lamentable
murder of Edward the Second of England, and James the first, and Milcolumb the
first of Scotland, the cutting off the head of good King Alpinus, the poisoning
of Fergusius the third by his own Queen, and her stabbing her self, the
strangling of Malvinus by his own Queen, and the throat-cutting of King
Fethelmachus by a Fiddler, and besides these the martyrdom of old Queen Ketaban
in Persia. The stabbing of Henry the fourth in France. The sacrilegious
poisoning of the Emp. Henry the seventh in Italy. The miserable death of
Mauricius the Emp. with his Wife and five Children, by the wicked Phocas. And
can read the fatal stories recorded by Boccace with less grief then the
deplorable narrative of Arnalte's love to Lucenda. And the patience of the good
King Henry the sixth, who being grievously struck by a murdering Varlet, only
made this Reply, Forsooth and forsooth [being his words for most earnest
expression, never using an oath] ye do foully, to smite a King anointed so: May
be far outrivall'd Stow. d. 425.
by some, with the misfortunes and hardship of some inchaunted Lover, in
Ariosto, Parismus, the two Palmerins or Mirror of Knighthood. And for the
horrid murder of his late Majesty, experience tells us, that many have been so
far from contracting grief, that they have so much triumphantly rejoiced at
it, that they have thought an action of so much wickedness to have been
honorable to them, and their posterity for ever.

Thus have we come short to our Ancestors in fidelity, and Loyalty, by studying
all occasions to rebel against our King: They rather then undergo the
ignominions title of Nithing (i. e. a knave, or a night-filcher) swarm to the
Service of their King; we on the contrary, rather Mat. Paris p. 15.
then not be branded with the wicked name of a Traitor, will court all
occasions by our Rebellion to make our selves meritorious to a pair of Gallows.

And so to conclude this assertion, I shall tell you, that the Parliament
wanted all the qualifications to make a war really espousable. No war being
lawful unless it be commanded by the Supreme Authority, the which the
Parliament was not, but the King, if the Laws of our Land be an authentic
Standerd.

And secondly the occasion of the War must be just, which was wanting on the
Parliaments side, all their specious pretenses being false and ridiculons,
their reasons suggested to the people to beget a War, being to as small
purpose as the Duke of Burgundy to quarrel for a cart-load of Sheepskins; or
the two Brethren near Padua, about the disposal of the Stars and Firmament.
And suppose their jealousies had been true, yet it was Treason in them to war
against the Supreme Authority the King, according to the Laws of our Land, and
damnable according to the word of God. [Let Buchanan and De jure belli ap.
Scotos.
such as he, by supposing the Apostles and the Spirit, to deal with us, like
Hypocrites, evince to the contrary]. For if the Apostle Paul commands the
Christians to be obedient to their Heathen and Tyrannical Kings (who made it
their sport to persecute Christians) and Romans 13. 1, 2.
that for Conscience Sake, telling them that their power was of God; certainly,
we are bound to obey a Christian Prince, whose authority can be no less.

If we perceive our selves grieved, resist we cannot but by Prayers and
Obedience: To which purpose the ancient Chaucer instructs us, who certainly in
this, sung according to the rule of his time, and therein, neither false Law,
nor Gospel. Clark. of Oxfords Tale 3 fol. 56. (a)


-- Lords hestes may not be feigned
They may well be wayled and complained.
But men must needs unto their
her luster obey,
And so wol I, there nis no more to sey.
The primitive Christians when collected into great Armies were honored for
their obedience; never rebelling against, but fighting, or quietly living
under, their Heathen Kings, as Tertullian will satisfy Apologet.
more at large. But now, we are so far from being peaceable in a Christian
Government, that, if occasion of rebellion cannot handsomely be plucked by the
fore-top, yet we can create reason to our selves though upon a serious
reflection, we acknowledge such endeavors to be unjust. Thus the Army, when in
obedience to the Parliament, it had conquered and ruined the King and Kingdom,
and by the assistance of the sword and Satan had made themselves Lords and
Masters over their Betters, then I say when they were at the top of their
prosperity, they do seriously profess that the Parliament, did justify many
The Armies plea. 1659. page 5.
extraordinary strange (and doubtless in respect of the letter of the Law)
very illegal actions, viz. Their taking up Arms, raising and forming Armies
against the King, fighting against his person, imprisoning, impeaching,
arraigning, trying, and executing him, cutting off his Head, banishing his
Children, abolishing Bishops, Deans, and Chapters; took away Kingly Government
and the House of Lords, broke the Crowns, sold the Jewels, Plate, Goods,
Houses, and Lands, belonging unto the Kings of this Nation; erected
extraordinary High Courts of Justice, and therein impeached, arraigned,
condemned, and executed many notorious enemies to the public peace, when the
Laws in being, and the ordinary Courts of Justice, could not reach them. These
were strange and unknown practices in this Nation, and not at all justifiable
(as is conceived) by any known Laws and Statutes. Thus have you the judgment of
a ruling Army against their Masters and themselves, though this their
repentance was but to vindicate another infidelity.

But here after all this, it may be objected; that though some factious spirits
of the Parliament have been too incroaching upon the King and the chief
Incendiaries of these Wars, yet why should I lay all this upon the
Presbyterian account? To which there needs no tedious reply, if we do but
consider that these factious people were all Non-conformists, from whom (if
examples may be held for proofs) as Schismatics, a self-conceited, giddy,
hotheaded zeal, and by consequence Rebellion, is as inseparable, as pride from
Menecrates, or Children when gallanted up in new clothes. For my part, I am
apt to believe that the Blood of many thousand Christians shed in these wars
and before, cries loud against Presbytery, as the people only guilty of the
first occasion of quarrel. And that they have been the chief occasion of other
slaughters, may be credited not only from foreign stories, but the authentic
judgment of the ever great Grotius, one born and bred amongst them, yet so far
satisfied, or rather nauseated with their manners, that he looks upon them as
factious, De Amichristo in append. post Annotat. in Evangel, p. 65.
turbulent, and rebellious spirits, and so not fit for Subjects. And this
character, it may be, has been the occasion of their gnashing their teeth so
much against him.

CHAP. II.
The Abominable Hypocrisy and Juggling of the Parliament and Army, till the
Murder of his Majesty.

AMongst the Ancients, Proteus was looked upon as a pretty fellow, that could
vary his shape according to his own pleasure. And with what equal respect we
have lately favored those, who have hugged themselves, for their same knack of
juggling; is not (nor never will be) worn out of memory: The smooth-tongued St.
Martins Quacksalvers at Venice, have dealt honestly and open-handed, in respect
of our Modern State-Mountebancks; who were so far Pharisees, that they blab'd
their zeal at the corner of every street, yet kept their Intentions more secret
than the Boy did, who dyed by the devouring Fox hid Horat. Epist. lib. 1. Ep.
18.
under his coat. Our Politicians, like Eutrapelus in the Poet, were grown to
the true pitch of callidity, to charm their Neighbors to the changing of their
Opinions with their Habits; and all this industry (as Bythius did the Roman
Cannius) merely to cheat those who deal with Tull. de Offic. lib. 3. sect. 63.
them.

I must confess, I am apt to smile, (though I do not approve) when I read or
hear a neat piece of small cousenage: But for those, who through private
Interests, by their plots and devices endeavor to overthrow whole Kingdoms,
no man of honesty but must abominate. That man, which through judgment, though
erroneous, sticks to his Principles, shall be more in my favor, than those who
outwardly offend less, yet are so peccant through design: which makes me have a
better opinion of many misled German-Boors at Munster, then some of our late
English Grandees; who for their own profit, have not only sided with all
Parties, but run counter to their former Oaths, Declarations, Principles, (if
they have had any, firm) to make a private advantage.

How many have we had who have confidently given out themselves the only men of
honesty and sanctity (yet such as against all Morarality) who have filled the
World with strange Declarations and Vows, by calling Heaven and Earth to
witness, that their intentions were so and so; whereas, if that be true of the
Poet,

Exitus acta probat --
-- Actions do show,
If they intended really or no.
Then may we justly conclude, that they intended nothing less, then that which
they most engaged to perform. And of this, I shall give some few hints, whereby
infallibly may be collected the knavery of the Presbyterian and great
Anti-Royalist; which may serve as a warning-piece to keep us from any more
Rebellion, and prompt us to keep close to our true and ancient Government,
Monarchy, and Episcopacy.

I have showed before, how, that the King did not only not begin the War, but,
that the Presbyterian Parliament by their plots and devices forced him to the
endeavor of opposing strength by strength. And I shall shortly demonstrate
from their own deceitful lips, how, that they and their Party, did not only
protest, to have no bad Intentions against the King, but also to defend and
maintain him and his Royal Progeny, and make them more glorious and famous then
ever. But this, I may say, was done, when they were either too weak, or to gain
more friends; for, when they were Conquerers, and had him in their disposal;
nothing could satisfy their well tutored Army, and many of themselves, but the
taking away his innocent life, that with Thieves and Robbers after the murder,
they might possess all; so that I may sing of them with the well known
Colletet. Epigram. page 201.


Voyez vous ce saint Nitouche,
Ce juge a quo, cet homme froit?
Il presche tous jours pour le droit,
Et ne l'a jamais qu 'en la bouche.
Which may thus be rendered,
O! Self-time-serving Knaves! who still profess,
You're for the Right, when you think nothing less.
Thus did these men steer their Intentions, according as the wind sat for most
benefit. Thus Aeneas Sylvius wrote many things before he was Pope, which, when
he had once obtained the Triple-Crown, he censured as dangerous: Hence came the
saying, That Pius condemned, Quod Aeneas probavit, Pius damnavit. Edward' s
Gangr. part. 3. p. 240.
what Aeneas thought good. This juggling amongst us, may allow me to affirm with
a great Presbyterian; I am persuaded there never was a more hypocritical,
false, dissembling, cunning Generation in England, then many of the Grandees of
our Sectaries.

Thus the Parliament, for all their former Protestation, to defend and preserve
the King and his Posterity, as if they had been doubletongued; like those
Islanders mentioned by Diodorus Siculus, or that Boy recorded by Borel, not
long afterward Voted the Queen a Traitor, Antiq. l. 2. c. ult. Borel. centur.
2. Sect. 63.
because she acted nothing but what became her, tending to the preservation of
the King her Husband, and the People. And within 23. May. 1643.
a fourth-night after this, took that treasonable (being against the Kings
consent, and the Laws of the Land) and therefore abominable Vow and Covenant,
wherein, how much their hearts agreed with their tongues, to preserve the King,
may be deduced from their actions; but the next year after, wherein the Commons
Voted, that this clause, For Preservation of his Majesty's Person, should be
left out in Sir Thomas 24. March. 1644/5.
Fairfax his Commission.

So that we may well suppose these men to have taken example from the ancient
Spartans, whom neither Religion, Contract, nor Oath could bind; with which
variable temper the Quibus nec ara, nec sides, nec jusjurandum soret. Alex.
sol. 268. a.
Graecians were generally inured. And for their Politics, without all
question, they agreed so far with their Testimoniorum Religionem, and fidem
nunquam ista Natio coluit. Tull. Orat. 24. sect. 148. and Epist. ad Quint. l.
1. Ep. 2. sect. 300.
good friend Machiavil, as to embrace that good and plausible humor of the
Parthians, who acknowledged no Honesty nor Religion, but, what was for their
own private Interests. How did our Grandees now and then Quibus utilitas semper
est fide sanctior. Alex. ab. Al. p. 268.
sweeten the people into good liking of them by amusing them with the joyful
hopes of Peace by Treaties, when, in truth, the thoughts of composition, was as
far from their Intentions, as Joab's when he slew Amasa with a kiss of seeming
friendship; or rather, as 2 Samuel 20. 9, 10.
Mr. Love, who at Uxbridge Treaty, instead of friendship, vomitted out nothing
but threatening and vilifying-contradictions to the Peacemakers, yet nothing
unbecoming one of his Faction in Religion.

When some honest meaning Seamen drew up a Petition for an 27. Jan. 1642/3.
Agreement and Peace, other Seamen were procured to protest against this
Petition, and the honest Petitioners, commanded to repair home again, with this
instruction for the future, that they need not trouble themselves about the
Peace, the Parliament intending to take care about it. And what great care they
took, (though the King daily plied them with Messages about it) is not unknown
to the World. What imperious and wicked Propositions sent they continually to
him upon such debates? as at the beginning of the Wars, after that to
New Castle, and after 29. December. 1647.
that, to him at Carisbrook-Castle; to which, when he declared, that he could
not in Honor and Conscience consent, (for by them he was not only divested of
all Regal Authority, but the Church ruined, and his Loyal Party bound to suffer
what deaths and miseries the Parliament please) then they impiously Vote, that
no more addresses should 17. January. 1647/8.
be made to the King, nor none received from him; whereby they dash all hopes
of a future settlement by the Kings ruling over them, contrary to their former
Vows and Protestations: so that, their seeming friendship by Treaties, seems to
me not unlike that of Rhadamistus King Alex. ab Ab. sol. 253. b.
of Iberia, whereby he betrayed well-meaning Mithridates King of Armenia, to
his destruction.

This action with their Vote against the Queen and that concerning Sir Thomas
Fairfax's Commission, does not a little or'e-cloud the Presbyterians, who think
they come off with honor, when they deny, it was them, but the Independants,
who beheaded his Majesty. But what little difference there is in the offense,
let others judge: The Presbyterians by this Vote of Non-address, actually deny
the King to be their King, by professing themselves his enemies for ever, and
thereby they not subject to his Kingship, or Rule: And the Independents take
him, acknowledged thus, by consequence, by the Presbyterians to be no King; and
in the notion of no King, behead him. And what suitable intentions they had,
for more then disowning him, may be collected from Declarat. showing the
reasons of no more Address.
them selves; in the reasons inducing them to such a Vote, which were, because
he was a coutinual breaker of promise, and trust. His punishing of Prynne,
Burton, Bastwick, and such like dicturbers of the peace: His Wars with
Scotland: His accusing some of the Members, (not forgot by some then in
Parliament:) His raising War against, or rather defending himself from the
Parliament; and such like accusatious, which they call Tyranny. And that He
has wholly forgotten his duty to the Kingdom, (they meant themselves;) and so
thus conclude, These are some of the many reasons, why we cannot repose any
more trust in him, and have made those former resolutions, (that is, the Votes
against any more addresses.) Yet they say they will settle the Government,
though it seems without them; so that the Army might very well tell us, that
these Votes, were understood by all To imply some farther intentions of
proceeding Remonstrance from St. Albnus 16. Nov. 1648. page 8. Idid. page 7.
in justice against him, and settling the Kingdom without him.

To this the Presbyterians cannot reply that the Army forced them, because it
is utterly denied by the Soldiery, who look upon themselves with sorrow, and
shame, because they were so slack in putting such a good action forward, as
they accusingly affirm themselves. Nor can they say, that they were out voted
by the Independent-faction; because, it is well known they were far the greater
number, till they were Secluded the House, almost a year after. And, whether
their thus Voting, and Scandalizing his Majesty, was done more like
Presbyterians, then good Subjects; let those judge, who know that it was once
enacted Treason, To attempt any harm to the person of the King, Queen, etc. or
deprive 26. Hen. 8. c. 13.
them of their Dignity, Title, or Name, of their Royal Estates, or
standerously, and maliciously pronounce, by express writing, or words, that the
King should be Heretic, Schismatic, Tyrant, Infidel, or Usurper; or to hold
from him, his Castles, Holds, or Marches, or Artillery, or Ordnances of War.

Yet were the intentions of Parliament more severe against his Majesty; the
Army, and others, would be as wicked as the best of them, of which some
authentic testimonies will not be amiss; And first you shall have the story of
some pure Rogues, chickens of the Parliaments, and Armies own breeding, and I
warrant you brave boys for King and Parliament, though their zeal for the
latter devoured the former, as appears by their Loyalty.

James Symball, Deputy-Keeper of Winchester-house Prison, said, That he hoped
to see the King's head upon the Tower-block.

Francis Wade, being urged to drink the King's health, denied it, his reason
was, because, the King was no King, but a Tyrant, having put the Parliament out
of his Protection, and so the whole Kingdom.

Robert White, a Soldier on the Parliaments party, being demanded what he
would have done to the King, had he met him in the head of his Army, answered,
He would have as soon killed him, as another man.

Words as full of Loyally, as Harry Martin of chastity, or the Rump of true
piety. If Doctor Chayfield must be brought upon his knees by the
Long-Parliament, for saying, From all Lay-Puritans, and all Lay-Parliament-men,
12 Februa. 1641/2. 4. March.
good Lord deliver me; If Sir John Lamb must undergo the same punishment for
setting up Organs; If Master Hollis (the Burgess for Newark upon Trent) must be
banished the Parliament House, for saying, that the Scotch Army should be
prosecuted with all rigor, 26. Apr. 1641.
and extremity, and speedily expulst the Kingdom by main force. If Master
Smith must be committed to the Gate House, only for speaking 14. May.
against the Parliament; If a poor Printer must be condemned to the same
prison, only for Printing an Elegy, in commendation of the Earl 17. May.
of Strafford; If the Lord Digby's speech, in the behalf of the Earl, must be
voted to the flames, only for being Printed. And his Brotherin-law, Sir Lewis
Dives, be condemned as a Delinquent, only for ordering the same to be Printed,
(a thing allowable to all other Parliament Men): 12. July.
If these, and many more severe judgments, be thought fitting by the
Parliament, what punishment is meritorius for the former verlits, for vomitting
out such hellish assertions against his Sacred Majesty?

But for all this, you shall see how cleverly they came off, as if with Saint
Dominick they had never committed a sin worthy damnation, or Nic. Jansenius
Vit. S. Dominici, lib. 1. c. 1. p. 7. and l. 2. c. 14. page 188.
rather had been as innocent as the child unborn. For though at first they were
committed to prison by Sergeant Creswell. Yet was it soon taken notice of, by
the Adjutators in the Army (a sort of underlings, secretly put on by Cromwell,
whom they call their Patron, and Protector, Their letter to Crom. 30. Apr.
1647.
to carry on his designs in the Army; every Regiment having two, who used to
meet in Juntos, and there consult for the seducing the rest of the Soldiers)
these Rabscallies (who neither must, nor durst be denied) present the case of
the former fellows to Sir Thomas Fairfax, their nominal September. 1647.
General, desiring their releasment from their Tyrannical sufferings, (for so
they call it.) He accordingly writes to Speaker Lenthall; Upon 12. September.
which, the Commons order the business to be considered by the Committee of
Indemnity, and to relieve them as they see cause; and so, how 14. September.
they came off you may judge. The imprisonment of these men made such a noise
in the Army, that it presently flew as far as Yorkshire, and was there taken
notice on, and, by the Adjutators in Pointz his Army, 5. July, 1647.
amongst other things sent up as a grievance to Fairfax. Nor was this action
then let alone, but was the next year brought upon the stage Their Declara. to
join with the Army, p. 2.
again, by the Sectaries of London, Westminster, and Southwark, complaining of
the imprisonment of such good, and faithful men.

Thus might the King, and People expect abundance of Loyalty from this Army,
composed of Independents, Levellers, and such like Enthusiasts, (people of
different ends, in their private respects, but all agreeing in the destruction
of his Majesty.) Notwithstanding to make Sir Tho. Fairfax Letter to the Parl.
from Cambridge 6. Jun. 1647. Their letter to London from Royston 10. Ju.
themselves favorites with the people, they can protest, that it is their
desire that a firm peace in the Kingdom may be settled, according to the
Declarations, by which they were invited, and induced to engage in the late
war. And that you might see what zealots they were, for the honor, safety, and
right of the King; You shall have their own words, Declara. concerning their
advance to London, 1647. page 10. Humble Remonstrance, from St. Albans 23. Jun.
1647. page 12.
We shall be as ready also to assure unto the King, his just rights, and
authority, as any that pretend it never so much. All this is very good, nor
does that which follows, in another of their Papers, bear less honesty, viz. We
desire the same, (i. e. right, and just freedom) for the King, and others of
his party. -- And me do clearly profess, we do not see how there can be any
peace to this Kingdom firm, or lasting, without a due consideration, of
provision for the rights, qutet, and immunity of his Majesty, his Royal Family,
and his late Partakers. And this was subscribed to, by

Cromwell, Hamond, Ireton, Sir Hardr. Waller, Fleetwood, Lambert, Rich,
Lilborne, Okey, Hewson, Scroop, Harrison, Barkstead, Horton, Pride, Deane,
Cobbet, Ewers, Goffe.
and several others. But how much their hearts differed from their mouths, and
hands; may be known both by their former, and after actions. Thus, like the
Satyr in the Fable, they breathed, as they pleased, so that advantage came by
it; and it is a bad wind blows no body any good.

After this manner in 1647. did they play fast, and loose; nor was the fashion
altered in 48. In which two years, was more Paper spoiled betwixt Parliament,
and Army, then has been amongst the Turks, since the first beginning of that
Empire: So lavish was the first, as if they had intended to tear the Nation
into rags for their supplies; and so frugal the others, who take more care for
the preservation of Paper, then the Parliament, or Army, did of their
Consciences.

By this time, and means, (these two parties endeavoring to discover one
another's nakedness) the good people began to perceive the knavery of them
both, and as with one voice murmured against their Tyranny, and so endeavored,
what in them (poor, broken, and harrass'd people) lay, to free themselves from
such yoaks of slavery; for which purpose, the Prentises rise up in London,
though their Triumph 9. April 1648.
was not long; their timorous, and self-ended Masters, only looking on, though
it may be some of them wished well. 30. April.
Barwick was also surprised by the Loyal, and Valiant, Sir Mar. Langdale. And
May.
Carltle, by the truly Noble Sir Phil. Musgrave, and Sir Tho. Glenham. The same
month the people of Saint Edmonds-bury rise up: And those of Kent draw
themselves to a considerable body. A great part of the Navy revolts. And the
next week Pontfract Castle in Yorkshire was surprised 3. June.
by Col. Morris (who was afterward unhumanely butchered at York, as Judge
Puliston well remembers) And the Scots under Duke Hamilton with a great Army
enter England: Whilst Argile, Casels, and other Kirkers, in opposition, mounts
several thousands tatterdemallions upon the Craigs of Lies near Edinbourgh,
valiantly to fight Munro, waiting for them three miles off on plain ground; but
alas! the Burrow moor, where the Gallows stands, was betwixt; and Argile loved
not to turn his face either that way-wards, or against an enemy, for there were
no boats near.

The Messengers of this bad news, one on the neck of another, struck terror
into the Parliament, who perceiving now, such an universal clamor for the
Restoration of his Majesty, that the condition of themselves (if the people
were not pacified) seemed desperate, such an odium had their selvish actions
pulled upon them. Whereupon, something to please the people, by making of them
believe that their affections were also high toward his Majesty, they nulled
their former votes of no more Addresses to the King. 30. June.


But this policy of theirs favored them not long; for the Army having quashed
all these Royal insurrections, grew so imperious, that they looked upon the
Houses, but as a Junta bound to satisfy their desires, and accordingly began
to act high: which the Members perceiving, thought it would befriend them more
with the Nation, to agree with his Majesty, then to lie under the lash of every
Schismatical (though in this something related to themselves) Trouper. For
which purpose, they commence a Treaty in the Isle of Wight with his Majesty.
But this Sept. 1648.
design of theirs, was soon broken off by the self-denying (for so they would
be called) Army; who complained that the Houses intended to leave them in the
Lurch, by making peace with the King without comprehending them in it, whereby
they might lie under the censure of King, and Parliament. For which trick, they
accuse several of the Members, and march up to London, with an intention to
shackle the two Houses; which the Parliament perceiving, and thereby their own
ruin, if not speedily prevented, Vote the Kings Concessions to their Proposals
lawful to make a firm peace upon. Hoping by this means, that not 5. December.
only the Royalists, but that the Presbyterians also, would assist them
against this Independent Army. Though it is no thanks to them, upon such a
pinch, and their own interest, to make peace with his Majesty; for if they had
not been utter enemies to him, they might have done it sooner; and then their
courtesy, or rather Royalty, had been double: But now, cry you mercy horse!
they would treat with the King, not to save him, but themselves. So that, for
all the boasts of these Braggadocio's, of their endeavors to preserve the
King's person; I shall easily be persuaded to believe, that their intentions
were as real, and to as small purpose, as the Statue of Henry the great, to
defend the Parisians from robbing upon Pont Neuf. Nor could any more be
expected from them; a true Royalist being as rare amongst them, as a Virgin at
sixteen in Marolle, a village in France.

But now it is too late for the Parliament to comply with the King, the Army
being resolved not to be governed by either of them; considering what they
might suffer (as May himself confesses) if he should come Breviary page 212.
to Reign again; and for this jealousy, the Nation may thank Cromwell, and
Ireton. And the Army, thus resolved, the next day seize upon 6. December.
the major part of the Members, whom they imprison, suffering none to Vote, but
those who would dance after their Pipe. Thus may some men better steal a horse,
then others look on. Hasterig, and Tate, Knights for Leicestershire; may
without any fear disobey the Parliament, Ang. 19. 1641.
in not returning, when they sent for him: But if the King deny them any thing,
then shall you hear a great clamor of the breaking of Privileges of
Parliament; and nothing but fire, and sword must redress it. When the King
accused but five Members of High Treason, and, in a civil way, went to demand
them of the House; the Parliament called it an Illegal, Seditions, and
Traitorous act, (though I cannot vindicate them for it), and this was one of
the main occasions, why the people joined with the Parliament, though in so
doing they had no more reason, then the roaring Blaces in the Counter-scuffle,
or Don Quixot's fighting with red-wine, or wind-mills. And, certainly the King
has more right, and law, in each particle of his body, then the whole Army
Their humble Answer 3. Jan. 1648/9. p. 2.
could in reason pretend to. And this, possibly, may be one reason why the Army
presently acknowledged their secluding the Members, to be a course in it self
irregular, and not justifiable.

And if the Parliament did so much dis-relish the King's, how might they
abominate this of their hired Cossacks: But I must confess, they were paid with
their own coin; the Soldiers sticking as close to their promises, to fight for
privileges of Parliament, as the Parliament to their Oaths of Allegiance and
Supremacy, Vows, and Protestations to maintain the King's person and
Prerogative; so that, Neither barrel better Herring.

The Members being now reduced to a small number, (and the Lord's flown away)
none being suffered to fit, but those, who had their Consciences, like
Fortunatus his purse, full of gold, and self ends; were from a name of several
syllables, (like those of Brasil) circumcised (for Christians no man can now
call them) under the short title of RUMP, Hist. Independ. part. 2. Sect. 23.
and fagge-end of a Parliament, with corrupt Maggots in it, as Mr. Walker terms
it. And the truth of it is, considering the many Members that went to the King,
with those Eleven forced away by the Army, and this last Seclusion; and then
the Remaining, will only be the Rump, of a Rump, of a Rump of a Parliament.
That the Rumpers, and the Army did comply together, is palpable; but whether
they persuaded the Army to turn out the other members I know not, though the
Army did a little dash it in their teeth afterward. Armies plea 1659 p. 28.


The Rump being thus fixed, and backed by an inconsiderable Army (if either the
Kingdom, or London to give it no other Epithet, durst know their strength)
composed of more Heresies then Rosse or Pratealus could imagine, the Rump I say
and the Army thus twisting their interests together, go as boldly on to the
destruction of others, as Lazarellos blind Master leaped to his own. And first,
vote no more addresses to be made to the King and order themselves the supreme
Authority of the Nation. And then, two days after, by the inspiration of 4
January 1648/9
some pretty Demon or other, make an Ordinance of their supreme Rebell-ships
for the Trial of his Sacred Majesty. And having dapperly proceeded thus far,
they in the next place conclude that Writts 9 Jan.
shall no longer run in the Kings name, and at last bring the King to trial
for his Life, where his declared and manifest enemies were his Judges, under
the title of a High Court of Justice: A thing which the Army highly complained
of several times the year before, when it was Remonstrance from Kingston, 18
Aug. 1647. page 20. Humble Remonst. from. St. Albans. 23 June. 1647. page 10.
their own case 'twixt them and the Parliament, calling of it contrary to the
law of nature that they should be judge in their own cause. But now the case is
altered quoth Ploydon, the Army thinking it very fitting thut any be judges
against the King, so they do but make sure work of him.

And to bring this great thing about, for all their protestations in favor of
his Majesty, all stones were turned that could be. Several of the Sectaries
like Hugh Peter's were set up, to prattle out the necessity of a Reformation in
Government, so that the people might take the Lilburns and Overtons books The
Army harmless. Roial project. A pair of Crystal Spectacles. Scots Cabinet
opened.
change more peaceably. Then were their several villains imployd to vilify
his Majesty in print, running through all the misfortunes of his Reign, still
implying that his own sins were the occasion of them all; stuffing their
pamphlets with abominable lies, set down with an infinite deal of malice, and
all applied to the ignorant people with an abundance of smooth-faced juggling:
most of them making perjury Hypocrisy, and such like villainies as inseparable
from his Majesty as the Devil from themselves. Though if ones living,
writings, and death do show any thing of a man, then there is no such thing as
Belief, if the world be not satisfied of his Majesty's Virtues and Holiness.

Besides these Pamphlets, several people were instigated to Petition the
Commons and General, that speedy justice might be executed upon his Majesty and
this as soon as the Army had conquered Hamilton, and the rest of the Royalists;
Ponifract excepted. For being now Masters in the field, they scorned to be
bafled by an imprisoned King or a few talkers at Westminster; for both which
they had laid rods in piss. Yet as a small cheat, something to gull the world,
as if their actions were not so much their own, as the desires and request of
the whole Kingdom; Petitions from several parts of the Nation must come thick
and threefold clamoring for justice against the King.

One of the leading cards of this cheating game was thrown from London,
Westminster, Southwark, and Hamlets, to the house of Commons, 11 Sept. 1648.
and then another from Oxfordshire to the same house and the same purpose; and
a letter made up of the same ingredients from the Garrison of New Castle and
Tinmouth (was not Sir Arthur Hazlerig then Governor?) to the Lord Fairfax. And
having thus begun they never leave off, till they had petitioned the King to
the block. For the next month another Petition comes posting from
Leichestershire October.
(and it is well known who were their Knights) to the Commons, desireing his
Majesty's speedy Trial for all the passages happened in his reign, and this is
backed by another from the Mayor, Aldermen etc. of New Castle upon Tyne to the
Commons, and this hotly pursued by another from Yorkshire. And to conclude,
this month a confident one was presented to the General from Iretons Regiment,
which was far from complementing but struck home to the purpose. In the next
month 16 October.
Coll. Inglosbys Regiment solicits Fairfax to the same purpose, which is
seconded by Fleetwoods, Whaleys, Barksteads, Overtons, and blind Hewsons;
November.
nor were the soldiers of New Castle, Tinmouth, Hartlepool, and Holy Isle
satisfied with their former paper, but they also fall on again and clamor for
justice: and now also comes the Petition of Coll. Hortons Regiment; and on the
last day of the month another from Sr. Hardresse Wallers tatter-demallions, as
also from Devonshire and Cornwall. And in the next Month the General is stiffly
solicited for the Kings December.
trial by the rabble of Bristol, Boston, Glamorganshire, Denbighshire, Dover,
and Kent with the Cinque Ports, and Canterbury, in whose proposals are these
words to the General, First that you prosecute the execution of justice upon
the person of the King. Words strange to proceed from such a County as Kent,
who have often bradg'd of their Loyalty; but if there be Knaves in all Families,
much more are there Rogues in all Provinces! But not unlike to the former, was
the letter of Exceptions and Doubts made by sixteen Kentish Gentleman, as they
titled themselves, directed from Maidstone to Speaker Lenthal, for which 7. 16
Dec.
they had not only his, but the thanks of the house to boot. In the next
January.
month the fatal stroke was given, in which month for the more hastening of the
Execution, several Petitions made haste from many parts of the Nation to the
same intent as the former. One was presented to the General, from (the then)
Capt. Smiths Troop in Oxfordshire, another from Hartfordshire, with a third
from Surrey, and a hotheaded one from London to the House of Commons, which
was seconded by one from the Common Council of the same City to the same
purpose and members. But that which gave the deepest stroke of all was that
Long winded Remonstrance, from the General Counsel of Officers at 16. 18. Novem.
St. Albans, wherein, after many extravagant expressions against his Majesty,
and some Common-wealth-like puny reasons for their so doing, they think it
fitting to Page 22, 23, 24. 50. 56. 61. 64.
proceed against the King; the which thoughts of theirs, they at last vomit
out, with more impudence, malice, and inhumanity, then an Army of Savage
Canabells could, in these astonishing words. That, that capital and grand
Author of our troubles the Person of the King -- may be speedily brought to
justice, for the Treason, Id page 62.
Blood, and mischief he is guilty of.



Desires so abominably wicked, that it is impossible for any but their
inspiring Satan, to give them a befitting descant.

And that they had before this, an intention to alter the Government is
palpable by the often consultations and proposals of their Agitators, and
themselves in 1647. about the Government of the Nation, by succession of
Parliaments; some advising Biennial, others Triennial, and some other modells;
And now Cromwell and Ireton all along cheated 2 Aug. 1648.
the King under specious pretenses, Major Huntington demonstrated in his
Articles against them to the Parliament. Yet could Cromwell with good store of
seeming sanctity, by his natural brazen face, presume to bring off all those
his seeming pretensions for his Majesty, under the Hypocritical and
sacrilegious Vizard, of profound Revelations Elenc. Mot. p. 119, 120.
from some Deity or other; By which means he would seem to patronize all the
Armies wickedness upon Divinity. So that the juggling humor of this Army well
considered, we may well question both the modesty and Religion of one of their
scribbling patrons, who had confidence publicly to assert, that the Nation had
far less cause to be jealous of the innocence or integrity of the Army, then
the Disciples of Christ. The Army harmless, p. 3, 4. Anno. 1647.


These treacherous dealings of a perfidious Army, not a little assisted by the
self-ended members; brought his Majesty to his Trial, a thing found out, but
as a politic trick, to blind the people with their open intentions, as may
appear not only by their ridiculous indictment, but their former votes and
actions, whereby it is palpable, that they were pre-resolved, not only to alter
the Government, but also to cut him off, as accordingly happened, to the
astonishment of humanity. And how ancient these wicked intentions of some of
them were hatched, was not a little hinted at by one of Cromwels Captains two
years before at Daintry, who then fully related the resolutions of Edw.
Gangraen. part. 3. p. 172.
the Army and himself to bring the King to destruction. Nor was the Revelation
of Mrs. Grace Carry of Bristol (though I do not use to give Vox Coeli. p. 5.
credit to such whimms) much out in this, exactly pointing out (before these
Wars) the Beheading of the King. And whether all Poets are Prophets or no,
need not here be discussed, though I am confident, that an ingenious Gentleman
did prognosticate better then those time-serving Schismatical Scriblers, Lilly,
Booker, Culpepper, or such like Sectaries, when he sung the Requiem of the King
and Kingdom, at the A model of Truths. Sect. 4.
beginning of the Wars.

They would not have the Kingdom fall,
By an ignoble Funeral;
But piously prefer the Nation
To a Renowned Decollation
The feet and lower parts it is sed
Would trample on, and off the Head;
What e're they say, this is the thing,
They love the Charles, but hate the King.
To make an even Grove, one stroke
Should lift the shrub unto the Oak.
A new found music they would make
A Gamut, but no Ela take.
This is the pious good intent
Of Privilege of Parliament.
Thus fell the best of men by the worst of Devils; so that this one wicked
action, will verify that old saying, that Britain is crowded with the
multitude of Tyrants, and the horrid Actors may be for the future Tho. Lansii
consultat. p. 558
judged by the more Noble inhabitants of Nicaragua (in America) who formerly,
(as Solon appointed no Law for a man's killing of his Father) had none for the
murderer of a King, conceiving no man to be so unnatural Tho. Gage's survey of
the West Indies. c. 12. p. 74, 75.
as to commit such crimes. And for that vast Chaos the City of London who thus
basely suffered their King to be murdered before their faces, their Ancestors
will rise up in judgment against them; nor will the valor of Sir William
Walworth, a former Lord Mayor of that City, be mentioned but in derision of
those Schismatics of late days. When King Richard the second, was in danger
of his Life and Crown by Wat Tylers Rebellion, Walworth raising up the Citizens
by crying out, Ye good Citizens, help your King that is to be murdered, and
succor Stow. p. 289.
me your Mayor, that am in the like danger; Or, if you will not succor me, yet
leave not your King destitute. By means of which the Rebels were dispersed and
the King rescued. This was the loyalty of that City in former times: But how
little they have trod the steps of their Ancestors, let themselves judge and
blush for shame; For being no small occasion of the ruin of his Majesty. The
Beheading of whom puts me in mind of a story recorded in our Chronicles in
King Richard the seconds time, viz. Of an Image of Wax, or an Head of Earth
Bakers Chron. page 167. Stow. p. 302.
framed by Necromancy at Oxford, which, at a time appointed, spoke these words.

Caput decidetur, caput elevabitur:
Pedes elevabuntur supra caput.
The Head shall be cut off, the Head shall be lift up;
The feet shall be lift above the Head.
And never did it happen so true as at this time; when a company of beggarly
peasants, by horrid Rebellion did not only cut off their Kings head, but also
made themselves supreme.

But whether this was made for a prophecy, or no, I know not; yet Nostradamus,
Physician to Henry the second King of France one much given to predictions, and
in great repute in those times for them; had a happy guess, when long since he
prognosticated, that Cent. 9. Sect. 49.


Senate de Londres metront a mort leur Roy.
The London Parliament shall kill their King.
An action so treacherous, that it would not be expected from the Devil
himself, after so many vows and protestations to the contrary, who as story
says, is true to his promise with those Miscreants who contract with him; so
that his Majesty might now be dumb with astonishment, when six years before he
cried out with grief, And are all the Ex coll. p. 252.
specious promises and loud professions of making us a great and glorious King;
Of settling a greater Revenue upon us then any of our Ancestors, have enjoyed;
of making us to be honored at home and feared abroad, resolved into this? Yet
does the King yet live as a Saint as well as a Martyr, in the memory of good
men; and, as long as Learning or Piety are permitted to adorn the world, his
divine meditations will be had by every one in greater esteem; then Alexander
had of Homer, Antonius Caracalla of Oppians Verses, or the Lord Burleigh of
Tully's Offices. Cujus siquis materiae pondus styli nitorem, rationis nervos,
ardoremque pictatis aequa lance pensitet, Regnum inter scriptores illum
promeruisse vel ipsa fatebitur invidia: et quae praedominum civil ausu nefan
do extorsit, reddet literarium. Elench. Mot. page 191, Gualdo part. 3. page 413.
Such is the excellency of the style, the strength of its reason, the
nobleness of its Subject; that malice it self cannot deny, but that the Royal
Composer has excelled all other humane penmen. Nor was the fame of his quil
only made known to this Island, but forraigners allow him the priority of all
others in this virtue. But I shall conclude this sad Tragedy, and Murder,
with the Stanza's of a good Historian and Poet.

What dissolute proceedings have we here? Sam. Daniel Wars of York, and
Lancaster. book. 2. Sect. 109, 110.

What strange presumptuous disobedience?
What unheard fury void of awe or fear,
With monstrous unexampled insolence?
Durst Subjects ever here, or any where,
Thus impiously presume so foul offense,
To violate the power commanding all,
And into judgment Majesty to call?
Fame, hide it close and do not carry word
To after-coming ages of our shame,
Blot out of Books, and raze out of Record
All Monuments, memorials of the same:
Forget to tell how we did lift our sword,
And envious idle accusations frame
Against our lawful Sovereign, when we ought
His end and our release have stayed, not sought.
CHAP. III
The Inconstancy, villainy, and monstrous Tyranny of the wicked Army! till the
Restoration of his Majesty.

THus did the Rump triumph, when separated from the secluded Members. The which
outing, was as great a Providence, as any that has happened to the distracted
Kingdoms these many years (the miraculous restoration of his Majesty
excepted). For if they had admitted the King to his Title again, yet had it
been so qualified, that his Authority and honor had lain in the dust, his
friends and our ancient Church utterly distroyed and discredited, and an abused
Nation trampled upon by a tyrannizing and schismatical Presbytery.

The Rump being thus a Cock-horse acted on with more wickedness then the 30
Athenian Tyrants, there being no good Theramenes at Diod. Sicul Bib. l. 14. c.
1.
Westminster, as there was at Athens, honestly to oppose our unheard of
Villainies, who presently Vote the House of Lords useless and dangerous, and
the Kingly-Office unnecessary and burdensome. And for 6 Feb. 7 Feb.
the better carrying on of their designs, order a Committee of Estates
consisting of several Lords and Commons, who were to sit in White Hall, and
rule the Militia and Navy, and look after the Trade and safety and peace of the
Nation, and this to continue a year and no longer; 14 Feb.
And makes it treason for any to proclaim the King, vote themselves a Free
State and a Commonwealth, and order an Engagement to be taken all England
over, to be true and faithful to them. And having thus secured themselves, they
ruled the roast till 1653. In which year 20 April.
they were pulled out by the ears, by their General and darling Cromwell and
his hireling Red-coats, who affirmed, Wisdom and direction Declarat. why they
dissolved the Rump.
being sought from the Lord, it seemed to be a duty incumbent upon us, who had
seen so much of the power and presence of God going along with us. And that we
were bound by necessity and providence to act as we have done, even beyond and
above our own thoughts and desires.

The Rump being thus squeezed out, Oliver began to be all in all, and so for
some days the Nation remained without any Government, but what reflected from
the beams of his Orient Nose; in which time the Fleet, and the Army in
Scotland, with others, congratulate his valor against the Beasts at
Westminster, and resolve to stick to him, as was formerly concluded upon
amongst themselves.

Yet at last after some consultation, a Council of State was ordered to 30
April.
sit, till another Representative be called, he and his Officers acting at
pleasure. At last, as the King does with the Peers, so did he with his
confiding Commons, sending out his Letters to every man who should sit, whereby
none were permitted but such as he pleased.

The men that were summoned by his particular writs (above a hundred in number)
accordingly met at White Hall, where their Patron Cromwell made a canting
Speech to them, and then gave them an Instrument under his own fist and seal,
whereby he constituted them the 4 July.
Supreme authority of the Nation, taking himself to be Don Quixot's
Knighterrant, to whom all things were common. This conventicle puts me in mind
of that Parliament, kept at Coventry in Henry the sixths time; which was
afterward declared a devilish Council and only celebrated for the destruction
of the Nobility, and no lawful Parliament: Because they which were returned,
were never elected according to the due 1459. Stow's Chron. page 412. col. 1.
order of the Law; but secretly named by them which desired rather the
destruction then the advancement of the Commonwealth. The majority of these
men were according to Olivers own heart, being of his own fraternity; by whose
compliablenesse, he knew was the only way to make himself more great. To bring
which to pass upon some instinct or other, they and he together dissolve
themselves: A great part of 12 December
them with their gray headed Speaker going to Oliver, and delivered him the
power that they pretended to have received from him, whose wicked
working-noddle was not unlike Ismens in Tasso who

-- I suoi Demon negli empi uffici impiega. Cant. 2. Sect. 1.

Pur come servi, egli discioglie, elega.
Could Devils employ to act what he designed,
And them, as if his slaves, could loose and bind.
Now were we again left without any show of Government, but what lay in the
sword and breasts of Cromwell and his dissembling adherents; who, after three
days seeking God as they said (and their devilish Hypocrisy verified the old
saying In nomine Domini incipit omne malum); It was resolved upon, that
Cromwell should be chosen Lord Protector 16 Dec.
of the three Nations. And was accordingly sworn, and after proclaimed.

Thus Oliver Cromwell from a low estate (yet a Gentleman) raised himself to the
Supremacy in England, not unlike the Macedonian Nabin thus related by the
Poetical Monck of Saint Edmunds-Bury.

Having no title save title of robbrye
Only by force himself to magnefye John Lydgate. lib. 5. fol. 126.

Which with strong hand took full possession
For to be crowny'd in thilke region.
To obtain this Height, his natural dissimulation was none of his least
assistants; who with his eyes lift up to heaven, and his hands clapped upon his
Egregius simulandi, et dissimulandi Artisex qui sublatis in Coelum oculis.
dextraque pectori applicata, Dei nomon invocabit lacrymabitur, precabitur, aget
paenitentiam, donec sub quinta costa trajecerit alloquentem. Elench. Motuum.
page 88.
breast, would weep, pray, bemoan and call upon God, till he had destroyed him,
to whom he seemed most friendly; so that in this he seemed to be typified by
Alete in the Italian Heroic Poem.

Alete e l'un che da principio indegno Tasso. Cant. 2.

Tra le brutture de la Plebe e sorto;
Ma l'innalzaro a i primi honor del Regne
Parlar facondo, e lusinghiero, e scorto,
Pieghevoli costumi, e vario ingegno,
Al finger pronto, a l'ingannare accorto:
Gran fabro di calunnie, adorn in modi
Novi, che sono accuse, e paion lodi.
Alete from the basest Rabble came,
From a vile Clown's unworthy loins being sprung;
Yet did he rise unto the greatest Name;
By a dissembling, lying, cunning tongue.
His temper to all humors could he frame;
And by his craft and lies blanch over all wrong:
A great back-biter, but in such quaint ways,
As whom h'accuseth most, he seems to praise.
Nor may we be branded with want of Charity, if we suspect his Religion to be
as true as he pretended: for, that he confided more in the sharpness of his
Sword, than the right of his Cause, is evident from his swerving from all his
Oaths, Protestations, and Promises, for the advantage of his own Interest; in
which, he was not unlike Argante, in the former Poet, Cant. 2.
who

D'ogni Dio sprezzator, each ripone
Ne la spada sua leg, e sua ragione.
Did scorn and spurn at God, and would afford,
Nor Law, nor Reason, but his bloody Sword.
Yet for all his Valor and Knavery, as Piedro Messia admires the sudden rise
of Julius Caesar, so may I of Oliver; considering, he had not only the
Royalists his Enemies, (and Experience tells us, and a Venetian Gualdo. part.
4. (...) 9. P. 515.
well observes, he was the greatest that ever the King had), but also the
Presbyterians, to both which, Cromwell's Faction was but a handful; yet may this
wonder be somewhat lessened, by considering, that the Parliament and
Non-conformists, had done formerly the main drudgery of the work to his hands.
Many Articles was he sworn to observe, contained in the Book of Government,
which with his Oath were afterward altered by The Advice. As he gained his
Government by blood and craft, so did he keep it, cutting off all people whom
he the least suspected; and toleing the people along to their own slavery and
destruction, as the Pyed Pyper did the Children and Verstegan. cap. 3. p. 85.
Rats of Hamel in Brunswick, some four years he protected it, giving Laws to,
and dissolving Parliaments at, pleasure; a thing which he, and his Creatures,
formerly judged most wicked: But many men commend themselves in that, for which
they despise others. And thus shall I leave Oliver with Nostradamus, his
Praediction above a hundred years ago. Cent. 10. sect. 22.


Le Roy des Isles sera chasse par force,
Mis a son Lieu qui de Roy n'aura sign.
A King of Islands, shall be bannish'd; and
An upstart Jack by force shall rule the Land.
Oliver being thus wafted away in a whirlwind, his Son Richard, as the 3. Sept.
1658.
Father had appointed, succeeded: to whom all the Armies of the three Nations
with some others, shoal with innumerable Addresses, pitifully lamenting the
death of his Father, whom they profainly honor with all the good titles they
could pick out of the Holy Scriptures; protesting to stand by him, and
professing and acknowledging their happiness under his Rule. But for all these
their Asseverations, he had not governed (prudently, piously, faithfully, to
his immortal honor, Preface to his Holy-Common-wealth, p. 25.
as his great friend and admirer Mr. Baxter says), long; but they, by the
contrivance of Lambert, and others, having weakened his Party, by forcing him to
dissolve his Parliament, thrust him out of the Throne too; by which action, as
Mr. Baxter says, he was very ill used.

The Officers of the Army having thus slighted him; command all things by
their Consultations at Wallingford-House; and from thence 6. May. 1659.
issued forth a Declaration to recall the Rump again, who the next day
accordingly met. And this, forsooth, was by them called the Good old Cause; but
why it should be honored with that Epethite, I know no more, than why the
wicked sin of Sodomie should be commended by Johannes Casa. These men having
Triumphed for about half a year, a great jealousy grew betwixt them and their
Army. For Lambert returning to London, proud with his pretty Conquest over Sir
George Booth, instigated his Red-coats, to Petition the Parliament for a
General, (and then he knew how to act his part as well as Cromwell did in
1648). But the cunning Rumpers smelling the design, Voted this grand Office, as
in a single Person, to be needless, chargeable and 23. September.
dangerous; which denial of theirs, was so far from danting the Resolved
Commanders (who knew, that if they were now baffled, their ruin by Rump-craft
would soon follow) who made no more use of the Parliament, nor the Members of
the Army, then they would serve for one another Interests; and so after
several Consultations at Wallingford. 5. October.
House, publicly desired a Chief Commander again, in their Representation
delivered by Giant Desborough. The Rump perceiving the Army resolute, and
fearing a change of Government, enact it Treason for any to raise Moneys, but
by their consent, and the next 11. October.
day (their disease being desperate) Vote Lambert, and the chief of his Faction
out of Commission, and appoint seven Commissioners over the Army, Fleetwood
being Lieutenant General; a man of an easy disposition, and so apt to be both
cozened and commanded. But this hindered nothing, the Armies prosecution of
their own designs; who to requite the good turn done them by the Rump, turned
them out of 13. October.
Authority, leaving us without any Government, only appointing Fleetwood
Commander in Chief, whose soft nature made him employed by both Factions,
wanting wit of himself, to do any man any harm; yet, as a Cyfer, could add
something to the number.

The Rump being now defunct, and the Army-Lords Paramount, are continued some
days without any Form of Government but those Ranters at Wallingford-House; who
at last, constituted ten pure Youths 19. October.
to carry on the affairs of the State.

But the glory of these Decemviri lasted not long, being nulled by their Lords
and Masters the Army, (so unconstant were their actions), who ordered another
Model of Government, under the pretty Title of The Committee of Safety,
consisting of Twenty three Brethren 26. October.
in Iniquity; all people of great pretended Sanctity, though their villainy,
made some think, that Hell was broke loose, and sat in Council in a place built
for their betters.

The Committee of Safety, who now appointed a pack of Beagles to hunt after
some Form of Government from Utopia, Atlantis the fairy Country, or some Terra
incognita, or other (provided, there should be no such thing as King-ship)
continued not long in any peaceable condition. For General Monk hating the
Tyranny of the English Army, opposed their proceedings; which occasioned
Lambert with some 3. November.
tatterdemallions, to march Northwards the same day, that the wicked
Long-Parliament commenced; thinking by the terror of these Forces to reduce
those in Scotland (having had formeely good luck there) to his Obedience. But
in this he ruined himself: for London, [more then could be expected from that
Monster of Wood and Stone, considering their former proneness to, and
compliance with intolerable mischief; and, when many of them will really be
honest and dutiful to the Laws, considering the multitude of their Schismatical
Presbyterian-Pulpitiers, I know not] this City?, I say, opposing the Committee
of Safety in the City, and the Rumpers playing their Cards well at Portsmouth,
and other places, and General Monk politickly droling Lambert to delays;
Fleetwood and the rest of his seeming sanctified Associates fell to dirt. By
which means, the indefatigable Rump was restored again, and 26. December.
with a seeming joy received by the Time-serving Army, their former stiff
Enemies, now protesting themselves their especial friends. Nor need this
Hypocrisy appear any strange matter from such like Hirelings as they were, who
are Masters of their own tongues and humors, and can commend and vilify
according as their own Interest leads; of which their actions toward this very
Rump, will testify sufficiently. For, when they dissolved them, [1653. 20.
April], they then called them, Declarat. 22. April. 1653.
a corrupt Party, having an aversion to things conducible to the good of the
Commonwealth, and opposition to the people of God. And that, through the
corruption of some, and jealousy of others, the non-attendance and negligence
of many, would never answer those ends, which God, his People, and the whole
Nation expected from them. This is an Indictment black enough to make any man
odious to all the World; yet few years after, the Scene was altered, and those
aspersions quite forgot. For, when their Interest engaged them to restore the
Rump again, Good God! how they -- Stroke them on the head, Cleaveland.

Call them good Boys, and buy them Ginger-bread.
Then they look upon them as people fallen from Heaven, and think nothing can be
too good for such white Boys, professing, That the want of Declarat. 6. May.
1659.
them is one cause of the Lords withdrawing his wonted presence, for they were
eminent Asserters of the Good Cause, and had a special presence of God with
them, and were signally blessed in that work. And with this same Legerdemain was
the poor Rump gulled the third time. For, but some six Humble Representation. 5
October. 1659.
days before they were again cast out by these Soldiers, the very Army call
themselves several times the Parliaments Army, and humble and faithful
Servants, protesting, through the help of God, that they would be found
(notwithstanding all endeavors to the contrary) faithful to them. But
Experience proved, that this their Protestation lasted no longer, then that the
Rump acknowledged them (or rather, five or six Chieftains) in Authority; so,
that I may say of the Army, as was formerly sung of the Pope, by one of our own
Poets.

Nulla -- non -- concessa potestas, Georg. Goodwin. Melissa. Relig. Pont. Eleg.
2.

Illius Imperium fasque nefasque facit.
Dat, rapit, exarmat, ditat, depauperat, ornat,
Foedera rescindit, bella cruenta ciet.
Cuncta tamen licite, quoniam generale --
-- Imperium nil nisi jure facit.
These have all power, and by their Swords can cause,
Things to be good or bad though against all Laws,
Can make us poor or rich, can give or take,
Raise cruel Wars, and all Agreements break;
Yet all these things are legal, cause their might,
So frames their Rule, that what they do is right.
By which means we seemed to be returned to the first Chaos of Government,
Populus nullis legibus tenebatur, arbitria I^^lacipum prolegibus erant. Justin.
page 1.
where people were ruled by no Laws, but the will and lust of their Chieftains,
as Justin informs us. And probably, that people under no Laws, live more happy
than those, whose Laws and Government are so apt to change, that they know not
what to trust to, next day.

The Rump being thus restored, thought nothing, but that all would fall down
and worship them: But in this they quickly found that they reckoned without
their Host. For, General Monk perceiving the inconsistency of these
self-ended, erroneous, popular Governments, with the good of the Nations;
resolved to crush the proceedings of any more such like wickedness. For which
purpose, with his small Army, he moved toward London, by any easy, and
tedious motion; by which means he sounded the hearts of all the Nation, by
their Address to him; where he found all the clamor for a Free-Parliament, and
through it the Restoration of their desired King. And to bring this about
after some complements with the Rump, (who now feared him); for a blind, and
fashion sake, he restored the long-banish'd Secluded Members. 21. February
1659/60.


A piece of a Parliament being now drawn together, by the addition of the
Secluded Members to the Rump; the good Nobility, and Gentry of the Nation,
began to be valiant once more, and to utter some thoughts of Kingship: Knowing,
that the animosity of the two parties in the House against each other, would be
the Rump's destruction, and the occasion of a New-representative; for which,
they nominated a Council 24. February. 16. March.
of State consisting of thirty Members; and the next Month, Dissolved
themselves from being a Parliament, leaving the Government of the Nation, to
the aforesaid Council, till the New-representative met.

The New-Parliament being met according to their Writs, received 25. Apr. 1660.
his Majesty's Gracious Letters to them, by Sir John Greenvill; and unanimously
acknowledge him for their King, and Sovereign, with desires 1 May.
of his return to receive his Crown. And having prepared all things for his
reception, he accordingly returned to England, (where long may he reign) to the
unspeakable joy, and benefit of the good, and Loyal people, and the confusion
of Rebellion, and Schism.

Thus in the space of eleven years, have we run the Gant-lope, through the
series of seventeen Governments, of which take this following scheme.

1. King Charles the first. 2. Rump. 3. Oliver and his Officers, -- -- 20.
April 1653. 4. Council of State, -- -- -- 30. April. 5. Barebones Parliament,
-- -- -- 4. July. 6. Oliver and his Officers, -- -- 12. December. 7. O. Cromwell
Protector, -- -- 16. December. 8. Richard Protector, -- -- -- 3. Septem. 1658.
9. Rump the second time, -- -- 6. May 1659. 10. Wallingford-house Junto, with
Lambert, and Fleetwood, -- -- -- 13. October. 11. Council of ten men, -- -- 19.
October. 12. Committee of Safety, -- -- 26. October. 13. Rump the third time, -- --
-- 26. December. 14. Secluded Members, and Rump, -- 21. Feb. 1659/60. 15. Council
of State, -- -- -- 16. March. 16. Parliament, -- -- -- 25. Apr. 1660. 17. King
Charles the second, -- --
And what miseries the Nation underwent in these chopping, and changing of
Models, is not yet forgot. This thing was to day High Treason, which to morrow
was good law; and the seduced people swore to maintain that, the contrary to
which the next week they were constrained to defend: So that old Chaucer's
complaint, may well be here revived.

O stern people! unsad, and untrewe, Clerk of Oxford' s tale par. 6. f. 59. R.

Aye undiscrete, and chaungying as a fane,
Delyting ever in rumur that is new,
For like the Moon ever wax ye, and wane,
Ever full of clappying, dear enough a jane
Your dome is false, your constaunce evel preveth,
A full great fool is he that on you leveth.
And all this, by the power of a faithless, rebellious, schismatical, and
heretical Army, composed of people betwixt whose hearts, and tongues, was a
certain Antipathy; so that it had been more credit to them, had they been
framed like the people of Quinbaia, (not unlike those Wywaypanamyans) Abbot's
Geogr. page 314. Purchase. part, 4. page 1285.
and other parts of Peru, with their heads in their breasts; for then their
tongues had been so near their hearts, that they could not have given their
tongues the lie. But these were agreeable to the wicked man, complained on by
David, who did not only break his Covenants, Psalm. 55. 20, 21.
but was also full of deceit. But this wickedness of theirs they endeavor to
wipe out, by affirming they did but follow the steps of the Parliament, who
swore to maintain the King, yet cut off his head; Armies Plea 1659. p. 24.
though it is no excuse to save a thief from the gallows, to plead, that the
knack of stealing was invented before his time. This juggling is odious in any
man, but, especially for a Soldier, whose profession, like our Knight errants,
is to right all people, punish the wicked, and relieve the oppressed. And thus
taken, no man can but honor his calling, knowing, that in a good cause, none
deserves his wages, or pay better; ventring life, limbs, and all that is dear
to him, for his Countries benefit.

But for your Soldiers of fortune, who censure the goodness of their cause, by
the greatness of their pay, and booty; who venture their lives only for their
own private interests; and fight merely because they hate peace, or, because
their former villainies in time of tranquillity would be brought to question,
who know no Conscience, and acknowledge no Law, but that called Martial; [the
which though the severest, yet so seldom put in practice, or at least, runs by
partiallity, witness the condemning, and quitting the same (once) great man
about the same falt, that like the Rack in England, it is rather talked of then
known]. As for these Banditi, or rather wild Canables, they are so much the
Pest of a Nation, that they were not unlike that ancient plague, called by the
Northern-people, the Grace of God; yet, for all it is good name, the effects of
it was destructive: And as they prayed against the graces of God, meaning that
sickness; so might we against our Army, said to be composed of Saints, though
their actions, and intentions were altogether wicked; being constant to nothing
but Gain, whereby the Poets observation may more especially be appropriated to
this Army. Lucan. lib. 10.


Nulla fides, pietasque viris, qui castra sequuntur;
Venalesque manus, ibi fas ubi maxima merces.
Nor faith, nor piety, these hirelings sway;
Thinking there is most right, where is most pay.
These men were more fit to fight under the Banner of the one eyed Arimaspi,
who formerly used to wage war against the Gryffens, merely Quod genus hominum,
-- nihil tam atrox sit, quod resugisti, nihil tam turpe quod erubescat
decuniae. Egisyppus Exid. Hierosol. lib. 5. cap. 25.
for the greediness of gold; or the aviritious Syrians, who like these men,
will perpitrate any thing for money: then to list themselves amongst
Christians, who should first know the reason of the war, before they enter into
it, and then act wholly for the public good. Not fighting pro and con,
according as their Officers (prompted by private opens) please to lead them on;
as if like Bull-rushes, they ought to be obedient to every blast of their
rotten-hearted Commanders.

And if cowardice (a thing not to be separate from all honest men, let the
Philosopher think the contrary) have been thought by the best Soldiers worthy
of death; what punishment is fit for these Needhamites, who have no end, or
reason for their supposed valor, but the destruction of those who are better
then themselves? as if like Envy in the Poet, they repined at the flourishing
of good things. So that truly it may be said of them, as the Long-Parliament,
ushered on by their own confidence, was pleased to affirm of the King. That
notwithstanding all the Vows, and Protestations, to govern by Laws, which have
been dispersed throughout the Kingdom, to blind, and decieve the people, the
most mischievous Ex. Coll. p. 575.
principles of Tyranny are practiced, that ever were invented. For if Le Sieur
Colletet does give us a true description of Tyranny, (and he was both learned
and ingenious enough to understand it) we may easily conceive that it was never
more practiced, then in these late times in England. Epigram. p. 212.


Ravir la paix, and le repos,
Accabler la France d'impos,
Rire du peuple, qui soupire
Sons le joug d'un cruel Empire,
Remplir d'infames Garnisons,
Jousque, au foger de nos maisons,
Vouloir qu' en nos propres familles,
Le soldat caresse nos filles:
Forcer en tout temps, en tout lieu,
Les Loix de l'Estat, and de Dieu,
Sage Conrart, c'est la many,
De la nouuelle Tyranny.
To over-cloud our peace, and rest,
The Land with Taxes to infest,
To' Abuse the people, who do groan
Under a Cursed, bloud-shedding Throne,
To cumber mankind with a Crowd
Of Garrisons, base-born, yet proud,
To let the Soldiers before our eyes,
Abuse our Daughters, as their prise:
Always to violate, and withstand,
The laws of God, and of the Land;
Is, Sir, if I can right define,
Of Tyranny the only sign.
And this description agrees with those villainies to make up a Tyrant,
mentioned by the learned, and, amongst the rest, that ever famous Saravia, the
Mauller of Beza. And really, the arrogance of every beggarly De Imperandi
Authoritate l. 2. cap. 24, 25. etc.
Red-coat, and intolerable pride and insolency of every upstart dung-hill-bred
Commander (many of their extractions being little better) was such, that we had
cause to think, as was formerly said of the days of King Stephen, that there
were in England as many Tyrants, as Governors Tot erant in Anglia Tyranni,
quot castellorum domini Lans. Consult. p. 559.
of Towns, and Castles. And I fear, [nor does my doubt argue want of charity]
that many of them by their arrogant wickedness, have not crossed the Proverb, Set
a Beggar on horse back, and he will ride to the Devil. For we know that such
upstarts are naturally most proud, which has been held above an ordinary sin,
and what sign of repentance they have yet shown, I am altogether ignorant.

How our Nation was reformed, (after so much fighting for it is pretended
happiness) when our Kings, Nobility, Clergy, and Gentry were thrown by as
useless; and Cobblers, Draymen, and such Mechanics, set up in authority to
domineer over us: will make posterity blush to consider, as it has done
Forraigners, rather to abuse, then pity us. And will remain as a sign to
posterity, of the Armie's abominable hypocrisy, and falsehood: When they had
the confidence to assert their first cause, Armies plea, 1659. p. 7, 8.
the just rights, and liberties, of all honest, and good men, in their
peaceable, and quiet living; and not at all indulged, either themselves, or
others, in the troubling, suppressing, or abridging any, though keen, and
froward against the Army, in the free use, and enjoyment of their just rights,
and liberties; and all this, and much more, with simplicity, impartiallity, and
uprightness of heart. Yet all this not half so true as the sea burns, let the
Country people confide never so much in the Proverb.

'Twas a mad world, my Masters, when John of Leyden a Tailor, must be made King
of the Universe: And Robert Kett a Tanner, ruin our English inclosers according
to his discretion; Or Michael Joseph a Blacksmith; endeavor to correct the
King, and his Council. Naples, we may suppose, was well reformed, when Thomas
Anello a poor Fisherman, would there rule the roast, to the destruction of
many stately buildings. And the Kingdom of Spain had small reason to bless her
happiness, when the sortish Commonalty against their King, [the Emperor Charles
the fifth] and Nobility, must be governed by the basest sort of people; as
Bodadilla a Cloth-worker at Medina del Campo, Villeria a Skinner in Pru. de
Sandoval. part. 1. lib. 6. Sect. 1.
Salamanca, and such like offals of rationality. What prosperity could they
expect from their Junta's, when in their great Assembly, none durst speak but
such, as one Pinelles a Cloth-worker was pleased to order, 1b. Sect. 20.
by the pointing to them with his Rod of an Usurpt Authority? And what a Bedlam
should we have had in England, if the Inferior rusticks of Kent, Essex, etc.
under Wat Tyler a Tailor, Jack Straw, and others such low-born chieftains, had
prevailed against King Richard the second, who endeavored to destroy the King,
Nobility, and Clergy; extirpate all Learning, and overthrow all Government, by
their levelling humors? For which purpose, they murdered all persons of
quality, which fell into their clutches if not of their society; burnt, and
distroy'd the best houses in London; And had so little respect of persons, that
every slave amongst them, would sport themselves upon the King's bed, and
impudently invite the King's Mother to kiss with them, whose head they also
broak in a Tyrannizing frolic: And that their villainy might be complete by a
bloody Sacrilege, they took Simon Tibald, alias Sudbury, Archbishop of
Canterbury, and in their devilish fury, by eight mangling strokes, cut off his
head; and for more infamy, set it upon Londonbridge.

How parallel (or rather excelled) our late Rebellion has run to this, is not
unknown. How has our Nobility, and Gentry been trod upon, and that by the scum
of Manhood; whose wicked designs were mainly carried on for their utter
annihilation: And they began betimes, witness that confident Petition of the
Rascally Londoners, at the beginning Ex. Coll. p. 548.
of the Long-Parliament, that the House of Lords might not be distinct from the
Commons, but both to sit together, by which means the King would be forced to
descend too. And with what applause the Commons received this durty Paper, is
clear from their swagring with it before the Lords; whereas their Loyalty had
been more shown, had they burnt the Petition, and cut off the Presenters ears;
but then I believe some of the Composers, would have pleaded Protection by
Privilege of Parliament, for it is more then suspected who set such people on
work.

Thus was Nobility struck at, and afterward by the rabble held in real
reproach; so that their intentions seemed to comply in wickedness with those
dung-hil Rebels in Valentia, who were resolved to destroy all Sandoval. lib. 6.
Sect. 20.
the Gentry; which occasioned a Hat-makers wife in Saint Catharines-street in
the same City, seeing some Gentlemen go by, to show them to her children, and
they asking the reason, she replied, Because when you Porque quando se ais
grandes podais dezir que vistes los Cavalleros.
come to be men, you may say that you have seen Gentlemen. Nor is it the Gentry
alone that suffer, but, how also have our Princes been not only abused, but
murdered? How has learning been out-vapoured by ignorance? And our Reverend
Clergy outed by a swarm of Enthusiastic Schismatics? Nor do we want the loud
Cry of a Reverend Archbishop to make the story alike. Yet how far our modern
Hectors are from Repentance, I need not tell.

For my part I have a better opinion for the Tyrian slaves, who slew all
Justin. lib. 18.
their Lords, and Masters, only one by chance escaped called Strato: yet
afterward on their own accord repented, and chose Strato for their King; then
I have for those Scythians, who (though their occasional Id. lib. 2.
crime was not great) would not be brought to obedience, but by force, and
scourges.

CHAP. IV.
The Grand Perjury of the Parliament, and Army.

OF all things, nothing is more destructive to government, then Perjury, and
falseness; amongst the retainers of these sins, all Laws, or Constitutions,
(the foundation of Rule) being of no validity. Nor is this of it self only a
political fault, but a great sin against the Almighty, of which the Poet speaks
like a good Divine, (as he might be, for ought I know.)

-- Quid enim magis esse profanum, Lud. Lucius Hist. Jesuit. li 1. 3. cap. 2.
page 317.

Aut mage turpe potest; quam sacris ludere pactis,
Vinclaque divini violare sacerrima juris?
Nothing a man more base and wicked shows,
Then to break Sacred Promises and Vows.
Yet nothing has been more familiar with our late Grandees then this; which
makes me sometimes apt to fancy, that our Phanaticks hold all manner of Oaths
unlawful, (though before a Magistrate) merely as a pretty salvo for their
Perjury, thinking those not fit to be kept, which in the Original is
unwarrantable to be taken. And this reason, as Prateolus does hint, was
formerly in use amongst Priscillians, who though they Elenc. Haeret. page 53.
opposed the legality of Oaths, yet had this for a rule amongst themselves.

Jura, perjura, secretum prodere noli.
-- Swear and forswear,
But from discovering your designs forbear.
Thus the Grecian Lysander made so little Conscience of Oaths, that he
affirmed, they were but to deceive men, as false-play children. And, whether
our Non-conformists are of the same opinion, or no, I know not; though I am
confident King James tells us, (and experience makes it not Bas. Dor. lib. 2.
p. 33, 34.
altogether untrue), that they care as little for the Observation of Oaths as
another. Though I believe, that many of them, at their last hour, will be
ashamed at their hands, either for holding them up at the Covenant, or
subscribing our late Engagements; as Rodulphus the Duke of August. Brun. Trias
Electoral. page 123. Mutius de Germ. l. 15. p. 130.
Schweben (by some of our English Writers erroniously called Duke of Saxony)
was for violating his Faith to the Emperor Henry the fourth. And without
question, if many of our Time-servers were to have their fidelity tried by
Ordeal (a fashion amongst the Ancient Saxons), there is few of them but would
either burn their toes, or end their days by their knack of sinking: Or, if we
had but here, some of those ancient Fountains mentioned by Alexander ab
Alexandro; how many Lib. 5. cap. 10.
thousands would make as good sport by diveing, as Lazarello when showed about
Spain in a Tub for a strange fish.

But to return to our late times, in which, we are first to consider the two
Oaths, one of Supremacy, (made in Queen Elizabeth's time), and the other of
Allegiance (made in King James his reign) wherein, all are sworn to defend the
Kings Person, Progeny, Power, Authority, and Privileges, and acknowledge him
to be Supreme over all; and this also the Protestation and Covenant bound them
to keep. But, how these were observed, and that by the Parliament itself (every
Member therein having taken the two Oaths), is not unknown. And, if these
allowed them to fight against the King, or at least to kill him, I shall lament
my Baptism, and put no more trust in my Creed.

When the Rump had perjured themselves by beheading their King, they frame an
Engagement, obliging all to take it; or else to have no benefit of an
Englishman, the words of which were these;

I do declare and promise, that I will be true and faithful to the
Commonwealth of England, as it is now established without a King or House of
Lords.

This was taken by all the Officers and Soldiers of the Armies who returned
their Subscriptions in Parchment-Rolles, to make the work more sure and
lasting; and besides them many others took it.

But the Army kept not long to this their Solemn Engagement; for they not only
rooted out the Rump, but altered the Government again to a single Person, by
making Oliver Cromwell Protector, whose Council, by Order of his Parliament,
was to swear Fidelity and Allegiance to him; and every Member of Parliament,
both then, and for the future, did, and was, to swear Failty to him, thus;

I A. B. Do in the presence, and by the Name of God Almighty, promise 26. June.
1657.
and swear -- That I will be true and faithful to the Lord Protector of the
Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland, and the Dominios and
Territories thereunto belonging, as Chief Magistrate thereof: and shall not
contrive, design, or attempt, any thing against the Person or lawful Authority
of the Lord Protector. --

This Oath in behalf of Protectorship, and a single Person, lasted not long:
for, the Army having overthrown Richard, and again restored the Rump, another
Oath was ordered to be taken, in these words;

You shall swear, That you will be true, faithful, and constant, to this
Commonwealth, without a single Person, Kingship, or House of Lords.

And after all this, as if one Oath signified nothing, some of them took a
new-found-out Oath of Abjuration against Kingship, though poor Souls! only to
their own shame and confusion. And this was the pretty invention of the
hotheaded Knight Don Haslerigo, one, of Dr. Burges's Principles, to abominate
and hate all Bishops, but to embrace and love their Lands dearly; but this
fault is not only incident to them, it being the main reason, that there is
such a skip-jack as an English Presbytery.

Such horrid Perjury as this, and such abominable Villainies committed by our
late Parliaments, made them not a little guilty of the highest Sacrilege. The
Parliament House where the Commons now sit, being formerly St. Steven's
Chapel, built by King Steven; The consideration of which, might have moved
honest men to have acted more religiously, though these men only sat there to
ruin both it and the Church: It being a knack amongst our new Saints, to pull
down Churches for the Propagation of Religion, an action of more malice than
reason, being as ridiculous, as the wisemen of Gotham, to put Saltfish into a
Pond to multiply; or to hedge in the Cookow: and as simple as Maestro Nun^o
(Divinity Professor in Valladolid) who made a great Gage's Travels. page 101.
deal of clutter, to borrow Boots and Spurs, because he was to ride in a Coach.
But of this no more: only if those men be not perjured who swallowed these
contradictory Oaths, I shall allow my self not only irrational, but bemoan my
condition, because not born one of the old Egyptian Heathens, whose Religion
punished such sins with severe death.

CHAP. V.
The wicked Sacrilege of the Parliament and Army.

THe Schoolmen and others, make a threefold Sacrilege, viz. either by taking
away from, or violating in, a holy place, a holy thing; or secondly, an holy
thing from, or in, a place not holy or fanctified; or lastly, a thing not holy,
in, or from a holy place. And, that there are some places and things holy, I
suppose, few (but those who are wickedly interested in Church Lands) will plead
ignorance; For, though this or that, originally be not really holy of it self;
yet, the Dedication Apellatione autem rei sacrae accipitur ea quae sanctitatem
aliquam habet, aut Christi institutione, aut Ecclcsiae Consecratione -- ca item
quam Ecllesia ad sacros usus and Ministeria destinavit. Jo. Sor. Institut.
Moral. part. 1. lib. 9. cap. 27.
and Consecration of them by the Church, to holy uses, makes them holy to the
Lord. For, says God, -- devoted things that a man shall devote unto the Lord.
-- every Levit. 27. 28.
devoted thing is most holy unto the Lord. And these things once offered unto
the Lord are not to be profaned: And, if any through ignorance Id. 5. 15. 18.
sin against this, He shall make amends for the harm that he has done in Id.
22. 15.
the holy thing.

Belshazzar's sin was not so much for being drunk with Wine, but Dan. 5. 2, 23.
his sacrilegious drinking out of the Vessels of the Temple: Those who rob God
of his Tithes and Offerings, are severely cursed, and an Mal. 3. 8, 9.
express command against exchanging or alienating those things which are holy
to the Lord, as the Lands of his Church. How highly did Ezekiel. 48. 12, 14.
God punish those who regarded not his Temple, every man running unto his own
House? and, what little impression has this made upon Hag. 1. 9, 10.
England, where most forsook the Church, drawing themselves to illegal
Conventicles, and such private Houses, never intended for such public duties?
It Is noted as a great aggravation of King Ahaz iniquities 2 Chronicles. 28. 22, 23,
24.
for destroying the holy Vessels, and shutting up the doors of the Temple;
though amongst our late rebellious Reformers, such actions were esteemed a true
token of holiness. Jehoash King of Judah, took 2 King. 12. 17, 18.
all the treasure and holy things out of the Temple, and sent them to Hazael,
King of Syria, for a bribe, and was recompensed by being slain by his Servants.
But our Innocent King was murdered by those who had fed their Brethern with
Moneys impiously rent from Church Lands; whereby their Villainies were doubled,
to make them more serviceable to their cloven-footed Master who set them on
work.

The wisest man that ever was, assures us, That it is a snare to a Prove. 20.
25.
man who devoureth that which is holy; and after vows to make enquiry: Out of
which words a learned Writer observes, That he is guilty of death, who Laqueos
mortis sibi induit quisquis Deum offendit, res ipstus aut sacras, aut
consecratas avertendo, i. e. tollendo quod jam illius est, aut quod illi
debetur retinendo. Junius in loc.
sins against God, either by alienating, taking away, or keeping back, those
things which are holy or consecrated to the Lord. Ananias and Saphiras Act. 5.
act, is held by Divines as a true pattern of Sacrilege; for which they
suffered death by a special judgment of God, as Achan in the old time was
stoned to death. St. Paul admires that any man should Romans 2. 22.
be so wicked as to commit Sacrilege; and our late Sectaries wonder, that any
should stand in aw of it: Our Saviors whipping the buyers and sellers, and
such like, out of the Temple, is no small sign, what respect should be held to
our Churches, not to be turned into Exchanges, as is well known, the once
famous Cathedral of St. Paul's was.

For Confirmation of this, many heavy examples of Gods judgments Ezra 6. 11,
12.
against those, who have either violated his Church, or alienated his
Messengers Lands, might be drawn out of the Macchabees, Sir Henry Spelman, and
other Historians, but that the certainty of such punishments are unquestionable.

Nor did the Reverend Fathers of the Primitive Church (led by the example of
Gods severe threatenings and chastisements of such horrid wickedness) wink at
such faults as this. A Reverend Asserter of the truth, positively assures us,
that he who commits Sacrilege, by taking Quanto vehementius judicandus est sur
Sacrilegus, qui eusus fuerit, non uadicunque tollere, sed de Ecclesia tollere.
Qui aliquid de Ecclesia suratur, Judae perdito comparatur. August. in Evang.
Joan. Tract. 50. p. 80. F.
or stealing any thing from the Church, may be placed beside Judas, who
betrayed our Savior. And not much disconsonant from this, is the opinion of
the Ancient Popes Council. Edit. Bin. vol. 1. p. 100. a.
Anacletus, and Council. Bin. page 180. 6 Edit. Crabbe. To. 1. p. 161. col. 2.
Lucius; who affirm, that those who rob and abuse the Church, are sacrilegious,
and as much guilty, as if they had slain a man. How lamentably do the two old
Fathers Orat. 1. p. 361.
Gregory Nazianzen, and Hist. Eccles. lib. 3. c. 8.
Theodoret, complain of the violation of Churches, and Church-plate and
Treasure? How earnestly does Spelman. Council. p. 235.
Boniface dehort King Aethelbold from acting Sacrilege? And, How plainly does
Lib. 3. Epist. 30.
Innocent the third tell us, that he commits that sin, who lays violent hands
on a Bishop. Then miserable were those tumultuous wretches at Westminster, by
their wicked assaults; but far more those who destroyed the Reveren'd
Archbishop Laud, one of more Integrity and Religion, than Prynne, Gage,
Burton, Hornius, and the rest of his railing Enemies.

Nor are the single Fathers only testifying the hainousness of this sin; but
also the whole Church [And he that neglects to hear the Church, Mat. 18. 17.
let him be unto thee as an Heathen-man and a Publican,] represented by their
Council, have, after much seeking God, solemnly cursed those who perpetrate this
Iniquity. In one of them it was concluded upon, That if Siquis docet domum Dei
contemptibilem esse, and conveatus qui in ea celebrantur; Anathema fit. Council.
Gangrens. c. 5. Bin. vol. 1. p. 384.
any one teach, that the House of God, or those who meet in it are to be
despised, let him be accursed. And with this does another Council also agree,
affirming, That the sin was so intolerable, that they should Ut non solum
Excommunicatus, sed etiam Anathematizatus moriatur. Council. Turonens. 2d. c.
25. Bin. To. 2 p. 660. a.
not only be excommunicated, but that they should dye accursed. And, with these
agree several other foreign Councils, too tedious here to be related, being
all to the same purpose, which are enough to demonstrate, how the Fathers and
Council. Coloniens. part. 9. cap. 17. Crabbe. To. 3. p. 808. Council.
Aquisgranens. lib. 3. cap. 12. Id. lib. 2. c. 28. Crab. To. 2. p. 726, 729.
Council. Constantinopol. Quinsextum, Canon. 97. Francise. a Coriolano sum.
Council. page 60. vid. Plura in Conciliorum omnium General. and Provincial.
collectione Regia. Edit. Lutet. Paris. Anno 1644.
props of the Primitive Innocent Church did look upon this sin as most
abominable, which might easily persuade any that dare pretend to honest
principles, to keep themselves from such Iniquity.

But because some may look upon these instances as only extranious or foreign,
and so not binding to the people of England, [Though the Laws of our Land,
affirm the contrary, allowing and receiving as proper, all such Canons,
Constitutions, etc. which are not repugnant 25 Hen. 8. c. 19. at the end.
to our Laws, and the Kings Prerogative], I shall show you with as much brevity
as I can, what care has been had by the State of England, over the Church and
her privileges for many hundred years past.

King Edgar about an hundred years before the Conquest, ordained That Churches
should be employed to no other use, then Divine Service; Docemus etiam, ut
sacerdotes Ecclesias suas omni honorificentia custodiant in divinum
Ministerium, purumque servitium, and in nihilum praeterea. Ncc illic hi
permittant quid superflui, nec vel intro nec vel in proximo. Nullum illic
vaniloquium, nihil factum indecore: non hic inordinatae compotationis locus,
nec vanita is unquam alicujus: nec Ecclesiae Coemiterium Canis intret, nec
porcorum plures quam quis [i. e. custos as Spelman] possit regere. Canon. 26.
circa. An 967. Spelman. Council. page 451.
and, that with all honor and respect, every thing to be done in all decency:
all babbling and such vain discourses to be banished thence, with all manner of
bousing and tippling. Nay, that a Dog shall not be permitted to enter the
Churchyard, or a Swine, if they can possibly be kept out. And many other
Canons commanding reverence and respect to the Clergy and Church, may be seen
in the same place.

Besides these, there is another ancient Order of the Church of England,
wherein it is strictly forbidden to employ the Vessels belonging to the Nullus
sacerdotum seu laicus praesumat calicem aut patinan: aut quaelibet vasa sacra
and divino cultui mancipata, ad alios usus retorquere. Nam quicunque de Calice
Sacrato aliud bibit praeter Christi sanguinem, qui in Sacramento accipitur, and
patinam ad aliud Officium habet quam ad Altaris ministerium; deterrendus est
exemplo Balthazar, qui dum vasa Domini in usus communes assumpsit, vitam
pariter cum Regno amisit. Sect. 18. Spelm. Consil. page 594.
Church, to any other use whatsoever then Divine Worship. In which Canon is
also set before their eyes, as a warning-piece, Gods judgment upon Belshazzar,
for carousing in the Vessels dedicated to God and the Church. And formerly the
Kings of England were so careful of these things, that they have put heavy
fines upon those who either robbed God or his Quicunque res Dei vel Ecclesiae
abstulerit, duodecima componat solutione, Episcopi res undecima solutione, etc.
Spelm. Cons. p. 123.
Church, as may appear by the Decrees of King Aethelbert above a thousand years
ago; and several other English Councils, as the industrious Council. page 398.
497.
and learned Sir Henry Spelman will inform you. Nor have these Sacrilegious
Verlets only escapt with a fine, but have been loaded with the severe and just
Curse and Excommunication of the Church. Of which form, for example take this
following; pronounced by Boniface Archbishop of Canterbury, assisted with other
Bishops in their Pontificals, against all Church-spoilers and breakers of
Church-liberties. By the Authority of Almighty God, the Father, the Son, and
the Holy Ghost, Weaver's Fun. Mon. p. 48.
-- we Excommunicate, Accurse, and from the benefits of our holy Mother the
Church, we sequester all those, who hereafter willingly, and maliciously,
deprave or spoil the Church of her right. And all those that by any craft, or
wiliness, do violate, break, diminish, or change the Church-Liberties and free
Customs, contained in the Charters of the Common Liberties, etc. And, besides
this, many other instances might be given of the heavy Imprecations laid upon
the sacrilegious person, Auctuarium Addit. in Calce. Mat. Paris. p. 241, 242.
Reyner. Dis cept. Histor. de Antiq. Benedict. in Anglia. Append. p. 49, 51.
by authority of the Church. For few there are, which have been Founders or
Benefactors, but, in their deed of gift, some heavy curse or other is denounced
against those who shall either alienate or take away their charity and
liberality.

Nor has this Sacrilegious Villainy been only fined, cursed, or excommunicated;
but as a reward for their wickedness, have suffered death by Law: amongst
others, our Chronicles assure us of five, who suffered at one time, three of
them being hanged and burnt, and the Stow. p. 431. col. 2.
other two pressed to death: And to them may I add the hanging of William
Mandevil, Baily of Abington, who under pretense of holiness had raised a
Tumult, but especially against the Priests, whose heads he Id. p. 372. col. 1.
vowed to make as cheap as Sheep-heads, which were then, as some say, ten a
penny. And how any man could think to escape without severe punishment, for
alienating the Church Lands, I know nor. Since former Parliaments (how wicked
soever the latter have been) have been so careful of the Privileges and
Maintenance of the Clergy, 2 Hen. c. 1. 13. 50 Edw. 3. c. 1. 1 Rich. 2. cap 1.
8 Rich. 2. c. 1. 6 Rich. 2 c. 1. 32 Hen. 8. c. 12. 1 Phil. and Mar. cap. 9. 2
Mary. c. 8. 1 Eliz. c. 2. 1 Jac. c. 3. Speed. p. 888.
that they have confirmed them by many Statutes. But these men care no more for
what the Laws of the Land say, then Oliver, who used to call Magna Charta,
Magna Farta. For, if they had, they then, had never so Sacrilegiously and
Traitorously violated the Statutes both of God and Man; yet, for all this, has
this wickedness been perpetrated by those who pretended the greatest
ostentation and show of holiness: as if to vilify Gods House, were the only
way to do him most service.

It is not, I suppose, unknown to any in Warwick, how sacrilegiously the
Parliamentarians behaved themselves in St. Marie's Church, and the Chapel
adjoining to the Quire; beating down and defacing the ancient and curious
Monuments of the Beauchamps. Nor can Colchester M. C. Relat. of the Expedition
in Kent. p. 164.
forget how inhumanly they used the Corpse of Lady Lucas, and Lady Kelligrew,
dismembring and disjoynting their Trunks, and wearing their hair in their Hats
by way of Triumph. Never dreaming (for all their Saint-ships) how God does
punish the violaters of the Amos 2. 1, 2, 3.
Dead.

How was the Church in Sudly Castle at the beginning of these Wars, profaned?
Not only the Monuments of the Chandoises spoiled, but one part of the Church
converted to a Stable, whilst the other was little better than a Shambles, the
Pulpit being made the chief stall where the meat was hung up, and the
communion table served for a board to joint upon.

The Inhabitants of Weden-Pinkney in Northamptonshire cannot yet forget how Mr.
Loss their Minister was abused, whilst he was officiating, by the soldiers,
who rid into the Church and wounded the Minister because he would not go along
with them, they refusing to tell him by what authority they commanded him. An
action so wicked Quis homo est tanta confidentia, qui sacerdotem audeat
violare? Plaut. in Rud. Act. 3. scen. 2.
that the very heathens will rise up in judgment against them. And those of
Chelmsford in Essex, need no remembrancer, how their Church-windows (having the
History of Christ and the Scutchions of Been factors painted in them) were
battered down by the instigated rabble, who not content with this, laid violent
hands on Dr. Michelson their Parson, and rent the Common Prayer Book with a
great deal of joy. This reformed Merc. rust. page 26.
town, as my Author says, was governed by a Tinker, two Cobblers, two Tailors,
and two Pedlers.

How miserably was the ancient Cathedral Church at Winchester dealt withal,
the famous Monuments of the Dead utterly defaced, the bones of Kings, Bishops,
etc. thrown about the Church, the two famous Brazen Statues of King James and
King Charles erected at the entrance into the Quire, pulled down, the
Communion-Plate, books, hangings, cushions etc. seized upon and made away, the
Church-vestments put on by the heathenish soldiers, riding in that posture in
derision about the streets, some scornfully singing pieces of the Common Prayer
whilst others tooted upon the broken pieces of Organs. The stories of the old
and new Testament curiously beautified with colors, and cut out in carved
work, they utterly destroyed, against which wickedness the Prophet David of
old complained. Nor did the famous Organs Psalm. 74. 6.
escape their fury, being pulled to pieces and employed to private uses. As one
in York something advanced his houses (if my memory fail me not) with Organ and
Church-wood, which if he had turned into Looms and Shuttles, had been more
proper for his trade; And of the brass torn from violated Monuments, might
have been built a house as strong as the brazen Towers in some old Romances.
And after this manner was the Cathedral of Exceter served, where the
Commandments were defaced, the Common Prayer Book burnt, the glassewindows,
monuments, statues and organs broke; and the name of Jesus over the Communion
table blotted out, as superstitious.

Nor can some honest people of London yet forget the intolerable Hist.
Independ. par. 2. Sect. 216.
actions of the saint-like soldiers at St. Peter's Pauls-wharf [sunday 9 Sept.
1649] who rode into the said Church with swords drawn and pistols spann'd,
crying out, Knock the Rogues on the head, shoot them, kill them, which was
accordingly done, an old woman being shot into the head, and above 40 more
grievously wounded, and the Minister (Mr. Williams) hurried Prisoner to
White Hall. And all this, because the Common prayer established by the true Laws
of the Land, was read: whence my Author observes, that these Heretics, though
they loudly cry up Liberty of Conscience, yet will allow none to others, but
take all to themselves, the better to cloak their villainies with pretended
Religion and reformation.

The Cathedral of Chichester was sufficiently violated, being robbed of all her
vestments and plate, and not so much as a Cushion left in the pulpit, the
Organs and ten Commandments broke down and spoiled, the Pictures of the Kings
of England and Bishops of that See defaced, with the monuments, seats, stalls
and painted walls. And after the same manner was the Cathedral of Peterborough
used; and how Lichfield escaped is not unknown.

And their fury being once begun, no man can expect that the Metropolitan Dr.
Paske's his Letter to the Earl of Holland, August 1642.
Church of Canterbury could escape, where Coll. Sandys soldidiers barbarously
overthrew the Communion Table, tearing the velvet cloth from before it,
defacing the goodly Screen, violating the monuments of the dead, spoiling the
organs, breaking down the ancient rails and seats, with the brazen Eagle which
supported the Bible, tearing the surplices, gowns, bibles, and Arras hanging in
the Quire representing the whole story of our Savior; wherein observing diverse
figures of Christ, one said that here is Christ and swore, that he would stab
him, another said here is Christ and swore that he would rip up his Bowels,
which they did accordingly, so far as the figures were capable, and not
content with this, finding another Statue of our Savior in the Frontispiece of
the south-gate shot about forty shots at it, tryumphing much when they had hit
the head or face.

The ancient Cathedral of Durham can yet show her ruins, and can tell with
what unspeakable tyranny the Kings poor friends were used in it. And that of
Carlisle deplores the want of a part of its body, being ruined to be employed
in wicked War, whilst it was intended a house of prayer and peace. Nor is it
unknown how sacrilegiously that excellent structure of St. Paul's in London was
abused, making of it an Exchange where things may be bought and sold, not only
contrary to the Laws of God Mat, 21. 12, 13. Luke 19. 45. Joh. 2. 14, 15.
but also of man, and that not only of our own, but foreign Churches, as may
appear by several Canons against such violations. The laws of our Nation
expressly forbidding any Fair or Siquis apud ecclesiam mercaturam excerceat,
legis violatae poena, esto. Leg. Presb. Northumb. Sect. 20. Spelm. council. p,
497. Council. Constantinop. can. 86. Francisc. ad Coriolano sum. Council. page
602.
market to be held in Churchyards, and by consequence not in the Church it
self; so that a late writer said not amiss that one might well be amazed at
the genius of this age, that suffered this goodly and venerable fabric, to be
built about, and converted into rascally warehouses, and so sordidly abused
and defaced, that an Argument of greater avarice, The great Abridgment, in the
word Churchyard.
malice, meanness and deformity of mind, cannot possibly be expressed. -- England
is the sole spot in all the world, where amongst Christians their Churches are
made jakes, and stables, markets and tippling houses, and where there were more
need of Scorpions than Thongs to drive Charact. of Eng. p. 11, 12. Id. p. 13.
out the Publicans and Money changers. And that St. Paul's, by the wicked
reformers was converted into a stable is not unknown to it is Neighbors, which
iniquities and such like occasioned the Saying, That we had now a thorough
Reformation in England, since our horses also went to Church.

Yet some not content to have their horses in the Church, unless some other
villainy were done: witness the damnable wickedness of one Edwards Gangraen.
part. 3. p. 17, 18.
Captain Beamont who at Yakesly in Huntingtonshire [Anno. 1644.] having pist in
the Font, fetched his bold horse from Mr. Finnemores stable, and in derision of
Baptism sprinkled it on the horse, calling of him Ball Esau (because he was
hairy), and in scorn to the Church of England crossed him on the forehead; and to
make their villainy complete, one Robert Rayner Corporal acted the part of the
Minister, and would also have Godfathers; one Bartly Ward, but nicknamed
Widow Shropshire acting the part of a God-Mother. And thus did they also
baptize a Pig, and were so far from repenting at these villainies that they
boasted they had done the same in many other places. This unheard of impiety
would make Martinus de Olave dumb with astonishment, when many years ago he
bitterly exclaimed against Annon merito cum Propheta [Psal. 74.] nunc
exclamabimus, Quantum indignatus est inimicus in Sancto? Incenderunt sanctua
ium Dei, polluerum Tabernaculum ejus? Nisi forte levius est aedes sacras in
equorum ac ferarum, Religiosis viris ejectis, stabula convertisse. Orat. in
Synod. Augustana. Crab.
those who turned out the Reverend Divines, and kept the Church only to be
stables for horses and such like Beasts.

Nor did Westminster under the very nose of the Parliament, escape scot-free.
The soldiers breaking down the Organs, pawning the pipes of them for Ale,
eating, drinking, smoking Tobacco at the Communion Table, and easing
themselves in most parts of the Church; Nor was this all, but keeping their
whores in the Church, and lying with them upon the very Altar it self, if you
will believe the learned Author of Mercurius rusticus, who page 237.
will inform you more at large concerning some of the forementioned passages.
And here I shall not speak of the wicked selling of Church Lands by the
Parliament who had no authority to do so.

And this is the happy Reformation begun and intended by the wicked
long-Parliament, a pack of such impious Varlets, that they were forced to call
themselves Saints, because their neighbors could not. Yet for all their
Saint-ship, several of their Members were not only instigators but high Actors
of this Sacrilege, who though not here named, yet I suppose are as conscious
to themselves, as a great Lord was when the word Sectary was spoken by
Archbishop Land. Nor were the Members altogether divested of Sacrilege, when
they acted and voted so furiously against the King, Church, and good of the
Nation, in their house which was formerly St. Stephens Chapel.

And how well many of them have feathered their nests in Bishops lands is not
unknown. But goods thus got (as the Proverb says) will Clem. Spelman's Epist.
before his Fathers Book, De non temerand. Eccles.
never prosper. Of which none of the least examples is King Henry the eighth,
who although (besides the vast sum of Abbey Lands, and the 5100000 l. left him
by his father in ready money) received more from his Subjects by loans, taxes,
and subsidies, then all the Kings of England had in 500 years before, yet what
King was ever pressed with so much poverty (all things considered) as he was? who
about the 36 year of his reign (as one observes) of all the Kings of England
was forced to Id.
coin not only base Tin and Copper, but leather moneys. And it is observed
(as the same Author says) since the accession of Abbeys and Impropriations to
the Crown, even the Crown Lands (which formerly have been thought sufficient to
support the ordinary charge of the Crown) are since so wasted (though I hope
the Loyalty of our Parliaments will augment them) that they will scarce defray
the ordinary charge of the Kings household.

Nor has it happened otherwise with our wicked Long-Parliament, and their
sacrilegious adherents, who could never keep their accounts straight: for
though in the heat of the war they demanded not much above 50000 l. a month
to carry on their designs; yet in time of peace they could not observe just
scores, though they had 90000 l. and 100000 l. per mensem; and sold all the
Kings, and Bishops, and such like lands which amounted to a vast sum; besides
taxes, excise, customs, and such like commings in. Nor was this all, but they
had the composition moneys of (those they called) Delinquents, which consisted
of many thousand Loyal Subjects, and to what a vast sum this came to, may
somewhat be collected from this. If ten thousand men at two hundred The grand
Account. 1647.
pounds per annum, pay two years for Composition (for so the ordinance
appointed) which amounts to two Millions, to what an incredible sum will it
amount, when several of the Compounders estates were 2, 4, 6, 8, 10. (and some
above) thousand pounds a year. But if this sum was great, what was the
Decimation, Sequestration, and such like knacks of procuring monyes? And yet
poverty still pleaded, so that their Armies and Navies could not be paid! till
our Gracious Majesty did it for them: who though they hoorded up much moneys,
and lands to themselves, yet the ever blessed divine Providence, has now
brought them to give an account to the Loyal, Royal, and Rightful owners. And
such or a worse Exit let there always fall upon all sacrilegious persons. To
whom as man has appointed severe judgments, so will not the all seeing and
ever-just Almighty be backward Photius Nomocon Tit. 2. fine Weavers Fun. Mon.
p. 42.
in requiting such prefidious and sacrilegious villains according to their
iniquity: who, I hope, will swallow down the Ophiusian herb as fast as the
Church patrimony, that the dread or terror of their consciences shall either
force them to restore the unjustly detained Lands and riches; Alex. ab Alex.
lib. 3. cap, 5.
or, Hoyl-like to swing their own requiem, for the better example and terror of
posterity.

CHAP. VI.
That some, through ignorance, and a credulous disposition, (prompting them to
embrace their specious Pretenses) might be charmed to side with the Parliament,
though really they designed no damage either to the King's Person, nor
Authority.

TO vindicate Rebellion (as has been the unhappy mode of late) is the worst
office that can be done to a Nation; yet to make all it is partakers of equal
guilt, will be a token of no great share of charity. I am apt to believe, that
hitherto there has never been any war, but some men as well of honest
intentions, as others knavishly-designed, have been of both sides. It is not
all men that rightly understand the frame by which they are governed, either
the Prerogative of the Supreme, or their own Privileges; and it is but few can
see into the contriving hearts of their neighbors. A harmless woman may be
deceived into the reality of the Actors, at the Hostel de Bourgogue in Paris,
or an English Playhouse: and it is no difficult thing, under the specious vail
of Religion, and Common good, to make many people believe, that actions which
are really the most wicked, tend to the best; like the Physician in the Fable,
who made his Patient think, that every Temper he was in, was still for his
health. By these insinuations increases the number of Heretics, and Rebels,
many being rather misled, then acting out of design, being not so much used for
any benefit to themselves, as ignorant instruments to promote their flattering
Grandees to the desired Haven of Supremacy; and, this once obtained are either
thrown by, as Day-labourers when the work is done, as needless, and
impertinent; or as ingratefully rewarded as Trebellius King of Bulgaria was by
the most unfortunate Grimston. Emp. Hist. page 360. 361.
Emperor Justinian the second.

As I showed before, that the pretended squeamish stomachs of the
Non-conformists, were, as Peter the Hermit, the first Trumpet to sound Alarm
to this supposed holy war; setting the Lecturers up to teach Nonconformity;
schism, and disobedience, the forerunners of Rebellion: so were the tongues,
and pens of this Novel Covenanting fraternity, the main instruments that
infused disloyalty into the peoples hearts: which the Parliament did not only
approve of, but also protect, (thereby gaining infinite Proselytes) as the
Devil in the Northern Coasts does his subjects, by making them invulnerable.
And these they feed up, and nourish with strange fears, (more fantastical then
Lazarellos, when he thought the dead man would be carried to his Master's
house) strongly fomented, and agitated by unheard of Plots, set a foot to
destroy Religion, and Nation; like the Roterdam-ship, which would kill the
English under water, and all this upon worsegrounds, and reasons, then the
influence of a Talisman.

Though nothing was more false, and impudent then these pretended dangers, yet
what by the authority, and countenance of those Grandees, who patronized such
rumors; and what by the power which the Tubthumping boute-feus had over the
peoples inclinations, and judgments, (whereby the Pulpit became the worst thing
in the Nation) many had not only a bad opinion of the King, but thought very
well of the Parliament, who in all their actions were far more sedulous then
his Majesty; but most of all (as a hindg upon which themselves, and designs
hung,) in sending forth their papers to abuse the people, by making the King's
actions odious, and their own for the best. And of this they 4 Jun. 1642.
took special care, not only by appointing a Committee to consider of the most
convenient way to disperse them, and to give an allowance to their Messengers,
but also by taking care by Order, that every Petty Constable, or Tythingman
throughout England, shall have one of every one 6 June 1642.
of their Orders, Declarations, etc. and to read them publicly to their
neighbors. And how these flattering papers, might work in the Country, where
they commonly believe all that is in Print, is easily to be imagined;
considering that most of them heard but the reasons of one Party, the
Parliament taking a special care by Declaration, that nothing 4 July.
which came from the King should be received, or permitted to be read. Whilst
the Parliamentarian-papers flew plentiful about the Nation, ^^t popularis
gratia, and secunda fama accederet, Prelis conductitiis, and scriptoribus
dispositis, res little omnes gestae miris efferuntur elogiis, Mercu riisque,
hebdo matim, and triobolaribus Diariis, populo fabularum avido obtruduntur
legenda, Elench Mot. page 90.
swollen with big praises of their worships, the better to captivate the ignoran^
people to their Lure, who are naturally of themselves apt to gape after any
novelty, or change; especially when any gain is like to be had by it; as there
was in this undertaking, they knowing that Plundering would be permitted them;
and the Parliament assuring them, that if they received any damage, it should
be repai'd them out of the estates of their enemies.

By these ways, the Country was droled into an high conceit of the Parliament;
and nothing stuck with those of the more wise, and honest sort, but the word
Treason; which they knew they should incur, by assisting the Parliament against
the King. But this doubt was presently wipt away in the opinion of many, by the
Parliaments distinction betwixt the Ex coll. 727.
Person, and Office of a King; as also by their daily protestations at the
beginning of the Wars: That they fought not against the King, but against his
wicked Council. Of which Protestations [in 1642.] I shall give you a taste,
whereby you may the better distinguish between their tongues, and hearts.

And first, we shall give you the Vote by which the Army was first ordered to
be raised; which was thus,

Resolved upon the Question, That an Army shall be forthwith raised, 12. July
1642.
for the safety of the King's Person, defense of both houses of Parliament, and
those who have obeyed their Orders, and Commands: and preserving of the true
Religion, the Laws, Liberty, and Peace of the Kingdom.

And to confirm the people in their intentions for the preservation of the
King, they thus profess, and protest.

-- House of Commons your Loyal Subjects, who are ready to lay Proposit. 31.
Dec. 1641.
down their lives and fortunes, and spend the last drop of their blood, to
maintain your Crown, and Royal Person; and greatness, and glory. --

-- And they pray your Majesty to rest assured, that they will always Decla.
16. Mar. 1641/2.
be tender of your Honor, and Reputation with your good Subjects. --

-- We seek nothing but your Majesty's Honor, and Peace, and the Petit. 26.
Mar.
Prosperity of your Kingdoms. --

-- Their earnest intentions, and endeavors, to advance your Majesty's Ibid.
Service, Honor, and Contentment, etc.

-- Do resolve to preserve, and govern the Kingdom, by the Counsel Petit. 8.
April.
and Advice of the Parliament, for your Majesty, and your Posterity, according
to our Allegiance, and the Law of the Land.

-- As if there could be a greater care in them (the King's friends Declar. 28.
Apr.
at York) of his Majesty's Royal Person, then in his Parliament.

-- The services which we have been desirous to perform to our Sovereign
Declaration on Remonstrance 19. May.
Lord the King, and to his Church, and State; in proceeding for the public
peace, and prosperity of his Majesty, and all his Realms: Within the presence
of the same all-seeing Diety, we Protest to have been, and still to be, the
enely end of all our counsels, and endeavors; wherein we have Resolved to
continue freed, and enlarged from all private
aims, personal respects, or passion whatsoever.

-- Who in all their Counsels, and Actions, have proposed no other Resol. 20.
May.
end unto themselves, but the care of the Kingdoms, and the performance of all
Duty, and Loyalty to his Person.

-- Your Majesty's most humble, and faithful Subjects, the Lords Petit. 2. June.
and Commons in Parliament, having nothing in their thoughts, and desires, more
precious, and of higher esteem, (next to the honor, and immediate service of
God) then the just and faithful performance of their duty to your Majesty, and
this Kingdom.

-- We the Lords, and Commons are resolved to expose our lives, and Declar. 1.
Aug.
fortunes for the defense, and maintenance of true Religion, the King's Person,
Honor, and Estate. --

-- Will really endeavor to make both his Majesty, and Posterity, as great,
rich, and potent; as much beloved at home, and feared abroad, as Declarat. and
Resolut. Aug.
any Prince that ever swayed this Scepter, which is their firm, and constant
Resolution.

-- And you shall declare unto all men, that it has been, and still shall
Advice and Direct. to Sir W. Brereton, 18. Aug.
be, the care, and endeavor of both Houses of Parliament, to provide for his
Majesty's safety.

-- Concerning the Allegations, that the Army raised, by the Parliament, is, to
Murder, and depose the King; we hoped the Contrivers of that Declaration, or
any that professed but the name of a Christian, could Declar. October.
not have so little charity, as to raise such a scandal: especially when they
must needs know the Protestation taken by every Member of both Houses, whereby
they promise in the Presence of Almighty God to defend his Majesty's Person.
The Promise, and Protestation made by the Members of both Houses, upon the
nomination of the Earl of Essex to be General, and to live, and dye with him;
wherein is expressed that the Army was raised for the Defense of the King's
Person.

-- And we have always desired from our hearts, and souls, manifested in our
Actions; and, in many humble Petitions, and Remonstrances Declar. 22. Oct.
to his Majesty, professed our Loyalty, and Obedience to his Crown; readiness,
and resolution to defend his person, and support his Estate, with our lives and
fortunes, to the uttermost of our power.

-- We call God to witness, that though our quarrel be against the Declar. 2.
Nov.
Malignant party, for his Majesty's sake, yet not in that sense as is here
affirmed, but out of our Loyalty, and affection to his Majesty: -- Shall not
the frequent protestations of both Houses of Parliament for his Majesty's
security, to the utmost power that the Law can give to them, or they unto the
Law, -- be sufficient to take away the pretense of danger to his Majesty's
Person? -- To think they [i. e. the Militia or Army] would have followed us in
any Act of dis-loyalty against his Majesty, if we should have been so wicked,
as to have had them to do it.

Thus you see, what glorious protestatious are here for the preservation of the
King, which, I dare boldly say, did engage many honest men to join with the
Parliament; really dreaming that those men, who have thus so solemnly vowed
before the Almighty to preserve the King, and Laws, must be men of public
honest spirits, and not to be drawn, though by chains of gold, the wealth of
Peru, or East Indies, to the magnifying of their own Interest, and the
relinquishing of that public Good to which they have tied themselves by so
many oaths. And after the same manner did the City of London declare themselves
by Petition: Yet let their Promises, Vows, or Protestations be never so many, a
French Poet sings not amiss,

S'il promen, and s'il rit de sa promise fail, Colletet. Epigra. page 118.

C'est qu'il en jure en Amant, ou qu'il parle en Poet.
He that does swear, and never means to do it,
Swears like a Lover, or sings like a Poet.
And really (if experience may be a rule) it is more then probable, that many of
the Members had learned the Jesuit's rule, by them called The Direction of the
Intention, whereby you may do any wickness, if you propose to your self a good
intent.

And after this manner has our former Rebels blanched over their designs: Wat
Tyler, and his Companions, pretended only to act against Stow. Chron. p. 292.
col. 1.
King Richards the seconds evil Counsel; but if they had once got to have been
Masters, their intentions were to have killed the King, and Nobility. Jack
Cade, and his rabble, under the color of holy and good intents, raised a
Rebellion against King Henry the sixth; and what Id. 381. col. 2.
iniquities such rubbish of humanity would have acted, if they had been
Masters, is not known. The Cornish rusticks, under the notion to deliver King
Henry the seventh from evil Council, raised a Rebellion. And Bacons Hen. 7.
page 164. The Tale of the Nonne priest. fol. 103. 8.
the subtle Fox in Chaucer, professed he only came to hear the Cock sing; but
when by that craft he had once got hold of him, the case, and story was altered.

And after this deceitful manner acted the Parliament, if you will give any
credit to one of the King's greatest enemies, who thus informs us, -- So
powerful, persuasive, and contentful, were their first Engagements, Papers, and
Remonstances; so fraught with self-denying doctrines, England's New Chain.
part. 2. page 2.
tender regard to the peace of the Nation, and satisfaction to all Interests;
as even lulled all peaceable people into a sound sleep of security, casting all
the care upon the General Council of the Army; as upon a people they thought,
could never have the face to decline either these principles, or to neglect the
performance of so many Engagements, Promises, and Protestations, made as in the
presence of the All-seeing God; frequently calling upon him, the searcher of
all hearts, to bear witness to their integrity, and sincerity therein: Insomuch
that we (who always with some wissness observed them) many times denied our own
understandings, rather then we would draw hasty conclusions, from evident
testimonies of their defection. And this principle of believing, but especially
their public multiplied affections for the preservation of the King, were the
motions which led Major General Massey to join himself to the Parliament, His
short Declarat. 1647. page, 3.
as himself declares; and that they led many others, is more then probable.

We see by experience that Religion is rooted into some men, not so much by
good, and true reason; as by birth, and education: the which, if after they
change, is as often for the worse as the contrary. It Is custom, and fashion that
over-powers, or rather overthrows the rationality of all men. The Indian women
of Tiembas, have always torn, and bloody Purchase Pilg. part. 4. p. 1349.
faces; by which lacerating, they judge themselves most beautiful: The Goths
gloried in a tall corpulent King; on the contrary, the Saracens liked none,
unless he were little, and lean. Custom has made it as natural to a British
Presbyterian (as it is to all Schismatics) to babble up sedition, as to the
Spaniard to court gravity, whilst their neighboring French affect an active
airyness: The Teneriff, or Pico, shall sooner shrink to Mole-hills, the name of
the Escurial be forgot, and the great Tun at Heidleburgh filled with
Renish-wine, but a mornings draught to a Pigmie, then a Nonconformist cease
from being disobedient, or our Disciplinarians (as if they had been stuffed with
a Jo. Episcop. Gerundens Paralipom. Hisp. l. 2. cap. 7.
Biscayners ignorance, and spirit) from hating, and persecuing our lawful
government of Bishops; and how sedulous, and crafty they have been, to inveagle
themselves into other men's affections, is not unknown.

Many who take exception at Government, can produce no other reason for their
dissent, but because others do so too; so that to sin with company is thought
by them rather a glory then shame. If a great man take distaste at Majesty, he
is confident to have most of his Relations, and Servants of his opinion; being
apt to run as blindly into their Master's quarrel, as their own ruin. Nor is it
a difficult thing among such variety of humors, to entise some into the
greatest wickedness; some men's Pet. Borellus Hist. and observat. Cent, 3. Sect.
1. and 67.
malice so far overclouding their reason, that like Le Faucheur, and Chauvinus,
they destroy those spectacles which should give them a sight, and knowledge of
truth, and reality of the business, by the malignity and wicked humors of
their eyes and spirits. Other men, though their Grandeur of estate, or
affection with the people, may after espouse them to be ringleaders of the
rabble; yet at first were rather entised themselves, then they the instruments
of others wickedness. Juam de Padilla's fault was, that he was young, good
natured, and so easily wrought Sandoval. l. 5. Sect. 16.
upon by his haughty wife. Donna Maria Pacheco, to rebel against Charles the
fifth. And many others have been led the same way. It Is observed that Dod Pedro
Lasso's sweet disposition, love to justice, and public good, engaged him in
the same quarrel, being noted for one clearly Id. Sect. 23.
without malice; but by the Inhabitants of Toledo hugged into Treason: and what
influence great Cities have upon the people, London knows too too well.

Many men through the hatred of some other person, by way of Revenge, (and what
more sweet, and enticing?) may be drawn into Factions; and so to espouse a bad
quarrel, to work their malice upon private enemies; as the Venavides and
Caravajales, two noble familes in Castile; Id. l. 6. Sect. 7.
or the Feuds, anciently in use in Scotland; and thus the Duke of Matalone,
(the chief of the Caraffa's) falling out with the Prince of Sanza at Howel's
Hist. Naples. Append. page 39, 40.
a Ball, had like to have brought their private injuries into a public
hostility, to the trouble of the Kingdom of Naples: Thus the insupportable
malice of private men may be a public detriment; as, the breach between the
English and French, was not a little widened by the hatred, and brags of the
Lord Cords, who used to say, that he could be content to Bacons Hen. 7. page
97.
lie in Hell for seven years, so he might win Calice from the English. And to
these I may add Don Pedro de Ayala, Earl of Salvatierra, who, through the
enmity betwixt him and his Lady Margarita, whom the Court favored against him,
and therefore by way of opposition, was invited to side with the Commonalty,
against the Emperor. In which case the late Earl of Essex, by a favorable
construction, was not much different: Sandoval. l. 8. Sect. 19.
Yet far is it from me to vindicate these men's actions, but rather to mitigate
some by considering the powerfulness of persuasion, it being natural for a man
to run into errors, and mistakes; and if of his own Temper he be so prone to
vice, how easy is it to draw him thither, when he is made more flexible by the
subtle allurements of his seeming best friends.

Many men who have been most serviceable, and loyal, have, at first, through
mistakes, slipped into some faults. De la Force run himself so much Howel's Hist.
Lewis 13. p. 52.
into the displeasure of Lewis the thirteenth King of France, that he was
proclaimed Traitor; but afterward did so recover his Reputation with his
Majesty, that he received the Trunchion to be Marshal of France; and grew to be
a great favorite. Sir Robert Clifford was a great adhearer to Bacon's Hist.
Hen. 7. p. 132.
Perkin Werbeck; but upon the sight of his error, became very advantageous to
King Henry the seventh, in discovering the King's enemies. The Macedonian
soldiers, did once muteny, and that in a furious manner Q. Curt. l. 10. Sect.
4.
against Alexander; but when they had considered the greatness of their crime,
they came weeping to him, and that in such an humble manner, confessing their
faults, and desiring his favor, and pardon, that story will scarce allow such
another president: And the King did not only Alex. ab Alex. page 124.
forgive them, but satisfied their former desires, by sending many of them
home; where, by his special Command, they were honored, not only by having
the chief places in Theaters, but with Crowns also. The Athenians would pardon
him who confessed his fault: And the Abbot Serapion conquered the Devil, by
acknowledging the sin of Theft, frequent with him when young. If a woman by the
true repentance of Marula, p. 297. Caesarius l. 2. c. 11.
her most horrid iniquity, obtained the pardon of Pope Innocent; The King's
grace, and favor will not be wanting to those, who by their timely repentance
denote the reality, whilst those who stave off the acknowledgement of their
offense to the last, can in reason expect no hopes of reconciliation, their
repentance being so late, that it demonstrates rather a juggling, and
time-serving humor; then a true, and genuine remorse. The Noble Earl of
Montross, that Scottish Oak and regal Buckler of fidelity and valor; at first
was as much peccant as the greatest Covenanter, yet none proved afterward more
faithful to his Majesty, and active against his former associates (because the
King's enemies) then himself. The great Earl of Strafford, and Attorney General
Noy, were looked upon at first, great courters of the Commonalty, and
dis-regarders of Prerogative, yet upon better insight became the greatest
admirers of the King's Authority. And I have heard of those who have so far
grieved for their former actions, that they have wished themselves breathless,
when they first drew sword for the Parliament.

It is repentance that does please God himself; and Kings (who are truly
called God's upon Earth) have received into favor their greatest enemies, upon
remorse of their former villainies. Yet all men's intellectuals do not so
sympathize as to perceive their errors at the same time. Some with Sir F.
Fortescue, may know themselves erroneous at the first onset, others (as we have
too frequent examples) are so stiff neck't opinionated, that they will not be
convinced of their guilt, till their appearance before the greatest, and last
Tribunal. As for the first, they deserve pardon, and favor, because they deal
ingenuously, and like men of reason, and nobleness; whilst the latter merit the
severity of laws, and scorn. And as I cannot plead for these, so shall I never
for those, who did not only oppose all Treaties with the King; but those also,
who, when any such thing was obtained, still shoved it off, by uncivil,
impudent, and abominable Propositions; framed, either for the prolonging of
war, and bloodshed, or the reducing of his Majesty to be but a King of Clouts;
and so under the obedience, and lash of their Schismatical Presbyterian
Tyranny: from which scourge, I hope these three Kingdoms, and all good people,
will for the future be delivered.

THE HISTORY Of the Wicked PLOTS and CONSPIRACIES OF OUR Pretended Saints. BOOK
III.
CHAP. I.
That the Presbyterians were not, willingly and actively, Instrumental for the
uncapitulated restoration of his Majesty.

I Have often smiled at the Story of an old Knight, who, in the small space of
one Battle, changed his opinion twice; and that with so much zeal, and
vehemence, as to cry out [when his Clerk brought him news, that Prince Rupert
had beat his enemies,] O the goodness of God! that will not suffer Traitors to
prosper! Those who fight against their King; must expect to have God for their
enemy, etc. And a Posset must be made too, to cherish up the wearied spirits of
the Messenger. Yet scarce had finished his discourse against the wickedness of
Rebellion; when, being truly assured of the mistake of his former information,
and that the Parliament remained victorious, he alters his note, and bauls out,
O the Gospel! the Gospel! the Gospel! Blessed be God, who has thus put to
shame the enemies of Reformation! O! had the Malignants got the better, we
should have had Popery restored again: But, O the goodness of God, who has
thus dispersed the members, and rags, of Antichrist! etc. And after this
manner did Master Gawen Hamilton who at Edinbourgh, when the Victory seemed to
incline to the Queen Regent, Hist. Reformat. of Scotlond, page 203.
abused those of the Kirk; but when the French were at last forced to retreat,
turned his coat, and fought against the Queen Regent's party with all
vehemence. Old Savill, in the Play, rather then lose his beloved bunch of Keys,
would comply with any thing; and how far a Presbyterian would stretch his
Conscience, rather then lose Authority, must be left to judgment: for I am apt
to believe, that many of them, are not unlike Paulet the old Marquess of
Winchester, who would rather bow Ortus sum ex Salice non ex Quercu.
then break, being always of the King's Religion.

I have known some in these late times, seriously deny any difference betwixt
the Ministry, and Laity; and yet upon this last change, have called those
irrational, who questioned the jus divinum of Episcopacy. And how many of our
Presbyterians have declared their perpetual adhearing to their Covenant against
our present Church Government? yet, since the Change, have taken contrary
preferments, with a pretty distinction, that they only swore against the
wickedness, accidentally happening to such forms. These Non-conformists, have
been originally the main enemies (as far as sword would go) against the late
King, and This present; yet now, that he is restored, none courts the rising
Sun-more then they, and that, with thwacking Rodomantado's of their activity
for his Restoration, and what danger, and jeopardy, they have incurred for his
cause: which puts me in mind of the first Reformation in Scotland, Hist.
Reformat. of Scotland, page 38.
When the Scriptures were allowed to be read in English; then those who had
ever scarce read ten sentences of it, would chop their acquaintances on the
cheek with it, and say, This has lain under my beds feet these ten years.
Others would glory, O! how often have I been in danger for this book! How
secretly have I stolen from my wife at midnight, to read upon it? All which was
done merely to curry favor, the Governor being then held one of the most
servent Protestants in Europe: And how far this story quadrates with our
Presbyterian temper, may be seen by the sequel discourse.

I have seen some men in the Rump's time, when condemned to death for Felony,
by the then Judges; earnestly plead their former siding with, and activity for
the Parliament, thinking thereby to gain so much favor from the Judge, (who
had been formerly brothers in one and the same iniquity) as the procurement of
a Reprieve, if not a pardon: But now, the plea is so much altered, that the
same Faction, pretends to hold forth some small favors to the present King, as
a badge to denote the bearers so stuffed with Loyalty, as to be capable of the
greatest trust. When the Father was alive, then, they fought against him, to
make him more glorious: And now that the Son's restored, they only sent the
Earl of Warwick to pelt him beyond seas, to learn humility, because Affliction,
and Presbytery, are the best Tutors to that virtue: For, rather then He, or his
Father, should suffer any real damage, or hurt, they would do -- just nothing.
Which cal^s to my remembrance the flatterer. Afranius, who swore to Caligula
then sick, that he would willingly dye, so the Emperor might recover; who,
upon Caligula's restoration to health, was by command slain, that he might not
be for sworn. Whether Afranius meant really or no, I know not, but this I am
confident of, That our Presbyterians, take little care of any oaths tending to
the safety, and peace of King, and Country; and therefore take what liberty
they please to protest, knowing his Majesty's mercy is such, that he had rather
give them time to repent, for their former wickedness, and perjury, then put a
period to their beings by the mode of Trussing; as they had done formerly to
many of his most faithful Subjects.

Americus Vespacian, the Florentine, had the confidence to denominate the best
Continent of the West Indies by his name, though, if he had not had the benefit
of Colono, or Colombo, (of Genua) his observations, he might as soon (it is
probable) have found out Nigra Rupis, or the certain Station of Ophir, as have
seen that other world. And if the ever to be honored Duke of Albermarle, had
not contrived, and, as I may say, of himself wrought out the happy Restoration
of his Majesty; The Brethren, alas! would as soon have found out the ten
tribes, as of themselves endeavored the King's return; unless upon Tyrannical
Conditions. So that if Virgil took it ill, that Bathyllus had robbed him of the
honor, but of one Distick; the Duke of Albermarle has no reason to favor
those people, who would pluck from him, the greatest glory, that in possibility
could be thrown upon a Subject.

If the Presbyterians did any thing advance his Majesty's Restoration, it must
either be by Chance, or Industry.

As for the first, they cannot expect any thanks; since this event proceeded
not from resolution, but rather contrary to their desire, or at least
expectation. The Ape little thought, by putting on his Master's Cap to cure him
of a Pluresy; and he who wrote to the Lord Monteagle, did not think thereby to
discover the Gunpowder plot. The Surgion had no intention to destroy Charles
II. King of Navarre, by burning the thread too carelessly; and what resolutions
the Presbyterians had to restore our Charles II, I must yet plead ignorance,
till better informed: but I am confident they would never willingly, have this
way pleasured King Charles the first.

And that they, ever so much troubled their thoughts, with the King, as to make
his Restoration a part of their business; is hitherto as far from my
discovery, as the true situation of the old Towns in Ptolemy, or the Northern
bounders of America. I hear not of any of their actions in England, when his
Majesty was beyond seas, before his agreement with the Scots; I hear of none of
their designs here, to assist the King, or their own Brethren for him, in
Scotland. I know of no assistance that they afforded, or brought to the King,
when he marched for Worcester; but have heard of some, who have then opposed
him with all their might: Nor am I informed of their activeness, in any of the
many Plots against Oliver; and if, in none of these things they have been
stirring, their Grand Plea of Loyalty must fall to the ground; unless they did
his Majesty good service, by being obedient, and faithful subjects to the
Rump, and Oliver, sworn enemies to the King: and in this case their plea cannot
be so ingenious, as that of the immortal Poet John Cleaveland. Petition to
Oliver. Jardin de Flores, Colloq. 3. page 29.
I remember Antonio de Torquemeda tells a story of some men, and their horses,
that were carried to Granada in Spain, by the advantage of one Cloak, though
they thought they had only been getting their dinners, not thinking of such a
journey. And if the Presbytery did any service for the King, it was I suppose
after this manner, when they never dreamed of it.

Nay I do not so much as hear the whispering of any relief [till the other day]
of moneys, or such like conveniences, that they assisted the King with, or any
of his distressed followers, Major General Massey, and Captain Titus excepted:
and that but a poor pittance too, some 400l. between them, not for any design,
but a supply of personal necessities. And the reason of this beggarly
liberality, was not so much, because they were sufferers for the King, as that
the former had done good services for the Presbyterian Parliament, as Master
Love himself does Narrative.
more then hint; besides this, we will not forget the huge sum of 40l. to
Coll. Bampfield, and his man.

Yet as a pretty token of their Loyalty, they keep a great deal of clutter,
concerning the actions of Master Love, and a few of his associates, as if this
were sufficient, to afford scraps of Loyalty to every particular Member of that
Faction. But to this may be answered.

First, that if the story were, as absolute Royal as man could imagine, yet
will it only demonstrate that there were some three or four and twenty
Presbyterians, which were active for the good of his Majesty, no more stirring
in it, as Master Love himself does confess, being utterly unknown to the rest
of their party: professing upon the Scaffold that Narrat. p. 8.
the saying the contrary, is only a politic Engine to make the Presbyterian
party odious; so that the actions of these men are nothing to Speech Sect. 11.
the vindication of the rest. Besides, complete Loyalty they looked upon as
odious.

But secondly, the complete honor of the story, may, upon very good grounds,
in the main be questioned: For though they did sometimes meet at Master Love's
house, yet their Consultations were rather for the misery, then benefit of
King, Church, or Kingdom: The main of their contrivances, being to send to
some about his Majesty; advising them by all means, to use their interests to
Provoke Him [i. e. the King] to agree with the Scots, and to take the Covenant:
as also to advise Narrat. p. 8.
the Scots Commissioners, that, in their agreement with their King, they should
have a special respect to the Interest of Religion, and Terms of the Covenant;
and to this purpose they must tumble out their prayers, and send into Scotland
to know whether they did maintain Religion, and Covenant Narrat. p. 9, 10.
Interest. So that the Scots were not only guilty of their after Covenanting
Tyranny with their betters, but the English Brethren also by their thus
thrusting on the design.

Hitherto, we see all the Loyalty, and affection by these men showed to their
Sovereign, was merely conditionally, and that upon a Covenantaccount; little
beneficial to the King, or his Party, as may appear by the acknowledgement of
one of their Patrons, viz. Mr. Love.

I do retain as vehement a detestation of Malignancy, whether in England,
Narrat. p. 14.
or in Scotland, as ever I did; and shall in my place and calling oppose such a
Design and Interest with as much zeal and faithfulness, as ever.

Nor was his rancour toward the Kings best friends staid here; but, even upon
the Scaffold, just before his death, as if thereby, he intended to proclaim
them odious to Posterity, he thus endeavors to charm his Auditors.

I dye with my judgment set against Malignity, I do hate both name Speech.
sect. 13.
and thing, I shall retain as vehement a detestation of a Malignant Interest,
as ever I did.

And, what he meant by a Malignant, himself shall declare, though it is well
enough understood.

I do not count the godly party, our Covenanting Brethren in Scotland, Ib.
I do not count them a Malignant Party. But who then? he presently thus tells
you, My judgment then was, and still is, for bringing Id. sect. 14.
Malignants, who did seduce him, [i. e. King Charles the first], and draw him
from the Parliament, to condign punishment. And the best friends his Majesty
had Beyond Sea with him, he calls desperate Malignants, Narrat p. 6, 7,
and bad Council; so that I believe, little honor can be attributed to this
Conventicle for what they did.

However, if through civility, though not any share of merit, we should grant,
that this little meeting was of a greater consequence, for the benefit of the
King, than it either was, or could be imagined, though Mr. Love does protest,
in the presence of God, the searcher of all Petition. 11. July. 1651.
hearts, that he knows no Plot or Design against the present Government, [i.
e. Rump]; nor is he privy in the least, to any preparations for, or intendments
toward, any intestine Insurrections, or foreign Invasions; or to any
Correspondencies now held with any in, or of, the Scottish Nation, or any other
whatsoever: Though, I say, some credit were given to this Design, yet will it
not advance the reputation of the contrivers, considering their
after-submission to the Rump, calling them the Supreme Authority, the
Parliament of the Commonwealth of England, etc. Mr. Love professing, That he
is unfaignedly sorry for his so acting; and promises never to plot, contrive,
or design, any Petition.
thing to the hurt of this present Government [Rump], and that he is sorrowful
for his high crimes, and offenses against the Parliament in his late and great
miscarriages, and desires them to Narrat p. 13.
pass by these sundry and great offenses, and, at last, thus fairly concludes,
That, I shall devote Narrat. p. 14.
the remainder of my days, to the glory of God, and good of his people, the
peace and safety of this Commonwealth, against all the Malignant Enemies and
opposers thereof. Nor did he alone recant, but also Jenkins, Case, and others
of the same Club.

Here we see a Company of Penitents, hanging down their heads, as if upon a
Scottish-stool of Repentance, acknowledging their Iniquity and sins [for
talking of the King] with a great deal of remorse and sorrow: faithfully
promising for the future to live obedient subjects to their Rumpships, and all this to procure the favor and love, of those Usurping and King-killing Tyrants.

Yet, when Love saw, that all his whining and puleing would not work his
Pardon, but that they were resolved to let him blood; Then, forsooth, he
thought it best, to put a good face upon the business; and, so being on the
Scaffold, and perceiving no hopes of life, he plucks up his courage, and, for
the credit of himself, and Brethren, he begins to ^ant dapperly against the
Rump: affirming, (for all his former repentance), That for the things I am
condemned, neither God nor mine Speech. sect. 9.
own Conscience condemn me; -- and, I would not be looked Id. sect. 15.
upon as a man owning this present Government, I dye with my judgment against
it: and, at last, calls himself a Id. sect. 25.
Martyr. Though he had a little before acknowledged, Petition.
himself guilty of the sentence of death, justly passed on him. And affirmed,
that he was Narrat. p. 13.
ensnared into the business, and Petit. 2.
that through unadvisedness and weakness: yet this compliance he boldly denies
upon the Scaffold: I am accused to be an Apostate, to Speech. sect. 13.
be a Turn-coat, to be this, to be that, to be any thing, but what I am; but, a
long Sword, a bloody Scaffold, has not made me in the least to alter my
Principles. The truth of which, I must leave to the Reader; only telling him,
that the Margaiates in America, scorn to submit to their Jo. Lerius Navigat. in
Brasil. cap. 15.
Enemies, because they know; that it will not save their lives; though
probably, if repentance would be an advantage, they might be as ready as
others: If Mr. Love dyed a Martyr, it was as unwillingly as ever man did; it
being the Rumps resolution, for example sake, not his constancy, that brought
him to the Block.

In plain English, the man was of a hasty and violent spirit, which seldom has
a rational or sound foundation: and by many is accused to be the breaker up of
the Uxbridge-Treaty, by his ranting Sermon, of which Relat. of the passages of
the Treaty. sect. 27, 28, 29, 30.
Preachment the Kings Commissioners complained, though to small purpose, as
appears by the Answers: yet, I shall willingly quit him from this, knowing,
that neither the Parliament, nor their Commissioners, would be guided by his
prattling; and being fully satisfied, that the Parliament never really intended
a Peace, unless they had thereby reduced the King to a Royal slave, or worse,
and have got liberty for themselves to have acted Treason and Tyrannized over
the poor Nation cum Privilegio; and this was the design of all their
counterfeited Treaties. Yet I must needs acknowledge, that Mr. Love, did what
in him lay to dissolve the Peace, as is palpable from the wicked and malicious
assertions and admonitions laid down by him in that Sermon, concluding it --
Whiles our Enemies go on in their wicked practices, and Chr. Love' s Englands
Distemper. p. 9. 42.
whiles we keep our Principles, we may as soon make Fire and Water to agree, and
(I had almost said) reconcile Heaven and Hell, as their spirits and ours;
either they must grow better, or we must grow worse, before it is possible for
us to agree. Words denoting such a malignant principle, that I am willing, to
quit those, whom he and the rest of his gang are pleased to call so; by putting
the Saddle on the right Horse, and attributing the Epithet to himself.

I might here also intimate some of his sacrilegious vapors, by discoursing
upon his extravagant reproaches thrown upon the Church of England, which I am
confident, might lawfully defend herself, by force of Arms, against the impious
actions of her spurious Antagonists, if that be true which Mr. Love affirms,
viz. That it is an hurtful Opinion England' s Distemper. p. 17.
to imagine, that the people might not do so against their Sovereign. I shall
conclude with our supposed Martyr, by asserting, that he who had the ignorance,
blind-zeal, and impudence, to term Episcopacy and the Common Prayer Book the
two Plague-sores, several times in one Preachment, had need have set-Forms of
Sermons enjoined him, as well as Prayers; And the Presbyterian House of
Commons, who cleared Mr. Love from any slander, for prattling such stuff, did
plainly demonstrate, what little desire, they had for Peace, and thereby
intimated their abominable hypocrisy to the whole world; since the Sermon
(pardon the giving it so good a Title) seemed more like an Harangue, to
encourage the People to a bloody slaughter, [and it is not unknown, how often he
mentioned the necessity of drawing bloud] than the imbracement of a happy and
settled Peace.

Having thus sufficiently proved Mr. Love to be no such Martyr, as his
Fraternity flab out (though much more might be enlarged upon this Subject), and
upon every discourse fly to him, as a sufficient Asylum, where they think they
may handsomely secure a Reputation: I shall now say something to another
Objection, whose main force lies upon the credit of the Covenant, and so may
with its Dam sleep with ignominy, rather than be held forth as a badge of
honesty.

In this plea, they boast much in their taking the Covenant, in which there is
one clause, for the Preservation of the Kings Person; to which Crofton's
Fastening of St. Peter's Fetters. page 146, 147.
League, one of their Chieftains, brags, that above 600. Ministers did
subscribe.

To which I shall answer, that if he glory in the number; 600. is but a poor
Bed-role in respect of 10000. for about so many Ministers are there in England:
But again, the taking of this Covenant, is no consequence of a good and loyal
Subject, but rather the contrary, being against the Kings express command. But
again, It is not the taking of an Oath, (provided it be a lawful one), but the
keeping of it, that may demand commendations. And, when Subjects break
Allegiance at pleasure, as they are a trouble to their King and Country; so
are they wicked before God, and so merit no commendation; no good being
intended either to King or Country, by this knack of Perjury.

What benefit was it for Ataulphus, Sigericus, Thurismundus, Theudesilus,
Agila, and Luyba, those Goths in Spain; or, for Friola and Sancho, Kings of
Leon, to confide in their people, and expect obedience, since they were slain
by their own Subjects? What advantage was it for St. Wenceslaw, Jaromirus, and
Wenceslaw the V. Dukes and Kings of Bohemia; or for Gotrick, and the three
Eric's of Denmark to trust to the obedience, which Law and Nature might assure
them of, since, contrary to all fidelity, they were murdered by their own
People. Those of Swedland, cannot handsomely boast of their Loyalty by killing
Ingevallus, Eric Aorsel [or Stanchil], and Swercherus their Kings: Nor could
the Queen of the same Country expect Commendations, by affirming her
subjection and love to her King and Husband Ingemarus, since she broak both, by
hanging him in a Gold Chain; as Queen Fredegunde did hers, by procuring the
murder of Chilperic King of France; as Fergusius III. and Malvinus, Kings of
Scotland, were thus assassinated by their Queens. Will any man quit the
Treasons of Zedechias, for saying, that he was sworn Physician to the Emperor?
or pardon Jaques Clement, Jean Chastel, or Francis Ravaillac, if they should
say, Their Religion obliged them to obedience? since the first poisoned Charles
le Chauve, the second stabbed Henry III. of France, Chastel assaulted Henry IV.
and the last man murdered him. Would it not heighten the wickedness of Dowall,
the three Donalds, and the two Fiddlers, by pleading that they were Subjects,
when they were so far from observing their Allegiance, that they impiously
murdered their Sovereigns, Nothatus, Ethodius I. Findocus, Fethelmacus,
Conranus, or Goranus, and Duffus, Kings of Scotland; and to these, I may add
the Assassinators of James I. of the same Nation. But to return home, (passing
by the disobedience shown to some of our own Kings of former ages) will it any
way diminish the crimes of the Presbyterian Ministry, with the rest of the
Schismatics, if they should plead, that they formerly subscribed the Articles
of the Church of England, but especially, the 36. Canon, when they took their
Degrees, [as appears by their own hands in the two Universities; a Catalogue of
which, might be produced, to the eternal ignomy and perjury of the Brotherhood]
since they violently broke all their promises, to the destruction of our Church
and State? Can any quit the long Parliament of Hypocrisy, when they affirm
that they all took the Protestation for the Kings Preservation; and Ex. Coll.
p. 657.
therefore wondered, that he should think much at their actions, though they
were in actual rebellion against him? Would it not be a pretty plea for the
Kings Enemies to say, Alas! How could we intend any harm against him, since we
all took the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy? Or can any man, give any
credit, to the wicked Long-Parliament, when they affirm, that they never
rejected the Common Prayer Book, Ex. Coll. p. 569.
nor do intend; only to alter it? When the enmity of those then in the Houses
against that Book, both before and after, is well enough known. But truth in
those days, was not used to be spoken within those walls, neither out of them,
by the Zealots then in Possession. Our late Grandees made many hundred
Protestations, that all their actions were only for the Preservation of the
Kings Person; yet they most wickedly murdered him, because he was a Defender
of the true Faith; as the ancient Sweeds martyred their good King Eric
Stenchil, Jo. Magnus, Hist. Goth. Suenonumque lib. Id. Hist. Metropol. Upsal.
l. 1. p. 11.
because he intended to bring the Christian Religion amongst them. And our
Presbyterians swore in the Covenant to preserve the King, yet never did in the
least assist him: but fought what they could against him, as appears by the
series of the whole War. When the Parliament threw by their King and Oaths in
the Votes for Non-Address, the Nation saw, that they were then contriving his
ruin. And the Royalists knew, that their Sovereign must be saved then or
never; for which purpose, in 1648. they seize upon Carlisle, Barwick, and
Pontefrait in the North, whilst those of Kent grow numerous in the South.

Thus the Kings Party (though divested of Arms and Strength) bestirr themselves
like faithful Subjects. But what did the Brethren do? Alas! they acted very
high too, though the clean contrary way; The Parliament cursing the Royal
design with Bell, Book, and Candle, contriving night and day how to bring them
to destruction, whilst their Associates in the Country and Army furiously
opposed, and, at last, (as the Devil was permitted to triumph over Job), proved
victorious, to the ruin of the Kings best friends. Yet, had these Zealots,
according to their Oaths, taken up their Weapons, probably the Kings murder,
and other following mischiefs had been stopped. But God would not suffer such
wicked perjured Wretches to be Authors of so much good: It being miraculous,
(which are now ceased) that the madd Pet. de Natal. l. 6. c. 133. Jacob de
Vorag. Hist. 94. Hispan. Bibliothec. Tom. 1. c. 1. page 12.
Bulls of Spain should be so favorable to the Corpse of St. James; And, that
the Devil (that delighter in mischief) should wait upon a good Caesarius Hist.
Mirac. lib. 5. cap. 36.
Knight so faithfully, and be so beneficial to Christianity, as to pay for a
Bell, that the people might with more facility be drawn to Church.

Thus did these people (for all their good Covenant) suffer their King to be
murdered before their faces, without moving one hand for a rescue; unless you
will allow the Petitioning of a few, when it was too late to do any good by
soft words; though it was more than could be expected from those, who had done
him all the mischief, that Sword, Gun, or Malice could do; which puts me in
mind of a passage in a Paper printed for Robert White, before the decollation
of his Majesty. The well-known Gilb. Mabbot, being Imprimatur, -- It Is
conceived, An Answer to the chief heads and passages in the late Decl. called
The Declar. of the Kingdom of Scotl. 1648. page 1.
absurd and hypocritical, to swear the Preservation of the Kings Person, as a
man; when at the same time a War is engaged against him, and he known to be in
the Field, subject to death, by the Bullet and Sword. And it is well known,
that some of the Soldiers said, that they would kill the King, asson as
another man: Though I do not say, that the Presbyterians were the men, that did
actually murder him; yet we know, that the Rump was not free from some of that
Faction, and so, whether any of that party consented to the stroke, or no, yet
I am confident, that most, if not all, of that gang brought him to the
Scaffold; concerning which, I shall borrow a Story, from an Ingenious Knight,
[for I do not love, like some of late, to steal whole pages, and attribute
their product to mine own Brain], and this, may very well reflect upon the
whole Presbyterian Party. Some Robbers on Shooters-Hill assault an honest
Gentleman, yet the Thieves among themselves are divided, some inclining only to
bind him, and leave him helpless Lively Portrait, of our New-Cavaliers. page 4,
5.
in the adjacent Woods: But others, for their greater security from pursuit,
determine rather to murder him outright: Now, I suppose, an honest Jury will
find both Parties guilty of, and agreed in, the main Design, viz. Robbery. The
Application is so true and plain, that any man will judge the Presbyterians as
well guilty of High Treason: For

1. Fighting against their King.

2. 20. May 1642.
Voting all his Assisters to be Traitors, contrary to the 11 Hen. 7. cap. 1.
Law.

3. Hanging and Beheading many gallant Gentlemen, only for their Loyalty.

4. Sequestrating the Orthodox, and ruining the Church, both against Law and
King.

5. Calling his Majesty (through his Declarations) scandalous, impious, false,
wicked, tyrannical, and what not?

6. Voting the Queen a Traitor, for assisting the King her Husband against
Rebels.

7. Ordering such abominable Propositions, that a Peace could not be agitated,
unless the Kings best Friends were delivered up to hop headless.

8. Forcing Oaths upon the People, contrary to the Kings Command, and the Law
of the Land.

9. Confining his Majesty.

10. Pinding him up to such intolerable Rules and Covenants, or else they will
have none of him.

11. Throwing him by, or rather disowning him to be their King, by their Votes
for Non-Address.

12. Voting and Fighting against those, who in 1648. endeavored to release him
from his Imprisonment, and save him from the Block. With several other such
like mad pranks as these, which, if not singly, (as most of them will) yet I am
confident will make Accumulative Treason, which will either hang them,
according to their own deeds, or else they murdered the Earl of Strafford; and
murder is death, both by the Laws of God and Man. I say, an Indifferent Jury
need never go from the Bar to consider, but at the first hearing, would freely
find the Presbyterian Subjects, as well guilty of Treason against their
Sovereign, as those, who would not add sin to sin, by Hypocrisy, but impiously
declared their dislike to Monarchy, by a wicked Decollation.

Another refuge, and that the last that the Brethren have, is in the action of
Sir George Booth. That some of them were well-wishers to it, I cannot [because
my knowledge is not Omnipotent] deny; but, what assistance, and upon what
conditions, they afforded to that design, I shall leave for them to
demonstrate, I being unwilling to say what Lords, utter Enemies to Episcopacy,
would not so much as Interest themselves in it, (if reports be true); or at
least so cowardly, that they only advantaged the Kings Enemies. But enough of
this, it being far from my humor to be so malepert with some Nobles, as the
Presbyterians are impudent with his Majesty. Though I am really of Opinion
that, had that Design taken effect, we should have had our old war renewed
again, the Puritans having been once armed, and imbodyed, would have fought
down our legal Episcopal Government, and chained up his Majesty to some
New Castle or Isle of Wight-like conditions, or (if they had proved Masters)
sent the King beyond Sea again, or secured him; if not, yielded him up also to
the Independants: for what wickedness have they not undertaken, to bring about
their ends? whether it be true or not, that the Devils have had several
conventions, for Art. a Monast. Martyrol. Franc. 3 January Sect 3, 4.
the extirpating of the Franciscan Order, it matters not; though I am confident
the Brethren seldom consult, but for the destruction of our Church: But if
8000 Fiends could no way endamage seven poor Friars; I hope, nor they, nor
Presbytery, will ever be able to do any mischief to the Church of England.

Yet as a descant upon the Objection of those, who plead their activity in Sir
George Booth's business, I shall propose one Query.

Whether if the Presbyterians had supposed, that our present King, would have
been so opposite to their Interests, as his glorious Father was, They would any
way have bestirred themselves for his Restoration?

Here I would not be understood, of those who at the beginning of these
troubles, had the misfortune to be of that Faction, yet since turned to the
true Church, with an acknowledgment of their former errors, and this through
conscience, not preferment; the once-flourishing Church, being then in a
persecution: But I intend those whose frantic zeal yet binds them up to
Schism, as well as those who are stuffed with Presbytery in Sr. George's rising,
and since of whom I believe, repentance is not yet impossible, because I read
that the Devil himself Caesarii Hist. Illustr. Mirac. l. 3. cap. 26.
has humbly acknowledged and confessed his offenses.

But to the Query, if they would not have endeavored his restorement, being so
qualified, then must they needs have a large stock of confidence to demand
thanks where none is due (but rather an halter) for their assistance in the
business. But if they did desire the King again, and so qualyfied, then must
they either declare, that they have been wicked Villains and Traitors against
the late King; or that this present King, was helped in by them, more through
their goodness to him, than his own desert.

For my part I am apt to give credit to the negative, really thinking that if
they had had as bad thoughts of this King as of his Father (who yet was better
than the best of his enemies) they would have made it their business to have
kept him out, (though, under favor, it is as much Treason to depose a Tyrant;
as a good King.) And I am drawn to be of this persuasion by these following
Motives.

That they looked upon his Fathers non-complyance with their peevish humors,
as a monstrous wickedness, is a truth not hitherto denied. Narrative page 9.
Wherefore else should Mr. Love pray, that God would redeem him [i. e. Charles
II.] from the iniquity of his Fathers house: And not half an hour before his
own death, to be so far out of Charity with Speech Sect. 20.
the oppressed and Martyred King, as to bluster out, For my part I have opposed
the Tyranny of a King.

And with this Love, great in the eyes of the Presbyterians, does the grand
Patron of that Sect in Scotland, Mr. Robert Douglas agree; who had the
impudence [pardon that low expression, for language cannot reach the
wickedness of his pretended Sermon] to tell the King to his Page 7. 11, 13,
15, 16. 27, 30. 32, 36.
face several times, of the sins of his Father and Family; Of which I shall
give you some taste, and that in his own words.

It is earnestly wished that our Kings heart may be tender, and be truly
humbled before the Lord, for the sins of his Fathers house. -- Id. page 13.
And for the many evils that are upon that Family. Again

-- Our late King did build much mischief to Religion all the days of his Life.
And again page 27.


Sir, there is too much iniquity upon the throne of your predecessors, who
framed mischief by a Law; such Laws as have been destructive to Religion page
32.
and grievous to the Lords people. And again

I may say freely, that a chief cause of the judgment upon the Kings house,
has been the Grandfathers breach of Covenant with God, and page 36.
the Fathers following his steps, in opposing the work of God and the Kirk
within this Realm.

And since he holds the King to be so wicked, what must be done with him,
himself does intimate in these following words.

-- This may serve to justify the proceedings of this Kingdom against the
late King, who, in an hostile way, set himself to overthrow Religion, page 15.
Parliament, Laws, and Liberties.

If Elisha called judgment from Heaven, upon little Children for calling of him
bald-head. What punishment do these Boute-feus deserve 2 Kings 2. 23, 24.
for throwing such false and wicked slanders and reproaches upon a just and
good King? If the Romans, according to their custom, broak the legs of the
wicked accuser of Apollonius, because he could not prove Niceph. Call lib. 4.
cap. 26.
his words; what tortures do those merit, who so falsely revile their innocent
Ruler? And if Nerva would have servants slain as ungrateful wretches, who
presumed to accuse their Masters; What death would he inflict upon those, who
had the impudence thus to vilify their Sovereign? Alex. ab Alex. l. 3. c. 20.
fol. 159. a.


But it was not Douglas alone who thought the late Rebellion against the King
to be lawful and commendable, but others of them and those the chief too; nor
indeed do I remember that any Presbyterian denied it. Amongst its chief
assertors, thus does Love declare himself,

I did (it is true) oppose in my place and calling the forces of the late King,
and were he alive again, and should I live longer, the cause being Speech Sect.
14.
as then it was, I should oppose him longer.

And of the same Rebellious humor, is the much talked of Baxter, who several
times professes, that if he had not been on the Parliaments party, he had been
guilty of High Treason against the Higher power, Holy Common wealth. page 477.
486. 488.
which his hasty zeal, took to be the Parliament. But I shall leave him to the
meditation of the Rebels plea, which if he do but seriously consider, I am
confident he may have a sight of his sins; against which conversion, I believe
the Brethren pray daily. And of this opinion concerning the lawfulness of the
War, was old Hall of Kings-Norton, canting and recanting Jenkins of London;
mad-pated Crofton, railing Vicars, Funeb. Flor. p. Petition.
with the rest of the covenanting Diegoes: It being one Article in their League
and Creed, that all Malignants that divided the King from his people, etc.
contrary to the League and Covenant, be brought to public Trial and receive
condign punishment, and by whom this is meant needs Covenant. Art. 4.
no Oedipus to unriddle: So that if the King offer to protect these eye-sores
of theirs, they think themselves obliged by their Oath, to take Arms to punish
the Kings best subjects; according to their pretty oath. And yet must these
men's actions be held ever for the best, as if they had taken infallibility from
the Papal Chair. Which puts me in mind of a Quaker, who not long since through
ignorance, led a friend of mine above 4 miles out of his way going to Oxford,
and when he perceived his error, greatly cried up the good providence of God,
which had brought them that way, because (as he said,) for ought he knew, they
might have been robbed had they gone the right road. And how many of the
Puritans have hugged themselves, because they have been in a wrong way against
King and Church, may appear by many of their Thanksgiving Sermons and speeches.

And whether these men can be called good Subjects, who would thus shackle
their King, extirpate and ruin his most faithful friends, I should willingly
leave to the judgment of Cornelius Burges himself, if he would but throw by his
malice, and those ill-got lands, which binds him to a perpetual partiality.

But because some may object, that this was but the fancy of some fiery
Lecturers [though I think it would be difficult to nominate so much as one of
this faction, (then of age) who did not actively acknowledge the legality of
the Rebellion; and yet I hear of small repentance] we will see what they say,
in their so much cried up Representatives in Parliament: and this multitude we
shall consider in two respects,

I. In their Actions from the beginning of the War, till the end of it. II.
In their Principles, (after their happy seclusion by the Independent Army) til
the Restoration of his Majesty.
As for the first, It is as true as Penry [Martin mar Prelat] was hanged, or
Burton and Bastwicks ears cut off, that the members [and it is well known what
they were] of the wicked Long Parliament remaining at Westminster, did declare
the lawfulness of the War; and accordingly, by their wicked Counsels, carried
it on: which is as impossible to be denied, as the fight of Lepanto, or 88.

As for the second, viz. the malevolent humors of the secluded Members, if
their hearts may be known by their actions [and we have no other Index] they
shall presently appear as bad as their Neighbors. For after that God had
allowed them some ten or eleven years time of repentance, they still harden
their own hearts, looking upon their former actions against their King, to be
too honest, to require remorse, or sorrow, as if they had done God good
service, by fighting against his Laws, and Anointed.

For no sooner were they restored by the now Duke of Albemarle, but they fell
again to the adoring, and doing homage to, their long-forgotten Idol, the
Holy-League; and, for it is greater honor, vomiting out this Order,

Ordered, that the Solemn League and Covenant, be printed and published, and
set up, and forthwith read in every Church, and that 5. March 1659/60.
also once every year, according to former Order of Parliament; and that the
same Solemn League and Covenant, be also set up in this House.

And to show themselves as pert blades against the King as ever, it was Ordered
by their Worships, that no Commissioner, or Commissionated Officer, should
exercise any power, or Authority, till he had acknowledged as follows,

I do acknowledge, and declare, that the War undertaken by both Houses of
Parliament, in their defense against the Forces, raised in the name of 12.
March 1659/60.
the late King, was just and lawful, etc.

Nor is this all, (though enough in conscience to make a Traitor, or else
farewell Poulton); but, the better to make the ensuing Parliament according to
their Puritanical humors, thereby to bring the Nations again into slavery;
They a little after the former Orders, Decree, that none shall be capable of
being chosen a Member of Parliament, which has any way assisted the King
against their Worships, unless he had since recanted his former adhearing to
the King.

Hitherto we see no sign of repentance for their former Rebellion, but rather a
stubborn malepert zeal, swaying amongst this Faction, and prompting them to a
readiness of their own justification, for their so doing. Though it is a
certain truth, that they were the -- Causa sine qua non of the King's Murder;
they putting the sword into the Independent hand, which gave the fatal stroke.
And these who are thus so confident, to justify their wickedness against the
Father, will not be wanting to create the same jealousies, that they might have
the same opportunity against the Son; as the multitude of scandalous, and
seditious Pamphlets (and I wish many Lectures were not so too) yet daily flying
abroad, does somewhat intimate.

However, had their malice hurried them on to far more extravagant actions,
(and who knows what they might have done, if their Carreer had not been stopped)
yet had they done but like themselves: A Presbyteri an Parliament, being as far
from doing Soveraignity any good, (for hitherto an instance cannot be culled
out of any story) as the rest of the Puritans studious for the real peace of
the Church and Kingdom; against both which, such is their malice, that I could
easily believe, that they Tutor up one another as Amilcar the Carthagenian did
his young son Hannibal, by making him swear to persecute the Romans, with all
fury imaginable. And we know that Beza persuaded his Brother hot-head John
Knox, by all means to extirpate Episcopal Government out of Bez. Epist. 77.
Scotland; though the being of it there, might cause peace and unity: And what
mad pranks old Knox played in that Kingdom, their own stories can inform us.
And the truth of it is, the old zealot, had been so well nurtured up at Geneva,
by Beza and others, that no other could be expected from him; of whole factious
humor, and doctrine, take this for a Taste. He maintained, -- That Subjects may
not only Hist. Reformat. of Scotland. p. 392, 393.
lawfully oppose themselves to their Kings, whenever they do any thing, that
expressly oppugnes Gods Commandment; but also that they may execute judgment
upon them, according to Gods Law: so that if the King be a Murderer,
Adulterer, or an Idolater, he shall suffer according to God's Law, not as a
King, but as an Offender.

Certainly Master John, was very well acquainted with the poor fellow of
Collen, who bittingly distinguished betwixt the Prince Elector, and the
Archbishop. And probably the Logicians in the long-winded Juncto, were
beholden to these two cunning Pates, who could with abundance of dapperness,
squeeze out of their infected brains, the forgotten distinction, of the Person,
and Office of a King, which is not unlike Ex Coll. page 727.
some Pole-Axes, with a Gun, and tuck all in one piece: if one fail to distroy
you, the other is certain of execution. The Proverb assures us that it is good
to have two strings to a bow: thus the Presbyterians, when they cannot hurt
they King, they will punish the Offender; and rather then their malice in this
must not take effect, they will sacrifice the lives of many thousands of
Innocents. Though when all is sum'd up, all their specious pretenses, is far
short of the value of one drop of blood. The Roman Rebels under Catiline, could
tell the people, that they fought Nos non imperium, neque divitias petimus --
sed libertatem. Salust. page 20. Lu. Florus. lib. 4. c. 1. Salust. Bell. Cat.
p. 15.
not for Supremacy, or Riches, but mere Liberry: And how has the air of Great
Britain been putrified, with the hypocritical clamours of Religion,
Reformation, and Privileges! and that with such fury, as if our Puritans, like
Catilines associates, had encouraged one another into a wicked conspiracy with
the intoxicating healths of humane blood.

It is reported of Pope Boniface VIII that he entered like a Fox, ruled Intravit
ut vulpes, vixit ut leo, mortuus est ut canis. Bal. Act. Pontif.
like a Lion, and dyed like a Dog. And I am confident our Puritans obstain'd
more by hypocricy, then true piety; And having once made themselves Masters, it
is not forgot, how they Tyrannized over the poor Nation; and the King's best
friends; which has brought, such an odium Moritur -- hoc modo Bonifacius ille,
qui Imperatoribus, Regibus, Principibus Nationibus, Populo, terrorem potius
quam Religionem injicere conabatur. Platin. Hist. de vitis Pontif. Romans
upon them, in the Nostrils of all good men, that I believe their exit will be
as reproachful to themselves, as beneficial to the Nations; so that of them
might be said, as Platina said of the same Pope; Thus expired these Bonte-feus,
who rather endeavored to make themselves a terror to Kings, and Magistrates,
then study the increase, and propagation of true Religion.

However, if after all this, we should grant (though I see small reason for so
doing) that the Presbyterians did contribute something to his Majesty's
restoration; yet will the credit (if rightly considered) be so little, that
they have abundance of confidence, who can boast of it. It being done
(supposing that they were assisters) rather for their own ends, then any real
love which they bore toward his Majesty. And what will not these men do for
their own advantage? We need not tell here, of some Patrons of that Faction,
who first subscribed to Episcopacy, then took the Covenant against it, then
took the Engagement against Kingship, and since have embraced both King, and
Episcopal Government: And certainly, most ignorant must that man be, who
supposes, that those who thus vary, do it really, by persuasion of the
excellent goodness of that thing they then engage for, rather then a
time-serving humor for a private benefit.

And what little thanks (much less reward) the Puritans merit, by their
assistance, (supposing that they were advantageous) may be hinted at by these
following parallel stories.

At that famous Siege of Ostend, a Frenchman, by disobeying his Sergeant,
caused a Tumult, for which, he was condemned by a Council of Vere's
Commentaries. page 140.
War to be Shot to Death: Yet, at the intercession of the French Captain, that
renowned General Sir Francis Vere, granted him life, upon condition, he asked
the Sergeant forgiveness, This he scorned, however had eight days allowed him
to consider; at the end of which, he seeming still obstinate, was Ordered to
Execution, and accordingly was tied to a Stake: But no sooner did the Monsieur
see the Harquebusiers ready to discharge, but the fear of death falling upon
him, he desired to be unbound, and so asked the Sergeant forgiveness. Our
British Presbyterians, by disobedience to their King, caused a most wicked
war, to the ruin of many Noble families, and the King himself. The merciful
King for the preservation of his Subjects blood, sent to the Malefactors Post
after Post, a full pardon, provided there might be a sure peace, and a perfect
Amnesty. To these propositions they scorn to hearken, and by their Covenant
swear to ruin all the King's friends; and in this manner, being confident in
their own strength, they run on in obstinacy; and in this stubborn fashion did
they continue many years, thinking themselves secure. But at last to their
amazement, they beheld the Independent ready to cut their throats; this fear of
a sudden destruction, brought such a terror upon these zealots, that they were
even at their wits ends: they look round about for relief, cast out many a sigh
to obtain favor, but they perceive no safety, unless they would acknowledge
themselves Subjects to their King. This they thought a hard lesson, and
contradictory to their Christian Liberty, but taking it for a good rule, that
of two Evils the less is to be chosen; they with a low voice (not willing to
be heard) mumble out, that Charles II. is their King, and so through his
Majesty's mercy were relieved from their bondage; though, innocent souls, they
scorned to ask pardon, for their former villainies, in which they came short of
the French man's ingenuity.

But to bring the Simile somewhat more pat, in respect of the relation betwixt
a Sovereign, and a Subject. Above 300. years past, the Danes banished their
King Christophorus II. and Imprisoned his eldest son Eric, Expold. Lindenbruch.
Hist. Dan. Reg. p. 41.
in the strong Castle of Hadersleben, [in the Dukedom of Schleswick.] These
dissentions having weakened the Nation, those of Holstein endeavored to get
Denmark under their subjection; which the Danes perceiving, were glad to
re-call their King, and set free his Son. This story will unfold it self, in
the application of the following Narrative, which is exactly to the business,
and has formerly been used by an Ingenious Gentleman in a speech at Nottngham,
though in the relating I shall not only somewhat differ Mr. Whoaly's Speech. p.
9.
from him, but also enlarge my self out of the Chronicles themselves.

James (I. King of Scotland) when, but Prince, and young, going into Hect.
Boethius. lib. 16, 17. Jo. Lesloeus. lib. 7. Geo. Buchaa. l. 10. p. 331. Alex.
Rosse Hist. of the World. p. 536. Will. Drummond' s Hist. of Scotland, with Mr.
Hall' s Preface.
France, was taken Prisoner by the English, [7. Henry IV. 1406.] where he was
detained some 18. years. In the mean time, the Government of Scotland was
usurped by Robert Steward, Duke of Albany, and Earl of Fyfe: after whose death,
his Son Mordack [or Murdo] got the command never endeavoring the resettlement
of his King, but lorded it over the Nation, wasting, and alientating the King's
Revenue, and the Churches Patrimony, turning all things upside down, according
to his Tyrannical humor. In the mean while, Mordac had three sons, Walter,
Alexander, and James, [though Hist. Generale d'Angletterre. page 1051.
Andre de Chesne, through brevity, takes no notice of the latter] who grew
very unruly, and imperious, obedient to no R. Hollingshead.
laws, but their own wills, presumptiously destroying what their Father most
delighted in, to his great grief, and discontent: And not being able to endure
their sawciness, he resolved to free himself from their Tyrannical yoke; to
which purpose, he told his eldest son [Walter, who Quoniam lu animo tuo
imperare non potes, ut mihi pareas; ego alium accersam, cui obtemperare ambo
cogemur. Buchan, Rerum Scot. Hist. lib. 10. p. 331.
had just then snatched a Faulcon from his fathers hand, and wrong off her
neck] that, since he would not be obedient to his government, and pleasure; he
would procure one, who should rule them both. After which time, all his
Counsels were for the restoration of King James, resolving, rather to be a
Subject to a lawful King, then a slave to his own Children. For which purpose,
he gets a Parliament called at Saint Johnstown, where (all being weary of the
present Government, and Tyranny) it was unanimously concluded, to send for
their own King home again, which accordingly was done, [1424.] and he presently
restores both the Crown, and Church Revenues: And in a Parliament held at
Sterling, Mordacus, with his two sons, were condemned as Traitors, and
beheaded; his youngest son flying into Ireland, where he dyed. The Application
of this Story is obvious.


Our present King, when also but a young Prince, by the malignancy of
self-ended Traitors, being secluded from his own, for the space also of
eighteen years: The Government of the Nation was seized upon by the furious
Presbyterians, who Tyrannize to the purpose over the distracted Country;
getting the King's Lands, selling his Woods, loading the Nation with Excise and
Taxes, ruining the Church, imprisoning and murdering the Bishops, and others
of the Chief Gentry, whose estates they also put into their pockets; imposing
wicked oaths upon the people, vilifying their King, murdering his Subjects,
and in a word, violating all Laws. After this fashion did old Father Presbytery
Tyrannize for some years; But at last Independency, Anabaptism, and the
Fifth-Monarchy-men, (the three ungracious sons of Presbytery) began to perk up,
grow headstrong, and so malepert, as to contemn, scorn, and deride their
Father; spitting in his face, and throwing all reproaches they could upon him:
and at last, fairly took the Old Knave by the beard, giving him a swing from
the seat of Correction, to the utter discredit, and defilement of his short
Lecturing Coat, and Sister-visiting black and white Caps, for Two Caps he had,
and turns up that within;
You Would think he wore a black Pot tip't with Tin. The Religion of the
Hypocritical Presbyterian. page 6.

These three younkers being now on Cock-horse, so tryumph'd over their old
wicked Parent, that he durst scarce say, his soul was his own; not allowing him
his will in any thing, and by a just judgment of God, paying him home in his
own coin, as the learned, and judicious Patron of Bishop Sandersons 20 Sermons,
Preface. Sect. 10, 11.
our Church observes. For, as this old jugler, had impudently quiped the
Reverend Church of England, with, what command, or example, have you for
kneeling at the Communion? for wearing a Surplice, etc? for Lord Bishops? for a
penned Liturgy? for keeping Holy Days, etc. So these three Mad-caps, thus
retort upon their amazed Father, where are your Lay-Presbyters, your Classes,
etc. to be found in Scripture? where your Steeple Houses? your National-Church?
your Tithes, and Mortuaries? your Infant-sprinklings? nay where your
Meeter-Psalms? your two Sacraments? your observing a weekly Sabbath? -- Show
us, say they, a Command, or Example for them in Scripture.

Thus did these three hopefalls retort, tearming all the old Knaves actions,
selvish, worldly, wicked, and only of humany institution: which proceeding
from his own Brats, so perplexed old Father Schism, that (being naturally of a
choleric temper) he could no longer endure the injuries, and ingratefulness of
these three Hot-spurs, who received life, and nourishment under the shadow of
his fiery zeal; but that which touched his heart most, was their plucking from
him all Rule, and Authority, so that his credit could scarce obtain a beast to
trott it to the next Lecture. These affronts, sufficient to make the Father run
horn-mad, (and the multitude of Conventicles may allow some Presbyterian
Cockolds, or else, what would the Sister-hood do?) prompts him to a resolution
to free himself from the lash of these his three boys, (who out stripped him in
new inlighten'd zeal) and being thus grown mad with despair, and willing to
submit to any thing, so he might be freed from this yoke, and having consulted
his pillow, with abundance of time and leisure, he saw no way to quel these
his insulting Children, but the restoration of his Majesty. And because a late
repentance is better then none, he hoped by thus working his own benefit, to
obtain his own pardon, knowing the King's mercy to be as great, as the
Presbyterian wickedness. Thus for his own advantage, to obtain the return of
his Majesty, he procured a Parliament, which to the joy of the Nation recalled
the King, yet not according to the Presbyterian hopes, who expected not a free,
but conditional return.

The truth of this Application must be left to the understanding Reader, who
shall be minded of the Spanish Proverb, Hagase el milagro, y hagalo Mahoma.


Let us but have our desires, though the Devil, or Turk, be our instruments, or
Assistants.

And with this, I am pretty confident, the Brethren did not disagree, is
appearing by their long compliance, (yet hatred to be kept under) that they did
not care, so be that they were but relieved from the Independent slavery,
though it were done by him, whom they always hated, and was the son of him, who
they always held for the Common enemy; and whose friends, they had solemnly
sworn to punish, and ruin.

What good wishes these people had for the King, was merely for their own ends,
as I am apt to credit; when I consider their high complying with Richard, one
of their Chieftains, viz. Master Baxter applying himself several times to him
by way of a faithful subject, and advising him how to behave himself the better
to perpetuate his usurped authority, and seemed very discontented at his
deposing. And though many of them disliked Oliver, yet if you do but inquire of
Doctor Manton, [for so he is now, for which he may thank the negligence of the
Proposer] I suppose he can inform you, who it was, that, when Oliver was remade
Protector, [1657.] prayed so heartily for him in Westminster Hall. 26. June.
And for the Saints of the Committee of Safety; you would bless your self, to
see, how the Brotherhood of Leicestershire accosted them, humbling,
Representation. 1659. Sept. 8.
themselves under the protection of those Lords of Wallingford house; declaring
their utter dislike to the intentions of those, who, in Sir George Booths
business, stirred for the King. Nay, should I say, that some of this faction,
were a part of the very Rump it self, I supposed the Brethren would be puzzel'd
to prove the Contrary. Thus like Diogenes's Archer, do they hit every where,
but the right mark; and this, through an innated spirit of wickedness, and
inconstancy; which puts me in mind of a story. Robert King of Naples, having
desired Giotto, Georg. Vasari. le vite de piu Excellenti Pittori. Part. 1. page
126.
then famous in Italy, to paint him out his Kingdom; drew an Ass with a
Saddle on his back, and smelling to another new Saddle, and upon each Saddle a
Crown and a Scepter: the King demanding what he meant thereby, he replied, Such
is your Kingdom, and Subjects, for they desire new Lords daily. I am confident
that the best Hieroglyphick of a Time-server, would be a fat-beneficed
Presbyterian; yet, did that Faction but once grow powerful, they would be like
Giotto's Ass, still smelling after new Governments; and Neapolitan Courser in
Boccalini, Pietra del Parag. Politico.
always ready to cast his Rider. So that if one should ask many of them, Where
was the binding force of their Covenant, in Oliver's, Richard's, the Rump's,
and the Committee of Safety's time, there would be but a shuffling Answer
returned.

Thus I suppose the Query is sufficiently satisfied, information being
particularly given of their Opinions, and Actions, all running cross-grained to
the King, and his Interest; and therefore, I suppose, little beneficial to his
restoration: A taste of which, you may see in these few instances.

I. The late war against the King, was lawful, and commendable.

II. It is lawful for Subjects to fight against their King; and so the oaths of
Allegiance, and Supremacy, of small validity.

III. The King is not above the two Houses of Parliament, and so they not
subject to him.

IV. They are bound to oppose all Archbishops, Bishops, Deans, Prebends, etc.
having exactly sworn against them in the Covenant; and so against
Church Government, appointed by the King, and the Laws.

V. They are by the same Oath obliged to bring to condign Punishment all
Malignants, that is, all those who assisted the King, and were sufferers with
him, here, or beyond sea: so that, had these men been such a main stake in the
King's restoration, they would, according to their Oaths, and Cruelty, either
have stopped the King's friends (as the Scots did) from returning with him, or
have proceeded against them as Malefactors, and Malignants, and so have
butchered them out of this world, as they formerly did with the Archbishop of
Canterbury, Sir Alexander Carew, Master Bowcher, Master Yeomans, Master
Tomkins, Master Challoner, Sir George Lysle, Sir Charles Lucas, and several
others; some by a dissembling method of judicature, and other by the quick and
speedy mode of Abington.

VI. They never assisted any Plot in behalf of the King: Nay, suffered him to
be Murdered without one stroke, not taking the Royalists part in his relief.
Nay, when a little before his murder, the Royal party rose up in Arms for his
rescue, the Presbyterians of the Parliament opposed their actions, by Voting,
and Ordering, whilst those in the Country fought against them.

VII. If this present King be as bad as his Father, [that is, thwart their
Schismatical humors as much] they are bound to fight against him, and so not
to restore him freely, as he was. For if they be not obliged to oppose him so
qualified, then was their late war against his Father unnecessary, and so by
their own confession, themselves Traitors. If again, they are bound to oppose
him so qualified, then must they confess that the restoration of the present
King, (so qualified) was more through their own goodness, and hopes of his
amendment, than any desert, or merit in himself. This shows, that they are for
the King, only when he is for their ends. And Conditional Subjects, in a Pure
Monarchy, deserve a Halter, rather then Commendation.

VIII. None fit to be a Commission-Officer, that would not affirm the late
Rebellion lawful, so that it is no hard matter to judge, what a pretty Militia
they would have had again; and being once up, God knows how they would have
employed them.

IX. None is capable of being a Parliament Man that was ever on the Kings
Party, unless he had recanted, and declared his sorrow therefore, by his
after-adhering to the Parliament. So that the Faction of the Houses so
qualified, would presently drive the King from White Hall again, and, How would
they then Tyrannize, having the Militia at their beck, as abovesaid?

X. They have quietly submitted to every Party and usurped Authority, yet
grumble to live obedient to that commanded by the King and the Laws of the
Land; so that it appears, that they have no great share of Love or Obedience to
Charles II. as their King and Sovereign; but it may be only, because, he
released them from an Independent bondage, for which they deserve no store of
thanks, their duty being rather bought, than freely bestowed.

How these Opinions and Actions can agree with honest and faithful Subjects, I
cannot in the least conjecture; And therefore, I must think it very improbable,
that those men should freely, and without any Conditions, restore the Son, and
set him over them, whose Father they had fought against, imprisoned, vilified,
and basely delivered up into the hands of his bloody Executioners. Certainly,
these Principles, can never quadrate with the free and uncapitulated
Restoration of his Majesty; some being unwilling to have him ride in on
Horseback, and others looking as far back as the Isle of Wight.

Mordake though Instrumental in the Restoration of King James I. of Scotland,
yet he with two of his sons suffered death for their former Treasons, whilst
the third fled into Ireland. And really, the Presbyterians do very badly (yet
like themselves) requite his Majesty for his free Pardon of their Villainies by
their refractory behavior, and wicked Pamphlets, which prompts me to agree
with an Ingenious Gentleman: That

Men possibly may repent of Presbytery, but Presbytery never yet repented Mr.
Whaly's Civil Rights, etc. of Episcopacy, in his Speech at Notingham, p. 9.
of any thing.

To be short: For any thing that I yet perceive, I may as well give credit to
Sedulius his Apology, in behalf of Barthol. Pisa's Conformity of St. Francis
with our Savior, as to the high brags of our Presbyterians concerning their
restoring the King: many men making high pretenses, though without any ground
or reason. Old Falstaff swore, that he fought a long hour by Shrewsbury Clock
with stout Percy, and at last slew him; though, if you will believe the
Comaedian, the sight of a drawn Sword, would be a sufficient purge to his
Knightship. Nieremberg. Hist. Not. page 429. 450. Jac. de Voragin. Hist. 51.
Pet. de Natal. l. 3. c. 204.
Our Legendaries affirm, that the reason of no venomous Creatures in Ireland
is, because St. Patrick beat them away with his staff; which I believe to be as
true as his causing the stolen Sheep to bleat in the Theifs belly, along time
after it had been eaten. Declarar. of the Popish Impost. in casting out of
Devils. c. 15.
Our modern Exorcists, will tell you pretty Stories of their afrighting the
Devil with some Priests Gloves and Shirts, Dibdale's Stockings, Campian's
Girdle, and such like knick-knacks, though the truth of the business is
undeniably false. Some Witches will relate fine tales of their travailing in
diverse shapes, hither and thither, though all that while they have not budged
out of their Chambers, being deluded by a Trance. A late Printer has boasted
himself the Author of a modern Book, though the poor Soul (as they say)
understands no Latin, a language often made use of in that Treatise. And the
Indians confidently believe, and relate, that those little sandish Islands
adjoining to the Island Manare, were Nic. Pimenta Nova Histor. Relat. de India
Orient. p. 33.
miraculously done by the leaping and jumping of an Ape, called Hanimantus,
(their chief God): and to these may I add, the whimsical boasts of the
Presbyterians, of their activeness for his Majesty's uncapitulated Restoration.

However, to pleasure these people, I shall freely confess, that they have done
this King a great deal of good, by making themselves odious, his Parliaments
obedient, himself by all confessed to be Supreme, and the People taught to beware
of any more trusting to specious Pretenses, since thereby, they are but
cajoll'd to set up Usurpers in Authority, and ruin themselves; yet was all
this not done by the consent of the Brethren, they having all this while fought
against them, and therefore cannot expect any thanks.

To conclude, if the Presbyterians did not assist the Kings return, then are
they perjured, as neglecters of their Allegiance; And, if they were the
Restorers, then are they perjured too, as neglecters of their League and
Covenant, [For, its Obligation Crofton, and others of that gang, maintain to be
perpetual] which, they so solemnly swore to defend, because they did not bring
to condign Punishment, the Malignants, (i. e. the Kings best friends) according
to their Oath; all which they Voted Traitors. And how many of those persons of
Quality, which returned with his Majesty, were by the Presbyterian faction
excepted from Pardon, may appear in 1646. 1647. 1648. Ex. Col. p. 633.
Qualification in their Propositions to the King. That they all broak the Oath
of Allegiance is palpable; that they have not fulfilled their Covenant, is as
true: the first they did freely, the latter by constraint, as appears by their
yet whining after it: So they could not be actively Instrumental: And, the
Independents, Anabaptists, and such like Phanaticks, may boast of a forced
Passive Subjection, as well as they.

CHAP. II.
The wickedness of our Presbyterians in throwing Aspersions upon his Majesty,
and Instigating the People to Rebellion, by assuring them in the Lawfulness of
Subjects Fighting against their Kings.

THe astonishment of the ancient Dionysius the Areopagite, at the grand
Eclipse, cannot plead much superiority to mine, when I perceive the Learned
Father of the Church St. Augustine the eloquent Lactantius, and others, startle
at, and expressly deny, so grand a truth as the Antipodes; and Pope Zachary, and
St. Boniface, [an English-man] Dr. Wilkins World in the Moon.
Archbishop of Mentz, to be so ignorantly (or, as some think, maliciously)
zealous, as to Excommunicate Virgilius [an Irish-man] Bishop of Saltzburg, for
offering to affirm such opposite habitations. Morney's Mist. of Iniquity. page
150.
If the more modern Americans were amazed at the sight of Columbus his Ships,
well may I wonder at the notions of some learned men Corn. a lapide. Com. in
Genesis Perer. in Genesis Tostat. in Genesis Sir Walt. Rawleigh' s Hist. Biblia Maxima
per de la Hay. Vol. 1.
concerning the Garden of Eden, some affirming it to be above the Moon, others
above the Air; some that it is the whole World, others only a part of the
North; some thinking that it was no where, whilst others suppose it to be God,
knows where in the West Indies; and, for ought I know, Sir John Mandevile's
story of it may be as true as any of them: And I do not the less believe it to
have been on the Earth, because the Devil (the Father of lies) told Dr. Dee,
and Edward Kelley, Relat. of Dr. Dee's actions with Spirits. page 156.
that it was so.

And if I have cause to admire at the simplicity of any of these fancies, well
may I be astonished at the easie-natured folly of some, who are yet so great
adorers of the Presbyterian Cause, (if not Interest), as at this time, (when
all their knavery is discovered) to ascribe, I do not know what Divinity to the
Brotherhood. But it is the fortune of the greatest wickedness to have many
followers, and as long as our Crafty Puritans can with the Roman Otho court the
Rabble, they need Tacit. Hist. 1. c. 36. 4.
never question the increase of Proselytes: it being the humor of some men to
caress Sedition and Schism, that they might with more ease embrace Rebellion:
And, though at this time they cannot glory in any grand hopes of prosperity;
yet Domitian, rather than destroy nothing, would kill Flies; and it is the
temper and constitution of these Disciplinarians to agree so far with the
Devil, as to play at small game rather than sit out.

So that considering the sedulity, and seditious temper of these Principiis
obsistendum malique nascentes radices evellendas. Adultam enim pestem exsecari
difficillimum. Hier. Osor. de rebus Emmanuel. lib. 11. fol. 346. d.
Schismatics; a faithful Monitor (for all the Restoration of our happiness)
cannot be ungrateful or unseasonable to Great Britain, whereby its Ruin may be
avoided, by being informed, that the Venomous Serpents, and Tyrannizing
Monsters, are yet in the Highwayes, endeavoring to seize upon the people, who
are willing (like honest and loyal Subjects) to embrace Obedience and
Conformity, perceiving now plainly the wickedness of their quondam Deluders. I
remember a well stretched story of a German, who told his friend, that once in
a wood Facet, Befellan. lib. 3. page 174
he seeing a Wild Boar blind with age, led along by another more young by
holding the young ones tale in his mouth, he fairly shot of the conductors
tail, so that the old one held still by one end, whilst the cunning German,
took hold on the other, and so led the blind boar above twenty miles to
Stutgart (the chief Town in the Dukedom of Wirtemberg). The truth of this
story you may believe as you please; though you may be confident that many
thousands of our ignorant people have been violently seduced and drawn from
those who did really intend the good of their souls, and this by a company of
hot spurred zealots, to the misery and destruction of their blind and simple
meaning followers. And if a great School Divine of Spain, quite lost his Jo.
Huarte Exam. de ingenios cap. 8. page 107.
Latin tongue by endeavoring to mend it from the eloquent Cicero; we have
small hope to learn Obedience or honesty from our Presbytery, since Schism and
Rebellion are their main Lectures, whilst Perjury, Sacrilege and Hypocrisy
is the only Climax by which they ascend to greatness, of which at this day we
need not go far for examples.

Yet a man might suppose, that upon the happy Restoration of his Majesty; And
his not only pardoning these seditious (to give no worse word) subjects, but
his freely giving honor to some, preferment to others, paying the Arrears of
his greatest enemies; that they should now study quietness, every man
regarding his own business, and in retalliation of his Majesty's mercy and
favor, in all things endeavor the tranquillity and not the disturbance of the
Kingdom. But in this we find our selves to reckon without our host, being
wholly deceived by a sort of men, who withstand all Supremacy, but what is
propt up by their giddy fancy, and subject to the lash of their
conditionally-covenanting fingers: And all this pressed forward with so much
violence, that fire and sword must obtain their desires, though it be to the
binding of their Kings and Princes in Fetters, as if they borrowed their
Religion from the Inhabitants of China, who will vilify, contemn, spurn and
beat their Idol Gods, when they do not satisfy them in what they D'Avity les
Estates, etc. de la Chine, Sect. 37.
desire: or as if they learned their Courtship from William Malmesbur. de
gestis Regum Anglorum. l. 2. cap. 5.
Rollo of Normandy (or one of his Wilhelm. Gemiticensis de Ducibus Normannis.
l. 2. c. 17.
Knights,) that, when he should have done homage to King Charles III. of
France, instead of kissing his foot took hold of it and threw him down.

It Is true at present the Heard or Flock of Presbytery, is not so numerous, and
strong as they were twenty years ago, by the dwindling of a great part of their
gang into other Conventicles of separation, some of them being since turned
Anabaptists, others Independents, some Quakers, others Fifth-Monarchy men, and
others run themselves into such gross absurdities, that there is scarce and
Heresy in Prateolus, but some branches of this Disciplinarian Tree, does
embrace and shelter. Yet can it not be denied, but that amongst this wild and
ravenous Rout of Renagadoe's, some few with the prodigal Son, having seen the
wickedness of their former sins, Schism and Rebellion, have with repentance
returned to obedience, and at this day, live dutiful Sons of the Church and
State. However though, as it is commonly affirmed, fierce Rivers run through
other waters without mixing, yet our violent Presbyterians (that is, in plain
English all) when in time of necessity (as at this time I hope they are) can
give a plausible compliance with all other sectaries, and can crowd with them
into a lump under the specious Titles of Godly men and persecuted saints, yet,
as in the furious Sir Henry Blunts Voyage to the Levant. page 19.
Danubius in the same place you may distinguish two sorts of waters, so may you
safely perceive the several interests and sects combined together in this our
hotch-potch club of Schismatics: But if once they be tolerated to the use of
their fury, then each Faction is prepared to cut one another throats, though
upon restraint, as at present, they all shroud themselves under the protection
and interest of their old Dam Presbytery: which calls to my mind their allusion
to the American beast Tlaquetzin, whose young ones on a fair day, and when no
danger appears, run sporting abroad, following their own fancies; but as soon
as they perceive any hurt or damage approaching, or prompted to them by their
own fears, they skud to their Dam with all speed, and secure themselves in the
same paunch, whence they first proceeded. At this time, I dare boldly say that
there is none pleads more in behalf and toleration of the Phanaticks, then
their Presbyterian Mother does, under the specious and whining pretense of
Tender Conscience; though when they were on Cock-horse, none did more oppose
that plea than themselves, as I shall show hereafter. Which abominable juggling,
with many others used by this Fraternity, prompts me to so much indignation,
that I can scarce allow the Foundation of Presbytery so charitable a thought,
as I do that poor miserable fellow, who being accused of Bestiality at his
Arraignment William Drummonds Hist. of Scotland p. 256
confessed it, yet that it was not out of any evil intention he had done it,
but only to procreate a Monster, with which (having nothing to sustain his
life) he might win his bread by going about the Country to show it.

These Puritans having formerly stirred up the Rabble by their seditious
Pamphlets and Lectures to Rebellion, against King Charles the Father, are now
driving the same way against the Son; as a preparative to which they are daily
instilling into the peoples Noddles, Principles of disobedience, schism,
discontent and Rebellion, for they

-- Still find it good Dr. Lluel. Miracles, page 77.

To keep the infection high in the peoples blood.
For Active Treason must be doing still
Lest she unlearn her Art of doing ill.
I shall not tell the Londoners, how King Henry III and King Richard Otto
Frisingens. de gestis Frideric. lib. 2. c. 18. Mart. Crusius, Annal. suev.
part. 2. lib. 10. cap. 14.
II used them: nor how Frederick Barbarossa the German Emperor clawd the
Milanois and their City: but it will not be amiss, to hint to our factious
Presbytery, how the same Emperor made Hermon the Elector Palatine, with his
associates carry dogs upon their backs (then held a punishment and disgrace)
for being disturbers of the peace: And were the same inflicted upon our
Boute-feu's, Good God! what snarling would there be at Christ-Church in London,
and the lecturing junctos? how zealously would the sister-hood meditate on the
Temple-Barre Offspring of Lay Elders? how would it puzzle the tenderhearted
souls to decide the grand controversies, which ears were longest, or, which
animal best conditioned? Thus would the Pulpit be guarded like St. Malo: And
our Non-conformists would have another plea against Tobit as Apocryphal,
because not agreeable to their practice; his Dog running before, but these lugd
behind. By this means, dogs would be used to smell out a Presbyter as the
Italian Jo N.uclel. Chron. vol. 2. p. 549.
dog could Fornicators and Adulterers; and, it may be, by this conjunction, the
Brethren might smell Popery in Obedience and Decency; as they do Idolatry in
kneeling, and loyalty in opposing the King. For Hist and Observat. Medic. Cent.
3. Sect. 68.
Monsieur Borel tells us of a man that by the biting of a dog, had his common
smelling raised to the sagacity of a hound or spaniel. And possibly the
presence of those crafty and cruel Nieremberg. Hist. Not. l. 7, c. 43, 44.
Hyena's might make the dogs as silent as those found in Africa, and the
East Indies, or those in Purchase Pilgrim. vol. 4. p. 1696.
Virginia, which cannot bark but howl: and since fair means and gentleness
will not work upon the churlish humor of the men, they should blame
themselves, if severity like a Wolf, should appear to silence them:
otherways, if the dog and man should be thus coupled together, our Curs at
London and other places, would in time be brought to be as devout at Lectures
and Conventicles, as the Lisboan dog Tudesco (so called I suppose in hatred to
the Dutch, as a Lancashire Gentlewoman called her three Cats, having Nieremb.
l. 9. c. 94.
no ears, Pryn, Burton, and Bastwick) was serious and zealous for the Romish
Church. But because they may grumble, and call this railing (though you see how
merry I make my self at their Worships), I shall, since they will not give me
leave to anger them, make them so odious to posterity, that a sign of Jack
Presbyters head, would entice no Customers, but Fauxes, Ravilliacks, Olivers
and such like detestable animals. And for these things, in this and the
following Chapters, I shall go no higher than our late times, which may serve
as part of a Supplement to the Reverend Bishop Bancroft.

But it may be said, To what purpose is all this, since they themselves do not
deny it, and all the world knows it? It Is true: However a few hints will not be
amiss, if it be only to tell the people, that these Blades are still of the
same metal: So that (I dare boldly affirm) that if this Loyal Parliament, or
the Reverend Bishops would make these Incendiaries recant their former
Rebellious and seditious speeches formerly affirmed in Pulpit and Writings, it
would be the greatest blow, that ever the enemies of Church, or State received,
and the only way to make the simple people see how they have been misled and
abused. If they refuse such Recantations it must either be through scorn and
contempt, or that they are still of the same Rebellious humor, for both which
the Laws provide punishment: and, I hope, their interest would not be so great
as to stop This.

I need not tell you, who they were who Rebelled lately against his Majesty;
yet would I gladly have the Consistory to enform me in these three Quaeries.

First. Why the Non-conformists; and only the Non-conformists, did oppose,
fight, and rebel against the King?

Secondly. Why the Episcopal part of the Lords and Commons, with the Judges,
Lawyers, and others, who followed his Majesty, should not, did not, or could
not, understand the Prerogative of the King, Privileges of Parliament, and
Liberty of the Subject, as well as the Puritanical party, which opposed his
Majesty?

Thirdly. Why, since the Reformation, None of the Reformed Episcopal
persuasion, have in Arms, Rebelled against their Sovereigns? Whereas ever now
and anon, we are alarmed with some Presbyterian Rebellion or other?

The Proverb assures us that There is no smoke without some fire. And why all
these men should be seditious (as experience assures us) I shall leave to the
consideration of Dr. Burges, being one of the oldest amongst them.

But it may be some of them, in answer to these Quaeries, will say in the
seditious Tenent of that Scotch-firebrand Mr. Robert Blair, who taught his
Scholars in his Lectures upon Aristotle; That Monarchial Large Declar. page
324.
Government was unlawful. And were not the blew-capt Covenanting Brethren,
pretty birds, that could find no fitter man to make Professor of Divinity in
the University of St. Andrews, then this furious Orestes? Some it might be
would affirm, that they only fought, to obtain the Id. page 404.
desire of that Scotch Bully, who in his sermon thus stirred up his Auditors;
Let us never give over 'till we have the King in our power, and then he shall
see how good Subjects we are. Others, it might be, were weary of the Kings
ruling over them, and so might act for England as others Mr. R. Watsons second
fair warning. p. 39.
belcht out concerning a neighbour-Kingdome, viz. That Scotland had been too
long a Monarchy, and that they would never do well so long as one of the
Stuarts was alive. And possibly some were so far for liberty of subject and
Conscience, that they hoped by their hands, that God would fulfill the desires
of him, who prayed to Almighty God Id. page 120.
in the Kirk of St. Andro, That He would carry through the good cause against
all his Enemies, especially against Kings, Devils, and Parliaments. Are not
these precious souls to promote the Holy League, or to put forward the cause of
Muntzer, or John a Leyden?

Well, if you will have any more of this Caledonian doctrine; Then what do you
think, Was not he a dapper Covenanter, that could thus Lysimach. Nican Epist
Congrat. page 13.
twit his late Majesty? We must not lose you and the Kingdom, by preferring
your Fancies, and groundless affections, before sound reason; you should
complain to the heart that the head is much distempered; The Lion must be cured
of the Kings Evil. Is not this a pretty reflection, fitting to prompt a
Rumper, to do what he will against a King? But if this be not enough, Bradshaw
may pick a small vindication from the Covenanters, who thus assure Kings, that
-- The people may be well enough without them, for there was NONE TILL Cains
days. Happy souls, that have the sole power of understanding Scripture, and
History! Nor is their knowledge stinted here only, but they can (as if they had
a strange spirit of Divination) even know the hearts of their Id. page 43.
betters: for thus one of their Grandees [R. B.] from the Pulpit could assure
his Beloved, that the Lord has forsaken our King, and given him over to be led
by the Bishops, the blind brood of Antichrist, who are hot Beagles hunting for
the blood of Gods Saints. Is not this fit stuff from the jaws of an hotheaded
Covenanter? I can tell you also, that (when his Majesty, sufficiently provoked
by these furious Rebels, went D. E.
himself to reduce them to obedience) one of these Tub-Pratlers told his
Hearers, that they of the Holy Covenant, were like Israel at the Red sea, and
Pharaoh and his host coming upon them. And another [H. R.] was as forward as
any of them, when he compared the King to a Wicked Italian, who delighted to
kill men, both in soul and body. And was not the King highly beholden to these
his good Subjects? And had no the reason to thank Mr. Cant. for his good
opinion of, and wishes for him, when in his Sermon at Glascow he could dapperly
pray to God, To take away the Kings Idolatry? But words are but wind, and
therefore deeds must do the feat; for obtaining of which they think themselves
obliged, to vindicate any manner of murder or bloodshed. Thus one of their
Zealots highly applauding John Id. page 57.
Feltons stabbing the Duke of Buckingham; God has chalked out the way unto
you, God offered himself to guide you by the hand, in giving this first blow;
will you not follow home? The sprinkling of the blood of the Wolf, if we can
follow the Lord in it, may prove a means to save us, etc. But because the life
of a Subject is too small a recompense for their Revenge, the pouring out of
Sacred Royal blood would not be Id. page 59. 68.
amiss, as appears by the words of a Covenanting Brother. Tell the Head it is
sick, press the people to Arms to strike the BASILIKE VEIN, since nothing but
THAT, will cure the pleurisy of your Estate. And is not this a good way to
plead for Zion? Is it not an hard case, that none but these blood-shot eyes can
discern the Pattern in the Mount? Would not a man think King Charles the I by
these Characters, to be a stranger Monster than ever Aldrovandus heard of? And
can any man think, that these Kirkers spoke like subjects, when they publicly
Id. page 2.
declared that, We deserve and expect [a proper word to their betters]
Approbation and Thanks from his Majesty. And all this only for Rebellion,
according, to Mr. Andrew Ramsey Minister of Edinburgh Id. page 7.
his Doctrine, viz. That it was Gods will that the primitive Church should
confirm the Truth by suffering; and that now, the truth being confirmed, It Is
his will that we defend the Truth by Action in Resisting TYRANTS. And what was
meant by this word Tyrants, the Time when the word was spoke, does sufficiently
demonstrate. And so little respect have these Brethren to the Supreme Powers,
that a great Grandee, well known in England, if you say but Thomas Cartwright,
did thus proudly give his judgment concerning this Question, Whether Id. p. 34.
the King himself might be Excommunicated? That Excommunication should not be
exercised upon Kings, I utterly mislike. And how exactly these Disciplinarians
Quadrate with the Jesuits in Politics, the learned Mr. Corbet, under the Name
of Lysimachus Nicanor, has Ingeniously discovered; which Book so handsomely
exposed the Zealots, that, [the Author being after, murdered by the Irish]
Robert Bailey, that Review. p. 2.
Scavinger of Presbytery, betwixt snarling and rejoicing, could not refrain
from crying out, O the judgment of God!

The Aethiopians paint the Devil white, and look upon our Europians as not
beautiful, because not of their black and obscure Complexion: And our
dark-souled Puritans censure all Virtue and Loyalty as abominable, because
contrary to their Principles, which persuades them to espouse such Maxims as
these;

I.
That it is lawful for Subjects to make a Covenant, and Combination Large
Declar. page 409.
without the King, and to enter into a Band of mutual defense against their
King, and all persons whatsoever.

II.
After a Law is made, and confirmed, yet if the Subjects (or rather, as Id. p.
412.
appears by practice, if only a part of them) protest against such established
Law, or Laws; Then, that does void all obedience to those Laws, and the
Protestors are discharged from any obligation to live under them; although the
Protestations, and the validity of them, be not discussed before the competent
Judges of them.

III.
A number of men, being the greater part of the Kingdom, (because Id. 413.
they are the greater) may do any thing, what they themselves do conceive to be
conducible to the glory of God, and the good of the Church, notwithstanding of
any Laws standing in force to the contrary: And that these (especially, met in
a Representative Assembly) may not only without the Authority of the King, but
against the express Commandment of the King, and his Council, and Judges,
declaration of it to be against the Laws of the Land; sit, act, and determine
of things concerning the Church and State; as if there were neither King,
Council, or Judges in the Land: and several other such like dangerous positions
as these, whereby they ruin, and destroy Kingdoms. Which can never be upon a
sure foundation, as long as such Bonte-feu's are tolerated; Schism being the
chief Conr. Brunus. de Haeret. l. (...). cap. 16.
overthrower of Nations.

Upon these Principles, our English Presbyterians rebelled against their
Sovereign; and upon the same account their Neighbors did in Scotland, and then
trudged forwards to the assistance of their Southern associates: declaring the
necessity of such a Rebellion, -- Unless we Declarat. of Scot. concerning their
Expedition into Eng. Aug. 10. p. 8, 9.
will either Betray our Religion, Liberties, and Laws, and all that we, and
ours do possess, into their hands; [i. e. The opposite, and malignant Party of
Papists, Prelates, and others the sons of defection, and contention, their
adherents] and suffer our selves to be cut off, and massacred, by such bloody,
and barbarous cruelty, as they have executed this time past in Ireland, and
England. There is a necessity of taking of Arms for mutual defense: -- In this
case it is most necessary, that every one against all doubting, be persuaded in
his mind of the lawfulness of this undertaking, and of the goodness of the
cause maintained by him. -- To assist our Brethren in England, who are calling
for our help, and are shedding their blood in defense of that Power; without
which, Religion can neither be defended, nor reformed, nor unity of Religion
with us, and other Reformed Kirks be attained: -- To whom of old, and of late,
we have made Promises of the real Declarations of all Christian duty, and
thankfulness; and who upon our desires, and their endeavors for unity in
Religion, have often warned us, that the Malignant Party would bend all their
invention, and forces, to interrupt the work, and to ruin, and destroy them in
the undertaking of it, which we see this day come to pass. The Question is no
sooner rightly stated, but it is soon resolved: the Lord save us from the Curse
of Meroz, who came not to help the Lord, to help the Lord against the mighty?
when we look upon the cause which they maintain, the Prayers, Tears, and Blood
which they have poured forth, and the insolences, and the blasphemies of the
enemies; we cannot doubt, but enlargement and deliverance shall arise unto
England. -- God forbid, and be it far from us to sit down at ease -- on this
side of Jordan; till our Brethren be possessed in the Liberties of the Kingdom
of Christ.

And this Seditious canting-language, they second in another of their
Declarations to the same purpose, -- Unless we can (which God forbid) A short
Declar. of their Expedit. into Engl. p. 4.
blot out of our thoughts the sense of piety, and Religion toward God, of
honor, and duty toward our Sovereign, and of gratitude toward the Parliament,
and Kingdom of England, we can in no wise resist our present call to this
Expedition. Very pretty! that their duty to their King should oblige them to
fight against him, and his Authority! But the people of this Gang, are very
much given to make Bulls, and Nonsense. This is not unlike to our
Long-Parliament, who thus very gravely Ordered. -- To the intent that his
Majesty's Revenue, might no more 21. Sept. 1643.
be mis-applyed, and that the same may be employed for the good of his Majesty,
and the Commonwealth: The Lords and Commons, therefore, do Ordain, -- That all
his Majesty's, the Queens, and Princes Revenue, -- shall be seized upon. -- But
what if I should tell you that some of these Diegos can affirm for their
excuse, that they were bound by the Oath of Allegiance to take the Parliaments
part against the King; would you not think that the price of Oaths is fallen very
low? Well, if you will enquire of old Master Thomas Hall the Parson of
Kings-Norton, he can tell you what is the opinion of him, and others, Funebr.
Flor. p. 40.
in this case: He is a notable Champion against May-poles, and will give you
abundance of arguments to prove that they are the Devils Anglerods, which
being well baited with Holy-sisters, is the only way to catch Puritans, as an
old woman told a zealous Grandee: but enough of his precise, and simple
Objections, of which I may say, as the famous Seldom His Notes upon Drayton's
Poly-Obb. Song. 3. p. 52.
said of some old fashioned Rhimes, You may read them, and then laugh at them.
If their Allegiance obliged them to fight against the King, they may well
suppose, that by the Covenant they were bound to cut him off, by the Article of
bringing Malignants to punishent; and what may be the sequel of such
assertions, I hope our Superiors will consider.

And what do you think of another swash-buckler of this Tribe, who assures the
world that the English had as much cause to rejoice for their Joh. Vicar' s
Chron. part. 4. * 2.
Conquests over his Majesty, as the Israelites for their deliverance from
wicked Pharaoh, and his Egyptians? And this use of Exhortation, the better to
advantage the memory of the whining Sisterhood, he coughs out in as good Dogril
Rhyme, as ever John Cotton, or Vavasor Powel were guilty of; a taste of whose
hatred to the King's Party you may see in these following,

Sing praise, sing praise, unto Jehova high,
For he has Tryumphed most gloriously,
Over all our foes: The Horse, and Rider He
Has tumbled down to deepest misery.
Yea, all the rotten-rout of Romanists,
Papists, and Prelates, Atheists, Royallists,
And Mad-Malignants void of grace, or sense,
To whom God now has made just recompense.
Why he should distinguish betwixt Royalists, and Malignants, I know not,
though I might very well; and I am as ignorant what difference he finds betwixt
a Romanist, and a Papist, unless all this be, with the fellow in the Play, to
make up Meeter. And who must this boaster be, but the furious John Vicars? one
that hated all people that loved obedience, as the Devil does Holy water: and
could out-scold the boldest face at Billings-gate, if Kings, Bishops, Organs,
or May Pole, were to be the objects of their zealous indignation; of which I
shall give you but one taste, to wit, against his Sacred Majesty.

-- The King's Letter full indeed of much EVIL, and Demonstration Id. p. 438.
of no Change of heart, from his former BLOODY, CRUEL, and UNKINGLY PRACTICES,
of the RUIN of Himself, and His Kingdoms, as much as in Him lay. --

Is this fit to be Printed for the information of the people? and yet Ja.
Cranford, thought it very fitting. Was is convenient to dedicate such stuff as
this to Almighty God? yet the Author thought nothing more. Would any man call
this a fair and famous History? yet Vicars himself could give it that Encomium.
Or could any imagine, that such a Part. 3. p. 304.
Rayler against the King and Church should (even the other day) deserve the
Title of The Worthy Patriot of his Country; and yet so is he Dagon. demolished.
honored: but, by whom, Edward Thomas, Mr. Pryn's Bookseller, can better
inform you than my self. The truth of it is, this man's Histories only look
like a Company of Thanksgiving Sermons stitched up together, as Georgius
Hornius well Uncharacterized them. Yet must I needs Sermones potius sacros,
quales ad populum habeatur, quam Historias scripsit; cum maxima operis pars
Theologica sit. G. Horn. Rerum Britan. ad Lectorem.
say, that of all men, that pretended to deep Learning, and good History, this
Hornius of Strangers is the most partial in his short Story of our late English
Wars; which makes me somewhat mistrust the man's Principles: seeing at his being
then in England, he might have more exactly informed himself, if Interest had
not swayed him; But, I hope, his History of the Scottish Rebellion, and the
beginning of the English (when it is printed) will be more Ingenuous; or else I
shall desire him to acquaint himself with his friend Monsieur de Parival, or
the two Italians, Priorato, and Bisaccione, and other Forraigners, who are more
impartial.

I need not tell you, how the Presbyterian mad-caps of the Long-Parliament,
declared the legality and necessity of the War against their King. Nor how
they they voted all his Loyal Subjects Traitors, because obedient to him: these
things be as well known as their Prosperity, they driving all before them,
being thrust on with a mischief, as if they had the command of Dame Fortune, as
Ericus [Ventosi Pilei] Jo. Loccen. Hist. Suec. p. 12.
King of Sweadland, had of the Winds, by the turning of his Cap. And
whatsoever they did, their white-eyed Pulpiteers vindicated, and whined it out
to their affected people with abundance of Has! Oh's! and O's! to be agreeable
to Gods Secret Will; for alas, every puny of these Saints understood his
Revealed, too well, to be Catechized in such things.

How pitifully these Schismatical Cushion-Thumpers abused the simple multitude
into Rebellion, you may in part perceive, by one instance, out of their own
Historian. After the Battle of Edgehill, the Earl of Vicar' s. Chron. Part. 1.
p. 212.
Essex, with several of his Regiments went to London, [Novemb. 1642.] The
Sabbath Day after their arrival to London, the Godly and well-affected
Ministers, throughout the City, preached and praised the Lord publicly, for
their so joyful and safe return home to their Parents, Masters, and Friends:
Exhorting those young Soldiers of Christ's Army-Royal, still to retain, and be
forward and ready to show, their Courage and Zeal to the defense of Gods Cause,
and their Countries Welfare: Showing them the Plots of their Adversaries to
have Introduced Popery and Tyranny into the Kingdom; and assuring them, that
this War on their parts was waged and managed by Papists; An Army of Papists
being raising by the Kings Command, contrary to his Vows and Protestations, and
deep Asseverations to the contrary. And were not these sweet-souls to preach
Peace and Repentance? Just as some foreign Priests by hearing Confession,
instead of a rebuke, persuade the simple women to act the same sin over again
with themselves. Nay, so far had our rebellious. Thunderers proceeded, as to
make the People believe, that those who sided with the King, were in a manner
past hopes of any happiness in the World to come: concerning which, I shall
tell you a Story upon the credit of honest Jack Tailor. One Francis Beal The
Noble Cavalier caracterised. p. 5, 6.
(dwelling in the Axe-Yard in Kings-street, Westminster), with his Wife, were
throrow-paced for the Parliamentary-Cause; yet had a Son, who like an honest
Subject, faithfully served the King in the Wars; which so troubled his zealous
Mother, that she caused a Bill to be written to have him prayed for in the
Church, which Bill was delivered in Martins Church near Chearing-Cross, to the
well-known Mr. Case the Lecturer there on Thursdays; the form of the Bill was
as follows.

These are to desire you to take into your Christian Considerations, the grief
and sorrow of one Mistress Beal of Westminster, whose son Francis Beal is fallen
away from Grace, and serves the King in his Wars: Wherefore she most humbly
beseeches the Prayers of this Congregation, that He may Return and be
Converted.

Is not this abominable Hypocrisy, as bad as the poor ignorant Irish, who when
they went a stealing, prayed to God for good Fortune; and, if accordingly, they
got a good Booty, used to render God thanks for his assisting their Villainy,
and so looked upon it as the gift of God.

Oh, what will men not dare, if thus they dare Relig. of the Hypocrit. Presb.
p. 20, 21, 22.

Be impudent to Heaven, and play with Prayer!
Play with that Fear, with that Religious awe
Which keeps men free, and yet is man's great Law:
What can they but the worst of Atheists be
Who, while they word it against Impiety,
Affront the Throne of God with their false deeds?
Alas! this, wonder in the Atheist breeds.
Are these the men that would the Age reform
That down with Superstition cry, and swarm
This painted Glass, that Sculpture to deface,
But worship Pride and Avarice in the place?
Religion they bawl out, yet know not what
Religion is, unless it be to prate.
Meekness they preach, but study to Control;
Money they would have, when they cry out the Soul.
And angry will not have Our Father said,
'Cause it prays not enough for daily bread,
They meet in private, and cry Persecution,
When Faction is their end, and State-confusion;
These are the men that plague and overrun
Like Goths and Vandals all Religion.
Vain foolish People, how are you deceived?
How many several sorts have you received
Of things called Truths, upon your backs laid on
Like Saddles for themselves to ride upon?
They ridd amain, and Hell and Satan drove,
While every Priest for his own profit strove.
They close with God, seem to obey his Laws,
They cry aloud for him, and for his Cause:
But while they do their strict Injunctions preach,
Deny in actions what their words do teach.
O what will men not dare, if thus they dare
Be Impudent with Heaven, and play with Prayer!
Besides, the many wicked Declarations of the Juncto of the Lords and Commons,
and the seditious Pulpit-Talkativeness of their puny Muffti's, many Pamphlets
were sent abroad to incite the people to Rebellion, and this by Authority too;
a sight of which, I suppose, their zealous Journey-man Sam. Gellibrand would
not deny a friend. Nay, they were gone so far, as to think the Rebellion, so
laudable and necessary, that they persuaded the people, that it was not lawful
to suffer patiently, and withdraw themselves from its calamities, (contrary to
the express command of our Savior, who bids us fly from City to City, Mat. 10.
23. Case of Conscience concerning flying in Times of Trouble. 1643. page 7.
rather than resist), to which purpose, one of their Beloved, [Mr. S. T.] put
forth a small Treatise, in which he tells the World, That when a
Parliamentary-State is engaged for the repressing of Injuries, and maintenance
of public Liberties, and men's Estates, this -- calls in all private thoughts
of escape, to contribute them to the public defense: and then furiously
exasperates them against the King and his Loyal Subjects, by infusing into them
strange things, of the dangerous distemper spread over all our Body, the
discord in our own Bowels, an Abominable Army, Idolatrous Ensigns, the Romish
Banner. And therefore, Things stand Id. p. 9.
now in such posture, that God requires our deep Engagement, and that we should
banish all thoughts of declining. In this great hazard, that Liberty, Laws, and
Religion run; to leave our ground, were to leave Popery Mastery of the Field.
And at last concludes, What comfort can this Id. p. 15.
be, if we run away from a good Cause, as if we were afraid to own, or afraid
to assist it, and unwilling to suffer and be lost with it? And who must be the
promoter of Printing this Seditious Pamphlet, but Mr. Edm. Calamy, the famous
hinter of Aldermanbury, London?

But it was not only Printing which they made use of to vindicate Rebellion,
but also, and that a main one too, Pulpit-prating; for I dare not call such
babbling, Preaching: where nothing was yell'd out but Persecution! Persecution!
O the cruelty and knavery of the King! O the Idolatry of the Queen! O the
wickedness of the Malignant, Antichristian Army! and all this (forsooth)
against the Cause of God, the souls of his true Saints, the peace of the
Directory, and the happiness of the Elect, the true children of Grace: the poor
people gaping all the while, really believing, no Devils to be in the World,
but Cavaliers; not a word, proceeding from the lying Throats of these
Pulpiteers, but filled the soft-brain'd Auditors with more indignation against
the King and his Cause, than our Women are against Popery, at the sight of a
flaming Picture in the Book of Martyrs. All their prittle-prattle was to show
the goodness of their Cause (and I wish some of the Presbyterian Churches
beyond-Seas were not too much complying in this), the abominable wickedness of
the Kings Party, and to persuade their friends never to make peace with such
Malignants: Of which I shall afford you two or three Instances.

Mr. Herbert Palmer of Ashwell in Hertfordshire, made a long-winded 28. June.
1643.
tittle-tattle, stuffed with Rebellion and Sedition, before the House of Commons:
at the latter end of which, he finds out a pretty device to have all the
Cavaliers throats cut; and all this to be justified by Inspiration from God
Almighty -- I humbly entreat you to ask Gods Page 70.
Consent first, whether he will spare such or such, or pardon them; and if he
will not, you must not -- Probably this Politician was very well acquainted
with the subtle Robber of old time, who made the Countrey-Parson pray for
Riches, and upon that account took all his Gold from him. Or it may be, Oliver
used this Art to murder his Majesty; Elench. Mot. p. 120.
for we are told, that he said, he prayed to know Gods mind in that case, and
he took the Answer Affirmatively. Thus our Red-Coats of Wallingford-House,
after they had concluded upon any mischief, would, for a blind to the People,
appoint a Day of Humiliation to enquire of God what should be done, though they
were before resolved, that all the Prayers in the World should not alter their
foregoing Determination. Whence it came to be a vulgar and true Observation,
That whenever those Saints had a Fast, they were then broaching some mischief
or other. To be short, the greatest wickedness in the World may be perpetrated
by this Rule of Palmer's, and so Religion prove but a piece of Policy; yet, was
it very fitting for the Parliaments actions, which I suppose, was the cause,
that they ordered Sir Oliver Luke to give him thanks for his Seditious
Preachment, and to desire him to print it, the better to infect the People.

Another of these Bawlers, seldom thought of a Bishop, or the Kings Party, but
with Indignation, and this must be Mr. Thomas Coleman, formerly of Blyton in
Lincolnshire, but since, by the Schismatics was put into St. Peter's Cornhill,
London, from which, they had not only wickedly Sequestered Dr. Fairfax, but
Plundered and Imprisoned him in Ely-House, and in the Ships, and turned his
Wife and Children out of doors: But to return to Coleman, who in one of his
Sermons, thus rants against the Church of England, and violently persuades the
Parliament 30. Aug. 1643. Page 39.
to execute severe justice upon her Children. -- Our Cathedrals? in great part
of late become the Nest of Idle Drones, and the roosting place of Superstitious
Formallists. -- Our Formallists, and Government in the whole Hierarchy is
become a fretting Gangrene, Page 24.
a spreading Leprosy, an unsupportable Tyranny; Up with it, up with it to the
bottom, Root and Branch, Hip and Thigh, Destroy these Amalekites, and let their
place be no more found. -- Throw away the Rubs, out with the Lords Enemies, and
the Lands: Page 64.
Vex the Midianites, abolish the Amalekites, or else they will vex you with
their wiles, as they have done heretofore. Let Popery find no favor, because
it is Treasonable; Prelacy as little, because it is Tyrannical.

This was rare stuff for the Blades at Westminster, and pleased admirable well;
and therefore they strait order Sir Edward Aiscough, and Sir John Wray, to give
the Zealot hearty thanks for his good directions, and to desire him, by all
means, to print it; which accordingly he did, and in requital of thanks,
Dedicates his fury to their Worships, where he falls to his old Trade again,
very pretily by his Art of Rhetoric, calling the Kings Army, Partakers with
Atheists, Epist. Dedicat.
Infidels, Papists, etc. That it has Popish Masses, superstitious Worships,
cold Forms in the Service of God. That it is stored with Popish Priests. That
it Persecutes Godly Ministers, painful Preachers. That it does harbor all our
drunken, debauched Clergy, our Idle, Non-Preaching, dumb Ministry, our
Ambitious Tyrannical Prelacy, and the sinck and dregs of the Times; the
receptacle of the filth of the present and former Ages, our
spiritual-Courts-men. This man's railing pleased the Commons so well, that they
could think no man fitter to prate when their wicked League and Covenant was
taken than He; which accordingly he did to the purpose, tickling their filthy
Ears with the same strains of malice. Impudently affirming, That none but an
27. Sept. 1643. Page 23.
Atheist, Papist, Oppressor, Rebel, or the guilty, desperate Cavaliers, and
light and empty men can refuse the Covenant: and so concludes with a reflection
upon the Kings Party, as Idolaters. And for this stuff, Colonel Long must be
Ordered to give him thanks from the Page 27.
House.

Another of these Parliamentary Furies [Mr. Arth. Salwey of Severnstoak 25.
October. 1643.
in Worcestershire], thus desires them to destroy the Kings friends. -- Follow
God (I beseech you) in the speedy and impartial Execution of Justice. -- -- The
hearts of your true Friends are Page 20.
grieved, that so many Delinquents are in Prison, and yet but very few of them
brought to their Trial. -- -- When Elijah had done execution upon Baals
Priests, there was rain enough, (1 King. 18. 40, 41.) Who knows how soon the
Lord may bless us with an holy Peace and blessed Reformation, if Justice were
more fully executed. And this man must have thanks sent him too, from the
Parliament by Mr. Rouse.

Another of their Thumpers, viz. Mr. George Walker, (of St. John Evangelists,
London,) thus stirs up execution against Malignants. -- Cut them down with the
Sword of Justice, Root them out, and consume 29. Jan. 1644/5.
them as with fire, that no root may spring again, let their mischief fall upon
their own Heads, that the land may be eased, which has a long time, and does
still groan under them as an heavy curse. And was not this a fit Sermon to be
preached just the day before the Treaty at Uxbridge, and then to be printed too
by the Presbyterian Authority? Could these men desire peace, that thus
countenanced men to rail against their betters, with whom they were to Treat?

But this is short of Mr. Christopher Love's malice (let one of their wits
sing out his Commendations as he pleases) he at the very day of the Treaty
must needs thunder it at the place it self: persuading the people by all means
not to treat with the Royalists, as I have in part before insisted on: but
besides that which I told you then, he could thus also animate his friends
against peace. --

-- It Is the sword (not disputes nor Treaties) that must end this Controversy;
Chr. Love's Englands distemper. page 7.
Wherefore turn your plow-shares into swords, and your pruning hooks into
spears, to fight the Lords battles, to avenge the blood of Saints, which has
been spilt; It must be avenged either by us, or upon us, -- -- I have sometimes
feared, always praid, that too much page 26.
mercy and pity in our State Physicians [i. e. the Parliament] might not
retard the healing of this land: Men who have deserted their trust, falsified
Would not the Presbyterians think much, if one should now retort? but a good
purse can raise envy upon any man that dare speak truth: It may be Mr. R.
L'estrange can think it.
their Covenants; how soon are they received into favor, enjoy their Estates,
as if they were never enemies! Oh! how are Neutralists and Malignants spared?
-- I have often thought that too much mercy toward Malignants, has made more
Delinquents than ever justice has punished: mercy should not weigh down
justice; in God they are both equal, why should it not be so in man? Pity to
the bad, has proved cruelty to the good; the sparing of Offenders has made
many worse, few or none better. To them that have showed no mercy, let judgment
be showed without mercy. Guilt has been contracted, much innocent blood has
been spilt, which must either be avenged on us or by us. --

-- Oh, there are many Malignant humors to be purged out of many of page 32.
the Nobles, and Gentry, in this Kingdom before we can be healed. -- The Lord
heals a Land by cutting off these distempered members, that endangers page 37.
the health of the Land. 'Twas the Lord troubled. Achan and cut him off,
because he troubled Israel: O that in this, our State-physitians [i. e. the
Parliament] would resemble God, to cut off those from the Land who have
distempered it. Melius est ut pereat unus quam unitas. -- Men who lie under the
guilt of much innocent blood are not meet persons to be at peace with, till all
the guilt of blood be expiated and avenged, either by the With what face then
can the Presbyterians expect mercy, and favor, till the blood of Lucas, Lisle,
Bouchier Yeomans, Arch. Laud, E. of Strafford, E. Montross, Mar. of Huntley.
Hathill, Gordon, Spotswood, and many other persons of quality by them murdered,
be avenged?
sword of the Law, or Law of the sword, else a peace can never be safe nor
just. And then at the last tells you, that the Parliaments cause and men are so
good, but the Malignants so abominably wicked, that Heaven* and Hell may almost
as soon meet, as these two make a peace. I might also tell you, how he hints
upon the perfidiousnesse of Princes, upon the deaths of King James and Prince
Henry, upon the loss of Rochell, and the Irish Rebellion; but I shall leave
such false dirty slanders, to be swallowed down by those Puritans who first
spewed them forth; yet did Ja: Cranford, think this hour of Rebellion very
worth printing, the better page 42.
page 5, 6, 23.
to persuade the people to embrace such wickedness. Which calls to my memory
one expression then uttered by Love, That it was a very page 17.
hurtful opinion, that people must not defend themselves by force of Arms
against their King. What wickedness this rebellious barrangue boaded I shall
not say, only desire you to observe, that his Sacred Majesty was murdered the
same day four years that this blood-thirsty doctrine was vomited out by Love;
and the same day that Love dyed on, was also honored with the death of that
bloody Tyrant Richard III.

What do you think of another of these Champions, viz. Mr. Samuel 25 June 1645
Rutherford? No less man then Professor of Divinity at St. Andrews, who thus
yell'd out his malice against the Kings friends.

-- Bloody men who defend a cursed cause. -- O enemies of the Gospel! page 11.
O Malignants and haters of the Lord and his Saints! -- Malignants are but
drawing blood of Christ's heel in these bloody Wars. page 20.
-- -- He (God) suffers Malignants to ride over his people, that he may
perfume the work of Hell in the enemies, who are as it page 25.
were skullions to purge the vessels of mercy and to humble them. -- Malignants
plow the Church, and sow blood in the three Kingdoms. -- -- The wicked of
these Kingdoms, malignants, bloody-Irish page 40
rotten-hearted men; such back-sliders and perjured Apostates, as are in
Scotland delivered to Satan, and Excommunicated. -- -- And The Earl of
Montrosse and his loyal party
after this, speaking concerning the reasons of Gods judgments upon the Nation,
he thus delivers himself. -- --

-- Others say, Rebellion against the King is the cause: but rather, the not
timous rising to help the Lord, and his oppressed people, against the mighty,
is the cause. The defection of both Kingdoms to Altar-worship, page 44.
Imagery, Idolatry, Popish and Arminian doctrine, etc. And a little after this,
throws more dirt upon the King and his party, than half his enemies page 64. 65.
had done before. Yet was all this very pleasing to the Lords house then at
Westminster; who like true English Barons (who should neither suffer their
King, nor their Peers to be abused) the next day, having consulted with their
Pillows, like themselves, Order thanks to be given to Rutherfurd, with desires
also that he print his gudly geere.

I could also tell you how Samuel Anneley [L. L. D. and Preacher at 26 July.
1648.
Cliffe in Kent] very manfully persuaded the Parliament to do page 11, 13, 16.
24. 28.
justice upon the King, and not to treat with him any more, yet highly extols
and affirms the obligation of the page 12.
Covenant, so that some can cut off the Kings head by authority of the
Covenant; for which pretty salvo, it may be the Commons ordered Mr. Boys to
give the Dr. thanks, where also they desire him to print this Queer come off.

I would also tell you of Mr. Matthew Barker [formerly of James Garlic hithe,
London, whence Mr. Freeman was wrongfully sequestered and plundered, and his
Curate Mr. Anthony turned out] then of Mortlake in Surrey, 25 October. 1648
who earnestly in the pulpit persuaded the Parliament to page 29, 30. 33, 34,
35, 36.
continue in the wicked ways they had begun. And that they do by all means
execute page 39, 40. 48. p. 43. 50.
justice. And not to have any more Treaties: and this man must have their
thanks too, from the mouth of Colonel Harvy.

I would also tell you how Mr. Tho. Brooks (of Thomas Apostles, whence Mr.
Cooper was sequestered, plundered, and sent Prisoner to 26 December. 1648. page 14.
etc. 46.
Leeds Castle in Kent) furiously stirred up the Rumpers to do justice, but
because this was after the seclusion, I shall neither speak of him, or his
being thankd by Sir John Bourchier.

The plain truth is, should I give you a Bead-role of all the Treasonable,
rebellious, and seditious expressions only uttered from the Pulpit before the
Parliament it self, from the beginning of these wars till the Kings murder,
(as I could soon do, did I think it worth the while) a Stranger might well
suppose our English Pulpits not to be unlike that dreadful passage in Sir John
Mandevile, where so many Devils cunningly acted their parts to intise
passengers to their perpetual ruin: and well might he judge every Presbyterian
black coat, a Cataline, whose only business is to promote Rebellion and
Bloodshed: yet was none of them ever checked by, but had the hearty thanks from,
the Parliament for so doing; which shall stand as a perpetual in famy to the
Presbyterians in the house, whether secluded, or a Rumper. For, had they any
respect to his Majesty, they would never have suffered him to have been so
abused: or, had they had ever any real intentions of peace, they would never
have permitted these Roysters to have widened the breach, by their perpetual
prating against Treaties. But both of them were well agreed against peace,
especially the Parliament hated a personal Treaty by all means, lest any of
them should be convinced of his error, as a former Earl of Ormond was. He was a
Friar of St. Francis Order; called Vincent, and through misinformation thought
our King Henry V to have been the most wicked man in the world, and so thought
his Titus Livius de Frunlonisis life of King Henry the V. M. S. in the Bodl.
library. page 61, 62.
War unjust in France; but after a little discourse with the King himself he
was so satisfied on the contrary, that he thus bespake the Kings Army.

My Lords and Masters all, see ye that ye do to the King your Master diligent
and true service, as you have till now well done; For in your so doing, you
shall well please God. This morning before I came hither, I believed that the
King your Master, had been the greatest Tyrant among all other Princes
Christian: but now I perceive the contrary; for I assure you, He is the most
acceptable unto God, of all them that be here present this day; and his Quarrel
is so just and true, that undoubtedly God is and shall be his Aid in all these
Wars.

And this is not much unlike the Reply of that great sufferer the Noble Bayly's
Worcesters Apothegms. 15. p. 21.
Marquess of Worcester to the Mayor of Bala in Merioneth-shire, who came to
excuse himself and Town, for his Lordships bad Lodging. -- Lord! what a thing
is this misunderstanding! I warrant you, might but the King and Parliament
conserre together as you and I have done, there might be as right an
understanding as betwixt you and I. Some body has told the Parliament that the
King was an Enemy, and their believing of him is such, has wrought all the
jealousies which are come to these distractions. The Parliament being now in
such a case as I my self am in, having The Parlour where the Marquess lay, was
a soft and loose ground wherein you might sink up to the Ancles. The top of the
house was tharcht with ill-thresht straw, and the corn that was left in the
straw, wherewith the house was thatcht, grew and was then all as green as
grafse.
green Ears over their Heads, and false Ground under their Feet.

Had the Presbyterians been content with the concessions, granted them by his
Majesty far above their desert or cause, they might have enjoyed peace and
liberty and the government to boot; but their resolutions to have all, was the
cause of their losing all, by the intervening of the Independents. Not unlike
the Clown, to whom St. Bernard promised his Mule, whereon he then rode, if he
could say the Lords Prayer without the interposition of any vain thoughts. The
fellow, very Alonso de Villegas, flos sanctorum. 20. August.
glad of the bargain, falls a saying Pater Noster, etc. but before he had said
half, there came an idle thought into his head whether St. Bernard would give
him the Bridle and Saddle too, which making him faulter, and confess the
truth, he lost all.

I shall not here trouble my self, to rake up all the sedition of that Scotch
firebrand Mr. Robert Bailey, but only tell you, that he greatly Bailys Review
pap. 83.
wonders that the Reverend Lord Bishop of Londonderry, should deny so grand a
Presbyterian Maxim, viz. That it is altogether lawful for the Parliament to
take up arms for the defense of the liberties or any other imaginable cause,
against any party countenanced by the Kings presence against his Laws. And of
all this who must be judge but themselves. But I shall tell you the passages of
one or two great men now alive, and great Bustlers in London against our true
Church.

Mr. George Cockain of Pancras Soperlane, London, whence Mr. Eccop was
sequestered, plundered, forced to fly, and his Wife and Children turned out of
doors. This Cockain held forth before the Commons, 29 November. 1648.
and whether or no he did not press them to murder his Sacred Majesty, let
any man judge by these his following words.

Think not to save your selves by an unrighteous saving of them, who are page
26.
the Lords and the peoples known enemies. You may not Imagine to obtain the
favor of those amongst whom you will not do justice; For certainly if you act
not like Gods in this particular against men truly obnoxious to justice, they
will be like Devils against you. Observe that place, 1 Kings 22. 31. compared
with chap. 20. It is said in chap. 20. That the King of Syria came against
Israel, and, by the mighty power of God, he and his Army were overthrown, and
the King was taken Prisoner. Now the mind of God was (which he then discovered,
only by that present providence) that justice should have been executed upon
him, but it was not: whereupon the Prophet comes with Ashes on his face, and
waited for the King of Israel chapter 20. v. 42.
in the way where he should return: and as the King passed by, he cried unto
him, thus says the Lord, Because thou have let go a man, whom I appointed for
destruction, therefore thy life shall go for his Life. Now see how the King of
Syria, after this answers Ahab's love: About three years after, Israel and
Syria engage in a new War, And the King of c. 22. v. 31.
Syria gives command unto his Soldiers, that they should fight neither against
small nor great, but against the King of Israel. Benhadad's life was once in
Ahabs hands, and he ventured Gods displeasure to let him go; but see how
Benhadad rewards him for it, Fight neither against small nor great but against
the King of Israel. Honorable and worthy, if God Is not this well applied?
do not lead you to do justice upon those that have been the great Actors in
shedding innocent blood, never think to gain their love by sparing of them; For
they will, if opportunnity be ever offered, return again upon you and then they
will not fight against the poor and mean ones, but against those Yet was it
Ordered, that Col. Wilson do give him thanks from the Presbyterian Commons.
that have been the Fountain of that Authority and Power which have been
improved against them. Was not this spoke in very good time? viz. Just upon the
breaking off the Isle of Wight-Treaty, and when the Great ones were consulting
about the Kings Trial, which may serve for a Comment upon the Author.

If you shake your head at Cockain, I make no question, but you will bite your
nails, when you hear the plain dealing of one of their Chiefrains: his words I
shall give you upon the honesty and ingenuity State-divinity. page 17.
of Mr. Roger L'estrange, for I have not the Sermon by me. This spruce piece of
Rebellion, in one of his Preachments before one of Oliver's Parliaments; like a
zealous Covenanter thus delivered himself. 24. Sept. 1656. page 23.


Worthy Patriots, You that are our Rulers in this Parliament, it is often said,
we live in times, wherein we may be as good as we please: Wherein we enjoy in
purity and plenty the Ordinances of Jesus Christ. Praised be God for this, even
that God, who has delivered as from the imposition of prelatical Innovations,
Altar-genuflections and cringings, with crossings, and all that Popish Trash
and Trampery. And truly (I speak no more then what I have often thought and
said.) The removal of these insupportable Burdens,
countervails for the blood and treasure, shed and spent in these late
distractions. Nor did I as yet ever hear of any godly men that desired (were it
possible) to purchase their
FRIENDS or money again at so dear a rate, as with the return of these, to have
those soul-burdening, Antichristian yokes re-imposed upon us: And if any such
there be, I am sure that desire is no part of their Godliness, and I profess
my self in that to be none of the number.

Would not this man be a fit Chaplain to an Army of Cannabals, whose delight is
to devour one another? Well, I shall desire to ask Mr. William one or two
Questions, which will be worth his answering.

I.
Is Episcopacy such a devilish Government, and Presbytery so good and
necessary, that the first ought to be nulled, and the latter set up; though the
doing of it, will cost an hundred thousand men's lives, and the destruction of
three Kingdoms, and the King to boot?

II.
Had not the King some friends, that were truly Godly, who wished the
Restoration of his Life, Crown, Throne, Authority, Supremacy, and Prerogative,
and the Episcopal Church Government too? Or, could no man, that was Godly,
desire these things? If not, then

III.
Would the Brethren wish this King upon the Scaffold too, provided, that would
free them from our Episcopacy? Or do they think it fitting or lawful, to rebel
again, and destroy so many families for the rooting out of our Bishops?

Though Mr. L'estrange will not shame the man, by concealing his name; Yet
because I am pretty confident of, no alteration in his judgment, unless it be
according to his custom from worse to worse: I shall tell thee where thou
may find him out. After thou have put on a mortified countenance, and
obtained the art of a counterfeited cough, but muster all the wickedness thou
can hear of into thine heart; foot it demurely to Mr. William Jenkin's house,
I mean the very same man of Christ Church, London, the very same man that
petitioned and recanted with a breath, and if thou can meet with him, he may
tell thee who was the utterer of that Sermon.

But not to trouble you any longer with particular instances. I shall give you
the Vote of a whole Club of London Levites; where you may see what good opinion
they had of the King -- The woeful miscarriages of the King himself (which we
cannot but acknowledge to Vindication of the London-Ministers p. 6, 7. 1648.
be many, and very great) in his Government, that have cost the three Kingdoms
so dear; and cast him down from his Excellency into an horrid Pit of misery,
almost beyond example. -- Pray that God would give him effectual Repentance. --
For subjects to give such a Character upon their Sovereign, is the highest
piece of impudence but for them to throw such aspersions upon the most virtuous
of men; is a malicious slander not to be found in Christians. Yet was this
piece of falsehood, approved of and subscribed to, by 59 Presbyterian
cushion-dusters about London; all which in the same paper acknowledge the
legality of the Rebellion.

If the King be such a wicked man as these Brethren make of him, what must then
be done with him? Some of them say, it is no great matter if execution be done
upon him. However, it may be, most of them will agree with their Champion, Mr.
Baxter, who decrees, that he must be deposed; Nor are the subjects afterward
to trouble themselves for Holy Commonwealth. These. 136. 137. 145, 146, 147.
149. 374, 375.
his Restoration; Nor is the Injured Prince himself to seek his re-settlement,
if the Common Wealth may prosper without him, and so he is obliged to resign
his Government. And thus the people being free from any obedience to him, may
choose another King. Or if a Commonwealth be pitched upon; it is not at all
displeasing to Baxter who is not fond (that is his word) of any one Government
above another, Preface, page 15, and 14.
only his desire is that the Parliaments may be Holy, and this Note, that when,
as abovesaid, he affirmed that the species of the Government, was not to be
altered, but another King to be chosen, that his special friend Rich. Cromwell
was Protector. But when he now writes this for the sole Government of
Parliaments, the Rump was then restored, and Triumphant.
ascertained from Generation, to Generation, by such a necessary Regulation of
Elections, as I have after here at large described; and that all those, that by
It Is worth knowing, whether he means not Royalists and Episcopal men, by those
who have forfeited their liberties by Wickedness.
wickedness have forfeited their liberties, may neither choose nor be chosen.
But I shall leave Mr. Baxter to his own Repentance: only I would put him in
mind, that once he thus magnied a Government of Traitors, which were his
Majesty's professed Enemies. If that Nation that is most happy of any upon Earth
in a Government page 455.
suited to the highest Interest, and to Gods description (Romans 3. 3.) should
yet murmr and despise that Government, It would be a most heinous sin, and a
terrible Prognostic, especially to the guilty souls.

These men must be brave Subjects that make it their whole business to study
Rebellion; and where they cannot execute the King, will imprison and spit upon
the face of the person; like those beyond Seas, that hang the Effigies when
they cannot ruin the life. Of which Presbyterian wickedness and policy, thus
a good Poet.

By this, self-pregnant sin improves to rh' full, Monumentum regale. p. 16, 17.

Affront at London, Treason grows at Hull:
A bold Repulse succeeds perplexed abode,
Despised at home, thrives to refused abroad:
Place tutors Place, on Cities Cities call,
He may not here be safe, nor there at all.
When lo the spreading mischief not content
To force up breaches in One Element,
Invades his Navy, does insulting stand
Over the joint-Trophies both of Sea and Land.
To gild this Rapine for the Vulgar eyes,
They chase him through all His Capacities:
Shift lights and distances, until they see
Another self in him, which is not He.
Vex Stills and Crucibles, the Furnace ply,
To soft and drain a Chymick Majesty.
At last their careful sweats, auspicious howr,
Drops him apart, distinguished from his Power.
I cannot but smile, when I see the Independent girding at the Presbyterians,
and vindicate their own actions by the Disciplinarian Principles, proving them
to be as great enemies to the King as those who cut off his head, as the laws
of the land makes the Trespass as great, felloniously to lop off the noble
branches, as to root up the whole body of the Royal Oak. To which purpose one
of the Presbyterian seconds though at last, their Interest were differently
bottomed) thus twits the Brethren. -- If by the Covenant we were indispensably
obliged The Bounds and Bonds. p. 45.
to preserve his Person, (i. e. the Kings), How comes it to pass, that we were
obliged by the same Covenant to wage War against him? I have heard of a
distinction betwixt his Power and his Person; but never of any betwixt his
Person and Himself. So that if the Covenant would have dispensed, any Soldier
of England or Scotland to kill his Person, by an accident of Wars (as his life
was often in danger, before he came to the Scaffold) his death had been violent,
and the Obligation to preserve him had ended; and yet according to this
Argument, the Covenant had not been broken; Why then should these men think the
World so dull, as not to understand plainly enough, that The Covenant provided
for his Death more ways than one?

Though this Objection may sound harsh in a Presbyterians ear, (who do not love
to hear of their Iniquities), yet that famous Geneva Bull (Stephen Marshall),
can out-rore this, though its clamours were as His Letter. page 19.
loud as the Nilan Thunderings of Catadupa: Noysing it out to the World, that
if he had been so slain, it had been none of the Parliaments fault; for he
might have kept himself farther off, if he pleased. These men rail against the
Pope as Antichrist, and the Whore of Babylon, (and their wording is all, for
they never yet proved it): but, whether they do not both tread in the same way,
(both taking upon them to depose Kings) let those who are skilled in Story,
judge: yet, for my part, I think, that one of our Contrymen was not amiss in
this: --

They depose Kings by force; by force you will do it,
But first use fair means to persuade them to it. A Satyr. The Puritan and the
Papist. page 6.

They dare kill Kings: now 'twixt you here is the strife,
You dare shoot at the King to save his life.
And what is the difference (pray) whether they fall,
By the Popes Bull, or your Oxe-General?
Three Kingdoms you have strived to make your own,
And like the Pope usurp a Triple-Crown.
But somewhat more to this purpose, the former Writer thus reasons. -- If --
in matter of Supreme Command, we of the People Bounds and Bonds. p. 20.
may not obey any but the Husband, or the King, Why then did the Presbyterian
Party for so many years oppose, and not totally submit to their now supposed
Husband? Why did they Commissionate so many thousand men, who by accident of
War had the power, though not the Chance, to kill him? Nay, in the Parliaments
Case, it was always conjoyntly argued by them, that it was he the Husband,
that would have killed them the supposed Wife; for which reason the Kirk of
Scotland, long ago sent him a Bill of Divorce, unless he satisfied for the
blood of three Kingdoms.

Which of the two Parties it was, that at last killed him, belongs not much to
the satisfaction of us the people, though here questioned: because those
Parties, as to that Act, differed no more, -- than Diminutio and Obtruncatio
Capitis do; for they who after a long War, and by long Imprisonment dispoil'd
him of that Regal power -- did, according to the Term of the Civil Law,
Diminuere Caput Regis; and they who in Consequence of his Civil death, took
away his Natural life, did Obtruncare Caput Regis. If he had been killed in an
Action of War before, should the Soldier, or he who gave the Soldier
Commission, have answered for his life?

For the more clearing of this, I shall desire Jack Presbyter to resolve me
these two Quaeries.

First, Whether he does approve of Cook' s Appeal, or Vindication of the King's
Trial? (except where he demands Justice, though I need not except it). If he
does, take him Jailer, and Lord have mercy upon him. But if he does not, then

Secondly, Whether he can show me any thing in that Hellish piece of Treason,
[except when Cook does vindicate his Majesty from some slanders], but I can
show the same wickedness, in Books published by the Authority of Presbyterians,
or made and printed by people of that Faction? For a piece of Parallel, I
shall, at present, point you to one or two Instances. See The Mystery of
Iniquity, yet working in the Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland.
Printed for Sam. Gellibrand, 1643.

Declaration of the Commons of England, concerning no farther Address or
Application to be made to the King, 1647.

A Remonstrance of the General Assembly of the Kirk of Scotland, to his
Majesty, 1645. Mr. Robert Douglas being Moderator, whose Sermon at Scoon, 1651.
you may also read.

John Vicars his several lying and scandalous Pamphlets.

And the several Presbyterian Books, and expressions mentioned in this Book;
needless now to be repeated.

And to this purpose, thus says the learned Mr. Rich. Watson. -- Second fair
warning. p. 12. in Epist.
Whosoever will take the pains to compare the particulars in the Scottish
Remonstrance which they brought in their hands, when they came in upon the
Covenant, with those, in the accursed Court, proceeding against his late Royal
Majesty, may be able to do Dorislaw, Steel, Cook, etc. some little courtesy in
their credit, and plead for them, that they drew not up, but only Transcribed a
Charge, brought long since from Edinburgh to London.

Thus both Parties think the King alike guilty, (though it was the Presbyterian
that first persuaded the Independent to think him so): Then here must be all
the difference. The first declares him abominably wicked; the latter, being
credulous, believes the Declaration. One part cowardly deliver him up (I shall
not hint upon the word selling) to Execution, and the other being more hardy,
strike the stroke: Not that, by this, I lessen the wickedness of a Rumper, as I
cannot excuse that of a secluded Member; since the latter, knowingly destroyed
and killed the King, 1642. the other, under the notion of a private man
murdered Charles Stuart six years after. The Laws of the Land, not only in
Killing, but also in Fighting, against the Kings Command, making it Treason.

How to that Heaven did this Pilot Steer Monument. Regalc. p. 25.

'Twixt the Independent, and the Presbyter,
Placed in the Confines of two shipwracks? thus
The Greeks are seated 'twixt the Turks and Us.
Whom did Bizantium free, Rome would condemn,
And freed from Rome, they are enslaved by Them.
So placed betwixt a Precipice and Wolf,
There the Aegean, here the Venice-gulf,
What with the rising and the setting Sun,
By these the are hated, and by those undone.
Thus Virtue's hemmed with Vices, and though either
Solicites her Consent, she yields to neither.
Nay, thus our Savior, to enhance his grief,
Was hung betwixt a Murderer and a Thief.
What the Powder Plot intended, the Independent acted, and I am confident, the
Presbyterians acted more mischief than Faux, or his Accomplices; Both of them
were stopped in their designs and actions: Only we know how far the Romanists
would have gone, but we cannot understand what would have been the conclusion
of the Puritans Villainies. As we have a fifth of November in memory of one, so
shall we never think of the third of November, but in detestation of the other
two.

If the Presbyter would repent his former Vindications of the late Rebellion
against their King. It would convert the Act of Indemnity, into one of
Oblivion; and people, instead of dashing them in the teeth with their
Iniquities, would pity their former blindness. But, when at this day, they
still continue in the same faults, it is not a sign of infirmity, but real
malice and enmity to that which is good. Still we hear them persuade the people
to the legality of the late War; and that, by consequence, the same may be
lawful against the Son, which was against the Father; and, that upon such petit
jealousies as their factious brains can possess the poor people with all, whose
easy natures are accustomed to take Pique against any thing, that their
hot-spurr'd Parson does call Antichristian, Popish, or Arminian, though two to
one, that neither the Prater nor Hearer, understand what really, those words
signify. Yet the Nation is come to that pass, that the ignorant zeal of our
Furies has made the later drown the noise of the other two; That if the word
Arminian be but named, How do the poor people startle, and bogle themselves
into a sweat? looking as distractedly, as if they had been rid with the
Nightmare; a name, that gets a man more envy than the title of Turk, or
Infidel: the people in part knowing what these signify; but for the Arminian,
their ignorance of what he is, puts them into such a fright, that they think
themselves never secure, till they get the destruction of these strange
creatures, for they do not know what things they are. Not unlike those simple
people Facet. Bebel. lib. 3. p. 184.
of Munding (in Schwaben), who having by chance found a Crab, which none of
them had ever seen before; by toling the Bell, as if their Enemies had been
upon them, they all hurryed together, and did seriously consult, what sort of
Animal it should be; its creeping backwards putting a terror into them all. At
last, they enquired of a poor fellow amongst them, because, for his livelihood,
he had been farther from home than any of them, who said it must be a Stag, or
Pigeon: but this not satisfying, and they not knowing how to be resolved; lest
it should do them some mischief, standing a good way off, they, for the safety
of themselves and Town, very valiantly shot this Monster; and lest any of
themselves, or Cattle, should be poisoned or venomed by it, they very carefully
fortified it about with a strong fence. Thus ignorance musters up all the
jealousies and fears that can be, and when these are once a Cock-Horse, they
can never want stuff to kindle up their hatred.

I need not trouble the Reader, by telling him, how Mr. John Corbet, Interest
of Engl. Sect. 14.
the other day partly whispered out the lawfulness of the War. Nor how another
of the Brethren (a great servant and adorer of the Murtherous Animad. upou the
Bishop of Worcester's Letter. p. 10.
Bradshaw), told the people, that it was those with the King, that began the
War, and not the Presbyterians; nor how the same man threatens the probability
of another Rebellion, unless the Saints have liberty of Conventicling allowed
them. Nor need I trouble you, by relating the wicked humor of Baxter, who
protests, that if the War were to begin again, he would take the Parliaments
part, his reason is, because, If I should do otherwise, I should be guilty of
Treason or Disloyalty Holy-Com. p. 486.
against the Sovereign Power of the Land, -- for -- I knew not how to resist
and disobey them without violation of the command of Id. p. 477.
God, (Romans 13.) Let every soul be subject to the Higher Powers, etc. and
without encurring the danger of the Condemnation there threatened to Resisters.
Nor is it needful to repeat to you, how the whole body of the Presbyterian
secluded Members, vindicated, not long since, the Rebellion, by their
Authority: Since all these particulars are to small purpose; I never yet
hearing through all mine enquiry, as I can remember, of any one Presbyterian,
but held forth the lawfulness of the late Rebellion.

Thus we find the Puritans more raging than fat Vrsula in Bartholomew-Fair, and
certainly Bedlam will be full of Mad-Boys, when the Master thereof is Rampant.
We may well expect extravagant Principles from these Disciplinarians, when
those who are held most moderate, and the chief amongst them, cannot hold from
prating Treason. People are apt to go beyond their Commission, but when such
Chief-tains amongst them as Baxter, (whose zeal cannot be persuaded from Bishop
of Worcester's Letter. page 7.
Preaching Sedition (to say no worse word) even since the happy restoration of
his Majesty) with a Club of Presbyterian-secluded Members, and others of that
Faction, can declare, write, and Vote the late Rebellion against the King to be
lawful; others of that persuasion may think it no breach of Conscience, to take
the other step, and justify the securing of his Person: and when a King is
once imprisoned by his unruly Subjects, it is time for him to prepare himself,
for a journey to the other World.

Doubtful Oracles, are always interpreted to the desires of the Interested
Faction. That dubious Letter.

Edwardum occidere nolite timere bonum est.
To kill Edward do not fear is a good thing.
was so well understood by Sir Thomas Gurney, and Sir John Maltravers, that the
horrid Murder of Edward II. was its result. Our Puritans well understand their
Teachers, when they mince Loyalty; and, though they carry nothing else away
with them, they are sure to keep that close, and at last put it into practice.
When from the Pulpit, Authority is tainted with abominable wickedness, and
Texts of Scripture wrested, to prove the necessity of destroying Tyrants and
Idolaters: The ignorantly zealous Auditors, may think they do God and the Cause
good service, by doing what they can to bring such a Malefactor to the block;
and will at all times be ready to Warragainst the Son, against whose good
Father they have been thus instigated to take Arms; and, thus at last, their
bewitching sin of Treason will dwindle to a Commendation amongst these Zealots.

But welfare Mr. Baxter, that has found out two pretty Salvo's for Bishop of
Worcester's Letter. page 8.
his former wickedness.

First, That he is pardoned by the Act of Indemnity. And is not he a very
thankful man, that in requital of the Kings mercy, has since that preached
seditiously? but he and the rest of his fraternity, are resolved to confirm the
character, given them by the Emperor Ferdinand, and Scrin. Sacr. p. 123. Bas.
Dor. l. 2.
King James, as before related.

Secondly, That now the Parliament had declared, where the Sovereign Power was,
he should acknowledge it, and submit to it. As if the Sovereign Power did not
lie in the King before this Parliament; and yet the Gentleman could be very
well persuaded to Richard's Supremacy. But a man that is altogether ignorant of
our Laws, is the fittest to make the Nation a Commonwealth, and yet none is so
blind as him that will not see; nor none so wicked as him, whose Interest
always prompts him to take the staff by the wrong end.

The best excuse that I know for them, is; Their being drunk with Zeal, created
in them a strange spirit of Prejudice, which fancied the Nation to be in such a
distracted condition, that all things were running to destruction: And these
good souls, thinking to free themselves, and the Kingdom, from such miseries,
busled into a body to expel those evils, which their debauched fury thought
might give ease to the Nation, and quietness to themselves. Like those guzling
Companions upon Howel's Germ, Diet. p. 37.
the Texel's side in Amsterdam, who tippled so long, looking out of a Casement,
that really thinking they were at Sea in a Tempest, to lighten their Ship,
began to throw Tables and Stools with other luggage out of the windows,
thinking they were in danger of Shipwreck. But if these men have the liberty to
create jealousies and fears, they will also tell the people, that they are
obliged to right themselves, which is the only way to set up the Stage, that
the Tragedy may be acted over again: But I hope the Lecturers and Pamphleters
will forget their Parts, and then the People will be more unwilling and unfit
for Action.

CHAP. III.
The small, or rather no, Authority or Power that the Presbyterians allow the
King to have over them.

TO lessen Authority, is the only way to null it; and it is as true, that those
who desire, and act the first, do it merely to make it subservient to the
latter. People will not declare their designs at first; a plausible pretense,
being half a Conquest, which may be spoiled by too much haste: For

-- A'voli troppo alti, e repentini Tasso, Cant. 2.

Sogliono i precipitii esser vicini.
Those men who too too high and hasty go,
Do take the course to their own overthrow.
The Turks will show you friendship, but thereby to make you embrace P. Dan.
Hist. de Barbary. p. 308, 309, 310, 111.
their Faith. Zopirus made a fair Relation to the Babylonians, but quite
different from his Intentions: War is in vain, if not maintained by stratagems
as well as force: Towns have been taken by show of Friendship; as many men,
with Darius, have been ruined by those, who promised to be their defense. Our
Parliament at first declared, their Intentions were only to relieve the King
from his wicked Council: But having once done that, (as they supposed), they
not only afforded him no better, but took away his Authority, clapped him up in
Prison, and there kept him secure, till his Cutthroats conveyed him to the
Scaffold.

And, which was an augmentation to their wickedness, they did not do this only
to make themselves Supreme, but looking upon themselves as the highest
Authority, they thought they might thereby lawfully do this and far more;
fancying the King to be as subject to their wills, as a Gally-slave to his
Captain. For proof of which, it is in vain to quote practice, or the multitude
of their Declarations, each of them penned to prove the legality of their
actions. Only it will not be amiss, to give you the opinion (concerning this
point) of a noted Presbyterian Writer, yet making a noise in his Fetters, who
would gladly persuade the people, that they are bound to obey the Parliament
and their Orders, though against the Kings express command. -- The Z. Crofton's
Fastening of St. Peter's Fetters. p. 67. Id. 118.
Parliament -- ever retained a Jurisdiction in themselves over both Church and
Crown. Of which in another place, he speaks more plain, thus; -- The Votes,
Orders, and Ordinances, of the Lords and Commons in Parliament, even without,
or against, the Kings Personal Command, is to be obeyed and observed.

But it is not only the Parliament, but the People too (forsooth), that must be
hail fellow well met, with, or rather above the King. And they know, that this
familiarity with Majesty is the only way to bring it into contempt; which
Crofton thinks a good Card for him to play, and therefore he thus very pertly
be-speaks the People: -- Is not Berith. Anti-Baal. p. 42.
the meanest Subject interested in the Kings Oath, and capacitated humbly to
demand performance? Do not Royal Acts fall under the consideration of Casuists,
resolving Conscience? Are not Kings Objects of Ministerial admonition? How bold
soever it may seem, none but a proud Pashur, and shameless Semaiah, could count
it odious in Jeremiah, to say to the King, Keep the Oath and thou shall be
delivered, from that distress which may too late engage his Majesty to send to
his faithful Monitor to Pray For Him. Does not the last clause speak little
Crofton a pert blade? who with Calvin, Knox, and others of that gang, would
make brave Modlers for a New Utopia, by making the Parliament as bounders and
controllers over the King, and allow the People over the Parliament, and then
should we have a brave World, the King and Three Estates lying at the mercy of
the People; and the bold Presbyterian Tub-tatler allowed to infuse into the
Rabble, what Principles are most agreeable to the sense of their Classes; but,
I hope, this Plot is too visible to take effect.

Yet thus did the Scots with King Charles I. by appealing from him and his
Council to a General Assembly in these words:

And because we did in our former Protestation Appeal from the Lords K. large
Declarat. p. 171.
of his Majesty's Council; so do we now, by these, renew our solemn Appeal,
with all Solemnities requisite, unto the next Free General Assembly Yet they
would allow none to be, but what would be for their Covenanting humors, as is
visible in their own Stories, however they were certain to have the Assembly on
their side, and then would they Protest against all that agreed not with them.
and Parliament, as the only Supreme National Judicatories, competent to judge
of National causes and proceedings.

Which way of Appealing, is High Treason by the Law of Scotland, Id. page 181.
as they knew very well by a good Token: For when their Ministers held an
Assembly at Aberdene, after it was Prorogued by King James, they were cited to
appear before the Lords of the Council, to answer that high contempt; but they,
denying the Authority, and appealing to a General Assembly, were therefore
arraigned and found guilty of High Treason, and had received the sentence
accordingly, if King James, out of his mercy, had not reprieved them before
sentence, and only inflicted upon them perpetual banishment, which they
under-went. But, that they may know themselves the better for the future, I
shall transcribe them a Copy of the Scotch Statute, that they may learn how to
avoid Treason. The eighth Parliament current holden at Edinburgh, the 22. of
May, in the year of God 1584. by the Right Excellent, Right High and Mighty
Prince James the sixth, by the Grace of God, King of Scots; and Three Estates,
of this Realm.

An Act for Confirming the Kings Majesty's Royal Power over all Estates and
Subjects within this Realm.
FOR AS MUCH as some persons, being lately called before the Kings Majesty and
his Secret Council, to answer upon certain Points, to have been enquired of
them, concerning some Treasonable, Seditions and Contumelious Speeches uttered
by them in Pulpits, Schools, and other ways, to the disdain and reproach of
His Highness, his Progenitors, and present Council; contemptuously declined the
judgment of his Highness and his said Council in that behalf, to the evil
example of others to do the like, if timely remedy be not provided: Therefore
our Sovereign Lord and his Three Estates assembled in this present Parliament,
ratifieth and approves, and perpetually confirms the Royal Power and
Authority over all Estates, as well Spiritual as Temporal, within this Realm,
in the Person of the Kings Majesty our Sovereign Lord, his Heirs and
Successors: And also statuteth and ordains, That his Highness, his Heirs and
Successors, by themselves and their Councils, are and in time to come shall be
Judges competent to all persons his Highness Subjects, of what Estate, Degree,
Function, or Condition, soever they be of, Spiritual, or Temporal, in all
matters wherein they or any of them shall be apprehended, summoned, or charged
to answer to such things, as shall be enquired of them, by our said Sovereign
Lord and his Council. And, that none of them which shall happen to be
apprehended, called, or summoned, to the effect aforesaid, presume to take in
hand to decline the judgment of his Highness, his Heirs and Successors, or
their Council, in the Premises under the pain of Treason.

To make this way of Appealing more plausible to the People, they are very
willing to make a separation betwixt the two words, Sacred and Majesty,
sticking close to Calvin, who calls it blasphemy to yield Calvin in Amos 7. 13.
p. 282. 2. Paper at Newcast.
the King a Supremacy in the Church under God and Christ; to which purpose,
thus the Zealot Henderson delivered himself to his Majesty. Such an Headship as
the Kings of England have claimed, and such a Supremacy as the Houses of
Parliament crave, with Appeals from the Supreme Ecclesiastical Judicature, to
them as set over the Church, in the same line of subordination, I do utterly
disclaim, upon such reasons as give my self satisfaction. And to this purpose,
against the Kings Sermon. 28. May, 1645. p. 12. 16. and Epist.
Supremacy in Church affairs, he ranted before the House of Lords, the year
before. Yet, when he was Moderator of the Assembly of Glasgow, in one of his
Speeches there, he attributed very much to the Kings Power in Ecclesiastical
Causes and Assemblies, and at last affirmed; That the King was Universal Bishop
over all his Kingdom. A Large Declar. page 280.
Copy of this Speech, his Majesty's Commissioner, [James, then Marquess of
Hamilton] used means to obtain, but could not get it presently, because those
expressions had offended the Covenanters; yet at last, a Copy was sent him, but
with all those Expressions left out, which were spoak in favor of the Kings
Power in Ecclesiastical businesses: by which one may guess at their juggling.
Another of these Brethren is Preface to Knox's Hist. g. 3. h.
very furious against the giving these Titles to the King, and must call it
Blasphemy too: But this man is not only against this, but also against the
attributing any such Epithets as Virtuous, Pious, or Religious, to our
Superiors; as if he had borrowed his breeding from Buchanan, who Praesat. de
jure Regni ap. Scotos.
rants against those who give the Titles of Majesty, Lordship, Illustrious,
etc. And these two, also agree very well together, in slaundering those who
will not fight against their Kings, since they say, Dame Nature knows no such
distinction. And this is agreeable to our Long-Parliament-Worthies, who gravely
declared it -- a fit Foundation for all Tyranny, Declar. of Reasons for no more
Address. page 12.
and a most distructive Maxim or Principle, for the King to avow, That He owes
an account of his Actions to none, but God alone: And, that the Houses of
Parliament, joint, or separate, have no power either to make or declare any
Law. And this power over the King, Henderson does not only give to the
Representatives, but also to the People over 2. Paper at Newcastle.
both them and the King; especially in Reforming: and so by consequence must
make them also judges too; and then shall we have a mad world my Masters. -- If
the Prince or Supreme Magistrate be unwilling, then may the Inferior
Magistrate, and the People, being before rightly informed in the grounds of
Religion, lawfully reform, within their own sphere; and if the light shine upon
all, or the major part, they may after all other means assayed, make a public
Reformation. And a few lines after, thus to the same purpose, -- It is not to
be denied, but the prime Reforming Power is in Kings and Princes, quibus --
deficientibus, it comes to the Inferior Magistrate; quibus deficientibus, it
descends to the body of the People; -- And this you must suppose to be a pretty
Rule, to make the People believe that no Religion can be true, but the
Presbyterians, and the Covenanters; and so a necessity of Reforming to their
Directory. For if not, how will they answer the common Quaere, How came they
then, or how durst they alter the Church Government, against his Majesty's
express command?

Well, necessity or no necessity, the English Presbyterians will swear that
they have power to Reform, and in that the King signifies but a Cipher. For,
Could not they null Episcopacy against the Kings command? Could not they devide
their Lands amongst themselves against the Kings command? Could not they Ruin
the Common Prayer Book against the Kings command? Could not they call a
Pye-bald Assembly against his command? Could they not swear a wicked Covenant
against his command? Could they not set up the Directory against his command?
Could they not set up Classical, Provincial, and National Assemblies, against
his command? Could they not Murder and beggar an Archbishop, and others of the
Orthodox, and Loyal Clergy, against his command? Could they not destroy
Cathedrals against his command? Could they not make Perjury lawful against his
command? Could they not commit Sacrilege against his command? Could they not
turn the Kings Loyal Subjects, out of both the Universities, against his
command? Could they not make Schismatical Presbyterian Ordinations against his
command? Could they not make what they pleased to be Idolatry and Superstition,
against his command? Could they not make Treason a Rule of Christianity against
his command? Nay, could they not do any thing, but make a man a woman, and a
woman a man? according to Pembrokes oath and judgment.

For those who vote Loyalty, Treason; and cloak Rebellion with high
Commendations, and Religion; will fancy a Legal Power into themselves, obliging
them to oppose their Prince. And puffed on with this persuasion, a Puritanical
Committee of our long Parliament, order this to be Printed and Dispersed, in
behalf of their Associates -- They Political Catechism, 1643. p. 12
have only used that Legal Power which was in them for the punishment of
Delinquents, and for the prevention and restraint of the Power of Tyranny; of
all which they are the legal Judges, and all the Subjects of this Kingdom are
bound by the Laws to obey them herein. -- And this Opinion, might be the reason
why Prinne and his Fellows, were so angry against that Murdered Archbishop
Laud, for not suffering such seditious expressions as these to be used to the
people in their Sermons. -- It is lawful for the Inferior and subordinate
Magistrates Canterburies Doom, p. 290, 291, 302, 303.
to defend the Church and Commonwealth, when the Supreme Magistrate
degenerates, and falls into Tyranny or Idolatry; for -- Kings are subject to
their Commonwealths. And that Subjects may lawfully take up Arms against
their Kings command, and in their Sermons revile the Kings Court, with Pride,
Avarice, Idleness, Flattery, Folly, Wickedness, and such like: Yet had a man in
London, but hinted half so much against the Parliament, he had been clawed for
it to the purpose.

But it is not the English Puritans alone, that would thus trample upon their
Kings: Nay, the Scots too will be as wicked as them, or else they could not
handsomely call one another Brethren. And this is especially practiced by their
zealous Hinters, who deny the King to have no more to do in or with their
Assemblies, than the meanest Cobbler amongst them; whilst they thus Impudently
told his Majesty's Commissioner, That if the King himself were amongst them, he
should Large Declar. page 245.
have but one voice, and that not Negative neither, nor more affirmative than
any one Member of their Assembly had. Nor will they allow the Civil Authority,
to have any thing to do with them, or any of their Kirk-actions; as I have
formerly showed in their continual practice; and for an assurance, take one of
their Declared Maxims.

-- As the Assembly cannot make Civil Laws, nor repeal K. Large. Decl. page
349.
them, nor impede the Parliament from making or repealing Civil Laws; No more
can the By this word they signify all Civil Power, The King as well as the
Three Estates.
Parliament make Ecclesiastical Laws Originally, nor repeal, or hinder the
Lawful Assemblies to repeal the same. For albeit, Acts of the Assembly are, and
may be, ratifyed in Parliament; that is only that the Civil Sanction may concur
with the Ecclesiastical Constitution: But will not stop the Assembly to recall
their Own Act, which being annulled by them, the Civil Ratification falls ex
Consequenti. Good Doctrine for the Puritans, when uppermost, but at this time
nothing more distructive to them.
For, to maintain that the Kirk may not repeal her own Acts, ratified once in
Parliament, is so derogatory to Christ's Prerogative and Ordinance, to the
Liberty of the Kirk, and Freedom of the Assembly, to the nature, and reason of
all Ecclesiastical jurisdiction (as we have more largely declared in the
Protestation 22 September last) that we believe few or none will be of that
Opinion.

Nor will they allow the King to Dissolve any of their Juntos, with which
Impudent humor, King Charles I. was sufficiently troubled. For having by
Proclamation Dissolved their Assembly at Glasgow [1638] They publicly deny his
Authority for so doing, declaring, that

-- It was most unlawful in it self, and prejudicial to those Id. p. 298.
Privileges, which Christ in his word has left to his Church; to dissolve or
break up the Assembly of this Church, or to stop and stay their Proceedings in
Constitution of Acts for the welfare of the Church, or execution of Discipline
against Offenders; and so to make it appear, that Religion and Church
Government should depend absolutely upon the pleasure of the Prince.

And after this they very solemnly protest against the departure of the Page
300.
Kings Commissioner, 'till their humors be satisfied; a sufficient sign of
their Presumption, to be so malepert with one that represented the Kings Person
and Authority; but they go on in their boldness.

-- We again and again do by these presents cite and summon Page 301.
them, and every one of The Bishops and others, who protested against, and
declined this jugled-up Assembly.
them, to compeer before this present General Assembly, to answer to the
premises, and to give in their Reasons, Defenses, and Answers, against the
Complaints given in, or to be given against them; and to hear Probation sed,
and Sentence pronounced against them, and conform to our former Citations, and
according to Justice, with certification of affairs: Like as by these presents
we summon, and cite all those of his Majesty's Council, or any other who have
procured, consented, subscribed, or ratified this present Proclamation, to be
responsable to his Majesty and Three Estates of Parliament, for their Counsels
given them in this Matter; so highly importing his Majesty, and the whole
Realm, conform to the 12 Act, King James IV. Parliament II. In which Act there
is not one word that intimates as these Covenanters would in this place, but
rather in behalf of the Privy Counselors, p. 310.
and protest for remedy of Law against them, and every one of them.

Having thus begun to thunder, they fall to work, though they had no power to
act, being Dissolved by the Kings Command; yet, to it they fall, in a furious
Zeal, not stopping at any thing which was once propounded; so that in one hour,
they declared six General Assemblies to be null and void. In another hour, they
condemned (not confuted) Armianism. In another hour, they deprived the
Archbishop of St. Andrews, and two other Bishops, viz. Galloway, and Brechen;
as at other times of that Kirk-Rump, all the rest of the Bishops. In another
hour, they declared Episcopal Government to be inconsistent with the Laws of
that Church and Kingdom, and so abolished it. And thus in all haste, without
fear or wit, in a very few days, they had made almost an hundred Acts;
sometimes three or four at one time, and sometimes more; to the utter discredit
of their Brethren of our English Assembly, who sat hum-druming several years,
and after all expectations, brought forth nothing worth a Mouse. But the one
was shackled, and the other at liberty; the one was overruled and awed, by a
Parliamentary Nod; but the other would neither be governed by God nor Man:
Though, no question, had that at London been their own Masters, they would have
been as hasty as their Brethren: An English Covenanter, being as good wildfire,
as any Kirker in Scotland. But by this you may guess how deliberate our
Northern Seers are, how rational they are, that, without Archimedes his
Engine, can skrew up a Government in a moment; like those in the Arsenal in
Venice, who in less than two hours time, can make and lanch a complete Gally.

But enough of their denying the Kings Authority over them in Large Declar. p.
284.
their Assemblies. I shall only give you one of their private Instructions, by
them carefully sent to some Ministers in every Presbytery, in whom they put
most special trust. Private Instructions, Aug. 27. 1638.


That the ablest man in every Presbytery be provided to dispute De Potestate
Supremi Magistratus in Ecclesiasticis, praesertim in Convocandis Conciliis, de
Senioribus, de Episcopatu, de Juramento, de Liturgia and corruptelis ejusdem.

How the Saints held these Questions, need not be asked; nor how partially they
would go about them, (for I cannot well say, study them). When people once
dispute Authority, practice assures us that they are resolved for the Negative;
and, when such questions as these are on purpose proposed by a biased Zealot,
the Intention is only to confirm people in Opposition. The Brethren long before
this, had found the benefit of such Discourses, which made them now trudge in
the same way: For their seditious Predecessors, in the University of St.
Andrews, instead of Divinity, had thrust up these Politic Questions.

Whether the Election or Succession of Kings, were the better form of
Government?

How far the Royal Power extended?

Whether Kings might be censured for abusing the same, and deposed by the
Estates of the Kingdom?

But besides those who expressly deny and fight against the Kings Supremacy, his
Majesty has other Enemies to his Authority, which are as dangerous amongst the
People as any other: And these are those who commend his Enemies, and so
approve their Actions; not, but that a wicked man in some things, might be
highly commended for other qualities. Thus of one hand, I find the great
Gustavus Adolphus, Salust. Germ. page 231. Martin's Chron. p. 422.
highly applauded, but that he was a Protestant; and on the other, our Queen
Elizabeth's Sister, Queen Mary, as greatly commended, but that she was a
Roman Catholic; yet, for either of these simply, aspersions are not to be cast
upon Magistrates, or others, more inferior. However, this hits not our case,
but the magnifying of those who are really wicked, which Epithet (let them take
offense that will) I shall freely bestow upon our Long-Parliament, as being the
Kings greatest Enemies, the only cause of his ruin, and the murderers of many
innocent Loyal Gentlemen.

By these Commendations, the People are made to believe that they are all
Saints, thereby enticing the Country to choose them for their future
Representees, that, under their protection, the Non-conformists might have more
work to do: or else by having a good opinion of them, may stick close to them
upon all occasions: and pity, that the Cause these good men undertook, had no
better success, but the discredit and ignominy of the Contrivers; not
forgetting the large sums of Money and Lands, they cheated the King, Church,
and State of.

If Rebellion, Murder, Sacrilege, Schism, Perjury, Knavery, and such like
sins, can make a man wicked, (and it is well known where all these, and many
more, vices were met together), the Epithet will keep its ground secure,
against the fume and range of all the Schismatics in England, or Scotland:
Yet, even since the King came in, have they had many good wishes, not unknown
to the whole Nation; and therefore I shall give you but one Instance, and, that
of one old enough to know what they were, but, that he spoke through a
Covenanting. Interest; and these commendations of them are, as they were
(1644.) when all those who were Loyal and good, had left the House and followed
his Majesty; his Encomium is this, -- -- A House full Mr. Hall's Funebr. Flor.
page 25.
and free, and these the best that ever England had, for Piety toward God, and
Loyalty to their Sovereign, -- A Parliament of Lords and Commons, so pious, so
prudent, so loyal, and faithful, to God and their King.

These Commendations are but like Libanius the Sophister's applauding and
praising Julian the Apostate, who amongst the many moral virtues that there
are, might possibly have a tincture of some. What goodness these people had, I
know not, yet can I guess at a large portion of their mischief. Only one shall
be mine instance, viz. That they were the first Contrivers of these Wars, they
consulted the Rebellion, they broached it, and gave it life by their Votes and
Declarations, whereby they cunningly inveagled others into their sin; yet,
(being degrees in wickedness), the worst of their Soldiers, was not the tenth
part so bad as these Members: the first being knavishly enticed to act the
others Command; they contrived and plotted the Rebellion, and drol'd on the
Country to be obedient to their Orders, under the specious show of Reformation
and Religion, knowing the consequence of the old Rule never fails: -- Quoties
vis fallere Plebem,
Finge Deum. --


They cannot be good Subjects to King Charles I. that commend his Enemies; and,
they deserve no thanks from King Charles II. who praise those, who did, and
voted and declared it lawful to fight against his Father, thereby proclaiming
to the World the legality of acting the same (if they could get occasion)
against the Son.

It Is needless to tell you, how they violently made it their business, to clip
and pare the Kings Prerogative, and Authority; and amongst many other,
frivolously plucking away the Militia, allowing the King through civility, to
carry a Sword by his side, because he is a Gentleman, but not, upon any occasion
whatsoever, to draw it, that being forsooth, the office and privilege of their
hands; by which, hanging a lock at his hilt, but they keeping the Keys; using
him as they used their children, giving them Gold in a Box, which they must not
finger, only please themselves with its rattling; by which means, they will make
themselves a Negative Vote in Peace and War. And after this fashion did their
Covenanting Brethren of Scotland abuse their King, taking all power of Arms
into their own hands: their reason being, because The Kings Castles and
Strengths are the Keys of the Realm; and Large Declar. p. 379, 380.
they knew no reason to the contrary, but that they might keep their own Keys.

Thus would they make their King merely Titular, and a perfect Slave and
Captive to their Wills. Not unlike Sancho Panco, who for sport-sake was made
Governor of the Islands, but had no Authority; nay, scarce liberty to eat his
Victuals. The rustic Biscayners cry up Jo. de Laet. Hispan. p. 90.
their privileges so much, that the King of Spain dare not go amongst them but
well armed and guarded: And good reason, for they think their King to have so
small Authority over them, that he must bare Mr. Heylin's Geogr.
one of his legs, when he comes upon the Frontiers of their Country; and,
though they meet him as their King, with what bravery they can; and proffer him
some few Maravidi's, [small brass-pieces, each of them about the value of a
Scotch Turner, or Bodel, somewhat less than our English farthing] in a Leathern
Bag, hung at the end of a Lance; yet, for all this show of great kindness, they
fairly tell him, that he must not take them.

This Nation has long enough felt the smart of crying, Privileges! and
Majesty it self has been dared by that specious pretense. Though they give him
the Name of King, yet they take all its Attributes to themselves; though they
call themselves Subjects, yet like the Scots, they do not Petition, but with
their Swords in their hands; at the first denial sounding an Alarm, and at the
second run themselves so far into Rebellion, that if something be not granted
them, they will destroy all: As if they had swallowed up their Obedience, with
that ravenous Whirl-pool in Pentland Frith, (in the North of Scotland) with
which, if either Ship or Boat shall happen to encroach, they must quickly
Lithgow's Travels. p. 505.
either throw over something into it, as a Barrel, a piece of Timber, and such
like, or that fatal Euripus shall then suddenly become their swallowing
Sepulcher. Thus the Presbyterians make their Obedience a Bargain, and, if
Interest out-bid the King, He need not trouble himself by being a customer to
these men: who allow him no power, but what they suppose he derived from them,
and which they can take to themselves again, when they see occasion, or please.

CHAP. IV.
That the Presbyterians are but Conditional Subjects; no longer obedient to
their King, or acknowledging Him, than he serves their turn, and is subservient
to their fancies.

A Conditional Subject is the worst Animal in a Kingdom, being the first
Creature that shrinks from Government, and always ready to destroy the Peace of
the Nation: for which, and other things, he will never want a reason grateful
to the Rabble, as long as he can cry out, that his Subjection is but
Conditional; and the Magistrate having broke his part, he is no more obliged to
his duty: And this the people believing to be each man's case, will make
themselves Judges, by which means the Authority of a single Person, will ever
be out-voted, or over-worded.

That the King of England is Supreme, is certain; That the greatest wickedness
in the World cannot un-King him, is as true. The Law of the Land obliges us to
submit, and makes it Treason to resist; and the Scriptures bids us Obey, but
never Rebel, for Conscience sake. Every man is born with the Oath of
Allegiance, and is as much obliged to its observance before, as after his
taking it. Though the Prince were Turk, or Heathen, yet would he be as much
King, and have as much right to the Crown, and Rule, as if he were
Presbyterian. It Is not the Religion of the Magistrate, but that in me (be what
it will) that I do call Religion, or Conscience, which obliges my obedience to
him. The Roman Catholic had as much Reason and Law for their Gunpowder
Treason, as the Scotch and English Puritans for their many Rebellions; and may,
as to themselves, as much rejoice, for their delivery from the Presbyterian
Tyranny, as they from the others intended cruelty; but in this they may both
shake hands, and cry quits Brother: which has made me smile as often as I hear
a Disciplinarian rail against the Romanists, for that wicked design, since
themselves have been as guilty; only some difference in the method, one putting
their confidence in Fire, and the other in the Sword.

The many Rebellions of these People, and their resolutions never to lay down
their Swords, till the King would satisfy them in what they pleased, is a
sufficient manifestation of their Conditional Obedience; and, that they are not
farther Subject to that Authority, than the King is obedient to their Wills;
examples of which are yet fresh in every man's memory.

At the very beginning of their Rebellion, they having declared those who
adhear'd to the King to be Traitors, and He had done the same to the Earl of
Essex: His Majesty unwilling to have the blood of his Subjects shed, and
delighting in Peace, sent to the Parliament to call in their Declarations
against his Party, and he would call in all his against them and their
Associates; and, that both the Armies might be disbanded, an Act of Oblivion to
be passed, and a perfect Peace composed: And, What could be more gracious then
this? yet this they deny: Nor will they hearken to any Overtures of a Treaty
with him, unless he first call in all his Declarations against them, Disband
his Army, yield himself to them, and permit those who were with him to be
proceeded against, and suffer as Delinquents.

Thus will they have none of him, unless he submit to them, and permit his best
Friends to be ruined: And, yet these men must think themselves so good
Subjects, that they deserve his Majesty's thanks for their so acting, and in so
doing think themselves Obedient enough in all Conscience. But, if this be their
duty, I wish they would tell me, what they think disobedience to be.

This rejecting their Sovereign, is sufficient to stop the mouths of these men
from railing against Pope Gregory VII. [call'd Hildebrand] who having
excommunicated the Emperor Henry IV. would not absolve Platina. p. 178.
Genebrard. Chron. Anno 1073.
him, nor receive him into favor, till, throwing off all his Princely attire,
he had waited three several days in the coldest time of Winter, barefooted at
the walls of Vercelli, (in Piemonte in Italy, where the Pope then was), to beg
audience and forgiveness.

Phaeton had no reason to question his birthright, unless Phoebus would allow
him the command of his flaming Chariot, to the ruin of Ovid. Met. l. 2.
the Youth and a great part of the World: And it is strange Logic, and
impudence in our Puritans, to deny themselves to be Subjects, unless they
command as Supreme. A pretty mode to trample upon Authority, as if they had set
for their pattern Pope Alexander III. who instead See Morney's Hist. of Papacy.
page 336.
of offering his Toe to be kissed by Frederick Barbarossa, set his foot upon the
Emperors neck.

If at the beginning of the War, they were so stubborn, as not to receive
their King into their favor, unless he yield to their mercy, and suffer his
friends to be distroy'd: he must expect stranger Conditions when they are
heightened with blood and villainy. For then must he ask them Pardon, give them
satisfaction, and carry nothing about him, but the bare Title, or else he shall
be none of their King. To which purpose, a whole Club of them having
sufficiently railed against Him, after all their lies, scandals, and hellish
forgeries, thus conclude their malice and obedience.

These are some few of the many reasons, Why we cannot repose any Declarat. for
Non-Address. p. 37. 1647.
more trust in him, [i. e. King Charles I.] and have made those former
resolutions; yet we shall use our utmost endeavor to settle the present
Government, as may best stand with the Peace and Happiness of this Kingdom.

Here they quite renounce any more Obedience to him; nay, make it, by Vote both
of their Lords and Commons, to be High Treason for any to make any Application
or Address to him: And, if these be good Subjects, without all question, it is
Treason to be obedient. And, what they meant by their utmost endeavors I know
not, only this I am certain of having thus thrown away the Father, they never
applied themselves to the Son, unless it were the motion of some of them to
proclaim him Traitor, and the conclusion of them all was to send the Earl of
Warwick to fight him.

How long before they had been resolved to renounce their King and In his
Speech to the King at New Castle. August. 1646.
his Government I know not, yet the Earl of Loudoun, then Lord Chancellor of
Scotland, a pretty while before this, gave the King notice of their intentions,
telling him that -- Some are so afraid, others so unwilling, to submit
themselves to your Majesty's Government, as they desire not you nor any of your
Race longer to reign over them. -- -- If your Majesty refuse to assent to the
Propositions, you will lose all your Friends, lose the City, and all the
Country; and all England will join against you as one man, and (when all hope
of Reconciliation is past) it is to be feared, They will process and depose
you, and set up another Government. They will charge us to deliver your
Majesty to It seems Lowdoun and they agreed very well together in their
Counsels, and Designs, this speech being spoak, a quarter of a year before
the English and Scotch made such agreement at New Castle; and it may be his
Lordship could also then tell of the 300000. pound.
them, and to render the Northern Garrisons, and to remove our Army out of
England. And upon your Majesty's refusing the Propositions, both Kingdoms will
be constrained to agree and settle Religion and Peace without you, which will
ruin your Majesty and your Posterity. And if your Majesty reject our faithful
advice, and lose England by your wilfulness, your Majesty will not be
permitted to come and ruin Scotland.

And at the beginning of the same year, when his Majesty from Oxford, earnestly
desired them, that there might be a personal Treaty; The Lords and Commons of
the English Parliament and the Commissioners of the Scotch Parliament, after
they had impudently hinted at his Majesty as a most wicked person, they
expressly deny any such means for peace, until he had given them satisfaction
and security. And this was still their custom with his Majesty; first must he
satisfy them before they will hear any thing from him. In the same year the
Committee of Scotland, tell his Majesty at New Castle -- We hope you come 13
Jan. 1645/6
with intentions and full resolutions to give all just satisfaction to the
jointdesires of both your Kingdoms, And two days after assure him, that 13
May. 1646.
-- If your Majesty shall delay the present performing thereof, we shall be
necessitated 15 May.
for our own exoneration to acquaint the Committee of both Kingd. at London:
that a course might be taken by the joint advice of both Kingdoms for
attaining the just ends expressed in the Solemn League and Covenant. And to the
same purpose (but with abundance of railing against the Remonstrance, February
1644/5
King) the year before did the General Assembly of the Scottish Kirk (Mr. Robert
Dowglass being Moderator) express themselves to his Majesty.

And in this humor of conditional and malepert capitulating Subjects they
continue, nay even when people might perceive the Army Humble Representation of
the Commissioners of the Genesis Assembly to the Honorable Estates of Parliament
1648. 28 April. page 6
bent against Monarchy, or at least the Royal Family of the Stuarts. For thus
they endeavor to make people believe, that the King cannot be truly King
indeed, unless he humbly give satisfaction to his covenanting people. -- We
leave it to be pondered by your Lordships, whether they that obstruct and
hinder the requiring of satisfaction, and security, from his Majesty in point
of Religion before his Restitution to the exercise of his Royal Power, do not
upon the matter and consequence obstruct and hinder his Majesty's deliverance
and restitution; whereof such security and assurance had from his Majesty might
be a powerful and effectual means. And a little after more fully declare
themselves thus. -- This Restitution of his Majesty to the exercise of his
Royal Page 12.
Power, before security had from Him for settling Religion, your Lordships know
by our eight desires, and otherways, is conceived by us to be inconsistent
with the safety and security of Religion. -- the bringing of his Majesty to
some of his houses in or near London, before satisfaction and security had from
him in point of Religion, and in such other things as are necessary for the
safety of the Kingdoms, could not (as we conceive) but be an exceeding great
discouragement and offense to the Presbyterianins England, who will conceive
that the Remedy is worse then the disease. -- seeing your Lordships are obliged
by the third Article of the Covenant, to defend his Majesty's person, and
authority in the preservation and defense of the true Religion and Liberties of
the Kingdoms: We conceive your Lordships should not demand from, nor press
Here Is a plain confession from the Scots themselves, who best knew the meaning
of the Covenant, that this League binds its Takers only to a conditional
subjection, of which they themselves must be judges too. Page 13.
upon the Kingdom of England, his Majesty's Restitution with freedom and
honor, and safety, except with that qualification in the Covenant, and with a
subordination to Religion and the Liberties of the Kingdoms.

And if all these things should come to pass, then the Kirkers cry out that
all is undone, and so they leave it to judgment, Whether his Majesty shall not
be restored to his honor before Jesus Christ be restored to his honor, and
set upon his Throne of Government in his Church? Whether his Majesty shall not
be in a condition of liberty, before the Ordinances of Christ have a free
course -- And is this to endeavor the settling of Religion before all worldly
interests? Or rather to make it come after the Kings interest? -- And If his
Majesty may be restored with honor, freedom, and safety, before such
satisfaction had from Him, we fear it shall lie as a great scandal upon this
Kingdom. And a little after; they plainly subject his Page 21, 22.
Majesty to their wills, in the interpretation of the Covenant. -- And is
nothing for the glory of God but Presbytery? Nothing good but the Covenant? And
must no body be judge of these things but themselves? Well, their meaning must
be -- To their self-ended Interests. Review, p. 39. Justification of Mr. Tho.
Chaloners Speech. 1646 page 12, 13.
Whatsoever we owe to the King in civil matters distinct from the cause of
Religion, sure all these other duties are with a subordination to the glory of
God, and the good of Religion: And we are very confident that it was and will
be far from the thoughts of the General Assembly, under color of his
Majesty's Honor, to concur with him, or any in his Name, in a cause which is
hurtful and prejudicial to the good of Religion and to the other ends of the
Solemn League and Covenant. Yet this way of diffience and standing off with
their Sovereign, Mr. Robert Beyley wonders that any body should call a Fault.
As if these men have the privilege to secure the person of the King when they
please, and then deny him either Authority or Liberty till he ask them
forgiveness and give them satisfaction, for his thinking much to be made a
slave to their fancies.

Upon such like expressions as these a Parliamentarian makes this observation.
-- If the Scots Commissioners did plainly affirm to the Committees of both
Houses at the Conference, that they could not admit of the Kings presence in
Scotland, because of the divisions and troubles of that Kingdom, which he
might make such use of, as to raise forces both against them and us. What could
this imply, but that, notwithstanding his person might be in safety in
Scotland, yet Scotland could not be in safety, whilst his person was there. And
if they positively affirm it on their part, may not we make a question of it on
ours? Thus both parties catch at what pretenses they can, to exclude the King
from both his Kingdoms.

As they did with the Father, so did they continue to act villainy with the Son,
concerning which I shall give you the words of that great Mattyr of Loyalty,
the Noble and Valiant Marquess of Montross.

And so little are these Godly and Religious men touched with any sense
Declaration 1649. p. 3.
of what mischieves they have already done, That they begin afresh with his
Majesty Our now Gracious Sovereign upon the same score, where they left with
his Father of ever blessed memory. They declare him indeed to be their King,
but with such conditions and provisoes, as robb him of all Right and Power. For
while they pretend to give him a little, which he must accept as from them;
they spoil him of all that Power and Authority, which the Law of God, of
Nature, and of the Land has invested him with by so long continued descent
from his famous Predecessors. They press him to join with those who by a
Sacrilegious Covenant have confederated all his dominions in Rebellion, and
laid all Royal Power in the Dust. Which in effect were nothing better then
that he himself should asperse with Insamy the sacred memory of his ever
Glorious Father, that he should with his own hands destroy himself and ruin
all such, who have still been Loyal to him in his three Kingdoms. These are
the men who first entering England solicited those of their faction to rise in
that desperate Rebellion (as a Prologue to the ensuing Tragedy which they
meant to act.) These are they who were the chief, and main Instruments of all
the Battails, Slaughters, and Bloody occasions within that of their own
Kingdom; These are they who sold their Sovereign to a bloody and infamous
Death; yea these are they who still digg in his Grave, and who are more
pernitiously hatching the Destruction of his present Majesty by the same bare,
old, antiquated Treacheries, then ever they did that of his most excellent, and
most innocent Father.

Except he would subscribe to their fancies, they would not allow him to be
their King, nor come amongst them, which is confessed by the Estates of
Scotland themselves -- Scotland is desirous to embrace Their Declarat. against
Montross 1650
him, upon grant of their just desires -- and are most willing upon just
satisfaction given to our desires. -- And after this fashion does the General
Assembly bid their King stand off, wondering that any one should be against
their keeping out the King till their Provisoes Their Declarat. against
Montross. 2 Jan. 1650.
be submitted to by him. And their reason is, because, should his Majesty be
put in power, before he did engage himself to submit to them, then no
obligation would be upon him.

Well, having jugled him into Scotland they use him worse than a Gally-slave,
threatening destruction to Him and all his Friends, unless he will dance after
their humors, and declare according to their malicious and Hell-contrived
dictates. Of which, thus take the words of their proud beggarly Assembly. --
They will not own him, nor See the Answer of the Parl. of Engl. to the Kings
Declar. 1650. page 18.
his Interest, otherwise then with a subordination to God, and in so far as he
owns and prosecutes the Cause of God, and disclaims his and his Fathers
Opposition to the Work of God, and to the Covenant, and all the Enemies
thereof. -- And this piece of Impudence was seconded by the Committee of
Estates, and the Covenanting Swash-bucklers of the Scotch Army.

But, that you might the better see, that their Obedience to the King, was no
longer than he served their turns and Interests, I shall give you a piece of a
Letter from their Great Minister of State, the Earl of Loudoun, Chancellor of
Scotland, which he wrote to his present Sacred Majesty. --

Since your Majesty refuses to do what is necessary for the good of All the
world knows the villainy of this way of canting. The Heathen called stocks and
stones true Religion; as here you have mischief, murder and perjury, called
Gods Interest.
Religion, and Gods Interest; They will look to the safety and good of
Religion, and to their own safety, and emit a Declaration, how willing they are
to hazard their lives for your Majesty's Interest, if ye had been for Religion.
But, that being denied, they will separate the preservation of Religion from
Your Interest, and so to the safety of this Kingdom. And, if there be a
difference and separation upon those grounds, there will never, in human
appearance, be such a Conjunction: And Your Enemies (who will grant any thing
which may destroy your Majesty) will win their ends.

This last clause does in part vindicate the report, of the Intention of some
of the Scots to deliver his Majesty to Cromwell, or the Rump, if they had not
forced their ends.

Besides these of more public employment, I shall afford you one passage out
of a private English thorough paced Presbyterian, who thus speaks his own and
the rest of his associates Intentions. -- They Vid. Bounds and Bonds. page 55.
1650.
who are now for the right of the Son, and continuance of the Government, are
as much against the vices in and about him, as about the Father. And should He
do as his Father had done, they who are Another Instance that the Covenant
binds only to Conditional Obedience.
now for the performance of this Oath and Covenant, would as truly join against
him, as against the Father.

This is home and pat to the purpose, and may sufficiently inform his present
Majesty, what small Obedience and Loyalty he can expect from these people. It Is
storyed of Pope Julius II. that being angry against Lewis XII. King of France,
and marching out with an Army against the French, took St. Peter's Keys and
hurled them into the River Quia clavis Sancti Petri, non amplius valet, valeat
gladius Sancti Pauli. Jo. Baleus. l. 7.
Tiber with this furious Bravado: Since St. Peter' s Keys will not quell mine
Enemies, I Will try what St. Paul' s Sword will do. These men take the same
course, but upon different scores: The first two being Princes, standing upon
their own bottoms; and, for ought that I know, neither bound to one another by
way of such an Obedience. The second almost of as much difference as betwixt
Heaven and Earth; one party within his own Dominions, above all that is mortal,
and superior to the Law it self; the other of so an inferior Allay, that by
all the obligations Human and Divine, he is so far bound to a real Obedience,
that the least Opposition is not only Perjury, but Treason.

It Is a pretty piece of Policy the People had got, first seditiously to swear a
wicked Oath, and then to declare that it is so far binding, That they cannot
in Conscience admit their lawful King to reign over them, unless he will swear
and forswear as fast as they do. Should we swear to root out Presbytery root
and branch, they would call it wicked, and no way obligatory; and, yet I am
confident, we have as much right (if not more) to do so, than they had for the
extirpation of Episcopacy. The Arch-Duchess swore never to put off her smock,
and the Archduke, that he would not eat, till Ostend should be taken; but Sir
Francis Vere, was not to be courted with such babbles, but made them know the
folly of such rashness, by the necessity of their nullity; and had he yielded
upon the foppery of preserving them from perjury, it is probable Queen
Elizabeth, or the States of Holland, would have rewarded him with an halter;
but he was too wise to be caught with such chafe.

It Is true, Richard I. being at dinner at Westminster, and hearing that Speed's
Chron. Rich. 1. sect. 58.
Philip of France had besieged Verneuil in Normandy, swore that he would not
turn his face till he had gotten thither with his Army, whereupon he caused the
wall to be cut through, (that he might save his Oath by not turning his back)
and never rested till with an hundred Ships, he had crossed the Seas from
Portsmouth into Normandy, where the only rumor of his approach, made the
French King raise his siege, and without stroke or sight of his magnanimous
Enemy quit the Field. Yet this is no example to us, he being his own Master,
and the action in vindication of his right: whereas we are but Subjects,
obliged to obey our King, not to make Covenants and Oaths of our own heads
against him, his Authority, and the Laws of the Land.

But it is not so much the validity of an Oath which these people are guided
by, [for if so, then they would not have broken those Oaths and Promises which
they had formerly taken of Allegiance, Supremacy, Canonical Obedience,
University Oaths, and Subscriptions], but self-ended Interest is the Card they
steer by, and have all along been so earnest for. What is advantageous to their
humors, that they are for; if you be against the Covenant, they are sworn to
be your Enemies; but, if you Worship that Idol, you need no more Christianity,
you are then qualified for any thing, but if otherwise, you are only fit
company for the wicked; which hypocritical partiality minds me of a passage in
their Assembly at Glasgow, [1638.]

The University of Aberdene sent none of their Professors to that Large Declar.
page 244.
Assembly, not daring to trust themselves upon the way, having been so much
threatened with the loss of their lives, for writing against the Covenant. Only
they sent one of their number, no Divine, but a Professor of Humanity, to
excuse their absence: His Commission being read, gave him only power to be
there, and did constitute him their Agent in any thing which might concern
their University, requiring him to continue there, and from time to time to
give them advertisement of all that passed. The Moderator [Mr. Alex. Henderson,
well known in both Kingdoms for a rigid Covenanter], did justly affirm, that it
was no Commission, the party having no power by it to give any voice in the
Assembly, and so there was no more to be said to it. But immediately something
being transmitted by whispering from ear to ear, until it came to the
Moderators ear; The Moderator began presently to Recant, and perusing his
Letter of Credence, said, He perceived that there was only want of Formality in
the draught, which they might easily pass over. And so they allowed that for a
Commission which was none, and admitted him to have a voice in the Assembly,
though the University gave him no such power; nor would they have sent any
Commissioner but a Divine. At this sudden change of the Moderator, made in him
by a whisper, many began to smile, and to lay wagers, that the party admitted
was a Covenanter, which the Moderator did not expect from that University, and
that this secretly-eonvey'd Intelligence of it had changed him. And accordingly
it proved to be.

Thus kissing goes by favor among these people: As a man might as well have
been a Devil as a Gibelline for any favor he might expect from Pope Boniface
VIII. so strictly and partially did he bind himself with those of the Guelphian
Interest.

But their hypocrisy is not only visible in these biased actions, but in the
whole series of their lives, in which their juggling is not to be paralleled.
What counterfeited Zeal! What pretended gifts of the Spirit! What seeming
Sanctity! What long-winded Prayer-affections! What contrived Sighs and Groans
not to be uttered! What demure Carriage! What Eye-humility! What pretended
Self-denial! And yet what real Wickedness and Roguery are acted under these
Vizards! Whilst they are under, they would be thought all humility; but having
once got their ends and Supremacy, their actions bespeak them the worst of
Tyrants: Which calls to my memory that Monck, that by his dejected carriage
always looking down with his Eyes, was by his Neighbors taken for a real
Saint: but being by hypocritical carriage chosen Abbot, lived in the height of
open wickedness; affirming, that at first, he was but Quaerebam claves
Monasterii, quibus inventis jam rectus incedo, and clavibus pro libito utor.
Ph. Lonicer. Theat Hist. p. 539. and vid. Oath. Meland. Joco-seria. Sect. 254.
p. 272, 273. Le Tombeau de la Melancholy. page 171.
seeking for the Keys of the Monastery, but having now found them, and got what
he looked for, would live according to his own pleasure. Thus it is storyed of
Pope Sixtus, (how true, I know not) that before he arrived to that honor, eat
and drank nothing but Bread and Water: saying Panis and Aqua
Vita Beata.
But having once settled himself in the Porphyry Chair, he refused to stoop to
such coorse fare when it was offered him, having his reason from the contrary
Position of the words, Aqua and Panis.
Est vita Canis.
After this fashion another threw away his Net when he came to the Pontifical
Dignity, knowing, that he had then caught the Fish. Thus at the beginning of
the Wars a public Monthly Fast was appointed, for the last Wednesday of
every Month; but no sooner had they got the King upon the Scaffold, and the
Nation fully secured into the Rumps Interest; but then they thought it needless
to abuse or gull the People with multitude of Prayers and Sermons, they having
got what they long expected, and, as they thought, had so strongly secured
themselves; that it was all one, whether the beslaved People thought them to be
Saints or no: and so by a particular Act of their Worships, nulled the 23. Apr.
1649.
Proclamation for the Observation of the former; all which, verifieth the old
Verse:

The Devil was sick, the Devil a Monck would be,
The Devil was well, the Devil a Monck was he.
Thus you see the true reason of this new Order of Sanctity, and how easy it
is to deceive the world with a counterfeit Holiness. Like the old Wife at
Venice, who caused two great Books to be made, both of Bee-hive of the Romans
Church. sol. 23.
equal bigness and like fashion, whereof the one was a real Bible, but the
other hollow within, like a Chest, made in all points like a Book with Clasps
and all; which she filled with flat Bottels of Malmsey, and with good fine
Marchpanes, which she her self made of the Brawn of Capons and Partridges, with
Sugar and Almonds, and then withdrew her self into a pretty Cell with these
two Books, and there sat prunking and tarrying all alone in her devout
Contemplations, sometimes five or six days together, Praying and Reading full
devoutly till the Bible was quite empty, not eating or drinking any thing else
all that while. And after this manner did Ant. Panormit a Parallela Alfonsina.
l. 2. c 9. p. 33.
Antonius Piceus get a name of Sanctity by his hypocritical fasting 40. days;
and whether Alex. Rosse Continuat. of Raleigh. p. 574.
John Scot did his Miracles this way, or by the help of the Virgin Mary, is not
worth enquiry at this time. Though I am confident, that the Presbyterians gain
more by juggling than by fair play.

How seeming honest are many of their Writings and Protestations! yet, when
well looked into, are either never kept, or of themselves signify nothing; but
like a mere Complement, full of courtesy, full of craft; of which many
examples might be given, but one at this time may satisfy, seeing it was done
by the chief of that Gang, and that too, since his Majesty's return. At a
General Meeting of the Covenanting Presbyterians in and about the City of
London, a Petition was drawn up by them to be presented to the King, which thus
concludes; -- Beseech your Majesty, Z. Crofton's Berith. Anti-Baal. Epist. to
the Reader.


That the things of God and Religion, which have been so Solemnly Covenanted
for, may be owned and confirmed by your Royal Authority; which notwithstanding,
we do sincerely profess our readiness to accommodate with our Godly and
Orthodox Brethren dissenting from us, so far as may consist with our
Consciences, and Covenant.



Is not this a very gracious Petition and Condescension? Can any man desire the
Society of more peaceable Brethren? Who only desire, that their Covenant [made
against all Laws and Authority, yet they hold its Obligation to be perpetual]
might be confirmed; yet, if it be not, for Peace-sake, they are very willing to
agree with the Episcopal Party according to the Covenant. O these are loving
souls, and hate Dissension as a Beggar does a liberal Alms; and truly the
Episcopal Clergy is as much beholden to them as Montross was. Had the
Independents at their first return from America and Holland, made a solemn
Engagement for the extirpation of Presbytery. And in 1644. or 45. had
Petitioned the Parliament, that their Engagement might be confirmed by their
Authority all England over, yet in conclusion, would profess, that they would
willingly agree with Presbytery so far as their Engagement allowed them: Would
not all the Brethren in England, and Scotland, exclaim against it for a mere
juggle, and cry out, Gra-mercy Horse? Yet had this Engagement been far more
rational and lawful than the Covenant. But -- Awaa! Whiggs awaa! -- This
Covenanting Sophism is but a demonstration of your Hellish Knavery: and he that
puts any trust in any of your Protestations and seeming kindnesses, may thank
himself for his own destruction; not a man of you, but like Pope Sixtus IV. if
the Poet hit right, Morney's Mist. of Iniquity. page 604.


-- Fraudisque dolique Magister,
Et sola tantum proditione potens.
-- A Master of frauds and deceits,
And only powerful in Treacherous feats.
So stubborn and perverse are these People in their Iniquities, that the King
and Church must either submit to their whimsies, or else neither shall have
Peace: For if ever the Common Prayer Book be imposed again, against the
Authority ofthese seditious Caterpillars, they plainly tell the present King,
that there will inevitably follow sad Divisions, and widening Two Proposals.
page 7.
of the Breaches, which your Majesty is endeavoring to heal. And in their
second Paper to his Majesty, they thus swagger, Should we Id. p. 11.
lose the opportunity of our desired Reconciliation and That is, the subjection
of all people to the Covenant, otherwise there can be no Union with them.
Union, It astonisheth us to foresee what doleful effects our Divisions should
produce; which we will not so much as mention in particular, lest we should be
mis-understood. And in another place they threaten the King with what great
Calamities Humble Petit. page 6. Grand debate. page 103.
will fall upon the People in his Reign, if Episcopacy be fully settled: And in
another of their Pamphlets, talks of the Worlds running into Confusion; yet, a
little after, assures the Bishops, how patiently they will undergo this
Persecution; [for such is Obedience in the Opinion Id. p. 118.
of these men]. But, how improbable it is, that these men should continue in
this Resolution, shall be left to experience, though any man may imagine that
their words were far from their intentions, when they shall hear the same
People tell the very same Bishops, that they must make loud complaint of their
Persecutions in their Sermons, Prayers, and other Discourses. To which purpose,
thus take their own words.

It is easy to foresee, how those expressions in men's Sermons, or Prayers,
Petition for Peace. p. 16.
or familiar Conference, which seem to any misunderstanding. or suspicious or
malicious Hearers, to Intimate any sense of Sufferings, will be carried to the
Ears of Rulers, and represented as a Crime. And Nature have planted in all men
an Unwillingness to suffer, and denied to all men a love of Calamity, and
necessitated men to feel when they are hurt, and made the Tongue and
Countenance the Index of our Sense. These Effects will be unavoidable, while
such Impositions are continued; And while a fear of sinning will not suffer men
to swallow and digest them. --

These are the expressions, not of private, but the public, and chief, persons
of their Faction; not singly neither, for not a word of these past, but with
the approbation and consent of their wisest Grandees; which may be, for ought I
know, a Representative of their whole Body. Yet here you see, the Foundations
of another War laid, if their desires be not satisfied: and, if this do not
signify their Obedience to be no longer, than the King and Bishops comply with
their humors, I will submit to be chained for a punishment to Jenkin's or
Calamy's Pulpit for a twelvemonth, to learn the meaning of the Covenanters
Gibbridge.

When they expressly declare, that unless the King satisfy their desires, there
shall be Divisions, Breaches, aoleful Effects, great Calamities, Confusions,
and that they, for their parts, shall not hold their peace: I must take it for
granted, that they are willing (nay resolved, if they can get opportunity
again) to renew their Rebellion; and all this wickedness to retrive that
hellish Imp their Covenant, burnt by the Hang-mans hand by public Authority.
And those who will thus outface King, Church, Law, and Authority, must be as
far from being good Subjects, as Ravaillac was when he stabbed his Sovereign.

CHAP. V.
I. The wicked Reproaches the Presbyterians cast upon the present Episcopal
Church.

II. What small reason they have to desire Toleration from the King and
Episcopal Party, since they deny the same to them: with their scandals upon the
Church as Popish, which are wiped off.

III. Their slanders upon the late King, and his vindication from his own
Enemies.

IV. Their endeavors to beggar the Episcopal Church.

V. Their stories of Gods judgments retorted.

THere is a Tale of Bajazet the first, that he had an Ethiope born in I. J.
Howels Ger. Diet p. 67. Part. 1.
India, about him; and having, upon a march one day, his Tent pitched near an
high Tree, He called the Ethiope and said; Dre Areb, if thou love me, go up
to the top of that Tree. The Indian scambled up presently, so the Emperor sent
presently for some to hew down the Tree, the poor Ethiop begging his life all
the while, and that his Counselors would intercede for him: but nothing
prevailing, the Ethiop pulled down his Breeches and with his Excrements and
Urine did so bewray the hewers, that they gave over work, and in the interim
the Ethiop gets down, telling the Turks Counselors, Would all such privy
Counselors as you, were so bewrayed, whose Counsel cannot do as much good as
mine Excrements.

There is nothing in this story that I do entend to be applicatory, but to one
piece of policy of the Presbyterians, who at this time, when all means else
fail them, make it one of their best Asylum's and last refuge, to bespatter and
vilify those whom they take for their enemies: And in this art they are so
dexterous as to charm the simple people Alaric. on Rome Vaincur, l. 6. p. 197.
198.
into a belief of their words; each of their Lecturers being as active for
England as the spirit Rigilde in Mounsieur de Scudery's Masterpiece was for to
persuade the Spaniards into Tumults and Uproars.

And they are not ignorant how credulous the vulgar are: A poor German was
easily persuaded, that a fellow was burnt at Auspurg for Facit. Bebel. l. 2. p.
125.
a Cheat, by placing snow before an hot furnace, and there to remain till it
was hardened with the heat, and then to have sold it for salt. A priest once
made some people so firmly believe, that the Storks were men of a far
Country, but only in winter Transfigured; That they Id. l. 3. p. 220.
did all seriously profess for the future, to have a greater respect and honor
for those Birds. If many men of good literature are apt to credit the stories
in Gononus, Metaphrastes, Surius, Dauroultius, Nider, Marulus, Cantipratanus,
Lippeloo, Caesarius, and such like Sacred Romancies, we may well suppose the
Faith of the unlearned to be more easily wrought upon.

This makes them at this time throw about their dirt to the purpose, persuading
the people that nothing but wickedness and Satan rules and over-spreads the
whole Land: To which purpose thus they send their Mercuries, about and old Hall
of Kings-Norton rants bravely.

-- I do verily believe there has been a greater flood of open profanesse
Funebr. Flor. page 3.
in ten weeks past, than in ten years before. -- Which is a pretty information
to the people of, what mischief the Kings return has brought upon the
Kingdom. And to this purpose also Crofton, Berith Antibaal page 67.
when he tells us of the -- Suppressing pious, painful Preachers thrust out,
and profane, drunken, deboist, canonical, Common Prayer Book men forced in,
wheresoever a Bishops power can reach. -- And this is seconded by his Brother
in malice, that hocus pocus and jugler in Divinity and Policy, Dick Baxter --
Too many Congregations Mischiefs of self-ignornce Epist. to his friends at
Kiderminster.
have none but insufficient or scandalous Teachers, or no preaching Ministers
at all. And then bravely bids his friends at Kiderminster never to join
themselves with the Episcopal Government, but to stick close to those
destructive and seditious rules he taught them. -- Let none draw you from
Catholic unity to a Faction, though the declaming against Faction and Schism,
should be the device, by which they should accomplish it. --

Is not the world well mended, when Episcopacy must be called Faction and
Schism; and Presbytery only held to be Catholic? But this is just like the
other actions of the same man, who used to call Rebellion Loyalty, and Loyalty
Rebellion; with such fury does his distempered zeal, make him continually run
counter.

Nor is this all, but they impudently tell the Bishops to their very faces of
their cruelty, pride, and covetousness, uncharitable censoriousnesse,
unmerciful opposition, and such like. Grand debate p 96. 108. 109. 118.
And then declare to the world of strange Persecution, Petit. for peace page 18.
of many hundred worthy men laid by, and that conformity is the means to strip
these Nations of the glory in which they have excelled all the rest of the
world, Grand debate page 58, 59.
even a learned, able, holy Ministry; and a people sincere, and serious, and
understanding in matters of their salvation, -- And also that the readiest way
to bring the Gospel into contempt in the World, and cause all Religion to
dwindle Id. p. 60.
away into Formality first, and then to barbarism, and brutishness, is to let
in an ignorant, idle, vicious Ministry. -- Thus do they vilify all that are
not of their Gang, really making it their business to make the people believe,
that none can be good but a Presbyterian, though I hope in this Book that their
knavery is sufficiently made visible.

In another of their ridiculous Pamphlets they persuade the Nation again to
believe strange things that -- some hundreds of able, holy, Petit. for peace
page 2.
faithful ministers are of late cast out, and not only very many of their
families in great distress, but -- abundance of Congregations in England,
Ireland, and Wales, are overspread with lamentable ignorance, and are destitute
of able faithful Teachers -- Thousands of the Servants of the Lord, that are
either deprived of their Faithful Teachers Page 3.
or in fears of losing them. -- And that there are few Nations under the
Heavens of God, as far as we can learn, that have more able, holy, faithful,
laborious and truly peaceable Preachers of the Page 4.
Gospel (proportionably) than those are, that are now cast out in England, and
are like in England Scotland and Ireland to be cast out, if the old conformity
be urged. --

-- This course of unmerciful opposition, is the greatest wrong to it, that you
can easily be drawn to, unawares: while so many truly fearing Page 18.
God are cast or trodden down, and tempted to think ill of that which
themselves and the Church thus suffer by. And when so many of the worst
befriend this way, because it gratifieth them, it tends to make your cause
judged of, according to the quality of its friends and adversaries. -- Well
said self-conceipt! And in another place hints to the world, that if the
Presbyterians be turned out, there will not be honest men enough in Page 8.
the Nation to supply their places.

And having thus told the Bishops the wickedness of their party, and the
honesty and goodness of a Puritan, they boldly appeal to the King, and after a
great many good morrows, thus pitifully conclude; -- And shall wait in hope,
that so great a Calamity of your people Humble Petiti. page 6.
as will follow the loss of so many able, faithful Ministers, as the rigorous
imposition would cast out, should never be recorded in the History of your
Reign. --

Thus these simpring Brethren are highly against liberty of conscience in
others, yet would they have it themselves. Though they will so far II.
comply, as not to be against Thoph. Timorcus Epist. Dedicat. Sect. 25.
an unimpos'd Liturgy; yet are they expressly against our Common Prayer Book.
Nay, were it altered according to their own desires, yet would they not be
obliged by the Laws to use it. Though in Queen Elizabeth's time, they amongst
themselves having composed A Book of the form of Common Prayer, etc. they
presented See back, Book 1. chap. 9 page 62.
it to the Parliament, earnestly desiring, that by Act of Parliament, that Book
might be confirmed and used all the Kingdom over. Yet about 1585. four
Presbyterian Classes made complaint to the Lord Burleigh against the Liturgy,
though they would not have it all taken away: his Dr. Hammond's view of the new
Directory cap. 1. Sect. 3. page 3, 4.
Lordship bid them make a better; upon which the first Classis framed a new
one, somewhat near the Geneva mode; but this the second Classis disliked, and
altered in 600 particulars; that again, had the fate to be quarreled at by the
III Classis; and what the third resolved upon, the fourth would not.

Thus would these men have somewhat, but they cannot agree amongst themselves;
a sufficient sign of their inconstancy, altering this way and that according to
the weather: sometimes they will have a form imposed, anon they will have it at
liberty; and another time they will have none at all: of whom I shall say with
a late Characterizer, That they are bold Gentlemen, that cannot speak to man
without notes, and yet prate to God ex tempore.

The African Scipio conquered the wild and heathenish Spaniards by his
courtesy. St. Francis (if you will believe the Legend) brought a H. Estiene.
l. Apol pour. Hed^do^. page 367. Id. p. 433, 434.
mad Wolf to such civility, that he could behave himself a la mode and live
friendly with his Neighbors. A furious Buck and a pack of Hounds were
miraculously brought to devotion, by worshipping a Sea-toss'd Relic; And an
Elephant at Adsmeer in Indostain in the height of Tyrris Voyage to the
East Indies. p. 148.
his fury, remembered the courtesy received from an Herb-woman; as St. Hieromes
Lion requited the cure of his foot, by the keeping of his Masters Ass, which
being lost by his negligence, the meek Lion did penance Jac. de Vorag. Hist.
141.
by bearing home the wood. It Is said that a Wolf at the command of St. Blase,
restored the hogg which it had taken from a poor woman; Nor would the birds
depart from the same man, till he had Id Hist. 41.
laid his hands on them and blessed them: A sheep is storyed to have bleated in
the Thief's belly at the command of St. Patrick; and the stones to have said
Amen to St. Bedes Preachment; as the Marble yielded to St. James body, and an
high Tower at the command of the same St. Id. Hist. 94.
bowd down its Top equal to the ground, to let a Merchant escape; Thus monsters
and stocks and stones (if you believe the Legends) can obey, but no courtesy
can win over these Nonconforming men; still they will be opposite, still
seditious, never complying to Authority, unless that submitt to them first;
and as men near drowning still catching hold of any thing for a pretense to
cover their obstinacy.

When the Parliament and Queen inact conformity they deny obedience to that
law: when King James by Proclamation order the same they deny its obligation:
when King Charles I desires any thing by order then they refuse also, affirming
that such things cannot stop the force of Laws. Yet when his present Majesty by
Proclamation graciously gives a kind of toleration, then they take hold of it,
and will stand by it, let the Act of Conformity say what it will to the
contrary. And indeed his Majesty is greatly beholden to them thus to testify
their Obedience; It being the first time that ever they complied with King or
Command in matters of Religion. Nor is their present obedience upon any virtue
or stress of the Command, but that it is agreeable to their wills. Balthassar
Cossa and other Cardinals being at Bologna to Morney Mist. of Iniq. p. 519.
choose a Pope, several they named, but none could content Cossa: wherefore
they desired him to nominate whom he would, whereupon he declared that he would
be Pope himself, and so was chosen and nominated John XXIII.

After this manner do our Presbyterians, no King, Law, Council, Convocation,
or any thing else, can please them, but what is of their own election, or
beneficial to their own designs. When themselves make a Covenant, then they
will swear for uniformity, and the ruin of those who do not agree with them.
But if the King and laws demand unity, then they are for liberty of Conscience:
yet if the Anabaptists, Independents etc. being then in supremacy, plead and
allow that liberty, then they cry out, that the Church is undone for want of
Government: Though now being not Lords and Masters, they are against such a
settlement and stick to that license granted by the Kings Declaration: which
though but temporary, yet will they never quit its Freedom till they be come
Conquerors again by Rebellion, let King and Parliament act what they will to
the contrary; and in this I am confirmed, by an expression in one of their
Grandees.

-- We doubt not but his Majesty will appoint such persons to review Theoph.
Timorc. page 84.
our Liturgy as will agree in one, which shall not be liable to just
Exceptions. TILL THAT TIME, HIS MAJESTY GRANTS A LIBERTY.

What arguments these Resolute hot-spurrs will make out of, just exceptions,
and the last words, till that time, his Majesty grants a liberty, may very
easily be suspected; and I am confident the event will show to be most
seditious; pleading the Kings Declaration against their Future Conformity,
though the King, Parliament, and Convocation agree on the contrary. Thus will
they act like the Bitch in Justine, which desired Hist. lib. 43. p. 43. p. 345.
the benefit of a place to whelp in, which being granted, begs of the Shepherd
liberty also to bring up her young there; this being performed too, then
confidently demands for the future a propriety in that Kennell: But these men
might know; that Agesilaus the great King of the Lacedaemonians used to
condescend to the pleasuring of his Son when Alex. ab Alex. fol. 161. b.
a Child, by riding with him on an Hobbyhorse: and what liberty our King
grants to consciences that are truly tender, cannot handsomely be laid hold on
by these wicked Incendiaries, whose abominable actions proclaim them to have no
Conscience, unless it be to commit mischief.

If these men will not allow liberty to the Episcopal Clergy, I know no reason
they should have it themselves; as for the first it is plain, of which take some
examples.

Where you have the kneeling at the Sacrament called an horrible stumbling
block, and that the kneeler is a Thief; and in the same place tells The Trial
of the Engl. Liturgy. page 27.
the people, that if none would communicate with the Ringleaders and
Introducers, they would be forced to desist, and had desisted long ago for
shame. Nay he goes farther and tells them, that though they receive much good
and comfort by the Common Prayer, yet they sin if they go to it. And fairly
assures us that we are bound to oppose the Page 30.
Liturgy; for otherwise the Superiors will be emboldened to sin, whilst they
think that to be lawfully imposed, which is by us received and Page 26.
obeyed.

Mr. Matthew Newcomen now a great man amongst them and an old Smecty M Nuan,
when the Presbyterians were top and top gallant, if 1646. Feb.
I mistake not, preached a Sermon against Toleration. And one of their great
Pulpit-teers of Scotland, publicly told our House of Lords that S.
Rutherford's Sermon 25 June 1645. page 33.
Liberty of Conscience is no remedy, but Physic worse then the Disease. And in
the same temper were this man's Country men, when they cried out -- God defend
all those who will defend Gods cause, and God confound the Service Book and all
the maintainers of it. And this was the Large Decl. page 37.
heat of the Scotch people at the beginning of their Covenant, turning out all
those that would not subscribe it, though contrary to the Kings command. They
presently expelled two Regents from the College of Page 73.
Edinburgh for not taking it: In Fyfe they ordered a Communion throughout Page
203, 205. 199, 118.
their Churches, at which they made every one to swear, not to subscribe any
thing but their Covenant. Nor were there few Ministers in that Kingdom, not
subscribers of their Covenant, whom they did not presently process and cite
before their several Presbyteries, and others were kept from their Privileges.

Nor was this all. One of their Ministers refused to pray for Sir William Id.
p. 104, 105.
Nesbett, late Provost of Edinburgh, when he was lying upon his Deathbed, only
because he had not subscribed their Covenant; Another prayed God to scatter
them all in Israel, and to divide them in Jacob, who had counseled the King to
require the Confession of Faith, to be subscribed by His Authority. Many would
not admit to the Communion those who had not subscribed their Covenant; Others
would not suffer children to be baptized in the Churches of those Ministers,
who were out of the Covenant, though they were their own Parish-Churches, but
carried them sometimes many miles, to be baptized by Covenanting-Ministers. One
preached, That all the Non-subscribers of the Covenant were Atheists, and so
concluded, that, All the Lords of the Kings Council, and all the Lords of the
Session were such, because none of them had subscribed it. Another preached,
That as the wrath of God never was diverted from his people, until the seven
Sons of Saul were hanged up before the Lord in Gibeon; so the wrath of God
would never depart from Scotland, till the twice seven Prelates [the number of
the Bishops in that Kingdom] were hanged up before the Lord there. Another
preached, That though there were never so many Acts of Parliament against the
Covenant, yet it ought to be maintained against them all. Another delivered in
his Sermon, That the bloudiest and sharpest War was rather to be endured, than
the least Error in Doctrine and Discipline. And another of these Bloud-Hounds
in his Pulpit thus furiously wished; That he and all the Bishops in that
Kingdom; were in a bottomless Boat at Sea together, for he could be well
content to lose his life, so they might lose theirs. And what do you think of
another of these Furies, who affirmed, that, Every man ought to be
excommunicated that took not the Covenant, and then any man might lawfully kill
him, who would put himself to so much trouble as to do it.

But we need not trouble our selves much by a recital of their words: since
their actions all along in that Kingdom were furiously hurryed on against
Episcopacy, or the Toleration of any thing that did thwart their Covenant.

And after this manner have we in England proceeded, the Brethren thinking it
impossible for any thing to thrive, unless Episcopacy be plucked up root and
branch; of which take the words of Crofton, -- I Will stand by it; It [i. e.
Episcopacy] must be extirpated, if King Berith. Anti-Baal, p. 23.
and Kingdom, or Peace and Glory must be preserved from Gods angry extirpation.
-- It it not unknown to any that is conversant in their Writings and Sermons,
How for many years together they thundered before their Parliament the ruin of
Episcopal Government, pronouncing sad woes and judgments if any such things
were tolerated, which highly stirred up the people of both Houses to act so
fiercely against all Law and Reason, for the maintenance of their wicked
Covenant and Presbytery, allowing no more mercy to the Orthodox Clergy than a
Jew, who sometimes might breathe amongst them, but not do any thing in
satisfaction of their Consciences. These men being then Supreme, being against
neutrality in Religion as well as War; concerning which, thus their Chieftains
of both Kingdoms declare, -- We give now public warning to such Persons, to
rest no longer upon their Declar. of both Kingdoms. 1643. page 6.
Neutrality, or to please themselves with the naughty and slothful pretext of
Indifferency: But, that they address themselves speedily to take the Covenant,
and join with all their power in the defense of this Cause against the common
Enemy, and by their zeal and forwardness hereafter, to make up what has been
wanting through their luke-warmness. This they shall find to be their greatest
wisdom and safety: Otherwise, we do declare them to be public Enemies to the
Religion and Country, and that they are to be censured and punished as
professed Adversaries and Malignants --.

Nor had they only the Solemn League, but another Covenant as full See John
Vicar's God in the Mount. page 364, 365.
of Treason and Wickedness as ever was invented by Satan, and the refusers of
this [and none could take it but such wretches as themselves], they Ordered to
be dealt withal as Conspirators and Enemies, and their Estates disposed of
accordingly. And besides this, their Lords and Id. part. 3. p. 24.
Commons put forth another Oath stuffed with nonsense, for the preservation of
themselves and their City, with the power granted to seize upon the persons of
all such as refused the said Oath. Thus had these Puritans several gins laid to
ruin the Orthodox and Loyal Subjects.

I might here tell of their giving Sir William Brereton, and his Cheshire 26.
March, 1644.
Associates, Authority, to turn out all the Ministers and Schoolmasters of
that County, who were for the King. I might tell, how they ordered every man
upon his peril, to submit to the destruction of Fonts, Surplisses, Organs,
painted Glass-windows, etc. I can also tell you, how their Lords and Commons
Ordained, -- That if any Person or 9. May, 1644.
Persons -- shall use, or caused to be used the Common Prayer Book, -- That
then every such person so offending therein, shall for the first offense 23.
Aug. 1645.
forfeit and pay the sum of five pounds: -- For the second offense the sum of
ten pound, and for the third offense shall suffer one whole years Imprisonment,
without Bail or Main-prize.

And it is further Ordained, That every Minister, which shall not henceforth
pursue and observe the Directory for public Worship, according to the true
intent and meaning thereof, in all Exercises of the Public Worship of God, --
shall for every time that he shall so offend, lose and forfeit the sum of forty
shillings. -- And that what person soever shall, with intent to bring the said
Directory into contempt, and neglect, or to raise opposition against it,
Preach, Write, Print, or cause to be written or printed any thing in the
derogation or depraving of the said Book, or any thing therein contained, or
any part thereof, shall lose and forfeit for every such offense, such a sum of
Money, as shall at the time of his Conviction, be thought fit to be imposed
upon him, by those before whom he shall have his Trial: provided, that it be
not less than five pounds, nor exceeding the sum of fifty pounds. I could also
tell you, how they turned out the learned and loyal Clergy, and put into their
places a company of Rebellious, Schismatical Tub-thumpers, such people being
most advantageous for their turns; and how they Ordered, that if any of the
Loyal Clergy endeavored to get their own again, 23. Aug. 1647.
they should with all their friends and assisters be Imprisoned, whereby many
of them were forced to beg for their livings. And many such like actions as
these might be shown, whereby their malice appeared visibly against the
Episcopal Party, and against the Toleration of any thing but their Rebellious
Covenant and Schismatical Presbytery. One of them tells us, that -- This very
Toleration has been the Discolliminium, or, a Reply to Bounds and Bonds, p.
29, 30.
principal cause of all our late Innovations, Dislocations, and Conflagrations
-- And -- That no Orthodox sincere Christian can, or dare, cordially Engage, or
bid God speed, to the proceedings of Supreme Power, so long as they intend to
allow a General Toleration of Errors and false Opinions.

How many Petitions were there yearly put up in behalf of the Covenant, and
that nothing should be allowed, but according to that League, endeavoring what
in them lay, to raze out the very thoughts of Episcopacy? And, yet these men
are now angry, that they have not public allowance for their sins.

If the Episcopal Clergy, desire that they may have privilege of Conscience,
according to the Laws of the Land, Baxter blesses himself, and wonders they
can have the confidence to ask such a favor; and tells them, that this denial
is so far from being a Persecution, Grotian Relig. p. 112, 113, 114.
that it is rather done for their greatest honor and accommodation. For, if
you of the Episcopal Clergy should have liberty, it would be the greatest blow
that ever was given to your Government; -- and the reason is, because, You
would have a small Clergy, and none of the best, and the People in most
Parishes, that are most ignorant, drunken, profane, unruly. -- For, the cause
of their love to Episcopacy, is, because it was a shadow (if not a shelter) to
the profane heretofore. -- so that a Prelatical Church would in the common
account be near kin to an Alehouse or Tavern (to say no worse), where some
honest men may be; and, yet it is taken for the note of an honest sober man to
be as little in them as may be.

'Twas the fashion of Andreas Ordogna, that famous Painter of Florence, to
paint all his Enemies in Hell: And what less malice Baxter and his Associates
have against the Episcopal Clergy, may in part be seen by their actions and
railing; and, what reason they have now (besides their Impudence) to expect and
demand a Toleration, since they so violently denied it to others, I must plead
ignorance; especially, the zealous Mr. Richard having been one of the greatest
Enemies both to King and Church in all the Kingdoms.

Yet would they now gladly persuade the Bishops, That, there may be Grand
debate. page 10.
either a total abolition of Ceremonies, or at least such a liberty, that those
who are unsatisfied concerning their lawfulness or expediency, may not be
compelled to the practice of them, or subscription to them. Then they run to
his Majesty, and desire him, -- That no Oaths Two Proposals. p. 6.
or Promises of Obedience to the Bishops; nor any unnecessary Subscriptions or
Engagements be made necessary to Ordination, Institution or Induction,
Ministration, Communion, or Immunities of Ministers. -- -- And -- That there be
no Law or Canon for or against them, Page 21.
commanding, recommending, or prohibiting them. -- And -- That your Majesty
will endeavor the repealing of all Laws and Canons Page 23.
by which these Ceremonies are imposed, that they may be left at full liberty.

Thus are they now for a perfect Toleration, knowing in time, that they and the
other Sectaries, by such a connivence may destroy all again, either by a
Presbyterian Parliament, or another Rebellion; by this liberty they having the
convenience to multiply their number both with the Great ones and Inferior; as
a means for which, they would have the Universities, and Cathedrals too,
receptacles for their Faction, which will be the only means to ruin both
places, by a continual Feud and Faction. -- We further humbly beseech your
Majesty, That this liberty Page 22.
of forbearing the Surplice, may extend to Colleges and Cathedrals also, that
it drive not thence all those that scruple it, and make those places receptive
only for a Party. And, that the Youth of the Nation may have just liberty as
well as the Elder. If they be engaged in the Universities, and their Liberties
there cut off in their beginning, they cannot afterward be free; and many
hopeful persons will be else diverted from the service of the Church.

Here you may see their violence against Laws and the Church; their furiousness
for a public Toleration, the Mother of Confusion; and their strange and
sottish complaints to the People of unheard of Persecution against their
Saintships; never remembering, that, when they were Lords and Masters of
Mis-Rule, how many able Divines they turned out of their Livings, and beggered
merely for their Loyalty; and yet these men would now be favored for their
Schism and Rebellion.

They thought it very fit for their Friends of the Long-Parliament, to turn
above an hundred Ministers out of London, and the neighboring Churches, and as
many Scholars out of the University of Oxford under the notion of a Visitation,
with a great many out of Cambridge. Nor was any thing their fault, but their
loyalty and opposition to the Covenant, let that professed liar, Robert Bailey,
write what he will to the contrary, Review. p. 80.
who is sufficiently confuted by the learned Mr. Watson, by his own sad
experience, and Querela Cantabrigiensis, will farther evince. Second Fair
Warning. p. 180. Dr. Pierce's New Discoverer, p. 140. See also p. 141, 142,
143, 144.
But it is needless to talk of hundreds and scores, when that great Persecutor
John White (well known to the Presbyterian London-Printers) made it his boast,
that he and his had ejected eight thousand Churchmen in four or five years:
yet was there none more ready and nimble to come into those sequestered places,
than the Covenanting Presbyterian, let the honest ejected Royalist and his
family beg or sterve, Jack Zealot must have no charity to the wicked.

Are not the Brethren pert blades, that can thus boldly demand Toleration of
the King, against whose Father and Himself they were such furious Enemies, by
rebelling against them, and murdering their best friends? Are they not
confident Younkers, that can expect such favors from the Bishops (without ever
repenting of their former Villainies) whom formerly they so violently
persecuted, illegally imprisoned; whose Lands they bought and sold, murdered one
of them, and made it their business to extirpate and ruin all the rest? Which
are sufficient signs of the wicked disposition and uncharitableness of a
Schismatic, who thinks it an unjust Rule of our Savior, that they should do
as they would be Mat. 7. 12.
done to. But alas! the Puritans were framed up at the Council of Constance,
and so not to keep Faith with Heretics. They are the old Rogatiani newly vampt
up, and so believe no true Church but amongst themselves.

But as some London-Beggers use to stand, Dr. Lluet Poems. p. 78.

In Graecians Coats with Papers in their hand,
Who are (as them in different parts we meet)
English at home, but solemn Greeks in the street;
Of whom unclothed, and when the Truth is heard,
Constantinople only knows the Beard:
So this sly Masker, lay its Tinsel by,
Is only Painted Zeal and Pageantry.
But,
Go lay your Vizard by, your Masking stuff, Page 83.

The Devil is tired, and Hell has laughed enough:
The World descryes the Chest, it is quickly known
They no Faith hate who have Resolved on none.
It Is an easy thing to cast reproach upon the best of men amongst the Vulgar:
The Arians falsely accused Eustathius the Bishop of Antioch Niceph. l. 8. c. 45,
48, etc.
of Adultery, the famous Athanasius Bishop of Alexandria of many other crimes,
merely to make them odious to the World, and throw them from their Bishoprics:
And the rabble of Tours falsely imputed Jo. Chena Archiepisc. and Episc. Gall.
Chron. p. 110.
strange wickedness to their Bishop Briccius. Thus did our English Puritans
scandalize Archbishop Laud of Popery, though none writ more bravely against
them; Thus did they vilify Dr. Cozin's (now Bishop of Durham), though none
opposed them more stiffly beyond Seas. Thus was Chillingsworth slandered, though
none repulsed them more by Reason; Archbishop Bancroft, and Bishop Bromhall,
must lie under the lash of these abuses, though they manifested their
Innocence; nor can Bishop Wren, Bishop Pierce, Bishop Tailor, nay nor Bishop
Usher himself, escape the malignity of such detractors; neither must that great
Grotius, (a man of more learning than all his Enemies in the World) in this
shun the dirt and envy of a root of snarling Pigmies.

And, when they can find no vice in the Person, then will they make the Order
and Office to be a sin, worthy all manner of misery and persecution: Though all
their Reasons for so doing, being well examined, seem but like so many Cypress
Trees, which grow tall, seem fair and glorious, yet barren from all manner of
fruit. Nor do they any thing else but renew their old complaints, having
nothing to say, but what was alleged (and abundantly confuted) many years
ago; their present Arguments being not unlike the Ficus Indica, whose boughs
take root again in so multiplied a fashion, that you would almost suppose them
to be a considerable Wood, and yet it is but all one and the same Tree, growing
originally from one Root: yet, with these, they make a great Bravado and Cry,
though it be but like the sheering of Hoggs, without the gaining of any Wool,
which is sufficient to nauseate any man from their Refutation; the undertaking
of it, being to as small purpose, as those Athenians, who thought to gain great
store of gold by conquering the Emmets of Hymettus: For nothing can be gained
by their Writings, unless Malice and Ignorance may go for precious Jewels.

To be short: Those who pretend to be such Zealots for the Reformed Bishop Juel
against Harding. Bishop Usher's Answer to the Jesuits Challenge. Fisher caught
in his own net. p. 3, 7, 9, 10, 20.
Church, should not endeavor its discredit, by asserting her novelty. If that
be true, which the most learned of the Protestants have maintained, viz. that,
that, which we call the Popish Religion, had no firm foundation by a public
acknowledgement, till about six hundred years after our Savior's birth; Then
were the Ceremonies now of the Church of England, used and generally received
long before Papistry had its being, as is palpable from Church History and the
Fathers; So that, we might as well call Churches, Bells, Pulpits,
Hower-Glasses, written-Sermons, etc. Popish, as well as Forms of Prayer,
Ministerial habits, and such like. And I am apt to believe, that, if our Church
should bring in the Wafer, (as there is neither harm in form nor matter) that
many of our Zealots, would refuse the Communion, though they are in use at
Geneva; yet the grand Disciple and adorer of that Knox his Admonit. p. 52.
City and Government, does call it The Round clipped God; which shows, that the
Masters and Scholars cannot always agree in all things.

Nay, these men are so far from agreement amongst themselves, that, for ought
that I know, their minds may alter with the Times and Seasons, of which
(amongst many) take but this one example.

One of their chief Generals, viz. Master Baxter, a little before Baxter's five
Disputations of Church Government. p. 358, 359, 409, 410, 411, 412, 416, 417,
418.
the King came in, does publicly declare, -- That a stinted Liturgy is in it
self lawful, nay, in some things necessary. And that, if the Magistrate, should
impose (and he could not otherwise be dispensed withal) the Surplice, though
it were made a teaching sign, the whiteness of it being to signify Purity; or
should he also appoint kneeling at the Sacrament, he would observe both. And as
for the Ring in Marriage, the name and form of an Altar, and Organs, or other
Instruments of Music, were they so enjoined, he should find no reason to
scruple them. Nor would he be wanting to the observation of our Church
Holy Days. Nor dare he peremptorily say, that it is unlawful to use the Cross
in Baptism. Nor will he condemn the Ancients and Moderns that use it; nor will
he make any disturbance in the Church about it.

Clinias and Demetas in Sydney, protested to fight like Hectors, and gave out
as terrible Bravado's against each other, as the stoutest Champion in the
world, each confiding in the cowardice of his Adversary, like Sir Ambros de la
Fool, and Sir John in the Play: And after this manner does Baxter show
himself. When there was no sign of Episcopal Government, and he hoped that
neither King, Law, nor It, would ever be in force and authority again; Then who
but Baxter? O how conformable would he be, if the Ceremonies were but settled!
What great things would he do, if these things were but up again! But words are
mere wind, though they signify something with an honest man. Now that the
King's come over, and the Church resetled, none more against it than Baxter,
none more opposes the peace of the Church than he; none more violent against
Authority; not is there any man opposes Decency more than this Proteus: yet is
this like the rest of his Faction, who swear Allegiance, and think they
satisfy and fulfill their Oath by Rebellion.

As for these men's desire of Toleration, I shall propose some Quaeries to them.

I.
Whether (supposing them to be Supreme) they would allow the same Privilege to
the Episcopal Party? If not, Then

II.
With what face they can desire or demand it, from the Superiors now in being,
to whom they will not grant the like favors? If they say they would, Then

III.
Why did they in 1642, 1643, etc. preach against, oppose, and deny such liberty
to be given to the Episcopal and Royal Clergy? If they say, That they are
since satisfied in the Contrary, and that their opinions are grown more
moderate, Then

IV.
What reason have we to believe their Moderation to be real? since they all
stand stiffly for the Obligation of their Covenant, in which they swear, to
extirpate Episcopacy, which Opinion is still maintained by Berith Anti Baal,
page 23.
Crofton and others of that gang.

The truth is, give once liberty to a Presbyterian, and give it also to the
Independent, Anabaptist, Quaker, and the rest of the Sectaries, for ought that
I know, one being as good English Christian, as the other; and this Liberty
once granted, in a few years, 'twill be an hard case to tell which is the
Church of England, neither party being subordinate to one another; only here
will be the difference, The Episcopal party will be bound to be obedient to the
Law and Canon; but the other, above both: by which Supremacy, the Authority of
the Loyal Clergy will be nulled, whilst the other by their Power and Liberty,
will have the best advantage to gain Proselytes; and then it is easily imagined,
what brave Elections there will be for Future Parliaments through the whole
Kingdom. But I suppose, his Majesty having been sufficiently plagued by a
Presbyterian Parliament, will desire no more such Representatives: which is
impossible to be hindered, if a Toleration once be granted; for, if from a very
small beginning, these sedulous Non-Conformists grew so headstrong, numerous,
and powerful in a few years, as not only to have a great party, but even a
Majority in Parliament in Queen Elizabeth's days, we must needs expect their
Faction and Authority now daily to increase (if Tolerated) being already so
numerous, and having settled themselves in the Affections, Families, Churches,
and Interests, not only in multitude of Gentry, and other people of the Nation;
but of the Great ones too, who have not only Power and Riches, but, it may be,
Will too, to do mischief by propagating a Presbyterian Interest; which in time
may act as wickedly against the Son (as in part they have already) as they did
formerly against his Royal Father.

It Is not unknown, how these Slanderers scandalize the Church of III.
England with high Popery, which for ought that I know they may by the by,
throw upon his Majesty too as a Favorite; for thus it is well known, they abused
his Royal Father, of which at this time take but one example, and this from the
Heads both of the Laity and Ministry of this Gang. The Assembly of Divines (for
so were they called) at Bibliotheca Reg. p. 64.
Westminster and the Commissioners of the Kirk of Scotland, drew up a Letter,
which was sent by Order of their Commons to the Belgic, French, Helvetian, and
other Reformed Churches beyond sea, in which they do assure them [brave, that
Subjects should complain to strangers of their King, and nothing but slanders
too] that the King made it his sole business to root out the Protestant
Religion, and used all means possibly to reduce the whole Nation to Popery,
etc. O the height of Puritanical Malice! were I a Caesar Vaninus, I would call
Presbytery the Father of Lies. His enemies the Independents are far more
Civil, in this, than these Brethren, of which I shall give you one or two
Instances enough to clear his Majesty from this Presbyterian slander.

John Cook then of Gray's Inn, Barrister, his Immortal foe, when it was his
purpose to cast all the filth that he could upon the King, with an intention to
make him odious to Eternity, yet even then does clear him of this -- I do not
think that the King was a Papist, or that Cook's Appeal, page 30.
he designed to introduce the Popes Supremacy in spiritual things, into this
Kingdom. -- Nor that I think he did believe Transubstantiation, Page 31.
God forbid I should wrong the dead. And another of his professed Enemies, viz.
Will. Lilly, thus vindicates the King, -- He was no Monarchy or no Mon. p. 83.
Papist, or favored any of their Tenants.

And because an Enemies Commendation is held Authentic, you shall see what a
good King he was, according to their own Opinions. Of him, thus says the
aforesaid Cook, (who yet demanded Justice against him, for which Treason he
since felt the Law) -- He was well Appeal, page 35.
known to be a great student in his younger days. -- He had more learning and
dexterity in State affairs, undoubtedly, then all the Kings in Christendom. --

And thus farther says Lilly -- He was an excellent Horsman, Monarchy or no
Mon. p. 75.
would shoot well at a Mark, had singular skill in Limming and Pictures, A good
Mathematitian, not unskilful in Music, well read in Divinity, excellently in
History, and no less in the Laws and Statutes of this Nation. He had a quick
and sharp Conception, would write his mind singularly well, and in good
language and style, only he loved long Parentheses. He would apprehend a matter
in Difference betwixt party and party with great readiness, and methodize a
long matter, and Contract it in few lines: Insomuch that I have heard Sir
Robert Holdorne often say, He had a quicker Conception, and would sooner
understand a Case in Law, or with more sharpness drive the matter unto a head,
than any of his Privy Council; Insomuch that when the King was not at the
Council Table, Sir Robert never cared to be there. He had also amongst others
his special gifts, the gift of patience; Insomuch that if any offered him a
long Discourse or Speech, he would with much Patience, and without any
Interruption or Distaste hear their Story or Speech out at length. -- He did
not much court the Ladies. -- Page 79.
He had exquisite judgment by the Eye and Physiognomy to discover the virtuous
from the wanton, he honored the virtuous. -- He was Page 82.
nothing at all given to Luxury, was extreme sober both in his Food and
Apparel. -- He could argue Logically, and frame his Arguments Artificially. --

If these qualities (confessed by an enemy) do not make a good man, Jack
Presbyter can have small hopes to be so, who hated him because he was too
virtuous for them, as the Devil envies honesty.

Amongst all the Plots and Designs these men have to overthrow IV.
the Church of England; it is none of the least to ruin its Glory, by making it
contemptible by Poverty. For which purpose they endeavor to get all the
Bishops Lands alienated or sold; Dr. Burgess being their Champion; and they
will never question Law, as long as Prynne has any malice, who toils and
writes what he can, to get the Lands confirmed, as they were sold by his
Associates, those Sacrilegious -- of the wicked long Parliament who impiously
sold the Church Revenues to maintain their Rebellion against God and their
King. Had they been the Doners, they might have had a more plausible Plea for
their Alienation; but since these Lands were given by other Pious and Noble
Benefactors, it shows their Devilish Avarice and Malice to meddle with, or
pocket up, that, which they had no claim to, nor power over, being but a Rump
of two Houses actually in Rebellion against their King; and so had no more
Authority to conclude and act in such an high Concern, without, and against,
the consent of the King, than the Pope has to give away this or that Kingdom
upon his form of Excommunication to any of his Favorites that can win it and
wear it; or poor Simnell had to the Crown in King Henry VII. time. Yet to have
this wickedness confirmed, Burges and his Associats, will offer several
hundred thousand pounds to his Majesty, by way of gift, thereby to hook him in
to be pertakers of their sins; a Presbyterian being like a Common Drunkard, who
is not satisfied with his own Excess, but makes it his business that all his
Neighbors too, should be partners with him in his wickedness and debauchery.
But his Majesty is too Sacred and good to be tolled away by such Miscreants; it
shows their abominable Impudence to imagine, to persuade the Son to be an Enemy
to the Church, whose Father was a Glorious Martyr for it; as if they would show
him a better way and Rule, than the Example and Footsteps of his holy Parent.

To me it seems a strange piece of malicious Ignorance, in them, who will allow
some knavish Lawyers to get by their prating, some ignorant Physicians by
destruction, some cousening Tradesmen by false dealing, and some murdering
Soldiers by plundring [for some such there are in all faculties, though their
callings be lawful and commendable] two, three, or four Thousand pounds a
year: and yet think it an hard case or unlawful, for a Reverend Bishop or
Clergyman [who has spent many years, and all his own means in hard study, and
is held the most honorable preferment, as much as the Soul excels the Body] to
possess that which other good charitable men have freely given him: since such
a deed of gift is so far from endamaging our Presbyterian Grumblers, that it
is a main encouragement for their studies and preferment. If they say, as I
have heard, that these Benefactorships were given not to the men, but the
Diocesses; by this retort they malepertly reflect upon the Kings discretion,
whose wisdom thinks such men fit for, and capable of, such Places. But by this
they may as well reason against College and Hospital Lands, and the Commons
belonging to Corporations; and when they have once taken these away, they will
eat up one another through avarice. But enough of this, only there was some
ground for the observation, that the only way to preferment, was to be a
busling Nonconformist.

Besides these and others, they have another way to shake the foundation V.
of Episcopacy and the peace of the Nation. They know full well that nothing
seems more formidable to the vulgar, then a story of Gods strange judgments
upon this or that: And if they question the verbal Narrative, show it them in
print and it is sufficient; they having not confidence enough to deny that which
comes from the Press. The story of a Spirit will fright these people out of
their little wits, and the relation of such a terrible accident (though false)
will force the poor souls to a blessing of themselves, from such people against
whom God has such an enmity.

Thus at the beginning of the Wars, John Vicars afrighted many of the weaker
sort, from having any agreement with the Kings party, by fobbing into their
heads strange stories of Gods wrath against Cavaliers. And thus they now set
themselves awork again by abusing the vulgar with such fopperies. What strange
judgments do they threaten to these Nations, if Episcopacy and Common Prayer
book be not taken away! And what sad Revolutions do they denounce, if they be
not removed! To which purpose Mr. Ed. Bagshaw (one now well known amongst the
Brethren) has lately put forth a Sermon, enough to make a whole Country
distracted.

And to carry on this great work, the dropping Anabaptist and Millenary, make a
great noise; in which Throng H. Jessey holding up his ridiculous Pamphlet, The
Lords loud Call to England, which is seconded by another forging zealot under
the title of Mirabilis Annus, both which are as free from truth as Tom. Scot
from chastity: here you may be as long finding a true story, as Diogenes an
honest man in Athens; Sutcliffs threefold Answer p. 109.
In both which books to my own knowledge and eyesight, are some most
abominable lies and forgeries, that, were but St. Quintin now alive to pull
them by their Noses, those parts would soon fall off, and leave the Sectaries
marked for liars. Not unlike one Harris a Goldsmiths, who in the straits of
Magellan going to blow his Nose, instead Purchase Pilg. part. 4. p. 1204, 1205.
of the snot, threw the nose into the fire, so violent was the cold: and so
Antony Knivet drew his benumbed toes off with his frozen stockens. But I hope
Jessey and the rest of his Sectarian Associates, will have no more influence
upon the people, than He, Knolls, and others of his Club, had over the old
blind woman near Algate in London; who by Edwards Gangr. part. 3. p. 19. Wier
de Priaestig. l. 4. c. 22. Lud. Lavater. de Spectris. part. 1. c. 8.
their anointing with oil thought to restore her to sight: But alas: these
Dreamers can do no miracles, unless like the two Priests of Orleance by
deceit and cunning.

But of these things I could pay them in their own coin, if I thought it worth
the while. I could tell them of a great Lord, a mortal enemy to Bishops and
Cathedrals, who March 1640. told some other Lords -- I hope one of us shall
live to see no one stone left upon another of that Building, meaning St. Paul's.
And after going to storm Lichfield-Close, being all completely armed, was in
March 1643. shot in the left eye by a Gent. that was both dumb and deaf; and,
which is also observeable, he was thus slain upon St. Ceddes day, who is the
Patron of that Cathedral. I could also tell them of Col. Hambdens being slain
in that very place where he first took up Arms against the King. I could also
tell them of Mr. Tho. Hoyle, Alderman of York and a Parliament man, who hanged
himself in his own House at Westminster, upon the same day and hour,
twelvemonth, that the King was murdered. I could also tell them the rumors of
Essex's death, the storys of Pyms eating-disease, and how the Lord Gray welterd
in his own blood. I could tell them of Mr. Hall of St. Needs in Huntingtonshire
Vicars Dag. Dim. page 7. 9.
who hanged himself: of Sr. Tho. Martin of Cambridg-shire, who said, that he
had rather wash his hands in the blood of the young King of Scots then in the
Deer then slain, and the same day brake his skull and shoulders of which he
died. I could tell them of one adventuring to J. Taylers Noble Caval. p. 5.
climb up to pull down Cheap Side Cross, slipped his hold, and falling with his
ribbs upon the Iron pikes wounded himself to death. I could tell of another
that endeavoring to tear down the Organs at Worcester fell down upon the
Pavement, broke his bones and dyed. I could tell of another, who had his hand
shivered to pieces by the breaking and splitting of his gun, as he endeavored
to shoot at the similitude of Christ over All Souls Coll. gate in Oxford: and
of another who thinking to do the same at Martin College had one of his eyes
blown out, and the other Edwards Oangr. part. 3. page 31. 105.
little better. I could tell the Anabaptists of one Anne Martin, and another
woman, who got their deaths by the new mode of dipping. And I could tell the
Quaker how Lieutenant Thomas lately poisoned Querers and Quakers cause page 36.
himself, and of a woman of his Tribe, endeavoring to do miracles fell
presently mad. And as for the Presbyterians, I could tell them a story of a
great Preacher of their Faction, viz. Mr. Barker of Pitchley in Dr. Pierce's
New Discov. page 120.
Northamptonshire and was by them held a godly man, who was publicly hanged
for incest and murder, who defiled his Niece and had the child murdered which he
had by her: And let them consider the temperature of Dr. Cheynell. But it is a
mark upon all this Fraternity to be hotheaded, which does make good the
Description of a Puritan, made long since by Dr. Butler of Cambridge, viz. A
Puritan is a Protestant Hanop. c. conf. page 38.
frayd out of his wits.

I shall say nothing of Mary Gadbury, a great Follower of Mr. Sedgwick Mr.
Ellis's Pseudo-christ. page 8.
and Mr. Case, then of Goodwin and Jessey; nor what pretty pranks she played to
prove her self to be the Virgin Mary, nor of Mr. Woodward Minister and his Wife
great actors in that story: yet it will not be amiss if I tell you one
Covenanting passage.

On the same day that Mr. Joseph Caryll preached to exhort the people Mr.
Caryls sermon. 6. October. 1643. p. 28.
to the taking of the Covenant, This following Bill was given to him to be read
and praid for.

One that through much passion oftentimes grievously offends the Majesty of God
by cursing and swearing, And that since his late TAKING THE COVENANT, desires
the Prayers of this Congregation, that his Offense may be pardoned, and that he
may be enabled to overcome that temptation from hence forwards.

Let Mr. Caryl make what interpretation he pleases, the Reader must have as
much power to judge as he.

Should I be as impertinent as these men, I could give them story for story, as
long as they would; and yet it may be scarce a true judgment of either side,
though highly fancyed so to be by the people: Like the Country fellow who
thought that the Astronomer taking the height of something with his Jacobs
staff, had shot down the star, which by chance then fell, as we usually say.
Tom Coryat tells a story of a fellow Crudities, page 187.
that mending a Clock in Venice, and being very busy about the Bell, at the
same time one of the great men of Brass that used to strike the Quarters of
the hours, with his great brazen hammer gave him such a violent blow, that he
knocked him dead on the place; should I tell the Brethren that this man was a
Roman Catholic, they would cry out a great judgment of God upon a Member of
Antichrist. But it is ridiculous to make every accident a judgment, and it is
unchristian to question, that God does not sometimes manifestly revenge himself
and cause, upon the wicked.

CHAP. VI.
Some short Observations upon their Covenant.

AN understanding Gentleman assures us, that A league [amongst Drummond' s
Hist. of Scotl. page 54.
Subjects] gives law to a King, breaks all bonds of Sovereignty; and invites a
people to seek for a New Master. And this, dear-bought experience has proved
true, to both Nations; yet, were the events of these Agreements more
mischievous, they would be courted by the seditious, thinking such pieces of
Perjury, to be the best works of their Holy Days.

Since the reformation this mode of swearing against Authority, has been
commonly practiced in Scotland. In their first Covenant [3 December. 1557.] An
Earl of Argile was the first subscriber and chief promoter; and how active an
Earl of Argile has been in our days, about such wickedness, need not here be
related, but I hope, as the other was the first, so this shall be the last.

Yet in this way, has the English been as faulty as the worst of them, Watsons
second fair warming page 178.
though I believe at first drol'd in by their Neighbors. For when at the
beginning of the Wars, the English Commissioners went from the Parliament
into Scotland to desire their assistance against the King; and having addres'd
themselves to the Scotch Assembly delivering them a letter subscribed by some
Presbyterian Ministers, in which they complaind that their blood was shed like
water upon the grouud, for defense of the Protestant Religion, they received a
negative answer. The Assembly telling them amongst other things, That -- you
cannot say you fight for the Reformed Religion, since you have not begun to
reform your Church; ye had thriven better if you had don as we did; Begun at
the Church, and thereafter striven to have gotten the civil sanction to what ye
had don in the Church. A few days after Sir W. Ermin, Mr. Hamden, and the rest
of the Commissioners, were invited by some of their friends to make a new
Address to the Assembly, which they did the second time desiring a gracious
Answer. Upon this request, the Assembly propounded to them this, Will ye join
in Covenant with us to reform Doctrine and Discipline, conform to this of
Scotland, and ye shall have a better Answer? Sir W. Ermin and the rest
answered, that they had not that in their Instructions, but thanked the
Assembly, and said, they would represent it to the Parliament of England: The
Assembly replied, that there would be much time loosed, ere they could go to the
Parliament for their resolutions, and thereafter to return to Scotland to draw
up a Solemn League and COVENANT; The danger was great and they were not able to
resist the King; But we shall draw up the Covenant here, and send up with you
some Noble men, Gentlemen, and Ministers that shall see it subscribed; which
accordingly was don, only two or three words altered.

Thus was this spurious Wretch illegally begotten, and brought forth by
unlawful Parents, by the Scots worshipped and adored as the only Idol, fit to
bless their undertakings; and by their Brothers in mischief, the English Long
Parliament, embraced; who peremptorily enjoin all people to swear Allegiance to
it, as their only supreme Law, and authentic Shibuleth to distinguish Treason
from Loyalty. Though what authority they had to impose such an Oath, (being
against the Command both of King and Law) must be left for Mr. Prynne to
discover in some Terra incognita, since we have no such custom amongst us. Yet
for all this Mr. Simeon Ash had the confidence in the Pulpit to wonder His Fast
Sermon. 23 Febr. 1647. page 15.
that any man should think that the Covenant was made here, only to bring in
the Scots when the Presbyterian Parliament and party was low in England.

Having thus seen the Birth of this Monster, it might quickly be desected, and
the poison and mischief lodged in it might evidently be manifested to the whole
world; but that it has formerly been don by more able pens.

However it cannot but seem strange to any that these men should swear to
extirpate the Government of the Church by Archbishops, Bishops, etc. which have
been confirmd by 32 Acts of Parliament: And they could never yet tell who made
them Rulers over Israel, and gave Dr. Pierce's New discoverer page 222.
them power to such actions, quite contrary to Magna Charta, the laws of the
Land, and the Kings express command. The first two are known to any one who
has heard any thing of the laws of the land, and the latter is as true. Yet
because I have heard some deny, and others question its truth, I shall give you
his Majesty's own Proclamation against it, 1643.

By the KING. His Majesty's Proclamation forbidding the Tendering, or taking of
a late Covenant, called a Solemn League and Covenant, for Reformation, etc.
WHEREAS there is a Printed paper entitled a Solemn League and Covenant, for
Reformation and Defense of Religin, The honor and happiness of the King, and
the peace and safety of the three Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland,
pretended to be Ordered by the Commons in Parliament on the twenty first day of
September last to be Printed and published. Which Covenant though it seems to
make specious expressions of Piety, and Religion, is in Truth nothing else but
a Traitorous and Seditious Combination against us, and against the Established
Religion and Laws of this Kingdom, in pursuance of a Traitorous Design, and
endeavor to bring in Foreign Force to invade this Kingdom. We do therefore
straightly Charge and Command all Our Loving Subjects of what Degree of Quality
soever, Upon their Allegiance, That they presume not to take the said Seditious
and Traitorous Covenant. And We do likewise hereby Forbid and Inhibit all Our
Subjects to Impose, Administer, or Tender the said Covenant; as they and every
one of them, will answer to the Contrary, at their Utmost and Extremest Perils.

Given at our Court at Oxford this Ninth day of October in the Nineteenth year
of our Reign. GOD SAVE THE KING.

Than this what could be more plain and authentic? yet a furious Jo. Vicar's
Gods Ark. p. 91.
Presbyterian is pleased to term this action of the King, Satanical slander,
and abuse; a most impious and audacious Paper, Atheistical boldness, Impious
and Platonical pleasure, etc.

Besides the unlawfulness of its making and Imposition; the qualities and
conditions of the Brat were so impious, that an honest man could never take it
for several reasons: amongst many other, take these two or three.

1.. They swear to extirpate When the Covenant was taken, they thought the King
to be a Papist, which makes the Oath more abominable, because those who thought
so, swore to extirpate him.
Popery without respect of persons. In which they might be asked, What they
would do with the Queen? If they forced her Religion, 'twas Treason; If they
did not, they are perjured.

2.. This Oath makes them to be but Conditional Subjects, swearing to preserve
the Rights and Privileges of Parliament, and the Liberties of the Kingdom,
before the King or his Authority: few of the takers, understanding any of these
things; by which means, they swore they knew not what: And, that this Oath
obliges them to be but conditional Subjects, is plain, they swearing -- To
preserve and defend the Kings Majesty's Person and Authority, In the
preservation and defense of the true Religion and Liberties of the Kingdoms. In
which cases too, themselves will be Judges; so that the meaning is this, (as
has been proved before by several examples), If the King will not obey the
Covenant, they are sworn, not to obey nor defend the King.

3.. By this Oath they commit absolute High Treason, by nulling several Acts of
Parliament made for the Preservation of the King and his friends. For here they
swear to bring to Public Trial, to receive Condign Punishment, the Kings best
Subjects and Friends, under the notion of Malignants, whom they thus describe;
-- Evil Instruments, by hindering the Reformation of Religion, Dividing the
King from his People, or one of the Kingdoms from another, or making any
Faction or Parties amongst the People, contrary to this League and Covenant. --
And that justice may be done upon the wilful Opposers thereof. -- By this, they
quite overthrow all Government, making Loyalty, Treason; and Rebellion, the
only sign of a good Subject. And how severe they stick to this murdering
Article, you shall see by one passage.

In the year 1646. the Parliament remaining Conquerours, many of the Loyal
Party thought it fit to compound for their Estates; better to have something
than nothing. Amongst those, in the County of Chester, who were put to this
hardship, were Mr. Richard Brereton of Ashley, Mr. John Wilson, and others:
This highly perplexed the Committee then at Chester, who therefore wrote several
Letters to the Youths at Goldsmiths-Hall, desiring them never to take such
friends to the King, into Composition; and one of their great sticklers at
Chester, [Mr. S. C.] thus delivers the Opinion of himself and his friends about
this business, -- The Gentlemen here conceive, they are bound in Conscience,
and by their late National Covenant, to do their duty in their place to bring
Delinquents to condign punishment. -- Here they will have no mercy, but stick
close to their wicked Principles. And this Oath must receive no Interpretation:
For, if we endeavor but to mitigate it, then some strange curse or other will
tumble upon the Nation, as Crofton Berith anti-Baal. page 63. K.
not long since affirmed -- His Sacred Majesty and the Kingdom must submit to
the plain and literal sense thereof, though it seem as sower Grapes; unless we
will by Gods wrath set our own and childrens Teeth on edge.

4.. The Covenant (if it were in force) would be the cause and maintainer of
Rebellion for ever, for in it they also swear to -- assist and defend all those
that enter into this League and Covenant in the maintaining and pursuing
thereof; by which means they oblige themselves to all acts of hostility in its
behalf, though the King and Parliament (as is now done) should find reason for
its nullity; and it is well known, how often they denied and defied their King
upon this score.

O the Obedience and Charity of a Covenanter? who, like the wicked Jews combine
together by Oath, to kill those more holy than themselves; Act. 23. 12, 13, 14.
needs must the malice of these men be so violent, that they may be excused
from saying the Lords-Prayer; the very clause of forgiving their Enemies, being
enough to fright them into Despair, I wish I could say, Repentance; but, that
is a thing, their zealous fury will not give them so much as leave to think on:
all of them hurryed on with that bloody rage, as to cry out with that Levite in
the Poet;

-- Blood, Blood, Blood, destroy O Lord! The Religion of the Hypocritical
Presb. page 7. Their Vindication. 1648. page 5. Two Papers of Proposals. page
12.

The Covenant-Breaker with a two-edged Sword.
Yet this Imp of wickedness the Brethren will not cast off, The
London-Ministers professing, all the power on Earth cannot absolve them from
it. And Zach. Crofton keeps a great deal of clutter, publicly affirming, that
it does not only bind those who took it, but Fastening of St. Peter's Fetters.
p. 134, 145.
those also who did not, and that the Obligation of this Oath is for ever
binding, from Generation to Generation. And in another of his flaunting
Pamphlets, he assures the Reader, That he does (and cannot but do it) now
contest for and assert the Solemn League and Covenant, in that Religious part
which must be promoted with out-most Zeal, by all who wish Berith Anti-Baal,
Epist, to the Reader. page ult.
well to the King and Kingdom; though the Devil and his Instruments do
endeavor to damp, deaden, and divert, the discharge of duty. And then
afterward tells them, that Gods wrath will fall upon the King and Kingdom, if
Episcopacy be not extirpated, and the Covenant observed Page 23. 63. K.
to its literal sense and plain meaning. And, as they would thus continue it in
fury, so did they begin it, as I have showed you before; however, I shall
afford you one other piece of Canting confidence. Mr. Andrew Cant the Father
(for the Son is now as bad,) in one of his Sermons at Glasgow, told the Scots
concerning their Covenant, That he was sent to them with a Commission from
Christ to bid them subscribe Lysim. Nican. Epist. Congrat. p. 49.
the Covenant, which was Christ's contract; and, that he himself, was come a
Wooer to them for the Bridegroom; and called upon them, to come to be
hand-fasted, by subscribing that Contract. And told them plainly, That he would
not depart the Town till he got the names of all, who should refuse to
subscribe that Contract, of whom he promised to complain to his Master, i. e.
Christ.

As for the Obligation of the Covenant, they themselves are sometimes forced to
deny it, unless they will make it a particular exception against all General
Rules. When the Scots in 1639. were a little troubled that Large Declar. p. 347.
Episcopacy was not absolutely abjured in their former Oaths, which many
thought binding to them; The Covenanters thinking to take away that rub, that
all men might with more freeness embrace their Covenant, declare publicly to
the World, that the swearer is neither obliged to the meaning of the prescriber
of the Oath, nor his own meaning, but as the Authority shall afterward
interpret it; and then, by this Heathenish rule, what will become of the
binding force of the Covenant at this time? Which is void also in the opinion
of a great Presbyterian under the name of Theophilus Timorcus, who thus shows
himself, -- Suppose, that upon mature deliberation, the Ministers The
Covenant-Plea. Chapter 7. Sect. 14.
that subscribed and took the Oath of Canonical Obedience, find that it was an
unlawful Oath, or Subscription, -- They are in such case only obliged to be
humbled for their rash subscription and taking of that Oath, and their second
Oath against them will hold valid. -- Now if they think, this a sufficient
salvo, I shall only insert these four words, Holy League and Covenant instead
of the forementioned four words Oath of Canonical Obedience, and think the
Absolution sufficient according to their own Argument.

Mr. Crofton tells us, that the Oath which the King takes at his Coronation
for the defense of Bishops, is of small validity, because limited Fastening of
St. Pet. Fett. page 100.
to the Laws of the Land. But will this subordinate it to the Covenant? Or will
he make a little scribble-scrabble of a few perjured Rebels to be the Law of
the Land? If the Kings Oath, and other men's Oaths, must submit to the Laws of
the Land; I know no reason, but the Covenant should too, being expressly against
them: So, that either the Covenant must null the Laws, or the Laws the
Covenant; If the first, then farewell Poulton, since the swearing of Presbytery
can make those Statutes useless; if the latter, then adieu Covenant and
Presbytery, not forgetting the League, and since that, the names of the
Parliament Men subscribers in Parchment, (a great sign of the Loyalty and good
Religion of the present Commons, (who in this have excelled all other
Parliaments, for many Generations past; let others commend themselves for me)
that were burnt by the hands of the Hangman in London, by Authority of
Parliament, a Supreme Power to that which made and forced it.

But, that you may see the folly of some Oaths, and how the Swearers are
sometimes even necessitated to smooth them over with a gentle Interpretation,
and a slender performance; I shall tell you one story, Jo. Dubravius Hist.
Boiemica. l. 7. p. 57.
Bretislaus [or Bisetislaus] Son to Udalricus Duke of Bohemia, fell in love,
merely by report, (for, as then, he had not seen her) with Jutha, Daughter to
the Emperor Otho II called Ruffo. To obtain her, he Aen. Sylvius. Hist. Boem.
c. 18.
goes under the show of Religion, to Ratisbone, [or Regenspurg] where she was
in a Monastery, and after some contrivances, gets her on The same, word for
word in Seb. Munsteri Geogr. p. 804.
Horseback, and gallops away with her to his Father, and by her own consent
married her. The Emperor enraged at this, raises an Army, and solemnly swears
a mischief to Bohemia, and never to return with his Army, till he had placed
his Throne in the midst of that Country. Against him, Bretislaus and his
Father raise Forces, the Son also swearing, to carry fire into the middle of
Germany; and, that so near the Imperial Court, that Caesar himself, should be
constrained to shut his eyes, for the greatness of the light and splendor of
those flames. The Armies drawing near together, and preparing for battle; The
Lady Gutta grieved that so much blood should be shed for her sake, tearing her
hair and face, exposed her self to all danger, by running betwixt the two
Armies, and, overwhelmed with sorrow, having found out the Emperor, earnestly
pleads in behalf of her husband; the strength of Love, the Child within her,
etc. With which, Caesar was so moved to compassion, that with tears he told her
of his willingness to Peace, but that his Oath obliged him to the contrary: She
told him, that her husband had sworn too; but, that he should consider Et
maritus meus jurejurando astrictus est Teutoniam armis lacescere: sed vana
Religio, quae sceleri locum facit; vim criminibus Sacramenta non addunt, etc.
Aen. Sylv. Seb. Munst.
the vanity of that Religion which allows of and gives place to wickedness,
since Oaths should not strengthen the foundation of sin and mischief. Well,
Peace is made, they having found out, as they thought, a way to keep them both
from Perjury, the Emperor going to Boleslau, then held to be the middle of
Bohemia, where a Throne being made with a few stones, he sits him down as
Conqueror. And Bizetislaus (for so some also call him) to save his Oath, went
into Germany, and the Emperor being by, set fire to a few Cottages, and
spoiled two or three little Fields, for which damages he presently satisfied,
paying the value.

The Brethren think, they have got another salvo for their honesty, when they
would make people have a good opinion of the Covenant, because several of the
Royalists took it; and in this accusation Crofton is impudent to a Wonder,
especially, to his Betters. But is it any honor to the Independent Engagement
against King, etc. nay, the Covenant too; because some great Presbyterians took
it?

The truth is, the Presbyterians, by the fortune of War, becoming Masters,
seized upon the Revenues of those who had been faithful to his Majesty, not
suffering many of them to Compound, but upon abominable terms, for their
Estates; unless they would take the Covenant to boot: which shows the
implacable malice of the Puritans; who in this, like the Italian, made it their
business to destroy the soul too. And this may serve to show what small reason
they have to demand Toleration of those, whose Consciences they formerly so
wickedly forced. Which horrid act will remain as a mark of Ignominy upon this
Faction to Eternity. And in behalf of the Royalist, I shall afford you another
Story, which will apply it self.

Emuanuel, King of Portugal, withheld from a Bishop his Revenues. Propos.
Memorables. p. 18.
The Bishop complains to the Pope, who sends a Legate either to persuade the
King to Restitution, or Excommunicate him, and upon the Kings refusal the
latter was denounced; and so the Legate departs toward Rome again. The King
enraged at this Sentence, mounted on Horseback to follow the Legate, and having
over-taken him; drew out his Sword, threatening to kill him, unless he would
absolve him, which was done, and the King returned to his Court. The Legate
being got to Rome, and told the Story of his Journey: The Pope was very angry,
and sharply checked him for absolving the King; to whom the Legate replied, Most
holy Father, had you been in danger of your life as I was, you would have given
the King absolution double and treble.

No People rails more against the Pope and a Jesuit than a Puritan, and yet in
their destructive Principles of Government none agrees more with them. Tell
them but of the Pope's Excommunicating of Kings, and disingaging their Subjects
from any more obedience to them, and you shall hear nothing but roaring against
Antichrist and Babylon, and stories of the Whore, Beast, Horns, and enough to
fright Children out of their Wits. Yet, if you tell them, that they are guilty
of Utinam eorum nonnulli, qui rectssime damnant, non pessime imitarentur.
Bishop Sanderson. de jurament. Praelect. 7. Sect. 3.
the same, by dispensing with the Peoples Oaths to their Kings and Bishops;
then will they call it the Cause of God, the Interest of Jesus Christ, and a
good sign that they are the true Saints of God, and the sureness of their
Election: thus (though seeming mortal Enemies) are they united to destroy the
Civil Power.

If the latter Oath (especially when wickedly and villainously imposed) cannot
take away the Obligation of the former, and that agreeable to the cause [as the
Reverend and Learned Patron of the Bishop Sanderson. de juram. Prael. II. Sect.
11. and III. Sect. 11.
Church says, whose single testimony is of more worth than the opinion of a
whole Assembly of Covenanters] I cannot conceive, how a company of Noddles
(being but a piece of a Parliament) prattling at Westminster, and in active
Rebellion against their King, can quit honest men [for Knaves can ease
themselves] from their Oaths and Subscriptions to Kingly and Episcopal
Obedience, by an after-Imposition of a contradictory and Id. Prael. II. Sect.
13.
wicked Oath.

But, it may be, they may suppose; that if Plin. l. 9. c. 55.
Hortensius shed tears for the death of a Lamprey: If Macarius Abbot of
Alexandria, penitentially tormented himself in Briars and Thorns Pet. de Natal.
l. 2. c. 47.
six Months, or H. Steph. Apol. pour Herod. page 367.
seven years, for the death of a Flea: If the Wotton's State of Christend. p.
147, 148.
Aetolians and Arcadians Warred together for a wild Boar: If the Carthaginians,
and the People of Piraca, for a Sea-Rovers ship. If the Scots and Picts for a
few Dogs. If Charles Duke of Burgondy and the Switzers, for a Cart-load of
Sheeps-skins; And if the Car. Garcia Antipat. de los Franc. y Espanoles. cap.
17. Epit. of all the French Kings. p. 280.
Antipathy betwixt the French and Spaniards began upon so slight occasion, (if
you believe mine Authors), as because the French were not so gloriously clad,
as the other, at an Interview betwixt Lewis XI. and the King of Castile: If all
this trouble and bloodshed for such trifles, why may they not stand stoutly to
their Covenant: But, if they be so stiff for that Oath against all Laws and
honesty, why may not the Orthodox stick to their King, Laws and
Church Government by Bishops, since the swarving from these things is
High Treason and Schism.

But enough of this perjured and condemned Traitor, since the judicious Reasons
of the famous University of Oxford, and that miracle of Learning (too untimely
snatched away) the Reverend Dr. Langbaine; have put it and its part-takers to a
perpetual confusion; against whom (though, I think, none of them ever yet durst
undertake the Doctor; nor could the other be answered but with Treason, of
which enquire more of Mr. Crofton,) their scribbling will not be unlike the
Pigmies fighting against Hercules; and their crying Victoria, to as little
purpose as Falstaf's vapouring of his own valor at Gads-Hill. Yet, since they
stand so stiffly to the literal sense of this Brat, I shall leave one or two
Quaeries to their consideration.

I.
Whether those who took the Covenant, and there swear to extirpate all Schism,
do not thereby engage to be (like Hoyle) their own Executioners?

II.
Whether when they swear to preserve and defend the Kings Majesty's Person and
Authority, and not to diminish his just power and greatness; they did keep
their Oaths by Voting no more Address to him; the Scots by selling him, the
English by buying him, hurrying him from Prison to Prison, Imposing upon him
strange Conditions, contrary to his Prerogative, taking from him the Militia,
acting all without and against his Commands, etc.

If they say, they did according to the Covenant: Then

III.
Whether such a wicked Oath is to be allowed in a Kingdom, which permits,
nay, I may say, commands such affronts to be done to Majesty, contrary to all
the Laws of the Land? And, if these Actions were against the Covenant, then are
they perjured.

But it may be, I have gone too far against these People, who in their Scotch
Assembly at Glasgow, by Act, forbad any to write or speak against their
Covenant. And the same did the English Leaguers, and what danger it may be to
write against their Laws, (since our own cannot be in force,) I know not. And
since a man must not speak ill of the dead, whose flaming exspiration was a
Type of the Reward befitting to the Imposers. [This I retort upon Antifloralis
in verses commending Mr. Hall's Funeb. Florae.
that Presbyterian who would have all May Pole dancers hang'd]. I shall leave
this wicked Covenant, only tell them, that the Lord Ravenstein, under pretense
of the binding of his Oath, ran into a great Bacon's Hist. Hen. VII. p. 77.
Rebellion against his Masters, the Emperor Frederick and Maximilian, as our
Zealots have against their King. To conclude, the words of James II. King of
Scotland, are worth your reading -- -- Could there be any greater surety for
you, than to rely on Drummand's Hist. of Scotl. page 55, 56.
the Laws of the Commonwealth and Country? especially in a Country where
Laws and not Faction rule, and where a man's own goodness is able to preserve
him: But such men as you are, raise these Factions to the subversion of all
Laws and Authority. And for Subjects to make an Offensive and Defensive League
against all Persons, is to disclaim all Government, and do what they please
without controlement, commit Treason in the highest degree, and make your own
Swords and Power justify your proceedings; which, though you first use against
mean persons, and conceal the progress of your Actions, (for there are degrees
in evil, and wicked men begin at that which seems the least of evils, or not an
evil at all at the first) your last aim is likely to be, the Robbing upon the
Crown. Consider, you are born under a Monarchy, which admits of no
Sovereignty but it self; and it is natural to Princes, to hold it in highest
esteem, and in no case to suffer it to be shaken by their Subjects. Take your
Prince for your best protection, and an Innocent life; Renounce that Union and
League, -- and let it not be heard any longer, that ever such an unjust
Confederation was; and so, wonted Clemency shall be preferred before deserved
Justice. But 'twas the wickedness of this action, which made the Zealots love
it, and therefore ordered, that in the Prayers after every Sermon, the Minister
should give God thanks The Directory.
for the Covenant: like John Becold a Tailor of Leyden (better known by the
Name of John of Leyden,) who having cruelly cut off the head of one of his
Wives, made others with himself praise God and rejoice for such wickedness.

The Brethren having thus laid their groundwork for a further Rebellion,
earnestly exhorts the people to stick close to their former seditious
Principles, and to be resolute in them. Then they advise their Associates in
the Parliament to be valiant for their Cause, and to endeavor what in them
lies, to oppose and overthrow any thing whatsoever, Sacred or Civil, which
thwarts their Principles. And, for the better carrying on this Rebellion, they
engage their Ministry to use what Interest they can with their Parishioners,
for the affecting of their designs: concerning which, you shall hear Mr.
Crofton himself Fastening of St. Pet. Fett. page 137.
speak, -- If private men and individual persons, who have sworn the Covenant,
will make Conscience of the Oath of God upon them, there can be no probability
of a Return, and Re-establishment within the compass of this age, of the evils
we have sworn to extirpate, They being locked under a moral impossibility of
readmission or continuance, by that public Parliamentary capacity into which
many, who have sworn the Covenant, are at this time If they be not Crofton
lies; and if they be, we may well expect Treason and Rebellion.
resolved; and in which they cannot but know themselves bonnd to endeavor in
their places and callings, with all sincerity and reality and constancy to
extirpate the same, and for that others, and those not a few, as Ministers of
the Gospel, are bound to the same in their Capacity. I am sure the Ministerial
rebukes, and confutations of the one, and public Parliamentary Debates of the
other, will lay a very great Remora unto their return. --

Here we have a Peter the Hermit blowing a Trumpet to his Holywarre. And that
in such an hasty and resolute fashion, that our Presbytery seem to stand upon
the very brink of Rabicon, only wanting some ill spirit or other to head them,
and lead them over into a War against their own King and Countrymen: so prone
are they to destruction, as if they were again turned to Heathenism, and
worshipped the spears Just. Hist. lib. 43.
[those primitive Instruments of Warre] as their only God.

And the Reverend Church of England has little reason to expect peace at these
men's hands, now that they cannot obtain their ends when they protest that if
they had been fully satisfied, yet they had been obliged to publish what
Pamphlets they could in vindication of the Covenant, and so in derision of the
Episcopal Clergy: to which purpose take one of their own his words -- We must
profess, that if his most excellent Majesty's gracious Declaration, had in
every tittle fully answered Theoph. Timorc. page 85.
the utmost of our Desires; we should have yet seen a need of some such
discourses as these are.

I am really persuaded, that were our Presbyterians but once again Masters of
misrule, they would act the same Tragedies that they did formerly; Then should
we have the King kept at swords point, all his Authority taken from him, and
himself secured in some Prison or other unless he would dance after their
Covenant. Then should we have the Archbishops and Bishops murdered and Tower'd
up: The Clergy sent a begging, or it may be for a more cleanly conveiance,
clapped under ships hatches (as they were formerly don withal) that they might
stifle one another. Then would the Brethren cry, The day is ours, Rejoice and
sing as the Roman Catholics did in Scotland above an hundred years Knox Hist.
of Scotl. page 84.
ago, two words being altered. Leaguers content you now, Leaguers content you
now,
The Bishops and their Company, have filled the Galleys fow.


But I hope our Government by King, and Bishops, (maugre the Devil and all his
Assistants) will be like the Island Est cetle Isle de tell condition, que
presonne du Monde ne l'oseroit approcher pour aucum mal y fair: Car qui y
essayeroit il periroit. Jeh. Froissart Chron. vol. 4 fol. 52. a.
Chifolignie, against which no man shall attempt any mischief, but to his own
destruction. And nothing have we visibly attempting, the breaking of this
Union; but an upstart Presbytery, which like the Heathenish opinion of dogs and
stones, mainly endeavors to run betwixt and divide these two. But of this they
have small August de Doctrine. lib. 2. 6. 20.
hopes, unless a Toleration be granted to their Villainies: which can never be
don through real policy; And I hope England is not now like Omnia Romae
venalia esse. sallust. Bell. jug. p. 55.
old Rome where all things were vendible: And those who grant favor to these
people will ruin themselves by too much pity.

Such a spirit of contradiction are these Puritans possessed with, that
Dissension seems to be their meat and drink; as if they were related to the old
Heretics the Cainani or Caiani who thought Cain a worthy man for killing his
brother Abel, and Judas a Saint for betraying our Pratcol. p. 110.
Savior. As if all wickedness might be perpetrated, whole Countries ruined,
the innocent blood of many thousand Souls spil'd upon the ground and all this
to good purpose, so their Discipline and Covenant be thereby erected: whereby
methinks, they court that wicked Idol, as Lucan did the Tyrant Nero.

Quod si non aliam venturo fata Neroni Lib. 1.

Invenere viam --
Iam nihil, O superi, querimur; scelera ipsa, nefasque
Hac mercede placent: diros Pharsalia Campos
Impleat, and Poeni saturentur sanguine manes,
Vltima funesta concurrant praelia Munda,
His, Caesar, Perusina fames, Mutinaeque labores
Accedant fatis, and quas premit aspera Classes
Leucas et ardenti servilia bella sub Aetna.
Multum Roma tamen debet civilibus armis,
Quod tibires acta est --
Which, with Lucans favor, I shall make more appliable to England and our
purpose.

If that no other means can be found out
To bring our Presbyterian whims about:
Ha! we are well content! mischief and war
Does please our souls, since so rewarded are.
Let Edghill swell with blood, and Marston plain
Groan with the mass of souls that there were slain:
Let thousands dye at Naseby, and let us tell,
Of Carlisle Famine, or who at Gloucester fell:
Let Warwick too (Allegiance is but pelf)
Charge the ship-guns against the Prince himself:
Yet gain we by these Woes; if that thereby,
We do but set up our Presbytery.
Yet if all their pretensions equal the life of one man I shall have a less
value of humane blood, than I have had.

Queen Elizabeth had the best way of teaching these people obedience, the
terror of a Rope, being a main stay to their proceedings: If the fellow thought
snails fish, and so eatable in Lent, yet was he bid by Lou is Garonle chasse
ennuy. Cent. 1. Hist. 27.
the Priest to beware of the horns. When the Brethren thus thunder up the
lawfulness of Rebellion, they should seriously think of its Reward, and what a
joyful sight it is to look toward Padington, and not think it an hard case
that they should suffer for their Villainies. And we see by experience that the
pardoning of one fault, makes them more bold to commit another, and yet
grumble and think much to be stopped in their mischief, as if (forsooth) they
Rebelled by Predestination, making themselves only instruments, but God (pardon
the expression) the seducer, drawer, commander, inciter and infuser of such
wickedness into them, as Pet. Martyr and See Dr. Pierce's Divine Philanth. c.
3. Sect. 34. R. Smith. Coll. Doctrine. Cathol. cap. 1.
others blasphemously assert.

To conclude, If all things according to the Poets grow worse and worse; to
what stupendous wickedness will the Presbyterians come? If Caligula sucked
blood when a Child, they might suppose him to be a cruel Monster when a man. If
the Puritans at first rebel against and imprison their King, murder and clap
up the Bishops, seize upon their lands and those of the Loyal Gentry, bloodily
destroy the best subjects and caress the wicked; If at their beginning of Rule,
they multiplied Religion into so many Heresies, that every house seemed like
that Family at the Hague in Holland composed of Io. Gee's New Shreds. p. 44.
seven several Religions: If when they were inferiors they durst proclaim the
Queen a Traitor, call the Kings actions scandalous, impudent, false, wicked,
Tyrannical, etc. Impose wicked Oaths upon the Nations and violate all Laws;
Good God! What as yet unheard of villainy and impiety will there be invented and
found out to please these Disciplinarian palats, if ever they should obtain
superiority, or have the least sway in these Kingdoms! Which no honest man can
desire, all good men are bound to oppose, and pray they may never have hopes of
such favor and authority.

FINIS.

