FOVRTIE ARTICLES IN THE HIGH COURT of PARLIAMENT, against William Lang, who
was Vicar in the Parish of Bradworthy, in the County of Devon, but now prisoner
in the City of LONDON.

WITH A Petition to the Right Honorable House of Commons, showing the
odiousness of his life and actions, desiring that his trial may not be
prolonged, nor his Execution hindered, being one of the late Tribe of Lordly
Bishops.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Bates in the Old Bayley.

TO THE RIGHT HOnorable the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, assembled in the
Commons House this present Parliament.
The humble Petition of Robert Judd, for and on the behalf of himself, and the
rest of the Parishioners of Bradworthie in the County of Devon.
HVmbly showing to this Honorable Assembly, That one William Lang, Clarke,
Vicar of the Parish of Bradworthie aforesaid, having for about 18. years last
past grievously vexed his parishioners with infinite vexations, and causeless
suits, to their exceeding great oppression, and to the ruin and undoings of
many of them, and lived with great dishonor to God, and scandal to the
Ministry, He the said Lang being guilty of symonie, Common Barretrie,
forgerie, practicing to poison some, and endeavoring to pistol others of his
Parishioners, with many other foul and gross misdemeanors, particularly set
forth, and expressed in the paper hereunto annexed, the consideration whereof
is herewith humbly presented to this Honorable Assembly.

Forty Articles exhibited against William Lang; humbly presented unto the
High Court of PARLIAMENT.
1. THat the said Lang lived till he was about the age of 30. years, by day
labor, and daily hedged, ditched, threshed, and carried sand, in the same
Parish and places adjacent, being never admitted of any University.

2. That then he became a Sheriffs Bay liffe, and arrested diverse in his own
person.

3. That about 20. years since he forged several Warrants, and the Justices of
Assizes having notice thereof, gave order for his apprehension, whereupon he
fled into Ireland.

4. That about 4. years after he returned, and pretended he had taken Orders in
Ireland, and did officiate as a hirelings Reader, until by Carry Bishop of
Exeter he was suspended for foul misdemenors.

5. That he procured his Vicarage of Bradworthy for money, by unlawful
Symonie, by the means of one Robert Ye, who being demanded by some how he
could make a Common Bayliffe (naming Lang) Vicar of Bradworthy, who answered
that he had then such friends, that if his horse head could but speak, he could
have made him Vicar of that place.

6. That the said Lang being desirous to be licenced to preach, and being
conscious of his own insufficiency to undergo examination, procured one
Nicholas Hunny to be examined for him by the name of William Lang, and so goes
for a preaching Minister.

7. That ever since he has been Vicar, he has taken upon him to be a common
Soliciter of causes in the Courts at Westminster, and frequented London
Tearmly, and taken money for Solicitations.

8. That he has commenced causeless suits against his Parishioners in the
Courts of Star Chamber, the Court of High Commission, the Court of Audience,
the County Court of Devon, and the Consistory Court at Exeter, all at once, and
has had above forty several Suits at one time, and above eighty of his
Parishioners and others in suite at one time, and having by vexatious suits
utterly undone diverse of them, their wives and children.

9. That he has had 4. Bills in the Star Chamber depending at one time against
forty of his Parishioners, whereof some have depended 12. years, and thereby
compelled his Parishioners to travel to London, tearmely from Bradworthie,
being two hundred miles distant.

10. That he never brought any of their Causes to hearing in the Star Chamber,
but after they have been set down (fearing that his foul misdemeanors should
there be made manifest, as indeed they are upon depositions) has procured his
own Causes to be dismissed before publication, whereby his misdemeanors have
escaped unpunished.

11 That he usually has served his Parishioners with paper Tickets, of his own
making, into the Court of Star Chamber, and High Commission, and exhibited
neither Articles nor Bill against them.

12 That diverse of his Parishioners have several times been enforced to give
compositions to him, whereof some have paid to him forty pounds, some ten,
some four pounds, some less, as his pleasure to redeem them from oppression,
and causeless suits.

13 That he has prosecuted Nicholas Eliot with unjust and causeless Suits
this 20. years and upward, to his damage above 500. l. and has utterly undone
him his wife, and children, and has kept him excommunicate for these 2. years
last past.

14 That he has of mere malice without any just cause utterly undone Robert
Judd, his wife and children, by taking wrongfully from him his lands and goods,
to the value of above 300. l. not leaving him worth one mouthfull of bread; And
in this his extreme poverty did (in a most unchristian and cruel manner) cast
into prison the said Robert Judd, and excommunicated him this 8. years last
past: and the said Judd does still stand unabsolved, notwithstanding there is
no cause against him. Nor did his malice cease there, but he has prosecuted
the children of the said Robert Judd most unjustly to their imprisonment and
ruin also.

15 That he having about 6. or 7. years since agreed with Anthony Nicholl, one
of his parishioners, for 14.s. per annum, in liew of the Tithes of his
Tenement, did notwithstanding shortly after sue the said Nicholl, and threaten
him, that unless he would give him 20.s. per annum, and 5. l. for so quiet a
composition he would make him spend more yearly then the rent of his Tenement,
and so forced Nicholl to a new agreement, and gave him a note under his hand,
that for 20. s. per annum it was agreed betwixt them from 5. years to 5. ye
(...) their lives if Nicholl so pleased: yet 2. years after the latter
agreement, he sued the said Nicholl for tithes, and threatened him the second
time, that unless he would compound with him again, and give him 24.s. per
annum: and 5.l. for his love, he would yet make him spend more then his
Tenement was worth yearly, whereupon the said Nicholl being unable to travel
to Exeter, to prevent excommunications, and being threatened with the High
Commission Court yielded to give whatsoever he demanded.

16 That for three pence (which was all he demanded, and which was tendered to
him) he sued Richard Snow in the Consistory at Exeter, and put him to 4. or
5. l. charge about it.

17 That he caused Samuel Chapel to be arrested at the suit of Andrew Speed,
who disavowed the Suit.

18 That he used the name of Gabriel Williams of Torriton in the Court of High
Commission to inform against his Parishioners, and gave money to the said
Williams to countenance the said Articles.

19 That William Lang served letters missive upon William Cann, John Bishop,
Richard Lile, Lewis Dennis, Robert Terdrew, John Ye, and when he could not
prevail with them to give him composition for to cease the suit, he used means
to the Examiner Greenhill, that upon their appearance they could not be
examined for 7. weeks, and at last four of them were forced to give 30. s. a
piece to be examined. Which cause lay dead almost a year, then they moving to
be dismissed with costs, Vicar Lang served them with Process never seen in Court
to bring in their Answers: whereupon they came, and produced the Process,
which were Langs own hand writing, whereupon the Examiner being Clark,
confessed he did it at Langs persuasion. So the Court fined Greenhill 20.s. But
Lang escaped unpunished, or reproved.

20 That he has lately got himself made an Officer (by some unjust way as is
conceived) of purpose to vex and oppress his Parishioners with causeless
Suits in the Stannery Court and has already done so.

21 That he has affirmed, that if his Chancell were full of gold and silver,
he would spend it all to be revenged of his enemies, and that he would never
give over his Parishioners with suits, until he lay down like the Hare before
the hounds.

22 That during his suits with his Parishioners he dealt with one Christopher
Pugsley, to poison 4. of his Parishioners, viz. Thomas Vigers, Richard Facye,
Robert Bishop, and Thomas Bound^^, and did give 20. s. 6.d. to the said Pugsley
to buy Ratsbain with promise of a certain sum of money upon the fact committed,
which Pugsley attempted three times. And besides there is more then suspicion
that he poisoned his predecessors wife, whose estate he had, and was tied to
maintain her for the same during her life.

23 That the said Lang did conspire the death of his predecessor Mr. Twiggs,
and in all probability poisoned his widow dying suddenly, whose estate he had,
and was bound to maintain her during his life, for to that purpose the said
Lang procured a Potion as can be proved.

24 That he carried a Pistall to kill Mr. Thomas Vigurs, one of his
Parishioners, and there in suit with him, and did threaten Thomas Woodroffe a
Minister, who revealed the same to the said Thomas Vigurs, that unless he
would deny before a Justice the words that he had told Thomas Vigurs, he would
lay Felony to his charge, and his man Jewel should swear it.

25 That he dealt with the aforenamed Pugsley to burn the Barn and Corn-mowes
of Samuel Chapel one of his Parishioners, and at that time in suit with him.

26 That he has committed diverse forgeries since he has been Vicar of
Bradworthie.

27 That he farmeth the Tithes of two Parishes to the great oppression of the
Inhabitants, in forcing them to pay much more then formerly they did, for fear
of Law suits, and London journeys.

28 That he has left his Cure to follow Suits, whereby there has been neither
Sermons nor Service in the Parish Church, many times for a month together, And
in his absence above 7. years since, he left Matthew Lile a Miller, and using
that Trade, and no Minister to read prayers in the Church, who has several
times by his appointment publicly read Divine Service in the Church there;
And since that Philip Natt a Tailor has by the appointment of Lang, and in his
absence publicly read Divine Service as well on the Sabbath as other holy
days.

29 That he causes Dorothy Lang his daughter to catechize the Parishioners
publicly in the Church, which she has done several Sundays together by the
appointment of the said William Lang.

30 That he being required to baptize a child, bade the woman that required
him to cast a dish of water in the face of it, and call it John or Joane (as it
was) in the name of the Father, etc. and that would be well enough. Which
child lived nine or ten weeks after, and died unbaptized.

31 That he obtained license to sell wine, and has kept a Tavern in the
Vicaradge house for 4. years last past.

32 That a child being at the Font to be baptized, the woman that held the
child softly and modestly asking the said Lang whether she should put back the
child's head-clothes, he answered, Go thy ways home, and teach thy maid to whip
her Cat.

33 That the said Lang being requested by one of his Parishioners to christen
his child, answered him thus, What will thou have me to christen thy old Sow.

34 That the said Lang caused the Body of Roger Neile of his Parish deceased to
be kept unjustly ten days unburied, and the same to stand open two Sabbath
days to the great annoyance and grief of his Parishioners.

35 That the said Lang does affirm that the Book of Canticles in the old
Testament was but a kind of bandy Song, My Love, my Dove, my fair one, etc.

36 That the said Lang said in a Sermon, that the holy Ghost was a created
corporal substance, or words to that effect.

37 That the said Lang went up into the Pulpit, and told them he was not able
to discharge the Office of a Minister amongst them, because the people were so
sinful, and that God had sent him for a scourge amongst them.

38 That the said Lang does make infamous Libels against his parishioners, to
their great scandal and unjust vexations.

39 That he never preaches or catechiseth in the afternoon on Sabbath days,
but goes constantly to the Alehouse, and makes himself so drunk, that he could
not go nor stand.

40 That the said Lang does usually serve Writs and Citations upon his
parishioners upon the days of Easter, and other general Communions, which he
might conveniently do on the week day with less breach of charity.

FINIS.

