Four fugitives meeting OR, The Discourse amongst my Lord Finch Sir Francis
Windebank, Sir John Sucklin, and Doctor Roane, as they accidentally met in
France, with a detection of their several pranks in ENGLAND.

woodcut, two men

Printed In the Year, 16^1.

Four Fugitives meeting, etc.
Suckling. IMmense Doctor Roan, you are most happily encountered, they have
wished your Company a long time in England, the poor Civilians look like spirits
now they are deprived of their body.


Roan. Body Sir John, what do you mean?


Suck. Why the Body of the civil Law, Corpus Iuris Civilis, for so they call
you.


Roan. And pardon of your Poetry, how fate your hundred Horse in the North, do
they stand to their colors, now their Commander is fled? I wonder much Sir
John, that you being a noble Gentleman, a Commander, and a Volunteere, that
would leave your poor soldiers without pay, and come away without taking
leave of your Friends.


Wind. I heard that Sir John had made a new play, and for fear lest it should
be hist off the stage, betook himself to travel.


Finch. And I have heard, that by reason of his absence, that play was not
worth the studying, there was ^n i^^m^at^ plot in it that could not well be
understood, there were two Poets in it that were sound to be the chief
Politicians, which the State perceiving, made diligent pursuit after them, the
one whereof had the happiness to escape, the other was apprehended, and then
the Play ended, before the Poets execution which was very much disliked.


Suck. How came you to the knowledge of this, my good Lord Finch, you do not
fly over into England every night, and there load your self with news
against the morning, do you?


Wind. No Sir John, he needs not, we were informed by --


Suck Spare your Wind, good M. Secretary VVindebank, I perceive you hold
intelligence with those Jesuits, you compounded withal at so easy a rate.


Roan. Still you are beside the mark, we were informed Sir John by one
Kilscot, one of your Worships Cap and Feather men, who came over hither to
know if your voyage into Portugal held or no, he said that some two or three
hundred buffe-men did much admire, that now the way is fair, you will not be
their guide, they would fanc have kissed their discontented Colonels hand before
he mistook Franco for Portugal, but you were so unkind to leave them on a
sudden.


Suc. Hold there good Doctor Roane, and take me with you, you are to be blamed
too, for not bidding farewell to Sir Paul ^inder, (at whose beauteous house,
you have devoured the carcass of many (...) Capo^) before you ^^ed but I
wonder more, why you came hither so unprovided; methinks some English diet
would have bin good for a weak stomach: the Church-VVardens of
North-hampton-Shire promised to give you a good see, if you will go to 'em,
and resolve 'em whether they may lawfully take the oath etc. or no.


Wind. That may very well be, for they have given him a great Addition, they
st^l^ him, Og the great Commissary, they say he was as brisk in discharging
the new Canons, as he that made them, but I pray Sir John, relate the cause of
your coming hither.


Suc. Then must I address my self to you, my good Lord Finch, I have some
papers to deliver you from the commons of England, who are sorry they are
deprived your company, and promise if your Lordship will go into England and
collect the Ship money, they will with all willingness pay you.


Finch. With a Powder will they not Sir John, you have not forgot the ^^irmish
i^th North, ^ave you, you call the poor^ Sco^^ Pedlars, but they were angry,
and made your fiery horse run ^way with you.


Wind. I think, Sir John, your co^t of Male would scar^e have kept out the
Pedlars bullets, as it did the Ra^ier, in Black-^ryars, when you came from
(...).


Suc. No more I believe would your high and mighty state have secured your
neck, had you staid there.


Wind. I am of opinion, that my Lord of Canterbury would remit the greatest
fine in the high Commission, on the condition he were here, but I believe, if
I had staid, all his Tobacco would not have cured the stopping in my throat, if
it secure his own, it is well.


Suc. For my part, I ever held my head to be my self, and honor to be but my
neighbor, and the rules of nature command me to love my self better then my
neighbor; I loved honor well, but not with such a zeal to venture my life
for her when I my self could never enjoy her.


Roan. Well said of all sides, why should we that are all alike, fall out,
come, lets to dinner, you shall fall to your dainty dishes, but give me a rib
and a leg, Roast-beefe and Capon, the very meat I eat at the commons, and then
after dinner we will play a game at Ticktake or Irish, for half a-pound of
reasons.


Suc. Pox upon reasons, I cannot endure your mechanicke games, He play at Inn
and Inn for a Piece the Caster, my old game.


Wind. No Sir John, you may excuse your friends, and use the art of slirring a
dye to strangers, win their money and welcome.


Finch. I Sir John, it is charity to cheat the Monsieurs, you use your
Quick-silverd dye, amongst them as securely as you could in England, and when
you have got their money, we will spend it bravely.


Suc. Come my brave boys, money weel never lack,
But drown our sorrows in a cup of Sack.

FINIS.

