LIBERTAS EVANGELICA

Jerusalem which. is above, is free, which is the mother of us all Gal. 4. 26.

If the Son therefore shall make you free, ye shall be free indeed. S. l^h^ S.
(...).



LIBERTAS EVANGELICA:

OR, A DISCOURSE OF Christian Liberty.

Being a farther Pursuance of the Argument of The Design of Christianity.

By EDWARD FOWLER, Rector of Alhallows Breadstreet, London.

LONDON, Printed by R. Norton, for Richard Royston, and Walter Kettilby,
MDCLXXX.

To the Right Honorable ANTHONY Earl of KENT, Lord Hastings, Waishford and
Ruthyn.
My Lord,
THE Relation I formerly had to Your Lordship, and to the Excellent Countess
Your Mother, who, like King Solomon's wise Woman, has Builded Her House, and
by Her extraordinary Prudence, accompanied with the Divine Blessing, has
raised the now Third Earldom in this Kingdom to its Ancient Greatness and
Splendor; this Double Relation, I say, has Emboldened me to make a Dedication
of this Discourse to Your Lordship: But there are also several other
Considerations that induce me thereunto: As particularly,

I know Your Lordship to be a Sober and Virtuous Person; and that, as the Grace
of God did Guard your Youth, and make the Pious and Solicitous Care of so Good
a Mother happily successful to preserve you from all inclination to the
Debaucheries of the Age; which have proved so Fatal to not a few Great Men and
Great Families; so since your coming to years of Consideration and Judgment,
You have not only upon deliberate Choice totally deelined them, but from the
Love of Virtue heartily detested them.

I know your Lordship to be excellently well Principled, both as a Subject of
his Majesty, and a Son of the Church of England; and to be a perfect Enemy to
the two great Adversaries of both, viz. Popery and Fanaticism. And that, as a
Noble Clergieman of this Church was your Grandfather, so your Lordship has
always been an Affectionate Friend and Patron of her Clergy; and have had a
very particular Value for those of them whose Piety, Prudence and Learning
entitle them to Esteem.

But I will not enlarge so far as truly I might upon this subject, I shall
only add, that I know your Lordship to be a Lover of Books and Learning
(wherein you attained to very good Proficiency, by your noted Studiousness and
Industry in the University) but chiefly to Admire that sort of Learning which
incomparably Excels all other, viz. That which our Great Master Christ Jesus
has so highly Advanced and Perfected: The Design of which is to make us wise
to Salvation, and Happy both in this World and to All Eternity.

And this (if your Lordship shall vouchsafe to peruse it) you will find is for
a great part the immediate Business of the following Treatise: As it is of the
remainder, to Undermine and Subvert those Principles, both Popish and others,
which are of so Pernicious Consequence, and infinitely Mischievous to that
Design.

I am so well Acquainted with your Lordships Candor and Ingenuity, as to
presume that it will easily overlook the many Defects of this Discourse, for
the sake of that Honest Meaning which your Charity will believe prompted me to
the Writing and Publication of it.

God Almighty continue to multiply His Blessings both Spiritual and Temporal
upon Your Lordship, together with Your Pious and Eminently Charitable Lady,
Your Hopeful Children, and the Rest of Your as Happy as Noble Family. This is,
and shall be the Hearty Prayer of,

MY LORD, Your Lordships most Faithful and Humble Servant, EDW. FOWLER.

THE PREFACE.
AS the right Understanding of the Nature of the Christian Religion will enable
us to discover all Destructive and Dangerous Errors, so those cannot be
Ignorant of its true Nature who are acquainted with its Design and Business;
and consequently to be well informed herein is the most sure and compendious
Method that can be made choice of to preserve our selves from the Contagion of
Heresy, and all such Opinions and Practices as are apt to make us Bad
Christians.

By this means men may save themselves the tedious labor of busying their
Heads in particular Controversies, and in strictly examining all the Arguments
whereby the many Sects among us do endeavor to make their proper Sentiments to
pass for great Gospel Truths: It is sufficient to measure them all by this one
Standard, and compare them with this Rule; which having done, we may be fully
satisfied, that all such as are opposite to the intendment of our Savior's
Coming are to be Rejected, all such as tend to promote it are to be embraced,
and as for such as do neither Oppose nor Promote it (if any such are) it is not
worth our while in the least to concern our selves about them.

The Consideration hereof did heretofore induce me to write that Treatise,
Entitled, The Design of Christianity: And whereas diverse Worthy Persons about
that time had written to excellently good purpose against certain Popular
Notions in Religion, and abundantly exposed both the Falsity and Dangerousness
of them, I employed my small Talent in Endeavoring in that Discourse to
Undermine them all together in the lump, and to pluck them up by the Roots:
And, I praise God for it, I have seen reason to hope that I did not wholly lose
my Labor.

Now the Reader will soon perceive that this plain Discourse of CHRISTIAN
LIBERTY (as is expressed in the Title Page) is a farther Pursuance and
Improvement of the Argument of that Treatise: And that the self-same thing for
substance is Endeavored in both. And I was the more inclined to treat of this
Subject, because, as clear and obvious as our Notion thereof is, I do not know
that it has hitherto happened to be fully expressed in any other Book, and
much less Made out and Improved.

Considering the near Relation between these two Discourses, I may save my Self
and Reader the trouble of a long Preface, and shall do little more than
acquaint him in a few words with these three things.

First, The Body of the Discourse is as Practical as can be, and treats of as
Weighty and Important Points as are to be found in the Gospel: Nor is there any
one Notion started throughout the Whole, but what is both very Easy, and
Improveable to the best and most Profitable purposes.

Secondly, The Opinions and Practices which are exposed as False and Dangerous
are none but such as are most Evidently Contradictory to Christian Liberty as
it is here Explicated, or to that Natural Liberty which is the not to be invaded
Property of Mankind; although some of them, we have showed, are insisted upon
by not a few, as so many Parts or Branches of Christian Liberty: And all those
that we have concerned our selves with may be reduced to three Heads,
Antinomian, Fanatical and Popish: Upon which last we have much more Enlarged
than on the other two; and not (especially at this time) without great reason.

Thirdly, We have fully made it appear, that as no man can entertain a kind
thought of Popery, so neither can he easily satisfy himself to separate from
the Communion of the Church of England, while he has the true notion of
Christian Liberty.

The present Separation of so great a number of our Protestant Brethren (I
meddle not here with the mere Nonconformity of Ministers) is chiefly
occasioned, the more is the shame, by things that are very little in their own
nature; By matters acknowledged by them generally to be Indifferent in
themselves, and which they can never show are forbidden by any express Law of
God, nor can make them look in the least like Sinful things, otherwise than by
using a deal of Artifice and Force in Interpreting and Applying of certain
Scriptures.

And the great Obstacle to our Peace and Unity, I mean next to Pride,
Self-conceit and the want of the true Christian Spirit, is a gross Mistake
concerning the nature of Christian Liberty: It being conceived that as Little
things as are the Cause of the Breach, there is a Great thing parted with by
Complying with them; no less a thing than that which their Savior judged to be
worth the Expense of his Precious Blood to purchase it for them, which is this
Liberty. And could the Brethren of the Separation be once persuaded out of
their darling Notion thereof (as if they will they easily may) and be satisfied
that it is no way betrayed by obeying their Governors; while nothing worse is
imposed by them than what is Indifferent, the Well-meaning People amongst them
would soon think it of far worse consequence to break the Peace of the Church
about such things, than to Conform to them: Especially since these Divisions
are no less dangerous to both the Church and State than Unchristian and
Scandalous. For who does not see what Advantage our Common Enemy does make of
them, and what farther Advantage, not to be thought of without horror, he may
be too like to make?

I have one humble Request to make to the Reader, viz. that he will be, I don't
say so kind, but so just to me as not hastily to Censure me, if he happens now
and then to light upon a passage which at first sight may seem somewhat odd to
him, but have the Patience to suspend his displeasure till he has read
farther; when he may possibly perceive that he misunderstood me in those
Passages: For it is impossible (I at least find it so) to deliver the entire
sense of ones Mind all at once, concerning any thing that requires some
considerable exercise of thoughts. I desire especially that this Right may be
done me in the Fifteenth Chapter, which treats of that most ticklish Argument,
Liberty of Conscience; whereon I have endeavored to give my most Sedate
thoughts with all sincerity and impartiality.

I will Conclude with this Advertisement, that whereas I have touched upon
several things which I have since found in the Learned Dean of S. Paul's his
most Excellent Discourse, Entitled the Mischief of Separation, I had perfectly
completed all that Part where I have done so, and sent much of it to the Press
too before I read that Discourse; nor did it occasion the addition of any one
thing. And it would have been, I am sensible, a weak thing of me had I
industriously repeated things published to the World so immediately before by
that Great Man, with so much greater Advantage.

THE CONTENTS.
SECT. I.
That the most excellent and most highly to be valued Liberty does consist in
an entire Compliance with the Laws of Righteousness and Goodness: Or in Freedom
from the dominion of corrupt and sinful Affections.

CHAP. I.
THis showed in the General from Texts of Scripture, and further confirmed by
those who were strangers to Divine Revelation. Page 1.
CHAP. II.
That the most excellent Freedom and Liberty consists in the Observance of the
Laws of Righteousness and Goodness, more distinctly and particularly
demonstrated by three Arguments. Of which the First is, that this is Freedom
from the worst and vilest of Slaveries. Where it is showed in three
particulars, that the Transgressors of those Laws are the most Slavish
Creatures. page 7.
CHAP. III.
That the Liberty which resulteth from the Observance of the Laws of
Righteousness is, Secondly, The Liberty of the Soul: and how it is so, is
showed in four Particulars. page 15.
CHAP. IV.
That this is, Thirdly, the Liberty of God himself, and his most Excellent
Liberty. page 32.
SECT. II.
That this Freedom to holy Obedience and true Goodness, or which consists in
an entire compliance with the Laws of Righteousness, is our Christian Liberty.

CHAP. V.
The foresaid Proposition Demonstrated by f^^r Arguments, viz. First, That this
has been proved to be the most Glorious Liberty. Secondly, This was that
Liberty, the instating us wherein, was the whole business of our Savior and
his Apostles. Thirdly, Our (...) Abolishing the Ceremonial Law was chiefly
d^signed in (...) to the thorough effecting this Liberty: Where it is showed,
that this Law accidentally became very prejudicial to the great Design of
setting men free from the power of their Lusts, in several particulars.
Fourthly, That none but the Jews were obliged to the Observance of this Law.
page 40.
CHAP. VI.
What course our Lord has taken to instate us in this Liberty showed in
several particulars, viz. that 1. He has most fully informed us concerning all
the Parts and Particulars of our Liberty. 2. He has furnished us with the most
potent Means, for the gaining of it. 3. He has purchased a rich supply of
Grace and Strength, to enable us to use these Means successfully. 4. He has
laid before us the most powerful Motives and Arguments to prevail on our Wills
to make use of this Strength, and comply with this Grace. page 60.
CHAP. VII.
Wherein is discoursed the First of those Motives and Arguments which are
offered in the Gospel, to persuade us to use the Means prescribed for our
deliverance from the Power of Sin. Namely, The love of God in sending his Son
upon the errand of our Redemption. And two most powerful Motives implied in
this. page 78.
CHAP. VIII.
A Seasonable Digression concerning the Doctrine of Universal Redemption. The
Antiquity and Catholicalness of this Doctrine. Large Citations out of Bishop
Latimer and Bishop Hooper, expressing their sense of it. And full proof thereof
presented out of the H. Scriptures. page 82.
CHAP. IX.
Wherein are contained Five more Evangelical Motives, which are of wonderful
Power to excite us to diligence in using the Means of our Deliverance from the
Dominion of Sin, viz. Our Saviors excellent Example. The assurance he has
given us, that he will not take such advantage of our Frailties and Weaknesses,
as to cast us off for them. Our Saviors Mediation and Intercession. The
Glorious Reward he has purchased for, and promised to those, who, by the
Assistance of his Grace, overcome their Lusts. And the most dismal Threatenings
he has pronounced against those who receive that Grace in vain, and will not
be delivered from the Dominion of Sin. page 105.
SECT. III.
Containing the Inferences from each of the Arguments of the foregoing Sections.

CHAP. X.
Which treats of the First Inference from the First Proposition, [That the most
Excellent Liberty does consist in an Entire Compliance with the Laws of
Righteousness and Goodness; Or in Freedom from the Dominion of Sinful
Affections.] Namely, That those are most Unreasonable and Depraved People, who
complain of the Divine Laws as intolerable Intrenchments upon their Liberty.
Where it is showed, First, That upon supposition our Liberty were restrained by
the Laws of God, it would nevertheless be most unreasonable to complain upon
that account. Secondly, That the Laws which oblige Christians do not restrain
their Liberty. page 127.
CHAP. XI.
The Second Inference, viz. That such a Freedom of Will as consists in an
Indifferency to good or evil, is no Perfection, but the Contrary. page 135.
CHAP. XII.
Which Treats of one Branch of the First Inference from the Argument of the
Second Section, [That in Freedom from the Dominion of Corrupt Affections does
that Liberty Principally or rather Wholly Consist, which Christ has purchased
for us.] Namely, that several Notions of Christian Liberty, which have too much
prevailed, are false and of dangerous Consequence. The First of which is, That
which makes it to consist, wholly or in part, in Freedom from the Obligation of
the Moral Law. Certain Texts, urged by the Antinomians in favor of it,
vindicated from the sense they put upon them. And the extreme wildness and
wickedness of it exposed in Five Particulars. page 143.
CHAP. XIII.
A Second False Notion of Christian Liberty, viz. That which makes it to
consist in Freedom from the Obligation of those Laws of Men, which enjoin or
forbid indifferent things. This Notion differently managed by the Defenders of
it. First, Some extend it so far as to make it to reach to all Humane Laws, the
matter of which are things indifferent. Secondly, Others limit it to those
which relate to Religion and the Worship of God. The 23. Verse. of the 7. Chap.
of the 1 Epist. to the Corinthians cleared from giving any Countenance to
either of these Opinions. The Former of them Confuted by three Arguments: And
the Latter by four. Under the Second of which, several Texts of Scripture which
are much insisted upon in the defense thereof, are taken into Consideration. An
unjust Reflection upon the Church of England briefly replied to. And this
Principle, that the imposing of things indifferent in Divine Worship is no
Violation of Christian Liberty, proved to be no ways Serviceable to Popery, by
considering what the Popish Impositions are in Three Particulars. page 164.
CHAP. XIV.
An Answer to this Question, Whether the Prescribing of Forms of Prayer, for
the Public Worship of God, be not an Encroachment upon Christian Liberty?
Wherein it is showed, that this is not a Stifling of the Spirit, or Restraining
the exercise of his Gift. And what in Prayer is not, as also what is the Gift
of the Spirit. Whereby is occasioned an Answer to another Question, viz.
Whether an Ability for Preaching be properly a Gift of the Spirit. page 198.
CHAP. XV.
A Third False Notion of Christian Liberty, viz. that which makes Liberty of
Conscience a Branch of it. Two things premised, 1. That Conscience is not so
sacred a thing as to be incapable of being obliged by Humane Laws. 2. That no
man can properly be deprived of the true Liberty of his Conscience by any Power
on Earth. That what is contended for, is more properly Liberty of Practice than
of Conscience. The Author's Opinion in reference to this Liberty delivered in
Ten Propositions. That whatsoever Liberty of this Nature may be insisted on as
our Right, it is not Christian Liberty but Natural Liberty. page 219.
CHAP. XVI.
The Third Inference from our Notion of Christian Liberty, viz. That Popery is
the greatest Enemy in the World thereunto. Where it is showed, First, That the
Church of Rome Robs those who are subject to her of that Natural Liberty which
necessarily belongs to them as they are Men, viz. That which consists in the
free use of their Understandings in matters of Religion. That She will not
permit men to Examine either her Doctrines or Practices by the Holy Scriptures;
nor yet to receive the Holy Scriptures themselves otherwise than upon her
Authority. The Wickedness of this exposed in two Particulars. The alleging of
Scripture for it, showed to be the grossest Absurdity. Their great Text 1 Timothy
3. 15. spoken to. Her Tyranny over men's Minds further showed. page 254.
CHAP. XVII.
Where it is showed, Secondly, That Popery is as great an Enemy as can be to
Christian Liberty. And First, To that Liberty which our Savior has purchased
for the World in general. As 1. That it tends as much as is possible to the
Corrupting of men's Souls by subjecting them to vile Affections. This showed in
the general, viz. in that it is apt to beget false Notions of God; and more
particularly, in that it brings men under the Power of the Lusts of Malice,
Revenge, Cruelty; Pride and Ambition; Covetousness; Uncleanness; Intemperance;
and the greatest Injustice and Unrighteousness. 2. That it no less tends to
Disquiet men's Minds with certain troublesome Passions. page 272.
CHAP. XVIII.
The Third Particular discoursed on, viz. That the Admirable Method our Lord
has taken to Instate us in our Christian Liberty, is made lamentably
Ineffectual by Popery. This showed as to each of those four Particulars that
Method consists of. The Second Head briefly spoken to, viz. That Popery is also
the greatest Enemy to that Liberty Christ purchased for the Jews in Particular.
A Pathetical Exhortation to a higher valuing of the Privileges we enjoy in the
Church of England concludes the Chapter. page 299.
CHAP. XIX.
The Fourth Inference, That he only is a true Christian, that looks upon
himself as obliged to be no less Watchful over his Heart and the frame and
temper of his Mind, than over his Life and Conversation. page 318.
CHAP. XX.
The Last Inference, Viz. That the most Proper and Genuine Christian Obedience
is that which has most of Liberty in it; namely, that which proceeds from the
Principle of Love to God and Goodness. page 322
ERRATA.
PAge 247. line 15. for Six, read Thirty Six. Page 259. line 6. after
Controversy, add this Parenthesis ( if they could be ingenuous.)

Page 287. line 17. after opportunities for, add or in order to.

A DISCOURSE OF Christian Liberty.
The Introduction.
THERE is nothing toward which Mankind is more naturally or vehemently affected
than Freedom and Liberty; there is so great a value and price set upon it, that
Life it self is not thought too precious to be hazarded or laid down for it:
And many have rather chosen to die by their Enemies hands than to be inslaved
by them.

It was the saying of Cato, Malui mori quam uni parere, I had rather die than
that one man (meaning Julius Caesar) should Lord it over me: And he was as good
as his word, he laid violent hands upon himself rather than that Usurper should
be his Master.

The Jewish Nation, being besieged in Jerusalem, thought it more Eligible to
suffer the most direful Calamities, such as are not to be paralleled in any
other History, than yield themselves Captives to Titus, and put their Necks
under the Roman Yoke.

Both single persons and Communities esteem all their other Enjoyments but
little worth, whilst Liberty is wanting, nor has any one thing occasioned so
much Bloodshed in the world, as the Defense or Recovery of Liberty.

Though Tacitus tells us, that 'twas greatly deliberated among the Gallican
Cities, whether Liberty or Peace was to be preferred, yet ordinarily, without
the least consultation, when these two stand in competition, the former is
chosen, and Peace is forced to give way to and sold for Liberty.

There is no Suffering so impatiently born as the loss, or but Infringment of
Liberty, nor are any looked upon as such Enemies to Mankind, or have so hateful
a character, as the Invaders of it.

But yet as inamoured with Liberty as we all are, the generality are lamentably
ignorant of its true nature, and wherein it mainly and principally consists.

A Spartan being asked, Quid sciret? replied, Scio quid est liberum esse: I
know what Liberty and Freedom means: But I fear there are very few
Comparatively that can truly return this answer; nay, that most are so
strangely mistaken in this matter, as to account the worst of Slaveries the
most desirable Liberty, and the chiefest of Liberties the most intolerable
Slavery.

But if we will believe our Blessed Savior, who, being the Wisdom of the
Father, can best inform us, we shall be satisfied that there is no Liberty like
that which is of his bestowing: He has said, John 8. 36. If the Son shall make
you free, ye shall be free indeed, (...), ye shall be really free, and not only
in show, in outward appearance and opinion; you shall be in the truest and most
excellent sense free. Which words do plainly tell us, that all other Liberties
are unworthy of that name, in comparison of that which is conferred by himself.

And what I now said of Liberty in the general, may as truly be affirmed of
Christian Liberty, viz. First, That there is nothing has raised more dust, or
occasioned more sad feuds in the Christian World than this has done: The great
Ball of Contention has been Christian Liberty, among the professed Disciples
of Christ. Such an opinion is conceived of it, that it is never thought too
dearly bought. This is the Good Old Cause, for which multitudes have been very
liberal of both their Fortunes and Lives; and no one thing has been esteemed
better, if so well, deserving the price of blood.

The pretense of Christian Liberty is of all other the most Plausible and
Popular, and nothing has been more unhappily successful in raising Tumults and
exciting the People to take the Field. Nay, this has been held so Sacred a
thing (if it be lawful to judge of men's opinions by their practices) as to be
able to hallow the unholiest actions, and to sanctify the most apparently
wicked, when designed for the preserving or regaining thereof. And therefore.

Secondly, Too many that are called Christians (as I should not need to add)
must needs very grossly mistake the nature of that they are so fond of. And, as
great zeal as they show for Christian Liberty, do as little desire that which
really is so, and is the chiefest instance of it. Upon which account I presume
'twill be thought no needless labor to endeavor to rectify men's
apprehensions about the nature of this Liberty.

And in order hereunto I design, with Gods assistance, to show in the following
Discourse,

First, That the most excellent and most highly to be valued Liberty does
consist in an entire compliance with the Laws of Righteousness and Goodness; or
in freedom from the dominion of corrupt and sinful Affections.

Secondly, That herein that Liberty principally, or rather wholly consists,
which our Blessed Savior has purchased for us, and in his Gospel proclaimed
to us.

Which two Propositions being demonstrated, we shall

Thirdly, Draw distinctly from each several useful inferences, where
particularly the false notions which too many have conceived of Christian
Liberty shall be effectually confuted.

SECT. I.
That the most excellent and most highly to be valued Liberty does consist in
an entire Compliance with the Laws of Righteousness and Goodness: Or in Freedom
from the dominion of corrupt and sinful Affections.
CHAP. I.
This showed in the General from Texts of Scripture, and further confirmed by
those who were strangers to Divine Revelation.
NOW in the General that this is so, those forecited words of our Savior, John
8. 36. do give us assurance: For the Freedom which Christ there commends as the
true Freedom by way of Eminence is this from the dominion of sin and corrupt
affections. This will appear by considering the Context: Our Savior having
said, verse 31, 32. to those Jews that believed on him, If you continue inmy
words, then are ye my disciples indeed, and ye shall know the truth, and the
truth shall make you free; It follows ver. 33. They answered him, we be
Abraham's seed, and were never in bondage to any man, how say thou, ye shall
be made free. They answered, not the Believers, but some of the Company that
came with no good design, We be Abraham's seed, we are not descended from the
Canaanites or other servile people, but from Abraham, and from him, not by
Hagar the Bondwoman, but by Sarah the Freewoman, We are of a Generous and
Illustrious extract; And were never in bondage to any man, as we were not born
slaves, so neither have at any time been made slaves. But how could they say
this, whenas they were formerly in bondage, both to the Egyptians and
Babylonians, with diverse others, and even now subjected to the power of the
Romans? The truth is, if they spoke this concerning their Nation, the saying
was an impudent and loud Falsehood, as it is usual for men when they are
vaunting and boasting, to make bold with truth; but if they understood it of
their own particulars, and they meant that they were not in Personal servitude,
had not lost their natural Liberty as Men, though they were in a Political
servitude as a Nation, their saying that they were Abraham's seed came in
impertinently.

It follows ver. 34. Jesus answered them, Verily verily I say unto you,
whosoever commits sin is the Servant of sin. He that is a worker of
iniquity, is inslaved and brought into a servile state thereby: Ver. 35. And
the servant abides not in the house for ever, but the Son abides for ever. Or
those who are in this servile state, under sin, though they may for a time be
members of Gods household, they shall at length be for ever Cast out, but the
Son has a right to continue there, and to the enjoyment of his Fathers
Inheritance. Then next follow those words, If the Son therefore shall make you
free, ye shall be free indeed.

So that the Freedom which our Lord speaks of, ver. 32. being deliverance from
the power of Sin, as appears by his explaining himself, ver. 34. It is manifest
that he means the same thing in these words, and consequently does in them
give testimony to what we are now designing to prove, that to be rescued from
under the dominion of our Lusts is Freedom and Liberty indeed, the true and
most excellent Liberty.

And of this the holy David was very sensible, when he uttered those words,
Psalm. 119. 45. I will walk at liberty, for I seek thy precepts. Whereby he
signified, that the ways of Gods Commandments, though they seem to the fleshly
and sensual strait and narrow, and though such look upon those that walk in
them as too much confined and abridged of Liberty; yet the spirit of a
Regenerate and Good man finds no where such Freedom and Enlargement as in those
ways. And therefore when he lapsed into those two heinous and provoking sins,
he felt himself exceedingly straightened, and his Spirit was miserably pent up and
contracted: As appears by that prayer in his Penitential Psalm, Psalm. 51. 12.
Restore to me the joy of thy salvation, and uphold (or establish) me with thy
free Spirit. Or rather, with a free Spirit. In 2 Pet. 2. 19. the Apostle,
speaking of a sort of wicked people, who were industrious to make others as
vile as themselves, says, that While they promise them liberty, they
themselves are the servants of corruption, for of whom a man is overcome, of
the same is he brought in bondage. They enticed others to all manner of
carnality and filthiness, and tempted those that were clean escaped from the
pollutions of the world to relapse into them, and this they did by the
plausible pretense of giving them Liberty; but alas (says the Apostle) they
themselves are the most wretched and miserable of Slaves, having yielded
themselves up to their vile affections, and being under the power and command
of Tyrannical Lusts.

And Heathens have diverse of them discoursed this excellently, and were great
Masters of this Notion: That he who is gotten from under the dominion of his
Sensitive part, and lives agreeably to the Dictates of Right Reason, and the
Will of God, is the only Free Man.

Arrian in his third Book upon Epictetus spends some time in showing, that the
true Liberty consists in the obedience of our Appetites to the Divine Will.
And in his first Book, that there is no true bondage but that which arises
from the Prevalence of Evil Affections; and that a Good man can never be in
real Slavery, though he be in his Enemies hands, that then his (...), his
Carcass only is taken Captive, but he himself is as Free still as ever. And he
gives Diogenes for an instance, who having been set free from his corrupt
Appetites by his Master Antisthenes, would deny that it was possible for any
one to make a Slave of him, and, being taken by Pirates, behaved himself in
their hands like one that was more their Lord than their Vassal.

And this is one of the Stoical Paradoxes which Tully discourses very bravely
upon: (...).
That all wise men (whereby they meant good men) are free men, but all fools
(whereby they meant bad men) are slaves.

And under this head Tully, showing who deserves the Title of Emperor, has
this saying, Let him bridle his lusts, Refranet prius libidines, spernat
voluptates, iracundiam teneat, co^recat avaritiam, cateras animi labes repellat
[imperator] tum incipiat aliis imperare cum ipse improbissi^is dominis,
dedecori ac turpitudini parere desicrit, dum quidem his ob^di^t. Imperator non
modo, sed liber habendus omnino non erit.
despise pleasures, suppress anger, subdue a covetous humor, and other vicious
affections: Then may be begin to take upon him the government of others, when
he shall have ceased to be under the government of those most cruel Lords,
shame and Turpitude, but whilst he yields obedience to these, as he ought not
to be accounted an Emperor, so neither so much as a Freeman. Again he says a
little after. Si servitus sit, sicut est, obedientia fracti animi and abjecti,
and arbitri^ carentis suo, quis neget omnes leves, omnes cupidos, omnes denique
improbos esse servos?
If Slavery be the Obedience of a broken, abject and base mind, and of a man
that has no power over himself, as it is, then who can deny that allwanton,
all covetous, and lastly, all bad people whatsoever are very Slaves?

CHAP. II.
That the most excellent Freedom and Liberty consists in the Observance of the
Laws of Righteousness and Goodness, more distinctly and particularly
demonstrated by three Arguments. Of which the First is that this is Freedom
from the worst and vilest of Slaveries. Where it is showed in three
particulars, that the Transgressors of those Laws are the most Slavish
Creatures.
IT may moreover be more distinctly and particularly proved, that the most
excellent Freedom and Liberty consists in the Observance of the Laws of
Righteousness and Goodness by these following Arguments.

First, This is Freedom from the worst and vilest of Slaveries.

Secondly, This is the Liberty of the Soul.

Thirdly, This is the Divine Liberty, the Liberty of God himself.

First, This is Freedom from the worst and vilest of Slaveries. And that there
is no such Slavish Creature as he who lives in the transgression of these Laws
(as the wicked man) does plainly appear, in that,

First, His whole man, both Soul and Body is inslaved. Those who are Slaves in
the vulgar sense, that are taken captive by the Turk, or such like merciless
and inhumane Masters, are necessarily inslaved only as to their Viler part,
their Bodies: It lies not in the power of any man on Earth to inslave a Soul.
The Mind and Will of him, who, as to his Outward man, is the most absolute
Vassal to the Lusts of others, may retain their Liberty still in spite of
them. No Tyrant can make me either think, or choose, or love, or desire what he
pleases. Where all the members of the Body are under constraint, the Soul may
continue free in all its powers, no external Force is able to inthral that.

But he who lives in disobedience to the Laws of Righteousness is perfectly
inslaved, his whole man has lost its Liberty. As his Body is at the command
and dispose of his Lusts, as each of its members are Ministers of
Unrighteousness, and made to fulfill the will of the flesh, so his Soul is
subjected to their power and dominion, and his Slavery begins there. His Mind,
Will and Affections are first subdued and brought into bondage by fleshly and
impure Lusts, and then his Body is engaged in the filthy drudgery of making
provision for them, of gratifying them and giving satisfaction to them. That is
the meaning of those words of S. James, Then when lust has conceived, it
brings forth sin, Chap. 1. 15.

Secondly, The wicked man is thus subject to the Vilest and Basest of Masters.
Such a one (to repeat those words of Tully) does parere dedecori and
turpitudini, is at the command of vile shame and filthiness it self. What is
Sordid Covetousness, Swinish Lust, Beastly Intemperance, Devilish Rage and
Malice, what I say are all these less than so? To which I may add those other
hateful Qualities of Fraud, Dissimulation, Envy, Pride, Selfishness, and the
like. But some or other, nay most of these are all wicked men, servants to, and
overpowered by.

If Tully could say of the Lustful man, In his St^ical Paradoxes.
An ille mihi liber videtur cui mulier imperat? Shall I think him a freeman who
is at the command of a woman? And if Arrian could say, What, miserable wretch,
do thou fancy thy self free, who art (...), the Slave of a Wench, and a vile
sorry Wench too; well may I say, what a wretched Slave art thou then, who art
under the dominion of so many base, vile, opprobrious, shameful and hateful
things?

To be subject to any one of these is vile Servitude; what is it then to be at
the command of so many such Masters, to serve diverse Lusts (as the Apostles
expression is, Titus 3. 3.) and all most vile, base and brutish.

Thirdly, The wicked man is also inslaved by the most Tyrannical and Cruel
Masters. Indeed it is rare that the Base prove other than Cruel whenever they
happen to get into power. Having understood who are this man's Masters, we must
needs be satisfied, that they are not more vile than they are Tyrannical. And
their Tyranny is showed in requiring the most Unreasonable services, and the
most Uneasy. Their Commands must necessarily be most unreasonable in that they
themselves are so. The forementioned vile Affections, and the like, are
therefore Vile, because perfect contradictions to the Reason of men's Minds, and
degradations of the Humane and Intellectual Nature: Because they Brutifie men's
Souls, yea, and make them more Vile than the Beasts which perish.

In short, he who obeys these Masters prefers the Creature before the
Creator, God blessed for ever: He forsakes the fountain of living waters, and
heweth out to himself broken Cisterns which can hold no water: His Body is far
more dear to him than his Soul, and he esteems slight and momentany
satisfactions and pleasures, above the most Substantial and Eternal. He fears
the displeasure of a poor Creature, and some very tolerable and small evil,
more than the wrath of the Omnipotent God, and than Hell it self. He is ever
doing that which the sense of his own Mind upbraids him with, and what he knows
before hand he shall wish undone as soon as done. In a word, he is always
contradicting the Great Design of his Creation and coming into Being. Such
things as these (as I need not stand to show) do the Lusts of wicked men put
them upon doing, such services as these are they perpetually employing them in.

And what we said of the Unreasonableness of their commands speaks them also
Uneasy, Grievous and Troublesome. It is impossible for a Creature to act
contrary to its Nature and Essential principles, but it must needs feel much
Pain in so doing; the more Unnatural any thing is, the more Disquieting and
Tormenting must it necessarily be. The very presence of evil Affections in the
Soul must needs make it as uneasy, as evil Humors do the Body; what then will
the gratifying, the Nourishing and Cherishing them do? I appeal to the Covetous
and Ambitious, to the immoderate Lovers of Riches and Honors, to such Lovers
of Wine, and such Lovers of Women, to the Revengeful and Malicious, and the
like, whether they do not feel excessive disturbance and perturbation of Mind,
from the several passions that denominate them such; and whether the Pain they
cause to their Souls, be not incomparably greater and more lasting, than the
pleasure which their Flesh or Sensitive part receives from them.

Add hereunto the grievous Disquiet and Torment that is occasioned by
Reflecting upon the past pleasing and gratifying a Lust. Tully has an
excellent observation to this purpose, Cum Cupiditatum dominatus excessit, and
alius est Dominus exortus, ex Conscientia Peccatorum Timor, quam illa miscra,
quam dura scrvitus! in Stoic. Paradox*
When a Lust has ceased to exercise its dominion for a while, or to employ its
vassal in new drudgery, he is not for that time at ease, but another Lord
immediately tyrannizeth over him, viz. the Dread that arises from
consciousness of Guilt, oh what a miserable slavery and bondage is this!

And (by the way) methinks it should much affect us, to find a Heathen
expressing such a sense of the intolerable Slavery men are brought into by
satisfying their Lusts.

I might add further, that men's Lusts have no moderation with them neither,
though (as that Philosopher supposes) they may, after their commands are
obeyed, for a while cease to command again, yet it is but for a very little
while; before the sinner has recovered his spent spirits, they lay new burdens
on his weary shoulders. What the Apostle says of those who have eyes full of
Adultery that they cannot cease from sin, is as true of those who are under the
dominion of any lust whatsoever: And what Horace observes of the Tyranny of
sensual Love, may as well be applied to every other corrupt Affection, namely,
Vrget enim mentem dominus non lenis, and acres
Subjectat lasso stimulos.
This cruel Lord the unhappy Creature rides,
And, when be-jaded, claps sharp spurs to's sides.


I might moreover show, were it needful, that the service which men's Lusts
exact from them, is such as ordinarily is of fatal consequence to their Estates
and Bodies as well as Souls, but there is nothing to which universal
observation in all Ages, and Sinners Experience gives clearer evidence. I might
also in the last place, show, that men's Lusts do deliver up their Servants to
the power of the Devil, such being said to be in his snare, and to be taken
captive by him at his will, 2 Timothy 2. 26. And no man, I hope, shall need to be
informed, what a Tyrant and Tormenter the Devil is.

But enough has been said of the service of Sin to make us cry out with the
Philosopher in the forementioned words, Quam illa misera, quam dura Servitus!
What miserable and cruel Slavery is that Service!

Enough, I say, has been said to assure us, that no Slavery is comparable to
this, and consequently, that the careful observance of the Laws of
Righteousness is the true, and most Glorious Liberty, in that, Freedom from
such Bondage is implied therein, as is not to be found in any other sort of
Liberty.

CHAP. III.
That the Liberty which resulteth from the Observance of the Laws of
Righteousness, is the Liberty of the Soul: and how it is so, is showed in four
Particulars.
SEcondly, The Liberty which resulteth from the Observance of the Laws of
Righteousness and Goodness is the truest and most excellent of Liberties, in
that it is the Liberty and Freedom of the Soul. As this is apparent by what
has been already discoursed, so we may further take notice, that by the
Observance of these Laws the Soul comes to be enlarged, to have Self-enjoyment,
and to be as it would be, in that it is by this means delivered from those
Passions which straiten, confine and pend it up, and put it into a Slavish
state. Those Passions are chiefly, Fear, Shame, Trouble and Dejection of Mind,
and an immoderate love to our own Bodily and particular concerns.

And the Opposites to these do give the Soul great Enlargement and Liberty,
viz. That Confidence that is opposite both to Fear and to Shame, Delight and
joy, which are opposite to Trouble and Dejection of Mind, and Generosity and
Nobleness of Spirit, whereby a man is carried forth to the loving of God the
Chief Good in the first place, and a hearty concern for the general welfare of
his Fellow Creatures, which is opposite to immoderate Self-love.

First, The Observance of the Rules of Righteousness casts out Fear. This is
a most servile Passion; the Apostle speaks of some, who through fear of ^^ath
were all their lifetime subject to bondage. By Fear I mean that which is
expressed by the Greek word (...), a cowardly and dispiriting Fear. None can
imagine I mean (...), an Awful and Reverential Fear, such as is called, Heb.
12. 28. a Godly fear: Nor yet do I mean such a Fear as awakens and excites the
Soul to the use of means for the shunning and keeping off evils. Such a Fear as
this does not at all inslave or put a man out of his own power, but is highly
serviceable to the maintenance and preservation of Liberty. And therefore it is
commended to us by the Apostle, Heb. 4. 1. Let us therefore fear lest a promise
being left us of entering into his rest, any of you should seem to come short
of it.

But, as was said, the Fear which is enslaving is a Cowardly Dispiriting Fear,
and this the Righteous and Good man is freed from. He has not received the
spirit of bondage again to fear, in this sense, but the spirit of Adoption
whereby he cries Abba Father, Romans 8. 15.

He is not afraid of God as a poor Slave is of his fierce Master, or as a
wicked Servant of his justly provoked and incensed Lord; but not being under
the guilt of wilful sins, his Conscience being privy to no other guilt than
that which upon good grounds he believes is expiated by the Blood of Jesus, he
can go to God as a child to his loving and tender Father.

And as he has no tumultuary, confounding or disheartening fear of God, so
neither has he of the Devil or Men, or any worldly evil; as knowing that all
these are subject to the restraint of that good Providence which ever charge
it self with the care of good Souls and all their concerns. God has not given
him the Spirit of fear (or timidity and fearfulness) but of power, of love, and
of a sound mind, 2 Timothy 1. 7.

This man is an affectionate Lover of God, and therefore cannot question God's
love to him, and is assured that all things shall work together for his good,
for his good both in this life, and in the life to come. Herein is our love
made perfect, says S. John in his 1 Epistle 4. 17. because as he is, so are we
in this world (because we follow the example of our Blessed Savior in the
conscientious observance of the Rules of Righteousness) there is no fear in
love, but perfect love casts out fear, because fear has torment, he that
fears is not made perfect in love: That is, he that is affected with such a
fear as has now been described.

He who is not under the power of Cowardizing, dismaying Fear, his Spirit is at
great Liberty; but a care to keep an inoffensive Conscience both toward God
and men, to adhere to the Rules of Righteousness and Goodness, and never to
swerve from them, will banish this Fear. The wicked (says the Wise man) flees
when no man pursues, but the righteous is bold as a Lion, Prove. 28. 1. He that
walks uprightly, walks surely: or confidently and securely, Prove. 9. 10. To
which great truth the Poet gives his Testimony in those known Verses; Integer
vitae scelerisque purus
Non eget Mauri jaculis nec arcu, etc.
He that is in life upright and pure in heart
Is too secure to need the Bow or Dart.
-- hic murus aheneus esto
Nil conscire sibi, nulla and pallescere culpa.
The strongest Bulwark's not so sure a Fence
As is an inoffensive Conscience.


Secondly, True Goodness begets that confidence which is opposed, as to Fear
so, to Shame too. There is a highly commendable shame, which is proper to a
Good man, namely that which is expressed by the Latin Verecundia: Which is a
quick sense of whatsoever is indecorous and misbecoming. No man can have too
much of this, for the more any one has of it, the better man must he
necessarily be. But there is another sort of Shame expressed by Pudor, which is
a troublesome passion arising from a sense of disgrace, upon consciousness of
Guilt. Of this Shame, the most learned Doctor Henry More observes in his
incomparable Ethics, Pudor nec in pessimos nec in optimos cadit. Nam qui sibi
conscius est se libero suo arbitrio constanter uti ad ca quae optima sunt,
novit se non debere contemni, ac proinde, omni contemptu superior, ipsumme^
contemnit contemptum; quae magna pars est Generositatis, in improbis vero
summum improbitatis fastigium. Enclur. Eth. lib. 1. cap. 2.
that it neither falls upon the worst nor the best of men. For he who is
conscious to himself that he constantly exercises his liberty in doing the
best things, knows that he ought not to be contemned, and thereupon, being
above all contempt, contempt it self is contemned by him; which is a great
instance, in good men, of Generosity, but in bad men, is the very height of
improbity.

This Shame is a good effect of a bad cause, for though it be an evil, yet it is
a necessary evil, and tends to the deterring men from unworthy actions for the
time to come, and does actually produce this good effect where the great
uneasiness and perturbation of mind which was caused thereby upon past
commissions of sin, is seriously and consideratively reflected upon. For where
this Shame is, there is great Bondage, where there is consciousness of guilt,
the mind of a man is miserably pent up, confined and straightened, so that he
dares many times neither to look abroad into the world, nor to look up to
Heaven, nor reflect upon himself. And therefore Liberty and Confidence are
expressed by the same word ( viz. (...)) in the Greek language.

But while a man is careful in the observance of the Laws of Righteousness, to
be Righteous before God, and to walk ( as it is said of Zacharias and
Elizabeth) in all the Commandments and Ordinances of the Lord blameless, he is
not affected with this kind of Shame, and consequently enjoys a mighty Freedom
by this means. Upright Job had the happy experience of this effect of
uprightness; as we find Chap. 31. 35, 36, 37. Oh that one would hear me, (
says he) behold my desire is, that the Almighty would answer me, and that mine
Adversary had written a book. Surely I would take it upon my shoulder, and bind
it as a Crown unto me. I would declare to him the number of my steps, as a
Prince would I go near unto him. Which is as much as if he had said, Oh that
mine Adversary instead of secretly whispering evil things of me, had drawn up a
charge in writing against me: I would be so far from endeavoring to have it
concealed, that I would my self publish it to all the world, and instead of
thinking it a disgrace and disparagement, I would esteem it as an ornament; for
my innocence would be the more cleared, and my good name vindicated by the
means of it. And so far would I be from sneaking and skulking in corners, like
one ashamed to show his head, that I would like a Prince with Heroic courage
and confidence go up to the face of mine Enemy, and expose and lay open my
whole life before him.

Or rather we will read these Verses as the sense of them is expressed in a
late excellent Paraphrase upon this Book: Dr. Patrick's.
Oh that the truth of all this [ that I have been accused of] might be examined
by some equal judge! Behold I continue still to desire of God this favor: And
let him that can accuse me, bring in his Libel in writing against me. Surely I
would not endeavor to obscure it, but openly expose it to be read by all; nay
wear it as a singular ornament, which would turn to mine honor, when the world
saw it disproved. I my self would assist him to draw up his charge, by
declaring to him freely every action of my life: I would approach him as
undauntedly as a Prince, who is assured of the goodness of his cause.

These words, with many other of his sayings, show, what a blessed Liberty the
Soul of this Holy man was possessed with, even whilst he was deprived of all
his outward comforts, and in the saddest and most dismal circumstances.

Thirdly, Nothing will free a man from Trouble and Dejection of mind, like the
careful observance of the Laws of Righteousness. This as it is a certain
consequent of Fear and Shame, it must needs free a man from, as it freeth from
those its Causes: But it incomparably beyond any thing in the world cures this
Malady of a wounded spirit how or by whatsoever it be occasioned. I have showed
that it is the fate of Sinners to feel great perturbation and disturbance of
mind from their corrupt Affections, by the law in their members warring against
the law of their minds, and also by reflecting upon their folly and madness,
and by the fearful expectations that their manifold bold transgressions of the
Divine Laws do raise in them. The wicked (says the Prophet) are like the
troubled Sea, which cannot rest, whose waters cast up mire and dirt: There is
no peace, says my God, to the wicked. Cain had no sooner given place to Envy
and Revenge, but his Countenance fell, and the Disquiet of his mind was
bewrayed by his looks.

But there is no such Lightsomness and Sprightfulness of Soul, no such Pleasure
and Self-satisfaction as that which results from true Religion, Righteousness
and Goodness. It Is ways are ways of pleasantness, and all its paths peace,
Prove. 3. 17. Light is sown for the Righteous, and joy for the Upright in heart,
Psalm. 97. 11. Great peace have they that love thy law, and nothing shall offend
them, Psalm. 119. 165. The work of Rigteousness shall be peace, and the effect
of Righteousness quietness, and assurance for ever, Esaias 32. 17. The Good man
is free from self-accusations, and from that gnawing Worm that is frequently
felt in Guilty breasts. He is not appalled in thinking of what is past, nor
cast down with the forethought of that which is to come. His Soul is like a
calm and clear River, like the waters of Siloam which run softly, without noise
or murmur.

Whatsoever is Natural is for that reason highly pleasing, but nothing so
natural to the Heaven-born Soul of man, nothing is so agreeable to our original
Make, as to live in conformity to the Laws of Righteousness. Whilst this is
our serious care, we act according to our Highest principle, that Principle
which God and Nature designed for our (...), our Leader and Governor, I mean
the Reason of our Minds.

And therefore so long as we follow its Dictates, and behave our selves like
those on whose souls the Divine image is imprinted, which consists in
Righteousness and true Holiness, so long I say we live in our own Element, and
therefore must necessarily have Self-enjoyment: And we shall enjoy our selves
more or less according as we are more or less diligent in works of
Righteousness and Goodness. The experience of every Good man will force him to
subscribe to the truth of this; no such man can withhold his assent from it, or
call it into question any more than he can his own Feeling. Such a one feels
such serenity of thoughts, and such great delight and satisfaction of mind in
the exercise of love to God and love to men, in works of Piety, Justice and
Charity, in the exercise of Humility, Meekness, Patience and Submission to the
Divine will, and all other Christian Graces and Virtues, that, while he is so
employed, all is as well within him as he can desire; he accounts it a Heaven
upon Earth to be so employed.

I fear that many a one who would be thought a Christian cannot receive this
Doctrine, that it seems to him a very strange Soloecism; but I could tell him
of many a Heathen of whom he may learn it as well as of Christians;
particularly Tully, O Vitae Philosophiae Dux O Virtutum indagatrix,
expultrixque Vitiorum! Vnus dies been and ex praeceptis tuis actus, peccanti
immortalitati est anteponendus.
who has this brave saying in his Tusculan Questions: O Philosophy the Guide
of our lives! O thou seeker out of Virtues, and expeller of Vices! One day well
spent, and in obedience to thy precepts, ought to be preferred before a sinning
immortality. And all those say for substance the self-same thing, who tell us,
that Virtue is a Reward to it self.

The Good man feels also no small pleasure in reflecting upon the fruits of
Righteousness he has brought forth: And much more in the Contemplation of that
Glorious Reward, which God for Christ's sake has promised to those who
patiently persevere in well-doing. The fore-expectation whereof does greatly
support him under all the crosses and afflictions wherewith he is exercised in
this life: And makes him not only Patient under those Tribulations he meets
with for Righteousness sake, but even to Glory in them, as the Apostles did and
Primitive Christians.

And moreover, he receives great Refreshment and Comfort more immediately from
the Holy Ghost, especially when he is called forth to any exceedingly great
suffering, or extraordinary service. He then marvellously strengthens the Good
man with strength in his Soul to bear the one and perform the other as becomes
a servant of Jesus Christ. Which he does chiefly by giving sensible, clear and
lively representations to the Good man's mind of the Glory of Heaven, and by
steadfastly fixing it upon the Crown of Righteousness and Life, which his
Blessed Lord has promised to all those who are faithful to the Death.

Thus was the first Christian Martyr S. Stephen strengthened, who being full of
the Holy Ghost looked up steadfastly into Heaven, and saw the Glory of God, saw
the Heavens opened, as ready to receive him, and the Son of man standing on the
right hand of God.

And in the same manner have innumerable of his Followers been since
strengthened; and among others not a few of our own Country people who were
burnt at stakes by the Bloody Papists in the Reign of Queen Mary. And if ever
such days should come again (as God grant they may not) all sincerely good
Souls, who are sensible of their own weakness, and entirely confide in the
power of Jesus, shall undoubtedly be enabled to suffer with great Patience and
Constancy, if not with great Ioyfulness also and triumphantly.

And indeed without this more immediate and special Divine Assistance, we could
not well hope to endure a Fiery trial. All External encouragements, such is the
infirmity of our Natures, accompanied but with the ordinary assistance of the
Divine Grace, are like little to avail us in the hour of such a temptation. And
the reason is, because we shall be in great danger of being totally deprived of
the power of considering by very acute pain and torment: And a vigorous
powerful sense of the Glory of Heaven, is necessary to our bearing with
patience, and much more with joyfulness the sharpest sort of Tribulations; the
mere Belief thereof would certainly have but a very weak influence in such a
circumstance.

And therefore (as was said) all Good Souls may confidently expect
extraordinary Assistance, whenever they are called out to extraordinary
sufferings. God is faithful (says the Apostle) who will not suffer you to be
tempted above what you are able, etc. 1. Cor. 10. 13.

Now then, who after all this shall need to be told, what a Glorious Liberty of
Soul is obtainable by the careful observance of the Laws of Righteousness and
Goodness? But this will yet further appear, if we consider that,

Fourthly, It delivers from all immoderate self-love. Such a love of our
selves as ties us down and determines us to our own bodily and particular
concerns.

A worthy person, Mr. John Smith.
in a Discourse of the Excellency of true Religion has a saying to our present
purpose well worth our reciting, viz. that Wicked men are of most narrow and
confined Spirits, they are so contracted by the pinching particularities of
Earthly and Created things, so imprisoned in the dark dungeon of Sensuality and
Selfishness, so straightened through their carnal designs and ends, that they
cannot stretch themselves, nor look beyond the Horizon of time and sense.

And there he observes, that Plato has long since concluded concerning the
condition of Sensual men, that They live (...), like a Shellfish, and can
never move up and down, but in their own Prison, which they ever carry about
with them.

But true Religion and Goodness is so Generous and Noble a Principle, that he
who is acted thereby cannot be confined to himself and his own things.

His Soul is not imprisoned within himself, that is, within his own particular
Being separated from the rest of the World; but is enlarged by an Universal
Charity, by a sincere good will to God's whole Creation.

He has an hearty concern for the good of the World, and carries on no designs
for himself which are opposite thereunto, nor any other but such as some way or
other do tend to promote the welfare and happiness of his Fellow Creatures: And
it is the greatest pleasure to his mind imaginable, to be instrumental thereunto.

Again, his Soul is not tied down to any inferior good things, his love and
desires are not terminated on such objects, but they are so extensive as to
stretch themselves far beyond this world, and fix upon the Original and Supreme
Good, and there to Center.

The Language of this man is the same with holy David' s, Whom have I in Heaven
but God, and there is nothing upon the Earth I desire in comparison of him.
Though he has a kindness for things below, yet his thoughts and affections are
not confined to them, but soar aloft to him who is the Author of them, and from
whom all the goodness that is in them is derived. Whereas (as the foresaid
Author expresses it) All the Freedom that wicked men have, is but like that of
Banished men, to wander up and down in the Wilderness of this World, from one
Den and Cave to another. And he says before, that Tully could see so much in
his Natural Philosophy, as made him to say, Scientia naturae ampliat animum and
ad divina attollit: The knowledge of Nature enlarges and dilates the mind, and
carries it up to Divine things. But this is most true of Religion, that in an
higher sense it does work the Soul into a true and divine Amplitude.

And thus have we showed, that the Observance of the Laws of Righteousness and
Goodness gives the most excellent Liberty, in that the Liberty which results
from thence is the Liberty of the Soul; and also how the Soul is thereby set at
Liberty.

CHAP. IV.
That this is the Liberty of God himself, and his most excellent Liberty.
THirdly, I proceed to show, that the Liberty which arises from the Observance
of the Laws of Righteousness and Goodness is the Divine Liberty, the Liberty of
God himself, and his most Excellent Liberty. God Almighty is of all Beings
infinitely the most unlimited and uncontrollable by any thing without himself.
He does whatsoever pleases him, in Heaven, the Earth, the Sea and all deep
places. The whole Universe is in his hands as the Clay in the hands of the
Potter, perfectly under his power, and at his dispose, so that there is no
resisting him, nor hindering one thought of his.

But as unboundable as his Will and Power are by any thing without him, they
are both determined, by the internal Rectitude and Goodness of his Nature, to
things Holy, Just and Good. He is so great a lover of Equity and Goodness, that
he can neither do or will any thing, that is contrary or not agreeable
thereunto.

We read that He is a Rock whose work is perfect, and all his ways are
judgment, a God of truth and without iniquity, just and right is he. Deuteronomy. 32. 4


That it is impossible for God to lie. Heb. 6. 18.


That his ways are right and equal, Ezekiel. 18. 29.
and his judgment according to truth.

That the judge of all the Earth will do right, Romans 2. 2.
and that he will not lay upon man more than is right, Job 34. 23
that he should enter into judgment with God.

That he is of purer eyes than to behold evil, Habak. 1. 13.
and cannot look on iniquity ( i. e.) with approbation.

That the righteous Lord loves righteousness, Psalm. 145. 17.
and his countenance beholds the upright.

That he is not tempted with evil (is incapable of the least inclination
toward it) neither tempts he any man: I^m. 11^
Can not tempt any man to evil, and much less by any Decree determine him.

That he is good unto all, Psalm. 145. 9.
and his tender mercies are over all his works.

That he is full of compassion and long-suffering. Ver. 8.


That he has no pleasure in the death of the wicked, but that the wicked man
turn from his way and live. Ezekiel. 33. 11.


And a multitude of such Declarations we find in the Holy Scriptures, which
abundantly speak the Divine Will and Power to be inseparably conjoined with
Righteousness and Goodness; and never in the least to swerve from either.

And if any such providence have fallen under our notice at any time, or come
to our knowledge, which we have been to seek satisfactorily to reconcile with
the Rules of Righteousness or Goodness, we ought to take occasion from thence
to be humbled under a sense of our own short-sightedness and shallowness of
Understanding, and to take great heed how we charge our Creator with that,
which he has so often professed to loath and abominate.

Now let us observe, that this determination of God's Will and Power from
within himself to things Just and Good, is that which gives a greater luster to
his Nature, and far more speaks him the most Excellent and most Happy Being,
than his mere unlimitableness by any thing without him. Nay, Uncontroulableness
and Absolute Sovereignty would make him so much the Worse, and less Happy
Being, except the exercise thereof were determined by a Holy, Good and
Righteous Nature.

If God Almighty were made up of Will, and every thing were in it self
indifferent to him, and he did this or that merely because it is his pleasure so
to do, he would (I say) be infinitely the Worse Being, for his Absolute
Sovereignty and Uncontrollable Power.

What is it that makes the Devils, the most vile and hateful of all Creatures,
is it not this, that they are Spirits endued with great Strength and Power,
with great Knowledge, Sagacity and quickness of Understanding, and with large
Dominions, though Usurped, but have lost that integrity of Nature, and those
good Principles, whereby they should govern themselves, and be determined in
the exercise of their Power and Wisdom? It Is certain, they would be nothing so
mischievous and wicked as they are, if with the loss of their Moral endowments,
they had also been divested of their Natural: I mean their Strength and Power,
their Knowledge and Acuteness of Understanding.

The Devils are in these far more like to God, than any of us Men are in a
possibility of being (at least in this life) but notwithstanding this, they are
of all his Creation the most unlike God; namely, because their great Power and
Knowledge are utterly unacquainted with, and estranged from, Righteousness and
Goodness; are altogether employed in most unrighteous and wicked designs and
enterprises.

So that irresistible power and All-comprehending knowledge are so far from
denominating a Being the most Absolutely perfect considered alone, that That
would be the worst Being in the world, which is supposed to have those
perfections, and is made to be the worst by those perfections, if they do not
exert themselves in Righteous and Good actions, but the contrary: if the
exercise of them be not determined by Rules and Principles of Righteousness and
Goodness.

And in saying that a Being will be the worse for Power and Knowledge, etc.
separated from Goodness, I say also it will be the more unhappy: For the worse
any one is, the less satisfaction he must needs take in himself, and the less
he will necessarily have of self-enjoyment; as has been already showed.

Now, considering what has been said, it is most apparent that the Divine
Liberty, the most excellent Liberty of God himself, is his absolute Freedom to
Good, his being perfectly unbyassed by any evil Affection, and infinitely out
of the reach of corrupt Appetites, so that he can as soon cease to be, as fail
to exercise his Almighty power, his Omniscience and Unsearchable Wisdom, in
doing what is most fit, most right and equal.

This is the Liberty, which most highly commends the infinitely best of Beings,
and therefore it is that which will make us poor Mortals most like to him, and
partakers of the Divine Nature.

And thus it is sufficiently, I presume, demonstrated, that the most Excellent
Liberty consists in, or results from, the Observance of the Laws of
Righteousness and Goodness. And to show, that this is eminently (nay and solely
too) our Christian Liberty will be the business of the next Section.

SECT. II.
That this Freedom to holy Obedience and true Goodness, or which consists in
an entire compliance with the Laws of Righteousness, is our Christian Liberty.
THis Phrase Christian Liberty being so much in the mouths of people professing
Christianity, one would think that nothing is better understood; that there is
no point of our Religion in the nature of which we less need to be instructed.

We mightily insist upon our Christian Liberty, a very warm Zeal we seem to
have for it, and we are not a little concerned (as has been already intimated)
when we apprehend it to be invaded, or in the least infringed.

And if we be not mistaken in our notion of this Liberty, it is most commendably
done of us to contend earnestly for it, to refuse to part with it, or to
consent to the smallest violation or abatement thereof upon any terms
whatsoever.

But alas, nothing is more misunderstood than Christian Liberty, and nothing
has been more abused; and therefore it is well worth our while rightly to state
the notion of it, and to fix it where it ought to be.

How it has been mistaken and abused shall be shown in its due place, our
immediate business is,

First, To Demonstrate the foresaid Proposition.

Secondly, To show what our Lord has done to instate us in this our Christian
Liberty.

CHAP. V.
The foresaid Proposition Demonstrated by four Arguments, viz. First, That this
has been proved to be the most Glorious Liberty. Secondly, This was that
Liberty, the instating us wherein, was the whole business of our Savior and
his Apostles. Thirdly, Our Saviors Abolishing the Ceremonial Law was chiefly
designed in order to the thorough effecting this Liberty: Where it is showed,
that this Law accidentally became very prejudicial to the great Design of
setting men free from the power of their Lusts, in several particulars.
Fourthly, That none but the Jews were obliged to the Observance of this Law.
FIrst, We will demonstrate the truth of this Assertion, that Christian Liberty
consists in Freedom to holy Obedience, in deliverance from the Power and
Dominion of sin, together with the direful effects and consequents thereof:
This we will do by these following Arguments.

First, This is, as we have showed, incomparably the best and most Glorious of
Liberties, and therefore it must needs be (at least principally and in the most
eminent sense) our Christian Liberty. For whatsoever Benefits our Blessed Lord
is any where said to have procured for us, the absolutely best of the kind is
always to be understood.

For instance, whereas he says, that he is come that we might have life, he
means the best of Lives, the Spiritual life of the Soul here, and Eternal life
hereafter.

By the Riches he is said to bestow, is meant those whereby the Soul is
enriched, the Divine Graces and Virtues, called by himself the true Riches.

By the Salvation which he is the Author of, is meant that from the worst of
evils principally, and everlasting Salvation.

So proportionably, whenas the Son is said to make us free, the meaning is free
with the best of Freedoms, viz. that from sin, as also we have seen is manifest
from the Context. Whenas Christ is said to be Anointed, according to the
Prophecy of Esaias concerning him, to preach deliverance to the captives, Luke 4.
18.
and to set at liberty them that are bruised (with being long fettered and
shackled) we are likewise to understand the same most desirable of all
Liberties and Deliverances. Whereas S. James calls the Gospel the law of
Liberty (Chap. 1. 25.) and the perfect law of Liberty, (Chap. 2. 12.) we are
primarily to understand it (as will be further shown) of this same Liberty
which infinitely surpasses all other. In which sense the Apostle S. Paul
understood it to be The perfect law of Liberty, when he called it The law of
the Spirit of life, which is in Christ Jesus, adding that, it had made him free
from the law of Sin and death, Romans 8. 2.

Secondly, We find this Liberty was that, the instating us wherein, our
Savior, when he was in the World, and his Apostles after him, were altogether
bent and intent upon. The business of making men holy and obedient to the Laws
of Righteousness, they had not only mostly in their Eye, but all they did was
subordinated thereunto.

All those powerful means that were used to persuade the world that Jesus is
the Christ, were in order to this end: For the Son of God was manifested to
take away our sins; and to destroy the works of the Devil, 1 John 3. 5, 8.

Therefore is Faith so highly commended, and so much ascribed thereto, and men
so excited to believe in Christ, or to believe his Gospel, because the
Doctrine, Precepts, Promises and Threatenings therein contained have a great
aptness and tendency, are of mighty force and efficacy, to the thorough
Reformation of our Lives, and the cleansing our Natures from all filthiness
both of flesh and spirit: Because that Faith which is terminated upon those
Objects is such a Shield, as whereby we shall be able to quench all the fiery
darts of the wicked one: Ephesians. 6. 16.
Because it is most effectual to the purifying of the heart, Acts 15. 9.
and the overcoming of the world. 1 Ioh. 5. 4.


In short, Christ gave himself for us that he might redeem us from all
iniquity, and purify to himself a peculiar people zealous of good works, Titus
2. 14.

He died for all, that they which live should not henceforth live unto
themselves (to the drudging service of their Lusts) but unto him that died for
them, and rose again, 2 Cor. 5. 15. Or, that they should be his Servants, that
is, his Freemen; according to that of S. Paul, 1 Cor. 7. 22. He that is called
being a Servant is the Lords Freeman.

He gave himself for the Church, that he might sanctify and cleanse it, by the
washing of water by the word; That he might present it to himself a glorious
Church, not having spot or wrinkle or any such thing, but that it should be
holy and without blemish, Ephesians. 5. 26, 27.

He his own self bare our sins in his own body on the tree, that we, being dead
to sins, should live unto Righteousness, 1 Pet. 2. 24. Or as S. Paul says,
Romans 6. 7. That being dead we might be freed from sin: That is, that being dead
to it, we might be freed from the Bondage we were in under it. Or, as we have
it, ver. 18. That being made free from sin, we might become the servants of
righteousness.

Our Savior required nothing of us, forbad nothing to us, but what was
apparently designed in order to our deliverance from sin, the making us pure in
heart, and holy in all manner of conversation. He gave us not a Promise, but
what was to encourage us hereunto, nor yet a Threatening, but what was intended
to scare us from the serving of one Lust or other. And the Apostle tells us,
that the whole of the Gospel, or, The grace of God that brings salvation is
designed to teach us, that, denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should
live soberly, righteously and godly in this present world, Tit. 2. 11, 12.

It Is sufficiently evident from this little that has been said, that the
setting us free from Sin, and the making us Free to Righteousness was the
business which took up our Blessed Savior's time and thoughts when he was upon
the Earth, and wherein his holy Apostles were employed after his departure: And
therefore this must necessarily be our grand Christian Liberty. Abundantly more
might have been said upon this Argument, The Design of Christianity.
but we have heretofore copiously handled it in another Treatise.

Thirdly, Our Saviors abrogating the Ceremonial Law, his freeing from that
yoke, was mainly designed in order to the thorough effecting this Freedom and
Liberty. This was a yoke which the Apostle Peter says, neither they nor their
Fathers were able to bear, Acts 15. 10. It was a yoke of bondage, as S. Paul
calls it, Gal. 5. 1. Stand fast in the Liberty wherewith Christ has made us
free, and be not entangled again with the yoke of bondage. This Liberty (as
appears by his discourse both before and after) was that which Christ had given
them from the burdensome services of the Mosaical Dispensation. And diverse
other places there are which speak of this Liberty as an effect and fruit of
the death of Christ.

Now it is worthy our Observation, that the great reason wherefore our Savior
did put an end to the Obligation of this Law, and why the Apostles, especially
S. Paul, insisted so much upon it, and so earnestly cautioned the Jewish
Believers against intangling themselves again with this yoke, was because it
became very highly injurious to the Grand Evangelical Design of setting men
perfectly free from their Lusts: Because it gendered to that spiritual bondage,
in deliverance from which consists our best Liberty. For this Law understood
Carnally, and according to the letter only, (which it ought not to have been)
was very apt to beget a sordid and low spirit, a temper of mind very much
estranged from true Piety and Goodness. And it is too unquestionable, that the
Jews generally had no higher a sense of it.

The Law, the Author to the Hebrews says, made nothing perfect, Chap. 7. 19.
It gave no man Freedom from the power of Sin, no power to subdue corrupt
Affections was obtainable thereby; it did not make men truly and internally
Righteous, but only Ritually and Externally. As the most eminently Good men
under the Law did fall far short of the Apostles of our Savior, and those
whose lives have been most answerable to the Christian precepts, so those
degrees of Virtue and Goodness they did attain to were not owing the Law, but
to the Covenant made with Abraham, which was the same for substance with the
Gospel Covenant. The Law is said to be weak through the flesh; or in regard of
the impetuosity and violence of men's fleshly Appetites, Romans 8. 3.

Nor is there any express mention in the Ceremonial Law of any necessity of
purity of heart: This was only represented by the diverse legal washings, and
other Rites; the mortification of corrupt Affections was signified by the
cutting off the foreskin of the flesh, and the great substantial duties were
veiled under dark shadows. So that a man might be very punctually observant of
this Law, according to the mere literal sense thereof, and yet his Soul remain
perfectly under the power of sinful Affections.

And the Learned Mr. Chillingworth in his Sermon on Gal. 5. 5. says thus even
of the Moral Duties of the two Tables, as they are part of the Mosaical Jewish
Law, viz. That they required only an external obedience and conformity to the
Affirmative Precepts thereof, and an abstaining from an Outward practice of the
Negative. They did not reach unto the Conscience, no more than the National
Laws of other Kingdoms do. So that, for example, when the law of Moses forbids
Adultery upon pain of death, he that should in his heart lust after a Woman,
could not be accounted a Transgressor of Moses his law, neither was he liable
to the punishment therein specified: Whereas the Gospel requires not only an
Outward, and, as I may say, corporal obedience to God's Commandments, but also
an inward sanctification of the Soul and Conscience upon the same penalty of
everlasting damnation with the former. And what is now said (proceeds he) of
the Moral Precepts (as they are part of Moses his law) by the same proportion
likewise, is to be understood of the Judicial.

And as for the Promises of this Law they were only of Temporal good things,
and therefore the Gospel is called by the Author to the Hebrews, The bringing
in of a better hope, Chap. 7. 19. And is said to be established upon better
promises, Chap. 8. 6.

It Is confessed that promises of Heavenly things were contained in those of
Earthly, as some of the latter were Types of the former, particularly the land
of Canaan of the Eternal Rest in Heaven; and the promises of good things in the
general had those of the other life implied in them; but there is not the least
express mention in this Law of any Life after this: I do not say, in any part
of the Old Testament, but in this Law.

Now then, seeing it abounded with Temporal Promises, and none but such being
in express terms contained therein, it is no wonder if it became an occasion to
the sensual Jews of their being the more eager and vehement in prosecuting the
profits, honors and pleasures of this life, as it was of their being the more
Mercenary in their obedience.

The like may be said of the Threatenings of this Law, they are all so expressed
as if they were only of Present, Temporal Evils, and the Jews, for the most
part, looking no farther than the outward letter of these Threatenings, it was
not to be expected that they should be excited by them to obey from any higher
motive than the mere fear of such evils; as those that did not look beyond the
letter of the Promises were obedient only from the hope of some sensual,
present good: And by this means especially did this Law Gender to bondage, as
we read it did, Gal. 4. 24.

The terrible manner in which the Law was given, and the Threatenings of Present
death or other temporal Calamities upon the Transgression thereof did occasion
that slavish sear, which the Apostle calls the Spirit of bondage, in those
words, Ye have not received the Spirit of bondage again to fear, Romans 8. 5.

God dealt with the Jews as it was most fit to deal with such a carnal, such a
stiffnecked, stubborn and disingenuous people; who would not be wrought upon
and overcome by love to himself, or a sense of the loveliness of Virtue and
true Goodness, nor regard any Laws, but such as were enforced with severe
present Penalties, or promises of sensual good things: Which obedience of
theirs was most truly and properly the obedience of Slaves, a Servile and
Mercenary Obedience.

So that this Law having been abused by the Jews to the so much the more
captivating them to their fleshly lusts, for this reason chiefly was it laid
aside, namely, because the Liberty which consists in a thorough compliance
with the Rules of Righteousness, the Obligation of this Law would have greatly
obstructed the promoting of.

And the things expressly required in this Law being such as had no internal
goodness in them, being weak and beggarly Elements, as the Apostle calls them,
Gal. 4. 9. the imposition of many such must needs be apt to call away men's
Minds and Affections from those that are essentially and immutably good,
whilst the spiritual meaning of those injunctions is either not understood or
not attended to. And that it had this effect upon the generality of the Jews,
by this means, is a case too plain to need to be proved.

And though the great substantial duties, which are in their own nature Good
and Necessary, and of Eternal obligation, were inculcated upon them by all
their Prophets, as well as taught by Natural Light, such as Doing Justice,
loving Mercy, walking humbly with God, and the like, yet they generally were so
sottish as to think that He valued Sacrifices, and the other Ceremonial and
External Performances of the Law so much above such Duties (nay, though he had
expressly also declared the quite contrary) as that their exact and diligent
observation of those would make expiation for their remisness in these, and
fully satisfy for gross immoralities. They trusted in lying words, saying,
Ier. 7. 4.
The Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord are
these; implying that their continual attendance on the services there
performed, according to the prescription of the Law, would effectually secure
them from Divine vengeance, although they refused to amend their ways, and were
never so immoral in their Practices.

And their constant Trading in Sacrifices, in Rituals and Ceremonial things,
occasioned their having but very little sense of things Morally good; so that
that distinction was almost lost among them, of things Positively and Morally
so, or things good only because commanded, and things commanded because good.
Their being so intent upon a many little things caused them to slight and
overlook the great ones, as our Savior told the Pharisees, Luke 11. 42. Ye
tithe Mint and Rue, and all manner of Herbs, and pass over judgment and the
love of God. And Mat. 23. 23. Ye pay tith of Mint and Anise, and Cummin, and
have omitted the weightier matters of the Law, judgment, mercy and faith.

And their omitting these things was too plain an Argument alone (though there
is other proof of it) of their having scarcely any notion of things Absolutely,
Immutably and Essentially Good and Evil, which was occasioned (as I said) by
their minds being so employed about things which were in themselves neither
Good nor Evil, but only by reason of Divine injunctions and prohibitions.

Not that this great evil was necessarily occasioned thereby (God forbid we
should think so) but 'twas through their own default; otherwise there could
have been no truly good people among them, as there were innumerable: just as
we see at this day, there are too many of a certain Profession, who, by means
of their continual dabling in matter, are of so gross and course intellectuals,
that they seem almost incapable of any Idea and conception of things immaterial
and incorporeal. Which is a great Unhappiness but as great a Fault.

So that, this we have now said suggests to us another reason for the putting a
period to the Ceremonial Law, in order to the introduction of that excellent
and Divine Liberty, which we assert to be eminently Christian Liberty; Because
that the love of Righteousness and Goodness under that notion is necessary
thereunto, as shall be farther shown hereafter. And it is an evidence of a Soul
imprisoned in Sense, and sunk in Selfishness to love Virtue and Goodness,
merely for its dowry and the external Advantages that accrue by it, and not for
its own sake: As also to avoid sin, only for the sake of the uneasy and sad
circumstances that attend it, having no sense of its Moral Turpitude.

Lastly, Whereas I have showed, that by the observation of the Laws of
Righteousness and Goodness a man is delivered from all immoderate Self-love to
his own Bodily and Particular concerns, and acquireth that Generosity and
Nobleness of spirit whereby he is carried forth and enlarged to the love of God
in the first place, and a hearty concern for the General welfare of his
Fellow Creatures, the Jews by the occasion of the forementioned Law, became
less free, as Freedom is opposed to Confinement. For they being paled in and
separated from the rest of the world by a Religion peculiar to themselves; and
it being forbidden by their Law to contract Marriages, or have any intimacy,
and that they should so much as eat with the Gentiles (though 'twas but
necessary they should be so restrained for the more effectual preventing their
falling into Idolatry, and being infected with their other wicked customs and
corrupt manners, to which they were naturally very strangely inclined, yet) by
this means they generally became woefully Narrow-spirited and contracted in
their Love, and took occasion from hence to banish all from their Kindness and
Charity, that were not of their own Nation and their own Religion.

And therefore for this reason also it was highly fit that our Savior should
take off all future Obligation to the Observance of this Law; his design being
to Ampliate and Enlarge men's minds by the most Universal and Unlimited Charity;
in imitation of himself, who was a Propitiation not only for the sins of the
Jewish Nation, but also of the whole World.

And for this reason particularly S. Paul tells the Ephesians, This Law was
Abolished, Chap. 2. 14, 15, 16. For he is our peace, who has made both one
(Jews and Gentiles) and has broken down the middle wall of partition between
us, having abolished in his flesh the enmity, even the Law of Commandments,
contained in Ordinances (or, having Abolished by his Sufferings the Ceremonial
Law, which was such a Makebate between the Jews and Gentiles) for to make
himself of twain one new man, so making peace. And that he might reconcile both
unto God in one body on the Cross, having slain the enmity thereby.

And that in the general, the great work of setting men perfectly at Liberty
from the power of their Lusts, and the making them free to all holy Obedience
was designed by the nullifying this Law, is asserted by the Apostle, Romans 7. 5,
6. For when we were in the flesh (or under those Carnal Ordinances) the motions
of sin, which were by the Law, did work in our members, to bring forth fruit
unto death. But now we are delivered from the Law, that being dead wherein we
were held, that we should serve in newness of the spirit, and not in the
oldness of the letter. That is, when we were under the Law, the (...), or
Sinful Affections, which were heightened thereby (through our own blindness in
not looking beyond the letter of the Law) did so work in us, as to render us so
much the more obnoxious to death: But now we are delivered by our Savior
Christ from that Law, it being dead, or abrogated, that in stead of a mere
External Obedience, and a company of Bodily Washings, we should for the future
be inwardly pure and spiritually obedient.

To conclude this Argument: Wheresoever we find Liberty or Freedom mentioned
throughout the New Testament, as that which belongs to us under the notion of
Christians, as that which we are beholden to the Gospel dispensation for, it is
still, I dare affirm, to be understood either of Liberty from Sin (the Power
and the Punishment thereof) or of Liberty from the Ceremonial and purely
Mosaical Law. This I assert upon a particular consideration of all those Texts,
wherein any thing is said relating to Liberty: And therefore this latter
Deliverance being principally intended in order to the former, the former, viz.
that from Sin, must necessarily be the Christian Liberty.

Fourthly, None but the Israelites were obliged to the Observance of this Law.
Indeed in order to a Gentiles partaking of the Jewish Privileges in the Land
of Canaan, it was necessary he should be Circumcised and become (as their
phrase was) a Proselyte of Justice, and so make himself a debtor to the whole
Law: But it was not necessary to his Acceptance with God and Eternal Happiness
to yield obedience to this Law. It was sufficient for him to worship the true
God and renounce Idolatry, and to follow the Dictates of the Law of Nature.

Even the Jews themselves, as ill affected as they were toward the Gentiles,
did acknowledge no more to be necessary, than the Observation of the Seven
Precepts of Noah, to their having their part in Seculo futuro; and therefore
they permitted the Proselytes of the Gate to worship in the Outward Court of
the Temple. Which was therefore called Atrium Gentium and immundorum. The Court
of the Gentiles and the Unclean.

And thus, as it appears from the three foregoing Arguments, that Liberty from
Sin and to Righteousness is the Eminent Christian Liberty, which is procured
for the World taking in the Jews, so from this fourth it is as evident, that it
is the only Christian Liberty which is procured and purchased for us Gentiles.

There is no other Liberty mentioned either by our Savior or his Apostles,
besides this from the Power and Dominion of Sin (wherein we always include
deliverance from the sad consequents thereof) which we Gentiles are obliged to
Christianity for, or which we are invested with under the notion of Christians.

CHAP. VI.
What course our Lord has taken to instate us in this Liberty showed in
several particulars, viz. that 1. He has most fully informed us concerning all
the Parts and Particulars of our Liberty. 2. He has furnished us with the most
potent Means, for the gaining of it. 3. He has purchased a rich supply of
Grace and Strength, to enable us to use these Means successfully. 4. He has
laid before us the most powerful Motives and Arguments to prevail on our Wills
to make use of this Strength, and comply with this Grace.
HAving, I hope, sufficiently cleared the truth of this Proposition, that our
Christian Liberty (both mainly and wholly) consists in Freedom to holy
Obedience, and deliverance from Sin, I now come to show,

Secondly, How Christ instates men in this Liberty, or what Course he has
taken for the effecting hereof.

By the way, we are to take notice that the Method our Lord has made choice
of, for the setting us free from our Corrupt Affections, is such as is most
Suitable to the Nature of those that are to be delivered, and such as is most
suitable to the Nature of that Bondage and Slavery from which he delivers.

Those who are to be delivered being Reasonable Creatures, Voluntary and
therefore Free Agents, who act not by mere Necessity of Nature, or Blind
instincts, and much less from External Force and Compulsion, he deals with
them, in Setting them free, as with such a sort of Creatures.

Again the Slavery (as also the Confinement) from which he delivers being
Spiritual not Corporal; I mean, being Originally in the Mind, Will and
Affections, and not in the Outward man, he has accordingly applied himself to
the effecting our deliverance.

So that our Deliverer has not done all for us that is to be done, and left
nothing for us to do, in order to our being set free. Nor can this be said of
any other who designs to deliver out of Bondage or Prison persons arrived at
years of discretion, and that are able to use their hands and legs. Such a one
accounts that he has done abundantly enough, when he has paid the Slaves
Ransom, and removed the necessity he was under of continuing in servitude; If
afterward he will not stir a foot, he does not think himself obliged to hale
him by main force out of the Galleys or House of bondage. He also looks upon
his work as done, when he has set the Prison doors wide open, and has cleared
the Prisoner's passage out, and put the Key into his hand for the unlocking his
Fetters, and offered to assist him if he cannot do it by his own strength: But
when all this is done, if the Prisoner will do nothing toward his own escape,
he, who has done thus much in his behalf, will think it great pity but that
there he should lie.

There is no Prince but will be satisfied that he has quitted himself bravely,
and fully performed the part of a Deliverer, when he has put Weapons into the
hands of a Conquered People, and furnished them with sufficient aids for the
rescuing themselves from the Tyranny of their Oppressors; but if after all,
they will not be persuaded to use their Weapons, and are so dastardly as not to
join with those Forces that are sent for their help, he nevertheless deserves
the Title of a Deliverer.

In like manner, it is not our Blessed Savior's Method to drag men with
irresistible force out of their Spiritual Vassallage and Slavery: He does not
deliver us against our Wills, nor in such a manner as if we were Creatures that
have no Wills; nor does so overpower our Wills (at least ordinarily) as that
they shall have left them no power of resistance, but be necessitated to give
their Consent.

But this is the Course he has taken, which is the most wise, and in its own
nature the most admirably effectual.

First, He has fully informed us concerning all the Parts and Particulars of
our Liberty.

Secondly, He has Directed us to the most potent Means for the gaining thereof.

Thirdly, He has purchased a rich supply of Grace and Strength to enable us to
use these Means successfully.

Fourthly, He has laid before us the most powerful Motives and Arguments
imaginable to prevail with our Wills to use this Strength, to comply with this
Grace.

First, He has fully informed us concerning all the Parts and Particulars of
our Liberty: I mean, he has instructed us in all those Rules of Righteousness
and Goodness, in the Observance of which consists our best and most desirable
Liberty.

This he has done by the Precepts he has given us, as also by the Example he
has set before us. In Matthew 11. 28, 29. he proposes both these, the one to
be obeyed, the other to be followed, in order to the possessing our selves of
this Liberty: Come unto me (says he) all ye that labor and are heavy laden,
and I will give you rest. And what he means by Coming unto him he tells us in
the next words, Take my Yoke upon you, or obey my Precepts, and Learn of me, or
follow my Example, for I am meek and lowly in heart, and ye shall find Rest
unto your Souls: Rest from the Slavish drudgery of sinful Affections.

As to our Saviors Precepts, whatsoever he has required of us, it is either a
Part of our Liberty, or a Means for the gaining and maintenance thereof.

Now as to the Christian Precepts which oblige us to those things in the doing
of which our Liberty consists, as they incomparably excel the Precepts of
whatsoever Religion was before or since the coming of our Savior, so there is
nothing defective or wanting in them. There is not any thing left out of them
that is necessary to the completing of the freedom and happiness of our Souls.
All the defects of the Mosaical Law, and of the Law of Nature, are supplied and
made up by them. As our Lord came not to destroy the Law, so he came to fulfill
it: To perfect it and fill it up, as he himself has told us, Matthew. 5. 17.

There is nothing that conduces to the restoring humane nature to its
Primitive Perfection, to the bringing every thing in man into due order, to the
effecting a complete Harmony and Agreement between his various disagreeing
Powers and Faculties, to the putting him into that state wherein every thing
would be with him as his own heart could wish to have it, or (in one word) to
the making him partaker of the God-like Nature, and consequently of the
God-like Liberty, Freedom and Blessedness; There is nothing, I say, conduceable
to these excellent purposes, but our Savior has in his own Person, when he
was on Earth, and by his Apostles since he left the World, acquainted us with
it, over and over inculcated it, again and again minded us of it, and urged it
upon our practice.

To speak in the words of the Apostle S. Paul, Phil. 4. 8. Whatsoever things
are true, or remote from insincerity and hypocrisy; Whatsoever things are
honest, (...), venerable and grave; Whatsoever things are just, or exactly
agreeable to the Rule of doing as we would be done unto; Whatsoever things are
pure, or far from all show and appearance of unchastity; Whatsoever things are
lovely, or which tend to secure to us love among men, such as all works of
benignity, mercy and Charity; Whatsoever things are of good report, or which
are apt to procure a good name, and therefore to prevent all the causes of
shame, and to give us the greatest freedom and confidence, as before God, so
before Men too; If there be any virtue, if there be any thing that is by Good
men reckoned in the number of Virtues; And if there be any praise, or any thing
laudable and praiseworthy: All these things, as the Apostle in the general
here enjoyneth us to think upon them, so they are very particularly, and as
clearly and perspicuously, recommended to us to be carefully observed by us, in
the New Testament.

There is nothing which it becomes us to Do or Forbear, whether in reference
to God, our Great Creator, Governor and Benefactor, or to our
Fellow Creatures, or to our own Souls and Bodies, but here we find it.

Again, we may observe all these in our Savior's Life also, wherein He set us
an Example, that we should follow his steps. And it is a most admirable Example
of Piety toward God (of Love to him, Trust in him, and Submission to his Will)
of Charity to all men, even his greatest Enemies; and of Humility, Meekness,
Temperance, Purity, Contempt of the World, and Heavenly-mindedness.

He that shall observe how our Blessed Savior Lived, cannot be ignorant of any
of those Laws of Righteousness and Goodness, which, before his coming, the
World was so lamentably, in not a few instances, to seek in the knowledge of,
through that blindness which by the customary gratifying their vile Affections
men had generally contracted. I say, he that is acquainted with the Life of our
Savior cannot easily be ignorant of any of those Laws, although he never
understood what particular Commands or Prohibitions his Precepts consist of.

So that this is the First thing Christ Jesus has done for us in order to our
being made Free: He has given us fully to understand what it is to be Free,
what are those several Rules of Righteousness and Goodness, in compliance with
which consists our Liberty.

Secondly, Our Savior has also prescribed most Effectual Means, by making use
of which we shall most certainly obtain and maintain this Liberty, that is,
obey those Laws of Liberty which he has given us.

These Means are especially: Believing himself to be the Son of God, and
consequently the Truth and Divinity of his Doctrine.

Hearing his Word, and Receiving it into honest hearts, or Pondering it in our
minds, and Meditating upon it, with the Design of conforming our selves to it.

Prayer to God in his Name, together with Faith in his Blood for the Remission
of our Sins, and in his Power and Goodness, for the Subduing our Lusts, and the
making us Obedient to his Precepts: That is, for the blessing our Endeavors to
that End.

Setting his Example before our Eyes, which is an Excellent Means to beget in
us a likeness to him, and to our partaking of his Spirit and Temper.

Watching over our own Hearts, and against Temptations.

Denying our selves, and not indulging our Sensitive Part.

Advising in all Cases of doubt and difficulty with our Pastors and Spiritual
Guides; whom Christ has given to his Church, For the perfecting of the Saints,
for the work of the Ministry, for the Edifying of the Body of Christ, Ephesians.
4. 12. And obeying them which have the Rule over us in the Lord, they watching
for our Souls, as those that must give an Account, Heb. 13. 17. Which Duties
were never more neglected, than in this Age, to the great scandal of our
Reformed Religion.

Keeping in the Communion of the Church: And not forsaking the Assembling our
selves together (or our public Assemblies) as the manner of some is, Heb. 10.
25. And now is the manner of vast numbers of us, (though no Terms of Communion
are required that contradict any one Text of Scripture) which Separation we are
too like ere long to pay dear for.

The Religious observation of the Lords Day, both in Public and Private, is
another singular Help and Advantage; Though few Professors of Christianity seem
now to have any great sense of it, to the great prejudice of their own Souls,
and the Souls of those who are under their charge.

And to these add in the last place (because it is most convenient to place them
here) The Sacraments of Baptism and the Lord's Supper.

By Baptism we are admitted into the Church of Christ, and brought into a New
State: We are baptized into the name of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, or
devoted to their service. And the Father, in this Sacrament, takes us into his
special care, and into the Relation of his Children, whereas before we were
only the Children of Adam. The Son receives us as members of his Body the
Church: We are baptized into one Body (as the Apostle speaks, 1 Cor. 12. 13.)
that Body whereof Christ is the Head. And the Holy Ghost, who is the Author of
Grace and Spiritual Life, takes us for his Temples. We are said to Receive the
Holy Ghost in Baptism, to receive that power and strength from him, which will
enable us to Mortify the deeds of the Body, and to acquire the Divine Graces
and Virtues; which we shall certainly do, if we refuse not to Exert and Improve
it, when we come to years of Discretion, and our Faculties are ripe enough for
that purpose. In Baptism the Holy Spirit communicates to us the Beginnings of a
new life, which may afterward be improved to large measures of Virtue and
Goodness, if we be not wilfully wanting to our selves in the other Means.

And in the Lords Supper, as we renew the Covenant we made in Baptism, to
renounce the Devil and all his works, etc. So all worthy Receivers of that
Sacrament receive great additions of Grace and Spiritual Strength, are fed with
the spiritual food of the most Precious Body and Blood of Christ.

And of all the Means prescribed for the Subduing our Lusts, and Growing in
Grace, the Frequent Receiving the Lord's Supper is very deservedly accounted
the Principal. Certainly there is not any Ordinance wherein sincere Souls do so
experiment the Communications of the Holy Spirit, by which they are so
Strengthened with strength in their Souls. Nor are there any such Strong and
Spriteful Christians, any so confirmed and rooted in Goodness, in the love of
God and their Neighbor, and all the Christian Virtues, as those who take all
occasions to attend upon it, with a thankful sense of the infinite love of God
and Christ to them, and sincerely design in so doing a fuller participation of
the Divine nature.

But this intimation that these two Sacraments are conveyances of Grace and
Strength leads me to show, that,

Thirdly, Our Savior has moreover purchased for us a rich supply of Grace, to
enable us to use the forementioned Means with happy success. He has obtained
from his Father by his Perfect Obedience, both Active and Passive, Authority to
send the Holy Ghost powerfully to assist us; and has assured us that those who
ask him shall have him, in those most excellent, and most comfortable words,
Luke 11. 11, 12, 13. If a Son shall ask bread of any that is a Father, will he
give him a stone? Or if he ask a fish, will he for a fish give him a Serpent?
Or if he shall ask an Egg, will he offer him a Scorpion? If ye then being
evil, know how to give good gifts unto your Children, how much more shall your
Heavenly Father give his holy Spirit unto them that ask him?

And if any of us want the Holy Spirit's Assistance, it is certainly because we
either pray not at all for it, or not with a sincere and earnest desire that he
should root up and destroy every Evil Affection in our Souls; Because we are
secretly unwilling to let go some beloved lust or other; And because we are
false to God and our own Souls in those things which he has put into our
Power. For it is certain, that not to put forth the power we have already
received, and yet complain for want of strength, is to play the Hypocrities;
and no wonder if the Holy Spirit of God does estrange himself, and withhold or
withdraw his blessed Influences from such persons.

But as for those who are faithful so far as those Talents reach, which they
are at present entrusted with, our Lord has promised them that more shall be
given them. That is the meaning of those words, Mark 4. 25. He that has, to
him shall be given: That is, that uses what he has; for no man properly has
or possesses what he makes no use of, 'twould be the same thing to him to be
without it.

Nay, our Lord does not only promise to him that has, that more shall be given
him, but also that he shall have abundantly more, Matthew. 13. 12. For whosoever
has, to him shall be given, and he shall have more abundance: And he repeats
this, Chap. 25. 29.

And if we were not through wilfulness and carelessness wanting to our selves,
in putting forth that measure of strength we have, as sure as Jesus is the
Christ we should fully experiment the truth of this promise: We should then
feel the Divine Spirit working in us mightily, as the Apostle S. Paul says he
did, Col. 1. 29.

The great things that are spoken concerning the Spirit, and of what he shall
do in the hearts of men, would be then punctually fulfilled in us, and we
should be satisfied by happy experience, that they are not mere words; the Holy
Ghost would not fail to do all that for us, he was sent by our Lord to do.

It is to be acknowledged with great sadness, that both Fleshly and Spiritual
Lusts are exceedingly strong and vigorous even in the generality of those that
profess Christianity, as well as in others, and no less than in others, that
are Strangers to our Religion: But this never to be enough lamented Evil does
not proceed from hence, that grace is denied to the generality, but it is wholly
to be imputed to their Receiving the grace of God in vain, and wilfully
refusing to comply therewith. It is not at all to be ascribed to the Spirits
refusing to perform his Office in them, or to do in their behalf what does
belong to him, but to their refusing to do their part* This we are as fully
assured of from abundance of Texts of Scripture as we can desire to be.

The same is to be said of men's so ordinarily falling again and again into
those sins which they frequently Pray and Resolve and Vow against: This is far
from being the account of it, that God is not willing to hear their prayers;
For (as S. John speaks, 1 Epist. 5. 14.) This is the confidence that we have in
him, that if we ask any thing according to his will, he hears us; and to ask
victory over our Lusts is of all Petitions most agreeable to his will. This
cannot be the reason of it, that the Holy Spirit refuses to enforce his
Preventing (or Prevenient) with his Assisting Grace, that he will not assist
some persons in the performance of those good Resolutions which his Preventing
Grace has excited in their Souls. But this is the true account hereof, viz.
Such Persons are undoubtedly wanting in the use of some Necessary Means or
other for the subduing their Lusts; they do not use all the means our Lord has
appointed, and are especially faulty in neglecting particularly the great duty
of Consideration, They pray, it may be, very frequently and earnestly too, that
God would give them strength against this or that Corruption, and they add Vows
to their Prayers, but they add not Consideration to their Prayers and Vows,
they watch not over themselves, disregard the first motions of their Wills, and
inclinations of their Souls toward the sins or sin they so Pray, Resolve and
Vow against, and are not careful to avoid Temptations.

And as inconsideration is the chiefest cause of unsuccessfulness in the use of
means for the subduing of Corrupt Affections, so the gross neglect of that
grand Means the Lords Supper, but now discoursed of (which I hope in no Age,
nor among any people professing Christianity, was ever so common, as to our
great shame it is in this Age and this Nation) this gross neglect, I say, is
questionless a very great cause of so much Nonproficiency in attendance on
other Ordinances as is complained of. Which Nonproficiency may well be,
notwithstanding the Promises of the plentiful Effusion of the Spirit, and our
Savior's purchasing so rich a supply of Grace for us. For our Savior is no
such Friend to Negligence and Carelessness, as to dispense his Grace in such a
way and manner, as that it must necessarily be a motive and encouragement to do
nothing, or but little our selves: But on the contrary, he so communicates his
Grace and Strength, as to make it a great Exciter and Quickner of Endeavors.
Of this S. Paul assures us, in making God's working in us to will and to do, or
his readiness so to do, an argument to persuade us to work out our own
salvation with fear and trembling, Phil. 2. 12.

Lastly, As our Savior has purchased for us a rich supply of Grace for the
Enabling us to use the Means of our Deliverance with happy success, so he has
given us the most powerful Motives and Arguments that can be imagined, to
prevail upon our Wills to comply and cooperate with this Grace.

And these Arguments are not only proposed outwardly to us in his Gospel, but
they are also enforced inwardly upon our hearts (as appears by what has been
now said) by his Holy Spirit. That is, they are enforced upon the hearts of all
those who will take the pains seriously to consider them. To which
consideration likewise the Spirit fails not to Excite men, till by long
Grieving him, and very frequent rejecting his good* Motions and Suggestions, he
is, as it were, forced to desist, and depart from them.

CHAP. VII.
Wherein is discoursed the First of those Motives and Arguments which are
offered in the Gospel, to persuade us to use the Means prescribed for our
deliverance from the Power of Sin. Namely, The love of God in sending his Son
upon the errand of our Redemption. And two most powerful Motives implied in
this.
NOW the chiefest of those Motives and Arguments are these that follow.

First, The unconceivable Love of God expressed in sending his only and Eternal
begotten Son, ultimately upon this errand of Redeeming us from the Power of
Sin: And the never to be sufficiently admired Love of Christ, in so readily
taking our Nature upon him, condescending to such extremely low circumstances
here in the World, and at last submitting to so Vile and Ignominious, so Cruel
and Tormenting a Death, and all this, ultimately I say, for this very End, that
of Sins and Satan's Slaves we might become his and his Fathers Free Subjects;
For he died, the just for the unjust, that he might bring us to God, 1 Pet. 3.
18.

Here we have a twofold most exciting and wonderfully powerful motive to
comply most heartily with the Method our Savior has taken for the setting us
free.

First, God's sending his own Son to be a Sacrifice for our Sins, without the
interposition of which he would not propose Terms of Reconciliation to Sinners,
shows his infinite hatred of Sin, and consequently, that it is a most deadly
Evil, and has excessive Malignity in it. This is expressed in the most
Emphatical manner by our Savior's shedding his most precious Blood upon the
Cross for the expiating of it.

And can we have a more constraining Motive to do our utmost to be delivered
from the Dominion of Sin, than this, that it is thus demonstrated to be an
unspeakable Evil?

It has been showed, that the Death of Christ was designed to set us free from
the Power as well as Punishment of Sin, and it is apt to effect that end,
partly as its extreme hatefulness is thereby discovered and made manifest. By
this Sacrifice for Sin, is it condemned in the flesh, as the Apostle says,
Romans 8. 3. It is condemned as the Vilest and most Intolerable thing.

The immediate end of Christ's sufferings was to make Atonement for Sin, but
this way of Atonement is a means, a most effectual means, to this farther End,
the making us out of love with Sin, and persuading us to Abandon it as the
worst of all Evils. Of which, I say, we cannot desire greater evidence than
this, that no meaner Sacrifice might be accepted for the making expiation for
Sin, than that of the only begotten Son of God.

Secondly, This is as wonderful an Expression of the Divine love to Sinners, as
of the Divine displeasure against Sin. God commends his love toward us, in
that when we were yet Sinners Christ died for us, Romans 5. 8. And herein did he
commend his love in the most wonderful manner that it was possible to commend
it. He showed the exceeding riches of his grace, in his Kindness toward us
through Jesus Christ, as we read Ephesians. 2. 7.

Was that an ordinary Love in God the Father think we, that moved him to send
no less a person upon the business of our Redemption, than him who was the
Brightness of his own Glory, and the express Image of his Person, by whom also
he made the Worlds? Was that an Ordinary Love in God the Son, that prevailed
with him to take the Humane nature, and to humble himself in that Astonishing
manner, and to undergo such direful Sufferings for our sake? Or was it not such
a Love as passes knowledge? So S. Paul says it was, and it can be no less.
This is such a love indeed, as is rather to be silently Admired, than much
discoursed of.

How hard must needs be that heart which will not be broken by the force of
such love as this! Nothing can be imagined to be of such irresistible power
over Persons not forsaken of all ingenuity, as the consideration of this Love.

This is the Other way whereby the Death of Christ was designed for the
Destroying of Sin. And in respect of either of these ways, but much more of
both, our Savior had good ground for the uttering those words, John 12. 32.
When I am lifted up from the Earth, I shall draw all men unto me: He spoke of
his dying on the Cross for Mankind, as it follows, This he said signifying
what-death he should die. And he here supposes this his Death to contain such
Forcible Arguments to persuade men to cast off the Drudgery of sin, and
exchange it for his Free service, that it must necessarily be happily
successful to this End, wheresoever it is seriously thought on, and laid to
heart.

CHAP. VIII.
A Seasonable Digression concerning the Doctrine of Universal Redemption. The
Antiquity and Catholicalness of this Doctrine. Large Citations out of Bishop
Latimer and Bishop Hooper, expressing their sense of it. And full proof thereof
presented out of the H. Scriptures.
BY the way: It is of great importance to be fully satisfied, that no man in
the World is excluded from having his share in this Propitiatory Sacrifice, and
that the Redemption designed by the Death of Christ is Universal.

For if each individual Person cannot be assured that he is his Savior, and
that he died for him; if he died not for all, nay, but for a few comparatively
(as those say who deny that he died for all) then what influence can the
consideration of his Death have upon the Wills of men? Surely the weakest
influence that can be, if any at all.

Indeed how it can rationally have any, seems unintelligible, since those who
assert that Christ died but for a few comparatively, assert also that those few
shall be infallibly at one time or other drawn to him, and Christ will not lose
any one of them.

If this be so, what inducement can we have either from the Death of Christ, or
any other Consideration, to concern our selves at all about leaving our Sins,
and using the means prescribed for our deliverance from the power of them? For
if it so happen that I am one of those few for whom Christ died, what need is
there of my being concerned about that which is so effectually secured? What is
this but to take Christ's work out of his hand? But if Christ died not for me
(as it is very many to one he did not, if he died for so few) then all my care
is to no purpose.

I say, if every one of us cannot be certain that Christ died for him, and
consequently for all, what motive to obedience can his Death be to us? And if
he died but for some, and those some but a very small number compared with
those for whom he did not die, and those for whom he died shall be undoubtedly
saved, and those for whom he died not shall be undoubtedly damned, then I
cannot see how the wisest man on Earth can answer this Plea of a wicked man for
persisting impenitently in his wickedness, viz. If Christ died for me I shall
be saved, and he will most assuredly at his own time, which to be sure is the
best, bring me over to the obedience of his Precepts by his Omnipotent grace,
if that be necessary, in order to my Salvation: But if he died not for me, then
let me do what I can, it will signify nothing, my state is unalterable. So
that I run no hazard in being careless and neglectful of the concerns of my
Soul, on supposition of my having an interest in the death of Christ; nor is my
case one jot the better for my diligence in using the means of Salvation
according to my power, on supposition of the contrary.

Now how can we think, that the Gospel does contain such mighty Arguments to
persuade us to work out our own Salvation, whilst it leaves us utterly unable
to answer this Plea, that Careless People may, and do many of them, make for
their Carelessness? And therefore it highly concerns us to beware of that
Doctrine, which makes Christ to die but for some Certain Persons, as not only
most false, but as very dangerous.

The truth is, this Doctrine could never gain any considerable Credit, in any
Church in the World, for the first fifteen hundred years: 'Twas broached (with
the other concomitant Doctrines) by one Lucidus a Presbyter in France, about
the year of our Lord 500, of which the Pelagian Heresy was the occasion, but
quickly condemned by two Councils, one at Arles, the other at Lions. About 300
years after, it was (with the other) revived by Godscalcus, a person of ill
Fame, but condemned again by a Council at Mentz.

But the Doctrine we are defending was Asserted, as a Point never doubted of,
by the Fathers of the first 300 years: And is as expressly Asserted in the most
Ancient Confessions of the Reformed Churches beyond Sea, and also in the
Articles, Homilies and Catechism of our own Church.

And those three Holy Martyrs, Archbishop Cranmer, Bishop Latimer and Bishop
Hooper (who will be acknowledged by our Adversaries in this Point, to be most
Orthodox men) have as plainly and fully given their testimony thereunto as we
can desire.

Archbishop Cranmer, in the Preface to his Book against Gardener has these
words, that Christ made a Sacrifice and Oblation of his body upon the Cross,
which was a full Redemption, Satisfaction and Propitiation for the Sins of the
whole World.

Bishop Latimer, in his Sermon on the first Sunday after the Epiphany, tells
us, that Jesus is an Hebrew word, which signifies in our English Tongue, a
Savior and Redeemer of all Mankind born into the World.

And he has this passage in his Sermon on the Gospel for the twenty first
Sunday after Trinity, P. 2. of Fol. 208. which would be horribly offensive to
many now adays, viz. That Christ shed as much blood for Judas, as he did for
Peter; Peter believed it and therefore was saved, Judas would not believe, and
therefore he was condemned; the fault being in him only, and in no body else.

Bishop Hooper, in his Preface to his Exposition of the Ten Commandments,
says, That as the Sin of Adam, without privilege or exemption, extended and
appertained unto all and every of Adams Posterity; so did this promise of Grace
generally appertain as well to every and singular of Adams posterity as to
Adam: As it is more plainly expressed, where God promises to bless, in the
seed of Abraham, all the people of the World.

And that these Good men did not hold Contradictions, but, as they undoubtedly
believed that Christ died for all, so they also rejected that Doctrine of the
Divine Decrees which is inconsistent therewith, is plain from the following
passages.

Bishop Latimer says, in his Fourth Sermon on the Third Sunday after the
Epiphany, That if the most part be damned, the fault is not in God, but in
themselves; for, Deus vult omnes homines salvos fieri, God would that all men
should be saved, but they themselves procure their own damnation, and despise
the Passion of Christ by their own wicked and inordinate living. Here we may
learn to keep us from all curious and dangerous Questions; when we hear that
some be chosen and some be damned: Let us have good hope that we shall be among
the chosen, and live after this hope, etc. Think that God has chosen those
that believe in Christ, and that Christ is the Book of life, etc. So we need
not to go about to trouble our selves with curious questions of the
Predestination of God. But let us rather endeavor our selves that we may be in
Christ, for when we be in him, then are we well, and then we may be sure that
we are ordained to everlasting life. But you will say, how shall I know that I
am in the Book of life? How shall I try my self to be elect of God to
everlasting life? I answer, First we may know, that we may one time be in the
book, and another time come out again, as it appears by David. See more that
follows to the same purpose, Fol. 310.

Again, in his Sermon on Septuag. Fol. 214. says he, God's Salvation is
sufficient to save all Mankind; But we are so wicked of our selves, that we
refuse the same, and we will not take it when it is offered to us, and therefore
he says, Pauci vero electi, Few are chosen; that is, few have pleasure and
delight in it, for the most part are weary of it, cannot abide it; for there
are some that hear it, but they will abide no danger, etc. Such men are cause
of their own Damnation; for God would have them saved, but they refuse it: like
Judas the Traitor, whom Christ would have had to be saved, but he refused his
Salvation, he refused to follow the Doctrine of his Master Christ.

And Bishop Hooper is very full and particular to this purpose in his forecited
Preface. Says he, Cain was no more excluded from the promise of Christ, till
he excluded himself, than Abel; Saul than David; Judas than Peter; Esau than
Jacob: Concerning which two Brethren, in the sentence of God given to Rebecca,
there was no mention at all, that Esau should be disinherited of Eternal Life,
but that he should be inferior to his Brother Jacob in this world, which
Prophecy was fulfilled in their Posterity, and not the Persons themselves. God
is said by the Prophet to have hated Esau, not because he was disinherited of
Eternal Life, but in laying his mountains and his heritage waste for the
Dragons of the Wilderness, Mal. 1. 3. That Threatening of God against Esau (if
he had not of wilful malice excluded himself from the Promise of Grace) should
no more have hindered his Salvation, than God's Threatening against Nineveh: The
cause of Rejection or Damnation is Sin in man, which will not hear, neither
receive the promise of the Gospel, etc. It is not a Christian man's part to
attribute his Salvation to his own Free Will, with the Pelagian, and extenuate
Original Sin, nor to make God the Author of ill and damnation, with the
Manichee; nor yet to say, that God has written Fatal Laws, and with necessity
of Destiny, violently pulls the one by the hair into Heaven, and thrusts
the other headlong into Hell.

I have thus at large transcribed the words of these two Holy Bishops and
Martyrs for the Reformed Religion, because the Books are not easy to be met
with, and Bishop Hooper's not to be light on without great difficulty. And, I
say, by these Citations (to which we might have added others) it is very
apparent, not only that they undoubtedly believed the Doctrine of Christ's
dying for all men, (and were zealous Assertors of it too) but also, that they
rejected that Doctrine of Fatal Decrees, which is the Foundation of the
contrary Opinion.

I cannot but take notice, by the way, how Unreasonable and Uncharitable those
men are, who clamor at such a rate against their Brethren, as Innovators and
Apostates from the Church of England, for their asserting no worse Doctrine,
than we have now seen was heartily approved by these Ancient and Eminent
Fathers of our Church. The Doctrine of which Church, I presume, they will have the
Modesty to acknowledge, they were as fit judges of as themselves. But I must
hasten to that which is much more to our present purpose; viz.

That no Doctrine is more clearly or fully asserted in the Holy Scriptures than
this of Universal Redemption. And that there may remain no longer the least
doubt or scruple in any of our breasts concerning it, let us take notice of
these following particulars.

First, How those that have a share in Christ's Redemption are expressed by our
Savior and his Apostles. They are expressed by the words SINNERS indefinitely,
the WORLD, ALL, the WHOLE WORLD, EVERY MAN. And can the Wisdom of man invent
more plain, significant and full words, by which to express the Universality of
Mankind?

1. Those whom Christ came, and died to save, that is, to put into a Salvable
state, so that it will be wholly long of themselves if they perish, are
expressed by the word Sinners indefinitely. S. Paul says, 1 Timothy 1. 15. This
is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance, that Jesus Christ came
into the world to save Sinners, of which I am chief. Now it is a known Maxim,
that An indefinite Proposition is equivalent to an Universal one. And our
Savior himself says, that He came to call sinners to repentance, Luke 5. 32.
And to seek and save that which was lost, Chap. 19. 10. He makes no exception
of Sinners or Lost persons, and therefore what can they be less than All
Mankind? But if this be not satisfactory,

2. They are expressed by the word World. Our Savior says, John 3. 16, 17.
God so loved the world that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever
believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting life. For God sent not
his Son into the world to condemn the world, but that the world through him
might be saved. I could not disparage any ones understanding more, than by
endeavoring to satisfy him, that it is a most pitiful and senseless shift, to
say, that by the World is meant all the Elect in the world, that is, some
exceeding few of the world in comparison of the rest. For, besides that this is
to make nonsense of the former Verse, as must needs be obvious to every body,
so by taking the same Liberty in interpreting other Texts, the Bible would be
made the most insignificant Book in the world. The Generality of men is
ordinarily called the World, and Bad men are sometimes so called in Scripture,
because they are the Generality; but to express the incomparably lesser part of
men by the word World, is such a Figure as was never heard of.

3. They are expressed by the word All, to put us more out of doubt, 2 Cor. 5.
14, 15. The love of Christ constrains us, because we thus judge, that if one
died for all, then were all dead, and that he died for all, that they which
live should not henceforth live unto themselves, but unto him that died for
them, and rose again. Now did ever the word All signify a few? And that by All
is to be understood the Universality is plain from the former of these Verses,
where the Apostle proves that all were dead, or obnoxious to death, by this
Argument that Christ died for all. But we will not question whether all in the
largest sense were obnoxious to death, and therefore all must be understood in
the same extent, when it is said that Christ died for all, or we shall make the
Apostle a very sad Arguer. For how could it follow from hence, that Christ died
for some, that therefore all without exception were dead?

Again, 1 Timothy 2. 6. we read that Christ gave himself a Ransom for all: And
ver. 4. that He will have all to be saved, and come to the knowledge (or
Acknowledgment) of the truth. And once more, 1 Timothy 4. 10. that He is the
Savior of all men, but especially of those that believe: So that those that
believe are not the all he is the Savior of, the all being distinguished from
them. And the meaning of the words is sufficiently obvious, viz. He is so the
Savior of all, as to put them into a capacity of Salvation, but he is so the
Savior of those that believe, as that they shall be actually saved. Those that
so believe as to obey the Gospel are at present in a state of Salvation, and if
they persevere shall be undoubtedly saved.

4. Those whom Christ died for and came to save (to make it still more out of
doubt if it be possible) are expressed by the Whole World, 1 John 2. 6. If any
man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the Righteous, who
is the Propitiation for our sins, and not only for ours, but also for the sins
of the whole World. Nay,

5. They are expressed by Every man, Heb. 2. 9. But we see Jesus, who was made
a little ( or for a little while) lower than the Angels, for the suffering of
death crowned with glory and honor, that he by the grace of God should taste
death, (...), for every man. And this is the fullest and most Comprehensive
Expression that can be imagined.

If after all these most express Affirmations, in such variety of the plainest
words, it shall still be asserted, that the Doctrine of Universal Redemption is
Heretical or false, there needs no other Reply but this: Let Christ be true and
his Holy Apostles, and everyman a Liar that dares to contradict them.

Secondly, As our Savior and his Apostles do so express the Persons for whom
he died, as that they must necessarily be the Universality of Mankind, so we
learn from S. Paul, that the Remedy by Christ is of equal extent with the
mischief occasioned by Adam: That the Sore is not so broad but the Plaster is
every whit as broad: Romans 5. 18. Therefore as by the offense of one judgment
came upon all men to condemnation, even so by the Righteousness of one the free
gift came upon all men to justification of life. Can anything be said plainer
than this is, in these words, viz. That as many as fell by the Transgression of
Adam, were designed to be recovered by the Righteousness of Christ?

But it is Objected that it follows in the 19. ver. that, By the obedience of
one shall Many he made Righteous; As our Savior himself says, This is the New
Testament in my blood, which was shed for Many for the Remission of Sins. But
that this is a Strange objection, will appear by comparing the latter part of
that 19. ver. with the former: For as by one man's disobedience Many were made
sinners. So that, as many were put into a possibility of being justified by the
Righteousness of Christ (and we do not desire that more should) as were made
Sinners (or made liable to condemnation) by the Disobedience of Adam. And by
this means, the Reign of Grace to Eternal life was designed to be no more
limited, than was the Reign of Sin to death: As it follows in the 21. ver. That
as Sin has reigned unto death, even so might Grace reign through Righteousness
unto Eternal life, by Jesus Christ our Lord. And it is not to be wondered at,
that the word Many should signify All, for it is well known, that (...), Many,
or the Many, is used in other Greek Authors to signify all, as well as in the
New Testament.

So that these Texts do most necessarily and plainly speak thus much, That none
that hear the Gospel shall fall short of Salvation, but through their Unbelief
and Disobedience, their wilful rejecting the Remedy offered them: Nor any
neither that never heard the Gospel, merely for the Transgression of their
first Parents, but only for their own Sins, I mean, their wilful disobedience
to that light they have.

And that none to whom the Gospel is preached are excluded from Salvation by
Christ, is manifestly implied in those words of our Savior, John 3. 14. As
Moses lifted up the Serpent in the Wilderness, even so must the Son of man be
lifted up, that whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have
everlasting life. As the Brazen Serpent was erected for the Cure of all that
were stung by the Fiery Serpent, none excepted but such as would not look up to
it, for that end: So none shall be shut out from the benefit designed by the
Son of man's being lifted up upon the Cross, but such as will not believe, that
is, apply themselves to him in that way, which he has appointed for the
obtaining of it.

And though our Savior says, ver. 19. of that Chapter, that This is the
condemnation, that a light is come into the World: Yet he immediately explains
himself in the following words, and men loved darkness rather than light,
because their deeds are evil. Or Men's being condemned by the occasion of his
coming is to be imputed to their Rejecting him, and so refusing to comply with
the most reasonable terms of his New Gracious Covenant, not to his or his
Father's design in his Coming. For he says, John 12. 47. I came not to judge
the World, but to save the World.

Thirdly, We are assured that Christ died even for those that perish. The
Apostle says, 1 Cor. 8. 11. If any man see thee which have knowledge sit at
meat in the Idols Temple, shall not the Conscience of him that is weak be
imboldened to eat those things which are offered to Idols, and through thy
knowledge shall the weak Brother perish, for whom Christ died? Here it is
supposed that a man may perish, for whom Christ died: And consequently, that he
died for Reprobates themselves; that is, those that have made themselves so,
for if Christ died for all, there can be no other Reprobates.

Again, Romans 14. 15. Destroy not him with thy meat, for whom Christ died.

And the Author to the Hebrews expressly preaches this Doctrine, Chap. 10. 29.
Of how much sorer punishment, suppose ye, shall he be thought worthy, who has
trodden under foot the Son of God, and has counted the blood of the Covenant,
wherewith he was Sanctified ( or Consecrated) an unholy thing?

S. Peter likewise asserts the same, 2 Epist. 2. 1. But there were false
Prophets also among the People, even as there will be false Teachers among you,
who privily will bring in damnable Heresies, even denying the Lord that bought
them, and bring upon themselves swift destruction. So that these vile wretches
were not destroyed because Christ did not redeem them, for they are said to be
bought or redeemed by him as well as others, but they brought upon themselves
swift destruction.

Lastly, If this Doctrine be false, that Christ died for all, then none are or
can be condemned for not Believing in him, notwithstanding that the
condemnation of men is so continually ascribed thereunto. For it is a plain
case, that those for whom Christ did not die, can be no more obliged to believe
in him, than the Devils are. And to say that any are condemned for not doing
that which it was not their duty to do, will, I hope, be acknowledged the
grossest absurdity.

This little in comparison of what might be said, to demonstrate the truth of
this Great Article of our Faith, is much more than barely sufficient to give us
an undoubted assurance of it. The truth is, the Sun does not shine more bright
in the Firmament, than does this Doctrine in the New Testament: And I know
nothing we can be assured of upon Scripture Authority, if this be False or
Uncertain. I verily believe that there are few of the Greatest Points of our
Christian Faith, but may as plausibly be objected against as this Doctrine,
from Scripture.

It Is said indeed by our Savior, John 10. 5. I lay down my life for my sheep:
But did he ever say, I lay down my life for none but my sheep? If he had, we
must have concluded, either that the whole World are his Sheep, or that which
is far worse, that he said and unsaid, and contradicted himself, and so
destroyed the Foundation of our Faith and Hope. But in saying He laid down his
life for his sheep, his meaning was, that those who obeyed his voice should
receive the benefit of his death; and such Sheep he would have all to be. For
(as we have seen in 1 Timothy 2. 4.) He would have all men to be saved, and to
come to the acknowledgment of the truth.

Again our Savior says, that He prayed not for the World, John 17. 9. From
whence some would infer, that surely he would not shed his Precious blood for
those on whom he would not vouchsafe to bestow a Prayer. But it is apparent his
meaning was, that at that time he peculiarly prayed for his Disciples: They
only (as appears by the Context) are meant, by those that his Father had given
him out of the World. But afterward, ver. 20. He proceeds to pray for all that
should believe on him through their word: And at his death, he prayed for his
very Crucifiers. And that he could not refuse to pray for the World, is
apparent from ver. 21. where he prays that Believers might be one in him and
his Father, for this reason, That the World may believe that He had sent him:
or might be converted to the Faith of the Gospel.

These two Objections, as weak as they are, are the chief ones that are taken
out of Scripture, against the most Ancient and Catholic Doctrine we have been
asserting.

But I must needs say, I have often wondered at their Boldness, who have used
their utmost endeavors to run down a Doctrine, that not only for so many Ages
together has stood unshaken, but is also so Abundantly, and in the Clearest
manner imaginable asserted by Truth it self, and those who were Guided into all
truth: And how they are able not to perceive, how grossly they wrest the Holy
Scriptures; so that, if they should use the same Artifice in interpreting all
other Texts, they would make the Bible to look like a thing that is contrived
for the service of every Humor and every Fancy, and for both the proving and
disproving every thing.

Certainly, if we should take the same liberty in understanding our own and
other men's sayings, that they take in Expounding the forementioned and the like
sayings of our Blessed Savior and his Apostles, Speech would signify nothing,
nay, be of very pernicious consequence, and serve only to abuse and put tricks
upon one another.

If so many plain Texts as can be, to all Appearance, should require so much
labor and pains to be rightly understood, 'twill be impossible to defend the
Holy Scriptures from that Obscurity which the Papists most injuriously charge
them with; and to preserve the Bible from that Contempt, which (the higher to
advance the Authority of Holy Church) it suffers from their profane Tongues
and Pens, and wicked Practices.

But this Doctrine of Universal Redemption, being so strongly fortified, could
never have been assaulted, were it reconcilable with that of Absolute
Reprobation, either in the Supra or Sublapsarian way (as it is impossible it
should be) which the too great Admirers of the otherwise very judicious and
pious Calvin, are so exceedingly tenacious and fond of. But it is much to be
wondered at, what these men should see in this Doctrine (which is so severe in
it self, and horrid in its necessary Consequences) that they should be
contented to buy it at so dear a Rate, as the Parting with that other most
Comfortable Doctrine. Especially since this has no Antiquity to commend it,
and is not so much as seemingly befriended, but by a very few Texts of
Scripture, and those very fairly capable of quite another sense, than at first
sight may seem to belong to them; but is contradicted by innumerable plain
Texts, and the concurrent strain both of the New and Old Testament.

But I must not forget that this Chapter is a Digression from our Main
Business; And I have thus long insisted upon this Argument, that the great
Motives contained in the Death of Christ to exchange the Slavery of Sin for his
Free service might have their full weight and cogency: which would be in
danger, not only of being weakened, but even quite lost, by limiting the Design
of Christ's Death to some particular persons, where the Consequences of such a
Limitation are apprehended.

And I appeal to every Considerative Person, whether it be not a mighty Motive
and Encouragement to the engaging all the powers of our Souls in this great
work of using the Means prescribed for the subduing our Lusts, to be assured
that every individual person of us is one of those, for whom Christ gave
himself to redeem them from all iniquity.

CHAP. IX.
Wherein are contained Five more Evangelical Motives, which are of wonderful
Power to excite us to diligence in using the Means of our Deliverance from the
Dominion of Sin, viz. Our Saviors excellent Example. The assurance he has
given us, that he will not take such advantage of our Frailties and Weaknesses,
as to cast us off for them. Our Saviors Mediation and Intercession. The
Glorious Reward he has purchased for, and promised to those, who, by the
Assistance of his Grace, overcome their Lusts. And the most dismal Threatenings
he has pronounced against those who receive that Grace in vain, and will not
be delivered from the Dominion of Sin.
HAving presented you with the First powerful Motive to diligence, in using the
Means of our Deliverance from the Dominion of Sin, namely, The unconceivable
Love of God in sending his only Begotten Son upon this Errand of Delivering us;
and of Christ in so readily taking our Nature upon him, and dying a cursed
Death for that End: And having also fully Demonstrated, that no man in the
World is excluded from the Benefit designed by the Death of Christ, in order to
our giving that Motive its full force and strength: I proceed to show, that

Secondly, Another singular Motive is our Savior's Example.

As we are by his Example Directed in the several parts of our Duty, as has
been showed; And as the frequent Eyeing thereof is a Means (as has been
intimated) whereby we may be more and more transformed into his Likeness; so is
it to be considered as a Wonderfully Exciting Motive to comply with those Rules
of Righteousness and Goodness, which we have naturally the greatest Aversation
of Will toward.

As particularly, those which oblige us to the Meek bearing of Indignities, the
Forgiving the greatest and most Provoking Injuries, the Loving our Enemies;
whereby we shall be set free from the Cruel Tyrants of Revenge and Malice.
Those also that oblige us to Humility, Patience and entire Resignation to the
Will of God, under the severest Dispensations of his Providence; and
Contentation with a mean Fortune, and low Circumstances in the World; which
will free us from the inslaving Passions of Pride, Anger, immoderate Grief,
Covetousness, etc.

When we consider with what Admirable Evenness of Mind, this Great Prince of
the Kings of the Earth endured the Contradiction of Sinners against himself;
How, when he was reviled, he reviled not again, when he suffered he threatened
not, but committed himself to him who judges righteously: When we consider
with what strange Sedateness of Spirit he bore the Mockings, Buffettings, and
most Contumelious and insolent Behavior of vile Creatures toward himself: It
is then hardly Possible that We despicable Worms should Rage and be inflamed
upon the account of such Disgrace, Contempt and ill usage from Rude People, as
is not to be compared with that which He underwent.

When we consider how our Blessed Savior Forgave those who Thirsted after his
Blood, and were never satisfied till they had put him to the most shameful and
most cruel Death; and not only Forgave them himself, but Entreated his Father,
and that even in the midst of his Torments (when his Spirit one would think
should be most highly exasperated) to forgive them too: I say, when we consider
this, how can it be difficult to dissuade our selves from Meditating Revenge
upon any Provocations whatsoever? Surely we must needs be very powerfully
inclined to forgive our Enemies.

When we call to mind how He expressed his love to his very Murderers, even so as
to design the greatest good to them by the means of that, whereby they designed
the greatest evil to him, can we be averse to the bearing Good will to those
who are ill affected toward us, to the Blessing of those that Curse us, and
Praying for those that despightfully use us?

When we consider how this Mighty Person humbled himself, even to the washing
his Disciples Feet, and declared that He came not to be ministered unto, but to
minister, can We contemptible Wretches cherish the least spark of Pride in our
Souls? Can We despise the meanest of our Fellow Creatures, or think our selves
too Great or too Good to condescend to the lowest Offices of Love whereby we
may serve our Brethren?

When we consider with what submission to the Divine Will our Blessed Lord
endured the most exquisite Pains both of Soul and Body, though He never
deserved them by the least offense, but was always most perfectly obedient to
his Father, can this be other than a most forcible motive to us, who have
Merited so ill at the Hands of God, quietly to submit to his good Pleasure in
Afflicting us, whenas in so doing he does always punish us far less than our
iniquities deserve?

When we consider how well satisfied our Savior was to be in poor low
Circumstances, and not to have so much as a Cottage of his own to put his Head
in, though he was Lord of all: Is it imaginable that We should aspire at High
and Great things, and having Food and Raiment, not be Content, who are less
than the least of all God's mercies?

And lastly, Will not the Consideration of our Savior's being such a Man of
sorrows, and so acquainted with griefs, exceedingly deaden our desires after
Sensual Pleasures? Surely it must necessarily so do.

Thus we see how greatly exciting the Example of our Savior is to the perfect
Mortifying of those Lusts which are most strong and vigorous, to the loathing
and abominating those, which are naturally very dear to us, and to the most
restless endeavors, to get our Souls possessed of those Virtues and Graces
which are most supernatural.

Thirdly, Another very prevalent Motive is, the Assurance our Lord has given
us, that He will not take such Advantage of our Frailties and Weaknesses, or
Sins we fall into by mere surprise and want of due Watchfulness, as to cast us
off for them; so long as we allow not our selves in any evil way, and it is the
principal design of our lives, to be conformed in all things to the Laws of
Righteousness.

There is a Prophecy concerning the Messiah, Isaiah 42. 3. which our Savior
applies to himself, Matthew. 12. 20. A bruised reed shall he not break, and
smoking flax shall he not quench, etc. He will not crush under foot those who
fall through weakness, but whatsoever good he sees in them, he will still
cherish. My little children (says S. John) these things I write unto you, that
ye sin not: But what if, through the weakness of their Flesh, they should at
any time be overtaken, is their state then desperate? No, by no means, for it
follows, And if any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father Jesus Christ
the Righteous, etc. 1 Epist. 2. 1.

As there are Sins unto Death, so there are Sins not unto Death, according to
that of the same Apostle, 1 Epist. 5. 17. All unrighteousness is sin, and there
is a sin not unto death. Though all Unrighteousness be sin, and the deserved
wages of sin be Death, yet such is the Goodness of God through Christ, that all
Sins shall not be unto Death, but only Wilful and Presumptuous Sins. And I add,
not these neither, if not persevered in, but thoroughly forsaken.

If we were liable to Eternal Ruin for such Faults, as considering all our
Circumstances in this state, it is scarcely to be hoped we shall constantly
avoid, we should necessarily live in great Bondage, through continual fear,
anxiety and disquieting thoughtfulness: But on the other hand, it conduces
exceedingly to the cheerful pursuing our Great Work, to be satisfied that it is
not every Failure that shall endanger our final miscarrying.

And it is no small inducement to ingenuous Tempers, to be so much the more
solicitous to avoid Deliberate and Wilful sins, because God through Christ is
so ready to forgive, and graciously pass by those that are not such: Because he
is pleased in his infinite Goodness to grant a pardon of course for these, upon
condition of their being in the general and habituals repented of. And it is a
great Motive also to such Tempers, to be the more vigilant and watchful against
all sins whatsoever; against sins of daily incursion and infirmity, as well as
those which waste the Conscience. And those are very ill natured and obdurate
Sinners, who can find in their hearts to Encourage themselves by this
indulgence to sin the more freely.

Fourthly, Another wonderful Encouragement to the careful use of the Means, we
are directed to for the subduing of our Lusts, is our Saviors Mediation and
Intercession. There is one God and one Mediator between God and men, the man
Christ Jesus. His oblation was begun on Earth, but perfected in Heaven; where
He appears in the presence of God for us, Heb. 9. 24.

Those Prayers we put up in His name, for things Agreeable to the Divine Will,
with honest and sincere hearts, our Savior inforceth with his own
Intercession. He ever lives to make intercession for us, Heb. 7. 25. And for
this reason (as the Apostle says in the former part of that Verse) He is able
to save them to the uttermost that come unto God by him: That is, to give them
a full and complete Deliverance from the Slavery of sin, and all the evil
Consequents thereof.

Now we know that we ask what is according to the Will of God, when we pray for
his Grace to Mortify our Corruptions, and to set us more and more Free from
their Dominion: This is the Will of God, even our Sanctification, etc. 1 Thessalonians.
4. 3.

There are many Temporal good things, which God in his infinite Wisdom may see
not to be good for us; but He knows that whatsoever has a necessary influence
into our Soul's welfare, and the making us partakers of his own image and
likeness, can by no Circumstances whatsoever become unfit to be bestowed on
those that heartily and sincerely seek it. And therefore we are assured that
those prayers that are put up for such things, with a true heart and full
assurance of faith in his Power and Goodness, are seconded in Heaven by our
Blessed Lord: And him the Father hears always, John 11. 42.

We have showed that our Savior has purchased a Rich supply of Grace to help
our Weakness, and that his Holy Spirit is promised to those that ask him; who
will not fail to assist them, whilst they carefully exert that power they are
already in possession of: But the most Honest Souls have so frequent experience
of Heaviness, Dullness and Distractions in their Addresses to God, that they
would be in great danger of despairing of the Success of their Prayers, but for
this Consideration, that they have a no Less Friend in Heaven, than the Only
Begotten Son of God; who is most powerful with his Father, and supplies all the
Defects of their Prayers by his own Intercession in their behalf.

I need not say, what a mavelous encouragement this is of our Faith and Hope
in the Divine Goodness; which are so necessary to Animate us, and to put Spirit
and Life into all our Endeavors.

And the Mediation and Intercession of our Blessed Savior conduces
exceedingly to the overcoming those inslaving Passions of Fearfulness and
Shame, which arise from Guilt; and do naturally cause a great Averseness in
Sinners from going into the Presence of God, and disable them, when they are
there, to behave themselves as they ought before him.

S. Paul tells the Ephesians, that In Christ Jesus they have boldness and
access with confidence, by the faith of him. That is, through Christ's
Mediation those Believing Gentiles (of whose Calling he was discoursing) as
great Sinners as they had been, even dead in Trespasses and Sins, have liberty
of Approach to God, with Confidence of a kind Reception and a Gracious
Acceptance.

And the Author to the Hebrews, Chap. 10. 19, etc. does thus encourage Sincere
Souls to draw near to God. Having therefore, Brethren, boldness (or Liberty,
(...)) to enter into the holiest by the blood of Jesus, by a new and living
way, which he has consecrated for us, (in opposition to the dead shadows under
the Law) through the veil, that is to say, his Flesh: (Breaking through the
veil of his Flesh, being fain to die before he ascended into Heaven) And having
an High Priest over the House of God: Let us draw near with a true heart in
full assurance of Faith; Having our Hearts sprinkled from an evil Conscience,
and our Bodies washed with pure Water. That is, being sincerely resolved
against all sins both of Heart and Life: As none that had touched any unclean
thing under the Law, till the Priest had sprinkled them with pure Water, had
Liberty to enter into the Congregation.

Fifthly, The Reward, which our Savior has purchased for and promised to
those that shall get free from the power of their Lusts, is another Motive,
than which a more Powerful one is not to be imagined. He has promised that
such shall be with him where he is. That because he lives, John 17. 24.
they shall live also. Has assured them, that He is gone to Heaven before,
Chap. 14. 19. ver. 3.
to prepare a place for them: That He is entered thither as their Forerunner:
Heb. 6. 20.
That they shall behold the Glory there which his Father has given him; John
17. 24.
and that they shall be sharers also with him in that Glory: That they shall
sit with Him upon his Throne, Rev. 3. 21. To him that overcomes will I grant
to sit with me upon my Throne, even as I also overcame, and am set down with my
Father on his Throne. That the Righteous shall shine forth as the Sun in the
Kingdom of the Father, Matthew. 13. 43. That their dead Bodies also, being raised
again, shall be fashioned like to his own most Glorious Body, according to the
Mighty working whereby he is able even to subdue all things unto himself, Phil.
3. 21.

Of this Glory it is impossible we should speak much in this state worthily of
it; it far surpasses our most Elevated Con^eptions, and therefore our highest
Expressions must needs fall excessively short of it. It does not yet appear
what we shall be, says S. John, 1 Epist. 3. 2. only we know so much of the
Heavenly Bliss, as to be assured that it is astonishingly Great; for, as it
follows, this we know, that when he appears we shall be like him (like Him the
infinitely Holy and Happy Being, in his Holiness and Happiness) for we shall
see him as he is. Which implies such a clear, distinct and vigorous knowledge
of his most Glorious Perfections, as will transform the Soul into His own
Nature, and fill it with His own Blessedness, to the utmost extent of its
capacity.

Could we now apprehend this Blessedness in any proportion to its transcendent
Greatness and Excellency, we should have no more Spirit left in us; as it is
said of the Queen of Sheba, when she beheld the Magnificence of Solomon's Court.
Indeed there is such an Account given us of the Happiness prepared for Good
men, that we should find it impossible to believe it, but that God which cannot
lie has promised it, and that it is the purchase of a most inestimable price,
the Blood of his Eternally Begotten Son. And we have so great Evidence of its
being promised by his Father, and purchased by Himself, given us by our Blessed
Lord, that our own Hearts cannot wish for greater; nay, such as we could not
have asked any comparable to it, might we have had our own choice of Evidence,
viz. His innumerable Miraculous works, His Resurrection from the Dead, His
Ascension into Heaven; And afterward (exactly according to his promise) His
sending the Holy Ghost.

We have not more Evidence that Jesus is the Son of God, than we have that All
his sincere Disciples shall live with him, in unspeakable and Eternal
Blessedness; for we have the self- same for both. The same Arguments which have
abundantly demonstrated the truth of the former Proposition, do equally prove
the latter, for they depend mutually upon each other; As S. Paul has showed in
1 Cor. 5. 13, 14. If there be no Resurrection of the Dead, then is Christ not
risen: And if Christ be not risen, then is our Preaching vain, and your Faith
is also vain. That is, there will be no Resurrection of the Dead.

Now of what mighty force and efficacy are the exceeding great and precious
promises of such a Glorious state as this, to engage all the Powers of our
Souls in the pursuance of that Holiness which is not only an indispensable
Condition to precede the obtaining of it, but like a necessary Qualification
for it.

The Happiness which will naturally, by proper, Efficiency and necessary
Consequence, result from our Deliverance from the Dominion of Sin, and our
being instated in the Freedom we have discoursed of, would be a mighty Motive
to the doing our utmost to be set at Liberty: What a Motive then is this Vast
Additional Happiness which our Lord has given us the most unquestionable
Assurance of?

We can never be sufficiently affected with those words of the Apostle, Romans 6.
21, 22. What fruit had ye then of those things, whereof ye are now ashamed; for
the end of those things is death. But now being made free from sin, and become
servants to God, ye have your fruit unto Holiness, an^ the end everlasting life.

Can we have such a Hope as this, such a Blessed Hope (as the Apostle calls it)
and not heartily endeavor to purify our selves as God is pure? S. John tells
us, that he who has this hope will do so. Has our most Gracious Lord made to
his Free Servants such a promise as this of entering into his Rest, his
Glorious and Eternal Rest, how should we fear, lest by continuing in subjection
to our vile Affections, we should at last fall short of it?

Good Lord!. That such a prize as this should be set before us, and we not
press hard forward toward it. That such Blessedness should be Purchased for,
and Offered to those, who have no esteem or value for it. But had much rather
be wretched Bondslaves and Vassals to the Devil and their Lusts, than Reign
with Christ in his Everlasting Kingdom.

How many shall lament this inexpressible Folly in a sad Eternity! And this
brings me to the Last Motive I shall speak to, viz.

Sixthly, If it be possible, that this with the foregoing Motives should not
prevail, there is another behind, which is suited to the most Disingenuous,
Stubborn and Inflexible Tempers, and must needs subdue them, if any thing will:
Namely, The most Dismal Threatenings our Savior has pronounced against those,
who will not Accept the Liberty he offers them, and become his Freemen.

As such will be necessarily exceedingly miserable, beyond what they are here,
when they leave this world, through the Fury of their Corrupt Appetites (there
being no objects in the other state to appease it, or to afford them the least
satisfaction or gratification) so our Lord has declared, that, They shall be
cast into outer Darkness, where shall be weeping, and wailing, and gnashing of
teeth, Matthew. 8. 12. That, they shall be cast into a Furnace of Fire, Matthew.
13. 42. That, He will say unto them at the last Day, Depart from me ye cursed
into Everlasting Fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels, Matthew. 25. 41.
And his Apostle S. Paul has told such, what their Doom shall be, in 2 Thessalonians.
1. 7, 8, 9. viz. That the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from Heaven, with his
Mighty Angels, in flaming Fire, taking vengeance on them that know not God, and
obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ: Who shall be punished with
everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from the Glory of
his power: When he shall come to be glorified in his Saints, and to be admired
of all them that believe. Then shall we discern the vastest difference
imaginable between the states of the Righteous and the Wicked, of those who
have through the Spirit mortified the deeds of the body, and those who have
lived after the flesh. The Former sort of men, as the same Apostle says, shall
live; that is, a most inexpressibly Happy and Glorious life: The Latter shall
die; that is, the Second death, or be Eternally Miserable. One shall be taken,
and the other left: One shall be saved, the Other damned: One shall be received
into the Blessed Mansions above, and crowned with Immortal Bliss and Glory; the
other shall be tumbled down into Hell, and have his portion in the lake that
burns with Fire and Brimstone.

Did I say, that these Fearful Threatenings are designed to awaken the most
Disingenuous, Stupid and Obdurate Souls? I fear there are Few who do not find,
that they have need sometimes of seriously considering them, and laying them to
heart. And when we feel the principle of ingenuity most unactive, as also that
those Motives that excite our Hope have but a weak influence (as it is possible
we may, at certain times, be in so dull and heavy a Temper, as that we may be
but very little affected with them) then should we rouse up our selves out of
our Lethargick stupidity, by employing our Thoughts upon the Terrors of the
Lord, the most Terrible Threatenings of the Gospel.

And now what think we? Has not our Blessed Lord done Abundantly enough to
make us Free indeed; To set us at Liberty from Sin and to Righteousness? In
that he has not only shown us What it is to be made Free, and wherein our
Liberty consists; And given us the best Means, by the use of which, as we
ought, we shall be set at Liberty; And purchased such Grace for us as whereby
we may be successful in the use of those Means, if we will not neglect them;
But also has given us such Motives, as those we have now discoursed of, to
prevail with our Wills not to receive that Grace in vain.

And as for these Motives, can the Heart of Man conceive any more powerful? No
surely, nor could it, unassisted by Divine Revelation, conceive any that are
the thousandth part so powerful.

But besides all this (as has been intimated) the Blessed Spirit of God is
ready so to enforce these Motives upon us, if we will endeavor to think
seriously upon them, as that they shall effectually do what they are designed
for: And not only so, but he also begins with us, and by his secret suggestions
excites us to the due Consideration of them, and the use of whatsoever Means we
are directed to, for the pulling down of strong holds, and casting down every
imagination, and every high thing, that advances it self against the Scepter
and Government of Christ in our Souls, and the bringing every thought, and all
that is within us, to the obedience of Christ.

And thus does he work in us both to will and to do, as to Do so to Will, of
his own good pleasure: or, of his free and undeserved mercy to us. And
therefore what encouragement have we to put the Apostles inference from that
Doctrine into Practice, namely, To work out our own Salvation with fear and
trembling? That is, to work out our own Deliverance from the Dominion of Sin,
and our Slavish subjection thereunto, with great Diligence and Solicitude.

SECT. III.
Containing the Inferences from each of the Arguments of the foregoing Sections.
CHAP. X.
Which treats of the First Inference from the First Proposition, [That the most
Excellent Liberty does consist in an Entire Compliance with the Laws of
Righteousness and Goodness; Or in Freedom from the Dominion of Sinful
Affections.] Namely, That those are most Unreasonable and Depraved People, who
complain of the Divine Laws as intolerable Intrenchments upon their Liberty.
Where it is showed, First, That upon supposition our Liberty were restrained by
the Laws of God, it would nevertheless be most unreasonable to complain upon
that account. Secondly, That the Laws which oblige Christians do not restrain
their Liberty.
I AM come now to the Last Head of Discourse, viz. To draw distinctly from each
of the Arguments of the foregoing Sections several very useful Inferences: Such
as, if they be duly considered, will farther improve us in our Knowledge of the
true Nature and Design of the Christian Religion; and (with the assistance of
the Divine Grace) Advance us higher in the true Evangelical Spirit and Temper.

To begin with the Former of those Arguments, viz. That the most Excellent
Liberty consists in an Entire Compliance with the Laws of Righteousness and
Goodness; or in Freedom from the Dominion of Corrupt and Sinful Assections.
From hence, and what has been discoursed thereupon, we Infer,

First, That those are most Unreasonable, and very sadly Depraved who complain
of, and quarrel with the Divine Laws as great Intrenchments upon their Liberty;
And therefore, in regard of the high value they set upon Liberty, cry out upon
them as intolerable. For,

First, Suppose it were true, that our Liberty is much restrained by the Laws
of God, yet would it be the most unreasonable thing in the World to cavil at
them upon that account, or to think our selves too unkindly dealt with: And
that for these three Reasons.

1. We know by Experience, that it is Absolutely necessary to the Well being
(nay to the very Being) of Societies, that particular Persons be obliged to
part with not a little of their Natural Liberty. It is utterly inconsistent
with the Welfare of the Whole, for each Particular to insist so severely on
his own Right, as to refuse to submit to the being deprived of that Liberty, in
several instances, in which the Primary Laws of Nature have instated him: And
consequently this is as inconsistent with the Welfare of Particulars; the
Well-being of each Part depending upon the Well-being of the Whole.

There can be no Leagues, Compacts or Agreements between Men and Men, but there
must be yielding, and quitting of Liberty; and that on both sides too
ordinarily, if not always.

All the Laws of Men do suppose the Necessity of this; Nor is there any one
merely Humane Law but does Restrain Natural Liberty. He therefore who is
resolved not to let go any part of that Liberty, must resolve upon another
thing too, viz. To live under no Government; To forsake all Society with his
own kind, and live alone in a Desert. But by so doing he will quickly be
satisfied, that he pays infinitely too dear for so stiffly infilling upon his
beloved Liberty, and that he has sold for it all the Comfort of his Life, and
whatsoever would make it desirable to him.

In a word, There can be no such thing as Property without parting with several
points of Liberty; without this no Meum or ^uum (I mean as to any thing without
our selves, or that can happen to come within the reach of Another Power) can
be secured, as every Body will grant. And therefore can it be thought a
grievous thing that God himself should restrain our Liberty?

2. As it will be Universally Acknowledged, that it is Absolutely necessary,
that Particular Persons be abridged of their Natural Liberty in abundance of
instances, so all that have a right Notion of the Deity must needs believe,
that we are abridged of it in no instances by God Almighty, but such as wherein
it is most fit we should be abridged.

The Holy Scriptures assure us of nothing more, nor does Natural Light neither,
than that Infinite Wisdom, Righteousness and Goodness are necessary Perfections
of the Divine Nature; Than that Wilfulness and Arbitrariness, Austerity and
Sourness, Envy and Ill will, are as far removed from God as is Hell from
Heaven. And consequently, though several of His Laws should seem to our
thinking never so Unreasonable, yet while we adhere to the Scriptural and
Natural Notion of the Deity, we our selves would be most Unreasonable, in not
Concluding them to be really most contrary to what they may seemingly be to us;
in not believing them to be as Wise, as Righteous, and as Good, as any can
fancy them Weak, Unrighteous, or Unkind.

3. As from the Consideration of the Nature of God we are as certain as we are
capable of being of any thing, that all the Abatements and Limitations of our
Liberty, He is the Author of, are most Wise, Just and Good; that they are
founded in great Reason, Equity and Kindness also to us, so we that live under
the Gospel Dispensation are assured from the Consideration of the particular
Observances and Forbearances He has by Christ Jesus obliged us to, that they
are no other, than such as are infinitely Worthy of such a God.

They are all of that nature, that they carry their own Reason most visibly and
apparently along with them: And such as we are easily able to give account to
our selves, upon what particular Designs, it was the pleasure of our Creator to
impose them upon us. It Is the easiest thing in the World to demonstrate, that
they are not only all of them Consistent with Infinite Goodness, but also great
Instances and Expressions thereof: That God is not only most Righteous in
enjoining each of them, but most Good and Gracious.

All but some two or three of the Precepts of the Gospel are no other than what
Right Reason, and the Law of our Creation did, and must necessarily, always
oblige us to, as will presently be seen. And those very few purely Evangelical
ones are designed for our better Observation of those Natural Laws.

And thus I have showed in short, that, granting Gods Laws do put restraints
(and those many too) upon our Liberty, we have no cause to complain upon that
account: They restraining it only in such particulars, as wherein it is
incomparably better for us to be restrained than otherwise. But

Secondly, It is utterly to be denied, that the Laws we Christians are under
the Obligation of, do any of them restrain our Liberty. They restrain
Licentiousness indeed, but not Liberty. This does sufficiently appear from what
has been discoursed.

That cannot be true Liberty which is injurious to our Chiefest Liberty, but
our Chiefest Liberty we have showed does consist in being free to Good; in
having all impediments taken out of our way to the free exercise of those
Virtues which are (as I may say) the very Soul of our Souls, the Life of our
Souls, as our Souls are of our Bodies: Without which we are dead even whilst
we live; without which we are in an utter incapacity of enjoying our selves, of
being in the least measure truly Happy, or of Living like Men, and discharging
the Functions of that Life which is proper to Reasonable Creatures: And by the
absence of which we degenerate into the Brutish, nay into the Devilish Nature.

You may as well say, that He is abridged of his Liberty, who is kept from
running his Head into the fire, or from Cutting his own Throat, as that He is
so, who is forbidden to be Unjust and Unrighteous in any kind, or to be
Malicious, or Uncharitable, or Intemperate, or Lascivious: That is, who is
forbidden to play the Beast or the Devil. Or who is Commanded to Love God above
all, to Fear Him, to Trust in Him, to be Thankful to Him, in all his ways to
Acknowledge Him; and to Love his Neighbor as himself. But, if we will believe
the Great S. Paul, in these particulars is comprehended all that for Substance,
which the Grace of God that brings Salvation reaches men to forbear or
practice.

To sum up all in short that needs to be said about this matter, There is
nothing required of us, but it is either an Essential part of our Liberty, of
our Highest and most Excellent Liberty, to be Free to it, or is a Means to the
obtaining and Maintenance of it.

What an Unreasonable Brutish Creature therefore art Thou, whosoever thou art,
that dare repine at the Restraints which thy Creator and Redeemer have laid
upon thee, whenas these Restraints (if they may be called so) are necessary to
thy greatest Enlargement. And let me tell thee, thou that think much of
being held within the Limits which the Gospel has set thee, thou affectest a
Liberty which God himself has not, and Abhors to have.

CHAP. XI.
The Second Inference, viz. That such a Freedom of Will as consists in an
Indifferency to good or evil is no Perfection, but the Contrary.
SEcondly, We may observe from the abovesaid Discourse, That such a Freedom of
Will as consists in an Indifferency to Good or Evil, as much as it is magnified
by some for a great Perfection of the Humane Nature, is indeed no better than a
Diminution and Disparagement: Nor is it otherwise Commendable than as a less
Evil.

This must necessarily be so, if the most Excellent Liberty consists in an
entire Compliance with the Laws of Righteousness and Goodness, as it has been
fully proved it does.

Seneca has somewhere a most Impudent and Blasphemous saying, to this purpose:
That a Wise, or Virtuous, man is in some respect Superior to God himself;
because God is Good by necessity of Nature, but he by his own free choice.

It Is to be confessed, that, comparing this indifferency to Good or Evil with
the Determination of the Will to Evil, so it is desirable; but then it is so
only as it is a less Evil than the other, as was said. But comparing it with the
Determination of the Will to Good, from an inward Principle, viz. from a quick,
Vigorous Sense of the infinite Loveliness of Virtue, and monstrous Deformity
and Ugliness of Vice, so on the other hand, it is a great imperfection, and
consequently by no means desirable.

The Divine Nature will be acknowledged to be the Great Standard and Measure of
Perfections: We cannot question but that, the more like to God any one is, the
more perfect he will be; and the more unlike to God, the more imperfect: But
the being Free to Evil and Undetermined to Good, makes a man less like God,
because God is (as has been shown) necessarily, from his own Nature Determined
to Good, and from Evil; And his Infinite Wisdom, Holiness, Righteousness and
Goodness cannot consist with Peccability, or a Possibility of doing or
approving the least Evil. And therefore the more any one is from within
himself, from a good Temper of mind, determined to that which is Good, the more
like must he needs be to the Best of Beings, and the more he partakes of a
Divine Nature.

That saying of S. Jerome does need a Paraphrase, Solus Deus est, in quem
Peec^tum non cadit; C^et^ra, cum sint liberi Arbitrii, possunt in utramque
partem suam flectere Voluntatem.
viz. God is the only Being, that is incapable of sinning; but all Creatures,
having Free Will in them, may turn their Will to Good or Evil. Namely, that God
alone is Absolutely Im^eccable; not but that by the Divine Grace Creatures may
be made so; as, without doubt, the Angels and Saints in Heaven are. And,
whereas the Father seems to exclude Free Will from God, and to give it to all
Reasonable Creatures, he must mean such a Free Will as consists in
Indifferency to Good or Evil, or Undeterminedness from within to Good and
against Evil, and so on the contrary. This kind of Freedom cannot belong to
God, because it speaks great imperfection: For it supposes him who has it, to
be without such a Sense of the Excellency and Loveliness of Goodness, and the
Hatefulness and Intolerableness of Wickedness, as he ought to have.

He that can in the least Deliberate* whether it be more Eligible to be Just or
Unjust, Chaste or Impure, Intemperate or Sober, to speak Truth or to Lie, to
Love God or the World, to Forgive or Revenge, to be Pitiful or Cruel, to be
Niggardly or Charitable, etc. He, I say, that can persuade himself to
Deliberate about these things, does manifestly declare, that he understands
neither the one nor the other, as he ought to do. I mean, that he has nothing
so lively a Sense of the Goodness of the one, or the Evil of the other, as it
becomes him to have.

If we had such a Sense, it would be as impossible to persuade us to any Vile
Action, as it would be to prevail with a man in his right Mind, to pour melted
Lead down his own Throat, to pluck out his Eyes, or to dash out his Brains.

You cannot deliberate whether it be better for you to be Healthy or Sick, to
be at Ease or in Torment, to have a Good Name or a Bad, to be Beggarly or in
Plentiful Circumstances, to be a Wise man or a Fool, to be a Madman or in your
Wits, to be a Slave or a Freeman, etc. You will say that Bedlam is the fittest
place for him, that shall in the least consider which of these he shall choose.
Now if we had as great a Sense of the Evil of the infinitely worst of Evils
Sin, as we have of those Evils, it would be as impossible, that our Wills
should incline to the Commission of a known Sin, as that they should prefer
Sickness before Health, and refuse Ease and embrace Torment.

As for those that contend that, It is more Praiseworthy to do Good and
forbear Evil, having a Power to do otherwise, than to be under a necessity of
so doing* Supposing they mean by necessity, such as is not from without, or
from an inward blind instinct, but from an Understanding Principle and
Perfection of Nature, I must needs tell them there is no Proposition in the
World more false or absurd. For is God Almighty the less to be Admired, Loved
or Praised for his Goodness, because his Nature is so Good, as that He cannot
but be ever doing good? Surely He is much the more to be Loved, Adored, Admired
and Praised upon this account.

I will not therefore stick to say, that to have the Will necessarily
determined to all Good, and from all Evil, from an Overpowering Sense of the
Becomingness and Excellency of the one, and the Vileness and Odiousness of the
other, is the very Perfection of Liberty. And this is so far from being
impossible to be obtained by Creatures or by our Selves, that, by the help of
God's Grace, it is in a large measure even in this life Attainable. I mean such
a Sense of Good and Evil, as shall certainly determine us to Good and against
Evil in most of the instances of each.

There are some immoralities and wicked Actions, that they who have attained to
but very mean and ordinary degrees of Goodness, cannot persuade themselves so
much as to endeavor to reconcile their Minds to. Nay, there are some that no
man can easily be supposed able to consent to, but an extraordinarily Depraved
and Wicked Wretch, let the Motives that are used to persuade him be what they
will. Such as Blaspheming of God: Contriving the Murder of our Parents, or of
a most obliging Friend: Torturing of innocent Babes, and the like Horrid
Villainies. Surely then, a man is capable of such a Vivid sense of the
Hatefulness of Sin in general, as will (whilst it lasts) render it impossible
for him to Will deliberately to commit any known Sin whatsoever.

It Is confessed that we cannot hope to get past all danger of sudden
Surprizals, so long as we inhabit these Bodies, and remain in our present
Unhappy Circumstances; but, I say, so powerful a Sense of the Infinite
Unrighteousness, Disingenuity, Unreasonableness, Folly and Madness of opposing
the Holy Will of our Great Creator and Blessed Redeemer may, by the Divine
Assistance, be acquired even on this side Heaven, as shall Determine us
effectually against all Deliberate and Wilful Violations of the Divine Laws.

For this we have the Authority of a Great Apostle: S. John says in his 1
Epist. 3. 9. Whosoever is Born of God does not commit Sin, for his Seed
remains in him, neither can he Sin, because he is Born of God. He here
affirms, not only that those who have attained to extraordinary Measures of
Goodness cannot Sin, that is, cannot will to sin deliberately, but likewise
that no Regenerate or truly Good man can. He cannot thus Sin, because he is
born of God; because he is a Child of God by the inward Renewing of his Holy
Spirit: And because his Seed remains in him, that is, the Divine Seed. Which
Divine Seed I take to be the same thing with the several times mentioned Quick,
Powerful and Pungent Sense of the Horrid Nature, and most dreadful Effects and
Consequents of Wilful Sinning. It is more than Morally impossible, that whilst
this Sense abides in its Strength and Vigor, the Good man should lapse into
such Sins.

Have we not such a Sense of the Vileness of some Actions, as to say
frequently, I could not for all the world find in mine heart (that is, in my
Will) to do so or so? And if we had the same Sense of all Sins, which it is
unreasonable not to have, considering them as Sins, or Transgressions of the
Everlasting Rules of Righteousness (for considering them under that notion, all
sins are alike) I say had we the same Sense of all Sins, we should as truly say
concerning each, I cannot find in mine heart, I cannot will, to consent unto it.

CHAP. XII.
Which Treats of one Branch of the First Inference from the Argument of the
Second Section, [That in Freedom from the Dominion of Corrupt Affections does
that Liberty Principally or rather Wholly Consist, which Christ has purchased
for us.] Namely, that several Notions of Christian Liberty, which have too much
prevailed, are false and of dangerous Consequence. The First of which is, That
which makes it to consist, wholly or in part, in Freedom from the Obligation of
the Moral Law. Certain Texts, urged by the Antinomians in favor of it,
vindicated from the sense they put upon them. And the extreme wildness and
wickedness of it exposed in Five Particulars.
WE proceed now to the Inferences from the latter Argument, viz. That in
Freedom from the Dominion of Corrupt Affections, and all the sad Consequents
thereof our Christian Liberty does Eminently consist, and wholly too the
Liberty which Christ has purchased for us Gentiles. And

First, We infer from hence, that several Notions of Christian Liberty, that
have too much prevailed, are False and of dangerous Consequence. We will speak
to,

First, That which makes it to consist in Freedom from the Obligation of the
Moral Law.

Secondly, That which makes it to consist in Freedom from those Laws of Men,
which Enjoin or Forbid indifferent things.

Thirdly, That which makes Liberty of Conscience a Branch of Christian Liberty.

First, For that Notion of Christian Liberty, which makes it to consist, either
wholly or in part, in Freedom from the Obligation of the Moral Law: This is
extremely Wild and Wicked, as will appear from what has been discoursed.

It is the Doctrine of the Antinomians, and they produce in favor of it all
those Texts wherein we are said to be delivered from the Law. As particularly
Romans 7. 6. Now we are delivered from the Law, that being dead wherein we were
held, etc. Gal. 2. 19. I through the Law am dead to the Law, etc. Romans 6. 14.
Ye are not under the Law, but under Grace. Gal. 4. 4, 5. When the fullness of
time was come, God sent forth his Son, made of a Woman, made under the Law, to
Redeem them that were under the Law, etc.

To this it is Answered, That there are indeed many Texts which Assert our
being freed from the Law, but the Question is, What Law they mean? Or rather
it is out of Question, that they mean not the Moral Law. For there is no need of
doing more than reading throughout the forementioned Verses, to satisfy us,
that the Apostle understood, in each of them, nothing less than that Law. Nay,
we need do no more to be assured, that he Abominated this Notion of Christian
Liberty.

For whereas he says, Romans 7. 6. Now we are delivered from the Law, that being
dead wherein we were held; it follows, that we should serve in Newness of
Spirit, and not in the Oldness of the Letter. That is, That we should no longer
be merely Externally Obedient, but also, Inwardly and Spiritually.

Whereas he says, Gal. 2. 19. I through the Law am dead to the Law, he
immediately adds this as the reason why he was so, that I might live unto God:
Or be in all things conformed to the Rules of Righteousness and Goodness, which
He has prescribed; all which are comprehended in the Moral Law.

Again, whereas he tells the Romans, Chap. 6. 14. Ye are not under the Law but
under Grace: This comes in as a proof of what he said immediately before in the
same Verse, viz. Sin shall not have dominion over you.

Lastly, In saying, Gal. 4. 5. That Christ was made of a Woman, made under the
Law, to redeem them that were under the Law, he gives this in the next words as
the reason or design hereof, that we might receive the Adoption of Sons. But
does not the Relation of a Son necessarily infer Obligation to Obedience? It
does so no less than that of a Servant. For where God says, If I am a Master,
where is my Fear? he says also, If I am a Father where is mine Honor?

The Law therefore which is to be understood in these and the like places is
the purely Jewish Law, the mere External and Drudging Observances of the
Mosaical Dispensation, which the Jewish Believers thought themselves to be
still under the Obligation of, and Condemned the Gentile Converts for not
submitting their Necks to the same Yoke.

And the Apostle takes a great deal of pains, in his Epistles to the Romans and
Galatians, to confute that mistake; and to convince the Jews, that that Law was
made by Christ null and void; that He had Cancelled it, and taken away its
Obliging power.

And in each of those places the Apostle as plainly affirms this to be the Law
they were delivered from, as that it is not the Moral Law. We will therefore a
third time go them over again.

Romans 7. 6. Now we are delivered from the Law, that being dead wherein we were
held, that we should serve in Newness of Spirit, and not in the Oldness of the
Letter. That is, We are delivered from that Law, that considered literally,
required nothing but a company of Bodily Washings, Outward Services, and Carnal
Performances, which the Jews generally rested in, and thought no more was to be
done to render them Acceptable in the sight of God; And the reason why we are
delivered from this Law is, that so we may be the more intent upon the Great
Substantial Duties, and the Purification of our Hearts, Souls and Spirits.

Gal. 2. 19. I through the Law am dead to the Law, that I might live unto God.
Or, I by virtue of the Law of Christ, am dead to the Law of Moses, that I may
have all impediments taken out of my way to the being entirely devoted, as to
the Inward as well as Outward man, to the Service of God. And it has been
showed how injurious this Law did Accidentally become to the great Design of
the Gospel, viz. The making us Spiritually Obedient; the enduing us with
Inward, Real, Substantial Righteousness; or the Divine Likeness.

Romans 6. 14. Sin shall not have dominion over you, for ye are not under the
Law, but under Grace. That is, There is no necessity of your continuing under
the power and dominion of Sin, because you are not under the weak Dispensation
of Moses, which made nothing perfect, and gave no strength to mortify Lust,
but under the Gospel Dispensation, which is accompanied with Promises of
Plentiful Supplies of Grace and Strength.

Gal. 4. 5. God sent forth his Son, made of a Woman, made under the Law, to
Redeem them that were under the Law, that we might receive the Adoption of
Sons. Or, That we might no longer drudge like Servants of the inferior Sort, in
such Employments as are mean and low, having no Internal Goodness in them; and
that from the hope only of some slight Reward, from the hope of some mere
Earthly good things, such as are Gratifications only of the Animal and Sensual
life; and from the Fear of mere Temporal Evils, and the present Lash, (that Law
containing no other express Promises or Threatenings but Temporal, as was
showed) but may be dealt with as Sons, be Honorably employed, viz. in such
services as are of the most Excellent nature, and do recommend themselves by
their own Goodness, and Agreeableness to our Rational and Intellectual Faculty.
And be acted also by a more Noble Principle, viz. Love, and encouraged by an
Infinitely more Noble Reward, which consists in a perfect Likeness to God,
and an Everlasting Enjoyment of him.

And thus we see, these very Texts that are made use of by the Antinomians, to
prove this mad Notion of Christian Liberty from the Obligation of the Moral
Law, are so far from signifying any thing to this purpose, that they give
manifest and clear proof of the Contrary. As they are far from asserting, that
any such Liberty as this belongs to Christians, so they assure us that no such
Liberty belongs to them.

Tertullian has a good saying to our present purpose: Operum juga rejecta
^unt. non disciplinarum. Libertas in Christo, non fecit Innocentie Injuriam.
Mannt ^extota Pictatis, Sanctitatis, Humanitatis, Veritatis, Castitatis,
Iustitiae, Mi^^ricordiae, Benevolentiae, Pudicitiae. Lib. de Pudi^itia.
The Yokes of Works (meaning the Drudgeries of the Ceremonial Law) are cast
off, not those of Rules to walk by. Liberty in Christ is not injurious to
innocence. The entire Law of Piety, Holiness, Humanity, V^rity, Chastity,
Righteousness, Mercy, B^n^volence, Purity is still of force.

And indeed should we find this Doctrine in those Texts, that our Savior has
procured for us Freedom from this Law, then,

First, The Blessed Apostle would have most expressly contradicted his Great
Master, and so have proved himself no Apostle; For our Savior plainly says,
Matthew. 5. 17. Think not, let not such a wild fancy enter into your Heads, that
I am come to destroy the Law and the Prophets, I am not come to destroy, but to
fulfill: (...), to fill it up, or Preach it fully. I am so far from such a
Design, as that of destroying or Abolishing the Moral Law, that, on the
contrary, I am come to Preach it more fully and perfectly, than ever it was
before my Coming.

And this he presently sets upon doing, Verse. 21, 22, 27, 28, etc. Ye have
heard that it has been said by them of old time, thou shall not Kill, and
whosoever shall Kill shall be in danger of the judgment; but I say unto you,
that whoso^v^r is Angry with his Brother without a cause, shall be in danger of
the judgment, etc.

Ye have heard, that it was said by them of old time, Thou shall not commit
Adultery: but I say unto you, that whosoev^r shall look upon a Woman, to lust
after her, has committed Adultery already with her in his heart. And so He
goes on to Perfect and Fill up Law, in the following Verses.

Again our Savior says, verse. 18. Verily I say unto you, that till Heaven and
Earth pass, one jot or one tittle shall in no wise pass from the Law, till all
be fulfilled: (...), till all be done, or till all things come to an End,
according to Doctor Hammond.

He has not here respect to the Universal Conflagration, says Grotius upon
the place, but it is a Proverbial speech, as if it were said in Latin, Vsque
dum Coelum ruat: Till the Heavens fall. Which is thus expressed, Luke 16. 17.
And it is easier for Heaven and Earth to pass, than one tittle of the Law to
fail. In which manner of speaking, as says the same Learned Expositor, He has
respect to the Order of Nature, and not to the Power of God. But according to
Nature it seems impossible that Heaven and Earth should pass away or perish.

So that the meaning of these Texts is plainly this, viz. The Obligation of the
Law can neither cease, nor be diminished or relaxed in the least, to all
Eternity.

And then our Savior adds, Verse. 19. of this Fifth of S. Matthew, Whosoever
therefore shall break one of these least Commandments, and shall teach men so,
he shall be called the least in the Kingdom of Heaven: That is, says Grotius,
Minimi erit pretii, eum minimi habitum iri, he shall be contemned, and treated
as a most despicable wretch at the Day of Judgment. Then it follows, But
whosoever shall do and teach them, the same shall be called Great in the
Kingdom of Heaven. He shall be highly Honored, and signally Rewarded.

When the young Man came to our Savior to ask him, What good thing he should
do, that he might have Eternal life, we know what his Answer was, If thou will
enter into life, keep the Commandments, S. Matthew. 19. 17. And whereas He meant
all, yet (knowing how apt Hypocrites are to flatter themselves with an opinion
of the goodness of their state, upon the account of their External Conformity
to the First Table Precepts, though they live in the gross Transgression of
those of the Second Table) He only expressed those which enjoin Duties relating
to our Neighbor. For the young Man asking which Commandments? Jesus said, Thou
shall do no Murder, Thou shall not commit Adultery, Thou shall not Steal, Thou
shall not bear false Witness, Honor thy Father and thy Mother: And thou shall
love thy Neighbor as thyself, Ver. 18, 19.

Secondly, The Apostle would have Contradicted himself most Egregiously, as
well as his Master, should he, in the above cited Places, or any where else,
teach this Notion of Christian Liberty. For 'twas He that said, Do we make void
the Law through Faith, God forbid, yea we establish the Law, Romans 3. 31. He
here includes even the Ceremonial Law, as appears by ver. 28. (which gave
occasion to these words) Therefore we conclude that a man is justified by
Faith, without the deeds of the Law: That is, that a Gentile is justified
without Circumcision, or Sacrifices, or any other of the Jewish Rites and
Services, which they still laid so great weight upon; as appears by the two
following Verses, Is he the God of the Jews only? Is he not also of the
Gentiles? Yes of the Gentiles also. Seeing it is one God, which shall justify
the Circumcision by Faith, and Uncircumcision through Faith. Now says the
Apostle, God forbid we should affirm that the Gospel Dispensation should make
void the Law; should make useless so much as the Ceremonial Law, therefore much
less the Moral, yea we assert it establishes the Law. In some sense it even
establishes or perfects that Law, as it brings in the substance of that,
whereof that Law had the shadow; and requires purity of Heart, which was the
spiritual meaning of Circumcision.

Again, 'twas the same S. Paul that said, Not the Hearers of the Law are just
before God; but the Doers of the Law shall be justified, Romans 2. 13. And it is
He who makes it to be the design of Christ's Expiating our Sins upon the Cross,
That the Righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us, who walk not after
the Flesh, but after the Spirit. And it is this same Apostle that says, Though
I speak with the Tongues of Men and of Angels, and have not Charity ( a Moral
Virtue) I am become as sounding Brass, or a tinkling Cymbal. And though I have
the gift of Prophecy, and understand all Mysteries, and all Knowledge: And
though I have all Faith, so that I could remove Mountains, and have no Charity,
I am nothing, etc. 1 Cor. 13. 1, 2. And in the last Verse, does not only
Equalize Charity with Faith and Hope (which many now adays are so far from
doing, that they are angry with those who do so) but also Advances it above
those Graces. And now abides Faith, Hope, Charity, these three, but the
greatest of these is Charity.

Thirdly, Whosoever teaches this Doctrine, of Christ's having set us free from
the Moral Law, contradicts the whole strain of the New Testament: Our
Saviors Sermon on the Mount throughout, all his Injunctions and even all his
Discourses, and all the Precepts and Exhortations contained in the Epistles of
the Apostles. They are all so many instances of the Obligations that the First
and Second Tables lay upon us, as understood in the most Spiritual, Sublime and
Comprehensive Sense: And none are more so than those of S. Paul, so intolerably
is he abused in being made the Great, and I think, Only Patron of that most
licentious and wicked Doctrine.

And even that Precept of Believing in the Name of the Son of God, is a
First-Table Precept, not Positive but Moral, in its own Nature necessarily
obliging, and a Dictate of Natural Light, to all those who are acquainted with
the Evidence of his being the Messiah, and Son of God. Upon our understanding
how He is demonstrated so to be, we should have known that Faith in Him is an
indispensable Duty, though we could not have produced one Text to prove it.

Moreover Believing in Christ, together with the Institutions of Baptism and
the Lord's Supper are designed as Means to the great End of making us entirely
Obedient to the Moral Law, or the Everlasting Rules of Righteousness.

Fourthly, Whosoever teaches this Doctrine, teaches a most manifest
contradiction to the Essential Principles and Make of Mankind. It is impossible
that Reasonable Creatures should be disobliged from Loving God above all, from
being Just and Charitable, Sober and Temperate, Humble and Submissive to the
Divine Will, and the like.

It is impossible that any Power whatsoever should discharge them from such
duties as these. Their Obligation to them does Naturally arise from their being
such Creatures. There is not a greater contradiction than this imaginable, that
Creatures made capable of understanding what God is, and their Relation and
Obligations to him, may not be Eternally bound to behave themselves toward
him, as the Moral Law requires they should. Infinite Power it self cannot set
such Creatures free from their Obligation to love God with the highest degree
of love their Souls will admit of. Now as the Apostle tells us, that Love is
the fulfilling of the Law, so it is easy to show, that all Moral Duties
whatsoever, whether relating to God, our Neighbor, or our Selves, are the
necessary results and consequents of the Love of God; so that we cannot once
suppose, that these should cease at any time to be the Duties of Men and Women,
but we must also suppose them then deprived of their Essential Form, and to be
changed into another sort of Beings.

Fifthly, This Doctrine also is as apparent a contradiction to the Happiness
and Welfare of Mankind. We cannot be in a Happy or tolerably Good state, but by
conforming our selves to the Precepts of this Law.

We have already showed, that those must necessarily be deplorably Miserable,
who live in subjection to any corrupt Appetite, any Fleshly or Spiritual Lust.
To which purpose, (...). Strom. Lib. 2. p. 424.
I will add this passage of Clemens Alexandrinus, To submit and give place to
evil Affections is extreme Slavery, as to overcome them is the only Liberty.
Nor can the best place in the World, not Heaven it self, or the most Glorious
outward circumstances, make that person Happy, or not Miserable, within whom
all is amiss and out of order, and who is endued with no good Habit or Temper
of Mind. A diseased Body will be uneasy, do what you can to it, and so will
diseased Souls.

These things considered, it is the most Amazing thing, that any who call
themselves Christians can entertain such a Notion as this of Christian Liberty;
the directly contrary being the whole Design and Business of Christianity. And
yet for all that we find it as Ancient as the Apostles days; there were those
so early that did not only Teach it but Practiced upon it; that used their
Liberty for a cloak of Maliciousness, and turned the Grace of God into
lasciviousness. But it is no over-bold saying, that if this could be really
proved to be a Liberty of Christ's bringing into the World, there is no Good
man but would abhor the Christian Religion.

But the Antinomians (not to make worse of them than they are) tell us, that
they do not deny the Obligation of Christians to the performance of the Duties
required by the Moral Law, but it is only Love, Gratitude and ingenuity that can
oblige them. Which is as much as to say, that they are not obliged to them in
strict Justice, or as they are the Matter of a Law.

But alas, they very little mend the matter by this Salvo, nay their Doctrine
is of the same dangerous consequence with it, that it is without it. For,

First, It destroys all the Gospel Precepts, makes them insignificant and idle
things; They being all Moral, either in themselves or in their Design.

Secondly, It takes off all Obligation to Love, Ingenuity and Gratitude. You
say you are not bound to be Righteous, Charitable, Temperate, etc. by any other
Law than that of Love and Gratitude: But by what Law are you obliged to the
Love of God and Christ, to be Grateful to them, and to have an Ingenuous,
Thankful Sense of the Great things they have done for you? You must say by no
Law at all, seeing you make these the only Law of Christians. And, if you are
obliged to these things by no Law, how are they Duties? And persuade a man
once, that they are not Duties, and 'twill be very strange if he make any
Conscience of Love and Gratitude: And then there is nothing left to hold him in
from committing all manner of wickedness with greediness, whenever the
Tempter or his Lusts solicit him, and opportunities are offered to him.

But besides, they have another Doctrine, and it is that upon which this strange
wild Notion is founded, which takes away all necessity of being Grateful and
Ingenuous, viz. That the Righteousness of Christ is Formally (and not only in
its Fruits and Effects) a Believers; so that He has done all that the Law
requires in the Believers stead, or as Personating him.

This is their Sense of those words lately cited, I came not to destroy the
Law, but to fulfill it; so that Christ having fulfilled the Law as the Believers
Representative, he has fulfilled it himself in Christ. And Christ's Active and
Passive Obedience is his, both as to Matter and Principle, and therefore
Christ's Love and Gratitude are his Love and Gratitude, and all those Graces
which so shined forth in Christ are the Believers, in their very Formality and
Essential nature.

Now what should ail those that can down with this strange stuff, to boggle at
believing that they have no need at all of any other Love, Ingenuity or
Gratitude, than what is thus imputed to them? And therefore you see that their
talking of the Law of Love and Gratitude is but a pitiful shift, and will do
nothing toward the deliverance of their Doctrine of Freedom from the Moral
Law, from the necessary tendency it is charged with, to the letting the Reins
loose, and opening the Floodgates to all Ungodliness.

I exceedingly wonder how it is possible, for People that have not first lost
their Wits, to embrace an Opinion so apparently Destructive of Christianity and
of all Religion, and all this while profess themselves Christians, and the
only Christians too.

But I have bestowed too much time in the Confutation of this Hateful Notion of
Christian Liberty; it being as ridiculously silly as it is wicked: And it being
as evident to him that knows any thing of the Gospel, that it is Antichristian
Licentiousness, as that there is any such thing as Christian Liberty.

Poor Souls! They little understand what Liberty means, who are able to talk
or think at this rate.

In short, He that believes that true Christians are delivered by the
Sufferings of Christ from the Curse due to the Transgressors of this Law,
believes most truly; but whosoever believes they are delivered from the Power
it had to oblige to the Duties thereof, or that any man can be so delivered,
thinks most wickedly, and thinks most madly.

CHAP. XIII.
A Second False Notion of Christian Liberty, viz. That which makes it to
consist in Freedom from the Obligation of those Laws of Men, which enjoin or
forbid indifferent things. This Notion differently managed by the Defenders of
it. First, Some extend it so far as to make it to reach to all Humane Laws, the
matter of which are things indifferent. Secondly, Others limit it to those
which relate to Religion and the Worship of God. The 23. Verse. of the 7. Chap.
of the 1 Epist. to the Corinthians cleared from giving any Countenance to
either of these Opinions. The Former of them Confuted by three Arguments: And
the Latter by four. Under the Second of which, several Texts of Scripture which
are much insisted upon in the defense thereof, are taken into Consideration. An
unjust Reflection upon the Church of England briefly replied to. And this
Principle, that the imposing of things indifferent in Divine Worship is no
Violation of Christian Liberty, proved to be no ways Serviceable to Popery, by
considering what the Popish Impositions are in Three Particulars.
SEcondly, We are next to speak to that Notion of Christian Liberty, which
makes it to consist in Freedom from those Laws of Men, that command or forbid
Indifferent things: ( i. e.) Things neither good nor evil in their own nature,
nor required or prohibited by any Law of God.

This Notion is differently managed by the Defenders of it.

First, Some extend it to all Humane laws, the Matter of which are things
Indifferent.

Secondly, Others limit it to those which relate to Religion only, and the
Worship of God.

But what proof is there of Christ's having purchased such a Liberty as this?
Or that Christians are made Free from such Laws in either of these Senses?

There is one Text insisted on by both of these Parties for each of their
Sentiments about this matter; viz. that of S. Paul, 1 Cor. 7. 23. Ye are bought
with a price, be not ye the Servants of Men. That is, say the former party, Ye
are Redeemed by the precious Blood of Christ from the Obligation of all merely
Humane Laws: From all such Observances as are only of Men's imposing, which
neither Natural Light, nor any Divine Law has made Necessary, but have left us
Free to. And the latter Party say, The meaning is, Ye are Redeemed by Christ's
Blood from all merely Humane Impositions which respect Religion and Divine
Worship, as being aware that the other Exposition is too too extravagant.

But these two Parties are equally Out in their Application of this Text to
their several purposes, nor will it do the least service to either of them. And
they may as well conclude from that of our Savior, Matthew. 23. 9. Call no man
your Father upon Earth, for one is your Father which is in Heaven, that it is
forbidden them to acknowledge any such Relation upon Earth, as that of Father,
as raise either of those Doctrines from those words of S. Paul.

And, as it is manifest, that by this Prohibition of our Savior, no more is to
be understood, than that we ought not to give up our selves Universally and
Absolutely to be Guided and Governed by any Man on Earth; as the Pharisees (of
whom He is there discoursing, and against the imitation of whose proud
practices he there cautions his Disciples) did expect their Proselytes should
be by them; as young Children who are wholly ruled by the Will of their
Parents: I say, as, by considering the Context, it is most evident that our
Savior there only speaks against an Unlimited subjection to Men, as being that
which is due to God only, so it is exceedingly Unreasonable to make that
Prohibition of the Apostle to speak any more than thus much, Put not your
selves so under the power of any Man or Men whatsoever, as to be in all things
without exception, at their Devotion. As to subject your selves to their Lusts,
in doing those things at their Command which God has forbidden. And thus to
do, it is acknowledged most freely, is with a Witness opposite to our Christian
Liberty, according to that Notion of it, which in this Discourse has been laid
down and defended by us.

But it is, I think, a plain case, that this Place has been not only by these
men, but generally mistaken; and that Doctor Hammond is in the right, in
reading the words otherwise than they are translated, viz. thus: Are ye bought
with a price? be not ye the Servants of Men. (...) (...) may as well be
rendered, Are ye? as Ye are bought with a price. So that the meaning of these
words according to this Reading is this, Have you bought out your Liberty, and
obtained Manumission (having been formerly Servants to Heathens) sell not your
selves again. Return not to that condition of Servitude, but prefer Liberty.
The immediately foregoing Verses do greatly favor this Reading, viz. Ver. 21,
22. Art thou called being a Servant? care not for it, think it not a
disparagement to Christianity for a Bondsman to be a Christian, but if thou
may be made Free, use it rather: Prefer Freedom, if thou can lawfully
obtain it. For he that is called in the Lord, being a Servant, is the Lord's
Freeman: Likewise also he that is called being Free, is Christ's Servant. So
that the 23. Ver. follows these two very fitly and pertinently, as we now read
it, Are ye bought with a price? that is, out of your Servile condition, (and it
was ordinary in those days, for Christians to buy themselves from their Heathen
Masters) be not ye, or be not ye made [(...)] the Servants of Men. Or return
not any more to your former condition. Now,

First, For that Doctrine which makes it a part of Christian Liberty to be
freed from all Laws that are merely Humane; (which the minds of some Professors
of Christianity were leavened with, as I might show, even in the Apostles time,
and all theirs must needs have been, who then held themselves disobliged from
the Moral Law) I say, as for that Doctine, the Wildness thereof will be
sufficiently exposed, by that time we have considered these following
Particulars.

First, There is no intimation in Scripture of any such Liberty as this. I
cannot think of any Text that so much seems to look that way, as this we have
now spoken to: And this, read it how you will, cannot to any sober man, at his
second thought upon it, seem so to do. But

Secondly, Nothing is more slatly contradicted by the Holy Scriptures than this
Doctrine. For, Servants are not only commanded to be Obedient to them that are
their Masters according to the Flesh, Ephesians. 6. 5.
with fear and trembling, in singleness of heart, as unto Christ, without any
such limitation as this, If they command nothing but what God has required;
But they are expressly commanded, in all things to obey their Masters according
to the Flesh, Col. 3. 22. That is, all things not Evil in themselves, or not
forbidden by any Law of God.

The All things must be so limited, because else S. Paul would have
contradicted two other Apostles, S. Peter and S. John, who said to their
Rulers, upon their Commanding them not to teach any more in the Name of Jesus,
Whether it be right in the sight of God, to hearken unto you more than unto
God, judge ye, Acts 4. 19. This limitation needed not to be expressed, because
nothing is better known from Scripture, nor from Natural Light neither, than
that no Laws of the greatest Kings on Earth are of any force that are contrary
to any Law of the King of Kings. According to that saying of Tertullian, if I
mistake not, Obediendum est Principibus, sed intra limits disciplinae. Princes
are to be obeyed, but no farther than our Religion will give us leave.

I see not how he can be better than a downright Atheist, let him pretend what
he will, whosoever patronizeth the Leviathan Doctrine, that Absolute
Subjection, Active no less than Passive, is due to Governors.

But to return to our present Business: S. Peter is still more express, 1
Epist. 2. 18. says he there to Servants, Be subject to your Masters with all
fear, not only to the Good and Gentle, but also to the Froward. Or, though they
require Unreasonable things of you, if they be not forbidden by a Higher Power,
do you obey them.

But I presume the greatest Zealots for this wild Notion who have Servants, are
well content that they should have no plea from their Christianity to disobey
themselves in any of their Commands; but are only concerned to have their
Notion of Christian Liberty true in reference to the Laws of the Magistrate. As
if a Master of a Family has more Power over his Servants, than a King has
over his Subjects. Let us see therefore what Doctrine we find concerning
Obedience to Kings and the Higher Powers.

S. Peter says, 1 Epist. 2. 13. Submit your selves to every Ordinance of Man
for the Lords sake; whether it be to the King as Supreme, or unto Governors,
as unto them that are sent by him, etc.

Again, Every Soul is commanded to be Subject to the Higher Powers, because
there is no Power but of God, the Powers that be are ordained of God, Romans 13.
1, 2, etc.

And Ver. 5. it is said, We must needs be Subject, and that not only for Wrath,
but also for Conscience sake. But there is not the least syllable, either in
these or any other places, of such a limitation as might Reconcile these
Injunctions with this Notion of Christian Liberty. And we may be confident,
that if, by virtue of that Liberty, Christians were disobliged from Obedience
to their Governors, whenever they required things indifferent, (though very
unreasonably enjoined, yet in their own nature not Evil, and no where forbidden
by God to be done) the Apostle would have put in this Exception in the last
mentioned place: The Emperor being a great Tyrant, and rather a Monster than a
Man, that then Reigned.

Thirdly, If Governors can oblige us to nothing, but what Antecedently to
their Laws we ought to do, there is no formal Obedience at all due to them. I
am then no more bound in Conscience to obey them, than those who have no power
over me, that are invested by God with no Authority. For if such say to me, Do
not Kill, Do not Steal, Do not commit Adultery, etc. I shall greatly sin in not
hearkening to them. And whereas it will be replied, that though such
Injunctions of Persons not placed in Power ought to be observed, yet not as
theirs, but as Divine Injunctions, I must needs profess that I do not believe
it neither to be at all my Duty to obey such Laws of our Governors under the
n^tion of theirs: My obligation to obey all the Laws of God being as strong and
indispensable every whit, by virtue of His immediate Authority, as if they were
backed and enforced by never so many, and never so severe Laws of his
Vicegerents. Nor can any of their Laws make what God Almighty has obliged me
either to or from, one jot a greater Duty or Sin than it was before; For the
Divine Authority has made whatsoever it has commanded or prohibited, as great
a Duty or Sin, as it is capable of being made, that is, considered in it self.

It is so evident, that we are not obliged to obey a Law of the Land as such,
which only requires or forbids what is required or forbidden by an express Law
of God, that the less respect any one has to Humane Laws in such things, in
doing Justly, in being Temperate and Chaste, in attending upon the solemn
Worship of God, and the like, supposing he makes Conscience of them upon the
account of the Divine Laws, the better Man is he, and the more sincere
Christian. And therefore such Laws of Men, as are Enacted against what God's
Law has forbidden, or do enjoin what was before commanded by God, are not made
for a Righteous man (as the Apostle speaks, even of the Law of Moses) but for
such Wretches as live under no Sense of the Divine Sovereignty, and would not
have any regard to God's Laws, were they not enforced with Men's, having severe
penalties annexed to them.

So that, if I am disobliged by my Christian Liberty from Doing or Forbearing
any thing in Obedience to Humane Laws, but what I ought to Do or Forbear,
though there were no Laws of Men about it, that which I now said is very easy
to be believed, viz. That no Formal Obedience is due to Magistrates; and they
have no Power to make any New Laws of their own, but only to take the best
care that the Old ones, viz. the Laws of God, be observed.

And if it be so, what becomes of all those Texts wherein Obedience to
Governors is with such strictness required of Christians? This Opinion that
Rulers have no Power over us in regard of our Christian Liberty in matters of
an Indifferent Nature, does make the Fifth Commandment, and all those
Injunctions perfectly insignificant. And the Apostle might well have spared his
charge to Titus, To put those under his care in mind, to be subject to
Principalities and Powers, to obey Magistrates, etc. Tit. 3. 1.

This Monstrously wild Notion of Christian Liberty, I should not have taken
thus much notice of, as little as I have said, but that of late days Multitudes
by their behavior would make us suspect they are infected with it, who yet
will not professedly own it. It is come to that sad pass, that preaching
Obedience to Authority is become as unacceptable Doctrine as can be to even
many great Pretenders to Christianity, although it be done never so prudently
and agreeably to the express Doctrine of our Savior and his Apostles: And the
Notion of Obedience for Conscience Sake seems almost lost among not a few.
Which is one of the great Sins for which we have too good reason to fear,
there is a Heavy Scourge near us.

Secondly, As for that Doctrine which limits our disobligation, by the means of
Christian Liberty, from the Laws of Men that impose indifferent things, to
those that only relate to Religion and the Worship of God: That this is Wild
too, though more Sober than the other, will appear by these Considerations.

First, This Notion of Christian Liberty tends to introduce sad Disorder and
Confusion into the Churches of Christ, and will certainly do it if practiced
upon. I need not go about to prove, that the Order of Ecclesiastical as well as
Civil Societies consists principally in the due Regulation of things in their
own Nature Indifferent.

S. Paul has enjoined that in the Church, All things be done decently, and in
order, 1 Cor. 14. 40. But how shall they be so done, if it be a Violation of
our Christian Liberty to have any thing imposed upon us by our Governors for
Decencies and Orders sake? Particular Rules being not given us in Scripture
about this matter; which to be sure would have been, were they not left to the
Determination of the Governors of each Church, upon supposition that it is
possible to give such as would well suit all Churches.

Calvin, upon those words of S. Paul, 1 Cor. 11. 2. Now I praise you Brethren,
that you remember me in all things, and keep the Ordinances as I delivered them
to you, does thus express his Sense about this matter: Says he, We know that
every Church is left free to appoint a Form of Polity for it self, because our
Lord has prescribed nothing certain: And he speaks this you see, not as his
own sense only, but as the sense, and that undoubted too, of his other
Brethren of the Reformation: Whose judgment, were it needful, we might largely
produce to the same purpose. But there is no need of it, those very Persons,
who have been most zealous for the contrary opinion being forced to contradict
it in their practice; And, for Orders sake, to determine such things in their
several Church-Administrations as are left perfectly undetermined in Scripture
(of which might be given very many instances) notwithstanding their clamors
against the Church of England upon this account, as modest as she is in her
Impositions.

Secondly, This Notion of Christian Liberty is so great an infringment of the
Liberty Christ has left to Ecclesiastical Governors, as not to leave them so
much, as it is certain the Governors of the Jewish Church was invested with,
who yet were bound up and determined in a very great number of Particulars.

Over and above the Multitude of Rites and Ceremonies which God himself did
annex to the Substance of his Worship, we read of not a few others that were
added by Men. We have a large account of such in Maimonides, in his Book De
Cultu Divino, and the Holy Scriptures themselves present us with diverse such,
without the least intimation of God's dislike of them; a Summary of which is to
be seen in several late Treatises.

I will only instance in some few of the chief of them, viz. King Solomon's
Hallowing the middle part of the Temple for Sacrifices, 1 Kings 8. 64. The
celebrating of the Passover for fourteen days by King Hezekiahs order, although
God had commanded no more than half that number, 2 Chronicles. 30. 23. The Yearly
Feast of Purim, Esther 9. 27. The set Hours of Prayer in the Temple, Acts 3. 1.
The Feast of Dedication, ordained by the Jews, 1 Maccab. 4. 29. in
commemoration of the new Consecrating the Altar, after Antiochus had profaned
it. This Feast, though God did not prescribe it, was Honored by Christ's own
presence at it, John 10. 22, 23. Several Alterations, and particularly that of
the Gesture, in Eating the Passover; The which Christ declared his Approbation
of by his Conformity to them, Matthew. 26. 20.

To these I shall only add those two known Rites of the Jews not commanded in
the Law, viz. That of joining Baptism with Circumcision in admitting
Proselytes; and that of the Post-coenium, or Feast after the Passover. And
these two our Savior was so far from condemning, upon the score of their being
of Humane Institution, that his two Great Sacraments received their rise from
them.

The Texts which are chiefly urged, to prove the Unlawfulness of bringing any
thing into the Worship of God, but what He has himself prescribed, are those
in the Old Testament, wherein God declares his displeasure against some of the
Israelites, for doing those things which he commanded them not: And one in the
New, but cited out of the Old, where our Savior reprehendeth the Pharisees for
Teaching for Doctrines the Commandments of men.

Those Texts in the Old Testament are Lev. 10. 1. Deuteronomy. 17. 3. Ier. 7. 31.
Chap. 19. 5. Chap. 32. 35. But I wonder that those who produce these Texts for
such a purpose, could not see without our showing it to them, that they all
speak of such things as God did not only not Command, but had strictly forbid.

In Lev. 10. 1. The thing which God says He Commanded them not, was Nadab and
Abihu's offering strange fire before the Lord. Which was an Act of Disobedience
to a most express Law, Chap. 6. 12, 13.

That, in Deuteronomy. 17. 3. not commanded by God, was a most heinous Sin, and a flat
Transgression of the First Commandment, viz. Serving other Gods, and
Worshipping of them, the Sun, the Moon and the Host of Heaven.

That not Commanded, Ier. 7. 31. was not only contrary to the Law of God, but
a horrible wickedness condemned by the Light of Nature, viz. The burning of
their Sons and their Daughters in the Fire, in the Valley of Hinnom.

That which God says, He Commanded not, neither came it into his Mind, Jer.
19. 5. was the same Unnatural wickedness, viz. The burning their Sons with Fire
for Burnt-offerings to Baal.

And that in Ier. 32. 35. was the causing of their Sons and Daughters to pass
through the Fire unte Molech.

But what does Gods condemning such Abominable practices as these signify,
toward the proving it unlawful to use or impose certain innocent Rites and
Circumstances in Divine worship, which are not expressly and particularly
required by God? But may be truly said to be in the general required by him, as
such are necessary to the decorous management of his Worship, and agreeable to
the forementioned Rule, of Doing all things decently, and in order.

And whereas the Urgers of these Texts for the foresaid purpose do reply to us,
that though they cannot deny but the instances of the things not Commanded
mentioned in each of them, are things also Prohibited, yet they are pertinently
insisted upon by them, because it is tacitly implied in God's expressing them
as things only not Commanded, that things not Commanded in His Worship offend
him, as well as things Prohibited.

To this I briefly Answer, that this is subtle Arguing indeed, except it can be
showed that God does any where condemn the doing in his Worship what is lawful
in its own Nature, and no where forbidden by him, under the notion of a thing
not Commanded. Which I dare affirm cannot be showed. And I add, that nothing is
more absurd, than to build Doctrines upon Idioms of the Sacred Language; but
this is too commonly done by the men we are now dealing with, as I am able to
show in too many Instances.

And if we should turn the Scales, and argue thus, such and such things are not
Forbidden by God, therefore they are Commanded, we should not be guilty of a
grosser absurdity than they are in inferring from God's not having Commanded
them, that he has therefore Forbidden them.

If it be said (as it is by these men) that there is a general Precept, Deuteronomy.
4. 2. that makes it as evident, that things not commanded in Divine Worship may
not be done, though they ben't forbidden, as if there were particular instances
of that nature condemned, viz. Ye shall not add unto the word which I command
you, neither shall you diminish ought from it, that ye may keep the
Commandments of the Lord your God which I command you.

I Reply, that if they be not mistaken in the sense of these words, they will
prove more than is intended to be proved, or than they would have true: Namely,
that nothing is to be done out of as well as in the Worship of God, but what is
expressly and particularly Commanded. But Episcopius (who may be listened to in
this matter because no Episcopalian) has showed that these words, Ye shall
(...) add unto the word which I command you, Instit. Theol. Lib. 3. cap. 8. p.
97.
neither shall you diminish ought from it, are no new Precept; but only
signify, Ye shall not transgress the Commandments of God, by doing any thing
contrary to them, which is to Add; or by omitting any thing Required by them,
which is to Diminish.

And as to that Text in the New Testament, Matthew. 15. 9. But in vain do they
Worship me, teaching for Doctrines, the Commandments of men. It is manifest,
that that which is condemned in the Pharisees here is the setting up of their
own Constitutions in stead or in the place of God's, and those too contrary to
God's Commandments. This is evident from the Context. Our Savior says Verse.
3. Why do you transgress the Commandments of God by your Traditions? That is,
Non solum autem per praevaricationem frustrati sunt Legem Dei, miscentes Vinum
Aqua; sed and suam Legem e contrario statuerunt, quae usque adhuc Pharisaica
vocatur. Advers. Haeres. Lib. 4. Cap. 25. p. 342.
says Irenaeus upon these words, They did not only frustrate the Law of God
by prevarication, mixing Wine with Water; but they also set their Law in
opposition, or contradiction to the Law of God, etc. And that so they did
appears by what follows, Verse. 4, 5, 6. For God commanded, saying, Honor thy
Father and Mother, etc. But ye say, Whosoever shall say to his Father or his
Mother, it is gift by whatsoever thou might be profited by me; And Honor
not his Father or Mother, he shall be free. Thus have ye made the Commandment
of God of none effect by your Tradition. And then next follows a Citation out
of Esaias 29. 13. according to the Septuagint, whereof these words are part, viz.
Ye Hypocrites, well did Esaias prophecy of you, saying, This people draws
nigh unto me with their mouth, and honors me with their lips: But their
heart is far from me. But in vain do they worship me, teaching for Doctrines
the Commandments of men.

We will also consider these words as they are recited by S. Mark, Chap. 7. 7.
with the Verse following. Howbeit in vain do they Worship me, teaching for
Doctrines the Commandments of men. For laying aside the Commandment of God, ye
hold the Tradition of men, as the washing of Pots and Cups, etc. That is,
according to Doctor Hammond 's Paraphrase upon the place, You are those
Hypocrites that profess great strictness in performances toward God, and
practice in some external things more than God commands you, and impose these
on others as the commands of God, when they are only Humane Ordinances. As for
the inward purity of the heart and actions, to which all God's Laws of washings
did refer, you take no care of them, transgress against this substantial part
of Religion in the foulest manner, and spend all your time in these External
superfluities, ^^shing of Pots, etc. The Ordinances of your Rabbis only.

But what are the Hypocritical and wicked doings here condemned, to Governors
determining of External Circumstances of Administration in the Worship of God,
which are not only innocent in themselves, but also not set up in the place
of, or justling out, any thing commanded by God, nor yet imposed as the
commands of God. But who can have the Forehead to fasten such high Presumptions
as these upon our Church? But I proceed,

Thirdly, As this Notion of Christian Liberty is an infringment of the Liberty
which is left to Governors, so is it also greatly injurious to the Peoples
Liberty. For it is a very highly to be prized instance of the Peoples Liberty,
that they may without giving God an offense conform to such Laws as oblige them
only to indifferent things. And it will be an intolerable straitning and
confining of our Liberty, it will be a very grievous Bondage to us, to be
always obnoxious to the Penalties which are the Sanctions of such Laws, and to
other manifold inconveniences that follow upon disobeying them.

Christian Liberty, according to this Notion, is so far from being worthy of
our Savior's purchasing, that it is infinitely more desirable to be without it,
in regard of the extremely mischievous consequences which follow upon
quarrelling with Authority about harmless matters, which have not the least ill
influence upon our Souls; whereby not only those who refuse Obedience are
exposed in their own Persons and Families to great Evils, both Temporal and
Spiritual, but also the whole Community, the Church and State too, by their
means. This we all know, at this day, by very sad experience.

This, I say, is such a Liberty as is the occasion of lamentable Mischiefs both
public and private, but I am wholly to seek what Good can possibly accrue
thereby; and therefore we may safely warrant it, to be no Liberty of our
Blessed Savior's procurement, but the contrary.

If we were well instructed in the Nature of the Gospel Dispensation, we should
be very certain that whatsoever does no way tend to the Depraving of our Souls,
and the bringing us into Bondage to Sin (Which we have proved to be the only
Opposite to our Grand Christian Liberty) cannot be unlawful to us Christians;
because not prejudicial to the Ultimate Design of the Gospel, which is the
making us Free from the Dominion of Sin. To which Design we have showed all the
Precepts of our Savior, the Promises and Threatenings (and I may add Doctrines
too) are subservient. And on the contrary, we may be as sure, that whatsoever
is apt to hinder the promoting of this Design must needs be Unlawful lawful
under the Gospel: As all that are not blind, or do not shut their Eyes, may
easily see this same pretended Christian Liberty most sadly does.

And there is nothing more apparent, than that Obedience to Authority, in all
things not forbidden by the Divine Laws, does mightily conduce to the promoting
of Peace, Love, Humility, Self-denial, and the like great Christian Virtues:
But Disobedience in such matters does as much occasion the gratifying of those
Devilish Lusts, Pride, Uncharitableness, Contention, Wrath, Sedition, etc.

Fourthly, Those that pretend it to be such a Violation of Christian Liberty to
be obliged by Men's Laws to things indifferent, if they will be true to
themselves and their own Principles, must not only refuse Obedience to the
Injunctions of such things, but to the Prohibitions also of such things: As
they must not do such as are commanded to be done, so they must do such as are
commanded to be forborne. For it is as great an Infringment of our Liberty to
have indifferent things Forbidden us, as to have them Imposed upon us; It Is a
no less intrenchment upon it, to be tied up from what we may antecedently to
the Magistrates Authority do, as to be commanded what we may omit.

So that if the things which the Dissenters now Refuse to do because Commanded,
should hereafter be Forbidden by Authority, they would be obliged, in order to
the Maintenance of their Christian Liberty, to be every whit as zealous for
them as now they are against them: Nor were they so honest as they should have
been, but false to this their Principle, and shamefully betrayed their Liberty,
in so patiently Submitting, when time was, to the severe Prohibition of the
same things, though it was by an Usurped Power too.

What a strange Liberty is this, which, in its natural consequences, tends to
make people so Humoursom, Crossgrain'd, and Opposite to Government! Surely it
cannot be Christian, but the most Unchristian Liberty.

If this Free Dealing should offend any, I shall be sorry for it, but must
withal take leave to tell the offended, that it is an Evidence of exceeding
great Weakness, not to say worse, to be Angry with those who endeavor in the
Spirit of Meekness, to convince us of our Dangerous Mistakes. But such is the
Fate of Conscientious opposing Popular and Prevailing Errors, that it seldom
meets with better success, than kindling the Passions, and sharpening the
Tongues (and Pens too) of those, who are most obliged to be thankful for it:
But Wisdom is justified of her Children.

But however it be taken, it was never more seasonable, nor ever scarcely so
Necessary, to do our utmost toward the rectifying of Peoples Apprehensions
about matters of this nature; when our Contentions and Animosities about little
things mostly, (things very little in themselves) and so great a Defection from
our Church, merely upon the account of such things as are no where condemned by
the Law of God, nor are opposed by any express or plain Text, but by
exceedingly labored and far fetched Consequences, have given our Adversaries
such Advantage against us, and do them far greater service, than all their open
Attempts, or secret wicked Plots and Conspiracies, through the infinite
Goodness of God to us, have hitherto done. God Almighty grant that that saying
be not to be applied to us ere long, which was used of our Predecessors the
Britains, when their intestine Quarrels had occasioned their being Vanquished
by the Romans, viz. Dum singuli pugnant, Vniversi vincuntur. While they
severally contend and quarrel with one another, they are all overcome by a
Common Enemy.

I must confess, when I consider what Excellent Treatises have of late been
published, fraught with Unanswerable and the most convincing and affecting
Arguments, to persuade our Brethren of the Separation to ease us in a great
measure of our Fears of Popery or Confusion, by Returning to the Communion of
that Church wherein most of them were Baptized; and when withal I observe what
little Success those Treatises have had, I have as faint hopes as can be that
so small an endeavor as this should do any Service. But however, it is some
satisfaction to my Mind to express my Good Will.

But we are told by some, that we may thank the Church of England if ever the
Pope be again our Master, and particularly that Principle of Hers we have been
now defending, viz. that Imposing of Indifferent things in the Worship of God
is no Violation of Christian Liberty: And that this Principle will open a door
to Popish Conformity, if we should be once more so unhappy as to be brought
into Subjection to the Roman Yoke.

To these I Reply, in the First place, That it is unconceiveable how any thing
but Malice or the thickest Ignorance can charge the Church of England with
serving the Interest of the Popish Religion: For is any thing more Notorious,
than that almost all the opposition that has either heretofore or of late been
made against Popery has been by the Bishops and the other Clergy of this
Church? To say nothing of what the Separating Party have done (though not upon
that Design) to promote Popery, which would be as large as unpleasant a Theme
to insist on; what have they done in defense of the Reformed Religion against
Popery? Have they all of them put together done the half quarter part of that
Service in this kind, that One Excellent Dean of our Church has done? Truly I
much doubt it. And I think I may adventure to say, that all the Reformed
Churches together can hardly show of their own so many Learned and Judicious
Treatises against the Body and the several Parts of Popery, as our single
Church can show of Hers.

Again, Is any thing better known than that the Priests and Jesuits, and Popish
Faction do at this time spit all their Venom and bend all their Force against
the Church of England, and indeed always have done? This shows that they are
well aware, though so many among our selves will not acknowledge it, but would
have the World think the directly contrary, that our Church is the most
Formidable of all their Adversaries.

In short, Who needs Arguments to convince him, that the Church of England is
at present our only Bulwark against Popery? As, ever since the Reformation,
she has been acknowledged by our Brethren beyond Sea, to be the strongest and
most impregnable upon several accounts.

But Secondly, as to this Principle of our Church, that Imposing of Indifferent
things in the Worship of God is no Violation of Christian Liberty, it is a most
weak and ignorant furmise, that it should in the least befriend Popery. Those
little understand what Popery means that think thus: For,

First, There is nothing more plainly demonstrable than that many of those
things which are imposed by the Roman Church are far from being Indifferent in
their own nature, but the grossest Corruptions, as contrary to the Doctrine and
Practice of the first Ages of the Church; and, which is far more, as contrary
to the Laws of God and our Savior Christ, as is Darkness to Light. I have
given a Catalogue in the Design of Christianity of the chief of these, Chap. 17.
with Remarks upon them, and thither I refer the Reader that needs satisfaction.

Secondly, Other of Her Impositions, which are Indifferent in themselves, are
made to change their Nature by the Notion under which they are enjoined by her.
That Church enjoins no Indifferent things as such (as ours does all she
imposes, as appears by her 34 th Article) but as made necessary by Divine
Authority; She pretending to the Infallible Guidance of the Holy Ghost in all
Her Decrees and Constitutions: And therefore expects your Receiving them, as
you do the Holy Scriptures, with a Divine Faith, and the self-same awful Regard
and Reverence.

I might add too, that several of her Rites and Ceremonies are imposed under a
most Superstitious notion, either as Sacraments conveying Grace, or as having
some special Virtue in them, to atone the Divine Majesty, or to scare away the
Devil, etc.

Thirdly, It is my opinion too, that though their Ceremonies were never so
innocent in themselves, yet the Multitude of them does make them in the lump to
cease to be Indifferent. My reason is, because it is unconceiveable to me, but
that so great a Number must needs so employ the Mind in the Worship of God, as
that it is not possible to be intent thereupon, and consequently must frustrate
(at least in a great measure) the Design of Worship.

But this is no Reason to a Papist, who cannot be thoroughly so, and
acknowledge the necessity of exercising the Mind in Divine Worship: For his
Holy Mother has taught him this mad and impious Doctrine, That the Sacraments
confer Grace, ex opere operato, from the work Done, and so are differenced from
those of the Old Testament, they conferring Grace, ex opere operantis, from the
work of the Doer; as also that a mere general Attention in saying their Prayers
and numbering them over, is as much as is necessary. And if we can believe that
we need not mind our Prayers, we have no reason to blame those of them, who do
not desire to understand them; Nor yet their Church for enjoining the saying
them in a Language which the Generality of Her Children are ignorant of; as if
She designed in so doing to put an Affront upon S. Paul, who has taught us in
the most express terms the quite contrary Doctrine, in the 14 Chapter of the
First to the Corinthians.

To conclude this Chapter: Our Notion of Christian Liberty is so very far from
befriending Popery, that it is not possible it should have a greater Enemy; in
that it so highly conduces to the advancing of the true Spirit and Power of
Religion, and to the perfect ridding our Minds of those two as Great Friends to
Popery, as Pests to Religion, and even Humane Society, viz. Superstition and
fanaticism.

I mean by these two a Base Unworthy Apprehension of the Deity, and a Blind,
Irrational, Heady Zeal.

If it be said after all, that supposing the two Notions of Christian Liberty,
which we have now declared our Sense (...) be never so false, yet we are
notwithstanding too confined in Our Notion; in that Christian Liberty does not
only ^onsist in Freedom from the Dominion of (...) and the other sad
Consequents of it, ^ut also in our Freedom as to all things ^fan Indifferent
nature, to or from which ^e are not determined as by any Divine, (...) neither
by any Humane Law: If this, ^say, be objected, our Answer in one lord is this.
This is not Christian, but ^his is Natural Liberty. That of S. Paul ^ving been
in All Ages, and in refe^ence to all sorts of People, as Great a Truth, as it
has been since our Saviors ^ime and in reference to Christians, viz. Where no
Law is there is no Transgression.

CHAP. XIV.
An Answer to this Question, Whether the Prescribing of Forms of Prayer, for
the Public Worship of God, be not an Encroachment upon Christian Liberty?
Wherein it is showed, that this is not a Stifling of the Spirit, or Restraining
the exercise of his Gift. And what in Prayer is not, as also what is the Gift
of the Spirit. Whereby is occasioned an Answer to another Question, viz.
Whether an Ability for Preaching be properly a Gift of the Spirit.
WHat has been last discoursed gives me occasion to Enquire, Whether the
Imposing of a Liturgy, or Forms of Prayer for the Public Worship of God, be
not an Encroachment upon Christian Liberty? I answer it is, if that Principle
taken up by very many among us be a true one, viz. That this is a Stifling of
the Spirit, and a Restraining of the Exercise of one of his Gifts. If this be
so, I say, it can be no better than a very great invasion of Christian Liberty,
and a far greater than the mere obliging men to things Indifferent. For, as S.
Paul says, 1 Cor. 12. 7. The Mani^estation of the Spirit is given to every man
to profit withal; and therefore for Christians to be limited in doing good by a
Gift of the Spirit, must needs be a robbing them of that Liberty, which Christ
in sending Him designed to give them.

By the way, it shall be no part of my Reply to say, that only the Ministers
are here concerned, not at all the People: For although a Conceived Prayer of
the Minister be of the nature of a prescribed Form to those that join with him,
as to the confining their Spirits, yet the People must needs be sufferers by
means of their Ministers being stinted in the exercise of a Gift of the Spirit,
since it was designed for their profit; and therefore upon this account, and
moreover in regard of the Countenance they will thereby give to Authority in
such a kind of Sacrilegious Usurpation of power over Ministers, it cannot be
justifiable in them to Attend willingly upon such Forms.

But in order to the undeceiving of those, who are so tenacious of this
conceit, that a prescribed Liturgy is a hinderance to the Free Exercise of a
Gift of the Spirit, I must freely profess, that I know of no Gifts of the
Spirit which we have warrant from Scripture to believe are continued to the
Church at this day, besides those which S. Paul calls the Fruits of the Spirit,
Gal. 5. 22. Where he says, The fruit of the Spirit is Love, Joy, Peace,
Long-suffering, Gentleness, Goodness, Faith, Meekness, Temperance. These and
the like Christian Graces, are Gifts which the Spirit still bestows, and
therefore called Graces. They are supernatural Gifts as no man by his mere
Natural power can obtain them, but only by the Spirit's blessing of our
Endeavors; and to the sincere use of the Gospel-means the Spirit is always
ready to give his blessing. And the reason why in these latter Ages, these
blessed Gifts are bestowed upon no more Professors of Christianity than they
are, is because the generality of such are miserably wanting to themselves, and
to the Holy Spirit, in refusing to do their part, and to cooperate with Him:
Because they will not attend to the evidence the Spirit has given to the Truth
of the Gospel, and therefore have too weak and ineffectual a belief thereof:
Because they will not consider the Doctrine of the Gospel; they will not weigh
well, and lay to heart its Precepts, with the infinitely powerful motives
wherewith they are enforced. Because they will not listen to the Spirits good
motions and suggestions, whereby he works in men to Will, and begets in them
good Resolutions, but do truly ^^ench the Spirit (though that phrase is ^sed in
reference to his miraculous Gifts) and resist the Holy Ghost; and because they
will not make a believing Application to Him for his powerful Assistance. I say
it is upon these, and such like accounts, that the forementioned Gifts of the
Spirit are so rare, and that the generality of those who are honored with the
Title of Christians are so destitute of them as we see they are. Nay,
multitudes are so befooled by the enemy of their Souls, as to expect that the
Spirit should do all in them, without their doing any thing; that He should
make them Temperate, Righteous, Charitable, Meek, Humble and Submissive to
God's Will, Heavenly-minded, and the like, without their due attendance upon
those Ordinances of the Word, Sacrament and Prayer, and serious Consideration
and Watchfulness over themselves, wherein alone we have ground to expect the
powerful working of the Divine Grace in our Souls.

But, I say, though these Gifts are observable in so very few comparatively,
(the account whereof I have briefly touched upon, and showed that it is men's own
fault that they are not very common) yet we have no warrant from Scripture that
I know of, to call those which are much more common, though they are by many so
reputed, Gifts of the Spirit; notwithstanding the Prophecies and Promises of so
plentiful a pouring of Him out in the times of the Gospel.

There were indeed common as well as more special Gifts of the Spirit in the
First Ages; For the miraculous ones of speaking all manner of Tongues,
Prophesying, Healing all sorts of Diseases, Casting out Devils, etc. which were
the great Witnesses to the truth of Christianity, were very common. They were
not only conferred upon the Apostles, but the private Believers: These signs,
said our Savior, shall follow them that believe in my name, etc. Mark 16. 17.
And not only on those Believers who were sincere Christians, but those also
whose Lives were not at all answerable to their Christian profession, as
appears by those words of our Savior, Mat. 7. 22.

And several of these miraculous Gifts, we have full assurance from Antiquity,
Vid. Just. Mart. Dial. cum Trypho. p. 247. Tertul. ad Scap. p. 69: Rig. Orig.
cont. C^ls. lib. 1. p. 34.
did continue in the Church, though in nothing so plentiful a measure,
particularly those of Healing, Prophesying and Casting out Devils, till about
the beginning of the Fourth Century, when Providence blessed her with a
Christian Emperor, and she came to be protected by his Sword and Laws; and
consequently stood not in such need of those Gifts for the keeping her in
Heart, and the upholding her Credit and Reputation in the World.

But as these have ceased for many Ages, so the abovesaid Fruits of the Spirit
are the only Endowments now remaining, which may in a more peculiar manner be
ascribed to Him; that is, they are the only Supernatural Endowments.

As to that therefore which is commonly called the Gift of Prayer, we have
these things to say,

First, That we have not the least reason to believe, that the expressions of
the very best men's Prayers are now dictated by the Holy Ghost, or that they
pray by the Inspiration of the Spirit as to Words or Matter. I know not that
any sober men do pretend to such a Gift as this in Prayer, and too many of
those that do pretend to it do manifestly declare by the management of their
Gift, that either they juggle and are gross Cheats, or are sadly deluded.

What slovenly, what ridiculous, what bold and impudent expressions are
ordinarily heard from them? And what a deal of nauseating stuff, that has
brought a vile scandal upon Religion, and furnished Atheistical and Profane
people with matter of derision? Even such stuff as that it is no better than a
Blaspheming the Holy Ghost to father it upon Him. But I delight not to insist
upon this Argument.

It is objected, that S. Paul says, Romans 8. 26. We know not what we should
pray for as we ought, but the Spirit it self makes Intercession for us with
groanings which cannot be uttered.

I answer, that this Text makes not at all for the purpose of those who in this
sense pretend to an ability of praying by the Spirit. For, as for the Apostle's
saying, that We know not what to pray for as we ought, it is to be limited to
Temporal things, and wholly to them: For we do know that all those things which
are necessary to our Eternal Felicity, viz. all spiritual Blessings, are to be
prayed for. And we do or may know what all those are without inspiration. But
we do not know whether worldly Prosperity or Affliction may be best for us, or
what measure of temporal good things, or what particulars of such good things;
and therefore in reference to these things, we are not to pray Absolutely but
Conditionally, and with a Willingness to be denied if God sees it not good to
grant them to us. And the following words show, that it is not therefore to be
concluded, that the Spirit will put it into Good peoples hearts, what temporal
things they should pray for, for they tell us that He will back their Petitions
in Heaven by interceding for them, with unutterable Groanings; not that He will
put words into their mouths, or suggest matter of Prayer to them. I dare not
say, the Spirit never does thus, I should be then too bold; but we have no
ground to expect or hope He should, at least, in ordinary cases. In short,
whosoever pretends that his Prayers are dictated by the Holy Ghost, must have
the very same opinion of them that he has of the Divinely inspired Writings.

Secondly, I say consequently, That an ability of uttering our Minds to
Almighty God in great variety of words and phrases, is as much a Natural Gift,
or a Gift acquired in an ordinary way, that is, by study and frequent
practicing and exercising, as any Art or Ability whatsoever.

Very bad men have been often known to have a notable Faculty this way; and so
miserably weak and silly are abundance of people as to admire those for
excellent Christians in whom they perceive it, though they know them guilty of
very great immoralities, and they have nothing to commend them but this
Faculty. But there is no man, if he will set himself to it, and he be made for
it, that is, prepared with a sufficient measure of Boldness and Confidence,
with a glib Tongue and a warm Head, but may be excellent at it.

Therefore, I say, how shamefully ignorant and childish are the Vulgar sort (I
fear the much greater part) that this dexterity at pouring forth words to the
King of Heaven without fear or wit, with a mighty voice, great earnestness, and
abundance of action, shall gain to a man a greater repute with them for a
precious Christian, than all the abovementioned real fruits of the Spirit put
together? Although any Hypocrite that is qualified as we now said, may with the
greatest ease attain to it.

Such a brave man as this shall lead multitudes by the Nose, work his base
designs upon them, and infuse what Principles he lists into them. Such Babies
are the common People too generally in the affairs of Religion, and their
Spiritual concerns. But, Si populus vult decipi, decipiatur, If Folk will be
thus cheated and made a prey of, who can help it?

It may grieve us at the Hearts to think, what work the Popish Priests and
Jesuits may hereafter make (as we know that in Disguises they have already made
sad work) among these silly Sheep: No men in the World having a rarer knack at
Extemporary performances, and at Feigning and Raising of Passions than many of
them have. But,

Thirdly, The true Spirit of Prayer consists in a deep sense of the
Incomprehensible Majesty of the great God, of the infinite distance that is
between Him and us, of our unspeakable Obligations to Him, and necessary
dependence upon Him: In an affecting sense of our own Wretchedness and
Sinfulness, which makes us altogether unworthy to appear in His presence, or to
receive the least Favor at His hands: In a sense of His infinite Goodness,
Wisdom and Power, and an undoubted Belief that whatsoever is really needful for
us, He knows so to be, and is both Able and Willing to confer it upon us,
when we ask it as we ought in the Name of Jesus. Add hereunto entire
Resignation of our Wills to the Will of God, to have Granted or Denied to us,
as shall seem most agreeable to His infinite Wisdom, the Good things of this
present Life; and hungering and thirsting desires after Righteousness, after
those Divine Dispositions and Qualifications which are necessary to our being
made meet for the Kingdom of Heaven.

In such things as these does consist the Soul and Spirit of Prayer: These are
the Absolutely necessary and Essential ingredients thereof. But,

Fourthly, As for Words, they are but a circumstantial part of Prayer, and no
farther necessary than as they tend to the more quickening our Affections,
exciting our Desires, inlivening our Sense of the forementioned Objects, and
keeping our Minds fixed and intent; And in public Prayer, or Prayer with
others, they are necessary to enable others to join with us.

But the Omniscient God understands the sense of our Souls, the temper of our
Spirits, and the desires of our Hearts, though no words be used for the
expressing of them; And always measures our Prayers by those, not at all by
these. I say not at all by Words, because if they flow from an honest Heart,
and a good disposition of Mind, they cannot be so faulty as to make a Prayer
unacceptable.

And therefore it is the same thing to God whether a good Sense and good
Desires be from time to time expressed by the same, or by variety of Words and
Phrases: And he who is affected as he ought to be in the use of a Form, who
has such Desires and such a Sense as he ought to have (as thousands of good
Christians have) has as much the true Spirit of Prayer, and as much of it too,
as he can have who has the most notable Faculty at varying his Expressions.
And he who has this Faculty but wants that Sense and those good Dispositions,
is notwithstanding utterly destitute of the Spirit of Prayer.

But it is incomparably most fit, that there should be a Liturgy, or Forms
prescribed for the public Worship of God, for Prayer and Praising of God in
the Church, and for the celebration of the Holy Sacraments, with the other
Offices; because the public Worship of God ought always to be performed with
the greatest Gravity and Solemnity possible. But such a performance of Divine
Worship can never be secured, where Ministers are wholly left to their own
Liberty, and permitted to put up all the Confessions, Petitions and
Thanksgivings of the Congregation, and to perform all the Offices, in their own
Arbitrary and Extemporary Expressions.

For though some Ministers who take this Liberty may pray excellently well when
their heads are clear, and they are in a good Temper, yet I doubt there are
very few who have always that Presence of Mind, that Composedness of Thoughts,
and Constancy of Temper as not to be forced sometimes to use many Tautologies
and indecent expressions. But however the Church is never like to be provided
with such Ministers as shall be able, for the most part of them, to keep
themselves from great confusion in their conceived Prayers, from bald and
absurd phrases, and from Nauseating their Auditory with repetitions of the same
things, ful^om sayings, or lamentable misapplications of Texts of Scripture;
through overmuch modesty or other infelicities of Temper in some, and in
others through ignorance, or weakness of Natural parts, either slowness of
Invention or want of Judgment.

And besides, there is this necessity of having a Liturgy, that without one
there is no rational way of persuading strangers to hold Communion with us:
Except we can show them something which is acknowledged by common Agreement for
a Form and Method of Divine Worship, we cannot satisfy them what public
Service we perform to God, it will then be so various, that is, as not alike in
all places, so neither at all times in the same places.

But to complete my Answer to the Question in hand.

Fifthly, The affecting us with a profound Sense of the Majesty and Glorious
perfections of the God we pray to, and of our own Vileness and Unworthiness;
And a Submissive frame of Mind to the Divine Will; Ardent Breathings after more
of the Divine Image and Likeness; And a lively Faith in the Power, Wisdom and
Goodness of God, which are, as I said, the Substantial and Essential parts of
Prayer; all these we heartily and thankfully acknowledge to be the Gifts of the
Spirit. We own them to be so otherwise than all other good things which are
every of them expressions of the Divine Bounty, and consequently Gifts of the
Spirit as He is one of the Persons of the Blessed Trinity: But we profess to
owe them to the more special operations and influences of the Holy Ghost; And
for the working and increase of these, all good Christians do daily crave the
Spirits assistance.

Now I need not say, that to endeavor to put a restraint upon the exercise of
such Gifts as these is a most wicked invasion and violation of our Christian
Liberty, according to our own Notion of it.

But what we have discoursed concerning Prayer, gives me occasion to add
something of Preaching too, and to show also how far an ability for that
performance is to be ascribed to the Holy Spirit, or called one of his Gifts.
And consequently we may from hence be satisfied, whether a Preacher of the
Gospel is in^^tled to such a Liberty in reference to Preaching as may not be
limited by Au^hority, or upon no accounts taken whol^ from him, without putting
an affront upon the Holy Spirit.

First, It is out of doubt, that no man (...) has the Gift of Preaching in the
demonstration of the Spirit and of Power, in the sense that S. Paul and his
fellow-Apostles had it. 1 Cor. 2. 4.
For by the demonstration of the Spirit and of Power is meant those
extraordinary Gifts of Speaking with Tongues, Prophecy and Miracles
accompanying their Preaching, whereby they demonstrated the truth of the
Doctrine preached by them. Contra Cells. lib. 1. p. 4. Edit. Spenceri.
And so Origin understands it, in his Book against Cel^us.

Secondly, There is not the least ground to believe that any man has now the
Gift of Preaching by Inspiration, or from the immediate Revelation of the
Spirit. Nor do any seriously pretend to it, but wild Enthusiasts, Brainsick,
Melancholy and Hotheaded people, who take their own Fancies and Whims, and the
products of an ungoverned imagination for Inspirations. I say none but those
who plainly discover themselves to be such do seriously pretend to this Gift,
because there have been and still are a company of Knaves in the World (as is
manifest by their actings) who, for the carrying on their corrupt and naughty
designs, pretend to that which they are conscious to themselves they have
nothing of.

But sober and honest Preachers of the Gospel do profess to deliver nothing to
their people, but what they conceive to be long ago revealed; But what they
acknowledge they have with study and pains gathered from the Holy Scriptures,
either immediately, or by plain consequence; wherein are contained all things
necessary to be believed and practiced by us in order to Salvation; and which,
without any Additions, are able to make us wise to Salvation (as S. Paul
assures us) and are a complete Rule of Faith and Practice. And that Preacher
who shall offer to require his Auditors assent to any thing not delivered,
either in express terms or by plain consequence, in the Writings of the Old or
New Testament, does impudently impose upon their belief, except he be able to
work real Miracles for the convincing of them. He takes more upon him, than
either the Apostles, or our Savior himself, who did still appeal to the works,
the Supernatural works he did, to attest the truth of the Doctrine he delivered.

I would such impudent imposers were only to be found among the Romanists (who
are all so, and the most impudent that ever appeared upon the stage of the
World) but alas, they are too too common also among professed haters of Popery.

Thirdly, And as to the sense of the more difficult places of Scripture, no
sober Preacher pretends to come to the knowledge thereof by the immediate
illumination of the Spirit, but such a one acknowledges he does it in the
general by the exercise of his Reason: And particularly by considering the
proper signification of Words and Phrases in the Original Languages; by
comparing Scripture with Scripture; by searching into the Ancient Customs,
which give great light to a great number of Texts, and without the knowledge of
which they are not to be understood; by enquiring after the judgment of those
who lived nearest to the Times of the Apostles, etc. And after all, they submit
their Expositions of such Texts to the judgments of their Hearers, I mean such
of them as are capable of judging. As for others, Oportet discentes credere, It
becomes Learners to give credit to their Teachers. And Credendum est peritis in
sua Art. But,

Fourthly, We do piously, and by the Authority of Scripture believe, that the
Spirit is ready to assist us in our Reasonings and Enquiries, and whatsoever
particular good means we use for the understanding of Scripture, when He is
humbly and devoutly sought to by us; and when without the least prejudice,
partiality, ill design, or sinister respect, but for the best of Ends, and from
the pure love of Truth, we make Enquiry. Thus even Private Christians are
assisted in the searches and enquiries which they are able to make: For God
has promised that The Meek he will guide in judgment, and the Meek he will
teach his way.

Fifthly, In composing also of profitable Discourses, as we implore, so we have
the Divine Assistance, but we see no ground to believe that we have it in any
other manner, than in other good works of what nature soever.

But as for the ready Faculty of Discoursing from a Pulpit, and popular
speaking to a Congregation, we have no reason to believe it a Gift of the
Spirit, any more than the Lawyers strange readiness in pleading at the Bar. And
a volubility of speech upon any subject whatsoever, heat of Fancy, and
nimbleness of Wit and Invention, are as much to be attributed to the Holy
Spirit as such a Faculty.

And hence we may gather, that a Preacher of the Gospel can plead no such
Liberty as is wholly exempted from Restraints by Authority. But one that is
known to have never so good a Talent at Preaching may be forbidden the exercise
of it, till he has submitted to a lawful Ordination, such as was in use in the
Churches of Christ for Fifteen hundred years together. And when Ordained, he
may lawfully have bounds set him as to the places where he shall exercise his
Ministry in public, and as to the times when. And he may be forbidden to
meddle with such Arguments as are above the reach of his Peoples
Understandings, or are not like to conduce to their Edification, and much more
to broach dangerous Doctrines, that is, such as are so in the judgment of his
Governors. And for his Disobedience, and other Misdemeanors, he is as liable
to be suspended or totally deprived of his Ministerial Office, as are any other
Officers.

I do but touch upon and give light glances at these things, because my present
subject will not give me leave to discourse largely upon them, which would be
too great a digression from its proper business.

CHAP. XV.
A Third False Notion of Christian Liberty, viz. that which makes Liberty of
Conscience a Branch of it. Two things premised, 1. That Conscience is not so
sacred a thing as to be incapable of being obliged by Humane Laws. 2. That no
man can properly be deprived of the true Liberty of his Conscience by any Power
on Earth. That what is contended for, is more properly Liberty of Practice than
of Conscience. The Author's Opinion in reference to this Liberty delivered in
Ten Propositions. That whatsoever Liberty of this nature may be insisted on as
our Right, it is not Christian Liberty but Natural Liberty.
THirdly and Lastly, I proceed to that Notion of Christian Liberty, which makes
Liberty of Conscience a Branch of it.

But before I deliver my Opinion about this weighty point, which has
occasioned as great Feuds and sharp Contests as any whatsoever, I shall premise
two things:

First, That Conscience is not so Sacred a thing as to be incapable of being
Obliged by Humane Laws.

Secondly, That no man can properly be deprived of the true Liberty of his
Conscience by any Power on Earth.

First, That Conscience is not so Sacred a thing, as to be incapable of being
Obliged by Humane Laws. This is sufficiently clear from what is discoursed in
the Thirteenth Chapter.

But it is said by many that God is the only Lord of Conscience, and therefore
it is the highest presumption for Men to go about to bind it by their Laws. It
is the sole Prerogative of the Deity to search the Heart, Icr. 17. 10.
and try the Reins of the Children of men; Conscience is too inward and secret
a thing to fall under Man's cognizance, and therefore what have any of our
Fellow Creatures to do to give Laws to our Consciences?

In Answer hereunto, We have already seen what S. Paul's sense is about this
matter, that he says, We must needs be Subject, Romans 13. 5.
or Obedient, and that not only for wrath, but also for Conscience sake. So
that the Apostle was far from thinking, that the obligation of Humane Authority
is founded in mere Prudence, not at all in Conscience.

But no man in his Wits will say, that the Laws of Men do oblige Conscience as
the Laws of God do. Those cannot do it immediately as these do, but only by
virtue of the Divine Authority. S. Paul says, Romans 13. 1. Let every Soul be
subject to the Higher Powers: I think I shall not be over-critical in saying,
that is every Conscience, for what follows proves the obligation of Conscience
to subjection, and is an Answer to the foresaid Objection against it, viz. For
there is no Power but of God, the Powers that be are ordained of God, whosoever
therefore Resists the Power Resists the Ordinance of God, etc. So that all
we assert is this, that we are bound to obey our lawful Governors for God's
sake, who has invested them with the Authority they have over us, and
commanded us to obey those Laws of theirs which are not contradictory to any of
His. Nor do we say that Humane Authority can make more Duties or Sins than God
has made, or to speak properly and strictly, can make any thing to be a Duty
or Sin; for it can only Command or Forbid, and what it Commands, if lawful, the
Divine Authority makes it a Duty, and what it Forbids, if not a Duty, the
Divine Authority makes it a Sin. Or to speak in the words of the Learned Bishop
Tailor: Ductor Dubitantium, Book 3 chap. 1. p 21. Edit. 1.
Humane Authority does not make the action of disobedience to be a Sin. It
makes that the not compliance of the Subject is Disobedience; but it is the
Authority of God which makes Disobedience to be a Sin. And what immediately
follows deserves also to be transcribed in this place, viz. And though no
Humane Power can give or take Grace away, yet we may remember, that we our
selves throw away God's Grace, or abuse it or neglect it, when we will not make
use of it to the purposes of Humility, Charity and Obedience, all which are
concerned in our Subordination to the Laws.

There is also this difference between the Obligations of Divine and Humane
Laws, viz. The Divine Laws bind our Thoughts and the Sense of our Minds, they
bind us not only to obey them, but to think them also Wise and Good Laws. But
so do not Humane Laws, they oblige only to Obedience, but not to the thinking
them such as ought, or are fit, to be imposed. A man may think a Humane Law
imprudent or unreasonable, and be guilty of no Transgression, if
notwithstanding he complies with it; I mean, provided he keeps his thoughts to
himself, or does not make them public.

The forementioned Worthy Prelate lays down no sewer than Ten or Eleven
differences of Divine and Humane Laws in their obligation, in his Ductor
Dubitantium: Book 3. chap. 1. p. 23.
Whether they will all hold or no, or may not be reduced to a smaller number, I
will not take upon me to say; but thither I refer the Reader.

And thus much may serve to be spoken to the First thing premised, viz. That
Conscience is not so Sacred a thing as to be incapable of being bound by Humane
Laws.

Secondly, I premise also, that no man can be deprived properly of the true
Liberty of his Conscience by any Power on Earth, I mean without his own
consent; no Mortal nor any Creature is able to invade it.

This will appear by considering what that is, which is called Conscience.

Conscience is The Mind of a man considered as possessed with certain practical
principles, and comparing his own actions with those principles, does,
according as he finds them agreeing or disagreeing with them, judge of himself;
either absolve or condemn himself.

So that there are three Offices of Conscience: The first is, That of assenting
to and embracing certain practical principles as Laws for the governing a man's
self. The second is, That of comparing ones self, or actions, with those Rules
or Principles. The third, That of passing judgment of ones self accordingly.

Now that is properly Liberty of Conscience, and that only, which relates to
the execution of these three Offices. But the Acts of Conscience in executing
these Offices being all Internal, and within a man's Soul, how can its Liberty
in exerting those Acts be infringed by any Humane Power? What Earthly Power can
make me Assent to or believe what it pleases? Can so give Laws to my
Conscience, as to necessitate me to receive them for such, and to think them
good Laws, and safe to steer my Actions by? Again, how can any such Power
deprive me of my Liberty to compare my Actions with such Rules as I think I am
obliged to be governed by? And, having reflected upon my self and actions, and
made this comparison, how can any such Power abridge me of Liberty to Absolve
my self, if I find my actions agreeing with those Rules, or to Condemn my self,
if I find the contrary? Can make me Condemn when I ought to Acquit my self, or
Acquit when I see reason to Condemn my self?

So that the Liberty which is with so much heat contended for by some, and
inveighed against by others, under the name of Liberty of Conscience, is truly
and properly Liberty of Practice, not of Conscience. And the great thing in
contest is, Whether a Liberty of doing what a man's Conscience tells him he
ought to do, and of forbearing what it tells him he ought to forbear, be an
inviolable Right, and not to be invaded by Humane Authority?

This being the true state of the Question, I shall endeavor an Answer
thereunto in these following Propositions.

Prop. 1. That there are two Extremes about this matter to be carefully avoided.

First, That of Asserting an unlimited Liberty of practicing according to a
man's Conscience.

Secondly, That of overgreat severity in Restraining this Liberty.

First, As to the Extreme of Asserting an unlimited Liberty of practicing
according to a man's Conscience: This will appear to be an Extreme indeed, and
a very wild and mad one, if we consider that there is scarcely any thing so
extravagant or wicked, but the Consciences of some or other may urge them to
it. Nay, it is certain that men have pretended Conscience for some of the most
impious and most villainous actions in the World. So the Papists have done among
our selves we all know; And another sort of People too, whose principles,
though very bad, were better than theirs. And it is not possible for us to know
that their pretenses of Conscience were m^re pretenses. Nor is it hard for us
to persuade our selves, that through the just judgment of God for past
provocations, the Spirit of delusion may be permitted to have such power over
some men's Consciences, as that they shall call evil good and good evil, put
darkness for light and light for darkness, and bitter for sweet and sweet for
bitter; for we find a Woe pronounced against such as do so, Esaias 5. 20. which
there would not have been, if there were no such men, nor could be. And it is
said of some, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 10, 11, 12. that, Because they received not the love
of the truth that they might be saved, God shall send them (or permit to be
sent them) strong delusions ((...), strength of delusion) that they should
believe a lie: That they all might be damned, who believed not the truth, but
had pleasure in unrighteousness.

Our Savior foretold his Disciples, John 16. 2. that The time comes that
whosoever kills you will think that he does God service. That is, the time is
coming, when men shall kill you out of Conscience. As no doubt the Papists have
done many thousands of good Christians: And it is well known that their
principles are such, as that they cannot be true to them, and not think
themselves bound in Conscience to Stab and Poison, Burn and Massacre all
without exception whom they call Heretics, whenever an opportunity is put
into their hands.

S. Paul, as cruel a persecutor of Christians as he was before his Conversion,
did then think not only that he did what was lawful, but that he did his duty
too. For, says he, Acts 26. 9. I verily thought with my self (or I was verily
persuaded in my Conscience) that I ought to do many things contrary the Name of
Jesus of Nazareth. Among which things he reckons in the two following verses,
Shutting up many of the Saints in Prison, and giving his voice against them to
be put to death, and compelling them to Blaspheme.

No man is able to imagine what dismal Effects Superstition and Enthusiasm may
have upon the Mind and Conscience.

So that this will be easily granted me by men of any Sobriety, that that which
they call Liberty of Conscience must be limited by Governors, if they will
have any concern for the Honor of God, the Welfare of Religion, the Safety of
the Community, and the Preservation of Government; it being impossible that
there should be any such thing as Government, if all shall be exempt from
Punishment who shall plead Conscience for their Disobedience; nay, though they
should be known to plead it never so truly.

Now it being so evident that Conscience may and must be restrained in its
Liberty, we clearly gain one point by it, and that no small one, viz. That
Liberty of Conscience is not to be necessarily allowed under the notion of
Liberty of Conscience: For this Liberty as such is not an inviolable Right,
Aquatenus ad omne valet consequentia.
if it be not to be claimed in all cases without exception.

Secondly, As to that which we call the other Extreme of overgreat Severity in
Restraining this Liberty, no man surely will question but that there may be an
erring on this hand also. But how to steer betwixt Scylla and Charybdis, these
two extremes, is, I think, one of the greatest difficulties: And requires a
conjunction of the greatest Prudence with as great Goodness. But as to what
measures in the general are to be taken, we will adventure modestly to suggest
our Thoughts in the Propositions that follow.

Prop. 2. No such Liberty of Conscience (for so for fashions-sake we will call
it) is by any means to be allowed, as is apparently injurious to the Community,
and such a Liberty as can have no ill public influence in the Church or State,
both may and ought to be granted. The welfare of the Community with respect to
both its Civil and Spiritual Interests is the business and design of
Government, and the welfare of particular persons, as they are parts of the
Community. Therefore not to grant to particular persons as much Liberty of what
nature soever, as is consistent with the general Good or Well-being of the
Whole, is to hold the Reins too strait, and to be over-severe and Arbitrary.
But it must be left to the judgment of our Governors, what measure and
proportion of Liberty may be safely vouchsafed, with respect to the Interest of
the Community, both because they are to be presumed the fittest Judges of this
affair, and because it is wholly inconsistent with Government for every private
person to be his own Judge. But (as I need not add) Governors are obliged as
they will answer it to their Judge, not to be hasty in making a judgment, but
to do it with the greatest wariness and deliberation, because their being
mistaken in this point may happen to be of very evil and mischievous
consequence.

Prop. 3. It is a very plain case that men ought to have the Liberty of
enjoying their Opinions to themselves, without their being extorted by
penalties from them. This follows from the foregoing proposition, and if that
be true this cannot be false. For if such a Liberty ought to be granted as has
no ill Aspect upon the Community, then no Body should be compelled to discover
his Opinions, because whilst they are kept within a man's own Breast, they can
do no hurt to other Folk, and if they discover themselves by Overt-Acts (as the
Lawyers speak) there is no need of using violent means for the Extorting of
them. Which is the cruel practice of the Roman Church, and our own Nation knew
it by sad experience in the Reign of Queen Mary. How many excellently good
Christians were then Sentenced to the Stake for their mere Refusing to
Subscribe to their as wicked as false Doctrine of the Sacrifice of the Altar?

Prop. 4. To make Sanguinary Laws against mere Dissenting from the public
Establishment, that is, when Dissenting from it is not accompanied with a
Factious, Schismatical and Seditious opposition to it, is without controversy
Antichristian Tyranny. Of all the indefensible practices of the now mentioned
Church, there is none that makes the Title of Antichrist more due to her, than
her prosecuting with Fire and Faggot, and all manner of Cruelties, men who are
guilty of no other crime but that of renouncing Communion with her in her gross
Corruptions.

But suppose her Terms of Communion were as agreeable as they are contrary to
the Word of God, yet would her putting men to death for their bare not
submitting to those terms, speak her to be utterly destitute of the true
Christian Spirit: And to deserve that Reprehension which her mild and gentle
Master gave to his Disciples for desiring him to call for Fire from Heaven to
destroy the Samaritans for refusing to receive him, viz. Ye know not what
manner of Spirit ye are of; for the Son of man came not to destroy men's lives,
but to save them. And if our Savior was so offended with those Disciples for
making that motion, though He knew 'twas not made deliberately, but in a sudden
fit of passion, and that kindled too by the quick resentment they had of an
high affront that was put upon his Sacred person, how highly must it needs
provoke him to see Christians destroying their Brethren in cool blood, and that
not for so heinous a crime as Renouncing his Religion, but for not being
Christians of their Mode and Form: Which possibly considering all their
circumstances (particularly their Education, the prejudices of which it is the
most difficult thing in the world one of them to overcome, their Parts,
Complexions, etc.) may be more their misfortune than their fault.

Besides Sanguinary Penalties, or the using of extreme Rigor of any kind to
compel men to come over to our way of Religion, are the most improper means to
effect that end; Religio cogt non potest; verbis potius quam verberibus res
agenda est, ut sit voluntas, lib. 5. cap. 20.
that of Lactantius being as great a Truth in all Ages as it was in his and the
two foregoing, when the Church was subject to the Heathen Persecutors, viz.
Religion is a thing to which no man can be forced, the Will is persuaded by
Words not by Blows. And the Arguments used by the most Ancient Fathers against
persecuting people for mere dissenting in matters of Religion are as strong
against the persecuting practices of Rome Christian, as they were against those
of Rome Pagan.

And this means has proved always as unsuccessful as it is improper, the best
success it has ever had has been to make some Hypocrites, and the rest more
averse and obstinate than they were before. That way of Religion they before
disliked, they now hate, and oppression making even wise men mad (as King
Solomon observes) multitudes from modest Dissenters in their own defense turn
Factious and Seditious, and downright opposers. And nothing has been more
ordinarily observed, than that Persecution does mightily increase instead of
diminishing the number of Dissenters. As it is grown into a Maxim, Sanguis
Martyrum est semen Ecclesiae, The blood of Martyrs is the seed of the Church,
so nothing makes any party so considerable, nor any thing gains them so many
Proselytes, as their bearing Death or Torment or any cruel usage like Martyrs;
which we need not be informed the very worst of men have frequently done.

Thanks be to God the Church of England is as far departed from that of Rome in
this point of merciless Severity, as in the rest of her Abominations. Which
has made me stand amazed at the Tragical outcries of one or two of late
against our Church, as if the Inquisition it self could hardly match her in her
savage cruelty toward sober Dissenters. Such Libellers as these have as little
Wit as Christianity or Common Honesty; for can they more expose their
Reputation than by publishing to the World such things as every body can
confute from his own knowledge. These people cannot but believe in their
Consciences; that modest Dissenters (nor immodest neither as themselves know by
experience) cannot hope to have fairer quarter in any part of the Christian
world, where there is any Establishment, than they have in this Church. Nay,
that there is hardly any one Party of the Dissenters that would be half so
favorable to the rest, should they get into Power, as our Constitution is to
all of them. The principal of our divided Parties it is well known have been
tried in England, Scotland and New England, and how exemplary they have been
for their Moderation toward men of a different persuasion is too well
understood to be quickly forgotten. But old sores shall not bleed afresh by my
rubbing them, as great provocation as is given by some at the most unseasonable
time imaginable.

Prop. 5. But, notwithstanding what we have now* Asserted, there is a necessity
of making it more men's interest to comply with the public Establishment, than
not to comply with it: Which cannot be done, so long as those who are
conformable thereunto, and those which dissent from it, are both put into the
self-same circumstances. It is as good, nay better, to have no legal
Establishment at all, than not to back it with motives of Temporal Interest, to
dissuade from Disobedience to it; it is so, so long as this sort of interest
has so great a power over the generality of men, nay of professors of Religion
too, as we see it has; and so few comparatively are governed by pure Reason
and Conscience, as great pretenses as there are to both. Penalties of one
nature or other are necessary Sanctions of Laws, and were it not for the
annexing of them, Laws would be so far from being generally obeyed, that they
would be generally despised and contemned. Nay, the perverse natures of men do
so incline them niti in vetitum, to do what is prohibited, through their
excessive fondness for Liberty, that I am persuaded the way to have this or
that done by the far greater part, would be for Authority to forbid it without
a Penalty.

And as for that Objection, that Civil penalties make men Hypocrites; how is it
possible that those who make it should not at the same time see, that it is as
much levelled at all Laws, as at those which relate to matters of Religion?
Then men ought not to be prohibited Murder, Adultery or Theft under Civil
penalties, because they will be apt to make them Hypocrites; as it is certain
those are no better, who abstain from those crimes from the mere fear of the
lash of the Law. But it is better for the Public that men should be Hypocrites
in their Obedience, than that they should live in Disobedience, and somewhat
better for themselves too. And no man will be made a Hypocrite by penalties,
but such a one as would disobey and be an open sinner were it not for them.

I add, that this Objection is also levelled at leaving it to every bodies
Liberty to comply or not comply with the legal Establishment. What a Temptation
would this be to those to plead scruples of Conscience against some condition
of Communion, who are only swayed by some motive of Interest (to get better
trading, to please their Wives or the like) to leave the Church, and join
themselves to separate Congregations.

Prop. 6. We must distinguish between a Liberty of serving God according to our
Consciences, and a Liberty of making others to be of our persuasion. There is a
wide difference between these two. See the Learned Dean of Canterburies
judicious Discourse on Josh. 24. 15.
It is inconsistent with Government for this latter Liberty to be Allowed.
Nothing can come of Authorities giving license to Dissenters to make Proselytes
to their several Parties, but downright Confusion. I appeal to themselves,
whether if any of them now sat at the Helm, and were in the chair of
Government, they could endure to have their Authority publicly confronted;
they know they could not, and much less give Liberty, that is Encouragement, to
those to confront it who have a mind to it. But what is it to put an affront
upon Authority, if public Endeavors to withdraw People from Obedience be not
so?

It is the greatest immodesty to desire of Governors such a Liberty as this,
and supposes them either not to understand or to have no concern for their own
interest as Governors. And those that dissent from the legal Establishment
ought to think themselves most kindly dealt with, and to be very thankful, may
they enjoy upon tolerable terms their own way of Religion, without free license
to do all they can to increase their Party. How happy would our good Ancestors
in the Reign of Queen Mary have thought themselves, had Her Majesty vouchsafed
them such a Liberty as that! They would hardly have thought they could pay too
dear for it.

It may be objected, what if a man be immediately commissionated by the King of
Kings, as the Apostles were, publicly to withdraw men from Obedience to those
Laws which require of them unlawful things, and withal he prove his Commission
by working of Miracles, is not Authority obliged to give Liberty so to do in
that case? Surely it is. I answer, surely it is not, but it is obliged to do
that which is much better than giving this Liberty, and which will prevent all
need of it, namely, to Repeal those Laws as soon as ever it appears they are
displeasing to God; and so to make the doing contrary to them no Disobedience.
But if this be not done, the Commissionated person ought not to expect that
Authority should give him this Liberty, but he ought to take it, and to be
confident that God will stand by him in so doing.

Prop. 7. Those Laws that enjoin or forbid things in their own nature
Indifferent, ought not to be enforced with as severe Penalties, as those which
are made for or against those things which are good or evil in themselves,
which are commanded or prohibited by the Divine Laws. Or the Transgressors of
the Majora jura, the Laws of Heaven should be more severely punished, than the
Transgressors of mere Humane Laws. It Is certain that the former sort of
offenders do deserve worse than the latter do. Their crimes are of an higher
nature and more intolerable, and therefore it is highly fit that they should be
greater sufferers than the other offenders, for the more effectual scaring of
others from following their Example, or doing like them.

All offenses against the State are not alike punished, neither should all
those which are against the Church. No good man will question, but that it is a
greater Sin to be a Separatist than a mere Dissenter in some things; and also
not to worship God at all than to worship him in an illegal way. To make no
Conscience of Receiving the Lord's Supper, than to scruple the Gesture he is
obliged to receive it in. Or, that Profaneness is more hateful than unaffected
Scrupulosity or Superstition. And therefore I think the self-same or equal
Penalties should not belong to both.

Common Equity requires this; and according to this Rule our Judge has
foretold us He will at the last day proceed with the Disobedient.

And by this means will no pretense be left to those, who take all occasions to
censure their Governors, for the reproaching of them, as laying too great
weight upon things little in themselves, as placing Religion in them, and
equalizing their own Traditions with (and much less preferring them, Pharisee
like, before) the Commandments of God; and as having less Zeal for Gods Glory
than for keeping up the Reputation of their own Authority.

And for the same as well as an higher reason it is necessary, that as great
care at least should be taken to bring the open immediate Transgressors of
God's Laws to condign punishment, as those who only are Transgressors of mere
Humane Laws.

But there is one thing more that I would not have forgotten, that the dreadful
Censure of Excommunication ought not to be past upon any but the greatest
offenders; among which (that I may not be mistaken) I account (as the Primitive
Church did) all Schismatics as well as Profane persons. To make the smaller
offenders liable to it, be it done upon what pretense it will, is the readiest
way to make it contemptible. And nothing is more contrary to the practice of
the Apostles or the first Ages than so to do.

Prop. 8. Most favor may be reasonably expected by such Dissenters as give the
greatest reason to judge that they are really Conscientious in their
Dissenting. If any Liberty be left by Law to the Magistrate to show favor in
pitiable circumstances, whatsoever it is, such Dissenters ought to have the
benefit of it. And those may be presumed to be Conscientious in reality as well
as pretense, who

First, Are observed to make Conscience of the great and indisputable duties of
Religion. And

Secondly, Who comply with the Establishment as far as they can, for ought that
appears to the contrary. These we are bound in charity to believe are
sincerely Conscientious in stopping where they do. This proposition needs no
proving; and this other is as clear, viz. Those who give greatest evidence of
their being Conscientious have most right to favor.

But although it be not an indisputable case, that he makes no Conscience in
some smaller things who makes none in certain great ones; or that he who goes
not as far as he declares he can, is a mere pretender to Conscience in what he
says he cannot do, yet there is no injury done him if his Governors have a
strong suspicion of him, and he fare the worse upon that account. He must then
thank himself for it, and not blame them.

Prop. 9. Those have least reason to ask or look for Liberty of Conscience or
any thing of Indulgence, who are for no bodies having it besides themselves,
and give great reason to presume by their behavior in their present
circumstances, that were they in Authority they would give none to those from
whom they now expect it.

Such are all those who are not contented to Disobey the present Laws, nor to
draw others to their Party as much as in them lies, but cannot forbear Railing
at, and passing the severest and most uncharitable Censures, in their Common
discourse, and in the Pulpit and Press too, upon their Spiritual Governors
especially, and those who are Conformable to the Constitution. It Is not at all
to be questioned but such People would Persecute otherwise than with their
Tongues or Pens, if ever they should be furnished with more dangerous Weapons.
He who shows his teeth at me, I have reason to suspect would make them meet,
were he able to bite; in so doing he shows his good will and what he would
gladly be at, had he an opportunity. I wish the Papists were the only people I
could now reflect upon.

Such too are all our peremptory Dogmatizers in Disputable points of Religion,
who cannot bear to be contradicted, though never so modestly, as if they had
gotten the Popes chair from him, and their judgments were the standard of
Orthodoxy. From whose Sentiments you may not depart scarcely one hairs breadth,
but you immediately fall under suspicion of Heresy, or some dangerous error.

I should be very loath these Stiff and Supercilious men should ever live to be
my Masters; if they should, I doubt not ^ut I should soon feel that they have
Cru^^ty answerable to their Pride, as much ^s some of them now cry out for
Liberty ^f Conscience.

The men I have now in my thoughts ^re not only (as I said of the other) ^he
Roman Gentlemen, but certain pro^^ssed Protestants (as like Papists as they
^ook) and those of more than one Mode and Form.

Such again are those, who, as impa^ent as themselves are of all Restraints,
^re very angry that the Conformable Clergy are no more restrained, that is, ^n
Doctrinals. Who would have the ^hirty Nine Articles more than Nine and Forty,
and are not a little grieved that several Points are so expressed, as to admit
of a latitude of Interpretation. Who can believe but that these men would be
far more severe Restrainers of Liberty, than those whom they so complain of? I
say far more severe, for there is no Considerative Ingenuous and Freeminded man
but had rather have twenty harmless Rites imposed on his Practice, than two
disputable and uncertain Doctrines upon his Belief.

And such lastly are those Parties, who, whenever they have had opportunity,
have been Rigidly severe to Dissenters from themselves. What security can we
possibly have, that those who for the time past have been Persecutors, whenever
they had Power in their hands, will never be so for the time to come, if they
should have Power? Especially if they still retain those principles which
naturally tend to make men Cruel.

Here if I expatiated I would have only to do with the Popish Faction, and
spare others, who though they have been too guilty in this respect, yet not
comparably to them. What is better known throughout the Christian World, than
the Horrible Tyranny of the Romish Church, than her most Barbarous and Savage
Cruelties toward those who would not Worship that Beast and his Image, and
would not receive the mark of his Name? What an Ocean of Blood has this
Ravenous Beast shed of the Saints and of the Prophets of God? The History of
Pagan Rome's cruelties toward the Christians in the ten Famous Persecutions is
far outdone by that of Rome Christian (I had rather say Rome Antichristian)
toward poor Protestants. Guess we what a prodigiously vast number have fallen
as Sacrifices to her Devilish Fury by two or three Instances.

It is computed that in the Massacre in Paris, and other parts of France, were
Butchered about an Hundred thousand. That of the Albigenses and Waldenses were
Murdered no fewer than a Thousand thousand. That within the space of Forty
years from the Founding of the Blessed Order of the Jesuits, were Murdered
about Nine hundred thousand. That the Holy Inquisition in the space of Thirty
years destroyed with an infinite number of cruelties an Hundred and Fifty
thousand. That in the Low Countries Duke Alva, that Bloody Bigot of Rome,
caused to be executed about Six thousand. And what great numbers did suffer
here in England purely upon the score of Religion in the Reigns of King Henry
the Eighth and Queen Mar^? And what work the Priests and Jesuits and other of
the Sons of Rome had ere this time been employed in again among us, if their
^ate Horrid Conspiracy had taken effect, we very well know.

Those know no more of the Principles or Spirit of Popery than a sucking
Infant, who can give the least credit to their most solemn promises of a
Toleration of, or Indulgence toward Protestants, although they should back
them with never so many Sacred Oaths upon the Holy Bible, and pawn their Souls
upon their fulfilling them with never so tremendous and direful Execrations.

And yet these men are so void of all shame, that ever since the Reformation
they have turned every stone to obtain a Toleration of their Religion among us:
And that notwithstanding the plainest Demonstrations which from time to time
they have given us, that they seek it for no other End, but that by the means
of it they may do that by Fraud against our Religion and all that is dear to us,
which (thanks be to God) they are not strong enough to do by force, nor by any
other methods of Fraud neither.

Though they could never yet obtain a legal Toleration, yet they have not
wanted for indulgence and kind usage, but this has been so far from melting
them into good nature, that they have still taken Advantage from thence to lay
Designs for our Ruin. At that very time (and for some time before) when their
Gunpowder Conspiracy, not to be thought of without the greatest Horror, was
projected and almost effected by them, did King James treat them with not only
extraordinary Clemency, but also Friendship and Bounty. At the Trial of the
Traitors, his Majesty's Attorney General observed, that that Treason was
hatched at a time, when the King used the greatest Lenity toward the Papists,
whom he honored with Advancement and Favor as well as others, and by the
space of a whole Year and four Months took no Penalties by Statute of them. And
this likewise the King himself remembered them of, the more to convince them of
their prodigious Ingratitude.

And to pass by their Conspiring the Death of King Charles the First of most
Happy Memory, and afterward effecting it by the hands of the Fanatics (whose
instruments they were, not only in the not to be paralleled Murder of that
excellently pious Prince, all circumstances of it considered, but also in the
long Civil War preceding it, as Doctor Peter Du-Moulin has discovered in his
Answer to Philanax Anglicus) I say to pass by all that, to which nothing could
provoke them except the most Gentle, Gracious and Kind usage, it is known to
every body, that nothing neither except the like usage could provoke them to
this last most Inhumane and Hellish Conspiracy.

And yet, notwithstanding they have always been to us like the Philistines to
the Israelites, sharp Thorns in our Sides, and Pricks in our Eyes, are they
still so impudent as to insist upon it as their Right to have Liberty of
Conscience; and hope with the Assistance of their old tried Tools at last to
obtain it. And it is matter of Grief and Astonishment to us, that these will not
yet see, though it be as visible as the Light, that if with their help they do
obtain it, the best Recompense they shall receive for their good service will
be the Inslaving of themselves, and the Ruin of their Religion.

I thought not of so far enlarging upon this Proposition, but considering into
what a large Field I was entered, I found it somewhat difficult to break off so
soon.

Prop. 10. In the last place, Governors ought not to impose any thing but for
weighty Reasons; but what upon the maturest deliberation they judge to be
necessary, or (upon one account or other) very highly Expedient. To make little
and insignificant things the matter of Laws is the readiest course to beget in
the People a sleighting of Authority, and to lessen the Veneration that is due
to Laws; And also gives illminded persons a great advantage, and puts plausible
objections into their mouths against the Government.

But, having taken leave to say what becomes Governors, I am obliged to add,
that private Persons are no competent judges of the Necessity or Expediency of
Laws. And that it very ill becomes them to be forward to Censure those as
needless, the reason of which is unknown to them. It Is an Argument of great
immodesty and pride to think, that we who stand upon the lower ground can see
as far as those who are so much above us: And a very little Prudence and
Humility will serve to convince us, that those much better understand the
Methods of Government than we do, and what is fit to be imposed, whose whole
Business and Employment it is to Govern.

We have certain Rules whereby to judge of the Lawfulness of things imposed,
but we may be easily mistaken when we undertake to determine of the Fitness of
them.

Thus having with submission to my Superiors offered my Opinion about this
weighty Argument in the foregoing Propositions, I hope I shall not be censured as
immodest if I also add, that I do not see but Governors might avoid the two
Extremes in reference to Liberty of Conscience, as it is called, by having a
constant regard to such like Rules. And that the Governed, on the other hand,
by doing the like, might understand without much difficulty, within what bounds
they ought to confine themselves, in Craving of their Governors or Expecting
from them this kind of Liberty.

But I think it seasonable to suggest this one thing more to these, that they
would so behave themselves, that those who have Power to grant it as far as is
sitting, might not be tempted to think it a thing only adapted to the serving
of Interest, and by that means be the more inclined to a total Refusing of any
such Liberty. I mean, that there be no Occasion given to what is so Commonly,
not without ground, said, viz. When it is men's Temporal Interest to plead for
Liberty of Conscience, then they are Zealous for it, but the Tables are no
sooner turned, but who like them against it. Were we as honest as we should be,
we should be more fixed and constant, and not so vary in our Principles as our
Circumstances vary. We should not in one Circumstance build what before we
destroyed, and in another destroy what we before built: And so declare amidst
all our Stir and Noise about Liberty of Conscience, that we have either none at
all, or but very little Conscience.

But in the Conclusion of all, I must not forget that which has occasioned all
this Discourse about Liberty of Conscience, viz. that whatever that Liberty of
this kind is which we have a Right to, it is not a Branch of Christian but of
mere Natural Liberty. There is no Text of Scripture that mentions this as a
Liberty of our Savior's Purchasing, and therefore no Christian may claim it as
a Christian. It Is due to men of all Religions, who may be supposed to make
Conscience of what they do, and not only to the Professors of the Christian
Religion. And 'twas always and in all places as much men's Right, as it has
been since our Savior's Appearance in the World, and is in those Parts of it
where his Gospel is received.

CHAP. XVI.
The Third Inference from our Notion of Christian Liberty, viz. That Popery is
the greatest Enemy in the World thereunto. Where it is showed, First, That the
Church of Rome Robs those who are subject to her of that Natural Liberty which
necessarily belongs to them as they are Men, viz. That which consists in the
free use of their Understandings in matters of Religion. That She will not
permit men to Examine either her Doctrines or Practices by the Holy Scriptures;
nor yet to receive the Holy Scriptures themselves otherwise than upon her
Authority. The Wickedness of this exposed in two Particulars. The alleging of
Scripture for it, showed to be the grossest Absurdity. Their great Text 1 Timothy
3. 15. spoken to. Her Tyranny over men's Minds further showed.
HAving now spoken to all the False Notions of Christian Liberty that I know
of, and discovered the intolerable Mischievousness of them as well as Falsity;
I proceed to another Inference from our Notion thereof, namely;

Thirdly, That Popery is a Religion (if I honor it not too much in calling it
so) that is the greatest Enemy in the whole World to Christian Liberty. Should
all the wicked Wits in the World meet together to Consult and Complot how to
Banish out of it this Liberty, they could not devise more effectual means for
the doing of it than those which are pitched upon by the Church of Rome. And
here we will show,

First, That She Robs those who Subject themselves to her, of that Natural
Liberty which necessarily belongs to them as they are Men, or Reasonable
Creatures. And much more,

Secondly, That She Robs them of that Liberty, which it was the Design of our
Savior's Coming into the World, and of all he did and suffered here to instate
us in.

First, That She Robs those, who Subject themselves to her, of that Natural
Liberty, which necessarily belongs to them as Men, or Reasonable Creatures.
There is no Liberty so Essential to Humane Nature, or so much its Inviolable
Right, as that which consists in the free use of our Understandings: But a
Papist is miserably tied up and inslaved here; and that in those matters
wherein it is of Infinitely the greatest Importance and Concernment to him,
that his Mind should be free, namely in matters of Religion; which have such a
necessary influence into the Welfare of our Souls and our Eternal Happiness.

But, notwithstanding that Injunction of S. Paul, 1 These. 5. 21. Prove all
things, hold fast that which is good. And that of S. John, 1 Epist. 4. 1.
Beloved believe not every Spirit, but try the Spirits whether they be of God,
etc. This Church denies to her Children all judgment of Discretion in Points
of Religion; at least except in this one Point, the choice of the Church for
their Guide, which having Chosen, they must follow her blindfold all their
lives after. They must be Implicit Believers, and Implicit Chusers, She will
(...) and believe for them: All their ^^dgment and Faith must be resolved into
h^rs; as being, if you will believe her, (...) and Incapable of being either
deceiv^^ (...) self, or of deceiving others.

And therefore, to take our Savior's (...) to (...) the Scriptures, except for
the forementioned one thing, (nay, for that too, as we shall see anon) is to
put an Affront upon Her Authority; and the Bereans, who were so highly
commended for so doing, were guilty of great Sauciness and high Presumption.

And She takes the most successful course that can be thought of, that you
shall not Search the Scriptures, by locking them up as She does, and making the
Bible so scarce a Book to be light upon, where she has Power enough to do it;
and in those places where her Power is Clipped, by using a many wicked Artifices
to keep the Vulgar from looking into it; who are so miserably imposed upon by
their wretched Priests, as to think it a lighter sin to be Drunk or to commit
Fornication, and transgress many an express Law of God, than to cast their Eyes
upon the Holy Scriptures. So well aware is this Church, that a great part of
her Religion is neither to be found there, nor agreeable with them, but as
expressly, as it can be done by words, contradicted by them.

And as you may not Examine any of her Doctrines or Practices by comparing them
with the Rule of Faith and Practice, the Scriptures, so neither (which is but a
necessary consequence from thence) may you have any other Foundation for your
Belief of the Books of Scripture themselves, besides her Authority. She will
have your Assent to their being of Divine Authority to depend wholly upon her
Testimony; Notwithstanding that God Almighty has vouchsafed to the World
marvellously full and plentiful Evidence thereof, and such as is adapted to the
capacities of all those who have the use of Reason, but never once mentioned
this as a part of that Evidence, and therefore much less can it be thought the
Whole.

How infinitely ill has this Corrupt Church deserved at the hands of all
Christians, although this were the only Abuse she had put upon them!

For (to say nothing of her Horrible Pride and Uncharitableness in making the
truth of the Scriptures dependent on her Testimony, that her Pretense supposing
her making her self the only true Church) this is the greatest injury
imaginable to Christianity; nor can she take a surer course than this to make
all men Infidels. And that upon these two Accounts.

First, This Pretense of hers is immediately founded upon a Precarious and most
Evidently false Principle, viz. That of her Infallibility. I dare appeal to
those of her own Sons who have studied the Controversy, whether there was ever
a more shamefully baffled Cause in the World than this is: Whether by their
Infallible Church they mean with the Jesuits the Pope alone, or with others the
Pope with his General Council, that is, a pack of Bishops and Priests of his
own Faction.

As the Psalmist says, If the Foundations be destroyed, what shall the
Righteous do? So if this be the Foundation of our Christian Faith, and that be
proved to be a Rotten Foundation (as nothing was ever proved if this be not)
then what shall we Christians do? We must then acknowledge our selves a
Generation of most Credulous Fools, and that our Faith is vain. If the
Foundation be tottering, the whole Superstructure must fall to the Ground.

But so fond is this Unsatiably Covetous and Ambitious Church of her Great
Diana Infallibility, by the Pretense whereof she has raised her self to such a
Height and Grandeur, that she is well content, if that must fall, that our
Savior and his Apostles, both the Old and New Testament should fall with it.
And she has done all that lies in her to make it necessary, that those who
shall have the wisdom to reject her Ridiculous Doctrine of Infallibility,
should at the selfsame time renounce Christianity.

If Popery were Chargeable with no other Crime (as it is with innumerable
others, and many of them intolerable) I say were it Chargeable with no other
Crime, but the making our Belief of the Authority of the Books of Scripture to
be founded on the Infallibility of the Romish Faction, we ought to be as
zealous for the Preventing its Reestablishment in this Nation (from whence it
has happily been twice Expelled) as we are desirous to Preserve the Christian
Religion.

Secondly, The Romish Church's making her Authority the sole Foundation of our
Belief of the Scriptures makes the Testimony of the Spirit to the Truth of
Christianity, in our Savior when on ^arth, and in the Apostles and others in
the Primitive Ages, to be now perfectly Insignificant. I think it makes them to
be so as to the Church Representative, for she pretends to her Infallibility
(and consequently to her Infallible Assurance of the Truth of Christianity) as
an immedi^te Gift of the Holy Ghost, therefore what need has she of the
Testimony of Miracles? But as to Private Christians I can by no means
understand in what stead they stand them; for if the Churches Authority be
necessary to their believing the truth of the Scriptures, and therefore to
their believing that there were those Miracles really wrought, which the
Writings of the Apostles tell us of, then why may they not without any more ado
make her Authority the immediate ground of their Assent to the truth of
Christianity?

It is said that the truth of the Matters of Fact are not knowable at this
distance, (such as whether there were such Persons as our Savior and his
Apostles, whether they performed such Miracles, and the Apostles wrote such
Books, etc.) but by the Tradition of the Church, because no such Matters are to
be known at any considerable distance, but by Tradition.

To this it is Answered, that it is one thing to believe the Matters of Fact
upon the Church's Tradition, and another to believe them upon her Authority
founded upon her Infallibility. Now this latter we reject, but adhere to the
former, as a Ground of our belief of those things.

But then by the Tradition of the Church we are far from meaning that of Rome
only. We mean the Catholic Church, or the whole Collective Body of Christians
throughout the World, from the Apostles times down to this present Age; of
which the Roman Church is but a Part (and therefore does Impudently in
appropriating Catholicism to her self) and that a very Vitiated Part too, and
that Church Representative an exceedingly small Part.

And we receive the Tradition of the Catholic Church as a Ground (as I said)
of believing these Matters, not as the Ground, because we take in another
Tradition, viz. that of those who are out of the Church, and Enemies to
Christianity, the Jews especially.

In short, we believe those and the like matters of Fact, upon the same ground
that we believe all other wherein Religion is not concerned; but there are
Circumstances which give the Tradition of Christian matters of Fact a mighty
Advantage above other Traditions, as unquestionable Assurance as these give
men, when they are General and Uninterrupted.

But it is well known to all who are not strangers to the Popish Writers, what
lamentable work they make in proving the Testimony of the Church to be the
foundation of our Faith concerning the Authority of the Scriptures. This Proof
they fetch out of the Scriptures themselves; and their main Text for this
purpose, and for the Infallibility of their Church is those words of S. Paul, 1 Timothy 3. 15. where he calls the Church the Pillar and Ground of Truth.

But what a manifest Circle is this? We ask them, how it appears that the
Scriptures are the Word of God? They answer, it appears from the Testimony of
the Church. We ask again, how it appears that the Testimony of the Church is
true? They reply, it appears from the Scriptures. And so they prove the
Authority of the Scriptures by the Testimony of the Church, and then wheel
about again, and prove the Authority of the Church by the Testimony of the
Scriptures.

But again, We can either be certain of the truth of these words of S. Paul,
setting aside the Authority of the Church, or we cannot be Certain. If we can
be Certain, why then not of the truth of the whole Scripture as well as of this
single Text? If we cannot be certain of the truth of this Text without the
consideration of the Church's Authority, what Folly or rather Knavery is it to
make this Text an Argument to prove the thing in Controversy by, when the
truth of this Text is questionable upon the same grounds that the truth of the
Scriptures in general is?

Again, When they say that the Testimony of the Church is the Ground of this
our Faith, they tell us, that by the Church they mean the Church of Rome, and
that She only is the True Church. We reply, that there are a many Societies of
Christians in the World, that hold no Communion with the Church of Rome, and
Each of these calls it self a True Church, and therefore how shall we know that
they are none of them so, but that the Church of Rome alone is? They tell us,
that this Church alone has the Notes and Characters of the True Church. We ask
again, how it does appear that those Notes and Characters they give are true
and genuine, and, if they are, that their Church only has them? Here they are
forced to fly again to the Scriptures, and produce us some which they would
have us believe are very pertinent to the purpose; though none but those who
see by their Light are able to discern any such matter. But whether they be to
the purpose or no, is no part now of our Enquiry, but this is that which we
show from hence, how still they are entangled in their own Net, and Run round
in a Circle.

Yet once again, these People would persuade us that there is no knowing the
Scriptures to be of Divine Authority, but by the Testimony of their Church,
whenas it is impossible to know that there is any such thing in being as a
Church, but by the Scriptures.

And thus you see what prime Christians these Romanists are, what Worthy
Catholics. If there were no better Champions than these for the Authority of
the Scriptures, or the Truth of Christianity, Atheists and Infidels long since
would have filled all Places: As it is well known how they abound in the Popish
Countries, and most of all in Italy, and of all Italy most in Rome. And but for
Old Mother Ignorance, whom they have a mavelous Fondness for, as well they
may, their Holy Mother the Church would by this time have had but a very small
number of Children or Friends. But I would this had been the worst on it, as
alas it is not: For Multitudes among them being well aware that they are merely
imposed on; and being Acquainted with no better than an Implicit Faith, and
thinking that no more is to be said for Christianity than they learn from them,
shake off both their Popish and Christian Faith together.

But we must not let that forementioned Text wholly pass on which is laid such
mighty Stress for the proving of the Infallibility of the Roman Church; which
gives her such a plausible Pretense for the Enslaving of Men's Minds and
Understandings.

The whole Verse runs thus, with the Verse foregoing: Th^^e things write I unto
thee, hoping to come unto thee shortly. But if I tarry long, that thou may
know how thou ought to behave thy self in the House of God, which is the
Church of the living God, the Pillar and Ground of Truth. According to
Episcopius his reading of these latter words, it is not the Church that is here
called the Pillar and Ground of Truth; Instit. Th^ol. Cap. 8. p. 241.
but God manifested in the flesh, justified in the Spirit, etc. in the next
Verse. For he makes that 15. Verse to conclude with living God, (Verses and
Pointings being arbitrary) and The Pillar and Ground of Truth to begin the next
Verse thus, The Pillar and Ground of Truth, and without controversy the great
Mystery of Godliness, is God manifested in the flesh, etc. But there is no need
of using any artifice to make these words unserviceable to the design of
proving the Infallibility of the Church of Rome; for all that can be gathered
from them is no more than this; That the Church is the support of that Truth
which is necessary to Salvation, viz. the Doctrine of the Gospel. That which
preserves it in the world is the Churches constant profession of it, and
standing up for it. That is, this is the External and Visible means whereby
this Truth is kept from perishing and being lost.

Or according to Grotius, The Church does uphold and lift up the Truth, it
causes it not to slip out of men's minds, and also to be beheld far and near.
For the Testimony of many good men, who all say that they received these
Doctrines and Precepts from the Apostles, must needs have great force and
efficacy upon those who are not obstinate and contumacious. So that,

First, This Great man seems to understand by the Church in this place only
that which was most Ancient. But,

Secondly, There is no reason at all to understand by the Church here only the
Church Representative, but the whole Body of Christians must necessarily be
meant; It being called the House of God, but the Apostles, Bishops and Pastors
are called the Builders of the House, and Governors never the House it self.
And besides, the Church which is here called the Pillar and Ground of Truth is
that over part of which Timothy presided. That thou may know how thou
ought to behave thy self in the House of God, etc. that is, as a Bishop and
Pastor in it.

Thirdly, If it should be understood of the Church Representative, it is however
intolerable impudence to make it only the Roman. But,

Fourthly, This Text makes nothing to the purpose of Infallibility in the
Church of Rome's sense, understand by the Church of the living God which Church
you please; especially if you do not limit it to the First Age: As is plain
from what has been said, and it needs no more words to make it plainer.

Now how can we have greater assurance that the Church of Rome is an Arrant
Impostor than this one thing gives us, viz. That She will not allow us the
Liberty of judging for our selves? The Great Apostle S. Paul allowed this
Liberty to the Corinthians in those words: I speak as unto wise men, judge ^e
what I say, 1 Cor. 10. 15. And dare they say, that he overshot himself in that
saying, or passed a mere Complement upon the Corinthians? 'Twill not be at all
strange if they do, considering how many worse things several of them have said
of this Apostle. But, I say, this Church will not permit us to see with our own
Eyes, but we must take the whole of our Religion upon trust, that is, upon her
bare word, pin our whole Faith upon her Sleeve, and receive the most
Fundamental Articles upon her Warrant and Authority. Nay, though she would seem
to give us leave to use our Reason in the choice of our Church, yet neither
does she this really; but what she gives with one hand takes away again with
the other, in that she will not suffer us to judge of the sense of Scripture,
and consequently not of those Texts whereby she pretends to prove her self the
only true Church. For if we be acknowledged to be Competent judges of the true
meaning of some Scriptures, why not of all that are as easily intelligible as
those are?

Those must be very Charitable, who can put a fairer Interpretation upon this
her Severity than this, that it is designed to make us swallow without Chewing,
receive without Examining the Doctrines which are of her own invention; and
obey blindfold those Decrees of hers, which she is Conscious to her Self, have
not only no Countenance from the Holy Scriptures, but are as apparently
Contradictory to them, as any one Proposition can be to another; and are framed
for no other purpose, but the serving of a worldly and most corrupt Interest,
and the gratifying of those Appetites which it is the Business of Christianity
to Subdue and Mortify, viz. Unsatiable Covetousness, Luciferian Pride and
Ambition, and Diabolical Revenge and Malice.

Again, what greater Tyranny can be Exercised over a man's Mind, than to impose
upon his Faith, and that upon pain of Damnation, not only the strangest
Absurdities and greatest Fooleries, but the grossest, most manifest and
palpable Contradictions? But the Romish Church requires your Belief of
Innumerable of these in that her one Doctrine of Transubstantiation.

Nay, in imposing this mad Doctrine upon you, she also tieth you up from giving
Credit to your very Senses, no fewer than four of five; and so would deprive
you not only of the Liberty of Men, but of all Animals.

CHAP. XVII.
Where it is showed, Secondly, That Popery is as great an Enemy as can be to
Christian Liberty. And First, To that Liberty which our Savior has purchased
for the World in general. As 1. That it tends as much as is possible to the
Corrupting of men's Souls by subjecting them to vile Affections. This showed in
the general, viz. in that it is apt to beget false Notions of God; and more
particularly, in that it brings men under the Power of the Lusts of Malice,
Revenge, Cruelty; Pride and Ambition; Covetousness; Uncleanness; Intemperance;
and the greatest Injustice and Unrighteousness. 2. That it no less tends to
Disqui^^ m^ns M^nds with certain troublesome Passions.
SEcondly, As Popery deprives men of that Natural Liberty which does
necessarily belong to them as men, so it is as great an Enemy as can be to
Christian Liberty. Both to that Liberty which our Savior has purchased for
the World in general, and to that which He purchased for the Jews in particular.

First, It is as opposite and injurious as can be to that Liberty which our
Savior has purchased for the World in general. This Liberty we have
abundantly proved does consist in Freedom from the Dominion of Corrupt
Affections, and an entire Compliance with the Laws of Righteousness. Upon which
follow Freedom from the Power of Troublesome and Disquieting Passions, and Sweet
Satisfaction and Self-Enjoyment.

Now it will fully appear, that the Popish Religion is as opposite as can be to
the Liberty which consists in these things, by that time we have dispatched
these following particulars; whereon should I give my self leave to be as large
as I might, I should write a large Volume instead of a Chapter.

First, Popery in its own nature tends, as much as is possible, to the
Corrupting and Debauching our Souls by bringing them into Subjection to Vile
Affections.

Secondly, It no less tends to Disquiet our Minds with Troublesome and
Tormenting Passions.

Thirdly, It makes the Admirable Method, which we have showed our Lord has
taken for our Deliverance from both, and the making of us Holy and Happy,
perfectly Ineffectual.

First, It in its own nature tends as much as is possible, to the Corrupting
and Debauching of our Souls, by bringing them into subjection to Vile
Affections. This shall be showed in the general, and more particularly.

1. In the general, it does this as it is apt to beget false Notions, and very
unworthy Conceptions of the Divine Nature: Whereas a true Idea of God is
necessary to the Reforming of our Lives, and Rectifying of our Natures, which
cannot be done, without a due Awe and Reverence for Him, nor without Conforming
our selves to his Image and Likeness.

Among the several Instances of Popish Idolatry (from the guilt of which high
and provoking Impiety the Heathens may as easily purge themselves, as the
Church of Rome) their Picturing of God the Father and the Holy Trinity (Allowed
by the Council of Trent) and Worshipping their Pictures is a very great one.
But who sees not how this tends to beget in men's Minds a most Low and
Undervaluing, Gross and Impure Conception of the Deity? Can he easily conceive
of God as a most pure Spirit, that uses to feed his Eyes, and foul his Fancy
with bodily Representations of Him? That uses to Worship the Trinity under the
Figure of an Old man, with a long Gray Beard, with a Crucifix between his Knees
and a Dove in his Breast? Or under the ugly Figure of a Man-Cerberus, or a Man
with three Heads upon his shoulders? But it is well known that these are the
Abominable Forms by which the Papists Represent the Glorious Trinity; of which
the former is much the more Common.

I do not see how any Man who venerates the Divine Majesty as he ought, and
has according to his Capacity a worthy Idea of the unspeakable purity of his
Nature and incomprehensible Perfections, can endure the sight of such Pictures:
But whosoever can fall in love with them, whatsoever becoming sense of God he
had before, must needs soon lose it.

That other Instance also of Popish Idolatry, viz. The Addressing themselves to
the Saints, whether by Images or otherwise with all the Reverence and Solemnity
of Devotion which is used to the Great God, must necessarily have much the same
influence upon their Minds.

And their multitude of little trifling things, and many of them most
ridiculous Fopperies, in which they place so much Religion, and seek to obtain
Pardon by them even for great immoralities, speaks them to have no true sense
of his Wisdom or Holiness, to have a base and sordid notion of Him, and does
more and more confirm them therein.

Nor can they have any true Sense of the Infinite Equity and Goodness of the
Divine Nature, who are able to think that there is no Salvation out of the
Church of Rome; and that God will damn to Eternal Torments all Persons that are
not of her Communion, that is, the much greater part of Christendom, let them
be never so good and pious people otherwise: But no man can be truly a Papist
who believes more Charitably. And it is no wonder that they should be Bloody
Wretches who are able to conceive such a thing of God; when according to their
Notion of Him the more Arbitrary, Tyrannical and Cruel they are, the more are
they like that Being, which to Resemble is their Glory and Happiness.

2. This brings me to show more Particularly that Popery does naturally tend to
bring men's Souls into Slavish Subjection to the Vile Affections of Malice,
Revenge and Cruelty; Pride and Ambition; Covetousness; Uncleanness;
Intemperance; and the greatest Injustice and Unrighteousness.

As for Malice and Cruelty (as now we intimated) they are the Natural and
Genuine Offspring of that most Horrible Uncharitableness that is proper to
Popery. When men have once conceived such an opinion of any of their
Fellow Creatures, as that they are hated of God, and damned Reprobates, they
think themselves obliged to Hate them too, and Hatred and Cruelty are never
separated.

We have already given Instances of Popish Cruelty in Butchering Protestants,
and showed what a vast Sea of Blood has been shed by the Papists; which has
been at the command of their Holy Father, and the instigation of his cursed
instruments the Jesuits. And I now add, that they have not satisfied themselves
with the mere shedding of Blood, but have devised the most exquisitely
tormenting Methods of doing it; such as can hardly be recited without great
Horror and Consternation of mind. To pass over the inexpressible Tortures of
the Holy Inquisition, what say you to long protracting the torments of those
whose Bodies have been committed to the merciless Flames, by letting them down
by degrees with Pullies, that the lower parts might be consumed before the Fire
could reach the Vitals? What say you to Roasting alive; To Flaying off men's
skins alive; To Boiling of the Young Children of Heretics alive, and casting
them alive to be devoured by Swine? What say you to Ripping up the Bellies of
Women Great with Child, their hands and feet being first nailed down; To
Hanging men at their own doors by their privy Members; To Burying men alive,
and young Children, making holes in the Ground out of which they have put their
hands, and made sad moan for their Mothers? What Heart is so hard as not to
bleed at the mere Reading or Hearing such things as these? But these and
innumerable such like, nay far more horrible things we might show are Instances
of Popish Cruelty; And those in^licted upon the account of no greater Offenses,
than Refusing to be Idolaters, See Doctor More's Modest Enquiry into the
Mystery of Iniquity, Book^ 2. Chap. 15, and 16.
and not daring to be partakers of Rome's Sins lest they receive of her Plagues.

But how should those think that these Devilish Barbarities do not well become
them, who presume the poor Wretches they so torture to be Accursed of God,
Devoted to destruction, and to far more grievous and intolerable Torments; and
that the Hatred God bears to them does cause him to accept it as an Excellent
piece of Service at their hands to be their Destroyers and Tormenters, that is,
the Executioners of His Wrath?

Moreover, the Absolute Obedience they owe to Christ's Vicar imposes a
Necessity upon them not to boggle at the greatest Cruelties, whenever his
Holiness shall please to employ them in such Services: which his Pride and
Malice will never permit him to fail to do, whenever he thinks it consistent
with his interest. And that a power to employ his Vassals in such work as this,
was conferred by Christ upon S. Peter and his Successors, Pope Pius the Fifth
tells you, in the beginning of his Bull against Queen Elizabeth. Says he,
Regnans in excelsis, etc. He that Reigns on High, to whom is given all Power
in H^^^en and in Earth, has committed the one Holy, Catholic and Apostolic
Church, to one alone on Earth, viz. Peter Prince of the Apostles, and to his
Successor the Bishop of Rome, to be governed with a plenitude of Power. This
one has he constituted Prince over all Nations and Kingdoms, (but what to do?
The next words tell us) Qui evellat, destruat, dissipet, disperdat, plantet and
aedificet. That he may pluck up, destroy, break in pieces, waste, (Blessed
work!) plant and build (i. e.) upon those Ruins. And Pope Innocent the Third
applies to the Popes in a literal sense those words in the Prophecy of Jeremy:
See, In D^^ret. Greg. Lib. 1. tit. 33. cap. 6.
I have set thee over the Nations, and over the Kingdoms, to root out, and to
pull down, and to destroy, and to throw down, to build and to plant.

And it would be a most tedious piece of work to show, what use the Popes have
made of this their pretended power; and how they have menaced with
Excommunication those good-natured or prudent Princes, whom they have not found
forward to obey their Commands in destroying Heretics. So necessary is it that
a Papist, if he will be true to his principles, should be either actually
Cruel, or in a ready preparation to be so.

And where is the Lust of Pride and Ambition so gratified to the height as in
the Church of Rome?

As for the Head of this Church, can there be a prouder or so proud a Creature
upon Gods Earth? Who claims as Universal and Unbounded an Empire over Mankind,
as the Father has invested his Son Jesus withal. Who pretends his Authority
to exceed as much the Royal Power as the Sun does the Moon. Which are the words
of the now mentioned Pope Innocent in the place cited. Who assumes to himself
as great a Power over Kings and Emperors as over the meanest of Peasants, and
Authority to dispose of their Crowns and Kingdoms at his own pleasure: And,
whenever he has been strong enough, has made them feel it. Who claims as
great a power over Men's very Consciences, their Minds and Understandings (as we
have seen) in matters of Religion, as God himself can. Nay, usurpeth such a
Power as God himself abhors to have, as shall be shown anon.

So that if the Man of Sin, who sits in the Temple of God, and Exalts
himself above all that is called God, be not to be found in Rome, no part of
the World ever was or will be able to show him.

And how is it possible that such prodigious Pride in the Head should not
affect and influence the Members, both Clergy and Laity; and that there should
be none or little contagion in such an Example? Surely the Example of the
profoundly Humble Jesus cannot have a more powerful influence upon his
Disciples, than that of his Diabolically proud and haughty pretended Vicars
must needs have upon their Proselytes; especially considering the great
propensity of Humane Nature to this Sin of Pride. But as for the Popish
Clergy, they have infinite temptations to the gratifying to the height this
Lust, and as great Opportunities for it.

To pass by the Cardinals and Bishops, the former of which have the style and
go in the Equipage of Princes, and are copartners with their High and Mighty
Lord in his forementioned vast Rule and Government: And the latter not inferior
to the greatest of the Nobility, and have been Censured for going too much out
of their way to meet Princes; I say to pass by these, their Common Priests,
Monks and Friars have the greatest incentives to Pride, haughtiness and
Contempt of others, that the most Ambitious of them all can well wish to have.

As for the Priests, I need not say how much their pretended Power of
Transubstantiating the Elements in the Eucharist, which is no less than making
a God Almighty with pronouncing five words, must needs Conciliate Veneration
from the People to them. And also what a mighty Awe and Reverence their taking
of Auricular Confession from People of all Ranks lying prostrate before them
must necessarily beget in their minds toward them. And to other Instigations
to pride, too many to be now instanced in, may be added their privilege of
taking the Sacrament in both kinds, whereas the greatest men of the Laity may
not presume to touch the Cup.

And then for the Monks and Friars* what a Gratification of Pharisaical Pride
is the Opinion that the Silly Vulgar have of their Extraordinary Sanctity, by
means of the many Ceremonies, of which some are peculiar to one, and some to
another Order, which are devised for no other purpose, but to make up a
Mockshew of wonderful Humility, Contempt of the World, and Mortification?

And to the Lust of Pride we next add that of Covetousness, this is no less
gratified by the Popish Religion than the other: And no wonder, for
Covetousness is a Pander and Pimp to Pride.

Indeed, the whole Systeme of Popery is mainly contrived for the heaping up of
Wealth. This is manifestly designed in their Doctrine of Purgatory; Of the
Merit of good Works; The Popes Indulgences, and his prodigious Grants of
Pardons; The prohibition of Marriage to Priests; Their many Spiritual
Fraternities, etc. But I must not take liberty to enlarge here; for innumerable
are the Ways and Methods of the Papacy, and that are interwoven with the Popish
Religion, for scraping together the Wealth of the World: So notoriously guilty
is that Church of the crime which S. Paul charged the Seducers with, Tit. I.
II. viz. Teaching things that they ought not, for filthy lucres sake. She has
infinitely outdone all Societies and Bodies of men that ever were in the World
in the Politic Trade of Grasping and Accumulating Riches; and that (which
makes it far the more abominable) varnisht over with a Form and mighty show of
Godliness; though in the mean time She sticks at no means, though never so
unrighteous and abominably wicked, to accomplish her End. The Sect of the
Pharisees, her famous Predecessors, Who made long Prayers to devour Widows
houses, were in comparison of Her very silly Novices at this Artifice, and
sorry Bunglers. Which should I make out by proceeding to Enumerate the rest of
the Particulars (as has been now intimated) I should hardly know where to make
an End.

Then, for the Lust of Uncleanness, what greater encouragement can a Beastly
Creature have to give it its full Swinge and Liberty, than Holy Church gives
him? As also what dangerous and next to unavoidable snares does she lay in the
way of those men's Chastity, who would be glad to live honestly?

As to the Encouragement she gives to the satisfaction of this Lust, what can
be greater than to make simple Fornication a Venial Sin? That is, in the Popish
sense of that phrase, Bellarm. d^ Amiss. Great. cap. 13. Et d^ Sacram. Euchar. l.
4. c. 19*
a mere Peccadillo; all of which kind put together, Bellarmin will tell you,
cannot equal one Mortal Sin, nor destroy Charity: Nor deprive us of Gods
favor, etiamsi nullum pactum esset de Remissione, although there were no
Covenant of Grace. And whereas it will be replied, that though such sins expose
not to the torments of Hell, yet they do to those of Purgatory, which are
sufficient to scare a man from them, and particularly from this of Fornication:
I add this as another great Encouragement to the commission of it, viz. The
exceeding light Penances that are ordinarily imposed for it, such as going a
little way bare^^^^; A little piece of Money; So often Repeating so many
Prayers, etc.

But can there be greater Encouragement given, than his Holiness his not bare
Connivence at, but Toleration of public Stews or Bawdy-houses even at his own
door, and Sharing with them in their wicked Gains? Nay, Chemnitius tells us
(for which he quotes the Authority of Sleidan) that the Popes Legate himself had
lately in a public Writing, Exam. C^n. Tri^. Ses. 8. cap. 1
both defended in his own behalf, and commended to others that horrid
Wickedness for which Sodom with the neighboring Cities was destroyed by Fire.

In short, there is a thousand times greater discouragement given in and by the
Church of Rome to Holy Wedlock (the special means appointed by God for the
preservation of Chastity) than to Uncleanness of what kind soever, and even the
most Unnatural, as might largely be showed. Vid. Chem. Exam. Con. Trid. Ses. 8.
cap. ^.
The Holy Fathers of the Council of Trent have the impudence to oppose Chastity
to Matrimony, in their Ninth Canon of the Eighth Session.

Which leads me to show likewise what Snares are laid by that Church, and what
next to invincible Temptations to the sin of Uncleanness she exposes
innumerable People to. As imposing Vows of perpetual single Life upon all
Priests, Monks, Friars and Nuns, most of which live idly and fare plentifully;
And giving the Priests the most inviting Opportunities for the commission of
Fornication and Adultery that can be: There being not a Female of ripe years
but is obliged once a year at least to be alone with a Priest for Auricular
Confession. And whenever they please to apply themselves to them upon that
pretense, it is a Sin for Parents, Husbands, etc. to prohibit them: By which
means there is no sort of men scarcely in all Christendom so infamous for
Filthiness as the Popish Priests: And what a snare their Example must
necessarily be to the Laity, I need not say.

I might instance in other high provocations to Lust and Wantonness which the
Clergy and Laity of that Church must thank her for. As her excessive number of
Holy days, whereon the Laity at least must be idle whether they will or no. And
which, considering how they are observed as well within the Church as out of
it, do generally not at all serve the purposes of Religion; and, considering
the Liberty that is allowed, are only opportunities for making provision for
the flesh to fulfill it in the Lusts thereof. And as for the Carnivals, the
business of them is to commit all manner of Wickedness with greediness, and
with the greatest Secrecy and Security.

And therefore I need not distinctly show what Liberty that Church gives to the
Sin of Intemperance, the highest provocative to Lasciviousness.

Lastly, For that of the grossest Injustice and Unrighteousness, no men in the
world have such Encouragement to make no bones of it as have the Children of
the Church of Rome: Diverse of whose Practices and Principles are exactly
fitted for so Execrable a Design, as the extirpating out of men's Minds all
sense of Justice or Common Honesty. As particularly, the Pope's claiming a
Power to dispense with the most Solemn Oaths, and frequent exercise of that
Power in Absolving Subjects from their Allegiance to Heretical Princes, and
otherwise: That truly Catholic principle, that Faith is not to be kept with
Heretics; which a Council of Constance put in practice upon poor John Husse:
The Doctrine of Equivocation and Mental Reservation, which takes away all
Security and Confidence in one another words, and tends to the destruction of
Humane Society. This Doctrine is not proper to the Jesuits, but (as Father
Parsons says in his Treatise tending to Mitigation) has been received in the
Roman Church for Four hundred years. Chap. ^.


And if you take in the professed Principles of that their most Renowned Order,
which improve that Doctrine so far, as in some cases, but especially in those
wherein their Religion is concerned, to make it Lawful or at least Venial, to
back Equivocations with Sacred Oaths, and horrible Imprecations; and that
before a Court of Judicature (at least if it consists of Heretics) of the
practicing upon which we have had among our selves of late most Amazing
Instances: If, I say, you take in these principles (which are now collected out
of their Books into Pamphlets, and exposed to the View of every Body) as also
those very many other, which are to be seen in the Jesuits Morals, you will say
that should we rake Hell for Doctrines to make men Devils, there can none be
found more Effectual for the purpose than those wherewith we are furnished by
the Church of Rome.

And so much shall suffice to be spoken to the First Particular, viz. That
Popery tends as much as is possible to the debauching our Souls, by bringing
them into subjection to Vile Affections; in discoursing on which we have
studied to be as brief as can be.

Secondly, Popery no less tends to Disquiet men's Minds with certain
troublesome and tormenting Passions. We have showed in the First Section, that
all Corrupt Affections (and therefore the forementioned, to which all may be
reduced) are of a very tormenting nature: In saying therefore now that Popery
tends to disquiet men with certain troublesome Passions, I design a distinct
head of Discourse, viz. That the better and wiser any man of that Religion is,
the more will his Mind be disturbed by a many Points thereof; particularly with
Fear, Shame, Anxiety and Solicitude: And

First, For the Passion of Fear, what can so excite this, or make a man so much
a Slave to it, as the Popish Doctrine of Purgatory?

Whosoever does really believe that there is a life after this, must needs be
more or less solicitous about his state in that life; and according to the
degrees of that his Faith, will his solicitude be greater or less. Now the
belief of that Doctrine must necessarily be accompanied with great fear of
Death; which, as the Apostle says, makes those who are under the power of it
all their lifetime subject to Bondage. For, as the pains of Purgatory are
taught to be so dreadful and terrible as to equallize those of Hell, except
only in the duration of them (and how long each particular person may lie
there before he be released, whether scores or hundreds of years, as also what
degrees of Torment shall be allotted to him, is the greatest uncertainty) so no
man can have any rational assurance, let him lead never so strictly holy a
life, of escaping this place of Torment; No nor the least hope neither from
such a life, if it be short of absolute Perfection, as whose is not?

And as for the Efficacy of Penances and Indulgences, it is impossible for any
one who ever thinks seriously about the concerns of his Soul, and understands
any thing of Religion, at least not to be full of diffidence what it may amount
to. Those are such monstrous Cheats, the former for the most part of them, and
the latter all of them, that such as are not much short of Brutes for Folly, or
of Devils for Wickedness, can never be so blinded as to promise to themselves
the least benefit or advantage from them, and much less that which is promised
by the Pope and the Priests.

Again, what a Slavish Fear and Dread of God, as a Revengeful Being, must needs
possess the Minds of those who have imbibed the Church of Rome's Doctrine
concerning Whippings and Scourgings, and other severe Penances? viz. That they
are necessary not only for Mortification, but likewise for Satisfaction, in
the Popish sense of that word.

But what a Spirit of Bondage are they under then from Dread of God's
Vengeance, in believing (as they are bound) that God will not Remit the
punishment of Sin where the Guilt of it is washed away with the Blood of
Christ, upon the performance of the conditions of the New Covenant (which is as
Nonsensical as False) that he will not Remit it, I say, to such, so far as to
excuse them from intolerable Temporary Torments in the other World, except he
has other satisfaction given him in this life by themselves; nor from Torments
of a Vastly long duration, except it be given him by others after their decease?

Their Church is so well aware, with what horrible Dread and Fear this Doctrine
must necessarily affect poor credulous Fools, that she has invented it for
that very reason; because by this means she brings them into the most Slavish
subjection, makes her self Mistress of their Purses, and is enabled to have her
fill of Tyranny over their Consciences, their Souls and Bodies. What tongue can
express the Devilishness of such Practices!

Next for the Passion of Shame; The necessity of all People's of both Sexes
Confessing to the Priest, which is enjoined by the Council of Trent to be done
once a year at least, Sess. 14. (...). ^.
and that of all their Actual sins, and not only so, but also of all their
purposes and desires to commit them, nay, and inclinations too; what violence
is hereby done to the Modesty of all such as have not arrived to the height of
impudence? This is (to use the words of the Learned Doctor More) as if all the
modest Maids and grave Matrons in the Parish should strip themselves stark
naked, Mystery of Iniquity, p. 78.
and in that manner humble themselves before their Priest once a year: Which
would look like a piece of unsupportable Tyranny. And yet (as he proceeds) this
extorted Confession upon pain of Damnation not to conceal any thing, is not the
stripping of a man to his naked body, but the stripping him of his body, that
they may see his naked Heart, and so by the force of this Superstition break
into those secrets, which it is only the due privilege of God Almighty to be
acquainted with, etc. And

Lastly, What Anxiety and Solicitude must those Papists minds needs be
tormented with, who are at all concerned about their Eternal State, by reason
of these following Doctrines, viz. That of the Dependence of the Efficacy of
Sacraments upon the Priests intention: That of Confession now mentioned,
decreed in the Trent Canons, viz. That the Penitent must not only confess
every Mortal sin, which after the strictest search he can call to mind, but
even his particular sinful thoughts, his secret desires, and every circumstance
which changes the nature of the sin: And that of their distinction of sins
into Mortal and Venial; to pass by many others.

As for the First of these, That known Doctrine of the Dependence of the
Efficacy of Sacraments upon the Priests intention: Such as Baptism; the Lords
Supper; Absolution, which is a grand Popish Sacrament, etc. Can it be other
than a great disturbance and distraction to a considering person, whether there
be any dash of Melancholy in his Temper or no, to think with himself thus: What
if after all my care and all my expense, the Priest should either from a
principle of Malice or non-advertency not direct his Intention as he ought to
do? Then, if I am not remedilesly damned, I am at least in eminent danger of
damnation.

But then as to the Second relating to Confession; This ushers in this
perplexing difficulty, viz. How shall I in enquiring after my particular sins,
in deed, word and thought, assure my self that I have used my utmost diligence?
Which if I have not done, my Absolution will signify nothing to me.

And as to Confessing the Circumstances of sins, the Questions and Scruples
which naturally arise from thence are too many to be recited. But I Will
transcribe some passages of the Learned Bishop Taylor' s, concerning Auricular
Confession, which are greatly to our present purpose. Says he in his
Disswasive from Popery, the First Part, How this can be safely done, and who is
sufficient for these things, Polemical Discourses in fol. p. 316.
and who can tell his Circumstances without tempting his Confessor, or
betraying and defaming another person (which is forbidden) and in what cases it
may be done, and in what cases omitted; and whether the Confession be valid
upon infinite other Considerations, and whether it be to be repeated in whole
or in part, and how often, and how much? These things are so uncertain, casual
and contingent, and so many cases are multiplied upon every one of these; and
these so disputed by their greatest Doctors, by Thomas and Scotus, and all the
Schoolmen, and by the Casuists; that, as Beatus Rhenanus complains, it was
truly observed by the famous John Geilerius, that according to their Cases,
Enquiries and Conclusions, it is impossible for any man to make a right
Confession. And thus he concludes that Section: So that although the shame of
private Confession be very tolerable and easy, yet the Cases and Scruples
which they have introduced, are neither easy nor tolerable. And though, as it
is now used, there be but little in it to restrain sin, yet there is very much
danger of increasing it, and of receiving no benefit by it.

But yet for all this, the Trent Gentlemen in the forecited Session and
Chapter, call it an impious thing to say that this their Auricular Confession
is Carnificina Conscientiarum, a Racking and Torturing of Peoples Consciences.
But it would be a wonder if the greatest Wickedness should be unaccompanied
with the most shameless impudence.

As for the Third Doctrine I named, viz. That of their distinction of Sins into
Mortal and Venial (that is, in their own nature so) the intanglements it brings
men into are inextricable. For they cannot be satisfied from their Casuists
what Sins are Venial and what are not so, in very many instances. And much less
can they distinguish between the greatest Venial Sins and the least Mortal ones.

Now, considering this little that has been said, as the Apostle says, 2 Cor.
3. 17. Where the Spirit of the Lord is (or the true Spirit of Christianity)
there is Liberty, so may we say, Where the Spirit of Popery is, there is
Slavery; much worse than Egyptian Slavery. No Papist who is disposed to be
Devout and Religious can be better than a poor Superstitious Creature: Nor can
scarcely serve God after a better sort than a Turkish Slave does his cruel
Patron; or than the poor Indians Worship the Devil.

But that those of them who make Conscience of their ways, and are Religiously
inclined are not beholden to their Popery for being so, will be fully made to
appear in the next Chapter.

CHAP. XVIII.
The Third Particular discoursed on, viz. That the Admirable Method our Lord
has taken to Instate us in our Christian Liberty, is made lamentably
Ineffectual by Popery. This showed as to each of those four Particulars that
Method consists of. The Second Head briefly spoken to, viz. That Popery is also
the greatest Enemy to that Liberty Christ purchased for the Jews in Particular.
A Pathetical Exhortation to a higher valuing of the Privileges we enjoy in the
Church of England concludes the Chapter.
THirdly, The Admirable course and Method which our Lord has taken to instate
us in our Christian Liberty is made lamentably Ineffectual by Popery, For,

First, Whereas we have showed, that He has fully informed us concerning all
the parts and particulars of our Liberty, what can the Romish Church do more
than she does to keep men in Ignorance of them? The Holy Scriptures (as has
been said) She has locked up: And though (as that excellent Gentleman Sir
Edwyn Sandys says) as well to beat back the irksome outcries of their
Adversaries, Europe Speculum, p. 126. Edit. 1673
as to give some content and satisfaction to their own, that they might not
think them so terribly afraid of the Bible, they were content to let it be
translated by some of their Favorers into the Vulgar, as also some number of
Copies to be saleable awhile at the beginning; yet since, having hushed that
former clamor, and made better provision for the Establishment of their
Kingdom, they have called all Vulgar Bibles straightly in again, yea the very
Psalms of David, which their famous Preacher, Bishop Panigarola translated, as
doubting else the unavoidableness of those former inconveniences.

And such base, blasphemous Reflections upon the Holy Scriptures have been
published, both from their Pulpits and Presses, as speak them exceedingly
dangerous by reason of their extreme obscurity, even in points necessary to
Salvation (though the Apostle says, If our Gospel be hid, it is hid to them
that are lost) as well as not worth the reading, as being fitted to serve all
turns, a dead letter, and at best an insufficient Rule, and not signifying any
thing unaccompanied with their paltry Traditions; though S. Paul says, The
Scriptures are able to make us wise to Salvation. Nor do their Preachers make
any great amends for this intolerable abuse; for, as they are too generally
most sottishly ignorant, and know little more of the Scriptures than the poor
people, so the most Knowing of them for the most part stuff their Sermons with
Legends and Idle tales, make as little use of Scripture as they can, and feed
their Flocks with sorry Trash, nay, with rank Poison mingled with the sincere
milk of the Word, and the Saving Doctrines of the Gospel.

Secondly, Whereas we have shown, that our Lord has furnished us with the most
potent Means for the gaining of our Christian Liberty, this Church has also
taken a course to make these unsuccessful We will instance in some of them.

As for that of Believing himself to be the Son of God, etc. we need add
nothing to what has been said to show how little she befriends it, in that she
makes her own Authority the only foundation of that Belief.

That of Hearing his Word, we have now seen how Ineffectual she makes it.

That of Prayer she makes so as much as she can, both by her foresaid Doctrine
of the Non-necessity of employing the Mind therein, and her suitable Practice
of enjoining the Reading of Prayers in an unknown Tongue: As also by defiling
them with Superstitious Rites, and even gross Idolatry: And by joining many
Mediators with Jesus Christ.

That of the Observation of the Lords day, for which we have uninterrupted
Tradition from the Apostles times, she has made as effectual to the business
it is designed for, as the rest of her Holy Days.

That of Denying our sensitive Appetites, she is a wonderful Friend to, as
appears by the foresaid Doctrine concerning simple Fornication, and the
forementioned Liberty she allows, and the Indulgences her Popes have granted.

And lastly, Those of the Sacraments, how unserviceable has she made them to
their intended End, by her Doctrines of opus operatum, and of making their
Efficacy dependent on the Priests Intention: And that of the Lords Supper, by
Robbing the People of half, and converting the whole by her prodigious Doctrine
of Transubstantiation into the most Shameful Idolatry; and by her, Doctrine of
the Sacrifice of the Mass into a daily Crucifying our Lord afresh, and putting
him again to an open shame.

Thirdly, Whereas we have showed that our Lord has purchased for us a rich
supply of Grace, to enable us to use these and the like Means with happy
success, I need not say what an Enemy Popery is to this Grace and the
Efficaciousness thereof, having now shown what an Enemy it is to these Means.

Fourthly, Whereas we have likewise presented several most powerful Motives,
which our Lord has given us to prevail with our Wills to comply with this
Grace, Popery is apt greatly to weaken and deaden every one of them to all its
Proselytes. As for instance,

1. That of the Vnconceiveable Love of God, expressed in sending his only
Begotten Son upon the Errand of our Deliverance, etc. Wherein we said are
implied two wonderfully exciting Motives to comply heartily with the Method
Christ has taken to set us free from the Dominion of Sin, viz. First, Gods
extremest Hatred of Sin, in that he would not propose Terms of Reconciliation
to Sinners without the intervention of such a Sacrifice as that of his Dear
Son. Secondly, His as wonderful love to Sinners. Now as to the former of these
two Motives, what influence can it have upon those who are made to believe that
a company of little slight Penances will satisfy for great and enormous
Crimes? Can they think that God does account Sin so heinous and intolerable an
evil, when they presume Him so willing to be reconciled to great Sinners upon
the most easy terms and conditions?

The foresaid Gentleman, who was conversant among them, tells us, Europae
Speculum, p. 13.
that their Penance does ordinarily consist but in Ave Mary's and Pater
Nosters, with some easy Alms to them that are able, and some little Fasting to
such as are willing. And that he himself has known, when the Penance for
Horrible Blasphemy, and that frequent too, besides much other lewdness, has
been but the bare saying of their Beads thrice over; which in Italy (such good
Husbands are they) hinders no business, but (as he also observes) they dispatch
their Beads as they walk the Streets, or rid business at home, making it two
lips and one fingers work. But were the Penance imposed by the Priests never so
sharp, he shows that the Fathers plenary Pardon sweeps all away at a blow. And
that of these they have granted (especially the Pope that lived in his time) so
huge a number, that he believed there were few Churches of note in Italy, which
had not purchased or procured a perpetual plenary Indulgence, by virtue whereof
whosoever at certain days being Confessed, and, having Communicated, pours out
his Devotions at some Altar in that Church, or gives Alms to the behoof
thereof, had forthwith free Remission of all sin and punishment. Which, I say,
is the most effectual course that can be devised to make people think, that the
greatest sins are no greater evil in God's than they are in their own account.

And then as to the latter Motive, how is the Love of God to sinners lessened
by this Doctrine of theirs, viz. That by the Sufferings of Christ true
Penitents are indeed delivered from Hell, but not from the direful pains of
Purgatory, which (as was said) may be equal in all respects to those of Hell,
except in the duration of them; which yet may endure too for many Ages, but
that they have invented means to shorten them. And their eaking out the
satisfaction which Christ has made to the Divine Justice for sinners, with
satisfactions of their own making, does also not a little disparage his and his
Fathers love in what he has suffered in their behalf.

2. As to the Motive of Christ's Admirable Example, we have showed of what
little Efficacy this is made by the Vile Examples of his Vicars and
Vicegerents, and their Spiritual Guides. Whereunto I will add this passage of
the said Sir Edwin's, Europe Speculum. p. 136, 137
That the Iniquity of their Chief See has been so exorbitant, as to have
raised amidst themselves this Proverb or saying, That the worst Christians of
Italy are the Romans, of the Romans the Priests are Wickedest, the Lewdest
Priests are preferred to be Cardinals, and the baddest Man among the Cardinals
is preferred to be Pope.

3. As for this Motive, viz. The assurance Christ has given us, that he will
not take such advantage of our Frailties as to cast us off for them. it is even
quite taken away by their Doctrine of even Venial Sins being so severely
punished in Purgatory.

4. For that of our Savior's Mediation and Intercession, what a little Motive
have they made it, by making so many Co-Mediators with Jesus Christ, as if his
Mediation were far from sufficient. And nothing has been more observed than
that for one Pater Noster, they say very many Ave Mary's. And the Virgin Mother
of God (as they call her) is Caressed after that rate by them, that it is
scarcely uncharitable to suspect that they lay far more stress upon here is than
upon her Son's Merits.

Lastly, To join together the Motives of the Glorious Reward promised to the
subduing of Corrupt Affections, and the most Dismal Punishment those are
threatened with who gratisie them, it appears abundantly from what has been
already said, that they have made these exceedingly weak and insignificant. But
that one Doctrine is enough to do it alone, which we find backed with the
Authority of the Council of Trent, viz. Quamv^ sine Sacramento Poenitentiae
[Attritio] per se ad Iustificationem perducere Peccatorem ^equeat; tamen cum ad
Dei gratian in Sacramento Paeniten^^ impetrandum disponit. Sess. 14. Cap. 4.
That Imperfect Contrition, or Attrition, although by it self it cannot bring a
sinner to Justification, without the Sacrament of Penance; nevertheless it
disposes him for the obtaining of the Grace of God in that Sacrament.

Now they tell you immediately before what they mean by Attrition, viz. A
sorrow for Sin, arising either from the consideration of its turpitude, or from
the fear of Hell, (not from both together, but from either) excluding a will to
Sin for the future, and accompanied with the hope of Pardon. Now who can find
it difficult to be affected with sorrow for his Sins, for fear of Hell, and to
be willing to leave off to sin, when he sees Death approaching, and he can sin
no longer? And then a Priest being at hand to apply the Sacrament of Penance,
according to this sweet Doctrine, the most profligate sinners work is done for
the other World. And therefore what need any man put himself to the trouble of
subduing his Lusts, and a holy life, seeing all that is necessary to Eternal
Salvation may be dispatched on the Deathbed? If it be said, that no man can be
certain that he shall have any time of sickness before death, or that he shall
not be cut off in a Moment, as many are, or that he shall be compos mentis, and
have the use of Reason in his Sickness, and therefore it is a mad thing to put
off the great work of Saving a man's Soul to the very last: I say, if this be
said, the Answer is easy, that seeing there is scarcely one in some hundreds
but has at some time or other the use of his Intellectuals upon his Deathbed,
and so very few comparatively die without some warning, there is no doubt of
it, but a hardened sinner will put those things to the Venture, when once he
has drunk down the comfortable Cordial which is prepared for him by his
Spiritual Physicians, and that by a General Council of them too, which never
fails of being Infallible.

And thus we have seen how woefully mischievous Popery is in making as
ineffectual as can be the most admirable Method our Lord has pitched upon for
the setting us Free from the Power of Sin. Which Argument I have been the more
brief upon, because I have already discoursed upon it in the Design of
Christianity. Chap. 17.


Secondly, It remains to be shown what an Enemy Popery is to that Liberty which
our Savior purchased for the Jews particularly. The Church of Rome has laid
on a far more intolerable Burden of Ceremonies and Ritual Observances than that
which our Savior took off their shoulders. Which, as they fall not short of
the Jewish ones in number, (nay I may say do much exceed them) so they are (to
say nothing how grossly Superstitious many of them are, and some as Idolatrous)
for the most part so odd and uncouth, so childish and ridiculous, so vain and
garish, as that it is not conceivable how truly Devout and Serious people
should stoop so low as to give their Minds to them, and not lose their
Seriousness and Devoutness. The ill influence which the Mosaical Ordinances had
by accident, and through their own default upon the Minds of the Jews, these
must naturally have, and a far worse, upon the Minds of Papists.

It would be an endless piece of work to discourse of them particularly, and I
shall only refer the Reader to the Seventeenth, Eighteenth, and Nineteenth
Chapters of the several times quoted Mystery of Iniquity.

Nor will I add any thing farther of mine own upon this Unpleasant subject, but
set down what Sir Edwyn Sandys has acquainted us with from his own
Observation. Europ^e Speculum. p. 3.
Says he, To omit the endless multitude of Superstitions and Ceremonies of the
Church of Rome, enough to take up a great part of a man's life to gaze on and to
peruse; being neither Uniform in all places, as some would pretend, but
different in diverse Countries: An huge sort of them are so childish also and
unsavory, that, as they argue great silliness and rawness in their Inventors,
so can they naturally bring no other than disgrace and contempt to those
exercises of Religion wherein they are stirring.

Nor can I forbear to add the following large Citation from the same Author, in
the Conclusion of this Discourse, of the infinite injury that is done by Popery
to Christian Liberty: Viz. Page (...).
The particular ways they hold to Ravish all Affections and to fit each Humor,
are well nigh infinite: There being not any thing either Sacred or Profane, no
Virtue nor Vice almost, nothing of how contrary condition soever, which they
make not in some sort to serve that turn; that each Fancy may be satisfied, and
each Appetite find what to feed on. Whatsoever either Wealth can sway with the
Lovers, or Voluntary Poverty with the Despisers of the World; What Honor with
the Ambitious, what Obedience with the Humble; What great Employment with
Stirring and metall'd Spirits; What perpetual Quiet with Heavy and Restive
Bodies; What Content the Pleasant Nature can take in Pastimes and Iollity; What
contrariwise the Austere Mind in Discipline and Rigor; What Love either
Chastity can raise in the Pure, or Voluptuousness in the Dissolute, etc. What
with the Hopeful Prerogative of Reward can work; What Errors, Doubts and
Dangers with the Fearful, etc. What Pardons with the Faulty, or Supplies with
the Defective; What Miracles with the Credulous; What Visions with the
Fantastical; What Gorgiousness of Shows with the Vulgar and Simple; What
multitude of Ceremonies with the Superstitious and Ignorant; What Prayer with
the Devout; What with the Charitable works of Piety; What Rules of higher
Perfection with Elevated Affections; What Dispensing with Breach of all Rules
with men of Lawless Conditions: In sum, what thing soever can prevail with any
man, either for himself to pursue, or at leastwise to love, reverence or honor
in another, the same is found with them, not as in other places of the World by
Casualty blended without Order, and of necessity; but sorted in great part into
several Professions, etc. What Pomp, what Riot to that of their Cardinals? What
Severity of life comparable to their Hermits and Capuchins? Who wealthier than
their Prelates? Who poorer by Vow and Profession than their Mendicants? On the
one side of the Street a Cloister of Virgins, on the other a Stye of Courtizans
with public Toleration. This day all in Masks with all looseness and foolery,
to morrow all in Processions, whipping themselves till the blood follows. On
one door an Excommunication throwing to Hell all Transgressors, on another a
Iubilee or full Discharge from all Transgressions, etc. What Pride equal to the
Pope's, making Kings to kiss his Pantafle? What Humility greater than his,
shriving himself daily on his knees to an ordinary Priest? etc. Where greater
Rigor in the World in acting the Observation of the Church Laws? Where less
care or Conscience of the Commandments of God? To taste Flesh on a Friday,
where suspicion might fasten, were a matter for the Inquisition; Whereas on the
other side the Sunday is one of their greatest Market-days. To conclude, never
State, never Government in the World so strangely compacted of infinite
Contrarieties, all tending to entertain the several Humors of all men, and to
work what kind of Effects soever they shall desire, etc.

So that where is mad Licentiousness more countenanced in the whole World than
it is by this Church? And where are poor Mortals made such miserable Slaves as
She makes them? And consequently, how can there be a greater Enemy than the
Romish Church is, to that which we have proved to be the true, and most
Excellent Liberty?

And now is it possible, that after the reading of the foregoing Account of the
unsupportably Tyranny, the intolerably Corrupt Principles and most Abominable
Practices of the Church of Rome, we should not be very greatly affected with
the Privileges we enjoy in the Church of England? And with the infinite
Goodness of God to us in giving us our Birth and Education in a Church which
affords us all the Advantages of which that Church, like a cruel Stepmother,
robs her Children?

We live in a Church which lays before us the Scripture Arguments for our
Confirmati^n in the Christian Faith; which obliges us to receive the Faith of
Christ upon the self-same Grounds and Motives that are proposed by our Savior
and his Apostles, and upon no other.

We live in a Church which not only gives us free leave, but likewise enjoins
us to read the Holy Scriptures, and deprives us of no part of them.

We live in a Church which requires us to receive nothing as an Article of
Faith upon her bare Authority; that assumes nothing of In^allibility to her
self, but freely gives us the Liberty of trying all things: That imposes
nothing upon our Belief or Practice as necessary to Salvation, but what is in
the plainest and most express terms to be found in the Bible: That makes the
Scriptures a complete Rule of Faith, and adds not one syllable of her own to
supply their defect: That takes no Liberty in her Constitutions, but such as
she believes to be agreeable to the General Apostolical Rules of doing all
things decently and in order, and to Edification; and imposes these not as of
Divine Institution, or as necessary in their own nature, but only as Expedient
for the more solemn, grave and decorous Management of the Public Worship of
God: This being left by Christ and his Apostles to the Prudence of the
Governors of each particular Church.

We live in a Church which Abominates the Worship of God by Images, allows no
Prayers to Saints or Angels, but only to the true God by the alone Mediation
of our Lord Jesus Christ.

We live in a Church which renounceth all Merit of good Works, and teaches us
to expect Salvation only for the sake of Jesus Christ, and through his
Righteousness; but gives not the least countenance to Licentious practices, or
Remissness in good Works; and teaches the absolute necessity of purging our
selves by the Assistance of the Divine Grace from all Filthiness both of Flesh
and Spirit, in order to our being made capable of God's Complacential love
here, and Glory hereafter.

Lastly, (whereas I might be exceedingly large upon this subject) we live in a
Church wherein we want no necessary help for the building us up in our most
holy Faith, or our having the Design of our Savior's Religion happily effected
in us; namely, the Reformation of our Lives, and our being Renewed after the
Image of God, which consists in Righteousness and true Holiness.

O that at length we could become more eflectually sensible of the blessed
privileges the Divine Goodness vouchsafes to us of the Church of England,
lest we be made to Prize them by the Loss of them: Lest our general monstrous
Ingratitude, and lamentable Unprofitableness under them; and the Wantonness,
Peevishness, and Causless Separation of Multitudes from the Communion of this
Church, provoke the Divine Majesty to put our Necks once more under the Iron
Yoke of those Tyrants, which made such Vassals of our Forefathers.

If that dismal day should again come (as God grant it may not) with what
Sorrow and Grief of Soul shall we reflect upon our neglecting and despising
such happy Opportunities as we now enjoy? What would we not then gladly part
with to regain them, when we are deprived of them?

And O that our several divided Parties were capable of being persuaded to
consider Sedately and Seriously before it be too late, what their Gain will be
by the Fall of our Chuch, when themselves and their Religion lie buried
together in her Ruins.

CHAP. XIX.
The Fourth Inference, That he only is a true Christian, that looks upon
himself as obliged to be no less Watchful over his Heart and the frame and
temper of his Mind, than over his Life and Conversation.
I Shall now return to more immediately practical discourse, for what remains
of this Treatise, which is far more pleasing to my self than that I have been
employed in for several of the past Chapters; as necessary and seasonable as
that is also.

Fourthly, From our Notion of Christian Liberty this is another manifest
Inference, viz. That a true Christian is one that looks upon himself as obliged
to be no less watchful over his Heart, than over his Life and Conversation; to
take as great care to cleanse the inside of the Cup and Platter (to use our
Savior's expression) as the outside; to be as vigilant over his Affections, as
over his outward Behavior; to be as Solicitous about purging himself from all
immoderate Love of the things of this World, as about procuring them by
warrantable and lawful means.

The true Christian makes as much Conscience of Lusting after a Woman and
cherishing impure thoughts, as he does of Lascivious and Wanton Practices; Of
harboring Revenge in his Breast, and bearing ill will to any, as of repaying
Injury with injury. He needs not to be made sensible that it is no less his duty
to forgive and love his Enemies, than to forbear reviling them or doing evil to
them; that it is as indispensably necessary to be low in his own Eyes, and to
think meanly of himself, as to beware of a haughty and supercilious carriage
toward others; that he cannot more safely Covet than he can Steal his
Neighbors goods; that he is as much bound to bring his Will into subjection to
the Will of God, under the severest Providence, as to forbear Murmuring,
Repining and Charging of God foolishly.

He who is a Christian in deed as well as in name places Religion in Governing
his own Spirit, no less than in any External performances or forbearances of
what nature soever; in putting away from himself all Wrath, Bitterness and
Sourness, no less than in abstaining from uncivil deportment toward his
Brethren.

This man does not think it more necessary to do good works than to do them
from a good principle: And he is as much concerned about Loving of God, as
about Doing what he has commanded him, and Forbearing what he has forbidden
him. He no less endeavors to Hate sin, than not to Commit it; and to be in
love with his duty, than to do his duty.

Nay, the sincere Christian looks upon that as his greatest and most important
work and business which is least in sight, which is to be done within himself;
as well knowing that if the Tree be good, its Fruit will be so also: That (as
our Savior says) a corrupt tree cannot bring forth good fruit, nor a good
tree evil fruit; and that all must needs be well without him, if all be well
within him: And that no outward Temptations can be forceably enough to draw him
to sin, so long as there is entertained within him no treacherous Lust, that is
ready to take part with them.

That he to whom this Character does not belong is no genuine Christian, is
apparent, in that such a person is no Freeman. And as a great number of Texts
do plainly speak the former Proposition to be true, so is it to be concluded
from what has been discoursed of the nature of Christian Liberty; from our
having demonstrated that it consists in deliverance from all Inslaving Lusts,
and in having all obstacles taken out of the way to our complete complying with
the Laws of Righteousness and Goodness.

CHAP. XX.
The Last Inference. Viz. That the most Proper and Genuine Christian Obedience
is that which has most of Liberty in it; namely, that which proceeds from the
Principle of Love to God and Goodness.
FIfthly and Lastly, I infer from our discourse of Christian Liberty what is
the most Proper and Genuine Christian Obedience; Surely that which has most of
Liberty in it; that Obedience which is most free and least forced: That which
springs from an Inward Living Principle, and is not merely occasioned by the
consideration of External Motives and Arguments.

And then does a man act from an Inward Principle of Life, when he acts from
the love of God and Goodness. There is scarcely any distinction betwixt these
two, for to love God, that is, as God, is to be inamoured primarily with his
most Beautiful and Amiable Perfections of Righteousness, Purity, Beneficence
and Mercy; all which may properly be expressed by that one Excellent word
GOODNESS. I say to love God as God is to be in love with these Perfections
primarily, and to love His Person upon the account of them, if it be lawful to
distinguish them, and abstract His Person from His Perfections. But those do
most truly conceive of that Incomprehensible Being, who make no such
Abstraction, but describe Him by calling Him Infinite Righteousness and Purity,
Bounty and Mercy, Wisdom and Power, etc. rather than a Being in whom are all
these Perfections: For they are not so properly said to be in God, as to be God
Himself. Thus limited that Maxim of the Schools is indisputably true, viz.
Quicquid est in Deo est ipse Deus: Whatsoever is in God is God himself.

So that I say, to love God and to love Goodness as such do amount to the same
thing: To love God not because Good in himself, but because Good and Kind to
me, is more self-love than a love of God. A Wicked man may thus love God, for
as the Wise man observes, that every man is a friend to him that gives gifts,
so is he especially to him that bestows gifts upon himself; the very Brutes
are so, and he is more a Devil than a Man that is not so. Publicans and
Sinners, our Savior says, do love those who love them, and the more a man
loves himself the more will he be inclined to love his Benefactors and best
Friends as such.

Now (as I said) that is the most Free, and consequently the most Christian
Obedience which arises from an Inward lively sense of the Beauty and
Amiableness of Goodness, of the Christian Virtues and Graces, which are all so
many Rays of and Emanations from the Divine Goodness, and therefore those who
are endued with them are said to be partakers of a Divine nature: And when we
act from this Principle we act from a New nature, and I need not say that no
actions are so free as natural actions. Thus to do good is to do like God
himself, the Freest of all Agents; for he does good not from External Motives,
but from the Infinite Complacency he takes in Goodness it self. I am the Lord
who exercise Loving kindness, Judgment and Righteousness in the Earth, for in
these things do I d^light says the Lord, Ier. 9. 24. Which is as much as to
say, therefore I am exercised in these things, because I delight in them: or,
my delight in these things is the Principle whereby I am acted in the Exercise
of them. Thou art Good (says the Psalmist) and do good, Psalm. 119. 68. Or,
because thou art Good thou do good, and God's being Good is his Delighting in
Goodness. Righteousness and Goodness are too Excellent things to be made mere
means to a farther End. Who is a God like unto thee, that pardons Iniquity,
and passes by the Transgression of the Remnant of his Heritage, he retains
not his anger for ever (and why he does not, the next words tell us) because he
Delights in Mercy, Mic. 7. 18. And our imitating of God and being like to him
is the great design and business of our Savior's Religion.

But I would not be understood as if I affirmed that that Obedience which
springs from Hope or Fear, or is excited by the consideration of Rewards and
Punishments is an Obedience not becoming and unworthy of Christians: If so, I
should condemn our Savior and his Apostles for proposing such Motives. But I
say,

First, That the most genuinely Christian Obedience is that which proceeds from
Love, from the Love of God and Goodness; Not that Christianity does exclude all
other Motives, but this is the Chief and Principal, because it makes our
Obedience most Free, and makes us most like to God in doing Good.

Secondly, I say also that to do good from a Principle of love to God and
Goodness, and to do it from the hope of Heaven and the fear of Hell are one and
the same thing, if we have a true notion of Heaven and Hell: That is, if we
conceive of the Heavenly State as that which consists in a perfect likeness to
God (as perfect as our Natures are capable of) and a full and complete
enjoyment of him; and of the Hellish State as that which is directly opposite
to the Heavenly, according to this Notion of it. Now I need not spend one
minute in showing, that to do good from the hope of such a Happiness, and from
the fear of such a Misery, is to be acted by the foresaid principle of Love in
so doing.

Thirdly, I add, that to be acted by mere External Motives, Motives wholly
Extrinsical to God and Goodness, by the ^^ar of Hell only considered as a
place of Torment, and the hope of Heaven only considered as a place of great
Pleasure and Joy, without considering the nature of that torment and the nature
of that Joy, this is a low and mean Obedience, as having nothing but Self-love
in it, and Self-love of the lower kind too; and this is a forced not a free
Obedience.

It is a certain truth, that he who has no sense of the inward Pulchritude and
Loveliness of Virtue, and of the Deformity and Ugliness of Vice, and the
Eligibleness of the former before the latter considered in themselves, and
therefore would be a Wicked wretch if he were not held in by the mere hope of a
Reward and fear of Punishment, though he be never so Conformable outwardly to
the Laws of Christ, this man is no Christian. He is much nearer to the Kingdom
of God, than he on whom Hope and Fear have no Influence to make him better, but
he has not attained to a due qualification and meetness for it.

I appeal to any Father, whether he would account such a one a good Child who
is mightily observant of him, if he were assured that his Obedience proceeded
from no more generous Principles; and that he would be a Rogue and a Villain
but for fear of the Lash, and that he hopes for his Estate. As little reason
has our Savior to account such Disciples of his good Christians, as we have
to account such Sons of ours good Children.

And from what has now been said we learn what to think of the Principle of
Gratitude; Whether this makes that Obedience which arises from thence the most
genuinely Christian Obedience, as it is ordinarily said it does. If our
Gratitude proceeds merely from the consideration of the Divine Bounty to our
selves, taking no notice of that expressed to our Fellow Creatures, it has
nothing but Self-love in it, and therefore is more Animal than Christian
Gratitude. And consequently, I need not ask what we are to think of that
Gratitude which is founded only or chiefly upon the Peculiarity of God's love
to our selves; that wherein the Sweetest and most Indearing Consideration is
this, that the Generality of Mankind are excluded from it: Truly this is a
worse than mere Animal Gratitude, and speaks a Mind exceedingly destitute of
that Divine (and therefore Christian) temper, which exerts it self in Universal
good will. And I am certain that the more a Christian any man is, the higher
will the Consideration of other's having a share with him in the Blessings of
God advance his Gratitude. And that which does most become us springs more from
a lovely sense of the Divine Beneficence considered as largely extended, than
from the Consideration of its being terminated on our own Persons or Families,
or some few people besides our selves.

I do not say, that the peculiarity of a Favor ought not to affect us, when it
is not in our Fancy only but in reality: But, I say, there is nothing but what
is natural, (it is impossible we should not be affected with it when we
consider it) there is nothing proper to a Christian in such a Gratitude; and I
say also, that though this Consideration, I have such a Mercy conferred upon
me, which not one in a thousand is blessed with besides my self, must needs the
more affect me with Joy and Gratitude; because it makes me sensible that it was
more than a thousand to one I might have missed of it too, supposing it was no
fruit of my extraordinary diligence, and I did no more than others for it who
went without it: Yet it would be a very Uncharitable, and therefore Wicked,
thing in me to be so much the more thankful for that Mercy, because it is
denied to most others. There is a Vast difference between being the more
grateful for a Blessing, because, since so small a number are partakers of it,
I am one of those that are; and being so, because so small a number are
partakers of it. And the more will our Gratitude have of the truly Christian
Spirit, the less we abstract our selves from others in the Consideration of
those obligations God has laid upon us together with others; and by
consequence that Obedience will be most Christian-like which flows from such a
Gratitude.

THE CONCLUSION.
NOW then, after all that has been said upon this weighty Argument, shall we
continue as negligent and cold as ever in Asserting our Liberty? That Liberty
which is infinitely most Valuable, that Liberty which sets free from the Vilest
and most Intolerable Slavery, the Liberty of our Souls, and the truly Divine
Liberty? Shall that Liberty which deserves not to be named on the same day with
this, be so highly set by, and can we tamely give up this? Do men think Freedom
from Bodily Slavery to be worth the Price of all they have, their Lives and
all, and are we able to imagine that Freedom from Spiritual Slavery can be
bought too dear; or think much of using our most Serious Endeavors for the
regaining of it?

Had the Laconick Boy, Phil. Iud. p. 682.
when taken Captive by a Soldier of Antigonus, so brave a Spirit as to refuse
to be employed by him, in any of that drudgery which was proper to Slaves, and
to prefer a Violent death before a Slavish Life, when he despaired of
Redemption? Ibid.
Did those Dardan Women esteem Slavery (...), the most loathsome of all Evils,
and so extremely Vile and Shameful a thing, as to take their dear Children and
drown them in the River to prevent their being made Slaves of? And are we of so
much a baser Make than that poor Lad, and these silly Women, as Sheepishly to
subject our selves to the incomparably most Vile and dishonorable Slavery?
Nay, are we so void of all Sense as to be unconcerned at the unsupportable
Misery which first or last will be the unavoidable consequent thereof? Are we
Nati ad Servitutem, is Slavery so natural to us, as that we can endure to be
domineered over by the most Tyrannical and Unreasonable Masters, as we have
showed our Lusts and the Devil are? Are we so in love with the house of Bondage
as to be well satisfied to make it the place of our perpetual Residence? Are we
so like Apes as to hug our Clogs, and so like Bedlams as to be fond of our
Shackles?

The King of Heaven, we have heard, has sent his only Begotten Son upon this
very Errand of Knocking off our Fetters, of proclaiming Liberty to us Captives,
and opening the Prison doors unto them that are bound; of delivering us from
our Thraldom and Vassalage, and making us Free indeed, Free with the most
Excellent and Noble Freedom; and recovering those out of the snare of the Devil
who are taken Captive by him at his Will; and will we not be made Free? Will we
not exchange this worse than Egyptian Slavery for the Glorious Liberty of the
Sons of God?

As God said of old to Jerusalem, Will thou not be made clean, when shall it
once be? So let me say to every Soul that lies under the Dominion of Corrupt
Affections, Will thou not be set at Liberty, when shall it once be?

Did the Grecians when set at Liberty by Flaminius (as Plutarch reports) sound
out, (...), SAVIOVR, SAVIOVR, with such a Courage, that the Birds which flew
over them fell Astonished to the Ground? And can we be so little Affected with
what our Savior has done for us in order to our being rescued from that
Slavery which is so much worse than theirs, as not to accept Deliverance at his
hands? Can we be so unconcerned at what King JESUS has done for our
Redemption, as to refuse to embrace his offers of it?

Have we conceived so low an opinion of the Service of God, and his Blessed
Son, as to choose to be Drudges and Vassals to most Cruel Pharaohs, rather than
to be their Freemen? Had we rather still toil in the Brick-Kilns of Egypt than
inherit and possess the good Land; the Land of Peace and Rest, Liberty and Joy?
God forbid.

O that therefore we would at length be persuaded, first to accept of, and then
to stand fast in the Liberty, wherewith Christ would make us free, and no more
be entangled with the yoke of Bondage.

Has Christ Jesus taken such an admirable course in order to our being set
free from the power of Sin, and its dismal Effects? Then let us no longer cry
out, O wretched men that we are, who shall deliver us from the body of this
death? as if we knew of no Deliverer; but let us thank God through Jesus Christ
our Lord.

It has been showed that Christ is not so our Deliverer as to leave us nothing
to do, as to bid us stand still (as Moses did the Israelites at the Red Sea)
and see the Salvation of God, and see what himself will do for us; but that he
does expect we should do our part in order to our being set Free. But he has
done as much as we can reasonably desire he should do for that end, and
abundantly more than could ever have entered into our hearts to imagine he
would have done; and so much that it must be now wholly long of our selves, our
own inexcusable negligence, if what he has done prove at last unsuccessful.

We are too weak to deliver our selves by our own strength, by our own natural
power we are utterly unable to rescue our selves from under the dominion of our
Spiritual Adversaries; but Christ has purchased that Grace which shall be
sufficient for us, if we will make a believing Application to him for it, so
that we may, if it be not our own fault, be strong in the Lord and in the power
of his Might; and therefore our weakness can be no excuse.

It is to be acknowledged also that we are naturally very listless and averse
to the using of the means of our Deliverance, but what would we desire our
Savior to do more than he has done to excite our Wills and quicken our
Endeavors?

Nor can we plead Ignorance of the Means to be used, for we have understood how
fully our Savior and his Apostles have instructed us in these.

Now has Christ been so wonderfully concerned for our Deliverance, and can we
our selves be unconcerned? Did he pay such a Ransom and Price for us, and not
think much of coming down from Heaven, of taking our Nature, of parting with
his precious Blood, and suffering inexpressible Torments in order to this great
End, and can we think it unworthy of our serious Care? What is this but to
tread under foot the Son of God, and that Blood whereby we are Redeemed?

Was ever any miserable Slave heard of that might if he would be set at
Liberty, and yet refused? Or is it imaginable that such a one could listen to
any temptation whatsoever to continue in Slavery? especially if he were
promised by a Person able to make good his word, that he should exchange his
Prison for a Palace, and his House of Bondage for a Kingdom? But we have seen
that no less a Motive than this is presented to us by one who cannot lie, and
who is as Able as Faithful. We have the greatest Security in the World given us
of a Crown of Glory, and an Everlasting Kingdom; which infinitely surpasses
all the Crowns and Kingdoms upon Earth to persuade us to comply with that Rare,
most Powerful and most Wise Method which our Lord has taken to make us Free.

What a wonderful thing is this, that our Lord should hire us to accept of
Liberty, and that at such a Rate as this! That he should have such Compassion
and Love for our Souls, as, that so we may be persuaded to do that which is
only our own Interest, and infinitely our greatest Interest to do, that so we
may be won upon to cease from the vilest, most filthy and most miserable
Drudgery, and to Engage in his most Free and Blessed Service, he should think
that he cannot make us too large Offers. That he should so strangely out-bid
the Devil and our Lusts, and, that we may no longer be be^ooled by their
pitiful Promises of Vanishing, Empty and False Pleasures, should proffer us
such Joys, such Bliss, as to which those Pleasures, were they truly so, and
never so durable, cannot bear the least proportion* And, that we might no
longer suffer our selves to be Insulted and Tyrannized over by them, and to be,
as it were, their Footstool, he should assure us of his willingness, nay, of
his great desire to advance us to his own Throne. For, as has been said, he
has promised To grant unto him that overcomes that he shall sit with him upon
his Throne, even as he also overcame, and is set down with his Father upon his
Throne. He applies himself to that Principle which is most predominant in our
natures, so that if the love of himself cannot, yet the love of our own selves
may even compel us to come in to his Service.

But one would think we should find it no less impossible to be so Disingenuous
toward our dear Lord, than to be so cruel to our selves as to slight such
promises, or that his most gracious and endearing Invitation, Come unto me all
ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you Rest. Take my yoke upon
you, and learn of me, for I am meek and lowly in heart, and ye shall find Rest
to your Souls. For my yoke is easy, and my burden is light, Matthew. 11. 28, 29,
30.

But then are we able to think of it with any Patience, that Christ should Do
and Suffer in our behalf so much in vain; that we should frustrate the Design
of his Astonishing Condescension in assuming our Nature, and of all he did and
suffered for us?

Has he paid so Excessively dear for us, and can we be content that after all
he should lose his Purchase? Especially since he purchased us, not because he
stood in the least need of our Service, but that we might serve our selves in
serving him, and be made thereby unconceivably and Everlastingly Happy.

Do we not look upon the Jews as a very strange Generation of Pople, and as no
less Ill-natured than Foolish, that they would not be prevailed with to accept
of Deliverance from the Burdensome Services of Moses his Law; that they should
be so fond of that Servile Dispensation they were under, as to refuse to be
Released from it? Whenas the Abolishing thereof was evidenced in as full and
convincing a manner as its Divine Authority before was: Nay, when that of the
Gospel set up in the room of it was demonstrated in a far more glorious manner
to be of God, by Christ himself before his death, by his Resurrection from the
dead, and Ascension into Heaven, and by the Spirit in the Apostles and others
afterward. And shall we refuse to be set at Liberty by our Savior from the
Bondage of Sin, which is infinitely more heavy and unsufferable, and the
consequences of which are so sad and intolerable? While we so do, let us never
blame the Jews, and much less accuse them of being so perverse, hard-hearted
and stiff-neckt a People; for then, wherein we judge them we condemn our
selves, for we that judge them do not only the same, but a far more
unaccountable thing. And think we this that so judge them that have done such a
thing, and do the same and so much worse, that we shall escape the judgment of
God? Nay, are we able not to think that it shall be much more intolerable for
us at the day of Judgment than for them, if we persist in so doing.

We are apt to believe that no People ever deserved so ill of our Savior as
those Pharisees who ascribed his casting out Devils to the Assistance of
Beelzebub the Prince of the Devils: But how much better do we think those
deserve of him who will not obey him, after they have had far greater Evidence
of his being the Son of God than they at that time were in a possibility of
having? And if our Savior did accuse those of despising both Himself and his
Father that sent him, who would not be persuaded by his Mighty WORKS to believe
in him while he was on Earth, what a high Affront then do those put upon both,
who will not give up themselves to be ruled by him, and quit the service of
Satan for his service (which is the same thing with not believing in him) now
he is in Heaven, and in all his Glory? This he must needs take far more
unkindly and hainously at our hands. And be we assured (for nothing is more
Evident) that, as he is a most unreasonable Creature, who after such mavelous
Evidence of Jesus his being the Son of God, and now sat down on the Right Hand
of the Majesty on High, will not give credit to these Doctrines; so he is much
more Unreasonable who does give credit to them, and yet behave himself as if he
believed no such matter.

O that therefore we would (those of us who have hitherto neglected to do it)
before it be too late and without farther delay, Consider these things, and
show our selves Men; and then we shall with great Courage and Resolution make
use of those Weapons which the Captain of our Salvation has put into our
hands, for the Vanquishing the Enemies of our Souls; which Weapons are not
Carnal, but Mighty through God. And if we persevere in so doing, then shall
those who have held such a severe hand over us fly before us; then shall those
Lords who so subjected us, and kept us under, be brought under by us, be our
Subjects. Then shall our Prison-doors fly open, we shall be no longer under
Restraint and Confinement. We shall be our own Men, and walk at Liberty; We
shall run and not be weary, walk and not faint, until we appear before God in
Sion; Until we are delivered from all Molestation from, as well as Dominion of
Sin and Satan; Being made by Jesus Christ, who has loved us and washed us from
our sins in his own Blood, Rev. 1. 6.
Kings and Priests unto God and his Father: To whom be Glory and Dominion for
ever and ever. Amen.

THE END.
Books sold by Richard Royston, at the Sign of the Angel in Amen-Corner.
THE Principles and Practices of Certain Divines of the Church of England truly
Represented and Defended, etc. In a Free Discourse between two intimate
Friends, viz. Theophilus and Philalethes.

The Design of Christianity; or, A plain Demonstration and Improvement of this*
Proposition, That the Enduing men with Inward Real Righteousness was the
Ultimate End of our Savior's Coming, etc.

The Second Edition.

Both of them by the Author of this Treatise.


