A true and exact RELATION of the Marchings of the Two Regiments of the
Trained-Bands of the City of LONDON,Being the Red and blew Regiments,

As also Of the three Regiments of the Auxiliary forces, the Blew, Red, and
Orange, who marched forth for the relief of the City of Gloucester from August
23. to Sept. 28.

Wherein the most material passages of every days Marchings are briefly
delineated.

As also a true description of the several battles and Skirmishes had against
the Enemy at Stow the old Sept. 4. at Aburne Chase September 18. and at Newbery
Septem. 20.

Set forth for the satisfaction of many who earnestly desired information
herein,

By Henry Foster, quondam Sergeant to Cap. George Moss.

Exodus 15. 6, 7. Thy right hand, O Lord, is become glorious in power; thy right
hand, O Lord, has dashed in pieces the enemy.

And in the greatness of thine excellency thou have overthrown them that rose
up against thee; thou did send forth thy wrath, which consumed them as
stubble.

London, Printed for Benjamin Allen in Popes-head-Alley. October. 2. 1643.

A TRUE RELATION OF THE Diurnall Marchings of the Red and Blew Regiments of the
Trained Bands of the City of London, as also the three Regiments of the
Auxiliary Forces.
Wherein the most material passages of every days Occurrences are briefly
delineated.
Upon Wednesday the 23 of August, our red Regiment, of the Trained Bands
marched into the new Artillery ground, and from thence that night we marched
to Brainford, and came thither about one a clock in the morning; from whence
the next day many of our Citizens, who seemed very forward and willing at the
first to march with us, yet upon some pretenses and fair excuses returned home
again hiring others to go in their room; others returned home again the
same night before they came to Brainford.

Upon Friday the 25 of August, we advanced from Brainford to Vxbridge, where
our Regiments were Quartered there that night, and marched away the next
morning.

Saturday the 26 of August we advanced to a Town 6 miles beyond Vxbridge
called Chaffan, where we were quartered that night; at this town a soldier
belonging to Lieutenant Colonel Tompson was accidentally slain by shooting
off a musket by one of his fellow Soldiers though at a great distance from
him, yet shot him in the head whereof he died.

Sabbath day 27 August, we advanced from Chaffan near to a village called
Chessun; this day the Blew Regiment of the Trained Bands, and the three
Regiments of the Auxiliary forces met us upon a great Common about three miles
from Chessun. our whole Regiment was quartered at one Mr. Cheyneys house an
Esquire, where we were well accommodated for Beer having great plenty, two or
three hundred of us this night-lay in one Barn.

Monday the 28 of August, we advanced from thence to a town called
Asson-Clinton a little village 3 miles from Alesbury, we continued here one
day and two nights.

Wednesday the 30 of August, we advanced from thence to a village called
Clayden; this day the Lord Generals Army and our Regiments of the Trained
Band, together with the Auxiliarie forces met at Alesbury; the great Guns were
fired at every Fort about the Town, as the Lord General passed by: This was
the Fast day: our Regiment was quartered this night at Sir Ralph Verneys House
a Parliament man; his Father the Kings Standart-bearer was slain at Edge hill.

Thursday the 31 of August, we advanced from thence to a village called
Stretton-Araley; this night all our Brigade consisting of six Regiments; viz:
Colonel Manwarings Red Regiment, two Regiments of Trained Bands, and three of
the Auxiliary, were all quartered at this little village, it is conceived we
were in all of this Brigade about 5000. here was little provision either for
Officers or soldiers, the night before we came hither, the Cavaliers were at
Bister two miles from this village and 6 miles from Oxford but were beaten out
of it by our soldiers and the Lord General with his army quartered there this
night.

Friday the 1 day of September, we advanced from hence to a place called
Bayards-greene in Oxford shire, being three miles distant from Brackley, and
eight miles from Banbury, where our Brigade met my Lord General with his whole
Army; whereat was great shouting and Triumph as he passed by to take a view of
our Regiments the whole Army being drawn up in their several Regiments,
continued there about an hour and then we marched away: It was a goodly and
glorious sight to see the whole Army of Horse and foot together; it is
conceived by those that viewed our Army well that we did consist of (to speak
of the least) 15000 horse and foot, some speak of many more. This day good
news was brought to us concerning Gloucester; and Exeter. From hence we marched
this day to a village called Souldern, four miles from Banbury, where our six
Regiments that came from London were Quartered, and my Lord General and the
rest of the Army were Quartered about a little mile from us, at a Market town
called Ano on the hill; we were very much scanted of Victuals in this place.

Saturday 2 Septem. we advanced from hence to Hooknorton, 25 miles from
Gloucester, at which Village our whole Brigade was quartered. This day the Lord
Generals Troops had some skirmish with the Cavaliers; it is reported there was
eight slain of the enemies party and one on ours. From hence we marched away
the next morning.

Sabbath day 3 September. we advanced from hence to a little Village called
Addington about a mile from Stew the Old, the hithermost own in
Gloucestershire, and about 20 miles from Gloucester; where in our march this
day, we again met the Lord Generals Army, upon a great common about half a
mile from Chippingnorton; at which place also our five Regiments departed from
his Army; and marched to the Village aforesaid. The blew Regiment of the
Trained bands marched in the van and took up the first quarter in the town;
the other 3 Regiments of the Auxiliary forces, were quartered at the adjacent
villages; whereupon our red Regiment of the Trained Band was constrained to
march half a mile further to get quarter we were now in the Van of the whole
Army, having not so much as one Troop of Horse quartered near us: but we were
no sooner in our quarters, and set down our arms, intending a little to
refresh our selves; but presently there was an Alarm beat up; and we being
the frontier Regiment nearest the enemy, were presently all drawn up into a
Body, and stood upon our guard all that night, we were in great distraction,
having not any horse to send out as Scouts, to give us any intelligence: my
Lord General with his Army lay at Chippingnorton, about three miles behind us;
who had an Alarm there given by the enemy the same night also: Our Regiment
stood in the open field all night, having neither bread nor water to refresh
our selves, having also marched the day before without any sustenance neither
durst we kindle any fire though it was a very cold night.

Monday 3 September. we got some refreshment for our soldiers, which was no
sooner done, but news was brought to us, that the enemy was within half a mile
of the Town which proved to be true, for presently one rid down to us having
his horse shot in the neck all bloody, and told us the enemy was at the towns
end; also one Trooper slain a quarter of a mile above the town, one of our
soldiers stripped him, and brought his clothes to us: It was a little open
Village, the enemy might have come in upon us every way; therefore we conceiving
it not safe to abide in the town, drew up our Regiment presently into a body,
and marched into a broad open field to the top of the hill, the blew Regiment of
the trained Bands were quartered within less than half a mile of us, but came
not up to us: Being come into the field we saw about 4 or (...) of the enemies
horse surrounding of us, one rid post to my Lord General to inform him of it
One great body of their horse stood facing of us upon the top of the hill at
our towns end, within less then a quarter of a mile from us, another great
body of their horse was in the valley, upon our right flank as we stood; and a
third great squadron of their horse were going up to the top of a hill, in the
reere of us; by all which it appears, they had an intent to have surrounded
our City Regiments, and to have cut us off; we stood and faced one another for
the space of half an hour, then 6, or 7. of our men who had horses, rod up to
them, and came within less then musket shot, flourishing their swords, daring
them, and one or two of our men fired upon their forlorn hope: we had lyned
the hedges with musketeers, which they perceiving did not move toward our
body, but only stood and faced us. Then some of the Auxiliary forces came up to
us, at whose coming we gave a great shout: and then by and by after we saw my
Lord Generals forces coming down the hill about a mile and half behind us: my
Lord drevv out the forlorn hope upon the hill as they came down; who fired 3.
or 4. Drakes against the enemies horse that were near themon the top of the
hill, that were coming upon the rear of us, and made them retreat to the rest of
the body, their intent was to have compasted us in on every side, but the Lord
prevented them, they might have spoiled our whole Regiment, had they in the
morning come down upon us when we were taking a little food to refresh our
selves, the enemy being then but half a mile off; a great many of the Cavaliers
lay all night, within less then a mile of us, which we perceived in our march
the next day, I hope the mercy of that day, will not be forgotten.

When this was done, my L. Generals forces marched up to our Brigade: when they
were come we drew forth our Forlorn hope, and marched up to the body of their
Horse that stood facing us on the top of the hill: we fired some Drakes at
them, they retreated: then the Lord General drew up his great Guns, they faced
us again, we fired two great Pieces of Ordnance at them, and then they
retreated up to the Town of Stow, and drew up all their horse into a body, and
stood upon the side of the hill facing us: then we let fly two or three of our
greatest Ordnance at them; they all fled, and we pursued them and followed
them three miles: Then they stood and faced the Lord General again about the
going down of the Sun, we fired at them a great while, marching up toward
them five or six Regiments together, all in a body, about 800 or 1000 abrest,
six deep, we having room enough, it being a brave champian country: which
goodly show did so much the more daunt the enemy, that (as it is reported)
Prince Rupert swore, he thought all the Roundheads in England were there.

In the first Skirmish we lost but one man, who was flaine by our own Cannon
through his own negligence, and another sore burnt and hurt by the same Piece.
When we came to Stow, the Cavaleers reported that they had killed twenty of our
men, and we two of theirs; but we hear there were six of their men slain,
some horses killed, and five prisoners taken. Prince Rupert was there, and some
say the Lord of Holland also. Our men pursuing them skirmished till nine of the
clock at night; we marched after them till twelve of the clock at night: we
lay all in the open field, upon the plowd-land, without straw, having neither
bread nor water, yet God enabled our Soldiers to undergo it cheerfully, there
was not one feeble sick person amongst us, but was able to march with us the
day following.

Tuseday September 25. we advanced from that field near to a Town called
Prestbury, within sight of Gloucester, about seven miles from it: This day the
whole Army marching together, it fell to our red Regiment of the Trained-bands
to march in the Rear of the Wagons, and had charge of them: about six of the
clock the Lord General coming to the top of a high mountain or hill, called
Presbury-hill, where we might see the City of Gloucester, he commanded four or
five great Pieces of Ordnance to be fired: some say it was against the
Cavaleers who were about a mile off, in the Town below the hill: others say it
was to give intelligence to Gloucester of our approaching to their relief. The
Army marched down the hill, and hastened to the adjacent Villages for Quarter,
but before the Wagons could come to the top of the hill, night drawing on it
began to be very dark, so that our Wagons and Carriages could not get down
the hill, many of them were overthrown and broken, it being a very craggy
steep and dangerous hill, so that the rest of the Wagons durst not adventure
to go down, but stayed all night there: six or seven horses lay dead there
the next morning that were killed by the overthrow of the Wagons: our red
Regiment having charge of the Wagons, were constrained to lie all night upon
the top of this mountain, it being a most terrible tempestuous night of wind
and rain, as ever men lay out in, we having neither hedge nor tree for
shelter, nor any sustenance of food, or fire: we had by this time marched six
days with very little provision; for no place where we came was able to
releeve our Army, we leaving the Rode all the way, and marching through poor
little villages: our soldiers in their marching this day would run half a
mile or a mile before, where they heard any water was such straits and hardship
our Citizens formerly knew not; yet the Lord that called us out to do his
work, enabled us to undergo such hardness as he brought us to. This evening
the Lord General was feign to fight for his Quarter, and beat the enemy out of
it, at a market-Towne called Cheltnam, five miles from Gloucester, and two miles
from this hill; about midnight we had two Alarms upon this hill, in the midst
of all the storm and rain, which together with the darkness of the night
made it so much the more dreadful, which also caused a great distraction among
our Soldiers, every one standing upon his guard, and fearing his fellow
Soldier to be his enemy. Many other particular sad stories of this
tempestuous stormy night I leave to the relation of others: one young man of
the Colonels company was shot in this confusion upon this hill, whose death
will be much lamented by his Parents and Friends, from whom he received a
Letter but a few days before to return home.

The next morning being Wednesday Sept. ^6. our Soldiers came down from that
hill into the village aforesaid, being wet to the very skin, but could get
little or no refreshing every house being so full of Soldiers: The Cavaleers
were in the Town but the day before. We stayed here but two or three hours
that morning, and then we had an Alarm that the Cavaleers were near the Town
with a great body of horse: We were all presently drawn up into a body in the
field; our soldiers began to complain pitifully, being even worn out and
quite spent for want of some refreshing, some complaining they had not eat or
drunk in two days, some longer time. Yesterday the enemy raised their siege
from before Gloucester: this day our two Regiments of the Trained Bands marched
to a little village called Norton, three miles wide of Gloucester, and four
miles from Teuxbury, where our Soldiers had some reasonable accommodation and
refreshment: in this village we had many Alarms: we continued here two days
and two nights.

Thursday Sept. 7. the Kings forces fell upon some of our troops of horse at
Winscombe, they being secure, the enemy killed many of them, and took many
prisoners, and some Colors: the Regiments of our horse there did belong to
Col. Vere and Col. Goodwin. The Auxiliary Regiments were quartered within two
miles where this was done. This night about seven of the clock there came a
command for our Regiments of the Trained-bands to march five miles back again
in the night but it being a very dark night, and our men worn out and spent
with their former marching, they refused to go; but next morning being Friday
Sept. 8. we did. The Lord General with the whole Army marched into Gloucester
this day. The City was exceeding full of horse and foot: the enemy besieged
this Town a full month and three days. They had many strong assaults against
it, and battered some of their works; and in two or three places they had
begun to undermine the gates, and out-workes, but were met with by the City
forces, who did undermine within to meet them: without they shot many
grenades of great weight, which when they fell in the City were red as fire;
yet blessed be God, killed not one man therewith; only tore up the ground as if
a Bear had been rooting up the earth: The Inhabitants in the City report that
the enemy shot 140 shot great and small in one day, and yet killed neither man
woman nor child; they lost but about thirty in this City during the time of
this siege; most of which, as is reported, were shot in the head, in peeping
through some holes at the enemy; we found very loving respect and
entertainment in this City, they being very joyful of our coming; we abode
here fryday-night and Saturday, and marched away on Sabbath day-morning: the
Lord General left in this City three great pieces of Ordnance, as also many
score barrells of powder, with match and bullet proportionable, furnishing them
to their hearts desire.

Sabbath day September. 10. the whole army advanced from Gloucester to Tewksburie,
where we abode four days and five nights, till Gloucester had provided
themselves of come and other provisions: the enemy had cut off from the City
all their pipes of water, and burnt their Mills: My Lord General summoned this
Town of Tewksbury, and demanded the twentieth part of their estates for the
relief of Gloucester. We were at this Town five days, from Sabbath day till
friday September. 15. On thursday-dayesnight the enemy did fall upon some of our
troops of horse, who were quartered about three miles from Tewksbury, of the
regiment belonging to Sir James Ramsey, they slew many of our men, and took
many others prisoners. We took four of them prisoners; but the greatest loss
was sustained on our side. Before we marched from this Town, the Lord
General gave order for the making of a bridge over the River Severne near
Tewksbury, as if our intention had been to march with our army over there to
Worcester; which caused the enemy to draw their forces thither, as a place of
refuge: The wisdom and policy of the Lord General and Counsel of war, as
also their great care for the preservation of our Army, is highly to be
commended and never to be forgotten; and may serve to stop the mouths of all
such as shall hereafter be opened against him: for had the enemy known which
way we had marched, they might have had us at a great advantage, by gaining the
hills; we being now in the vale of Esum, and all our great Ordnance and
Carriages to be drawn up those hills, they might have kept us there all this
winter, and starved our army: but blessed be God, we all marched away with
safety. One that was present at Esum, where the King with his Army lay,
affirms that when tidings came to the King that we were marched from
Tewksbury, they did stamp and swear and curse their Scouts exceedingly, that
they gave them no better intelligence of our departure. And the same day we
marched from Tewksbury the King with his Army and train of Artillery marched
from Esum after us, as will appear in the ensuing matter.

Friday September. 15. our whole Army advanced from Tewksbury to Ciceter, alias
Cirencister 17 miles we marched all night, and sat down before it about three
aclock in the morning: when we came thither Sir Robert Pie marched up to the
Town, and with some Musketeers he gave fire upon the Centinells, killed one
of them, and wounded the other; Sir Robert himself received a shot in the arm:
the Cavaliers yielded the town and desired quarter: we took 225. prisoners,
whereof 10. were Commanders, we tied them two and two together with Match, and
brought them along with us: we took also 27 waggon-load of provision, which the
Cavaliers had provided for the relief of their own Army: they had taken the
School-house, belonging to the Town, and made it their storehouse, to lay in
such provision as they made the Country to bring in: they slew one man of
ours, who was pistold by one that took him prisoner: we killed 2. or 3. of them.

Saturday September. 16. we advanced from Ciceter five miles to a village called
Letton, where our London-Briggade was quartered that night; the Lord General
with his Army quartered a mile further at a Market-towne in Wiltshire called
Cricklet; at the village aforesaid were ten cart-load of Cavaliers, who were
sick and lame, and brought thither to be quartred, who when they heard we were
marching to this place, they then found their legs and run away: this day we
had a wet march, and in the night a false alarm.

Sabbath day September. 17. we marched from Cricklet to a Market-towne called
Swindowne 8. miles. This morning news was brought that the Cavaliers were come
to Ciceter, and had taken and killed many of our men, who stayed behind drinking
and neglecting to march with their Colors: who are not much to be pitied:
this day we drove along with our army about 1000 sheep and 60 head of Cattle,
which were taken from Malignants and Papists in the Country for the maintenance
of our army: 87 sheep was allotted for our red Regiment, but we afterward
lost them all, when we came to fight; it being every man's care then to secure
himself, and to see to the safety of the Army: this night our London-Briggade
was quartred 2 miles beyond the Lord Generals quarters at a little poor
village called Chizelton, where we could get no accommodation either for meat
or drink, but what we brought with us in our snapsacks: most of us quartred in
the open field, it being a very cold frosty night, we marched away hence the
next morning.

Monday September. 18. we advanced from this village about two miles to a place
called Abern-chase, where news was brought to the Lord General, that the
enemy was coming upon us with a great body of horse, which caused the Lord
General to make a stand, our whole Army being in a deep valley, and the enemy
upon the hills on our left flank, we drewup all our Army into a body to the top
of the hill, where we had a full view of the enemy over against us: there
appeared a great body of their horse; if was conceived there was 7 or 8000 but
no foot that we could discern; we stood a while and faced them; then one small
body of horse as a forlorn hope marched up the hill to them, and fired upon
them, and then retreated to their main body in the valley; the enemy followed
our horse in their retreat, firing at them all the way very feircely; then we
fired some Drakes at their horse, but did little execution; then our body of
foot was drawn down from this hill to the top of another high hill, where we
stood and faced the enemy, having a full view of all that was don between our
horse and theirs: our foot were not engaged at all in this fight, except two
Regiments only: Then Collonell Meldrams and Colonel Harvies troops drew up in
a body and gave the enemy a very feirce charge, which was performed with as
brave courage and valor as ever men did, and then wheeled about to a Regiment
of our foot that stood in the rear of them, the enemy pursued them in their
retreat, skirmishing one at another all the way: what number was slain in this
fight is not yet known: here Cap. Willet received a shot from the enemy, of
which wound he is since dead: we lost no other man of note in this fight: one
man of great note and esteem of the enemies party was here slain, Marquess
de la Veel, his father is Lord high Marshall of France, and chief Commander in
the field: we took up his body and carried it to Hungerford; I viewed his
wounds, he received three shot in his body from us, one in his right pap,
another in the shoulder, and a third in the face: from this place all their
horse gathered into a body when it begun to be dark, and so ours likewise, and
we marched away that night to Hungerford 5 miles: our red Regiment with some
other Regiments were quartred a mile on this side Hungerford, at a little
village called Shelton; those that marched in the rear of the Army, were
marching this 5 miles all night: we were much distressed for want of sleep, as
also for all other sustenance; it was a night of much rain, we were wet to the
skin: this day we took 25 Cavaliers at Hungerford, whereof one was slain.

Tuesday, September. 19. we advanced from Hungerford to a village called Embry,
about a mile and half from Nubury: the Lord General had intent to have
quartered at Nubury that night, but the King got into the Town that day before,
and so we were prevented. This morning a Trumpetter came from the King to the
Lord General, to desire that Chyrurgions and Doctors might have free access
from them to the Marquess that we had taken. But the Messenger came to late:
for the Marquess was past their cure. The Lord General told him, if they
pleased to send for his body, they might have it. The death of this Marquess
has much enraged the enemy, being one whom they did highly esteem. This night
our whole Army quartered in the open field; we had no provision but what little
every one had in his Snapsack. We had now marched many days and nights with
little food, or any sustenance, and little sleep. This night the King sent a
challenge to the Lord General, to give him battle the next morning, which
accordingly was performed; and in the night our enemies gained the hills where
they intended to give us battle, they planted their Ordnance, got all
advantages they could desire, before our Army marched up to them: Yet now we
see there is neither wisdom, nor policy, nor strength, against the Lord;
yea, had not the Lord himself been on our side, they had swallowed us up
quick, so great was their rage and fury stirred up against us, they being
confident of the victory before we came to fight: But let not him that puts on
his harness boast as he that puts it off. For it was not our own arm that
saved us, but the right hand of the Lord became glorious in that day, to get
himself a glorious name.

The next morning, Septem. 20. very early before day, we had drawn up all our
Army in their several Regiments, and marched away by break of day; and then
advancing toward the enemy with most cheerful and courageous spirits: The
Lord Roberts soldiers had begun to skirmish with them before we came up to the
enemy; which we hearing, put us to a running march till we sweat again,
hastening to their relief and succor. When we were come up into the field,
our two Regiments of the trained Bands were placed in open Campania upon the
right wing of the whole Army. The enemy had there planted 8 pieces of Ordnance,
and stood in a great body of Horse and Foot, we being placed right opposite
against them, and far less then twice Musket shot distance from them. They
began their battery against us with their great Guns, above half an hour
before we could get any of our Guns up to us; our Gunner dealt very ill with
us, delaying to come up to us: our noble Colonel Tucker fired one piece of
Ordnance against the enemy, and aiming to give fire the second time, was shot
in the head with a Cannon bullet from the enemy. The blew Regiment of the
trained Bands stood upon our right wing, and behaved themselves most gallantly.
Two regiments of the Kings Horse which stood upon their right flank a far off,
came fiercely upon them, and charged them two or three times, but were beat
back with their Musketeers, who gave them a most desperate charge, and made
them fly. This day our whole Army wore green boughs in their hats, to
distinguish us from our enemies; which they perceiving, one regiment of their
Horse had got green boughs, and rid up to our regiments crying, Friends,
friends; but we let fly at them, and made many of them and their horses
tumble, making them fly with a vengeance. The enemies Canon did play most
against the red Regiment of trained Bands, they did some execution amongst us
at the first, and were somewhat dreadful when men's bowels and brains flew in
our faces: But blessed be God that gave us courage, so that we kept our
ground, and after a while feared them not, our Ordnance did very good execution
upon them: for we stood at so near a distance upon a plain field, that we could
not lightly miss one another: We were not much above half our Regiments in
this place; for we had 60 Files of Musketeers drawn off for the forlorn hope,
who were engaged against the enemy in the field upon our left Fank. Where most
of the Regiments of the Army were in fight, they had some small shelter of the
hedges and banks, yet had a very hot fight with the enemy, and did good
execution, an (...) to it as bravely as ever men did. When our two regiments of
the trained Bands had thus played against the enemy for the space of three
hours, or thereabout, our red Regiment joined to the Blew which stood a little
distance from us upon our left Flank, where we gained the advantage of a little
hill, which we maintained against the enemy half an hour: two Regiments of the
enemies foot fought against us all this while to gain the hill, but could not.
Then two regiments of the enemies horse, which stood upon our right Flank came
fiercely upon us, and so surrounded us, that we were forced to charge upon
them in the front and reere, and both Flanks, which was performed by us with a
great deal of courage and undauntednesse of spirit, insomuch that we made a
great slaughter among them, and forced them to retreat; but presently the two
regiments of the enemies foot in this time gained the hill, and came upon us
before we could well recover our selves, that we were glad to retreat a little
way into the field, till we had rallied up our men, and put them into their
former posture, and then came on again. If I should speak any thing in the
praise and high commendations of these two regiments of the trained Bands, I
should rather obscure and darken the glory of that courage and valor God gave
unto them this day, they stood like so many stakes against the shot of the
Cannon, quitting themselves like men of undaunted spirits, even our enemies
themselves being judges. It might be expected that something should be spoken
of the noble and valiant service performed by the rest of the Regiments of the
Army both horse and foot; but their courage and valor it self speaks, which
was performed by them that day, our men fighting like Lions in every place, the
great slaughter made amongst the enemies testifies. My noble and valiant
Captain George Massy, who was with the forlorn hope, received a shot in the
back from the enemy, of which wound he is since dead. This 26. of September
(hinc illae lachrymae) we lost about 60 or 70 men in our red Regiment of the
trained Bands, besides wounded men, we having the hottest charge from the
enemies Cannon of any regiment in the Army. Also that worthy and valint
Gentleman Capt. Hunt was slain in this battle, whose death is much lamented.
These two poor regiments were the very objects of the enemies battery that
day, and they have since made their boast of it. It is conjectured by most,
that the enemy lost four for one: 70. chief Commanders were slain on their
side. This is most certain, that they did acknowledge themselves to be beaten.
It is credibly informed by those that were this day in the Kings army, that the
King himself brought up a regiment of Foot and another of horse into the field,
and gave fire to two pieces of Ordnance, riding up and down all that day in a
soldiers gray coat. The next day I viewed the dead bodies: there lay about 100
stripped naked in that field where our 2 regiments stood in battalia. This night
the enemy conveyed away about 30. cart load of maimed and dead men, as the
towne-people credibly reported to us, and I think they might have carried away
20 cart load more of their dead men the next morning; they buried 30 in one
pit, 14 lay dead in one ditch: this battle continued long; it begun about six
aclock in the morning, and continued till past 12 aclock at night: in the night
the enemy retreated to the town of Newbury, and drew away all their Ordnance;
we were in great distress for water, or any accommodation to refresh our poor
Soldiers, yet the Lord himself sustained us that we did not faint under it;
we were right glad to drink in the same water where our horses did drink,
wandering up and down to seek for it. Our word this day was Religion, theirs
was Queen Mary in the field: The great goodness of God, in giving us victory
this day is so much the more remarkable from these three considerations: First,
that great disadvantage we had this day, in case we had been beat by the enemy,
we having no place of retreat for safety nearer then Gloucester, which was above
30 miles: whereas our enemies had possession of Newbury, and in a manner of the
whole Country round about: secondly, we had great scarcity of provision for
our Army, having marched many days and nights with little food or sleep, or
any refreshment; had not God fed us with the bread of our enemies which we took
at Ciceter, we could not without a special providence of God have been able to
subsist, whereas our enemies had the town of Newbury, and the Country all about
for their relief. Thirdly, we had a great disadvantage by giving battle in
that place the enemy had made choice of their ground, planted their Ordnance,
gained all advantages they could desire. Beside many other disadvantages on our
part, which I forbear to relate; yet God gave us the victory, and made our
enemies fly before us, that we kept the field all night. The Lord General
deserves perpetual honor by his wise, valiant, and worthy managing of this
days battle, as also no less praise and commendation to the rest of the
council of war. Many more particular passages might here be inserted, but I
proceed.

Thursday, Sept. 21. after we had buried our dead, we marched from this field
with our whole army to a town called the Veal, 11 miles, and 4 miles from
Redding; where in our march this day, our enemy pursuing of us, fell upon our
rear in a narrow lane about a mile and half from a village called Aldermason,
they came upon us with a great body of foot and horse: our London Briggade
marched in the rear, and a forlorn hope of 600 Musketeers in the reere of
them, besides a great number of cur horse: but our horse which brought up our
reere, durst not stand to charge the enemy, but fled, running into the narrow
lane, routed our own foot, trampling many of them under their horse feet,
crying out to them, Away, away, every man shift for his life, you are all dead
men; which caused a most strange confusion amongst us. We fired 10 or 12 Drakes
at the enemy, but they came upon us very feircely, having theirfoot on the
other side of the hedges; many of our wagons were overthrown and broken:
others cut their traces and horse-harnesse, and run away with their horses,
leaving their wagons and carriages behind them: our foot fired upon the
enemies horse very bravely, and slew many of them; some report above 100 and
not 10 of ours: some that we took prisoners our men were so enraged at them
that they knocked out their brains with the butt-end of their Muskets: in this
great distraction and rout a wagon of powder lying in the way overthrown some
spark of fire or match fell among it, which did much hurt; 7 men burnt and 2
killed: the enemy had got 2 of our drakes in the rear, had not our foot played
the men and recovered them again: this was about 4 or 5 aclock at night; many
of our men lost their horses, and other things which they threw away in haste:
we marched on and came to the Veal about 10. aclock at night.

Friday Sept. 22 we advanced from the Veal and came to Reading four miles,
where we refreshed our Soldiers after our hard service and wearisome
marchings. We stayed here friday saturday and sabbath day: saturday night about
20 of the enemies horse came and gave us an alarm. Sabbath day was celebrated a
day of thanksgiving; we marched away hence on monday morning.

Monday Sept. 25. we advanced from Reading to Madenhead, our Briggade was
quartred here. But the Lord General with his Army and all his train marched to
Windsor.

Tuesday Sept. 26. we advanced from Maidenhead about 4 aclock in the morning,
having some intention of marching to London that night, but came no farther
then Brainford, where we stayed the next day also being Fast day.

Thursday, Sept. 28. we marched from Brainford to London, where we were
joyfully received home of all our friends, and all that wish well to the
Parliament; and to the vexation of heart of all wicked malignants who had
raised reports that we were all routed and slain: The Lord Mayor together with
the Aldermen of the City met us at Temple-barr, and entertained us joyfully:
many 1000 bidding us welcome home, and blessing God for our safe return: Thus
God that called us forth to do his work, brought us through many straits,
dilivered us from the rage and insolency of our adversaries, made them turn
their backs with shame, giving us victory, and causing us to return home
joyfully.

FINIS.

