A SERMON PREACHED at the General Meeting OF Gloucestershire-MEN; For the most
part INHABITANTS OF THE City of London: In the Church of St. Mary Le-Bow,
December the 9th. 1684. By Edward Fowler D. D.

LONDON, Printed by T. B. for Braybazon Aylmer, at the Sign of the Three
Pigeons in Cornhill. M DC LXXXV.

TO MY Honored COUNTRYMEN Mr. John Haynes Mr. Aaron Pengry Mr. Richard Bishop
Mr. Gwynnet Freeman Mr. Edward Sandys Mr. Edward Davis Mr. Anthony Partridge
Mr. Stephen Rose Mr. John Ferrers Mr. William Till.
The STEWARDS of the late Gloucestershire-FEAST.
Gentlemen,
THE Sermon which, in compliance with your desire, I Preached to a very
Numerous Meeting of our Countrymen; and the Publishing of which you since
Requested, I here present you with: And God grant that this plain Discourse,
Composed in a hurry of other Business, may in some Measure Contribute to the
better observance of the great Praecepts of Fearing God, Honoring the King,
and Loving one another, therein recommended and enforced. Then shall I have
great cause to be thankful, as to Almighty God, for His Blessing on this
endeavor, so to your selves, for putting into my Hands this opportunity of
doing good. I am

Gentlemen, Your Affectionate Countryman and Humble Servant EDWARD FOWLER.

A SERMON PREACHED at the Gloucestershire-feast,
1 Pet. 2. 17. -- Love the Brotherhood, Fear God, Honor the King.
THat the Religion of which our Lord Jesus is the Founder, is most admirably
fitted for the making Mankind as happy as they are capable of being in this
world, as well as in the world to come, is a no less certainly true than common
observation: As also that it tends as much to the happiness of Societies and
Bodies Politic, as of single Persons. And were I to give a Demonstration of
this, I should need to do more than propose to your consideration, this one
short Verse, Honor all Men, Love the Brotherhood, Fear God, Honor the King.
If Christians generally practiced the four duties, which our Blessed Lord, by
his Apostle St. Peter, here enjoyneth; if they gave all Men the respect due to
Human Nature, to the Relations they stand in to each other, and the Rank and
Circumstances God has placed them in; if they loved one another as Brethren,
the Children of the same Father, endued with one common Nature, and Redeemed by
one Savior; if they Revered the Divine Majesty, and dreaded the wilful
Transgression of any one of his Laws; and under God Honored their Kings, as
his immediate Representatives and Vicegerents: If (I say) Christians were
generally as willing to put these Duties in Practice, as they are to acknowledge
their Obligation to them, I need not tell you, that to live in Christendom,
would be, to live in a Heaven upon Earth; and in all likelihood in a short
time, the whole World would be taken into Christendom.

In the handling of this Text, I shall begin with the duties of Fearing God and
Honoring the King; and spend the rest of my Discourse upon that of Loving the
Brotherhood: each of which three Arguments does well suit with the occasion of
this Meeting, but more especially the Last.

In the Prosecution of these Words, Fear God' Honor the King, I will endeavor
to show these three things.

First, What it is to Fear God.

Secondly, What to Honor the King.

Thirdly, That there is a necessary Connection between these two, Fearing God,
and Honoring the King.

First, We will show (and that very briefly) what is employed in this Precept,
Fear God.

1. To Fear God is to be possessed with an holy Awe and Reverence of his
Infinite Majesty, of his Glorions Attributes and Perfections. Particularly of
His irresistible Boundless Power, of his Absolute Dominion over us, and the
whole World, of His infinite Wisdom and Knowledge, of His unspotted Purity and
Holiness, of His uncorrupted Justice, and His inexhaustible Goodness. The Fear
of God does presuppose an hearty belief and acknowledgment, that all these
Perfections are in the Divine Nature, and implies in the first Place, the
being affected with Awe and Reverence toward God, upon the account of all
these. He who understandingly believes the Existence of God, must necessarily
believe Him to be a Being Absolutely Perfect, and Consequently must believe
that He has all these Perfections: Of this Natural Light assures men, no less
than Divine Revelation. And therefore the Philosophers, who were hearty
Asserters of the Deity (which the Epicuraeans were not, as Tully confidently,
and with great reason affirms) have abundantly Preached this Doctrine, as well
as the Prophets and Apostles, concerning God. And he, I say, that Fears God,
does so believe this Doctrine, has so lively and vigorous a Sense of the Truth
thereof, as to have an holy Awe and Dread of the Divine Majesty upon his
Spirit, upon the account of the foresaid Perfections of His Nature: Each of
which singly and much more altogether, do make Him an Object of the Greatest
Reverence, Awe and Fear; and each of them does necessarily attract Fear from
him who Considers it.

You may Object, that the last of these Perfections, viz. the Divine Goodness,
does not seem to be attractive of Fear, but of Love and Gratitude.

I Answer, That it is no less attractive of Fear, than of Love and Gratitude:
Not of a Slavish but of a Fillial Fear, which is founded on Love and Gratitude,
and necessarily results from them. And therefore the Prophet Hosea. chapter 3. 5.
praedicts concerning the Children of Israel, that They shall fear the Lord, and
his Goodness, in the latter days.

2. The Fear of God implies also the Expressing of this inward Fear and
Reverence in our Outward Conversations, in all the Actions of our Lives. And it
is impossible, where there is an holy Awe of God in the Heart, but it must
express it self in the Life.

In short, This is, in the general, the true Character of the man that Fears
God; He is one who escheweth Evil. It was part of Job's Character, that He
feared God, and eschewed Evil; which are two Phrases to express the same thing;
and so are departing from evil and fearing God, Prove. 3. 7. Fear the Lord and
depart from evil.

He that Fearetb God is one, that though he may happen to transgress a Law of
God before he is aware, and may be surprised into a sin, yet dares not sin
deliberately, nor allow himself in the doing of any thing which God has
forbidden, nor in the neglecting of any thing God has commanded. And therefore
he endeavors sincerely to acquaint himself with his whole Duty.

He is one who dreads more to offend the great God, than to provoke the
greatest of Men: As knowing that these have done their worst, when they have
killed the Body; whereas Almighty God is able to destroy both Soul and Body in
Hell. Which is our Saviors Motive to the making of God the object of our
greatest Fear. Mat 10. 28. The Man that fears God is so affected with those
words, as to be incomparably most afraid of the evil of Sin.

And, no longer to insist upon this Man's Character, He who Fears God does
exercise himself (with the Blessed Apostle) to have always a Conscience void of
Offense, both toward God and toward Men: And this is his rejoicing, the
Testimony of his Conscience, that in simplici^y and Godly sincerity, not by
fleshly Wisdom, but by the grace of God, he has his Conversation in the World.

Secondly, I proceed to show what it is to Honor the King. This implies these
following Particulars.

1. The Revering of Him as Gods Vicegerent, as His immediate Representative.

Kings are called the Ministers of God. He is the Minister of God to thee for
good. Romans 13. 4. The Higher Powers, in the same Chapter, are said to be
ordained of God. v. 1. 2. There is no Power but of God, the Powers that be are
Ordained of God: whosoever therefore resists the Power, resists the
Ordinance of God; for which reason (as it follows) They that resist, shall
receive to themselves Damnation.

Kings are said to Reign by God, or by Virtue of the Commission they receive
from Him: By me Kings Reign, and Princes decree Justice; by me Princes Rule,
and Nobles, even all the Judges of the Earth. Prove. 8. 15. That is, by God
immediately Kings Reign, and Inferior Magistrates by God mediately, as
receiving their Commissions immediately from the King, who is empowered by God
to give them.

Again Kings are called the Anotnted of God; even Cyrus, though a Heathen
Prince, is so called. Thus says the Lord to Cyrus his Anointed, Isaiah 45. 1.

And Lastly, God has put his own Name upon them: I have said ye are Gods. Thou
shall not revile the Gods, nor Curse. (or speak evil of) the Ruler of thy
People. Exodus 22. 28.

Now this being so, in the Honoring of the King, is manifestly implied, the
Honoring Him as Gods Vicegerent and Representative, as the Person whom he has
Commissionated to Rule under Him. This is to Honor the King, which a Man may
be short of doing, and yet have Reverence for his Person: For Honor or
Reverence is due to all Men. Honor all Men, says the Apostle before my Text;
But to Reverence the King, under the notion of Gods Minister, Gods Deputy and
Vicegerent, this (I say) is to Honor the King. This is to Honor Him as a
King; and therefore he who honors him not under this notion, though he may
honor that Person who is the King, he does not honor the King: or (which is
the same thing) he gives him not that Honor that is due to the King.

2. In Honoring the King is employed, Expressing the Reverence we bear to him,
as God's Vicegerent, by yielding Obedience to his Laws, from a Principle of
Conscience. Whatsoever Honor we express to his Person, that is not accompanied
with the Observance of his Laws is insignificant; Nay it is a perfect Mockery of
him. And our King may say what our and His Great Master did, Luke 6. 46. Why
call ye me Lord, Lord, and do not the things which I say; This is shameful
Hypocrisy.

And as without Obedience, so without Obedience from a Principle of Conscience
too, our Honoring the King will fall far short of our Duty, and be far from
speaking us truly Loyal.

1. To obey the Kings Laws, merely for fear of the Penalties annexed to them,
is not Loyalty: It Is neither Christian, nor true Loyalty. This is not Christian
Loyalty: For the Apostle has told us, that We must needs be subject, not only
for Wrath, but also for Conscience sake. Romans 13. 5. And St. Peter says, 1 Ep.
2. 13. Submit your selves to every Ordinance of Man, or to every Ordinance of
Man, which does not contradict any Ordinance of God: And, God be thanked, no
People in the World have better Laws and Ordinances, than those of our King
are. But now, How does the Apostle say, we must submit to every Ordinance of
Man? it follows, for the Lords sake; whether it be to the King as Supreme; or
unto Governors as unto them that are sent by him, etc. Now to submit for the
Lords sake, and to submit for Conscience sake, are the self same thing; for the
Lord alone can immediately bind the Conscience, and the King binds the
Conscience by his Laws, as the Great God has obliged us, upon pain of
damnation, to observe them. That is, all such Laws (as I now said) as are not
contrary to his own: For as to all such as are contrary to them, we must reply
as the same Apostle did, Whether it be righteous in the sight of God, to
hearken unto men more than unto God, judge ye. Acts 4. 19. But, God be praised,
We have not any occasion to use these words to our Governors.

Furthermore, we are so to obey the King, as not only not to disobey God in
Obeying him, but likewise so as to Obey God in obeying him. And he obeys God
in obeying the King, who obeys him, as God 's immediate Representative: And
thus to do (as has been showed) is to obey him as a King. And therefore not so
to do, as it is inconsistent with Christian, so also with true Loyalty. But to
obey him from mere Fear of Punishment, is, to give the King such Obedience, as
the poor Indians give to the Devil Worship; It is to obey him only as one who
has gotten us under his Power, and who will have his Will upon us, whether we
will or no. Thus we would obey the Great Turk, were we his Vassals, or any
Usurping Tyrant; and consequently, to be subject to our Lawful King, from the
mere Principle of Fear, is no Loyalty at all. And,

2. The like is to be said of Obeying him merely for our own temporal Interest,
for the making our selves Rich and Great under him, or for the bettering of our
Fortunes. All Kings have ever had too many such Loyal Subjects, who, whilst
Loyalty serves their turns, set up for Mighty Royalists, but when nothing more
is to be gotten by it, but especially when any considerable danger attends it,
shake hands with their Loyalty, and will by no means be held to their
Allegiance, by the mere Sense of their Duty; nor by the most Sacred Oaths,
again and again repeated. That Blessed Martyr King Charles the First, had woeful
experience of such Loyal Subjects, and so has our Present Gracious Sovereign
had too. When a King is in prosperous Circumstances, and able to reward
plentifully whatsoever Services are done him, there needs nothing but an eager
desire of Wealth, or Honor, or both, to excite to the making a Mighty Show of
Loyalty. But if he chance to be so Unfortunate, as that more is to be hoped for
by deserting his Interest than cleaving to it, there is the Trial of true
Loyalty. But, if this Trial happen (as God grant it may never among us again)
that Subject who is endued with this Principle, will be stripped stark Naked of
all his Enjoyments, and part with his Heart-Blood to boot, rather than forsake
or prove false to his Prince. And Abundance of Brave Instances of such a
Loyalty, God be thanked, We have known.

But he who will be Loyal no longer than he has a Motive from Worldly Interest
so to be, is far from being Obedient to the Praecept in our Text, of Honoring
the King: And consequently, is a mere Pretender to Loyalty, let him seem to
value himself never so much upon it. He may be rewarded by the King, who knows
not breats, or inward Principles, as a Loyal Subject, but he must expect no
reward from the King of Kings.

Thirdly, I come to show, that there is a necessary Connection between these
Two, Fearing God and Honoring the King. We find else where likewise these two
joined together, viz. by King Solomon, Prove. 24. 21. My Son fear thou the Lord
and the King, and meddle not with them that are given to change; And it
follows; For their Calamity shall rise suddenly, and who knows the ruin of
them both? Or what ruin attends them, both from God and the King. And what has
(by the way) been more observed, than the fulfilling of this Threatening upon
Rebellious People, and Traitorous Conspirators?

Now there is very great reason, why these two Precepts should go hand in hand,
viz. Because there is a necessary Connection between the Duties enjoined in
them, and that a Mutual Connection too. So that he cannot honor the King that
Fears not God; and on the other hand, he cannot Fear God, who Honors not the
King.

1. He who Fears not God cannot Honor the King. I have shown that to Honor
the King as such, is to Honor him as God's Representative; But how can he
Honor the King as Representating God in his Kingdom, who has no due Reverence
for God Himself? Again you heard, that to Honor the King, is to express our
Reverence by submitting to his Government, and observing his Laws from a
Principle of Conscience, and for God's sake. But how can he who Fears not God
thus submit and be obedient to the King? Who can expect, that he should obey
the Kings Laws, because God' has commanded him, who makes no Conscience of
living in disobedience to Gods own Laws? A man that is so void of the Fear of
God, as to live in the plain Breach of his Holy Commandments, will make no
bones, of breaking the Kings Laws, when he thinks he may do it safely, and it
makes for his Interest. This is so evident as to need no more words.

He again that Honors not the King cannot be said to Fear God. For as the
Apostle faith, He that loves him that begat, loves him also that is begotten
of him. And, ^f we love not our Brother whom we have seen, how can we love God,
whom we have not seen? so he who Honors not the King who Reigns by God,
and has his Authority from Him, does not Honor or Fear Him by whom he
Reigns, and who has given him his Authority. He who revereth not the Divine
Authority which displayeth it self in Gods Vicegerents, will not revere it in
God Himself. And the like is to be said, as to Obedience to the Kings Laws, he
who makes not Conscience of obeying these, supposing them not contrary to the
Laws of God, will not be obedient to Gods own Laws; Because it is a great Law
of God, that we should obey such Laws of our Kings.

To make a short Application of this past Discourse; As we would have our
Professions of Loyalty believed to be sincere, let us give the World a
demonstration thereof, by our Fearing of God. If we be Profane and Wicked,
though we may do some Externally Loyal Actions, and may be in some Instances
what the World calls Loyal, yet it is manifest from what has been said, that we
are devoid of the true Principle of Loyalty, and may no more be called Loyal
Men, than, in regard of our doing some Externally pious Actions, we may be
called Godly men.

Besides can People who live in the constant Transgression of the Kings Laws,
be said to be Loyal men? But if we are Debauched and Wicked, if we stick not at
profaning the Name of the Great God by Swearing, or can give our selves leave
to be Intemperate Drinkers, or to commit Uncleanness, or the like, we break our
Kings Laws, as well as Gods. Even nine Commandments of the ten are incorporated
into the Laws of our Country; and so, no doubt, would the tenth have been too,
but that the Sin of Covetousness, being a Sin of the heart, falls not within
the reach of Human Cognizance. Pretend we therefore to Honor the King as much
as we please, if we live not Sober, Righteous and Godly Lives, we are insyncere
in such a pretense. The Loyalty we brag of lies but in a few Instances, and in
these (I need not mind you again) we are not truly Loyal, as not being so from
the true Principle: And therefore our Loyalty is by no means such as his
Majesty can securely trust and confide in. King David was very sensible, that
those who Fear not God, are not to be trusted as Faithful Subjects: For he
says, Psalm. 101. 5. etc. A froward heart shall depart from me, I will not know
a wicked Person. Who so privily slandereth his Neighbor, bim will I cut off;
Him that has a high look and a proud heart, will not I suffer. Mine Eyes shall
be upon the Faithful of the Land, that they may dwell with me. He that walks
in a perfect way, he shall serve me, etc. For God's sake, what Security can we
give of our faithful Adherence to God's Vicegerent in all his Circumstances, if
we are false and perfidious toward God Himself, and live in the Breach of that
Solemn Vow, we made in Baptism, and renew from time to time in the Lord's
Supper? viz. To for sake the Devil and all his Works, the Pomps and Vanities of
this wicked World, with all the Sinful desires of the Flesh, so as not to
follow, or be led by them. What Security can he give, that the Oath of
Allegiance shall bind him fast, who makes nothing of breaking so much stronger
a Cord?

And therefore, as we would have all to conclude, that we Honor the King, let
all be satisfied by our Lives and Conversations, that we Fear God: And let us
Abominate such Shameful Hypocrisy, as to pretend to Honor the King, whilst we
don't Fear God; or to Fear God, whilst we Honor not the King.

And so much for these two Precepts, Fear God, Honor the King.

I now go back to that which praecedes these, viz. Love the Brotherhood; or
Love the Brethrem. Now Men are our Brethren, either in a more large or strict
Sense. In the most large Sense of all, Men of all Nations and Religions, even
Turks, Jews and Infidels, are our Brethren. That is, as we have all one God for
our Father. Have we not all one Father, has not one God Created us? says the
Prophet. Mal. 2. 10. And all Men are Brethren, as they proceed from one Stock,
and have one Common-Nature.

In a more strict sense, all Christians are Brethren: All that prosess Faith in
Christ; and are Members of the Catholic Church, These St. John calls the
Brethren. And all the Members of a Particular Church, are Brethren in a
stricter sense than that; and in a stricter sense than this (to descend no
lower) those Christians are called Brethren, whose places of Birth and
Habitation are so near together, as to stand in need of one another more
immediate Assistance; and to be combined in all the same interests. For
instance, those of the same Town, City or County.

Now, though by the Brotherhood, which in this place we are required to Love,
beonly to be understood Christians; because Brotherhood is here distinguished
from all Men; Honor all Men, Love the Brotherhood: Yet nothing is more evident
from the Praecepts of our Savior and His Holy Apostles, than that it is our
duty to love, that is, to be concerned for the Welfare and Happiness of all
Men, without exception: And it is as evident, that we are obliged to love our
Fellow Christians in an higher degree than the rest of the World; and that,
according as Christians are more or less like to Christ, as also according to
the more or fewer Relations they stand in to us, it is no less evident, they
ought to be sharers in the degrees of our Love.

And what Duty is so often inculcated, so vigorously urged, so passionately
pressed, by our Blessed Lord and his Apostles, as this of Loving each other?

Our Lord has told us, That a new Commandment he has given us, That we love
one another, even as He has loved us: That is, at least, that we love all
Universally, as He did, and that in such a degree as to taste Death, the most
ignominious and torturing Death, for every Man. And he makes this the great
Mark and Character of His true Disciples. By this shall all Men know that ye
are my Disciples, if you have love one to another. And so desirous was He, that
they should not be defective in his Grace of Love, that, among all the
excellent Petitions He put up for them, when He was upon leaving the World,
John 17th. this is the only Grace He particularly prays for in their behalf. v.
21st. He prays, That they may be one, even as He and his Father are one. That
they all may be one, as thou Father art in me, and I in thee: That they may be
United in Love and Affection, have one Heart and one Soul. And the reason for
which he desires this, does mightily recommend this Grace, That they also may
be one in us, that the World may believe that thou have sent me. In which words
is implied, that Christians loving one another, would be a great Conviction to
the World, of the truth and excellency of the Christian Religion.

And so it was in the first Ages of Christianity; when as Tertullian reports,
it was a common saying among the Pagans, Ecce quam se diligunt Christiani!
Behold how these Christians love one another! Though almost ever since the
three first Centuries, to our horrible reproach be it spoken, we have given
them cause to cry out, Ecce quam se odio prosequuntur Christiani! Behold how
these Christians hate one another.

But to proceed, our Lord 's Beloved Disciple thought he could never speak
highly enough, of this Grace of Love: For he makes it the very Definition of
God himself. He tells us, That Love is of God, and every one that loves is
born of God, and knows God. And we know, says he, that we are passed from
Death to Life, because we love the Brethren. And that, He that loves not his
Brother abides in Death; Or, he is a wicked Wretch, and that, He who hates
his Brother is a Murderer.

Nor is St. Paul wanting in pressing this duty of Love. Owe, says he, no Man
any thing but to love one another: For he that loves another, has fulfilled
the Law: Or, this is that Perfection of the Law which Christ requires. And he
shows in the following words, that the whole second Table is herein employed.
And (in short) the same Apostle prefers Charity to all Accomplishments and
Endowments whatsoever: To the speaking with the Tongues of Men and Angels: To
gifts of Prophecy and Understanding all Mysteries: To all Faith, even the Faith
of Miracles, nay to the greatest Zeal, such a Zeal as will carry a Man, evcn to
the Stake. And he shows that Charity is so much to be esteemed above all
these, that they are none of them worth any thing, or will avail in the least,
without Charity. 1 Cor. 13th. Chap. Much more might be added, to show what
mighty weight is laid upon this duty of loving one another: But it sufficiently
appears by this little that has been said.

I have told you what our Blessed Savior (the stupendous example and pattern
of love) and what two of His Apostles, say of it. I might add, that there is no
one thing wherein Mankind do more Universally agree, than in the beneficialness
of Love and Friendship, both to single Persons and Communities. That excellent
Heathen Cicero, in his Laelius tells us, That although many do contemn Virtue
it self, and others despise Riches and Honors, yet, de Amicitia omnes ad unum
idem sentiunt; the whole World to a Man, has the self same opinion of Love and
Friendship, That is, of the excellency and the necessity thereof, to the
happiness of Mankind. And before these words, he says, That they seem to pluck
the Sun out of the Firmament, who rob humane Life of Love and Friendship; than
which we receive nothing from the Immortal Gods, that is more excellent or more
pleasant. And he makes it in the same Book, his request to his Friends, That
they would prefer Friendship before all humane things: So that, what ought to
be so coveted, so earnestly pursued? I say, so earnestly pursued, for this Love
of each other, accompanied with the Love of God, is that which mainly
constitutes the Heavenly State.

All that we know (says the Poet) the Blessed do above, Is that they Sing, and
that they Love.

But (it being an old Maxim, Contraria juxta se posita mag is elucescunt) I
cannot more Endear Love and Friendship to you, than by presenting you with some
of the most mischievous Effects and Consequents of the contrary Vices, ill Will
and Malice, Strife and Emulation, etc.

1. I will mind you of some of those, by which the Community must needs greatly
Suffer.

One is, Wicked Partiality. What Moses says of a Gift or Bribe, is every whit
as true of illwill, emulation, etc. viz. It blinds the Eyes of the Wise, and
perverteth the Judgment of the Righteous. Nothing is more natural to men, that
are at variance and strife, than to Saint all on their own side, and to
Reprobate their Adversaries; and when they have so done, no wonder if they see
no Sin in those, and deal with these in this World, as they wickedly presume,
God Almighty will deal with them in the other. And whatsoever Furious People
will Own, it is too likely that most of them think, that God is a Being like
themselves, and saves and damns men, not by fixed and standing Laws, but by
mere Will and Power.

Again, This Strife and ill Will, etc. destroys all the Comfort and Pleasure of
Conversation. And that as they engage the Company in Siding against one
another, and in wrathful disputing, when they meet together for mutual
Enjoyment; And also as they cause Fear, and jealous Mistrust, and so destroy
all Freedom in Converse.

Again, when this ill Will, Emulation and Strife, etc. come to be between great
Numbers, they have a most mischievous Influence upon the Government. Nothing
makes men so ungovernable. And therefore, Traitorous, Heady and High-minded, do
well follow, False Accusers, Incontinent, Fierce, 2 Timothy 3. 3. It is not
possible that the Government should carry it, with such an Even and Steady
hand, as not to favor one side more than the other: nor is it indeed fit it
should; because it hardly ever so happens that one part has no more right on
it is side, than the Opposite: And it would be Strange too, if both should be
equally guilty of Injustice and Transgressing the Laws. Now nothing is more
natural, than for men of Wrath and Fury, to take high offense at those, who are
in the least favorable toward their Adversaries; especially if they perceive
them, to be one jot more in their favor than themselves. And I think they are
far more apt to take this heighnously at their Governors hands, than at their
fellow-Snbjects: Because they always on each side pretend, to be most faithful
to the interest of the Government. Now when once offense is taken at the
Government, whilst People are so generally acted by Interest, much more than by
Principles of Religion and Conscience, I need not say that the Government can
be no longer secure from open Violence, or private Conspiracies, than till the
offended Party grows strong enough, to hope for Success. Oh how sad a Felling,
have we of this Nation had, of the Truth of this!

Moreover this evil Spirit, when it is gotten into Societies, tends mightily
to the Debauching of them. This it does, as it takes men off, from following
the Business of their Callings; as it makes them Idle and Gadders about. The
Heads of those who are engaged in Strife and Contention, are too much heated,
to mind, as they should do, Serious Business. And therefore they commonly
employ themselves, as the Athenians did, who spent their time in nothing else,
than to tell or to hear, some new thing. When they should be in their Shops,
and about their necessary Affairs, you may find them in the Coffee-Houses, or
in the Taverns, Caballing together: And as in the one they spend many precious
hours, one while in vain prating, and another while in Seditious Talking, or
Unchristian Censuring, Railing and Reviling; So in the other, in adding to
these and the like Immoralities, Excessive Drinking; which I need not tell you,
draws after it other vicious and lewd Practices. I add also, that by this
means they become great Sufferers in their Fortunes, and Abundance Break and
run-out of all, and bring themselves and Families, to a Morsel of Bread. What
a number of sad Instances of the Truth of this, have we of late years had in
this City!

And lastly, Strife and Variance, if not timely abandoned, brings upon that
Kingdom, City or other Society, utter Ruin and Desolation. This our Lord
Himself has told us, Mat. 12. 25. Every Kingdom divided against it self, is
brought to dosolation; and every House divided against it self, cannot stand.
And he intimates to us in the following words, that the Devils are so wise, as
to be aware of this; and therefore will agree together, as natural as Malice
and Contention are to them, and as great pleasure as they take, in imbittering
Men's Spirits toward one another. There are innumerable instances of the truth
of that saying of our Blessed Lord; and the Experience of those to whom He
spoke it, found it Verifyed, within about half an Age after, with a Vengeance.
The horrible Feuds that were in Jerusalem, did the Romans business to their
hands, and brought them under a Fatal Necessity, of a total Destruction and
Desolation. Again,

2. As the Community must needs Suffer thus by the means of those Vices that
are Opposite to Love, so are they the heaviest Plague to those Particular
Persons, in whom they reign, that can befall them. But the time will suffer me,
to say but a very little to this Argument. In short therefore thus.

Malice, Revenge and Fury, etc. are mightily Uneasy and Restless Vices: they
are a very Hell to him in whom they dwell. They give not so much trouble and
vexation to others, but that they give more to those men themselves, who
entertain and gratify these Lusts. All corrupt Appetites whatsoever are of a
Tormenting nature, but it is most especially true of them in whom the Spirit of
ill will is found, that They are like the troubled Sea which cannot rest, whose
waters cast up Mire and Dirt.

This, farthermore, is the true Spirit, and Temper of the Devil. S. James
says, Chap. 3. 15. If ye have bitter Envying and Strife in your hearts, Glory
not and Lie not against the Truth; this Wisdom descends not from above, but
is Earthy, Sensual, Devilish. The Pharisees who were acted by this Spirit, our
Savior calls the Devil's Children. Ye are, says he, of your Father the Devil,
and the Works of your Father, ye will do; he was a Murderer from the
beginning, etc. In this, says S. John, the Children of God are manifest, and
the Children of the Devil; he that does not righteousness is not of God,
neither he that loves not his Brother. Or the man who is guilty of this
instance of Unrighteousness, Hating his Brother, is in a more especial manner
the Child of the Devil. No man does Resemble him so exactly, as does this man.
And Envious and Malicious Kain is said by the same Apostle, to be of that
wicked one, of his Spirit and Temper, as if he were his Natural Offspring, and
Begotten of the Devil.

Consequently, This Spirit and Temper sets us at the greatest distance
imaginable from God; who is a most Kind, Gracious and Benign Being: whose
tender mercies are over all his works. Who is a Being most Placable and
Reconcilable toward Repenting Sinners: A Being of Wonderful Patience and
Long-Suffering, not willing that any should perish, but that all should come to
Repentance. A Being that considers our Frame, and remembers that we are dust;
and is Compassionate in all Cases that are Compassionable.

And, Lastly, It Is apparent from the foregoing Account, that this Spirit of
Malice and Revenge, etc. puts men into the Hellish State, and completely
qualifies them, for the Place called Hell, and the Company thereof, and for the
worst of Company there, the Devil and his Angels, for whom Hell was originally
prepared. A Soul destitute of Love, and fraught with the Contrary Qualities,
when it goes out of this Body, will be pressed down by them into the bottomless
Pit: 'Twill as naturally sink down thither, as the Stone, or any Heavy Body,
falls to the Ground. Hell is the very Center of all such Souls.

And therefore what remains, but that we Hate this Malign Spirit, as we Hate
the Devil; and that we Shun it, as we would do Hell it self. As also that we
make it the Chief Business of our Lives, to get our selves entirely possessed,
of the Godlike Spirit of Love; of that Wisdom which is from above, which is
first Pure, then Peaceable, Gentle and Easy to be Entreated, sull of Mercy and
Good Fruits, without Partiality, and without Hypocrisy.

But it may be Objected, are we obliged to be United in Love and Friendship,
with those who are Enemies to all Unity; who do all they can to Encourage
Faction and Sedition in the State, and Schism in the Church; and are Enemies
both to our Ecclesiastical and Civil Government?

Hereto I Answer,

1. If we could all be persuaded to love one another, we should have no such
Offenders as these among us. All true Love and Unity has its foundation (as I
showed true Loyalty has) in the Fear of God: And where that is (as I showed
too) there will be Submission to the Higher Powers. The Combinations of
Traitorous, Factious and Schismatical Persons (and indeed of all wicked Men
whatsoever) is, as the Father says, Conspiratio non Unit as, A Conspiracy not
an Unity. But because we cannot expect in this Depraved State of Mankind, that
so much as the Major part should be induced with the Principle of Love, I
answer,

2. That there is a twofold Love, a Love of Complacency, and of mere Good Will.
Now as to the love of Complacency, that cannot be between Persons of unlike
Spirits and Tempers; they cannot take delight in one another. A Man of Loyal
Principle and Practices, can take no delight in a Man of Disloyal ones; nor can
any good Man take delight in a wicked Man, nor ought he so to do, if he could.
But then we ought still to retain the love of good will for such; we ought in
this sense to love their Persons, whilst we hate their Principles and
Practices. And we ought to express our goodwill to their Persons by pitying
them, and praying for them, and using all endeavors to reclaim them. We ought
(as the Apostle advises) with meekness to instruct those that oppose
themselves, if God per adventure will give them Repentance, to the
acknowledging of the truth. And when there is a necessity of exercising
Severity, it should never proceed from a Principle of Revenge; but the design
thereof ought always to be, the Preservation of the Government, and the
Reformation too of the Offenders, when their punishment is not Capital. So that
in no case whatsoever Malice and Revenge, Wrath and Fury may take place among
us. And all Men whatsoever should be Objects, either of our Love of Delight, or
of Good Will.

And now, my Honored and Dear Countrymen, God Almighty grant, that this our
happy Meeting, may contribute toward the promoting and increase of Love among
us: And fully answer the Designs thereof expressed in the Tickets, viz. Mutual
Society and Charity. And it is my humble request to you, that this our first
Feast, after a long discontinuance, Viz. Ever since the Burning of London.
may give a noble Example to all succeedings ones, of forwardness to this great
work of Charity, The putting out to Apprentice poor Children of our Country; or
otherwise releiving the most Necessitous of our Brethren.

And farther, God Almighty grant, that no other strife, no other Emulation, may
ever be discerned in Our Brotherhood, than these most highly Praiseworthy
ones, viz. Who of us shall give the best demonstration to the world, of his
Fearing God and Honoring our King (or of Honoring our King, from the true
principle of Fearing God) and of sincere Zeal for the interest of the
Government. Who of us shall be most concerned for the Religion of our truly
Apostolic Church, in opposition to both its Adversaries, Popery on the one
Hand, and Fanaticism, under all forms, on the other. And who of us shall most
hate meddling with either of those Extremes, who would fain change our
Government, whether Civil or Ecclesiastical.

A word or two more, and I will no longer Trespass upon your Patience. We have
a Country, I think, take it altogether, not inferior (to speak modestly) to
any one in England, both for Riches and Pleasure; and a Country that is
Honored with Inhabitants of Great worth and Great Quality, equally with most
in England. She has indeed but a few of the Nobility, but, among these, She
can boast of one Family of the very Highest His Grace the Duke of Beauford's.
Rank of Nobles.

And I cannot but take notice farther, of the Honor which some would have to be
done our Country, by an Ancient Proverb, the like to which, no other place I
ever heard of can lay claim to, except Heaven it self: Namely this, As sure as
God is in Gloucester-shire. Our Country's so abounding heretofore with
Religious Houses, has been thought (as Dr. Fuller, and others say) to be the
occasion of this Proverb. But though those Houses have been long gone (which we
have no cause to be sorry for, except their Religion were better than it was) I
could be content we might never lose our Proverb; on condition that it may
never for the future be profanely used, as alas now it is; and that this, for
the time to come, may be the ground of it, viz. That Gloucester-shire abounds,
above all other Countries, with Love and Friendship. Then there may be a
defense made for such a Proverb as this: For though God be every where, yet is
He most especially, and peculiarly, present there where Love reigns: For God
is Love, and those that dwell in Love, dwell in God, and God in them: As St.
John assures us. I say, upon so Blessed an Account as this, Let this Proverb
(so it be never, as I said, for the future, profanely or irreverendly used) to
all Generations be continued.

THE END.
ERRATA.
Page 1. l. 10. read no more. Page 13. l. 21. read Representing.


