Fourteen QUERIES Offered to the Consideration of all the Faithful Adherents to
the PARLIAMENT, And Public Interests: Who are not corrupted into the present
DESIGN FOR OLIGARCHY.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1659.

Fourteen QUERIES Offered to the Consideration of all the faithful Adherents to
the Parliament, and Public Interest, etc.
Taking the great Cause so long contended for, to be the pulling down of Kingly
Power, to make way for the securing of both Civil and Spiritual Liberty, the
question follows.
I. and cannot be preserved, are the fittest persons, in reference to liberty
of conscience, as least likely to berray it, to be entrusted with the settleing
of the Government.

II.

III.

IV. not ben at all in Polliticks, nor out of their own Country* and who,
according to ancient Maxims, are good servants, but bad masters, good
defenders of Laws in some cases, the worst makers and executioners of them in
the world, (witness the late Reign of our Bashawes) are fitting persons to
frame a new Government, especially those that join with them being no other to
them then Jurnymen.

V.

VI.

VII. Cromwells crooked and by ways are not exactly followed in designing the
bringing these Nations into confusion, that thereby they may be necessitated,
according to the healing question, to put the Sovereignty into one or a few
hands.

VIII.

IX. Richards convention, argue strongly against the being of the other House
of Parliament, from the Military Officers that was in it; saying, that so long
as they were there, Parliaments might vote what they pleased, but the other
would do nothing but what they pleased. And whether does not the same argument
lie against himself, and the rest of the Officers of the Armies, their being in
any Civil power, so long as they will remain Soldiers.

X.

XI. Whether the supposed Author to the healing question his former denying to
own Cromwell, and his Adherents, because usurpers does not teach all others, to
do the same toward himself, and those he is joined with. And whether his
present engagement does not argue, that his former opposition proceeded from
his being cousened of that share of Government he should have had, and not from
any sound, and right principles. And whether the little Secretary, who in
Richards convention, told him of his sneaking Oligarchy, did not therein speak
his knowledge, and is not able to prove the same.

XII.

XIII.

XIV. Harry Cromwell when he was in Ireland, and a Votary to his Tyranical
Government.

FINIS.

