Four Pious, Godly, and Learned TREATISES.

The first, Leads us to the Gate of true Happiness. The second, Is for
Instruction; Letting us to know what Christ suffered for us, that we might
enjoy him. The third, Is Helps and Cautions, that we may the better aVoid Sin.
The fourth, Brings us to be seekers and suers to God for those things that be
above, Collo. 3.
By a late Faithful and Godly Minister of Jesus Christ.

Now since his death recommended to all the people of God, by Mr John Goodwin.

Psalm. 32.1. Blessed is he whose transgression is forgiven, and whose sin is
covered. LONDON, Printed for Thomas Slater at the Angel in DUCK-LANE. 1652.

The Epistle to the Reader.
GOOD READER,
THe Author of these Sermons, having served his time, and being fallen asleep,
before their time came to look out, and do service in the world; I conceived
it might bear the construction of a piece of some light charity to lead them
out in their Orphan-like condition by the hand of a recommendatorie Epistle
into the world. Men for the most part desire in Books, to know first what is
said of them, before they care to know what they say; and sometimes an Author
worthy of prime inspection, for want of an Agent to make his worth his
harbenger, may lie as long neglected and unread, as the poor Cripple at the
poole of Bethsaida lay uncured for want of one to cast him into the water.

The subject (indeed) here principally discoursed, and brought out of darkness
into light (Christian mortification) seems to disdain all mediation, and
petitioning for it, it being of so great weight and transcendent importance,
that it commands all hearts and eyes to look up unto it; and threatens with
power and authority from on high, even the greatest on earth that shall turn
their back, and not their face upon it.

There are three things especially (among others) that will say well to make
this rough and hidden way of Mortification, smooth and plain. The first is,
the greatness of the Author, and founder of that honorable order of
Mortification, and who was the glorious President of it himself; Even the Lord
Jesus Christ: the apprehension and sense of such fellowship with us in our way,
cannot but devour and drown all sense and thought of what otherwise might be
difficult and distasteful in it. Among the Romans, the General being slain in
the battle, there was scarce any Soldier that regarded his life; but rather
chose to make an exchange of it, for such a death, wherein he might bear his
General company; and if any did return home alive, in such a case there was a
brand of ignominy set upon him ever after. The truth is, were not the
consideration of sin, and the madness of unbelief in the world at hand to
qualify the matter, and give satisfaction; it were the most astonishing wonder
that ever the world saw, that Jesus Christ being dead, the whole world should
not presently resolve to die with him.

The second is the greatness of the help, or mighty arm of assistance that
is ready to join with us in this great work of mortification if our hearts
be once set upon it: this is the Spirit of God and of Christ; If you mortify
the deeds of the body by the spirit, you shall live, Romans 8. This Spirit of God
residing and dwelling in those that believe, to whom he is given, is always at
hand, ready; yea, desirous and longing to be set on work in their s^^^e, to
be employed in this honorable service against sin, and all inordinate
affections, evill-concupiscence, uncleanness, pride, covetousness, etc. And
being stirred up, and set on to purpose, it carries on his work before him
with an high hand, making havoc and desolation among the fleshly lusts and
corruptions of the soul. The greatest and most difficultest undertakings, and
such which the soul of man would otherwise abhor, and turn aside from
altogether, are yet digested and carried on with a sweetness and pleasantness
of hope, when a man sees measure for measure, strength fo^^^ ^^^gth, as much in
his mea^^^^* in his opposition, as many with him as against him: Now the Spirit
of God within us, is of more might then all the hills of the robbers (as David
speaks in another case) he is stronger than all their strong holds; he is
above all the high things and imaginations that lift up themselves to the
highest within us against the knowledge of God. Mortification can be no other,
but a solid delight and spiritual recreation to him, that duly and deeply
considers what odds and advantage he has of his enemy, the flesh, by the
partaking, and close standing of that blessed friend of his, the Spirit.

The third and last is, the exceeding greatness of the reward which the God of
recompenses (as the Scripture terms him) has sealed and settled by purpose
and promise, both Yea and Amen upon this work of Mortification. If we be dead
with Christ we believe, that is, we easily believe, or have ground sufficient
to believe, that we shall live with him, as the foundation of the ensuing
discourse proclaims aloud to the world: where by living with Christ is not
meant of an everlasting being in his presence only (though his presence alone
be a Paradise of joy and blessedness in abundance) but an admittance or taking
up into an in the communion with him in all his glory; or as himself is
pleased with the expression, Revel. 3.21. a sitting down with him upon his
Throne. Men for the most part can be content that any man should choose or
appoint their work for them, if it might be permitted to themselves to choose
their wages, and have good security for it: Who would refuse with Sampson to
encounter Lions, if they could be secured to eat honey out of their carcasses?
Who would not have cast in his lot with those three faithful servants of GOD,
and have been content to have taken part with them in that hot service of
the fiery furnace, could they have been satisfy for their safe coming off
with their lives untouched, and like advancement afterward in the Kingdom? Low
wages and slender recompenses make even light work heavy; the only way to
drown the sowernesse or unpleasantnesse of any task, is to make it swim in
an Ocean of reward. It is a principle in reason, Finis dat amabilitatem mediis,
Good ends make hard ways or means lovely and desirable. If Mortification had
as bitter and irreconcilable an opposition, and repugnancie to nature, as the
grave it self, yet the transcendent vastness of the reward, that same far
more exceeding, eternal weight of glory (as Saint Paul had much ado to bring
out his notion of it in words, without loss, and leaving somewhat behind, 2 Corinthians. 4.17.) dearly apprehended and believed, mightily and effectuously
considered, is able fully to reconcile the disproportion.

I am loath to exceed the time and measure of an Epistle. The nature, necessity
and means of this great Masterpiece of Mortification with some other things
of Affinity with them, are well laid down in the Sermons following; Some
strains (I believe) thou will meet withal, that have been strangers to thee
heretofore, and which will do lively execution, and quit themselves like the
words of the wise, whose property is (as the wise man informs) to be as
goades or nails thoroughly fastened. Holy and learned men (amongst whom not to
number were doubtless to injure much mine Author) are not to be too deeply
charged, or too troublesomely expostulated with for some peculiarities of
expressions, wherein perhaps they give themselves more satisfaction than
others: And indeed it is a hard thing for any man to write so savourly or
warily, but that the Reader has need still to bring a grain of salt with him
to make the nourishment wholesome.

The blessing of the God of heaven be with this little piece in its going
forth into the world, that it may go forth in its might, and do worthily in
Israel, teaching and persuading many to desire (with Paul) the knowledge of the
fellowship of Christ's sufferings, and how to be made conformable to his death,
which is one of the greatest and most hidden mysteries of Christianity, and
requires the best and greatest Masters in Israel for its Teachers.

Thine in the Lord Jesus, JOHN GOODWINE.

The Contents of the ensuing Treatises.
Treatise 1.
To be dead with Christ what. Page 5 Propos. 1. We must die with Christ first,
if we will live with him. page 10 Reason 1. From the contrariety between sin
and grace. 12 Reas. 2. Else the Spirit dwells not in us. 13 Reas. 3. Because it
is hard to be a Christian. ibid. Use 1. Reproof of men dead in sin 14 Moral
death to sin distinguished from true death to sin. 16 1. In the Essence of
it. ibid. 2. In the efficient cause. 17 3. In the latitude ibid. 4. In the
issue. 18
Popish mortification differs from true mortification. 1. In the object. 19 2.
The efficient cause. ibid. 3. The formal cause. 20 4. The final cause. ibid.
Characters of a man dead to sin. 1. When occasions to sin work not. 21 2.
When all sin is dead in us. 22 3. When we do not the service of sin 23 4.
When we abhor sin. ibid. 5. When sins power is daily abated. 24 6. When
we can willingly have our sins wounded. 25
Means to be dead with Christ. 1. The Spirit of God. 27 2. Faith in Christ.
ibid. 3. Prayer. 28 4. Submission to the ministry of the Word, ibid.
Motives to die to sin. 1. The necessity. 29 2. The commodity. ibid. 3. The
facility. 30 4. The equity. 31 5. The treachery of sin. 32 6. The example
of others. ibid.
The difficulty of being a Christian. 33 The method to come to live with
Christ. 36 Spiritual death what. 40 Spiritual life what. 41 Propos. 2. Those
that are dead with Christ, shall live with him. 42 Reas. 1. To whom Christ
communicates himself he does it wholly. 43 Reas. 2. Death with Christ
insufficient, with out we live with him. 44 Reas. 3. From the opposition
between the life of sin and grace. 45 Use. Those that are not dead with
Christ, do not live with him. 46 How to know we are alive with Christ; 1. By
the cause of spiritual life. 47 2. By the exercises of spiritual life. 48 3.
By the properties of spiritual life. 49 1 Nourishment. ibid. 2 Augmentation.
50 3 Generation. 51

Use 2. To labor for death with Christ. 52 1. Because by him we shall enjoy a
spiritual life. 53 2. An eternal life. ibid.
Propos. 3. The knowledge of Mortification seals up the assurance of salvation
55 Reason. The promises of eternal life are made to the mortified. 68 Use 1.
For confutation of Bellarmine. 72 Use 2. To labor for Mortification. 75 Use 3.
Those that are not dead with Christ, cannot be assured of life with him. 77
Propos. 4. As our death to sin, so our life to grace, both proceed from
Christ. 80 Reason. They are both the work of grace. 81 Christ is the author of
the death of sin, and the life of grace. 1. As a meritorious cause. 83 2. As
the exemplarie cause. 85 3. The moral cause. 86 4. The efficient cause. 87
Christ is the efficient cause. First in the first working of it three ways.
88 1. By his Spirit. ibid. 2. By the Word. 89 3. By Baptism. 90
Baptism is a cause isntrumental 3 ways. 1. As a resembling cause. 91 2. As
a concurring means. ibid. 3. By Stipulation. ibid.
Secondly for the increase of it 2 ways. 1. By Faith. 92 2. The Lords Supper.
94
Use. To endeavor to be in Christ. 95 Use 2. To return the praise of grace to
Christ. 97 Use 3. What to judge of men out of Christ. 98
Treatise 2.
Observe. 1. What Christ suffered was not for his own sin. 104 Use 1. To show how
Christ could bear the punishment of sin. 108 Use 2. To discover the malice
of the Jews against Christ. 110 Use 3. To condemn those that judge by
success in outward things. 114 Use 4. To read us a Lecture of patience 115
Use 5. Comfort for distressed consciences. 116 Obser. 2. Christ suffered all
for our sins. 118 Reas. 1. The love of Christ. ibid. Reas. 2. The love of God
the Father. 119 Use 1. To admire Gods wisdom. 120 Use 2. To see the
haynousnesse of our sins. 121 Use 3. To provoke us to sorrow for sin. 123
Use 4. For Consolation. 125 Use 5. To set forth Gods love to us. 126 Use 6. To
return love again. 127
Treatise 3.
Conclus. 1. SVrfeiting and Drunkenness, and Covetousness to be taken heed
of. 134 Reas. 1. There is danger in these sins. 137 Reas. 2. There is danger
of falling into them. 139 Use 1. Complaint of neglect of this duty. 141 Use 2.
Exhortation to Caution. 143 4, Helps to Caution. ibid. Conclus. 2. The best
men to take heed of these sins. 149 Reas. 1. Because they are but men. ibid.
Reas. 2. Satan envies them most. 150 Reas. 3. Their falling make others fall.
ibid. Use 1. To show the best men are frail. 151 Use 2. Why the best should
suffer admonition. 152 Use 3. How to demean our selves. 153 Conclus. 3. Our
care and caution must be continual. 154 Reason. Because there is danger of the
sins. judgment.
155 Use. To discover the abounding of these sins. 156 Conclus. 4.
Drunkenness and Covetousness overcharge the heart. 161 Reas. 1. They press
the soul from heaven to earth. 162 Reas. 2. They press it from earth to Hell.
166 Use 1. To take heed of these sins. 167 Use 2. To use Remedies against
them, 171 Means to be disburdened of these sins. 172 Use 3. To see the false
judgment of the world 175 Conclus. 5. We should not be overcharged with
immoderate eating. 177 Danger in conversing with Epicures. 178 Reas. 1. It
unfits us for good Duties. 179 Reas. 2. It is the nurse of security. 180 Reas.
3. It breeds many lusts. 181 Reas. 4, It brings Gods judgments. 182 Reas. 5.
It hurts the body. 183 Reas. 6. It hurts a man's state. 184 Reas. 7. It hurts
the Commonwealth. ibid. Reas. 8. It wrongs the poor. 185 Use. To take heed of
surfeiting. ibid. Many ways of surfeiting. 186
Treatise 4.
SEeking things above enforced. 196 1. In respect of God. 197 2. In respect of
our selves. 204
Things above what. 209 Why so called. 211 Seeking What. 212 Propos. Those that
are risen with Christ, must seek the things above. 213 Conditions requisite in
seeking 3. 214 Means of seeking. 218 Signs of seeking. 223 Use. Exhortation
to seeking. 226
FINIS.
THE GATE TO HAPPINESS.
ROMANS 6.8. Now if we be dead with Christ, we believe that we shall also live
with him.
THe aim and scope of the Apostle in this place, Scope of the words.
is by the occasion of an objection proposed verse 1. to show the necessary
coherence of sanctification with justification. The objection is this, If where
sin has abounded, grace does much more abound, (which the Apostle S. Paul
affirms in the former Chapter, treating of free justification by grace) then
says the carnalist, let us continue in sin that grace may abound: this is
the objection.

To this the Apostle answers two ways.

First, by way of detestation. Secondly, by way of confutation.
By way of detestation in the beginning of the second verse, God forbid: far
be it from such gracious premises, to make so dangerous and pestilent an
inference; What, says he, shall we continue in sin that grace may abound?
God forbid.

Secondly, by way of confutation, and that by a double argument, answerable to
the two parts of Sanctification; Mortification, and Vivification, both of them
pregnant, and full of sinews to enforce, and press the cause and conclusion
in hand.

The first argument is thus, such as are dead to sin with Christ, they cannot
wilfully and wilingly live and continue in sin, but such as are justified
from their sins by Christ, they are dead to sin with Christ; therefore such
as are justified by Christ they cannot live, and continue in sin. The Minor
proposition the Apostle proves. First by the efficacy of baptism verse. 4. and
5. and by conformity to Christ, in his crucifying and sufferings verse 6.

The second argument (as a consequent, and dependent upon the former) is thus:
Those that are quickened by Christ to a new life of grace, they cannot willingly
and wilfully continue in sin: but those that are justified by Christ, are
quickened to a new life of grace, they cannot therefore willingly and wilfully
continue in sin. The Minor proposition the Apostle proves thus, those that
are dead with Christ are quickened to a new life of grace: Such as are justified
by Christ are dead with Christ, therefore they are quickened to a new life with
Christ, and therefore they cannot continue in sin. The Major proposition is
in the words of the Text, Now if we be dead with Christ we believe that we
shall also live with him. You see the Logic and argumentation of the Apostle,
which words being a proposition, and argument hupotheticall, observe in them
two parts.

First, an Antecedent, according to the law of such propositions.

And then, a Consequent; Or more properly, one thing supposed, and another
thing inferred.

First the thing supposed in the former part of the verse, that we are dead
with Christ.

The other inferred in the latter part, we believe that we shall also live
with him.

More particularly, you may please to observe these four parts.

First the method and order of the parts: first we must be dead with Christ
before we can live with him, If we be dead with Christ we believe that we
shall also live with him. We must first die with Christ before we can live
with him.

Secondly, the inseparable connection and conjunction and union of these two:
though the one go before, yet the other follows inseparably, and unavoydably,
as Jacob took Esau by the heel: In the latter part. Now if we be dead with
Christ, we believe that we shall also live with him, there is the conjunction
of these two.

Thirdly the assurance of this connection or conjunction, if we be dead with
Christ, we believe we shall live with him.

Fourthly and lastly, the cause and ground, as of the two former, so of the
latter, both of our death with Christ, and of our life with Christ, it is
Christ, Christ is the cause of both, If we be dead with Christ, that is, (as
Aquinas rightly interprets the place) through or by the virtue of Christ, We
believe that we shall also live with him, or be raised to the life of grace
by the same virtue. Thus you have the parts: If we be dead with Christ, we
believe that we shall also live with him.

First of the order and method of the parts, which is the first part or
proposition.

We must first die with Christ before we can live with him.
To be dead with Christ, To be dead with Christ what.
is in imitation or conformity with Christ to be dead to sin, as Christ dyed
for sin. So we are said to dye with Christ, when we dye to sin. Now we are
said to be dead to sin when sin is dead in us: when the command and
dominion of sin is broken down, when the power and force of it is enfeebled:
when we do what we can that sin may not have any vigor, or power, or
command, no nor quiet being in us, then sin is said to be properly dead in us.

Now we must not conceive that as long as we live, sin will utterly and
totally dye. The reason is this, S. Basil.
(it is a comparison of St. Basil, says he) it is with sin, and with the
corruption of nature as it is with the Ivy, Simile.
and the wall, when the Ivy is fastened and incorporated into the wall, a man
may cut the boughs and branches, but he can never root it out except he
pull down the wall. As Ivy is to the wall, so is sin and corruption to our
nature, it is so scrued and got into our nature, that so long as we live, so
long as this house of clay stands we cannot utterly root it out; we may
mortify and kill it in some measure, but when this house of clay shall be
demolished and dissolved, then sin shall be utterly extinguished; I say then,
we must not conceive sin to be so dead, as that it has utterly no life in
it, but it is said to be dead in a double respect: First it is dead Civilly.
Secondly it is dead Naturally.


It is a rule among Civillians, he that is a servant is half a dead man. The
reason is, because he is no longer at his own command; but what he is, he is
that he is, as he is inspired, and animated by the command of his master. So
sin is said to be dead because it is made a servant, it is forced to
undergo the yoke, to be subject to the Spirit of grace: therefore it is said
to be dead civilly.

Secondly, it is said to be dead naturally too; the reason is this, because
howsoever there be some life left in it, yet it has its deaths wound, and
that will cause it to die at the last: In the mean while it is in the wane, and
languisheth away; so that as a man that has received a mortal wound, he is a
dead man, the reason is, because that wound will bring death at the last: So we
may say though sin have some life in it, yet it is dead naturally too; the
reason is this, because by the death of Christ, it has received its deaths
blow, that it will never recover, and so at the last it will altogether die.

As sin is thus said to be dead in us, so we are said to be dead to sin in
a three sold respect.

You know death is nothing but the separation of the soul from the body, the
separation of that that is the principle of life. Now look what the soul is
to the body, the same is sin, in a sort, in a natural unregenerate man, he
lives not so much by his soul as by his sin; his sin is the life of his
life, it is that that enacts, and enlivens, and animates him: therefore it is
called the body of sin, why? because sin is in an unregenerate man's body as
the soul is in the body, it gives life to it. A natural man esteems sin as
his soul and life; so the members of his body are called the members of sin;
the reason is, because look as in nature the members exercise their functions
by the influence and virtue of the soul; so an unregenerate man in the corrupt
estate of depraved nature, such a man, his members work as they are enabled
and commanded by sin that dwells in him.

Secondly, we are said to be dead to sin, in respect of those antecedent
convulsions and pangs that go before death. Ordinarily there is no death
without pangs and convulsions. Now as it is in natural death, so it is in
this, there is no part of crucifying and mortifying of sin, without pain and
dolor, therefore it is justly called death, the mortifying of sin; we are
said to be dead to sin, when we mortify sin, because it is with so much
pain, with convulsions and anguish: So says Peter Martyr. The parting of a
natural man, the foregoing of his sin, it is not without much torment and
anguish: so in that respect it is said to be a death, in regard of those
convulsions and pangs that usually are the forerunners and harbingers of death.

Thirdly, we are dead to sin in another respect, for as a dead servant is no
longer at the command of his Master, let him command what he will he hears
him not, he does nothing. So it is with a man that is dead to sin, let sin
command what it will, he hears not, he listens not to the suggestions, he
practices not the commands of sin, he is as a dead man to sin. As a dead
man performs not the offices of the living, a dead servant does not obey the
commands of his master, so it is with a man that is dead to sin. Let this be
sufficient to be spoken for the meaning of that phrase, If we be dead to sin,
that is, as Christ dyed for sin.

Secondly, says the Apostle, If we be dead with Christ, we believe that we
shall also live with him.

There is a twofold life Natural Spiritual.


The natural life is not here meant, but the spiritual life, that is,
principally the life of grace and consequently the life of glory. The reason is
this, because the life of grace, and glory be not two lives, but one and the
self same life, they differ only in degrees. Look as the life of the child
in the womb, is the same life that the child enjoyes, when it comes to be
borne and brought to light in the world; so the life of a Christian in this
world it is in a manner the same that he lives in heaven, only I say it
differs in degrees; For look, as grace is nothing but glory begun, so glory is
nothing but grace consummate.

But if he mean the life of grace, shall live? If we be borne with Christ we
shall live with him.

I answer briefly for two reasons.

First, perfectly; therefore the Apostle reflects on that life respectively to
that time, and says we shall live the life of grace, because then we shall
enjoy this life perfectly, whereas here we have it but in some measure, and
degree with interruption.

Secondly, it is said in the future, we shall live, to affirm the perpetuity
of this life; this life is not like the life of nature, a fading and perishing
life of its own nature. It is the observation of Tolet the Jesuit upon the
place, says he, though the Apostle mean the life of grace, as we see by the
11. Verse, yet he uses the future tense, to show that this life is a
perpetual life, and such a life as has no date nor period. I say it is in the
future tense, to signify that the life of grace once begun, it never has
date.

Well, the words being cleared, I come to speak of the first thing proposed;
the order and method of the Apostle in these words; If we be dead with Christ,
we believe that we shall also live with him.

We must first die with Christ if we
We must first die with Christ if we will live with him.
For look as it was with Christ, so it shall be with every member of Christ;
Christ first dyed before he was raised to life; he was first brought low, and
humbled before he was exalted, before he had his glory. As it was with Christ,
so it must be with every member of Christ, he must first die before he can
live, he must first have his Good Friday before he have his Easter day, he
must first die to sin, before he can live to God.

It is otherwise in the life of nature then it is in the life of grace, there a
man must live before he die, but here he must die before he can live. So says
S. Paul Ephesians. 4.22.24. Ephe. 4.22.24.
Put off concerning your conversation, the old man which is corrupt according
to the deceive able lusts, look in Ver. 24. then says he put on the new man,
which after God is created in holiness and righteousness. Then the Apostle
here compares the life of grace to a new garment: before we can put on the
white and pure Stole of Christ's righteousnssse, we must first put off the
filthy rags of our own corruption, put off concerning your conversation, the
old man which is corrupt, according to the deceivable lusts. So in Ephesians 5*
Ephesians. 5.8.
8. The life of grace is compared o light, the life of sin is compared to
darkness, you know before the Medium be enlightened, the darkness must be
dispelled: First the darkness must be dispelled before it can be lightened. So
this new life, it is said to be a new Image; it is a new Image indeed, but it
is such an Image as we are not capable of, till first we be made pure Tables;
the former Image of Satan and the Characters of sin be defaced, till then
we are not capable of the Image of God, and the fair impressions of Grace. It
is called an ingrafting, or inocculating: now we cannot be grafted into
Christ, till we be cut off from the old stock; I say generally, as we must
die to nature, before we can live to glory, so we must die to sin, before
we can live to God.

Look what the Angel commanded Joshua Josh. 5.8. to put off his shoes before
he came to converse with God. If you please to take the allusion of Philo which
is this, (and it is pertinent to our purpose) put off thy shoes before thou
come to God, that is, put off dead works, because shoes are made of the skins
of dead beasts. I say, before we can live with Christ, we must die with
Christ, we must die to sin before we can live the life of grace. The reason
is plain.

From the contrariety between sin and grace.
and a life in sin. A man may live many lives if one be subordinate to
another, as a m^n lives a vegetative, a sensative, and a reasonable life,
because these are subordinate one to another; but to live in sin and to God a
man cannot, because these lives are contrary, they come from contrary
principles, they cannot consist in the same subject. It is an ordinary saying,
The Bed and and the Throne admit not of partners. It is true as Christ says,
No man can serve two masters; It is true, when they command contrary things.
Now sin and grace command contrary things, therefore no man can serve them
both, either he will cleave to the one and deny the other, or forsake the one
and cleave to the other. No man can serve sin and Christ because they are
contrary masters. No man can serve two masters when they command contrary
things, that is the first reason: We must first die to sin, before we can
live the life of grace, because they are opposites that will not admit of one
another in the same subject.

Secondly, till we be dead to sin we cannot Else the spirit dwells not in us.
because we cannot till then admit of the principles of the life of grace;
where sin reigns and dominiers the Spirit of grace dwells not, and where
that is not there is no life of grace: Therefore we must first die to sin,
before we can live the life of grace; because before we be dead to sin, the
Spirit of grace that quickens and revives us, does not dwell in us.

Thirdly, if it were not needful first to die Because it is hard to be a
Christian
wherein consisted the hard task of a Christian? How easy were it for a man
to be a Christian, if a man might be a Christian, and live after the lusts of
his own heart? if he might take liberty to do what his corruptions prompt,
and suggest, if a man that were ignorant might be ignorant still, and yet be a
Christian, if he that is a swearer might swear still, and he that is proud
be proud still, and he that is profane might be so still, what great matter
were it to be a Christian? how easy were it to persuade Agrippa, not to be
almost, but to be altogether a Christian? Therefore we must first die to
sin, before we can live to grace, before we can be true Christians: the
reason is because the task of a Christian is a hard task, such a task as a
man cannot perform without denying of himself, without crucifying and
mortifying of his lusts. This shall suffice to have spoken for the confirmation
of that point, by occasion of the method of the Apostle, If we be dead with
Christ we shall also live with him. That we must first be dead. As Christ died
for sin, so we must die to sin before we can live the life of grace. Now
I come to make use and application of it.

Reproves of men dead in sin.
Which if it be so how justly does the censure of Christ, Revel. 3.1. fall upon
many Christians? that of the Angel of the Church Sardis, that they have a name
to l^ve, but are dead, why dead? dead because they are not dead, dead to grace
because they are not dead to sin: many men though they seem to be lively and
active, are no better then walking, breathing Carcasses. The reason is this:
because till a man be dead to sin, he cannot live the life of grace; we
must first die to sin with Christ, before we can live the life of grace with
Christ. Gal. 5.
In Gallat. 5. Those that are Christ's have crucified the flesh with the
affections and lusts: Why then on the contrary, such as have not crucified the
lusts and affections of the flesh, they are not Christ's. Wheresoever any sin
reigns, in whom soever any lust dominiers, what lust soever it be, that man is
a dead man, there is no true life of grace in him. The reason the Apostle gives
in these words; because we must be first dead to sin, before we can live
the life of grace; first our lusts must be mortified and crucified in us,
before we can live with Christ the life of grace, we must first pass this
red Sea, that is, to die with Christ before we can enter into the Land of
Canaan, to this life with Christ. But that I may make it more useful to you,
let me show you these four things.

First let me discover to you some false deaths, for as there is a false and
counterfeit life of grace, so there are false and counterfeit deaths to sin.

Secondly, let me show you some characters whereby a man may know a true death
to sin, whereby he may judge and examine himself, and know whether he be
dead to sin or no.

In the third place I will show you the means whereby (if a man be not dead)
a man may get this death, whereby he may come to mortify and crucify the
lusts and affections of the flesh; and if he be dead, whereby he may
proceed on in the work of mortification, because mortification is not one
individual act, but has a latitude, and admits of degrees.

Fourthly, I will show you arguments to persuade you to this death to sin
with Christ, especially such as are immergent, arising from the words of the
Text; Of all which briefly.

First then of false deaths, that seem to be true in show, but are counterfeit
deaths.

There is a threefold death to sin.

A Moral Popish Christian
death to sin.

The moral death to sin is distinguished from the true death to sin,
especially in four things.

First, the maine difference is in the Essence of it; the truth is, a moral
death is indeed no death, he that is morally dead to sin, is not indeed
dead to sin: for such a mortification takes away, not the life of sin, but
the harshnesse, and rudeness of sin, it takes it and restraines it, it makes
sin more tractable and smooth, and subtle, but it takes not away the life of
sin; that is the first.

Secondly, it differs in the efficient cause, the efficient cause of a
Christians mortification is the Spirit of God, Romans 8.13. Romans 8.13.
If ye mortify the deeds of the flesh through the Spirit: but the cause
efficient of moral mortification, it is from the temper of the body, or good
education, or the like. Consider therefore if it proceed from the Spirit, from
the general, common operation of the Spirit, or from the special saving and
sanctifying virtue of Gods Spirit.

Thridly, moral mortification differs from that which is true, in respect of
the Latitude: he that is morally mortified, he is mortified only in respect of
outward gross sins, in respect of such things as are more notorious, such as
run in the eyes of men, such as cause disgrace, and dishonor, and obloquie:
but secret spiritual sins are unmortified, nay, (it is the observation of
Saint Austin, that) a moral man, though he seem to the eye to be never so
much mortified (as indeed if a man look on their formal austerity, to look
on Cato or such a one, a man would judge them mortified) yet commonly they
feed one lust, and for the sake of that they curb the rest. So Saint Austin
upon the Romans observes, the lust of covetousness, of injustice, of
intemperance, etc. they curb them being over borne with the lust of ambition;
says he, they keep down all other lusts that they may give more scope to this
one lust, in his fifth book de Civit. dei Chap. 12. But a true Christians
mortification is universal, he does not kill some sins, as Saul killed the
small Cattle, and left Agag, and the great ones, but he mortifies and
crucifies all sin, true mortification will not suffer a man to allow himself
in the practice of any one sin.

Fourthly, moral mortification differs from Christian in respect of the issue;
he that is truly mortified, in such a one sin has received its deaths wound
in him, it never comes fully to be healed and recovered it self again.
Indeed if he be negligent in the exercise of mortification it may get
strength upon us; as the Canaanites being neglected of the Israelites grew
stronger, but they never obtained that absolute command, and dominion in Canaan
as before: but for a morrall man, because sin is not truly mortified in him,
therefore when those restraints and retentives are taken away that kept in
sin, it rages and dominiers as much as it did before in him, or as it does in
another man. Let this suffice to be spoken of the difference of moral
mortification from that of a true Christian.

Secondly, Popish mortification differs from true mortification, in all the
degrees and causes.

It differs from Christian mortification.

In the efficient material formal final
cause.

First Popish mortification differs from Christian in respect of the object
matter; the principal object in Popish mortification, is not so much perhaps
sin in the members, but the members themselves, they lash and tear them with
scourges and whips, their aim is not so much against sin as the members;
whereas true mortification is a revenge on the members as they are instruments
of sin: a man's principal grudge is against sin in his members, and not
against the members that sin dwells in.

Secondly, they differ in the efficient cause the cause efficient of true
mortification is the Spirit of God, Romans 8.13. Romans 8.13.
If ye through the Spirit do mortify the deeds of the body; but the cause
efficient in Popish mortification is, among too many themselves; they offer,
violence to themselves, self considerations is the sum of their
mortification.

Thirdly, the formal cause of Popish mortification is humbling the body,
abstinence and rending the humane body by whippes, and scourges: this they make
the true bearing of the dying of Christ in their members: Getzer. 2. book
discipline, chap. 8.
So says Getzer in his second book of discipline, Chap. 8. They bear the
dying of Christ in their body, that shed their blood with whipping and lashing
themselves willingly for Christ, such a man is said to mortify himself. It is
a strange thing, as if we should go about to please the divinity by
inhumanitie.

Fourthly, they differ in respect of the end, and aim of both; Popish
mortification ends not in the destruction of sin, and infeebling the power of
it so much as the satisfying of God for sin: Hear what Getzer says in the
same place, in his second book of discipline, Chap. 8. says he, such as whip
themselves till the blood come, for their sins, by such whipping of
themselves they satisfy Gods justice for their sins. What Christian heart
can hear such Doctrine and his heart not ache, and his ears not glow, and his
joints tremble? Blessed Savior that they that style themselves by thy name
should derogate from thee by their blasphemies! We say the blood of Christ
expiates sin, they say their own blood wilfully shed, satisfies God for
their sins: whereas the end of Christian an mortification is not to satisfy
God for sin, but to infeeble the power of sin, to break down the command
and dominion of sin. This shall suffice to be spoken concerning the first
point proposed, the false deaths to sin, and those are two; Moral, and
Popish.

Now I come to show the Characters of a man that is truly dead to sin with
Christ.

The first sign of a man that is dead to sin is this, that when occasions
are offered, and invite him to sin he does not yield, this is an argument
that that man is dead to sin. It is true I confess there is great power in
occasions, that except we keep a jealous guard they are able to transport a
holy sanctified man, and so they have done the best; but I say such a man, as
when no sooner an occasion is presented, but he is ready to give way to
satisfy his lust, such a man, let him pretend what he will, he is not dead to
sin. He is like a tree, we know in winter there is no visible and apparent
difference between a dead tree, and that that is alive, Simile.
neither of them have either fruit or leaves, they differ not in outward view:
but when the spring comes again and the Sun approaches, then there is a
difference, then the juice in the root shootes up, and diffuseth it self into
the rest of the parts: you may know a tree whether it be dead or alive, when
the Spring comes, when the Sun approaches, if it does not shoot forth and
flourish then, we say it is a dead tree. I apply it thus look what the Sun
is to the tree, so is occasion to lusts: he that does not sin when occasions
are offered and present themselves: when a man has occasion to satisfy his
lusts if he do it not, this man is truly dead to sin. Whereas such a man as
either through age or want of opportunity and occasion is disabled from
fulfilling his lusts, but in the mean while he pleases himself to revolve
them in his mind, and to discourse of them with his tongue, such a man is not
dead to sin; if he had the same strength and occasion presented as before,
such a man would discover that sin were alive in him as much as ever it was.

Secondly, we may know we are dead to sin if all sin be dead in us: it is
not sufficient that one lust seem to be mortified, and crucified in us unless
all be mortified. We know there is life in an Apple tree, or a Pear tree if
it produce but one Apple, or Pear: So we may know that sin is alive in us,
if there be but one reigning domineiring sin. It is true I confess in the
best men, sin is so much alive in them, that ever and anon it will be
shooting forth some of these cursed fruits; but yet (as we shall see in the
third place) the power of it is more infeebled; I say where one sin or lust
rules and dominiers in a man, that man is not dead to sin, as if an Apple
tree bring forth but one apple we conclude it is not dead.

Thirdly a dead man cannot perform the works of a living man, when we
perform not the works and service of sin, then we are dead to sin. Every
thing has power to bring forth fruit according to its own nature, Ioh. 8.39.
Ioh. 8.39.
If you were the children of Abraham, you would bring forth the fruits of
Abraham. Now if a man bring forth ordinarily the fruits of sin, let him say
what he will, sin is alive in that man. I grant that as I said before, sin
will ever and anon be sending forth bitter and cursed fruits, but he that is
ordinarily and commonly transported to the service of his own lusts that man
is not dead to sin. Shall a man say he is a dead man that lives in pride?
that he is a dead man that lives in swearing or uncleanness etc? I say he
that is ordinarily, and habitually transported with pride, with swearing and
blasphemy, with uncleanness, etc. he that is ordinarily transported to the
committing of any sin, that man is not dead to sin.

Fourthly, it is not sufficient to forbear the practice of sin, but to
abhor and detest sin: we know when we come by aputrified dead Corse, we stop
our noses, to show that we abhor the noisome smell and detest it. If we do not
only forbear sin but loath and abhor it, it is a sign that sin is dead,
it is a Carcass, we begin to abhor it.

Fifthly, by this Character we shall know that sin is dead, if daily more and
more we see the power of sin abated and infeebled in us; we know dying men,
the nearer they draw to the grave the more weak are all the actions and
functions of the soul: So I say, sin shall never in this life be utterly
dead, but it has its deadly blow, and languisheth away. Now then we may know
we are dead to sin, if sin more and more decay, and the power of it be
more and more feeble, if every day the inclinations and provocations to sin
are more weak.

Yet mistake not, a man may deceive himself by this Character: for often times
it comes to pass that sin when it has its mortal, and deaths wound, it
rages more then it did before. Simile.
It fares with sin as with a wild beast that has received his deaths wound,
he rages more then he did before: So sin and Satan, then labor to provoke
and stir up corruption in a man to rage more, notwithstanding stay a while,
and you shall see the power of it more infeebled: So I say a man must not judge
himself by the present fit or rage of sin to have no spark of regeneration,
for that may be occasioned by the deaths blow of sin; but look if sin be
enfeebled, and the inclinations and lusts to sin grow every day weaker then
other, and that is an argument that sin is dead.

Sixthly we may know that we are dead to sin by this argument, then a man is
dead to sin, when he can willingly and patiently endure the Axe of the Gospel
to be laid to the root of his sin, when he can patiently submit himself to
have his sin wounded, and to have it executed by the sword of the Spirit. I
say patiently to endure the reproof of his sin, especially when the reproof
is laid against the sin that most prevails against him, the sin that a man
loves dearest, patiently to endure the reproof of that sin is an argument
that that man is mortified, and dead to sin. Let a man say what he will, he
that storms and grudges, and grumbles and chafes when his sin is met with in
the Ministry of the word that man is unmortified, at the least so far as he
chafes and frets, so far he is unmortified. He that is mortified to sin,
he that is grown to a loathing and detestation of his sin, he rejoices
when the Ministry meets with his sin, Oh says such a one that my sin
might be met with to day! I stand in terms of hostility with it, I would
have it put to death, Oh! that it might have one blow to day by the Sword of
the Spirit: such a man as will not endure the reproof of his sin he is
unmortified, at least so far as he is impatient of reproof.

Yet mistake not, a man may be more impatient for some sins than for others:
for though in a gracious man all sin be mortified, yet some sins be more
rooted, and radicated. As we say in Philosophy, there are some parts that
live first, and die last, as the heart. As it is in the body 'so it is in the
state of nature, in the body, of sin: there are some sins in which life is
more radicated; and one sin may have more life when others are mortified, one
may have more strength then others, and life in it, and yet the mortification
be true; yet generally such men as are impatient at the reproof of their
lusts, especially that lust that dominiers, that man is unmortified; he that is
a mortified man, that sin is dead in, he will suffer reproof patiently.

Now I come to the third thing I propoposed to show the means whereby we may
come to be dead with Christ: for if we cannot come to live with Christ, but
we must first die with Christ, then it mainely concerns us to labor to die
with Christ to sin, that so we may come at the last to live with him. The
means are four.

The first cause which is the principal cause is the Spirit of God, so says
the Apostle, Romans 8.13. the place before alleged, If ye mortify the deeds
of the flesh through the Spirit ye shall live. Romans 8.13.
It is true, we are enjoined mortification, but we cannot do it till by the
Spirit of God our sins be mortified. Simile.
It is with sin as it is with some wild beasts, they cannot be taken and
apprehended till they be shot and wounded: So it is with sin, till the Spirit
of God give the deaths blow to sin we cannot mortify it of our selves;
therefore the first and principal cause is the Spirit of God, he that is in us
is stronger then he that is in the world. The Spirit of God is strong and
powerful to subdue sin.

Secondly, Faith in Christ: for by faith we must be ingrafted into Christ, and
so partake of the Spirit of Christ whereby sin is dead in us, so says the
Apostle, Rom.. 6 5. Romans 6.5.
For if we be planted into the likeness of his death we shall be also into
the likeness of his resurrection. First we must be planted and grafted into
Christ: As a Syens must be planted into the stock of a tree before it partake
of the juice of it: So we must be planted into Christ by faith before we be
made partakers of the virtue of the death of Christ to kill our sins; Col. 2.13.
so says the Apostle, We are raised through the faith of the operation of
God, it is through faith, not only as a persuading, mooving cause, but as an
efficient cause, because faith as a pipe of Silver conveyes the juice, the
water of life, the Spirit of God, whereby our sins are mortified, it unites
us to Christ and makes us partake of the virtue of his death whereby our sins
are killed.

Psalm. 19.13.
The third means to work this death in us it is Prayer, so David, Psalm. 19.13.
Lord keep me from presumptuous sins, let them not have dominion over me,
that is, mortify, and crucify them so that they may not have dominion over
me, or not have a being if it were possible, Let them not have dominion over me.

Fourthly and lastly, a special means to put sin to death is to submit our
selves to the Ministry of the Word, such as can manage and brandish the two
edged Sword of the Spirit against sin. And so in private by meditation to
apply to our selves the curses and judgments that God has threatened against
such sins as we give most way to: for if once the principal and vital
sin (as I may call it) be destroyed, then other sins will die of
themselves; this shall be sufficient for the third part, touching the means to
die with Christ.

I come now in a few words to the motives to persuade us to die with Christ.

The first arises from the necessity of dying to sin, either we must die
to sin, Romans 8.13.
or die for sin, woe to us if we do not die to sin, If ye live after the
flesh ye shall die, Romans 8.13. that is, if ye live unmortified ye shall die,
how? eternally, not only the death of the body but of the soul too, here is
the choice, we must either mortify our lusts or incur the danger of
damnation, there is no other way to escape it, If ye live after the flesh ye
shall die, that is, eternally, therefore there lies a necessity that should
persuade us to die to sin.

Secondly, from the commodity of it, by dying to sin we shall not only free
our selves from eternal death, but from much trouble and molestation, and
disquiet also that we should be sure to have by keeping sin alive, and by
yielding to the lusts of sin. Most true it is that it is with our lusts as
with little children, humor and observe them, Simile
and give them that they cry for, and you shall never have rest, but still they
will cry for something more, so it is with our corruptions and sinful lusts
yield to them upon every desire, and we shall never have done, when we have
satisfied one lust, it will call upon us again, and will never have done;
whereas by mortifying of it, we shall bring to our selves much quiet, and free
our selves from much molestation.

Thirdly, consider the facilitle, by mortifying the deeds of the flesh we loose
nothing that will make to our happiness; Adam in innocence in Paradise was
happy without these lusts, Christ on earth was happy without them: the Saints
in heaven are happy without them, Iam. 1.21.
these are but superfluities, Iam. 1.21. Lay aside all superfluity of
naughtiness and malice. We may have all true contentment whatsoever, and yet
part withour lusts; they are things that we may well spare: By mortification of
them, a man loses no profit, nor pleasure, nor honor whatsoever, but there
is recompense with advantage. Let a man mortify his lusts that bring him
profit, he shall have profit in durable riches, not only in this life, but
for his reward he shall have a whole kingdom to enjoy. Let him loose some
present pleasures (as we have all too much of common Soldiers in us, we love
present pay) he shall have infinite recompense, he shall have pure pleasures,
peace of conscience, God will praise him, and say, well done good and faithful
servant, he shall have peace of conscience, that will lift a man above ground,
an infinite recompense in the loss of other pleasures. Secondly for honor,
what if a man for the crucifying of his lusts be reproached and contemned in
the world, yet he shall have true honor of God in heaven, he shall have honor
of Angels, of good men; honor did I say of good men, nay wicked men shall
honor him. God is able to command honor from the hearts even of wicked men,
so much as he is mortified: Let a wicked man see one that is a mortified man,
(that as David was he behaves himself as a weaned child from the world) he
cannot but give a good testimony, but if he will not now, let him be on the
rack in sickness, let death appear, then he will desire to die the death of
the righteous; and that his last end may be like his. It is true while he is in
his jollitie and bravery, then such men load a mortified man with reproach and
contempt: but we must do as Physicians do, when they judge by urine of the
state of the body, they look not on the urine that is voyded when men are
walking up and down before they go to bed, Simile
but that which they make after their first sleep when they are come to
themselves. So take not a wicked man now in the fulfilling of his lusts, but
look on that man when he has slept, and you will judge otherwise of him, he
cannot choose but give a good testimony of a mortified man.

Fourthly, consider the Equity of it, Christ died for sin that we might die
to sin, 1 Pet. 2.24. 1 Pet. 2.24.
who his own self bare our sins in his own body on the tree, that we being
dead to sin should live unto righteousness. What, did Christ lay down his
life for our lusts, and shall not we lay down our lusts for Christ, did
Christ die for our sins, and shall not we for Christ die to our sins?

Fifthly, consider our sins are Traitors, and rebels against heaven. Tertul.
Apol. cap. 2.
Well says Tertullian in his Apology for the Christians in his second
Chapter; against Traitors and such as are common enemies every man must be a
common Soldier. Now our sins are Traitors against heaven, we cannot better
express our loyalty and alleagance to our great Master, God, then to kill and
put to death these rebels, it is a most acceptable sacrifice to God.

Sixthly, and lastly consider the example of other men, we see what care men
take, and what pain they will undergo, not for the avoiding but for the
putting off a natural, a temporal death for a while. Men for the preserving
of this temporal life, they are content not only to take harsh Physic, but
to endure launcing, and searing and cutting off the parts, a leg or an arm,
etc. so to preserve natural life; if they do so for preserving of this
natural life, Oh what should we do for the gaining of eternal life? It is
true Christ compares lusts to eyes, and hands, and feet, it is true they are
eyes, but such as when they are pulled out we may see well enough. They are
hands, but such hands, as when they are cut off we may still do what we have
to do without them. Now shall a man for the preserving of his temporal life,
endure a member to be cut off, and shall not we cut off our superfluous lusts
for the gaining of eternal life? shall they, not for the avoiding, but for the
respiting of death endure this pain, S. Aug. Epist. 45.
and shall not we for the avoiding of eternal death? S. Austin presses this
excellent well in his Epist. 45. They do this, not as if there were any hope
to put off death quite, but only to adjourne, and put it off for the present;
if they do this for the respite of death, what should we do for the avoiding of
eternal death, says he? They undergo many certain torments, perhaps that
they may have hope, but of a few uncertain days, what! do they thus for a
temporal life, shall not we much more for the procuring of an eternal life? Do
they so much for the adjourning of a temporal death, and shall not we for the
avoiding a perpetual, and eternal death? If these arguments persuade us not,
none can, so much for the fourth point, the Motives to this death to sin.

Fifthly, if we must die with Christ, before we can live with him; S. Jerome.
then as Saint Jerome somewhere has it; It is not so easy a thing as some
happily conceive it, to be a Christian. It was Iulians scoff of Constantine,
Julian.
and in him of all Christians: To be a Christian there is no more required, but
to wash themselves with a little water, that is, to be baptized, and how great
soever their sins were before, this cleanses them, says Julian; or if it
chance that a man fall into the same sins again; says Julian, It is no more
for these Christians but to beat their breasts, and to smite their heads, and
all is well again: (in the conclusion of his Caesar's.) But the best is, it
matters not greatly what Julian says; it concerned him to speak evil of that
says he was fallen away from; if he had spoken well of it, he had spoken
against himself. But he that knew better then Julian says, Mat. 7.14.
strait if the gate, and narrow is the way that leads unto life, Math. 7.14.
The way to heaven is strait, he that will enter in this way must strippe and
divest himself of his old lusts: The way of Christianity is a narrow way;
nay, that is not all, it is a way full of pain, and pressures to the flesh, as
Camerarius interprets that place; Narrow is the way, and full of pain to the
flesh; He that walks this way, must resolve to meet with difficulties, he
must take out lessons that are harsh to flesh and blood, to mortify, nay, to
crucify the flesh, Gal. 5.24. They that are Christ's, have crucified the flesh
with the affections and lusts. Every death is not sufficient to express the
pain he must undergo, but crucifying only, the death that Christ died, that
was both a lingering and painful death. Thus every man that will live with
Christ must first crucify his sinful lusts and affections.

Which notwithstanding I speak not, to deter or discourage any from entering
into the way of Christianity, or having entered, for going on in the same way:
No, God-forbid, that I should (like the ten spies that Moses sent to spy out
the land of Canaan) bring an ill report upon the ways of godliness; but to
inform us, and arm us. He that is to travail into a far Country, on
which his life and livelihood depends, and should meet with a friend that
should tell him the way were deep, and troublesome, and that there were such
difficulties did stand in the way; he would easily perceive that he did tell
him this, not to discourage and dishearten him, because he is his friend, nor
to stay his journey; because he knows it is upon his life, his life lies on
it; but to arm and prepare him before hand, that when he should meet with the
difficulties, he might the better encounter them, and go over them. I apply
it thus, Heaven is our country, we all pretend we are Pilgrims traveling to
heaven: the way that leads to heaven is this narrow way, our death with Christ:
the necessity of walking this way appears in Math. 7.14. This way, Mat. 7.114.
and only this leads to life, it is the strait gate and the narrow way that
leads to life? Now when we tell you of Lions, and Bears in the way, the
difficulties, and incombrances that you shall meet with, it is not to
discourage you, but to arm, and provide you. It is not to dishearten you, you
must needs go, your life lies upon it; but to arm and prepare you, that when
you meet with these difficulties, you may be the better provided to encounter
them. It is good says the Proverb, to know the worst of things before hand,
lest otherwise after we have walked in the way, we meet with incombrances, and
dreaming of nothing but delicacies, our hearts fail us, as the hearts of the
Israelites in the report of the ten spies. Like the foolish builder in Luke
4. Luke 4.
that was not able to go on with his building, because he did not sit down
first, and reckon what it would cost him.

Sixthly and lastly, if we must first die with Christ, before we can live with
him, it serves for direction to teach us what order and method to take to come
to live with Christ. He that will live with Christ, must be sure to begin at
the right end, to die with Christ first: he that will perform holy duties, and
gracious actions, that man must labor to crucify and mortify sinful
affections. Sinful affections are like weeds; the Husbandman that desires his
corn should thrive and live, he labors first to kill the weeds. I say
sinful affections in the soul are like weeds in the ground, or soil; if we
desire that grace should thrive, and to perform gracious duties with content
to our selves and to God, we must labor to kill our lusts. When we find in
our selves an unaptnesse, and an indisposition to the performance of gracious
duties, suppose it be to prayer, to humble ourselves before God, to hear the
word of God, etc. let us then reflect on our selves, and see what sinful lusts
there have gotten strength, and labor to abate the power of that, and then
certainly we shall live with Christ, we shall be enabled to perform holy
duties; So says the Apostle (in the second place) If we be dead with Christ,
we believe that we shall also live with him.

Which is the second thing I proposed in the beginning. The connection, and
conjunction of these two; If we be dead with Christ, we shall also live with
him.

Where first give me leave to remember you of what I formerly delivered in the
unfolding of these words: that the life that the Apostle here means, when he
says; If we be dead with Christ, we shall also live with him; it is the
same that in verse 4. he calls Newness of life. Therefore we are buried with
him by baptism into death, that as Christ was raised by the glory of the
Father, so we should walk in newness of life. I say the Apostle means here
the life of Grace, which in verse 4. he calls newness of life. And in verse
11. he calls it living to God: Likewise reckon ye your selves dead to sin,
but alive to God. Though secondarily, and by consequent, I deny not but that
the Apostle means living with God in life eternal. And the reason is, as I
showed before, that the difference of the life of grace, and the life of glory,
it is not in Nature, but in degrees, Grace is Glory begun, and glory is nothing
but grace perfected. As the child in the womb has the same life that it
enjoyes in the world, only then it is in a further degree: so the life that a
Christian enjoyes in this world, it is the same life in nature though it differ
in degrees from that he enjoyes in heaven.

The Apostle uses the future tense; If we be dead with Christ, we believe
that we shall live with him, for these three reasons.

First, to show the order and Method between this life, and the former death:
because this life in nature, though not in time is after our death with Christ.
As it is in nature, the introducing of habites in nature, is after the
expelling of privations, as the enlightening of the air in nature is after the
dispelling of darkness.

Secondly, the Apostle uses the future tense, because though the life of Grace
be here begun, yet it is not consumate till afterward, in which respect the
Apostle says; We believe that we shall live with him. He makes this life in
respect of the complement, and consummation an act of faith, according to that
in the Creed; I believe the life everlasting.

Thirdly, because the life of grace does not fade as the natural life
perrisheth, but it is an enduring life. As Christ being once raised, he died no
more, verse 9. so every member of Christ, he that is once quickened, and raised
with Christ from sin, he dies no more, so says Christ, Ioh. 5.24. he that
believes has eternal life. What? has every one that believes life
eternal? Yes, every one that believes has life eternal in hope, and in the
beginning of grace; because he has that life for the present, that does not
fade and perish, but endure to eternity, Verily, I say unto you, he that
hears my word, and believes in him that sent me, has eternal life, and
shall not come into condemnation, which expresses the former.

Now what this life of grace is, this spiritual life, will appear by
comparing it with spiritual death. It is the property of opposites being set
together; as to impugn, and fight against the nature one of another, so to
discover the nature one of another.

Now spiritual death, as the Natural includes two things.

First, a separation from the fountain, and principle of life.

And, as a consequent of that, a privation of the faculties, and acts of life.

Look what the soul is to the body, the same is the Spirit of Christ to the
Soul, it is that that enlivens and quickens it, so says Christ, Joh. 6.63:
Ioh. 6.63. It is the Spirit that quickens. Now look, as upon the parting of
the soul from the body, the body dies; so upon the separation of the Spirit of
God from the soul, the soul dies. So it was in Adam, when by eating the
forbidden fruit, he had cut off, and separated himself from the fountain,
and principle of life, he died spiritually. I say, as when the Soul that
enlivens and quickens the body, when that is separated the body dies, so the
Spirit of Christ that enlivens and quickens the soul, when that is separated
from the soul, the soul dies.

Secondly, look as upon the separation of the soul from the body, there
follows a deprivation of the faculties, and acts of life: so upon the
separation of the Spirit of God from the Soul, there follows a deprivation of
the habits and acts of grace. The gifts and habits of grace, are as the
faculties; the acts and operations of grace, are as the acts of those
faculties: and as upon the separation of the soul from the body, there
follows a deprivation of the faculties, and acts of life, so upon the
separation of the Spirit of Christ from the Soul, there follows a deprivation
of the habites and acts of grace.

If it be so, then spiritual life includes two things,

First, the having of the Spring and fountain of life, the Spirit of God, and
an union of it to the soul.

Secondly, the having the habites, and acts of this spiritual life.

First, the having of the principle of spiritual life, the having the Spirit
of God in our souls: for it is not sufficient that there be a quickening
Spirit, unless it be united to us. For look as when a man dies, Simile.
the soul of a man, and the body of a man continue still, but there is no
life, because the soul is not united to the body: so I say there may be a
spiritual death, though there be the Spirit of God, and the Soul; if the
spirit be not united to the soul: that is the first thing.

Secondly, where the Spirit of God is (as a consequent of the other,) there
follows the faculties, and acts of life: the habitual presence of all the
graces of the Spirit, band the actual exercise of them. In these two consists
the nature of this life. These things premised, I come to show the necessary
conjunction of this spiritual life (that I have explained in the kind and
nature of it) with spiritual death. If we be dead with Christ, we believe
that we shall also live with him.

Which Hupotheticall proposition, or supposition affords us this Catagoricall
Position, that Those that are dead with Christ, shall live with him.

For when the Apostle says; If we be dead with Christ, we believe that we
shall also live with him. This is supposed: as much as if he had said in
effect; They that are dead with Christ, shall live with him; Or, They that are
dead to sin, shall live the life of grace.

Look as it was with Christ, so it is with the members of Christ; as he being
dead rose again, and could not choose but rise again. Act. 2.
(As it is said Act. 2. the chains of death, the cords of death could not hold
him;) So it is with every member of Christ, he that is dead with Christ, must
needs live with Christ, Death cannot hold him, not death in sin. The Apostle
affirms as much in this Chapter verse 5. For as we are planted into the
likeness of his death, so we shall be also into the likeness of his
resurrection. If we be planted with Christ into his death; (there is our death
with Christ,) we shall be also in his Resurrection: (there is the conjunction,
and connection of our life with Christ,) where the Apostle not only averres the
truth of the former proposition, but withal insinuates the reason of it: those
that are planted with Christ into the similitude of his death, shall also into
the similitude of his Resurrection; Why? because they are planted with Christ.
As a Plant that is grafted into a stock, it partakes of the whole virtue of
the stock: so every member of Christ, he that by faith is grafted into
Christ, and made partaker of the virtue of Christ's death, to the mortification
of sin: that man also is made partaker of the virtue of his Resurrection, to
the reviving, and quickening of him to a new life of grace.

The ground of it is this; First, to whomsoever Christ communicates himself,
he communicates himself wholly; to whomsoever he imparts the virtue of his
death for the killing of sin, to him he imparts the virtue of his
Resurrection to revive, and quicken him to a new life of grace; If we be
planted with Christ into the similitude of his death, we shall be also into
the similitude of his Resurrection; because we are planted with him. Every
plant partakes of the whole virtue of the root, and by consequent we partake
as well of the quickening virtue of Christ to raise us to the life of grace, as
of his crucifying virtue to kill sin.

The second reason is from the insufficiency of the one without the other; If
we be dead with Christ, we believe that we shall also live with him; Why?
because death with Christ is insufficient, unless we live with Christ.
Philosophy says that nature does nothing in vain: much less does Christ,
the God of Nature. Now as in Christ, it was in vain for him to die for us,
unless he had risen again: so it is in vain, and ineffectuall for the
members of Christ to die to sin, if they be not quickened to the life of grace.

The reason is this, that death to sin indeed, defaceth the Image of sin,
but it does not renew in us the Image of God Now it is the Image of God that
makes us fit and capable of eternal life: It is true, the righteousness of
Christ gives us title to eternal life; but our own inherent righteousness
qualifies us, and disposes, and makes us fit, and capable of it, for without
holiness no man shall see God. Flesh and blood shall not enter into the
kingdom of God. By mortifying of sin, we cease to be sinners; by mortifying
of sin we have the Image of Satan defaced; but the Image of God is not
renewed in us; therefore besides our death with Christ, there is required our
life with Christ, that so besides the defacing of Satan's Image, we may have
the Image of God renewed, that we may be capable of eternal life, and be
qualified and disposed, and made fit to partake of the inheritance with the
Saints in light.

The third Argument is drawn from the opposition between the life of sin,
and the life of grace; Philosophy tells us that in those opposites, that are
immediately opposite; that is, such opposites where one must of necessity be in
the subject, if one be removed, the other of necessity follows the subject;
Health and sickness are immediate objects, a man must either be sick or
well: Now that which removes sickness, restores health, that that expells
darkness out of the Air, it brings light. Now the life of sin and grace are
thus opposite, that that takes away the life of sin then, it must of
necessity bring with it the life of grace. If Christ mortify sin in us, and
take away the life and vigor of sin, Christ of necessity must bring into
the same subject the life of grace; because these are immediate objects, he
that takes away the one, must bring in the other, as that that takes away
sickness, brings in health. This shall suffice for the proof of the point. I
come to make use of it.

If we be dead with Christ, we shall also live with him. Those that are dead
with Christ to sin, as Christ died for sin, those shall live the life of
grace. If it be so, if there be such a necessary connection between these two,
then it follows back again, that those that do not live with Christ, those
are not dead with Christ. For look as it is between Faith, and good Works,
if good works be necessarily joined with Faith, then where there are no good
works, there is no faith: So thus it follows, if spiritual life, the life of
grace, be necessarily joined with death to sin, then where there is no life
of grace, there is no death to sin. According to that of Saint Chrysostom,
S. Chrysostom.
says he, it is true indeed, faith without works is dead; so it is true on
the other side, works without faith is dead. No man can perform good works,
though he may for substance, yet not formaliter without Faith; he that has
not Faith, has not Works. If good Works be necessarily joined with Faith,
then where there are no good Works, there is no Faith: so if our life with
Christ be necessarily joined with death to sin, then, where there is no life
with Christ, there is no death to sin.

You will say, how shall we know that we are alive with Christ, and dead to
sin?

I answer, you shall know it by three Characters.

First, that which is the cause of spiritual life, as that which is the cause
of natural life, is union with that which is the principle and fountain of
life: Now the fountain of life is Christ, so says the Apostle in 1 Ioh. 5.12.
1 John 5.12.
He that has the Son, has life; he that has not the Son has not life.
Now what is it that unites us to Christ? Gal. 2.20.
It is faith that knits us to Christ, so says the Apostle, Gal. 2.20. The life
that I live is by faith in the Son of God. Look as the cause of the natural
life, is the union to the principle of natural life: so the cause of
spiritual life, is union to that which is the principle of spiritual life.
Now the cause and fountain of spiritual life is Christ, so says the Apostle
in this chapter verse 11. Rom 6.11.
Likewise reckon ye your selves dead to sin, but alive to God through Jesus
Christ our Lord. It is through Christ that we are alive to God. Now I say,
that that knits and unites us to the fountain of spiritual life, it is Faith.
He then that has Faith, that man is alive to God, but he that has no faith,
that man is dead in sin; that is the first character by which we may know,
whether we be alive with Christ or no, if we have this spiritual life.

Secondly, we may know it if we have the exercises of this spiritual life.
Every thing delights to operate, and exercise answerable to its life: where
there is a natural life, there is a delight in actions that are natural;
where there is a sinful life, there is a delight in actions that are sinful.
Take a man that sin lives and reigns in, it is life to such a man to serve
sin, to perform and satisfy his sinful lusts: so, where there is delight
in performing spiritual duties, it is an undoubted argument that that man has
spiritual life in him. Take a man that delights in prayer, in hearing the
Word, in contemplating, and meditating of Gods goodness toward him, and in
other spiritual duties; this is an argument that that man has spiritual
life, because he delights in spiritual actions.

The ground of it is this, all delight proceeds from similitude, and
conformity: we delight in things that are like us: Now when a man is
spiritual, there is some likeness between him and spiritual actions, and so
he delights in them. Take a carnal, natural man, he delights not in
spiritual duties, it is death to him to do that which is good: when he comes
to betake himself to prayer, to perform religious duties, to sanctify the
Lords day, to keep a watch over himself, to check his sinful lusts, it is
death to a natural man; Why? he has no delight in spiritual actions,
because he has nothing in him that is spiritual; all delight proceeds from
likeness and similitude; that is the second Character that we have this
spiritual life, if we delight in spiritual actions.

Thirdly and lastly, another Argument of spiritual life is, if we have the
properties of life, and they are three as Philosophers say.

The first is nourishment. The second is augmentation. The third is generation,
or production of the like.
So answerable, wheresoever there is spiritual life, in some proportion there
is all these three.

First, there is nourishment; As newborn babes desire the sincere milk of
the Word, 2 Pet. 1.2.
2 Pet. 1.2. Where there is a new life, there is a desire of the sincere milk
of the Word. Take a man, that is a dead man, he desires no meat, Why? there
is no life in him. Now look as a man that lives a natural life, he desires
natural food: so he that is spiritual, he that lives a spiritual life, he
hungers and thirsts after the word. As where there is the life of sin in a
man, that man desires after all things that may fill and increase, and preserve
that life in him; so in spiritual life there is a desire after the spiritual
food of the Word, to preserve this life.

The ground of it is this, God never gives any grace to a man, but he gives a
man a care, and endeavor to preserve that grace: God never gives a man
spiritual life, but he gives withal a desire to preserve that life. Now how
can a man preserve it? How should a man preserve life, but by food? by diligent
repayring to the places, where the spiritual food of his soul is provided? It
is with this spiritual life, as it was with the fire on the Altar: Simile.
The fire on the Altar, though it came from heaven, yet when it was kindled,
they were bound to preserve it by ordinary means, to put fuel to it: so when
God has kindled that spiritual life, we must not turn off all the care on
God, let God take care for the life he has wrought in us; but God will give a
desire to a man, to keep that fire, to put continual fuel to it, to preserve
and nourish it. That is the first property of life, to look for nourishment.
God never gives a man grace, but he works in that man a desire, and endeavor
to preserve it.

The second property is Augmentation, and growth, and proceeding from one
degree of grace to another, when we find our selves more strong to perform
the duties that are spiritual, when we find sin more weakened. This
spiritual growth in grace, is a property of this spiritual life. If diverse
Plants be planted, if we see some of them grow, and others do not, we
conclude, this is dead, why? it grows not. As it is in nature, so it is in
this spiritual life, where there is no growth, there is no life. Every thing
that lives, has the property of life, it has the faculty of growing. Which I
would notwithstanding have to be understood: not, but that this life may admit
of a Winter, there may be an increase, and decrease: but yet there is a
continual strayning after perfection; Though sometimes the stream may be so
strong, that it may carry them down: yet they bend their strength against the
stream, they labor to grow up more and more. That is the second property of
life, augmentation; where there is spiritual life, there is growth.

The third is Generation, where there is life, there is a faculty and power to
beget. As in a coal, a live coal will kindle a dead one; a dead coal cannot
kindle another, there is no heat in it. So it is in this spiritual life, where
it is, there is a desire to beget others: as Christ says; When thou art
converted, strengthen thy brethren. When thou have spiritual life begotten in
thee, labor to beget it in others. We see it exemplified in Ioh. 1.44. Joh.
1.44.
no sooner had Christ called Philip, but presently Philip calls Nathaniel. No
sooner had Christ by his Word begotten spiritual life in Philip, but Philip
endeavors to beget the same in Nathaniel. This is the difference between a
live and a dead coal, a live coal can beget life in another coal, and kindle
the same fire in another, but a dead coal cannot. That man that has
spiritual life in him, he will improve all opportunities and occasions that
are offered to beget others to a spiritual life.

The ground of it is, he finds a sweetness, and a goodness in spiritual
life, and that is the reason, out of love to his brethren, and an endeavor to
glorify God, he desires to beget others to this spiritual life. This is the
first use: The Characters by which we may know whether we have this life or no.

Secondly, if such as be dead with Christ shall live with him. This should be
an argument to persuade us to labor for death with Christ. Can any prize be
propounded better to a man then life? what will not a man do for life? S.
Austin in his 45. Epistle, says he, We see men endure death almost for life,
for the enjoying of it for a little while. Shall men do so for a natural
life? shall not we much more for a spiritual life? If these be necessarily
joined, if he that is dead with Christ, shall certainly live with him: then
this should be an argument to persuade us to die with Christ, that we may come
to live with him. And this the rather, because, by dying with Christ, we shall
enjoy, not only a fading, perishing, natural life, but

A Spiritual Eternal
Life.

First, a spiritual life, in Ephesians. 1.4. Ephesians. 1.14.
it is called the life of God, because it resembles the life of God. Now that
which is spiritual is more excellent than that which is natural and
corporal. The ground of it is this: because the nearer a thing approaches to
that which is more excellent, the more excellent that must be. Now the life
spiritual as it approaches more near to the life of God, the more excellent
it must needs be, it must needs be more excellent then the natural life,
that is the first reason. By dying with Christ we shall live with Christ, not
only a natural but a spiritual life, such a life as approaches nearer to
God then the life of nature.

Secondly, we shall enjoy a life not fading and momentary, but an eternal
life; for (as I said) the difference between the life of grace and glory, is
not in the nature but in the degrees; in whomsoever there is a spark of true
grace begun, it will certainly hold out till it grow to a flame of immortality,
if like the fire upon the Altar it be nourished with fuel, so that a man that
is once dead with Christ, he shall not live only a spiritual life for a
while, but an eternal life in this world and in the world to come, and both
these should be arguments to stir us up to labor for this death with Christ,
because we shall live with him, not only a spiritual life, but such a
spiritual life as is eternal. So much for the second proposition.

Now I address my self to the third.

If we be dead with Christ, we believe that we shall also live with him.
We beleeve] Or we are persuaded, or we are assured says Cardinal Caietane,
upon this place we are undoubtedly assured. The word in this place is a word
of affiance and confidence; As if he had said in more words thus, not only the
thing is sure and certain in it self, that they that are dead with Christ
shall live with him; for so many things are sure and certain in themselves,
and yet we may remain uncertain of them. The reason is, because the
assurance of them proceeds, not so much from the certainty of the thing, as
from our apprehending and knowing that certainty. It is not a thing only sure
in it self, but it is a thing whereof they themselves are sure and certain:
If we be dead with Christ, we believe, we are persuaded or assured that we
shall live with Christ. Which being so, the conclusion is, That the knowledge
of a man's own mortification does seal up to a man's soul and conscience the
assurance of his salvation. Or thus. They that are dead with Christ, may
believe or rest assured that they shall also live with him.

Not only with the life of grace (although as I heretofore proved, from the
scope and drift of the Apostle in this place; this life the Apostle principally
intends; for this they actually do, they that are dead with Christ actually
for the present live to God, verse. 11.) but they shall live also the other life
of glory: they that are dead with Christ may be assured that they shall live,
with the life of glory, not only of grace here, but of glory hereafter.

Where first, that you may not mistake or misconsture me, observe. I do not
say that he that is dead with Christ, or mortified, is presently assured that
he shall live with Christ. The reason is because a man may be mortified, and
yet not know that he is mortified at some time. Now our assurance springs not
so much from our mortification as from the assurance, and knowledge of our
mortification; In which respect it is ordinary for those that are babes in
Christ, and young beginners, to make doubt and question of their title to
heaven, as the aged also in Christ sometimes may do. The reason is, because
though they be mortified in part, yet because grace is weak it is almost
undicernable, in respect of the infinite mass of corruption. In which respect
it is with them as it is with the Mariners needle, which though it be truly
touched, yet it takes not the North point at the first, Simile.
but it first shakes and trembles, and then is fixed: So a man that is
regenerate, and mortified presently as soon as he is regenerate, he is not
assured of salvation, but first shakes and trembles, there is a kind of
spiritual palsy, a trepedation in the soul. The reason is not because of
mortification, it proceeds not from the nature of it, but because mortification
is weak, therefore he cannot have great assurance, for assurance comes from the
long continuance, and experience of the power and practice of mortification.

And as it is in young beginners in respect of the weakness of grace, so it
may be in a grown man in Christ in respect of the strength of temptation. He
that has been assured of his salvation by the evidence of his own
conscience, and Gods Spirit, that he has the beginnings in truth and
sincerity of mortification, yet he may have his assurance interrupted, there
may be a kind of interposition, he may loose it in respect of the present
sense and apprehension of assurance. Simile.
Just as it is with the Sun, so long as the Sun is continued, so long there
is continual ground and cause of light: but notwithstanding the discerning and
perceiving of the light may be taken from us by the night, or by an eclipse, or
by clouds, that may take away the sight of the Sun. Just so it is with a
regenerate man, a mortified man, he that is not only a babe in Christ, and
has made some beginning in the course of mortification, but he that is a
grown man, and gone on in the practice of mortification, yet notwithstanding
he may come to doubt and question his salvation, and his right to heaven
sometimes. The reason is because sometimes by reason of temptations, or after
the committing of some great and heinous sin, mortification in him may be
clouded for a time, so that he may loose his assurance, the present sense and
apprehension of that assurance that may be lost for a time.

Just as it was in Christ when he was on the Cross in combat for our sakes,
he seems to have lost for the present, the assurance and apprehension of Gods
love, he said, My God my God why have thou forsaken me? The vaileing of the
dietie was a kind of dissertion, and forsaking of Christ, in respect of
evidence and assurance, yet he had the ground of his assurance still; the
humanity of Christ was individually and inseparably united to the Godhead,
which was the ground of this assurance. I say then it is not every man that is
mortified that has presently assurance of salvation; no, nor every man that
once has had assurance of salvation that has this assurance always: it has
ebbings and tides, wanes and ^ulls; but indifinitely true mortification seals
up to a man the assurance of salvation; he that is dead with Christ, that man
may be assured he shall live with him.

Romans 8.13.
Romans 8.13. If ye live after the flesh ye shall die, but if through the
Spirit you mortify the deeds of the body ye shall live. Look as God
threatens death to men that walk after the flesh, so he has promised, and
covenanted to bestow life on those that mortify the deeds of the flesh. 2 Timothy
2.11.
So in 2 Timothy 2.11. says the Apostle, This is a faithful saying and worthy to
be believed: for if we be dead with him, we shall also live with him. It is a
faithful saying. Now what firmer foundation or more pregnant rock can we have
of assurance then the promise of God? says Saint Austin, S. Aug. lib. 12 cap.
1.
he to whom truth it self has made a promise, how should he be able to be
deceived? he that is truth cannot lie. As God cannot be deceived so he cannot
deceive: S. August. in the 12. Book of his confessions Chap. 1.

It is true says Bellermine, Bellarm.
we need not fear in respect of God; to whom has God promised eternal
life? to them that are mortified, and they shall certainly enjoy eternal life,
but here is the question.

How shall we know that we are mortified?

I answer briefly.

First, where God gives a grace, commonly at one time or other, God gives a man
a gift to discern that grace, I do not say in the beginning, when grace is as
it were, in its infancy, and beginning, or in temptation, but at one time or
other God gives another gift that is, a gift whereby a man shall discern that
grace, or else how shall God have the glory of his grace, if we cannot be
assured that we have it? Or how shall we have comfort by the Grace of God, if
our selves cannot come to be assured of it?

But, says he, think the Fly in winter is dead, when others know that the
Fly is but benumbed, there is life in it, though she do not exercise that
life.

Athens thought all the Ships that came to Beream were his own, because he
thought the Ships his own should the owners of them not think they were
theirs? If a man in a dream think that he eats shall not men therefore that
are awake be assured that they eat? It follows not that because some men are
deceived with a persuasion of mortification when they have it not, that
therefore others that are indeed mortified should not be persuaded of it.





First, by the Word of God, which God has left as a Test or Touchstone,
whereby men may try the sincerity and truth of their mortification. Heretofore
I have given some notes, and characters (whereby ye may discern whether you
are mortified or no) out of the Scriptures. The first thing whereby we may try
the truth of our mortification is the Scripture, which God has left to be a
light to our feet, and a Lantern to our paths, to be a Touchstone whereby
we may discover whether our mortification be sincere or counterfeit.

Secondly, there is another testimony, and that is the testimony of our own
conscience, when the conscience being renewed and sanctified, conscience bears
witness before God, out of long experience of the truth, and sincerity of
mortification, that we are mortified: for this assurance, that arises from
mortification, arises not from one act, but from long experience of
mortification. Now any man knows, that knows the nature of experience, that
that arises from many acts. The second means then to know we are mortified,
it is from the testimony of our own conscience, and spirit, as the Apostle
says, Romans 8.16. Romans 8.16.
that bears witness that we are the children of God, that we are mortified.

Thirdly and lastly, there comes another testimony as a means, and that
assures the rest, that is of Gods Spirit, that calmes the conscience, and
persuades of this, that we are mortified, and so by consequent that we have
right to heaven. That is the first reason then, he that is mortified, that is
dead with Christ, he is assured to live with him; because God has promised
life and salvation, to such as are dead with Christ; and such as are dead with
Christ, they may know themselves at one time or other to be dead with Christ.



I ask, whence comes this death with Christ? Whence comes it that sin is
mortified in a man? Is it not because he is in Christ, and is united to
Christ? and thence it is because he is united to Christ, that he partakes of
the virtue, and Spirit of Christ, whereby sin is mortified; Let this be
sufficient to be spoken for the proof of the point.

Bellarmine, and the rest of that faction persuade men he may. They say a man
cannot attain it by the contemplating, and viewing of the grace of God in him,
he can but attain a kind of hope of salvation; a kind of doubting,
conjecturall, moral assurance; but for this assurance that we speak of, our
Contrymen at Rhemes stick not to say that it is a damnable false thing,
upon Romans 9. Rhem. on Romans 9.
such an assurance as is impossible to be attained in this life, except it be
by revelation, and by extraordinary means. And then they say moreover, if it
be ^ttained, it is perilous, and dangerous to attain: because it opens to
men, a gappe to all licentiousness; for say they, if a man may be assured of
his salvation; let him do what he will, he shall be saved.

I cannot now enter into the lists with these Rhemists at this time, but give
me leave to their objection to return two things.

First, (say they) it is impossible for a man by mortification, to come to be
assured of his salvation. I desire them to unriddle me this; They say, a man by
mortifying, by macerating himself, by fasting and sackcloth, and by whipping
himself, he may merit salvation and heaven; May he merit heaven, and not be
assured he shall come to heaven? What? is it because God is ignorant, and
knows not their good deeds? or because he is unjust, and will not reward
them? If they say either, it is blasphemy, if they give way to either of them,
then they give way to this doctrine that we speak of. If a man by macerating
himself, in sackcloth and ashes, by whipping, and bearing himself, may merit
heaven (as the Papists jointly affirm, or most of them; And Getzer in his
second book of Discipline* Chap. 8.) then certainly a man, by mortification
may come to have assurance of heaven: for if a man be not assured, but doubts,
that doubt must come, that either God knows not that we deserve heaven, by
our mortification, and then God is not omniscient; Or if he do know it, he
will not reward us according to our merits, and then he is unjust; either of
which to affirm is blasphemy. So their own tenent overthrowes themselves. See
the difference between truth and error, one truth and virtue contraries not
another, but one vice and error contradict each other: as Covetousness
opposes Prodigality, etc.

Secondly, say they, as it is impossible to attain, so it is dangerous to
attain, this opens a gappe to licentiousness. I wonder what fear there is of
this, since we affirm that this assurance is to be had by holiness, by
mortifying of our sinful lusts. It is true indeed, if we had assurance, if we
did maintain that it might be gotten, notwithstanding that we went on in the
practice of our sinful lusts, then it were another matter: but we affirm
that this assurance is had only by the practice of mortification, by
mortifying, and subduing our sinful lusts. And as it is gained by this, so it
is to be preserved by this. I wonder then what fear here can be of opening a
gappe to licentiousness and wickedness, by maintaining assurance of
salvation, when we maintain here with, that assurance is had by mortification,
and is to be kept, and preserved only by it. The rule of Philosophy here is
true, the same cause that produces, the same cause preserves a thing: but to
let them pass and to return to our selves.

If those that are dead with Christ, may Pet. 1.10. says he, 2 Pet. 1.10.
Give diligence to make your calling and election sure. Give diligence, it is
not a thing so easily attained as some dream, it is a thing that requires cost
and pains; a man has it not but after long practice and endeavor of
mortification. Now, I say, it is that that the Apostle persuades us unto, to
give diligence to make our Calling and election sure. It is sure enough in Gods
counsel, we should labor to make it sure in our own conscience. We may
complain, men give diligence to make their houses sure, to make their lands,
and preferments, and offices, and friends sure, but how few give diligence to
make their Calling and election sure?

Yet I know not when there was ever more need, that we of this place should
labor to make our calling and election sure then now, we perceive already
that wrath is gone out from God, and the Angel of the Lord has stricken some
among us, and they have fallen on the right hand, and on the left hand before
us, and behind us, and we our selves know not when our turn may come. Now the
less assurance we have of being here on earth, the more we should labor for
assurance of our well being hereafter in heaven. And if we have once this
assurance, this will bestead us, and minister comfort in all calamities. What
though we be poor, if we have this assurance, we know we shall come there,
where there is durable, unperishing riches: What if we be in disgrace? this
will make us possess our souls with patience, and tell us that we shall come
shortly to a place where we are assured, all tears shall be wiped from our
eyes, and all that blemisheth our name: What though we be sick? we are
assured that we shall come to a place where we shall have no sickness but
constant health. What though death come? It will make us cheerfully to welcome
it, and it will make us call it as Saint Ciprian does, S. Cyprian.
the Midwife of immortality, that shall translate and remove us from a fading
perishing life, to the everlasting life. Then let us (that God has bin so
gracious unto, that he has spared us, and visited others,) labor to improve
the time to practice mortification, that in case worse come, we may yet be
provided. If we adresse our selves to this, who knows if God will not
graciously spare us, and not afflict us: or if it come, we shall have infinite
comfort, then when our doors shall be shut up, and we have no other comfort,
yet then our conscience will witness comfortably, that notwithstanding we
die, yet we shall come where we shall live for ever. Oh then, as the Apostle
says, let us give all diligence to make our calling and election sure. It is a
matter of pains, it is not easily gotten, but it will abundantly recompense
the pains. If we look, and find our sinful lusts mortified in part, let
not that satisfy us, let us not rest there, but go further, and proceed in
the work of mortification: for look as our mortification is, so is our
assurance: the weaker our mortification is, the weaker our assurance of
salvation; the stronger our mortification, the better assurance we have of
salvation.

Thirdly, if they that are dead with they that are not dead with Christ cannot
assure themselves that they shall live with him. If only he can be assured of
salvation in who^ sinful lusts are mortified, then he in whom they are not
mortified, that man cannot be assured of salvation. Indeed he may have a
kind of a wild hope, a presumptuous confidence, but it is such as will fail
him in the time of need. Like to your Winter brooks, or land-floods; In the
time of Winter when a man has no use of water they flow abundantly; but in
Summer, in the time of drought, when men have need, they are gone, they are not
to be had. So that assurance that a man has, as long as he goes on in the
practice of his sinful lusts, it is a wild, deceitful presumption, such an
assurance as will do him no good when he comes to need it.

I have read it was the manner of trial that was used, when there was a
controversy of land, whether it belonged to Ireland, or to England, they did
take Snakes, and Toades, and poisonous Serpents, and put there, and if they
lived there, they concluded it belonged to England, if they died, they judged
it belonged to Ireland: the reason was, because no venomous thing will live
there. I apply it thus, sinful lusts are like Snakes and Toades, and venomous
creatures: look what soul they live in, if they live in a man's soul, it is
an argument that he belongs not to heaven, and we know what place he belongs
to then, only to hell, if it dye in us, we may assure our selves that we
belong to heaven. He in whom sin lives, and his lusts continue unmortified,
that man cannot assure himself of salvation.

The reason is, because all assurance comes from the promise of God; God has
made no promise to men that continue and go on in the service and obedience of
their sinful lusts, he threatens nothing but death and destruction to such,
If ye live after the flesh ye shall dye, Romans 8.13. Romans 8.13.
This shall suffice to have spoken of the third point the certainty of this
connection, If we be dead with Christ, we believe that we shall also live with
him. Mortification seals up to a man's soul and conscience the assurance of
salvation: for they that are dead with Christ may rest assured, and persuaded
that they shall live with him.

I come to the fourth and last point, The cause and ground of this death to
sin and this life to grace, which is Christ, If we be dead with Christ, we
believe that we shall also live with him: If we be dead with Christ, that is,
if we be dead by the virtue and power of Christ, then we believe that we
shall also live by virtue and power of the same Christ. The conclusion is this,
that, As our death to sin so our life to grace, they both proceed from
Christ.

If we be dead with Christ says the Apostle, that is, if we be dead by the
virtue and power of Christ: if sin be dead in us, then we believe that we
shall also live with Christ the life of grace here, and of glory hereafter, by
the power and virtue of the same Christ. I say, the point on which I shall
insist is this, that as our death to sin, so the life of Grace, they both
proceed from Christ, Christ is the author and the producer of both. So says
Saint Paul in Gal. 2.20. Gal. 2.20.
says the Apostle, I am crucified with Christ, yet notwithstanding I live, yet
not I but Christ lives in me, and the life that I live in the flesh is by the
faith of the Son of God, who loved me, and gave himself for me. Look what the
Apostle Paul speaks of himself, the same may every Christian (in whom sin
is dead and mortified, and the life of grace wrought) speak of himself, says
the Apostle, I am crucified with Christ, that is, sin is crucified in me,
sinful lusts are crucified and mortified in me by the virtue of Christ, so
says he, I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me, I live by the faith of
the Son of God. As I am crucified to sin by Christ, so I live by the virtue
of Christ. Phil. 3.8, 9, 10
So in Phillip. 3.8, 9, 10. He desires so earnestly to be found in Christ that
he contemned and undervalued all things but this, that he might be found in
Christ, says he, I account all loss for the excellent knowledge of Christ,
for whom I suffer the loss of all things, nay I account them not only loss
but dung, that I may win Christ and be found in him, we see in verse 10. the
reason, that I may know him and the power of his resurrection, and the
fellowship of his suffeings being made conformable to his death. The reason why
the Apostle desired to be found in Christ, and why in comparison of this he
accounted all things as dross, it was because he might be made partaker of
Christ's death. What is the fellowship of Christ's death, but to be partaker of
the Spirit of Christ that raised him from the dead that by the same Spirit of
Christ he might be raised from the death of sin to the life of grace.

The reason of it is this, because as our death to sin, so our life to grace,
are both the work of grace, from whom can we expect the work of grace, but
from him in whom is the fullness of grace? so says Saint John Ioh 1.14. The
Word was made flesh, Ioh. 1.14.
(that is, Christ) and dwelt among us, and we saw his glory, as the glory of
the only begotten Son of God full of grace and truth. Our death to sin and
our life to Christ are both the effects of Gods grace: Now from whom can we
have the effects of Gods grace, but from him in whom alone is the fullness of
grace? The word was made manifest among us, in whom is the fullness of truth
and grace. Look as it is in the natural body so it is in the mystical body,
as in the natural body all the natural motion proceeds from the head, and
from the virtue that is derived from the head to the members; so in the
mystical body, all the spiritual motion it proceeds from the influence of the
head; Christ is the head, and from him as from the head, is derived all the
virtue to the members of Christ, by which the death to sin, and the life of
grace is wrought in us likewise.

Look as it was in the oil of Aaron, the oil that was powered on the head of
Aaron, it stayed not on his head, but descended to the skirts of his clothing:
So the Spirit of Christ, it rests not on Christ only, but from Christ as the
head, it descends upon all the members of Christ: The reason thereof, why as
our death to sin, so the life of grace proceeds from Christ, is because both
are the works of grace, according to that of the Evangelist, in him dwells all
the fullness of grace, and in Collos. 2. the Apostle says, In him dwells the
fullness of the Godhead bodily. For the better and fuller opening of the point,
give me leave to propose, and resolve one question, and that is this.

I answer briefly,

Christ is the 1 meritorious 2 exemplary 3 moral 4 efficient
Cause as of our death to sin, so likewise of our life to grace.

First, Christ is the meritorious cause; for Christ did by his death and
obedience, not only purchase for us a release and freedom from hell, and
consequently title to heaven, but Christ merited for us, the donation of the
Spirit of God, whereby we are made fit for, and capable of that inheritance.
Christ not only purchased a right to heaven, but grace and holiness, whereby we
might come at last to jus in re: For as I said before, by the righteousness of
Christ only we come to have right to heaven, but it is our own
righteousness, whereby we come to be made capable of that right to heaven, for
says the Apostle, flesh and blood shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven.
Flesh and blood, that is, nature uncorrected, unsanctified, and uncontrolled it
shall not inherit the kingdom of God; therefore Christ has purchased not
only redemption from hell, and title to heaven, but the donation of the Spirit
of God, whereby we are made fit and capable of heaven, whereby we are made
meet, as the Apostle says to be partakers of the inheritance with the Saints
in light. Ioh. 17.19.
So says the Evangelist, Ioh. 17.19. For their sakes says our Savior I
sanctify my self, that they also may be sanctified through the truth. Christ
sanctified himself not only to redeem us from hell, and to procure title to
heaven, but he sanctified himself that his members might be sanctified, that
by the merit and virtue of Christ's sanctification we might be sanctified. So
says the Apostle to Titus, he has bestowed on us the spirit through Christ,
Tit. 3.5.
Tit. 3.5. not by the works of righteousness that we had done, but according
to his mercy he saved us, by the washing of regeneration and the renewing of
the holy Ghost, which he shed on us abundantly through Jesus Christ our
Savior. It is through Christ only, as through the meritorious cause; by whom
we obtain the Spirit of God, by which Spirit our sinful lusts are mortified
in us, and by which we are quickened and revived to the life of grace, so Christ
is the meritorious cause, he deserved the donation of the Spirit from his
Father.

Secondly, Christ as he is the meritorious so he is the exemplary cause, as of
death to sin, so of our life to grace. Christ in dying to sin he set
himself as a pattern to us, to teach us also that we should dye to sin.
Christ in rising from the grave he set himself a pattern to us to teach us
to rise from sin, so he is the exemplary cause.

For Christ is a pattern for our immitation in his moral actions, and we
must resemble after a sort some of his Mediatorious actions also; not only in
the good duties that are commanded in the Law, but in those that he performed
for our redemption; It is true in a different manner. Christ is a pattern to
us in actions moral, that is in the good things that he performed that are
commanded in the Law, he is our pattern to be imitated in the same kind: As
Christ was gracious to the poor, so should we to them that are poor, and in
distress in the same kind; as he was temperate so may we imitate him in the
same kind, though not in the same degree. But for his actions Mediatorious, we
are to resemble some of them too, though not in the same kind, yet in some way
of use. As he died for sin, so we should dye to sin, as he rose from the
grave so we should rise from sin to newness of life: so still Christ is our
pattern. As Saint Austin says, Christ came not only to help us, and to
perform the things that we ought to have done, but he came to teach us by his
example what we ought to do And he teaches, us, he is our Schoolmaster not
only in his actions moral, but in his actions mediatorious; in the former we
may imitate him in the same kind, though we cannot in the same degree, in the
latter we cannot imitate him in the same kind, yet in some sort we may.

We should be as the Heletropium, that opens and shuts with the Sun, so we
may follow the lamb wheresoever he goes, as he dyed for sin so we must dye
to sin, as he rose from the grave so we must rise from the death of sin to
newness of life, so Christ is the exemplary cause of our death to sin, and
the life of grace.

Thirdly, Christ is the moral, moving, persuading cause of both. That the
Apostle wills Timothy to remember, 2 Timothy 2.8. Remember, says he, that Jesus
Christ of the seed of David, was raised from the dead, according to my Gospel:
he bids him remember it, why remember it? because the very thought and
remembrance that Christ dyed and rose again, it cannot choose but be a powerful
motive to holiness, for it makes men conclude and argue with themselves; what
did Christ lay down his life for us, and shall not we lay down our lusts for
him? Did Christ arise again the third day from the Grave, and shall not we
rise from the death of sin, to newness of life? Do we profess our selves
to be members of Christ, and not endeavor conformity with our head Christ?
Shall we be like the Image or statue of Nebuchadnezar, to have a head of gold,
and to have feet of mire and clay? So, Christ is not only the meritorious, and
exemplary, but the moving, persuading cause: the very thought, that Christ died
for sin, and rose again, it will move us to die to sin, and to live the life
of grace.

Fourthly and lastly, Christ is the cause efficient, as of our death to sin,
so of the life of grace. It were in vain, that Christ were the meritorious
cause, that he had merited the donation of Gods Spirit, whereby sin might be
killed, and we be quickened to the life of grace. It were in vain for him to
set himself as a pattern for us to imitate; and that he is a moral cause to
move, and persuade us to imitate him, unless he were also the cause
efficient, to work in us this death to sin, and this life of Grace:
therefore Christ also is the efficient cause he works in us, both a death to
sin, and the life of grace. For the understanding of which, know, that Christ
not only saves us by merit, but he saves us by efficacy too; not only by
Merit in deserving of life for us: but in efficacy in fitting, and preparing
us to partake of life. He not only by death has abolished, and removed death
for sin; but he abates in us daily the power of sin, so he is the efficient
cause as well as the rest.

death to sin, and of the life of grace; by what means does he work in us
these two?

life of grace, and death to sin; and there are others that concur not to
the first work, but to the increasing, and augmentation of it.

Those that concur to the first work are three; 1. The Spirit of God. 2. The
Word of God. 3. And Baptism.


Now those again that concur not to the first work of our death to sin,
and kindling of this spiritual life, but to the further increase; and
augmentation of it, when it is wrought: they are two; 1. Faith. 2. And the
Lords Supper.


Of every one of these briefly.

First, I say, the principal cause of death to sin, and of the life of
grace, is the Spirit of Christ, so says the Apostle in that place before
alleged, Romans 8.12.13. says he, Romans 8.13.
If ye live after the flesh ye shall die, but if ye mortify the deeds of
the body through the Spirit, ye shall live. It is through the Spirit of Christ
whereby sin is mortified in us, and through the Spirit of Christ that we are
quickened to the life of grace. In which respect it is called the quickening
Spirit: says Christ Ioh. 8. The spirit quickneth. Joh. 8. 1 Thessalonians. 2.
It is called also the Spirit of sanctification, 1 These. 2. Why is it called
the Sanctifying spirit? because by it we are sanctified. Now what are the parts
of Sanctification? They are two, first our death to sin, the subduing of the
power of sin: secondly, our enlivening and quickening to grace. Now the Spirit
of God is said to be a sanctifying Spirit in respect of both these: for from
the Spirit of God it is that sin is mortified in us; and it is from the
quickening Spirit, that we are enlivened to a new life, so the principal cause
is the Spirit of God.

There are two other causes, and those are isntrumental.

First, the Word of God, that is a powerful means whereby God works in us
this death to sin, and the life of grace; it is a powerful means that God
uses, as the Apostle says, for the battering, and demolution of all Satan's
strong holds. Our lusts of themselves are too strong for us to vanquish, it is
the Spirit only that is mightier, that can vanquish them: but by what means
does the Spirit do it? It is by the Spirit as the principal cause, but by the
Word, as the isntrumental cause, or by the Spirit of God concurring with the
Word. For the Word of it self is not of power to mortify sin, and to
quicken us to a new life of grace: but as it is a means to convey, and derive
to us the Spirit of God.

It is with us as it was with Lazarus when he was raised from the grave to a
new life: he was raised by the word of Christ; it was indeed by the word of
Christ; but it was not only the word of Christ that raised him: but the virtue
of Christ's Spirit went along with that word, and made that effectual for the
raising of him. So it is with us, it is not the Word only that is available for
the mortifying of our sinful lusts, or that quickens us to the performance of
the holy duties of a new life: but the Word as it is the instrument of the
Spirit of God which is the chief Agent.

Secondly, another isntrumental cause is Baptism, that also is a means
whereby the Spirit of God works in us this death to sin, and life of grace:
Now Baptism is a cause of both these three ways.

First, as it is a cause resembling, or as a type, shadowing and pointing out
to us, our death to sin, and our life of grace: which type and resemblance
was far more express in hotter clymates and Countries; in which in Baptism
they used to drench the child, to dippe it in the water, which dipping of the
child in the water, was a resemblance and type to them, of their death to sin
with Christ: and their rising out of the water, expressed their rising to
newness of life; so by Baptism we are said to be dead to sin, and alive
to God through it, as a resemblance expressing to us this death and life.

Secondly, not only as a resemblance, but as a special means whereby the
Spirit of God concurres, and goes along with the Element of water, and makes it
effectual for the cleansing of us, as from the guilt of sin; so for the
subduing the power of sin, and working in us a new life: in which respect it
is styled by the Apostle in Titus 3. Tit 3.
The laver of regeneration; that is, it is that means whereby the Spirit of
God works regeneration this death to sin, and life of grace.

Thirdly and lastly, Baptism is said to be a cause, as of our death to sin,
so of the life of grace, in regard of the stipulation or covenant: because when
we are baptized, we enter into a solemn vow, and covenant with God, that we
will forsake the Devil and all his works: there is mortification; and that
we will lead a new life, there is vivification. So it is said to be a cause in
regard of the stipulation, and contract that we make then, solemnly by our
selves, or by those that undertake for us that are our sureties, our
Godfathers, and Godmothers: It is a means in that regard. Let this suffice
to be spoken of the means whereby Christ as an efficient cause, works this
death of sin, and life of grace.

Before I pass, let me tell you, as by these causes, this death to sin, and
life of grace is wrought: so there are other causes that serve not to kindle
this sacred spark, but to increase it, and make it grow to a flame: such
means as do not serve for the performing of the first act of mortification
and vivification: but when once there is mortification, and quickening in the
soul, they increase both, and those are principally two; 1. Faith. 2. The
Lords Supper.


Col. 2.12.
First, Faith, so says the Apostle, in Collos. 2.12. Ye are buried with Christ
in Baptism, wherein you are risen with him through the faith of the operation
of God. I say, faith is not the means to give us the first assault, and
impression upon sin, to mortify, and subdue it at the first: but when we are
morfied, Faith helps, and increases, and perfects that work of
mortification. So that the sophisme of our adversaries is easily answered: say
they, if we be risen through Christ, to a new life of grace, and through
faith: then say they, we have Faith before we be quickened, for say they, that
which is the cause of the effect, must go before, as the cause of that effect.
Now if Faith be a means to raise us to a new life, then before we have a new
life, we have Faith; for says the Apostle, Ye are risen with him, through the
faith of the operation of God: therefore we have Faith before we can rise. I
answer, with Amesius; Faith is not the cause of the first mortification, but
the cause of the increase of mortification; it is not that by which at the
first we are quickened, but when once we are quickened, it is that by which the
work of vivification is more and more increased. Conceive it thus, The work
of grace, is only the fruit, and effect of the Spirit of grace. Now when the
Spirit of God enlivens, and quickens us, it begets in us, as other graces, so
the grace of faith; Now when this grace of faith is wrought in us, by this we
are united more to Christ then before, and so partake more of the virtue of
Christ, and so the work of Mortification, and vivification is more increased.
Faith then concurres not to the first act of mortification, and vivification,
but it concurres to the increase, and augmentation of both.

The second means or cause that concurres not to the first act, but to the
increase of mortification and vification, it is the Lords Supper: for that
serves (as the ancient Father calls it) as physic received into the body, not
only for the checking and curbing, and expelling of obnoxious humors, but for
the restoring of health by consequent: so the Lords Supper duly received, it
serves as a means to abate sinful lusts in us, if it be worthily received I
say, not by a dead faith; he that receives it worthily, it is a means to
mortify sin in him, and so by consequent, for the quickening of him to a new
life, the life of grace, though not to the first act, yet to the increase of
that former life that was in him. It is called meat. Now as the meat that we
receive cannot avail to beget a new life in a man: put meat into the mouth of
a dead man, it does not quicken him: put meat into the mouth of a living man,
and it increases his life. So in the Lords Supper worthily received; it is not
a means to work the first act of Mortificatification, and vivification, but
when once Mortification and vivification are begun, when there is a new life in
a man: this serves as spiritual food to strengthen and increase that life.

Let this suffice for the answer to the question proposed, If Christ be the
cause of death to sin, and of the life of grace how he is the cause; he is
the cause meritorious, the exemplary, the moral, and efficient cause: he is
the cause efficient, both by his Spirit, by his Word and by Baptism. And then
he is the cause efficient though not of the first act of mortification, and
vivification, yet of the increase of them, that is, by Faith, and the Lords
Supper. I come briefly to the use.

Well, if through Christ alone, Constantine, and the glory of him too, he
professed that he had rather be a member of Christ, then the Lord and King of
the Empire. Now if we desire to partake of the virtue of Christ, our first
care must be, to labor to be in Christ.

For look as it is with a Plant, it partakes not of the virtue of the stock
till it be grafted into it, and then it does; so it is with us if we be grafted
into Christ we shall partake of the virtue of Christ, by which sin will be
mortified in us, and we shall be quickened to a new life of grace. As it is in
the natural body, the members partake not of the virtue of the head, unless
they be united to the head; so it is with us, except we be united to Christ
through a true and lively faith, (which is the sinew and ligament by which we
are tied to Christ) we do not partake of the virtue of Christ. Indeed many of
us desire the favor of great ones, to receive benefit from them: but there is
no man, no Monarch on the earth by whom we can reap that benefit as we may by
Christ if we be in him.

We acknowledge that Kings are Lords of life and death; yet they are not Lords
of this life and death. All the Kings and Monarchs in the world, though they
may take away the life of their subjects, yet they cannot take away the life of
one lust or sin; though perhaps they may give life to a man, that is, not to
take it away when they may, yet they cannot give a new life to a man, they
cannot work this new life the life of grace. Therefore it should be our
desire and endeavor to be in Christ, that we may partake of the virtue of
Christ, since it is only he from whom the virtue comes, by which sin is
mortified, and we are quickened to a new life. Zach. 13.1.
Let us labor to be in him that we may partake of this virtue. In Zach.
13.1. It is called a fountain opened for sin, and for trangression. Christ
is not only a pond or a poole that is dried up, but a fountain and perpetual
spring; if we desire to have our souls washed from corruption and sin, let
us labor to wash them in this living spring and fountain. And then it is a
fountain opened, not a sealed fountain as we read in Scripture. And then
again, as it is a fountain opened for the killing of sin, so for the
quickening to a new life. Look as it was with that River that Naaman washed
himself in, he was not only cleansed of his Leprosy, but his flesh came
again as the flesh of a child; so every one that is washed in the blood of
Christ he is not only cleansed from the Leprosy, and corruption of sin, but
his flesh comes as the flesh of a child; the life that he formerly had in
Adam, comes again to him by the virtue of Christ. That is the first Use; if
our death to sin, and life in grace proceed both from Christ, this should be
a motive to us to labor to be in Christ, that we may die to sin and live
with him.

Secondly, if our death to sin, To return the praise of grace to Christ.
and life in grace proceed from Christ, then when we find in our selves
sin in any sort mortified, and that we are enabled to perform holy duties;
we know from whom we have it; let us know to whom we ought to return the
glory of it. Let us say as David, through thee we have done valiantly. It is
through Christ, and by virtue from him that we overcome our lusts, or else
they are too strong for us. If we be enabled to do holy duties, let us lift
up our eyes to heaven, and say, through thee O Christ we are enabled to do
this. As all the virtue whereby we dye to sin, and live the life of grace is
from Christ, so it is equal that all the glory should be returned to Christ.
It is the greatest sacrilege in the world, to attribute any thing to us. To
mortify sin it is a part of Christ's kingly power, of his kingly office. Now
he that chalengeth any virtue, and power to mortify sin in himself, or to
raise himself to a new life of grace, he is guilty of high treason, he
usurpes on the Kings prerogative. It is Christ's prerogative only to mortify
sin in us.

Thirdly, if it come of Christ alone, our death to sin and our life of grace;
then we see what to judge of them that are out of Christ, sin is neither
mortified in them, nor they quickened to a new life of grace. If all water
proceed from one Fountain, then that that is separate from that Fountain
must of necessity be dry. If Christ be the Fountain of all Grace, by which
our sins are mortified, and we quickened to a new life, then they that are
out of Christ, they cannot have either death to sin, or the life of grace:
Whatsoever is in them it is dead, if there be any thing that is good,
whatsoever it is it is dead, whatsoever is alive in them it is but dead, it
makes them dead to grace here, and assures them that except they be revived,
they shall go from one death to another, from spiritual death to eternal,
for evermore.

FINIS.
THE WOUNDED SAVIOVR.
ESAIAS. 53.5. But he was wounded for our transgressions.
IT was not without good reason, that among all the Prophets in the Old
Testament, our Prophet Isay only should be styled by ancient and modern
writers, the Evangelicall Prophet. He that reads this Chapter whereof my Text
is a portion will confess as much.

The Chapter conteines a description of Christ, of his coming into, and his
harsh entertainment in the world, his sufferings and resurrection, so fully
and punctually, that at the first view a man would think it were rather a
History than a Prophecy, and rather a relation of some what past, then a
prediction of any thing to come. Wherein, for the better distinct understanding
of the method, and coherence of the words, know that Isay, (the Eagle-eyed
Prophet, as one calls him) having in the second verse of this Chapter showed
how mean and contemptible in the eyes of men, Christ's incarnation should be.
In the fourth verse he shows what the judgment, and censure of the world
should be concerning Christ, how basely and indignly they should conceive of
him; not as he was indeed the innocent, and immaculate Lamb of God, but as a
notorious malefactor, one that for his own sins was stricken of God, and
humbled. But how unjust and impious their opinion was, the Prophet shows in
Verse. 5. whereof my Text is a part.

First, by remooving the false cause of his suffering which was supposed to be
his own sin in this particle But: We judged him to be stricken and afflicted
of God, But: As if he should say, there was no such thing. He first remooves
the false cause of his suffering, which was his own sin, we judged it to be
his own sin, and deserving; But.

Secondly, by assigning the true cause in these words, He was wounded for our
transsions, not for any sin of his own, but for our transgressions, you see
the coherence of the words, and the context. In which observe three parts, for
they being a description of Christ's sufferings,

First, consider the patient or party suffering; He. Christ, God, and man,
the second person in the Trinity: He was wounded.

Secondly, the passion it self in these words, He was wounded; whereby not
only, though principally is understood the torments that as Preached on a
Good Friday.
this day he suffered on the Cross; but withal, all the calamities and
miseries that befell him through the whole course of his life. For howsoever it
be true, that the great Captain of our salvation, as the Apostle says, Heb.
2.10. H^b. 2.10.
did never till the last, enter into the maine battle with the spiritual
enemies of our salvation: yet he had many skirmishes with them before; often in
his lifetime, he did taste and sippe (as it were) of the cup of Gods wrath,
but he did never till then, drink, and suck up the dregs. He was wounded
for our transgressions.

Thirdly, the cause or reason of these sufferings Our transgressions: not for
any sins, or demerits of his own; no, but he was wounded, for our sins
and transgressions.

I shall not presently descend to these particulars, I find a But, in the
entrance of the Text, But he was wounded for our transgressions.

Goldsmiths, weigh their gold to the utmost weight, and the privileges of
Scripture are such, that there is not a word or tittle, but it is as full of
weight, as it is certain of accomplishment. This But is like a counterblast of
a contrary wind that meets a Ship in her full sail, and turns her course
another way. Thus it runs, We judged him stricken of God, as deserving it by
his own sins, But. It checks and controlls the hard conceit that the world
entertained of Christ, who looked on him in the false glass of envy, and
took him, or mistook him to be a Wine bibber, a Glutton, a Blasphemer, and
what you will, saving what they should; and so that he suffered death for his
own sins and transgressions. This But checks, and controlls the conceit that
the world had of Christ. Which being so; The deduction hence in a word is, that
What Christ suffered on earth, either torments of body, or anguish of soul, it
was not for any sin, or fault of his own that he was guilty of personally.

We looking to outward appearance, we judged him smitten of God, and
afflicted: but this But, has the force of a negation: there was no such thing.
I say, whatsoever Christ suffered on earth, whether torment of body, or anguish
of soul, it was not for any sin of his own.

This the Apostle Saint Peter witnesses, 1 Pet. 3.18. Christ suffered once for
sin, 1 Pet. 3.18.
says the Apostle; The just, for the unjust, that he might bring us to God.
Where the Apostle Saint Peter having said, that Christ suffered for sin, lest
some should misconceive that Christ suffered for his own sin; he prevents
this cavil, and removes the ground of suspicion, The just for the unjust. If
Christ had suffered for his own sins, he had not suffered as just, but as
unjust, as a malefactor, he had suffered the punishment due to his own
transgressions: so says the Apostle, 1 Pet. 2.20, 21, 22. 1 Pet. 2.20, 21, 22.
Exhorting those to whom he wrote, to patient suffering, and enduring of
injuries, though undeserved, he sets before them the pattern of Christ, who
though he had committed no evil, and there was no guile found in his mouth,
yet when he was reviled, reviled not again; when he suffered, yet
notwithstanding he reproached not, but committed himself to God that judges
righteously. Mark, though he had committed no evil, nor there was no guile
found in his mouth, there was no sin, or demerite of his own, that he should
deserve such punishments.

And this is one difference that the Apostle observes, Heb. 7.26. between the
high Priests under the Law, and our high Priest Christ: they offered, first for
their own sins, and then for the sins of the people, but Christ had no
need to offer sacrifice for his own sins, for he had none: but we have such
a high Priest, and such a one it became us to have, as is holy, and undefiled,
separate from sinners; And this is the reason likewise, why the Prophet Isay in
this Chapter, assigning the true reason of Christ's suffering, he repeats, and
inculcates these, and the like phrases; He bore our infirmities, and carried
our sorrows, he was broken for our iniquities, and wounded for our
transgressions, and with his stripes we are healed. Still he lays all the
fault, and blame upon our selves: but he does not so much as mention any fault
in himself, whereby he did deserve to die.

And indeed, how could he suffer for his own sin, that was free from all
sin? So says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 5.21.
2 Cor. 5.21. He was made sin for us, that knew no sin: He knew no sin;
that is, he did practice none, he committed none: for in spiritual things we
are said, to know no more good then we practice: so Christ is said to know no
evil; that is, he practiced it not. He made him sin for us, that knew no
sin,

He was free from original sin in his birth and conception.

And he was free from actual sins in his life and conversation.

First, he was free from Original sin in his birth and conception: For
whereas there are two parts of original sin.

First the imputation of the guilt of that actual sin of Adam, in eating the
forbidden fruit.

Secondly, the corruption or perverseness, derived, and propagated to us from
our first Parents: Christ was free from both.

First, He was free from the guilt of Adams sin: though he had his nature
of Adam, he was a child of Adam, but he was not begotten by Adam, not by a
son of man; the latter whereof is that that entitleth us to our first Parents
transgression, and makes it ours. By one man sin entered into the world, etc.

Secondly, for that corruption, and perverseness that followed on that
transgression of the command of God, Christ was free from this, not by virtue
of the Womb that bare him, as if the blessed Virgin Mary had been free from
sin, as Scotus affirms upon the Third sentence, distinct. 26. Article 4. but
he was free from sin by the supernatural work of the holy Ghost,
sanctifying and purging that substance of the Virgin, whereof his body was
framed, from the common infection of our nature: so that he is styled by the
Angel, Luke 1.75.
Luke 1.75. That holy thing, by way of excellency.

Secondly, as Christ was free from original, so from actual sin: as he was
free from Original sin, in his birth and conception, so he was free from
actual sin in his life and conversation, so in the ninth verse of this
chapter, He had done no violence; there was no deceit in his mouth; he
committed no evil, as Saint Peter speaks. On this ground Christ challenges
the Jews, Which of you can accuse me of evil? It is true, they accused him,
and laid many crimes to his charge; (as what innocent was ever so happy, as to
be exempted, and privileged from unjust imputations?) but how flight they
were, you may judge by this in that the Judge, before whom he stood as prisoner
at the bar, accounted him acquitted, though he used no oratory but silence;
I find no sin in this man.

If Christ had had any sin of his own, he could not have satisfied God for
us, he might have quit scores with God for himself, but for our handwriting
it had stood still. Let this suffice to show that what Christ suffered on earth
in body or soul, it was not for any sin of his own, but for us; not that
he stood personally guilty.

But how then could it stand with the justice of God to suffer him to die,
Ezekiel. 18.20.
for so we find in Ezekiel. 18.20. so runs the menace, if Christ did not sin,
how could God suffer him to endure the punishment due to sin?

I answer briefly, Christ is to be considered in a double respect;

If Christ be considered as a private person, so, it is true, it could not
stand with the justice of God to suffer him to die; because he was not guilty
of inherent, personal sin: and shall not the Judge of all the world do
right? But consider Christ as a public person standing in our room and stead,
taking on him the guilt, and burden of our transgressions, so the justice of
God required that he should die: because though he were not guilty of any
personal sin: yet he was so guilty, as our sins were translated, and
imputed to him, and so it was requisite he should die. Look as it is among
men, it is no injustice that a man should require a debt of him that has
undertaken to pay it for another, especially if he be able and willing to
pay. So God was just to exact the debt of obedience and suffering, he having
undertaken it, and being both able, and willing to pay. Joh. 10.18.
He was willing, Ioh. 10.18. I lay down my life, there is no man that takes
it from me. He laid it down unforced. Secondly, Christ was able to pay the
debt, he was able by dying to satisfy the justice of God to the utmost, to
drink the cup of Gods wrath to the dregs for us, and to free us by death,
Heb. 2.26. He is able to save them that come to him to the very utmost. Nay,
he not only freed us, but himself too, from being held captive under the
power, and dominion of death. Let this suffice for the first Use, for
instruction, that if Christ had no sin of his own, how it could stand with
the justice of God, that he should bear the punishment due to sin.

Secondly, it serves to discover the extreme malice of the Jews against
Christ, especially the Scribes and Pharisees, whose heads as they were busiest
in plotting, so their hands were deepest imbrued in the executing of Christ's
death: notwithstanding such was his innocence, avouched to their faces, by him
that betrayed him, Judas; I have betrayed the innocent blood; and by him that
condemned him, Pilate; I find no fault in this man. Yet such was their malice,
they laid the greatest things against him, that the wit of man could devise, or
impudency object: and yet they were not satisfied with this, till as Wolves of
the evening they had torn the Lamb of God without sorrow, or compassion. The
blood of a mean man unjustly spilt is a crying sin, a skarlet sin, of a
deep crimson dye; every wound is a mouth and every drop a tongue to cry, as
the blood of Abel for vengeance on the murderer: but the death of Christ, the
crucifying of Christ, it was a sin of so high a strain, that for this sin
God has spent his plagues, he has emptied the quiver of his judgments on
that nation, and made them ever since a reproach to the world, a hissing and
gasing stock, and an astonishment to men and Angels.

If any enquire the way how it must be that the crucifying of Christ should be
so grievous a sin in the Jews, Act. 2.23. Him have ye with wicked hands
taken and crucified, Act. 2.23.
being delivered by the determinate counsel, and foreknowledge of God: How
then could it be so heinous a sin in the Jews to crucify Christ, seeing
what they did was according to the determinate counsel of God?

I answer briefly thus: who least intended it; they did perform Gods purpose,
but all this while they had little thought and purpose in them to perform it.
Isay 10.5.6.
See the like, Isay 10.5.6. Oh Assirian, says God, the rod of mine anger, and
the staff in their hand is mine indignation. I will send him against an
hipocriticall nation, and against the people of my wrath will I give him a
charge, to take the spoil and the prey, and to tread them down like the mire
in the streets. Howbeit, he means not so, neither does his heart think so.
What then does he think? Surely I will cut off, and destroy nations not a few.
See what the Lord says in Verse. 12. Wherefore (says the Lord by the mouth of
the Prophet) when I have performed my whole work upon Mount Sion and
Jerusalem, I will punish the fruit of the proud heart of the King of Assiria.
Observe, the King of Assiria was Gods instrument, his officer and executioner
to inflict that punishment that the Jews had deserved, and it was Gods will
and decree: notwithstanding, because though he did that that God had purposed
to be done, yet he had not a purpose to do it: because that that he did, was
not out of obedience to Gods will, it was not for the glory of God but out of a
proud humor: therefore when God had scourged them, God would punish him; and
when his people of Israel had felt the rod, he would cast the rod into the
fire of his indignation.

So then to apply it, look as it stood with the King of Assiria in punishing
the Jews, so it was with the Jews in their crucifying of Christ. It is true
what Caiphas unawares prophesied, that it was expedient that one man should
die, and give his life for the people; yet the Jews intended it not when they
put him to death, but did it out of malice, Matthew. 27.28.
Matthew. 27.28. and that with God (that eyes not so much the work and action of
the hand, as the intent and affection of the doer, I say, with God) they were
esteemed no better than cruel murderers and butchers of Christ: So Saint Peter
sticks not to tell them to their face, Act. 2.23. Act. 2.23.
Your wicked hands have crucified him, that God in his determinate counsel
delivered; still he calls them wicked hands though they did that which was Gods
determinate counsel.

It is not sufficient to make an action good and warrantable, that it be
conformable to Gods secret will, in the thing willed except there be a
conformity in the manner of our willing. For a man, while the will of God is
hid may do that that God wills not, without sin; our rule being the revealed
will, as the Gloss has it. As a man that has a Father, or a Friend sick,
his friend knows not whether he shall recover, though God have determined
that the man shall dye, yet he may pray for his recovery, he wills a diverse
thing from that of God, and yet it is warantable: A man may do that which is
Gods secret will and yet be faulty if he do not do it in that manner that
God wills. Let this suffice to be spoken of the second Use.

Thirdly, as it serves for the just condemnation of the Jews, and such as
unjustly condemned Christ, so in the next place it seems to remoove the gross
carnal conceit in the vain hearts of men, in our days; men that make the
square and rule of their judgment success in outward things; and pronounce of
men, of their innocence, or guilt, of their favor, or disfavour with God,
according to their prosperity or adversity, according to the success of
things below. A thing that falls foul upon the Papists, that make outward
prosperity an inseparable note of the Church. Thus it was with the friends of
Job, miserable comforters, as himself justly styles them; they saw him
afflicted in his goods, in his children, in his person, and from these premises
they concluded presently that he was an hypocrite. Thus it was with the
barbarous people, Act. 23.
Act. 23. when they saw a Viper fastened upon Saint Paul's hand, presently the
Viper strongly indicted him a murderer. Nay Christ's Disciples did so, Joh. 9.29.
Ioh. 9.29. no sooner did they see a man that was borne blind, but they they
questioned with our Savior, Who sinned, this man or his parents that he was
borne blind? implying that it must needs be that this man must sin himself
blind. So it was with the Jews in this Chapter Verse. 3. they saw Christ
despised and rejected of men, and presently they infer, that he was rejected
of God, smitten of God, and humbled for his own sins; but such men must
think that even Christ himself who like Absalom, from the crown of his head
to the sole of his foot, had no stayne or blemish of sin in him, yet he
tasted as deep of the cup of Gods wrath, and more than any mortal man;
besides, he that stood highest in his Fathers favor was most low and
despicable in the eyes of the world, he that was the favorite of his Father in
whom his Father was well pleased, yet he was not exempt from that scourge
wherewith God chasteneth every Son that he receives.

Fourthly, if Christ suffered not for his own sins; This reads us a Lecture
of patience, to put up injuries, though they be not deserved in the world. It
is the plea of some men when they are injured, it would not trouble me if I
deserved it; think what Christ deserved at the hands of the Jews what he had
done that he was so used. In 2 Pet. 4 21. Christ dyed, 2 Pet. 4.21.
and has left us an example to follow his steps. What example, but an example
of patience that we should follow him when we suffer undeserving? Seneca gives
that advise in his 69. Epistle, as if he had been a Disciple of Christ. 2.
Pet. 3.21.
We should labor to imitate Christ in this, in putting up and digesting
injuries, though on our part they be cause less and undeserved. In 2. Pet.
3.21. What glory is it, if when ye be buffeted for your faults ye take it
patiently? what great matter is it? but if when you do well and suffer for it
then you bear it patiently, this is acceptable to God. It is true, it is
acceptable to God, that we suffer punishment patiently when we have deserved
it; but when we are patient and have not deserved it, it is highly acceptable,
as the word imparts.

Fifthly, and lastly, Christ dyed not for his own sins, then here is Balm in
Gilead, comfort for wounded and distressed, consciences, that faint under the
weight and burden of their sins. It is true indeed if Christ had dyed for
his own sins, then our estate had been woeful and lamentable, then he had
quit scores only with God for himself, but we should still have remained as
deeply engaged as ever, and have been cast into utter darkness, and have
been reserved in chains till we had paid the utmost farthing, but now Christ
has suffered for us. Then as the Apostle inferres, Romans 8.34.
Romans 8.34. Who shall condemn? Let Satan the accuser of the brethren bring
what objections he will, this one plea will answer all; Christ dyed, if he
dyed, then he has appeased the wrath of God to us, and paid the debt of the
Law, and the punishment of the Law, and fulfilled obedience, and given
satisfaction to God. Christ had no sin of his own, therefore what he
suffered, it was for our sins and transgressions. This shall suffice to be
spoken of the negative part from this particular, But, that carries the force
of a negation. That Christ was affirmed to suffer for his own sin, We judged
him smitten of God and humbled: But.

The affirmative part follows to be handled, But He was wounded for our
transgressions.

Where I shall not need to tell you, that by being wounded in this place, we
are not to understand only, nor principally (as some Popish writers do) the
bodily torments, and tortures of Christ that he as this day endured on the
Cross; but withal, and especially those secret agonies and conflicts of soul
that he felt, that were caused out of a deeper apprehension of the greatness
of our sins that he suffered for, and the sense of the greatness of Gods
wrath that he then sustained; which being so, the conclusion from this
affirmitive part is this, that Christ Jesus suffered extreme torments in his
body, and sad and amazing agonies in his soul, for our sins and
trangressions.

He was wounded for our transgressions, etc.



For the proof of it I need not range far from the Text. In the fourth verse
of this Chapter, surely says the Prophet, he has borne our griefs and
sorrows. In the fifth verse. he was bruised for our iniquities, the
chastisement of our peace was on him, by his stripes we are healed, In the
sixth verse. The Lord has laid upon him the iniquity of us all. In the eighth
verse. For the transgression of my people was he stricken. In verse. 10. He made
his soul an offering for sin. In the 12. verse. he poured out his soul to
death. We see, he was broken for our iniquities, the chastisement of our peace
was on him: and this not only in body but in soul too, he poured out his
soul to death, he made his soul an offering for sin.

If you ask the reason why,

I answer first, It is a rule of the Schools where the gift is free and
undeserved, without merit or desert on our part, there the best if not the
only reason that can be assigned of that gift, is the free grace and love of
the doner. So this gift is freely from Christ's love to us: so says the
Apostle, Ephesians. 5.2. Ephesians. 5.2.
Let us love one another, as Christ has loved us, and given himself a ransom
for us; where he shows not only the manner how we should love one another,
As Christ has loved us; but the motive how he loved us, he suffered for us,
he loved us, and gave himself a ransom for us.

Secondly, as it was the love of Christ to give himself, so it was the love of
God that gave Christ: as Christ says it of himself, so he speaks it
likewise of his Father, Joh. 3.16.
Ioh. 3.16. God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, etc.
We must not think that God then begins to love us, when God is actually
reconciled to us in his Son: (so some conceive but amiss, if I be not
deceived, and mistaken) for says the Apostle, Romans 5.18. Romans 5.18.
He loved us when we were enemies. God loves us not only when we are
friends, when we are actually reconciled by the death of his Son; but when
we were enemies. S. Aug. psalm. 113.
So says S. Austin upon Psalm. 110. God loves us when he hates us, he loves
us as creatures, when notwithstanding he hates us as sinners: So I say, God
does not then begin to love us, when we are actually reconciled by the death
of his Son, but he first loved us, and because he loved us, therefore he
gave his Son, Pet. Mart.
(As Peter Martyr says excellently) as the pledge and pawn, and earnest of
his love. So then that is the second reason, that as Christ gave himself out
of love, so God gave Christ because he loved us.

Thirdly, as the love of God was the cause of this, so the justice of God
required that Christ should die: For God had no purpose to redeem man; and man
being not able to satisfy Gods justice for his sin, it was needful that
Christ as our surety should answer that, that we were not able to do, and to
take our burden.

Oh the deepnesse and riches of the knowledge and wisdom of God, how
unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out. It is true, I
deny not the print, and footsteppes of the ways of God in the Creation, the
Heathens themselves discovered, by the dark and dim light of reason; The
Heathen could discern it in the Creation: but for the print of his footsteps
in Redemption, men and Angels could not conceive, how infinite justice, and
infinite mercy should come together: how sinners should die eternally, and be
saved eternally, and live for ever: How God should be just, and yet man that
had sinned not die; these ways are past finding out. But now in the death of
Christ, all these seeming contradictions are easily reconciled. For now as in
the co^posing of David's Ditty, Mercy and Justice are met together, truth and
mercy kiss each other. For first, that God should punish sin at all, it was
an act of Gods justice: but that God should punish sin, not in our selves,
but in Christ it was an act of mercy. That God should exact the payment of the
debt to the utmost far thing, it was an act of severe justice: but that he did
not exact it at our hands our selves, but at the hands of our Surety, this was
mercy, infinite mercy. So that we have great cause to say, and so we may well
with David, we may say on this occasion of Redemption, as he on the Creation,
Psalm. 104. Psalm. 104.
How admirable are thy works! In wondrous wisdom thou have made them all.
That for the first use.

Secondly, as it serves to set up the wondrous greatness of Gods wisdom; so
likewise it serves to set forth the grievousnesse and haynousnesse of our
sins. It is a true saying; No glass can represent so fully the grievousnesse
of our sins, not the torments of the damned in Hell, as the torments of
Christ on the Cross for sin. Surely those sins must needs be great, that
could not be expiated, but at so dear a rate as the shedding of the blood of
Christ. I come not to dispute here, as the Schools, nicely and curiously, and
unprofitably, whether God could have devised another means to work the
redemption of man kind, besides the death of his Son.

I know, it is not for man to confine the wisdom of God, and to say, this God
can do: as he says to the Sea, Hither shall thou go, and here thou shall
stay, thy proud waves shall go no further. It is not for man to say so to Gods
wisdom and power, this God can do, and he can do no more. But let me tell
you thus much, that the Son of God was more precious, and dear in the eyes
of his Father, then to suffer him to die a cursed death, if the work of
redemption, could be so well, and so conveniently accomplished otherwise. I
cannot think but that the Son of God was more precious in the eyes of his
Father, then to suffer him to undergo such a cursed Ignominious death, if
redemption could have been effected by other means. Nay, I speak more boldly
(for I may do it upon good ground) the satisfaction for man's sin, it was
such a work, as could not have been performed, but by the finger of God: Men,
nor Angels could not do it; they might have given some satisfaction, but they
could not give a valuable satisfaction. 1 Timothy 1.6.
As it is 1 Timothy 1.6. Christ gave himself a ransom for all; that is not all,
he gave himself not only a ransom, but a full, valuable, sufficient ransom.
I say, all men and Angels could not have given to God a sufficient ransom.

First, not men; because no man can pay his own score, therefore he cannot
satisfy for others.

Secondly, not Angels, being finite created natures, they could not undergo
the punishment of our sins which was infinite: there was an infinite
punishment due to our sins, because we had offended infinite justice; and
there is no creature can undergo an infinite punishment. Nay, I say more, all
the Angels, and Arch-angells in Heaven, if they had united their forces, to
sustain and endure one moment, those exceeding unexpressible agonies that
Christ endured on the Cross, when he said, My God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me? they would have broken them, and have crushed them down
irrecoverably to Hell. Then far be it from us to set light by those sins,
the weight and burden whereof, none but Christ could undergo, and when he did
undergo them, it made him bow and buckle, and by his own confession it made
his soul heavy to death.

Thirdly, as it serves to discover the greatness of our sins; so it serves
to provoke us to sorrow, and humiliation for our sins: for what; did Christ
shed drops of blood for our sins, and shall not we shed tears for them?
Thus it was with the converts, Act. 2 37. Act. 2.37.
when Peter told them your wicked hands have crucified Christ, says the Text,
they were pricked in their hearts; Nay, that is not all, they were pricked
through in their hearts, or violently: as it were, all the floudgates of sorrow
were opened; they were pricked through with sorrow. And mistake me not
Brethren; think not that it was the soldiers, and the Jews only that
crucified Christ: no, it was every one of us, our hands are as deeply imbrewed
in the blood of Christ as theirs. Our wicked thoughts are as thorns that
goared his precious head. Our wicked actions are as nails that fastened his
hands and feet to the tree. Our oaths and blasphemies are as swords and
spears, that pierced his sacred side. Oh then can we choose but be pricked
in our hearts, when we have crucified Christ! If Peter went out and wept
bitterly when he had denied Christ, what cause have we to weep, tears, not
of brine, but of blood, when we look upon Christ whom we have so cruelly
crucified! How can that choose but be sorrow, and compunction to us, that
occasioned so much anguish and torment to Christ! Oh that our heads were
rivers, and our eyes fountains of tears, that we might weep day and night
for our sins and transgressions.

Fourthly, as it serves to humble us, so it serves for comfort and consolation,
as I told you; for what says the Apostle? Christ died, who shall condemn?
Christ died: then he has appeased his Fathers wrath, then he has satisfied
his Fathers justice, then he has redeemed us from Hell, he has made Heaven
smile on us, he has purchased a crown of glory, he has tryumphed over, and
trampled under our spiritual enemies. Let me sing with Isay, Isay 44.23. Isay
44.23.
Sing oh heavens, and shout ye lower parts of the earth, Why? The Lord has
redeemed Jacob, and glorified himself in Israel. And surely brethren,
whatsoever we think now in our strength and bravery, and jollitie, there is
nothing in the world will minister comfort but this in time of distress, when
we shall come either upon the rack of conscience, or come to the sight, and
kenne of death, or to appear before that Tribunal: there is nothing but the
death of Christ will stead us. What else in the world will revive, and cheer a
drouping soul affrighted with horror, groaning, and bowed under the burden of
sin? What will be able to stablish a man's heart, and conscience, that fears
the approach of death, but this? What else will make him stand upright and
unapaled before Gods Tribunal at that terrible day? In all these sad exigents,
in these times, the blood of Christ it serves as Rahabs scarlet thread, it is a
token to us that God will deal mercifully with us. Only, it must be our care,
as it was the Spies condition with Rahab, to tie it in the Window, we must
look to tie it to our selves by faith, and apply it to our selves, and then
you shall never miscarry.

Again, as it serves for comfort, and consolation: so it serves as a rich
Mirror to set forth the love of God to us. If the Jews could conclude from
our Saviors shedding of a few tears over Lazarus, Ioh. 11.36. they see him
shed a few tears over dead Lazarus, Joh. 11.36.
see how he loved him, say they: With how much more force may we conclude,
since Christ has shed his blood, see how he loved us? Greater love then this
(says Christ) has no man, then to lay down his life for his friend. It is
true, blessed Savior greater love has no man: but thou art more then Man, and
thou have done more then this, for thou have laid down thy life for thine
enemies.

It was the honor of that Trajan when a Soldier was wounded, he suffered his
own clothes to be rent, and made clouts to bind up his wounds: but what is
this to the love of Christ, that not only did forgo his clothes, but was
content that his own flesh should be torn for us to cover our wounds, this he
did. Observe, this love was showed to us, not to Angels, creatures more noble,
Heb. 2.14. Heb. 2.14.
By no means took he the nature of Angels. As he did not take their nature,
so he did not suffer their punishment due to their transgression and
Apostacy: when those sons of the morning fell from their prime estate, they
fell as the Elephant, they could not raise themselves, and they are still
reserved in chains of darkness, and shall to the last day: but when man
sinned, God sent his Son to suffer death on the Cross for us; we have
reason to say as David, Psalm. 8. Psalm. 8.
Lord what is man, that thou art so mindful of him?

Lastly, if such, and so great has been the love of Christ to us, then what
can we do less, then to return like love back again to him? We know a
Diamond is best fashioned by a Diamond; love is the best procurer and
solicitour of love, how can we but love God, that has sent his Son to die
for us! How can we esteem any thing too dear for him, that esteemed nothing
too dear for us! And if Christ did give his life for us, shall we grudge to
give a penney, to part with somewhat for his members? How shall we esteem any
thing too dear for him? shall we not part with our lusts for him? Surely, if
there be any argument in the world will prevail, it is this argument from
Christ's love, that will persuade men to obedience: so says the Apostle Saint
Paul that apprehended it, 2 Cor. 5.
2 Cor. 5. The love of Christ constrains us; it constrains us to do that
that God requires. Let us take heed that we do not trample under foot the
precious blood of Christ, by committing those sins it was shed for. Exodus
12.6.
In Exodus 12.6. we shall find that the blood of the Passover was sprinkled on
the two side-posts, and the upper door post, but not upon the threshold,
under-foot, implying, and intimating in what high reverence and esteem we
should have the blood of Christ, we should not trample on it. The blood of the
Passover was sprinkled on the two side-posts, and the upper post of the house,
but not on the threshold, underfoot. If such reverence were due to that that
was but the type, how much is due to that that is the substance? Then let us
take heed we trample not under-foot the blood of Christ, by wilful committing
those sins for which it was shed. Let it suffice; nay, let it be too much
that we have once crucified Christ, let us do so no more; if we do so, we
are worse then the Jews. Every wilful sin we commit, we crucify Christ,
and he that crucifieth Christ now, is worse then the Jews: the Jews
crucified him in the time of his humiliation, and abasement, but now if we do
it, it is in his exaltation, when he sits at the right hand of God. Let us all
take up that speech, Ezra 9.14. Lord, Ezra 9.14.
since thou have stayed us from being beneath for our iniquities, should we
break thy Commandments? would not thou return, and confound us? Gods
blessings are as strong physic, if it work not health, it makes more sick.
Every blessing, especially such as this, makes us either better or worse,
certainly that heart is steel, or brass, which the sense of the love of God
cannot move to leave evil and vile courses. *

FINIS.
THE EPICURES CAVTION.
LVK. 21.34. And take heed to your selves least at any time your hearts be
overcharged, with surfeiting and drunkenness, and the cares of this life, and
so that day come upon you unawares.
IN the Verses going before, from the 25. Coherence.
to the 34. of this Chapter, our blessed Savior had discoursed in the hearing
of his Disciples, concerning the day of judgment, and concerning the signs
and tokens that should foregoe that day; by occasion of a question he had
proposed to him at the seventh Verse, concerning the destruction, and
demolition of the Temple of Jerusalem, when that should be, And his Disciples
asked him saying, Master, when shall these things be? and what shall be the
signs when they shall come to pass? When this is done, from the 34. verse. to
the 37. our blessed Savior begins to make use of this: from the former
premises to draw some conclusions, and those are,

Partly by way of admonition exhortation
to his Disciples.

By way of admonition in verse. 34. that since it is certain that such a day,
the day of judgment will come, (but when it will come nothing more uncertain)
when God will examine and sift the lives of every man, and pass an unpartiall
sentence upon all the acts and deeds of their lives in this world, it concerned
them therefore to take heed least at any time their hearts should be
overcharged with surfeiting and drunkenness, and the cares of this life, which
Christ enforces by the danger that otherwise might befall them, and so that
day come upon them unawares, which he further enforces in the verse following:
for as a snare shall it come on all them that dwell on the earth, that is the
first thing by way of admonition.

Secondly, by way of exhortation in the 35. and 36. verses, that since it is
certain such a day shall come, and uncertain when, therefore they should
watch and pray, and not a while only, but continually and constantly that so
they might be accounted worthy to escape the evil that should come upon the
world, and at the coming of the Son of God they might stand undaunted, and
unapaled before him.

The words I have read, are a part of the former, of the admonition. Take heed
therefore to your selves least at any time your hearts be overcharged with
surfeiting and drunkenness, and the cares of this life, and so that day come
upon you unawares. In which words observe with me these five parts.

First, you have the caution it self, Take heed. Prats of the Text.


Secondly, you have the persons to whom the caution is given. To your selves.
It was to the Disciples of Christ to whom this was given in charge immediately,
but in them to us all, as appears by a parallel answerable place, Mark 13.
What I say to you I say to all, Watch.

Thirdly, the time, how long they must take heed, least at any time. Their
care and caution must be constant and continual.

Fourthly, of what they must take heed, and that is, first in a general,
least your hearts be over pressed, or overcharged or burdened. And then more
particularly, least they be overcharged with surfeiting and drunkenness, and
the cares of this life, for with these three, the hearts of men are ordinarily
overcharged.

Fifthly and lastly, the reason why they should use this caution, or the motive
enforcing this caution, least that day come upon you unawares.

And take heed to your selves least, etc. I begin with the first part, the
caution it self, in the first word.

Take heed. Be well advised, use all care, and circumspection, intend your
thoughts, for so the word implies, prosequeti, to apply their minds, and
intend their thoughts. Now what Christ gave in charge to his Disciples, though
he gave it first and primarily to them, yet not to them alone, but to us, in
and from them: So the conclusion is this, that,

Surfeiting, drunkenness and covetousness especially to be taken heed of.
It is, and ought to be the care of every one, as to take heed of all other
sins, so especially of surfeiting and drunkenness, least there hearts be
overcharged with meat and drink, and the cares of this life.

Take heed says our Savior. He says not only forbear, but we must watch
and be cautionate, that our hearts be not over charged. I say it ought to be
the care of every one, as to take heed of all sins in general, so
especially that their hearts be not overcharged with surfeiting, drunkenness,
and covetousness, that their hearts be not overcharged with meat and drink,
and the cares of this life.

Hence it was that that the Apostle Saint Jude in the 12. verse of his Epistle,
speaking of those seducers that crept into the Church for this end, to solicit
those that had given their names to Christ, to defection and apostacy: among
other vices and faults he charge them with this one, they feed themselves
without fear, what is the meaning of that? feeding themselves without fear?
that is, they gave free scope, they let loose the reins of their sensual
appetite, they gorged themselves, without fear or care what issue it would
bring in the consequent. Now if it were the fault of those seducers to feed
themselves without fear: then it is the duty of us, to feed our selves with
fear, and to use care and caution in feeding our selves, that we be not
overcharged with surfeiting. That is for the first part. So Solomon in Prove.
23.20. he unfolds two of them in one verse; he gives a charge to be careful,
and cautionate, says he, Be not among winebibbers among riotous eaters of
flesh: riotous eaters of flesh, there is surfeiting, and Wine bibbers, there is
drunkenness; We see what care and caution the wise man would have us use
least we be entangled in these sins.

A man should not so much as keep company commonly with such as they that are
thus. If we know a man that is infected with the plague of Pestilence, we
shun him, and use care and caution, we will not come near him for fear of
infection, because it is contagious. Solomon seems to imply such a thing, he
would not have us to be with drunkards, or with those that are given to
surfeiting; be not with Wine bibbers, or riotous eaters of flesh, least by
conversing with them, by their counsel and example, they draw thee to the
participation of their fault.

Luke 12.15.
And so for covetousness in Luke 12.15. says Christ, Take heed and beware of
covetousness; mark it, Christ is not content to give a single charge, but he
doubles it, Take heed and beware. It is not only enough to have a wary head,
to epsy (as the phrase is borrowed from Soldiers that stand Sentinel, to
epsy such as come) but to guard themselves, to harness themselves, to be able
to withstand, so the word imports, being a word borrowed from watchmen, those
that guard Princes or great men, while they sleep, their guard stands to
repulse dangers that may come near them. Take heed and beware of
covetousness. You see we ought to have a care, and take heed of these
sins, and of these especially.

The reasons why we ought to be careful of these sins are,

Because there is especial danger in these sins.

And there is especial danger of our falling into these sins.

First, there is danger in the sins, or else There is danger in these sins.
that we should not fall into them. The word here Take heed, implies danger.

The danger is double. One is in the Text, because these sins burden the
heart, they overcharge the soul. As a man that is clogged and overburdened
with a great weight, he is not able to lift up himself to do any other work;
so it is with surfeiting, and drunkenness and covetousness, they overcharge
and burden the heart; they make a man that is possessed with them, not able to
lift up himself, to perform holy and spiritual duties, to pray, or to
meditate, or to perform any other pious exercise. That is the first danger
then, they burden the heart therefore they had need to take heed of them.

Secondly, they not only burden the heart but with a special burden, such as
when it has gotten on a man, when a man is sunk under it, he is not able
easily to disburden himself.

It is a good observation. There are few that are given to epicurisme to
drunkenness or covetousness, that are reclaymed. They are a burden that is
hardly laid off and deposed. Hos. 4.11.
In Hosea 4.11. the Prophet speaks expressly of wine, and now wine, they take
away the heart, that is, they that are given to wine and to new wine, to
drunkenness, I may add also they that are given to their belly to epicurisme,
to satisfy their sensual apetite when once they are given to it they never
return again; those sins, when they have gotten possession they still keep
it, it is a miracle almost if one of them recover.

The reason of it is this, because it is the property of those sins, they
slumber the conscience, they cast a man into a dead sleep, they make him in
such a case that he stands in no awe of the threatenings nor judgments of God,
whereby he might be reclaymed, and awaked out of his security: that for the
two first. 2 Timothy 2.4.
Then for covetousness in 2 Timothy 2.4. says the Apostle no man that warreth
entangleth himself with the affairs of this life. Mark, The Apostle compares
covetousness to a snare, as when a bird or a beast is entangled in a snare,
when men entangle themselves in pleasures, and in covetousness it is a snare;
and when they are once entangled, it is a hundred to one if they recover it. No
man that warreth entangleth himself. He compares covetousness to a snare.
You see then there is a double danger, why we should be cautionate: First
there is a danger in the sins, they burden the soul, and with such a burden
that a man cannot easily depose when he is sunk under it.

But that is not all, there is another danger There is danger of falling into
these sins.
so there is danger of our falling into these sins: otherwise it mattered not,
we might be secure and retchlesse though there were danger in them, if there
were not danger of our falling into them, but there is danger of that,
therefore in that respect we ought to be cautionate, and that in three respects.

First, there is danger of falling into those Because of daily occasions.
Now we daily eat and drink, we daily provide for this life, we have
continually every day occasion to eat to surfeiting, to drink to
drunkenness, to provide to covetousness: there is more danger of falling into
these sins, because the occasion and matter of them is so frequent. It is
otherwise with other sins, a thief or an adulterer have not always an
opportunity, at least not daily oppportunitie to commit those sins, but for
these there are occasions, and opportunities always at hand, therefore there
is more danger of falling into them then others. They border on lawful things.


Again there is a great deal of danger of falling into them, because they are
placed upon the confines, and border of lawful things, for often times, through
our blindness and misguided affection, that which is lawful imposes upon us,
and carries us to that which is unlawful. What says the Epicure? Is it not
lawful to enjoy Gods creatures liberally? therefore he will gorge himself,
and give way to his greedy sensual appetite. What says the drunkard? has not
God ordained Wine to refresh man? therefore he will drown and overwhelme
himself with drunkenness. So says the covetous Ma^monist, Is not a man bound
to provide for this life things honest before God and men? Therefore he may
make money his God, and devote himself to the world. Thus that which is lawful
imposes on us, and carries us to that which is unlawful. Now surfeiting
borders upon that which is lawful: it is lawful to eat, but to go beyond
the due bounds it is surfeiting; it is lawful to drink, but beyond the due
measure is drunkenness: It is lawful to care for the things of this world,
but if it be beyond the measure, either unseasonable for the time, or
immoderate, then we become guilty of covetousness. These things border on
things that are lawful, They have affinity with nature.


Thirdly, there is most danger of falling into those sins which have the
greatest affinity and cognition with our nature, those that have much nature
in them, it is easiest to fall into them. It is natural for us to eat and to
drink, and to provide, for this life, nature prompts us to this. Now the
motions of nature especially of corrupt nature, are vehement, and often
transport us from that which is natural, to the doing of that which is
unnatural. The reason is, because there is much in them that is natural. It
is natural to eat and to drink, and to provide for this life, therefore from
thence we are carried often times by the violent motion of corrupt nature to
that which is unlawful. So here is a double danger. First in the sins, if
we fall into them. Secondly, there is a danger of our falling into these
sins. This shall suffice to be spoken for the proof of the point.

I come now to make use of that which Complaint of neglect of this duty.
You see what care and caution we ought to use, least our hearts be
overcharged with surfeiting and drunkenness, and the cares of this life.

But alas, how many are there that use not this caution! Nay how many are there
as the Apostle says, Romans 13. Romans 13. ult.
ult. that make provision for the flesh! not only now and then through
temptation occasionally, when they are overborne and entangle themselves with
these sins: but they lay projects, and designs, as the word imports in the
original; they use to provide, and plot, and project for the accomplishment of
these lusts. How many are so far from taking heed, least their hearts be
overcharged with surfeiting, that their whole care, or the most of it is how
they may provide such dainty fare wherewith to satisfy, and gorge their
appetite, whose whole life is one continual surfeit, and when they dye (as one
said) a man can hardly tell whether they breath out, or gorge out their souls!

How many are there that are so fare from taking heed least their hearts be
overcharged with drunkenness, that they rather invent new acts whereby to
provoke themselves to drink excessively! Pro. 23.30.
In Prove. 23.30. such as the wise man speaks of, that purposely tarry long
at the wine, and seek for mixed, for the most generous, pleasant wine as the
place is interpreted! such as are never so joviall and jocund as when they
meet with company to go to the Tavern to be drunk. What shall we say to
to those that are so far from taking heed that their hearts be not
overcharged with the cares of this life, that they do nothing but willingly
entangle themselves with the cares of this life? Phil. 4.19.
such as the Apostle says Phil. 4. 19. That mind earthly things. The best man
in the world, may, and is bound perhaps, to meddle with earthly things; but
these men mind earthly things; their study, and their care is upon that, their
thoughts and the bent of their mind is upon earthly things, they make gold
their god: they will prostrate themselves to the wedge of gold. What shall we
say to all those men? but that that Christ says here immediately after the
Text, except they repent; that day, either the day of death, or the day of
Judgment shall come upon them as a snare unawares.

But for us that desire to be prepared for Exhortation to caution.
let us be persuaded to use care, and caution, as Christ advises, lest our
hearts at any time be overcome with surfeiting and drunkenness, and the cares
of this life. It is safer, and easier to prevent these sins, then to remedy
them. It is easier to take care, that our hearts be not overcharged, and
burdened with these sins, then when they are burdened to disburden them.

You will ask, how shall we take care?

Let me commend to you briefly these four Rules, upon the virtue of which, 4.
Helps to caution.
(If I be not deceived) there will be much help to this caution that Christ
advises.

To limit our selves in things lawful.
The first is this, to limit and restrain our selves in the use of those things
about which these sins are ordinarily committed. To prescribe, and in things
indifferent (as it were) to straiten and limit our selves, to lay harder laws
upon our selves then God has: for the rule of S. Gregory is most true, S.
Gregory.
He that would not offend in things unlawful, must often abridge himself in
things lawful. Let us not eat as much as we may. I say not as much only as
nature will bear, or as we have strength; but not so much as God alowes. Let
us not drink so much as we may. And in a holy contempt of these inferior
things; let us not care, and carke for the world so much as we may: or else
we shall find by woeful experience, that if we go to the outmost border, and
skirts of that which is lawful, we shall easily come to that which is
unlawful. If once we come just to the cross line, the devil will put hard to
make us go beyond it. It is a good saying of that doubtful Author, says he,
He that sleeps upon the very edge, and brinke of a precipis, or downfall, it
is a thousand to one but he falls: that is the first thing, to limit our
selves in these things, not to eat so much as we may; nay, not so much as God
allows: not because it is unlawful, but because it may be in-expedient? and
not to drink so much as we may, not to carke and care so much as we may. He
that will go to the utmost of his the other, that will go to the bounds, and
skirts of that which is lawful, will easily be transported to that which is
unlawful. That is the first rule.

Secondly, that which the Apostle advises, Ephesians. 5.18. To set our minds on
better things Ephesians. 5.18.
that our hearts be not overcome with surfeiting and drunkenness, says he,
be not overcome with wine, wherein is excess, but be filled with the Spirit.
Mark it, the way not to be filled with wine, is to be filled with the Spirit.
Simile.
We must herein imitate Chirurgions, who when a man is taken with a dangerous
bleeding at the nose, the Surgeon opens another vein, he lets him blood
there to divert, and turn the blood another way: so let us, when we perceive
our selves to have an immoderate ravening appetite after corporal food, let us
turn the edge of our appetite another way; labor to have an appetite after
heavenly dainties; and that will abate, and dull our appetite after earthly
things; or take away the immoderation of it. So when we perceive we have an
immoderate thirst after wine, and strong drink, let us labor for a spiritual
thirst after the pleasures that run and flow in a full channel, at Gods
right hand for ever; When we find an immoderate desire after earthly things,
let us turn our cares and desires another way, to study and care for heavenly
things, as the Apostle advises, Col. 3.1.
Collos. 3.1. says he, set your affections on things above, and not on things
that are below. If we find our affections set on things below, let us labor
to raise them to that which is above, and this will weane and take off our
affections from earthly things. For it is with the affections, Simile
as it is with the eyes: a man cannot at the same time look up to heaven, and
look down to the earth: so our affections cannot be set vehemently upon
things above, and things that are below. This therefore is the second rule, to
labor for diversion, to take away the edge, that our hearts be not overcome
with surfeiting and drunkenness, and the cares of this life.

Take heed. To consider what we do.
As I told you before, it is to apply our thoughts. Let us intend our thoughts,
consider with our selves what we do, say with our selves thus; Shall I take
that meat which God has given me for my support, for the undoing of my
self? Shall I take that he has given me to do him service, shall I use it
to difinable me for his service? And so for Wine and strong drink that he
has given me to cheer my self; shall I use them for the oppressing and
overcharging my self? And the world that God has given me for a servant,
shall I inslave my self to the world as my Lord? This is the third rule, to
take heed, to apply our thoughts, and take heed what we do.

The fourth and last, To think of the day of judgment.
is that which Christ Take heed.

I come to the second part, the persons to whom Christ gives this charge, to
take heed; Take heed to your selves.





Well; first immediately to his Disciples, but who were those Disciples? They
were those whom he had chosen out of all mankind to preach, and publish his
Gospel to the world: yea, they were they who already had preached the Gospel
through Judea: they were those that Christ chose in his pilgrimage upon earth,
to be his especial followers and retinue: those that he endowed with
especial privileges, and prerogatives: those that had been partakers of his
gracious Sermons, he labors to weane the hearts of them from surfeiting and
drunkenness, and the cares of this life. Nay, that which is more then any
Sermon, they were eyewitnesses of his life, that was free from drunkenness or
surfeiting, or the cares of this life; these were they to whom Christ gives the
charge to take heed to themselves. Well, the conclusion is, that The best men
have need to be admonished to take heed of surfeiting, etc.
those that have the greatest privileges, and prerogatives, even the Disciples
of Christ have need to be admonished to take heed, lest their hearts be
overcharged with surfeiting and drunkenness, and the cares of this life.

You see whom the persons are that Christ gives this charge unto, to his
Disciples. I say, the best men, those that are most eminent for gifts, and have
the greatest privileges, and prerogatives, even the Disciples of Christ have
need to be admonished, lest their hearts be overpressed with surfeiting, etc.
There is no man, says S. Austin, August.
that can be secure in this life, which is but one continual temptation. We
can never be secure, as long as we live in that estate, wherein of worse we
may be better, and of better we may be worse, So far as we may go up the
stream, if we use care, and plie the oar, so far we may go down the
stream if we slack our care.

Now, Because they are but men.
the reason why the best want admonition Lot, he that preserved himself in
Sodom unspotted, and unstained in the midst of an impure generation; yet in
the mount he was twice shamefully overcome with drunkenness.

Satan envies them most.
because the best men are in the greatest danger: not in respect of themselves,
but in respect of their enemies; the reason is, because Satan desires more
covetingly, and more thirstingly to overthrow them then others. Now the more
danger they are in, the more need of caution they have. Simon, Simon, Satan
has desired to winnow thee, says Christ to Peter, Luke 22. Luke 22.
Nay, that is not all. Satan has earnestly, thirstingly, covetingly desired to
winnow thee; that is the meaning of the Word, he says not Simon, Satan has
desired to winnow thee; but Satan has earnestly desired to winnow thee. Satan
indeed desires to winnow all; but for Peter, and such as are like him, he
desires earnestly to winnow them. As Pirates that set with the greatest fury
upon the ship, that is richest laden, so does Satan on such. Now the greater
the danger is that they are in, the more need they have to be admonished to
take heed.

Because their fall makes others fall.
Thirdly, and lastly, not in respect of themselves only, but in respect of
others they have need to take heed; because if they fall others fall, they
hurt others as much by the scandal, as they hurt themselves by the sin.
Other men's sins hurt the persons that commit them, but the sins of great
and eminent men, they are Plague sores that infect others. Gal. 2.4.
So Saint Paul Gal. 2.4. says he to Peter when he temporized and played the
Jew, Why do thou compel the Gentiles to play the hipocrites? why, how did
Peter compel the Gentiles to play the Jews? says Saint Austin in his 11.
Epistle, S. Aug. Epist. 11.
not by any thing he preached to them, tending to that purpose, but by his
example: the very example of such a man as Peter, so eminent, it offers a kind
of violence to the witnesses of it, it compells them to imitation: Therefore in
this respect they have need to be admonished to take heed that they do not
fall into these sins, because if their hearts be overcharged with them it
hurts others, their sins are Plague sores. You see the truth of the Doctrine.
To come to make some use of that that has been spoken.

If the best men have need to be admonished then the best men may here be
admonished of their frailty, The best men frail.
of their weak condition; even the best men that are, those that have made the
happiest profession of piety, and grace: those that are endued with the
greatest privileges, as long as they are here, they are but as little
children, Simile
that their joints are not confirmed and knit, that being left to themselves
we call upon them ever and anon to take heed that they fall not. 1 Cor. 10
12. says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 10.12.
Let him that stands take heed lest he fall. Who were those to whom the
Apostle gives this caution? To them that were rich in all knowledge, that were
destitute of no gift, 1 Cor. 1.12.
1 Cor. 1.12. Mark, they were rich in all speech, and knowledge, and destitute
of no gift, and yet these that stand have need to be admonished, to take
heed lest they fall.

Why the best should suffer admonition.
Secondly, if the best men have need of admonition, then it should teach the
best men to suffer with patience the words of admonition, out of conscience of
their need. That is the reason why many men take with such impatience the
words of admonition, because they are strangers to themselves they know not
their own weakness, they think they have no need of admonition. And that
is the reason they return hatred for good will, when they are admonished to
reproach and revile them that admonish them. Says the wise man, Pro. 9.8.
Prove. 9.8. Rebuke not a scorner least he hate thee, but rebuke a wise man and
he will love thee. Why would he not have a man rebuke a scorner? every scorner
is a proud man, he knows not himself, he is a fool. Now every fool is a
stranger to himself, he knows not himself and his own weakness, if a man
reproove such a one he cannot expect but to be hated: He thinks he goes not
about to heal him but to make him sore. But says he, reproove a wise man and
he will love thee, why? he is a wise man, he knows his own weakness (for
that is a special point of wisdom) he knows how apt he is to offend, how
prone to be secure: therefore he thanks a man, he takes it kindly, (out of
conscience of his own weakness) when he is admonished, it comes as oil to
a wound, as a fomentation to open the sore that the admonition may enter, and
have its due effect, so it follows in the ninth verse there admonish a wise
man and he will be wiser.

Thirdly, if the best men have need of Bellarmine falsely, but yet for that end
too) to admonish and to teach us to take heed of these, and other sins: Let
us diligently repair to Gods ordinances, to the ministry of the word, which
God has ordained to admonish us, 1 These. 5.12.
1 These. 5.12. God knows how apt we are to be secure notwithstanding we are
beset and beseiged, and begirt with dangers, therefore God has appointed the
Ministers as watchmen, as Sentinells to epsy dangers a far off, and to give
us notice when dangers come; they ring the alarm that we may provide for our
selves. Therefore we should diligently go to the Word that we may be
admonished of the dangers, least we be surprised unawares. I remember the
saying of that General, presuming on a man's own strength is the greatest
weakness, and the ready way to betray himself to dangers is to contemn
them. You see the persons to whom Christ gives this charge, Take heed to your
selves.

Least at any time. Conclusion.
It seems then it is not sufficient to take heed for a while, Our care and
caution continual.
for a day, or a month or a year, but our care and caution it must be
constant and continual. He does not say take heed least at sometime; but
take heed least at any time your hearts be overcharged, etc. It is our Saviors
counsel in the 36. verse of this Chapter, Watch therefore and pray always: he
that would watch always, must take heed least his heart be overcharged at any
time; why? because if the heart be overcharged at any time, he cannot at that
time watch. For as a man's body that is overcharged with meat and drink, he is
inclined to sleep; so when a man is drunk and eaten up with covetousness, he
is inclined to sleep insinne, he cannot watch; therefore if we would watch we
must always take heed least at any time our hearts be overcharged.

And Christ implies the reason in the words of the Text, Least the day come
upon you unawares. The sum and substance of this our care and caution, ought
to be answerable to the danger, now that is not for a time only, but
continually.

First, Because there is danger.
there is danger least we be overtaken with these sins, that is the first
danger. We know Lot, Of the sins.
he that lived soberly in the midst

Secondly, there is another danger; as there Of judgment.
so there is danger least we be overtaken with judgment, either the day of
death, or the day of judgment. So the rich man Luke 12. Luke 12.
he was anxious, thinking of pulling down his old barnes, and enlarging them,
and at that time God requires his soul. We see here at that time when his
heart was overcharged with the cares of this life, death surprizeth him, and he
was taken away.

Or else if not the day of death, the day of judgment, for so Christ says in
the next verse, the day of judgment shall come as a snare upon the world.
Simile.
There is something in that; as birds, we see commonly they are entangled in
the snare that is cast over them when they are eating, so the world when they
are eating and drinking and sensual, that day shall come upon them as the
snare on the birds when they were eating. Luke 17.
So Christ says, Luke 17. look as it was in the time of Lot, when Sodom and
Gomorah was destroyed so it shall be when the world shall be destroyed: they
shall be eating and drinking, and buying and selling. They shall be eating and
drinking; is there any harm in that? No, that is not the meaning of it, but
eating sensually, and drinking immoderately, and buying and selling covetously
then that day shall come upon them. So that here is danger, continual danger,
least we be overtaken with these sins at all times, or least death or the day
of judgment overtake us at all times, therefore our care should be always,
Least at any time.

Discovering the abounding of these sins.
we need no other example, but this ordinary practice of dunkennesse,
surfeiting and covetousness, if it were no where else but in this City: men
are so far from watching, as that they think it lawful for them to have
there hearts overcharged.

For surfeiting, they think it sometimes lawful to give liberty, and reins,
to be overcharged with it: As at Christmas, the time of the coming of Christ,
as if they could not celebrate the coming of Christ in the flesh, except
themselves become fleshly. And at the beginning of Lent, as if they intended to
revenge themselves on God before hand, and since he will needs have them fast,
they will get in his book as far as they can by surfeiting. And so, on the
holidayes, as if by celebrating of holy days, they must needs become unholy.

And so in some times, people think it not only unlawful, but that they are
bound to be drunk, as at Nuptials, or at the Coronation of a King, they
think it a point of duty to be drunk that day, and they that are not drunk
then (as they said to Pilate) he is not Cesars friend. And so at the meeting
of friends, as if they could not meet friendly, and courteously, except they
be enemies to themselves, or as if they could not express humanity unless
by drunkenness they overwhelme and loose it. And so at the meeting of
strangers, men think it lawful to be drunk, (it is the manner of some to do
so) as if the way to entertain stangers were to become strangers to themselves.

And so for the third, the cares of this life, some men are so far from
thinking of, and using this caution always, that they think they may sometimes
suffer their hearts to be overcharged with the cares of this life. As when they
are married and have a charge of Children. As if the same God that cared for
them single, would not care for them when they are married; and as if the same
providence that extends to Sparrowes, did not extend to Children, those that
are made after the similitude and Image of God. Such men should remember, what
Christ says here, they should take heed least at any time their hearts be
overcharged. As there is no place, so there is no time that can dispense with
these sins to make it lawful to have our hearts overcharged with surfeiting
and drunkenness, and the cares of this life. Well says David, Psalm. 93. ult.
Psalm. 93. holiness becomes thy house forever. Holiness never wears out of
fashion. If holiness become Gods house for ever; then unholinesse, surfeiting
and drunkenness, and the cares of this life they never become Gods house. And
if they become not Gods house then they become not Gods Temple, his Chapel,
as we are 1 Corinthians. 6. says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 6.
Know ye not that you are the Temples of the holy Ghost? Let us then be
advised to take heed as Christ says here, lest our hearts be overcharged
with surfeiting or drunkenness, or the cares of this life. Take heed lest at
any time we defile and polute the Temple of God with these sins. Remember, as
in all virtues so in this, the crown is vigilancie, constancy, and
continuance: we must not only watch, but we must watch continually. We must
not not only take heed lest at some times, but lest at any time our hearts be
overcharged with surfeiting and drunkenness, and the cares of this life.

Let us remember we deal with such an enemy as will give us no truce, nor
rest: such a one as with whom we can never have peace or truce, that daily
lays wait to subvert us, that lays snares in our meat, and drink, and the
things of this life: Indeed as Saint Chrysostom says well, S. Chrysostom.
the whole world is but one snare. Now if Satan use this care continually to
subvert us, shall we not be as continual in our care, not to be subverted?
Shall he be more diligent to work our ruin, then we shall be to work our
safety and salvation?

As we see those that are besieged, when a Town or City is besieged with
enemies, they do not slack their guard a moment: because they fear that at
that time the enemy may come on them, and surprise them: yet notwithstanding
sometime they may slack their guard, and not have harm, because the enemy may
not know it. But it is not so with our spiritual enemies, we are surrounded
with spiritual enemies, that not only watch all opportunities, and take all
advantages, but they know when we give them advantage, when we are secure and
retchlesse, and they take it. Therefore it concerns us to look, lest at any
time our hearts be overcharged.

Let us not plead difficulty, and say it is a thing hard to stand upon our
guard, we cannot enjoy our selves. If the thing be difficult, yet look to
the end, it is profitable: lay the benefit we shall enjoy by this care in the
other end, and that will make the care light As in a pair of balance, Simile.
if a a man lay weight in the one scale, and none in the other, it will sink:
but if he lay a weight answerable in the other scale, the first will be light,
a man may lift it easily. So let us lay this continual care and caution in the
one balance, and the benefit that we have by it in the other balance, and
we shall never grudge at our care. Let us think with our selves, while this
care lasts, we are free from all other care; and who would not care for a while
upon condition to be eternally secured after.

I have done with the third point, how long we must take heed, in these words;
Lest at any time.

Now I proceed to the fourth part, that is, of what we are to take heed,

And that is first general.

Lest your hearts be overcharged. Observat. Drunkenness and covetousness,
etc. overcharge the heart.
It seems then, It is the Property of these sins, surfeiting and
drunkenness, and the cares of this life, to overcharge the heart, That is the
point.

Take heed, says our Savior, lest at any time your hearts be overcharged. It
implies that it is the property of these sins here mentioned to overcharge
the heart. Look what a millstone, or a talent of lead, is to the body, the same
are these sins to the soul; (which is meant by the heart; as S. Peter says,
the hidden man of the heart; that is, the hidden man of the soul) they
over-presse, and burden the soul: so much the Word here used implies, and
imports in the Original, Take heed to your selves, lest your hearts be
overcharged. The Word coming from Balos, that signifies no ordinary, portable
burden, but a grievous oppressing burden (as the Etimologists have it:) such as
cannot belifted, but with an extraordinary strength, with a Giants arm: such
are these sins to the soul, they are no ordinary, portable, but grievous
oppressing burdens.

Now the grievousnesse of this burden appears by these two things;

First, these sins are such a burden to the soul, as press the soul, as
press the soul from heaven to earth.

Secondly, they are such a burden, as except they be disburdened, except we
acquit our selves of them, they will press our souls down from earth to hell.

They press the soul from heaven to earth.
from heavenly affections to earthly. Look as a man is oppressed with a great
burden, from which he is not able to rise, nor to stir hand nor foot to
help himself for the doing of any thing: so it is with a man, when his soul
is overcharged with surfeiting and drunkenness, and the cares of this life:
he is oppressed with a grievous burden, he is not able to stir hand nor
foot: he is not able to exercise the powers, and faculties of his soul to do
any good, or to perform any spiritual dut^e indeed. As for two of them, the
two first; surfeiting and drunkenness, they disable a man from worldly
performances, therefore much more from heavenly and spiritual performances.

For the other the cares of this life; Covetousness, they burden the soul no
less then the former, though I grant it is more slilie and insensibly: nay,
they burden the soul in these two respects more.

First, surfeiting and drunkenness, they burden the soul but now and then,
sometimes: no man is continually surfeiting, or drunk: but when Covetousness
oppresses the soul, it does it constantly, it is a continual burden;
therefore in that respect they burden the soul more then the former.

Secondly, surfeiting and drunkenness, they burden the soul, not immediately,
but by the body, they burden the body the instrument of the soul, and so by
consequence the soul, but Covetousness burdens the soul immediately, it hangs
a weight, as a plummet of lead upon every faculty of the soul, so that the
soul cannot lift it self to any spiritual duty: it hangs a plummet of Lead
upon every power of the soul, whereby it becomes bowed and bended to the earth.

Will you see the truth of this in some particulars? The highest, and noblest
faculty of the soul, is the understanding, that whereby we apprehend, and
judge of things, now covetousness clogges, and burdens the understanding. Take
a covetous man, there is no man so dull, to apprehend spiritual things as he.
Indeed in matters of the world, talk with him in his own sphere of the
world, and worldly things, there I grant, he is quick and nimble enough, if
not above, yet equal with others; for the most part above others. It fares
with a covetous man, as it is with the Moon, when the Moon is enlightened in
that part that is toward the earth, commonly it is most dark in that part that
is toward heaven, Simile.
so it is in this: there is ignorance of spiritual things, often times where
there is the greatest light toward the things of the world. I say, talk with
such a one in his own sphere, of matters of the world, and the things of it,
he is quick and nimble enough, but come to spiritual things, that concern
the life to come, and there he is a very Nichodemus, he understands nothing.
Covetousness is to the understanding like the nail of Iael: says the Text,
Iael drove the nail through Sisera's temples when he was asleep, and
fastened his head to the ground: so covetousness fasteneth the head, the
understanding to the ground, that it cannot lift up it self to apprehend, and
understand the things of the Spirit: we see then Covetousness it burdens the
chief faculty of the soul, the understanding.

And so for the other faculties, the will and the affections it burdens them,
it makes the will and the affections of a man, when once it possesses them,
like the woman in the Gospel, that had a disease and infirmity 18. years,
says the Text, she was bowed together, that she could no way lift up her
self, Luke 13.1. Luke 13:1.
So it is with a covetous man, it bows the will to the ground, that he is not
able to lift up himself to a through prosecution of that that is good, or to a
constant declining, and flight from that which is spiritually ill.

And so for the affections it bows them to the ground, that they are not able
to lift up themselves to desire, and delight in any thing that is heavenly, not
to love, and joy in any thing, but such as are earthly and sensual. I say, it
bends them so to the ground, that they cannot constantly delight in these
things. I grant that a covetous man for a fit, for a while, his will and
affections may lift up themselves a little; but they are not able to hold out,
the greatness of the weight bears him down again, and oppresses him. He
that has his heart overcharged with covetousness, and so with surfeiting and
drunkenness, he may for a while lift up himself: as a man that is oppressed
with a burden, that gets the upper hand of him, and bears him down.
Covetousness bows the understanding, the will and affections to the ground.

And not only these, but likewise the fancy, and memory, and speech too, it
burdens those. Take a man that is covetous, his imagination works, and
exercises it self about the things of the world. For his memory, it
treasures up nothing, or but little else besides these. And so for his speech,
the speech of a covetous man, Simile
it is as the breath of a dying man: We say that when a man approaches to
death, his breath is earthly, so it is with the Discourse of a covetous man, it
is of the earth. It burdens the fancy, and memory, and speech of a man: so
that he dreams of nothing, he remembers nothing, he speaks of nothing
willingly, with delight, ordinarily, but that which is earthly. You see then
that Christ might well say, take heed lest your hearts be overcharged with
surfeiting, and drunkenness, and the cares of this life: for it is the
property of these sins to overcharge the heart, as it is of a burden to
press down, first from heaven to earth, but that is not all.

They press the soul from earth to hell.
and disburden our selves of them, they press the soul, as from heaven to
earth, so from earth to hell: so says the Apostle expressly for two of them,
1 Cor. 6.10. Be not deceived, neither fornicators, nor Idolaters, nor
effeminate, abusers of themselves with mankind, or thieves, or covetous, or
drunkards, shall ever inherit the kingdom of God. Neither covetous, nor
drunkards, there are two of them; and so for the first of them, surfeiting:
Phil. 3.19.
you see in Phil. 3.19. the Apostle speaks of some whose belly is their God,
whose end is damnation, and destruction. So likewise, Gal. 5.21.
Gal. 5.21. the Apostle reckons surfeiting, or revelling among the works of
the flesh, and tells them before hand that those that do such things shall not
inherit the kingdom of God, envy, murder, drunkenness and revelling, and
such like; (revelling may signify, and does properly, gluttony) of which I
have told you before in time past, that they that do such things shall not
inherit the kingdom of God. So then we see the grievousnesse of these sins
in two things: First they press the soul from heaven to earth in the
affections and exercise, and then except we be disburdered of them, they
press the soul from earth to hell.

If it be the property of these things, To take heed of this sin as a burden.
to burden the soul, it may be a motive to force this caution of Christ to
take heed that we be not overcharged with surfeiting and drunkenness, and
the cares of this life. Why should we take heed, the reason is, because they
burden the soul, and the heart. We are naturally of our selves, lumpish and
heavy enough to perform spiritual duties, we need not make our selves more
heavy. We bring into the world burden enough to press our souls, that makes
us unfit for spiritual performances, we need not clog our souls with more
unnecessary burdens.



Why men feel not the burden of their sins.
I answer, it is true, they feel not the burden of them; the reason of it is
this, because it is the property of these sins to take away the sense of
them; the burden is not the less, because they feel it not; because it is the
property of these sins to besot the soul and make it insensible that they
cannot perceive the burden. The wise man says as much of drunkenness, Prove.
23. ult.
Prove. 23. says he, thou shall be, that is, if thou give thy self to
drunkenness as one that lies in the midst of the Sea, or the top of a Mast.
The wise man resembles a drunken man to a man that lies on the top of a Mast
in a great storm when there is danger, when the ship and the Mast reels, he
lies there and thinks not of it, in his drunkenness he feels it not. And
then in the last verse says he, they have stricken me and I was not sick,
they have beaten me and I felt it not. It is the property of drunkenness to
make a man insensible of the wounds and plagues that he receives by it. I
grant that they that are adicted to these sins they feel not the burden,
because it is the property of these sins to take away the sense of them; but
what then? because they feel not the burden of them is it the less? Nay it is
greater because it is not felt. As the Physicians say of diseases, of all
diseases those are most dangerous that are not felt. And that is the reason
that a Consumption it is hard to be cured because it is hard to be discerned
till it have eaten and wasted the body so much that it is almost impossible to
be cured. When it is easy to be cured it is almost impossible to be
discerned, and when it is easy to be discerned, it is almost impossible to be
cured. As of all diseases of the body those that are most dangerous that are
not felt: So of all the burdens of the soul those are most dangerous that are
not felt. The reason is, because the feeling of the danger makes men seek for
remedy, and labor to be disburthened of them when they feel the burden; but
when men feel not the burden that lies on them, they seek not for remedy,
that is the first answer.

But secondly if they feel not the burden now, the time shall come that they
shall feel it, either when God opens their eyes to see the grievousnesse of
their sins, and to give them the grace of repentance; or hereafter when they
shall press the soul to the bottom of hell. First, if God open their eyes
then they will be sensible of the burden. It is with sin, as the
Philosophers say it is with heavy elements: it is a rule in Philosophy that
an element in its proper place is not heavy, that is, it exercises not
actually its heaviness. If a man lie under water though all the water be above
him he feels not the weight of it; the reason is, because the water is in its
proper place. So in a Well or Pumpe, when a man draws a bucket of water, he
feels it not while it is under water, but when it is above water, he feels
the burden of it. So, as long as men lie under these sins, when God gives
them not a hand to lift them up, they feel not the burden of them; but if God
reach a hand of grace to lift them up, and open their eyes to see the
grievousnesse of their sins, they feel the burden of them, and go and
importune the throne of grace and desire to be disburthened, that is the first
thing.

But if they feel it not so, that God open their conscience, and their eyes
here, they shall feel the burden of it hereafter. I told you what the Apostle
says, and what he says to the Corinthians I say to you, that drunkards and
covetous, I may say it of surfeiting also, they that are guilty of these things
shall not inherit the kingdom of God. They press the soul to hell, and
though for the present they take away the sense of them, yet afterward, when
it is past redress men shall be sensible enough of the burden.

Secondly, as it may serve for caution, To use remedies against these sins.
to Heb. 12.1. says he, since we are compassed about with so great a cloud of
witnesses, let us lay aside every weight that presses down, and run with
patience the race that is set before us. It is the advice of the Apostle to lay
down every weight that we may run with patience the race that is set before
us. Now surfeiting and drunkenness and the cares of this life, or
covetousness, are weights and clogs that burden the soul and hinder a man,
not only from running the race that is set before him, but they hinder him
from so much as going; when a man is sunk under this burden he is not able
to step or set one foot before another in this way: therefore we had need
to be diligent to disburthen our selves, if we find our selves burdned, and
oppressed with these sines.



Means to be disburdened of these sins.
First labor to feel the grievousnesse of them. Till a man feel the
grievousnesse of the disease, he is not diligent to To feel the grievousnesse
of them.
it is otherwise with spiritual diseases then with corporal: In corporal
diseases, first we find the simptomes of them, and then we know them; but in
spiritual diseases first we must know them before we can have the simptomes
of them, before we can be relieved of them: the first thing we must labor
for is the knowledge of the grievousnesse of them, to feel how they burden us
both in spiritual duties and other, how they press our souls (except we be
disburthened of them in time) even to hell.

Go to Christ for his Spirit.
so he likewise is able to take our burden from us. Let us go to him, and
desire him to send his Spirit into our hearts, that is, a Spirit of strength
and power able to lift off these burdens. For as I told you, when he says
here take heed least your hearts be overcharged, it signifies such a burden
as is a grievous oppressing burden, such as cannot be lifted but with a
Giants arm, such a burden are these sins, they oppress the soul, and none
but the Spirit of God can ease us of them. Therefore let us go to Christ and
desire him to send his Spirit into our hearts to ease us of this burden. Look
as it is with those that are troubled with the Incubus, the Nightmare, when
they feel a great weight and burden on them, they put forth all their power
to free themselves of it; so when we find this Incubus, this spiritual
Nightmare to lie on us, and to press, not only our bodies but our souls,
we should use all our strength and power to be free that so we may run with
patience the race that is set before us.

Thirdly and lastly, let us use the means, (besides these there are some
means to be To practice the contrary.
What are those? Look as in Physic the rule is; contraries are cured by
contraries: so if we have burdened our selves by surfeiting, let us disburthen
our selves by the contrary: if we have burdened our selves by eating
immoderately, let us put the knife to our throat abridge our selves in the use
of meat, not to eat so much as we may do: for as I said before out of that
doubtful author, he that will go in the use of indifferent things as far as
he may, to the utmost length of his tether, it is a thousand to one but that
man will offend. He that sleeps upon the pitch or brinke of a downfall or
Precipis, it is twenty to one but he falls. And so for drunkenness if our
hearts and souls be oppressed with the excessive use of strong drink: says
the Apostle, rather then I will offend my brother I will not eat flesh while I
live; if the Apostles argument be good, rather then I will offend my brother, I
will not eat flesh, the argument will hold thus too, that rather then we will
offend our selves, and burden our souls, we will not drink strong drink
while we live.

Let us labor thus to take a kind of holy revenge on our selves, so the
Apostle calls it, 2 Cor. 7.11. says he, Behold this self same thing that you
sorrowed after a godly sort, what clearing of your selves, what revenge it has
wrought. I say thus we should take a spiritual revenge of our selves, that if
we have been overshot in the use of meat or drink and exceeded our bounds,
that for the future we limit and abridge our selves, and take a kind of
revenge of our selves. This is the way to disburthen our selves if we find
that our hearts have been oppressed with these things.

here take notice briefly of the perverse judgment of the world, The false
judgment of the world.
how contrary it is to the judgment of our Savior: ask the world who have
the lightest, and merriest hearts of all men; They will tell you those that
fare daintily, that are good fellows, they are joviall and merry hearts. But
ask Christ, and he will tell us that surfeiting and drunkenness opresse the
heart; they have not (as the world would make us believe) light-some hearts. It
is true, if we will believe their faces, they seem to have light-some hearts,
if we will judge of their hearts by their fleiring, and laughter: but Solomon
says, Prove. 14.13.
Prove. 14.13. That even in that laughter the heart is sorrowful: there is
sorrow in their laughter, it is but from the teeth outward, and it is not so
only for the present, but the end of that mirth is heaviness. It is sorrow for
the present, and the conclusion is heaviness.

Therefore whatsoever the world says, Epicures and drunken men, such as are
given to the immoderate use of meat and drink, those men have the heaviest
hearts. Let the world say what it will, the life of a Christian is cheerful,
he has a lightsome heart. Says Christ, Come unto me, Mat. 11.28.
all ye that are weary, and heavy laden, and you shall find rest to your
souls; Take my yoke upon you, for my yoke is easy. Christ's yoke is easy,
he that has given his name to Christ, that sets himself constantly to the
performance of spiritual duties, he has a lightsome heart. Nay, whereas all
other things, they may be burdened, his body, and his estate may be burdened
for a while, and his name may be burdened for a while, but his heart is light
and merry. Therefore as the Wiseman says, A wounded spirit who can bear? But
if the heart be well, it will bear a man's infirmities: so long as a man's heart
is light: as long as the burden lies in a man's body, or his name, or estate,
if the heart be light they may be borne. Of all men, a Christian, a good man,
a conscientious man has the lightsomest heart. This shall suffice to be
spoken of the fourth part in general, what we are to take heed of, lest our
hearts be burdened. I told you it is the property of these things to burden
the heart.

Now I come in the next place more particularly to tell you, what we are to
take heed of, that our hearts be not overcharged with surfeiting. Take heed
lest your hearts be oppressed at any time With surfeiting.

That is, with riotous, immoderate excessive eating. The word in the original
is Clifani. The sense and derivation of the word is borrowed from those two
pains and distempers of the head that is caused by sympathy, and consent of
the head with the stomach, through distemper of riot, and inordinate eating.
In the Latin it signifies those crudities that are caused in the stomach
through immoderate excessive eating, when the heart is surcharged, when there
is more meat then it is able to digest. Thence it is that Christ wishes us
here to take heed; Take heed to your selves, says Christ, lest your hearts be
overcharged with surfeiting. Now look what Christ charged his Disciples, he
charge us also as I told you out of Mark 13. ult. What I say unto you, Mark
13. ult.
I say unto all. It was indeed spoken to them first, to the Disciples; it is
our duty also to take heed lest at any time our hearts be overcharged with
surfeiting. The point that I will insist on at this time, is this, that It is
our duty to take heed, We should not be overcharged with immoderate eating.
that our hearts be not overcharged, with immoderate, and excessive eating.

It is that that the Apostle warnes the Galatians of, in Gal. 5.21. to take
heed of, Gal. 5.21.
he reckons it among the works of the flesh, revelling, or gluttony. The
works of the flesh are, envy, murder, drunkenness, revelling, or gluttony,
and the like; Now see the caution, in the words following; Of which I tell you
before, as I have told you in time past, that they that do such things, shall
not inherit the kingdom of God. To stir up, and enforce caution, the
Apostle sets before them the greatness of the danger, if they did suffer their
hearts to be overcharged with revelling, and gluttony, it would be such a
burden, as would press their souls down to hell, such as would exclude them
from entering into the heavenly Canaan. So likewise the wise man in Pro. 23.20.
Prove. 23.20.
says he, Be not among wine-bibbers, or riotous eaters of flesh. Observe,
says the Wiseman, be not among them. What? not among them, is there such
danger? Is their company so contagious, and infectious, that we may not be
among them? No, we must not willingly, ordinarily be among them; we must not
choose such company to converse with, Why? because there is danger of
infection; Danger in conversing with Epicures.
First there is danger by their example.

And then there is danger by their exhortation or counsel.



First by their example, you know it is a saying, that seeing other men eat
oft-times brings a man a stomach: he that had no stomach, or appetite, by
seeing others eat, it draws him on to eat; so the very sight of a man
eating, that is a glutton, and gives scope and loses the raines to his
appetite it transports others that are spectators, by his example.

Secondly, by counsel, you know men often call upon others, and say, eat
neighbors, etc. as they give themselves to immoderate excess of eating:
therefore in both these respects, we are not to affect or seek their company,
it is dangerous, by reason of their example, and of their counsel.

But why are we to take heed that our hearts be not overcharged with
surfeiting?

I answer, first, because if our hearts be It unfits us for good duties.
we are unfit to perform spiritual duties. I told you before, surfeiting
burtheneth and overchargeth the soul, and makes it heavy, and lumpish, not
able to lift up it self to perform any spiritual duty. It is a pretty
conceit of Saint Chrysostom, in his first Homily on Genesis: that Moses, S.
Chrysostom. Genesis hom. 1.
when he came from the Mount, and brought the two tables of the commandments
with him, when he perceived the people of Israel to whom he came, that they had
filled themselves full, and betook themselves to dancing, and sporting
themselves, says Saint Chrysostom, he took the Tables, and threw them down;
Why? he thought it an absurd, and unfit thing to give commandments for them
to observe, who now had gorged themselves with meat. No man is so unfit for
the service of God, to observe the commandments of God, as those that have
surfeited, and filled themselves with meat. So, likewise says our Savior,
Take heed to your selves, lest at any time your hearts be overcharged with
surfeiting: In the next verse but one, says he, Watch, and pray always, he
opposes watching and prayer to surfeiting. Those that have their hearts
overcharged with surfeiting cannot watch and pray, and perform spiritual
duties. Now therefore the first reason why we should be heedfull that our
hearts be not overcharged with surfeiting, is because it makes our souls
unfit for the performance of spiritual duties, it makes us unapt for the doing
of that for which we came into the world.

It is the nurse of security.
When a man has filled himself with meat and drink, as it is apt to incline
him to bodily sleep, so it is to spiritual sleep too, to security. He that
gives himself to satisfy his sensual immoderate appetite, there is no man so
subject to security. See the truth of this in those of the old world, in the
time of Noah, though he preached to them that the world should be drowned,
and overwhelmed, yet they cared not, they were secure, and careless, and
feared not the threatening of Noah, nor the judgment of God: the reason is
given, because they betook themselves too much to eating and drinking, Luke
17.27. They did eat and drink, Luke 17.27.
and marry wives, and give in marriage till the day that Noah entered into the
Arc, and the flood came, and destroyed them all. But why did the flood come
and destroy them? The reason is insinuated in these words, because they ate,
and drank; that is, they gave themselves to immoderate eating and drinking.

Thirdly, It breeds many lusts.
we should therefore be careful against the soul. As the Apostle Peter says
in that place; As pilgrims, and strangers abstain from fleshly lusts, that
fight against the soul. If a man give himself to immoderate eating, he
strengthens the flesh, to combat and fight against his soul: it gets the
victory, and oppresses, and bears down the soul. See the like in Ierem.
5.8. Jer. 5.8.
speaking of Israel, that they were as fed horses; In the morning every one
neighs after his neighbors wife: See the consequent, In the morning they are
as fed horses; there is a surfeiting, they filled themselves to the full, then
presently their souls are overborne, every one neighs after his neighbors
wife. There is the third reason why we should be careful not to have our
hearts overcharged with surfeiting, because it fills our souls full of lusts.

It brings Gods judgments on us.
Fourthly, and lastly, it brings on the judgments of God: Look as it was with
Sodom, they were eating and drinking, and giving themselves to satisfy their
sensual appetites, and the judgments of God came and swept them away suddenly
and fearfully. Ezekiel. 16.49.
Ezekiel. 16.49. Behold, this was the iniquity of thy sister Sodom, pride,
fullness of bread: there is surfeiting. Verse 50.
Now in verse 50. Therefore I took them away as I saw good. They gave
themselves to pride, and fullness of bread, to surfeiting and drunkenness, and
God took them away as he saw good. So in Amos 6.4, 5, 6. speaking against the
wantonness of Israel, Amos 6.4, 5, 6.
he says, They stretch themselves on beds of Ivorie, they eat the lambs of
the flock, and the calves out of the midst of the stall; that is, they did
yield too much to their sensual appetite in the use of these things. Verse 7.
What then? Therefore in verse 7. They shall go captive with the first that
go captive: and the banquet of them that stretched themselves shall be
removed. Because they gave themselves to satisfy their sensual appetite, and
to the immoderate use of the creature, God would cut them short, and they
should go into captivity, where they should be pinched with want, and
penury. You see the reasons why we should take heed that our hearts be not
overcharged with surfeiting. First, because it makes the soul unfit for
spiritual duties. Secondly, it is the nurse of security. Thirdly, it fills
the soul full of noisome lusts that fight against the soul. Fourthly, it
provokes the judgments of God, as against us, so against others too. These
sins are such, And against others.
that they provoke the judgments of God not only against us, but against
others. Often times poor people smart with famine and penury: the reason is,
because of the excess and immoderate eating of great ones. As in a mist,
Simile.
we say it is a sign of rain and showers, when the mists go up by the
mountains: so when surfeiting sends up a mist in those mountains, those that
are eminent above others in power or place, it is an argument it will bring
rain, not only on the mountains, but on the holes and valleys, it will cause
a storm and tempest. These sins are such sins as draw judgments not only
on them that are guilty of them, but on others also.

I might add to these many other reasons, It hurts the body.
because it does not disable the soul only, but the body also, it fills that
full of diseases; in respect of which it is grown now a disputable question,
and has been long, whether surfeiting or the sword kill more. We complain
that men in these times live not to the years of our forefathers. It is true,
we live a less time, the reason is, because we eat more meat, we kill our
selves. Every glutton is guilty of his own death, at least if he be not
guilty of his death manifestly, yet he is obliquely, he cuts his life short
which he might else enlarge (I question not) to the days of our forefathers,
if we were careful of our lives.

It hurts his estate.
as we see it plainly in many of our gallants. It was a good saying of Plato a
heathen man, a man undoes himself, by giving way to his sensual apetite, he
devours his estate and patrimony.

It wrongs the commonwealth.
but it hurts others, it hurts the common wealth, because by prejudicing of our
selves, by consequent we prejudice the common wealth whereof we are a part. You
know what the Civillians say, it concerns the community, that every
particular man use his estate well. Now if we use our estates ill, and
impoverish our selves in our estates, by consequence we impoverish the common
wealth: if we make our bodies unfit by surfeiting to serve God, and our
country, we impoverish the country.

Lastly, we hurt not only our selves but It wrongs the poor.
that might be relieved with our superfluity; we hurt our brethren, and so by
consequence we come to be guilty of a double murder, by surfeiting we murder
our selves, and our poor brethren that by our superfluity might be relieved.
I will not insist further on the reasons, but come to make some Use.

Surely if ever it were seasonable to take heed of surfeiting,

We many times speak against drunkenness (and if there were not laws made
against it, what could we expect but an inundation and catoclisme, and
overwhelming? Time was it was the fault of Beggars, As drunk as a Beggar, they
used to say, but now it is the fault of great ones, It is a fault not only of
the night, and of the darkness, but of the noone day) but for gluttony, we
lift not up our voices as trumpets as we should do. Simile.
It is true it fares with the diseases of the soul as it does in the body:
Physicians tell us and we know by experience, when a man is troubled with the
stone and the gout, if he have a pang and fit of the stone he feels not the
gout; The reason is because of the violence of the stone, it is so grievous a
pain that it bears down, and takes away the sense of the gout. Just so it
is with surfeiting and drunkenness, they are both grievous diseases of the
soul, but yet drunkenness is the more grievous, the reason is because of the
violence of it, we take no notice of gluttony (but speak against drunkenness)
though that be a work of the flesh, Gal. 5.
as we see Gal. 5. As the gout is a grievous disease, though the stone be
more grievous; so gluttony is a grievous disease of the soul though
drunkenness be a more grievous. And if we that are Ministers had ever need
to speak against gluttony, surely it is in this land, as we may see by that
order lately set forth. It is a sin almost proper to this Land; we make our
selves a scorn by our intemperance in meat; and if we should speak against
it in this nation, I know not where it should be more then in this place.

Men surfeit many ways.
more then we can digest, that is the most enormious surfeiting, but otherwise
men surfeit diverse ways, besides in quantity when In eating too much.


So also in quality, when they hunt for too In quality.
It is the fault generally of nice curious dames, they esteem not meat so
much by the taste, as by the daintiness and variety, not so much (as the Poet
says) by the taste, as by the price; when things are common they care not for
them: this is a kind of gluttony. In Luke 16. the rich man that fared
deliciously every day, he is called a glutton, why? It appears not by the Text
that he overburthened his stomach, that he did eat more then he could digest,
but because he fared deliciously every day, he hunted too curiously and too
anxiously after dainty fare, this made him a glutton. So we commit gluttony in
our immoderate and too careful seeking for dainty meat, when we are not
content with such things as are common, but we must have such thing as are
hard to be got, and are costly. As the Poet says, we have a kind of humor
that we scorn to be satisfied with every thing, but only with such things as
are hard to be got; things when they come out first, and are of great price are
fittest for us. This is a kind of In respect of time.

Eating at unseasonable times.




Thirdly, a man may become guilty of surfeiting in respect of time, two ways.

Not only when they eat unseasonably, Ier. 5.8. Jer. 5.8.
As fed horses in the morning, such as when in the morning they should betake
themselves to their devotion to the performance of spiritual duties, they fall
to cram themselves, that scarce their eyes are opened, but they open their
mouths to fill themselves. So says the wise man in Ecclesiastes, Woe to thee
O Land whose Princes eat in the morning. No question, it is not a fault for
men to eat in the morning, nay I am persuaded that men are bound in such times
as these, that live in an infected air, to eat in the morning, it is
physical; but when men constantly eat in the morning, and so eat as they are
made unfit for spiritual duties, this is a kind of surfeiting.

Philosophers say that when a man has eaten somewhat he is lighter then when
he fasts, and they give the reason, because the Spirits are more refreshed; I
dispute not that problem, I think the contrary that a man is not lighter,
though he be in his heart, yet he is not in the skales or balance: but
spiritually when a man is fasting he is more active and quick for the
performance of spiritual duties. Now men that in the morning betake themselves
to eating and drinking they become guilty of surfeiting and gluttony, because
they are made unfit for spiritual duties.

But that is not all, there is another gluttony Spending too much time in
eating.
when they bestow too much time and stay too long in satisfying of their
appetite, (I mean not upon extraordinary occasions at feasts, etc. for then we
may seek for delicacies, and we may sit longer then at othertimes, but) when
we ordinarily sit an hour, or two, or three hours at a meal, when we do
not make it as we should do, a by thing, but we make it our work, and our
employment. We complain that our time here is short; but as Seneca says, we
may find fault with our selves that it is so short. How easy is it for a man
to satisfy nature soon, and betake himself to his general or particular
calling? Now when we shall spend not half an hour but an hour, or two or
three hours, and sit all night before we can rise from meat: this is a kind
of surfeiting; we deprive our selves of our time. This is not to redeem time,
but to spend time and our selves, that that God has given us for the doing
good to our selves and others, we cast it away carelessly in superfluities upon
our selves. We speak to men, and tell them, if they desire a blessing on
themselves, and to keep the judgments of God from them, let them be diligent
in their callings, and pray in their families, and in their closets; alas, they
are so full of employments they cannot spare time to pray with their charge,
yet they can spend two or three hours, sometimes a whole day in visiting their
friends, and in holding an idle chat with others, they can spend three or four
hours sitting at meals. How much better were it, to take away some time, to
improve and redeem time (that we cast away) for examining our selves upon our
beds? to go and make our peace with God, to search and try our selves? Thus we
become guilty of gluttony, and surfeiting, not only in respect of the
quantity, by eating too much, and in respect of the quality in curiosity; (
Ahab did not search more curiously for Eliah, through the land then some do
after delicacies) but also in respect of the time, when we eat in the
morning, (though it be not absolutely unlawful, but) when we so eat as to
make us unfit for good duties, as when we eat too long, or eat in the times
of humiliation, when there is no necessity of eating, as in the times of
fasting. Some men are made such slaves to their appetite, that if it bid them
come, they must come, if it bid them provide such a dish they must have it.
They are slaves to their appetite, they set appetite in a throne, it has
dominion in them, when that commands they must obey. That is a third kind of
gluttony in respect of the time.

by an anxious care for meat before hand, When men take too much care for
meat. Romans 13.
and by too sensual a delight in eating for the time.

First, for too anxious care before hand. This is that the Apostle speaks of
Romans 13. making provision for the flesh: such men as use care to provide for
the flesh.

You will say,

Yes, but when men are too anxious,

Lastly, men are guilty of immoderate eating, they are guilty of gluttony,
when in the use of meat they are too much transported. When a man does not as
he should use meat only for the satisfying of nature, and for inabling of
himself to undergo the duties of his general, or particular calling, but is
transported, and too much affected with it, and gives too much way to his
sensual appetite, so that he thinks it the only contentment, the only
pleasure in the world. There are some such men that think there is almost no
contentment in the world, but to relish fine, and pleasant dishes. It is not so
much our meat that makes us gluttons, as our affection toward our meat: such
men are just like those the Apostle speaks of, Phil. 3.19.
Phil. 3.19. They make their belly their god. Why so? because they give all
their devotion to their belly, they take the greatest pleasure and contentment
in satisfying their belly. Such are those too, that if they want a dish that
they desire, they are never quiet; and if they be spoken to, they are ready to
say, Has not God given to us all the creatures alike? It is true, but mark
the falacie; while they use their liberty they lose it. God has given us
liberty to eat meat, and any kind of meat, if it be in our calling, and we
be able to provide for our selves with the caution before mentioned; but these
men lose their liberty, they bring themselves into such an estate, that they
cannot want it. There are some men, let them want Tobacco, or such a dish as
they devote themselves to, they cannot live. This is that that the Apostle
says, in 1 Corin. is to bring a man's self under the power of a thing. Says
the Apostle, it is lawful for a man to eat any thing, but says he, I will
not bring my self under the power of any thing. How does a man bring himself
under the power of any thing? When a man yields too much to his appetite, that
he is brought to this pass, that he is a slave to his appetite: if it call
for such a dish, he must have it; if it call for such viands, he cannot be
without them: Then a man is brought under the power of meat. In using our
liberty, if we do not look to it, we may lose our liberty.

If we examine our selves by these rules, we shall find that there are few,
but they are guilty of surfeiting, not only in respect of quantity, when they
are immoderate, but in regard of quality, when they are too delicate, and in
respect of time, as we see in Amos 6. They did eat the calves out of the
stall; and the lambs out of the flock, when God called for humiliation; they
remembered not the afflictions of Joseph. And last of all, when we are too
careful to provide our selves before hand, or else are too much transported in
the use of meat, by these means we become guilty of surfeiting. Therefore
we should follow the advice of our Savior here, take heed lest at any time our
hearts be overcharged with surfeiting. *

FINIS.
THE GENERATION OF SEEKERS.
COLLOS. 3.1. Seek those things which are above.
YOu see my Text is a consequent from the former words, If you be risen with
Christ. It suffices not that a proposition be good, except the consequent and
illation be also strong. The Apostle therefore having premised the former part
of the proposition, the antecedent; If ye be risen with Christ, he here brings
in the consequent of the proposition, seek those things that are above.

And here it is needful I suppose, (both for the quitting of our Apostle from
all suspicion; and also for the clearing of that that follows) to stay a while
and view the several ligaments by which the two parts of the Text are knit
together. And briefly to inquire into those grounds and reasons, why if we be
risen with Christ, we must seek those things that are above.

And for this inquiry I confess there is not any thing specified in the Text:
but I appeal to any judicious auditour if it be not herein employed. My Text
being like a well couched building, wherein the stones and only the principal
materials are in the view, but the Cement and Mortar is undiscernable; If ye
be risen with Christ, seek those things which are above.

Admirable is the logic and sinews of our Apostle in this place, affecting
here rather strength of sense, then language, and pregnancie of reason above
eminency of words.

Two reasons enforcing the seeking things above.
Two reasons I find especially, whereupon these words are grounded, which as
the foundation in the architecture gives strong support to the whole: either of
them able to infer, both together to enforce this duty.

There was great reason that the Colossians now risen with Christ, should seek
those things that are above, whether we look to the direct beams above, or
the reflect beams on themselves, whether we respect, God that raised them, or
Themselves that were raised.

First, in respect of God that raised them; In respect of God.
to give their future life to him that had given them life; to employ those
gifts and graces that they had so lately received from his hands in his
service, to the honor of the doner. An argument in the balance of the
Apostle, weighty and ponderous; therefore when else where he goes about to
urge the Romans to the like duty; as one that well knew how potent above the
rest this was, he makes choice of this, Romans 6.13. Romans 6.13.
give not your members weapons of unrighteousness to sin, but give your
selves to God: Why? As those that are alive from the dead; or because you are
quickened with Christ.

Every blessing that God bestows upon us, is or should be so many real
persuasions, Spiritual blessings special obligations.
and bonds and obligations to tie, and bind us to obedience: but spiritual
blessings, such as the raising of these Collossians mentioned in the Text, they
lay so much a stricter bond on us, by how much more they be excellent in
themselves, and beneficial to us. The time once was that the Collossians were
darkness, but now they are light in the Lord. They were once the vassels of
Satan, but now they are the servants of Christ; they were once dead in
trespasses and sins, but now they are alive, raised from the dead. Sinews of
Brass, a heart of Adamant and Steel, must needs relent in the fence and
memory of such a mercy, to bend it to holy and gracious duties.

It is the ignorance of men to think that the doctrine of Christ is a doctrine
of carnal liberty, that the Gospel is a Charter, and immunitie from
obedience, at least from that strict obedience to which men were tied under the
Law. As if because God has done more for us then for them, therefore we
should do less for him; that because we are eased of that clog of ceremonies,
and such burdens, we might load our selves with more guilt; and because he
has purchased our freedom from sin, therefore we might take freedom to
sin: or because with these Collossians we are quickened with Christ, therefore
we may crucify afresh the Lord of life by unlawful courses, and as much as
in us lies still hinder our reviving.

I would to God this age had afforded no such sophisters, in whom
profaneness, like a distemper has turned the Physic administered for their
cure to a disease, that has made these mercies of God one powerful pretense
to sin, and an occasion to loose the reins, and to pour out themselves to
all wickedness. How much better was the practice of that gracious Matron,
Peter's wives mother? Matthew. 8.15.
Matthew. 8.15. no sooner Christ had cured her, but presently she arose and
ministered to him, she consecrated the first fruits of her health and strength
to the service of Christ. Nay how much better was the Logic of gracious
Joseph, in whom the memory of his masters kindness showed in advancing of him,
was a sovereign remedy to keep him from the enchantments of his mistrisse;
ever upon the review of it concluding how shall I do this wickedness and
sin against God? Genesis 39.9.
Genesis 39 9. But I forget my self, that all this while I dwell upon a
circumstance; but what was spoken to these Collossians is fit for us. I hope
there are some here present that with these Collossians in the Text are raised
already to the life of grace (I pray that all may) and therefore in that
respect stand as deeply bound as they to seek those things that are above. If
you please to go along, and parallel, and lay our happiness to the scales
with theirs, you will confess that we are bound more.

A greater obligation on us then those in former times.
First, the Colossians were yet in their minority; when the Apostle wrote this
Epistle, the light of the Gospel, it was but even now broken out amongst them;
those thick clouds and mists of Gentilisme and superstition wherein they were
formerly wrapped, were scarce dispelled. And when once the Sun was risen
among them, and with his wonted speed hastened to his height, upon the sudden he
set at once, and to them ended in perpetual darkness. Even this our Apostle,
though himself were cut off with an untimely end; yet he saw these Collossians
go to their grave alive, and were swallowed by an earthquake as Eusebius
witnesses. But for us I appeal to all venerable records of antiquity, if any
time since Christ has afforded a Church on which the beams of heaven has
shone so bright and so clear as on ours? The Gospel we have now a long time
enjoyed. It is not many years ago since they said we were going to our
Climactericall year; and almost all men's hearts failed them. And if you will
believe the world, still there is somewhat unlucky coming toward us: they
will tell us that the concurring of this Easter day, 1626.
day with our Ladies, certainly imports some ill. Alas, did not our sins
portend worse then this, we still might hope that the light of the Gospel
would continue with us, and that Religion should not have a fatal period as it
is sometimes with men.

Secondly, these Collossians, though they were novices, and weak; yet they had
whole armies and squadrons of enemies. Besides those cunning Sophisters that
went about to put tricks and falacies on them, Col. 2.4. Collos. 2.4.
And besides a band of Newters that came into the field with mixed colors,
bearing partly Moses and partly Christ, that pretended to be confederates, but
intended to betray them. Besides these there was a troop of Panims, and
Pagans, and subtle heathen Philosophers, that with banners displayed, and open
defiance made war against them, Salvian on Collos. 2.
says Salvian upon the second of this Epistle. I believe his chronology
failed him; for Eusebius says that that Sect sprang not up till the second of
Fabian: But I say, still there were some adversaries that made war against
them, so the word signifies, Chap. 2. Verse. 8. Take heed that no man carry you
away. The word there is a military term expressing those acti silogizan that
they use to make in hostile affairs. But as for us, I must confess with
sorrow of heart that too many Romish dogs there be that lie abroad in the
Caves and blind corners of the Land, that as the Apostle speaks, 2 Timothy
creep into silly men and women's houses; I say, the truth is, though there be
too many Romish emmissaries among us; yet thanks be to God, openly to profess
and publicly to maintain superstition (as those hypocrites among the
Colossians) they dare not. I hope such has been the restraint by the force of
the Laws, and such has been the care of our Religious King (which God more
and more increase) that I hope they never shall (and I pray that they never
may) prevail more against us. And let those eyes fall out with looking when
our Land shall be like them. I will proceed no further in the parallel.

O that we would every day set aside sometime, to account Gods mercies to us;
how powerful would it be to awaken us to seek those things that are above?
When Satan shall solicit us to commit any evil, how powerful would it be to
repulse him, and to put all by, as Joseph waved his mistrisse inticement, with
a how shall I do this and sin against God?

Or if the memory of these Collossians be buried with their Carcasses, then I
beseech you cast your eyes abroad on foreign nations this day, and the
miseries that are on them will read the mercies of God to you. How many Cities
and Countries are there where the sound of the Gospel is not? at least not
sincerely preached and heard? But alas, alas, how many are there where the
sound of the Gospel cannot be heard, for the noise of Drums, the rattling of
Armor, the roaring of Canons, and the confusion of wars that drown the cry
of the Preachers, as they drowned the cry of their children in their sacrifices
to Moloch? while we alone have enjoyed the Gospel in safety; I would to God
with sincerity.

What can we think, but that God who has bestowed his blessings on us with a
more liberal hand then upon others, does expect from us as from the Colossians
(in the Text) that we seek those things that are above, more then others? What
little comfort will it be to us that we have had these favors, if we go on
in sin? the increase of Gods blessings upon us here, will be an augmentation
of our punishments hereafter. I conclude the point; then we make a right use
of Gods blessings when (as water pipes that send the water as high as is level
with the head,) what we receive from the hand of God, we return to him
again. This is the first ground whereupon the Apostles argument is built. The
love of God showed to these Colossians in raising them to the life of grace,
laying upon them an obligation by way of thankfulness to seek those things
that are above. The next ground follows.

If [Yee] be risen with Christ then seek the things that are above.
In respect of our selves.
these Colossians were now risen with Christ, therefore now it became them as
men of another world, to devote themselves to the study, and contemplation of
the things above, and no longer to be in the pursuit of things below. To see
Moales, and Swine, men of the earth as the Psalmist says to be diligent,
still to dig in the earth, who would wonder; but to see such as profess
themselves strangers and Pilgrims on earth, such as all should be that are
risen with Christ, to see them set up their staff and their rest, as if there
were no celestial city, no further Jerusalem to be looked for but this
earthly (like him that would not give his part in Paris for his part in
Paradise. And (by the way) I cannot greatly blame him, it seems this man had
some part in the one, and none in the other) such as whose profession is to
renounce the world and themselves, to see such, such I say to run themselves
breathless to be keen and eager in the pursuit of the things below! to
profess a resurrection with Christ, when yet their thoughts and affections
savor of nothing but earth; what is it, if this be not a strange incongruitie?
As the man that fixed his eyes on the earth, and stretched his hands to heaven,
and cried O Jupiter. Or like the cheating votaries of Rome that profess
poverty, in plenty of riches.

The care of all those that desire to adorn their calling, The care of those
that will adorn their profession.
it must be the same that the Apostle wishes the Colossians, to weigh not
only what is lawful for them to do, but what is comely and graceful; not
only what may stand with a good conscience: but with the credit and honor of
Religion also. What else mean those frequent exhortations of the Apostle as
well in other places as here, to walk worthy and as becomes Saints, Ephesians.
5.3. To walk honestly, Ephesians. 5.3.
or after the best fashion, as it is 1 These 4 12. 1 These. 4.12.
and what means that adorning of the Gospel of Jesus Christ in all things? I
say, what mean those exhortations of the Apostle, but to teach us that we are
to respect (as these Colossians should) what becomes our present profession.

It was lawful for David, 2 Samuel 24. 2 Samuel 24.
to accept of the offer of Araunah the Iebusite, to have taken the threshing
place for a floor to have erected an Altar, and his Oxen for a sacrifice, and
his threshing instruments for wood; but David would not, he saw it did not
stand with the honor and munificence of a King to offer sacrifice to the Lord
of that that cost him nothing.

It is a rule of Canisius in the twelfth of his common places, and commended by
him to the consideration of all Divines, that when they go about to dispute of
things that are supernatural, and above, let them remember and recount with
themselves, what they are; remember that they are Divines, and that will be a
restraint that they shall do nothing, nor say nothing unworthy that sacred
profession. A rule useful not for Divines only, but men of all qualities and
conditions and ranks whatsoever that desire to adorn the Gospel; whether in
their general calling of Christianity which the Apostle here means, or in
those particular forms and stations wherein they are set in the Church, or
common wealth: give me leave to exemplify it by one or two for all.

Art thou a Magistrate? then think what becomes a Magistrate: say to thy self
thus, what? a Magistrate and smile on villainy? a Magistrate and discountenance
goodness? a Magistrate and an enemy, and not a furtherer of frequent
preaching? a Magistrate and suffer the crying sins of the times to walk in
the streets, and to outface the Sun without control, with impunitie? does
this become a Magistrate?

Art thou a Minister? memorable is that in Eusebius, Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 17.
wherewith one flouts the false Prophets in his time: what (says he) art thou
a Prophet? what, a Prophet and a dicer? a Prophet and a dancer? a Prophet and a
Usurer? He might have gone on, what, a Minister and a swearer? a Minister
(indeed I am ashamed to speak it) art thou a Christian and blasphemest the
name, and deridest the Ministers, and contemnest the word, and tramplest on the
servants of Christ?

Admirable was the resolution and renouned the practice of Nehemiah upon this
ground, that being warned by the false Prophets to fly into the Temple before
the enemies for his refuge: as one that well knew how dishonorable this would
be to God, and to himself that was now a Commander and General of the Jews;
he makes this reply stoutly: what, shall such a man as I fly? shall such a man
as I go into the Temple to save my life? I will not go, Nehem, 6.11. Nehe.
6.11.
I conclude this point; what is the world but a wide Theater, whereon each man
acts a part; God looks on us, and Saints and Angels, and the Church. Our
special care ought to be to demean our selves well. What becomes a Pesant
does not beseem a Prince; others may seek after things below, it does not
become a man that is risen with Christ.

The neglect of which decoram in some men which have professed themselves
Christians, has exposed the very profession it self to disgrace: when men
have compared their lives with the rule there has been so wide a difference
that some men's lives in this respect is no better then a continual solisizme.
This is the second ground upon which the Apostle would have them seek those
things that are above. First they are tied to do it in thankfulness: And then
it was seemly for them to do so.

I now go on to the exhortation, and that is in these words, seek those
things that are above.

Which being a proposition, I should observe in it according to the Law of
propositions two parts.

The Subject Predicate.


I will choose rather to distinguish the words into,

Parts of the Text.
An Act, and its Object.

The Act, Seek.

The Object, Those things that are above.

An Object.
I begin first with the object as that which is first in nature; and there I
will show what these things that are above are; and why they are so styled.

An Act.
Secondly, I will go on to the Act, and there having found what it is to seek.

We will in the next place by the rule of Logic resolve this hypotheticall
proposition into a Catagoricall. If ye be risen with Christ, seek those
things that are above. Those that are risen with Christ ought to seek the
things that are above.

Fourthly, we will go on to enquire into the conditions required in seeking;
the means and some Characters whereby we may take the height of the elevation
of our thoughts, and whereby we may know if we seek the things above,

And lastly to conclude all, I will mention a few arguments of some validity,
to seek the things that are above. Of all these briefly.

First of the Object, what is meant by Things above, what.


The best rule to know the meaning of any Text of Scripture is to compare it
with more. It being with this sacred body, as it is with a Lute, or Instrument
with strings, Simile.
which by stringing one or two you may tune the whole. The knowledge of our
Apostles Aim and scope in this present Chapter it will not a little advantage
us in the enquiry of this, what the things above are. Which being (as all the
arguments here are) to persuade the Colossians to holiness; it must needs
follow by the rules of Logic that by things above are either meant,

Something wherein the nature and essence, and divine qualities of holiness
consists.

Or the practice and possession that may be attained.

Or something bordering upon it.

The word largely conteines in the reach of it, all things that make for the
eternal welfare of the soul. All those graces mentioned by the Apostle in
this Epistle and else where. Faith, love, joy, hope, sincerity, the fear of
God, the remission of sins, peace of conscience, and freedom from the
dominion of sin; all which are wrapped in these words, things above, which
(as it were) is the abridgement of all.

Which spiritual graces, though they be chiefly meant here; yet I dare not,
nor I do not say they are only meant. It may be and I think verily the
Apostle looks further then thus, and by things above, he looks not only to
the means, but to the end: the state of grace and glory. And well may these
two, grace and glory lie couched in one word, since grace and glory differ not
in nature but in degrees, grace being nothing but glory begun, and glory being
grace consummate.

Yet I shall in the process of my ensuing discourse adhere rather to the
former; and so by things above, understand especially things concerning the
state of grace here; here, because though the Apostle meant not them only, yet
he immediately looks on them, as those that were nearest, so that by these
things above we must come if ever, to the state of glory hereafter.

These things above I understand to be spiritual gifts, and graces; Why called
things above.
fitly here styled things above.

First, in respect of the source and original, because they deserve to
challenge the prime place among those perfect gifts that are from above, Iam.
1.7. Jam. 1.7.
every grace being a ray, and stamp of the dietie. That is the first reason,
they are called things above, because they come from above.

Secondly, in respect of the end, to which Sion, and as Jacob called that place
Bethel, the gate or subburbs of heaven.

Thirdly, and lastly, they are called so in called things above in all these
respects. You see then how spiritual graces may be styled things above,

In respect of the original whence they came, end to which they lead, place
where we shall enjoy them in full measure. This shall suffice for the first
inquiry concerning the Object, what is meant by things above, and why they are
so called.


Seeking, what.
I come to the Act, Seek. The metaphor implies fervencie, not as Becanus the
Jesuit defines it, (a desire, and rest) absurdly; but it is joined with exact
care, and the utmost endeavor for the obtaining of somewhat that we formerly
lost, or did not before enjoy, a desire to find it. The truth is that once man
in Paradise was like his Maker, bravely accomplished with all spiritual
graces, called here things above; but no sooner did man fall from his due
subjection, but presently he was disrobed of these, and shut out of Paradise.
When guilty Caine was pressed with his brothers blood, he was ever seeking those
precious Jewels he had lost and found them not. The sense of the loss of
those spiritual graces is left behind, that impression is in the minds of
all. The heathens themselves by the purblind eye of nature could easily
discern that they wanted somewhat, though they knew not what to seek, nor how
to find. But when the light of grace breaks into the soul as it did to these
Collossians; then it seeks the things above and leaves not till it have found
them, nor then, till it have attained them in full fruition in heaven above.

As it is with some wanton stream that parting from the Ocean, Simile.
runs all along in the dark windings and passages of the earth, till at last
it breaks up, and when it is broken forth, as ashamed of its wandering, it
presently returns with a restless unwearied course, and seeks here and there
till it find the Maine from whence it strayed. This for the second enquiry
concerning seeking, which implies the hight, and best of our care for the
attaining these things above, such as concern the spiritual welfare of our
souls.

Which briefly premised, it will be easy in the third place to resolve this
single hupotheticall proposition into a catagoricall, If ye be risen with
Christ, that is, because you are risen with Christ, seek the things above.

The proposition is, Propos.
Those that are risen with Christ ought to seek the things above.
that Those that are risen with Christ ought to seek the things that are above.

A lesson taught by him (that as one styles him) was the best teacher, in whose
divine Sermon upon the mount you shall find that he bids us seek, and in the
first place the kingdom of God, and the righteousness of it, Matthew. 6.33.
Matthew. 6.33.
And indeed what is the sum of all our Sermons? Hillarie.
or wherefore serve Preachers, a^ Hillary styles them, those seeking men of
eternity? but to call for this surs^m Corda, to bring men to a constant minding
of the things above. A duty so proper to them that with these Colossians are
risen to the life of grace, that David makes it the proper character and badge
of the Church Psalm. 24.6. Psalm. 24.6.
This is the generation of them that seek the Lord, of them that seek thy
face, this is Jacob.

But, oh! that it were as easy to persuade men to practice, as to convince
them of the duty. We cannot find these things, but we must seek them with
diligence; and that we will not do, unless we highly prize and affect the
things we seek, neither of which we will or can do, except we know our want
of them, and their worth, all of which in the fourth place are,

Conditions requesite in seeking.
The conditions that are requisite in seeking.

Diligence.
First, diligence; if we will seek the things above, we must seek
dilligently. The word imports indust^y, and sweat. And indeed what in the
world deserves our best endeavors if not these things? What may justlier
challenge the utmost of our strength, the sinews of our souls, if not that
upon which depends the eternal welfare of our souls? Me thinks when I look
abroad in the world, and see how busy men are in the pursuit of earthly
things; with what unwearied industry, and disposition they pursue, and with
what eager appetite they snatch at things below, as if the dust of the earth
were not sufficient to give every man a handful: methinkes I know not whether
to entertain them with pity, or with scorn. When I see such men concerning
their souls, to be negligent in what terms they stand with God, what
assurance of the remission of their sins, etc. Alas, alas, these thoughts are
seldom entertained; these desires are banished, as if these things above were
to be lighted on without seeking, or it skilled not greatly whether they be
found or no. Thus with Shemei while men look their servants they loose
themselves.

Secondly, we must seek them with Love.
where love is, it setes an edge on our seeking, it will make us look over all
indignities, and sweeten all the crosses we meet with here, and cause us like
high flying Eagles to neglect the chirpping of Sparrowes; as Jacob that was
scorched in the day and pinched in the night, yet love made all seem as
nothing to him

Knowledge of
and of the worth of these things.

our want.
First, our want of these things, without which we are children of wrath here,
and shall hereafter assuredly be sons of destruction. With which we are
here the sons of God, and shall hereafter be with God in glory. We must
bring our selves to a sight of our want; for nature till it be convinced of
that, will not seek abroad, and be beholding to any.

Pride hinders seeking.
Of all lets and bars that hinder men from seeking these things above, there
is nothing like to pride. It is the observation of the royal Prophet David,
The wicked through the pride of his countenance will not seek after God, Psalm.
10.
Psalm. 10. It is true other men do not seek after him, but the proud scorns
to be beholding to God; therefore before we can bring our selves to seek
them we must be convinced of our want of them. Now for that, what need any
other argument but this injunction, Seek? Seeking is of the nature of hope;
Aquinas.
and he that hopes says Aquinas is imperfect yet, and wants something that
he hopes for. Tertull.
And says Tertullian in his twenty third book of the resurrection, we use
not to seek for that we have; so that the very injunction here to seek, is
enough to convince any reasonable man, that he wants these things above.

But the exact knowledge of the worth of these things, and of our want of them,
it may be sought, but it is not else where found but in the Scriptures only,
which alone is that impartial beam of the Sanctuary, which can help us to
take the worth of the one, and that impartial glass that represents to the
life, and shows us the face of our own souls, and consequently, our want of
these things above.

In the mean while injurious in both these respects is the domeniering Prelate
of Rome, while by a sacrilegious robbing of the laytie of the Oracles of truth,
and fearing least their own blindness should be discovered, they labor to
put out, or at least to hide them. As if it were with Men as it is with Doves,
that being blinded they should fly up directly to the things above; to make
men in Religion to grope, and seek they know not what; while by their doctrine
of free will, and merit of congruitie, that man by doing that which is in the
power of nature may dispose himself to justification, and so puff up depraved
nature against the grace of God.

Hark what that Romish pander Becanus speaks, says he, our first parents
lost not by the fall two graces, Faith and Hope: why? because these carry no
repugnancie or contrariety to the fall. Thus Popery is the bane of Piety,
and the destruction of souls like a draught of deadly poison which makes men
swell, Simile.
and die. This for the fourth enquiry concerning the conditions necessarily
required in seeking the things above.

The means of seeking.
I come now to the means by which we must seek.

It was not the least part of the unhappiness that attended Adams fall, that
besides the utter loss of the things above, he lost the skill, and means
whereby to recover them. We are all of us borne wanderers; Psalm. 119. ult.
we go astray from the womb as lost sheep, Psalm 119. verse ult. Like lost
sheep, how is that? We are not only out of the way, but we want skill and
power to seek it again, much more to find it unless God that gives ability
to the one, gives success to the other. Yet some means there be that God
has appointed to us for the finding of these things above, which we must make
diligent use of: and from the ignorance, and neglect of these means come two
general miscariages, that men seeking the things above, either they know not
the right, or they take the wrong point of the Compass.

Among the means for the attayning of The Word preached.
why may I not in the first place give the Garland, and precedencie to the Word
Preached? A sacred ordinance of a large and Catholic virtue, which as the
Sun not only discovers by his light, but by its influence does effect what
ever may make for our spiritual estate in grace here, or fit us for glory
after. Here being not only the privileges and prerogatives of Faith, but
Faith it self with all her sister graces. Or if it be freedom from the
dominion of sin; the Word preached is the mighty Armor of God, 2 Cor. 10.
2 Corinthians. 10. for the battery and demolition of all Satan's strong holds. Or
whether it be peace of conscience in assurance of the remission of sins, the
word being as interpreters call it, the voice of the Harpers harping (in the
Revelation) which is only able to calm the conscience.

Prayer.
Secondly, prayer, that is another means whereby to seek these things above.
Eyes lift to heaven where these things are, conveying thence to the soul what
may make for the abundant supply of its necessities. In the neglect of which
exercise can we wonder, if we want the things above? If our hearts be as the
Wilderness or Heath, empty of all good? If our souls be over run with
lusts like a neglected Field with brambles, and briars for want of husbanding?

Simile.
Our hearts are as the Cords of a Watch, if they be not wound up morning and
evening, all spiritual motion will quickly be at a stand.

Luthers Schoolemasters, Meditation.
by which he confessed he thrived more then by the rest; to which he
attributed a great part of his being in grace: Genesis 24.
The practice of Religious Isaac, Genesis 24. who went into the field at eventide
to meditate. And it is fitly joined by the ancients to prayer as the two wings
of the Christians soul, by which it soars to contemplation, and attaines
those things above.

It is the policy of our common ene-enemy as Chrisologus styles him,
Chrisologus.
the sworn enemy of mankind, who knowing how powerful a means meditation
is, to (...) our selves from worldly things, and betake our selves to divine
contemplation to get the things above, he labors to keep us from it by all
his strength, and by div^^s means.

Sometimes by causing us to stoop to his lure, by committing any sin; Simile.
and who knows not that every sin, as a ^^umme^ of Lead clogges the soul,
and hinders the actions of it? But especially he keeps us from meditation by
keeping us in the throng: by perpetual puzelling us in business, he steals
us from our selves, and gives us not time to retire. Alas, ask most men what
hours they set apart for prayer, and meditation? They will answer, I have so
much business, I cannot turn my self to it: Oh the policy, and stratagems
of Satan! I say he keeps us by this from the exercise of devotion by which
we should attain the things above, he keeps us in the throng of business;
did I say business? Nay how many are kept away from this divine exercise by
spending their time foolishly in Courtship, and I would not worse? Whence it
comes to pass that I look (I profess) with pity upon many great ones, whose
lives are a story of sin, whose sins it comes to pass are never cured,
because they are always in motion.

You that are Gentlemen, sequester some time; if not every day, yet at least
every week, bid all other business stand by, and attend on your closet to
think of the things above, how to attain what you want, and how to increase
what you have attained. You that are tradesmen, take off your selves from other
affairs, retire home and examine your spiritual estate with God.

And we that are Scholars should vindicate some time from the study of Books
to read our selves. All of us should set aside some time for the thinking of
the things above, to examine what spiritual graces we need, that we may use
the means to attain them, and what sins we have committed, that we may
repent of them, for fear the sad time of death come and cut our thread, and
then we go down to the Chambers of death. Let us examine to what sins we
lie open that we may fortify our selves against them, that the evil one have
no power over us. All these things are contained in the things above, and all
these we must seek here if we desire to attain the blessing of them
hereafter. Let this suffice to be spoken of the first inquiry concerning the
means whereby to seek these things above.

There remains only two more.

The characters by which we may know if we seek these things.

And the motives.

You see how we ought to seek the things bove. But alas, The signs of
seeking.
the over eager pursuit of the things below! we see how coldly and faintly
(if at all) we seek the things above; which if we did seek as we ought,
Neglect of earthly things.
it could not choose but abate the edge of our desires to these earthly things,
and cause us as strangers and pilgrims to use the world as not enjoying it, as
Saint Austin said long before, to make it our servant; to be content like that
noble Bird that desiring to fly aloft, when she is compelled by hunger to
descend, she unwillingly obeyes, and presently dispatcheth that she may up
again; which contempt and neglect of the things below, it is a sign we seek
the things of heaven, and though our bodies be on earth that we hold our
conversation in heaven, where we look and fix our eyes through all earthly
contentments. We should be on earth as a wheel is, that though it moove upon
the earth; yet the least part touches it. Simile.
That is the first; if we will seek the things above, we must not too
eagerly seek the things below.

Sorrow in want of heavenly things.
Secondly, if we seek the things above can we choose but be affected with
sorrow and compunction when we want them? It is not possible: he that seeks
these things above as he ought, when he finds in himself the want and decay
of them, it is impossible but he should betake himself to black, to a
mourning state. You see the truth of this exemplified by David, when he upon
the commition of those two sins, murder and adultery, he found he was
bereft of the comfortable presence of Gods favor, he furrows his cheeks with
weeping, and spends himself, his marrow was as the drought in Summer, he
never gives himself rest till God revived, and cheared his drouping soul, and
caused the beams of his countenance to smile upon him. So it is with a man
that seeks the things that are above, in the want of them he is as the
Mariners needle, Simile.
as that is in the want of the point, so are all those that seek the things
above in the want of them, they never rest but shake and tremble till at last
they recover them and stand as they did formerly. That is the second argument
whereby we may know if we seek these things, if we grieve and mourn when
we want them.

Thirdly, if we seek these things above; Joy in enjoying them.
how can we choose but rejoice when we find them: for Love where it is it
cannot choose but be glad when it finds that it delights in. Take an instance
of both in David, Psalm. 73. Lord, says he, Psalm. 73.
whom have I in heaven but thee? and there is none in earth in comparison of
thee. Mark there, David desired these things above, and when his soul found
them, his soul loved them. Who can read it, and not be ravished to see to
what an excessive extacie of joy he was transported? Psalm. 4.
he preferred the light of Gods countenance, Psalm 4. before all the Corn
and Wine, and Oil, the poor things that worldlings place their chief content
in.

But in the last place, what need other By our thoughts and speeches.
our own thoughts are the image of our souls, and our words are the image of
our thoughts; he that seeks these things above as he ought, he cannot but
make them the ordinary subject of the one, and the frequent argument of the
other.

And here, were our breasts transparent, and our thoughts written in Characters,
Lord! for one thought that we spend on things above, how many thousand
thousand do ewee spend about the profits and pleasures, nay about our sinful
lusts! Or if we think they lie hid in the secrecy, and reservednesse of our
thoughts; alas our language betrays us: how rare a matter is it for heaven to
be made the theme of our discourse? If our hearts did run full to the
things above, they could not choose but often over-runne the banks. And these
are the Characters whereby we may take the height of our thoughts, and know
whether we seek the things above or no.

Exhortation to seek these things.
I conclude all with one word of exhortation. The best things when they come to
be degenerate, and to turn edge they become the worst. Man, the glory and
Paragon of the creatures, transgressing the the law of his maker, though he
lost the whole world in his own ruin and downfall, yet he drew the greatest
weight of misery upon himself. For whereas all other creatures by the sole
discipline of nature seek perfection, and the thing it consists in, Man only
bands against himself and stands in need of wooing. Alas that we should
need to be solicited to seek the things above, that we cannot find except
we seek, and are eternally lost our selves except we find. The truth is,
these are seeking times, as indeed what times are not? some seek pleasure,
some profit, some honor, a fourth is for favor, and so the rest; among all
which, set but aside our passion, and preposessed thoughts, and what shall we
see in them to command our affections or deserve them? What is pleasure, but a
silken halter that if we look not well to, will strangle us in the embracing?
What are riches, (but as Saint Austin says, except they be in a wise and wary
hand) agents and Pandors to execute our lusts? As the same same Father says,
Gold is clay that we can hardly handle without soyling of us. What is honor
but a glorious misery, a pleasant discontent? What is fame, but a windy meteor
wrapped upon high which in a while vanishes and comes to nothing? Suppose a
man wanted the things above, and were placed amidst the confluence of all the
contentments below: Nay suppost he wanted one of these things above, the peace
of conscience, the assurance of the remission of his sins; I say, place that
man amidst the confluence of all contentments below, and see how miserable his
case would be. Let his cup overflow with Belshazer, let the whole world pay
tribute to his Table, let him get mountains of Gold and Silver, and let all
the world be bur one Exchequer; let him trample on Crowns and Scepters, and
let all the Kings and Princes do him homage, and at his frown let the earth
tremble and move. Here were content enough you would think; But let this man
want one thing, the peace of conscience, and see how soon all these
contentments vanish as the dew before the Sun. Let but God awaken this man
out of his deceitful slumber, and bid his conscience muster his sins, and
set them before him in their ghastly shape; let him give it charge to take him
and as an earnest of his future torments shake him over the pit that one day
he must tumble headlong in, I say how soon will his contentments vanish? How
frail are they in his greatest need. If he call for Gold, conscience will
not be bribed; if he solace himself with royal banquets, conscience as an
unwelcome guest dogs him, or as that dismal summons that appeared to
Belshazer disrelisheth all the rest. Let him settle his temples with a Crown
of Gold, and take the royal Scepter into his hand, conscience is like a master
that will know no partner, and acknowledge no commander. So all things here in
our greatest height they are unsound, but in our chiefest need they are false
and treacherous.

Our wisdom therefore ought to be in the midst of the infinite variety of
these objects, in the pursuit of them, to speed our selves, to be sure to get
somewhat that will quit our charge, that will stand us in stead here, and
comfort us hereafter. And can there be a fayrer object for our seeking then
grace and glory, called here the things above?

Who would not think grace worth the seeking? to be reconciled to God, to be
freed from the power and dominion of sin, to have our souls enriched with
heavenly graces, and our selves inherit a Crown of glory? All which fruits of
grace must here be sought, and may be found. But what is there below? How much
better is it to go up to the things above, as the Angel did to heaven in the
flame of the Altar?

O Lord we cannot seek the things above till we have found them, and when
we have found them we must still seek them: thou by thy preventing grace
must enable us to seek, and by thy grace also give us success to find. Lord
we pray thee open our eyes that we may seek the things above, and then let
us find them. Say Lord, seek ye my face, and thy face Lord will we seek.
And if we seek thy face here then we shall be satisfied hereafter with
thine Image. And so satisfy still our desires, and so desire we that we may
not want what we can desire, till we be swallowed up of that Ocean of
happiness, and loose our selves in enjoying of thee.

But if all this will not stir us, there is somewhat yet that will, let us
look further with Moses eye to the recompense of reward. I say let us look
further, take the perspective of our faith, and view those glorious Crowns,
and Scepters, and long white robes, the garments of Christ's victory, reserved
in heaven for all those that in the means of grace here seek those things
that are above, and an entrance into glory. When we find our selves dull in
seeking the things above, let us betake our selves upon the wing in a flight to
heaven, and there bathe our souls in those pleasures that run in a full
Channel at Gods right hand for ever. If we taste but one drop of them we
should distaste all the bitter sweets below. Let us go to God with those
glorious Queresters, and bear a part in those sweet Hymmes, and say thus,
Glory, and honor, and power, and wisdom, and might, and majesty, and
dominion be to our Lord, and to the Lamb that sits upon the Throne for ever,
and ever, even so Amen. *

FINIS.

