THE Rewards of Virtue; A COMEDY.

By J. F. Gent.

LONDON, Printed by Ja. Cottrel, for Hen. Fletcher at the three Gilt Cups in
St. Paul's Churchyard, 1661.

The Persons.
BASILIUS, the King. THEANDER, the Prince. The PRIST. PYRRHUS, a Lord of the
Court, the Kings confident. NEANDER, a vain Lord of high birth. ENDYMION, a
Lord of a small fortune. GERON, an old jealous Knight, husband to PHRONESIA.
The QUEEN. CLEANTHA, a young Princess, Niece to the QUEEN. URANIA, a young
Shepherdess waiting on CLEANTHA. EVADNE, daughter to the PRIEST, newly come to
the Court. PHRONESIA, an ordinary Court-Madam, belonging to the QUEEN.
PARTHENIA, Mother to URANIA.
The Scoene, Arcadia.

Actus 1. Scoena 1.
Enter Pyrrhus, Neander, and Endymion. Pyrrh. BElieve't, my Lords, they say the
Prince does wonders.

Neand. They say he kills a world of men indeed.
But 'faith, I think the wondered greater been,
Had he made but half so many live.

Pyrrh. Perchance my Lord, you would have him turn Physician.

Nean. Rather then Butcher; it is the nobler Trade.

Pyrrh. Why? but they are his enemies he kills,
Men that offend, and do deserve to die.

Neand. Oh! then I think you will praise the Hangman next;
You give a definition of his Trade.

Pyrrh. If I do not mistake your humor Sir,
You never were much taken with this dying:
It is a thing (I do confess) does mar
A Courtier much.

Neand. Why faith my Lord it is true.
Let broken Merchants and the busy rout
Who dirt the Streets, when their designs miscarry,
Cry that there is nothing certain in this world;
I think there is less in that which is to come.
Here I am sure of something: I Am a Lord,
And live with Men. But to be turned a grazing
In the Elysian-Fields that men do talk of,
Among Philosophers never could make a leg,
Who purblind grew with viewing of those Stars
Never made them worth a groat; and took strange pains
In measuring Sea and Land, when they would more need
To have a Tailor come and measure them;
In troth my Lord, here is blessed Company;
Who would not change this world for such a life?

Endym. Fie, fie, Neander. This is too profane,
And rellisheth far more of beast then man.

Neand. My Lord, I ask you pardon: I Would forgot
You are a Vertiosi -- It Is my Lord Pyrrhus
That makes me wander from my argument,
By putting me in mind of the world to come:
(A Theme indeed, on which few men speak sense) --
But to the matter first proposed, -- My Lord,
The thing I only stuck at, was that you
(So wise a man) should give so mighty Names
To killing Men. Why! celebrate the Plague;
What General ever did destroy like that?
Or study glorious: Titles for old age,
That kills all those, whom nothing else can kill.
Great Warriors are but the journey-men
Of fatal Atropos, whose swords she uses
To cut men's lives off, but to save her sheers,
Which else had sure been edgeless long ago
With too much work; and we (for ought I see)
By this time might have all immortal been,
Having by long dying worn out Death it self.

[Endymion smiles] Pyrrh. My Lord, 'faith he that dares dispute with you,
Must be a cunning Sophister, I see;
Must be content to give you victory,
Without receiving truth in exchange for it.

Neand. The truth is, my Lords, in short, you have all the wit, though I have
all the talk -- Fare you well; I believe I shall not much mar your discourse by
my absence, nor will you much mend my manners by your presence: adieu.


[Exit Neand.] Pyrrh. It Is a mad Lord as ever was born: 'twere pretty
(If possible) to sit within his skull,
And take a Prospect of his giddy thoughts,
Which do like Centaurs seem, half Man, half Beast.

Endym. He Is too profane; and chooses to buy wit
At the expense of Friends, Religion,
And all, but Ladies smiles; which he more values,
Then honest Men do the kind looks of Heaven.

Pyrrh. And nothing hates like Reputation won
By Arms. He hates all Deities, for Mars his sake*
And swears that Generals only famous grow
By valiant Friends, or cowardly Enemies;
Or (what is worse) by some mean piece of chance.

Endym. The truth's, my Lord, it is pretty to observe
How little Princes and great Generals
Contribute oft-times, to the fame they win.
How often hath't been found, that noblest minds
With too short arms have fought with fatal Stars?
And have endeavored with their dearest blood
To mollify those Diamonds where dwell
The fate of Kingdoms; and at last have fallen
By vulgar hands; unable now to do
More for their cause then die; and have been lost
Among the sacrifies of their own swords,
No more remembered then poor Villagers
Whose ashes sleep beneath the common flowers
That every meadow wears: whilst other men
With trembling hands have caught a victory,
And on pale foreheads worn triumphant bays.

Pyrrh. Believe't, it is true.

Endym. Besides, my Lord, I Have thought,
A thousand times; in times of War, when we
Lift up our hands to Heaven for victory;
Suppose some Virgin Shepherdess, whose soul
'S as chaste, and clean, as the cold spring where she
Quench's all her thirsts, being told of enemies
That seek to fright the long-enjoyed Peace
Of our Arcadia hence with sound of Drums;
And with Horse, Trumpets, Warlike Ayrs, to drown
The harmless Music of her Oaten Reeds;
Should in the passion of her troubled spright
Repair to some small Fane (such as the Gods
Hear poor folks from) and there on humble knees
Lift up her trembling hands to holy Pan,
And beg his helps: it is possible to think
That Heaven, which counts the purest vows most rich,
May not permit her still to weep in vain,
But grant her wish, (for would the Gods never hear
The prayers of poor folks, they would never bid them pray)
And so, in the next Action happens out,
(The Gods still using means) the enemy
May be defeated. The glory of all this
Is attributed to the General,
And none but he is spoke loud of for the Act,
Whilst she from whose so unaffected tears
His Laurel sprung, for ever dwells unknown.

Pyrrh. Your Lordship does not doubt the Prince his merit.

Endym. By no means, Sir; I know the Prince a man
Who owns a soul of that vast magnitude,
That flesh did never circumscribe a greater:
And merits so much from the virtuous world,
By's rare example, that the world it self
Were but too mean a present to require him.
All that I say, is what I Have thought upon
Some hours of sweet retirement, when I Have sat
And viewed the fleeting state of poor mankind,
A thing too giddy to be understood.

Pyrrh. Indeed the Prince does more then give us hopes
Arcadia shall command those Provinces
Who lately thought our long and happy Peace
Had soft'ned so our minds, that now we were
Fit to be lorded over by their wills.
But strange it is to see the King so little
Joy'd with the news, that still he wears a face
More troubled then Cicilian Seas in storms:
And all but for the love of that poor Maid
The Prince not ten months since took from a Cottage
As he a hunting was, and gave the fair
Cleantha for a present.

Endym. Who! Urania?

Pyrrh. Yes. -- But stay; I see him coming Enter King.
Let us retire. It may be we shall hear
Some of the thoughts that trouble him.

Endym. Hushed.

King -- Ah! Where will this tyrant end? Heaven! shall I still
Be Priest, and Sacrifice, and Altar too,
Unto a passion I can satisfy,
But never conquer? what poor things are Kings!
What poorer things are Nations to obey
Him whom a petty Passion does command?
Fate, why was man made so ridiculous? --
But I can quench my Flame. And where my prayers
Have not prevailed, my power can command.
Who in Arcadia dare resist my will? --
-- But, stay! -- When this poor Maid, sprung from a stock
Low as the Cottage where she first saw light,
Shall call on Virtue, and the Gods to keep
Her body (they too weakly have exposed)
White as her soul, which all the world cannot sully;
Shall I (whom men call sacred, and divine,
And look on as derived from Ancestors
Who have not Tombs but Altars) without shame,
And thousand blushes, dare with ruder force
To drive poor Virtue from her cleanest Temple,
And use that power the Gods have given me
Over others, but to offend them how I please?
By Heaven, by Heaven, I will not. -- But I die.
Oh I am mortal. Men but flatter me.
Oh fate, why were not Kings made more then Men?
Or why will people have us to be more?
Alas! we govern others, but our selves
We cannot rule; as our eyes that do see
All other things, but cannot see themselves.
I must submit. -- I am a King, but LOVE
'S a Deity -- I am resolved to try
Whether Urania will Love, or die.
I Will in, and faithful Pyrrhus straight shall prove
My fate. Lords must be Pimps, when Kings do love. Exit King

[Pyrrhus and Endymion appear again.] Pyrrh. He Is gone.

Endym. But he first thought on your employment.

Pyrrh. Truth, I have had already but too much on it.

Endym. Have you then been the Mercury between
Him and the fair Urania?

Pyrrh. Yes, I have
Already done what Language and Rewards
Have power to do. But she is as deaf to this
As blind to those. She seems not to see
Ought shine but Virtue.

Endym. But, what can she say.
Poor Country Girl? Where can she find words
And resolution when you do assault her?

Pyrrh. Why 'faith my Lord, I Will tell you. When I first
Mentioned the business to her all alone,
Poor soul she blushed, as if already she
Had done some harm, by hearing of me speak;
Whilst from her pretty eyes two Fountains run
So true, so native, down her fairest Cheeks,
As if she thought her self obliged to cry,
'Cause all the world was not so good as she.

Endym. aside. Heaven! how does this carriage please me!

Pyrrh. For my own part, I know not what to say,
Her tears so innocently begged my pity,
That I was straight turned over to her side;
And had forgot the cause for which I strove,
'Till rallying once again, I once more gave
A new assault, and urged her to an answer.
All her reply was, No; then humbly prayed me
Not to be cruel to a poor weak maid
Who had not any thing in all the world
To give her credit, but her innocence.
With such success as this I often have
Assailed her virtue, adding promises
Of all things I could suppose might tempt her;
But all in vain. This Ermyne will not be
Persuaded from the whiteness she so loves.

Endym. And do you think the King will now use force?

Pyrrh. You heard him what he said. I cannot tell.
It Is hard to say what men whom reason guides
Intend to do, much more whom passion rides. --
But let us away: I would not have him know
We were so near the venting of his thoughts.

Endym. There comes my Lord Leander, let us away.

Exeunt severally. Enter Neander, Cleantha, and Urania waiting on her. Neand.
How does this hour transport my soul with Joy,
To have the blessed privilege to be
With fair Cleantha -- the best Princess. --

Cleanth. I Am glad it makes some body happy Sir.

Neand. With her who has my heart --

Cleanth. Have it I, Sir? Pray my Lord then take it again, for I would not be
troubled with the keeping such a bauble for all the world.


Neand. She, whom great Nature, now grown wanton, made
To look upon and scorn her other works.

Cleanth. My Lord, I see you are resolved not to study to no purpose. You will
have our your Complement, let me say what I please. But, by the by, I hope you
will not be angry if I prove somewhat like my scornful Mother (as you say) and
make you the first example of it. Fare you well.


Neanth. Nay, Madam; I beseech your Highness --

Cleand. Nay, my Lord, now I have put you out of your Complement, I Will tarry a
little longer.


Neand. Madam, You are cruel. How do you kill --

Cleanth. Kill, Neander? No sure, for then you would be afraid to come near me.


Neand. Great Princess, You are cruel. But I never
Could fear Death from so fair a hand as yours.

Cleanth. Perchance you do your self the justice to think that such will not
foul their fingers about you. I believe, indeed, my Lord, You fear Death least
from the hands of a woman, which is the reason you choose to tarry here at Court
among the Ladies, rather then go to the War with the Prince.


Neand. Madam, You Ladies have a Privilege.

Cleanth. Yes, my Lord, it is sometimes a Privilege to speak Truth.


Neand. 'Faith Madam, You may say what you please.

Cleanth. Pardon me, my Lord; it would please me much better if I could say you
were in the war in Thessalia.


Neand. Why truly Madam, I could give your Highness very good reasons why I
went not to the war with the Prince.


Cleanth. I believe you can, my Lord: and so can every body else that knows
your Lordship. It was because you were afraid.


Neand. Do not disgrace me so, Madam, I beseechy you. It was for very different
reasons.


Cleanth. Truly my Lord, You will give very much satisfaction to the world, if
you say what they are; and very much undeceive them.


Neand. Why then, Madam, to tell you truly, I am somewhat troubled with Corns,
so that I cannot without pain wear a riding Boot: And then I am strangely
subject to the Tooth-ake, which makes me very unfit to lie in the Field. Which,
indeed, were the two main reasons made me to refuse the war.


Cleanth. What pity it is so brave a mind should be thus unluckily hindered
from showing it self!


Neand. Madam, I perceive you jeer me.

Cleanth. What a quick apprehension you have, my Lord! And do not you perceive
you merit it? -- But the Queen will expect me, and possibly Sir, you are by
this time somewhat satisfied with my company: adieu.


Exeunt Cleanth. and Urania. Neand. Pox take her for me, for all she is so
great a Lady. But what an ass was I to be so out of countenance? Well, 'faith,
I even see I must go and be drunk, to recover my self again: for at the
present, by Jove, I am damnably cowed.


Exit. Neand. Enter Endymion sol. Endym. Alas my poor Urania! how does
Thy harder fortune vindicate my choice?
Who now dare say Endymion loved too low
When he loved her that can make Princes die?
No more, no more, we must scorn Cottages;
These are the Rocks from whence our Jewels come.
Gold breeds in barren Hills, the brightest Stars
Shine ore the poorer Regions of the North.
But, say my dear! why did thou cast away
Thy Beams, to thaw that Ice, which but makes clouds
To sully thy own face? Unwise Urania,
Let me a little chide thee now. -- But Fool;
Can Urania choose but to be fair?
Can she help it that she'th pretty eyes?
Or gather the soft Roses from her cheeks?
Is It in her power to make her lips less coral,
Her Teeth less Pearls? Or will her breasts obey her
If she god bid them to be snow no more?
No, poor Urania; come, we'll both chide Nature;
'Twas she, 'twas she alone dealt hardly with thee,
When she made thee fairer then all others.
Or else 'twas Fortune, when she took thee from
The fresh delights of thy still Hermitage.
There had thou lived, and by some silver Brook
Unenvied sang away thy softer hours,
And killed a thousand Shepherds with thy eyes;
There had thou gathered Jewels from the Fields
To deck thee with, more beauteous then thy Pearls,
And like a Queen had changed them every day:
There had thou never wept, but for the fate
Of some poor Lamb perchance, which used to lay
Her sleepy head upon thy lap; No Kings
Had threatened thee for being virtuous,
Nor Ladies envied thee for being fair.
Perfections then had been no sins; but had
Received the little Tributes which kind nature
Gives to those honest folks who dwell with her.
And had she been content, she had been rich.
And folks thus rich can never be made poor, --
But stay -- I hear some coming: I Will away,
And search her out: may be she needs my help.

Exit. Endym. Enter Queen and Phronesia. Queen. And is the old Knight so
jealous, Phronesia? It may be you give him cause.


Phron. No other cause an't please your Majesty, but that I am with child.


Queen. He knew not that (you say) until this morning.


Phron. He knew not certain Madam, till this morning. But he has more then
doubted me these fourteen days.


Queen. Why did he marry, if he thought he could not get thee with child?


Phrones. I cannot tell, an't please your Majesty.


Queen. Why do not ask him?


Phron. I have.


Queen. And what says he?


Phron. He told me --


Queen. What did he tell thee?


Phron. An't please your Majesty, you cannot imagine his wicked intentions.


Queen. What did he tell thee?


Phron. He told me he married only to keep me honest.


Queen. But now it seems he is convinced, it is more then he can do.


Phrones. Every man best knows his own abilities.


Queen. Well, Phronesia, I must talk with you a little more. But this place is
not altogether so convenient for it. Follow me


Exeunt Queen and Phrones. Enter Priest and Evadne. Priest Well now, Evadne, my
deat child, thou art
Come forth upon the Worlds great Stage; and it
Must be my care, first to advise thee, then
To pray for thee. And this is all that is in
My power to do. The rest must be the Gods
And thy part to perform. Yet you are innocent,
(Oh may thou still be so, my child!) yet know not
Ought but the holy practices of cells,
Where virtuous Matrons have instructed thee.
But now the Scene is changed: the Queens commands
Have brought thee to the Court, to wait on her.
Th'imployment truly Noble; and thou have
In her the brightest Pattern of true Virtue
That all the world can boast of. But thou wilt find
Few more besides, whose wandering paths are safe.
Those of thy Sex, thou wilt find so strangely vain,
That they can think they 've curled, and patched, and washed
Themselves even into little Deities.
They do believe that wanton men speak truth,
When to consume those hours they care not for,
They tell them that their eyes are more then Stars,
Their cheeks more rosy then the mornings face,
And coral learnt its redness from the lips.
And by degrees they do so strangely cheat
Themselves (poor souls) into the fond belief
That they not only are the fairest, but
The wisest too; and will not be content
With all the beauty, without all the wit.
And now they are attained to that degree,
All must admire, but none must merit them;
Until that Time (too old to complement)
Takes from them all those little Ornaments
Which wanton Nature had adorned them with
And then they do awake, the Dream is done,
The Market falls, and some distressed Knight
Unenvi'd bears away what all had courted.
This is the common Fate of your poor Sex,
(To pass by what is worse, yet but too common)
When they get great opinions of themselves.
Therefore Evadne, let me pray thee still
Keep thy best Jewel, thy humility.
For since thou never wilt be more innocent
Then now thou art, thou never wilt have more reason
To think well of the self then thou have now.
If thou wear'st better clothes; alas, consider,
Each little little Flower that does in Meadows grow
Is better clad then thee, yet is not proud.
Hence may thou shun that common vice of Courts,
Scorn and contempt of others, which often have
A nobler Virtue, though a meaner fortune.
For know, Evadne, that this lower world
In which we dwell, is not distributed
According to folks merits: the Gods preserve
That justice for those nobler Regions which
Themselves inhabit. Here the mighty are
Like mighty Mountains, high, but seldom fertile;
The richest soil is in low Valleys found.
Devotion oft-times weeps in humble cells,
Whilst under gilded roofs profaness sings.
This is this the world, Evadne. -- But to come
To what I Have else to say, Thy next temptation
Will be to love (for hardly 'twixt those Ills
Of easy love and scorn, do Maidens well
Direct their course) know, thou will surely have*
Enough to court thee; some cause it is the mode;
Others because they 've nothing else to say;
And wiser folks, because they think me rich.
But know, Evadne, that to marry, is,
The greatest action of our lives, and merits
The greatest of our cares; and therefore if
Thou think me wiser then thy self, commit
This to my breast. But above all, I warn thee
Against Neander: Though thou see him rich
In clothes, as if he would authorize vice,
Ye he is a vain, profane, and idle person;
One that would make me hate the name of father,
Should he but call me so. -- But who is that yonder?

Evad. I think Sir his name is Geron.


Priest. It is so. An impertiment old fellow, that will trouble me. Let Us away.
The Queen (I suppose) will by this time expect you. Think over what I 've told
you.


Exeunt Priest and Evad. Enter Geron sol. Geron. And have not I brought my self
into a sweet condition now? -- Heavens! nothing grieveth me but that I am an
old fool. Why, could not I remember how many I had cuckold my self? and to
think I should not be served in the same kind if ever I married, was to suppose
neither wickedness nor justice in the world. How could I imagine that any one
of the lower rate of Court-Ladies would ever keep her self honest three
minutes, when once she feared neither the danger of taking Savine, nor a
big-belly? Without all doubt, now the Priest has given her leave to eat flesh,
she runs from dish to dish, like a starved prisoner at a feast, who for three
months has had only the privilege to think of meat; and that is the reason her
belly is so soon full. I might have been these four years a getting her -- by
the rate I went to work with her; but now (I think) I could do it with my
horns, were it to do again. Ah! Geron, Geron! What a cocks-comb art thou in thy
old age? A reverent fool! How prettily do horns mingle with thy gray hairs? And
yet thou art likely to cause more laughter then a wit. Heaven! What a condition
am I in? My Lord Pyrrhus, he is a man of an aspiring spirit, and of what else,
the world may imagine; but my head must have a hard bargain of it. My Lord
Edymion he is a Poet, forsooth, and can find no other place but my reverend
forehead for his forked Parnassus. And for my Lord Neander, the Priest
convinced him the other day that adultery was a very great sin; and that is
reason enough for him to lie at rack and manger. What a conspiracy is there
here to make me a cuckold? O that I had now but the generosity to hang my self?
Now do I perfectly perceive the pains that poor Children endure at the coming
of their teeth, by the coming of my horns. How happy was I when I was a young
man, when my care was only to keep my hair from forking, and I gave every
Barber a fee for a receipt: but Oh that I had got but one receipt to keep my head
from forking, in this my old age! Wicked Phronesia, How have thou used me? How
have thou affronted my weakness, that thou have made a collection through all
the Court for a big-belly? -- But, what a comfortable sight will it be to me,
to see her lie in? what a deal of pleasure I shall take to pay the Midwife and
Nource? Well, it is now in my own power to make my self mazed immediately. O,
O, O.

I must away, I must. But ah! I dread
I near shall get these horns out of my head. --

Exit Geron as in a fury. Finis Act. prim.
Actus 2. Scoena 1.
Enter Pyrrhus and Urania, as in a Garden. Pyrrh. -- Well, Madam Urania! You
imagine my business. As long as you are pretty* folks will be amorous. You know
my meaning. --


Vran. The Heavens forbid. --

Pyrrh. Sure it is the twentieth time I Have told you it,
And must you hear it over again once more?
I hope my business then is almost done,
When thus you love the repetition of it.

Vran. My Lord! Oh add not injury to my misfortune! --
Oh! pity; rather pity a poor Girl
Who fain would seem to be as innocent
As late she was, and not to understand
How harmless words by men are turned to sins.

Pyrrh. Why should you be thus obstinate? To be
A Mistress to a King; what greater honor
Can those you serve ere hop'e t'aspire to?

Vran. A Mistress to a King! No, no, you would have me
To be a Servant to his vice; an honor
I should not envy her that sought my ruin.

Pyrrh. Is love a vice, Urania? Then surely nature
Did make us vicious when she did immerse
Love in the very beings of all Creatures.
Search the great Universe, and show me there
What (but affrighted man) is not as free
To satisfy his loves, as thirst or hunger?
They near dispute the lawfulness of what
Is natural. No stone was ever so dull
To make it a case of conscience whether it
Should follow 'ts natural motion to the Center.
Love's natures representative, to whom she seems
To 've taught her Trade, and instituted it
Still to continue all her self had made;
Without which (surely) this whole world had been
But one poor Generation, and each species
Had been made up but of one He and She.

Vran. You do do well, my Lord, when you intend
Unlawful loves, to instance not in men
But beasts. -- But let me ever be
Of that affrighted number who follow virtue,
Rather then your examples with four feet.

Pyrrh. Mistaken Sophistress! How much more powerfully
Do thou dispute with those soft eyes of thine,
Then with thy pretty tongue? Let these then be
Rather employed to see thy error, then
This to defend it. Know, that instances
In beasts, do hold in men, when they relate
Unto that Nature which is truly common
Unto them both: And such is this of Love.
They cannot Say their passions like to us,
But they can Mean them with as strong an Ardor.
And though they do not sing their loves in verse,
Like me; they do attain them less in prose.
And is this wickedness! Sure vice is known
By its own fruit; and what do these bring forth?
Thy sheep Urania, gave thee gentle Lambs,
The warmer Goat brought forth a prity Kid
That thou would play withal: And will thou blame
That play which did produce thy play-fellow?
No, no, Urania! Love, like men, was free,
Ere power and laws had taught them both the use
Of chains and fetters (Nature never confined
Her noblest creature to the narrowest prison,
Nor gave him inclinations to torment him)
And therefore when thy Prince, who only does
In right abridge thy other liberties,
Shall offer to restore thee this, thou may
As freely take it as thou might the rest.

Vran. How is the King (my Lord) obliged unto you,
To serve whom, even in sin, you can permit
Your noblest faculties to abuse each other,
Your Reason to abuse your Love? But say, my Lord!
Do you do well to plant so mighty Engines
Against so weak a Fort, that is designed
Only a poor shelter unto Innocence?

Pyrrh. Well, Urania! I do perceive you still
Make me to toil in vain: But (though it is hard
And painful to deliver harder dooms
To pretty folks) yet I must plainly tell you,
The King's resolved to leave you but this choice,
Either to Love, or Die; to be the Subject
Of his Revenge or Pleasure: answer quickly,
And answer wisely* For (believed Urania)
If you refuse his Love, this houre's your last.

Vran. Sure Sir, the King's more just -- She cries.

Pyrrh. By Heaven it is true.

Vran. Then Heavens more merciful -- Unfortunate,
Unfortunate Urania, what can thou do?

Pyrrh. What? Thou can grant the Kings desires, and live. --
Come, be brief. Here Is one at hand will have small pity on you.

Vran. Oh, my Lord, pity me! pity a distressed Maid.
She kneels.
Pyrrh. Urania, pity your self, and pity a Prince that loves you.
Come, do not cast away thy self: You're young,
And (if you please) have many years to live,
And pleasant ones. Be wise ere't be too late.

Uran. My Lord, what shall I do?

Pyrrh. Why love the King.
Say but the word, and he will presently be here.

Vran. And must I loose my Innocence?

Pyrrh. Come, come,
Urania live. The King will straight be with you.
I Will turn the Lock, and keep you sure till then.

Ex. Pyrrh. and locks the door. Vran. sol. Unhappy Maid; wretched Urania,
Thou art undone, for evermore undone.
Lost to the World, or Innocence. Thy choice
Is either to be wicked, or to die;
To loose thy Virginpurity, or life.
Ay me, unblest! What black, what fatal Star
Shone sad misfortune at thy birth? How happy,
How blessed had thou been still, had thou still dwelt
Amongst those who wear poor clothes, and honor Virtue;
Whose chaster Loves made Love a Deity.
What will thy Mother say, when she shall hear
Urania is not Innocent? And what
Will thy brave Love think, who never approacht thee
But with a flame as pure as that which burns
On holy Vesta's Altars. No, no; die,
Die, die, unfortunate, but chaste Urania.
Never be thrifty of that blood which must
But serve to blush that it preserved it self.
Endymion from behind an Arbor

Endym. -- It Is not safe to tarry longer. Poor Soul, her love
To me may prove her ruin. Now I see
She loves me, and I must improve my time.

He appears. My dear Urania! -- Why these Tears?

Uran. Is this Endymions Ghost? --

Endym. No, it is his Body, Madam. --

He imbraceth her. Vran. Then never more welcome.
Dear my Lord! Urania is undone.

Endym. Not so, because Endymion lives. -- Know,
Urania's ruin never can be writ
But in Endymions blood.

Uran. Undone beyond
Endymions help, because to help her is
To be a Traitor now.

Endym. If to assist
My Queen be to rebel, then let me wear
The glorious Name of Traitor.

Vran. Ah! my Lord,
You know not what I mean.

Endym. Yes, yes, my Dear,
Yond Arbor was my covert, whilst I heard
Pyrrhus assault thy Noble Innocence.

Uran. And can you help me now, my Lord?

Endym. I can;
And I will show you how I can. -- But know,
Know my Urania, I have loved thee long,
And loved thee with a holy flame. My Hopes
And all my Longings have as virtuous been,
As those of pious Votaries, who court
Strait-lac'd Religion. All my sighs and tears
Have been as pure, as are those Gales and Springs,
That in Elysium do refresh the Blessed.
And yet thou have not pitied him that loves thee,
Even though thy very Nature be as gentle
As Morning dew just melting into Air.
And shall I languish thus, and die? Must Love
His Martyrs have, as well as other Gods?
Sure no, Urania; he has no Rewards
Beyond this Life: How can he gratify
His Martyrs then? The cold Inhabitants
Of Graves do not desire, but dwell alone,
And never Think, like aged Priests and Nuns.
Help then thy dying Lover, and he will change
His Love to adoration, since thou wantst
Nothing but pity to become Divine.

Uran. What shall I serve you in, my Lord?

Endym. Permit
Me to enjoy the Title of thy Servant;
And pay my fire with equal flames again.

Uran. My Lord, I were ungrateful if I should not.

Endym. Then be not so. -- But (to be short) I doubt
The Kings approach; and therefore, if thou wilt promise
This night to sleep within mine Arms (being first
Authorized so to do by Hymen's Priest)
I Will free thee from the Kings illicite Love.

Vran. My Lord, I will. But satisfy me how.

Endym. You must appoint the King to meet you here
In yonder Grotto, and oblige him to
The language, and the time of Love, soft whispers,
And the Night; and I Will prepare
Some other Body to supply your place.

Vran. Ah! Who will be so wicked as to do it?

Endym. Enough. --

Vran. Sure it is impossible, it cannot be.
What Woman would consent to such an Act?

Endym. Ten thousand, Madam.

Vran. Would they? They let them not --
I Will rather choose a thousand times to die,
Then own a wretched life, saved at the Rate
Of so much Wickedness. --

Endym. Come; be content,
Chaste Soul, the Queen her self shall be the Person.
I Will tell her all thy story, and I doubt not
But she will preserve thy Innocence, and love it.

Uran. Thrive, brave Endymion; thrive in all thy Loves,
That have for Love redeemed (and redeemed too
Without a Sacrifice) a wretched Maid,
Naught but whose Blood could have preserved her White.

Endym. My Dear, I must retire: I fear the King.
Thou have a Part to act, and so have I.
Be happy, fair Urania; I am blessed
That my employment is to do thee service.

Ex. Endym. as at a private door. Uran. sol. Poor, poor Endymion! in what
little point
Will all the Virtue and Religion end
Of thy contrivances? How does thy Fate,
In the contempt of all that is brave and worthy,
Play with thy Noble Actions; and endeavor
In pride to make Virtue ridiculous?
Poor, poor, Endymion! How could I now weep,
If tears were able but to wash away
The blackness of thy Fate? Now thou have thought
(And thought by paths white as the milky-way)
To lead me from the Labyrinth of my Woes;
The next thing I must think, must be to cheat
All thy innocent expectations, which
Are every of them Honors to my self,
And condescentions in thy Noble Soul.
Whilst thou in melting language tell my tale,
And giv'st me so much value by thy words,
That she who is a Queen shall condescend
(And love that condescension too) to pity
The Daughter of an humble Villager,
And to become her self her Substitute:
Whilst thou do this (and for no recompense,
But to bestow on me, what were more fit
For Temples far, a pure unspotted Love)
I must endeavor at that very time
To frustrate all thy hopes, and only give
My fained promise to the King, on this
Condition, That Endymion must be sent
So far from Court, that he do not return
Until to morrow Sun see us again,
And my engagement to him be made void.
And to effect my purpose the more surely,
I must endeavor to persuade the King
That he has often courted me, and has
So wary eyes upon me, that I doubt
I shall not be secure but by his absence;
And thus I must reward the brave Endymion.
But, I will recompense thee with my tears:
And since I cannot sat is fie thy flame,
I Will weep it out. -- Poor, poor Endymion! She weeps.
How must I cry to see thee like a Ball
Tossed vainly up and down, even by those two
Blind Gamesters, Love, and Fortune?

Enter Pyrrhus. Pyrrh. And why with showers allay you thus you beams?

Uran. You are the Messenger of Sorrow, Sir.

Pyrrh. In bringing the sad news a Prince attends
Your prettiness in yonder Parler. Come. --

He takes her by the hand. Uran. I Will follow, Sir. -- Pray Sir go on, I Will
follow.

Pyrrh. I Am glad you're so obedient.

Urania to her self. Urania! Whiter go thou? With what face
Can thou say Yes unto the Kings proposals,
Although thou surely do intend to cheat him?
It is immodest sure. -- It cannot fit
A Maiden mouth. -- I never more must pray
With the same tongue that is able (though but feigned)
Thus to consent. --

She stops. Pyrrh. Nay, I must have your hand, unless you will follow.
Uran. to her self. Kind Heaven assist me! -- Give me strength to hear
-- What I should not, and fain'dly to assent.
And know, Heaven, like thy Sun, my blushes shall
This Even show, I will rise fair to morrow.

Exeunt Uran. and Pyrrhus. Enter Neander and Evadne, with a Maid following her
at a distance. Neand. -- And what do you think of those unactive hours
You Have spent in Cells, compared to those o'th* Court?

Evadne. I think them innocent. And if they showed
Me fewer objects, they did show me too
Fewer temptations, and therefore gave me
More content, though less variety.

Neand. Madam, the diverse objects of the Court
Have yet been but disturbances, to scatter
Those thoughts of yours which your dim Cell united.
But when you have weighed each various face, each garb,
Each brisk behavior *among the Gallants here,
And have contracted your now scattered beams
To make illustrious some one persons fortune;
You Will then take pleasure in your own effects,
This day to frown him dead, to morrow to
Kiss him alive again; and thus each day
To multiply the Miracles of Love.

Evadne. These are the Wonders Sir, which greater Beauties
Do in far higher Orbs: Evadne were
Proud, as her Fortune has designed her low,
Should she dare think ought what in complement
You do attribute to her.

Neand. Madam, would you were but content
To see me fall your earliest Victim here. --

Evad. Alas, my Lord, the Sacrifice would much
Excel the Deity.

Neand. No more then little Fanes,
The mighty powers they are dedicate to. --
Dearest Evadne, fairest Murdress, thou
Have slain Neander with thy pretty eyes.

He imbraceth her with his arm. Evad. And do you apprehend me for it, Sir?
What Flower is yonder?

She goes from him to gather it. Neand. A Flower more happy (Madam) then my
self,
And like me shows you do love cruelty;
That fain would live, and you to kill it, place
It in your Bosom. I would fain live too,
And you to kill me, thence will keep me out.

Evad. My Lord, though I am wholly ignorant
Of all the Arts of Court, yet I can see
You're pleased to fain much Love, to exercise
Much Wit. Surely, I cannot think
You can so soon be taken with my Beauty.

Neand. Then hear my Vows. --

Evad. No, good my Lord, let these
On more deliberation be pronounced.

Neand. Do men deliberate whether they will be
Happy and blessed? -- Pox on this Rogue. --

Enter Geron to them. Geron. Nay, now I will not hang my self yet, I Will be
revenged on this Lord first. -- My Lord --


Neand. What say you Geron?


Geron. -- How do you do, my Lord?


Neand. Very well, Geron. How does your Lady?


Get. stamps and speaks to himself. It Is he has done it. --


Neand. Why? How now, Geron; Do you conjure? What Is the matter?


Ger. to himself. I need not conjure. I know the Father now.


Neand. Why, what do thou mutter among thy no teeth, Man?


Ger. My Lord, why should you ask for my Wife?


Neand. Because I am civil.


Ger. to himself. Because I am a Cuckold.


Neand. Pox on thee, why do not speak out?


Ger. Ah --


Neand. Prithee Geron, what is the matter? Have thou seen a Spirit? Or have thou
lost any money? What is it?


Evadne. Your servant, Sir. -- I suppose by this time my Lord Endymion will
have left the Queen. --


Neand. So very hasty Madam! You will permit me to wait on your Ladyship. Fare
you well, Geron.


Exeunt Neand* and Evadne. Ceron. sol. This is the Man. -- It Is he. -- Why
should he ask for my Wife? Suppose I have a Wife, what is that to him? Must be
needs be asking for her presently? Ah phronesia, I wish (I wish heartily) I had
never seen the head of thee, -- But, I could never be content till I was
married, like a fool as I was, -- This Rascal Neander; this Rascal that I dare
nor call Rascal: This Villain that I dare not say any thing to, not because he
is Valiant (for then it would not grieve me) but because he is a Lord, which he
could no more help then I can that he has made me a Cuckold. He was born to
that, just as I am to this. The case is the selfsame. --


Enter Endymion. -- Here Is another Lord too. --
Endym. Sir Geron, how is it with you?


Geron. Your Servant, my Lord. --


Eudym. How does the fair Phronesia, Sir?


Ger. to himself. What! Here Is another. -- Two Lords to make one Cuckold. --


Endym. What, mute, Geron! Has any misfortune befallen your Wife?


Ger. to himself. Cuckold! Laughed at! --


Endym. Geron, you make me wonder. --


Ger. to himself still. You have made me a Cuckold I am sure, among you. --


Enter a Page hastily; and delivers a Letter to Endymion from the King: at
which he withdraws a little, and opens it. Geron. My Lord, I shall take my
leave of you; you have business.


Exeunt Geron and Page. Endym. reads the Letter: which was, My Lord,
We are informed (though not certainly) that there happened last night a mutiny
in Our Castle of Argos. It is Our pleasure therefore, that you, immediately on
sight hereof, take a convenient number of Our Light Horse, and go thither. And
if you find any such thing, to use your best endeavors to appease it; and
bring with you the principal Actors therein, to receive such punishment as
their Crimes shall deserve.

Basileus Rex.



Endym. Where, where will not Misfortune find thee out?
Sure Fortune has more eyes then those who say
Shee'th none: else how could she still hit the self-same mark?
This night, when I supposed within thy arms,
Thy arms, my Dear, to have scorned all the world,
To Have pitied Monarchs, and looked down on Kings;
Must I be taken from my virtuous Love,
And change her Stars (her fairest Stars) for those
Poor eyes that Heaven allows to look upon
The dewy night withal? -- But stay; I sin,
I sin like all the world, who never think
That every other part is well, if but
One finger pain them. -- I am fortunate,
That I have gained her love, that can no more
Change, then a Star his course, or Fate
Her everlasting Laws: and I Am to fail
But one night of my promise; and that night
Is but twelve hours. -- But say, Endymion, how
Can thou live twelve hours from Urania's eyes? --
But I must haste, and bid my Fair adieu. --
-- And yet I will not neither; the first kiss
I beg from those dear lips, shall never be
A parting one. -- And must I not then wish
For a Goodnight, because I must have none?
Sure, I must see her. -- But say, Endymion, say
She should look sad, or sigh when thou depart'st?
How do thou think, at the same time, to quell
Two insurrections, that at Argos, and
This sadder one in thy own breast? -- My Dear,
I must not see thee. I must only make
Some little paper happier then my self,
And write thee, why Endymion is unblest.

Exit Endym. Enter King and Pyrrhus. King. Well Pyrrhus, now our business is
done. This night Urania (after all her pretty blushes, and loathness to say
Yes) is mine.


Pyr. She is, an't please your Majesty, and I am very glad of it, knowing your
Majesty's passion; for the truth is, I did very much doubt so much innocence
would never have been overcome.


King. She was loath indeed. -- But Pyrrhus, prithee see Endymion loyter not.
She was very passionate in that particular; and all her promise is void, if he
be in town by six of the clock this Even: and it is near so much already, I
think.


Pyr. I shall hasten him, if he be not already gone.


King. And then you must see yond Grotto prepared.


Pyr. It shall be fitted for the Scene of Love.


King. The all I have to do, is to make some fair pretense to the Queen for my
absence this night -- Look where she comes.


Enter Queen alone. Pyrrh. I shall make haste to wait on your commands.


Ex. Pyrrh. King. How does my Queen? what, all alone?


Queen. Not now
When I have found my Lord, who is to me
All company. --

King. Ah! thou have found him none.
Thou'st found him now disordered. -- I Am not well.

Qu. Alas, I doubt you have taken cold.

King. I have;
But hope that this nights rest will make me well.

Qu. Sure Sir, you don't do well to tarry here.

King. I do not, Madam; I Will retire. Good night. Kisseth her.

Qu. Nay, give me leave Sir to attend you. --

King. No,
I will not draw you from the entertainment
This pleasant evening will afford you here.

Qu. Alas, my Prince, you injure now your Queen,
To think that evening which gives Pain to you,
Can give her Pleasure.

King. My dear, I am not sick;
I only am a little indisposed;
I Will beg thy pardon to retire this night:
But pray sup you, and take no farther care,
Till at your own appartment I wait on you
To morrow morning.

Queen. Your will is still my Law.

King. Once more goodnight. -- Ex. King.

Queen sol. Poor Prince! poor Prince! How little do thou think
How soon we two shall meet again: and she
Thou so much fly'st, shall prove the very thing
For which thou fly'st her? How ridiculous
Just Heaven does make the ways of men, when they
Forsake the ways of Virtue? -- This brave Prince,
At whose victorious Armies Greece now trembles,
When he contrives inglorious actions, shall
At the same time be pitied by his servants;
And a poor Girl shall upbraid him, in
Contriving to preserve him virtuous.
How do men ravel back to childhood, when
They cease to be thy Children, sacred Virtue;
And need the care of every little person,
That what they call for may not do them harm!
Poor Prince! I pity thee. -- And oh that Heaven
She kneeles. May do so too! And though the setting Sun
Bode naught but darkness to the world, yet may
Some charitable Star vouchsafe one beam
To his benighted breast; lest wicked men
Upbraid your wisdom, that give Crowns and Scepters
To those poor spirits, who can softly creep
At cowardly midnight to their beds of sin. She rises.
How happy should I be this tedious night
In yonder Grotto, to expect in vain?
And by my penance there to expiate
The intended crime of my repenting Prince? --
But I must haste -- Blessed Heaven, have pity on
The folly of my poor deluded Lord.

Exit. Queen. Enter Cleantha. She takes two or three turns in the Garden, and
then breaks into these words. Unfortunate Cleantha. --
She walks a turn or two more. -- Too fortunate
In that which Fools call Happiness. --
She walks a little. -- Fate, Fate,
Why do thou thus abuse the world, to make
Some high, some low, yet every one alike
Unhappy? -- whatever our stations be,
We meet in this sad Center, Misery. --
Yet, lest by knowing this, we should rebel,
And every Generous soul turn Destiny
Unto it self, (scorning thy tyranny,
And rather choosing not to be at all,
Then be thy sport) thou have contrived things so,
That every person thinks others more happy,
And that no breast knows Misery like theirs.
But those whom thou do destine to such Plagues,
As would break forth through private windows, thou
Do place in mighty Palaces, and with
External splendor hid'st their inward Griefs
From common eyes, and make them (silly souls)
Admire, what, did they understand, they would pity.
How many that behold Cleantha walk,
Attended by the proudest sparks of Greece,
And richer clad then Tulips in the Spring,
Do think her every minute happier far
Then Cowards condemned are, when their pardon's read;
And every Lady in Arcadia
But wretched, when compared to her bright Fortune.
Whilst poor Cleantha at that very minute
Envies some Village-Maid that Russet wears
(The Livery of those sheep she does attend)
But freely favors the poor Swain she loves,
And sleeps at night. -- Cleantha's often admired,
And her great titles reckoned up, whilst she
Does in her closet weep she is not less. --
Heaven! Heaven! where was thy Mercy then,
When thou made Life so great a pain, and Death
A Sin? -- Did thou create great souls but to
Affront them with thy greater power? -- But stay,
Profane Cleantha, stay; and be not more
Unfortunate, by being wicked too. --
Endymion is all virtue, and he would
Hate a profane Cleantha. -- Poor Endymion,
How little dare thou think my thoughts, or I
Dare say them to thee? -- Ah wretched, wretched Princess,
Whom Fate has made greater then Happiness! --
What can I hope for? should Endymion speak,
I then should hate him for his confidence;
A Crime, of which he never can be guilty. --
When once he bled for me (and conquered too)
And I on purpose chid my woman, that
She was unhandy, only 'cause my hand
Ambitious was to wipe his wounds, and give
Him Balsam for the better Balsam of
His blood; poor Lord, me thought he seemed to wish
The earth had been created lower, that
He might have lower bowed, to give me thanks;
And was so far from daring to presume,
That he did seem to make the distance more
Betwixt himself and me, by placing me
Yet higher, for my so great charity.
Nay, should he speak, in speaking he would forfeit
The very thing I love him for, that rest
He finds in the Elysium of his thoughts;
And those true satisfactions which he takes,
In being all the world unto himself.
But since my Love is virtuous as its Object*
Why should I stick to tell it all the world?
Nay, why should I not rather glory in it?
To blush to say I love Endymion, were
To be ashamed to love Religion, 'cause
Her Priests are poor. -- If Fortune 'th set him low,
Fools that are blind, like her, may do so too.
But let Cleantha's pleasure be to see
Virtue affronting the Fools Deity.
Direct me, my good Stars; and let me do
Honor to him, who so much honors you.
And if I needs so hard a Fate must prove,
As fall at last a Sacrifice to Love;
'Twill be my Glory, when it shall be said,
Cleantha for the brave Endymion died.
Exit. Cleantha. Finis Act. 2.
ACTUS 3.
Enter King. He takes a turn or two, and then to him Pyrrhus. King. GOod morrow
to you, my Lord.


Pyrrh. A good day to your Majesty. A day as pleasant as your night has been.


King. Ah! -- I wish it indeed.


Pyrrh. I hope your Majesty has been well enough diverted this night.


King. -- Yes, my Lord -- though not as you suppose. --
I Have been diverted from those wild desires
That made me first unking my self, and then
Unlord my Confident. But I Have asked pardon
Of Heaven and my own Majesty; and now
I beg it too from thee, my loyal Pyrrhus:
Forgive me that I have profaned thy Faith
By such Commands, that thou art bound to ask
Blessed Heaven forgiveness for thy Loyalty.

Pyrrh. Your Majesty (I hope) will give me leave
To wonder at this change, and understand it,
When you shall please to think me fit to do so.

King. Pyrrhus, I Will tell thee all. -- When now the night
Grew black enough to hide a skulking action;
And Heaven had never an eye unshut to fee
Her Representative on earth creep amongst
Those poor defensless worms, whom Nature 'th left
An humble prey to every thing; and no
Asylum but the Dark: I softly stole
To yonder Grotto through the upper walks,
And there found my Urania, -- But I found her,
I found her, Pyrrhus, not a Mistress, but
A Goddess rather, which made me now to be
No more her Lover, but Idolater.
She only whispered to me, as she promised,
Yet never heard I any voice so loud:
And though her words were gentler far then those
That holy Priests do speak to dying Saints,
Yet never Thunder signified so much.
And what did more impress what ever she said,
Methought her whispers were my injured Queens,
Her manner just like hers. -- And when she urged
(Among a thousand things) the injury
I did the faithfull'st Princess in the world,
Who now supposed me sick, and was perchance
Upon her knees, offering up holy vows
For him who mocked both heaven and her, and was
Now breaking of that vow he made her, when
With sacrifice he called the Gods to witness;
When she urged this, and wept, and spoke so like
My poor deluded Queen, Pyrrhus, I trembled,
Almost persuaded that it was her Angel
Spoke through Urania's lips; who for her sake
Took care of me, as something she much loved.
It would be long to tell thee all she said,
How often she figh'd, how bitterly she wept:
But the effect. Urania still is chaste,
And with her chaster lips has promised to
Invoke blessed Heaven for my intended sin.

Pyrrh. A happy night. Indeed, I never took pleasure
To Have served your Majesty in this employment,
Until this instant.

King. But how do think, my Pyrrhus,
I shall reward Urania for this action?

Pyrrh. Ten thousand ways. --

King. No, no, I am unhappy;
I must undo the fair, the chaste Urania.

Pyrrh. And me with wonder too. --

King. Thou know she told me
Endymion was her servant (an high Fortune
For one so mean, and a rare one too,
Who can love Virtue where he sees her poor.)
And I shall be constrained to banish him
To some remoter Isle, unless he will be
(Which I much doubt) content to marry her
Within few days. Pyr. This is all news. King. It is.
But Pyrrhus, thou art worthy of my secrets.
And therefore know, I Have lately learnt, Cleantha
Loves nothing but Endymion. Though she have
(Thou known) a Prince that courts her, high in Birth
And Fortune too: one worthy our alliance,
Yet she slights all addresses, and last night
I was informed, 'was only for the sake
Of this mean Lord; which should the Prince but know,
He sure would scorn her for his Rivals sake.
The certainty I hope to know this day,
From our good Priest, whom I Have employed to sound her,
And learn her resolutions, whence I shall
Discern Endymions fate. Pyr. An't please your Majesty,
But does Endymion know Cleantha loves him?

King. I Am told he does not. All that can be gathered,
Is but from some few words she was by chance
O'er-heard to say unto her self, too big
For her own breasts confinement, and too secret
(It seems) for any others ear. -- But hark, what is yonder?

Trumpets without. Pyr. I do believe Endymion is returned.

King It Is likely. Let us in, and have his answer.

Ex. King, Pyrrhus. Enter Cleantha sol. into the Garden. She walks a while,
often fetching very deep sighs; at last says, -- When every thing is green,
Must poor Cleantha only wither, and never
Know a Spring? -- Was I made only high
Like Rhodope, and Haemus, or the Alps,
To dwell with everlasting winter, to wear Snow,
When every valley Roses wears? -- Cleantha,
Thou must die. Then thou may also be
Happy as other folks. The Grave looks wistly,
Like thy Fortune. Then every bodies face
Is pale as thine. There, there thou will not see
Poor Villagers more blessed in love then thee.
And there thou will be able make appear,
Cleantha and Endymion equal are. --
Then, possibly, some of Cleantha's earth
May prove a little flower, and look fresher,
Then when it part of a great Princess was,
And show the erring world --
Enter the Priest. -- Heaven! what shall I say
To this good man now? --
Pri. Good morrow to your Highness.
Heaven send you a good day. --

Cleantha. I shall not doubt it,
After so good a Prayer. -- Good morrow, Sir. --

Priest. Your Highness all alone? 'Twere too great boldness
To ask what little pensiveness invited
You to so much retirement, whilst the day
Is yet so young; and you as young as it? --

Clean. I cannot wonder, Sir, at what you ask,
When I consider in what vanities
I usually have spent my mornings, more
Examining my Face then Self. -- But late She sighs.
Repentance is a little commendable. --

Pri. But yours, Madam, is not so. Your morning yet
Is younger then this days, and you can still
Pay First Fruits unto Virtue. -- But, fair Princess,
(Pardon the freedom of your Priest) we often
Mistake our Melancholy for Repentance;
And think that sadness our souls health, which is
Indeed, but the disease of our weak bodies.

Queen. It Is likely, Sir, and likely that weak sort
That I am of, may thus often be deluded.
But Heaven (I hope) has pity for that weakness
It made not stronger. --

Priest. Madam, be pleased to know,
The only reason why I urge this, is,
The only reason why I Have thus intruded
Into your Highnesses Retirements now.
This is not, Madam, the first time I Have seen
Your Highness walk alone, and shun those places
Which company did seem to make unhappy:
And often have I too observed you have been
Alone in the middle of a multitude:
Which sort of temper being no wise proper
To your more sprightly age, and (...), I
(As one obliged by Heaven, to serve you, and
Authori'zd too to speak) presumed to watch
A fitting opportunity, to pray
Your Highness to unfold, whether its cause
No wise concerns my Function; or if I
Might serve you with my Counsel, or my Prayers.

Clean. Sir, You have ever been a Father to me,
And, possibly, your great respect, a little
May injure your great judgment, and present
Things you are pleased to fear, as though they were.

Priest. No, Madam, pardon me, I Am not mistaken;
But much more doubt, what you with so much art
Desire to hide. Sure, it is no common thing
You can think worth the covering with such language.

Cleanth. Indeed, I am no wise sad, Sir; you but doubt it.

Priest. Pardon me, Madam, if I dare to tell you,
You do not well to say so. You are troubled. --
Madam, you are in love. -- You ought not to
Deny it, 'cause it is truth. --

Cleanth. Nor ought I to

Confess it, 'cause it is no sin. --
Priest. If it be not,

Indeed you are not bound to it. But if you
Love one beneath your birth and Fortune, Madam,
That is a sin.
Cleanth. It may be so; but I

Am no wise guilty of it, Sir.
Pri. Madam,

Endymion is so. --
Cleanth. And can I help it; Sir?

So are a thousand more, it may be. --
Pri. Madam,
'Twere to affront your Highness, should I longer
Delude you by my seeming ignorance
Of what (would Heaven) had never been known to you,
Nor me: Madam, you love that poor
Mean Lord Endymion. -- It Is for him that you
Look pale, and sigh, and walk alone, and die
To all that is glorious, and worthy you
So high a Princess. -- It Is for him you slight
The Prince of Macedon, and disoblige
The King your Uncle. -- It Is for him you are
No more Cleantha, no more that noble Princess,
That like a Deity reflected on
Your own perfection (that Supreme Estate
Nature and Fortune thought you worthy of)
And did esteem your self at the same rate
Heaven and the Gods had valued you. -- But, Madam,
It Is not too late yet to recant all this;
And there is often more glory in repenting
Us of some errors, then never to have erred;
Because we find, there are more folks have Judgment
Then Ingenuity. -- Madam, let me be
The happy Messenger of this good news.

Cleanth. Poor Cleantha! poor Endymion!

Aside. Pri. Madam --

Cleanth. Enough Sir. -- I am not ashamed
My Priest should know, what my Prayers are not
Ashamed to own.

Pri. Then you love Endymion. --
Confess it, if you're not ashamed. --

Cleanth. It may be
It suits not with my Modesty to say so:
Nor yet with my Religion to deny it. --
I am sorry you are angry, Sir. --

Pri. Ah! dear Princess,
I am not angry; that would not become me.
I am afflicted, Madam, I am afflicted,
At what much less becomes your Highness. -- Can
You love so mean a Lord, and own it too,
And still think your self innocent, and talk
Of Modesty, and say Love is no sin?
And pray --

Cleanth. Nay, Sir, I must be bold, when you
Instruct me to be so, and interrupt
That Language, Sir, you must not let me hear.
Know, I may love Endymion, and yet talk
Of Innocence and Modesty, much more then you
May of Civility, when you presume, Sir,
To tell me, to my face, the contrary. --
You Will pardon me, I hope, Sir. -- I would fain
Remember you, yet not forget my self. --

Pri. Pardom my passion, Madam. -- It Is for you.

Clean. It Is not for me to hear. -- That Modesty
You dared to doubt (heaven, have I heard it!) -- Know,
She cries. Is much too tender to be touched, Sir, with
Hard fingers yet. --

Priest. Dear Princess pardon me.

Clean. Had you not been my Priest, I could have thought
So bold a passion: but for you, who teach,
That all the Wealth and Grandeur in the world
Does hold no more proportion with true Virtue,
Then this world with Elysium, her reward:
For you who teach this, and have taught it me,
(And if you teach it not, your Function's nothing)
For you (I say) to be so much in passion,
I love Endymion, who is poor, but has
More virtue then a thousand Princes: this
Is wonder, Sir: But for your office sake,
I Will think you speak not your own words; and so
I still may reverence you; as you well know
I still have done. --

Priest. Madam, have I your pardon?

Cleanth. You have it, Sir. --

Priest. Then give me leave to be
Grateful, and serve you. Humbly to discuss
This Love you're pleased to own, without the least
Of prejudice, or favor. Thus you may
Best judge of this great action of your life.

Cleanth. You have it, Sir; and may oblige me with it.

Priest. Then know, fair --

Clean. But when you name Endymion. --

Priest. -- Your pleasure, Madam. --

Clean. -- Nothing. -- I do attend you.

Priest. Nay, Madam, pray be free. --

Clean. It Is nothing, Sir. --
Endymion needs not my Apology. --

Priest. Madam, you do acknowledge that you love
The Lord Endymion? --

Cleanth. Sir, I do to you,
But never have to him; and it may be
I never will.

Priest. (Your Highness does oblige me) --
And you do seem to give this reason, 'cause
He ownes more virtue then a thousand Princes;
Which, sure, is probable. Yet, Madam, know,
That there are Princes too are virtuous
As he: and in particular, the high-
Born Prince of Macedon, who courts your Highness,
Does yield to none, but has as good a title
To Virtue as his Crown. -- Now, though you ought
To prefer Virtue before Wealth, or Greatness,
As what is of more value then them both;
Yet these are both fair Pedals unto Virtue;
They much advance her stature, and do make
Her more conspicuous to the world, and so
Much more adored; and therefore always are
To be preferred, when to be had with her.
Low Violets may smell among the grass
And their own leaves, whilst that the nobler Rose
Adornes the Garden, and is no less sweet. --

Clean. Sweeter then both in your comparison. --
But, Sir, if it be possible to advance
This humble Violet almost unto
The stature of the Rose, to whom great Nature
Has gi'n a higher stem, though not more sweetness;
Pray, would it not be more of charity
And judgment, then to endeavor with more hazard,
To add some leaves unto that Rose, whom Nature
Already had made fair enough? --

Pri. Madam,
I well do understand, your Highness owns
Greatness enough to make another Great:
And that the Prince of Macedon appears
Already fair enough to all the world:
Yet surely, Madam, though your structure be
Noble and high, if you will build it on
A low foundation, it can never appear
So high, as if your Basis higher were.
You may appear your self; but when you do
Join with an equal, you appear him too.

Clean. Pardon me, Sir, I only him appear.
I lose my name, and all I was before.
I am not greater (when his wife) because
I was a Princess; for should he but wed
The meanst Lass in all Arcadia, he
In doing so, would make her full as great
As I should be. Ambitious Rivers, whilst
They needs will strive to join with greater Floods,
Do add indeed to them, but lose themselves,
Whilst those that court some smaller Brook at once,
Increase their Waters, and preserve their Names.

Pri. M^dam, you will do well to heed, that whilst
You seek t'encrease your Waters, you do not
Increase your Years too. Mighty Floods, you know
Glide smooth, yet bear down all; whilst little Brooks
Murmr at Pebles in their way, and have
Their courses often obstructed. And, Madam, what,
What is a Name to the unfortunate?
What is a Name to those, whose Names must live
But in their Epitaph? if you do wed
A Prince, the fair Cleantha will adorn
His Chronicle, and that in recompense,
Will make that Name immortal as her Merit.
But if you will in common Channels run,
Poor Neighbor-towns may know your Name, but Mapps
Will heed you not. And then the brave Cleantha
Will set with her own face; and the injut'd world
Shall lose her best Example, to those Ages
Are yet to come; and thus Cleantha will
Undo her self, and all Posterity.

Cleanth. You almost do undo my reason with
Your language, Sir. -- But you well know, Sir, should
I by each action of my life endeavor
To be forgotten in all Chronicle,
And leave it in my Will, to have my Name
Never mentioned more; this very Will of mine
Would live to all Posterity. Comets
As soon may unobserved pass among
Astrologers, as any Princess can
Among Historians. -- But, alas, Sir, what,
What Is my Remembrance, when I am dead,
To be compared to the Contents of Life?
Shall I be wretched all the day, because
I Would have folks talk of me when I Am asleep?
What is it, if it be hereafter said,
Cleantha was the Queen of Macedon,
When poor Cleantha's but a little earth?
If I love nothing but Endymion,
Nothing but him can make me happy, Sir;
And if I love nothing in him but his Virtue,
And his brave Soul, and can be well content
To lose a Crown, and Title of a Queen,
To sind those better treasures, though I stoop
To take them up, 't will be more glory, and
Eternity unto my Name, then if
(Like petty Country folks) I do dispense
With Love for my convenience, and wed
What I may chance to like in time, with help
Of some good Counsel, and Necessity. --
This, Sir, will be an act, will give my Name
An honorable mention in the mouths
Of Priests, and holy folks, as often as they
Instruct men, that the Gods sometimes reward
Virtue in this world, or that Virtue is
To be preferred before a Crown or Scepter.
For then it will be said, Endymion's virtue
Won him a Princess, and Cleantha did
Esteem a brave Endymion much above
A Prince and Diadem. And thus my Greatness,
At once, shall make it self more great, and serve
TO embalm the bravest person in the world,
And make him, like my self, immortal too.
For whist men write Cleantha's Story, since
(Like her) it will be naught without Endymion,
The brave Endymion must be mentioned too,
(That else perchance might have been numbered 'monstg
Those precious things, whose loss the world bewails.)
And thus I shall oblige Posterity,
More in Endymion then my self: and shall
Give (like a Goddess) immortality,
To what was mortal in it self, and had
Died but for me. -- This, Sir, I only say,
To answer your objection; and I name
Endymion, 'cause you named him, as I did
The Rose and Violet, when you were pleased
To instance in them. --

Priest. Heaven! would it were but so. --
Madam, as error never can be more happy
Then in your mouth, nor more secure, who give
It so much beauty with your language, and
Strength with your Wit; so, can it never be
More dangerous. -- And therefore, pardon me,
If I no longer do occasion you
To show the omnipotency of your wit,
In (almost) making Error, Truth; and tell you
What Is surely true. -- Madam, I have not thus
Presumed to interrupt this your Retirement
I found you in, on any confidence
Merely my own, but only in obedience
Unto the King's Command, your Royal Uncle,
Who understands (however you little think it)
You love Endymion (Heaven would not conceall
So great an ill from him who may prevent it)
And has commanded me to use my best
Endeavors to dissuade you from an action
So much beneath your self, and contrary
To his desires, who with so dear affection
Has ever treated you: And now refused
To speak to you himself, lest that his passion
Should move too violent against what he hates,
And disoblige what he so dearly loves.
To this so true and tender a regard*
Of this your Royal Uncle, Madam, what
Regardfull answer will you now command
Me to return him? --

She rests a while. Clean. Sir, I cannot tell
What way the King should know what you affirm,
Since I never said so much to any person. --
I dare not think you would betray me, Sir. --
That were profane. -- But if you must indeed,
Return some answer to the King, be pleased
To tell him, As I ever yet have been
Obedient to him, as my Uncle, so
I still do think my self obliged to be;
Supposing (as he has not hitherto)
His Goodness never will command, cut what
Shall be within my power to obey him in.

Pri. Madam, this answer has much Latitude. --

Clean. It promises, Sir, all I can. -- You will not
Have me to promise more, I hope. --

Priest. But is it
In your Highness power to love the Prince
Of Macedon, and not to love Endymion?

Clean. I think, Sir, Love's as much within my power,
As't is in any other body's. --

Pri. Madam,
I must entreat your Highness for an answer,
A little more direct unto the question. --
You Will pardon me, I hope; I Am to deliver
It to a King. --

Clean. And to receive it from
A Princess, and a Maid. --

Pri. Madam, I shall
Be loath to tell the King you love the Lord
Endymion. -- And, may be, you will be sorry
To see him banished to some distant Isle,
There to bewail his own perfections, that
He 'th pleased too much; and wish a thousand times
You had not thus undone him with your love. --
Injure not, Madam, thus a Lord, who else
May number many happy days, and live
An honor to his Country, and grow old,
And die among his Kindred, and his Friends. --

Clean. Sir, this would be strange justice, that my Love
Should be Endymion's Crime. --

Priest. 'Twill prove so, Madam.

Clean. He may be sufferer, but not criminal.
And Heaven will do justice, when men do not. --

She being ready to cry, fetches a sigh, and goes as toward her appartment.
Pri. Your humble servant, Madam. --

Ex. Priest. Cleantha perceiving the Priest gone, gives way to her tears, and
remains still speaking thus to her self. Clean. -- Wretched Cleantha! Is thy
Love a Crime?
A crime to him thou love? Must it be ruin
Unto a person, if thou but affect'st him?
Have I some plague, that I must thus destroy
Whom I embrace? Or is my destiny
Grown paradoxicall, and proves my Love
To be true hatred? Or does Heaven revenge
Other folk Pride, and my Humility? --
Oh Death, Death, Death! thou art not half so cruel
In thy destructions of the prosperous,
As in not killing wretches that would die? --
She weeps. It Is thou can make Cleantha happy; and
Preserve Endymion so. -- It Is only thy
Long night, and thy dark bed, that can give rest
And sleep to sad Cleantha. --

Enter Endymion. Endym. -- Urania
Has not done well to treat me thus: -- Alas,
Could I divine the Kings command? or durst
I not obey him, or refuse employment,
In which was Honor and Obedience too,
Unto my Prince, and Service to my Country? --
I took no leave of her; but I have told her
The reasons why my Love forbad it me. --
Surely Urania's cruel. -- She ought not sure
To be thus angry, and accuse me of
Slighting a poor deluded Shepherdess,
When I have vowed so often to her my love.

Clean. Here comes my poor Endymion. --

Endym. -- The Princess!
She is still gracious to me, and I were
Best to entreat her to persuade my now
Provoked Urania. -- But she is alone. --

She steps aside a little. Clean. -- Good morrow, my Lord. --

Endym. Your pardon, Madam, if unthought of, I
Have rusht on your Retirement. --

Cleanth. Your presence, Sir,
Will better it. -- Pray what is the news from Argos? --

Endym. Madam, the report was last night brought to Court,
Had nothing in it of truth. I found all quiet,
But only for the disturbance that we made
Our selves, by our arrival in the night. --

Clean. I Am glad, my Lord, your danger was no more. --

Endym. You do oblige me, Madam, to undergo
Much greater danger for your Highness, then
This could have proved. --

Clean. My Lord, you have already
Purchased the name of my preserver with
Your blood. --

Endym. 'Twas at too cheap a rate. --

Clean. Indeed
You never can be in greater danger. --

Endym. Madam,
The cause I fought for, made the danger nothing.
They might have killed me, but I could not die.

Clean. Your Nature's to oblige, my Lord. -- I shall
Be happy, when I find it in my power
To let your Lordship know the great respect
I have for that great Virtue which you own.

Endym. Madam, 't has been your Highness pleasure still
To honor with too great respect the little
Merits of your mean servant, who is advanced,
When numbered in the lowest rank of those
That have been fortunate to do you service.

Clean. You add still to my debts, my Lord, yet are
No wise injurious, since you make me rich,
In having such a noble Creditor. --
But pray, my Lord, tell me (as one concerned
Match in your Fortunes, who have so obliged me)
(If it be fit for me to know, and you
Conceive, that by my wishes, or endeavors,
I any wise may stead you) what is the cause
Your Lordship has not worn of late that rest
Upon your looks, which heretofore appeared
A happy witness to the world, you were
A world unto your self, still, and with wise
Content, blessed all your fortunes.

Endym. Ah! great Princess;
It is for you to wear that Rest, who are
Placed in that upper Region, where there is
No wind. But for a little Bark in the midst
Of a great Sea, subject to every wave,
And all the winds, she never must pretend
To this blessed state. -- And for my troubles, Midam,
Alas, their objects will appear so small
To your great Eye, you would think I did affront you,
Should I dare say them to you. -- Should the Lion in
His midnight walks for prey, hear some poor worms
Complain, for want of little drops of dew;
What pity could that generous creature have,
(who never wanted small things) for those poor
Ambitions? yet these are their concernments.
And but for want of these, they pine, and die. --
There must be some proportion still to pity,
Between our selves, and what we moan: it is hard
For men to be ought sensible, how Moats
Press Flies to death. Your Highness often in jest,
Has played away, more then some poor men have
Wrought all their life for. --

Cleanth. My Lord, I cannot tell,
Whether, possibly, what is your trouble, may
Not be augmented, by my knowing it. --
Else, shall I never think ought small, that can
So much affect you, nor beneath my care,
To seek to remedy that gives you pain. --

Endym. Great Princess, you undo me with your Honors.
My blood turns all to blushes, as a shamed
It had not all been shed for your sake, when
I had the honor to pour forth a little,
A sacrifice to your great merits. -- Madam,
I must obey your Highnesses Command:
And thank you for it too; since in your knowledge
Of what afflicts me, is my remedy.

Cleanth. What will he tell me? Heaven! he knows I love him.

Aside. Endym. Madam, I long have loved. --

Clean. Whom, Sir? --

Endym. The fair
Urania, who attends your Highness. --

Clean. Forgive, Aside.
Forgive me, poor Endymion. --

Endym. And have used
A thousand arts to get her love, and had
Won her consent, last night, to be my wife,
(Not doubting, Madam, but your Highness would
Have favored me in this adventure) but
My sudden being sent to Argos, did
Unhappily absolve this promise, and
I am accused by her for slighting of
An innocent Shepherdess, who was too forward
In trusting me, and in believing that
I ever would match to one of her mean fortune.

Clean. Indeed, my Lord, I never could have guessed
Your melancholy had so mean a cause.
I could not think you would so far dishonor
Your Family, and Name, as to have courted
So low a person. --

Endym. Madam, I well do know
Urania was a Shepherdess, and born
In some low Cottage, amongst those little folks,
Whom Honor seldom visits, and are blessed
With nothing but their own content; but she,
Like to a Star, mistaken of his sphere,
Grew so conspucious amongst those dimmer lights,
That brave Theander had no sooner spied her,
But he became all wonder, and would needs
Dismiss all but my self, to talk with her.
I do remember yet, when first the Prince
Asked her some little questions, how (poor soul!)
She blushed, and looked upon her Lambs, as if
She Would have them take her part. -- Her answers were
So innocent, as if she would been begot
By Prayer upon some Vestal. This sweet carriage,
From this sweet person, caused the Prince almost,
For one whole Summer, ever when he hunted
About those parts, to spend his pleasant'st hours
With this fair Shepherdess; until, at last,
He had persuaded her (for she was loath
To leave what she well knew, for what she knew not)
To leave her little flock, and go with him.
At what time he esteemed her fit to be
A P^esent for your Highness, an Advancement
Few Families can boast of, since when (I know not
Whether through your reflections on her, Madam,
Who was celestial, though obscure before,
She did become a Star; or whether she
Became a greater Imitator of
Your Highnesses perfections, then all others)
She has so added unto Nature, Art,
That she is grown bright to every eye; and Lords
And greatest persons of the Court are proud
To say Urania favors them to wear
The Title of her Servant, as a Gem
Too rich to be examined whence she came. --
For her low Birth: Madam, this morning sprung
First to our eyes, from yonder barren hill;
And so will thousand Stars at night, though this
And they, and she are lights from Heaven all.
Their rise is mean, or noble, only from
Our situation; so is hers: You cast
Your eyes upon her, from the hight of Birth
And fortune too, and see her low; whilst that
Some other Princess, Born as high, but not
Beneath so happy Stars, beholds her through
The thicker Medium of her Tears, and thinks
Her Birth more noble, 'cause more free and less
Subject to Fate, that does like Thunder often
O'erturn vast Oaks, whilst Rue and Vervin stands.
Her Loves are free, (without which we may wear
Fetters of gold, but they are Fetters still,
And fit as hard as Iron, though more rich)
Whilst many great folks are constrained to wed
By Law and Policy, and marry those
Old Men in Council shall think fit, who have
So many years for gotten love, and hate
Now all but wealth and Empire, 'cause themselves
Have nothing else to boast of left --

Cleantha being not able longer to contain her self at this, goes abruptly from
Endym. to a Sun-Dial which stood not far from the walk, where she lets fall
some tears (her back being toward Endymion) and says with a low voice
Cleantha! Now thou art not fond. Endymion says,
Thou art unhappy. -- And will thou say so,
And leave me so, Endymion? -- No, my passion
Is now Authorized, and I Will speak. --
She wipes her eyes. My Lord,
Would you think it were so late already?
Endym -- Indeed
Endym. Comes to the Dial. I could not think it had been night so late.
But every part of Heaven hasts to see
What it so loves, and favors, your bright self.

Cleant. Well, my Lord, I do not wonder much
So great a Wit should thus maintain so great
A Paradox; since that in nothing less
It can find its true exercise. -- But say,
(And tell me truly) should I make it my care
To choose a Mistress for you, fair as Urania,
(If thousands may be judges) and as Virtuous
(Because she truly honors Virtue) but
Extracted from a Family would give
Luster to yours, although it were as mean
As hers you court now: say! would you not leave
Urania for her, who does seem to me
To undervaule your respects? --
Tell me, my Lord.

Endym. pauseth a while.
Madam -- should your highness condescend to choose
A Torment for me, it were impudence
In me to choose ought else. But that is all blessed
Which is so like Urania. --

Cleant. So like to her? --
Vrania's body's fair, but what is that mind
Which cannot apprehend the true contents
Of being bound with sacred chains to him,
Who in her Closet, and alone can be
The whole world to her, unto whom she may
Bring all her doubts, and tell her sorrows, and
Repeat her joys, and have his censure on them?
What is that mind which cannot value such
True satisfactions more (perchance) then Crowns
And Sceptres? which is more then ever Urania
Does ever hope for sure --

Endym. Great Princess! could I own
Half those perfections, I might happy be
Without Urania. -- But Urania knows
She may find thousands of more merit then
The poor Endymion, who durst never measure
Himself, but by the passion he had for her.

Cleant. Sure, 'twas his modesty. He might have thriven
Much better, possibly, had his ambition
Been greater much.
They oft-times take more payns,
Who look for Pins, then those who find out Stars.

Endym. They do, and are unfortunate. But know,
Know highest Princess, those may search for such
Small things you're pleased to name, who only have
A little candle of as small a value:
But those who seek out Stars, must be provided
With Arts and Glasses, and such costly things
As humble folks must be content to want.

Cleant. Those coyer Stars indeed, which so retire
Their little eyes in Heavens vast Bosom, do
(They say) require those things you mention; but
For others of more magnitude, you need
Only to fix your eyes, and they will appear
By their own light; and all you have to do,
Is to receive those Beams they cast upon you.

Endym. You cannot err, great Princess -- But it is hard
To fix our eyes aright upon that part
Of Heaven where those Stars inhabit, if
We have not some directions first. --

Cleant. Indeed
Those who look downwards ought to be directed
To look above them -- to the highest sphere --
(For there the Stars -- are) then I Am apt to think
Their task will not prove hard. -- She blusheth.
My Lord, I blush
Thus to instruct you in Astronomy.

Endym. No wonder, Madam, if I Am proud of what
You blush at, and esteem this my best knowledge
Which your unbounded wit (perhaps) to morrow
Will with much greater reason quite deny.

Clean. My Lord, you think no woman's ever constant
To what she says, a day, but your Urania.
But till you have tried, pray have more charity.
You Will after have more Faith. -- It Is late, my Lord:
You have obliged me with your company.

Exit Clean. Endym. sol. -- What meant this last discourse? -- Heaven!
blessed Heaven!
VVas't not enough to lose my dear Urania,
Unless I also did adore the hand
Which snatched her from me! Cleantha love Endymion!
The great, the pure Cleantha! -- All my hopes
In rich and holy Incense stifled are.
The worlds best light has burnt my Phoenix with
A thousand Spices -- but Fool ^ it cannot be.
Can brave Cleantha love the poor Endymion?
Cleantha, pardon this wild thought, forgive
The proud Endymion. Never may he know
Thy noble breast harbor a thought so low.

Exit Endym Finis Act. 3.
ACTUS 4.
Enter Neander sol. in a fury. Neand. I Wonder who the Devil intends I shall
marry with; for marry I will, by Heaven, though the Match be made in Hell. I
have been a servant, as they call it, (that is, I have sworn, and ly'd and
spent money upon every Lady of Quality in the whole Court) yet I am still so
far from having a Wife among them all, as the veryest Eunuch in the Great Turks
Seraglio is from having a Child among all those wenches. Indeed, I never was in
any probability (unless in my own conceit) of winning any one but the sweet
Evadne; and now, that the Queen, and her ugly Father, should cross me, should
forbid her to speak to me, to see me, it is what I cannot, I will not bear,
though Fate it self say I shall do it. No, I have been told, that most old
folks, when the Wine of Love is worn our in them, live some years by its
Vinegar, Spite; and I will do the same, I am resolved; and that old gray
Priest and his Mistress, the Queen, shall be my subjects. And yet, I am not
ambitious to show my valor so far, as to be hanged for it neither. This (if I
can do it) shall be the sweetest part of my revenge, That I will live, and
tread, and spit upon their Graves.

-- But who comes here? Geron? A Rogue for my purpose, it may be. Here is a
fellow now that will be glad to be hanged, on any terms in the world, that has
been more plagued with one Wife, then I have been with all my Mistresses. --
Geron, How is it?


Geron. How, is what, my Lord? -- But let it be what it Will, I don't care
three pence how it be.


Neand. How, Geron! why so sullen? I mean, how is it with you, Sir?


Ger. With me, my Lord? why just as folks say it is with the Devil: I go up
and down, and carry my Hell with me.


Nean. What say you to a bottle of wine in my chamber, Geron, to quench it?


Ger. As much to that as to any thing else.


Nean. Come along, then.


Ex. Nean. Geron. Enter Endymion, with his hands bound, attended by a Guard of
Soldiers. Endym. -- Why, may I not see the Princess,
For whom I Am banished, before I go? --

Offic. No, no, along. --


1. Sold. Pray Sir walk a little faster.


2. Sold. Prithee let the Gentleman alone. Soft and fair goes far; and the
Gentleman considers he has far to go.


Endym. casts his eyes toward Cleantha 's apartment. Endym. Farewell then
brave Cleantha; may thou never
Once think Endymion suffers for thy sake. --
And farewell, dear Urania; I will love thee
On those hard Rocks I now must dwell upon.

Off. What Is this muttering? -- along. --


2. Soul. Good Gentleman; he is loath to leave the Princess, I Will warrant him.
--


1. Here she comes. --


Enter Cleantha, two Ladies following her. Clean. -- Unmoved,
As if he went to meet those Triumphs which
His worth alone deserves. --

Endym. -- The Princess. --
-- Great Princess pardon
He takes off his hat with his two hands, as they are bound, and kneels to her.
My glorious sufferings. Forgive me, that
I ever saw the light, or lived a minute,
That you are injured thus by him, whose being
'S not worth your meanest thought. --

Clean. Ah, my Endymion!
She lets fall some tears. Affront not poor Cleantha. --

Endymion stoops down to kiss the bottom of her garment; which she perceiving,
gives him her hand, which he kisseth. Clean. Rise, brave Endymion, it is my
misfortune,
Thou art too low already. --

He rises. Endym. Fortune made
Me low, to be advanced by a hand
More worthy then her own.

Clean. My noble Lord,
I have undone thee. What can I give thee now
In recompense of Liberty, and all
The pleasures of this life, which thou must lose
In a sad banishment for her, who only
Can be afflicted at thy sufferings?

Endym. Madam, you have enough to give, to pay
So mean a debt (if you will call it one)
A thousand times. --

Clean. Name it, and take it, dear
Endymion, though it be my life.

Endym. Madam,
Then grant me this request; use every Art,
To make your hours as blessed, as (I shall pray)
They may be many. And never let a thought
Ever represent to your remembrance more
Unfortunate Endymion. -- Then shall I see,
Among the Desolations of my Fortune,
This cheerful Green. The brave Cleantha's happy.
She wears a Crown, and lives adore'd; what then,
Though poor Endymion suffer banishment,
Though he. --

Officers. Sir, this is what was forbidden us to permit you.
You must away Sir. --

Takes him by the arm. Cleanth. Impudent Villain, dare thou interrupt
A person I am talking with? --

Offic. Yes, Madam,
When I have the Kings commands to do so.

Endym. -- Madam,
These persons do their duty: they are the hands
Of Fate that pull me from you. -- Sacred Princess,
All that is bliss attend you. --

He kneels to kiss her hand. She stoops, and kisseth him. Cleant. My Lord,
farewell. --
Know that Cleantha loves thee, and will never
She gives him a Ring. Be happy 'till Endymion make her so.

Endym. I cannot doubt, but Heaven will prosper what
'S so like it self. Blessed Princess, take my Prayers:
Heaven thinks not fit to entrust me with ought else.

Exit Cleant. with her attendants. Endym. sol. Thus Fate directs me what I now
must do
To serve my Shepherdess and Princess too.
Endymion Falls; but to the first he dies
A Lover, to the last a Sacrifice.

Exit Endym. and his guard. Enter Evadne, and to her Neander; at which she
seems troubled, and willing to haste from him. Neand. My dear, and why so fast?
-- What, have thou wounded
Thy poor Neander, and now fly'st him? -- Your servant,
Fairest Evadne. -- Why this haste --

Evad. My Lord, you will
Oblige me much if you permit it; and
Be pleased to think there is a reason for it:
And ask it not.

Neand. Must then Neander die,
And never know his crime. Cruel Evadne,
Give me that ease in death, to let me know
How I Have deserved it. -- Speak, my dear Evadne:
Tell me the reason.

Evad. My Lord, I Am but a child,
And all my reason is obedience.

Neand. Obedience to that Priest! --

Evad. Sir, he is my Father.

Neand. Who more esteems a heavie-headed fool
(Who Is but afraid to swear, thinks most old women
Are Witches, and that dead-folks walk) although
Not worth a groat, then him who owns at once
A generous Fortune, with a generous Soul?

Evad. Sir, he is my Father; and who injures him,
Never pleases me. His part is to command.
Mine is obedience. --

Neand. Nay Evadne, pray
Hear this before you go: 'twill be the fruit
Of your obedience, think never of marying till
You see three caps, a narrow band, a mouth
Mishap'd By my Truly, and the Cough --

Exit Evadne. Neand. I perceive you will hear no more of your servant, Madam:
adieu. -- What simpleton in all Arcadia, but this Priest, would not have
married his daughter to my estate, had I been the veryest coxcomb in Greece?
Why, so he might but have said his daughter My Lady such a one, and talked of
her Gentleman-ushers, her Pages, and her women, who would ever have stood upon
it whether her husband had been a Philosopher, or (as they call it) an honest
man? Poor Evadne, Thy Mother died too soon for thee; she (good woman) (I Will
warrant her) would have made a hard shift to have sat at the upper end of my
Lord Neanders Table, to have had occasion to make up a fine mouth, and said, My
service to you Son Neander, before all the company: and then to have said to
Evadne, Daughter, you don't help my Lord. She (good woman) would have thought
of these things -- and he shall go to her to learn more wit shortly. --


Evadne, I am mad; but it cannot be,
Mad as I am, but I will marry thee.

Exit Neand. Enter Cleantha and her Nource. Cleant. -- Nource, where is Endymion
now?


Nource. He Is where he wants good company, I believe, poor Lord.


Cleant. Nource, say not so, because his steadfast mind
Still leaves him with himself, and thus he'th still
The best of company -- My dear Endymion.

Nource. Come, come Madam, your Highness must study to forget him now, and
think of some other body. --


Cleanth. Forget him (foolish-woman!) I sooner shall
Forget that I have eyes, forget I have
A memory. Shall brave Endymion dwell
In banishment for me, and I forget him? --
Sure thou would mind me of him, if I should.

Nource. Well, Madam, I wish your Highness do not remember him too much. I am
glad you are alive yet, for my part; now he is gone.


Cleant. Indeed, I speak, and do the offices
Of life as yet. But say, say, my dear Nource,
Did never see a Tree cut down in spring,
A while put forth his buds and leaves, as if
He Would been a live, until that sap was spent
Which he had sucked from his life-giving Root:
And then he withered? --

Enter King and Queen. King. How do you Niece?


Queen. We are come to visit you in the absence of your Lover.


Cleant. Your Majesty's do always do me honor.


Queen. Indeed Niece, you ought to thank those who do you honor, when you
forget to do it to your self.


King. Cleantha, you are not too much discontented (I hope) at Endymions
departure. You are too wise to be so.


Cleant. Sir, whatever my troubles are, as they are my own, so I shall
endeavor not to make them any other bodies.


King. Niece, you ought to look to the justice of the action, and so be
satisfied.


Cleant. Indeed, there is little of mercy in it to be seen.


King. Well Niece, I shall not dispute the business over with you again. The
Priest, the Queen, and my self have done it already at large, and you seem to
be resolved not to be satisfied with any thing but your own unreasonable
desires. The action I have done is just, I thought it so, and I have done it,
and will continue it, and you must be patient.


Cleant. Your Majesty may please to know, that I shall have so much regard to
my self, as not to permit my impatience to be troublesome to other folks.


Exit King. Queen. Come Cleantha, prithee be not sad.
The Prince of Macedon will make a better
Husband then Endymion. --

Cleant. It may be so.
And some one else will make a better wife
For him then I shall do. --

Enter Phrones. Queen. What news with you, Phronesia?


Phrones. Only a word or two, that does a little Import your Majesty to know.


Queen I Am going, wench.
Cleantha, fare you well. I hope I shall
Next find your Melancholy less --

Exeunt Queen and Phrones. Cleant. -- Why should they call it melancholy,
Nource?
Love is not melancholy; this is cold,
But that a burning flame; this dry, and that
All tears. -- But why this wonder? -- I sit strange that such
Are ignorant of Love, who never knew it?
Who wedded are indeed, but not because
Their souls were equal, but their fortunes; not
That they themselves, but Parents did agree. --
And think they that Cleantha'll do so too?
Is she so small a needy Girl, to choose
A servant for advantage, and to love him
Until next our Commissioners disagree,
And then to be indifferent again;
And never give account of her affections
Till she've inquired first how the Chaffer goes? --
No, my dear Nource, I better understand
My present freedom, that true Monarchy
I Am to my self, then on indifferent Parley
To yield my self a cowardly Captive. -- If
I fall, 't shall be by storm; nor will I be
Conquered by ought less then a Deity.
To add unto thy triumphs, Love,'s no more
Then that which Goddesses have done before.
And this Cleantha may not blush to do,
Although a Princess, and a Virgin too.

Nource. Madam, you are too wise; why should you not contented be to do like
all the world?


Cleant. I never examine, Nource, what most folks do,
But what all should do, and those few do practice,
Whose real Virtue never blush't to be
Brought to the test of reason. I can pardon
Poor silly Lasses that believe their Granams,
Who tell them it is a sin to intermix
With those beneath them, (as though the rich and poor
Were different species) whose Sunburnt modesties
Can well dispense with th'loss of that pure state
Nature had placed them in, for the advantage
Of some convenient neighborhood; but still
I Have no forgiveness for my self, should I
(Grown now a woman, and endue'd with reason)
Play with those Puppet-Vertues old folks give me,
And (understanding my own whiteness) ere
Dissolve that Snow but by a flame as pure.

Nource. Well, Madam, I cannot dispute it with you. But sure I am, I should
never have got a husband on these Philosophical terms. -- It is well for me I
was not so wise at your age [Cleant. smiles.] Why Madam, when I had loved any
one (as that was no very hard matter for me to do when I was young) it had been
ten to one if he had loved me again; and there I had been gone: Or if he had
loved me, then his friends would not have liked it; and there I had been gone.
Or if his friends had, then mine would have found some fault or other; and
still I had been gone. -- Madam, there is so much to do, to bring two young
folks together that have any thing in the world, that should they refuse
marriage on any terms, old maidens would be as plenty as Crabs are in America.


Cleant. Prithee Nource no more. --


Nource. Nay, I was resolved to put you out of your dump: you would have cried
presently, if I would have let you. -- But, have you gi'en Urania leave to be
wanting?


Cleant. Yes, she asked me to be a day or two with her Mother somewhere here in
Town.


Nource. She looked but ill when she went: I thought she had gone on some
discontent.


Cleant. I know none. She went hence two days since, I think.


Nource. Then she should be returned again.


Cleant. She may take her own time -- Come, shall we go, Nource? --


Exeunt Cleantha, and Nource. Enter the King and Pyrrhus. King. -- Is It
possible? -- It cannot be --
My Queen, -- My Queen an Adulteress! and with
My Priest too! Could Heaven not punish me
But by it is representative? In what can men
Confide, if sanctity and holy vows
Are nothing? --

Pyrrh. I am amazed. -- The Queen
And Priest in woman's Clothes (strange circumstance!)
To meet in the Grotto now this night? sure it is
Impossible!

King. It must be so, unless
This Geron be quite mad, who is now secured,
And is content to die for it, if I see not
My self, with my own eyes, all this, this night.

Pyrrh. Heaven bless me!

King. Ah my Pyrrhus, Heaven is just;
It Is we are wicked. In this very Grotto
I met Urania, and forgot my Queen;
Though then I thought her faithful, and almost
White as Virginity itself. --

Pyrrh. It Is certain. --
But Heaven grant this metting prove no worse
Then that did.

King. Blessed Heaven grant it may not.

Pyrrh. Your Majesty may yet prevent it.

King. I may
For this time doubtless. -- But I will not harbor
That Devil Jealousy within my breast,
For all this world can give me. I Am resolved
To see the certainly my self. And if
It prove untrue, my Queen shall dwell with freedom
(As she has ever done) in all my thoughts,
And her accuser fall her sacrifice.
But if she can forget her former Virtue,
I can forget my former Love, and be
As just as she is wicked. I can take
As true a pleasure then to see her blood
Drop from the fatal sword, as ere I did
To see it blushing on her cheek when erst
I thought her modest. -- And for the Priest, whom I
Have ever Father called, and have revered
More in my thoughts then language, if he can
Un-priest himself by wickedness, I can
Be glad to see those hands in iron which
So often have blessed me; to behold him burn,
Who has burnt holy incense, and perfumed
All my Devotions with it -- I can glory
To let him feel this Truth, That it is Heaven's guise,
Not to have beasts for Priests, but Sacrifice.
Enter Queen and Priest. Look where they come. -- Let us withdraw, it may be
We shall hear something. --

Pyrrh. Sure they see you.

Priest. -- And nothing is more common
Then this, which is not thought a sin, because
It seems rather an impulse of Nature --

King. Hear'st thou, Pyrrhus! --

Queen. The King --

Priest. All happiness attend your Majesty.

King. I must contain. -- How does my Queen?

Queen. Always happy whilst your Majesty
Is so. --

King. And what are you discoursing?

Queen. Nothing but good with this good person sure.

King. What Is that you talk of? that which is not sin
'Cause an impulse of Nature? --

Queen Smiles. What means your Majesty?

Priest. I know not how we came by chance to speak
How little wantonness is thought a sin
Because it seems an impulse of Nature;
Whereas the Virtuous still do fix their eye
On the Command, not the Temptation;
And think it enough, if what Heaven gives as Law
Be possible, although not natural.

King aside. It Is well put off. -- I shall never hold
To hear this hypocrite. -- Well, I must leave you.

Queen. I shall wait upon your Majesty
If It may not be a trouble.

King. To you it may be.

Queen Smiles. That as your Majesty's pleasure is to make it.

Exeunt King and Queen. Priest. How happy it is to see a King and Queen
Thus blestly live together? --

Pyrrh. Heaven keep them so.

Priest. Pray Heaven Amen. -- My Lord, adieu.

Exit Priest. Pyrrhus solus. Did I but dare to disobey my Prince
In any thing, or call my self to counsel
Whether I should reveal a secret he'th
Vouchsafed to tell me, I would certainly
Prevent this Tragedy. My Queen and Priest
Should still be white and holy. But what Kings
Please to command, requires obedience, not
Examination: when they once have judged,
It Is want of judgment if we dare judge too.

Enter King hastily. King. Pyrrhus, I had forgot one thing. Thou know the
Prince is expected here to morrow, and I doubt he will be somewhat early too.
It will be necessary his coming be retarded until this business be over, that
I may know with what face to receive him, after all the glorious actions he
has done. I would not for a world his arrival should happen 'till the whole
examination be over. --


Pyrrh. It will be an unhappy entertainment for his Grace. -- Would your
Majesty please to have me go my self?


King. If thou can handsomely do it, and be early back in the morning. It is
but riding all night. In the morning I shall want thee.


Pyrrh. I shall do it with much ease, if it be your Majesty's pleasure.


King. I shall leave thee to frame the excuse.


Pyrrh. I shall be gone immediately. Heaven grant I meet good news to morrow
morning. --


Exit Pyrrhus. King. I doubt that --
Thus we with them in plotting do consent;
But they plot sin, and we plot punishment.
And little think they in how small a time
(Poor souls!) my justice shall overtake their crime.
Too happy were men, if they understood
There is no safety but in being good.

Exit King. Finis Act. 4.

ACTUS 5.
Enter the King. He walks a while, then seateth himself in a Chair. King. --
UNfortunate Basilius! How just
Are all thy punishments proportioned, Heaven,
To unjust men! -- Yet should I dare to judge
Those happy Essences that dwell in Light,
And cannot err, I should be apt to say,
My punishment exceeds my crime: my sin
Went never farther then the intention, and
My sufferance is real. -- But was it not
Solely your goodness that it rested there?
And must you not be just now, 'cause you then
Were merciful? --
Enter Pyrrh. Pyrrhus, undone --
My eyes are witnesses. I saw them both
Enter the Grotto. --

Pyrrh. The Priest in woman's habit?
King, All Is true. -- The Queen has been already
Examined by the Council. -- All she says
Is, that she is innocent; but will not say
The cause which moved her to an action so
Suspected, though she die for it. -- But such, Fyrrhus,
Are never innocent, who are ashamed
To vindicate their deeds when once their lives
Do lie at stake for 't. --

Pyrrh. Your Majesty was not present.

King. No, I leave them totally to justice, I
Shall make the Law their judge. --

Pyrrh. But pray
What says the Priest?

King. I now expect to hear
The examination. It has been very long,
Two hours at least. It Is bad enough, for certain.
But here it comes. My Lord, you have been long,
Enter Lord of the Council. But I expect no good, and therefore care not
If you had longer been. --

Lord. An't please your Majesty,
Before I can give satisfaction to
Your expectations, I must humbly pray
You will pleased to pardon the entreating
Your answer to a question; on which all
That we have done depends. --

Pyrrhus withdraws a little. King. What is it?

Lord. 'T may seem too insolent -- but the whole truth
Of all the examination wholly does
Depend upon it, Whether your Majesty
(For reasons known best to your royal self)
Did not one night command a little Lady
Who waits upon the Princess, one Urania,
To attend you in that Grotto where
The Queen and Priest were seized on?

King. I did.

Lord. And she was there!

King. She was.

Lord. And was your Majesty
Assured that it was she; or might it be
The Queen? --

King. Her whispers were the Queens: Pyrrhus
Knows what I told him.

rises. Lord. Be happy then great Prince --
Your Queen is Innocent, your Priest is holy,
And Geron and Neader only are
The Criminals. --

King. Relieve my wonder. --

Lord. Hear,
Great Prince, in short, a plot, that seems contrived
In Hell by Heaven, to add more whiteness to
The Virtuous. -- Here is the Priests confession.

Unrols a paper, and reads it. The confession of the Priest, and his
examination. With the confession of Phronesia, Geron and Neander. That Geron
came yesterday in the afternoon unto the Priest; and after much seeming
troubled, told him, that he had some hours before overheard a contrivance
between the Queen and the Lord Neander to meet at eleven of the clock that
night at the Grotto in the Garden, and that Neader was to be habited like a
woman, and the Queen to be dressed like a young lass named Urania who waits on
the Princess, the better to prevent suspicion, in case they should chance to be
seen by any in their passage thither. This he asserted with much violence; and
at last (after much discourse) the Priest was persuaded by him to attend the
Queen there in the habit of a woman, instead of Neander (whose entrance he had
promised to hinder, by shutting the door he was to pass at to get into the
garden) and thus, when the Queen should begin to speak to him as her Lover, he
should then make know himself unto her, and do his duty, in justly blaming her
for so unvertuous an action.

King. Where ends this?


Lordreads on. This the Priest did. And he was not sooner entered into the
grotto, but he found the Queen there before him. But the Queen seeming to
expect his speaking first, and he not allowing his lips to be provided on this
subject, told her plainly that she was mistaken of her Lover; that he was her
Priest: and then producing a little light he had concealed in a dark Lanthorn,
he manifested himself, and perfectly discerned the Queen, although in a
disguise. The Queen thinking her self bound to give an account of her being
there, and yet very loath to speak the cause of it, at last told him, that as
her Confessor, she would reveal unto him, that the King had of late somewhat an
immoderate respect for a young lass named Urania belonging to the Princess, and
that having forced a promise from the poor maid, she did (by the Lord Endymions
means) easily persuade her self (for the securing of the Kings honor) to
supply the place of the said Urania, (they having agreed to have no lights,
and to speak very low) which she accordingly had done for some nights before,
and with such success, that the King returned rather satisfied in his reason
then his Love.


King. All truth. --


Lord reads on. But having reassumed his desires, she had again this night a
summons to the same task, from a woman of hers named Phronesia; which was the
occasion of her being in that place. But all this she did very passionately
desire the Priest to be secret in, in that it concerned so nearly the Kings
honor.


King. And what then?


Lord. On this, we immediately sent for Geron, who after many threats confessed
as follows: That the Lord Neander being crossed in his love to Evadne
Daughter to the Priest, by the Queen, and Priest her Father, was resolved on a
revenge for them both: and by removing them out of the way, to accomplish his
design of marrying Evadne. To this end, he promises to Geron great rewards for
the contrivance of the business, woe accidentally (by his sculking up and down
in every corner to watch his wife Phronesia, of whom he is very jealous)
overheard the agreement between Urania and Endymion, concerning the Queens
supplying her place in the Grotto. On this foundation he founds the whole
fabric of his hellish plot. For sending his wife Phronesia (who having been
horribly abused by him, was willing notwithstanding to purchase his respect at
any rate whatever) unto the Queen, as from Urania, only with these words in her
mouth, That she humbly desired her Majesty to think of her royal promise at
eleven of the clock that night, and of the King, as she had been pleased to do
some few nights before: the Queen (he knew) would on this resolve to be at that
time in the Grotto. After which he goes himself to the Priest, and counts to
him what is before repeated in the Priests confession. And in the last place,
he had the impudence to come to your Majesty, and tell you what your Majesty
was pleased to inform us of. And all this Neander and he were resolved to
outface with oaths, in case it should ever come to be examined (for they
supposed it probable that your Majesty would in fury have killed both the Queen
and Priest on the place; which was the reason for which Geron persuaded your
Majesty to have Pistols or a Stilletto with you.)


King. Wicked Villains! --


Lord. After this, we sent for Neander, who (amazed at his condition) confessed
the whole business in the same manner. As also Phronesia, what Geron affirmed
concerning her.


King. Blessed Heaven, how are thy ways just like thy orbs,
Involved within each other? yet still we find
Thy judgments are like Comets, that do blaze,
Affright, but dye withal; whilst that thy mercies
Are like the Stars, who oft-times are obscured,
But still remain the same behind the clouds.

Pyrrh. May all your doubts and fears thus terminate.

Lord. Thus are you shaken, to be more confirmed.

King. Pyrrhus, send for Urania; she shall wear
This day the just rewards of Virtue. I
Will visit my brave Queen, who rather chose
To die unjustly as a Criminal,
Then that her Lord should justly so be termed.
For which I will proclaim my fault, since she
Will have the glory of concealing it.

Exit Pyrrhus. Lord. Heaven bless your Majesty.

King. My Lord.
I Would have the Council with all speed remove
Into the Hall, where before all the Court
I Will bring my Queen in triumph, there to hear
Her base accusers sentenced.

Lord. It shall be done

Exeunt King and Lord. Enter Evadne weeping. Evad. Alas Evadne! miserable Maid,
Why did thou ever beg to leave thy cell
(Where thou did never injure any one)
To see this place, and here in some few weeks
To do more mischief then whole Generations
Can parallel? -- Unfortunate Evadne! --
It had been better thou had ever dwelt
In those retirements, where small sins seem great,
And great Devotions small, where folks make conscience
To taste of any thing that ever bled;
Then to be found there, where the blood of Queens
And Priests are sacrifices to the Malice
Of wicked Men. -- It this to be at Court? --
Ah poor, poor Girl! How has thy Ignorance
Deluded thee? -- And 'twas but just that she
Who did begin to disobey her father,
(Until he gave her new commands) should be
Punished by that which tempted her. It is
Enough she is innocent, although she prove
Unfortunate. Whatever Neander did,
Heaven knows I never knew. -- Yet I much doubt
I Am somewhat guilty, 'cause 'twas for my sake.

Exit Evadne. Enter the Lords of the Council, and seat themselves. Enter a
guard of Soldier with Neander, Geron, and Phronesia, who are placed at the
Bar, as Prisoners to receive sentence. Enter Music; then the King leading his
Queen crowned, and in royal apparel; after them the Priest. They place
themselves on high in the middle of the Council, and the Priest somewhat lower
next the King. Then this Song is sung. Thus from the Prison to the Throne
Virtue comes to claim her own:
And now appears
Upon that Throne a Star,
Who lately at the Bar
Stood only Jewel'd with her Tears.
1. Great Queen
2. Great Queen.
Chorus
Whoever was so well content
To suffer, and be innocent?
To suffer, and be innocent?
Exit Music. Enter Gentleman leading Urania. King. The fair Urania! Madam, I
must this day
Turns to the Queen. Do honor to this Virgin. -- And since it is
To noble natures a more pleasing task
To give rewards to Virtue, then punishments
To wicked folks; I Will in the first place show
How lovely justice looks, when we are good;
And only sin makes her seem terrible. --
Urania, approach us. --

Gentlem. Ah, great King!
Vrania's place (I doubt) will nearer be
The Bar then Throne --

King. What mean thou?

Gent. See, O see
Those cheeks that lately beauty wore, now pale
With guilt. --

Urania weeps. King. Her crime. --

Gent. She'th lately had a child.

King. How know you this? --

Gent. By a strange piece of chance:
For being sent in haste by my Lord Pyrrhus
To bring herto you Majesty; by chance,
I learnt of one of the servants of the Princess,
Near to what place he thought she was: and when
I made enquiry there, at a small house
I was acquinted at, the woman told me
She thought her I inquired for was in the house;
And asking of me many circumstances,
She told me surely it must be the same:
Only (she did in private add) she took her
Not for a Virgin -- (And as we thus discoursed,
Urania chanced to pass before the door.)
A Virgin, said I! It may be she is married;
What, has she had a child? she told me; Yes,
(Though much in private) but 't was very much
Before her time; and she affirms she is married,
As did her mother, who this morning left her.
At this, I went in where I saw her enter:
And after some examinations, she
Confessed she would had a child; but said withal,
She had a husband too, and one who would
Dare own her for his wife: but would not tell me
His name or dwelling; and was very loath
To move a foot with me, but merely by
Constraint as 'twere. --

King. And is this truth, Urania?

Lord. Speak to the King. --

Urania. It Is true.

King. And who is your Husband? --

2. Lord. Be not ashamed to name your Husband, Madam:
'T will be your shame if you name none.

Urania. I Am not
Ashamed to name him, but afraid. --

King. What is it?
Speak --

Urania. I dare not disobey, and by my Lord
I am authorized to name him when
My Honor shall be questioned (who is more tender
Of that then of his own) --

Lord. Name him. --

Urania. It is
The great Theander!

Queen. The Prince?

King. What, are you married
Unto the Prince Theander?

Kneels. Urania. O pardon me, great King,
That I refused not to be taken from
A Cottage to the bosom of a Prince,
On such conditions as we dared to call
The Gods to witness.

King. Whether she be his wife,
Or only dare's affirm it, though she were
More to me then my hands or eyes, she should
Die ere I sleep. -- The Prince in some few hours
Will be in Town -- If what she says be false,
This news shall be his welcone. -- But if true,
It Is fit his coming be too late to save her.

Vran. Ah great Prince! -- Pity the distressed, who has
No friend to plead her cause -- All I affirm
Is truth -- Theander is my witness. See
Takes a letter out of her bosom. That noble name. -- This I received from him
Not three days since. --

King reads it, and gives it the Queen King. It Is so. But know, Urania,
My Crown will prove too heavy for your offspring,
Nor may I mingle blood with those small folks
Who dwell in Cottages. Heaven, it seems,
Would not permit so foul a stain upon
My Family, but has condemned to death
(What men in justice could not) that poor infant
Whose only guilt was, that it must be born. --
No, know Unania, it is enough you have been
Wife to a Prince some months; you have lived enough
In that small time: Now 'twill behove you to
Prepare for death; this day within three hours
You are to loose your head, 'cause it is not fit
To wear a Crown. -- Marshal, take her hence.
Let all things be prepared. I Will see her dead
By two this afternoon.

Vran. Is there no mercy then?
Heaven help the friendless. -- Such must never cry
To men for help, whose crime is poverty.

Exeunt Marshal and Urania. King. My Lords, had not this accident befallen me,
I Would been too blessed. Wise Heaven does see it as fit
In all our joys to give us some allays,
As in our sorrow comforts: when our Sails
Are filled with happiest winds, then we most need
Some heaviness to ballast us. These are
The ways of Heaven, and we who are but earth
Must all submit. I am afflicted for
The poor Urania -- But the Gods have sure
(In death) rewards for those who sometimes fall
Nor for their crimes, but through a kind of sad
Necessity. -- I Am to proceed now to
A far more willing task, the sentencing
Of those most wicked persons at the Bar. --
Neander I condemn to loose his head
Tomorrow morning, which I will have placed
Over his Lodgings, to show, those heads who dare
Contrive their Princes harm, do only meet
With such advancement. Geron I adjudge
To die in Chayns, that bunger may devour
That little body malice yet has left him.
(A proper Lent for such a sinner.) And
('Cause what Phronesia did, she did not know;
She ly'd, but did not know the consequence,)
Her I condemn only to banishment.
And thus I hope to expiate the thoughts
I Have had of my chaste Queen, and holy Priest,
Through those men's wickedness and teach the world,
That such who dare be traitors to their King,
Do on themselves the certain'st ruin, bring.

Omnes. Heaven bless the King, and may our eyes still see
Such Justice done on all that traitors be.

Exeunt Omnes. Enter Cleantha and her Nource. Cleantha. Alas, Urania! -- Now
thou have unriddl'd
How thou could understand, and yet accept not
Endymions Love. -- Poor Heart, I pity thee. --
Endymion now will be more banished, when
He hears Vraaia's dead. -- Ah Urania,
Would thou had a crime to die for, that
My just Endymion might less bewail thee.
Where can he now relieve himself? If Virtue
Be not security, who can be safe? --

Nource. Why Madam, here was now a marriage made
According to your Highness principles,
Purely for Love; without consideration
Of Portion, or equality, or friends;
And here you see the end on it. --

Cleanth. Silly woman,
Talk not so Idly. -- Had they understood
The force of Love, who thus condemned Urania,
They never had done it. And shall we disesteem
Religion, 'cause folks often suffer for it?
And think it is not true, because 't has Martyrs?
Were thou not old, thou might be brought to know
There is a Gust in death when it is for love,
That Is more then all that is taste in all the world.
For the true measure of true love, is death;
And what falls short of this, was never love:
And therefore when those Tides do meet, and strive,
And both swell high, but love is highest still,
This is the truest satisfaction of
The perfectst love: For here it sees it self
Endure the highest Test, and then it feels
The sum of delectation, since it now
Attains its perfect end, and shows its object
By one intense Act, all it is Verity,
Which by a thousand, and ten thousand words
It would have took a poor diluted pleasure
To have imperfectly expressed. --

Aside. Nource. Heaven bless me!
I do not wonder Lovers often run Mazed,
That think at this strange rate. 'Twill crack my skull
To hear it longer. -- Madam, will you not see
The execution? --

Cleant. Not for ten thousand Worlds. --

Nource. It is at hand. --

Cleant. Poor Urania! I
Can find no friends on earth to help thee; now
I will address my self to Heaven for thee,
Who only can reprieve what Great-folks have
Condemned to Ruin, and 's the sole defense
Through all the world, unto weak-innocence.

Exeunt Cleantha and Nource. There appears a Scaffold covered with black, with
many Spectators about it. The King is present himself to see the Execution done
before the Prince his arrival, which was at hand. Enter Urania in Black,
weeping; led by two of the Princess's Servants in Black. King. Poor heart! did
I not fear the Prince's coming,
I would not see so sad a spectacle. -- /
But I Will retire a little. -- I Would have her live
As long's she may. --

Urania casts her eyes on the Executioner. Sheriff. Retire 'till you are called
to do your office.

Exit Executioner. The Two Gentlemen who attend her, conduct her to the Rayls
of the Scaffold; where having wiped her eyes. she speaks thus to the People.
Vran. -- Did any thing but my own innocence
Lie now at stake (which now is all I Have left
To comfort me) I should not dare to speak
Before so many Persons. But, (though I
Must quire despair of Mercy in this world,
I hope I may find Charity, and that
Good folks will credit a poor dying Person,
Although she bring no witness but her vows.
All I am now condemned for, is my Birth.
That I was meanly born (which seems indeed
A Punishment; but not a Crime) (or if
It were, I could not help it sure) for this
I Am doomed to suffer, and my poverty
Must be relieved with death. -- But though I can
Find no forgiveness in the world, I Am glad
I find it in my self. I freely can
Forgive who ever have injur^d me, if any
Have done so (for I cannot tell) and this
Is some ease to me; though, perchance, the living
Do little heed the pardons of the dead.
I do not know I ever hurted any:
But if I have, I hope, they will forgive me.
Only my Lord Endymion I did once
Delude, to save my life (would Heaven I had not.)
But he is merciful to others, though
He'th met with little for himself. -- I do
Confess, I Am married to the Prince: But he,
He sure will witness for me, 't was the Effect
Of his own choice: I never did presume
To think it, ere he told me 't should be so. --
Since when, how faithful I have been unto him,
VVitness O'Heaven, and those powers who know
The thoughts of every one; and only dare
To quit whom Kings condemn. And though I must
For this now suffer death, I cannot wish
It never had been so, because it was
The Prince his pleasure; whom to contradict,
Were more then death to me. -- And yet I feel
That death is bitter. -- It Is an enemy
Looks cruelly on those who have no friends
To speak a little comfort to them. -- It Is hard
To undergo the greatest Task alone. --
But, it is my Fate, and Heaven must be obeyed;
Whose ways, although they seem obscure to men,
Are known unto it self, whole eyes increase
With it is own dark ness still. And't were not hard,
Now men have jud'd me thus unfit to live,
Would Heaven assure me I am fit to die. --
It Is a long Hazard that folks run in death:
And a short warning rather does disturb
Then fit those for it, whose poor judgments never
Judge well, but when they doubt themselves. Were not
For this, I could be well content, though young,
To find that Quiet in a Grave, I Have mist
Among the living, and close up those eyes
That have of late beheld so little pleasure,
And that must see the brave Theander blamed
For his unworthy choice, his judgment questioned,
Which were a living death, not to be bought
With all this world can give. -- But I too long
Detain you with complaints, whose business is
To see me die. -- Live happy, brave Theander!
May all thy sorrows die with thy Urania,
And all those joys live with thee, which she took
In thy contents. -- May thou be Happy in
A princess, Great, as thy own Merits, Bright
As thy own eyes, and Virtuous as
Are all thy Thoughts; and may she honor thee
As truly as thy poor Urania did. --

Enter Executioner. She weeps. Execut. Are you ready, Madam? --

Uran. Who is this, Sir? --

Gent. -- Madam. --

Vran. Who is it, Sir?

Gent. Madam, It is your destiny. --

Uran. Is this he? --
Sir, can you instruct me what I am to do?
I never yet saw any body die. --

Gent. You must kneel down.

Vran. How will he strike?

Gent. With all the mercy that he can. --

Execut. Madam, when
You Have ended all you have to say, be pleased
To kneel -- Your face that way -- And give some sign
When I shall strike --

Vran. Pray Sirs be near me
When I do fall. I cannot tell what postures
Death may allow of. --

Gent. You have our promise, Madam.

Vran. And when I Am dead, pray Sirs, pray Sirs, permit
None but my Mother fit me for my Grave.
She will be careful of me; she will pay
Holy Devotions for me, and bedew
With pious tears that Face she still has loved. --
And may blessed Heaven give comfort in her sorrows;
And all those Stars which have been hard to me,
Be merciful to her. -- May my Misfortune
Work on her only a more true content
In the low Sphere she so securely moves in. --
Blessed Heaven assist me. -- Sirs, farewell. Present
My humble Service to my noble Princess,
With thanks for all her favors in my Life,
And charity in death. -- The gods reward
Your mercy, Gentlemen. -- Blessed Heaven assist me.

She kneels, and the Executioner bares her neck. Uran. Pray -- expect the sign.
--

Execut. I shall. --

Enter in haste Parthenia, Urania's Mother. Parth. -- Stay, stay the fatal blow.

The King hearing the noise, comes forth. King. What Is this? --

Parth. A miserable Mother come to save
Her only Child. --

King. Executioner, do your office. -- Quick. --

Parth. -- Great King! -- Dread Sovereign, hear,
Hear a distressed Mother. -- Hear for their sakes
That at your death must hear you. --

King. What will you say?

Parth. My Child is innocent. --

King. Do your office, Executioner.

Parth. O! stay, stay. -- Great King, Urania is
A Princess born. -- Her father was a King. --

King. What say you? --

Parth. Vrania's father was a King
Great, but unfortunate. -- The King of Thrace.

King. It is not possible. -- The King of Thrace? --
And what are you? --

Parth. Great King, I Am now your Subject,
My name Parthenia, and my habitation
A little Cottage: But I once was known
By the name of Cleopatra (great in Brith,
But greater in misfortune) and was wife
To Pyrocles the Virtuous Prince of Thrace;
Of whom, all that remains, besides his fame,
Is this poor child, for whom I beg your mercy,
Not to extinguish with one stroke all that
The strokes of Fate have left among the ruins
Of a late glorious Family. --

King. Her language.
Bespeaks her something else then her mean habit.
It Is strange. -- But, how do you make good
What you affirm? -- How came you to Arcadia?

Parth. Will you Majesty be pleased in short
To hear my story? -- I shall be brief. --

King. Say on.
But if you speak not truth, you shall partake
Your daughters Fate. --

Parth. Let heaven by my witness;
And if I lie, my Executioner.
I shall not now repeat the long misfortunes
Of my unhappy Prince, by that dire War,
His Rebel-Subjects raised against him, through
His too great goodness. These reports enough
Already have afflicted all good ears,
And all good hearts. -- I now shall only tell you,
When he had acted out his Tragedy,
And wicked hands had made him glorious
By patient suffering all that Malice could
Inflict upon his person. They next come
To his Relations. How they did betray,
And butcher diverse of them, all have heard,
And I have felt. -- I having now remaining
Of all my Treasure, this poor Jewel only
Some few Months old; and knowing how soon Kingdoms
Seem to grow weary of the unfortunate,
Resolved (when all looked strange upon me) to
Retire to some small place, such as my fortune
Could make my own, and there to buy my Peace
With my obscurity, and learn to be
Contented with a little, since Heaven thought
Much too much for me. Hither then I came,
Invited by the Peace of this blessed Region,
And purchased the small Cottage where I dwell,
And learned to change my Scepter for a sheep-hook
And thus I bred this child, and never told her
Ought of her Father's or of my Misfortunes,
Not willing to disturb those sweet contents
She took in being all she hoped to be,
And all she understood: she felt no care,
And with more pleasure governed her small flock,
Then her unhappy Father his great Kingdom.
And this was my content, and Heaven can witness
How often I Have blessed those Powers it does contain
For this condition, and how little I
Have envied any one. But Heaven that often
Affronts the highest Probabilities,
And gratifies by ways were never thought of;
T'incourage men to pray, but not prescribe:
When all my greatness now was set; when I
Had lost the Twilight too of hope, and was
Gone far from all my Losses to forget them:
When my great Palace, where I once commanded,
Was shrunk into a Cottage to obey in;
When I despaired to see Urania great,
(The only spark that still kept in my Life)
And only prayed she might be innocent:
In this low Ebb, when all my hopes were grown
More prostrate then my fortune, Heaven begins
To dawn upon me, and instruct me, those
Are nearer it who kneel in humble Cells,
Then such as stand on tip toe on high Towrs.
For now Theander makes Urania more
A Princess then a Kingdom could, by courting
Her as a shepherdess; and shows the world,
That more then Chance conduced to her greatness.
Immerit persons may be born thus, but
By wise folks, they will never be chosen to it.
And such Theander's known to all the world.
I could have told Theander the whole truth
When he would needs ask my consent to wed
My erst neglected child, but that I would not
Lessen those great contents he seemed to take
In his Arcadia, that a Cottage had
Brought forth a person fit to be a Princess.
But chiefly I reflected on the dark
Meandrous paths of fate, and gratified
My former sufferance, by being now admitted
Into its Councels, and the Prospect of
Its hidden steps: 'Till now, it thinks not fit,
I longer should enjoy the privilege
It has denied the more deserving world.
For witness of all this, I do invoke
Those powers who never testify untruths,
And here produce those small remains of Greatness
She shows several very rich Jewels. Misfortune yet has left me. See here,
great Prince
That so famed Jewel, which so many Kings
Of Thrace have worn, and with such veneration
Have still preser'd, on an old Prophecy,
This should preserve the Thracian Family.

King. I need no Testimony but those words
All Queens might blush to hear from Cottagers.
But is it possible so mean a place
So long should hold great Cleopatra?
How could she lift her eyes to Heaven, beneath
So low a roof? When they looked up for mercy,
How were they minded of it is Cruelty?
Unheard of Patience! --

Cleopat. Know, great Prince, and know it
From one who has experimented greatness too;
When I had satisfied my self, in my
Endeavors of regaining my lost Rights,
And saw it all unprosperous (as if
Heaven long enough had given one Family
The privilege to govern other folks)
I was as well content to be the first
Must learn to act again with common people,
As he who first was called from them to rule;
And did endeavor by my Virtue to
Deserve again what (possibly) my sin
Had made me loose. And thus I found in patience,
As much content in suffering, as I did
In Moderation in prosperity.
And paid to Heaven, as true, as real thanks
For this, as ever I did for that. --

King. Great Queen,
The Prophecy is now fulfilled: That Jewel
Will serve to satisfy the world as much
Of all you say, as your own words have me:
And thus preserve the Thracian Family. --
Embraces and kisseth Urania. Dear Daughter. -- Still be happy -- And forgive
Our ignorance. -- I cannot love thee better,
Then at that very time I did condemn thee;
I could as well have sentenced my two eyes.
Salutes Cleopatra. And pardon us, dear sister, if we first
Asked pardon where we did most need it. -- Call
Our Queen immediatley, and tell Cleantha,
Urania is alive. --

Pyrrh. I shall be proud
To be the Messenger. --

Exit Pyrrh. Trumpets without. King. What Is that? -- The Prince is come. --

Lord. The Prince is come. --

King What will Theander say, to see his dear
Urania thus attired at his return?
Vran. He Will say you're merciful. --

Enter Queen and Cleantha. King. My Queen! See here great Cleopatra,
And call her Sister. -- Take Cleantha, take
Her thou have wept for -- Pyrrhus has told you
All Heavens goodness. --

The Queen Salutes Cleopatra, then runs and embraces Urania. Enter Theander.
King. See here the Prince. -- My Son. --
Never more welcome. -- Never did more joy
Spring from more sorrow. --

He sixeth his eyes on Uran. Theand. -- Bless me, dread Sir!
What scene does entertain me? -- Are your joys
Expressed by sacrifice? --

King. Theander, take,
Take thy Urania, and wonder not
At any thing but her. --

Theand. My Triumphs more
Affright me then my conquests. --

Queen. My Son, be happy
In thy best choice. -- Let not thy wonder make
Us longer languish. --

Theand. Madam, I will believe,
Salutes the Queen. And hope in time to understand -- Dear Cozen.

Goes to salute Cleantha, who steps back* Cleanth. -- Sir, when you first have
done
Your merited respects unto the Queen
Of Thrace, your Mother; then to your Urania
I shall be thankful for the honor you
Too early do vouchsafe me. --

Theand. I must obey
What Heaven knows when I shall understand.
Salutes Cleopatra. This is an earlier tribute then I thought
Embraces Urania, who cries on him. To pay yourlips. -- My dear Urania, why
Do thou conspire to my distraction? -- Why
This Black? -- And why these tears? --

King. Heaven bless you both;
And may your Loves increase still with your days:
May you be fresh as spring, as Autumn fruitful,
And know no Winter of adversity:
And Heaven that has done wonders in your Loves,
May it do wonders in the effects of it. --

They both bow to the King, and then step a little aside and talk together.
Enter Priest. Priest. A day full of wonders. --

King. Aday
All miracle. -- How merciful is Heaven
To those it loves? -- Who would be ever Bad,
When Virtuous folks are thus rewarded in
The midst of their distress? --

The Prince returns to the company again. Theand. Cozen --
Salutes the Princess. Your pardon. -- Happy is this meeting.
I am obliged for all the joy I see
Bows to the company. Start out of sorrow now at my return.

Cleant. Heaven give you joy of your Urania.

Theand. You have obliged me Madam, that you have
Dealt still so gently with your servant.

Cleant. She never
Had been esteemed so, had you esteemed
Me worthy of your Council, Sir; but now
I shall endeavor to repay her all
Those services I have received from her.

Theand. She Is still your servant, Cozen. --

Cleant. Aside. How can there be such mirth; when brave
Lives sadly in an unjust banishment?

Endymion Theand. I long to ease my wonder, and to know
The story of great Cleopatra; how
She'th been so long obscured to all the world,
But, to her self. --

King. We'll find a scene for that,
Less like the face of sorrow, It Is enough
Urania is a Princess, and had Fortune
In ought but in her blindness been like justice,
Had worn the Crown of Thrace. -- Only my Daughter,
My dear Urania, ask me on this place,
I so have injured thee, what I shall do
To expiate my ignorance of thy worth.
Ask what thou will, I shall not find a tongue
To give thee a denial.

Vran. Great Prince, I do not
Want a request, had I but merit to
Deserve it first, then confidence to ask it.

King. Ask it; or you choose the perfect'st way
To disoblige me. -- What is it? --

Uran. It is
Endymions Liberty. -- 'Twas by his goodness,
I lived to see this day, whose only Cloud
Is his confinement. -- Pardon the boldness Sir
You're pleased to give me; and the gratitude
I hope the Gods will never take from me.

King. You have my word, do with it what you please.
Endymion shall have his liberty. --
I shall give order for it. --

Theand. Your pardon Sir,
If your commands already are obeyed.
Endymion is returned. -- I met him ere
He was imbarq'd, and having been informed,
From my Urania, all his cares for her,
I stayed him, hoping from your goodness to
Obtain his pardon. -- For the love Cleantha
So truly bears him, I have no more to say
Against it, then against my own I bare
To my Urania, when I thought her less.
And since the Gods have made her great for me,
'Twill be but gratitude in me to do
Some of their business for them, and reward
So brave a Virtue as Endymion owns,
And make him great for his Cleantha too.
Especially, since by their goodness, I
Have power to do it. -- The war in Thessaly
Has found a happy end. -- And there I Have left
Those hands which made that Scepter stoop, who now
Want but a scoene to do new wonders in.
And this may prove rebellious Thrace, if you
(Dread Sir) approve it fit I wear that Crown
Urania gives me. In this expedition,
And in this conquest too, the brave Endymion
Shall be my second. -- What shall I not expect from
Such Virtue and such Valor when they meet?

King. I have of late received such mercies, that
I cannot think of any thing which looks
Like cruelty. -- And in my condemnations,
Heaven has done miracles, to keep me from
Horrid injustice. Therefore wonder not,
All that you ask is so soon granted you. --
Cleantha, take then thy Endymion, be
More blessed in him then greatness ever could make thee.

Cleantha bows. Queen. And now you're doing works of mercy Sir,
Hear one entreaty more, (not for their sakes
For whom I ask, but for this days sake, which
Has been a day of mercy to us all.)
Let not Neander, nor old Geron die.
A banishment for life, will more prepare
Them for their deaths; and thus your mercy shall
Best fit them for the mercy of the Gods.

King. What you propose, has much of piety
And mercy too (the works of this day) and
May Not be denied. -- And now I Have one request
To you my honored Priest (because I Would give
Joy to all honest hearts this day) your leave,
That Pyrrhus (my best confident) may serve
The fair Evadne. --

Priest. Great Prince, I am obliged,
My poor Evadne is so much your care:
It shall be mine, she still shall think that best
Your majesty is pleased to choose for her.

Enter Endymion. Theand. Endymion! Why so slowly to thy joys?
Reap here the fruits of gratitude and mercy,
And see those Stars again thou do adore.

Takes him by the hand, and leads him to Cleantha, who kneels down and kisseth
her hand. Cleant. VVelcome, my Lord. --

Queen. My Lord, you're welcome from your banishment.

King. You Have only now this Ladies leave to ask
For any thing you would have --

Endym. I Am happy in
Your royal mercy Sir, and hope in time.
To be so too in hers. --

King. You need not fear
Your sentence, when Cleantha is your judge. --
But let us all away, and satisfy --
Our selves with what we have so long traveled with;
And let the world learn from this story, though
Heaven may a while correct the Virtuous,
Yet will it wipe their eyes again, and make
Their Faces whiter with their tears. Innocence
Concealed is the stolen-pleasure of the Gods,
Which never ends in shame, as that of men
Does oft-times do; but like the Sun breaks forth,
When it has gratified another world,
And to our unexpecting eyes appears
More Glorious through it is late obscurity.

Priest. Unvertuous folks a while may find some Rest;
But in the end, the good are only blessed.

Exeunt Omn. FINIS.

