THE COPY OF HIS EXCELLENCY THE EARL OF FORTH'S LETTER TO THE EARL OF ESSEX:
AND THE COPY OF HIS MAJESTY'S LETTER TO THE LORDS and COMMONS OF PARLIAMENT
Assembled at Westminster:

Sent enclosed in the same 3, March 1643.

OXFORD March 7.

Printed by LEONARD LICHFIELD Printer to the University 1643.

The Copy of His Excellency the Earl of FORTH'S Letter to the Earl of Essex.
MY LORD,
I Have received your Letter of the 19th of the last Month, which according to
my duty, I showed to His MAjESTY, who, observing in it your Expressions
concerning Peace, (that whenever you shall receive any directions to those
that have entrusted you, you shall use your best endeavors) is graciously
pleased to send this enclosed, which is desired may be delivered according to
the directions.

Your Lordships humble Servant FORTH.
Oxon. March 3. 1643.
C. R.

OVt of Our most tender and pious senfe of the sad and bleeding condition of
this Our Kingdom, and Our unwearied desires to apply all remedies, which by the
blessing of Almighty God, may recover it from an utter ruin; By the advice of
the Lords and Commons of Parliament assembled at Oxford, We do Propound and
Desire, that a convenient number of fit Persons, may be appointed and
authorized by you to meet with all convenient speed, at such Place as you shall
nominate, with an equal number of fit Persons, whom We shall appoint and
authorize to treat of the Ways and Means to settle the present distractions
of this Our Kingdom, and to procure a happy Peace. And Particularly, how all
the Members of both Houses, may securely meet in a full and free Convention of
Parliament, there to Treat, consult and agree upon such things, as may conduce
to the maintenance and defense of the true reformed Protestant Religion, with
due consideration to all just, and reasonable ease of tender Consciences; to
the settling and maintaining of Our just Rights and Privileges; of the Rights
and Privileges of Parliament, the Laws of the Land, the Liberty and Property
of the Subject; and all other expedients that may conduce to that blessed end
of a firm and Lasting Peace, both Church and State, and a perfect
understanding betwixt Us and Our People, wherein no endeavors or Concurrency
of Ours shall be wanting. And God direct your hearts in the ways of Peace.

Given at Our Court at Oxford, the third day of March. 1643.
Superscribed, To the Lords and Commons of Parliament Assembled at Westminster.


