A SERMON PREACHED Before the Right Honorable, THE Lord Mayor OF LONDON, AND
THE Court of Aldermen, etc.

On Wednesday in Easter Week, in the Church of St. ANDREW Holborn.

Being One of the Anniversary Spittal SERMONS.

By EDWARD FOWLER, D.D.

LONDON, Printed by T.M. for Brabazon Aylmer at the Three Pigeons against the
Royal Exchange in Cornhil, 1688.

To the Right Honorable Sir John Shorter, Lord Mayor of London, AND The COURT
of Aldermen.
Right honorable,
THe Sermon which by Your Appointment I Lately Preached, and You heard, I have
now in Compliance with Your Order made more Public; hoping that by this means
it may be the more Serviceable, through the Blessing of GOD, to the Charitable
Design (and that toward the Rich no less than the Poor) which, my Conscience
bears me Witness, I sincerely propounded to my self therein. Which that it may,
is the earnest Desire and Prayer of,

Right Honorable, Your most Humble Servant, Edw. Fowler.


A SERMON Preached before the Right Honorable the LORD MAYOR of LONDON, AND
THE COURT of ALDERMEN, etc.
Luke 16.9. And I say unto you, make to your Selves Friends of the Mammon of
Unrighteousness; that when ye fail, they may receive you into everlasting
Habitations.

THat Saying of the Wiseman, Money answers all things, is no doubt in the
Opinion of the Children of this World, one of the Wisest of all his Sayings.
And whosoever observes how zealous Men are in the pursuit of Money, what Labor
and Toil both of Body and Mind they undergo, and what eminent Hazards both of
Soul and Body they run themselves into, for the Gaining of it, must needs
conclude, that there is scarcely a more Universally-received Maxim than This,
that Money answers all things. But yet, so silly are the incomparably-greater
number of poor Mortals, as to take this for granted, in such a sense, as
wherein their manifold Experience tells them, there can be nothing more False:
And least to think of that sense, in which it is especially and most eminently
True. They think that the Heaping up of this Worlds Wealth, is the most
Effectual Course to have all their Needs supplied, and Desires answered:
Whereas a Wiser, as well as Greater Person than King Solomon, even our Blessed
Savior (and Solomon himself too) has again and again assured us, That the
Well-spending it is the best means we can use for the obtaining of our Withes.
And particularly, those words of our Savior, now read, assure us of This; viz.
And I say unto you, make to your selves Friends of the Mammon of
Unrighteousness, etc.

By the Mammon of Unrighteousness, we are to understand this World's Goods: So
(...), which is more a Syriac than a Greek Word, signifies. But why they should
be called, (...), Mammon of Unrighteousness, there are various Conjectures; of
which (perhaps) the truest is, that it may best be rendered, Vain or false and
deceitful Riches. For (...) just, and (...) true, are taken in the same sense,
and put one for another, in several places, by the Sacred Writers; as also
(...) unjust, and (...) deceitful. And in the 11th. Verse of this Chapter,
(...), which varies from (...), not in Sense, but only in the Phrase, by an
ordinary Hebraism, is opposed to (...), true Riches. If therefore you have been
unfaithful in the Unrighteous Mammon, Who will commit to your trust the True
Riches? Which is as much as to say, If you have been unfaithful in those
Riches, which deserve not that name, Who will entrust you with real, true,
substantial Riches?

But in what sense soever we understand this Phrase, we must confess, that the
things which are so eagerly pursued, and so vehemently thirsted after, have but
little Credit done them by being thus expressed. Yet, since no less a Person
than our Blessed Lord, has bestowed this Name upon them, we are certain, that,
as generally-adored an Idol as Wordly Wealth is, it is not given it without
just cause, that it has it not for naught.

Make unto your selves Friends of the Mammon of Unrighteousness. This
Figurative manner of speaking is well suited to the foregoing Parable; the Sum
and Substance of which is this: The Steward of a certain Rich man was accused
to him of wasting his Goods, and his Lord hereupon requiring him to give
Account of his Stewardship, and threatening him, that he should be no longer
Steward, he immediately resolves upon this Course, for the securing to himself
a Livelihood; viz. the drawing of his Lords Debtors into the same guilt of
Cheating him: Foreseeing, as easily he might, that their fear of his telling
Tales would-lay an Obligation upon them, to maintain him among them.

Now my Text is the Moral or Application of this Parable: And therein our Lord
advises us to be as Wise and Prudent, as this Steward was wickedly Crafty;
viz. As he made Friends of his Lord's Riches to procure him Houses to live in,
when his Lord's House would no longer hold him, so we should make such Friends
of our own Riches, as that when we are turned out of this Earthy house of our
Tabernacle, we may be received into Everlasting Habitations; or into a Building
of God, an House not made with hands, eternal in the Heavens.

Make to your selves Friends of the Mammon of Unrighteousness, that when ye
fail, (i.e. when ye die) they may receive you, etc. i.e. you may be received.
Like that in Luke 6.38. where Good measure shall they give into your bosom,
signifies, Good measure shall be given, etc. And like that in Chapter 12.20. where
They shall require thy soul, is as much as, Thy Soul shall be required of thee.
And other instances, of the like forms of Speech, I might present you with.

So that the sense of this Verse may be thus expressed: Do you so use the things
called Riches, with which God intrusts you as his Stewards in this World, as
that when you take your leaves both of them and it, you may have Riches truly
so called, in the Kingdom of Heaven.

First, It is, you see, Supposed in these words: That let us stock our selves
never so plentifully with this Worlds Wealth, yet there is no help for us, but
fail we must; we must die sooner or later, and leave it all behind us. Thou
that have best Feathered thy Nest, and laid up the richest Treasure on Earth,
shall not be able to redeem thine own life there with any more than thy
Brothers, nor to give to GOD a ransom for it. It may enable thee to make a
great Figure, and to Fluster in the World for a little while, but it cannot
secure thy continuance therein, Psalm. 37.35.
for one day or hour. Thou may be in great Power, and spread thy self like a
green Bay tree, but thou shall quickly pass away notwithstanding, and be no
more here, and he that seeks thee shall not find thee. Eccle. 8.8.
The most Wealthy and Powerful have no power over the Spirit, to retain the
Spirit, neither have they power in the day of death. This is an Evil among all
the things that are done under the sun, Chapter 9.3.
that there is one event unto all, unto the Rich and Poor: But this is an
intolerable Evil, and never sufficiently to be lamented, that the hearts of the
far greater part of the Children of Men, and especially of Rich men, are full
of Evil; and madness is in their Hearts while they live, and after that they go
to the dead. He who has most improved his time in filling his Chests, and
laying House to House, and Field to Field; as he came forth of his Mothers
Womb, naked shall he return, Chapter 5.15.
to go as he came; and shall take nothing of his Labor along with him, which
he may carry away in his hand: in all points as he came, so shall he go; and
what profit has he, he has but labored for the Wind; that is, supposing he
has not taken the Advice in the Text. This man comes in with vanity, Chapter 6.4.
and departs in darkness, and his name shall be covered with darkness. And
though we know nothing more certainly, than that die we must: Yet so
inconsiderative are the Generality, that they know not their time; Chapter 9.12.
but as the Fishes that are taken in an evil Net, and as the Birds that are
caught in the snare, so are the sons of men snared in an evil time, when it
falls suddenly upon them. Though we all know that we must fail, and cannot be
assured but we may the next moment; and have innumerable Warnings given us to
prepare for death, yet most die suddenly, Deuteronomy. 32.29.
and before they are aware. O that we were wise, that we understood this, so as
to lay it well to heart, that we would consider our later end.

So much for that which these words suppose.

Secondly, That which is Expressed in them, is, That the well-imploying, and
doing good with the good things of this present Life, shall be rewarded with
infinitely-better things in the Life to come.

And of this, we have the fullest Assurance from these two Considerations, and
from either of them, viz.

I. That one Phrase, whereby our Savior expresses doing Good and being
Charitable, with our earthly Enjoyments, is laying up a Treasure in Heaven. II.
That He has entitled the Heavenly Happiness to the sincere performance of this
one Duty, by many Promises and Declarations.
First, One Phrase, whereby He expresses doing Good with our Earthly
Enjoyments, is Laying up a Treasure in Heaven. This we find, Matt. 6.20. In the
foregoing Verse our Lord says, Lay not up for your selves Treasures on Earth,
where Moth and Rust do corrupt, and where Thieves break through and steal. Or,
Do not hoard up your Riches, there being no Goodness in them, but what
consists in the well-using of them; and besides, by hoarding them up, they
will be liable to be either spoiled, or stolen from you. It follows, But lay up
for your selves Treasures in Heaven, where neither Moth nor Rust does corrupt,
and where Thieves do not break through and steal, etc. Or, according to your
Ability, do Good with your Estates; make them serviceable to Works of Piety,
Mercy, and Charity. And agreeably to this sense, He thus proceeds: The Light of
the Body is the Eye; See Dr. Hammond's Note on this place.
if therefore thine Eye be single ((...), which may better be rendered Liberal,
as (...) signifies Liberality in several places) thy whole Body shall be full
of Light: But if thine Eye be evil, ((...), Envious, or Covetous) thy whole
Body shall be full of darkness. And this is plainly the Meaning of this Verse,
viz. As the Eye enlighteneth the whole Body, and guides it this way, or that,
so a liberal mind has a like Influence upon all the Actions of a Christian:
But where an Uncharitable Spirit is, there is nothing but Darkness, or the
abounding of evil Works. So that it appears by the Context, that this Phrase,
Laying up a Treasure in Heaven, was designed by our Lord to signify, being
liberal and bountiful with our Riches: But there could be no reason for his so
calling it, were it not to assure us, that by this means we shall undoubtedly
obtain a Treasure there. And the like He does, Luke 12.33. Sell that ye have,
and give Alms, or rather than excuse your not giving Alms by your want of
Money, make Money of what you have, that you may give Alms. And to encourage
hereto, he in the next words calls it, Providing our selves Bags, which wax not
old, a Treasure in the Heavens which fails not, where no Thief approaches,
neither Rust corrupts. And in imitation of our B. Savior, S. Paul calls it,
Laying up in store for our selves a good Foundation, against the time to come.
1 Timothy 6.17. Charge them that are Rich in this World, that they be not
high-minded, nor trust in uncertain Riches, but in the Living God, who gives
us richly all things to enjoy: That they do Good, that they be rich in good
works, ready to distribute, willing to communicate. O what a Charge is this!
How happens it that so few comparatively will Obey it? But What Encouragement
is there to it? Surely the greatest imaginable, for it follows; Laying up in
store for themselves a good Foundation against the time to come, that they may
lay hold on Eternal Life. Or, Rich men's being Rich in good works, is, Laying up
in store for themselves a good Foundation, or Treasure, against the time to
come, etc.

Secondly, Our Lord has entitled the Heavenly Happiness to the sincere
performance of this one Duty, by many Promises and Declarations. As we have one
of these in the Text, so the time would fail me to recite all those which our
Lord has given us out of his own mouth, and by his Apostles. I shall now
Content my self with presenting you with two or three of those which he himself
delivered. In Mat. 25.34. etc. He expresses no other reason for the
pronouncing of that Joyful Sentence, Come ye Blessed of my Father, inherit the
Kingdom prepared for you, from the foundation of the World, to the Sheep on his
right hand, but this; I was an hungered, and ye gave me meat; I was thirsty, and
ye gave me drink; I was a stranger, and ye took me in; Naked, and ye clothed
me; I was sick, and ye visited me; I was in prison, and ye came unto me. Verily
I say unto you, inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the least of these my
Brethren, ye have done it unto me. And on the contrary, there is no reason
expressed, why the Goats on the Left Hand should have so Horribbe a Sentence
pronounced against them, as, Depart from me ye Cursed, into everlasting Fire,
prepared for the Devil and his Angels, but this; I was an hungered, and ye gave
me no meat; thirsty, and ye gave me no drink, etc. Inasmuch as ye did it not
unto one of the least of these my brethren, ye did it not to me. Again, see
what our Lord says, Luke 6.35. Love your Enemies, and do good, and lend,
hoping for nothing again, (or hoping for no Reward from those whose Benefactors
you are, and charitable Creditors) and your reward shall be great, and ye shall
be the Children of the Highest, etc. And Mat. 5.7. Blessed are the merciful,
for they shall obtain mercy. Whereas S. James has declared, Chapter 2.13. that He
shall have judgment without mercy, that shows no mercy.

I am sure you will acknowledge, that there is no need of going farther than
these two Considerations, for the Confirmation of the Doctrine raised from the
Text.

If it be asked, How this one part of Religion can be said to give a Title to
these Everlasting Habitations? I hope none of us do believe, that there is any
thing more of proper Merit in these than in other good works; since the Falsity
and Dangerousness of the Popish Doctrine of Merit has been sufficiently exposed
to us from time to time: As also, the Folly of imagining that Creatures can
deserve any Reward at the hands of their Great Creator; and much more, of
thinking that Sinners can; and much more, that they can deserve such an
immensely Great Reward as the Kingdom of Heaven by the best Works they are in a
possibility of performing; these Works not bearing the least proportion with
that Reward. Nor need I surely go about to persuade a Congregation of
Protestants, That the Righteousness of Christ is the only Meritorious or
procuring Cause of whatsoever Good we have received, or can hope to receive.
And as to that Saying, that Christ has merited, that we may merit, it is so far
from good Doctrine, that it is impossible to make any good Sense of it. But,

1. Works of Mercy and Charity are Conditions, to the sincere performance of
which, GOD in his infinite Grace and Bounty, and for Christ's sake, (or in and
through Christ) has promised these Everlasting Habitations: And they are such
Conditions as our Savior might well propose, without naming any other with
them, because the whole of Religion is virtually contained or employed in them.
Who knows not, that Faith, and Love, and Obedience, are words which severally
express in Scripture all Religion? But all these are employed in true Christian
Charity. Both the Tables are comprised by our Savior in the Love of God and
our Neighbor; and the sum of what is required in the Gospel, is sometimes
expressed by Believing, and other times by Obeying. Now, as Charity has a
respect to God's Gracious Promises, or as a Christian is excited thereto by
them, so is it an eminent Act and Exertion of Faith: As it has respect to the
many Commandments of GOD and our Savior, so every act of Charity is an act of
Obedience: As it has respect to our infinite Obligations to GOD and our
Savior, and is an Expression of Gratitude toward them, so every act of
Charity is an act of Divine Love: As it has respect to the Necessities of our
Brethren, so is it an act of Brotherly Love; and that which has these several
respects, is the truly Christian Charity. Considering this, well might S. James
say, Chapter 1.27. Pure Religion and undefiled before God and the Father is this,
to visit the Fatherless and Widows in their Affliction, and to keep ones self
unspotted from the World. And therefore good reason had our Savior here to
instance solely in employing our Estates in doing Good, as that which intitles
to Everlasting Habitations in the Heavenly Mansions. And this likewise
justifies that Advice of the Prophet Daniel to Nebuchadnezzar, Chapter 4.27. Break
off thy sins by Righteousness, and thine iniquites by showing mercy to the
Poor, etc.

And also this interprets to us those words of S. Peter, 1 Ep. 4.8. Charity
shall cover the multitude of sins. Above all things, have servent Charity among
your selves, for Charity shall cover the multitude of sins.

2. Works of Mercy and Charity give a Title to these Everlasting Habitations,
as they are the best Evidence of our being Regenerate, and Christians in Deed
as well as in Profession. The Tree, says our Savior, is known by its Fruits.
But it has already appeared, and will farther appear, that no Fruit speaks a
good Tree like these Fruits. And therefore S. Paul prefers the Grace of
Charity before the Graces of Faith and Hope. And now abides Faith, Hope, and
Charity, but the greatest of these is Charity, 1 Cor. 13. ult. It Is confessed, he
does not here mean by Charity the mere giving of Alms, as appears by the third
Verse of this Chapter; but, as wheresoever that Charity is, which the Apostle
describes in the foregoing Verses, there will be a cheerful forwardness to the
relieving of our Necessitous Brethren, so this forwardness proceeding from the
forementioned Motives, is the best Expression of that Charity. And what single
Evidence of a Man's, being a good Christian, can excel, nay can equal this? Who
can doubt whether that man does truly and sincerely Believe in God, and
embraces with his Heart, that Religion which he professes with his Tongue; or
whether he has a powerful Sense of another Life, and sets his Affections on
the things above, that can freely forego present Profit and Advantage for their
sake? What surer Argument can there be of our sincerely loving GOD and our
Blessed Savior, than our readily parting with those things at their Command,
which the Generality are so tenacious of, and most unwilling to let go, upon
any other account, than the some way or other serving themselves? I mean
promoting their carnal Interests. And I need not say, that this is the best
Evidence of a man's loving his Neighbor as himself, since all other Signs
thereof, can signify nothing without this. For it is too plain a Case to need
proving, that he is a Liar who pretends love to his Neighbor, while he
cannot find in his Heart to Relieve him in his Necessity, in some proportion to
his Ability. S. John makes this the great distinguishing Character of a sincere
Lover of GOD, from an Hypocritical Pretender to the love of Him, in 1 Ep. 3.16.
Hereby perceive we the love of God, because He laid down His life for us; and
we ought to lay down our lives for the Brethren: Or, for the promoting of their
eternal welfare. But whosoever has this Worlds Goods, and sees his Brother has
need, and shuts up his Bowels of compassion from him, that is so far from
venturing his life for him, that he will not so much as open his purse to him,
How dwells the love of God in him? My little Children, let us not love in
word or in tongue, but in deed and in truth. Or, Let us not only profess Love
to our Brethren, but demonstrate the sincerity of that Profession, by Acts of
Bounty and Beneficence. Then it follows, And hereby we know that we are in the
truth, and shall assure our hearts before him, etc. Or, We cannot desire a more
certain Evidence, a more infallible Mark, of our being upright-hearted
Christians, than such a temper of mind as shall be on all occasions engaging us
in such Works as these.

3. By Works of Mercy and Charity we are made more and more Capable of being
received into these everlasting Habitations; more and more meet to be partakers
of the Inheritance of the Saints in light; which principally consists in a
Likeness to God, and a Complete Enjoyment of Him. There is nothing whereby we
can so Resemble GOD, and therefore that can put us into such a Capacity of
Enjoying Him, as our being habituated to these Works. The Divine God-like
Nature must needs most eminently appear in these, since Mercy and Goodness,
Benignity and Loving Kindness are the Perfections by which the Best of Beings
does above all other Recommend himself to us; as might be largely showed from
the Holy Scriptures. Therefore the Definition which S. John gives us of God,
is, Love. 1 John 4.16.
God is Love, says he, and he that dwells in Love dwells in God, and God
in Him. The Lord is good to all, says the Psalmist, and his tender mercies are
over all his Works. Nothing is so natural to Him, as Doing Good. The Prophet
Isaiah calls his Judgments and Acts of Severity his Strange Work. Esaias 28.21.
And the Prophet Jeremiah tells us, that He does not afflict willingly, Iam.
3.33.
nor grieve the Children of men. The Divine Severity is not an Effect of
Choice, but of Necessity, for the maintenance and upholding of God's Government
of the World. It proceeds from a Necessity of Sinners making. But He has thus
declared, by the now named Prophet, Jer. 9.24.
I am the Lord, which exercise LovingKindness and Righteousness in the Earth;
for in these things I delight, says the Lord. (...). (...). It Is as natural to
God to do good, Stromat. Lib. 1 p. 313.
as to Fire to warm, and to Light to enlighten, says S. Clemens of Alexandria.
Those therefore who do most good, and are most delighted therein, are most like
to God; whereas those who most Resemble Him in Power and Knowledge, if void of
Goodness, (the Devils for instance) are most unlike Him. And those who are most
like to God, are best qualified for enjoying Him; and capable of enjoying most
of Him. And such as by their Likeness to God, are fitted to Enjoy Him, shall
not fail so to do; I may truly say cannot. (...). There cannot be a separation
betwixt God and his Likeness, Hicrocles.
said the Philosopher excellently.

The Application.
NOW from what has been Discoursed, we learn, First, Wherein lies the
Goodness and Desirableness of a plentiful Fortune. If we give any Credit to our
Blessed Lord, we must believe that it does not lie in its inabling us to Lay
up, but to Lay out the more, and that upon Pious and Charitable Designs, not
upon our Selves or Families, (and much less to gratify Pride or Luxury) and
the better to promote by that means, the Great Business for which we were sent
into this World; to make our selves so much the greater Blessings to it, and
more to glorify our Creator and Redeemer by Good Works than we are capable of
glorifying them without Plentiful Estates; and to attain to the Higher degrees
of Blessedness and Glory in the World to come. I say, we are abundantly
satisfied from what our Lord has declared to us, in our Text and other places,
and from what has been discoursed, that herein alone consists the Advantage of
being Rich. And he is a Person not sufficiently purged from Worldliness and
Sensuality, who endeavors or can desire to be Rich for other Ends; or to make
his Children so for any other reason, than that by this means they may be the
more serviceable to their Fellow Creatures, may bring the more Glory to GOD,
and gain the larger Proportions of Bliss and Happiness in the other Life: In
Comparison of which this Life is nothing worth; and truly all things
considered, not worth any thing in it self, nor at all desirable, but as it is a
State of Probation for the fitting and preparing us for an infinitely better.
And if we considered how far a large Estate is from making the Owners of them
Happy in this life, nay, how it involves them in innumerable anxious Cares and
distracting Troubles, and a World of Misfortunes, which those are secure from,
who possess but just so much as not to stand in need of the Charity of others,
we should think it the most desirable thing for our selves, and ours, to have
no whit more than Agurs with, viz. a Competency, except for the foresaid
Purposes. And especially considering the Dreadful Account which those shall be
called to, who have not Hearts to employ their Riches to such purposes, and
withal, what our Lord has said of the extreme difficulty of Rich men's entering
into the Kingdom of Heaven (in regard of the difficulty of their not trusting
in their Riches, and of their not being made Covetous, or Proud, or Sensual by
them) one would think that all who have any serious Concern for the Souls of
their dear Children, should tremble at the thoughts of venturing them with
Great Estates; and be under no Temptation upon their account of not being
liberal. And I cannot imagine, but that every truly-Good man must needs dread
for his Childrens sake, as well as for other reasons, being backward to Works
of Charity: Nothing being more commonly observed, than that the Children of
Covetous Close-handed Parents, do either as prodigally fling away what they
scraped together for them, or prove mere Mammonists and Muck-worms like them;
and so have their Portion, like them too, in this Life. Which no man that
really believes the other Life, shall need to be told, is an Evil to be dreaded
unspeakably more, than their going a Begging from door to door.

Secondly, We learn from our past Discourse, that it is not in the least
disbecoming a Christian Spirit, nor at all inconsistent with that Ingenuity
which Christianity requires, to have Respect, with Moses, to the Recompense of
Reward in the Good we do; or to be excited thereby to Well-doing. Many
Charitable and Good Souls have perplex't themselves with doubts, that their
Good Works are not of the true Christian kind; because they think they are
Conscious to themselves, of not being principally moved to them by Love to GOD,
but by self-Love; being persuaded that the only spring and principle of
Evangelical Obedience is Divine Love and Gratitude; and that neither Hope nor
Fear is so. But since so very many Promises and Threats are to be found in the
Gospel, it is evident they are greatly mistaken, and that they fear where no
Fear is. For is it to be thought, that we should be stirred up to Good Works by
such Motives as these by Our Blessed Savior Himself, if their having their
designed influence upon us would so spoil them, as to make them not truly
Christian? But I will say Two things in reference to this matter.

1. It is true, that self-Love ought not to be our only Principle in doing
Good. We ought to be constrained thereto by the Love of God and our Savior,
and the wonderful Expressions of their Love to us. We are obliged also to do
Good Works from a sense of the Goodness of them; and to be Charitable from the
Love of Charity as such; as it is a most lovely Thing, an excellent Grace,
highly beneficial to the World, and greatly ennobling and beautifying the Soul
that is therewith inspired. And we ought likewise to show pity to our Afflicted
Brethren from a principle of Love to them. But still since God and our Savior
have seen it necessary to lay before us the Motives of Promises and
Threatenings, it is impossible it should be unworthy of Christians to be Acted by
them in their Obedience. And God knows, that in this imperfect State, the Best
Christians find that they have need enough of these Motives. But,

2 d. It Is a mighty Mistake to think that to be persuaded to the Obedience of
the Precepts of the Gospel by it is Promises or Threats either, is to obey from
a mere selfish Principle. For if we have a true Notion of that Happiness our
Lord promises, and of that Misery He threatens, we are no less acted by Love
to God, in that Obedience which our desire of obtaining the one and avoiding
the other excites us to, than by Love to Ourselves: The Heavenly Happiness (as
has been already observed) principally consisting in a perfect Likeness to
GOD, and Enjoyment of Him, viz. as Perfect as our Nature is Capable of; and the
Hellish Misery being a State of perfect Unlikeness to Him, and Eternal
Separation from Him.

Thirdly, We learn from what has been said, what a Folly it is for men of
Estates to hope to be Received into the Everlasting Habitations in the Text,
without being Charitable with them; without making to themselves Friends, in
our Savior's sense, of their Mammon of Unrighteousness. Let me Beg of such not
to be offended, if I take leave to be a little Free and Plain with them. Do you
really and indeed Hope to be saved? To be sure you will say you do. But, for
God's sake, tell me why? Has GOD promised such as you these Habitations, and
will you expect them without a Promise? I pray look into the Bible, I can in
the Name of GOD assure you, that you shall not find one Syllable there of any
Promise whatever, and much less so exceeding great and precious a Promise as
this, made to such as you. But you will there meet with Threatenings good store
against you, and such terrible ones too, as would make a man even Tremble to
read them, though he should know himself to be unconcerned in them.

You will, no question, say that you hope for Eternal Happiness through the
alone merits of Jesus Christ. Very well! But has Christ promised to Save all
by his Merits that Rely upon them for Salvation? Has he proposed no Terms to
us, without our Compliance with which, He will not Save us? Nay, Have not He
and His Holy Apostles most expressly and frequently told us, that Obedience to
His other Precepts is every whit as necessary to our Salvation, as Obedience to
that of Relying on his merits can be? And is there any one Precept so often
repeated, so much inculcated, as this of Charity? As those of feeding the
hungry, and Clothing the Naked; of being Fathers to the Fatherless, and
Husbands to the Widows; of being merciful and tenderhearted; of being ready to
distribute, and willing to communicate, etc.? Nay, Is any one single Duty
oftener made a Condition of Salvation, than this of Charity? There is scarcely
any one made so so often. Why then should not those who live in the open
Transgression of the Laws of Temperance, Sobriety, and Chastity, or of Justice
and Righteousness, expect as well to be Saved by the Merits of Christ, as you
who live in the manifest Breach of those which oblige you to be Charitable?
There are many Promises of such Blessings as I know you desire with all your
hearts, and much more than you ought, made to the Charitable: Now what an
unaccountable thing is it, that those who cannot find in their Hearts to Trust
in God for the fulfilling of his Promises, by performing the Conditions of
them, should be able to Trust in Him without the Encouragement of any Promise;
nay, against many solemn Declarations made by God and His Son Jesus, on purpose
to discourage us from expecting the least Favor from them, while we persist in
wilful disobedience to any of their Precepts. Your are plainly told, that
Whosoever shall keep the whole Law, and yet offend in one point, Jam. 2.10.
is guilty of all: Or, if it were possible for a Man to observe all the Laws of
God but one, and live in the Breach of that one, this will as certainly make
him liable to the Divine Vengeance, as living in the Breach of all; though not
to the same degrees of Punishment. And you are assured by Him, on whose Merits
you so rely for Salvation, and who will be your Judge, that the Covetous and
Uncharitable shall be placed on his left hand, at the Day of Judgment, and
receive that foresaid fearful Sentence from Him, Depart from me ye Cursed, etc.
And yet, I say, in spite of such Declarations as these, those I now address my
self to, will hope, not only to escape the Wrath to come, but to be eternally
Happy too: At least those of them will that are not secret Infidels (as I must
confess it is hard to think most of them should not be, profess they what they
will): But who can express the Folly, the Madness rather, of such a Hope?

I know many of our Covetous ( Christians I cannot call them, but) Professors of
Christianity do lay no small Weight on their being Just and Righteous in their
Dealings, and taking great Care to do no wrong. But,

1. Suppose you are strictly just, can you expect a Reward for this? Nay, can
you expect that the King of Heaven should bestow upon you no less a Reward than
the Kingdom of Heaven, merely because you do no wrong; merely because you are
pleased not to be Mischievous? In good time in truth. But this is all that a
barely just man can commend himself for, viz. that he does no Mischief. And
remember, I beseech you, that our Lord has declared that The Unprofitable (and
not only the Injurious) Servant shall be bound hand and foot, Mat. 25.30.
and cast into outer Darkness; where shall be weeping and gnashing of Teeth.
And that The Tree which bears not Good fruit (and not only that bears bad)
shall be hewn down, Chapter 3.10.
and cast into the fire. But,

2. It Is more than an even Lay, that those Misers who most boast of their
Justice, are far from being strictly Just. Nay, I dare warrant them, should
their Practices be narrowly looked into, if they be not found guilty of such
gross Injustice as will render them obnoxious to the Laws of the Land, yet they
may be discerned to make no scruple of many such sly Tricks, as will speak them
no less Unjust than Uncharitable in the Court of Heaven; nay, and also in any
impartial Court of Equity. That common Saying, Such a one is a very just, but
an hard man, is founded upon making mere humane Laws the Measure of Justice;
but a man may be a great Villain, and yet be as honest as he can be made to be
by the Laws of his Country. And, I say, it is many to one, but that those
Misers, who most bepride themselves in their being just and honest in their
Dealings, will be found to have much too good an Opinion of themselves, were
their Actions measured by either the Laws of the Gospel, or of Natural Equity;
even such as are to be seen in Tully's Offices, and many other Writings of the
Pagans. But however,

3. Men are Unjust in being Uncharitable. For the Uncharitable are always
transgressing that Rule of Justice given by our Savior, and which is as much a
Maxim of the Law of Nature as of the Christian Religion, viz. What you would
that men should do unto you, do you even the same to them. There is no man, let
him be never so insensible of the Miseries of others, who would not, should
himself fall into needy Circumstances, complain of it as a great Cruelty to be
denied Relief by those who have power to help him. And therefore it is the
plainest Case, that men as often transgress this Golden Rule, as they refuse to
close with Opportunities of being Charitable. Again, every Uncharitable Person
is as such Unjust, in that the Poor and Necessitous have a Right and Title to
their Charity. God has by many Laws given them a clearer Title to our Charity,
than any man can show for his Estate. And therefore in denying it to them, we
withhold a plain Due, and What is this but as plain Injustice?

These things considered, What can be more evident, than that those do put the
grossest Cheat upon their own Souls, and are befooling themselves into Eternal
Misery, let them be never so great Professors of Christianity, and never so
observant of its easy and cheap Duties, who hope to be Saved upon such
accounts, while there is no prevailing with them by all the Arguments that
Almighty GOD has laid before them, (though they are the greatest imaginable)
to employ any considerable proportion of their Mammon of Unrighteousness in
Works of Charity?

Before I proceed farther, I would briefly speak to this Question, What Rules
should we go by, what Measures should we take, to satisfy our selves that we
are truly Charitable; and therefore have a right to the Promises made to such.

1. In answer hereto, let us take notice that GOD expects our spending more or
less in Works of Charity, according to the Estates he has blessed us with. If
the H. Scriptures had been silent, as they are not, about this matter, we may
be certain from the Equity of the Divine Nature, that according to our
Circumstances and Abilities, God looks for more or less from us. If there be a
willing mind, 2 Cor. 8.12.
it is accepted, according to what a man has, and not according to what he
has not. Which words the Apostle spoke in reference to Charity. And men's
Estates, and therefore their Abilities for doing good, are to be measured, not
only by their incomes, but also by their necessary layings out. And
consequently he who has a Family to maintain, is far from being obliged to
give as much as he who has no body to take Care of but himself, though the
Lands or Stocks of both are equal: And according as a man's Family is greater or
less, more or less of his Estate is to go to Charity. This is too plain to need
proving.

2. GOD expects more or less of our Charity, according to the Opportunities His
Providence presents us with, Gal. 6.10.
of being charitable; As we have opportunity, says the Apostle, let us do good
unto all men, etc. The more or greater the Objects of Charity are, that we hear
of within our reach, the more Liberal are we bound to be.

3. We ought to be much less cautious of offending on the Right, than on the
Left hand in our Charity. He is like to be but a Sorry Creature at Charity, who
is resolved to do no more good than he needs must. In an highly important
Affair, the Extreme of Overdoing is far more safe than that of Vnderdoing. The
Overdoer in a good Work, supposing his Excess proceeds from a good Principle,
shall have his Charity rewarded, and his Imprudence pardoned; but the Wilful
Vnderdoer must neither look for a Reward, nor without Repentance, (that is
Reformation) a Pardon. And whosoever is an Vnderdoer from too great
inadvertency, and a too-little Concern about the Duty of Charity, has no Title
to any greater Promise than this, He that sows sparingly shall reap
sparingly. 2 Cor. 9.6.
And as with respect to our selves, the offending on the Right hand is by much
the safer Extreme; so is it also with respect to others. There is more good in
giving to one Needy Person, than there is evil in giving to twenty
Counterfeits. For, as being liberal to these, proceeds from a better Cause,
than does the withholding from the really Necessitous; so it is more Eligible
that some should have more than enough of our Charity, than that any should
want bread. And the Extreme of being too charitable (of which fault I doubt but
few are guilty) is better for the World in general (which I need not stand to
show) than the other Extreme.

In short, Most, I am sure, do exceed in their Expenses upon something or
other; but he who does so on Objects of Charity, of all Exceeders, exceeds the
most safely. That Saying, Too good is stark naught, needs some Wit and Pains to
make it a true Proverb. But,

4. Though we should rather choose offending on the Extreme of Charity, yet we
ought to manage our selves with such Prudence, as so to give at one time, that
we may give at another, and hold on in giving.

5. This is the best general Rule I am able to prescribe, Viz. That we never
refuse to part with our Money to Charitable Uses from the love of Money. It is
not to be particularly and exactly stated, how much it is each Persons Duty to
give; Circumstances in this Case to be considered, being infinitely various:
But if this Rule be carefully observed, and we keep alive and cherish in our
Breasts the true Christian Principles of Charity (which I need not again
repeat) though it is possible we may not always be so very prudent in our
Charity, as is desirable, yet we need not fear, but we shall so govern our
selves in this weighty point, as to be accepted of GOD, and rewarded by him, as
Charitable Christians.

But it is necessary to add, That it becomes us not to be desirous of more for
ours, than that they may live comfortably, according to their Education, and
the Rank and Quality of Our Children: Nor ought we to covet Great things for
them; Prove. 11.24.
since by this means we may endanger their being deprived of what is infinitely
better than any thing we can leave them, viz. God's Blessing. And He has made
Promises enough to put us out of all doubt, that the best Course we can
possibly take to have our Children blessed in the World, is to be mighty cautious
(while we retain enough for their comfortable Subsistence) of making the Poor
and Needy fare the worse for them. And now,

Fourthly, and Lastly, Since we have such abundant Evidence of the Absolute
necessity of Making to our selves Friends of the Mammon of Unrighteousness, if
we would, when we fail, and are turned out of these mouldering Cottages, be
received into everlasting Habitations: Since, if we are not Infidels, we must
needs be convinced, that there is no Duty whatsoever, but will as easily be
dispensed with as this Duty; and that it is every whit as indispensable as Faith
in Christ's Merits and Righteousness, for the Remission of our sins: And since
we have not the least shadow of Reason to hope, be we never so observant of
other Precepts, that Christ's Undertakings for Sinners will in the least avail
us, while we live in disobedience to his so often repeated Precepts of Charity,
and have none, or but little fellow-feeling of the Distresses and Calamities of
our poor Brethren: Let us, considering these things, be persuaded to make as
much Conscience every whit of this, as of any other Duty to which our Religion
does oblige us.

And in order to the still more effectually exciting you hereunto, I might
present you with as many Promises relating to this Life, as well as the other,
as your hearts can wish for. And I might show particularly, from not a few
Texts of Scripture, that to be Rich in good Works is the surest way to increase
your Riches, to add to your Treasures on Earth, as well as to secure and
augment your Treasures in Heaven. But as these Promises are foreign to my
Text, so you were on Monday minded of many of them. As also had many bright and
shining Examples of Charity, the more to quicken you to this great Duty, laid
before you. But yet I must not wholly wave this Great Topic, but shall confine
my self to those Examples which our own City has been, and God be thanked, is
still Blessed with. Examples enough to shame all Miserly People out of their
excessive Backwardness to Works of Charity, and more than enough to make our
Adversaries ashamed of their Nick-naming Protestants Solisidians, although they
were wholly unacquainted (as it is impossible they should be) with our
Principles. Which (by the way) are no more reconcilable with Solisidianism
than is the Doctrine of the Bible. For, The Bible, (as Mr. Chillingworth says)
The Bible is the Religion of Protestants. Which if it were of another sort of
Christians, who call us Biblists, it could not be one of their Avowed
Doctrines, That Good Works do Vere mereri augmentum Gratiae, aeternam vitam and
augmentum Gloriae: Truly or properly merit an Increase of Grace, Eternal Life,
and an Increase of Glory. Which are the words of the Council of Trent. Nor
would their Greatest Motive to Good Works be that which diverse of them have
frankly acknowledged is not in the Bible; and which we are certain is a mere
Figment, and the very Dream of a Shadow: And Serves to no better purpose than
to spoil Charity, and make it a thing forced and extorted by slavish fear. I
need not tell you I mean their Doctrine of Purgatory.

But to proceed, I say we have had many Noble Examples among our selves, and
have at this day, to encourage us to be Charitable. And great instances of the
Charity of our Fellow-Citizens (for the most part) are commended to your
Imitation in this Paper.

A True Report, etc.
HEre are Five Eminent Hospitals, which you may be satisfied by what has been
now a third time read, are such Treasuries for Charity, as there are no where
to be found better: And which withal give us such Patterns of it, as the like
to them are not easily to be met with.

As these Hospitals have had of late years far more Liberal Contributions than
heretofore, so a very great part of their Revenues being consumed by the late
dreadful Fires (and the greatest part of three of them) and the whole Stock of
the Hospital of Bethlem exhausted by the Building of a far more Commodious
House, which cost above 17000 l. (besides paying Interest for several great
Sums for the finishing thereof) they would since have signified nothing to
what they now do, without such Contributions.

Now certainly those whom God has blessed with Estates, and who want not Hearts
to be liberal with them, cannot want Encouragement to Liberality toward these
Houses of Charity. For as in these they cannot fear depositing their Alms
either in Unfaithful or Imprudent hands, their Governors and Treasurers having
so great a Reputation for their Excellent managing and improving of Charity, so
they cannot be bestowed on People whose Case is more compassionable than theirs
is, who are received into these Houses: I mean among our own Countrymen. I
thus limit it, because the French Protestants (for whom I must take all
opportunities of being an Advocate) must necessarily be acknowledged to be the
most inviting Objects of Charity in the World: Both in regard of the not to be
paralleled Greatness of their Sufferings, and the Blessed Cause for which they
suffer. But if God's Stewards (as all that have Estates will one day be
convinced they were, and that GOD never parted with His Propriety in them)
would be but as just as He is bountiful to this City and Kingdom, neither these
distressed Foreigners, nor our own Poor, would have cause to complain of the
want of Charity. Our good GOD has given among us enough and to spare, for the
Supply of both, and no one be in ever a jot the worse Circumstances.

But to return to our business; In the Hospital of Christ's-Church, the
Receivers of your Charity are poor Orphans, who might have been cast upon the
Wide World, had they not here been taken in: And whose begging about our
Streets could only have been prevented by the hand of Charity. And, Who would
not Covet being of their number, whose Hearts are now rejoiced at the Lovely
Show now before us, of Fatherless Children well Fed (which is seen in their
Countenances) and as well Clothed, by the help and Assistance of their
Charity? But they are (next under God) obliged to their Benefactors for a far
greater Blessing than mere Food and Raiment, viz. a Liberal Education; which is
fitting them for good Callings suited to their several Genius's and Capacities;
and to which they are placed as they become fit for them. So that they being as
well Taught as Fed, are not only in an Excellent way to be enabled comfortably
to provide for themselves, but also to Relieve others: To be useful in the
World, and great Blessings to their Country.

Nay, by your Charity to this Hospital you no less contribute to poor Orphans
eternal Happiness, than to their temporal Welfare: To their Souls no less
than to their Bodies; and Charity to the Souls of our Fellow Creatures, I need
not say is incomparably the most Worthy and Excellent in it self; and therefore
the most Grateful to God, and the most highly Rewardable. And in the Hospital
of Christ's Church (I am well assured) no means are neglected for the well
Principling its Children in the True Religion; all Care is taken for the
Training of them up in the Way that they should go; in Piety and Devotion,
Virtue and Goodness. God Almighty reward those (as most certainly He will) who
so faithfully discharge this greatest of Trusts: And give the Poor Children His
Grace, to be duly affected with, and carefully to improve, so inestimable a
Blessing.

In the Hospitals of S. Bartholomew and S. Thomas, you bestow your Charity on
the Sick, Lame, and Wounded, who must inevitably perish, and while they live
lie in great Misery, without the help of Charity. And (as you have now heard
from the Paper) there are such great Numbers of these Miserable People received
into these Houses, that they must be very large Contributions that will defray
their Charges.

And these Objects of Charity you shall not need to be told, are sad Ones
indeed. It Is a lamentable thing to be destitute of Food, Fire and Clothing;
but over and above these Wants, to want Health too, or the Use of Limbs, which
Wants render incapable of supplying the other; and to have excessive Pain added
to extreme Poverty: Oh what a pitiable Case is this!

What is given to the Hospital of Bridewell contributes to the Maintaining of
Poor Youths, and fitting them for Trades, and putting them out to them: which
are much like Objects of Charity with those in the Hospital of Christ's Church.
It farther contributes toward the Reducing of Vicious People to Sobriety;
which, whatever the success be, is never the less Acceptable Charity; Endeavor
being our Work, and not success. And what is bestowed here, helps also to the
Relieving of indigent, miserable People; and to the sending of poor Vagrants to
the Places which ought to be their Homes, that are bound by Law to take care of
them; and to their Relief and Subsistence in the mean time. And though many I
fear of these last do much more need than deserve your Charity, yet this is so
far from being a good Objection against giving to them, that it carries with
it a no small Motive thereto, viz. that this is imitating the Charity of our
Heavenly Father, who is kind, as our Saviors Words are, Luke 6.35.
to the Unthankful and to the Evil. And if those should want the Charity of
Heaven who are far from deserving it, we should all go without it.

But I am not now encouraging you to any great Liberality toward our street -
Vagrants; and much less to such of them, as are not by Age, or loss of Eyes or
Limbs, disabled from Working. The Truth is, the so swarming, and I doubt daily
increasing, of Common Beggars, is a great temptation to reflect upon our
Government.

And Lastly, As to the Hospital of Bethlem: Lord, how deplorable is the
Condition of those, for whom your Charity is here desired! Of those who have
lost their Reason, and so are rendered as Vnuseful to themselves as to the
World; and have left them but little more, to make them distinguishable from
Brute Creatures, than the Shapes and Tongues of Men and Women!

But the Case of Lunaticks is too Lamentable to need Aggravation, for the
raising of Compassion. Those therefore can be no less void of Sense than these
poor Souls, who need to be told, that what is given toward the reducing of
such as are destitute of other help to their right Minds, is extraordinary
Charity.

And now let me commend those Words of the Author to the Hebrews, Chapter 13.3. to
your very serious consideration: Remember them that are in Bonds, as bound with
them, and them which suffer Adversity; as being your selves also in the Body.
That is, as being liable your selves, whilst you are in this World, to the same
Adversities. The Richest man among us has no Assurance, but that he may be as
poor as Job. The Healthiest and Soundest of us all, cannot promise himself,
that he shall not Live to be as full of Sores, as was that Good man and Lazarus
in the Parable; or as miserably Diseased as the most languishing People in
either of our Hospitals. The Ripest Wits and best - Parted in our City do
little know, but that they may end their days in Bedlam. And the best Security
we can have from such like Calamities, is to Sympathize with, and extend what
Relief we are able to, suchlike Sufferers.

As on the other hand, 'twill be most just with GOD so to abandon us by His
Providence, as to permit our falling into very miserable Circumstances, if we
have little Compassion for our Fellow Christians, or Fellow Creatures in
Misery. And whenever this may happen, (as God only, knows what a day, or what
an hour, may bring forth) How must then our Consciences needs upbraid us, as
Ioseph's Brethrens did them, Genesis 42.21.
When they said one to another, we are verily Guilty concerning our Brother; in
that we saw the Anguish of his Soul, when he besought us, and we would not
hear: Therefore is this Distress come upon us.

I doubt I have tired your Patience, but I cannot however conclude, till I have
Addressed my Self, in a few words, to those of you whose Hearts and Souls are
in doing Good: Who chiefly value your Riches upon the account of the Good you
are enabled by them to do in the World: Who cheerfully Embrace all
Opportunities of expressing a Compassionate and Charitable Temper. The Great S.
Paul, (who next to our Blessed Savior, was the most wonderful Example of
Charity the World has known; though he was not in Circumstances to be so of
that part of it which consists in Almsgiving): S. Paul, I say, assures such as
you, that God is not Unrighteous, to forget your Work and Labor of Love: And
that, You who sow bountifully, shall reap bountifully. And therefore, as it
follows, Every man according as he purposes in his Heart, so let him give not
grudgingly, or as of necessity, (or, as being constrained by importunity) for
GOD loves a Cheerful Giver, 2 Cor. 9.6, 7. And give me leave to read what
follows to the End of this Chapter. And God is able to make all Grace abound
toward you, that ye always having all sufficiency in all things, may abound
to every Good Work; or may still have plenty for all Charitable Works: As it is
Written, he has dispersed abroad, he has given to the Poor, his Righteousness
remains for ever. Or, his Charity. And therefore he has ever wherewithal to
be Charitable. Now he that ministers Seed to the Sower, both minister Bread
for your Food, and multiply your seed sown, and Increase the Fruit of your
Righteousness; or, of your Charity. Being enriched in every good thing to all
Bountifulness, (or, having enough to be liberal at all times) which causes
through us Thanksgiving to God. Or, gives us Occasion to Bless GOD for all His
Blessings bestowed on you. For the Administration of this Service, not only
supplieth the want of the Saints, but is abundant also by many Thanksgivings
unto God. Or, causes mighty Thankfulness to God from those that are Relieved
by you, and those that are Beholders of your Charity. While by the Experiment
of this Ministration they glorify GOD, for your professed subjection to the
Gospel of Christ; and for your liberal distribution to them, and to all men.
And by their Prayer for you, which Long after you, (or are in Love with you)
for the exceeding Grace of GOD in you. Thanks be to God for His Unspeakable
Gift. Or, for this His Great and Unspeakable Gift of Charity.

THE END.

