Alderman FOWKE'S SPEECH At the delivery of a Petition from the Lord Mayor,
Aldermen and Commons in Common-Councill Assembled TO THE PARLIAMENT OF ENGLAND
Concerning their Militia. And the Parliaments answer thereunto.
Published by Authority.

THe House received a Report from the Committee appointed yesterday to go into
the City, That they had been with the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of the City of
London, and acquainted them with the Votes of the Parliament, and that the City
was so forward to express their affections to the Parliament, that
notwithstanding the great decay of Trade and poverty of the City, They did
offer to advance 60000 l. toward the present supply of the Army and Navy; and
did therefore humbly request the Parliament to appoint some of the Aldermen of
the City to receive the Assessement, that they may be reimbursed out of the
said Assessement. The House being informed that diverse Aldermen and Common
Council men were at the door, they were called in; and being come to the Bar,
^lderman Fowke, in the names of the rest, in a significant Speech expressed
himself, the heads whereof follows,

THat the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Common Council of the City of London, being
sensible of the goodness of God in uniting the Parliament, and restoring the
Members to the discharge of their trust; thought it their duty upon their first
meeting to give glory to God, and had set apart Tuesday next for a day of
Thanksgiving; That they acknowledge it their duty in their humble thanks for
the favor of the Parliament expressed in their late Votes, and the
seasonablenesse of it, That though they had been laid low, and had not fully
answered what had been expected from them, and had been looked upon as persons
disaffected to the Parliament; though they were in some things dissatisfied,
yet they were ever well-willers to the Parliament. He did with thankfulness
own the Resolutions of the Parliament in restoring the Members that were
imprisoned, and in ordering their Gates, Portcullices, Posts and Chains to be
set up at the public charge of the State. That the Confidence the Parliament
put in the City would not be misplaced, nor their expectation frustrated: That
the City did congratulate the happy return of the Parliament: That they found
some persons for a Monarchical, some for a Commonwealth, and some for no
government at all: the last they did abhor; for the other, they would not
presume to direct, but should acquiesce in, and submit to the determinations of
Parliament. And concluded with an humble desire, that the Militia of the City
might be put into such hands as the City might confide in, and to that end
tendered a List of Names of Commissioners for their Militia, yet with humble
submission to the Judgment of the Parliament, and thereupon delivered the
Petition.

After the Petitioners were withdrawn, their Petition was read, and was
addressed to the Parliament of England; and entitled, The humble Petition of
the Mayor, Aldermen, and Commons of the City of London in Common Council
assembled; which, together with a List of the Names of the Commissioners for
the Militia presented, were read.

The Petition is as follows:
To the Parliament of England, the humble Petition of the Mayor, Aldermen and
Commons of the City of London in Common Council assembled.
SHOWS,

THat the Petitioners in a deep sense of what the City of London has lately
suffered by misapprehensions of their affections to the Parliament of England
(to which in all times they have constantly adhered) do humbly adore that
gracious God, who has so mercifully restored this honorable Parliament to the
exercise of their trust, for this Cities just vindication and theirs and the
Nations deliverance and preservation, and do with unfeigned thankfulness
acknowledge the happy concurrence of this honorable House in their late worthy
and prudent Resolves, in order to the general settlement of the Nation, and
for your tenderness to this City, in enlarging their late imprisoned members,
restoring their Common Council, and ordering their Gates and Portcullices,
Posts and Chains to be repaired at the public charge.

By all which signal marks of honor and respects to your Petitioners, they
do find themselves drawn forth into duty and affection, to tender to this
honorable House their sincere and most ready service in all the capacities God
has put them in, for the maintenance of your Parliamentary Authority, and
safety of your persons: and your Petitioners hope they neither have, nor shall
forfeit that confidence, which the Parliament has always had of them.

The Petitioners do therefore humbly pray, that the Militia of London may be
forthwithsetled in the hands of Citizens of known integrity, and interest in
the City. And your Petitioners shall pray, etc. Sadler.

The List of the aforesaid Commissioners is as follows.

The names of the Militia of the City of London.
The Lord Mayor and Sheriffs for the time being. Thomas Aleyne, Lord Mayor.
Alderman Atkins. Ald. Foot. Ald. Fowke. Ald. Viner. Ald. Tompson. Ald.
Robinson. Ald. Bateman. Ald. Lawrence. Ald. King. Ald. Bolton. Ald. Whale.
Of the Common Council.
Col. Bromfield. Rich. Floyd. Major Chamberlain. Will. Bateman Esquire John Jolly
Esquire Major John Tailor. Deputy Antropus. Deputy Staynes. John Win. Theoph.
Biddulph. Esquire Capt. Story. Capt. Johnson. Mr. Sanders. Thomas Bludworth Esquire
Max. Beard Esquire Major Cox. Major Eardly. Deputy Lenthall. Gower Esquire Peter Mills.
Nic. Penning. Capt. Cleggat. Will. Vincent Esquire Major Alsop.
Resolved, that the Parliament does approve of, and agree to the List of the
Names of persons presented to be Commissioners for the Militia of the City of
London.

The Petitioners being again called in; Mr. Speaker gave them this answer,

Gent.

If we may measure affections by the number of the Persons, that came to
present your Petition; we may say you brought the affections of the whole City
with you. Your expressions at the Bar Intimate no less, and you may rest
assured of the like from the Parliament: you acknowledging that Duty and
Respect, which is Due from you to the Parliament.

They have read your Petition, and have also already read your list, and passed
it as you desired: the Members of Parliament, who were yesterday with the Lord
Mayor, and Aldermen have made a report of the great readiness of the City, to
advance moneys for the present supply of the Army and Navy. Whatever mistakes
have been formerly, it cannot but be a happy day to all, but our enemies; in
that the affections of the City, and Parliament are joined together; you have
showed your affections as well by your Actions, as words; and the Parliament
have Commanded me for your good Affections and Actions, to give you hearty
thanks, and in their Names, I do give you very hearty thanks accordingly.

A List of the Names of the Council of State.
Genesis George Monck. William Pierpoint Esquire John Crew Esquire Col. Rossiter. Richard
Knightley Esquire Col. Popham. Lord Widdrington. Sr John Evelyn of Wilts. Sr
William Waller. Sr Richard Anslow. Sr William Lewis. Col. Edw. Mountague. Col.
Edw. Harley. Col. Richard Norton. Arthur Ansley Esquire Denzill Hollis Esquire Col.
Morley. Lord Fairfax. Sr Ant. Ashley-Cooper. Sr Gilbert Gerard. Lord St John.
Sr John Temple. Col. George Thompson. John Trever. Esquire Sr John Holland. Sr John
Potts. Col. John Birch. Sr ^arb. Grimston. John Swinfin Esquire John Weaver Esquire
Sergeant Mayna^d,
LONDON Printed by John Redmayne in Lovels Court in Pater-noster-Rowe 1659.

And are to be had at the Office of Intelligence.


