A Brief COLLECTION Of many Rare SECRETS.

Most of which are approved, and Physical, and the rest most Pleasant and
Recreative.

Very necessary for all sorts of People.

Newly set forth and published by LA FOVNTAIN an Expert Operator, living over
against Essex House in the Strand near Temple Bar.



LONDON, Printed Anno Dom. 1650.

To the Reader.
I Do not attribute to my self to be sole inventor of these insuring Secrets;
yet know that here are none concerning Curo but what I have experimented, or
had from good Authors, great imitators of Galen, and Hippocrates, the famousest
men of their calling in the World; as for what is recreative, herein they need
no other testimony but your own judicious application. The general acceptance
of a little Book of twenty Secreets, which I published formerly, has obliged
me to present you here with a far better, concealing nor retaining nothing to
my self from your view that I think may do you good: Here you may have more
instructions in the things it treats off, for a couple of pence, then you can
have of another that is more coveteous then charitable (of which there are many
now a days) for twenty shillings: I direct this chiefly to the poor that are
not able to go to the price of higher matters, though others may profit by it:
However to as many as will accept hereof, if possibly it lies in my power, I
will study to present them with a better thing hereafter. In the mean time, my
greatest ambition shall be, always to deserve the title of your Friend and
well wisher,

EDW. FOUNTAIN.

A Brief Collection of many Rare Secrets.
I. How to make ordinary diet drink, of which good purging diet drink may be
easily made, as after you may see, very good and necessary for most diseases.
TAke a good handful of Barley, pick and wash it in fair water, and a dram of
green fennel seed, or annise seed, and half an ounce of liquorish prepared,
that is, scraped clean and somewhat bruised; put all this in a pottle of running
water to boil, skimme it when it boils while it yields any skimme, and then it
is boiled enough, then take it off, let it cool, and keep it for your ordinary
drink; this is good drink for most diseases, especially being feverish or hot.

II. How to make the same drink, a most excellent purging diet drink.
Take a pint of the said drink, and steep therein half an ounce of seen, and a
dram of green fennel, tied at liberty in a little clean linen cloth, or bag
for the purpose, over night; then strain it, and take a good glasseful of it in
the morning fasting, and half an hour after a mess of clear fresh broth. That
many thousands have been cured of sundry dangerous diseases hereby, I can
Justify it, continuing to do the same every morning for three or four days
together, as your Doctor shall think best, and your necessity require.

III. How to make and take a vomit.
Take about twelve spoonfuls of warm water, mingle therein four or five
spoonfuls of Sallet-oyle, and drink it; a little while after thrust your finger
or a feather in your throat to make it operate the better, if it be necessary;
note that the best time to take this vomit is, when your stomach is full
presently after dinner or supper; for then your victuals will bring up all the
phlegm, and ill humors from the very bottom of your stomach.

IV. An excellent purging Glister which may easily be made at any time.
Take a handful of Barley, as much clear bran, and a quart of running water;
boil this a little space, as two or three boils; then take a pint of the said
water strained but not squesed, and boil therein half an ounce of Seen one boil
or two, together with two drams of green Fennel-seed, or Annis-seed; then
strain it through a clean linen cloth, squesing it somewhat softly; then take
a dish and put therein two or three ounces of good honey, and an ounce of the
coursest red Sugar, and seven or eight spoonfuls of the said water hot,
mingling or stirring all well together with the rest of the foresaid pint of
water; which done, you shall strain it again, and put therein five or six
spoonfuls of Sallet-oyle, or half a quartern of fresh butter, which you shall
give warm but not too hot, and let the patient retain it as long as he can, so
it exceed not half a quarter of an hour, or thereabout.

V. An other easy Glister, both to refresh, cool, and purge if need require.
Take a quart of Whey, and boil therein a good big handful of the best great
lettis you can find, and as much purslain; then take a pint of the said liquor
strained, and put therein a quartern of honey and it is done, giving it warm as
above.

VI. An Astringent or Stopping Glister.
Take a pint of new milk, and then take a good big piece of any Steel red hot,
and quench it in the said milk, then heat and quench it as before in the same
milk, continue to heat and quench in the same manner, three or four times over,
then strain it, and put therein two ounces of oil of Quinces, with two yolks
of Eggs, and so give it the Patient.

VIII. An easy remedy for them that are bound in their bodies, and will by no
means take any Glister, as I have seen many.
Take a dram or two (a little more or less according to the strong or weak
Constitution of the Patient) of good Seen, half a dram of green Fennel-seeds,
or Annise-seeds, put them in a Porrenger, and power thereon four or five
spoonfuls of clear water, more or less according to the quantity of Seen that
you use, and if the Patient be not troubled with a Cough, pour an equal
quantity of juice of Lemons and water, instead of water alone; cover the said
Porrenger, and put it upon the hot ashes with few or no sinders; there let all
infuse or steep together an hour or there about; then strain and squese it a
little through a clean cloth, put thereto twice or thrice as much clear broth,
without salt; finally let the Patient take this in the morning fasting, two or
three hours before he eat any thing; this is likewise a very good purge for
many diseases, and may be taken by young, or old, or women with child, without
any perril or danger using discretion.

VIII. An excellent remedy for either Quartan, Tertian, or Quotidian Ague.
It is good first to be let blood and purged, before you take this ensuing
Medicine, yet I have cured many hereby without either; take Roch-allum, cut or
scrape them round as near as you can, in fashion of Pills, as big as you think
you can swallow them; let them that are very young, very old, or very weak,
take three of these Pills, in three spoonfuls of Angellica-water; the stronger
Constitution may take five in the same manner; the time to take them is when
you begin to feel the fit a coming on, and drink not if you can help it during
the cold fi^; but during the hot fit which ordinarily comes after, drink as
much Carduus benedictus Posset drink as you please; it is best hot to provoke
sweat if your drouth can possibly endure it; if not, better cold then not at
all; this will much weaken your Ague at the first taking, and at the second or
third taking totally cure you, God willing.

IX. How to procure Rest and Sleep, to them that are hindered there from by
headache, or any such like pain.
Take Violet-oyle, with the yolk of an Egg, and b^east-milk, of each a like
quantity; which being well mingled, apply like a plaster upon the forhead and
temples; this will appease the pain, and bring on rest and sleep suddenly.

X. A good and easy remedy for Children troubled with Worms.
Take of the finest wheat flower you can yet, very well sifted, as much as a
six pence will hold three times covered over: then mingle as much
fountain water with the said flower in a glass as will make it look like
milk, which you shall give the Child to drink, and soon after you shall see the
worms come out dead in the Child's excrement.

XI. How to cure any swelling in ones head, caused by a fall, a blow or the
like, very suddenly.
Take an ounce of salt, three ounces of ordinary honey, three ounces of Cummin,
two ounces of Turpentine, all which you shall mingle well together about a
quarter of an hour, upon a soft fire, in any clean thing; then spread it like a
plaster upon a clean piece of linen cloth, and apply it hot upon the swelled
place; a better cure can hardly be had, for this purpose.

XII. How to increase milk in a Woman's breast, if need require.
Take a good handful of green Fennel, picked from the great stalks, and boil it
very well in a pottle of white wine, or strong ale, either being very good for
that purpose; then keep it up close, and let it be your ordinary drink at meals
and other times; the longer you continue to drink of the said drink, the more
your milk will increase; in this I never saw any to fail.

XIII. An approved remedy to cure Warts.
Take any piece of Gold, or Gold-ring without any stone; heat it red hot in the
fire, and l^y ^t as hot as ever you can endure it upon each w^rt, until they be
well cauterized thereby; instead of Gold you may use Iron or a red coal in the
same manner; then wash them with good strong Lie; do this three times a day, or
several days if you will; it imports not much whether; lastly take Radishes
and cut them into thin slices in a platter, and strew over them a reasonable
quantity of salt, then lay on another bed of sliced Raddishes upon that, and
salt as before, and so three or four times, let all this lie and steep over
night in the said platter, and in the morning you shall find the salt melted,
and the virtue of the said Raddishes in it, with which water you shall often
wash the warts, and lay a linen rag or cotton dipd in the said water upon
them, in which doing they will in few days fall, or at the least be easily
drawn off: likewise any scratching, black or blew spots, got by fighting or
she like, the said water will suddenly cure, using it as above said.

XIV. How to cure any kind of Itch, though ever so bad, either inward or
outward, with a sweet water: very cheap and very easy to be done, then the
which there is nothing better, as I can justify, both for this and diverse
other diseases.
Take a quartern of Plantain-water, half as much Rose water, half a
wine-glasse of Lemond or Orange flower water, and an ounce of Sublimatum beaten
into very fine powder, all which you shall mingle in a clean skillet upon the
fire, and there let it boil for a quarter of an hour; then let it cool, and
keep it close in a viol for your use; then wash the place or places where you
have the itch with the said water, and let it dry of it self; your
convenientest time will be when you are going to bed; do this three times,
leaving four and twenty houers respite between each time; the first and second
time will bring them all forth, and the third time will dry and take them quite
off; thus leaving aside all stinking ointments, and inward physic whatsoever;
you may have a safe, sweet, speedy, and infallible cure for your itch: Likewise
using this water as above said, it will draw out all kind of foul corrupted
humors, and leave the skin clear and white; what virtue the said water may have
to cure the Pox, and other soul diseases being rightly used, I leave to the
judicious Artists censure.

XV. How to cure one that spits blood, having some broken vein in his breast.
Take Mice-dung dried and beaten into powder, as much as a sixpence will hold
at a time, in half a wine-glasseful of juice of Plantain, with a little sugar;
drink this every morning fasting, and as much every night when you go to bed,
for a week or there abouts; and this with Gods help will cure you.

XVI. For the Squinsie.
Take two or three drops of oil of Vitriol, in a glass of white wine; gargle
often your mouth and throat therewith; this has cured many, and this you see
is very easy to be done.

XVII An excellent Remedy to Cure the Evil.
Take four ounces of Ceruse, otherwise called White-lead, in fine powder, and
boil it five or six houers in half a pint of Sallet oil, or until all be very
black, stirring it continually wh^le it is on the fire; then spread of this
upon a piece of leather or clean linen cloth, and apply it upon the Sore, and
if the Sore runs, using this often it will heal it; if not, it will first
dissolve it and afterward perfectly heal it, if it be not too inveterate:

XVIII. How to cure a Cough, or Cold, either old or new.
Take Brimstone well powdered half an ounce, and mingle it with a new laid Egg
boiled soft, and half a scruple of Beniamen softly reduced to powder. Take this
in the morning fasting, and as much going to bed at night, and you shall be
cured thereby at the second or third taking: But if your Cough be very
inveterate, you must take it oftener.

XIX. An assured Remedy for the Plague, approved of throughout Venice, in the
year 1504.
Take of a healthy Male young child's water, fine Treacle and Annise seed-water,
of each a like quantity, mingle them, and give about a quarter of a pint or a
little more at a time of it to the Patient in the morning fasting, for three
mornings together; this has cured many.

XX. An infallible remedy for any Burning, or Scalding.
Cut an ounce of the newest wax you can get in thin slices, and melt it in two
ounces of Sallet oil; then take it off the fire and mingle well therein two
yolks of Eggs, roasted hard under hot ashes; spread a little of this very thin
being cold upon a clean linen cloth, and apply it upon the Sore, changing the
same twice a day; this will in very short time appease the pain, and heal
without leaving any scarre at all: this is the only thing I have always used
for this purpose, not without good success.

XXI. An excellent Perfume in a Chamber, to drive away all ill air.
Take ten or twelve Cloaves somewhat bruised, and three or four little slices of
Orange or Lemond pill, put these in a clean porrenger with six or seven
spoonfuls of Rosewater, upon a few cinders or coals in a chasingdish about the
middle of the room, and it will perfume the place, and expel away the ill air.

XXII. How to cure a strong Breath proceeding from the Stomach.
Take Sage-leaves dried and powdered an ounce, Rosemary flowers in the same
manner three ounces, Cloaves beaten into powder half an ounce, Cinnamon beaten
two dramms, two Nutmegs grated very small, and two grains of Musk;
incorporate all this with as much clarified honey as will make it into a soft
paste; then put it in a box five or six days together, where the Sun may shine
most upon it, and it suffiseth. Take of this every morning half an ounce
fasting, and as much after supper going to bed; this will keep what you have
eaten from putrefying over night in your stomach, and continuing thus a while,
you shall by Gods help be delivered from all strong or stinking breath
whatsoever.

XXIII. A present remedy for them that are much troubled with the Hickock.
Eat every morning that you fear to be troubled with the Hickock three hours
before dinner time, a good piece of green Ginger, and drink thereon two good
draughts of Malmsie, and you shall be soon cured thereof God willing.

XXIV. How to be never troubled with the Colic.
Take two pounds of the outward thickest skin of Raddishes, and four pound of
good honey; boil all this together until half the honey be consumed, then
mingle therein Cinamond, Cloaves, Mace, Nutmegge and Pepper, of each two drams
beaten to powder, which done, set it up in a vessel for your use; finally take
of the said Raddish skins thus prepared half an ounce every morning; they that
use this remedy are never troubled with the Colic.

XXV. How to make Red, or Gray hair, black.
Take five flaggons of Rain water, as much Oake-ashes, or other good strong
ashes as will make Lie thereof, six ounces of litharge of Gold, Sage, and
black-figtree-leaves, of each a handful; if you cannot get this last, take the
more Sage, boil this together until the fourth part of the liquor be consumed
in boiling, with which you shall wash your head twice a week; and when your
hair is dry, take Sage juice four ounces, Tartar of Redwine in powder one
ounce, and of litharge of Gold reduced to powder likewise half an ounce,
mingle these three last things together, and there with anoint a Lead-combe,
with which you shall comb your hair often, and they will become black in a
short time.

XXVI.
Likewise if you take oil of Tartar, and warm it a little, and anoint your
Comb in combing your hair well before the Sun, two or three times a day for a
whole week, after you have washed and dried your hair as before, it is an
approved remedy to make hair of any color black.

If you think all these things too tedious or troublesome, take twenty or thirty
Horseleaches, or as many as you can get, and put them to steep and rot in a
violl with half a pint or a little more of course Red wine for two months
together, which done, anoint and comb your hair often therewith before the
Sun, and they will soon become brown at the least if not quite black.

XXVIII. An infallible way to make a Gray beard black, by once anointing it,
which is not so convenient for the hair of the head, by reason of the care
which ought to be had in using it.
Take half an ounce of Aqua fortis in a Vial, put therein to dissolve by the
fire side the quantity of three pence or a groat in silver, and when you would
use this, anoint the roots of the hair a little with oil of Roses; then wet
the hair well with a little sponge dipped in the said Aqua fortis, (having a
care not to touch the skin but as little as may be for that it is apt to raise
a blister) then let it dry, and finally wash it over with a little Lie, wherein
has been boiled a little Red-roses, and Pomgranet-flowers; this Secret as well
as many others in this little Book, is a rare experiment, easy, useful, and
profitable for my greatest envyers: but I stick not to let them know, that my
ambition is to restore good for evil, rather then seek revenge.

XXIX. An infallible remedy for them that are come to age to have a beard yet
want it, so nature do but co operate ever so little.
Shave the place often where you would have hair to grow, then presently
anoint the place shaved with a little spirit of Honey, or oil of Tartar,
either being very good and best for that use of any thing that ever nature has
produced, I am confident of it: the best time to use this is during the
increase of the Moon, in the spring season going to bedward, to make the hair
of your head grow in a short time fair, long, thick, and curled; use the same
wearing a Periwigge, or a leather Cap with borders to it which is far better,
by reason that a Periwigge for the most part is too hot for that use, and does
often hinder somewhat therefore the growth of the hair more, then a Cap and
Borders does.

XXX. How to take Wrinkles out of ones Face, Forehead, or any other part.
Take a little of the wood of a white Vine, that is such as bears white Grapes,
or a little Briony, and beat it well in a Mortar with a good big Fig or two,
such as you may buy at the Grocers; which done, anoint the wrinkled place
therewith, and walk thereupon until you sweat: otherwise the Vine wood will
take of the skin, or the Briony make it black.

XXXI. How to soften hard Hair, and to hinder the grows of it.
Take Bean-cods, bruise them, and apply them like a poultice over night upon
the place, where you would hinder the grouth of hair, or at least to soften it;
the next morning wash the place with water wherein beans have boiled; the best
time to use this is during the decrease of the Moon, and the oftener you do it
the sooner you shall obtain your desire herein: if some find that no hair will
ever grow upon the foresaid place, yet I cannot affirm that it will do the
same to all; for I am of opinion, that it is not easy to change the ordinary
course of Nature in this particular.

XXXII. How to take out Freckles or other Spots out of ones Face, and likewise
to make it fair.
Take a little Roch-allum and bruise it somewhat small, together with the white
of a new laid Egg, warm from the hen, and put them in a dish upon the fire
until they begin to boil, mingling them together until they be incorporated,
and somewhat hardened, with which you may anoint your fate several times, for two
or three days together: this has been often experimented, and found to be
excellent for this use.

XXXIII. An easy way to take all Colors, Painting, or any other Spots from
ones hands, very necessary for so^^ Artists and Tradesmen.
Take juice of Lemond, with a little fair mingled therein wash your hands
therewith, and let them dry of themselves; which done, wash, them in fair
water: moreover this is good to take away the Itch, using it in the same manner.

XXXIV. How to make ones hair to become of a yellow Golden Color.
Take the rind, or outward parings of Rhubarbe, and put them to steep in
Whitewine, or clear Lie; wet a sponge or linen cloth therein, and anoint your
hair therewith, and let them dry before the fire or sun; the oftener you do
this the sooner they will become yellow: note that before you use this, it is
good to clear your head and hair from sweat, and all other filth whatsoever.

XXXV How to take off Hair, so that it shall never grow again.
Some that have the hair of their forehead growing too low, others the hair of
their eyebrows growing too thick; and some women that have hair growing on
their lips, (an unseemly sight to see) would give any thing for this Secret;
Take a Ring without a stone, of the best Gold you can get, or any other piece
of fine Gold, make it red hot without melting it, and touch only the place
suddenly therewith where you would never have hair to grow again; if it should,
as very seldom it does, return to do the same again, and infallibly no hair
will ever grow in that place; note that presently you must anoint the place
with oil of Roses, or of Violets: The convenience of this good Gold, is, that
it leaves no scarre at all, as other Metals applied hot, would do. The Author
hereof found this Secret, much practiced amongst the Moors, and since used it
much himself throughout Europe, to many Ladies and Gentlewomen to their great
content, and to his own Fame and Credit.

XXXVI. How to make a most excellent Water, which I always use to fasten Teeth
that are loose, to clear the Gumms from putrefaction; to cause them to grow if
need require; to sweeten the breath; and finally to divert away the Rheum from
that place, it being very astringent, and cleansing.
Take two ounces of good White wine vinegar, four ounces of Rosemary
flower-water, Myrrh, Mastick, bole Armenick, fine Dragons-blood in leaf, of
each an ounce; Roch-allum burnt, and fine beaten Cinnamon, of each half an
ounce; a pint of fair water, and half a pound of good honey, with a little
Benjamin; mingle all these together, and put it to boil for a quarter of an
hour, skimming it well, then take it off, let it cool, and set it up in a viol
for your use; gargle your mouth well with a little thereof, every morning, and
before and after meals: I cannot extol this Secret too much, having
experimented it with good success to many people of quality, within this City
of London, as I can justify.

XXXVII. How to keep Wine fresh, as if it were in a Celler, though it were in
the heat of Summer, and without Ice or Snow, yea, though it were carried at a
Saddle bow, and exposed to the Sun all the day.
Set your Wine in a Viol of glass, and place it in a box made of wood, leather
or such like; about which Viol place Saltpeter, and it will preserve and keep
it very fresh: this experiment is not a little commodious, for these which are
not near fresh waters, and whose dwellings are much exposed to the Sun.

XXXVIII. How to melt Mettle very quick, yea in a shell upon little fire.
Make a bed upon a bed of Mettle, with powder of Sulpher, of Saltpeter, and saw
dust a like; then put fire to the said powder with a burning charcoal, and you
shall see that the Mettle will dissolve incontinent, and be in a mass: this
Secret is most excellent and often practiced.

XXXIX. How to make the string of a Viol sensibly shake, without any one
touching it.
This is a miracle in Music, yet easy to be experimented: take a Viol or
other instrument, and choose two strings, so that there be one between them;
make these two strings agree in one and the same Tune; then move the Viol bow
upon the greater string, and you shall see a wonder; for in the same time that
that shakes, which you play upon, the other will likewise sensibly shake,
without any one touching it; and it is the more admired, that the string which
is between them will not shake at all; and if you put the first string to
another Tune or Note, and loosing the pin of the string, or stopping it with
your finger in any feet, the other string will not shake: and the same will
happen if you take two Viols, and strike upon a string of the one, the string
of the other will sensibly shake.

XL. Of a Vessel which contains three several kinds of liquor, all put in at
one bung-hole, and drawn out at one tappe, severally without mixture.
The Vessel is thus made, i: must be divided into three Sells for to contain
the three liquors; which admit to be Sack, Claret, and Whitewine: now in the
bung-hole there is an engine with three pipes, each extending to its proper
Cell; into which there is put a broach or funnel, pierced in three places, in
such sort that placing one of the holes right against the pipe which answers
unto him, the other two pipes are stopped; then when it is full, turn the
funnel, and then the former hole will be stopped and another open, to cast in
other wine without mixing it with the other.

How to draw out also without mixture: At the bottom of the Vessel there must
be placed a Pipe or Broach, which may have three Pipes, and a Cock pierced with
three holes, so artificially done, that turning the Cock, the hole which
answers to such of the Pipes that is placed at the bottom, may issue forth
such Wine as belongs to that Pipe; and turning the Cock to another Pipe, the
former hole will be stopped: and so there will issue forth another kind of
Wine, without any mixture: but the Cock may be so ordered, that there may come
out by it two Wines together, or all three kinds at once: But it seems best,
when that in one Vessel and at one Cock, a man may draw several kinds of Wine,
and which he pleases to drink.

XLI. How to find the new and full Moon in each month.
Add to the Epact for the year, the month from March; then substract that
surplus from 30. and the rest is the day of the month, that it will be new
Moon; and adding unto it 14. you shall have the full Moon.

XLII. How to find at any time which way the wind is in ones Chamber, without
going abroad.
Upon the planching or floor of a Chambe^, Parlor, or Hall, that you intend to
have this device, let there come down from the top of the house, a hollow post,
in which place an Iron-rod, that it ascend above the house ten or six foot,
with a Vane or a Scouchen at it, to show the winds without: and at the lower
end of this rod of Iron place a dart which may by the moving of the Vane with
the wind without, turn this dart which is within: about which upon the plaster
must be described a circle divided into the 32 points of the Mariners compass,
pointed and distinguished to that end; then may it be marked by placing a
Compass by it; for having noted the North point, the East, and so forth, it is
easy to note out all the rest of the points: and so at any time coming into
this room, you have nothing to do but to look up to the dart, which will point
you out what way the wind blows at that instant.

XLIII. How to practice excellently the re-animation of Simples, in case the
plants may not be transported to be replanted, by reason of distance of places.
Take what simple you please, burn it, and take the ashes of it, and let it be
calcinated two hours between two creusets, well luted, and extract the salt,
that is, to put water into it, in moving of it; then let it settle, and do it
two or three times; afterward evaporate it, that is, let the water be boiled
in some vessel, until it be all consumed; then there will remain a salt at the
bottom, which you shall afterward sow in good ground well prepared; such as
the Theater of husbandry shows, and you shall have your desire.

XLIV. Of the admirable invention of making the Philosophers tree, which one
may see with his eye to grow by little and little.
Take two ounces of Aqua fortis, and dissolve in it half an once of fine Silver
refined in a Capel; then take an ounce of Aqua fortis, and two drams of
quicksilver, which put in it, and mix these two dissolved things together;
then cast it into a Viol of half a pound of water, which may be well stopped;
for then every day you may see it grow both in the Tree, and in the Branch:
This liquour serves to black hair which is red, or white, without fading until
they fall: But here is to be noted that great care ought to be had in anointing
the hair, for fear of touching the flesh; for this composition, is very
corrosive or scarching, that as soon as it touches the flesh, it raises
blisters and bladders very painful.

XLV. How to roast a Capon, carried in a budget at a Saddle bow, in the space of
riding five or six miles.
Having made it ready and larded it, stuff it with butter; then heat a piece of
steel which may be formed round according to the length of the Capon, and big
enough to fill the belly of it; and then stop it with butter, then wrap it up
well, and enclose it in a box in the budget, and you shall have your desire. It
is said that Count. Mansfield served himself with no others, but such as were
made ready in this kind; for that it loses none of its substance, and it is
dressed very equally.

XLVI. How to make two Marmousets, one of which shall light a Candle, and the
other put it out.
Upon the side of a Wall, make the figure of a Marmouset, or other animal or
form, and right against it on the other Wall make another; in the mouth of each
put a quill or pipe so artificially, that it be not perceived; in one of which
place Saltpeter very fine, and dry, and pulverised, and at the end set a little
match of paper; in the other place sulpher beaten small; then holding a candle
lighted in your hand, say to one of these images, by way of command, blow out
the candle; then lighting the paper with the candle, the Saltpeter will blow
out the candle immediately; and going to the other image (before the match of
the candle be out) touch the sulphur with it and say, light the candle, and it
will immediately be lighted, which will cause an admiration to these which see
the action, if it be done with a secret dexterity.

I have some things extraordinary, which I cannot communicate to any but them
that have need of my help, and will make use of me. What I have writ here, is
very good and necessary; yet know, my manual operation excels them beyond
proportion, in which I presume to be as expert in, as any man in Europe
whatsoever he be; as the approbation of some of the best Doctors of this age
shall justify, if need repaires.

I glory not in knowing or doing much, but in doing well that little which I
undertake, and the things which I undertake are these:

First, I draw out hollow Teeth or roots, though ever so short, with wonderful
dexterity, facility, and ease:

I make even, smooth, and plain, Teeth that are extravagant, or sharper, longer
or ruggeder then the rest.

Hollow Teeth that for some reason you would not have drawn, as the falling in
of the cheek, or an invincible apprehension or fear, or the like, I can stop
them so that they shall neither ache, putrify, nor smell ill.

I have the best secret in the world, absolutely and infallibly, to make Teeth
most perfectly white and clean, though they be ever so black or rusty.

Fore-teeth that are loose, I can fasten very well in less then half an hour.

I can set in Artificial Teeth so well, that none can possibly know them from
natural ones.

Finally, I cannot choose but convince their ignorance, that are against
drawing hollow Teeth or roots; their common foolish objection is, that I do it
more for my own profit, then the Patients ease. I say they may as well object
the same against all other Arts, Sciences, or Trades in the world; for it is
evident and clear, that the drawing of Teeth from others, is as necessary for
them, as the profit is for me; by reason that all the Art in the world, cannot
make a perished Tooth sound again, nor hinder it from infecting the next
adjoining teeth in time. Besides, hollow teeth breed often a stinking breath, a
canker in the mouth, and other diseases in the body, and their intolerable
aching is able to make a body fall into a dangerous Feavours; all which
inconveniences may be shunned by having such teeth and roots neatly drawn.
Lastly, if it be true, that it is good to take the broken from the whole, or
that one scabbed sheep may spoil a whole flock, or that it is good and
necessary to repair imperperfections of nature with art, then all that I have
said herein is true, and so I rest fully satisfied

An Excellent remedy for sore eyes.
TAke three ounces of the best Honey, an ounce of Venice Turpentine, and the
yolks of twelve eggs that has been roasted hard under hot ashes, then mingle
them in a dish pouring thereon the said Turpentine and Honey, and put them to
sees a little upon a soft fire, then press it in a press in the same manner
that oil of Almonds is made; this is called oil of Eggs, aod though there be
sundry other ways to make it, yet this is one of the best and easiest, however
it has a most admirable operation for curing of sore eyes, anointing them a
little therewith sometimes, especially at night going to bed.

The use and virtue likewise of Roman Vitriol, so called by some, by others the
Celestial or blew stone, is publicly known to be good for this and many
things else besides, yet let a thing be ever so good when it is once made
common it is not half so much esteemed as that which is not a quarter so good,
especially if it be dearer and harder to come by, such is the unsatiable
profitlesse curiosity of most people.

A Remedy for noise or buzzing in the ears.
TAke half a pint of good old white Wine in a Porrenger, and two ounces of
Roch Alum, put it to boil upon a Chafingdish, then hold your ear over it and
receive the smoke and vapor thereof into your ear as well as you can; finally
put two or three drops thereof into your ear and keep it stopped with black
wool or Cotton til you be cured; likewise drop sometimes two or three drops of
the joice of a Leek in your ear, keeping them stopped as before, this is
easy, and commonly cures the said noise in the head, and often restores
perfect hearing to many that accidentally have lost part thereof.

For Hemeroids or Piles.
TAke a fresh Eele roast it and with the dripping thereof annoint the afflicted
part osten, it helheth beyond expectation.

A cure for Corns.
STeep your feet (the space of a quarter of an hour, going to bedward) in warm
water wherein has boyld three or four sorts of sweet smelling Herbs, as
Rosemary, Time, Hi^op, Spearmint, or the like, then pare a little of the
outward hardest part of your Corns, having a care you cut not to the quick,
then apply the breadth of your Corn of this plaster upon each Corn, and as much
fine Leather upon that as will keep it from sticking to your stockings,
continuing and renewing this plaster as need requires for a whole week, it
will soften the very roots of your Corns, so that you may easily pick them out
with the point of a pen knife.

The use and virtue of my Powder for Teeth.
TAke as much as you can hold between your two fingers at once of this Powder,
and rub your Teeth well therewi^h, then take three spoonfuls of water, and half
a spoonful of Wine-vinegar mingled together, and wash your mouth and teeth
therewith: the best time to use this is in the morning, as often as you please,
or as necessity requires: this is as good to take away all rust, to divert away
the Rheum from the Teeth, and consequently to keep them perfectly white, as
any Powdet can be for this purpose.

To conclude as there is no man free from the aspersions and slanders of
envious tongues, so I shall think my self sufficiently vindicated that the
discreeter sort will suspend their judgment at the first view, until they
hear what others will say that have been under my hands, for I desire no other
praise save what they can justly give me: and though some out of ignorance,
malice, or both, cannot or will not make any distinction between an Operator
and a cheating Mountebanke, yet they nor no man can deny but that in all
vocations there are some honest men as well as knaves, both which I heartily
wish may prosper and fare as they deserve, and no otherwise.

FINIS.

