THE HUMBLE PETITION Of His Excellency THOMAS Lord FAIRFAX, AND THE General
Council of Officers OF THE ARMY under His Command: To the Honorable, The
COMMONS of ENGLAND IN PARLIAMENT, ASSEMBLED.

Die Sabbathi, 20 Januarii, 1648.
ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That the Petition of the
General, and the General Council of the Officers of the Army under His Command,
this day presented to the House, be forthwith printed.

H: Scobel, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

London, Printed for Edward Husband, Printer to the Honorable House of Commons.
Jan. 22. 1648.

To the Honorable, The COMMONS of England IN PARLIAMENT assembled: The humble
Petition of His Excellency Thomas Lord Fairfax, and the General Council of
Officers of the Army under His command.
IN our late Remonstrance of the 18th of November last, we propounded (next
after the Matters of public Justice) some Foundations for a general
Settlement of Peace in the Nation; which we therein desired might be formed and
Established in the nature of a general Contract, or Agreement of the People.
And since then, the matters so propounded being wholly rejected, or no
consideration of them admitted in Parliament (though visibly of highest moment
to the Public) and all ordinary Remedies being denied, we were necessitated
to an extraordinary way of Remedy; whereby, to avoid the Mischiefs then at
hand, and set you in a condition (without such obstructions or diversions by
corrupt Members) to proceed to matters of public Justice, and general
Setlement. Now as nothing did in our own hearts more justify our late
undertaking toward many Members in this Parliament, then the Necessity
thereof, in order to a sound Settlement in the Kingdom, and the integrity of
our Intentions to make use of it only to that end: So we hold our selves
obliged to give the People all Assurance possible, That our opposing the
corrupt closure endeavored with the King, was not in Design to hinder Peace or
Setlement (thereby to render our Employments as Soldiers necessary to be
continued) and that neither that extraordinary course we have taken, nor any
other proceedings of ours, have been intended for the setting up of any
particular Party or Interest, by or with which to uphold our selves in Power
and Dominion over the Nation; but that it was and is the desire of our hearts,
in all we have done (with the hindering of that imminent evil and destructive
Conjunction with the KING) to make way for a Settlement of the Peace and
Government of this Kingdom, upon Grounds of FREEDOM and SAFETY. And therefore
because our former overtures for that purpose, being only in general terms,
and not reduced to a certainty of particulars fit for practice) might possibly
be understood but as plausible pretenses, not intended really to be put into
effect, we have thought it our duty to draw out those generals into an entire
frame of particulars, ascertained with such circumstances, as may make it
effectively practicable: And for that end, while your time has been taken up
in other matters of high and present importance, we have spent much of ours in
preparing and perfecting such a Draught of Agreement, and in all things so
circumstantiated, as to render it ripe for your speedier consideration, and the
Kingdoms acceptance and practice (if approved) and so we do herewith humbly
present it to you. Now to prevent misunderstanding of our intentions therein,
we have but this to say, That we are far from such a spirit, as positively to
impose our private apprehensions upon the judgments of any in the Kingdom
(that have not forfeited their Freedom) and much less upon your selves; neither
are we apt in any wise to insist upon circumstantial things, or ought that is
not evidently Fundamental to that Public Interest for which you and we have
declared and engaged: But in this tender of it, we humbly Desire,

I.
That whether it shall be fully approved by you, and received by the people (as
it now stands) or not, It may yet remain upon Record before you, a perpetual
witness of our real intentions and utmost endeavors sor a sound and equal
Settlement, and as a Testimony whereby all men may be assured, what we are
willing and ready to acquiesce in, and their jealousies satisfied, or mouths
stopped, who are apt to think or say we have no Bottom.

II.
That (with all expedition which the immediate and pressing great affairs will
admit) it may receive your most mature Consideration and Resolutions upon it;
not that we desire either the whole, or what you should like in it, should be
by your authority imposed as a Law upon the Kingdom (for so it would lose the
intended nature of an Agreement of the People) but that (so far as it concurs
with your own judgments) it may receive your seal of Approbation only.

III.
That (according to the method propounded therein) it may be tendered to the
people in all parts, to be subscribed by those that are willing (as Petitions
and other things of a voluntary nature are) and that mean while the
ascertaining of those circumstances which it refers to Commissioners in the
several Counties, may be proceeded upon in a way preparatory to the practice of
it. And if upon the account of Subscriptions (to be returned by those
Commissioners in April next) there appear to be a general or common Reception
of it amongst the people, or by the well-affected of them, and such as are not
obnoxious for Delinquency, it may then take place and effect, according to the
Tenor and Substance of it.

By the Appointment of His Excellency and the General Council of Officers. JOHN
RUSHWORTH Secr'


FINIS.

