FOUR QVERIES RESOLVED FOR The Satisfaction of all men, who are not willingly
ignorant, Touching the late ARCHBISHOP:

I. What his Religion was, he so coloured-over at his Death? II. What His
Church was, he so bemoaned at that time? III. What his Confession was? IV. And
Prayer, which his brethren, in iniquity, do so approve-of at this day.
Concluded, that all those four are so many abominations before the Lord God,
and all Good men.

Imprimatur JAMES CRANFORD.

PSALM. 58. 12. Do ye indeed speak Righteousness, do ye Judge uprightly O ye
sons of men?

JOB 11. 13. Should a man hold his peace at thy lies.

LVKE 16. 15. That, which is Highly esteemed amongst men, is an abomination in
the sight of God.

Qui valde cum stultis congruit, ipse suspectus esse potest. Justitia, etsi
vitia tollere non possit, tamen hoc efficit, ut non laedant, Co: Ver:

Published according to Order.

LONDON, Printed for JOHN HANCOCK in Pope's Head Ally 1645.

Four Queries Resolved, Toching the late ARCHBISHOP.
READER:
TO Preface a little; I have set forth to the World a Breviate of the late
Archbishops doings in his life: and made a faitfull comment on his sayings at
his death. So much haste was desired in it, and such Brevity in all, That truly
some lines were omitted, which were prepared. And as his expressions were dark
and involved touching his Religion: so I was not so clear and full at that
point to the Readers satisfaction as now I shall be. And at one great point
about the Church of England, I mistook the Preacher, Blasphemer rather,
altogether: for running over that point hastily, I understood not the
incoherence of his words, as now I do, so I took the word Church in our sense
for the Church indeed: when as he meant the Bishops, the church in name, or of
Rome for under that notion (Church) has been meant these three hundred years
and more. It shall be called by that name no more, unless with this addition,
the Malignant Church. I took but half his confession neither: And for that the
Malignants may say, I have done him wrong. I Will make them amends now in clearing
before their eyes if they would see (but some will not see, and other-some
cannot see, now, having shut-out light so long;

1. What his Religion was. 2. What is the church he so bemoanes. 3. What his
confession 4. And prayer: And that these four, are four abominations before
the Lord God, and all good men: And shall be acknowledged by Malignants
themselves so to be, an abomination all four, if their eyes be not quite shut
up; Their hearts void of all grace, and their consciences past all feeling.

It will be said.

Why do I trouble the dead, raking, as it were, in his ashes; he is now lanched
forth into the Ocean of Eternity, entered into his unchangeable condititon;
Whether at rest there or restless, is not to be disputed; his judgment is
from the Lord, let the tongues of men and their pens suffer him to rest now
from all uncharitable Sensures, wherever he is. I answer. (1.) I have not
formerly, I do not now meddle with the dead. But for the sake of the living,
ever-living Souls, I deal in those matters, which live, and spread, eat and
consume like a canker, to the utter destruction of the unwise and ignorant (
viz.) The conceit vain men have, they are no other, of this late and last
Archbishops Religon, Church, Repentance, Prayer; of high esteem with vain men,
but abominations all four, as we said, before the Lord God, and his faitfull
servants. This was one mighty motive with me to do as I have done, not
censuring the dead, but condemning a Dead Religion, A false Church, An unsound
Repentance; A Confession of sin, and prayer forgivenes more abominable then any
of the former; That these may not be received, and approved, to the
condemnation and destruction of the living. (2.) Because the late Arch. B.
Sermon, as Malignants will call it (though as cunning a piece of Blasphemy, as
by the help of the Devil, was contrived this hundred years, all the reason
why the Devils firstborn sons, the Malignants, like it so well) is posted
over the Seas, there to speak Dutch, and French, (Italian it speaks already
pretty treatably) so to persuade all who meet with it, That, what ever this
late Archbishop was all his life long, yet he was an angel at his death;
which vain opinion may amuse and abuse the simple reader infinitely, it may
make him beleev that he may be the Devils servant, do the Devils work all
his life long: and die as a servant of the Lord dies, the death of the
Righteous. That I may prevent this dreadful mistake, I assure thee readed, i will
set down these matters (omitted before through too much haste) faithfully as
the Truth is, So help me God, the God of Truth, and leader into all Truth. And
when I have so done, i will post it over beyond sea also as fast as I can, in full
assurance, that if this paper happen into a wise man's hand, who has read the
said Sermon, he will find truth here, and there a Bishops Sermon indeed, if
not as full of Blasphemies as of leaves. Yet as full of falshods as of lines.

One word more before I come to the Resolves, I must in duty, and ought in
manners, forbear, as before, to set down how he quits his Judges, he chargheth
nothing in the least degree upon them, he said, not considering what he said:
for if there be any guilt in his Condemnation it must ly upon his Judges: But
he does indeed in a full and clear expression acquit his Judges, saying, They
proceeded by the clearest proof. He cleared his witnesses too, saying; They
were valuable witnesses: Yet most unwillingly did he do all this, as a man,
who could not give Glory to God, nor Honor to men. But his Judges and
witnesses all, are now acquitted indeed, as before in their own Consciences,
and in the Court of Heaven: so also before all the world, who will be at the
cost and pains to read their equitable proceedings throughout his whole
Arainment: And they that cannot be at that charges (as few can for our sins
and the Bishops wars have emptied our purses very much) will be so gracious,
I hope, as to conclude, That the Judge of all the world (whose Almighny Arm
brought this mighty adversary to the block) will do Right: and so charitable
they will be I hope, as to conclude also, That all the gods, the Lords under
judges here on earth, whom He has called together so unexpectedly, preserved
to this time so wonderfully, delivered so miraculously, as fire Brands out of
the fire, That these Judges, the highest one Earth, will do right also: So I
proced to the Resolves in Order, but beginning brokenly, because of the
Reference it makes to the Printed Coppie.

The first of the four queries Resolved.
Honor (Add) H would crouch down to the foot of that great Page 4. l. 19.
Lord, Kiss his hand, lick the spittle from his mouth (the manner of all
Lord Bishops would-bee) who had power to lift-him up toward that Pinnacle, and
to show him the Glory of the world there: He was this great man's Gregory
indeed, as the complement was, a Servant of Servants, to his Lord and Masters
Lusts; he was this Lords Vassal; his willing Slave, his any thing that his
great Lord was, or would have him to be.

I must here resolve a question, which some make, Touching this I.
man's Religion, and other such like Lord-wouldbees as was he; I. What Religion
was he of? What Faith did be profess? What Law did he hold to? What Gospel did
he preach or cause to be preached? What was his opinion touching Peace with
those, against whom the Lord God has sworn, He will have war for ever: Or
what was his opinion of War against those, with whom the Lord has sworn, and
will not repent, That He will have peace for ever and ever; What was his
opinion touching this War and this Pease? All these questions were resolved
in the breast of his Great Lord and Master one earth; As this Little-man yet
could resolve what his great Lord thought, so thought he: for what his great
Lord was, such was he, of his Lords Religion; of the same Faith with him; held
fast to the same Law, for liberty of Sports on the Lord's Day (though a law of
Sin and death) and the Same Gospel also; was of the same Judgment his great
Lord was of, both as touching Peace and War. Indeed, and all the Christian
world knows it to he so. This man molded Religion, Faith, Law, Gospel, War,
Peace, all to the fashion of the times; as his great Lord did so did he, and
it was his glory so to do: he could step out of one way into another, no
matter what way though the way of Death, so it was the way of preferment, and
lay in a direct line to the pinnacle he aspired unto.

For further confirmation hereof, and clearersatisfaction to the foregoing
questions, let us resolve our selves (1.) What his Court-Chaplaines were. (2.)
What his Civilians were, I mean, his Doctors, Proctors etc. in the Civil Law.
(3.) And all the Scholars in both Universities, I mean all and none other but
those all Bishop-would-bees, all that gaped after preferment by his means, and
to come through his hands:

(1.) What were these Court-chaplaines? The same this late Archbishop was,
when he was a Court-Chaplaine himself; of the very same Religion, Faith,
Gospel, Judgment also, touching the law for War, and Peace. God, Angels and
men will witness with me, That Such they were, as he was. These Chaplains
molded their Sacred Texts, so they do now, like a nose of Wax, to the mind
of their Lord, and fashion of the times, and then forced themselves to speak
scarce not more words than blasphemies against God, and His Holy Ones; Which
Chaplains and Doctrines this man had opposed with the same zeal, as Paul and
Barnabas showed at the hearing of Act. 14.
the like Insidels, had he had the least spark of love, or heat of that, in
his breast, we call true zeal for God, His Religion, His Faith, His Law, His
Gospel.

2 And for his Civilians, those that served his lusts, as I think the most
did; What they are now I cannot tell, for I know not where they are: But all
the Kingdoms knows what they were, as arrand -- I Will say no more touching
persons so notoriously known all over the land, burdens of the earth, plagues
and pests there.

(3.) And for the Doctors, Proctors and Scholars all I mean all, who loved
the wages of iniquity, hunted after preferment; Ah Lord, how did these mould
and fashion themselves to the forms and fashions of this great-man! Very Apes
they were, they would imitate him as they could; What he speak, they would
speak; What he did in point of service to the Church, they whould do; his
religion was theirs; his faith theirs; his law theirs; his Gospel theirs; his
gods theirs, of the very same zize and making! And as stout and stiff in
maintenance of those gods, and service to them Devils, I should say, (such they
are in Gods sight,) as he their Lord was. Indeed these all were and still are,
as firm and fast to this late Archbishop, as (if I might compare persons so
contrary) Ruth was to Naomie, as fast to his Forms, to the Laws of his house;
to his gods; to his services: They were fast friends, and walked together,
being of the same mind, and Judgment, in all matters till the last: only
there they differed; For where he died they would not die; nor would they
there be buried; which had been with the Burial of an Ass, had he had the
burial his life deserved; I had spoken more to this, but that the present
state and face of things speak the fullest answers to the forgoing questions,
yet for the satisfaction of all that are not willingly ignorant, so much I have
said: I proceed now to a conclusion of what I was saying, and all that knew him
will conclude with me: That he breathed after Preferment, molded and
fashioned himself, words and Actions, Religion, Faith, Gospel, all to the
Times; and most compendious ways, bearing-up towads that Pinnacle, He did as a
man that Loves the world, and deifies, makes a god of its Glory; And what
havocke he made of Faith and a good conscience, all wise men know. You will
say, etc. p. 4. l. 21.

Died with a Jest in their mouths; other some with an Oath there, others with
a Blasphemy there: And other died as he died with an, etc. l. 2. l. 21. All
wise men will.

The Seconnd Quere Resolved.
II. The Church of England is now in a Storm her self, and God knows,
whether or how it shall get out? This must have a twofold answer, for Church
has a twofold acceptance, the one in the Bishops sense, the other in ours;
Church in the Bishops acceptance is themselves; Archbishops and Lord Bishops
are the Church, the poor Church of England indeed. Doubtless that was his
meaning, and thus he bemoaned themselves. The Poor Charch of England is now in
a Storm. Indeed it is, and not one man that is a member of the true Church can
be sorry for that. And God knows whether or how it shall get out; He knows
indeed and He has assured His faithful servants that the Bishops shall never
weather it out: Their Seas shall work so High, and the Storm shall lie so long
upon them, till their Lordships shall be able to bear-up no longer: but sink
they must like a Millstone into the great waters. The men may find mercy, and
God grant they may, but their Lordships none at all. And this Poor Church (
the Bishops) is now fallen into a great deal of danger by her own. We grant
this also; The Archbishops and Bishops have more than endangered themselves,
they have done that which the Parliament, and all the Faithful servants in all
the world could not do against that cursed Hierarchy for the casting of it
forth; what the faithful could not do, they have done against themselves;
ruined themselves they have with their own hands; Their villainies, Their
Outrages, their Horrable Impieties, iniquities, Blasphemies against God and
man; by all these they have ruined themselves They Intraduced such
profaneness and irreligion, cloked all this While with the name of imaginary
Religion; They dwelt so much upon shadows that they have quite lost the
substance. These are his Page 12. line 7.
words and they must be understood of his Church, and no other, so he betrayed
himself with his own Tokens, and beat himself with his own staff: for as it
follows; They were so fixed upon their opinion, a conceit only, so fixed I
say, and so fully persuaded, That they the (Malignant) Church Should abide
Queen for ever; Their mountain was so strong, and they so strong upon it, That
they thought they should never be moved, Then they advanced their throne above
the Stars of God, and so ruined themselves, and their thrones for ever. He must
mean themselves under this notion Church, for his words are inconsistent with
any other Church but their own. Only these words clest as under as With wedges
cannot agree with their Church. Indeed on heed of that monstrous Church, which
has two, is cleft asunder from the body by the Death-mans Axe, as was Goliahs
head by the sword in David's hand: But the Bulkly body of that Church, and
members of the same are entire: and platted together they are all like thorns,
in a fast confederacy with the King of the bottomless pit: These Adversaries
are, as is said of the Leviathans scales, shut up together lob. 41 16
as with a close seal one so near to another that no Ayre-can come between
them; They are joined one to another, they stick together that they can not be
sundred: so here his old memory failed him. But though here are the turnings
and windings of the crooked Serpent; though he Doubles here, loving, as some
Beasts do, confus a vestigia, that we might not track him, or find him out,
yet we understood him very well, That he could bemoane none other Church but
his own; he could not bemoane the True Church at his death, whom he persecuted
heartily with his tongue and hand all his life long. He bemoaned his own
Church, whereof he was head; for thereunto his own words all along do agree,
congruous and consistent with that Church, and no other, the enemies themselves
being Judges; or if not they we indite them before the Judge of all the word,
in their ArchB, words, 1 That they, the Bishops, have introduced irreligion,
and profaneness, cloked under the guise or name of Imaginary religion; 2 That
they and only they, have quite lost the substance, while they dwelt too much a
great deal upon shadows ( in opinion) so that God would be served against this
command, and express will touching the way of His worship. And so it was of
the Lord, That their Church is in a storm indeed, and fallen into a great deal
of danger by her own; nay tuined now by their own hands, that sureiy the Prince
of Devils sat in council with them, when time was, else they could not have
consulted such shame to their own house, nor have taken such a ready way to
ruin themselves, and their thrones. I will conclude this mighty ruin of these
mighty Adversaries, once the Lords of the world, as Joshua does the ruin of
those mighty Kings: For it was of the Lord to hearden their heart, that they
should come against Israel in battle: and that they might hawe no favor, Josh.
11. 20.

So much to his first acceptance of this word church, in the Bishops
construction, themselves, a poor church indeed,

3. Now, as we understand the Church andin true construction the True church:
he would seem to bemoane it thus, The poor church of England is now in a
storm her self. And God knows whether or how it shall get out. God knows
indeed. But yet, blessed be his great Name, He has not left the case doubtful,
much less desperate, or hopeless, The Church has a promise, page 27. line 13.

Confessing his sin (Add) He acknowledges his sins great Page 33. line 29.
and many in the lump, but for his transgressions in particular he confesses
nothing at all, but that all he did was for the honor of God. If he did worry
any of the sheep of Gods pasture almost to death, he did in his zeal to bring
the sheep home unto his fold. And all the detestable things; he kept-in or
brought-in to his Churches, he did all to keep as uniformity in the external
service of God there. This an humble confession! The Lord knows it is a proud
confession, and which His soul abominates, But that is his confession to God,
no marvel he confesses not any wrong he has done to man; But if any mandoes
but conceive that I have offended him, I beg forgiveness of him: So he says;
If the faithfulest servants of the Lord, thrust-out of Gods house by this
Archbishops roughest hand, because they would not blaspheme God, and His name,
and His day, in that very house; If they did but conceive he had offended them
in this roughest and most violent dealing with them, then he begs forgiveness
of them, 2. If these servants of the Lord thrust-out of their house with their
wives and children; and turned into a wilderness to seek their bread there
amongst wild beasts, and salvages (whom the servants of the Lord found more
gentle than was his Lord-ship) if he had offended them by this hard dealing,
than he begs forgiueuesse of them, 3. If by taking away that the Scripture
means by the Quicquid hominis vitam ex necessitate tolerat Deuteronomy 24. 6
millstone, men's livelihoods, be an offense to any he begs forgiveness of them,
4 If his dealing with the most faithful servants of the Lord, as with the
vilest persons on earth; If degrading defacing, etc. if dealing with the
precious and honorable of the Lord, if dealing with these, as a mastiffe with
swine, if this, be an offense, then he asks forgiveness; [if an offense!]
But I forbear, that I may conclude his confession; If he had offended any by
ungodly deeds, which he had ungodly committed: or by hard speeches, which he (a
most ungodly sinner) had spoken against the Righteous, then he asked them
forgivenes, if they did but conceive he had so done. Reader, this is the
proudest acknowledgement that ever was heard of in the world. Cain, A truer
penitent by far, and Genesis 4 13.
and a more free acknowledgment he makes, though but of his punishment; It is
greater then I can bear: This man says, though the weight of the sentence
lies very heavy upon me, yet I am as quiet within, as ever I was in my life:
A cursed peace, and that was but of an hours lasting. Through the efficacious
and high working of a cordial potion he drank, they say, immediately before
he went forth to the Scaffold, after the manner of the Devils Martyrs. But read
Judas his confession, he confesses his sin without any if there, and he makes
Restitution also: This man cannot tell whether he has offended or not. I
conclude, That he did not humbly desire forgiveness, for he did not humbly ask
forgiveness of sins; But the contrary he did, as the proudest of sinners,
Irish Rebels, brethren in iniquity, whose rage the Lord God has cursed, and
now, by his Judges on earth, commanded to be cut asunder, and then hanged-up
before the Sun: So did he confess, as such sinners use to do, etc. Page 33.
last line but one.

Touching his prayer, I have spoken already, briefly, what the sacred IV.
Scripture gave me warrant to speak. I have not space to enlarge now; I add
this only; That his prayer is the highest provocation of all that went before,
and the greatest abomination. He prays for an heart to dye (1) for Gods
honor, whom he had dishonored all his life long; and now most presumptuously
at his death, giving no glory to Him at all. (2) For the Kings happiness,
Whom, by his wicked counsels, he has helped to make the most unhappie and
unglorious King, that now lives upon the face of the earth. (3) And this
Churches preservation. I grant This, in his meaning, not in his intent and
purpose, but by Gods gracious dispensation, preserving His Churches by ruining
This Church, the Bishops, and this Archbishop, Gods, and His Churches
Arch-Adversary, the Head of the same. So let all Thine Enemies perish, O Lord,
But let them that love Him, be as the Sun, when Judge. 5 21
he goes forth in his might.

To conclude, we understand now what this man's Religion was. 2 What his Church
is. 3 And we have read his Confession and Prayer full out. There is not one
truly wise man in the world, but says, all these four are so many
abominations. Yet there be some who would pass for wise men, but so they
cannot do: And would not be accounted Malignants neither (that cannot be) who
praise his doings and sayings, specially all he did and said at his death. Is
it possible that men will not remember themselves and show themselves men? If
they will not, I will resolve what they are also; They are of the Bishops
Religion; of his Church; and they verily think, that such 2 Confession of
sin, and such a Prayer for forgiveness, the late Archbishop made at his
death, will serve their turn too at that dreadful time. If they think so, and
that be their hopes, then they may hope well of Judas, in reference to his
Confession, for it is full and free, and no if there. And if this man's
acknowledgement of his Doings may be thought free and ingenuous, they may say
as much and more of the Devils acknowledgement of his ways before the Lord;
Whence come thou, Satan, said the Lord? Job 17.
The great Peripatetick of the world acknowledges, saying, sroin going to and
fro in the Earth, seeking whom to seduce, and to destroy there. The Devil is
summoned again, and he is before the Throne of the Lord; and the Lord said, Who
shall persuade the King, that he may go up to war, and fall there? I will
lays the Devil; And the Lord said unto him, wherewith? With a lie says he,
which I will put into 1 King. 22.
the mouth of all the Kings Prophets: give me but power, I have will enough,
and the King has Prophets enough, who will speak what I will: I will persuade
them, and they will persuade the King to his destruction. A very ingenious
acknowledgment of what he had a will to do; he was before the Lord, and then
always he speaks the Truth; he is as he is, no Angel of light then; He was a
lying-Spirit, from the beginning; he is the same still; and if he might have
power to his will, so and so he would do; power was given him, and so he did
persuade to his will.

This man was before the Lord too, as he said himself, before all His holy
Angels and men: but whether his acknowledgement of his ways before the Lord,
be full, and ingenuous, as the Devils was, let the Reader Judge. I could make
these words very parallel with the Bishops doings; But I will forbear there,
and to make any conclusion from thence. Nor shall I so much as look toward
Gods decree; The quickest sight therein is but blindness: Nor dare I thrust
him into the pit of hell, whom I saw Sometimes walking on the brinke thereof:
Nor set limits to infinite Grace, and Mercy, which may intervene and come-in,
inter pontem and fontem as we use to say.

But this I have clear warrant from the Sacred scripture to say.

(1) That JUDAS his Confession was more full and free than this man's was: And
that the Devils acknowledgment of his ways before the Lord exceeded this man's
acknowledgement also.

(2) And that we have not a word, no not one word in the Sacred Scripture,
wherefrom to conclude the salvation of this man so Confessing his sin, and
praying forgiveness of the same: And yet I deragate nothig at all from the
Height, Depth, Length, Breadth, of free mercy through the Lord Jesus Christ;
And let him that reads this consider on it if he will, and tremble if he can;
Tremble he shall one day, if he be persuaded in his heart, and to die in that
persuasion, That such a Religion, this late and last Archbishop was of, such a
CHVRCH, such a CONFESSION of sin, such a PRAYER for forgiveness will serve the
turn at that dreadful time.

It is spoken with a dear respect to thy dying, rather dead body, (the body is
dead because of sin) and never dying Soul.

An End.

