Four Great and Horrible MVRDERS, OR, Bloody Nevvs FROM ISLINGTON.

Being a Full and True Relation how a Woman's Brains were knocked out with her
own Pattin, Robbed, and her Throat Cut, on Friday the 5th of February Instant. A
Man beaten to Death the 8th of the same Month. And a Woman Drowned her self in
a Pond at Islington.

Likewise a Maid Barbarously Murdered at Chester by two Villains that would have
enticed Her to Leudness, for which they were Condemned at the Sessions there
held the 23. of January last, and Hanged, with their Confession at the place of
Execution.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1674.

Four Great and Horrible MURDERS: OR, Bloody News from Islington.
It Is an approved Maxim amongst Divines, That the Custom of slaning, takes
away the sense of it, which we may too truly apply to the particular Sin of
Murder, in this our barbarous Age, which is become so frequent and common,
that it is scarce reguarded or laid to heart by any but those immediately
Concernd in it; it is strange that that which is the most Crying and inhumane
crime in the world, should find such ready Entertainment, that persons should
be so given up to work wickedness, as to deface the image of their Creator, and
violate all L^ws Divine, Moral, and Civil, by diping their barbarous hands in
the blood of their brethren, we need not now search ancient Records, not turn
over Foreign Hystories, since every day almost, supplies us at home, with
fresh stories of dismal Tragedies, and one Parish, in one weeks time is stain
d^with no less than three horrible Murders Committed severrally and in
different manners.

The first was of an innocent Countrywoman, whose name and habitation is as yet
unknown, she was traveling toward London, and was seen in the Evening coming
along the further part of the Town of ^^ington, in Company with two men, one of
them carrying her pattins for her, A Footboy going accidentally near behind
them, overheard one of the men, ask her whether she was not afraid to go in
the Evenning, and whether she knew the way well, to which she replied
Innocently, that she was not at all afraid, as long as she had good company,
and that if she wear alone she knew the way pretty well; for she had traveled
it several times before, whereupon the man told her, he would show her a way
that was both cleaner and much nearer, this discourse the aforesaid Boy heard,
and has since testified, and further remembers not, but it is most Consentaneous
to Reason, to suppose that the poor woman was inveigled with these pretenses of
a better way, by these Villains out of the Road, into a place more fit for
their hellish purpose, for the next morning she was found, lying dead by the
Gravelpits in Islington, with her Throat cut, and a great Fracture in her
Skull, even to the Brain, it is thought as they came together, these unknown
Assassinates might understand by some means, that she had money about her, and
therefore having got her to this place, he that carried her Pattins, might with
one of them strike her on the head, and give her that wound on the Pericranium,
for the blow by the hurt seemed to be made by some such thing, and was
undoubtedly Struck with a good will, for her hat was cut through with it, and
that she was Robed, is apparent, for three farthings were found dropped upon the
brim of her hat, which it is very probably they let fall whilst they were
Riffling her in the dark, the person Murthred was a handsome Country woman, as
it is guest about Thirty years old, she had on a stuff Vest, and Petticoat, a
green Apron, and Lutestring Hood, and when she was laid forth by women, a
Gold-ring, was found in her shoe, she has bin seen and Cried at Barnet, but no
body knew her, or would own her, we wish this account of her mishapy Murder
may reach the Ears of her Relations, where ever they live, that they may know
how she came to her End; the Bloody Murderers are escaped under the Covert of
the Night, yet doubtless divine vengeance will in due time bring them to light,
that they may suffer according to their demerits.

The next Tragedy is that of a poor honest Laboring man, that lived in
Islington, near the Nags head, the manner was thus, on Monday last being the
Eighth of this instant February, he and one that usually workt with him as his
Partner, went industriously to their usual Employ which was Ditching, and as
they were honestly at their work, there came Two persons, that were Brothers,
and whethe^ they had any particular quarrel or prepensed malice against these
laborers, or either of them, or whether they (...) Drunck, and resolved to act
that Mischeivous (...) about this wicked town a Frollique, I cannot (...), but
so it was, that coming near they began to (...) the Ditchers with whole
Valleys of Clo^^s of ^irt, who finding themselves thus (...), demanded the
reason of such Hostillities, b^^ the over furious Assailants were not at
leisure to Answer, but gaining ground by nearer approaches, would needs fill up
the Ditch the men had been making, and to that purpose threw down the Ba^^
upon their heads, which they had before cast out, hereupon hard words did
arise, which were followed by harder blows, for in fine one of the Ditchers
(...) so mortified with beating, that he never spoke a word afterward.

The Third is of a poor Woman in the same Town, or one at least that had for a
night or two before her death-Lodged there, she had two Children, and was in
great want which it is thought was the occasion that she made away her self being
drowned in the Pond at Islington, It Is said that she told her Children when she
left them, that if any body inquired for her, they should say she was gone
because she wanted Victuals and Money, so sad a thing it is to despair, and
distrust the all satisfying Providence of God, well may we say ^o such
Repiners, let their Condition be never so mean or necessitous, in the sense of
our blessed (...) words, If your heavenly Father provideth for the Sparrows,
and cloth the Lillies of the Field, will he not much more supply you with
necessaries, oh ye of little Faith.

Our last scene is laid somewhat more remote, but no less true and altogether
as bloody, and in some respects more cruel than any of the former, being very
lately transacted near the City of Chester, where one Tho. Edwards and one
John Stevens of Warrington in the County were taken for Murdering one Jane
Made Servant of their Master Mr. John Gibson of Warrington aforesaid
Haberdasher, the occasion of it was that the Wench being handsome they often had
enticed and persuaded her to lewdness and dishonesty with them, but she not
yiedling thereunto, they invited her to a Tavern the next night after the last
Attempt, and were very merry there together for some time, and once were a
going out of the house the maid being very earnest to be gone home, but with
much Entreaty they persuaded her to go in again, and staid above in a Room
together about half an hour, and then the two men came down stairs and went
out, where upon the people of the house went up and found the maid on the Bed
as they thought asleep, but putting her in a Chair to see if she would come to
her self Imagining her to be overtaken with drink, they perceived she was dead,
and sending for the Constable Searched her, where they found in her left side a
Bodkin of Iron that they had Stobd her with, whereupon Warrants were made out,
and the two Murderers taken at supper and Committed, and at the
Quarter Sessions at Chester, held the 23. day of January last were arraigned
and Confessing the Fact Condemned to be Hanged, at their (...) they
acknowledged that one of them (...) out (...) his Handkerche^ whilst the (...)
as a (...), and that they had formerly (...) Servant-maid to steal some Plate
and sell it and give them the money, for which wicked Act the poor maid was
afterward so much troubled in conscience that she Poisoned her self, the
rather for that one of them in Consideration she would Commit that robbery had
promised her Marriage, which after he had got the money he refused to make
good, they also confessed that they had cheated their Master of many a Pounds
worth of Goods, and had deserved Hanging before that time.

Thus Reader, have thou here heard Several sad Examples, wherein Covetousness,
Revenge despair and lust all club to beget an horrid Murder, so great an
affinity there is between sins, that the Divil seldom sends them abroad alone,
let these wretched Presidents be our warning Lessons, that shunning such wicked
Crimes, we may avoid such deplorable Ends.

FINIS.

