Posthuma Fosteri: THE DESCRIPTION OF A RULER, Upon which is inscribed diverse
SCALES: AND The Uses thereof:

Invented and written by Mr. SAMVEL FOSTER, Late Professor of ASTRONOMY in
GRESHAM-COLLEDG.

By which the most usual Propositions in Astronomy, Navigation, and Dialling,
are facily performed. Also, a further use of the said Scales in delineating of
far declining Dials; and of those that Decline and Recline three several ways.

With the delineating of all Horizontall Dials, between 30 and 60 gr. of
Latitude, without drawing any lines but the Hours themselves.

LONDON: Printed by ROBERT and WILLIAM LEYBOURN, for NICHOLAS BOURN, at the
South entrance into the Royal Exchange, 1654.

TO THE READER.
COURTEOUS READER,
WE here present to thy view, this short TREATISE, (written by that learned
Professor of ASTRONOMY in Gresham College, Mr. SAMUEL FOSTER deceased)
containing in it the Description and Use of certain Lines to be put upon a
straight Ruler, in the ready solution of many necessary Questions, as well
Geometrical, as belonging to Astronomy, Navigation, and Dialling.

We should not thus hastily have thrust this into the World without its
fellows, had we not been assuredly informed that some people, greedy rather of
unjust gain to themselves, then with honesty to sit still, had prepared one for
the Press, from a spurious and imperfect Copy, both to the abuse of thee, and
discredit of the industrious Author: who had he thought such things as these
worthy him or the Press, could have daily crammed thee with them, to his own
loss of time, and thy satiety. However, such as it now is, we assure thee was
his own, and doubt not, but thou will find it pleasant in the use, profitable
to thee, and portable in it self.

We thought fit farther to advertise thee, that there are abroad in particular
hands, imperfect Copies of some other Treatises of the same Author: Namely, An
easy Geometrical way of Dialling. Another most easy way to project
houre-lines upon all kind of Superficies, without respect had to their
standing, either in respect of Declination or Inclination. A Quadrant fitted
with lines for the solution of most Questions of the Sphere: with some other
things of the like nature. We fear least sinister ends of some mean Artists, or
ignorant Mechanics, (for those of ingenuity in whose hands they may be, we no
way distrust) may engage them to father these things as their own, or at least
under the Authors name put out lame and imperfect Copies of otherwise good
things: To prevent which we give thee this timely notice, assuring thee, that
these, together with diverse other pieces never yet seen, except by very few,
and if we deceive not our selves, of much greater weight, are making ready for
the Press by the Authors approbation, and from his own Copy in our command,
with his other papers, of which thou shall be made partaker within few months.
In the mean time, we desire thee not to lose thy time in reading, or money in
buying any the forementioned Treatises put out by any other, either under their
own, or our Authors name, except such as shall be attested by me, who am one of
those entrusted for that purpose, and who shall be ever studious of thy good.

Grayes Inn, July 26, 1652. Edm. Wingate.

The description of the Scales on the Ruler.
THere are 9 Scales upon the Ruler.
1. Of Inches or equal parts. 2. Of Horizontall spaces: with 3. A Scale of 60
Chords fitted to the same Radius, proper to that Horizontall Scale. 4. A Scale
of Sines, to a Radius of two Inches. 5. A Scale of Secants: and 6. Of Tangents,
both of the same Radius with the Sines.
All these are upon one side. On the other side is,
7. A little Scale of 60 Chords, of the same length with the common Radius of
Sines, Secants, Tangents, and common in use to them all. 8. A large Scale of
Versed-Sines of the whole length of the Ruler, with a Zodiac annexed to it. 9.
A Scale of unequal parts divided into 90, noted with, of two Inches Radius as
is the line of Sines.
THE Uses of the SCALES on the RULER.
CHAP. I.
Of the Scale of equal parts.
THe Scale of Inches is a Scale of equal parts, and will perform (by
protraction upon paper) such conclusions as are usually wrought in Lines and
Numbers, as in Master Gunters 10. Prop. 2. Chap. Sector, may be seen, and in
others that have written in the same kind.

An Example in Numbers like his 10th. Prop.

As 15 to 5, So 7 to what?

Here, because the second term is less than the first, upon the line AB, I
set AC the first term 15, and AD the second term 5, both taken out of the
Scale of equal parts. Thence also the third number 7 being taken, with it
(upon the center C) I describe the arc OF, and from A, draw the line AE, which
may only touch that same arc. Then from D, I take DG, the least distance from
the line AE, and the same measured in the same Scale of equal parts, gives 2,
the fourth term required.

But if your second term shall be greater than the first, then the form of
working must be changed; as in this Example.

As 5 to 15, So 20 to what?

Upon the line AB, I set the second term 15, which here suppose to be AD: then
with the first term 5, upon the center D, I describe the arc GH, and draw AG
that may just touch it. Again, having taken 20 the third term, out of the same
Scale, I set one foot of that extent upon the line AB, removing it till it fall
into such a place, as that the other foot being turned about will justly touch
the line AG before drawn, and where (upon such conditions) it rests, I make
the point C. Then measuring AC upon your Scale, you shall find it to reach 60
parts, which is the fourth number required.

The form of work (though not so Geometrical) is here given because it is more
expedite than the other by drawing parallel lines. But in some practices, the
other may be used.

I have been the more large upon this, because the solutions of proportions
which follow must be referred hither, the form of their operations being the
same with this. In them therefore shall only be intimated what must be done in
general, the particular way of working being here explicated.

CHAP. II.
Of the Scales of Chords.
THe Scales of Chords are to protract and measure angles. The manner how they
must be used is well enough known.

Only note here, that you may make the line of Sines, the line of Versed Sines,
or the Zodiac, (beginning at the middle of these two last mentioned) to serve
for Chords of several extents, if you count each half degree for a whole
degree, and so double all the numbers, accounting 10 to be 20; and 30 to be 60,
45 to be 90, etc. By this you are fitted with several Scales of Chords which
are of different lengths, and may be used, each of them, as occasion shall
require. And (by the way) the Versed Scale being taken for Chords, it will be
of the same Radius or length with the Sines, Tangents and Secants and so will
protract Angles to a Circle of their Radius, which is useful in Projections,
and many other things: and so the little Scale of 60 Chords might be spared.

CHAP. III.
The joint use of equal parts and Chords.
BY these two together, may be resolved all Cases in Plain Triangles without
proportional work, if the three quantities given be protracted by help of
these two Scales. For their principal uses are to measure lines and angles.

Here must be remembered. First, that if the three angles alone be given, then
will the proportions only of the sides be found, but not the sides themselves.
Secondly, that if two angles be known, then is the third also known; because it
is the residue of the sum of the other two to 180 gr.

One case which is of frequent use may here be given for an example. In
mensurations of distances of places (as Towns or Forts) there are usually two
stations taken as A and B, whose distance AB suppose known, 300 feet, and the
two angles adjacent, at A 105 gr. at B 60 gr. known also by observation. To
find the other sides, draw AB, and upon it set 300 being taken from the Scale
of equal parts.

Then with a line of Chords protract the angles at A and B according to their
known quantities, so shall the two legs of the same angles meet at C: And if
the length AC be taken and measured upon your Scale of equal parts, the same
will show about 1004, intimating that C is from A 1004 feet. So again BC being
measured in the same Scale will give 1120; showing that from B to C are about
1120 feet.

In this manner may perpendicular altitudes (as of Towers or such like) be
measured, though no access can be had to them; and that much better than by
the Geometrical Square. For it is not here requisite that the ground whereon
the mensuration is made, should be level, as if you work by the Square it is
most commonly required; neither are you tied to right angled Triangles here, as
there you are. As for example,



If one station be at A, and the other at B, you may, by the precedent work get
the distance AD. Then (standing at A) observe the altitude of C, the complement
of that altitude gives the angle ACD. And again from A, if you observe the
altitude of D, the difference of these two altitudes observed, gives the angle
CAD. Or if D had appeared lower then your station, then the sum of your two
observed altitudes had made the angle CAD. However, you have now the three
angles and side AD; you may therefore, by help of them, find the length of CD.

In such manner may all cases in plain Trigonometry be resolved.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Scales of Sines, Secants, and Tangents.
THese being jointly used with a Scale of equal parts, will resolve all things
in plain Triangles, by working such proportions as are usually given for that
purpose. The manner of the work may be gathered by the former delineation in
the 1 Chapt. For if AC and AD had been taken out of the Scale of Sines, or
Tangents, or Secants; and CE, DG, out of the Scale of equal parts; then had the
work been resolved in Sines and equal parts, or Tangents and equal parts,
etc. And so this kind of work will produce the quantity required; although
there be no delineation of the particular parts of the Triangle, as was before
done by protraction.

By these same three Scales of Sines, Tangents, and Secants, may be wrought all
things pertaining to Sphericall Triangles. That is to say.

1. Proportions in Sines alone. 2. Proportions in Tangents alone. 3.
Proportions in Secants alone. 4. Proportions in Sines and Tangents together. By
natural Sines and Tangents. By and Versed-Sines.
5. Proportions in Sines and Secants together. 6. Proportions in Tangents and
Secants together.
An Example in Sines alone
What Declination shall the Sun have in the 10 gr. of Aries?
Upon the line AB (see Chap. 1.) set the Radius or Sine of 90 AC: and make AD
equal to the Sine of 10 gr. (which is the Suns distance from the next
Equinoctial point.) Then with the Sine of 23 (taken out of the same Scale of
Sines) upon the center C, describe the arc OF; to which, from A, draw the
Tangent line AE. Lastly, from D, to this line AE, take the least distance, the
same measured in the line of Sines, gives about 4 gr. for the declination
required.

The proportion that is here wrought stands thus. As the Radius, to the Sine of
23;
So the Sine of 10, to the Sine of 4 gr.


The like manner of work is to be used in Sines and Tangents (or any of the
other two) joined together; if it be remembered that the greater terms be kept
upon the line AB; as was before prescribed in the first Chapter.

CHAP. V. OF NAVIGATION.
Some things in this kind will be performed very conveniently by these lines:
As,
SECT. 1.
To make a Sea-chart after Mercators projection.
A Sea-chart may be made either general or particular; I call that a general
Sea-chart, whose line AE, in the following figure, represents the Equinoctial,
as the line AE there does the parallel of 50 gr. and so contains all the
parallels successively from the Equinoctial toward either Pole: but they can
never be extended very near the Pole because the distances of the parallels
increase so much, as the Secants do. But notwithstanding this, it may be
termed general, because that a more general Chart cannot be contrived in
plano, except a true Projection of the Sphere it self. And I call that a
particular Chart which is made properly for one particular Navigation, as if a
man were to sail between the Latitude of 50 and 55 gr. and his difference of
Longitude were not to exceed 6 gr. then a Chart made (as the figure following
is) for such a Voyage, may be called particular.

Now the making of such a Chart, is Master Gunters first proposition page 104
of the Sector, and this the line of Secants will sufficiently perform.

For it were required to project such a Chart: Having drawn the line AB, and
having crossed it at right angles with another line AE, representing the
parallel of 50 gr. you must then take the Secant of 51 from your Scale, and set
it from 50 to 51 on both sides the Chart, and draw the parallel 51 51.

Again, take the Secant of 52 from your Scale, and set it upon your Chart from
51 to 52, and so draw the parallel 52 52. And so you are to draw the rest of
the parallels.

Then for the Meridians, or divisions of the line BC, they are all equal to
the Radius.

If therefore you take the Radius, and run it above and below, you shall make
the spaces or distances of the Meridians such as in the bottom of the Chart
are figured with 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.

These degrees thus set on the Chart, may be sub-divided into equal parts,
which in the graduations above and below ought so to be. But in the graduations
upon the sides of the Chart, they ought as they go higher, still to grow
greater. Yet the difference is so small that it cannot produce any considerable
error, though the sub-divisions be all equal. Divide them therefore either
into 60 minutes, or English miles, or into 20 leagues, or into 100 parts of
degrees, as shall best be liked of.

It a little more curiosity should be stood upon for the graduations of the
Meridian, instead of the Secants of 51, 52, 53, etc. you may take 50, 51, 52,
etc. always half a degree less than is the Latitude that should be put in.

Now if each of those divisions at the bottom of the Chart, as A 1, etc. be
made equal to the common Radius of the Sines, Secants, and Tangents, and if a
Chart be made to that extent upon a skin of smooth Velame; well pasted on a
board; you may work upon it many conclusions very exactly.

The Uses of the Sea-Chart
Are set down in 12 Propositions by Master Gunter, beginning page 121. In each
of which Propositions is showed how to resolve the Question upon the Chart it
self, which will be direction enough how the work must be performed, without
any more words here used.

The working of these propositions also may be applied to the Scales of Sines
and Tangents, on the Ruler, and wrought by protraction, according to the rules
given in the first Chapter, if the proportions, as he lays them down in the
forecited pages, be so applied.

If a Scale of Rumbs be thought more expedient for these operations then is a
Scale of Chords, it may be put into some spare place of the Ruler.

His two Propositions, page 114. 116, may be done upon the Chart as is there
showed, but his second Proposition, which is,

SECT. 2.
To find how many Leagues do answer to one degree of Longitude, in every
several Latitude.
THis (I say) may be done upon the Scales of Sines and equal parts: And for
this purpose, the two last inches of the same Scale of equal parts, being
equal in length to the Radius or Sine of 90, are divided into 20 at one end,
and into 60 at the other end.

Take therefore upon the line of Sines, the complement of the parallels
distance from the Equator, (or the complement of the given Latitude) and
measuring it upon the Scale of 20 parts, it will show you what number of
Leagues make one degree of Longitude in that parallel of Latitude. And being
measured upon the Scale of 60 parts, it gives so many of our miles, or so many
minutes of the Equinoctial, or any other great circle, as are answerable to
one degree of Longitude in that Latitude.

Example,
Let it be required to find how many Leagues do answer to one degree of
Longitude, in the Latitude of 18 gr. 12'.

Take out of the line of Sines, the complement of the given Latitude, namely.
71 gr. 48'. Then applying this distance to the Scale of 20 equal parts, you
shall find it to reach 19, and so many Leagues do answer to one degree of
Longitude, in the Latitude of 18 gr. 12'.

And the same distance being measured upon the Scale of 60 equal parts, will
give you 57 parts, and so many minutes of the Equator are answerable to one
degree of Longitude, in that parallel of Latitude.

So likewise, in the Latitude of 25 gr. 15', if you take the complement thereof
64 gr. 45', out of the Scale of Sines, and apply it to the former line of 20,
you shall find it to reach 18 parts, and so many Leagues do answer to one
degree of Longitude, in the Latitude of 25 gr. 15'.

In the Appendix to Master Norwoods Doctrine of Triangles, there is by him laid
down 15 Questions of sailing by the plain Sea-chart, and others by Mercators
Chart, all which the line of Chords and equal parts will sufficiently perform,
if the work of the third Chapter of this Book be rightly understood.

SECT. 3.
How to set any place upon your Chart, according to its Longitude and Latitude.
IF the two places lie under one parallel, and so differ only in Longitude,
then the course leading from one to the other is East or West: As A and E being
two places under the parallel of 50 gr. and differing 5 gr. in Longitude.

But if the two places differ only in Latitude, and lie under one Meridian, as
A and B, then the course is North or South.

But if the places differ both in Longitude and Latitude as AC, then the course
is upon some other point so much distant from the Meridian, as is the quantity
of the angle BAC.

CHAP. VI.
Of Projections of the Sphere.
FOr this purpose chiefly, is the lesser line of Chords added, being made to
the same Radius that belongs to the Sines, Secants, and Tangents. For when any
Projection is to be made, the fundamental Circle must be of that common
Radius, and then the angles to be inserted upon it may be taken out of this
line of Chords which is fitted to it. See the second Book of the Sector, Chap.
3. For these Tangents and Secants will perform the same things in those
Stereographicke projections that there are done; and in all other irregular
projections likewise.

By this kind of work may any Sphericall conclusions be performed by
protraction in plano. Also true Schemes of the Sphere may be drawn, suitable to
any question, which will not a little direct in Sphericall calculations.

As suppose it were required to project the Sphere suitable to this Question.

Having the Latitude of the place, the declination of the Sun, and the Altitude
of the Sun, to find either the Azimuth or the hour of the day. First, With
the Radius of the line of Chords, upon the center C describe the fundamental
Circle ZHNO representing the Meridian, and draw the diameter HO for the
Horizon, and ZCN at right angles thereto, ZN being the Zenith and Nadir points.
Then by your line of Chords set the Latitude of your place (which let be 51 gr.
32') from Z to E, and from N to Q, drawing the line ECQ for the Equinoctial,
and at right angles thereto, the line MP for the axis of the World, P
representing the North, and M the South Pole

Secondly, Supposing the Sun to have 20 gr. of North Declination, take 10 gr.
(the Semitangent of the Declination) out of the line of Tangents, and set it
from C to G. Likewise, take 20 gr. (the Declination) from your line of Chords,
and set that distance upon the Meridian from E unto D, and from Q unto K: then
describe the arc of a Circle which shall pass directly through the points
DGK, the center whereof will always fall in the line CP if it were extended,
and this arc DGK shall be the line of the Suns course when his Declination is
20 gr. from the Equinoctial Northward.

Thirdly, Supposing the Altitude of the Sun to be 50 gr. take 25 gr. (the
Semitangent of the Altitude) out of the line of Tangents, and set that distance
from C to F. Also take 50 gr. (the Altitude) from your line of Chords, and set
them upon the Meridian from H unto A, and from O unto B, drawing the arc AFB,
the center whereof will fall in the line CZ being extended, and this arc shall
represent the Almicanter of 50 gr. And where this parallel of Altitude crosses
the parallel of Declination, which is at S, that is the place of the Sun at the
time of the Question: Therefore, if you draw the arc of a circle which shall
pass through the points MSP, it shall represent the hour of the day; and
another arc through ZSN shall represent the Azimuth of the Sun at the same
time. And the distance CT being measured on the Tangent line will fall upon 20
gr. 4', the double whereof is 40 gr. 8', which is the Azimuth of the Sun from
the East or West, and the complement thereof to 90 gr. is the Suns Azimuth from
the South.

1. The centers of the parallels of declination, and of the parallels of
altitude, may readily be fouud by the Scale it self; as in this projection,
having found the point F upon the Line ZC, extend the line ZC without the
circle, and because the Suns altitude is 50 gr. take therefore out of your
Scale the Secant of 40 gr. (the complement of the Altitude) and set that
distance from C to I, so shall the point I be the center of the parallel of
Altitude.

Or take the Tangent of 40 gr. out of your Scale and place it from F to I,
either of which will fall in the point I, the center of the parallel of 50 gr.

In the same manner may the center of the parallel of Declination be found, by
taking out of your Scale the Secant complement of the Declination, and setting
it from C, upon the line CP, (being extended) and where that distance ends,
that is the center of the parallel.

Or the Tangent complement of the Declination being set from G on the line GP
shall give the center also.

2. For the finding of the centers of the Hours and Azimuths, the Scales of
Secants and Tangents will much help you; So the Azimuth from the South being 49
gr. 52', if you take the Tangent thereof out of the Scale of Tangents, and set
it upon the Horizon from C to L: the point L shall be the center of the circle
NTZ.

Or the Secant of 49 gr. 52' being set from T, that also shall give you the
center Las before.

The center of the Houre-circle is found in the same manner, for the hour from
the Meridian being 31 gr. 28', if you take the Tangent thereof our of your
Scale, it shall reach from C to R, the point R being the center of the
Houre-circle MVSP.

Or the Secant of 31 gr. 28', being set from V, shall give the point R for the
center of the same hour. And in this manner may any Hour or Azimuth
whatsoever be drawn.

Many other propositions in Astronomy, may be wrought upon this projection,
and indeed any of the 28 cales of Sphericall Trigonometry, may by this kind of
projection be easily illustrated and resolved, which will clearly inform the
fancy in the resolving of Sphericall Triangles. An Example or two for practice
shall be,

1. To find the Suns Amplitude.
In this projection, the Amplitude from the East or West is represented by the
line CX, take therefore the distance CX in your compasses, and apply it to the
line of Tangents, (counting every degree of the Tangents to be two degrees) and
where it rests, that shall be the Amplitude from the East or West, which will
be found to be 33 gr. 22x.

Or if you lay a Ruler upon Z and X, it will cut the Circle in Y, and the
distance NY being measured on the line of Chords, shall give the Amplitude also.

2. To find the distance of the Sun from the Zenith.
The distance of the Sun from the Zenith is the arc Z S, therefore to find
the quantity thereof, you must first find the pole of the circle NS Z, which
is done after this manner.

Lay a Ruler from Z to T, and it will cut the circle in a, then take in your
compasses a quadrant of the outward circle, and set it from a to b, then lay a
ruler from Z to b, and it shall cut the Horizon in e, which point e is the pole
of the circle ZTN.

Now to measure the arc Z S, you must lay a ruler upon e and S; which will cut
the outward circle in the point A, so shall A Z, being measured upon the line
of Chords, give you the quantity of degrees contained in the arc Z S, which
will be 40, equal to the complement of the Suns Altitude.

This latter proposition was inserted rather to show how the arc of any great
Circle of the Sphere (the sides of all Sphericall Triangles being such) may be
measured, then for any need there was to find the distance of the Sun from the
Zenith, for that mighe have been more easily effected, it being only the
complement of the Suns Altitude; but according to this operation, may the side
of any Sphericall Triangle whatsoever be measured.

The line of Sines also will project the Analemma, as Master Gunter shows, if
this proposition be added.

How to divide any line given, into such parts as the Scale of Sines is
divided. Which proposition may be done by that which is set down in the 1
Chapt. For if AD mn C were parts or divisions made equal to those upon the
Scale of Sines, and CE were a line in the same manner to be divided: After you
have prepared your work as is there prescribed, you need only to take the least
distances between the points C nm D and the line AE, and insert the same into
your given line, so shall the divisions thereof be proportional to the line of
Sines.

CHAP. VII.
Of the line of Versed-Sines.
THe general use of this Scale is principally to resolve these two Sphericall
Cases. First, By having three sides of a Sphericall Triangle, to find an
angle. Secondly, By having two sides and the angle comprehended, to find the
third side. According to which two general cases you shall find particular
examples; namely, the first and third Sections of this Chapter suitable to the
first Case: and the 5 Section answerable to the second.

SECT. 1.
To find the Suns Azimuth.
FIrst, Find the sum and difference of the complement of your Latitude, and
complement of the Suns altitude. Then having made AB equal to the length of
the whole Scale, count upon the same Scale the sum and difference before
found. After this, take with your Compasses the distance from the Suns place to
the sum, and setting one foot of that extent upon B, with the other describe
the arc CD. So again, take the distance upon the Scale from the Suns place to
the difference, and with that extent upon the center A, describe the arc OF:
Which done, draw the straight line DE, so as it may justly touch those two
arks, cutting the line AB in G: so shall BG (being measured upon the Scale,
from the beginning of it) show the Azimuth from the South. And AG measured upon
the same Scale will give the Azimuth from the North.

SECT. 2.
To find the Amplitude of the Suns Rising or Setting.
IF you suppose the Sun to be in the Horizon, or 00 gr. high, and so the
complement of the Altitude to be 90, and if (upon these suppositions) you work
as in the last Section is showed, then shall BG give the graduall distance of
the Suns rising or setting from the South; AG from the North, and from the
midst of the line to G, is the Amplitude from East or West.

SECT. 3.
To find the hour of the Day.
MAke AB equal to the whole Scale, as before: and count from the beginning of
the Scale to the Suns place what number of degrees there are; the same number
shows the graduall distance of the Sun from the North Pole. Of this distance
and the complement of your Latitude, find the sum and difference, and count
them both upon the Scale, as was done before. Then again, count thereon also
the complement of the Suns altitude: Upon which point, setting one foot of your
Compasses, extend the other to the forenamed sum; and with that extent upon
the center B describe the arc CD. Again, setting one foot of your Compasses
upon the complement of the Suns altitude, extend the other to the forenamed
difference, and with that extent upon the center A, describe the ark OF.
Lastly, draw the straight line DE, which only touching the two former arks, may
cut the line AB in G: so shall AG (measured on the Scale, from the beginning of
it) give the degrees of the Suns distance from the South. These may be turned
into hours, counting 15 gr. for one hour, and 1 gr. for 4 minutes of an hour.

SECT. 4.
To find the Semidiurnall and Seminocturnall arks.
IF you suppose the Suns altitude to be 00 gr. and so the complement of it to
be 90, and then work as is directed in the 3. Sect. of this Chap. then shall AG
give the Semidiurnall arc, and BG the Seminocturnall arc: Each of these
turned into Hours and minutes, and doubled, will give the length of the Day
and Night.

SECT. 5.
The Suns place being assigned in any point of the Ecliptic, to find his
Altitude at all hours.
BY this, may Tables of the Suns Altitude be made to all hours, the Sun being
in any Sign of the Zodiac, whereby many particular Instruments for finding
the hour of the day, may be made, as Rings, Quadrants, Cylinders* and such
like.

Draw the line AB, and upon it, with CA or C B, equal to half your Scale,
describe a Semicircle. Then count upon your Scale the Suns distance from the
North Pole, as was done in the 3. Sect. of this Chapt. and in the same manner
also find the sum and difference of this distance and the complememt of your
Latitude. Then take the distance of the said sum and difference in your
Compasses, and set it upon the Semicircle from A to D, and draw BD. Now because
AB is equal to your whole Scale, you may divide the same into hours, by
transferring each 15' gr. from your Scale to the line. This done, take the
least distance from the point 1 to the line BD, and set one foot of this
distance upon the forenamed difference counted upon the Scale, and let the
other foot stand further onwards upon the Scale, and where it falls, it shows
how many degrees that hour of 1 is distant from the Zenith. Or if you count
the degrees from the middle of the Scale, it shows the Altitude of the Sun in
that Hour. Thus do for the points of 2, 3, 4, etc. and you shall in the same
manner find their Altitude: And if you go on to the end, you shall (most
commonly) find your Compasses at last to reach beyond the middle of the Scale.

[This always, and then only, happens, when the sum (found at first) is
greater than 90 gr.] Look then how much it is beyond, for so many degrees is
the Sun below the Horizon at that hour of the night: Or (which is all one) so
many degrees is the Sun elevated above the Horizon in that Sign or point of
the Eclipticke which is so much on the other part of the Equinoctial. That is,
If the Suns place given were the beginning of Taurus or Virgo, and your
Compasses (suppose at the 9th. hour) go beyond the 90th gr. of the Scale, you
shall there see how low the Sun is under the Horizon at 9 a clock at night, or
at 3 in the morning. And the same also shows how high the Sun is at 9 in the
morning, or at 3 afternoon, if his place were in the entrance of Scorpio or
Pisces, which two Signs are so much beyond the Equinoctial on the other part,
as Taurus and Virgo are on this side.

SECT. 6.
All Proportions in Sines alone, where the Radius stands first, may be wrought
upon this Scale, without any protraction at all.
THe manner of the work will best appear by an Example. Let the proportion set
down before in Sines alone be here repeated. The terms stand thus: As the
Radius, to the Sine of 23;
So the Sine of 10, to the Sine of what?
Take the sum and difference of the second and third arks, the sum is 33 the
difference is 13: count these both upon the Scale, and there take their
distance: apply the same to the middle of the Scale; so as that the same number
of degrees may be above 90, that is below; so shall the degrees either above or
below, be about 4; and this is the Sine required for a fourth proportional to
the former.

CHAP. VIII.
How to work proportions in Sines and Tangents, by the lines of Versed-Sines
and.
DEscribe a Circle, as ABD, of the same Radius with the line. The Versed Scale
is in length four times the same Radius.

Let the Sines (given or required) be measured out of, and let them be set upon
the Radius from A, to AC or AE.

Let the Tangents (given or required) be measured out of the Versed Scale, from
90 to 00, or to 180, which are 90 Chords belonging to 90 equal parts of the
Semicircle ABDP, and the same Tangents must ever be set upon the Circle from A,
as AB, AD:

Then draw a right line through the first and third of the given terms, as from
B and C to O; and another right line from O to D or to E.

So the fourth term required shall be either the Sine AE, or the Tangent AD,
each to be measured in its proper Scale.

If the Radius be ingredient in the proportion, then this of Sines and Tangents
may be wrought by the draught of one line: see this third Scheme. The Sine is
to be taken or set on the Radius from A, as AF, the Tangents are to be set and
taken upon the Circle (in this case always) the lesser of them from A, the
greater from P; as AG and PH. So that whatsoever is given or required will here
be found.

The further use of this line is shown afterward in the making of declining
reclining Dials.

CHAP. IX.
To find the declination of a Plain.
TO effect this, there are required two observations: the first is of the
Horizontall distance of the Sun from the pole of the plain, the second is of
the Suns Altitude, thereby to get the Azimuth. And these two observations must
be made at one instant of time, as near as may be, that the parts of the work
may agree together the better.

1 For the horizontall distance of the Sun from the pole of the plain: Apply
one edge of a Quadrant to the plain, so that the other may be perpendicular to
it, and the limb may be toward the Sun, and hold the whole Quadrant
horizontall as near as you can conjecture: Then holding a thread and plummet at
full liberty, so that the shadow of the thread may pass through the center and
limb of the Quadrant, observe then the degrees cut off by the shadow of the
thread, and number them from that side of the Quadrant that stands square to
the plain, for those degrees are the distance required.

2 At the same instant observe the Altitude of the Sun, these two will help you
to the plains declination by the rules following.

First, By having the Altitude, you may find the Azimuth by the 1. Sect. of
the 8. Chap. then by comparing the Azimuth and distance together, you may find
the plains declination in this manner.

When you make your observation of the Suns horizontall distance, mark whether
the shadow of the thread fall between the South and that side of the Quadrant
which is perpendicular to the plain. For,

1. If the shadow fall between them, then the distance and Azimuth added
together, do make the declination of the plain, and in this case, the
declination is upon the same coast whereon the Suns Azimuth is.

2. If the shadow fall not between them, then the difference of the distance
and Azimuth is the declination of the plain, and if the Azimuth be the greater
of the two, then the plain declineth to the same Coast whereon the Azimuth is:
Otherwise, if the distance be the greater then the plain declineth to the
contrary Coast to that whereon the Suns Azimuth is.

Note here further, that the Declination so found is always accounted from the
South, and that all Declinations are numbered from either South or North toward
either East or West, and must not exceed 90 gr.

1. If therefore the number of declination exceed 90, you must take the residue
of that number to 180 gr. and the same shall be the declination of the plain
from the North.

2. If the number of declination do exceed 180 gr. then the excess above 180
gives the plains declination from the North, toward that Coast which is
contrary to the Coast whereon the Sun is.

And here note, that wheresoever in this Chapter the use of a Quadrant is
required, the Scale of Chords will effect the same; if upon a piece of plain
board you describe a Quadrant, whose sides may be parallel to the edges of the
board, upon which you may set off the Horizontall distance and Altitude, which
will perform the work thereof when a Quadrant is not at hand.

CHAP. X. OF DIALS.
To draw upright declining Dials, by the lines of Sines and Tangents.
THe declination of the plain being found by the last Chap. Upon your plain
describe a rectangled parallelogram, in which let the sides AB and CD be
perpendicular to the Horizon, and each of them equal to the Tangent of your
Latitude: and let AC and BD be equal each of them to the co-tangent of your
Latitude, and let BD be prolonged if need be.

Then taking that side of the parallelogram (for the hour of 12) which looks
toward that coast unto which the plain declineth, as here namely, the side AB;
and on that line having assumed the superior angle A in
South-declining-plains, or the inferior in North-decliners, for the center of
your Dial: Let BE and CG be made equal to the Sine of the plains declination,
so AE being drawn, shall be the substilar, and AG shall be the hour of 6. Then
from E, raise OF perpendicular to AE, and make A 12 and OF equal to the
cosine of the declination: and if you draw AF, the same shall represent the
Axis, and the angle FAE shows how much the same is to be elevated above the
substylar. Again, make AH equal to the cosine of your Latitude, and draw H6
parallel to AB; which will cut AG in the point noted with 6. To this A6, let A6
also beyond the center be made equal, and then draw the lines 12 6 and 12 6,
which lines must have the hour points set upon them; and to perform that
work do thus.

Draw upon paper, or some other plain, the line LM, upon which set LR and RM,
each of them equal to your Tangent of 45 gr. Then make RN equal to the
Tangent of 30, and TO equal to the Tangent of 15, so shall you have points to
find all the hours, and if you desire halves and quarters, you must also put
their Tangents into the same line RM. Being thus prepared, if you would divide
the lesser line 12 6 into its requisite parts, take the same line in your
Compasses, and with it, upon L as a center describe the arc PQ, and from M
draw MP, which may only touch the same arc. Then from N take the least
distance to the line MP, and the same will reach from 12 to 11, and from 6 to
7; so the least distance from O to the line MP, will give from 12 to 10, and
from 6 to 8. And the least distance from R will reach from 12 or 6 to 9.

In the same manner you must divide the larger line 12 6. Take it out of your
Dial, and with it describe the arc ST from the same center L, and draw MS
touching only the same arc. Then the least distances from N, O, R, to the line
MS, will give the points or distances 12 1; 6 5; and 12 2; 6 4; and 12 3; or 6
3. These upon the South-decliner; the like may be done upon the North-decliner.
Lastly, from the center A, through these points you must draw the Houre-lines.

An upright plain declining from the South toward the East, 30 gr.



An upright plain declining from the North toward the East, 30 gr.



In both these Plains.
a rectangle parallelog.
AB=tang. Lat. BD=co-tang. lat.
BE=CG=sine declination. A12=OF=cosine declina. AH=cosine lat. A6=A6.
RL=RM=tang. 45. RN=tang. 30. TO=tang. 15.
CHAP. XI.
Of the Horizontall and full South Dials.
THese are done more easily, for having made ZX for the line of 12, and WV
perpendicular thereto for the two sixes, in them both make ZX equal to the
Radius, and in the Horizontall let ZV and ZW be equal (each of them) to the
Sine of your Latitude: in the South plain let ZV and ZW be (each of them)
equal to the cosine of your Latitude. Then draw the lines XV and XW, and
divide them as was now showed in the declining plains; so may you from the
center Z, and these points, draw all the hours, as you see in these figures.

The Styles are to stand over the line of 12: that in the Horizontall must be
elevated so much as your Latitude comes to; the other according to the
complement of your Latitude.

The upright North plain is the same with the South, only turned upside down,
and the course of the figures altered.

The East and West upright plains may be made by the Tangent line, in such
manner as others have prescribed.

CHAP. XII.
Of the Scale of Horizontall Spaces.
FOr the Horizontall plains in special, there is a peculiar Scale by which the
hours may suddenly be described, to any Latitude between 30 and 60 degrees.

The manner of which work is easy. For you have the numbers from 30 to 60 five
times repeated, serving for the five hours in so many Latitudes. Suppose then
a Horizontall Dial were to be described for the Latitude of 51 gr. First, by
the Radius (which is from the beginning of the line to R) describe a Circle,
and draw the line of 12 from the center. Then take from the beginning of the
line to VI, and set it in the Circle both ways from 12, these two are the
points of the two sixes. Again out of the same Scale take the length from the
beginning to 51 in the remotest numbers, and set that upon the Circle on both
sides 12, these are the points of 5 and 7. So from the beginning of the Scale
to 51 in the next remotest numbers, being set as the other were, will give the
points of 4 and 8. The third 51 will give the points of 3 and 9. And the fourth
gives 2 and ^0. The last gives 1 and 11.

The Chord line that is fitted to this Horizontall Scale, is of good use in
other delineations: But the further use of these two jointly, must be referred
to another place.

CHAP. XIII.
How to draw upright declining Dials when the Latitude of the place is very
little or very great.
IN the work of the 10 Chap. it may fall out that either the Tangent or
co-tangent of the Latitude may be too great, such as the Scale will not afford.
This will frequently fall out in the new Latitude of re-in-cliners: to remedy
that inconvenience, I have added these helps.

Where the Latitude is but small


A rectangle parallelo.
1. AB=CD=tang. of Latit. 2. BD=AC=Radius.
3. BE=CG=Sine declination. 4. A12=OF=cosine of declination. 5. AH=consine of
Latitude. 6. H mAB. 7. Draw EG, it will cut CD in K. AK is the line of six: it
cuts H m at 6, make A6=A6, on both sides, and draw 12 6; 12 6; and divide them
as the other are in the 10 Chap.
Or you may draw BC the Diagonall, and EK thereto, and so omit CG.

Or you may make the DEK=to your Latitude, and so omit the two former.

Or thus.
After the 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, you may omit the 6. Then 7thly. Draw EG it will cut
CD in K, and AK is the line of six.

Then lay a Ruler from 12 to H, cutting DC in L.

Make 12M=CL, and AN=AK.

So shall KM, MN, be to the two former lines 6 12; 6 12; and may supply their
Offices somewhat better, because they are larger.

Where the Latitude is great.
a rectangle parallelogr.
1. AB=CD=Radius, 2. BD=AC=co-tang. lat.
3. BR=CG=Sine declination. GR a right line cutting DB in E. AE Substilar. AG
hour of 6. 4. GP=RT=A12=cosine of declination. TP a right line, cutting BD in
O. AEF a right angle. 5. OF=EO. AF the Style. 6. AH=cosine Latitude. HmAB,
cuts AG in 6. A6=A6, on both sides. Draw 6 12; 6 12, etc. Or after the 1, 2, 3,
4, 5. 6. Draw 12 H, it cuts DC in L. Make 12 M=LC: and AN=AG. Then GM, MN shall
be to 6 12; 6 12: and may therefore supply their uses.
CHAP. XIIII.
Concerning Reclining and Inclining Plains, how to draw hours upon them.
THey may be referred to a new Latitude, in which they shall stand as upright
plains: and then the delineation will be the same with those in the 10 Chap.

The Meridian line is not here to be taken for the line of 12 at midday (for
it often represents the midnight) but for that part which helps to describe
the Dial.

1. The first thing to be done upon these plains, is (by some level) to draw
the Horizontall, and then the Vertical line perpendicular thereto.

2. Next is the placing of the Meridian upon the plain, in a true position. In
direct plains that re / in-cline, and in upright decliners, the Meridian is the
same with the plains Vertical line. In East and West re / in-cliners, it is
the same with the horizontall line. In the rest, it ascends or descends
from the horizontall line, and must be placed according to the rules hereafter
given.

3. For which purpose, In the Circle FZFN (made of the same Radius with that of
Sines and Tangents, etc. upon the Ruler) set FP, ZAE, FP, NAE, each equal to
your Poles altitude. Then count the Reclination or Inclination from Z
downwards, toward P if it be North, toward AE if it be South; and there set
B. Then proceed by one of these two ways. I.



ZB iein-clination. BGZO OC cosine of declination. RCFO. ORD Radius. DSBO.
Out of this Structure will follow.
DAE new Latitude less than 90. OR cosine of new Declination. DS Sine of
Meridians ascension or descension.
II.



ZB rein-clination. BGZO. OA Sine of declination. HAIFO. IO Radius. AMIO.
Out of this Structure will follow.
OK is the sine of ZD or ND in the former figure, where the new Latitude DAE
will be found. HO Sine of new declination. AM cosine of Meridians ascension or
descension.
How all re / in-clining plains (being counted as upright in their new
Latitude) are to be taken; whether as North or South decliners.

As also, How the Meridian line is to be placed, whether ascending above, or
descending below the horizontall line: and from which end of that line, whether
that which looks the same way with the declination of the plain, or that which
looks the contrary way.

In North re / in-cliners. If D fall below P, the Recliners are North plains,
and the Meridian ascends above the horizontall line, from that end of it which
looks to the same Coast of declination. Incliners are South plains, and the
Meridian descends below that end of the horizontall line, which looks to the
contrary Coast of declination. If D fall above P, the Recliners are South
plains, and the Meridian goes below: contrary, Incliners are North plains, and
the Meridian goes above the end looking the same way with declination. In South
re / in-cliners If D fall above AE, the Recliners are North plains, and the
Meridian goes above the horizontall line, from the same end with the Coast of
declination. Incliners are South plains, and the Meridian goes below the
horizontall line, from that end which is contrary to the Coast of declination.
If D fall below AE, the Recliners are North plains, and the Meridian goes below
the horizontall line: contrary, Incliners are South plains, and the Meridian
goes above the horizontall line, from that end which looks to the Coast of
declination. If D fall into P, both re / in-cliners, are called Polar plains,
and the Meridian, in both, ascends from the Same end in Recliners. contrary end
in Incliners.

If D fall into E, the Recliners are North plains, and the Meridian ascends
from the same; descends from the contrary end to that which looks upon the
Coast of declination. Incliners are South plains, and the Meridian ascends from
the contrary; descends from the same end that looks upon the Coast of
declination.

East and West Recliners are North plains, declining from North, So much as the
complement of their re / in-clination comes to. This is their new declination,
and their new Latitude is the complement of the Latitude of your place.
Incliners are South plains, declining from South,

4. For that which follows, take notice of these four things. First, That from
D to the nearest AE (measured by the line of Chords) gives the new Latitude, in
which the re / in-clining plain, is an upright declining plain. Secondly, That
OR (measured upon the line of Sines) gives the complement of the plains new
declination in that new Latitude: this New declination is to the same Coast
with the Old, but always less in quantity than it. Thirdly, That DS (measured
upon the Sines) gives the quantity of the Meridians ascension or descension.
This gives the quantity, the former rules gave the Coast. Fourthly, That in the
description of the Dial, you must only make use of the new Latitude, and new
Declination: having nothing to do with the other.

5. Having the former things known, you must (by the Tangent and co-tangent of
the new Latitude) describe your Rectangled Parallelogram (as in the 10 Chap.)
and according as the plain was discovered to be a decliner from the North or
South, you must make choice of your center, place the substylar, style, and six
a clock line, by help of the Sine and cosine of the new declination, and new
Latitude, and then prick down and draw the hours, all in the same form that
was before showed in the 10 Chap. for upright decliners.

This for the Dials description.
6. Lastly, for placing your Dial. First, Consider which way, and how much,
your Meridian ascended or descended from the horizontall line. Then go to your
plain, and there draw the same Meridian line answerably, setting off so many
degrees by your Scale of Chords. When this is done, take your paper
description, and lay the Meridian of it, either upon, or else parallel to, the
Meridian drawn upon the plain, and take care to place it the right way; namely
so, as that the imaginary style of your paper (or a real pattern of the style
cut fit and set upon the paper Dial) may point into the North or South Pole,
according as the plain is esteemed to be a North or South plain. After this is
performed, you may transfer each hour from the paper to the plain, and so
finish all the work.

CHAP. XV.
Concerning full East and West re-inclining plains.
HEre in this sort of plain, you are only to take notice, that the new Latitude
(wherein they stand as erect plains) is ever the complement of your own
Latitude. And the new declination (in that Latitude) is the complement of their
re / in-clination. By knowing these, you may describe the dial according to
the 10 Chap. The Meridian line (in all these) lies in (or parallel to) the
horizontall line. All which things will appear also out of the former figures,
if according to them you should make a draught, and suppose your plain to
decline 90 degrees, as all these East and West plains do. All other things will
follow of themselves, agreeable to other plains.

CHAP. XVI.
Concerning re-in-cliners, that are direct, or have no declination.
IF the line CB be placed (as is prescribed in the former figure) and drawn
quite through, it will represent your plain that is re / in-clining toward the
North, and without any declination. So also BL, if it be drawn quite through,
will represent such plains as re / in-cline toward the South, and have no
declination.

For which lines so drawn (or imagined only) you may gather (according to the
former rules) which of the Poles (A or X) is elevated, and how much it is
elevated (which is showed by the arc CA or LX.) You may also see which end of
the Meridian is to be taken for the substilar line, over which (in these direct
plains) the style is ever to be erected, and must stand.

Then for drawing the hours, you have no more to do, but to describe an
Horizontall Dial to that elevation, which is due to the plain. The manner
whereof is showed before in the 11 Chap.

CHAP. XVII.
How to deal with those plains, where the Pole is but of small elevation.
SUch plains whose styles lie low, cannot have the houre-lines distinctly
severed, unless the center of the Dial be cast out of the plain. In such
cases therefore the Dial is to be made without a center, in this manner.

1. Place AB the Meridian, A^ the substilar, AF the style, by the rules before
given in the 10 and 13 Chapt. omitting what is done for the line of six, being
here of no consequence.

2. Find the plains difference of Longitude by the 18 Chap. following.

3. Assume any two points in the substilar AE, as at R and S, and through them
draw two infinite right lines, at right angles to AE.

4. To the style AF, draw the parallel GH, at any convenient distance, such as
you shall think fit, for your new style to stand from your plain.

5. Take the least distance from R to GH, and set it upon the substilar from R
to K. So from S to GH, set from S to L.

6. Upon the two centers K and L, describe two Circles: And in them both, make
the two angles RKM, SLM, equal to the plains difference of Longitude; and set
it on that side the substilar RS, upon which the Meridian AB stands.

7. The rest of the work will be easy to finish, if you begin (in each circle)
from the points at M, to divide them into 24 equal hours; and from the
centers to those equal divisions, draw out lines to cut their respective
contingent lines in 12, 11, 10, etc. And from each correspondent hour, you
must draw the lines 12 12, 11 11, 10 10, etc.

An Upright Plain declining from South toward East 80 gr.



Difference of Longitude 82d 08'
South Pole elevated 6 12
CHAP. XVIII.
Having the Latitude of the place, and the plains declination, to find the
plains difference of Longitude.
IT must be understood, that the plain is supposed (in this work) to be always
erect; and that therefore for re / in-clining plains, the Latitude and
declination here mentioned is meant of the new Latitude and new declination.

Two ways to do it.
Make ABC a right angle.

I.



AB Sine of new Latitude.

BC Tangent of new declination.

BAC is the difference of the plains Longitude from your Meridian.

Make DEF a right angle.

II.



DE Radius.

EG Sine of new Latitude.

OF Co-tangent of plains new declination.

Draw GH parallel to DF.

HDE is the complement of the difference of Longitude.

Or DHE is the difference it felfe.

If this work be done for upright plains in your own Latitude, which will be
needful in far decliners, then instead of the new Latitude and new Declination
here mentioned, you are to use your own Latitude, and the upright plains
Declination. The new Latitude and Declination are for re-in-clining plains.

CHAP. XIX.
Of Polar Plains, on which the Pole is not elevated at all.
THose are called Polar plains, upon which neither of the two Poles is elevated
at all, but the plain lies parallel to the Axis, such are the upright East and
West: and in every declination from the South some one recliner: in every
declination from the North some one Incliner.

The new declination of all Polar plains is their difference of Longitude, in
these you must work by the 10 and 14 Chap. to place AB the Meridian, AE the
substilar; and for the style AF, it has no elevation from the substilar, but
is the same with it. So that the work will be much like that in the 17 Chap.

Make GH for the style, parallel to the substyle AE, at some convenient
distance. Then assigning any point in the line AE, as S, through it draw an
infinite right line perpendicular to AE. And take the least distance from S to
GH, make SL equal thereto. Upon L describe a circle, and make SLM equal to
the difference of Longitude, on the same Coast from SL unto which the plain
declineth, or to the same Coast upon which the first line of 12 namely AB
stands. Then having found the hour points upon the line which passes
through S, namely, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, etc. draw lines through them, all parallel
to the^ substilar AESL.

CHAP. XX.
Another way to prick down the hourepoints, by the Tangent line on the Scale.
LEt the first four Sections of the 17 Chap. be performed according to the
directions there given. After them, you must gather the angles at the Pole, by
help of the plains difference of Longitude in this manner. Let the former
example serve. The difference of that plains Longitude will be 82 gr. 08'. Out
of this, take the greatest number of some just hour; viz. 75 gr. The remainder
is 7 gr. 8'. Having then set down the substile 00 00, as in the Margin, write
this 7 gr. 8'. next under it, to which add 15 gr. continually, and you shall
produce all the following numbers as you there see them. And note, that in this
work 82 gr. 8'. the difference of Longitude will ever stand against the hour
of 12, if you work right. Then take the first number 7 gr. 8'. out of 15 gr.
the remainder is 7 gr. 52'; set this above the substyle, and to this number
add continually 15 gr. (or one hour) the numbers will be produced such as you
here see.

gr. ' 3 52 52 4 37 52 5 22 52 6 7 52 Substyle 00 00 7 7 08 8 22 08 9 37 08 10
52 08 11 67 08 12 82 08

When this is done, draw a right line, therein assuming the point S or R. Then
upon your Scale of Tangents, count the numbers 7 08, 22 08, etc. in the Table,
and take them off from the same Scale, setting them severally from S to a, b,
c, d, e. So again, upon the same Scale of Tangents count the other numbers, 7
52, 22 52, 37 52, etc. and take them off thence severally, and place them from
Sat f, g, h, i.

After this, take 45 gr. out of your Tangent Scale, and place it upon this line
from S to K both ways. Then (as in the 19 Chap.) take the least distance from
the point S (in your Dial) to GH the fiduciall edge of your style, and setting
one foot of that extent upon K, with the other describe the arc MP, and from S
draw the lines SP only touching the said arks. Being thus fitted, you must from
a, b, c, d, e, take the least distances to the line LP, and set them
(respectively) upon the contingent line of your Dial, from S to 7, 8, 9, 10,
11, And again, the least distances from f, g, h, i, to the line PS, will give
the poins 6, 5, 4, 3, upon the same contingent line of your Dial. Thus is one
of the contingent lines divided into his requisite hours. The like work must
be done with the other. For you must take the least distance from the point R
(in your Dial) to GH the fiduciall edge of your style, and setting one foot of
that extent upon K, with the other describe the arc TV, and draw the
touch-line SV. Then from a, b, c, d, e, take the least distance to SV, and set
them on your Dial from R to 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. So from f, g, h, i, take the
least distances, and set them from R to 6, 5, 4, 3, by which means you have the
other contingent line divided into its requisite hours. The rest of the work
for finishing the Dial will be the same with that in the 17 Chap.

But because the tangents upon the Scale go but to 63 gr. 26', it must
therefore here be showed how those that exceed that quantity may be supplied.
Namely thus, Double the number of degrees and minutes, and from the sum take 90
gr. so shall the Tangent and Secant of the remaining arc (both of them put
together) give the Tangent required. As if in the former example, it were
required to find the Tangent of 67 gr. 8' noted upon the line by the length S
e, we must do thus. The double of 67 gr. 8' is 134 gr. 16', from which taking
90 gr. the remainder will be 44 gr. 16'. Accordingly we must first take the
Secant of 44 gr. 16', and set it from S to y; then take the Tangent of the same
44 gr. 16'. and set it also forward from y to e, so shall you have S e the
whole Tangent of 67 gr. 8'. as is required. Thus do for any other which shall
go beyond the Scale.

CHAP. XXI.
A second way for re-in-cliners.
TAke notice of these terms. 1. Vertical distance, is the distance of the
plains pole from the Vertex or Zenith of the place.

2. Polar distance, is the distance of the plains pole from the North pole.

Preparatory works. 1. Draw the horizontall line upon the plain, The ways how
to effect these are showed other-where, and are here taken as known.
and cross it at right angles with a Vertical line.

2. Get the plains re / in-clination, and consequently the distance of the
plains Pole from the Zenith of the place: which is here called the Vertical
distance.

3. Get the plains declination, and always account how much it is from the
North. For that is here called the angle of Declination.

SECT. 1.
By the Scale of Versed Sines, how to find the elevation of the Pole above the
plain: and which Pole it is, whether North or South, that is elevated.
First, find the sum and difference of
The complement of your Latitude, The plains Vertical distance.


Then take half the length of your Versed Scale; and with that Radius (upon
the center C) describe the Semicircle ADB. Afterward, upon the same Scale,
count the former sum and difference, and take the length betwixt them, and
set it from A to D, and draw BD. Also count (upon the same Scale) the angle of
the plains declination, and set that length from B to E, and take the least
distance from E to BD. This least distance being rightly applied to the Scale,
namely, from the forenamed difference forward upon the Scale, will give the
distance of the plains Pole from the North Pole, which is to be made use of
hereafter, and is called, The Polar distance.

And observe likewise, that

If the point of your Compasses (applied to the Scale) do fall just upon 90,
then is your plain a Meridionall or Polar plain, and has no pole elevated
above it.

If it fall short of 90 then is the North Pole elevated; and the elevation is
so much as the point falls short of 90.

If it fall beyond 90, so much as it falls beyond, so much is the South Pole
elevated.

SECT. 2.
To find the plains difference of Longitude from the South part of your
Meridian, and which way the said difference of Longitude is to be taken.
First, find the sum and difference of
The complement of your Latitude, The forementioned polar distance.
Then make AB equal to your whole line of Versed Sines. And upon your Scale
count your difference now found, and the forementioned vertical distance,
taking the distance of these two as they are numbered upon the Scale. With
which length upon A, describe the arch CD. Take also upon the Scale, from the
vertical distance to the forementioned sum, and with that length upon B,
describe the arc OF. Then draw the line FC, so as to touch both these arks,
cutting the line AB in G: so shall AG (being measured upon the Scale) give the
plains difference of Longitude from the South, which is here required.

This difference of Longitude is to be taken to the same Coast in the heavens
unto which the plain declineth, and may afterward, in the description of the
Dial, be easily accounted either from the South or North part of the Meridian,
viz. so as that the said difference may be always lesso than 90 gr.

SECT. 3.
To find how much the Substilar (or plains proper Meridian) must lie from the
Vertical line of the plain, and which way.
Frist, Find the sum and difference of
The Polar distance, The Vertical distance.


Then make AB equal to your whole Versed Scale. And on the same Scale, take
the extent from the complement of your Latitude to the difference now before
found, with which length, upon A as the center, describe the arc CD. Also upon
the Scale, take from the complement of your Latitude to the sum here before
found, and with that length, upon the center B, describe the arc OF. then draw
the line FC, justly touching both these arks, and cutting the line AB in G, so
shall AG (being applied to the Scale) give the quantity of the angle here
required. According to this angle the substylar line must always stand off
from the vertical line of the plain.

Which way must the Substilar lie from the Vertical line.

If the plain has the North Pole elevated upon it, then must the substilar
always lie from the upper end of the Vertical line toward the North Pole, so
much as the angle was (in the last Section) found to be.

If the South Pole be elevated, then the substilar lies always from the lower
end of the vertical line toward the same South Pole, according to the
forenamed angle.

If the plain be Meridionall (upon which neither of the Poles is elevated) then
the substilar must do either, or both; these two: according to the angle
before found.

According to these Rules you may place the substilar line upon the plain in
its true position requisite.

SECT. 4.
To draw the houre-lines upon the plain.
FIrst, consider by the first of these Sections, whether it is the North or
South pole that is elevated upon your plain. If it be the North pole, then must
the center of your Dial stand downward, and the style must point upward to the
said North pole. But if the South pole be elevated, then the center of the
Dial is to be set upward, and the style coming from thence must point
downwards into the South Pole.

This being remembered, you may upon paper draw the right line ACB, and upon C
as the center, with the extent of the line taken from your Scale, describe a
circle. If then the North pole South pole
be elevated, let the center of your Dial be below at B, above at A,
and the poles elevation (taken from the Scale) must be set betwixt A and C, B
and C, namely, at the mark. Then (counting half your Versed Scale as a line of
90 Chords, beginning at 90, and ending at 00, or 180) from that end of the
diameter A or B which is the center of your Dial, set off your difference of
Longitude (taken out of the Versed Scale as it was now taken for Chords) that
way to which the plain declineth, set it off at M, this point M is the point of
12. Then from M, divide your circle into 12 equal parts, at a, b, c, d, e, f,
g, h, i, k, l, and from each of those points through the point make touches of
right lines, cutting again the same circle on the opposite part into 12
unequal parts.



Lastly, From the center of the Dial A or B, and through the said unequal
parts, draw right lines. These last lines shall give you 12 of your hours
required: And if you draw each of them quite through the center, you shall have
the whole number of 24, of which, you may take such as are suitable and
necessary for your plain.

When your paper Dial is thus finished, you may transfer it to your plain, by
laying the substilar upon (or parallel to) the substilar before placed upon the
plain, and so insert all the hours from the paper to the plain.

After all this, you may make the style to the angle of the Poles elevation,
and fit it in according to its requisite place and position.

Note, that because some of the hour points found in the Circle will happen so
near to the center of the Dial that you cannot well draw the houre-lines
true; you may therefore help your self by that direction which I have given in
my Geometrical way.

[ This Geometrical way shall shortly be published by the Authors own copy,
with his own Demonstrations of the whole work.]

For drawing hours upon plains that have small elevations, and upon Polar
plains, use the former directions.

CHAP. XXII.
A third way for all re-in-clining Dials.
SECT. 1.
To find a re-in-clining plains difference of Longitude from the South part of
your Meridian: and how much the plains Meridian or (substyle) must lie from the
Vertical line of the plain.
I. II. III. Complement of your Latit. 38 30 K 38 30 K 38 30 K Plains vertical
distance. 100 00 Z 60 00 Z 30 00 Z Their Sum. 138 30 98 30 68 30 Their
Difference. 61 30 21 30 8 30 Their half Sum. 69. 15 R compl. 20 45 V 49. 15
R comp. 40. 45 V 34. 15 R compl. 55. 45 V Their half difference. 30. 45 S.
compl. 59. 15 X 10. 45 S compl. 79. 15 X 4. 15 S compl. 85. 45. X Plains
declinat. from Sou. 50. 00 Y 140 00 Y 160 00 Y

Describe a Circle with your common (or lesser) Scale of Chords.

And out of the same Scale make A Y = plains declination from South.

Out of the line make A R = R, and A S = S, and draw Y R M and M S B and make A
D = A B.

Out of the same line make A V = V, and A X = X, and draw Y V N, and N X C.

Then if K be less than Z
C A D is the differ. of Longitude required. and C B is the angle between the
substile and the vertical line.
But if K be greater than Z
C A D is the forementioned angle. and C B is the difference of Longitude.
These two arks C D and C B, must be measured from 90 in the line of Versed
Sines, and look what number of degrees they there cut, the same must be
accounted for their quantities.

SECT. 2.
To find the elevation of the Pole above the plain: and which of the Poles it
is, whether North or South, that is elevated.
MEasure A B upon the Versed Sines (from 90) as before: the complement of that
is E B. Measure also E C upon the same Scale, in the same manner. Count these
quantities E B and E C (so found) upon the line, and set them from E, to F and
G, and make Er = R (taking E r out of the Scale of Versed Sines from 90) Draw r
F O, and O G P. Measure E P upon your Scale of Chords, it will there give you
the polar distance.

If E P fall to be 90, it is a Meridionall plain, and has no Pole elevated.
If it be less than 90, the complement of it is the elevation of the North
Pole.
If it be greater than 90. the excess is the elevation of the South Pole.

Note, that the three figures following have relation to the three Columns of
the foregoing Table; and to these rules last delivered.

Figure I.
In this first Figure
C A D 62 49 C B 34 13 E P 122 00


Figure II.
In this second Figure
C A D 110 29 C B 42 19 E P 36 28


Figure III.
In this third Figure
C A D 118 26 C B 44 56 E P 14 00




SECT. 3.
Which way must the Substilar lie from the Vertical line?
THe Rules are the same with those before in the second way of Dialling, where
the same Question is propounded. You may therefore have recourse to them. Or
thus.

Upon all plains whereon the North pole South pole is elevated; the substilar
must lie from the upper end lower end of the Vertical line toward the full
North. South.
For drawing the hours, and finishing the Dial, you must do as is prescribed
in the 4th. Sect. of the former second way. For, having placed the Substilar,
and knowing the plains difference of Longitude, you are to use the same course
here that was there given.

It will be easy to do these things in plains that are upright, and have no
re-in-clination.

Note in all these three ways of Dialling.
All directions here given suppose you to be in the Northern Hemisphere of the
world. If therefore you should be in the Southern Hemisphere, you may easily
make these precepts serve there too, by only altering the name of North,
Northen, etc. and South Southern, etc. one into the other.

FINIS.
This Scheme has relation to the 16th. Chapter, page 54.


Errata.
Page 32, in the Diagram, for H P G, read H F G.
Page 51, for, If D fall into E, read, If D fall into Ae.
Page 54, line 16, for For, read From.
In the Dial Page 57, at the other end of the line
M, place the letter K upon the Substilar.
Page 62, line 19, for L P, read S P.
In the Diagram page 76, the letter R is wanting, at the intersection of the
line Y M, with the line A E.

