SOME Seasonable Considerations TO THE Young Men and Women Who in This DAY of
TRIAL Are made willing to offer up themselves, Estates or Liberty, and suffer
Reproaches, with other hard Usages in the Streets of this City, and Elsewhere.

To bear a Testimony for the Life, Light and Truth of Jesus Christ.

And to all who make a Profession of the same, this in the tender Love of God
is written.

By Mary Forster.

LONDON: Printed and Sold by Andrew Soul at the Crooked-Billet in
Holloway-Lane, Shoreditch, 1684.

Some seasonable Considerations to the Young Men and Women, who in this Day of
Trial are made willing to offer up themselves, Estates or Liberty to suffer
Reproaches and other hard Usages in the Streets of this City, and elsewhere,
to bear a Testimony for the Life, Light and Truth of our Lord Jesus Christ, etc.
FRiends, Consider your Calling, it is High, it is Holy. it is out of the World,
its beggarly Rudiments, its false Ways and Worships, its Customs and Fashions,
with all the Abominations, Prophanations, Sports and Pastimes; Into what? even
the glorious Liberty of the Sons of God, to be made conformable unto Christ our
Head, to be in him Holy as he is Holy, then to be Heirs with him, joint Heirs
with Christ, and to sit with him in the heavenly places; O blessed Exchange!
unspeakable Love! What manner of Persons ought we to be? says the honest
Heart; Oh! let none of us walk unworthy of such Mercy, but keep a living sense
thereof upon our hearts, continually, watching over our Thoughts, Words and
Works, that we in all may glorify the Lord our God, who is worthy to be Loved,
Feared, Reverenced and Obeyed, from henceforth and forever.

The matter chiefly upon my Heart is this, That as there is now a more public
Testimony born to Gods blessed Truth, than when we had liberty to assemble our
selves together in our Meeting Houses; so now let our care be more to answer
our Profession; for we are as a Candle in a Candlestick, not under a Bed or
Bushel; yea, as a City set upon a Hill, publicly taken notice of, to be of
that number, of them, who dare not omit the Assembling our selves together, as
the manner of some is, but we must confess him before men, who (we know) will
not deny us before his heavenly Father; we must bear our Testimony to the
blessed Truth he has made us Partakers of, though in such Hazards: Let this,
my dear Friends, engage our Souls to all Circumspection in our Lives and
Conversations, that we give no occasion to the Enemy to blaspheme or speak Evil
of that holy Profession we are called to hold forth in the midst of a perverse
and crooked Generation, amongst whom we ought to shine as Lights, that men
seeing our holy chaste Conversation, coupled with fear, may glorify our
Father; to this surely every honest Heart cannot but say, Amen, Amen, as says
my Soul.

Friends, the Enemy of our Souls is busy, both within and without, yea, the
Devil still goes about as a roaring Lion, seeking which of us he can devour;
and he may suffer us to make a Profession, even in the strictest manner, whilst
he endeavors to spoil us of our Possession, he will not disturb us, if he can
but draw into looseness or lightness, it is possible you may speak the plain
Language without interruption, if you will but use it in foolish Talking and
idle Jesting; and although you do not appear in the Superfluities of this
wanton Age in your Apparel, but in plain Clothing, yet if you do suffer your
Hearts to be in the Nicities, Costliness and Curiosities, and let them be as
like the World as may be, Lace only excepted (if you can but escape the
Reproofs of them who abstain from every appearance of Evil, and hate the
Garments spotted with the flesh) then the Soul's Enemy will indulge you
therein, and you may for a time possibly, in this day of Trial, come frequently
to Meetings, stand in the Streets, bear the Gainsaying of Scoffers, and the
haling before Magistrates; but if any of you indulge a loose careless Spirit,
such make void their Suffering, invalidate their Testimony, and fall short of
the Reward and Comfort of the Upright, and so will not hold out to the end.
This I write, not to accuse any particular, but do beseech all to stand upon
their Watch, that they suffer not this Spirit to prevail in them, or if it have
any place in any that makes a Profession of Gods pure holy Truth, to give no
rest to their Eyes, nor slumber to their Eyelids, till they are turned to the
Light of Christ Jesus in their Consciences, and listen to its Reproofs, which
now, as heretofore, bears a faithful Witness against every evil Word and Work,
and as it is heard, believed in and obeyed, will give strength to overcome all
and every thing that is of that Nature.

Oh, my Friends! press forward in the holy Warfare; for of a truth, Victory may
be obtained, if you run well, and continue to the end, you shall have a Crown
of Glory.

Friends, Let me expostulate the matter a little with you; I know there is
many, that when the Enemy of man's Soul comes to tempt to any gross Sins, can
have no entrance, their Souls abhor this or the other Abomination, so as to
gross Enormities he may come and have naught in Thousands; but the great danger
lies here in little things, and they think their Souls may live in this little
Zoar, if they escape the Sins of Sodom, and such like.

But here is a Snare, here is a Rock that many are split on, taking liberty in
little matters, in Decency, till Pride sits in the Chair, in excessive
Merriment, which some call Cheerfulness, till it come to such vain and
immoderate Laughter as the wise men call Madness, appears in their
Conversations; They must not be too demunitive (some will shy) they must be
friendly to all, free to discourse with any, and this may be good in its place;
but for want of taking up the daily Cross, and not being upon the Watch, they
become one with the idle Talker and foolish Jester; and so in many other cases;
As, We may be Angry and sin not, which is true; but letting themselves loose,
here the Enemy takes an Advantage, and in the Night sows his evil Seed, and the
wrathful hasty spirit gets up, grows strong, till that which is tender, meek
and lowly in themselves, and others they converse with, is grieved, and groans
under the Oppression. And from this Spirit there is no deliverance till they
come again to learn of him that is meek and lowly* as they did at their first
Convincement, when after great and sore Travels they did find rest unto their
souls, in him that was meek and lowly.

And its at these Breaches, the Enemy being entered, the more grosser and
grievous sins enter, and so even the old Iniquity is revived, and the sin that
so easily besets gets up again; and by giving way to this vain Imagination,
That such small things will not hurt, the foolish Heart comes to be darkened,
and the poor Soul that once was raised, comes to be enthralled, and a good
Condition to be lost, and it will be harder with such to be restored, than it
was for them to be brought into the knowledge of the Truth at the beginning.

And this also has been known by sad Experience, when any one has let in
Grief, and joined the Powers of their Souls with it, here the Enemy of man's
Peace lays seige, sometimes tempting the poor bewildred soul to despair of the
Mercy of the Lord, sometimes to Curse God and dye, and sometimes to lay violent
hands on it self.

Oh, my dear Friends! what need is here to stand upon the Watch, to keep in the
pure fear of the Lord, even all the day long? for if any Affections or Passion
inordinately be suffered to harbor in the Soul, the danger is great.

And yet further, what has been said in these foregoing particulars, may be
said also of letting in the Worldly Spirit, which none ever knew whilst it had
rule in their hearts, but at the entrance thereof, as the Eye of the Mind has
been toward the Lord, to be kept and preserved from every Evil that would
grieve the good Spirit, or hinder Communion with it, the Lord opens the
mysterious workings of this Spirit in the honest Heart, and strengthens him
with all Diligence to keep the Watch; and here the Soul escapes this Snare,
that is so privily laid, that many are ensnared and taken, and call it good
Husbandry.

O remember the great Love of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, who has
commanded his Disciples, To cast all their care upon God, who cares for them,
and has given himself for us, that he might deliver us from this present evil
World.

And let any experienced one, into whose hands this may come, consider, Have
you at any time let in the Spirit of Prejudice, (more especially upon the
account of Religion) against any Person? Let the cause be right or wrong, yet
if once it be let in, and you converse with it, and give liberty to your
Thoughts therein, how apt are you to receive any Report that may tend to make
the Breach wider? how ready it is for any prejudiced Person to take wrong
Measures of right Actions, as thus, If any in the pure Love of God, that
thinks no evil, watch over his Brother for good, or the Ancients in Israel,
who are unblameable in their Lives and Conversations, who have (if the word
Rule can be born) ruled for God, and are truly worthy of double Honor; if such
knowing the Wiles of Satan, as also the Terrors of the Almighty, shall propose
good and wholesome Methods to keep all within the Church of Christ sweet and
clean, in which the honest hearted rejoice, yet the prejudiced spirit will cry
out presently of Lordships, of Laws, Church Canons and Imposition; though at
the same time those who were in Christ before them, and by Grace were made
Members of that Body of which Christ is the Head, declare to such, That its but
the godly Care of our Brethren to preserve every Member in its place and good
Order. Much might be written, but I did only intend to hint at these things,
and beg of the Lord they may be enlarged in my soul, as in every honest Heart,
as there may be any occasion.

Oh Friends! I am deeply grieved in the Consideration of these things, and its
the cry of my soul to the God of all Grace, Arise, O Lord, and rebuke this
Gainsaying Spirit; Arise thou mighty God, whose Fan is in thy hand, and
thoroughly purge thy Floor; O bring down into thy pure fear (which makes and
keeps the heart clean) every one that makes a Profession of thy pure holy Truth.

And now to conclude with that which was principally upon my heart in the
beginning, in which let me expostulate again with any or every honest Heart,
into whose hands this may come, that has but known or experienced any thing of
the Power of God to make clean the Vessel, and that has been convinced of the
Evil of their Ways, Words and Works, and in the Light, Strength and Power of
God has been made able to judge down every appearance of Evil in themselves,
that has not had Holiness to the Lord stamped thereon. Oh! why should any such
turn again to Folly, and build again those things they once pulled down, or
allow themselves in any thing now, which heretofore they durst not live in the
Practice of?

Friends, Truth is unchangeably pure, and that which it appears against to day,
it will not allow to morrow: Therefore, I beseech you in the Love of God, try
and examine, Durst I take a false Liberty in the day of my Espousal? Why should
I do so now? Are not my Obligations greater now than ever, now I can say, My
Maker is my Husband, and he provideth all things necessary for my Spiritual as
well as Temporal Well-being, and if I do not depart from him, he has promised,
He will never leave me nor forsake me? Why then should I allow any Evil Spirit
to lodge within me, any accursed thing to approach his Temple, to hinder me in
my near Approaches unto him? Why should I suffer a wild, wanton airy Spirit to
get up, that will unavoidably make me vain in my Conversation, seeing I could
not be redeemed therefrom by Silver nor Gold, or any corruptible thing, but
with the precious Blood of Jesus Christ? Shall I trample under Foot the Blood
of Christ? or shall my light unsavory Words and Actions cause any to say, It
is an unholy thing? Shall I deny my Redemption, and my Redeemer (even to all
them that behold) by my vain Conversation? God forbid.

Or, if at any time there has been a neglect, the Watch has not been kept, nor
the Prayer offered, but as it were for a little time, the Soul forgetting that
it was cleansed, enters into the Temptation, and touches with the
unsanctifi'd thing, yet as the Heart abides honest, the pure holy Fear will
spring again in such a Breast, and that Man or Woman will soon see from whence
they are fallen, and will cry, with David, Restore me, O Lord, to my former
Condition; take not thy holy Spirit from me; set thou a Watch before my Mouth,
that I offend not with my Tongue: O Lord, keep the Door of my Lips, etc. This
is the care of the Upright, that whether in Eating or Drinking, in Speaking or
in Silence, all might be done to the Praise and Glory of God.

Friends, we above all the Families of the Earth, bear our Testimonies to
Christ's Appearance in spirit, and to that Grace which has appeared to all
men, teaching us (who have received it) to deny Ungodliness and worldly Lusts,
and to live Soberly, Godly and Righteously in this present World. And shall we
allow our selves in any thing that is justly reproveable? God forbid; I will
set a Watch over my Thoughts, says the honest Heart, for my God knows them
afar off; and I must give an account for every idle Word; I will watch over my
Eyes, for my Lord has said, Whosoever looks upon a Woman and lusts after
her, has committed Adultery with her already in his Heart; and the Apostle
James says, Whosoever seems to be Religious, and bridleth not his Tongue,
that man's Religion is vain. And Oh! that all my Works might witness the Lord at
hand, seeing they must follow me after Death. [Here is Heartwork indeed]
blessed is he who works out his Salvation with Fear and Trembling; such shall
be safe, and no evil Tidings can make them afraid; such shall hold out in all
Trials, for they are builded upon a sure Foundation, Jesus Christ himself being
the chief Corner Stone.

Friends, This is a Day wherein Satan desires, yea, does indeed winnow all
Professions, blessed is that Person and that People who partake of the benefit
of our Lords praying, for he has prayed, That their Faith fail not; and him
the Father hears always; blessed are they who watch and keep their Garments
unspotted, their Conversation will be such as will adorn the Gospel.

Now unto God only wise, who comforts his People with his Rod and with his
Staff, he who knows our frame, and will not suffer any who fear his Name to be
tempted above what they are able to bear, and in the fittest Season will
deliver Jacob out of all his Troubles, To him be all Power, Might, Majesty,
with Dominion and holy Praises given and ascribed from this time henceforth and
forever, says my Soul.

MARY FORSTER.

THE END.
BOOKS Printed and Sold by Andrew Soul.
NO Cross, No Crown: Or a Discourse showing the Nature and Discipline of the
holy Cross of Christ. Price 2 s. England's Interest discovered, etc. 5 d.

A brief state and examiation of Liberty Spiritual. 2 d.

An Address to Protestants upon the present Conjuncture. 18 d.

An Answer to a foolish Libel, called, The Quakers Opinions. 2 d.

An Epistle, containing a solemn Farewell, etc. Price One Halfpenny. All writ
by William Penn.

A Lamentacion over England. By W. Bingley. 2 d.

(...)ruth's Vindication. By E. Bathurst. Price bound 8 d.

The Principles of Truth, or a declaration of our Faith, who are called
Quakers. Price bound 8 d.

Universal Love. By W. Smith. Pr. bound 8 d.

(...)saac Pennington 's Works. Price 12 s.

Humphery Smith's Books collected into one Volumn. 2 s. 6 d.

The Collected Labors of Samuel Fisher.

A Collection of the several Writings of William Baily. 5 s. 6 d. ^ames Parnels
Collection. 3 s. 4 d.

A sober Vindication of the Religious Assemblies of the People called Quakers,
and the Manner thereof warranted and justified by the Liturgy of the Church of
England. 2 d. ob.

The Redemption of the Seed; being the several Writings of Richard Moore. 6 d.

The Foundation of Tithes shaken. By T. Elwood.

The great Case of Tithes once more revived. F. Howgill.

Due Order of Law and Justice pleaded against Irregular and Arbitrary
Proceedings. By George Whitehead. 7 d.

A legal Examination of Abuses of Law Concerning 1. Forcible Entry; 2.
Imprisonment without Warrant, how contrary to Law; 3. Riots, Routs and Unlawful
Assemblies; 4. The public Peace, and Breach of it; 5. Oppression and Duress by
Goals and Goalers and what Privilege the Law allows to Prisoners. 3 d.

The Prisoners Vindication, with a sober Expostulation and Reprehension of
Persecutors. By John Gratton. 2 d.

Jacob the Plain Man wrestling with God, for perfect Victory and Dominion over
Esau, the Rough and Cunning Man. 2 d.

Some Buds and Blossoms of Piety. 6 d.

The Sayings of Women, etc.

A brief Treatise of Religious Women's Meetings, Services and Testimonies; also
concerning Women's Speaking and Prophesying in the Church. By Hugh Wood. 2 d.


