THE FORTUNE OF FRANCE, FROM THE Prophetical PREDICTIONS OF Mr. Truswell, the
Recorder of Lincoln, AND Michael Nostradamus.

In se magna ruunt laetis hunc numina rebus,
Crescendi posuere modum --
LONDON, Printed for Jonathan Edwin, at the Three Roses in Ludgate Street. 1678.

THE FORTUNE OF FRANCE, etc.
THAT this present Age is an Age of Wonders, I think there is no Person but
will acknowledge, who does but consider the prodigious Revolutions which have
happened in the world within the space of sixty years last past. Nor shall we
need to travel so far as China or Indostan, or visit the Sunburnt Regions of
Africa, to justify the truth of this. Europe alone will suffice, having been
the Theater of such Mutations as are not the least miraculous; and in which, as
we have had our share, so likewise a very near concern. The Great Gustavus of
Sweden begun the fatal Dance, and Germany still wears the marks of those
Desolations which were occasioned by his Arms. Portugal revolts from Spain,
France is overrun with Civil Broils, Great Britain and Ireland are all in
flames and confusion.

Scarce had the World begun to breathe the gentle Air of Peace, when the
aspiring Spirit of France, big with the ambitious hopes of Glory, and puffed up
with a vain desire of the Sole Monarchy of the Western World, raises fresh
Commotions in Europe, and has set all Christendom in flames of War. What have
been the Effects of these horrible Combustions are too well known already, and
what will be the Issue, although we may from probability make Conjectures, God
only knows.

These great Changes and Revolutions which have happened in the Affairs of the
World, have always been ushered in with some strange Presages and Predictions;
it would be tedious to recount all the prodigious Comets, Visions, Apparitions,
and Prophesies, which have in all Ages of the World given occasion of wonder
and amazement to the vulgar, but of caution to the wise; to whom the
consideration of present Circumstances compared together, have given great
advantage to conjecture of the Series of future Events, and to improve those
hints both to the public and their private good. A pregnant instance of which
we have in Joan of Arc, to whose Prophesies the French were obliged both for
Direction and Courage to clear themselves and Country of the English. Nor ought
we to doubt, but that these Admonitions are the Effects of Heaven's kindness,
as well as the Heralds of its anger; nor does the Divine Vengeance act by
surprisal, but always first denounces War before it begins it; though usually
these Portents and Predictions meet with the same treatment from the
incredulous World, which Noah's prophetic Sermon of 40 years whilst he was
building the Ark, received from the indocile People who inhabited the Earth
before the Universal Deluge.

I know the hazard of Interpretation, is apt to render a curiosity of this
nature, culpable to some, ridiculous to others, and many times to those who are
most nearly concerned in the danger; Caesar could laugh at the Predictions
concerning the Fatal Ides, and the Dream of his Lady, but it proved a Risus
Sardonius, which ended in Death. Did I propose any thing with a pretense of
Inspiration, or the confidence of un-erring Infallibility, I should deserve the
censure of the wise, and which is far more insupportable, the derision of the
foolish; but what I offer is only as a private and probable conjecture, and I
leave it to every man's liberty to judge even of that liberty I have taken, and
to the Event to justify or confute my Opinion.

I will not pretend a familiarity with the Stars, though I do not despise their
Influences; nor will I undertake to explain the Mystical Characters of the
East; nor to tell you exactly which way any of the late Comets directly
pointed; nor to unriddle all the dark Nonsense of Nostradamus; but something
sure there is in all these things. And although I believe there is some Wheat
in all that heap of Chaff, yet I question whether or no my Judgment be strong
enough to winnow it, and separate one from the other. That which I here offer
to the view of the Curious and Inquisitive, is a very ancient Prophecy, though
not much regarded: But who was the certain Author, I am no more able to assure
them, than what will be the certain Event. However, let this suffice, that it is
said to have been found in the Ruins of a Religious House at or near Lincoln,
and given to Mr. Truswel the Recorder of that City, from whom it now borrows
the Name, and goes under the Title of Mr. Truswel's Prophecy the Recorder of
Lincoln. It was writ in an obscure and barbarous Latin, which does in some
measure show the Antiquity of it, and that it was penned in those Ages, when
Learning was at so low an Ebb, that the high Water-Mark of it, did not run
above a sort of Gothish Latin; all beyond which was the Hercules Pillars as
they thought, with the Ne plus ultra inscribed upon them, of Graecum est non
potest legi.

The PROPHECY. Lilium manebit in meliori part, and movebitur contra semen
Leonis. Et stabit ex una part inter spinas Regni sui, cujus Regnum est in
Terra Lunae, per totum Orbem timendum. Et veniet Filius hominis ferens feras in
brachiis, cum multitudine Populi, transibit multas aquas, and veniet in terram
Leonis, auxilium querens a Bestiis terrae suae. Veniet Aquila ex Orient, aliis
expansis radiis filii Hominis. Et hoc anno Castra super Thamesin peribunt, and
magnus erit timor in toto Orb, and in quadam part Terra. Magnd Praelia erunt
inter multos Reges. and in illo die erit Pugna Cruenta in qua Lilium perdet
coronam suam, de qua coronabitur filius hominis. Et quarto anno multa erunt pro
fide certamina; caput mundi erit ad Terram. Filius hominis and Aquila
elevabuntur: and tunc erit Pax in Terris Universalis. Et accipiet filius
hominis mirabile signum. Et erit magna frugum abundantiae. ibit in Terram
Crucis.

In ENGLISH. The Lilly shall remain upon the better part, and he shall be moved
against the Seed of the Lion. And he shall stand on one part amongst the Thorns
of his Kingdom, whose Kingdom is the Land of the Moon, which is to he dreaded
throughout the World. And there shall come the Son of Man, bearing the
Wild-beasts in his Arms, with a multitude of People. He shall pass many Waters,
and shall come to the Land of the Lion, looking for help from the Beasts of his
own Country. Then shall there come an Eagle out of the East, and his Wings
spread with the Beams of the Son of Man. And in that Year shall be destroyed
Castles upon the Thames, and there shall be great fear over all the World, and
in a part of the Land. There shall be great Battles among many Kings. In that
Day shall be the Bloody Field, in which the Lilly shall lose his Crown,
wherewith the Son of Man shall be crowned: and in the fourth year many Battles
shall be for the Faith. The Head of the World shall be brought to the Earth.
And the Son of Man with the Eagle shall be exalted. And there shall be
Universal Peace over all the World. And the Son of Man shall receive a
wonderful Sign. And there shall be great plenty of all Fruits of the Earth. And
he shall go into the land of the Cross.

I do not find that this Prophecy has been taken notice of, except by an
inconsiderable and little regarded person, Arise Evans in a Book entitled, A
Voice from Heaven, printed Anno 1652. and though he did strangely foretell many
things, and particularly was always positive about his Majesty's happy
Restoration, and with him of the Church of England, then trampled under foot
by the prevailing Sects and Factions; yet mentioning this Prophecy, he has
both given so false a Translation, and an Interpretation no less impertinent
than ridiculous in some things, making the Lilly to be Mr. Lily the Astrologer,
and some such things as look like the effects of a weak or shattered Brain. Nor
do I remember any Conjuncture of Affairs which have been in Europe, to which
this Prediction could possibly be applicable except the present, to which it
seems plainly and perspicuously to direct, and to threaten France with an
inevitable fall from that Glory and Prosperity which now she does seem to enjoy.

According to the manner of all Prophesies, and even this as well as the rest
is wrapped up in a mysterious confusion, which leaves us no more to work upon,
than matter of Connection and Conjecture: But however according to the judgment
of persons much conversant in Writings of this nature, there seems to be an
agreement in Opinion, that by the Son of Man who carries the wild Beasts in his
Arms, is intended the King and Kingdom of England, which is so distinguishing a
difference, as no other Prince besides him can pretend to the Description. And
possibly he calls him, the Son of Man, with a regard to his Exile, alluding to
that place in Scripture, That the Foxes have holes, and the Birds of the Air
have Nests, but the Son of Man has not where to hide his head. He having had
in that extremity of his Fortune no place of security or retreat, capable to
shelter him from the malice of his implacable Enemies, whilst he was hunted by
them from one Kingdom to another, his Reception being made a sufficient ground
of War, as his Banishment was always an Article of Peace. And he seems farther
to explain this, when he tells us, He shall pass many Waters. Which is both
literally and prophetically true, for his present Majesty was forced for his
security to pass and re-pass the Seas. But in the Figurative sense, by Waters
is always in the prophetical dialect understood Afflictions, Instability of
Fortune, Dangers and Hazards from the People. Now all the world is witness,
that even from his Infancy his Majesty of Great Britain sailed through a most
tempestuous Ocean of Adverse Fortune.

And he shall come to the Land of the Lion.] By the Lion is here meant the Leo
Belgicus, the Belgic Lion, as the United Provinces and Spanish Netherlands,
from the figure of the Country as it lies in the Maps, and from their ancient
Ensigns are called, and by that Name commonly known; from both which Countries
his Majesty expected Protection and Assistance, and did in some measure receive
it: [looking for help from the Beasts of his own Country,] that is expecting
Assistances from the Scottish Nation; to some of which the Name he gives them
did but too well agree, with that part of them who endeavored to make a prey
of him, as before they had done of his Royal Father. This he further explains
in the foregoing words, telling us [and he shall come with a multitude of
People,] which shows his Restoration, and that he should come, that is, to be
received with the universal desire and consent of his People into his Kingdom
[which Kingdom is the Land of the Moon] either because it is surrounded with
the water of the Ocean, over whose fluxes and re-fluxes the Moon has such
absolute Sovereignty and Dominion; or to signify the great Changes and
Alterations, the ebbing and flowing of the Tides of Faction and Rebellion which
should be in that Kingdom, and especially in Ecclesiastical Affairs, of which
the Moon is even in Holy Prophesies not an unusual Significatrix; the Church
being often figured by the Moon, as shining by a borrowed light (Luna quasi
luce lucens aliena) and being frequently under great Changes and Alterations,
and never more bright and conspicuous, than in the darkest nights of
Persecutions. [Which Kingdom, of the Moon, is to be dreaded throughout the
World,] he does not say England, which here he calls the Land of the Moon,
shall have dominion over all the Earth, an Island being altogether incapable of
such a design or Dominion, but it shall be dreaded, which may well be
understood to be meant in regard of the great Maritime Power, and Naval
Exploits of the English, which has already made their name terribly known to
all the world; and which is to be hoped such care will be taken to increase and
encourage that Power, as well as to abate that of our Rivals and Enemies, as in
future Ages shall render England not only considerable, but formidable to all
the Earth; so as to be able, if not to give Laws, yet to hold the Great
Balance, so as to make England terrible to her Enemies; who shall therefore
dread their great Naval Power, in regard of their Ability thereby to make
sudden Invasions and Discents into the Maritime Countries of their Enemies, and
to stop their Trade and Commerce abroad.

Thus far the Prophecy appears plain and easy, Events having in a great
measure given us a clear Interpretation of it. Now Affairs thus standing, the
Son of Man who bears the Wild-beasts in his Arms, whose Kingdom is the Land of
the Moon, which is to be dreaded throughout the World, being come through many
Waters with a multitude of People, he comes to discourse of the Lilly. By the
Lilly they interpret France, whose Ensigns are the Lillies, as they themselves
discourse it by their Salique Law, when they tell us the Lillies spin not,
excluding thereby the Distaff from all hopes of enjoying the Scepter: Rather to
destroy the pretensions of the English, than that they are able to show any
such original and fundamental Law of their Crown. [The Lilly (says he) shall
remain in the better part] that is, France shall be in great Peace, Glory,
Plenty and Prosperity; which has been exactly verified ever since the
conclusion of their last Domestic Wars, by the Policy of that great Minister
of State, Cardinal Mazarin, during the minority of the present King of France,
Lewis the Fourteenth; ever since which time France has enjoyed a constant
current of Greatness and uninterrupted Prosperity: which as it has infinitely
augmented their Trade, Navigation, People, and the Treasure of the Prince, into
the Sea of whose Coffers all the several Streams of Money in France do finally
discharge themselves; so it has elevated their minds to high Attempts; Pride
being the usual Companion of Prosperity, and a vast Treasure the greatest spur
to the thoughts of Ambitious Princes. The Lilly standing in these terms, [shall
be moved against the Seed of the Lyon] that is, as before we took notice,
against the United Provinces and Spanish Netherlands, who are altogether called
the Leo Belgious, and give the Lion for their Ensigns. This likewise needs no
great matter of explaining, it being so visible and fresh in remembrance, how
the French began to quarrel with the Dutch: Though upon what real or solid
grounds, since they never yet told the world, we are left to the liberty of our
Conjectures; and may therefore judge it was the Child of their Pride and
Ambition, Riches and Prosperity, with which unbounded desire of Greatness and
Sovereignty some of their late Ministers have traveled long, and had they not
strangely miscarried, it is more than probable they would have brought that
Embrio of slavery which they had conceived in their brains, to a perfect birth.

[And he shall stand on one side amongst the Thorns of his Kingdom, whose
Kingdom is the Land of the Moon] that is, at the beginning of this War betwixt
Lilly and the Lion, England shall stand upon the part of the Lilly against the
Lion, though not without Difficulties, by reason of the Thorns of his Kingdom,
by which Thorns they understand the uneasiness of his People, occasioned by
this confederation with France, by reason of their Apprehensions of whose
growing Greatness and Power both at Sea and Land, and his dangerous Vicinity
they are said to stand upon Thorns, according to our English Proverb of
expressing any thing which gives us a trouble, or which we cannot long endure:
And by his adding [the Kingdom of the Moon] may further be meant, that this
Confederation shall not be lasting, but shall change, as it has done, from
Friendship, to a cold Neutrality, from Neutrality, to open and violent, because
necessary, Hostility [Then shall come the Eagle out of the East, with his wings
spread with the Beams of the Son of Man.] Here is plainly deciphered his
Imperial Majesty of Germany, whose Ensign is the Eagle displaid, and his wings
being spread with the Beams of the Son of Man, denotes the Confederation
between England and the Empire; which Confederation shall influence, warm, and
revive the drooping Spirits of the Imperial Party, adding new life to their
endeavors, and fresh vigor to their enterprises, as the kind Beams of the Sun
impregnates the Plants and Herbs, with a new Life and Growth. [There shall be
destrdyed Castles upon the Thames.] Whether this may not have reference to the
action of Chattam, or to the conflagration of London, or to some other great
Sea action, in which the English may lose some Ships (which he calls Castles
upon the Thames) and which may probably happen if there be Naval Engagements
with the French, I will not undertake to determine, but as before was observed,
there is no method or exact order observed in these Prophetic Discourses, and
I am rather inclinable to believe it does relate to the Affair of Chattam, in
which the English Ships were destroyed, with the great pleasure, if not by the
Instigation of France.

[There shall be great Battles among many Kings.] This is not only already
verified no so many Combats, as during this War have happened between the
Emperor, the Crowns of France, Spain, England, Sweeden and Denmark, but in
great probability that still there will be more and greater: for the Power of
France is too great, to be the Trophie of one Day, and there appears no safety
to any Neighboring Crowns, but by abating the Luxury of the Lillies.

[In that Day shall be the Bloody Field,] This is spoken exegetically, as if
one particular remarkable and Decissive Day, wherein shall be a most Bloody
Battle, the end of which shall terminate in a most notable Victory, in which
the Lilly, that is France, shall be subdued, wherewith the Son of Man shall be
crowned. [In the fourth year many Battles shall be for the Faith.] This seems
to intimate, as if during this War, and before the final conclusion of it, by
the great Battle which he calls the Bloody Day, France finding her self
straightened should excite the Grand Signior, the Capital Enemy of the Christian
Faith, to enter into the Christian Territories, according to the Example of
Francis the first of France; and the present Commotions in Hungary, supported
in a probability both by the French and Ottomans underhand, render the
conjecture not much void of the Mark. This War between the Christians and Turks
shall continue some time after the Power of France is humbled; and shall
occasion many Battles for the Faith, that is against the Mahometans; but at
last Victory shall declare her self for the Christians. [Caput mundierit ad
terram.] I can easily make of this better sense than Latin: The head of the
World shall be brought to the Ground,] which may be meant either of the Pope or
Turk, who both pretend to that Title of Universal Head; the one as Temporal and
the other as Spiritual Monarch of the World; and I leave it to the Opinion of
the Reader, and to Time the surest Interpreter of Predictions, to declare upon
which of these Heads, this Vengeance shall fall so heavy, as to lay them in the
Dust.

After this, The Son of Man and the Eagle, that is the King of England and the
Emperor, shall be exalted; that is, they shall be in great Honor, Dignity and
Power; upon which there shall succeed Universal Peace, and as the Natural
Effect of it all manner of Plenty.

As for the last Clause where it is said, [The Son of Man shall receive a
mavelous Sign, and shall go to the Land of the Cross.] I confess I want an
Oedipus to furnish me with a Conjecture, and will not therefore undertake it;
in regard that Voyage has been out of fashion with all Princes, since they
understood that it was an Intrigue of Ambitious Popes to send Princes to the
Holy War, whilst they in the mean time made a Prey of their Prerogatives and
Subjects at home.

Thus far Mr. Truswel's Prophecy, which because it may be thought the work of
an Englishman, and may therefore be supposed in favor of the Nation; let us
hear a Prophet of their own, Nostradamus, the great Favorite of three Kings,
Henry the 2. Francis the 2. and Charles the 9. and if he be a Prophet, he will
it may be confirm the Truth of the former Predictions, applying his rugged
Verses to the present Circumstances of the time.

Naples, Palerme, Sicile, Syracuse,
Noveaux Tyrants, fulgures seu Calestes
Force de Londres, Gand, Bruxels, and Suse
Grand Hecatombe, Triomphe, fair Festes.
In ENGLISH. Naples, Palermo, Sicily and Siracuse, new Tyrants, like Heavenly
Lightning. The Arms of London, Ghent, Bruxels, and Suse, a great Hecatomb,
Triumph, and making of Feasts.

Here are Naples, Palermo, Sicily and Siracuse, by name, threatened with new
Tyrants, who should feise upon them like Lightning; which I think was most
truly acted by the French, who did unexpectedly surprise Messina, and a great
part of Sicily: And the famous Sea-Action of the French at Palermo, does even
literally expound the Verses, nothing being so like the heavenly Lightning as
the thundering Cannon, which never before did so terribly enlighten the
Trinacrian shore. And let the Sicilians speak, whether the French have not been
great as well as new Tyrants; since that place which was wont to be the Horreum
Romani Imperii, the Granary of the Roman Empire, is now obliged to beg supplies
from the rest of the world. But then follows [The Arms or Power of London,
Ghent, Bruxels and Suse] by Suse he must mean the Empire, Susa being the
Capital City of the Persian and Assyrian Monarchies, and it being a common
blind with Nostradame, to put old Names to new things. Those Powers of England,
Germany, and the Netherlands being confederated together, shall occasion a
great Hecatomb, that is a great slaughter, a Hecatomb being a Sacrifice of an
hundred Oxen; this slaughter shall to the Victors glory produce a great Triumph
and much Feasting. But you will say here is the Devil of Delphos,

Aio te Aeacida Romanos vincere posse.

I say the Son of the Aeacides the Romans may overcome.

Who shall be these triumphant Conquerors? I answer, that the Victory shall not
fall to the French, of which the Prophets silence is a convincing Argument; for
he would certainly have given some intimation of it, and whoever reads his
Writings, where any sense can be made out, shall find, that he is not sparing
to proclaim any good Fortune to his Nation, and it may be some things in his
Book, and some Discourses with some of the French Kings, have not given them a
little encouragement in their great Undertakings. But let him explain himself.

Bordeaux, Rouan and la Rochelle joints,
Tiendra autour la Grand Mer Oceane,
Anglois Bretons, and les Flamans conjoints,
Les chasseront jusque aupres de Rouane.
In ENGLISH. Bordeaux, Rouan, and Rochelle being joined together, shall rove
abroad upon the great Ocean Sea, the English Britons, and Hollanders united,
shall chase them as far as Rouan.

I would gladly be satisfied, in what Kings Reign of France till now, they were
in a capacity to range the Ocean, or to oblige the Dutch and English to join
for their common safety against them? And if the man be a Prophet, here is like
to be some work at Sea, as well as Land; but it is to be hoped the French will
pay the Charges of the War: And if the Dutch and English chase them as far as
Roan, they must chase them off the Seas; and I cannot imagine when such a
pursuit shall be, that the Armies of France shall be in a good posture in
Flanders: So that one wedge must drive out another, and this later Prophecy
applied to the Circumstances of time and the Confederations now on foot, seem
to explain the Riddle of the former.

In another place he tells us

Par la Guyenne infinite D'Anglois
Occuperront par nom D'Angle Aquitaine.
In ENGLISH. An Infinite Number of English shall possess Guyenne, by the name
of English Aquitaine.

And this I am sure there was yet never any attempt to do, since the time that
Nostradamus lived, nor any considerable War betwixt the two Nations, till this
present; in which, if the English should land, possibly the French might
receive them as their welcome deliverers from slavery, rather than as insulting
Conquerors. But that which has often surprised me with the most pleasant
Imaginations in the World, as the most ridiculous of all those Prophesies, is
that which now is as much the occasion of my wonder.

Celuy qut la Principaute
Tiendra par grade cruaute
Ala fin, verra grand Phalange
Par Coup de feu tres dangereux,
Par accord pourroit fair mieux,
Autrement boira suc D'Orenge.
In ENGLISH. He who shall with great Cruelty hold the Principality, in the
Conclusion shall see a great Army ruined by a most dangerous Fire-blow, he
might do better to make an Accord, otherways he shall drink the juice of
Orange.

Here is first a plain description of the French Dominion, which is certainly
carried on with the greatest Cruelty, and managed with the most horrible
Oppression, where ever their Arms have made a Conquest; and for their own
People, they are most absolute Slaves. One may say of France as of the Grand
Signior, wherever his Horse sets his Foot, the Grass will not grow again in
seven Years. So great are the Desolations of Germany; especially Alsace, and
all that pleasant, populous, and fertile Country along the Rhine, that there is
scarce an Inhabitant, or a Village left for many Leagues together, to make
complaint of the barbarous inhumanity of the French Armies, who have left
behind them unexampled Instances of their Cruelty, in such spoils and ravage,
as makes the Country look like the Fields of Sodom, when first covered with the
Ashes of those flaming Cities. Such Cruelties of War as exceed all the most
salvage proceedings of the Ottoman Family, and the most barbarous Conquerours
amongst the Heathens.

[But he shall see his great Army ruined by the most dangerous blow of Fire.]
Not improbable, Heaven often measures by the Lex Talionis; Fire shall destroy
those who have destroyed so many innocent millions by fire. But by this Fire he
seems to intimate the force of Powder, the now common and terrible Fuel of the
horrid Engines of War.

[He might do better to make an accord.] Certainly this would have been wholesome
counsel for France, who doubtless might have had honorable terms of Peace, had
they prosecuted it in good earnest, and not rather as a Blind to lull some of
her Neighbors asleep, whilst she might more easily cut the Throats of others:
though how safe such a Peace, as must have left France in the Possession of so
great Conquests, or any part of them, must have been to the rest of the
European Princes and States, I leave it to the Determination of Politicians.
But since France has refused those Proposals, it follows, [That he must drink
the juice of Orange.] This is what I have often laughed at, but now it seems to
carry in it not only a very serious but significant meaning. For by the Orange
must of necessity be meant the most illustrious William of Nassau Prince of
Orange, that great though young General; and by the juice of Orange must be
meant the force, power, and virtue of that Princes Valor, Courage, and
Conduct, which speak him an old Soldier though a young Man: And by France
drinking the juice of Orange, if an Accord be not made, cannot be meant any
other thing, but that to her disadvantage, she shall feel the Force and Power
of that young Hero designed for Greatness and Wonders.

And to animate that Illustrious Prince, I will subjoyn but one more of the
Prophecies of Nostradamus, which shows that he shall have good Assistance.

Le grand D'Hongrie ira dans la Nacelle
Le Noveau ne feraguerre novelle,
A son voisin qu'il tiendra assiege,
Et le Noireau avec son Altesse,
Ne souffrira que par trop on le press
Durant Trois ans ses Gens tiendra range.
In ENGLISH. The great one of Hungary shall go to the Boat, the new one shall
not make a new War against his Neighbor, whom he shall besiege on every side.
And the black one with his Highness, shall not suffer him to be over-pressed.
During three Years he shall keep his People in order.

By the great one of Hungary is meant the Emperor; by his going into the Boat,
is meant his imbarquing in the Confederation. By the new one is meant, a new
King of France; that is, such a one as France never had before: He shall not
make a new War with his Neighbor; that is, it shall not be a new War, but the
old claim to Elaunders revived. His Neighbor is the Spaniard, whom he shall
besiege on every side, viz. in the Netherlands, Catalonia Messina, etc. But the
Black one, that is the King of England, according to the old Prophecy, Rex
ater in albo, with his Highness, that is his Highness the Prince of Orange,
being confederated together by the alliance of a happy match, shall not suffer
him (that is the Spaniard) to be over-pressed, During three Years he shall keep
his People in order; but after that let France look for nothing but Domestic
Insurrections and Rebellions, from a People overladen with the intolerable
burden of a War, which might have been happily ended long before, if the
obstinacy and ill Genius of some great men, driven headlong by their Destiny,
had not prevented it.

I might add, to render these Conjectures more probable, many other Rational
Arguments, as that old and so often verified Prophecy of the Poet,

Adgenerum Cereris, sine caede and sanguine pauci
Descendunt Reges, nec sicca morte Tyranni.
Ambitious Princes rarely go
Unbloody to the Shades below.
And the dreadful Instances of Philip of Spain, and the three Henrys, Second,
Third, and Fourth of France, who all aimed at the Monarchy of the West, are
fatal Examples of the Tragical End of vain Ambition after unlawful Sovereignty
and Empire. And certainly they who will sacrifice the Blood and Treasure of so
many Innocents, and the Interests of all other Princes and States to their own
inordinate desires of Ruling, cannot in common Reason believe, but that they
have almost as many Enemies as there are men in the World; and cannot expect a
mild or gentle Destiny. For there is in all Mankind, Princes and People, a
natural love for their Liberty, Life, Property, and Religion; and when they
apprehend that all these are in danger of being invaded, and ravished from them,
by the force of Arms, they will not only combine pro Aris and focis, and
resolutely dispute the Quarrel, with their Lives and Fortunes. And they live in
a perpetual fear of a Scaevola or a Ravaillac, to endeavor by a sudden blow,
to free the World as well as themselves from the danger of Slavery; and to
revenge those Murders, Rapines, Miseries, and Desolations, which have been the
Results of such Ambitious Attempts, which brings into my mind another of the
Prophesies of Nostradamus.

Tard. arrive l'Execution fait
Le vent contrare; lettres au chemin princes
Les Conjurez quatorze d'une sect
Parle Rousseau seront les Entreprinses.
In ENGLISH. Arriving late the Execution done, by reason of the contrary Winds,
Letters taken by the way. The Conspirators fourteen of a Sect, by the Red-haird
Man this Enterprise shall be undertaken.

I will leave this to the probability of what may be, according to what has
been.

To conclude, I wish all prosperity to the Arms of the present Confederation,
and that by their Union amongst themselves they may disappoint the Designs of
their Enemies; and that they would lay aside their Private Animosities, Heats,
and Quarrels; which, who-ever in such a Conjuncture shall refuse to do, cannot
be the Friends of their Countries Interest, Liberty, or Glory; but will lie
under the vehement suspicion of being corrupted and dazzled with the Luster of
Gold, to side with the Common Enemy, and betray their Country; nor will their
Clamours against the French be able to protect them from so just a suspicion,
but rather increase the jealousy; nothing being a more common Blind, than to
look one way whilst men Row another; since it is most certain that no persons
can oblige an Enemy, though with their personal assistance, to that degree, as
they may by sowing Jealousies in a Confederation, and by crossing the Designs
that may be formed for the Common Security; which is in short to unbind the
Faggot, that it may more quickly be burnt. Let the Malice of these Predictions
be to the Enemies of Peace, and to the Authors of this miserable War.

Pax queritur Bello.
FINIS.

