THE HISTORY OF POPISH TREASONS AND USURPATIONS.

THE HISTORY OF ROMISH Treasons and Usurpations: Together with A PARTICULAR
ACCOUNT Of many gross CORRUPTIONS and IMPOSTURES In the CHURCH of ROME, Highly
dishonorable and injurious to Christian Religion.

To which is Prefixed A Large PREFACE to the ROMANISTS.

Carefully Collected out of a great number of their own approved Authors, By
HENRY FOVLIS, B. D.

Late Fellow of Lincoln-Colledge in Oxford.

S. Joh. 18. 36. Jesus answered, My Kingdom is not of this world. S. Luke 12.
14. Who made me a Ruler over you? LONDON: Printed by J. C. for Richard
Chiswell, at the two Angels and Crown in Little-Britain. 1671.

THE PREFACE.
Gentlemen,
I Am apt to fancy, that at the first sight of these Papers, I shall be loaded
with your severest Censures, condemned as the worst of Heretics, nay, and
branded as the greatest of Liars and Slanderers. And all this, because I only
tell you, what the Pope and his boldest Champions would have you to believe;
because I tell you what grand Authority his Holiness has, what great power and
jurisdiction lies in your selves, what bloody actions have been done to
maintain these privileges; and as a Preparative to all, have afforded you the
Glories, Commendations, and Prerogatives of your Religion, from Brutes and
Blocks, Fools, and Devils themselves; with suchlike odd Arguments, as some of
your Graver Wits have troubled themselves, confirmed their Religion, and
pleasured us with.

But, My Masters, I may assure my self of a mitigation of your Fury, when you
have seriously considered, that here I say nothing but what is asserted and
vindicated by your own Authors, approved of by your own Authority, and
agreeable to the Sentiments and Doctrine of the Pope himself. From whence will
follow, that with what ill will or names you prosecute me for these
Collections, you must do the same to his Holiness, and the greatest Assertors
of his Religion; I being but the Compiler or Transcriber of their words and
actions, which used to be your Patterns and Examples to live by: and now to
turn tail, to oppose and contradict the Pope and his Learned Doctors, not to
believe in his infallible Documents, might renew a Dispute about your
disagreements, or that there might be two contradictory Truths; this may be
true at Rome, and yet the quite contrary also true in England; as Father Coton
and other Jesuits affirmed at Paris. In short, thus to withstand the Pope,
would show your selves no good sons of his Church, though it might good
subjects to your King; which is a great part of a good Christian.

But by way of Apology for my self, I must add, that your own Writers
occasioned and provoked these Collections; that their slanders engaged me to a
Vindication, and this Retort: and I think Duty and Truth obliges me to
justify my Mother the Church of England, as well as they theirs of Rome. And
to deny us this favor, would be a Restraint beyond all Story: for if yours
take upon them the liberty to oppose and defame our Church, it would be
strange, if you would not allow us in England to vindicate her. And by the by,
it had been well, if they had not so much troubled themselves in opposing our
Oath of Allegiance, and clamouring against the Magistrates for requiring it
(which yet is more talked of then done) seeing these Papers will show, both
from Principles and actions, that some men's Doctrines are so dangerous and
pernicious, that the strictest Oaths are scarce strong enough for them; and
that this especially is favorable enough, considering the occasion of its
making, and the seditious Principles of some people.

It Is said, that those of ill names are half hanged; and the poor woman that
durst not kill her Landlords ill-lucky Dog, got her design by crying out he
was Mad, whereby the Neighbors presently knocked him on the head. And thus it
fares with our Religion. Of all names, nothing more odious then a Traitor; and
the Romanists will scarce have any to be such, but those of the Reformed
Church; which Charge they lay so heavy upon us, and with such often
Repetitions, that most of their Gentry (who in this and other things are apt to
be Priest rid) now use it as the only Argument to bespatter the Church of
England; and I fancy, have got some Proselytes by the strength of these
Reproaches.

But I would have them to remember once for all, that every one in England is
not of the Church of England [and for other Churches, at this time, I shall not
concern my self] and for ought that I know, our Presbyterian and Independent
are as great enemies to our Church as the Romanist.

Certain I am, the Papists ought to be cautious in their Accusations against
these mischievous Non-Conformists also, lest at the same time they do but
condemn themselves: and I -- Utinam eorum nonnulli qui rectissime damnant, non
pessime imitarentur, Bp. Sanderson de jurament. Prael. 7. 3.
wish there were no reason for such a supposition; yet it is too true, that at
the same time that the former were Rebels against the King in England, the
Romanist was as active in Ireland, despising and vilifying his Majesty through
his Viceroy (then Marquess of Ormond) as much as those did the King in England.
And though here the Presbyterians imprisoned the King, renounced him by their
Non-Address, and by their other villainies set up the Scaffold; and the
Independants, and other Phanaticks struck off the Head: yet will the
Irish-Romanists gain small honor by this Objection, seeing they did as much as
lay in their power to act the same to their Viceroy, by fighting against him,
excommunicating him, combining to take away his life, or to deliver him up to
the Independent Army; by traitorously offering themselves and Kingdom to the
command of Foreigners, as Lorraine, the French, the Spaniard, nay the Pope
himself. Not to insist here how grateful the Kings Murder was to several
Romanists, and how formerly they have gloryed in the Murder of other Princes.

Yet will their Writers take the confidence to declare their innocence and
loyalty to the face of the whole world; and thereby not only seem to quit and
clear themselves, but at the same time bespatter and asperse, what in them
lies, us wicked Heretics, as they are apt to call us.

Pedro de Ribadeneyra, a Jesuit of no small Sanctity and credit amongst them
(being a Disciple and acquaintance of their Founder Ignatius) though as arrant
a Railer as the best of them, would gladly persuade the world that Hoc [i. e.
Evangelium] mentiri docet, hoc pejurare, hoc fingere, hoc dissimulare, hoc
adulare, hoc Hypocritas esse, hoc Principes ovinam pellem induere, and
nihilominus laniare, occidere, sanguinem prosundere, and more luporum gregem
dominicum devotare. Quantas, Deus bone! seditiones, quantas turbas and tumultus
novum hoc vestrum Evangelium, ab eo tempore quo primum eme^ sit, in mundo
excitavit? Quot Civitates evertit, destruxit and solo adaequavit? quot
Provincias vastavit, quot Regna depredatum est, quantum denique innocentis
sanguinis prosundere non dubitavit? dicat hoc Gallia, dicat Belgium, dicat
Scotia, dicat etiam vestra haec Anglia: Siquidem omnis illa tyrannis,
barbarics, crudelitas, and saevitia, quae hodie apud vos obtinet, aliud nihil
sunt, quam vestri Evangelii fructu^. Quibus ita constitutis, Evangelium adhue
vestrum, Deo attribuere, and ad illum reserre audetis? Potestne blasphemia
major ista reperiri? Pet. Ribad. Appendix sive Lib. 4. ad Nicol. Sanders. de
Schismate Angl. cap 17. You may see the same also in his Spanish Hist.
Ecclesiastica del Schisma del Reyno de Inglaterra, lib. 3. cap. 17.
Lying, Perjury, Deceit, Flattery, Hypocrisy, Tyranny, Sedition, Destruction,
Murder, and what not? is nothing but the fruit and result of our Religion:
upon which the man wonders how we dare entitle it to God or Christ; but never
remembers the treasonable Principles of himself and his Brethren, with the
Practices of his Church.

Jacobus Gretser, another of the same stamp, will have our Religion not only
to be the off spring, but also the Sectam vestram Martis and Bellonae esse
filiam and parentem, clarius est quam ut sine impudentia negare possis:
loquatur Gallia and utraque Germania, Anglia, Scotia, Jac. Grets. Apol. pro
vita Ignat. Loyolae, lib. 3. page 475.
Mother of War and Sedition; to deny which, he looks upon as a grand piece of
Impudence. And -- Ubique seditiones and tumultus praetextu Religionis movent,
ubique jugum Principum quantum possunt excutiu^t, and sibi omnem gubernationem
vindicant. Discussio Decreti Magni Concilii Lateran. page 129.
Leonardus Lessius, of the same Order, but disguised under the false name of
Guilielmus Singletonus, is much of the same opinion; and we need not doubt but
these men speak the sentiment of their whole Order.

But to come nearer home. No sooner was King James settled in the Kingdom here,
but the English Romanists drew up a 1604. page 7
Supplication to his Majesty and the Parliament, in which they do not a little
vaunt of the loyalty of their Religion, in these words: -- The Catholic
Subject is (if any other) the Glory, strength and perpetuity of the Kingdom,
because he principally seeking Heaven in this world (and will not for the world
be diverted) cannot be treacherous or disloyal, or undutiful to your Highness;
but in every service and distress occurring, valiant, resolute and most
faithful: and all these fair words were to the same King and Parliament, whose
destruction they intended, and had at that time contrived it.

Toward the latter end of the said King James his Reign, Prince Charles was
sent a wooing into Spain; at which time, the Romanists were filled with hopes
(though upon no certain grounds) of the Conversion of the Prince, a Free
Toleration of their Religion, or rather that the whole Kingdom would be at
their Devotion. As a preparative to this grand Expectation, Father Pateson drew
up a Book under the Title of Jerusalem and Babel, or The Image of both Churches
(collected mostly out of the Answers to Anti-coton and Brerely.) This Treatise
he dedicateth to the Prince; the main design being to vindicate the Popish
Loyalty, and to declare the Protestants to be absolute Rebels. For proof of
which, he boldly affirms -- Page 347. Editionis Land. 1653.
Now it is manifest, that in the short space of her Reign, [viz. of Queen Mary
of England] which was not much above five years, she had more open Rebellions
and Insurrections made against her, from such of her Subjects as were not
well-affected unto her Religion, then Queen Elizabeth had from Catholics in
full forty and five, etc. And to testify farther what loyal people they were
to Queen Elizaheth, let Pope, Spain, or any other confederate against her never
so much, thus the same Penman takes upon him the confidence to testify, --
Page 491.
Among so many Priests as by that time there were both in England and beyond
the Seas, and in so long a time as this pretended Confederacy was in framing,
when Spies and Intelligences were many, and well paid by the State; was there
so much as one Priest nominated and accused to have been so corrupted, or
induced any way by these Princes or their Ministers, to practice ought to the
prejudice of their Country? was there any one apprehended or convicted of such
a Treason? was there ever any subject of England called in Question, for
entertaining Priests that were sought after upon that account? In a word, when
the Spanish Armado was under sail for England, was there so much as one Priest
or Seminary-man found or known to be in it? Or at any time since discovered to
have been employed in that service? And lastly, thus the same man characters
the two Religions: The -- Page 560.
Catholics seek only by way of Petition, Supplication, Prayer and humble
Remonstrating of their sufferances; the other, viz. Protestants, seek chiefly
by Fire and Sword, and Cannon-Bullet, and by thundering of Ordnance. --

With these Arguments or Weapons did Pateson endeavor to force the Prince from
his Religion; but they were too weak and blunt against such a noble and knowing
Champion: yet when he was in Spain, he is there assaulted again, and that by no
less man then Zacharias Boverius, the old Cappuchine, who wrote a Folio Book,
called Orthodoxa Consultatio, and dedicated it to the said Prince; where he
endeavors by might and main to bring a dislikeing in Prince Charles to the
Church of England, by hinting to him the Divisions of it; as if, forsooth, the
Romanists agreed in all things. He would also persuade him to turn Romanist;
one of his encouragements being, that the Pope can Ortho. Co^sult. part 2. Reg.
6. p. 286.
Depose Kings: a very excellent complementive Argument, to convert a man out of
his Rights and Dominions. But this Caeterum si Reges ^e oves esle aegre serent,
ac luporum more Ecclesiasticum Potestatem invadant: sciant profecto eam
potestatem Pontifici totius Ecclesiae Pastori a Christo esse collatam, quae
ve^o P^stori adve^sus Lupos greg^s vastatores ipso naturali jure permissa est:
nimitum ut Lupos a grege arceant. Id enim postulat commissa sibi a Christo
Dominici gregts cura, qua Ecclesiae conservationi sedulo invigilare debet, ut
Lupos gregem invadences expellat, ac modis omnibus Ecclesiasticae Reipub.
utilitati atque incolumitati consula^. Praestat. namque Principem a grege
expelli, quam gregem totum corruete. Zach. Bover. Demonstrationes Symbolorum
verae and falsae Religionis, Tom. 2. Art. 5. page 150.
Doctrine Boverius had taught in his former Writings; from which his Orthodoxa
Consultatio (if a man may be a Plagiary to himself) is stolen for the nonce.

Dr. Benjamin Carier having played the Turn-coat, would gladly persuade King
James to change too, undertaking to make him believe, that true Policy would
really oblige his Majesty to it: thus -- Letter to King James: vid. Dr. George
Hakewell's Answer to it, page 94. B. C.
The first reason of my hope that Catholic Religion should be most available
for the honor and security of your Majesty and your Children, is taken from
the consideration of your Subjects, which can be kept in obedience to God and
to their King by no other Religion, i. e. then Popery. But somewhat after he
confesses that there may be some few Romish Traitors, but with this difference
-- Ib. page 102, 103.
It is certain there be Traitors against God and Man of all Religions; and
Catholics, as they are the best Subjects, so when they fall to it, they are
the worst Traitors. But if we look upon Examples, or consider Reasons, the
Catholic is the only Religion, which as it does duly subordinate Kings unto
God, so does it effectually bind subjects to perform all lawful obedience unto
their Kings.

Another Runaway, viz. Dr. Thomas Baily, is very zealous for the loyalty of the
Romanists; and yet at the same time, bravely tells us, what good Subjects the
Romanists were to Oliver Cromwell, whereas the other people of England were
against him: but take his own words -- D^. Baily's life of Bishop Fisher, p.
179.
Where should a man find better Subjects? [i e. then Romanists] and yet these
are the men who have been traduced all along as inconsistant with politic
Government. And why should the same loyalty be suspected at any time still to
remain within the same breasts; since that their Religion, Laws (both Civil and
Ecclesiastical) Custom, Provision for the future, present Practice, Oaths and
Protestations all along, evermore obliging them to such Obedience: especially
whereas at this present, all other Sorts and Sects of Christian Religion
(excepting those who are for all Sorts and Sects) appear against this 1655.
present Government, like Aries, Scorpio, Leo, Sagittarius, etc. as if they
would all and every one of them wound each part and member of this body
politic; the Roman Catholics, like Pisces ( the emblem of the Fisherman) are
contented to remain quiet under foot. A little after he renews the former
comparison betwixt Queen Mary's and Queen Elizabeth's Reign, thus; -- Id. page
183. 184.
It is most notoriously evident, that there were more open Rebellions during
the five years of her short Government, then during the four and forty years
of her late Majesty's after Reign.

But Bailie need not talk much of Loyalty, either to Kings or Queens, since
nothing likes him so much as a Protector, whom he hopes (considering his
virtuous actions) will be no small friend to the Loyal Romanists; and so
alluding to Henry VIII his Cromwell, he goes on and tells us of his hopeful
Oliver -- Id. page 260.
And who knows but that it [i e. the Restoration of the Roman Religion] may be
effected by the same NAME? And then observing that the then Pope, Innocent X,
had as part of his Arms a Dove with an Olive Branch in her mouth, he thus
proceeds with his Worshipful hopes and comparisons between that Olive and his
Oliver.

Id. page 260, 261.
Oliva vera is not so hard to be Construed Oliverus, as that it may not be
believed, that a Prophet, rather then a Herald, gave the Common Father of
Christendom, the now Pope of Rome (Innocent the Tenth) such Ensigns of his
Nobility (viz. a Dove holding an Olive Branch in her mouth) since it falls
short in nothing of being both a Prophecy, and fulfilled, but only his Oliver
Cromwell.
Highness running into her Arms, whose Emblem of Innocence bears him already
in her mouth.

Thus you see his hopes of Cromwell: yet the same man can His end to
Controversy, in his Epistle or Preface.
tell the world, that the Beheading, Banishment, and other Miseries of our late
Kings, was a just judgment of God upon them, because they were not of the
Popes Religion. But a great deal more might be said of this man; but enough at
this time, if not too much.

One tells us that the effects of Protestant Religion in all Countries is W. W.
The Catholic Doctrine of Transubsiant. page 115.
Licentious Liberty, Rebellion, and other horrid Vices; and this is argued to
the Lady to have a care of our Religion, and to embrace that of Rome, as if
they were all good people, and never taught Rebellion: yet it may be he will
not allow the deposing of Kings to be Rebellion or Treason.

Another desiring of the bloody and murdering Rump, or the Remnant of the
wicked long Parliament, that the Papists might have a freedom or liberty for
their Religion, amongst others is pleased to give this encouraging Reason. --
The Christian Moderator, part 2. p. 7
I am confident they will neither be such fools, as to forfeit their Liberty,
nor so ungrateful to forget them that gave it; since out of all our Histories
not one Example can be assigned, that they ever offered to move the least
sedition, in a time when they enjoyed but half the Liberties of Free born
Englishmen. And it is a wonder to see how this man does magnify the Rump, and
Id. p. 12, 29.
declares that most of the Romanists who seemed to be of the old Kings side,
only fled to his Garrisons for shelter, and not to take up Arms to offend the
Parliament. I shall here say no more of him, but that he calls the Rump the Id.
page 38.
Renowned Parliament, for delivering us from the Tyranny and Oppression of the
Prelates. And indeed, our Reverend Bishops and their Clergy were the only men
that the Romanists stood in aw of, the Ignorant Phanatick wanting Learning to
cope with such penmen.

But to come yet nearer our present time; since the happy Restoration of his
Majesty, there came into the World a Book under the Title of Philanax Anglicus:
who was the Author of it, I know not; but this I can tell the Reader, that be
who he will, he was an arrant Plagiary, it being all stolen out of Pateson's
Image of both Churches. The Publisher calls himself Thomas Bellamy, but upon
enquiry there is no such man found; but Annal. anno 1586.
Cambden will tell him of two of that name; Jerome Bellamy hanged for Treason;
and his Brother hanged himself, to avoid public Execution.

This pretended Fair-friend would make the world believe that -- Phil. Angl.
page 71.
It is plain that in the poor five years of her [viz. Queen Maries] Reign,
there was de facto more open and violent Opposition and Rebellion made by her
own Subjects, then Queen Elizabeth had in forty five years, or any Prince
before or since the Wickliffian Doctrine. Thus what one boldly affirms,
others as ignorantly believe; which is too common with such people, whose
design is not so much to search out the truth, as to expose another party.

Well, the same Pamphleter proceeds to tell us, that, -- Id. page 93.
If we mark well, we shall find that in this last Century of years, there has
been more Princes Deposed and Murdered for their Religion by these Protestants
of Integrity, then have been in all others since Christ's time, by the Popes
Excommunication, or the attempt and means of Roman Catholics. -- Id. page 98.
By all which it is plain that Rome is so far from being the Author and
Fountain of these Rebel-Doctrines, that all Loyalty is in the Reputation of
these Protestants of Integrity, Popery. For he would make you believe of the
Romanists, that they -- Id. page 104.
are to fight only with Prayers; Arms against Princes have no warrant. Quis
est Judex, si Rex transgreditur Conditiones Regni? solus Deus: Who is Judge if
the King transgresses the Conditions of his Kingdom? only God. Navar.
Cunerus, and all the Catholic Doctors that ever I have seen, agree perfectly
in this same sentence.

But who so bold as blind Bayard? And therefore whence must these Treasonable
Doctrines, Opinions and Practices come? he will tell you, and hops you will
as freely credit him. -- Id. page 110.
From Rome it cannot be, for its Doctrines with the Opinions and Practices of
all its Doctors are -- quite contrary; and all that is said against that
Church, in this particular, is mere Calumny.

And so much for this shameless Libel, which is since well Answered by the
Reverend Dr. Peter du Moulin, the Learned Son of a Learned Father.

T. C, or be who it will, that was the Author of Labyrinthus Cantuariensis,
will by no means allow the Romanists to hold any disloyal Assertions. His words
are -- Preface.
Neither does Mr. Fisher, or any of his Profession allow or use any such nets
as the Relator [viz. Archbishop Laud] mentions; that is, they neither practice
nor hold it lawful to dissolve Oaths of Allegiance, to depose and kill Kings,
to blow up States for the establishing of Quod volumus, etc. But I would know
of the Author, for what things they do allow them? And in another place he thus
undertakes to Apologize for the Popes. -- Labyrinth. Cant. p. 226. 7.
Nor did the Popes ever attempt, or so much as pretend to bring the Emperors
under them in Civil Affairs; which is another aspersion the Bishop lays upon
them. Gregory VIII and Innocent III, were indeed very prudent men, and worthy
Champions of the Church, to assert her just Liberties; but they never
endeavored to subject the Emperor to themselves in Temporal matters.

And Mr. Sergeant, according to his usual way, will thus in a few Idle words
vindicate the Popes -- J. S. Answer to Dr. Pierce's Sermon, page 116.
Nay but the Court of Rome trod upon Crowns and Scepters. An Hyperbole fetched
from the Horns of the Moon: When? where? what Crowns and Scepters?

Another who undertook to answer the said Sermon, would gladly thus clear the
Romanists. -- The Primitive Rule before the Reformation, in the Afternoons
Exhortation, page 18.
We Catholics declare Kings to be free from any Coercive power from their own
Laws and Subjects, to which they are not bound civiliter, but naturaliter
only: for if once a Coactive power be allowed, Ex coactione sequitur saltem
paritas and summitatis divisio, as the Civilian speaks: and Kings once
compelled by their Subjects, are no more Scripture-Kings, Gods Kings; Titular,
Popular, Kings only. For Gods Kings, says Otho Frisigensis, being above all
Laws, are reserved to the Divine judgment hereafter; they may not be punished
by the secular Laws. -- Id. page 20.
As for Catholics, and their fidelity to Kings, none speak it more, none
advise or practice it more, in all secular obediences, then the Roman Pastors,
and the Catholics in their Communion. -- Id. page 22, 23.
Yea, so far is this Sea Apostolic from frequent practices of that nature upon
Kings [viz. to depose them] of which the Reformed Churches are so guilty, that
it is evident more Rebellions have been raised against Princes for Religion,
only in this last Reformed age, in a few Protestant Countries, then have been
raised by Catholics, for any cause whatever, in seven Ages before throughout
all Christendom. And whereas this Indirect Power of the Sea Apostolic is so
much traduced, as derogatorie from the Rights of Kings; the Histories of this
last confused Age do manifest, that even this Power is and has been rather a
Fortress to Princes against their Rebellions Subjects. Yet Id. page 22.
he is unwilling to speak too plain; and therefore tells us, that as for the
Popes Indirect Power over Kings in Ordine ad Spiritualia, to Censure and
Deprive Kings, I leave that Question to be decided by the two Supreme Powers
[viz. Pope and King] when occasion shall be for it. And then probably our
Author will declare for the Pope, as some Priests did in Queen Elizabeth's time,
anno 1582.

Lastly, for in these assertions a man might be endless, one in his
Animadversions upon Dr. Bates and his Elenchus Motuum, in which the Doctor is
sometimes partial or faulty; this Elenchus Elenchi, page 17, 20, 21.
Animadvertor, I say, will by all means have it to be an old and false Calumny
to think that the Romanists were not always the best Subjects. But words are
cheap; and why did he not Answer my positive proofs against it as well as make
Id. page 26.
use of my Book to show the villainy of our Non-conformists, and by them to
insinuate a discredit of our Church of England to those beyond Seas, who
through ignorance may suppose the Presbyterians to be true sons of our Church?

But what they cannot answer, some make it prudence to pass by with silence;
and then the Gentile Romanist, who seldom troubles himself with reading any
thing but what makes for himself, fails not to vapor that his Champion has
got the day; putting most of his confidence in the Title Page, seldom or never
examining the honesty or exactness of the Writer. Thus selfinterest persuades,
and then assures him of the Conquest; so that with him, to write against the
Church of England, is the same to confute and confound.

Thus we see how they would cunningly bear the people in hand, what peaceable
men they are, what good subjects they are; and always make a noise of their
Obedience and Loyalty, as a main Argument to persuade our Kings to embrace
their Religion. But as for us of the Church of England, alas! we are nothing
but Traitors and Rebels; Treachery and Sedition being the chief Articles of our
Faith whilst at Rome nothing is taught but peace and loyalty. And if we must
believe Father Parsons, we must thus know the difference of the two Religions:
for with the Romanists out of England, -- Three Convers. of Engl. part 2. page
581, 582.
All Modesty, Gravitie, Learning, Piety, Devotion, Peace, Concord, Unity and
Charity was carried away. And in the new Gospelling Ship, came in all the
contrary vices; namely of Sedition, Division, Pride, Temerity, Curiosity,
Novelties, Sensuality, Impiety and Atheism. But,

Quis tulerit Gracehos de seditione querentes? Juv. Sat. 2.
-- Who can with patience hear
A Guizard blame a Scottish Covenanteer?
The Ostrich, with great pains and ostentation of his Feathers, endeavors to
make a great flight, yet cannot get an inch higher from the ground; like the
lying Hypocrite, whose goodly shows and cheats will little avail him. The
Jesuits tell us, that the Founder of their Order, Ignatius Loyola, imitated the
Devil, using all his tricks, sleights, cheats and cunning, to convert Souls,
Jo. Pet. Maffeius, in vita Ignat. l. 3. c. 11
as the other did in perverting of them: And I wish some of his Disciples had
not made use of Falsities to inveigle and abuse their Proselytes.

All is not Gold that glisters, nor all good Ware that is commended by a
fair-Tongued Sales-man; and when you see a Religious face, suspect a knavish
heart. Our English Fugitives made the people at Rome believe, that in Queen
Elizabeth's days, there Sir Geo. Paul's life of Archbishop Whitgift, p. 79. 116.
was no Church or Bishop standing in England, but that the people heard their
Ministers in Woods and Fields amongst Trees and Brute Beasts. The Spaniards
were made believe, that here they worshipped the Devil. When [1623. 5 of
November, according to the Roman account] the Chamber fell at Black friars,
killing by its fall almost an hundred, with Father Drury the Jesuit their
Preacher; some had the impudence to print beyond Seas, as if the story had been
a judgment of God upon some Protestant Heretics in Holborn. How often have they
printed the lie about the Nags-head Consecration; and belyed Bishop Morton, as
if he acknowledged the truth of it in a Speech in Parliament? We need not tell
what Tales they have published of the Deaths of Beza, Calvin, Luther, Henry
VIII, Queen Elizabeth: nay, some had the confidence to give out, that King Vid
Purchase Pilgrimage, l. 9. c. 3. page 831. Edit. 1614.
James was turned Romanist, and had sent to the Pope about it. And to conclude
this, no less man then Monsieur de la Milletiere has, without question, truly
placed King Charles the Martyr in Heaven, but had a great deal of Assurance,
when he could hint and insinuate to us, as if the said King dyed in the La
victoire de la verite, Epist. au Roy de la Gr. Brit. p. 78, 79, 80.
Roman Religion. And as for his affirming that none can go to Second Discourse
Politic, p. 37.
Heaven but of the Roman Church, I believe it like the former stories, and so
join it with them; and so he might have spared his pains in dedicating them to
King Charles II.

But, Gentlemen, to take off these slanders from my Mother the Church of
England (the freest from established blemishes of any in the World) and as we
say, to set the Saddle upon the right Horse, was this Treatise by way of a
retort undertaken. And for my so doing, I need no other Apology, then the words
of your own Protestants Apol. Preface to the Reader, 7.
Mr. John Brerely, or as some think Anderton; thus.

-- Being therefore thus provoked, or rather urged, it will not, I hope, seem
offensive to the Discreet and Sober [Romanist] against whose confessed loyalty
I hereby intend nothing, if I but a little examine, not what I can, or am
provoked to object, but what is by our Learned Adversaries themselves confessed
and reported on the contrary part. Wherein (courteous Reader) if much contrary
to my disposition and thy liking, I do somewhat enlarge my self in more fully
opening those things, -- I am not without all hope of Pardon, especially
considering that the foresaid Occasion, which compels me (so unwilling
thereof) is in it self so provoking, uncharitable, and exceeding.

But here it may be objected by some Roman Catholics, that in the following
Assertions, and Histories of King-deposing, I do but belie and slander them,
falsify and corrupt mine Authors, and so cheat and abuse my Readers: For the
Romanists (forsooth) never taught disobedience to Magistrates, never allowed
Kings to be deposed; nor could the Pope and Cardinals (the true Mar. de
Alteriis de Censuris Eccles. Tom 1. lib. 5. disp. 14. cap. 1. page 655.
Representives of the Roman Church) being infallible, especially in such solemn
things as Bulls and Breves, publish such destructive Doctrines.

In Answer to this Charge, I hope I shall return enough to clear my self, by
affirming, first, that the Doctrine or words are none of mine, but their own,
as appears by the Quotations of their Authors. Secondly, If in the multitude
of these Citations, I have by haste or chance (not by design) mistaken some,
it no way contradicts the Doctrine it self, which is held so Universally by
them, as will appear presently hereafter, by the Testimonies and Confessions of
the Romanists themselves. Thirdly, That herein I do not intend all, that
pretend to be the sons of the Roman Religion; there being both in England and
France many Noble and worthy Persons of that Persuasion, who do detest and
abhor this King-deposing Principle. But whether in so doing the Pope does look
upon them as true sons to him and his Church, I shall leave to the
determination of the Romanists themselves: And if in this there be any doubt or
dispute, we may suppose the Pope, Cardinals, and their chiefest Doctors about
them, may best understand the meaning of their Roman Church, and so more
capable to decide the Question; which is one reason that I all along use the
word Romanists, as those adhering to the Church at Rome, or that which is
taught there by the Pope as true Doctrine. Fourthly, For the better
Confirmation of this Assertion, I have showed and proved these Treasonable
Positions from above two hundred of their own approved Authors. But if this
number be not sufficient, Sexcentae doctorum and Pontificum My^^ades, omnibus
Eloquentiae nervis and ^nixissime laborant persuadere a summis pendere
Pontificibus usum Imperialis Gladii, and Regios sasces dare and adimi, Romani
Praesulis arbitratu. Jul. Taboet. Ephemerid. Hist. Tom. 2. page 30.
Julianus Taboetius, a French Civilian, does assure us long ago, that there had
been six hundred thousand famous Writers in behalf of the Pope's Authority to
Depose Kings and Emperors at his pleasure.

Fifthly, You shall plainly see that it is not I, that lay these King-deposing
Principles to your Charge, but your own selves or Brethren, the Chieftains of
your Church. So if you deny the Point, do not say that I have slandered you,
but rather say, that your Popes, as Gregory VII, Boniface VIII, Sixtus V, Pius
V, etc. rather say that your Cardinals, as Bellarmine, Baronius, Allen, Rather
say that your Saints, as Bo^aventure, A^^inus.
Perron, etc. rather say that these, with your other chiefest Doctors, Divines,
Schoolmen, Canonists, Lawyers, with your great est Scholars and Writers, have
belyed and slandered you and your Religion; rather then I, who am only the
Instrument to convey to you the Words, sentiments and belief of these your
grave Oracles; leaving at your own discretion, either to approve or reject them.

For if you doubt or question the truth of this Assertion, -- According to the
Church of Rome, Kings may justly and lawfully be deposed -- [it being nothing
to the purpose, which way, or by what knavish distinction]. The true-blew
Romanists will positively assure you, that it is a truth so certain, that not
so much as any one do make any doubt of it. For, as says Bellarmine, -- It is
agreed on by all: -- Nor amongst the Schoolmen is there any Controversy about
it, nor can they show one Catholic Author against it. And to say that Kings
may be deposed, is a golden sentence; and this is not a mere Opinion, but a
certain truth amongst all Catholics. And that this may be justly done, none
but a Madman will deny.

Decianus says that it is the true and common Opinion; so that Germonius
affirms, that it is madness not to believe it: It is now evident and
conspicuous to all, says Mancinus and Capistranus. Botero would have us believe
that it is ridiculous to think otherwise; or as Gretser says, to deny this
King-deposing Doctrine, as the same to deny the Catholic faith: And this he
repeats over and over again, that he might be the better believed; and offers
at some reason for it too: which he need not have troubled himself with to have
convinced King James, seeing his Majesty would easily believe him, if by the
Catholic Faith, he meant the Roman Religion, as we need not question but that
he did.

In behalf and vindication of Allegiance in King James his time, was here
published by Authority a little Book called God and the King. In opposition to
this Tract, is another Dialogue printed by the Romanists beyond Seas, and also
called Deus and Rex; wherein is affirmed that this King-deposing Doctrine is
doubtless the suffrage of all men.

Gregorius Nunnius Coronel tells us, that if we should read all the Ancient
and Modern Divines and Lawyers, we shall find that they do unanimously affirm
this Doctrine; and those who think otherwise, are not only far from truth, but
madmen. If you ask Cardinal Perron of this thing, he will tell you, that it was
always the judgment of the Roman Church, that all Magistrates and Divines
maintained the same; and to believe the contrary, would make them Schismatics
and Heretics, or else the Church must have failed, and so the Pope not to have
been Christ's Vicar, but a perfect Heretic and Antichrist. If you advise with
Adolphus Schulckenius Vicar General of Colen, he will plainly tell you, that it
is the judgment of all their Divines, Lawyers, Councils, and Popes: that he is
no good Catholic that denies it, which cannot be opposed without great
rashness and blasphemy: and no less man then Cardinal Allen assures the
Catholics, that by maintaining this Principle, they are no Traitors, nor hold
Assertions Treasonable, false or undutiful. His friend Father Parsons says
that it is asserted and taught in all the Schools, both of their Divines and
their Lawyers; and that the Doctrine is certain, and must be believed as an
Article. And again, that it is the most certain undoubted Common Judgment of
all the learned Catholics. And in another of his Books, thus he assures his
good Romanists: -- All Catholic Subjects also of other Countries do hold and
acknowledge this Doctrine.

If this Doctrine be not true, Sanctarellus will have the Church to err; and
Suarez affirms that it is as certain, as it is certain that the Church cannot
err: That to believe otherwise, is against Ecclesiastical Custom, the practice
and agreement of the General Councils; against the opinion of all learned
Catholics, and against reason it self: Nay, in short, that to believe the
contrary is downright and flat Heresy, as several of them tell us: Carerius
calls it the very Heresy of Calvin, and suchlike Heretics [meaning in not
allowing the Pope to have power to depose Kings] and Solarzanus testifies the
same, with this addition, that it has been formerly condemned as Heretical.

No less man then Leonardus Lessius (though under the disguise of Singletonus)
tells us, that to think that Kings may not be deposed, is expressly against the
great Lateran Council: whence he makes these following Conclusions; and the
same method and arguments are also used and approved of by Cardinal Bellarmine.

I. If Kings may not be deposed, then of necessity must that General Council of
Lateran have erred; and not only this, but also that of Lion, that of Vienna,
that of Constance, etc. nay, that the very Council of Trent it self must also
have erred; and also not only these his General Councils, but also several
Provincial ones.

II. If this King-deposing Doctrine be not true, then must the Popes themselves
also be fallible; for then must Gregory VII have erred, Urban II have erred,
and so must also Gregory IX.

III. If this Principle be not true, then must also the Church it self have
erred for many Ages; nay farther, to have erred willingly or maliciously, with
a design or on purpose: And that Hell has prevailed against the Church; and
so the Roman Church not to be a true Church, nor the Church of Christ.

IV. And if the Church, Councils, Popes, have erred in this, they may also err
in other Articles, as the Sacraments, Trinity, Incarnation, etc. and that with
greater ease and facility; whereby Christ must be a Deceiver; and so we may
suspect the whole Christian faith it self.

Thus you see the judgment of their so much cried up holy Lessius, who farther
assures us, that to deny this Doctrine, is the mere cunning and instigation of
the Devil. Again, That there is scarce any Article in the Christian Religion,
the denying of which is more dangerous to the Church, then this Doctrine.
Again, That it is more pernicious and intolerable, then to err concerning the
Sacraments. And to conclude with him, he at last conjures all that call
themselves Catholics, upon their Salvation, to have a care how they deny this.

For as Coquaeus will tell you, this King-deposing Doctrine is agreeable to the
holy Scriptures, and the Rules of Christ. Another assures us, that to doubt of
the truth of it, would seem not only to oppugn the verity of the Christian
Faith, but to savor of perfect Heathenism.

But not to trouble my self or Reader with their zeal and resolution in defense
of this King-deposing Doctrine (in which I might be endless) I shall tell you,
that no less man then our Cardinal Allen declares his judgment in these very
words -- God had not sufficiently provided for our Salvation, and the
preservation of the Church and Holy Laws, if there were no way to deprive or
restrain Apostata Princes. The foresaid Coquaeus says, that otherwise Christ
had not sufficiently provided for the safety, either of the Commonwealth, or
of our Souls. And Petrus Bertrandus positively declares for the former
Principle, that if such a deposing Authority had not been, that then Christ
Jesus had not shown himself wise or discreet; or, as Father Parsons says, Gods
providence had been defectuous. And when Johannes Mariana, the so noted Spanish
Jesuit, had in one of his Books so expressly maintained the lawfulness of
killing bad Kings, upon which the said Book was censured; I meet with an
English Romanist, thus to vindicate or justify the said Book -- They are
enemies to that holy Name [i. e. of Jesus] that condemned Mariana for any such
Doctrine.

Nay, so zealous are some for this King-deposing Doctrine, that with De Politia
and Immunitat. Eccles. part 4. cap. 50.
Laurentius Ortiz de Iberrola, they will assure it the only safety and
preservation for Princes. But King James, who thought himself not a little
concerned; and therefore thus delivered his opinion to his Parliament: --
Speech in Parliament 1605. Vid. his works, page 504.
As on the one part many honest men seduced with some errors of Popery, may yet
remain good and faithful Subjects: so on the other part, none of those that
truly know and believe the whole grounds and School-conclusions of their
Doctrines, can either prove good Christians or good Subjects.

And yet, if for all these grand Testimonies, they should plead their
Allegiance, and their respect to Princes; I could ask why all Books writ
against this King-deposing Doctrine, are censured and prohibited by their
Indices Expurgatorii; whilst on the contrary, those who affirm it, are
published* with honor, as true and authentic: and if Agapetus above a
thousand years ago, speak honorably of the Imperial Authority, the V.
Bibliotheca Patrum.
Expurgatorian Index must stifle it with some worshipful gloss or other. And if
any should deny this to be the Doctrine of the Roman Church, I should gladly
know, where is the judge? whether the Popes themselves, the Cardinals, their
greatest and most famous Writers, as Bellarmine, Baronius', Perron, etc. do not
understand what are the Tenants, and the meaning of the Roman Church, as well
as some private Englishman here; and whether we are not to believe the Popes
Cardinals, and their learned Doctors, before the said private person.

Thus are the Romanists as stout and zealous for this King-deposing Doctrine,
as the Mart. Martin. de bello Tartar. page 45, 107, 121, 157.
Chinese were for their Beards; and do adore and worship this destructive
Tenet, as the old Cainites did Cain, because he was the first man-killer; or
the Ophitae, who worshipped the Serpent, because he was the first deceiver, and,
as they say, the Author of good and evil.

Thus the Romanist may perceive what danger he runs himself into, if he dare
but offer to oppose this Treasonable Principle, seeing to deny it is madness,
flat Heresy; nay Paganism, contrary to the judgments of Popes, Councils, and
the whole Church, nay, the Gospel of Christ; a more intolerable Heresy then to
err concerning some of the Sacraments; nay, so gross an one, that it does
destroy the very Church and Gospel it self: wherefore they persuade us, that
all good and sound Catholics must believe that Kings may be deposed, seeing
all who are truly Romanists, and Sons of that Church, do and must believe so.

Thus these men are like Polychronius, who would rather err with Macarius,
then be in the right with others; and this Doctrine must be the Shibboleth to
distinguish them from other Christians. There is a Sect in Spain called Anton.
de Torqu^meaa, Dia^og. 3
Saludadores, who are known by a knack of curing many Diseases, as a gift
peculiarly belonging to them: those of the House of Luis Du-May Estate of the
Empire, p. 73.
Austria are known by their long chins, and thick lips; and, as they say, are
particularly blessed with other Graces, as to cure Wens by giving only a Glass
of Water, and to unloose the Tongue of him that cannot speak plain, only by
kissing. Thus the Monarchs of England do the King's Evil; and in Brecknockshire,
within two Miles of Brecknock, there is a Lake called Lhyn Savathan, or
Linsavethan, or Brecknock mere; of which Itiner. Cambr. lib. 1. cap. 2.
Giraldus Cambrensis tells us, that the birds there will sing at the desire of
the Prince of Wales, but no man else; so that it is the best Rule to know the
true Prince; of which matter Polychron. lib. 1.
Ranulph Higden, Monk of Chester, thus Poetizeth.

Si Terrae Princeps venerit,
Aves cantare jusserit:
Statim deproment modulos
Nil concinunt ad caeteros.
Which I find thus translated to my hand by John Trevisa, the old Vicar of
Barkley, almost three hundred years ago.

If the Prince of the Land hoote,
Briddes singe well merry noot,
As merrily as they can,
And singe for none other man.
And so this King-deposing Principle they will have to be the Characteristical
note, whereby a through-paced or true Romanist man be known, who must answer to
none but their Prince at Rome, and whose commands they must not disobey. And
should any one now begin to teach them Allegiance, and the pernicious
consequences of this Doctrine, which by length of time has had such a sway
with them; probably it might be as great a novelty and strange to them, as the
(e) people, who after a long Interdiction, d Sextus de Se^tent. Excot^^c. Alma
Matter. Gloss. v. Insurgunt.
were so unused to Devotion, that they laughed at the Priests when they came
again to say Mass, and pray with them; for some will not leave an old Mumpsimus
for a new, though better Sumpsimus.

As for the Romanist's distinctions (the better to maintain these Treasonable
Assertions) of Direct, Indirecte, Proprie, Improprie, simpliciter, secundum
Quid, Absolute, in Ordine ad Spiritualia, and suchlike whimsical Save-alls,
they have not only been derided by those of the Pet. Molin. de Monarch.
Temporal. Pont. page 87. Jo. Buckeridge Episc. Roffens. lib. 2. cap. 5.
Reformed Church, but also by several Romanists themselves, especially of the
Caron Remonst. Hybern. p. 236, 237.
latter stamp: and of such cheats as these, thus says Father More ample
account, page 28.
Welsh -- In Ordine ad Spiritualia, and the cheat of a verbal distinction, the
trick of abusing two other words, Direct and Indirect, and these two very new,
altogether unheard of in this matter, till some Caprichious heads brought them
unfortunately to the Schools, of mere design to make people loose themselves
in words, by confounding right and wrong together, and the fignification of
both -- And so nothing need be said against such childish inventions, being
nothing to the true and real design of the positive Doctrine of King-deposing,
which is the thing we treat of, without any idle evasions: A knack or knavery,
only fit for those Romantic or Melancholy Don Quixot Virtuosi, who love to be
called Schoolmen, whose Trade is only to rack Divinity and Reason, and to
smother up Truth with insignificant distinctions, and never think themselves
knowing enough, till they can tell the color, dimension, weight and contexture
of all Vices, Virtues, or Actions; a sort of people that can be zealously grave
upon empty nothings, and like the little Spirits in Mines, idly keep a great
deal of clutter and toil without any proficiencie; like Lib. de Mirabilibus.
Aristotle's madman, who took as much pleasure, and was as observant in an empty
Stage, as others at a real Act. But it may be these may take it ill to have
their distempers corrected, like the fellow in Epist. lib. 2. Epist. 2.
Horace, who was angry at his friends for curing him of his Madness, protesting
he had lost his life and greatest happiness: yet in some men, this study is
convenient, because it is fit our enemies should be fought with at all their
respective Weapons.

But why should we blame the good-natured Romanist for espousing this
King-deposing Doctrine, seeing he has such grand encouragements for his so
doing; and has such fine, pretty, sweet Rules laid down for his guide, that it
is almost an impossibility for him to sin? and to make him the more bold and
confident in any daring Enterprise, they have invented two excellent Crutches
to support the undertaker, and help every lame Dog over the Style; and are
called by their Masters in this Science,

The two Rules of Directing the Intention. Probable Opinion.

By which is taught (if we may credit either the Vid. les Provinciales.
Jansenist or Vid. Responces aux Lettres Provinciales, page 103, 104, 105, 108,
110, 111, 115, 116, 334.
Jesuit) that if you mean well, though your actions and deeds be bad, all is
safe; and that the judgment of one or two Doctors or Divines, is enough to
make an Opinion to be probably true; and that which is thus rendered a Probable
Doctrine, may honestly without sin be followed and perpetrated; and the Priest
and Confessor is obliged by his Office to absolve such an one, for his thus
acting according to the probable opinion. And what wickedness may be committed
under the protection of such deluding Salvo's, is no difficulty to conceive.

But suppose, that for all these Guards and Protections, it were possible for a
Romanist to sin in any of these his undertakings, yet is there Pardon to be had
Dog-cheap, according to the old and careful Custom of their Mother Church of
Rome; for it is but trudging thither, and they are cock-sure of Absolution: of
which a few instances, for their greater comfort, take as follows.

At St. Peter's Church in the Vatican, from the Ascension of Christ, to the
Calends of August, is every day granted pardon for 14 years. At St. Paul's
Church is every day granted pardon for 18 years. Pope Silvester granted to any
one that shall but enter such Churches at Rome, pardon for 47 years. In the
Church of St. Agnes are pardons for 46 years. In the Church St. Maria Maggiore
is every day granted pardons for 48 years. In St. Paul's Church, upon every day
of his Conversion, is granted pardon for 100 years. In the Churches of St.
Lucia, of St. Elizabeth, of St. Clara, are every day granted in each of them
pardons for 100 years. In the Church of St. Catherina are granted pardons for
200 years. In St. Agnes Church, on his Feast Day, are also granted pardons for
200 years. In St. Susanna's Church are pardons for 200 years. In the Church Del
S. Croce, upon every Sunday and Wednesday are granted pardons for 254 years. In
St. Sebastians Church there is a pit where the bodies of St. Peter and St. Paul
(as they say) lay hid an hundred years before they were found; at this place
pardons are granted for 300 years. In St. Martins Church, where St. Silvester
was buried, are every day granted pardons for 300 years.
But because some may think, that these few hundreds are not enough to satisfy
for the journey, their Indulgent Mother has enlarged her bounty to thousands,
as follows.

In St. John's Church, in the Lateran, is a Chapel called Sancta Sanctorum,
not far from which is an ascent of 33 steps; and how if a man shall ascend
them, for every step he shall have 1000 years pardon, in all 33000 years. In
St. Peter's Church, upon every Feast of St. Peter, St. Paul, and the Virgin
Mary, and the Ascension of Christ, are pardons granted for 1000 years. In St.
Sebastians Church, from Christ's Ascension to the Calends of August, are every
day granted pardons for 1000 years. In St. Maria Maggiore, upon every
Feast-days of St. Mary, the Birth and Resurrection of Christ, and St. Laurence
his day, are pardons for 1000 years. In St. James his Church, they say, there
is a stone upon which Christ stood, when he was presented in the Temple; and at
it are granted pardons for 1000 years. In St. Catherina's Church, upon her
Festival, are pardons for 1000 years. In St. Petronella's Church are pardons
for 1000 years. In St. Minerva's Church are pardons for 1000 years. In the
Church St. Maria Annunciata, for every day one shall visit it, are granted
pardons for 1040 years. In the Church St. Maria del Popolo, are every day
granted pardons for 2800 years. In a Cloister adjoining to St. Paul's Church,
upon every Sunday, and some other holy days, are pardons granted for 3000
years. To whomsoever that shall drink of the three fountains where St Paul was
beheaded, whose head, when cut off, gave three leaps, and so made them; is
granted from every Fountain a thousand years, in all 3000 years. Whosoever
shall but visit the Sepulcher of St. Stephen and St. Laurence, in St.
Laurence's Church, to him is granted pardons for 7000 years. In St. Paul's
Church, upon the day of its Dedication, are pardons granted for 8000 years. In
St. Peter's Church in the Vatican, in the high Altar, is the Hankirchief, which,
they say, Christ wiped his face with, and since that bears his picture; which
is some times ^hew'd to the people; by virtue of which the Roman people have
pardons granted for 7000 years. Those that dwell out of Rome have 9000 years.
Those that live out of Italy, and come to see it, have pardons for 12000 years.
In short, in St. Sebastians Church, there is a vault wherein the Christians in
old time of persecution used to hide themselves; and to this Vault, they say,
do belong so many pardons and Indulgences, as none can number but only God.
But what need we stand fiddle-fadling about the numbers of years, seeing the
Church of Rome is so brisk, debonnaire, frank and free to her sons, that rather
then to give them any disincouragement, she will venture all her interest and
credit for their sake; and in this her stock is so great, that we cannot
suppose her to be bankrupt; for rather then fail, she will pardon them for ever
and ever, as may appear in what follows.

In the Church of St. John the Lateran, is a Chapel called Sancta Sanctorum,
in which there is every day pardon and remission for all sins, both from the
punishment and the sin also. In St. Peter's Church in the Vatican, by the Font,
is every day remission of all sins to be had. Also in the same Church, upon St.
Martins day, there is to be had full remission of all sins. In St. Paul's Church
in the Vatican, upon the XXIX of January, being the day when the Church was
consecrated, there is then to be had remission of all sins. In the Church of
St. Croce, is a Chapel called Jerusalem, where is to be granted full
remission of all sins, both a poena and a culpa. In the Church St. Maria
Maggiore, upon All Saints day, there is granted full remission of all sins. In
the Church St. Maria Rotonda, upon the third of May and All Saints day, are
pardons for all sins to be had. In the Church St. Maria del Popolo, on the day
of Assumption of the Virgin Mary, are granted remission of all sins. In the
Church of St. Peter's ad Vincula, are remission of all sins to be had. In the
Church called Ara Coeli, or St. Maria Ara Coeli, where, they say, is the first
Altar that ever was made in the world; at which Altar there is every Sunday,
and upon the Assumption of the B. Virgin, granted full pardon and Remission of
all sins.
These and such other like Indulgences were formerly Fiscus Papalis, sive
Caralog is Indulgentiarum, etc.
published in England by Mr. Crashaw, from an old Manuscript which he had; and
I have also seen an old MS. 196. K Digby in Bibl. Bodl. ^xon.
M^nuscript to the same purpose. But what need we trouble our selves with
Manuscripts, seeing the same things may be seen in feveral Indulgentiae
Eccl^siarum urbis Roman, Impressum Romae 1509. Le Cose maravigliose dell' Alma
citta di Roma 1625. Onuphrius de urbis Romae Ecclesiis. Le Ste^r de Villamont
ses voyages. Vid. Weave^s Funeral-Monuments, page 160, 161, 162, etc.
Books, made, printed by them, and published by their Authority, to procure the
greater credit and belief for suchlike pardons as these.

This occasioned so many Pilgrimages to Rome, to the great enriching of that
City, and the wonder of Johannes or Janus Pannonius, the Hungarian Poet, and
Bishop of Funfkirken, or Eutegyhazae, in Latin Quinque Ecclesiae; who, though
of the Roman Religion, yet could thus jest at the gadding of People from other
Countries to Rome for Pardons at their Jubilees.

Hispani, Galli, Solavi, Teutones and Hunni Delit. Poet. Hungar. p. 274.

Clavigeri petitis limina Sancta Petri:
Quo ruitis stulti Latios ditare penates,
Salvari in patria siccine nemo potest?
The Spaniard, French, Pole, German, and the Hun
Unto St. Peter's Chair for Heaven does run:
Whither, O fools! to enrich the Popes do you gad?
As if salvation cannot at home be had.
Yet Indulgences were also granted to particular places in other Countries:
amongst the rest, England (being then free-handed to Rome) did not want such
pretty Indearments, whereby the people were made as free from sin as Jo. Fox,
vol. 3. page 223.
Nightingal the Priest in Queen Mary's days; and of them might be said, as was
thus in an old The. Becon's Relics of Rome, fol. 193. b.
printed Pardon,

John or Joan, as free I make thee,
As heart may think, or eye may see.
And their Power and Prerogative is so great, forsooth, that they cannot only
pardon past sins, but sins to come, or what you will commit afterward; of
which King Meditation on the Lords Prayer. p. 58.
James does protest that he has seen two Authentical Bulls with his own eyes:
And of this the Gravam Germ. 3.
Princes of Germany at Nurnberg (1523) did publicly complain; and that your
friends soul should skip out of Purgatory, when the cash ratled in the Basin.
And how liberal they used to be with their Pardons, De Schism. lib. 1. cap. 68.
Theodorick a Niem (who was Secretary to three Popes) has of old hinted; and
Dr. Manuduction to Divinity, page 64, 65, etc.
Thomas James will refer you to some more abuses.

And though they are willing to be no loosers by these favors, yet their
prices are cheap enough; which probably may the sooner engage or oblige some
trusty son to act any Villainy, the rates of their Absolutions being so cheap;
of which take this following Taste, as I find them set down in their Taxa S.
Cancellariae Apostolicae.

Sect. III. Tit. 2.
ABsolution for him who lies with a Woman in the Church, and committed other
crimes, is rated at 6 The common value of a grosso is about 4 penny sarthing of
English money; but some in this occasion will make it about 1 s. 6 d.
grossos He that keeps a Concubine, if a Priest, must pay for his Absolution 7
gros. If he be a Layman, he must pay 8 gros. If a Layman commit Sacrilege by
taking holy things out of holy places, he is well used, seeing he pays no
more for his Absolution then 7 gros. If a man carnally lie with his Mother,
Sister, or other Kinswoman or God-mother, he shall have his Absolution, paying
5 gros. Absolution for him that deflowers a Virgin, is dog-cheap at 6 gros. If
a Priest commit Simony, he shall have his Absolution for paying 7 gros.
Absolution for Perjury is but 6 gros.
Ib. Tit. 6.
If a Layman kill an Abbot, a Monk, a Clerk, or other Priest less then a
Bishop, he shall only pay for his Absolution (according to the Quality) 7, 8
or 9 gros. But if a Layman only kill a Layman, he shall then only pay 5
gros. If a Woman be with Child, and she willingly and on purpose destroy the
said Infant within her, she shall have an Absolution for 5 gros. And if one
kill his Father, Mother, Brother or Wife, he must pay for his Absolution 1
Ducat, and 5 This is sometimes valued at the same with a Grosso.
Carlins.
This Book was published by their own Authority, it may be the better to let
the Romanists see what a kind, loving, and indulgent Mother they have: But how
often it has been published I cannot tell.

It was W. Craf^^aw's Mittim^s to the Jubilee of Rome, Epist. to the Reader.
first made and printed at Rome, in the time of Pope Leo X, and was after
printed at Paris (1522) the Pet. Molin. de Monarch. Temp. Pont. page 355.
Kings Privilege, and the Popes Bull being joined to it. 'Twas the next year
(1523) printed at Laur. Banck. Taxa Epist.
Colen; and afterward in that Noble Collection, called Tractatus Illustrium
virorum, printed by the King of France his Privilege at Lions 1549. This Taxa
was also then published Tract. Illust. Tom. 16.
amongst them. And though Claudius Espencaeus, the famous Sorbonne-Doctor, was
so ashamed of this Book, to be thus by Authority so publicly printed and sold,
that he solemnly Liber palam ac public hic Impressus hodieque ut olim venalis.
Cl. Espenc. Com. in Titum, cap. 1. Digres. 2.
complains against it, yet he gained nothing by it, but the ill will of the
Grandees of the Roman Religion; those his Comments upon Titus, being called to
an account by their Index Expurgatorius, and this passage against their Taxa
commanded to be dashed out, lest, it may be, it should discredit their ware, and
so spoil their Trade and Market. And afterward when these foresaid Tractatus
Illustrium were by the command of Pope Gregory XIII augmented, and by the care
of Franciscus Zilettus published at Venice 1584, this Taxa was also Tom. 15.
part 1. fol 368, etc.
reprinted, and with the rest dedicated and presented to the said Pope.

These several Editions (and probably some others) of this Taxa published by
Authority of the Romanists themselves, take off all Replies, as if it might be
a cheat: and to this may be added, that the Learned De Tyran. Papae, p. 544,
545, 546, 547.
Laurentius Banck [who also of late reprinted this Taxa with his Notes upon it]
does assure us, that to his knowledge and eyesight, the same pardons and
abuses are at this day publicly practiced at Rome. And it is not unworth the
observation, that though of late Pope Alexander VII has in his Index
Expurgatorius placed the Taxa, yet he excepts nothing against the foresaid
Editions, or those printed by the Romanists, but only against that lately put
forth with Bancks his V. Taxa.
Notes or Annotations, or which have been corrupted by V. Praxis.
Heretics; though I think it would puzzle him to prove any such corruptions.

Thus you see, you may name your sin, and pardon is to be had at a small rate;
nay, they have been so kind, that rather then want your custom, they have sold
Pardons for Sixpence, a Groat or Twopence, a game at Tennis, a Cup of Ale; and
with some kinde-natured Women they have made more pleasant bargains.

And here, for the honor of these Money pardons, a merry story or two should
not be taken amiss. In the time of Leo X, Mart. Chemnit. (...) Council. T^dent.
part 4 de Indulg. O^h^. Miland. Joc^-seti^, 44.
Tetzelius was sent into Germany with multitude of Pardons to advance money for
the Pope (which were then first opposed by Luther). It Is said that this
Tetzelius affirmed that he could also pardon sins to come; whereupon a German
Gentleman bought such an one of him, and afterward robbed the Dominican
Pardoner: Tetzelius threatening him, the Gentleman pleads he had bought his
Pardon for it, declaring that was the sin he determined to commit: to which
Tetzelius could not reply.

About the same time, a Shooe-makers Wife buyeth a Pardon, in which was
expressly indulged her, that her soul should fly to Heaven as soon as she was
dead. At last the woman dies, and is buried; but her Husband gives nothing to
the Priest to pray Wulph. Muscul. loci communes, page 394.
her soul out of Purgatory: Whereupon the Shoemaker is accused to the
Magistrate, who chides him for having no care of his Wives soul: the fellow
pleads that there is no need for any Mass for it, seeing her soul was in Heaven
before she was buried; for proof of which, he shows the Popes Pardon: a
Testimony so Authentic, that they durst neither deny it, or the Pontifick
Authority; whereby the Cobbler came off clear.

But another story I meet with, where the Judge being a party, he was not so
honest in his determination; in short thus: A German Mat. Flav. I^leric. de
S^ctis Pap. page 220.
Gentleman, according to his Fathers will, paid yearly such a s^m to a
Neighboring Monastery, that the Monks therein should pray for the deliverance
of his Fathers soul out of Purgatory. At last, the Gentleman understanding that
they bragged that they had Pardons which could deliver any soul, he buys one of
them for his Fathers soul; which for more certainty was confirmed by their
Monasteries Seal, and subscribed by their General and themselves. Thus being
cock-sure of the happiness of his Fathers soul, he refused afterward to pay
them the Annual Stipend he used formerly to do: whereupon the Monks appeal to
the Bishop, who gravely Decrees, that the Gentleman must continue the payment,
though his Fathers soul were quit from Purgatory by the former Pardon.

But because some may be unwilling to trudge as far as Rome for Pardons, or to
go any whither else upon suchlike Pilgrimages; and others, either through
poverty or covetousness, may grudge to give any thing for their Absolutions,
which they suppose should be given them freely: therefore the Popes (good
souls) not willing to give the least discontent to any of their Children have,
out of their good nature, and fullness of Authority, afforded them Pardon and
Heaven at as easy and lazy a rate as heart could wish; and they need not
question the Authority of their Popes, seeing it is a sure Rule, that when his
Holiness gives Plenary Absolution, Quando Papa concedit plenariam
Absolutionem, intelligitur, quod absolvit tam a culpa quam a poena quoad omnia
peccata quantumque enormissima. Vid. Domin. Card. Tusch. Practicarum
Conclusionum juris, Tom. 4. v. Indulgent. 6.
It is to be understood, that he absolveth as well from the Punishment, as the
sin, be the sin never so great or abominable.

And as for these so frankly and freely bestowed Indulgences, for the honor
and comfort of the English-Romanist, I shall go no farther for them then the
Horae Beatae Virginis Mariae.

And this according as it was used at Salisbury: and in this I shall only
follow the Edition of Paris 1527, because the greatest cost and care has been
taken in that Impression, both for Pictures and Ornaments, of any I have yet
seen. And now bless your eyes, and behold the Popes Treasure opened.

Pardon for days. Vid. Fol. 165. a.

Pope John XXII has granted to them that shall say this Prayer, Ave Fol. 73. a.
caro, Christi caro, etc. at the Elevation, pardon for 100 days. Pope Celestine
has granted to them that shall say in honor of Fol. 58. a.
the B. Virgin this Prayer, Ave mundi spes Maria, etc. pardon for 300 days.
Pope John XXII has granted them that shall say this Prayer, Fol. 61. b.
Stabat Matter dolorosa, etc. pardon for 300 days. Pope Anastasius has granted
to them that say this prayer, Domine Fol. 84. a.
Jesu Christ, etc. pardon for 500 days. Pope John XXII has granted them that
say this prayer, Anima Fol. 72. b.
Christi Sanctifica me, etc. after the Elevation, pardon for 3000 days. Pope
John has granted to them who shall say this prayer, Precor Fol. 76. a.
te amantissime Domine, etc. before a Crucifix, as many days of pardon as there
were wounds in Christ's body at his Passion, which the Rubric says were 5465.
But another Edition [ viz at Paris 1534.] tells us thus:

Pope Benedict XII, made this prayer ( Gratias ago tibi Domine, Fol. 40. b.
etc.) and gave to all them that devoutly said it, as many days of pardon as
our Lord had wounds, that is 6646 days. So here you must take your choice, but
consult first, which of the two Popes is to be believed. Pope Innocent II has
granted to them that shall say this Prayer, Fol. 86. a.
Ave vulnus lateris, etc. pardon for 4000 days. Pope John has granted to them
who shall say this prayer, Miserere Fol. 165. a.
Domine animabus, etc. as many days of pardon as there are Christian bodies
buried.
Pardon for years.
Pope Innocent has granted to them that shall say this prayer, Fol. 73. b.
Salve lux mundi, etc. at the Elevation, pardon for 7 years. Pope Boniface has
granted to them that shall say this prayer, Fol. 61. b.
Stabat Matter dolorosa, etc. pardon for 7 years and 40 Lents. Pope Gregory has
granted to them that shall say these five little Fol. 79. a.
prayers, Ave manus dextra Christi, etc. with five Pater Nosters, five Ave
Maria's, and a Credo, pardon for 500 years Pope Boniface VI has granted to
them that shall say this prayer, Fol. 72, 73.
Domine Jesu Christ, etc. pardon for 10000 years. Pope Alexander VI has
granted to them that say this prayer, Fol. 92.
Ave Maria gratia plena, etc. pardon for 10000 years. Pope Sixtus IV has
granted to them that say this prayer, Ave Fol. 56. b.
Sanctissima Maria, etc. before the Image of our Lady, pardon for 11000 years.
Pope John XXII has granted to them that shall say these three Fol. 80. b.
prayers, Domine Jesu Christ, etc. pardon for 1000000 years.
And though this last pardon be for a pretty number of years, viz. ten hundred
thousand, yet they will go a little farther, and assure the Romanists, that
whosoever of them shall say a prayer, Fol. 77. a.
beginning O Deus Propitius esto mihi, etc. that his soul shall not Fol. 86.
enter into Hell. And they will give you another prayer, at the saying of which
you shall be past both Hell and Purgatory. And of late days the English have
been very careful to procure such Pardons and Absolutions, as appears by some
of them published by Mr. New Shreds, p. 77, 78, etc.
Gee, to whom I shall refer the Reader.

But as for Purgatory, whose particular description of every hole and cranny in
it, and what pretty sport the Devils have there, you have at large described to
you by Matthew Paris, Philip Osullevan, and others; and of the particular cheat
of St. Patricks little hole, Bishop Jones has given a sufficient Narrative. I
say, as for Purgatory, there need no great care or trouble to be taken, seeing
that Mass is not worth a rush that cannot deliver a soul thence, especially if
said by the Monks of Cluny Abbey; in the time of whose Abbot See their
Legendaries, 1 Jan. and 2 November.
Odilo, the place and intrigues of this tormenting Cavern were fully discovered
to mankind: And it was an unlucky observation of a German, that if there be a
Purgatory, souls could not stay long there: of which take the story thus in
short.

This merry fellow of Antwerp was accused to the Inquisitors, L^d. Lavater. de
Spect^is, part 2. c. 13. M. Fl. Illyrie. defectis Pap. page 219.
for saying amongst his companions, that there was no Purgatory; and in behalf
of himself thus pleaded, -- That according to the Sermons he used to hear,
there was either no Purgatory, or no souls in it; for we are taught that Turks,
Jews, Pagans, Heretics, and the wicked go forthwith to Hell, and none goes to
Purgatory but Penitent Christians; of which there is no great number, as you
daily lament and complain. We are also taught that every Mass delivers one soul
out of Purgatory; and besides, multitude of souls are delivered by Pardons and
Indulgences; and it is plain that there are more Masses said then Penitent
Christians dye; whereby it follows, that there is either no Purgatory, or
that it is empty. -- At which, the Inquisitors knowing this used daily to be
preached, let the Wag go, but chid him for meddling with that which did not
belong to him.

According to this, Purgatory is no such Bugbear; so that nothing is now left
to deter a Romanist from committing what he pleases, but the fear of Hell it
self: Yet the bold Roman need not cool or stagger his resolution for this,
seeing the Pope has such an Interest and Authority in Hell also, that even
thence he can deliver the tormented soul, as some D. Damascen. Sermon. de
desunctis. Jo. Diac. vit. Greg. apud Surium. Vincent. Belluacens. Spec. Hist.
l. 10. c. 68. Antonin. Chron. part 2. Tit. 12. c. 3. 8. B. Brigittae Revelat.
lib. 4. c. 13. Abulens. 4 Regum, c. 4. q. 57. Barth. Medina in 3. D. Thom. q.
52. art. 6. Ric. de Media villa in 4. sent. did. 45. art. 2. q 1. Sigebert.
Gembl. Chron. an. 592. Go^frid. Viterbie^s. Panth. part 15. Sixtus Senens.
Biblioth. lib. 6. Annot. 47. Fill. Be^gamo. Chron. fol 284. Zac. Lippello. 12
Mart^i.
Romanists affirm; else why should they tell us that Pope Gregory the Great
redeemed the Emperor Trajan's soul, and St. Tecla did Falaonilla's? and in
Vindication of the former, no less man then Alphonsus Ciaconius has published
a particular Book, where you may see more: and if they can do thus for Pagans,
what may they not do for the sons of their own Church? And no question but that
his Holiness will venture much of his credit to redeem a soul of one of his
sons from Hell, when he would allow his friends to make use of the Devil for
the amendment of their bodies, as it is said Pope (c) Nicholas V once indulged
an intimate friend of his. Vid. Sennert. lib. 6. part 9. cap. 8.


The Predestinarian Turks, under the notion of having their Fortune writ on
their Foreheads, joyfully venture their beings upon the greatest hazards: and
it has (c) formerly been observed, a His mercium nundi^^tionibus simul and
spoliato est aere Germania and Christi pietas extincta, quando quilibet (...),
quod in has merces expenderat, modo peccandi impunitatem sibi pollicebatur:
hinc Stupra, Incestus, Adulteria, Perjuria, Homicidia, Furta, Rapinae, Foenera,
ac tota malorum Lerna semel originem sibi traxerunt. Quod enim malorum amplius
jam horrebunt mortales, quando sibi peccandi licentiam ac impunitatem nedum in
vita, sed and post obitum (aere licet immodico), comparari posse a
Nundinatoribus illis Indulgentiarlis, semel persuasum habent? -- Verum si quis
unde numeret, habeat; jam nedum Praesentes Indulgentur harum constitutionum
transgressiones, sed and in futurum impune, ut eas ipsas transgredi liceat,
indulto permittitur. Quo fit ut ansam inde accip^ant ii, cum quibus ita
dispensatum est, Pejerandi, Homicidia, Adulteria, and similia flagitia
perpetrandi, quando quilibet ex Sacerdotum vulgo, Absolutionem emptitiam
virtute indulti his impartiri potest. Gravam. German. 3, 6.
that the true Romanist would boldly commit any villainy, under the security or
shadow of these Pardons or Indulgences, which he by Tradition supposed to be
Protection enough both to himself and sins.

But what need we talk of guilt or sins, or trouble our heads about procuring
Indulgences or Pardons? as if he that is obedient to the commands of the Pope,
and a through-paced son of the Roman Church, could in his so doing, either
commit the one, or stand in need of the other.

As for the Church of Rome, to which this grand All-obedience is due, it is
nothing else but the Cardinales cum Papa constituunt Ecclesiam Rom -- Quare
Episc. jurans fidelitatem Ecclesiae Romans and Papae and successioribus ejus,
obligat se non tantum ipsi Papae, sed Collegio Cardinalium. Mar. Altercus.
disput. de Censuris Eccles. Tom. 1. lib. 5. disp. 14. cap. 1. page 655.
Pope and his Cardinals, as some say; or, as others will have it, by the Church
there is nothing else to be understood but the Jacob. Gretser defens. Card.
Bellarmin. lib. 3. cap. 10. col. 1450.
Pope, whose almighty Infallibility is not to be called in question.

Therefore if there be any doubt of any thing, the Holy Scriptures, Andr. du
Val de Ecclesiastica and Politica potestate, page 88, 89.
and other such means must be thrown aside, as being doubtful, and like the
Lesbian or Leaden Rule, may be bended this way or that way, and so may serve
for any mansturn; they must therefore not be credited or trusted to. And so
none is to be judge but the Pope, who in his determinations cannot err,
neither of right, or matter of fact: for which we need go no farther then the
positive sentiment and judgment of their grand Masters the Jesuits of their
College of Clermont, in their public Theses, published by themselves to be
held, vindicated, and maintained against all the World; and that of very late
days, as appears by part of it as follows.

XIX Christum nos ita caput agnoscimus, ut illius Regimen dum in Coelos abiit,
primum Petro, tum deinde Successoribus commiserit, and EANDEM QVAM HABVIT IPSE
INFALLIBILITATEM concesserit, quoties ex Cathedra loquerentur.

XX Datur ergo in E. R Controversiarum fidei Judex Infallibilis, ETIAM EXTRA
CONCILIVM GENERALE, tum in Questionibus Juris, tum FACTI, etc.

Propugnabuntur, Deo Duce and auspice Virgin, in Aula Collegii Claromontani,
Societatis Jesu, die XII Decembris 1661.

We acknowledge Christ so to be the Head ( of the Church) that during his
absence in Heaven, he has given the Government thereof, first to Peter, and
then to his Successors; and bestowed unto the Popes his Successors THE VERY
SELF-SAME INFALLIBILITY WHICH HE HIMSELF HAD, as often as they speak e Cathedra.

There is therefore Constituted in the Church of Rome an Infallible Judge [i.
e. the Pope] of Faith, and that even without a General Council, as well in
questions appertaining to Right, as in matters of Fact.

These shall be defended, by the assistance of God, and the favor of the
Virgin, in the Hall of the College of Clermont, belonging to the Society of
Jesus, the XII day of December 1661.

And by their Canon Law, it is as plain as a Pike-staff, that the Popes Did.
19. c. Si Romanorum.
Decretory Letters, not only carry Authority along with them, and what he Ib.
c. Enimvero.
commands to be obeyed, and are to be received as if they were the very words
of Ib. c. Sic Omnes.
St. Peter; but they are also to be reckoned and esteemed as authentic as the
Word of God, or Ib. c. In Canonicis.
Holy Scriptures themselves.

Therefore, they say, it is Did. 40. c. Non nos Gloss. Quis enim
Sacrilege to question the Popes actions, and downright Did. 81. c. Si qui
sunt.
Paganism not to to obey him: and he is 25 q. 1. c. Generali decreto.
cursed of God who violates the Popes Censures; so we must be Extra. Com. l. 1.
Tit. 8. c. unam Sanctam. -- Si quid quod oculis nostris apparet album nigrum
illa esse definierit, debemus itidem, quod nigrum fit, pronunciare. Ignat.
Exercitia Spiritualia apud finem, Regulae aliquot servandae ut cum Orthodoxa
Ecclesia vere sentiamus. Reg. 13.
obedient to him upon peril of our Souls.

And no less man then their late great Saint, Ignatius Loyola, lays this down
for a certain and perpetual Rule of Obedience:

If the Church affirm that to be black, which our own eyes judge to be white,
we ought also then to declare that it is black. And we are not to question the
Truth and Authority of this Rule, being so strongly confirmed, commended and
ratified by the 1548.
Bull of Pope Paul III, as every thing also is, which is contained in the said
Exercitia Spiritualia: and how can any thing be amiss in it, if it was, as some
say, by Inspiration from Heaven dictated to Ignatius?

And now who dares call himself a son of the Roman Church, and not be of the
same Religion with the Pope? be of the same Opinion? Obey his commands and
dictates, seeing there is no difference between the sentiment and judgment of
the Sententia Papae and sententia Dei una est sententia. August. de Ancona, Q.
6. art. 2.
Pope, and that of God: and what a grand Power and Authority the Pope has, for
diversion sake take them thus in verse, out of Andrew Melvin, from their own
Writers.

Quod Paepa Romanus vult, norma est juris and aequi; Delit. Poet. Scot. vol. 2.
page 150.

Quod Papa cumque facit, ratum habet Deus aethere in alto;
Posse Papam quodcunque Deus; par, aequa potestas
Cumque Deo Christoque Papae commune Tribunal.
Est major Paulo Papa: major foedere prisco.
Contra Evangelium statuit Papa, Scriptaque Pauli,
Articulos fidei condens, Oecomenicumque
Concilium cogens, decretaque sancta reformans.
Si currus plenos animarum ad Tartara trudat
Secum ipse, haud quisquam potis est contendere contra,
Dicere cur facis hoc? Stat pro ratione voluntas.
The Papal Fiat of all right is the guide;
What he does here, in Heaven is Ratified:
He acts as God, their Powers so equal are,
And God, Christ, Pope, have but one judgement-chair.
Then Paul or the Old-law, he is more great and true;
He can command against Paul and Gospel too.
Can frame new Rules of Faith, the old Casheer;
And over General Councils domineer.
If he to Hell millions of Souls should draw, 40 Did. c. Si Papa.

Yet none must ask him why? His will is Law.
Nor need this seem strange to those who are assured by good Authority, that
some have held the Pope for no less then a -- Aestimant Papam esse unum Deum,
qui habet potestatem omnem in Coelo and Terra. Johan. Gerson. Tom. 2. Resolut.
circa materiam Excommunicationum and Irregularitat. Consid. 11.
God, and accordingly could command all both in Heaven and Earth.

Tindal disputing with one thought a Learned Doctor, drove him to that issue,
that he burst out, -- We had better be without Gods Laws then the Popes. --
Tho. Fuller's Abel Redivivus, page 127.

Thus you see the more then Hogan Mogan Authority (of which you shall hear more
hereafter) of your Infallible Lord; whereby you cannot do amiss, as long as you
obey his hests and commands, be it against King, Country or Parents; for
against all these it is said that he has a jurisdiction to hound you. And for a
farther encouragement, he makes no small use of the word Heretic; and all
must be such, who do not swear, right or wrong, to him or his Church. And if a
Governor be not of the Roman Church, and so by their consequence be an
Heretic, this following Treatise will tell you what is to be done with him:
and their Bulla Coenae Domini, published every year at Rome and other places on
Maundy-Thursday [the Thursday before Easter] will tell you how they are Cursed
and Excommunicated to the purpose. And according to the Non enim e^s homicidas
arbitramur, q^os adversus Excommunicatos Zelo Catholicae matris ardentes
aliquos eorum trucidasse contigeret. 23. q. 5. cap 147. Excommunicatorum.
Canon Law, he that kills an Excommunicated person, in mere Zeal for the Roman
Church, does not incur the crime of Homicide.

Amongst other things, this Bull damns to the Pit of Hell all those who shall
assist or carry Arms to any Heretics: upon which (c) Marius Alterius starts
this Quaere: a De C^nsu^is Ecclesiasticis, lib 5. Disput 8 cap. 2. page 527. ^^
postulabit quis.


If such prohibited things be conveyed to the subjects of a Prince expressly by
the Papal sentence declared an Heretic; whether then, the Conveyers are by
this Bull Excommunicated?

To which the said de Alteriis gives this doughty and Roman Answer:

If the Subjects (under the Heretical Prince) to whom the Arms are carried, be
of the Roman Religion, hate their Prince, and desire (if they have ability) to
free themselves from his Tyranny or Government; and to that end, do secretly
seek Arms, to employ them at the first opportunity for the destruction of the
said Heretical Prince; then, as this great Doctor thinks, the Aiders or
Assisters do no ways incur Excommunication.

Thus would they intrude upon us a pretty Salvo for Treason, and no small
encouragement for Rebellion, if to Depose Kings may be titled such.

Again, the Popes Infallibility, being by some so highly cried up, it is no
hard matter to make a good-meaning Romanist believe, that it is his best and
safest way to obey the Pope in every thing he commands, though it were
against his King and Country; of which this following History will afford many
instances: and this King-deposing Doctrine being so stiffly maintained as a
grand Article, by their most Authentic Papal Writers, the inferior Romanist
will think himself obliged to credit it, and his great Judge the Pope, who if
he did err in this point, how can they rest assured that he did not err in
other points of Faith? to retort Joh. Clare The converted Jew, part 3. page 17,
Michaeas his Rule.

But concerning Infallibility, I find a war amongst themselves; and our
English men, when it comes to a pinch, are as unsettled as they think their
Neighbors are.

Father Controversie-Logick, page 212, 213.
White (one of very desperate Principles as to Government) does in the name of
the Romanists, flatly deny that the Pope is Infallible, affirming the contrary
to be Injuriously imposed upon them by Sectaries: And Father Remonstr.
Hibernorum, part 5. cap. 28. p. 85, 86, etc.
Caron (of better Tenants then the former) is of Opinion that the Pope with any
other assistance whatever (unless a General Council) may err; and this of late
he undertakes to prove at large. And farther, White confesses, that it is not
yet known where this Infallibility lies: For, says he, -- Controvers. Log. p.
96.
some place it in the Pope, some in a General Council, some in both, some in
the whole Church. And a later Writer, grants several Infallibilities. --
Labyrinth. Cantuariensis, page 177.
The Infallibility of the Church* Councils and Tradition, depend so necessarily
upon each other (that) whatever Authorities prove the Infallibility of any one,
do in effect, and by good consequence prove the same of all the rest.

But methinks we need not stand so resolutely upon Religion or Church, since
the Author of Fiat Lux assures us, that Time will alter any Religion. -- Fiat
Lux, page 73, 74.
A Religion once established, be it true or false (when it is once received, it
is then taken for true;) in the space of some succeeding ages is reformed anew
by other Teachers or Interpreters, who in time lead men out of the former way
into their own; sometimes slowly, gradually and insensibly, that they are
brought into another Religion before they be aware: sometimes by open hostility
to the former, which whether by Covin or violence, yields at last to the
Ingress of a new one.

If thus Religion it self will vary and alter in time, there needs not be such
a confidence placed in their Infallibility: and yet it is pretty to observe,
that this their grand Rule, which on all occasions they call to their
assistance, they do not know where to fix or find; and that which must judge
the rest, is of it self unsettled and uncertain. And they grant that a Church
that is S. W. Schism. disarmed, page 22, 26, 28.
fallible may lawfully be forsaken. But this by the by, and I shall confess
nothing to the purpose, as being besides my design, and so the less careful in
its hasty scribbling.

As for this King-deposing Doctrine, though it be positively taught and
believed at Rome, by Pope, Cardinals, their greatest Doctors, and every where
by those whom his Holiness looks upon as through-paced sons to him and his
Church; and those who absolutely deny this Article (as Widdrington, Caron,
Barckley, etc.) are with their books censured and prohibited, as rotten,
unfound and false ware: yet in Countries far enough from Rome, when this point
comes to a pinch and a serious debate, then we shall see some of them, like
Coton, and the other French Jesuits, to have two Consciences, one at Rome, and
another at home.

As when any mischief is done, the Child cries Nobody did it, thereby
thinking to secure it self: so now, when some Kings and Princes have looked
upon this King-deposing Doctrine as wicked and dangerous; we have some of the
secular Priests, and some French of a freer humor, will throw all the fault
upon the Jesuit, and would gladly make the world believe that all other Roman
Catholics are innocent as to these accusations, being true Subjects to their
Prince, and Enemies to Treason or Sedition; and that the contrary Principles
are only taught by the Jesuits: to which Order, many other Catholics having
no good will, make it their business to expose them, as much as they can; and
this Quarrel is now grown to such an height, that there appears no signs of a
Reconciliation; which every day weakens the Papal Authority, and may in time
squeez that jurisdiction within its own narrow limits.

The truth is, some other Orders think the Jesuits carry too high an hand, and
others suppose them too busy and active in State Affairs, and have been the
Fomenters of many troubles and Wars in Europe; to which purpose I meet with
this biting Character.

Martem norunt animare
Et Tumultus suscitare
Inter Reges and sedare.
Tanquam sancti adorantur,
Tanquam Reges dominantur,
Tanquam Fures depraedantur.
Dominantur temporale,
Dominantur spirituale,
Dominantur omnia male.
Hos igitur Jesuitas
Nebulones Hypocritas
Fuge si Coelica quaeras.
Vita namque Christianv
Abhorret ab hoc doctrina
Tanquam ficta and Insana.
Another will offer these Anagrams upon the word JESUITA,

ES VITIA, and
SEVITIA.
I, non es vita at VITIA ES and mortis Imago,
Et Saevitia dans vim tibi nomen erit.
But this following, for its brevity and pithiness, may carry away the Bell:

Seductor Sueco: Gallo Sicarius: Anglo
Proditor: Imperio Explorator: Davus Ibero:
Italo adulator: dixi teres ore, -- Suitam.
Nay, the very Spaniards, though great admirers of the Papal Prerogative, and
might have some respect for this Order, their Founder Ignatius being their
Countryman; yet have some pique against them, as appears by this Libel, found
in the Spanish Court, by way of the Jesuits Ten Commandments.

Los Mandamientes de los Teatinos
Mas humanos son que Divinos.
1. Adquirir mucho dinero. 2. Sugetar todo el mundo. 3. Buen Capon, y buen
Carnero. 4. Comprar Barato, y vender caro. 5. Con el blanco aguar el tinto. 6.
Tener siempre el lomo en siesto. 7. Guardarse bien del sereno. 8. Obrar lo suyo
y lo ageno. 9. Hazar del Penetente esclavo. 10. Mesclarse en casas d'estado.
Estos diez Mandamientes se encierran en dos:
Todo para mi, y nada para vos.
The Ten Commandments the Jesuits sign,
Are far more Humane then they are Divine.
1. Great Riches see you do procure. 2. Bring the whole world to your lure. 3.
Eat fat Capons, and the best cheer. 4. Buy but cheap, yet sell full dear. 5.
Water your red wine with white. 6. Lie with ease, and warmth at night. 7. Keep
you from the ill evening airs. 8. Do your own and others affairs. 9. Make
slaves of your Penitents. 10. Plot in State-deeds and Events.
These Ten Commandments are thus made two;
All for my self, nothing at all for you.
But too much of this Learned Order, whose exact or Blind Obedience (as their
Founder words it) is maligned by some others, Caeca Obedientia.
who have faults enough of their own; and make a clamor against these Fathers,
not that the other are of sounder principles, but thereby to turn people eyes
upon another Object, that their own faults might not be take notice of.

But though Clark and Watson, the two secular Priests, ranted dapperly against
the Jesuits, as the only Teachers and Instructors of Sedition and Treason; yet
scarce was a year turned round, but these pretended good Subjects were taken
napping in Rebellion, and accordingly had their reward. And as for the Tenants
of the Jesuits, I find the Fathers Reply to that Objection, that On dira
tousiours que Bellarmine, Gretserus and les Pe^es Jesuits en corpse and en
particulier, ne croyent and ne croyront, n' enseignent and n' enseigneront
autre chose que ce qu' en croit l'Eglise. Responce Apologetique a l'Anticoron.
page 90.
neither Bellarmine, Gretserus, nor any other particular Jesuit whatsoever, do
teach any thing but what is held for a truth, and believed by the Church it
self.

What they mean by the Church of Rome, we have told you from themselves
formerly; and it is certain that according to History, the Pope has been so
active in maintaining this Kingdeposing Doctrine, and so furious and active
with his Sword, that even honest Pasquin thought himself obliged to keep to the
Proverb, Whilst thou art at Rome, do as they do. And thus to Apologize H^nr.
Estten. ^pol. pour Hered. p. 382.
for the Pope, and answer all Objections.

Quum tibi non aetas habilis sit Caeraphe bello,
Et castris habeas cognita claustra magis:
Quum desit miles bellique pecunia uervus,
Quis te praecipitem cogit ad arma furor?
Infirmis humeris damnata quid induis arma?
Quae tibi cum libeat ponere, non liceat?
Cur respirantem and curantem vulnera mundum,
Concutis and Martem solus ad arma cies?
Da miseris requiem and spatium concede malorum,
Si nobis Pater es, si tua cura sumus.
Conde senex gladium, and Christi reminiscere berbi;
Quod dixit Petro, dixit and ille tibi.
To this, Pasquino, (one would think a doughty Romanist) thus returns an answer
in behalf of his Holiness.

Quod dixit Petro Christus, nolim esse putetis
Dictum (Pontificum pace Petrique) mihi.
Nam neque sum Petri successor, nec quoque talem
Agnoscit bona pars Christicolorum hodie.
Pauli ego (successu coeptis meliore deinceps
Dii faveant) sumpsi nomen and arma simul:
Et Christi verbi memor intrepidusque minister,
NON VENI PACEM MITTERE, SED GLADIVM.
And now Gentlemen, though at the beginning I gave you (I hope) good Reasons
for this my undertaking; yet because the other discourses intervening might
possibly dash them out of your memories, give me leave to reminde you of them,
with this previso, that I think my Mother the Church of England a good Church,
and the King our Sovereign a true and lawful King.

And therefore (in short) when I find a compact amongst your (b) Jesuits,
never to give over their attempts, till they have ^t^er ruined themselves, or
reduced England to their Romish obedence.

When I find S. W. Schism. disarmed, page 181.
you declare that our Kings have forfeited the claim to the Title of the
Defender of the Faith.

When I find you refuse the Oath of Allegiance, one reason being, because it
will not allow the Pope to have a true right and authority to depose Kings, and
to absolve subjects of their Oaths of Allegiance.

When I find you in your very Image of both Churches, page 171, 172.
Apologies for your selves, confess the Romanists to be but conditional
Subjects, i. e. only to one of your own persuasion in Religion; as is farther
proved all along in this History, that Heretical Kings may be deposed.

When I find you in your late Vid. The Roman Clergy of Irelands Remonstr.
before P. Welsh's more ample Account.
Remonstrance and Petition to his present sacred Majesty King Charles II. come
off so bluntly in relation to his Majesty's life, and your own loyalty, in
these really insignificant, yet too much significant words. -- And we do hold
it impious, and against the Word of God, to maintain that ANY PRIVATE SUBJECT
MAY KILL or MURDER the ANOINTED of God, HIS PRINCE, though of a different
belief and Religion.

And what will they have to be the meaning of these idle words? though they
will not have a Ravaillac to kill a King, will they allow of an English Rump,
or a French League to order the same? though they will not allow a private
person, will they think it legal, if done by a Representative, a Popular
Convention, or the three Estates? But a word is enough to the wise; and it is
dangerous sometimes to speak too plain.

When I find your selves confess that even since the happy Restoration of his
Majesty, -- P. Welsh more ample Account, page 32.
Some of you have given sufficient demonstrations of their failing in the duty
of good Subjects; and that some of your Tenants have been Id. p. 43, 44.
inconsistent, and injurious to good Government.

And yet for all this, to take upon you the confidence of declaring to the
world your innocence and loyalty, and that Treason and Sedition are only the
Principles of us English Heretics (the Puritan and Phanatick, I grant, are as
wicked as your heart could wish) for so you are pleased to nominate all those
who are true sons of the Church of England: Upon these slanders, in respect of
this Church, I could not but think my self obliged to show to the world where,
as to this case, the truth is; and in so doing, show my self a dutiful son in
vindicating his Mother.

A Church famous for her Loyalty and Sufferings; not one of her Constitutions
intrenching upon the Crown, nor any of her sons faithless or rebellious to his
Prince: whereas that of Rome, by her Popes, Bulls, Constitutions, Penmen and
Swordmen, have destroyed Nations, harras'd Kingdoms, Dethroned Emperors,
Deposed and Murdered Princes, trampled upon Crowns and Scepters: In a word, has
declared -- Illos quod bella civilia abhorrerent, a nobis and Imperio deficere
nollent, crimen laesae Majestatis, scelus perfidiae admittere recusarent; --
Haeresios nota inussit. Jo. Aventi^. Annal. Boiorum, lib. 7. page 613.
Loyalty a Crime, Treason a sign of true Roman Religion; looked upon her self
as the Supreme Judge of the world in all cases; usurped a power to dispose of
all Dominions, to dethrone Monarchs, and absolve Subjects from their Oaths of
Allegiance.

Some may fancy Surata 76. Edit. lat. 1550. or Surat. 66.
Mahomet in his Alcoran, the first absolver of Oaths; and that Pope Zachary
presently after put it in practice against Childeric King of France.

But letting this pass, we have it from good Authority, that there were
formerly a Sect amongst the Turks called Assasini [whence we say to
Assassinate;] they lived in the Mountains of Phoenicia toward Tire: their
Government and chiefest Laws were Mat. Paris page 83. Hen. Spelman glossa^ium,
Assasini.
these. Their Governor or Master was not Hereditary, but Elective.

He under the Notion of Humility, as if he would be only the servant of
servants, refused all lofty Titles, being only called the Old man of the
Mountains.

Was honored and worshipped as Vicar to Mahomet, and so their Father and
Prophet.

They pretended to be such exact Observers of their Turkish or Mohammedan Laws,
that all other seemed but as mere cheats, or Non-conformists in respect of them.

They were led with that Blind Obedience, that they never questioned their
Masters command: be the action never so dangerous, difficult or wicked, they
never left off till it was finished.

Any Prince whom they either hated, or thought to be no friend to them or their
party, upon the least hint they would Murder, though they were sure to suffer
for it.

Whosoever murdered a Prince, that was not of their Religion, they believed
him to have the second place next to Mahomet in Paradise.

For they also believed that the Old man, their Head and Prophet, could also
dispose of Paradise.



It Is said that this Sect was long ago destroyed by the Tartars; and whether
any who call themselves Christians have espoused their Tenants, I shall not say.

But to return. As for the Pope, though the Pagan King of Peru might call him a
Hier. Benzo Hist. Nov orbis, l^b. 3. cap. 3
great impudent fool; though the great Turk might call him the Jo. Gerhard.
loc. Theolog. Tom. 5. de Ecclesia, 294.
King of Fools; or though Marbizan the Mohammedan might term Pius Il's Bulls
only Hist impressa ante Alcoran. Edit. lat. 1550. p. 99.
Epigrams: yet it may seem to go hard, when those he pretends to be his own
sons should show no more respect to him; as when Philip King of France called
him Your Foolishness; and the Emperor Maximilian I, should say he was only
Discourse d'un Bourgeois de Paris sur les Pouvoirs de Cardinal Chigi legate en
France, p. 80.
King of Fools. But methinks Sancho, Brother to the King of Arragon (if my
Author mistake not, another only says Spain) was most ingeniously even with
his Holiness; and bit the closer, by seeming to do him L^uys Garan le chasse
Ennuy-Cent. 2. 3.
the greater honor: the story in brief thus.

Pope Adrian IV supposing he had Authority to dispose of all Kingdoms in the
world, gave to the former Sanctius the Land of Egypt, then in Possession of
the Sarazens; yet he should have it, if he would take but the small pains to
conquer it; and accordingly at Rome proclaims him King of Egypt: so bountiful
and noble was this English Breakspear. Sancho informed of this, would not be
behinde-hand with his Holiness in courtesy, and so very gravely proclaimed the
Pope to be Caliph of Bandas, which he might also conquer and possess if he
pleased.

Yet others there are (as may be seen in this following Treatise) who are more
wide on the other side, and will be satisfied with nothing, but I know not what
strange Almighty Faculties, Authorities and Blessings adhering to the Pope. As
if they were related to George the Suffragan of Erfordt, who was so zealous in
Oath. Meland. page 521. 428.
his commendations of Boniface Dorneman, the little Priest of Hallandorp, that
he told his Auditors that he was more learned then St. Paul, more holy then the
Angels, and more chaste then the Virgin Mary: Or like the German Boor, who at
Marpurg in Hessia, thus saluted and desired the assistance and favor of Judge
Burckhard. -- O Eternal and Omnipotent Lord Vicegerent, I have heard Id. 572.
that you are the very Devil and all in this Court, therefore for Gods sake put
an end to my Trial.

But now some Princes begin to see their own Rights and Prerogatives, are
sensible how unworthy their Predecessors have been abused, and begin to
understand that their Power is Independent; neither receiving their Rights from
Rome, or her Popes, but that their Crowns were given them from Heaven; and that
rather, the Popes have been like that Bird in the Fable, and made use of of old
by the Franciscan Friar Jehan de Rochetaillade [by some Jehan Froissard. Chron.
Tom. 2. fol. 182, 183. Edit. 1530.
called de Rupescissa] which Bird being born without Feathers, was through
Charity relieved and made gay by other Birds; and thus perk'd up, despised her
Benefactors; who at last not able any longer to suffer her pride and tyranny,
every Bird plucked back again their own Feathers, leaving her as naked as she
was at first. And the truth is, the Popes have done with the Empire, as the
Snake in the Fable did with the Husbandman, who finding it almost frozen to
death, in pity brought it to the fireside, where by the warmth having
recovered strength and vigor, all the thanks it returned was the stinging of
the Goodmans Children.

And for these ungrateful actions, many have undertaken to foretell strange
Judgments and Calamities to happen upon the Popes. But though for mine own
part, I am no great admirer of our later Prophets, and trouble my self with
their odd Predictions no farther then for recreation; yet seeing the Romanists
have put such a strange confidence in those Relations of their Swedish St.
Brigit [or Birgit] as to declare that they were all immediately inspired by God
himself; and not only canonized the Lady, but by several Bulls and Authorities
so confirmed the truth of her Book, that it must not be contradicted: yet if
they will but seriously look into her Revelations, they will find little
reason to boast so much of them, seeing they will find few so Revelat. S.
Brigit, lib. 1. cap. 41.
Zealous as this Saint against the Pope and his Assistants, prophesying with
bitterness their ruin and destruction.

That his assumed grand Authority has of late sensibly decayed and lost
ground, is manifest; and this Conquest has been not so much by the Sword as
the Pen: so that as Adeodate Seba formerly Delit. Poet. Gall. Tom. 3. page 678.
writ of Luther (one against whom many lies have been published, as other men
having his passions and failings) may also be said of many other learned
Penmen.

Roma Orbem domuit, Romam sibi Papa subegit;
Viribus illa suis, fraudibus iste suis.
Quanto isto major Lutherus, major and illa,
Illum, illamque uno qui domuit calamo.
I nunc, Alcidem memorato Graecia mendax,
Lutheri ad Calamum ferrea clava nihil.
Rome tamed the World; the Pope, Rome Conquered, ties;
She by her force, He by deceipts and lies.
How greater far then they was Luther, when
Both him and her, he conquered with one Pen!
Go lying Greece, vaunt thine Alcides; though
His Club compared with Luthers Pen's a straw.
But amongst these Learned Worthies, I have nothing to do: And am apt to think
that all this time has been bestowed to little purpose, either because of mine
own insufficiency, or the too much resoluteness of some other people. However,
I might have made better use of my time, in regar'd of mine own advantage, had
I soon enough called to mind Juvenal's observation.

Vester porro labor foecundior Historiarum S^t. 7.

Scriptores, petit hic plus temporis atque olei plus,
*****
Quae tamen inde seges? terrae quis fructus apertae?
Quis dabit Historico, quantum daret act a legenti?
Do you Historians more then Poets get?
Although more time and charge your works befit;
No, no, what gain you by your toil? where is he
Will give the Historians an Atturnie Fee?
In the compiling of this History (such as it is) I have not dealt with the
Romanists as the Hotheaded Puritans used to do, whose strength of Arguments
lie chiefly in canting, misapplying Scripture, confidence and railing; and if
they can but make a noise with the Whore of Babylon, Antichrist, the Beasts
Horns, etc. they suppose the Pope is confuted sure enough, at least the good
Wives and Children are frighted out of their little wits, and take him to be
the strangest Monster in the World, with so many Heads and Horns; insomuch,
that Pope Urban VIII did not amiss, when he desired some English Gentlemen to
do him only one courtesy, viz. to assure their Countrymen, that he was a man
as much as themselves.

And had he said a better Christian then the Puritan, I should not therein have
troubled my self to contradict his Infallibility: for I think them to be the
worst people of all mankind. A Sect that will agree with you in the
Fundamentals of Religion, but will take mi^^, and destroy all for a trifle; and
rather then submit to an innocen^ Ceremony, though imposed by lawful Authority,
will ruin Kingdoms, Murder Bishops, Rebel against their Soveraig^^ Banish
Queens, declare them Traitors, Imprison and depose then Kings, and make the way
as plain as can be for their mur^^^. A Sect that will cry down Bishops, to
possess their lands; (...) the Kings Great-seal, imprison him, renounce his
Authority, and murder his best Subjects; and yet cry out they cannot commit
Treason: In short, a Sect that would hate Christ, but that he said he came not
to bring peace but war.

As for the Roman Catholic, I must needs have a greater kindeness for him,
then the former firebrarnds, as being an Adversary more Learned, and so to be
expected more Civil and Gentile; and wherein they differ from us, they look
upon as Fundamental, and so have a greater reason for their dissent then our
Phanatical Presbyterians, a people not capable of a Commendation, nor to be
obliged by any Favors; their very Constitution being ingratitude, as Histories
do testify, and King James himself does acknowledge as much.

In this Treatise, I hope I have behaved my self civilly with the Romanists,
having forborne all bitterness and railing; though the many bloody and
unwarrantable actions that I here meet with, might prompt a milder man then my
self to some indignation; which may somewhat Apologize for me, if by chance any
do either meet with, or fancy a stricture or retort tending to dislike. And
yet I dare boldly say, that they shall not find any such heavy Censures and
Severities, as some Romanists are apt to throw upon the Reformed Churches.

Mr. Confut. of the Apology.
Harding will allow us to be nothing else but -- Fol. 114. b.
wicked Chams brood; -- that we -- follow the steps of Proph^ne Hell Hounds; --
are -- 121. b.
Cursed Canaanites, -- 131. b.
Rebellious sons -- d^spisers of God -- 222. b.
Apostates, Renegates, Epi^ures, Turkish H^gueno^s, and Heretics who be worse
then Devils. Another of his acquaintance assures the world that we -- Tho.
Hide's Consolatory-Epistle, G. 1111.
have no Church no Bishop, no Priest, no Altar, no Sacrifice, and consequently
no God. Another breaks out in these words, -- Miles Huggard displaying of
Protestants, fol. 114.
O wicked men! worse then the Devil your father, of whose progeny you are
lineally descended. Another of our Countrymen, Calvino-Turcism. page 806, 854.
William Reynolds (brother to the Learned John) is very favorable to us, when
he allows us to be as good as Pagans or Turks; his main business being to
make the world believe that a Turk is more capable of Heaven then the
Protestants, And the same harsh Censure is used by his friend and Publisher In
Argumento praefix. Calvino-Turcismo.
Dr. Gifford, affirming that our Gospel is in nothing better, but in many
things worse then the Alcoran.

Nay, so severe are they, that they will not allow us to be civil one to
another; all commendatory expressions being forbidden; their Indices
Expurgatorii using no other Complement but this, -- Author Damnatus. Nay, we
must not so much as keep one another picture, though privately, not excepting
either our Friends, Parents, or the King himself; only one exception Institut.
Moral. part 1. lib. 8. cap. 16. ult. Quaeritur.
Azorius grants (thanks to him for his courtesy) viz. the Pictures of such
Protestants may be kept and looked on, if they be drawn by way of scorn and
derision; as for instance, says he, if Luther be painted burning in Hell, O
then, that may be lawfully preserved and gazed on.

For there it is they will have us all to be: Motives, Mot. 36.
Bristow's words are these -- Whosoever in this new faith and service has
ended his life, is in Hell most certainly. The Jesuit Gretser is of the same
opinion, viz. Apolog. pro Ignat. Loyol. lib. 1. page 183, 184.
that no Protestants go to Heaven: and others of them are so particular, that
they will hold it impossible for Queen B. D de Cle^imond Answer to King James
his Proclamation, page 140.
Elizabeth to be in Heaven. Nor is this any such wonder with them, who have the
sole keeping of Heaven-Gates, and will let none in but themselves: Whereby they
uncharitably exclude many a good Christian, King Charles our late holy Martyr,
and some of his good Subjects, who suffered Butchery only for their loyalty,
which might have some interest in merit, if the grand Champions of it would
assume some Charity. A virtue which the Italian Proverb will not allow any man,
such a general disease will it have Envy to be. For,

Se l'Invidia fosse una Febre,
Tut' il mundo morirebbe.
Had Envy been a Fever, then
Ere this, had failed the Race of men
Long since.
It Is said, that the Jews are obliged to rail three times a day against (...)
Sene^sis (...). Sanct lib. 2. de Traditione, de Talmad.
all Christians, whom they are to account no otherwise then Brutes or Beasts;
to pray for the destruction of their Princes, and to do them what mischief they
can. But I wish better from the Romanists toward their fellow Christians,
though in all things they do not jump. And whilst they think they are too sure
of their own Salvation, they might reflect upon the doubts of some of th^^^
In^a^lible Heads: As Manu mensam percut^ens, divit, Non video, quomodo q^^
locum hunc al^ishmum tenet, ^^^va^i possint (...) vit^ (...) page (...).
Marcellus II, who seriously protested, that he could not conceive how a Pope
could be saved. And Pius V. could say -- When I was in Orders, I had pretty
hopes of my Salvation; when I was made Cardinal, I had less; but since I came
to be Pope, I almost despair of it. Not that I am such a peevish zealot, or a
positive Gabriel Powel, but can easily think, that Jesus Christ dyed also for
Popes, as for other people, who may accordingly be partakers of his blood and
merits, i^ they lay hold on them.

In choice of mine Authors I have been diligent, not willing to let any
Historian slip me; yet making use of those, who have been generally received as
the best: and to do the Romanist a pleasure, I have very seldom made use of a
Protestant. Where I find a Faction, I consult the Writers and Reasons on both
sides, and hope have been so luckie, as to set the Saddle on the right Horse.
But if it be objected, that any of my Authors are partial, as favoring the
Emperors more then the Popes; Father Remonstr. (...), (...) 2. p. 178.
Caron has lately answered for me, by affirming that the same may be retorted
upon those who inclined to the Roman Prelates. And if it be again said, that
any of them are Schismatics, because supposed to oppose the Pope, the said ^^.
page 177, 178.
Romanist replyeth, that by the same Rule, we must sometimes affirm all
Germany, all France, the greatest part of Italy, and so the Princes, Bishops,
Councils, Provinces, Clergy, people of Europe, and by consequence the better
part of the Church to have been also Schismatics.

I am far from the cheating humor of some Modern Writers, who the better to
conceal their theft and Plagiary, cry out that it is Pedantick and Ungentile,
to tell what Books they made use of; as if they were of the Rosycrucian
whimsie, who, forsooth, is not Jo. Heydon's Harmony of the World, in the
P^stscript.
bound to give any man so much satisfaction: For he that takes upon him to
scribble so slightly and cheap, intends to impose upon, and so to abuse and
cheat his Reader. I have therefore been exact and punctual in my Quotations:
and to give the Reader the more satisfaction, where any thing of moment or a
stress happens, I have in the Margin [as the most proper place] given the
Authors own words, whereby the Reader may judge the more conveniently, whether
I have abused him and the Author. And as I resolved at first not to take any
thing upon trust [a cheat too commonly practis'd] but to view the Writers my
self: so can I not remember that I have broak the Rule; not but that other
Writers have prompted me to many Citations.

If any think, they could put a more moderate Interpretation on some Writers,
and so render their opinions less wicked and treasonable then I have; I might
here in my defense, justly demand the same privilege and favor that Father
Image of both Churches, page 72, 73.
Pateson the Jesuit desires in the same case, viz. -- Nor do we insist so much
here, what studied or strange sense may possibly perhaps be put upon his words;
but how they sound outwardly, and how they are apt to be understood by the
Common people; who do not usually Vid. Father Parsons three conversions of
Engl. part 3. page 306.
stand much pondering about words, but take them a^ they sound; especially when
they sound liberty, or any thing agreeable to their corrupt passions and
humors, as these do. -- And this I thought not amiss to mind the Caviller of,
that he may note, that we have a trusty Romanist thus to befriend us in some
things; which favor, if he think it not fitting for me to desire, let him
judge the same also of Pateson, and I am satisfied, seeing I may expect as much
privilege as he.

And some slips may happen to the most careful Writer; therefore I dare not
plead my self free from such, considering the variety of Histories, Countries,
Matter, Authors and Tongues I was obliged to make use of, and in too short a
time requisite to gather up so many materials, and that without any assistance;
not so much as acquainting any with my design [obliged thereto in vindication
of the Church of England from some slanders, by way of retort] till I had
almost brought the story to its Conclusion. And in my way of scribbling, it is
against my patience and idleness to write one thing twice over, or stand
pumping for fine fantastical or newfangled words, neither befitting an English
man or History, nor any but those who are ashamed of their own Country and her
Language, as many of our shatter-nodled Gallants are, who think to better the
English Tongue, either by beating out her Native words, and placing foreigners
in their stead, or by a Court-mincing; yet this must be called the best
English, as if one should call the Modern Italian the purest Latin. But it is
the French Tongue, that must now with us domineer, as the Juvenal. Sat. 3. and
6.
Greek of old did at Rome: though it is fit we should borrow from others, what
our own Language cannot express.

However it happens, as for my self, I can freely protest, that Si voluntatem
mentiendi non habent, nec homines fallunt, nisi ab hominibus human^ infirmitate
salluntur. August. Epist. 131.
as I neither intended to abuse my Reader or the Truth, neither to my knowledge
have I, unless through Humane frailty I have been deceived by other
Testimonies: And shall be so far from disgusting any man's showing me my faults,
privately or publicly, that I shall take it for a favor, that thereby truth
may be discovered, and shall accordingly acknowledge them. Pietro Poalo
Vergerio once a very zealous Romanist, and employed in many honorable
Embassies in behalf of that Church; yet whilst he set himself most earnestly to
confute Luther, in the very undertaking was himself converted: and if any Roman
Catholic should have the same design against these Papers, I wish they might
have the same effect; which I would not despair of, if he would first swallow
the Despovillez vous de tout affection.
French Doctors Pill, viz. not to be guided by interest. Not that I here
concern my self with the multitude of their other Articles, but only that they
will grant so much, that no Authority whatever, be it Pope or other, can
legally and of right depose the King of Great Britain, or absolve his subjects
from their Allegiance; or that his subjects ought to obey either, without the
Kings free and voluntary Concession, no force, Yet I am an enemy to Flatterers.
Vid. Jo. Filesac. de Idolat. Politica, page 28, 53. Vid. Hieron. Osorium,
contra Haddon. fol. 27. b.
restraint, or any violence or opposition before had or offered to him.

Yet if any Romanist think himself obliged to Reply to these Papers, I shall
desire and expect these Conditions from him.

That he do not Picquere here and there at the weakest places, some of which
possibly are not material; but charge boldly through the whole body.

That he answer in order as I write, not at random, but Chapter after Chapter,
and Section after Section.

That those Chapters and Places he does not answer to, he will grant to be true
on my side.

That his Answers be short and positive, not stuffed up with idle words and
impertinences, nothing to the business in hand.

That he answer not me only, but the Romanish Authors, and the very places
which I quote, and show how in the respective Citations they are mistaken.

That the Authors he brings against mine, being Romanists, be such as himself
will stand to, and declare to be of more credit then mine.

That his Quotations be as exact and punctual as mine, by some letter or mark
directing to the named Author; and th^n setting down the Book, Chapter, Page,
Year, or Paragraph, as I have done.

That he either set down my words which he excepteth against, or at least quote
the place where they are.

We are told of some Germans who used to speak one way and think another; used
to confess that in the Abb. V^sperg. P^^^lip. an. 1518. p. 448.
Schools, and publicly they used to maintain such a Doctrine, but believed the
quite contrary. As the great Lawyer Digest. in Proem. 14.
Bartholus thought it his wisest way to affirm Constantines Donation, because
he was in the Papal Territories; like Father Coton and his Jesuits, who would
believe one thing in France, but the quite contrary at Rome. But I would not
have our English Romanists to use double dealing or a double conscience, like
these men, lest they might be somewhat akin to those Islanders, mentioned by De
Gentium motibus, lib. 3. cap. 26.
Johannes Boernus, whose Tongues are so cloven, that they can speak to two men
at the same time. Let them assert what they really think is the Doctrine and
Sentiments of those at Rome, and let them affirm nothing but what they will
avouch to be publicly maintained there. For if, whilst they oppose me, they do
also confute the Pope and his Church at Rome; they show themselves to be none
of his through-pac'd sons; cast a doubt upon their Church, and may want the
blessing of his Holiness.

In short, I shall entreat him with -- Proinde quisquis haec legit, ubi pariter
certus, est pergat mecum; ubi pariter haesitat, quaerat mecum; ubi errorem suum
cognoscit, redeat at me; ubi meum, revocet me. Ita ingrediamur simul charitatis
viam, tendentes ad cum, de quo dictum est Quaerite faciam ejus semper. August.
de Trinitate, lib. 6. cap. 3.
St. Augustine, to agree with me where he finds the Truth, to consult me where
he is doubtful; to confess his fault, and acknowledge me where he sees his
Error, and where he finds me straying, to lead me into the right Way and Truth.

H. F.
November. 10. 1666.
THE HISTORY OF Romish Treasons AND USURPATIONS.
BOOK I.
CHAP. I. Their vainglorious and impious Commendations of their Saints and
Orders, as S. Francis, S. Dominick, Ignatius Loyola, and the Jesuits; with the
Trinitarians, the Carmelites, etc.
MAny of the ancient Heathens, as Caligula, Commodus, Heliogabalus, nay the
Physician Menecrates, prided themselves not a little, in being held and
accounted to be Gods by the people, and so to be sacrificed to: Hence the
Emperor Domitian used to Style himself Dominus and Deus noster sic fieri
jubet. Sueton in Domit. Sect. 13.
Lord and God: to which L. 5. Epigr. 8.
Martial alludes; Edictum Domini Deique nostri.


Alexander would be worshipped with divine Honor, and thought himself the
better man, for being called the Son of Q. Curt. l. 4. Sect. 7.
Jupiter: fit Deities to be attended upon by such Priests as Caligula's Pazel.
Mellif. Hist. part. 2. p. 142.
horse.

This Caligula used to threaten the Air if it rained upon his sports, as Xerxes
would have the Seas whipped, because not presently calm at his command; as if
they were related to the King of Catona, who swears at his Coronation, that
during his Reign, it shall not rain unseasonably, neither shall there be
Pestilence or Famine. Nay, even of late days the Epist. Indicae, page 121.
Persians worshipped their Emperor Xoa as a God; and the water wherewith he
washed his feet, they accounted as holy, and a certain Cure to all Diseases.

It Is pretty to observe with what Thundering and Impertinent Titles* some of the
petit Kings in Asia and other places do attribute to themselves, as if they
were Lords of the Sun and Moon, terrible to those who never heard of them; and
though their Dominions be but of small extent, yet would grudge not to be
thought Gods, and Conquerours of the whole world: like the great Edw. Terry's
voyage, p. 367, 368.
Mogol, that slighted and despised Mercator, for allowing him in his Maps no
greater Share in the world, of which he thought himself the Supreme, and all
other Princes but to truckle under him.

At these and such like extravagances we are apt to smile, and to censure not
only as foolish but profane, and pity the ignorance and credulity of such
Pagan Fondlings; and yet in the mean time, those who account themselves the
only Christians are too guilty of the same folly.

'Twould make a man bless himself, to hear the strange Encomiums that the
Minorites give to their Patron St. Francis, whom they fancy to have been as it
were like Batth. de Pisis lib. conform. Epitomized in several Languages; and
here I follow the French and Latin, most common to be had, and called L'Alcoran
des Cordeliers, p. 137.
Adam in his Innocence, and to have observed and kept the Id. page ^. and 160.
and page 45, 46.
Gospel exactly to a Letter, not breaking so much as a Tittle or jot of it: and
for miracles, they would have you believe that he far out did our Savior; for
if we do but peruse Bartholomeus de Pisis, we may easily perceive how short
they make Christ to come of him for number in every sort: And in other
Qualities they would not have you to suspect that there was any difference.

As for his body, they say there was no disagreement, he having exactly the Id.
p. 4, 5. 299. Villegas. October. 4. Guil. Gazet. To. 2. p. 513.
wounds bestowed and imprinted upon him by Christ, which the Leo^. Coquaus
Antimorn. To 2. p. 245. Coest^tean p. 1117.
Pope by Bulls commands every Christian to believe. And farther, St. Francis
must not be only like Christ in these wounds and passion, but in L' Alcoran,
part. 2. page 62.
Life also; for our Savior (if you will believe their Legends) had made him
like to himself in Id. lib. 1. p. 18.
all things, and a Roll from Heaven declared him to be the Hic est gratia Dei.
Ib.
Grace of God: Nay, that all might agree, they entitle him Id. l. 1. p. 268.
Jesus of Nazareth King of the Jews. Thus would they make our Savior and him
so like one another, as if the difference lay only in the Clothes: to which
purpose Horatius Tursellinus the eloquent Roman Jesuit thus compares them:

Vid. Ant. Possevin. Biblioth Select Tom. 2. l. 17. c. 19. page 295.
Exue Franciscum tunica laceroque cucullo;
Qui Franciscus erat, jam tibi Christus erit:
Francisci exuviis (si qua licet) indue Christum,
Jam Franciscus erit, qui modo Christus erat.
Which I find thus Translated by Doctor White:

Strip Francis from his Coat and Cowl, all naked, and you shall see
He that even now St. Francis was, to Christ will turned be:
Again, put Francis Coat and Cowlon Christ (and mark the Liar)
He that even now was Jesus Christ, will Francis be the Friar.
And another Italian Jesuit Fran Benc. Ca^m^^um, lib. 4 page 203. Tho. Boz^us de
si^^^s Eccl^s. Tom. 2. lib. 15. cap. 3.
Franciscus Bencius, noted amongst the Romans for his Oratory and Poetry, thus
also sings the comparison.

Sancte Patrum, spirans Christi expirantis imago,
Tempore quam nullo deleat ulla dies.
Quas etenim fers ipse manus, fers ipse pedesque
Has tulit ille manus, hos tulit ille pedes.
Nec minus and tali transfixum cuspide pectus,
Quale tibi patulo pectore vulnus hiat.
Cuncta estis similes; illum qui forte verentur
Reddere, te saltem cur imitentur habent.
Which the former Doctor White thus renders:

O Holy Francis that of Christ dying upon the Tree
The very breathing image art, for ever so to be:
What hands thou bear, what feet thou have, such hands, such feet had he,
And such a wound wide in his breast, as in thy breast we see.
In all things you were both alike, that he which is ashamed
Him t'imitate, may follow thee at least, and not be blamed.
This Carm. l. 4. page 202, 203.
Bencius has also another Copy of Verses upon the Picture of St. Francis, much
to the same purpose, as if Christ and he were so alike, that he could scarce
tell whose it was.

Besides these, with them St. Francis is of such concern, that they will tell
you that there is scarce a Book in the Bible, but has several Prophecies of
him. Thus they tell us that the Angel in the 7^2.
Revelations having the Seal of the living God, was this L'Alcaran, l. 1. p.
27. 269. lib. 2. p. 43.
Francis: that St. Paul, meant Id. l. 1. p. 27.
him, when he said Gal. 6. 17.
I bear in my body the marks of the Lord Jesus. That Id. lib. 1. p. 269.
he was that Man in 9. 4.
Ezekiel which by Gods appointment set marks upon the foreheads of them that
sigh, and that cry for all the Abominations, etc. That he had the Id. page 35.
wounds, according to this saying of Christ Joh 8. 56.
Abraham saw my days and was glad; and is not this an excellent Catholic
Exposition? That in the Preacher it is said of Id. lib. 1. p. 11. and 160.
him (though the Text names Abraham) Eccles. 44. 19, 20.
In glory there was none like unto him; who kept the Law of the most High. That
Genesis 1. 26.
Let us make man after our likeness, was meant Id. page 12, 13.
St. Francis; in which place Pisanus has many other fooleries.

To proceed, they Id. l. 1. p. 203.
tell us, that as by Adams fall all Creatures rebeld; so to St. Francis are
they subject, because he kept and fulfild the Laws of God: so that it pleased
God that all things should obey this Friar: hence they affirm that he might
deservedly say, All things are given to me of my Father. Farther, that this
Saint was Lib. 1. p. 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, etc.
figured out to us, by Joseph, Isaias, Jonas, Isaac, Samuel, Job, Abraham,
Solomon, Moses, David, etc. the Cherubins, Angels, Archangels, Powers,
Dominions, etc. all the Apostles, etc. That Christ himself Prophesied of his
L'Alc. l. 2. page 43.
Order when he said, Luke 12. 32.
Fear not little Flock, for it is your Fathers good pleasure to give you a
Kingdom. And that he also meant these Minorite Friars, when he said, Matt. 25.
40.
In as much as you have done it to one of the least of these, you have done it
unto me. A ridiculous allusion from the Latin word Minores.

It Is said of Gab. Prateol. Elench. Haeres. l. 5. Sect. 19. page 168.
Eunomius, that he taught that all who believed his Eunomian Tenets should be
saved, though they committed never so many sins. I will not say that the
Franciscans do positively teach the same of their Order, though they offer very
fair for it, when they assure us that Francis Gonon. Chron. S. Deiparae, p.
217, 218. L' Alcoran, page 205, 206.
desired that all the sins which were confessed might be pardoned; and that
Christ admitted of the Request, but bid him go to his Vicar the Pope for
farther Authority; and that L' Alcoran, lib. 1. p. 313. 195, 196.
whosoever affected the Franciscan Order, though he were never so great a
sinner, should have mercy: and lastly, that no man who dyed in one of their
Nullus qui moreretur in habitu est damnatus Barth. a Pisis, lib. conform. lib.
^. Fruch. 9. fol. 130. col. 4.
Frocks or Habits should be damned. Upon which pretty fidelity, many from the
Highest to the Lowest have industriously procured their departing bodies to be
wrapped in a Franciscan garb.

If all this be true, I shall not so easily question what they tell us, viz.
that all the L' Alc. l. 1. p. 17.
virtues that all the Saints as well of the Old as New Testament ever had, were
met together in St. Francis: that he was better then all the Ib. page 45.
Apostles; of which they give us a doughty reason, viz. they left but a Ship
and some such things, but Francis left all; nay, threw off his Clothes, and
went naked for Christ's sake: a good sign that he was of the Ranters Religion.
As for St. John the Baptist, he must not by any means come in Competition with
their Francis; for which one of their Reasons is this, because Joan. verbum de
poenitentia accepit a Domino, Fran. a domino and a Papa, quod plus est. Id. p.
36.
he received the word of Repentance only from the Lord, but St. Francis
received it both from the Lord and from the Pope, which is a great deal more.

Wherefore methinks it might savor of presumption in St. Peter and St. Paul to
come down from Heaven to meet Francis at Rome, and to presume to Ib. p. 19.
kiss and embrace him, as if he had been but their equal and familiar. But well
might Friar Giles say, that men should never name the word St. Francis, but
they should lick their Ib. page 75.
lips after it; and well might such a Crowd of Ib. p. 250.
Angels guard and incompass him when dead, that the Devils, though greatly
endeavored, could not come for the throng, within ten miles of his Corpse; and
in Heaven he sits in the Page 44. 293.
same Chair whence Lucifer was thrown down: and why not? since they tell us
that God obeyed Ib. p. 203.
Francis in all things whilst he was upon Earth.

Many other Sottish and Impious Extravagancies concerning this Saint, might be
mustred up; but I shall leave him to the consideration of the judicious, and
the Hyperbolies of his followers.

Nor is it this Francis alone, but the People of his Order have also been
pretty Fellows. Friar (...) Alc. p. 96.
Rinaldus they say was carried in a cloud to Paradise; where Enoch and Elias
being informed that he was a Cordelier, skipt and danced for joy, and went
about with him, and showed him all the Rarities there. The same blade longing
to see Daniels Tomb in Babylon, which they say was kept by Dragons, an huge
Dragon (which they suppose to be an Angel of God) sweept him up in his Tail,
carried him thither, where for manners sake he only took a finger from the
Prophet, and so was brought home safe and sound again as he was carried, and
his heart never at his mouth all the while.

Friar Id. page 125.
Suffian when sick would take no Physic but from the Virgin Mary, who thrust
into his mouth a whole box full of heavenly Syrrops by spoonfuls, and then
giving him a little out of another box (the greedygut having eaten all the
former) he was so enlightened, that he perfectly saw in the book of Life, the
names of all those who should be saved. What need I tell you of Friar Id. p.
146.
Benet, who they would make you believe was Butler to the Virgin Mary, but they
never tell us where the Cellar was? and suchlike fopperies, since 'twill be
easily judged that I do it but in Drollery, and then will they judge me never
to be capable of those blessings, which they attribute to the lovers of this
Order; but rather condemn me to the punishment of the poor Id. page 174.
Florentine, who they say having no affection for the Franciscans, was decreed
to have two Hammers continually knocking him on the head: and this punishment
they assure us, is to continue to him till the day of judgment.

These and many other such like stories may be read in L^ber Conformitatum S.
Francisci c^m (...).
Bartholomeus Pisanus, a Book approved of by the general Chapter of the
Franciscans at Assist, 1399. who declared, that after their diligent search,
they could find nothing in it worthy of correction or amendment; and so it is
entitled the Golden Book, and has been several times printed with approbation.
Henricus Sedulius has writ a vindication for it, and Martyrol. Francisc. IV
November. Sect. 4. 5, 6, 7, 8.
Arthurus a Monasterio will have nothing spoke against it, but commends the
Author as worthy of IV October. 11.
belief; and so I hope one may the more freely present them with that, they so
much magnify.

Nor have the Predicant Friars less extolled their Patron St. Dominick, Vid.
Antonin. Archp. Flor. chron. part. 3. tit. 23.
who (as they say) had power over all Celestial, Terrestrial and Infernal
things; and that both Angels and Elements did serve and obey him: that he
showed an easier way to Heaven than St. Paul did; and that the Prophet intended
this Dominick, by the Zech. 11. 7.
Staff of Beauty, as he did St. Francis by the bands: and ten to one but he
thought of both alike. God they say never denied him any thing that he Nic.
Jansenius vit. Domin. l. 2. c. 3. p. 119.
asked: that he received the Holy Ghost with the same glory of a flaming Id. l.
1 c. 8. p. 56.
Tongue as the Apostles did, and had also the gift of Id. l. 2. c. 11. p. 170.
Tongues given him by Inspiration.

They go on and tell us that St. Dominick himself never committed Id. l. 2. c.
14. p. 188.

Villegas flos Sanctorum. IV August.


mortal sin from the day of his birth; and the other Friars of his Order
exactly Villegas ib.
imitated the Apostles in Life, Works and Miracles. And what favors might not
St. Dominick be capable of, since he was seen to proceed from Gods Nic. Jansen.
l. 2. c. 14. p. 190.
breast, but Christ only from his mouth? And by this way of Nic. Jans. l. 2.
c. 14. Antonin. part. 3. tit. 23. Nic. Jans. l. 2. c. 12. p. 179.
comparing do they make our Savior and this Friar contend as I may say for
superiority, and yet in Miracles Dominick carries the day.

Nay, so great was the Virgin Mary's affection (as they say) to this Spaniard,
that not long since, even within the memory of man, viz. 1606. the Friars of
Soriano in the farther Calabria in Italy, not having a Picture of their Founder
Dominick; she with Mary Magdalene came from Heaven, and with their own hands
presented them with his Picture, which she bid them hang up in their Chapel;
and for ought that I know there it yet hangs, and if you will believe them,
cures the blind, lame, and such like diseases, and miracles. Nor do I know any
reason, why this Picture might not do as pretty feats, as well as the very Nic.
Jansen. p. 242.
dust at Calervega in Old Castile, where he was born? (though I think Phil.
Briet. Geogr. Tom. 1. l. 5 p. 298.
some doubt of the place.)

And if this do not show her love sufficient, they will tell you other stories,
as that she preserves the Friars of this Order, safe and sure from harms-way
under her Ben. G^non. Chron. B. Virg. p. 212, 218, 223.
Mantle; and that by her Intercession she has obtained of her Son, that none
of this Order shall continue long in Id. p. 221.
mortal sin; and several other such like Tales for old Women to pass away the
time withal.

Neither will their back-friends the Jesuits be wanting in magnifying their
Founder and Order, as that their Imago primi Saeculi soc. Jesu, p. 64.
Valderama sermon.
Society was not of humane Invention, but proceeded from Christ himself; that
the first College of it was in the Womb of the Virgin Mary; that instead of
Act. 9. 15.
St. Paul, their Patron Ignatius Loyola was him, whom Christ declared should
carry his name before the Gentiles, as the Portugal Doctor de societatis
Origin, p. 14.
Jacobus Payva would persuade the world, that this is an Order which the
Prophet Is. 65. 22. and 18. 2.
Isaiah has several times prophesied of, as the Jesuits of Imago primisaeculi
soc. Jesu, p. 25. and 60.
Flanders testify: and that God the Father was seen to commend this Order to
his Son Jesus, by way of Protection.

Valderama, Deza and Rebulloza, though of other Orders, have in their Sermons
extolled this Ignatius to a wonder, as that the name of Jesus was I know not
how imprinted in his hands; that he did greater Miracles than others; for as
Valderama says, Though Moses did great wonders with his Rod, and that was
only by the virtue of the name of God written on it; and also what the
Apostles acted, were only by the power of the name of God: But as for Loyala
the Founder of the Jesuits, he only by his own name writ in a piece of Paper,
did more Miracles than Moses and all the Apostles; which was admirable. Nay,
that as long as he lived his actions were so holy, that none but Popes, as St.
Peter; none but Empresses, as the Mother of God; none but some Sovereign
Monarch, as God the Father and his Son, had the happiness and favor to behold
them. And that which was spoke of our Heb. 1. 2.
Savior, Pedro Deza applies to the Institutor of this Order, telling his
Auditors and the world that -- In these last days, God has spoken to us by his
son Ignatius, whom he has appointed Heir of all things.

It Is true, these three Sermons of Valderama, Deza and Rebulloza, were 1 October.
1611
censured by the Sorbonists at Paris; but within nine days after, Francois
Solier a French Jesuit [and one well known for his many Translations, and who
also turned these three Spanish Sermons into French] writ against this
Sorbone-censure, accusing the Faculty of Paris, of Le^tte justificative, p. 25,
32.
Ignorance, Impudence and Malice, and that they acted more by Passion than
Reason. And a little after this, Jaques de Montholon, though there might be
some probable Reasons that the true Author was the noted Jesuit Peter Cotton
Confessor to Henry the Fourth; but be it who it will, under the name of
Montholon was a large Plaidoy^ pour les Jesuits, p. 462, 463.
Apology writ for this Order, which toward the latter end has also a
Vindication of these Sermons, and that printed too by public Authority: and
lastly, that they were received with applause and approbation, needs no farther
evidence, than their several Impressions and Translations.

But besides these, others are not ashamed to tell us, that God did often Imago
primi saecula soc. p. 584. Exodus 33. 11.
talk with Ignatius Loyola, as he talked with Moses face to face, and as a man
speaks unto his friend; that the Virgin Mary is such a Patroness of this Order,
that she Hieron. Platus de bono statu Religiosi, l. 1. c. 34 p 108. Imago soc.
J^s. p. 1. ^0.
preserves it also under her Mantle or Garments: And which is more, that God
has granted the same benefit to this Society, that was formerly bequeathed to
the Benedictans, that for the first three hundred years, not any that dyed in
this Order, should be Imago societ. Jesu, p. 648, 649
damned. And so much for the Jesuits and their Founder Ignatius Loyola, whose
life I have writ formerly in another Treatise.

They tell us that Pachonius was in that esteem with God, that an D^^^ultius
^^^r Exempl. cap. 7. tit 77. Sect. 1.
Angel from Heaven brought the Rules for him and his Brethren to live by: But
the Trinitarian Friars go a little higher, affirming that the ^. ^^^. Hist. de
B^ ^^ie and de les C^^sai^^, ^ 6. c. 1. Sect 2. p 466,
Father, Son and Holy Ghost, were their Founders and Institutors; which in part
is hinted at by these Verses so common amongst them, and for ought that I know,
may yet be seen over the Door of their Cloister in the Suburbs of Arras in
Artois, and several other of their Covents.

Hic est Ordo Ordinatus,
Non a sanctis fabricatus,
Sed a solo summo Deo.
This Order made by God himself we see,
And not by Saints, or men, as others be.
The truth is, this Order of the Trinity, begun by two Frenchmen, betwixt four
and five hundred years ago, [though I shall not give too much credit to the
Miracles they say occasioned it] was upon a Charitable Account, viz. to redeem
the Christian Slaves from the Turkish Tyrannical Bondage; whereupon I shall
willingly agree with Ca^a^. glo^mund^, part. ^. (...). ^3.
Cassanaeus, and his Archbishop Antoninus of Florence, that this Order should
have preheminency above the rest. But I fear of late days the Slaves are not so
much regarded as their own preferments.

Though the Carmelite-Fryars will not draw their Institution so high, yet they
plead pretty fair for Antiquity and continuance, by affirming the Prophet D'
Avity discourse de l'Origine de toutes les Religions, Sect. 26.
Elias to be their Founder, and that their Order shall remain to the end of the
world; which grand Privilege [as they say, the Virgin Mary Gonon. Chron. p.
319.
told one of this Fraternity] the Prophet desired of our Savior Christ, at the
time of his appearance to him in his Mat. 17. 2, 3. Mark 9. 2, 3, 4.
transfiguration on the Mount.

But this is not all the benefit belonging to these people, for they assure us
that all of this Society shall stay no longer in Purgatory, than the next
Saturday after their death; and this they publicly Vid. P. du Moulin Defense
de la foy Catholic, Article 21. p. 441.
printed in certain Theses at Paris (8 October. 1601.) and mainly defended by
Doctor Cayer. Besides this, they tell us that the Virgin Mary persuaded Friar
Francis to enter himself into this Order, and then in Heaven she would give him
a Crown of Flowers, which she then showed him; and that he obeying this advice,
because neither himself, nor their Covent at Siena through poverty, was able to
buy him an Habit, an Gonon. p. 203.
Angel very freely came and gave him one. And lastly, that she appeared to our
Countryman Simon Stock (so called from his Jo. Pitseus de Scriptor. Angl. p.
345.
living in a hollow Stock or Trunk of an Oak) General of this Order, holding a
Scapulare in her hands, positively assuring him, that all the Carmelites who
dyed in that Habit should be Gononus p. 256.
saved.

Here might I tell how the Premonstrensian Monks (so called from the Village
Premonstre in Picardy, whither their Founder Nortbert Archbishop of Magdeburg
retired himself for Devotion) affirm they received their habits Gonon. p. 159.
from Heaven by the Virgin Mary. And here might I show how the Cistercian Monks
(so called from Cistertium (Cisteaux) in Burgondy, where they began) for all
this, affirm the Virgin Mary to be kinder to them than others, by Id. page 156.
protecting them under her Arms, and Cloak or Mantle: and many such like
fopperies of other Orders; but this may serve for the present to give the
Reader a taste of their Fooleries, in the too too much magnifying of their
respective Orders and Societies.

CHAP. II. Thinking to honor their Religion, the Romanists relate, 1. several
ridiculous Stories to the abuse of the B. Virgin Mary, 2. and childish
Fopperies, to the reproach of our Savior Jesus Christ.
THe hardest Students have their Intervals, and the greatest Scholars SECT. I.
Several ridiculous Stories to the abuse of the B. Virgin.
will now and then have a frolic or crotchet to divert their more serious
thoughts. Methinks it was not amiss in Mr. Geast (formerly of Cambridge) when
under the Parliamentary persecution, and their Prisoner, for his Loyalty and
Honesty, to throw away an hour or two, to find out a Mystery in their
abominable and treasonable Presbyterian-Covenant, viz. that the number of the
words in its six damnable Articles, agrees with the number of the Beast, 666.

The Learned Thomas Lansius pleased himself in these two opposite Consult.
German in Prefat. ^d Lectorem.
Verses; the one exhibiting a Catalogue of good things, the other of bad: Lex,
Rex, Grex, Res, Spes, Jus, Thus, Sal, Sol, (bona) Lux, Laus.
Mars, Mors, Sors, Vis, Lis, Styx, Nox, Crus, Pus, (mala) Fex, Fraus.
and took the pains to know how many alterations they would endure, by which he
found out that either of them, by the transposition of words might be changed
(excluding bona or mala) XXXIX Millions, DCCCC Hundred, XVI Thousand, and VIII
Hundred times.

And Bernardus Bauhusius the Poetical Jesuit of Antwerp made this Verse of our
Savior, Rex, Dux, Sol, Lex, Lux, Fons, Spes, Pax, Mons, Petra, Christus.
Epigram. lib. 2. page 39.
which he says may be converted 3628800 times. And in honor of the Blessed
Virgin Mary, he composed this Verse, Tot tibi sunt dotes Virgo, quot sidera
Coeli, which he says may be changed a thousand twenty two ways according to
the number of the Stars: And Erici de Puys (Puteanus) bestowed a great deal of
time and Paper to prove it; yet as he might increase his number of the Stars,
so (if the Verse will bear it) might he the changes too, if Lansius his account
be true, that VIII words may be varyed 40320 times: Nor need any of these seem
strange, when we consider what variety and multitude of Languages and Words are
composed of XXIV Letters.

Against such commendations as this of the Virgin Mary I shall say nothing,
leaving every man to employ his Ingenuity upon what he pleases. But for any to
think they can or should advantage her glory, by fathering a thousand lies and
fopperies upon her, is beyond reason: so far are they from being advantageous
to her honor, that they must be abominated by the judicious, and ridiculous to
the very Vulgar.

It Is no great honor to her, that they tell us, she was so familiar with some
men, as to come down from Heaven to be married to them. Thus they tell us, how
she went and held a young man's Horse, desired him to take her for his Caesa^ius
l. 7. ^. 33. Specul. Exempl. did. 6. Sect 63.
Wife, and forced him to kiss her, the man being unwilling; and then very
carefully held his Stirrups, whilst he mounted again on Horseback. And another
time Gonon. Chron. B. Vi^g. page 142.
espoused her self, and that with a Ring too, to one Robert, whilst he was yet
in his Mothers Womb. Another time they say that a Vid A^ds. Ri^^t. Apol. pro B.
Virg. l. 2. c 15. p. 367.
Brother to a King of Hungary going to be married, she was troubled at it,
because he seemed not to accept of her. Again, how a young man Ib. p. 3^6.
married himself to her, and put a Ring on her Finger; and afterward he
marrying another woman, and being in bed with her, she came to him, showed him
the Ring, upbraided him for his faithlesness; for which another time she whipped
him to the purpose. And as bad as these is another Tale which they do
confidently tell us, in short thus: Two Angels conducted the Virgin Mary to one
Hermanus, to whom they agree Vid Rivet. p. 363, 364.
to marry her; to which purpose they bid him draw near: he, though he had a
months Inc^tabat am^^, pud^r retin^bat
mind, yet through shame seemed unwilling; for though he had been very ^am^^si
Vi^gine familia^ss^^^ ^^huc us^s ^ss^^.
familiar with her, yet he thought it odd to be so coupled with her: At last he
takes some courage, and on he goes; but again he falls off, and fancying it an
odd business, at this the Angel takes hold of his hand, and, will he, nill he,
by main force joined it to the Blessed Mary's right hand, and in these words
married them together, Hanc ego tibi virginem, uti olim B. Josepho desponsa
est, despondeo, jubeoque nomen sponsi simul cum sponsa accipere, ac deinceps
Josephum nominari.
I espouse this Virgin to thee, as she was formerly espoused to holy Joseph,
and command thee with this thy Wife, to take upon thee the name of an Husband
and of Joseph.

But because there is few satisfied with a bare Marriage, they will have her to
be much given to kissing too. To which purpose I told you formerly how they
say, she begged of a young man to buss her, and Accede ad me, and da mihi
Osculum, and coegit cum. Caesar, l. 7. c. 33.
made him do it whether he would or no. Another man ( Gononus tells us) she
Collum meum brachiis suis stringens, dedit mihi osculum, p. 297.
hugged about the neck and kissed him; and the same familiarity and ceremony (and
I should be apt to think it the same story, did not my Author make almost an
hundred years difference between them) did she use to another Ib. page 207.
Caesar, l. 7. c. 51.
Cistertian Spanish Monk. To another of the same Order, whose name name was
Gonon p. 235.
Abundus, she gave her hand to kiss; but this not satisfying her, she also went
and kissed him, as she bust the Id. page 525, 526.
cheeks of Stephanus Justitius, whom she also persuaded from that severity and
abstinency of body which he formerly used.

But as if marrying and kissing were not enough, she must also afford the
benefit and happiness of her Breasts: Thus they say she pulled out her Dugs to
pour her Milk Gonon. p. 374.
into the mouth of her Friend Alanus. Thus she let Abbot Dauroult. cap. 2. Tit.
41. Sect. 2. Gonon. page 131.
Fulbert suck her Breasts, and with that frankness, that his Cheeks were all
besmeared with her Milk. And to another Gonon. p. 132.
Priest she did the same favor. Nay, rather than fail of love-tricks, her very
Gonon. p. 172, 173, 174.
Image or Statue could several times afford some drops to the comfort of St.
Bernard, to advance his Eloquence. And she was as they say so kind too, as to
lie in bed Vincent. spec. Hist. l. 7. c. 87.
between a man and his wife, the first night of their Marriage.

Nay, as if all this were not enough, they would make her a Patroness (for
ought that I know) to whoredom. For thus they glory of her, that one Beatrice a
Nun, having stole from the Nunnery, and played the errant Caesarius, l. 7. c.
35.
Whore for fifteen years together; the Blessed Mary supplied her place all the
while in her likeness and habit, that it might not be known that the Nun had
been so wicked. A pretty while and honor to her, to be absent from Heaven,
playing the drudge upon Earth, in behalf of such an Whore. Another time they
say, a certain Vincent. Specul. Histor. l. 7. c. 86. Discip. de Mirac. B. Virg.
Exemp. 24.
Abbess being got with Child, and in great perplexity how to keep its
knowledge from the rest of her Nuns, who bare her a grudge; the Virgin Mary, to
hide the shame, and save the credit of the Strumpet, descended from Heaven with
two Angels, whom she commanded to play the Mid-wives, and then to carry the
Child in her name to a certain Hermit, to keep it till it was seven years
old. Another wench they tell us of, who being Vid. Rivet. Apol. pro B. Virg. l.
2. c. 15. p. 375.
over-kinde with her Master, her Mistress the goodwife offended at this abuse,
had a mind to be revenged on her; but the Virgin Mary bid her let her alone,
because she belonged to her. Nay of late days, within these forty years, viz.
1627. they tell us how a Neapolitan Gononus page 525.
Whore, dying suddenly at Anagni in Compagna di Roma, had the favor showed her
by the Virgin Mary to be restored to life again, that she might confess her
sins and be happy in Heaven. And so she saved the life of another Id. page 221,
222.
Harlot.

What shall I say of her other love-tricks they father upon her? of her giving
Alanus a Gononus, page 374.
Ring made of the Hair of her own Head; of her bringing Caesar. lib. 7. cap. 32.
Bread from Heaven to give to another; of her giving Celestial Ib. l. 7. c.
48. Spec. Exemp. did. 3. Sect. 28.
Electuary by spoonfuls to a company of Monks, only neglecting one for his
studying of Physic: Of her coming from Heaven with St. Catherine and Mary
Magdalen, to I know not what poor Dauroult. c. 2. Tit. 41. Sect. 3.
Indian Woman, spreading a Cloth on the Table, and feeding her with I know not
what.

Would they not have us to think that they work and labor at their respective
Trades in Heaven, as we do upon Earth? when they tell us that the Virgin Mary
brought a Specul. Exempl. did. 4. Sect 6.
Garment thence and gave it to Boniface. That she brought another out of
Christ's De Thesauris filii mei. Alphons. de Carthag. Anacephal. Reg. Hispan.
cap. 38. Jo. Mariena, Hist. Hisp. l. 6. c. 10.
Treasury, which she gave to S. Ildephonsus, Archbishop of Toledo: but whether
it is now kept in that Gononus, page 96.
City, or in Jo. Eus. Nieremburg de Mirac. Europae, l. 1. c. 18.
Oviedo in the Asturias; let them agree about it, I shall let it alone, as
doubting to find it in neither; yet this Garment probably might be made on
earth, since Ib.
Nieremburgius tells us, that some are of opinion, that our Savior ware it
himself, when he first celebrated the Sacrament of the Eucharist. But they tell
us nothing to the contrary, but that the Ib.
Girdle which she gave to a Priest, [and as they say, is yet to be seen at
Tartosa in Catalonia] was made in Heaven, but by whom I know not.

What can I say against the Cistertian Monks? since she was so favorable to
them, who used to wear black Habits, as to come from Heaven, and bring a white
Cowl or Hood with her, and put it on the head of their second Abbot Gonon. p.
154.
Albericus; at which instant all the Cowls of the Monks singing in the Quire,
were also miraculously turned white; which color they have kept ever since.
Thus Id. p. 177. Specul Exempl. did. 9. Sect. 122.
Thomas of Becket received another Garment from her. Thus she gave a
sweet-sented, curled or crisped skie-colour Vail to Gonon. p. 351.
Lyuvina: Another of Cloth of Gold to Francisca, put it on her, and laid her
head in her lap. And another time brought a rich Id. page 322.
Crown from Heaven, and placed it on the head of St. Brigit. As she bestowed a
Id. page 202.
golden Cross upon Waltherus.

Besides this, would they not have us to think that there are brave Gardens and
Flowers in Heaven? when they tell us, that she brought thence two baskets full
of Specul. Exemp. did. 9. Sect. 117.
Roses, and gave to two women as a proof of their pure Virginity. And another
time walked along by a Friar, being stuck about with white and red Roses, and
having a Id. did. 9. Sect. 118.
Chaplet of Roses on her head, which looked as fresh as if they had been newly
plucked from Paradise. Another time brought a Co^on. p. 209.
Garland of Flowers, and put it on the head of a German Woman called Mary. But
methinks she was most kind to Jacobus Calipetus, who Id. page 459
dying, and it seems none of the greatest Saints, she at last procured some way
or other that his soul should be restored to him again; and being thus alive
upon earth again, he made himself a Caelestine Monk [so called from their
Founder Pope Caelestinus the Fifth] where they say he lived very godly, and did
a great many pretty Miracles; and one time whilst he was celebrating Mass, the
Virgin Mary went into the Chapel with a troup of Saints and Angels, and placed
a Garland of Flowers upon his head: And this not long since, for he dyed the
second time, but Anno 1538.

Besides these, we might question from what Apothecaries Shop in Heaven she
procured the formerly-mentioned Electuaries, or the strange Caesar. lib 7. cap.
19.
Ointments wherewith she anointed and cured the wounded leg or knee of the
German Nun. But letting these pass, what honor do they do her when they make
her a drudge? as to come from Heaven with many Saints and Angels to assist
Catherine of Siena to make Gonon. p. 323
bread. Another time to descend with a company of she-Saints, to some Monks
working in Harvest, whom she kissed and embraced, and with Dauroult. c. 2. ^it.
41. Sect. 4. Goton. p. 168. Spec. Exempl. did. 3. Sect. 24.
Towels (which they brought down with them) wiped the sweat, dirt and dust from
their faces. Another time to get all the sweat of the laboring Monks and put
it into a Specul. Ex emp. d^st. 9. Sect. 103.
Vessel, because it afforded a pleasant smell to her and Christ. Another time
to come from Heaven to Nicol. J^^ senius vita St. Dominici, l. 2. c. 12 p 1^7.
G^^^^s, p 212.
besprinkle with holy Water a company of sleeping Monks; nay, they make her so
officious and subservant, that they tell us, how one time she came from Heaven,
and mended Thomas of Beckets Tho. Cantipratan, lib. 2. cap. 29. Sect. 12. page
285. Specul. Exempl. did. 8. Sect 77.
Hair-shirt for him, when he himself knew not how to get it patched up; but she
stitched it neatly up with red Hair.

To these we might add many other ridiculous Fopperies; as of a woman, having
her son taken from her by the Enemies, earnestly desired the assistance of the
Virgin Mary in getting her son again; but finding all these prayers in vain,
she takes another course, goes to Church, upbraids the Virgin of her
negligence, and tells her plainly, she will take her Son from Jacob. de
Voragine, hist. 126.
her, and keep it till she have her Child restored; and forthwith takes the
little Image of Christ from the Virgins Arms, and home she trots, and locks it
up safely in a Chest. Upon this the Virgin Mary seeing no remedy, hyeth her
that night to the Prison where the woman's Son was, opens the door, lets him
out, bids him haste home to his Mother; and having thus restored him, bids him
desire his Mother that she might have her Son Christ again; which accordingly
was performed, and so all were friends. And such another Tale they tell us of a
German Woman called Jutta, whose young Child being snatched away by a Wolf,
and carried into the Woods; of this the Mother informed, runs to the Chapel,
and took the Caesar. l. 7. c. 46.
Image of Christ from the Virgin Mary's Arms, telling her she should never have
her Son again, unless she had her child restored to her safe and sound. At
this the Virgin Mary was puzzled, fearing she should Quasi timeret carere filio
suo.
loose her Son Christ; upon which she commands the Wolf, who left the Child,
which being found and carried to its Mother, she went to the Church and
restored the Image. Nay, they would make her descend to take up the tears of a
certain devout Youth in a Gonon. p. 222.
Cloth, that she might the more conveniently show them to our Savior; as if he
understood not all things as well as her self.

But though the Protestants of the Reformed Church are apt to think that God
the Son should apprehend and understand all our necessities a great deal better
then the Virgin Mary, and having shed his blood for us, is more powerful for
our Salvation; yet the Romanists will tell us other Stories, and for ought that
I know, call us Heretics for being of such a Persuasion.

How come they else to start this Question Franc. de Mendoza viridarium, lib.
2. Problem. 2.
Whether it is better for us to implore the name of Jesus, or the name of Mary?
In the deciding of which doubt, Mendoza the famous Portugal-Jesuit tells us
plainly, that as Moses made two Cherubins of equal bigness, so she and Christ
are almost of the same Authority with God; as they had wings alike, so these
two afford the same objects to God, she her Breasts, he his Wounds, by which
means both obtain of him what they desire. Nay, that sometimes she is easier
entreated than Jesus Christ, and therefore sometimes her Protection is more
assisting and helpful to us.

To what purpose else should they bring in the Blessed Virgin thus saying --
Vid. Rivet. Apol. pro B. Virg. l. 2. c. 5. p. 248.
As Adam and Eve sold the World for an Apple, so I and my Son did redeem the
world as if it were with one heart. And that the Rule of the world is divided
Vid. Rivet. l. 2. c. 2. p. 210. and 211.
between God and the Virgin Mary; and if any man be agreeved of God, they may
have their recourse to her.

Wherefore else should they make comparisons betwixt our Saviors Blood and the
Virgins Milk, as if they could not tell which to rely upon for their Salvation?
Thus one of them shows his uncertainty:

Vid. Rivet. l. 1. c. 19. p. 155 Id. Jesuita vapulans, c. 14. Sect 15. p. 307,
308.
Positus in Medio
Quo me vertam Nescio.
In hoc dulci dubio,
Duleis est Collatio.
'Twixt Christ and Mary placed to turn about,
To which I know not, so great's this pleasant doubt.
And to this purpose Gilbertus Masius, not long since Bishop of Shertogenbosch
[Sylva ducis, Boscum ducis, Bo^sleduc in Brabant] had his Picture made between
Jesus and Mary, with this Motto: Positus in medio, quo me vertam nescio. which
for ought that I know, is yet to be seen in the Glass-Window of St. James his
Church there. And this puts me in mind of the great Spanish Cardinal Xemenes,
who of his famous Bible printed at Alcala de Henares Prefat. ante Bibl. Complut.
says, that he has placed the vulgar Latin between the Hebrew and Greek, as
Christ was hung between two Thieves.

But to return: Carolus Scribanius, the famous Rector and Provincial of the
Belgic Jesuits, though for some time he lurked under the Anagrammatical Vizard
of Clarus Bonarscius, thus wavers betwixt our Savior and the Virgin Mary.

Haereo lac inter meditans, interque cruorem, Amphitheatr. Honoris, lib. 3.
cap. 8.

Inter delicias uberis and lateris:
Et dico (si forte Oculos super ubera tendo)
Diva parens Mammae gaudia posco tuae.
Sed dico (si deinde oculos in vulnera verto) Such a Copy of Verses as these I
find in the ingenious Jesuit Angelinus Gazaeus, in his Pia Hilavia, but which
of these two was the first Author, and which the Plagiary, I shall leave to the
B^lgick Jesuits to determine, both being born, both living at the same time,
and both Governors amongst their Order, in that Country.

O Jesu, lateris gaudia malo tui.
Rem scio, prensabo, si fas erit ubera dextra,
Laeva prensabo vulnera si dabitur.
Lac Matris miscere volo cum sanguine nati,
Non possum Antidoto nobiliore frui.
Ira vomit flammas, fumatque libidinis Aetna?
Suffocare queo sanguine, lacte queo.
Livor inexpleta rubigine saevit in artus?
Detergere queo lacte, cruore queo.
Vanus honos me perpetua prurigine tentat?
Exaturare queo sanguine, lacte queo.
Ergo Parens and Nate, meis advertite votis:
Lac peto, depereo sanguinem; utrumque volo.
Parvule, maternis mediis qui ludis in ulnis,
Qui tua jam comples ubera, jam vacuas.
Saepe quidem dixti, noxis offensus iniquis
Tune meas mammas, Improbe tune meas?
Nolo tuas, O! nolo tuas puer auree mammas;
Non sum tam duri, tam gravis oris homo:
Sed tantum lateris pluat unica, and unica stilla,
Et saltem a dextrae vulnere gutta pluat.
Dic matri, meus hic frater sitit, optima Matter,
Vis de font tuo promera, deque meo?
Dic nato tuns hic frater, mi mellee fili,
Captivus monstrat vincula, lytron habes.
Ergo Redemptorem monstra te jure vocari,
Nobilior reliquis si tibi sanguis inest.
Tuque Parens monstra matrem te jure vocari,
Vbera si reliquis divitiora geris.
etc.
My thoughts are at a stand, of Milk and Blood,
Delights of Breast and Side, which yields most good:
And say, when on thy Teats mine eyes I cast,
Sweet Lady, of thy Breasts I beg a taste.
But if mine eyes upon thy wounds do glide,
O Jesu, then fain would I suck thy side.
But now I Am fixed, for my right hand shall hold Here the Milk is advanced above
the Blood.

Thy Breasts, whilst with his wounds my left makes bold,
And with the Milk and Blood in mixture, make
The Soveraign'st Cordial sinful soul can take.
Does Ire belch fire, or lust like Aetna smoke?
Either this Blood or Milk that heat can choke.
Does Envies rust enroul me round about?
This Milk, or that same Blood can wash it out.
Or do vainglorious thoughts pride up my will?
Thy Milk as well as his Blood lays them still.
Mother and Son, give ear to what I crave;
I beg this Milk, that Blood, and both would have.
Youngling! that in thy Mothers Arms art playing,
Sucking her Breasts sometimes, and sometimes staying:
Often have thou said (being angry at my sin) Here the Milk is preserd before the
Blood.

Dare thou desire the Teats my food lies in?
I will not, Oh! I dare not, golden Child;
From fear and shame I Am not so far exilde.
I Would only have one drop, one drop implore
From thy right hand or side; I ask no more.
Yet tell thy Mother, see thy Brothers thirst,
Mother, your Milk will ease him at the first.
Say to thy Son, Behold thy Brothers bands,
Sweet Son, thou have his Ransom in thy hands.
Show thy Redeeming Power to souls oppressed,
O Son, if that thy Blood excel the rest.
But Mother, if thy Breasts the rest exceed,
Show you are a Mother justly so styled indeed.
etc.
And to the same purpose has Veridarium, lib. 2. Probl. 2. Sect. 20.
Franciscus de Mendoza another Copy of Verses, to whom I shall refer the Reader.

And here I might enlarge of many more of their commendations of the Virgin
Mary; as that she was of such Zeal, that if the Jews had not crucified our
Savior Jesus Christ, Vid. Hen. Estiene Apol. pour Herodot. page 301. Rivet.
Apol. pro B. Virg. l. 2. c. 5. p. 248.
she would have done it her self with her own hands, because forsooth she had
no less Charity than Abraham had, who was going to kill his son. What might I
say of the extravagances of their Poza, who brings all the pen-lavishments of
the Pagan Poets concerning their Heathen Goddesses and Whores, to complete the
commendations of the Blessed Virgin? And again of the folly of another, who
would have Moses to allude to her, because he says, that the gathering
together of the Waters was called (in Latin) Vid Rivet. l. 1. c. 9. p. 66.
Maria (Seas.) And many other such like Fopperies (to say no worse) have they
abused her with, insomuch that Doctor Andre Rivet of France thought himself
obliged to write an Apology for her, where may be seen several other of their
absurdities of her.

But to conclude with these follies concerning the Blessed Virgin, it is not
amiss to see how they bury, and carry her into Heaven.

She desiring to dye, an Angel tells her the time shall be three days after;
Vid. Rivet. lib. 1. cap. 22. Gononus, p. 29, 30, 31, 32, 33.
brings from Paradise a bough of a Palm Tree to be carried before her Hearse,
and mourning Garments for the Funeral. Then the Apostles were hurried to her in
Clouds, from whom she received the Eucharist and Extreme Unction. Then Christ
with the Angels, Patriarchs, Prophets, Martyrs, Confessors, and Virgins, who
sang her Requiem, and so she dyed; Christ commanding the Apostles to bury her
body (which spoke after her soul was gone out of it) in the Valley of Josaphat;
which accordingly was done: St. Peter and St. John complementing one another
who should carry the Palm. Christ and all the Angels assisted, but the Jews
endeavored to spoil the solemnity; yet some of them had better have been
quiet, unless they believed when they could not see.

Having lain some time in the Grave, her soul entered into her Body again, to
make way for her Assumption, which they make a glorious and very orderly show:
thus marshalling it; first went the Apostles, then the Angels who were on the
world; then the souls flying to Heaven; then the souls from Purgatory; and
fifthly, the Angels who were Guardians to these souls. Again, these were met
from Heaven, 1. By the Patriarchs. 2. The Prophets. 3. Martyrs. 4. Confessors.
5. Virgins. 6. All the Saints. 7. Angels assistants, who go seldom out of
Heaven. And 8. and lastly, the Trinity, Father, Son and holy Ghost: every one
of which company made a speech; and now was Coel^m fuisse evacuatum.
Heaven they say quite empty, and nothing in it.

And thus all things being ready and prepared for her motion to Heaven, up they
have her; and as she passed through the Orbs, the respective Planets according
to their duty met her, every one of them making a wise Speech to her, to entice
her to stay with them: and the Planet Venus pleaded very dapperly, hoping to
persuade her to stay and live with her, telling of her how she was the Goddess
of Love, and is called Lucifer, being the brightest of all the Stars; how she
pleases all the five Senses, etc. and, which is best of all, they make the
Planet quote in her Speech Bartholomeus Glanvellus an Englishman, who lived
about thirteen hundred years after the Blessed Virgins death. And it seems
Venus went very fair to have won her; for they say the Angels persuaded her not
to stay there, telling her how Venus was an crrant whore; and so desired her to
leave that place, and ascend higher, where was a better Crown and Habitation
for her.

Yet they will tell you that she left not the earth so carelessly, but that she
left many holy Relics in the custody of St. John, as pledges of her Gononus,
p 32. 33.
affection to us; such as the Swadling-bands of our Savior, his Windingsheet,
her own Girdle, the Vail which she wore when she was married, her Kemb, the
Ring wherewith she was married; Christ's Napkin that was wrapped about his head in
the Sepulcher, his Foreskin, his Crown of Thorns; and to show her self a good
House-wife, she bequeathed also to us her very Spindle, wherewith she used to
employ her self. Relics, I must confess, that if I knew certainly where to
have them, I should have a vast esteem for: But when I find such apparent
cheats in such ware, that many times pieces of Dogs, Cats, and suchlike animals
have been worshipped Vid. Jo. Polyand. Disput. de Reliq. and Lord Herberts Hist.
Hen. VIII. Anno 1538.
for holy Relics of Saints, and such incertainty where the truth lies, I am
the less zealous. As for Example:

Christ's Foreskin, the people of Akin say they have it; those of Antwerp
affirm they have it; Heldesham in Germany brags of it; the Romans say, it is in
St. John Laterans Church. And again, both Byzanson and Charroux in France boast
that it is there. And yet others say that it is at Calcata twenty miles from
Rome.

Again, what a Monster will they make of St. John Baptist! those of Rome
assuring us that his whole head is in the Cloister of St. Sylvester; those of
Malta say, they have the hinder part of it; Amiens and St. John Angelique brag
of the forepart. And although Hist. l. 3. c. 6.
Theodoret declares that Julian the Apostate burned to Ashes the body of this
St. John, yet they will have the Finger wherewith he pointed, saying, Behold
the Lamb of God which takes away the sins of the world, was saved; but if you
have a mind to see it, you must trudge to Lions, to Bourges, to Bezanson, to
Fortuits, to Toulouse, and also to Florence; every one of these places
affirming they have it.

Thus St. Andrew has two Bodies, one at Tolouse, another at Melple. And St.
Anthony has two, one at Arles, another at Vienna. St. Matthias has three
Bodies, one at Rome, another at Padoa, and a third at Triers. So has Lazarus,
at Authun, at Marseilles, and at Avalon. And St. Sebastian has four Bodies,
one nigh unto Narbonne, a second at Rome, a third at Soissons, and the fourth
at Piligni near unto Nantes. To St. Anne they give five Heads, Lions, Apt in
Provence, St. Annes in Turingue, Duran in Juliars, and fifthly, Tryers; all
these places boast of such a Skull. And for St. Sebastian, for ought that I
know, the present Romanists give him as many Arms, as the old Romans wounded
them with Arrows, for they allow him no less than twelve, viz. one Arm at
Mombrison in Forest, one at St. Servins de Tolose, one at Case-Dieu in
Auvergne, and one at Angers; besides these, two at Soissons, two at Piligni,
two nigh unto Narbonne, where he was born; and lastly, two in St. Laurences
Church at Rome. And many suchlike monstrous instances might be shown, enough to
cool my Zeal and Fancy, though apt superstitiously to admire Antiquity.

What might I say of the Milk of the Blessed Virgin, now so plentifully bragged
of in many places, that the famous Colloq. Peregrinat. Religionis ergo, page
260.
Erasmus is of opinion, that it is impossible for one teeming Woman, though the
Child had sucked nothing, to afford so much? And for the Cross, there is
scarce a Romanist in the world but brags that he has a piece of it; which made
the former judicious person declare, that if the pieces of the Cross now bragged
of and showed about, were gathered together, they would fill or load a great
Ship; as St. Tho. Fullers Chapter Hist. l. 6. Sect. 5. Sect. 11
Apollonias Teeth being gathered together, were so many that they filled a Tun.
All which makes me subscribe to the Learned Exercit. contra Baron. 16. Sect.
104.
Isaac Casaubon, that most of our modern Relics are either doubtful, or
palpably counterfeit.

Though the forementioned comparisons might sufficiently testify, that SECT.
II. Childish Fopperies to the reproach of Jesus Christ.
they had none of the greatest Values of our Savior; yet let us add something
to show what a little helpless youngling they would yet make him; and yet
forsooth, would persuade us all these petty pranks to be for his commendation.

Though I am not apt to fancy the contrary, when I find them telling such
ridiculous and impertinent Trifles as these; that the Blessed Virgin brought
him dandling in her Arms like a little Child out of Heaven, willing him to be
Gonon. page 44, 45.
married to Catherine of Sienna; but he said, she was not handsome enough: but
at last he accepted her, and so they were married together with a Ring. Another
time, how she brought him down, and placed him in the arms of one Id. page 169.
Fastredus. Another time she descended with him to a company of Friars, to whom
he spoke in Id. page 310.
French, bidding them magnify his Mother; and at last I know not how the
little Infantulus.
Infant Christ slipped out of his Mothers Arms, and gave a sweet Rose to one of
them. Another time she gave him to D Alcoran, l. 1. p. 3.
St. Francis, who kept him and kissed him all night long; and the same favor
he obtained Id. page 254.
another time. Benevent also had him in his hands; but, which was more, they
say he played the Id. l. 2. p. 366.
Cook-boy, and looked to dress the Friars Victuals, whilst Benevent through
forgetfulness had neglected them and his duty.

They go on and tell us how the Virgin Mary once placed him on a Caesarius, l.
7. c. 20. p. 406.
Corporale then drying on a Woman's knee; the Woman not knowing what little
Child it was, would have thrust him off, but he desired her to let him sit
there. That another time he showed Gonon. p. 233.
Arnulphus all the Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, Confessors, Virgins
and Angels; that the Virgin gave him to be embraced by the said Monk, who not
able to endure the pleasure, bid her take her Son again. Thus they tell us that
Id. p. 274.
Hostradus being at meat in the Hall or Refectory with the other Friars, she
brought Christ from Heaven, and carried him in amongst them: Hostradus seeing
him a pretty boy, offered him some Victuals, saying, Eat, eat, pretty Child.
To whom Jesus smiling, said, He needed none of his meat, but he should eat some
with him in Heaven.

What shall I say more? they assure us that he came to Bzovius Annal. an. 1236.
Sect. 4.
Arnoldus, and showed him his name writ in the Book of Life. That not many
years since, viz. Anno 1505, one Gononus, p. 418.
Osanna of Mantoa, a Nun, was wedded to Christ by a Ring, the Virgin Mary and
the Prophet David assisting; and that Jesus taught her to Write and Read. That
Specul. Exemp. did. 7. Sect 37.
Conradus de Offida had Christ brought him from Heaven by the Blessed Virgin,
whom he took in his Arms, and placing mouth to mouth, and lips to lips, he was
overcome as it were with kisses and embracements. That Art. a Monast. Martyrol.
Franc. VII April. Sect. 3.
Sebastianus a S. Maria about an hundred years ago (he dyed 1580) saw the
Virgin at the Altar to dandle Christ up and down in her Arms and kiss him.

Nor is this all, for they would make us believe, that our Savior Christ Art.
a Monast VI April. Sect ^.
spoke intelligibly several times out of the Wafer to a Spanish Franciscan
called Joannes ab Occania. That he appeared to Dauroult. c. 5. Tit. 2. Sect. 15.
Lyduvina; imprinted upon her (as St. Francis had) his five Wounds, and turned
himself several times, now into the fashion of a Wafer, then into a Child, and
suchlike tricks. That one time upon the Altar he turned himself from the form
of the consecrated Wafer, into a little Child; which Child, after Ib. Tit. 2.
Sect 7.
Plegilus the Priest had taken into his Arms, and wearied himself with kissing,
clipping and embracing, by pressing breast to breast, and lips to lips, and then
laid on the Altar, was again converted into Wafer as formerly. Nay, which is
more, that in the likeness of a little Child he appeared upon the Altar, and
was there really Ib Tit. ^. Sect. 2.
Sacrificed, and cut to pieces by an Angel from Heaven, his blood poured into
the Chalice; and all this ado, to make a poor simple old man believe
Transubstantiation.

But to show you, that the world was come to that pass, that the people had a
greater love and respect for the Virgin Mary than Christ himself; nay, and at
last, their very common Saints got the esteem and affection from both of them:
one Instance shall serve for all, and this of one declared by the Fox, Tom. 2.
page 440.
Injunctions of King Henry the Eighth (and that before he had fully thrown off
the Pope) to have been a Rebel and Traitor to his Prince, and by reviling words
and violent hands to have provoked Tracy and the rest to kill him: And this
shall be Thomas a Becket, whose life we shall declare in the following History.

The Church of Canterbury before the dissolution of Abbeys, had three several
Shrines or Altars:

One dedicated to Christ.
Another to the Virgin Mary.
The third to St. Thomas Becket.
The yearly Offerings to these, will show the peoples affection; an instance or
two of which, take as follows, out of the old Leger-Book of that Church.

This Year,
l. s. d. The Oblations offered to the Virgin 063 05 6 0 Item, To the Shrine of
St. Thomas Becket 832 12 3 ob. Item, To Christ's Shrine 003 02 2 0

The next Year,
To the Blessed Virgin 004 01 8 q Item, To St. Thomas 954 06 3 0 Item, To
Christ 000 00 0 0

And this is that to which Mr. Church History, Book 3. p. 36. Sect. 70.
Fuller alludeth, thus: -- The Revenues whereof, by Peoples Offerings, amounted
to more than 600 pounds a year. And the same Accomptant, when coming to set
down what then or there was offered to Christ's or the High-Altar, dispatcheth
all with a Blank, Summo Altari nil. Yea, whereas before Beckets death, the
Cathedral in Canterbury was called Christs-Church, it passed afterward for the
Church of St. Thomas, verifying therein the complaint of John 20. 2.
Mary Magdalen, Sustulerunt Diminum, they have taken away the Lord. Though
since, by the demolishing of Beckets Shrine, the Church (and that justly) has
recovered his true and ancient name.

CHAP. III. For the glory of their Religion, and their holy Chieftains, the
Romanists tell, 1. Many foolish, unchristian, unmannerly, filthy, and nasty
stories of their Saints. 2. They invent many brave Utopian Saints, who never
breathed in this World. 3. They faign and devise several lying Stories and
Wonders. 4. Their pretty Tales of Brutes and senceless Creatures, and what
doughty Champions they are for the Romanists against Heretics. 5. How basely
they abused and so vexed the poor Devil, that at last he repented of his sins;
and as it seems, had a good opinion of the Romish Religion, by his great
affection to the Mass. 6. Their foolish description of Hell, Purgatory and
Paradise: and what a simple and vain place they make Heaven to be.
THere goes a story of a Frenchman, that seeing his Master kiss the SECT. I.
Unchristian, Unmannerly and filthy Stories of their Saints.
Popes Toe, sneaked out of the Presence, giving this for his Reason, that if
his Lord kissed his Feet, he feared they would make him salute a worse place. I
shall not offer to make comparisons: but since they father such foolish stories
upon Christ, we have little reason to suppose that they mend the matter when
they come to the Saints, men for ought that I know equal to themselves.

And the truth is, it is pretty to observe what simple and sottish Tales they
invent to magnify these their Saints, as if they were agreed with the
Mahumetans, to fancy Folly to be a sign of Holiness; so far are their actions
from having any real badge of Sanctity, or discretion, unless you will allow
the nakedness of a Ranter or Adamite, and the stupidity of a Quaker, to pass
for true Holiness.

Thus to pass for excellencies in Religion, they commend Moses the Marc.
Marulus, lib. 1. cap. 4.
Abbot, and Constantius the Monk, for desiring and longing to be abused by any
body. Of one Laurent. Forerus Anatomia, sive Antanatomia, p. 70.
Peter, who had rather be held a companion of Women, then a Holy man: And St.
Francis, for making it his business to procure one to speak evil against him,
as to call him Clown, Idiot, lazy-fellow, and suchlike. Thus they honor Pet.
de Natalib. l. 2. c. 45.
Simeon Stylita for his mad-fashioned Devotion, as his girding himself so hard
about with a Cord, that his Flesh putrified; for his living several years in a
Pit or Well; for his living forty years on a Pillar twelve Cubits high, till
his very Thigh rotted; and then he stood stock-still a whole year upon one
Foot. Or as Marulus, l. 1. (...).
another tells us, he lived thus upon several Pillars, one of which was thirty
Cubits high; as upon one he stood four years, upon another twelve, on another
also twelve, and on another four; and lastly, upon the highest of all, till his
dying day; nay he dyed so standing, and after his death they say he stood also
still, and might have stood so yet, if Antonius had not been too busy, and
taken him down and buried him. And thus do they mainly magnify one Id. page 50.
John for standing three years together upon one Stone, not sitting or lying
down all the while; insomuch that odd corrupted matter ran from his Feet, by
reason of that continual posture.

To these senceless signs of Sanctity, they continue their commendations to
Marulus l. 3. c. 8. Niceph. Callist. lib. 17. cap. 5.
Timotheus the Hermit, and Mary of Egypt, for going stark-naked. To Marul.
lib. 4. cap. 6.
Agathon the Abbot, for keeping a stone in his mouth three years together, that
he might not speak. To Id. l. 4. c. 7.
Anianus of Alexandria, for plucking out his eye, for once looking upon a
Woman. To Id. l. 5. c. 4.
Peter Abbot of Claraval, for rejoicing that he had lost one of his eyes. To
one Id. Ibid.
Egidius, who being wounded by an Arrow, was so far from suffering the wound to
be cured, that he earnestly prayed to God against it. To one Ibid.
Sylvania, for being so careless and sluttish, that for sixty years she never
washed Face, Feet or Hands, excepting the very tops of her Fingers. And to Id.
l. 5. c 9.
Apollo the Abbot, for being so unchristian-unneighbourly, as not to assist his
friend to help out his Ox, then upon perishing in a Quag-mire, because forsooth
he would not meddle with any worldly business.

They go on, and add one glory to Dauroult. c. 7. Tit. 80. Sect. 8.
Ronualdus, for his so much love to silence, that for seven years together he
would not speak one word. To Ib. Sect. 4.
Godefridus a Monk of Clugny, for his whimsie, that would rather suffer a
Thiefto steal an Horse, then he would speak one word to awaken the Keepers. And
all these as much badges of Christianity, as that they tell of the Abbot Jacob.
de Voragine Hist. 17. Petr. de Natalibus, l. 2. c. 35.
Macarius, who all naked, repented, and tormented himself amongst Briars and
Thorns six months [but Apol. pour Herodot. p. 367.
Estiene seven years] and all this only for killing a flea. Or the Religious
Frolic of St. Francis to know Gods will which way he should go: As some set up
a Staff to observe its falling, so he used Friar L' Alc. des Cord. l. 1. p. 60,
61.
Massy for such an Instrument, bidding him turn and whirle himself about as
fast and as long as he was able, and which way his face stood when he had done,
that way must they go: for so, he said, was the Will of God; though sometimes
the poor fellow got falls by reason of his dizziness.

To continue these holy pranks of Devotion, they tell us that Friar Ruffin once
bad the Devil Aperi os tuum, and ego in illud st^rcorizabo. Id. p. 65.
open his mouth, and he would -- in it. That another time St. Francis commanded
the same Ruffin to go to Assisi, and there preach Id. page 66.
naked (only his Linings on) to the people; and that he himself went also
stark-naked and heard him preach. That another time the said St. Francis,
though very weak, and sick of a Quartain Fever, and in the midst of a very
cold Winter, yet put off all his Clothes, his Breeches excepted; commanded one
Peter Catanai to tie a Id. l. 2. p. 320.
Rope about his neck, and so to drag him to the place where Malefactors used to
suffer; which accordingly was done; and all this ado, because he had eat a
little flesh, and supped some flesh-broth.

And suchlike Marks of Holiness are these: Friar Id. l. 1. p. 69,
John would do every thing that he saw St. Francis do, whether it were
kneeling, spitting, etc. And indeed this Father of the Minorites would have all
his Flock obedient to him, were it never so ridiculous: Thus he turned off one
because he did not plant or set his Id. page 241, 242.
Coleworts with their Roots upwards and the Leaves in the ground, as he had
done. Another time he bad one of them Ibid.
strip himself stark-naked, to dig a deep hole, and to put himself into it;
which being done, St. Francis covered him all over with Earth, even to the very
beard: Then he asked him if he were not dead? Yes, quoth the poor Friar, I am
dead. Then says Francis, Rise up, for though thou be'st dead, yet thou ought
in every thing to obey me.

To these we might add many other of their tokens and sure signs of
Christianity; as how a Friar going Id. p. 83, 84.
naked to his Covent, for which being checked, vindicated himself with this
saying; As he came naked, so he must return. How the said Friar is called Tam
Sanctus fuit iste Fratricellus.
Holy for putting off his Clothes, and going naked into Viterbo. How Friar Id.
l. 2. p. 163.
Egidius is commended, for having got more Nuts than he could carry in his lap,
put off all his Clothes, filling them with Nuts, and so he went naked into the
City. And another time he went into a Wood Id. l. 2. p. 166, 167.
put off his Clothes, tied a Cord about his neck, bidding another Friar so to
lead him to the Covent, which was done, where he baul'd out like a great Booby.
And why might not all these primitive postures be convenient, seeing Id. l. 1.
p. 195.
St. Francis once told a Friar, that if he would go naked, and preach so, he
should be saved?

And so I suppose Friar Juniper, (so great a friend and familiar with St.
Francis) bended all his thoughts for the best and speediest way to Heaven, when
he earnestly desired that he might Id. l. 1. p. 92, 93.
stink so, that none should be able to come near him; and that he might be
thrown into a Ditch, there to dye, and be eaten up of Dogs. Another time they
tell us, being to dress the Victuals for the other Friars, he Id. page 90.
boiled the Chickens and other Meat together, without either washing them, or
pulling off the Feathers: and that this Friar was cleanly enough we need not
question, seeing they brag of him, that being once nobly entertained, and laid
in a very brave bed, he very mannerly and religiously Id. page 88.
bewrayed it, and stole away next morning without thanking his Landlord; which
trick had more of a Beast than a Wag in it, though they think they do not a
little commend him when they call him Christi jaculatorem. Id. l. 2. p. 199.
Christ's Jeaster or Bouffon; an Expression of so much boldness (to say no
worse) that they neither honor their Religion, nor their St. Clare by
fathering it upon her.

But besides all this, as Poets and the Authors of Romances have the liberty
SECT. II. Many false Saints that never had being.
granted them, not only to invent the Tale, but also to give what names they
please, as well to the great lubberly Giants, as the always-conquering valiant
Knights, with the lovely and enchanted Ladies: So here the Romanists making
themselves to be of the same Profession, take to themselves the same freedom,
suspecting the number of their true Saints, not to be enough or sufficient to
complete the honor of their Church.

And for a proof of this, I shall only give two or three Instances, and that
of our own Island. Thus they tell us of the Martyrdom of one Vsua^d. Martyrol.
9. Febr. and Philip Fe^rarius Catalog Generali^ Sanctorum, 8. F^^r.
St. Maingoldus, a Duke, and Son to one Hugh King of England: Though I think it
would puzzle their best Historians to find out an English Monarch of that
name. Yet will they not let this King go by himself, but give us another to
keep him company, and him they call by the name of Rob. Parsons Calendar Caes.
B^ron. Martyrol. S^^ius. Hist. Sanctor. Gu^^. Gazet Hist. des Saints, VII Feb.
St. Richard King of England, and Nephew to Offa King of the East Saxons,
almost a thousand years ago; by which means, without the help of a Cromwell,
they have found out a fourth Richard, which our Chronicles never dreamed of.

But to leave off single Testimonies, since an Army of no less than eleven
thousand invented Saints offer themselves at one view, viz. S. Vrsole and her
Virgins; a story made up of so many contradictions, improbabilities, not to say
impossibilities and abominable lies, that An. 383.
Baronius is at a loss about it, and our Countryman Hist Eccles. page 35, 36.
Harpsfeld resolves bravely to believe it, though he confesses he knows not
how to prove it; and yet it is pretty to observe how England and Scotland both
strive to make her theirs. But let the story Coryats, p. 61^.
seem never so improbable, the good Catholics of Colen will not loose the
place nor memory of her Martyrdom; to perpetuate which, they have a large
Church built to her, bearing her name, in which, that they also might not want
the benefit of her Intercession, they in the year 1607. 17. April, permitted a
Prayer to be printed to her, and there hung up in a Table: and why not, having
got a name in the 21 October. Da. Camerar. de Regn. Scot. Tho. Demster.
Roman Calendar?

And with her, they tell us dyed also by Martyrdom one Pet. de Natal. lib. 9.
cap. 87. Jac. de Voragine Hist. 153. Petr. Merssaeus Catalog. Elect.
Ecclesiast. Annal. Archiepisc. Colen, Sect. 4. Jo. Gault. Chron. Chronicor.
Tom. 1. page 1259.
Cyriacus of British Extraction, and one that was Pope of Rome. But Baronius
himself is altogether silent concerning him; nor do their Pontifick Histories
afford us any Pope near such a name, unless we allow of Siricius; which could
not be the same with the other, because a Roman by Birth, and no Martyr.

And thus when their hands are in, they scorn to give out, lest you SECT. III.
Many lying Stories and Wonders.
should fancy their Invention to be so dull, that they have not stories as well
as names at their Finger-ends, with which it is none of their least glories that
they can show their voluminous Church-Histories, or Kirk-Tales stuffed up.

As how a Gononus, page 136.
Dutch Painter, using to draw the Devil as ugly as possibly he could; the
wicked spirit, who thought himself not so ugly as he is painted, every one
thinking best of themselves, took this in very great indudgion, and to be
revenged, one time took his opportunity, and threw down the high Scaffold on
which the Painter stood: upon which the poor Dutchman had fallen so, that his
neck had been in danger, if the very Picture of the Virgin Mary, which the
fellow had newly painted, had not reached out its hand and held him up, till
other people came and helped him down. How Id. p. 300.
St. Agnes stole a Cross from little Christ, which she saw hang by a thread
about his neck; at which theft he was well pleased, and smiled. How the little
Id. p. 314.
Statue of Christ used to come out of his Mothers arms and eat Victuals with a
Spanish Boy. As they say the Virgin Bzovius Annal. An. 1294. Sect. 3.
Mary and St. John, who are painted by the Cross, used to come thence to Pope
Caelestinus the Fifth when a Boy, and sing to him, and take the Book from him
which he used to carry.

And as true as the rest are these, how a Vid. Andr. Rivet. Apol. pro B. Virg.
l. 2. c. 15. p. 376.
Sergeant being slain, the Virgin Mary and Devils fell out about his soul: to
end this controversy, Christ comes and sits as judge; and at last both parties
having pleaded as much as they could, he willing to obey his Mother, returns
the soul to its body, that he might repent of his former evils; and so by the
Pope a Prayer was appointed to be said for his soul. Again, how a wicked Monk
dying without Confession, Id. p. 381.
St. Peter went and begged of Christ his soul; but being denied, he goes to the
Blessed Virgin, and desires her to intercede: she attended with her Maids,
hastes to Christ, who consented that the soul should be restored to the body to
repent. This grant she informs Peter of, who thereupon, falls upon the Devils,
and bangs them away with a great Key he had, takes the soul from them, gives
it to two Angels to carry it to its body; and thus the Monk revived. Again, how
a fellow being dead, Id. p. 373.
two Angels carrying his soul to Heaven, an Army of Devils met them, and
demanded his soul as their due, and so they hoped God being just would not take
from them what belonged to them. To end the Controversy, Mary comes, pleads
that he dyed in her service, in returning from his Pilgrimage, and was confessed
before he dyed. To this they reply, that there was one wicked sin which he
never confessed. This puts her to her Trumps how to bring him off clear; at
last finding no other way, she gets his soul restored to his body; then he went
and confessed that sin to a Priest, and so dyed, and never fear but he slipped into
Heaven. Such a like story they tell of Genonus, p. 140.
another man. And such another of a Id. p. 167.
Woman, who dying, leaving one sin unconfess'd, the little Devils were
presently fingering her soul; but the Virgin chid them away, got her soul
restored, that she might confess that fault, and then never question but that
all went well.

To these they add how Villegas VI Feb. Pet. de Natalibus, lib. 3. cap. 101.
Dorothea sent one Roses and Apples out of Paradise: how Jac. de Vorag. Hist.
95.
St. Christopher was twelve Cubits high, sought out the Devil, and served him
as a man; carried Christ over-Sea on his back, with whose weight he had almost
sunk down; and that the Arrows shot against him, hung still in the Air, and
durst not approach him. That Id. Hist. 96.
seven men slept almost 200 years, some say more. How Pet. de Natal. l. 5. c.
117.
St. Brandan found out Paradise, and a great Fish called Jason, which he taking
to have been an Island, made a fire upon him. That some of the Angels who fell,
are kept in an Island in the shape of white Birds singing, and that he saw
Judas sitting upon a stone in the Sea. That Gonon. page 126.
Vdo of Magdeburg had all manner of knowledge miraculously given him, as they
say Id. p. 154.
Rupert Abbot of Duiitz over against Colen had. That Abbot Tho. Cantiprat. lib.
1. c 9. Sect. 3.
Conrade had that knack, that those Fingers which he held forth in consecrating
the Eucharist, in the nightime did shine like a Candle, and gave him light to
read or study by: But I warrant you the Chandlers cursed the Miracle. And that
Jo. Capgrave in vita Brigita.
S. Briget made a newborn Infant tell who was its true Father, to decide the
Controversy: a wiser Child, I fancy, than Briget her self was at its age, for
I think she is supposed to be a Bastard. They go on, and boldly tell us, how
upon the death of one Friar Peter, L' Alc. lib. 1. page 136.
the Bell-rope being broke, an Angel tol'd the Bell a great while. How an Angel
assisted one Id. page 137.
Drodro to sing Mass, and another Angel made ready his Horse. How one not using
to bow at Gloria Patri, was thus punished in Id. page 184.
Purgatory; he was set upon an high and narrow Pillar in the midst of the Sea
(it seems Charon may employ his Barge there too) and bowed an hundred times a
day, and as many at night, till he had satisfied for his former neglects. And
how an Id. lib. 2. page 215.
Usurer dying, his heart was found warm amongst his Riches.

But this is nothing so wonderful, as that which they tell of Catherine of
Sienna, who desiring a new heart, Christ came to her, opened her Breast, took
out her heart, and away with it he goes: (and now I would have their Schoolmen
tell us whether she could not lift up her heart to God) But at last he returns
again, and put into her breast a new heart, which he told her was his En filia
mea, habes pro cord tuo cor meum.
own; the mark of which action always remained in her Breast. This Catherine
they say was several times carried through the Air by Angels: That Christ with
a triple Crown like a Pope, accompanied with some Apostles blessed her: That he
received her to be his Wife, being wedded to her with a Ring; the Virgin Mary
making Christ hold her by the right hand; the Prophet David playing to them
upon his Harp. That he came from Heavem to embrace her: that he made her kiss
his wounded side: that he put a Crown of Gold upon her head, and gave her the
Sacrament: that his five wounds were imprinted upon her; but the marks were
taken away, though the pain endured. And several suchlike stories do they tell
of her, enough to make large Treatises; all which are written and testified by
several of their Authors: And Petrus Firens, in the year 1612, published a
Volume of them with large Pictures.

But it was not her alone, who as they say had these wounds: for St. Francis
had them, Luduvina had them, a woman in Tho. Cantiprat. lib 1. cap. 25. Sect. 7
Brabant had them, and De signis Eccles. Tom. 2. lib. 15. cap 3.
Thomas Bozius will tell you of others; and ten to one but all these as true as
that Maria de la Visitacion, Prioress of the Monastery de la Anunciada in
Lisbon had them, for so she bare the world in hand; and that she did many
Miracles, insomuch that she was looked upon as a wonderful Saint, from the Pope
himself to the lowest of his sons; many Pens employed to write her Miracles,
the greatest persons begged her assistance; Philip the Vid. Cyprian Valera, 362,
420, 421, etc.
Second himself 1588, before he sent his invincible Armada (as they called it)
to conquer England, must have her to bless his Standard-Royal, which was
accomplished with the greatest ceremony, and presence of the chiefest Grandees
in Spain: Nay, one of the main hopes that the Crudelita^is Calvinianae exempla
duo recentissima ex Anglia, 1585. Prefat. ad Principes Cathol.
English-Romanists had of their designs, was from her Prophecies. And yet
having cheated the world for several years, at last, as God would have it, some
of her own Nuns took an humor to watch her narrowly, and discovered her to be
a mere Cheat and Counterfeit, as she her self was afterward forced to confess.
This was a Dominican; and not long before, was there such a discovery made at
Cordova of the Abbess Magdelena de la Cruz, who was a Franciscan: and thus both
Orders have their tricks.

But to proceed to some other of their pretty Wonders, they tell us how Friar
L' Alcor. des Cord. lib. 2. page 200.
Theobald by virtue of the sign of the Cross walked upon the Water over Tyber.
How Art. a Monaster. Martyrol. Francisc. XIII Apr. Sect. 2.
Hervaeus of Toledo laid his Coat on a River, got upon it, and so saild over
dapperly: and such tricks they tell of Id. VI November. Sect. 5.
another of the same City. But the Spaniards must not run away with all the
glory, for a Tho. Cantiprat. lib. 2. cap. 29. Sect. 26.
German Dominican did but lay his Cowl upon the waters, set his feet on it, and
so slipped over a broad River very cleverly, not a bit of his Clothes being wet.
Thus Ib. Sect. 27.
another desiring to come into England, strutted manfully over a great part of
the Sea, till at last a Ship for the Miracles sake took him in. Thus M.
Marulus, lib. 3. cap. 3.
Nazarius and Celsus walked upon the Ocean. Thus Lovys Richeome discourse des
Miracles, c. 35. Sect. 1.
Fransois de Paula using his Coat or Cowl instead of a Ship, he and his
Companion passed gallantly over the Sicilian waves. But above all, well fare
St. Fingare, who after her head was cut off, saild from Ireland to Cornwall upon
a Leaf: though Villegas, V Octobr.
Maurus did best, who ran upon the water without any such helps. But yet why
should we make these pretty Tales to be such badges of Christianity and
Holiness, seeing no less man than Epist. IV. page 331.
Busbequius tells us of a Turk who could do as well as any of them?

But I believe the Turks are not so good at flying, as some of our Saints are;
for L' Alcor. l. 2. p. 217.
Antonius got from Padoa in Italy, to Lisborn in Portugal in one night, and the
next night home again. And Imago primi Saeculi societatis Jesu, page 630.
Ignatius Loyola in a moment whisk'd from Rome to Colen. But what need we talk
of men, when we can produce an House, as la Santa Casa di Loreto, with us
commonly called the Chapel of Loretto, which one time skipt from 1292, Gonon.
Nazareth in lower Galile in the Holy Land, to a little Hill between Terzatz
and Fiume in Dalmatia? then upon some grudge, took its flight thence, and 1298.
flew over the Venetian Golf into la Marca d'Ancona, not far from Recanati,
into a Wood belonging to a Lady called Laureta: (from whence it took its name)
Thence a little after, (being vexed at some Thieves) it jumped about a Mile more
Southwards: but here two Brothers falling out about it (by reason of the great
gain and Riches was got by it) it left them both in the lurch, and hopt about
twelve score Northwards to a little Hill, where it now stands: so that in one
year it took the pains to remove thrice. But now they have shackel'd it to the
purpose from any more removes, by building a great Church over it, and it must
squeeze hard to creep out of its Doors or Windows. Though in the year 1606,
Pope Paul the Fifth feared his Friends the Venetians would make bold to give
one motion farther to the best part of it, viz. its vast Riches; to prevent
which, he thought he might be as bold as his Neighbors. The whole travels of
this Chapel of N. S. di Loreto, is accounted by Signor La Santa Casa
Abbellita, part 1. c. 6.
Sylvio Serragli (one some years ago employed there for its Registers) to be
2030 Italian Miles, which he esteems to amount to 1870 of English. A story made
suspected by many impertinent actions they make as companions with it.

However, shall we not think Pet. de Natal. l. 2. c. 55.
Lucianus was a brave Fellow, who after he was beheaded, took up his head in
his hand, and carried it three Miles, and crossed a great River? Like Id. l. 9.
c. 41. Villegas, IX October.
St. Dionise, whose head being cut off, walked two Miles with it in his hands,
and then gave it to a woman: Or like the six Abr. Bzovius, Annal. An. 1227.
Sect. 18.
Dominician Friars, who being made shorter by the Noddles, yet each of them had
so much wit, as to take up their respective Pates again in their hands, and
with them to strut to their Covent. Thus they say that one Pet. de Natal. l. 9.
c. 80.
Justus having his head cut off, he then very trimly washed his body, took up
his head in his hands, carried it to his friends, praised God, and told them
how he would be buried. As Surius, X Sept.
Vrsus, Victor, and LXVI others, having undergone the same sauce, very fairly
took up their Noddles, went a great way, kneeled down, prayed, and after all
this labor were content to rest very quietly: and such another story have I
read of one Hispan. Bibliotheca, p. 103.
Lambert.

And why should we think this strange, since they tell us that Niceph. Callist.
l. 14. c. 43.
St. Chrysostom himself spoke many years after he was buried? That a wicked
Tho. Cantiprat lib. 2. cap. ^9. Sect. 24.
Norman having his head cut off, the head tumbled along, bauling out to be
confessed; which afterward it did to a Priest. That one Vid. Andr. Rivet. Apol.
pro B. Virg. l. 2. c. 15. p. 374
Alexandria Arragonia having also her head cut off, and thrown into a deep
Well; an hundred and fifty days after, it spoke, and confessed her sins. That
Gonon. page 336.
Stephanus Lonsoscius, being by all wise men thought to be slain by the Turks,
yet three years after was he found alive under an heap of dead Bodies, calling
out to be confessed; to which purpose they say he was kept alive by the Blessed
Virgin. And thus they tell of her kindness to a most wicked Tridentine
Caesarius, l. 7. c. 59.
Thief, who being beheaded for his many abominable Villainies, and buried, she
with some other Saints from Heaven came, took him up, fixed his head to his body
again, and very ceremoniously carried him and buried him in a Church.

Though this was not so pretty a trick as the L'Alcoran des Cord. l. 2. p. 244,
245.
Fellow did at Marceille, whose head being cut off and buried, by the virtue of
St. Jews was joined to his body again, and so he lived once more to the
comfort of his Mother. Was not Id. l. 2. p. 364.
St. Francis a notable shaver, who to show what he could do, first killed a
Physicians son, and then made him alive again? whereby it seems he out-vapour'd
the Doctor in his own Profession.

And many suchlike Stories as these will they tell you for the honor of their
Religion; as how a fellow having hung on the Gallows Nieremburg. de Mirac.
Europ. l. 1. c. 1. Jacob. de Vorag. Hist. 94.
thirty six days, was after all this found alive, and lived many years after,
for the credit of St. James of Compostella. How two Monks being Corn.
Schulting. Thesaur. Antiq. Eccles. Tom. 7. c. 165.
hanged on a Tree, and dead, yet revived, and sang very sweetly: I suppose, as
the fellow by advantage of the Wind and his hollow Tooth whistled. But above
all, give me Gono^us, page 327, 328.
Hugo de la Sale, who could not be hanged, let the Luccesi do what they could;
so much was he befriended by the Virgin Mary.

Shall we believe trusty Friar L' Alc. des Cord. lib. 2. page 249.
Roger, when he says he never saw a Woman's face in his life, nay, not so much
as his Mothers? or that Friar Id page 365.
Bentivola took another fellow on his back, and for fifteen Miles carried him
faster than an Eagle could fly? and many other suchlike Tales, that they do not
a little glory in. For my part, I shall as soon believe that they have the Vid.
Andr. Hond^^f. Theatr. Histotic. 1 Praecept. page 81, 82.
Flame of Fire showed to Moses in the Bush: a Feather of the Archangels Wing:
the Banner wherewith Christ descended into Hell: the Vid. Alex. Cooks Pope
Joan, p. 41.
sound of the Bells which hung in Solomon's Temple; or that the three-corner'd
Stone is now to be seen at Jerusalem, whereof David spoke, saying, Psalm. 118,
22.
The stone which the builders refused, is become the head-stone of the Corner:
Or the Vid. Mart. Luther Tom. 1. X praecepta, Pr. 8. fol. 44. b. Oath. M^land.
joco-ser. p. 241. Sect. 227.
Hair which a mad-cap Wench showed to be St. Catherines: Or the Eric. Cord.
Epigr. vid. Delit. Poet. Germ. Tom. 2. p. 802.
Breeches which the Friar said were St. Francises. All which Fopperies were
ingeniously derided by a certain Earl, who hearing them boast of suchlike
Relics, told them, that at such a place was to be seen the Chamber Pot which
Vrsula and her eleven thousand Virgins made use of.

But because Carping Heretics may object these pretty feats may be SECT. IV.
done by combination, men, and cunning men being the main Instruments in the
former Actions; to take away all doubt, they think it no hard matter to confirm
their Religion from Brutes and senceless Blocks or Stones.

Thus they think it worth our belief, that Jo. Capgrave* fol. 2.
Aido, through pity giving eight Sheep to as many hungry Wolves, and all well
eaten, were yet restored safe and sound to him again, and alive. That Pet. de
Natal. lib. 6. cap. ult. Jac. de Vorag. Hist. 102.
St. Germanus and his Companions having eaten up a Calf, very honestly restored
it to life again. That St. Bernacus his Jo. Capgrave, fol. 37.
Cow being stolen, killed, cut in pieces, and put in the Chaldron to be
boiled, was yet for all this made alive. That an Nieremburg. de Mirac. l. 1.
cap. 5.
Hen being drowned, the Children fearing to be whipped for it, called but upon
Ignatius Loyola, and it was as well again as ever. That a Id. l. 1. c. 1.
Cock and Hen, after they had been roasted, and going to be cut up, revived,
and lived several years. But concerning this Cock and Hen at St. Domingo de
Calcada in Rioia (a little Province between Old Castile, Navarre, and Biscay)
Nieremburgius would tell us another Miracle, viz. that every one may take a
Feather belonging to these Birds thence, and yet the number never the less. But
when I tell the Romanists that in the Church there (where they may also see the
story painted) are always kept alive in a Cage a Cock and an Hen; and when
either of them dies, its place supplied by another, and the dead ones Feathers
pulled off, and laid up with the rest as holy Relics: they will easily grant
that it is no such wonder to find no decay of Feathers in so many years, seeing
they have so easy a way besides other tricks to keep up the store.

But to return: was it not a pretty knack of Friar L'Alc. des Cord. l. 1. p. 93.
Andreas de Anania, who having some little Birds roasted at his own desire to
stay his Appetite, yet upon better consideration, it went against his stomach
to devour them; and thus bravely resolved, he makes but the sign of the Cross,
and presently they revived and flew away? It was very charitably done of Abbot
William, to kill an Tho. Cantiprat. l. 2. c. 25. Sect. 5.
Ox, cut it in pieces, and give a piece of it to a poor woman to save her
longing, and then next day make it as well and as live again as ever it was.
And it was as well done of L'Alc des Cord. lib. 1. page 119.
St. Antony, who by the sign of the Cross, turned an ugly Toad into a fat
piping-hot roasted Capon.

'Twas a good-natured piece of Id. l. 2. p. 322.
Capon, that to save the credit of St. Francis, turned it self into a Fish. And
a merry Tho. Cantiprat. l. 2. c. 1. Sect 10.
Magpy, which for many days talked in the belly of him who had eaten it: As the
Irish Sheep did Jac. de Vorag. Hist. 51. Pet. de Natal. lib. 3. cap. 104.
bleat in the guts of him who had stolen and eaten it, the better to discover
the Theft.

It was an hard case, that at the same time a great Pet. de Natal. lib. 1. cap.
25.
Rock should divide it self for the preservation of St. Barbara, and that a
Shepherd and his Sheep should be turned into Stones. But it was a civil Jac. de
Vorag. Hist. 94.
stone that yielded like wax to the body of St. James: But above all, the
highstone-Tower showed its kindness best, when it was so complemental as to
Ibid.
bow its Top down to the ground, to let a Prisoner the better to escape. Yet
the flowing Seas showed their humility enough, when for reverence they durst
not approach near to the Jesuit Nieremburg. Hist. Not. l. 9. c. 95.
Joseph Anchieta: and the ( c) Sun it self must return back, or stand still, at
the desire of Father Xavier of the same Order: as it did to Dauroult. cap. 7.
Tit. 76. Sect. 6.
Mutius the Hermit. b Imago primi Saeculi soc. Jesu, page 625.


But to return to Earth: they tell us how Jo. Capgrave Surius.
Swithine the true Raining-Saint, made whole and sound a poor Woman's Eggs, that
were unhappily broken to pieces. That a Woman had her Tho. Cantiprat. l. 2. c.
25. Sect. 7.
Tub miraculously filled with Meal: And for the honor of good-fellowship, how
one by the same knack had his Ib. Sect. 11.
Barrel filled with Wine: as another had his Ib. Sect. 12.
Flagon. That a well-meaning Wench having emptyed by stealth an Art. a Monast.
Martyrol. Francisc. XXI Aug. Sect. 4.
Hogshead of her Fathers Wine to pleasure some Friar, had it replenished again
by the virtue of St. Francis. And that a Woman, running to give Friar Antony
some Wine, through haste and negligence, carried away the L' Alc. des Cord.
lib. 1. page 115.
Spigot in her hands; and so at her return, found the Wine all run out: but she
relying on the Friars merits or cunning, put the Spigot into the Faucet, and
presently the Vessel was so full of good Wine again, that it ran over. But
above all, give me some of Vita S. Bernard, l. 1. c. 11.
St. Bernards Ale, which was so good, that it infused Grace, and converted a
Company of Jovialblades.

It seems Beasts and Birds were not so shie and peevish formerly, as now: when
a Capgrave, fol, 18.
Buck would run to St. Aido, and kneel as him, or if praying his help. As an
Id. fol. 37.
Hare was so saved by Anselme. When Ni^remberg. Hist. Not lib. 9. cap. 95.
Sparrows would flock to Remigius, and eat from his fist: When not only Birds,
but Ibid.
Fishes would do the same to Jodocus; and took delight to flutter about
Maxentius. They say that Id. c. 95, 96.
Joseph Anchieta the Jesuit out-vapour'd the Serpents; and in the heat of
Summer, made the Birds fly over him for a shade. That Id. cap. 95.
Brigid had a Boar to preserve her Flocks; Id. Hist. Mirac. l. 2 c. 68.
Eutichius a Bear; and St. Hidrome a Lion to keep his Ass. That a ( Dauroult.
c. 7. Tit. 76. Sect. 3.
Wolf at the name of Nortbert let a Sheep go. A Ibid. Sect. 4.
Serpent secured a Thief. Two Ibid. Sect. 2.
Lions upon command, directed strayed Travelers into the right way. And which
is most of all, that an ugly filthy Nic. Jans^^. l. 2. c. 3. p. 215.
worm was turned into a precious Stone by St. Dominick.

Nay, these Beasts must be Religious too, and probably good Roman Catholics.
Thus the Beasts used to come to be Villegas, III Febr. Jac. de Vorag. Hist. 41.
blessed by St. Blasius; nor would they depart, till they had received his
Benediction. A company of L' Alc. des Cord. l. 1. p. 69.
Larks sang the Requiem of St. Francis: the Birds Id. page 82.
flew out of a Wood, lest their chatterings should disturb the Prayers of
Friar Rollus. One time a great Flock of Birds with stretch'd-out necks, gaped,
and attentively Id. page 192.
hearkn'd to the Preachment of St. Francis. Another time, a great Shoal of Id.
page 112, 113.
Fishes held their heads out of the Water, the better to hear Friar Anthonies
Sermon; and when he had done, some of them opened their mouths, others bowed
down their heads, whilst others hum'd him; and then departed with a great deal
of comfort. And other Pet. de Natal. lib. 5. cap. 117.
Fishes at the command of St. Branden, lift up their voices and praised God:
And thus a L' A^c. des C^rd. l 1. p. 200.
Sheep bleated and kneeled before the Altar: And the story says, that the
stones answered, Amen, to blind Venerable Bedes Sermon.

And if any of these Creatures do an injury and displeasure, how sorry and
grieved will they render them for it? Thus they tell us of a Nieremberg. de
Mitac. lib. 2. cap. 72.
Raven or Crow which did Penance, by tormenting it self three days on a
Mountain, only for throwing down a little Milk. But the Story how St. Francis
made peace between the City Eugubio and a Wolf, is as pretty a thumper as any,
in short thus: A Wolf having done much mischief to the Citizens, he undertook
to make them good friends: upon this he calls the Beast to L' Alc. des Cord.
lib. 1. page 188, 189.
him, saying, Brother Wolf, you shall promise to live quietly, if the people
will afford you Victuals. Then the Wolf bowed down his head in sign of consent:
But Francis bid him plight his Da mihi fidem.
troth: Then the Wolf lift up his right paw, and Francis held forth his fist,
and so the Saint and Beast shook hand and foot. Then Francis Preached; and
after Sermon, past his word to the Citizens for the Wolfs future good
behavior, provided they would not molest the Wolf: to which they promising,
and the Wolf kneeling down in sign of agreement, all the people shouted for joy
of the Peace: And thus the Wolf lived two years, begging his meat from door to
door; the very Dogs all the while not so much as barking at him.

Nay, these Animals are doughty Champions for Invocation of Saints too. Thus
they assure us, that a little Bird, being Gononus, page 150.
seized on by a greater, cried but out Ave Maria, and presently the great
ravenous Bird fell down dead: That a Parrat sporting her self out of a Cage,
and being almost seized upon by an Hawk, did but call upon St. Thomas a Becket,
and the Hawk fell down dead, and so the Parrat escaped a scouring. Nay, that a
Faulkoner being to be hanged for loosing his Lords Hawk, and had the Rope about
his neck, did but think upon our Lady of Hall [a place in Hainault, where of
late her Image is set up and more peculiarly worship'd] Just. Lips. D. virgo
Hallensis.
and forthwith the Faulkon came flying home, light upon his shoulder, and so
saved his life.

But if these little Creatures have not a visible Church, they cannot escape
being Heretics: to avoid which mischief, you shall see they shall have a place
for Devotion, the which though not so big as the seven Mother-Churches at Rome,
yet more miraculous than any of them. And thus it happened:

A Woman's Caesarius, l. 9. c. 8.
Bees not thriving, by the advice of her Gossip, she steals a consecrated
Wafer, and places it in one of her Hives, hoping it would drive away the
disease, and bless all their undertakings. The devout Bees, in honor of such a
sacred Guest, fall to work, and with their Hony-combs, make a pretty little
Church with Windows, a Covering or Roof, with a Door, a Belfrey, I and an Altar
too, upon which they had laid the Host, about which they continually Apes
circum volantes, and in laudem Creatorisbombisantes.
flew, and by their Humming praised the Lord. A pretty company of Catholics,
and a notable Argument for Transubstantiation. But I hope De signis Eccles.
lib. 14. cap. 3. Sect. 1.
Bozius and the rest will pardon me, if I make no more account of this
Bee-hive-Church, than I do of Hist. Nature. lib. 9. cap. 94.
Nierembergius his zealous Lisboan Dog; a story too long for this place, though
he is pleased to fancy it a proof or confirmation of their Pro confirmanda
fide, augendoque cultu Sacerrimae Mensae.
Religion (and if I mistake him not) of Transubstantiation.

But besides all this, I warrant you it is none of the least glories and honors
SECT. V.
of their Church, (as they think) to see how they bang the poor Devil about: I
shall not here trouble my self with their abominable cheating stories of their
exorcising and casting out Devils, with a thousand childish and
Poppit-play-tricks, as you may find them set down in their Practica
Exorcistarum.
Valerius Polydorus, Flagellum Daemonum, and Fustis Daemonum.
Hieronymus Mengus, Complementum Artis Exorcisticae.
Zacharias Vicecomes, Fuga Satanae.
Antonius Stampa, and suchlike Juglers in Divinity, who act by compact or
delusions, to the enriching of themselves, the destruction of many simpleminded
people, the impoverishment of their gallant Patrons, and the abuse of Religion
and whole Countries: For I am apt to lay this down for a Maxim in Politics,
That when they are busy in Exorcising or dispossessing of Devils, it is time
for our Governors to look about them, there being a worse Devil lying hid,
than that which appears upon the Stage, be it in the House of either rich or
poor, though we find these Mummeries commonly acted in the former. For it is
dangerous when an underparty, by these and suchlike cheats of Sanctity,
endeavor to strengthen their interest, by making themselves Popular. Though
methinks it is but a simple commendation to find the Devil in all these black
sports, only to have power over the Romanists, and that of the poorer sort
too, whilst the Heretics (as they call us) are free from such vexations; for
we shall hear of none such, but what proves a juggle at the long run.

But I say, letting alone these their stories of hunting or ferretting out the
wicked spirit from one place of ones body to another, as if they were playing
together at hide and seek, or find out the Thief; I shall show you the valor
of the old Romans, how they cuft the poor Villain, till they made him ashamed
of himself.

Thus they tell us, how Pet. de Natal. lib. 6. cap. 120.
St. Margaret took the Devil by the Hair, threw him down, set her foot upon his
Neck, and made him roar out, though at last he having given her a good account
of his actions, she very civilly let him go. And how another time, he thinking
to make sure of her, put out his ugly long tongue, and swallowed her up: she
being in this pickle, made but one sign of the Cross, and the Fiend burst in
two, and so she escaped that scouring. And such another Virago was Id. l. 3. c.
131.
Juliana, who tied the Devils hands behind him, whipped him bravely with a great
chain; and though he earnestly begged her favor, and not to abuse him before
all people, yet she dragged him as a laughing stock about the Marketplace, and
then without any compassion threw him into a Jakes.

'Twas a cunning trick which they tell of Id. l. 8. c. 20.
St. Lupus, who having once got the Devil in a Basin of Water, laid but a
Cushion upon it, and so he kept the simple Rogue howling there all night, being
not able to get out. And Id d. l. 8 c. 70.
St. Niceta as bad as the former, for he took him, and valiantly threw him down
upon the ground, set his foot upon his neck; then asking him what he was, and
the fool confessing that he was the wicked knave who had abused Mankind: Then
Niceta threw him in his own Father King Maximinianus his face, and at last tied
him fairly up to a Dunghill. And if here he stank not enough, another pickled
him to the purpose: for the spirit having I know not how got into him, he very
neatly took the advantage of a slippery gut, and Jac. de Vo^ag. Hist. 195.
flirted him out with a powder backwards. And I think St. Dustan was even with
his love-tricks, when he took him by the Nose with a pair of hot Tongs, and
made him roar again. ca^grave.


But what need these people put themselves to the trouble thus to persecute the
Devil, when himself sometimes by chance can be his own Tormentor? Of which one
story for all. The Disc^p. in Prompt. Ex^mpl. lit. E. Exemp. 16.
Devil one time writing down the sins of some Friars, and the Paper it seems
not long enough for the Catalogue; he goes the Shoomakers-way to work, puts
one end of the Paper in his Mouth, holds fast the other end with his hands, and
so endeavors to stretch it out longer, as they use to do Leather. But see the
mischief of it! as he was thus earnestly tugging, the Paper unexpectly tears;
with which slip, back flies his Coxcomb against the Wall, whereby he got such a
rattle on his pate, that we may well suppose the teeth chatter'd in his head.
Yet it seems, as bad as he was, he once Caesar. lib. 3. cap. 26.
confessed his sins to a Priest, had a great humor to repent and turn over a
new leaf; nay, and went so far in this good course, as to pay for a Id. l. l.
5. c. 36.
Bell to tole the people to Mass.

As for Purgatory, their stories are too many and long for this place; but
SECT. VI.
if you have a mind to take a view of it, Hell or Paradise, I shall refer you
to Hist. Angl. An. 1153. p. 86, 87, 88, 89, 90. and An. 1206. page 215, 216,
217, 218, 219, 220, 221. And see Phil. Osullevan Compend. Hist. Cathol. Hibern.
and his Patritiana Decas
Matthew Paris, where you may see what buildings they have; how many ways the
wretched are tormented; the description of the narrow Bridge, or Bridge of
Dread; how St. Paul and the Devil weigh the souls in Scales, to see whether
their good or bad works are heavyest, that accordingly one of them may dispose
of them; how the Devils have their Theaters or Stages to sport and pleasure
themselves for diversion sake, by seeing the souls act their parts there: What
pleasant Fields and Flowers there are in Paradise, and suchlike old Wives
stories, very fit for Winter-nights. And here may you see St. Patricks hole in
Ireland too; with which impudent Fable many good people have been deluded. And
I dare say, some of our Countrymen are so far from being in their wits again,
that as yet they will believe the miraculous stories of that Irish hole.

But to go a little higher, you shall see what an excellent Heaven they will
afford to the sons of their Church; though certainly, when some of them thus
think to set out its glory and honor, they rather make it contemptible to very
Christians, I am certain an Argument of Derision to the Atheist.

As when their Barelete can confidently tell the world, what a great deal Vid.
H. Estiene Apol. pour Herod, l. 1. p. 302.
of clutter there was in Heaven to get God to send his Son into the World: For
when Adam, Noah, Abraham, David, etc. had desired him to send them, and nothing
granted them; then the Women went to see what they could do: And first went
Eve, but God told her she was not worthy of his Son, because she had sinned.
Then Sarah went, but God told her that she wanted Faith concerning Isaac.
Rebecca entreated, but he told her she was Partial between Jacob and Esau.
Judah spoke, but she was told that she was a Murderer. Then went Esther, but
God stopped her mouth, by telling her, she took too much pains to pleasure
Assuerus, etc.

Like to this is another story, how after Christ's Resurrection, several Id.
page 304.
strived to carry word of it to the Virgin Mary. Adam said it belonged to him,
because he was the cause of sin; but Christ told him he would loyter by the way
to eat Apples. Then Abel he would go, but Christ told him he might meet Cain,
and so be killed. Noah offered himself, but he was told he loved drinking too
much. John Baptist would have gone, but his Garment of Hair was not fine
enough. And though the good Thief begged the employment, yet Christ told him he
was not fit, because his legs were broak: And so at last they were forced to
send an Angel.

And as bad as the former is this, that some days after Christ was crucified,
Id. page 301.
the Apostles went and complained to the Virgin Mary, that he had not sent the
Holy Ghost to them as he had promised: Upon this Jesus went to God, telling him
what he had promised, and that it was now time to perform it. God consents,
bids him inform the Holy Ghost of it. Upon this the Holy Ghost desires to know
how the people had used him: Christ shows him how they had crucified him: then
the Holy Ghost cried out, Heu mihi!
Alas, woe is me, and so turned himself into another shape, that they might not
seize on him. And upon this Mission Baralete says, there was Facta est
dissentio inter Patrem and spiritum sanctum.
a dissension or falling out between God the Father and the Holy Ghost.

But leaving these Blasphemies, they will tell you how to get into this Heaven;
for I suppose every Order has the same benefit with the Franciscans; and how
they do, take this one Example. A L' Alc. des Cord. lib. 1. page 195, 196.
Friar dying, went to Heavens Gates, and knocked there; the Porter asked him
what he was? he replied he was a Minorite: The Porter bid him stay there, till
he had spoken with St. Francis: Upon this, St. Francis comes with a World of
Friars, and seeing him, bid the Porter let him in, for he was a Franciscan
Friar.

And now that you are in their Heaven, I make no question but you will find it
governed just as their Church is below here, as if they were both under the
Obedience and Government of the same Customs, Canons, Caesariu^, l 7. cap. 20.
Specul. Exempl. did. 6. Sect. 60.
and Constitutions or Decrees. For in Heaven they tell us that the Saints go in
Procession by Couples; that they carry lighted Tapers in their hands; that they
sing the Responses according to the day or Rubric; that Christ himself goes
clad in his Pontificalibus, with a Myter on his head, a Crosier in his hand,
with Gloves, a Ring, and suchlike Episcopal Ornaments: That they go to Church
there; that Mass is sung there, Christ standing at the Altar, some reading the
Epistle, others in their Surplices the Gospel; and when they have done there,
that they all offer up their Candles, which our Savior receives. Nay, they
tell us, that sometimes Christ and the rest comes from Heaven, to do these
Ceremonies and Services upon Go^onus, page 133.
Earth, etc.

Thus have we seen the thumping commendations of their Saints, Devils, nay, of
Heaven it self; in which, they have racked their Wits so much upon the
Tenter-hooks to make all these their glories lovely and taking, that by
thinking to over-do, they have come short; and instead of rendering them
amiable, have showed them but as contemptible: As if all their pains and labor
were guided with the same misfortune of our Arcadian Demetas, who after all his
pumpings and endeavors to make his Madam Mopsie renowned and famous, sum'd up
all in this, that she was his own Pigsnye, whereby she became more ridiculous.

I have been the longer upon these Wonders and Fopperies (and might easily have
enlarged their number to a great Volume) because I find them in every place so
triumph over all other people by their Miracles, which in every Age they make
so necessary a Mark of a True Church, that they think it none of the least
Arguments against the Reformed.

But these may give you an hint, what little credit may justly be given to such
Tales: and when men have trapt any as Impostures, so often in lying and cheating,
they have small reason to believe them in their other Stories or Actions. And
besides these Forgeries, when we consider what compact juggling and delusions
there may be, and that the Devil also may have a hand in the employment, as
also some may have their Natural causes; we should not so easily believe all to
be gold that glistereth, nor every thing we see or hear, to be a Miracle
wrought by God, since 2 Thessal. 2. ^.
Antichrist himself must deceive by signs and lying Wonders.

Though as I have no power to hinder Almighty God from working Wonders, so have
I no Authority to deny that he does do any by his faithful Instruments; and I
am apt to believe upon good Reason, that the Church of Great Britain, since the
Reformation, may glory and triumph in this blessing, as well as their
Fellow Christians beyond Sea.

CHAP. IV. Their Idle, Extravagant and Profane Titles and Prerogatives
appropriated to the Pope.
HAving hitherto seen how lavish they are in the commendations of their
inferior Christians, those but as it were Fellow Subjects, or of the same rank
in obedience with themselves: what lofty strains and towering Encomiums may we
expect, when they advance to magnify their Lord and Master, their Infallible
Judge, and what not? If in any thing they observe Sir Philip Sidneys Rule:

If the man such praises have,
What must he that keeps the knave?
And if when several of their Wits have strained themselves to compare the
great Cardinal Many of which you may find collected together in a Quart^ Book,
called Scriptorum Galliae Maledicentiae and Adulationes Impiae, Anno 1635.
Richelieu to God Almighty for Power and Wisdom, though he has not hitherto
been held one of the greatest Saints; we may not hope for less Blasphemies, to
be produced to the honor of their Roman Bishop, whom they fancy to command
Heaven and Hell; and so at his pleasure to dispose of their souls to either of
those places.

But that good Emperor Volaterran. lib. 23. fol. 266.
Alexander Severus rejected all such cogging Claw-backs: As Ant. Panormita de
rebus gestis Alphonsi.
Alonso that wise King of Aragon, did not only hate, but several times punish
his flattering, creenging Courtiers, whom he justly called the Plague of
Princes; it being a truth not easily denied, that (next to such a Treason as
Presbytery) the dissembling fawning Favorite, is the discredit of his King, and
the ruin of his Country.

What the Popes have done by way of command to others, to proclaim to the World
the Commendations, Strength, Power, Virtue and Authority of his Holy-Chair,
would be a task too tedious and difficult, to search exactly and thoroughly
into: Yet that such endeavors have been somewhat Ancient, appears by
Augustinus de Ancona, now better known by the name of Triumphus; who above
three hundred years ago, was commanded by Pope John XXI (or XXII) to write a
Treatise to this purpose, which he did, where he boldly maintains that no De
Potestate Ecclesiastic^, Quest. 44. Art. 1.
law can be made to bind Christians, but by the Popes Authority, as of old the
Israelites received none but by the Intercession of Moses. Nor is this all; but
he makes all the world to be so much the Popes Right and Inheritance, that he
expressly gives us this Caution of Interpretation of some Facts in History, viz.
That if we meet with any Emperors to have given any Id. Part. 1. Quest. 1.
Art. 1.
Temporal Privileges or Lands to any Popes, (as they say Constantine did to
Sylvester) we must here understand that they did not at all give that which was
their own to give; but only (forsooth) restore that, which had formerly been
taken away from them by Tyranny and Injustice. Or if on the contrary, we read
of any Popes to have given off any such Temporal Benefit, we must then suppose
that it was done more for peace-sake, then really to give to others a true
Title to them. Fine Rules, if they were true, to keep all Jurisdiction and
Territories in their own clutches. But alas, they are too simple and childish
to be embraced by any but fools, and suchlike Papal Scriblers.

Not long after him, we have a trusty Spaniard, Alvarus Pelagius Confessor to
Balthassor Cossa, called John XXII (or XXIII) who writ a large Book, in part to
vindicate his Master, by many then held an Antipope. This Alvarus, amongst
other things, affirms that no Emperor must be held to rule De planctu
Ecclesiae, lib. 1. cap. 13.
justly, who received not his Power and Authority from the Roman Church,
especially after Christ had granted all Rule and Government to St. Peter: which
seems a pretty Paradox, as if the Church at Rome by right ruled all the world,
before ever St. Peter was ever there, or held as Supreme there; or for ought
that I know, before any other Christian in that City had any abode. Nor will
that which follows any whit mend the matter, viz. that every Pope has all
the same, or as much power upon Earth, as Jesus Christ himself had; and that
the Pope is as a God to the Emperor.

Some years before this, Urban the Sixth and Clement the Seventh bandying for
the Popedom, the Christians not agreeing which of them was the true one;
insomuch that the Kings themselves were also divided, from which troubles it
may be he might expect some disadvantage: However it was, he had one Johannes
de Therano his Chamberlain, who upon his command writ a Book to lessen all
Temporal Authority in Princes, in which he very finely evades these words --
Give unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and to God the things that are
Gods, by affirming that these words of Christ have place only for a time, viz.
until his Ascension; and that after his Ascension they are of no force or
value: proving it from this Verse -- Joh 12. 32.
When I shall be lifted up from the Earth, I will draw all men unto me; which
he interprets by all Kings and Kingdoms to be under the Popes jurisdiction: a
bundle of such strange Assertions, that Tom. 2. page 232.
Coquaeus himself seems almost ashamed of them.

But to go on: long before any of these, above five hundred years Anno 1131.
ago in a Council at Rheimes, some one or other (for his certain name I find
not) made a learned and wise Sermon, as he thought, in commendation of the
Pope, telling his Auditors, that he was greater than Moses, greater than any
Angel, greater than Solomon; -- nay, except God, there is none like unto him
either in Heaven or Earth. And that this might carry the more credit with it,
they have foisted this into the Works of Sermo ad Synod. Rhemens. beginning
Grave est quod mihi injungitur.
St. Bernard, though Anno 1131. Sect. 4.
Baronius himself cannot believe that he was the Author of it.

Yet good Bernard knew not all things, nor in some things could he see any
farther than that blind Age in which he lived would allow him; nor will I take
upon me to censure him of flattery, for his thus complementing with his
Holiness, -- Be^nard. de Considerat. ad Eugenium, sib. 2. cap. 8.
Thou art the Prime of all Bishops, the Heir of the Apostles, an Abel for
Primacy, a Noah for Government, an Abraham by Patriarchship, a Melchisedech by
Order, Aaron by Dignity, Moses by Authority, Samuel by Judicature, Peter by
Power, Christ by Unction, etc.

And this piece of canting Courtship, was taken up by the Archbishop Vid
Abrah. Bzov. Romans Pent. c. 6. p. 56.
Stephanus Tigliatius, and bestowed upon Innocent the Eighth with some
Additions.

But we might go higher yet, and see what goodly Privileges Gregory the
Seventh got an Assembly at Rome to bestow upon him, as that B^o^. Anno 1076.
Sect 31, 3^, 33.
only the Pope of Rome can depose Bishops: That he only according to the
Times may make Laws: That he only may use the Imperial Ensigns: That all the
Princes are to kiss his feet: That he can depose Emperors, and Translate
Bishops: That no Synod can be held without his command, nor any Book is
Canonical without his Authority: That he is undoubtedly made Vid. Did. 40. ^.
Noa nos.
Holy by the Merits of St. Peter: That there is but one name in the World, i.
e. the Pope.

Nor can such Extravagances as these seem strange to any, who is acquainted
with their writings and stories; the Popes themselves not a little delighting
in these Flatteries, and accordingly they never want such complying Pick-thanks.

Thus Fernando de Velasco in behalf of his Master John the Second King of Vid.
Bzov. de Romans Pont. c. 6. p. 56, 57, 58, 66.
Portugal, applied that to Innocent the Eighth, which the Apostle speaks of
Christ, viz. That he is Ephesians. 1. 21.
far above all Principality and Power, and every name that is named, not only
in this world, but also in that which is to come; and that he is the Sun and
Light of the World.

Thus Scala the Florentine Ambassador told the same Pope, That his Dignity was
so great, that a more Excellent could not be invented or fancyed on Earth: Nay,
that to dispute or doubt of his Power, is no less than Sacrilege, as Cheurer
flattered him from the Duke of Savoy. Julius the Second was told by Diego
Pacettus, Envoy from Emanuel King of Portugal, That he was the Doorkeeper of
Heaven, and held the Keys of eternal Life: And Bernardus Justinianus, Agent
from the Venetians, assured Pope Paul the Second, that Cui claudere Coelos and
aperire, detrudere ad Inferos, and eruere quoscunque velit, concessum.
he could damn and save whom he pleased: Which was also affirmed to Julius the
Second, by Michael Risius, from Lewis the Twelfth of France, with this
Addition, that the Necks of all Kings and Princes must submit to him.

Narius Bandinaeus, Ambassador from Sienna, fob'd up Pope Paul the Third with
the Epithites of The Father of Godliness, Day Star of Justice, Prince of Faith,
Chiestain of Religion, Arbitrator of all things, Savior of Christians, and
Image of Divinity. And as if the Princes of Italy strove in the magnifying of
his Holiness, the Ambassadors of Genoa, Sienna, Lucca, Venice, Florence, Parma,
Milan and Ferrara, humbly told Leo the Tenth, That he excelled all Kings as
much as the Sun does the Moon.

And well might these petit Potentates thus tumble themselves before their
Infallible Chair, when the great French Monarch, Francis the Second, by his
Deputy Johannes Babo a Burdaesia, did creenge to Pius the Fourth, in the
acknowledgement, that all Laws depended upon his pleasure; that Kings threw
themselves down at his feet, and Heaven opens at his will; and that his
pleasure did stand for a Law, as his voice for an Oracle.

Pope Pius the Fifth was once told, that the whole world lay at his Feet: And
Sixtus the Fifth, that Princes, Kings and Emperors were so much subject to
him, that they should not only attend upon him, but worship and adore him.
Which if true, then Aquinas was not amiss, when (as they say) he told the
world, That Vid. Bzov. page 53, 55.
our Kings ought to be as much subject to him, as to Christ himself. Nor those
others, who with the German have declared, that all must be obedient to him,
upon pain of Salvation, according to the Decree of Extra. Com. de Major. and
Obed. c. U^am sanctam.
Boniface the Eighth.

Their Canon Law tells us, that Christ received St. Peter into the Sext. de
Electione, cap. Fundamenta.
Fellowship of his undivided Unity: Informs us; that as Did. 12. c. Non decet.
Christ did the Will of his Father, so we should do the will of the Church of
Rome. That Did. 19. c. Sic omnes.
all the Orders of that Church ought to be held, as if St. Peter himself had
proposed them to us. And therefore are Ib. c. Enimvero.
perpetually and inviolably to be observed. And so are the Papal decretal
Letters, which they say are to be Ib. c. In Canonicis.
numbered amongst the Canonical Scriptures: Nor is any man Cause. 17. Q. 4. and
Did. 81. c. Si qui sunt, c. Nemini est.
to judge or revoke the Popes sentence: For the Paul. Lancelottus Institut.
juris Can. l. 1. Tit. 3. c. Decreta.
Decrees of the Popes are of equal force and authority with the Canons of
Councils. And good Reason, since they Decree that every one is to be Extra.
Com. de Major. and Obed. c. Unam sanctam.
obedient to the Pope, upon pain of damnation; and so must we believe that
Extra. Com. Tit. 1. c. Super Gentes.
all Nations and Kingdoms are under the Popes jurisdiction: And that Extra.
Joh. XXII. Tit. 5. and Did. 22. c. Omnes. Gloss.
God has delivered over to him the Power and Rule of Heaven and Earth.

And well may he thus triumph over Principalities and Powers, since the
Glossaries have the confidence to assure us, that he Naturam rerum immutat
substantialia unius rei applicando aliis -- de nihilo aliquid facere pot^st. --
sententiam quae nulla est facit aliquam. In his quae vult ei est pro ratione
voluntas. Nec est qui ei dicat, Cur ita facis? Ipse enim potest supra jus
dispensare -- de injustitia potest facerc justitiam corrigendo jura and
mutando. Decret. Greg. lib. 1. Tit. 7. c. Quanto perjonam. Gloss. Sect. Very
Dei vic^m.
can change the Nature of Things, make (or rather create) something out of
nothing; since his will must stand for a Law, nor must any man say to him, Why
do you so? since his power is such, as to dispense beyond Law it self, and so
of Injustice can make Justice, either by correcting or changing the Laws or
Rights; and Did. 34. c. Lector. Gloss.
dispense too against the Apostle.

Their Canon Law brags, that Constantine the Great called the Pope a Did. 96.
c. Satis evidenter.
God: But their extravagant Gloss speaks out more plainly in these very words
-- Credere Dominum Deum nostrum Papam Conditorem, etc. Extra. Joh. XXII. Tit.
14. de verborum significat. cap. 4. Cum inter nonnull^s. Gloss. Sect.
Declaramus, prope finem.
OUR LORD GOD THE POPE.

Because Warn-word to Sir Fran. Hastings's wastward, Encount. 1. c. 2. Sect. 10.
Father Parsons affirms he could never find any such expression, though he
says he sought much for it; I have been the more exact and plain in the
Quotation, as also to confute Apol. pro Hen. Garn.
Andraeas Eudaemon-Johannes, and some others, who are apt to persuade their
Readers, that there is no such thing to be found, at least in those Copies that
they can meet withal: for confutation of which, take this Catalogue of Editions
which I have met withal, in which they will find the said words expressly set
down.

Lugduni. Lutet. Paris. 1526 1522 1556 1561 1559 * 1585 1572 * 1601 *1584 *1612

Several of which, viz. those you see here noted with the Asterisks, were Vid.
Pet, Moulin vates, lib. 5. cap. 6.
printed after Pope Gregory the Thirteenth had corrected the Canon Law, and
were as they confess printed and published according to the Roman Copy, by
Authority of the said Pope.

And it may be from suchlike wicked expressions as this, that abominable Varlet
Francois Ravaillac drew this Blasphemous Doctrine, Parceque faisant la guerre
contre le Pape, c'estoit la fair contre Dieu, d'^utant que le Pape estoit
Dieu, and Dieu ^stoit le Pape. P^ocez, Examen, Confessions, etc. du F^anco^s
Ravaillac. page 39. and Is. Casauban. Ep^st. ad Front Ducaeum, page 14
The Pope is God, and God is the Pope. And therefore supposing that Henry the
Fourth of France would make War upon the Pope, he thought himself obliged to
murder the said King, lest he should fight against God, that is, the Pope.
However, though I cannot say that the wisest of them think the Pope really to
be God; yet this I am certain of, that they commonly paint one so like the
other, with a Triple Crown, and all other Pontifical Garments, that you can
scarce know whether they designed it for the Picture of God Almighty, or the
Pope.

But others would have us to think, that he is not really a God, no more than
he is really a man; but something or other between both, according to our
Countryman in their [h] Gloss. g Cl^m^^t. in Proem. Gloss, ^ Papa.


Papa stupor Mundi --
-- Qui maxima rerumes;
Nec Deuses, nec homo, quasi neuter es inter utrumque.
Pope! the worlds wonder, greatest in all the world,
Nor God, nor Man, but between both, you are Purld.
And now can we think that they give these almost-almighty Titles and Power to
his Holiness, without sure grounds and good cause? And that of all Reasons and
Authorities, the Canon Law, which has been so carefully composed, and so often
revised by their wisest ones, does not afford the best? No surely, and
therefore for a taste, take some of their invincible Arguments, and those too,
for more Authority, framed by the Popes themselves, and so infallibly true.

Can any deny that the Pope has all Extra. Com. de Major. and Obed. c. Unam
Sanctam.
Temporal as well as Spiritual jurisdiction, seeing the Apostles said, -- Luke
22. 28.
Behold, here are two Swords; and Christ answered, That it is enough? Which is
also sufficiently testified by Christ's saying, Peter Job. 18. 11. Mat. 26. 52.
put up thy sword into the sheath.

What need any man question the Extra. Com. c. Unam sanctam. Greg. de Major.
and Obed. c. Solitae.
Popes Authority to depose Kings, seeing God told the Prophet Jeremiah, saying,
-- Jer. 1. 10.
Behold, I have this day set thee over the Nations and over the Kingdoms, to
root out, and to pull down, and to destroy, and to throw down, to build and to
plant?

Is it not as plain as a Pike-staff, that there is but one Supreme Authority in
the World, and that that is the Extra. Com. c Unam sanctam.
Pope, because God Genesis 1. 1.
created heaven in the Beginning? for it is not said in the plural number, in
the Beginnings. And therefore he that believes not that the Pope is the Chief,
must be an Heretical Manichee.

Again, is it not impudence to deny the Greg de Major. and Obed. c. Solitae.
Pope to be above any Emperor, (be he East or West) seeing God himself decided
long since the Controversy, by creating Genesis 1. 16.
two great Lights, viz. the Sun and the Moon, whereby he did plainly
demonstrate, that the Pope is as far above the Emperor, as the Sun is greater
than the Moon? And for the Kings, they are no more to be compared to the Pope,
than Did. 96. c. Duo sunt.
Lead is to Gold.

Upon the strength of these Authorities and mighty Reasons, though not a Rush
to the purpose, their Writers vapor with his Holiness over all poor Heretics.
Comment. in c. Oportchat. page 48. Sect. 9.
Rodericus Cupers thinks that those who deny the Popes Temporal and spiritual
Supremacy, deny also the Gospel; and the great Sum. Patt. 3. Tit. 22. c. 5.
Antoninus of Florence, that he has power not only on earth, but in Heaven
and Hell. Doctor Tract. de jurisdict. part. 4. cent. 1. cas. 56. Sect. 1.
Marta says, that he is Judge of all men in the World. And so any may appeal
from their secular Judges to him: He being the Ibid. Sect. 8.
Fountain and Original of all Temporal jurisdiction, and having all the Power
that Id. cap. 25. Sect. 20.
Christ had.

Quodlibet. VI. Quaest. 23. fol. 369. a.
Henricus a Gondavo with his Commentator, Marcus Vitalis, Zuccolius, and De
Potestar. Rom Pont. l. 2. c. 9. Sect 7. and cap. 10.
Alexander Carerius, with a multitude of others, are great sticklers for this
his Authority; and the later of them tells us, that it is the common opinion of
all their Divines and Canonists. Nay, Stephanus an Archbishop, in one of their
Lateran Councils, applauded the Opinion, That the Council. Edict. Regia. Tom.
34. page 449.
Pope was above all Power both of Heaven and Earth.

One tells us that he is not only the Judge, but the Jo. Rubeus in Bonifac.
VIII. page 216.
Spouse of the Universal Church, and the Arbitrator of Heaven and Earth.
Isidor. Mascouius de Majestate Militant. Eccles. p. 26, 27
Another goes on, and affirms him to be King of Kings, Lord of Lords: that
there is but one and the same Judgment Seat and Council-house belonging to God
and the Pope, and so all the world obliged to stand to his judgment: for
should all people bandy against it, their sentence would be of no force. A
third proceeds, and maintains that he can do Jac. de Griff^is Decisiones
auriae, part. 1. cap. 31.
all things that God himself can do, only sin excepted. And another from the
same Authority assures us, that he D. Guido Decisiones, Quaest. 589.
can take away any man's right, and give it to another: Nor need we to think
much at this, since they allow him to Jason Mayn. Council. 14^. Sect. 7. and
Vol. 3. Cons. 68. Sect. 14.
do any thing above all right, against all right, and without all right: That
he is the Cause of Causes, and can declare square things to b^round. And then I
warrant you that we are Heretics, if we do not believe that the square thing
is really round.

The Rabbis told their Jews, that they were to believe the Judges, though they
told them that the Right Hand was the Left, and the Left Hand the Right. And
this knack of credulity, was lately endeavored by the Si dixerit tibi, quod
dextera sit sinistra, vel sinistra dextera, talis sententia est tenenda. Nic,
de Lyra in Deuter. c. 17. 11.
Jesuits to be an Article: the famous and judicious Father Paul assuring us,
that the third of their Rules found at Padoa 1606 was, that -- Hist. of the
Quarrels of Pope Paul the Fifth, with the Venetians, lib. 1. page 96.
Men must believe the Hierarchical Church, although it tell us, that that is
black which our eye judges to be white. And something like this, is the
Doctrine which Bellarmine himself lays down, in these words, -- Si autem Papa
erraret praecipiendo vitia, vel prohibendo virtutes, teneretur Ecclesia credere
vitia esse bona, and virtutes malas, nisi vellet contra conscientiam peccare.
Bellarm. de Romans Pont. lib. 4. cap. 5. Sect. Quod autem.
If the Pope should err, in commanding Vices or prohibiting Virtues; then is
the Church obliged to believe that Vices are good, and Virtues are evil, unless
she would sin against her Conscience.

And I doubt he is willing to give to St. Peter, and by his consequence to the
Pope, the Contra Barklaium, cap. 31.
power of making sin to be no sin, and that which is no sin to be a sin.
Certain I am, that when Pope Clement the Eighth desired the said Cardinal to
draw him up some private Rules and Directions for the benefit of the Church; he
could not in that Paper of secrecy, keep himself from flattery, by telling the
Pope, that Jac. Fuligattus vita Card. Bellarm. lib. 3. cap. 5.
he had no limits or bounds in the whole world, but those which the world it
self had.

About twenty years ago, Innocent the Tenth being chosen Pope, Cardinal
Colunna, as he delivered him St. Peter's Keys, told him, that Laur. Banck, Roma
Triumphans, p. 216.
the Angels in Heaven reverenced him, the Gates of Hell feared him, and the
whole world adored him. But this snip of flattery is nothing to the Blasphemous
Paper presented to the same Pope by the hands of the German Jesuit Melchior Id.
page 81, 82. Herm. Conringius Castigat. de Elect. A^exand. 7. p. 55, 56.
Inchofer (though himself was not the Author of it) then living at Rome.

The Elogy it self, with the bold allusions to the Popes Surname Pamphilio,
whereby he would make him better than our Savior, take as follows; though we
may guess that they were composed a little before his Election.

Eminentissime and Reverendissime D. CARDINALIS PHAMPHILI.
I. PHILIUS Dei (superlativus amor Patris, quia (...), ideo Philius dictus) ex
aeterna ejus charitate, qua se Deo Patri obtulit, in amantissimum Intercessorem
a^ Mediatorem Dei ac hominum ab instanti Conceptionis in utero B. Mariae
Virginis, factus fuit Sacerdos in aeternum, secundum Ordinem Melchisedech, ac
Primus Pontifex Optimus Maximus.

II. Sed Filius fuit Philius, non fuit PAMPHILIUS.

III. Fuit intercessor Dei and hominum.

IV. Non fuit Vniversalis Mediator Angelorum and hominum, seu PAMPHILIUS.

V. Si ex Nominis analogico aeternoque Anagrammate praesagire licet, Mysterium
aliquod in Tempore: Tu ab aeterno Praedestinatus es, esse Pamphilius in Terris,
ac dici PAMPHILIUS, aemulus filii Dei in Coelis.

VI. Pamphilius ergo eris, Vniversalis nimirum Reconciliator Angelorum and
hominum, in Terris hostiliter pugnantium Regum and Populorum.

VII. Quod praestabis non nisi electus in Pontificem Opt. Maximum.

VIII. In cujus faustissimum augurium Evangelus ego, felixque Nuncius ter
sanctos Pedes Eminentiae vestrae ex nunc deosculor.

IX. Quod etiam Graece scripsi december abhinc annis, in Graeca nostra Academia
Basiliana in Columbae vestrae stemmata (...), Rex Pacificus eris and
Clementissimus.

Ter genu flexus Italo-Graecus ego Joan. Baptista Catum Syritus.


Pope Paul the Second told Plat. in Paulo Secundo.
Platina and others, that all right and power were lodged in his Breast, and
that his Authority was such, that even according to his own pleasure and will,
he could null or approve of other men's actions. And why not? seeing Anno 552.
Sect. 11.
Baronius affirms, that when Vigilius sat in the Chair, that then also Christ
himself, not only as he was man, but as he was God also, sat with him. Upon
which ground, it may be that Albizzi (made Cardinal, I suppose, by this present
Pope Alexander the Seventh) told two Cordeliers, that the St. Amors journal,
p. 170.
Gospel would not be the Gospel, if the Pope had not approved of it. And to go
a little higher, those of Palermo having sent their Ambassadors to Pope Martin
the Second; these Holy men (as my Author calls them) being come into his
presence, having first thrown themselves all along before his feet, thus began
their Speech to him:

O thou! who take away the sins of the World, have mercy upon us. Paul.
Aemilius Hist. Francor. in vita Philippi III.

O thou! who take away the sins of the World, have mercy upon us.
O thou! who take away the sins of the World, have mercy upon us.
Nor did the Pope find any fault in this Salutation, but only that he thought
them to be Hypocrites, and to have spoke him fair, when he thought they
perfectly hated him.

As for Kings, their Greg. de Major. and Obed. c. Solitae.
Canon Law tells us, that the Pope is as far above them, as the Sun is greater
than the Moon. Upon which their old Glossator takes upon him to find out the
distance; and according to his skill in Astronomy, he makes the Pope to be
about forty seven times better than a King: But this seeming too little for his
Holiness, it fairly concludes him to be above 7744 times greater than any King.

And though this seems brave, and sound high, yet Chimaera, fol. 97. a.
Stanislaius Orichorius, of a later cut, makes it his business to out-vapour
the Gloss, by affirming that a common Priest is as much better than a King, as
a Man is better than a Beast. Nay farther, that as much as God Almighty does
excel a Priest, so much does a Priest excel a King.

And this may somewhat agree with Gaspar Scioppius, a great man amongst them,
though of more words and passion, than Charity or Discretion, who in the
swindge of his Zeal, allows all Laymen to be no better than Horses, Mules or
Asses; and that with such small distinction, that the Romanist Ecclesiasticus,
cap. 147.
himself has but the honor to be a tame Ass, whilst the Heretic is a wild
one. Nor do the Kings of the Popish persuasion get any more addition of esteem
from him, then that they are the foremost or leading Asses with fine jangling
Bells about their necks. And that favorite of their Church, Reges Catholici
sunt Asini cum Tintinnabul^, etc.
Charles the Great, is honored enough, as Schoppius thinks, by calling him a
wiser and greater Ass than our King James, because he was obedient to the Pope.

And the truth is, many of our chief Princes, by their too much debasing
themselves to that Chair, have rendered themselves little better than Scioppius
his comparisons; or his Holiness must have thought them to be so, in respect of
his Almighty Greatness: Witness the great Kings and Emperors who have held the
Popes Stirrops, have kissed his Toe, have like Foot-boys led their Horses
along; witness Alexander the Third, for presuming to Vid. Tho. Bozium de
Italiae statu, l. 3. c. 4. page 298.
tread upon the Emperor Frederick Barbarossa's neck; witness Gregory the
Seventh, for making the Emperor Henry the Fourth to wait upon him three
several days in the midst of Winter, barefoot, bare-headed, and fasting: and
several suchlike impudent stories, which may be seen more at large in the
prosecution of this History.

And for more confirmation of this Papal Pride and Greatness, let us take a
short view of somewhat to this purpose, which they have left upon Record, with
a strict injunction to be performed by all Kings and Emperors whatsoever.

The Pope in the Book of their holy Ceremonies, does command as a Law, Sacrarum
Ceremonia^um, Edit. Romans 1560. lib. ^.
That when an Emperor goes to be Crowned by a Pope, Fol. 22.
he is as soon as he espyeth his Holiness, to kneel and worship him
bare-headed; then to approach nearer and kiss his feet: and the same is to be
done by the F^l 2^.
Empress when she is Crowned. When the Emperor is Crowned, at the public
Procession, before a world of people, he is to Fol. ^6.
go to the Popes Horse, and there to hold the Stirrup till his Holiness mounts
on Horseback; and then like a Lackey must he lead the Popes Rosonante some way
by the Reins. And this piece of service or slavery must the Fol. 17.
Emperor, King, or chief Potentate perform, when the Pope is chosen, in his
Procession to the Lateran Church: But if there be two Kings present, then has
the Pope expressly commanded, that Ibid.
one of them on his Right-side, the other on his Left, must lead his Palfrey
along by the Bridle. And this Office of the Yeoman of the Stirrup, they are
confidently pleased to tell us, that Constantine the Great did it to Pope
Sylvester. But the (...). D^n^^io v^l Privil^gi ^^ Constantant.
Copy whence they produce this, I shall prove to be a whilking lie and forgery,
in the following History.

The Pope goes on in his proud Laws, by decreeing, that the best Layman,
though he be Emperor or King, must Sac^a^. Ce^em. lib. 1. fol. 20.
carry water for the Pope to wash his hands in: nor must his trouble and
slavery cease here, but he must also carry up the first dish of meat to his
Table. And as if all this were not enough to debase the Temporal Princes, the
same Authority goes on, commanding, that if the Pope will not ride on
horseback, but be carried in his Chair, that then the four of the greatest
Princes, yea, although the Emperor be one of them, shall put their Fol. 1^.
shoulders to the said Chair, and so carry him some space: yet this being a
tyranny beyond all expression, therefore somewhat to mitigate it, they provide,
that four lusty fellows shall so far assist, as to ease those Royal Shoulders
from the great weight.

The truth is, the Pope is wont to call himself the servant of servants of God:
But it is none of the least signs of great Pride, to affect a seeming Title of
humility, when in the mean time they make it their design to Domineer over the
whole world: and something to this purpose, their Gloss upon Gratian affords us
this Distich:

1 q. 7. c. Quoties Cordis, Gloss. Et per te.
Servierant tibi Roma prius Domini Dominorum,
Servorum servi nunc tibi sunt Domini.
The greatest Kings once served thee, Rome, but now
To th'least of Servants thou thy neck must bow.
And such another like cheat as this does his Holiness afford the Romans, or
rather the holy Scripture, when he is elected and carried to the Lateran, where
he takes up as much Sacrar. Cerem. lib. 1. fol. 17.
money as he can in his hand, and throws it amongst the people, saying, -- Acts
3. 6.
Silver and gold have I none; but such as I have, give I thee. A most
ridiculous Ceremony for his Infallible Holiness, thus to abuse the words of St.
Peter!

And though Pope Julius the Third was content to call himself no more than Gods
Vicar, yet the extravagancy of the expression spoiled the Complement: For as
the story goes, having once commanded a Peacock to H. Esti^ne Apol. pour
Herod. p. 291.
be set by, that he might eat it cold, and being missing when he desired it,
forced him into a great rage; and being desired by a Cardinal, not to be angry
for such a Trifle, thus replied, -- If God was so angry for an Apple, as to
drive Adam out of Paradise; why might not he that was Gods Vicar, be angry for
a Peacock of more worth? And like this was another reply of the said Pope, who
wanting his Dish of Pork, and being told that his Physician had forbad it, as
not then good for him, thus unholily commanded, -- Bring me my Pork in spite
of God. Porta mi quel mio piatto al dispetto di Dio.


Methinks Johannes Andraeas, Bishop of Aleria in Corsica, thought himself no
small Wit, when his fancy reached so high, as to call Pope Leo the Great, Epist
ad Paulum II. praefix, Opuscul. Leonis.

Fran. Sweert. page 115.


The Tully of Church-Oratory, The Homer of Divinity, and the Aristotle of
Faith: and this mode of School-boy-allusion is used also by some others, as
amongst other Monuments of the Great Duke of Bourbon who took Rome, this
following is at Gaieta:

Consiliis, Calchas, animo Hector, robora Achilles,
Eloquio Nestor, jacet hic Borbonius Heroes.
And thus the other day a Philanax Anglicus, or a Christian Caveat against
Protestants of Integrity, page 57, 58.
Romanist thought he had commended our blessed Martyr King Charles the First
beyond all comparison, when he called him a Prince wise as Apollo, Valiant as
Achilles, Virtuous as Socrates, Pious as Aeneas, and Beautiful as an Amazon. So
that it seems to make a noise, any thing that sounds great, be it devilish or
wicked, must be brought in; like the people of Sofala in the East Indies, who
appropriate to their King, by way of commendation, all things that are great,
be it good or bad; insomuch, that they call him not only Purchase Pilgr. Vol.
2. page 1539.
Great Lion, but great Thief, great Witch, and suchlike.

But for such allusions of Bishop Andraeas, I shall let them alone, as
impertinent to my purpose, and of as little harm as they are of discretion; I
only meddling with those of a higher pitch, such as attribute a Deity, or little
less, to his Holiness, of which formerly; and to them I might add this Distich
set Da. Magerus Transenna Theologica, page 61.
upon a Triumphal Arch at Rome, relating to Pope Sixtus:

Oraculo vocis mundi moderaris habenas,
Et merito in Terris crederis esse Deus.
And therefore they command us Paris Crassus de Ceremoniis Cardinalium, and
Epist lib. 1. cap 22.
to bow at the name of the Virgin Mary and the Pope, as well as at the name of
Christ. And if these and suchlike Extravagances (not to say Blasphemies) have
not been asserted, yea, and by those who think themselves the wisest,
concerning the Pope, I shall desire the same censure that the famous Parisian
Chancellor Gerson (by themselves styled the most Christian Doctor) did in the
same case, viz. to be held a Mentior si non inveniantur haec scripta, and ab
illis etiam qui sapientes sunt in Oculis suis. Jo. Gerson. de potest. Eccles.
Consid. 12.
liar.

But to end all with a story or two: the famous Stephanus assures us, that a
Priest at Tours told his Auditors, that if Apol. pour Herod. p. 291.
Christ and the Pope were by him, and one commanded him one thing, and the
other another, that he would obey the Pope rather than Jesus Christ. And this
Doctrine agrees somewhat with the Cardinal, who told his Confessor, That he had
rather adore the Pope than God, because one was visible, and the other not.

And these Extravagances, and the Popes taking upon him to domineer over all
mankind, made the Greek Church send this short Complement to his Holiness,
John XXIII, -- We do really acknowledge thy high Jo. Bale. Acta Pontif. Romans l.
6. p. 253.
Authority over thine own Subjects: but we cannot endure thy great pride, nor
are we able to satisfy thy avarice: So the Devil be with thee, and the Lord
with us.

Thus when we find their Grandees, and those who think themselves the wisest
of their Religion, to ascribe s^c(...)s^ve Power and Prerogatives to his
Holiness, we may the less wonder (...) simplicity of the poor people Da.
Magerus, Transenna Theologica, page ^5.
of Limosin, who (according to the (...)) ^^aring and so believing that the
Pope was not only Gods Vicar, bu^ (...), and so had such great power in Heaven
and Earth, etc. and (...) wing that the then Pope was their Countryman, and so
near them (...) in France at Avignon; and so full in hope (for Relation-^a(...)
some comfort and help from him; sent to him, laying open (...) of his and their
Country, scarce any thing growing in it, bu^ (...), and a little Corn to serve
them on Sundays; and the(...) ^eg'd that his Holiness would be pleased to make
their poo(...) un^^y so fruitful, that they might have two Harvests in a year.

The Pope after long consultat(...) with his Grave Council about this weighty
matter, was pleased very (...)sly to grant their request; but upon this
condition, that for the future (...) should not reckon twelve, but twenty four
Months for the year. (...)engers glad at heart of this unspeakable favor and
benefit, return (...)rrily into their Country with this good news, to the great
rejoicing and ^riump^^ (no doubt) of their Neigbours.

However those people, with those of Munding in Schwaben, who knew not the
difference between a ^^bel. Facet. l. ^. p. 18^.
Crab, Pigeon and Stag, and contended in voice with a Id. l^^. p. 56.
Cuckoo; and those Inhabitants of M^rt. Z^^^^e H^span. l^iner. page 1^9.
El Campo in Estramadura, who knew not three Miles beyond their own homes: and
our Virtuosi of Gotham may be, for ought that I know, as honest, though they
are not the wisest of their four respective Nations.

But though the Pope may think himself above all Power in this World, and so
not liable to any censure whatsoever; yet against this, I remember a droling
story. A Friar Minorite having proved that the Pope might be Excommunicated, by
this, as he thought, invincible Dilemma: -- Either the Pope is a Brother, or
not; if he be a Brother, he may be Excommunicated by a Brother; if he be not a
Brother, why does he say Our Father? The Pope not knowing how to answer this, a
merry Courtier undertook the solution, and so to ease him of his troubled
mind, by this advice: -- Let your Holiness never say the Lords Prayer, and the
Argument is void, and of no force against you. And so I leave his Holiness in
deep consultation with his Cardinals in the Consistory, what to do in this
case; not troubling my self a Rush what advice he shall follow

THE TREASONABLE AND Rebellious Principles Of the ROMANISTS.
BOOK II.
CHAP. I. Their fancying that the Pope has Power and true Authority to depose
Emperors and Kings, and dispose of their Dominions.
HAving hitherto taken a short view of the Glories (as they fancy) of the
Romish Church; let us now see some of their Destructive and Treasonable
Principles, whereby we shall perceive that Heathens in some things have better
Tenets, than those who call themselves the truest Christians.

For though Attabalipa King of Peru told that Cacafuoco Dominican Vincent
Valverde, That the Pope, who would thus Pontificem insigniter satuum and
Impudentem esse, eo sacile prodi, quod aliena tam liberaliter largiatur. Hier.
Benzo. Hist. Novae Orbis, lib. 3. c. 3.
dispose of Kingdoms, was not only Impudent, but a great Fool, to give that
which was none of his own: Yet they may suppose, that the Inca spoke this not
like a Romanist, but an Heathen as he was; for their Writers anon will tell us
another Doctrine: and yet all parties smile at the Fool in Athens, for thinking
all other men's ships to be his own.

Whether the Pope has any real Reason for the exercising of this his supposed
Prerogative, is nothing to the Purpose; as Thomas Bozius affirmed to Pope
Clement the Eighth, and all people else: Sitque aliquis Rex ju^e, solers,
industrius Po^ens, Catholicus, pius; tamen Pontifex, Episcopique Pontifice
approhante, u^e naturali Divino in Divinis Scriptis expresso ac tradito per
Christum and Apostolos -- valent, huic auferre Imperia, Regna, alterique nullum
jus alioque habenti adjudicare, ubi judicave^int id esse non modo necessarium
sed expediens. Tho. Bozius, de jure status, lib. 3 cap. 4.
For although, said he, that the King be lawful, and not only so, but
understanding, careful, powerful, one of the Popes Religion, and godly too; yet
can the Pope take his Empire or Kingdoms from him, and give it to another,
although there be no necessity for so doing, it being enough if he think it
only convenient. Nor is this all; for he attributes the same Authority to the
Bishops, which is of sufficient validity, if the Pope do but approve of their
actions.

This Eugubian in other places of his Writings, harps much upon De Italiae
statu, p. 300. and 311.
the Popes power in deposing of Kings, and dividing the World amongst them, as
if they were his Sons, and he the Father of all. And then would seem to thrust
Dante aut auferente Imperia Regnaque opulentissima and omnium Maxima, Orbem
rerrarum distribuens, ac partiens, inter maximos omnium Principes veluti inter
filios. Ib. page 301.
into the World an Opinion of bad consequence, of none being held for Kings,
but those who were anointed and Crowned: but the Priests Watson and Clark 1603
found that this Plea would neither Id. page 305.
quit them from Treason, nor save their live.

Amongst other things, to Buoy or bolster up this his Opinion of the Popes
Spiritual and ^emporal Power, he Id. page 430.
brings the Authority of one Roderigo Zanchez, Bishop of Zamora; and the truth
of it is, that where wording is all, this Spaniard may carry the Bell away,
boldly affirming, Est vero naturaliter, moraliter and Divino jure cum recta
fide tenendum, Principatum Romani Pont. esse verum and unicum immediatum
Principatum totius O^bis, nedum quoad Spiritualia sed quoad Temporalia, and
Principatum Impe^ia^em esse ab ipso dependentem, and mediatum, ministerialem,
and instrumentalem eidem subministrantem, and deservientem, foreque ab eo
ordinatum and institutum, and ad jussum Principatus Papalis mobilem,
^evocabilem, cor^igibilem and punibilem.
That by Natural, Moral, and divine Law, we must believe that the Pope has the
immediate and only Rule of the whole World, in Temporals as well is in
Spirituals; all imperial Authority depending so much upon him, that it is
alterable, punishable, or nulled as he shall command. The small esteem which
this Bishop thus declared to the World by his Pen, he had of Temporal
Greatness. Another of the same Sea, viz. Antonio de Acunna, by his Sword
declared his approbation to it, Prud. de Sandoval. Anno 1520.
though upon different accounts; by his turbulent spirit, adding fresh Fuel to
the Treasonous humors then raging in Spain: this old Don still charging in the
head of above four hundred Priests, which he had under his Command well armed,
his Word being, Here my Priests. But at last by a strangling, he paid for his
Rebellions against his Sovereign Charles the Fifth, Emperor of Germany.

Laelius Zecchus a great man with them, both for Law and Dignity, is earnest
for this jurisdiction of the Popes, affirming Papa enim Caesares deponit, jura
Impe^ia transfert, and Reges Regnis private, etc. Lael. Zecch. Tract. Theolog. p
82, 83.
that he can depose both Emperors and Kings, being absolute Lord of the
Christian World. And another Italian Lawyer, viz. De po^est Romans Pont. l. 2. c
3. Sect 18. Adversus impios Politicos and hujus temporis Heretic^s
Alexander Clericus is much of the same opinion, and declares that he writ this
Book against the wicked Politicians and Heretics of his time; amongst the
rest, whether he intended Cardinal Bellarmine, let others judge, since he has
several whole Chapters against him. But a greater Lawyer than the former, and
one of more Learning and Modesty, viz. De Testament. cap. 6. Sect. 19.
Didacus Covarruvas, is willing to let himself be persuaded by the Canon Law to
embrace this King-deposing Opinion. And his Countryman, though of an ancienter
Cut, De planctu Ecclesiae, l. 1. cap. 13, 37, 56.
Alvarus Pelagius, out of the same Box swallows down the like Poison.

Gaspar Scioppius that unruly German, though of the same wicked judgment, yet
he will pretend to give you some pretty Reasons for it; as, that because the
Pope is the Head, as he says, and the Emperor and Kings but Arms or Hands to
the same monstrous Body; therefore if these do not their Itaque si Reges non
nutriant neque vestiant Corpus -- certe manus aut brachia munere non funguntur
-- itaque velut memb^um -- inutile capitis Imperio amputantur. Gasp. Sciop.
Ecclesiasticus, c. 141. p. 511, 512.
duty in being careful to preserve the Body, the Head as Lord and Master may
cut them off. A pretty simile, to make the supposed wise Head cause of its own
ruin. But if this do not please you, he will give you another as good, from
the great benefit, forsooth, that some Countries have received by this Temporal
Power of the Popes: As, by this France had their Ancient Family of the
Meroveens thrust out from being Kings, and the Carlovingiens popt into the
Throne. That Germany by this has got the Western Empire; but not a word of the
Emperors wanting Italy. And as for Spain, it is obliged to hug and defend this
unlimited Prerogative of St. Peter, since it gained the Kingdom of Navarre by
Hispania, Navarrae Regnum nullo alio titulo, nisi quia capiti Ecclesiae
Pontifici sui visum fuerit, obtinuit. Ib.
no other Right nor Title, but only because it so pleased the Pope. In the
mean time, was not Don John of Albret, and his Wife Catharina, King and Queen
of Navarre, and their poor Subjects also, much beholden to Pope Julius the
Second, for his thus ruining of them by the hands of their Enemies? By this
Argument, Schoppius might maintain the knack of Plagiery, he gaining at first
the name of some Learning by his sly transcribing of his Masters Notes; but
never the more honesty or right stuck by him; nor had he mended his manners,
had he lived to the age of his great Grandfather or great Grandmother, the
first living one hundred and ten, and the other one hundred and five years:
what spirit he was of, may in part be seen by his violent persuading to the
ruining of all Protestants in his Classicum Belli Sacri, and his ranting and
calling of it Ecclesiast. c. 74. p. 242.
Dathanismus and Abironismus in King James, because he would not believe that
the Pope had power to depose Kings.

But enough of Schoppius; let us now see the Judgment of one greater than he,
Martinus Becanus, a man of great Parts and Learning, yet is pleased to compare
Kings and Princes to Per Canes -- partim Reges and Imperatores qui morsu and
externa vi defendunt Ecclesiam ab Incursione Haereticorum and Infidelium, Mart.
Becan. Controvers. Angl. p. 131, 132.
Dogs, That by their bitings and force do defend the Church from the Assaults
and Incursions of Heretics. And these he says, upon some occasions, may not
only be Bec. de Republ. Ecclesiast l. 3. c. 4. Sect. 48, 49.
Excommunicated, of which he endeavors to give some Instances, but also
Reges and Principes quando negligentes sunt in arcendis vel expellendis
Haereticis excommunicandos, and a Pontifice deponendos. Controvers. Angl. Ib.
Id. Tom. 3. Part. 2. Theologiae Scholasticae, cap. 15. q. 5. page 421. and Id.
Refutatio Tort. Torti. p. 23.
deposed by the Pope. And therefore a little after, he affirms that none can
with a safe Conscience take our English Oath of Allegiance, because amongst
other things it declares that the Pope upon any account cannot depose a King;
which Assertion he says all Catholics hold to be Catholici judicant hanc
propositionem aperte falsam esse, Id. page 139.
false, and against the Lateran Council.

Gabriel Vasquez, one of the most famous Schoolmen of Spain, is also of
opinion, that it is in the Popes power to Com. in 1. 2. Thom. Tom. 2. Did.
152. Sect. 8.
punish Princes; and that the crime of Heresy against him is of such force,
that none of such Conditions are capable of Rule, so that the Si omnes de
stirpe Regia Haeretici sintt, unc devolvitur ad Regnum nova Regis electio: nam
just a Pontifice omnes illi successores Regno privari possunt. Id. disp. 169.
Sect. 42, 43.
Kingdom must choose some body else. But if it so chance that the whole Kingdom
be not of the Romish persuasion, then the Q^od si Regnum infectum esset,
Pontifex -- assigna^e posset Catholicum Regem -- and ipsum vi armorum, si opus
esset, introducere, Ib.
Pope can assign them one, whom the people must not deny; for if they do, his
Holiness, forsooth, may bring him in by force of Arms.

Nor can we expect any better Doctrine from Franciscus Feu-ardentius, -- Reges
-- Regnis suis abdicare, and omni potestate dignita^eque privare potest. Com.
in Esther, p. 82.
his very name somewhat showing the fury of his Zeal: this Franciscan is
resolved for the Popes pulling down of Kings; and yet he could wish that in
these things his Holiness would consult with the holy Consistory of Cardinals.
Julius Ferrettus, though not so hotheaded as the former, and one that could
endure cold as well as any Italian; yet though he seldom used a Fire, his
Doctrine wa^ Zealous enough in behalf of the Pope, affirming that he could Papa
dat Imperium and Regna -- iis de causis rite deponuntur ab co. Jul. Ferrettus
de re and disciplina Militari, p. 156. Sect. 113.
give Empire and Kingdoms, nay, and depose the Possessors, because he is judge
of all, and instead of a God on Earth. And in another Id. page 354. Sect. 26.
place he concludes with the same Doctrine against the Emperor: And yet this
Doctrine he intended for Charles the Fifth, and assured it to his Son Philip
the Second. And for all this bad Doctrine, this Lawyer was in great Repute, as
appears both by his great Preferments and Employments: and the latter end of
his Epitath may serve for a hint.

Jura Poli atque fori belliterraeque marisque
Descripsit, tandem conditur hoc Tumulo.
And Celsus Mancinus, Friend, Towns-man born, viz. Ravenna, and of the same
Profession with the former, is just of the same Opinion. Conspicuum fit omnibus
a summo Pontifice deponi privarique Imperatores, and e contra eligi. Mancin. de
jurib. Princip. l. 3. c. 3. p. 76.
Nor need this be any such wonder to us, when a greater than either of them,
does not only affirm that this Reges nostri in multis casibus possunt deponi,
sive per Papam, sive ipsis Regn^c^lis. Tostat. Com. in III Reg. c. 11. q. 35.
King-deposing Authority is not only in the Pope, but in the very people too:
and of this Opinion is no less man, than the voluminous Tostatus; so that the
word Treason will become nulled. Although his Countryman De potestate
coactiva, cap. 12. Sect. 17.
Josephus Stephanus does not speak any thing of this Power in the people, yet
he is as forward as any to give it to the Pope; especially if the Kings be not
of his Romish Religion: and in another of his De adorat. pedum Pont. cap. 7.
Books, gives you a Catalogue of some Emperors and Kings unthroned by the
Pope. For those Opinions, and other his Writings in honor of the
Porphyry-Chair, he was made Bishop of Orihuela in Valentia; and his learning
might deserve some preferment, being well studied in Church-Antiquities.
Another Spaniard, viz. In 2. 2 Tho. q. 12. art. 2. col. 478.
Dominicus Bannez allows the same power to the Pope of King-deposing; but had
this Guipuscoian in his old age studied Loyalty more than Hebrew, he might have
altered his judgment, and it might have been more for his credit. And with
this noted son of Mondragon, does another Spaniard Tom. 3. disp. 1. q 12.
^unct. 2. col. 439. 443.
Gregorius de Valentia agree. And though their Orders be Enemies, yet like
Herod and Pilate they can shake hands to propagate Rebellion.

But we have a Countryman of our own, as famous as either of the other two,
both for his Learning, and his stedfastness in this wicked Opinion; and this is
Thomas Stapleton, who boldly declares, that for Heresy the Romans Pont. -- and
punire quosvis Principes potest, and si rei necessitas exigat Regno private.
Tom 1. page 710. Contr. 3. q. 5. Art. 2. -- N^mpe per popul^m ipsum cuju^ est
eligere sa^^n Principem, aut Ordines Regni, vel Senat^m Civitatis -- At vero si
istud non succedat -- potest per se immediate proced^^e, dando illud Regn^m
alte^i O^thodoxo Principi, vel pr^mo Victori O^thodoxo illud assignando. Ib
Sect. 4. p ^^
Pope may not only punish, but also deprive Kings of their Countries. And to
have this done, he thinks this the best way; he would have the Pope to work
about by the people, or the Parliaments; but if these will not fadge, either
because they cannot or will not, then his Holiness may do it himself, by giving
that Kingdom to another Prince, or let them have it that can get it. It may be
it was for these pretty Doctrines that Clement the Eighth was so taken with
this man's Writings, that he would have his Books read to him whilst he was at
Victuals; and besides other large liberalities, had once a mind to make him
Cardinal.

We have formerly seen the Opinion of Thomas, and now let us see what his
Brother Franciscus Bozzius says, and we shall presently perceive them to be
Birds of a Feather; this fobbing up the same Pope Clement the Eighth with the
same Language that the other had, telling him, that though Justis de causis
posse deponi Imperatores, transferri Imperia. Fr. Boz. de Temporal. Eccles.
Monarch. lib 3. cap. 16. page 553. Possunt ab Ecclesia leges temporales condi,
novi creati Reges, justis de causis au far Regna, quod saepe actum esse
constat a summis Pontificibus. Id. lib. 5. cap. ult. page 823.
he should not take away lawful Rule, yet upon just grounds he might depose
Emperors: and this he says has been several times done by Popes, as in
another Id. lib. 1. cap. 21. page 225. etc.
place he endeavors to show by several Examples.

And to this purpose was Gregory the Fourteenth clawed by his Protonotary,
Anastasius Germonius, by affirming what great power he had over the world; he
could Imperatores enim Reges aliosque magnos Principes Principatu Regno atque
imperio private, necnon alios cum libet in eorum locum sufficit, subrogat --
nemo -- sanae mentis dubitare debet, quin facere valeat, faceatque cum opus
sit. An stas. Germon. de Sacrorum immunitat. lib. 3. cap. 3. Sect. 38, 39.

Hujus est Imperium ex uno in alium locum transfer electionem, aut admittere,
aut rejicere electum ac confirmatum ex justis de causis deponere, subditos a
fidelitatis juramento absolvere, and alia id genus facere. Id. lib. 3. proem.
Sect. 9, 10.


throw down Emperors and Kings, and put others in their places: and if any man
doubt of this Authority in the Pope, he plainly calls him a Madman; and that he
can alter the place of Election, allow or throw by him that is elected, quit
Subjects from their Oath of Allegiance, and several suchlike tricks as these
can he do.

And as for De Pontif. potestate, Sect. 19.
Petrus Albinianus Tretius, do but compare the Contents with the Text of the
next Section, and you will see him fairly grant the Pope to have power Papa
potest depone^e Imperatorem sine concensu Cardinalium. Id. Sect. 20.
without the consent of his Cardinals to depose the Emperor. And another
Italian Lawyer Solus Papa etiam sine Concilio potest deponere Imperatorem. Lud.
Bolo. addit. ad Cataldinum de Boncompagnis de translatione Concilii Basil.
Sect. 5.
Ludovicus Bologninus, from the Canon Law, tells the world that he may do it
clearly of himself. And I think that Quaest. Mercuriales, Q. 25. Sect. 3.
Johannes Andraeas does not much vary from him, when from the same Authority,
he says, That he can take away any man's Right and give it to another. But
Julius Caesar Madius does not mutter in his Teeth, but speaks boldly out, that
upon some Reasons, the Pope has Authority Eos a Regnis and Principatibus eorum
deponere posse. Mad. de Sacris Ordinibus, cap. 9. Sect. 17.
to turn the best of them out of their Kingdoms and Sovereignty. And the same
does another Italian, Antonius Sanctarellus, one that has made some noise in
the World, not only by his confident Assertion of the Popes Power in Potest
non solum eos excommunicare, sed etiam Regno privare, eorumque subditos ab
illorum obedient^a liberare. Sanctarel. de Haeresi. c. 30. p. 293.
deposing Kings, and quitting their Subjects from their Obedience; but by the
story which happened at Paris, upon its being censured there: For the Court of
Parliament perceiving the Book to be printed at Rome, by permission of the
Superiors, and approbation of Vitelescus General of the Jesuits; the Fathers of
that Order in Paris were sent for by the Court, and demanded, Whether they
believed as their General did, concerning this Book? They answered, That their
General living in Rome, could not but approve that which was agreeable to the
Court of Rome. But being demanded then, what they believed? Answered, That they
believed the clean contrary. Being again asked, And what would you do, if you
were at Rome? Answered, As they do at Rome. Which made some of the Court say,
Have these men one Conscience at Rome, and another at Paris? God keep us from
such Confessors.

Johan. Baptista Vivianus, agrees very well with the former, and their
Canon Law and Court of Rome, by maintaining their Article, that the Papa
Imperatorem deponere potest ex causis legitimis. Jo. B. Vivian. Rationale, l.
2. p. 283.
Pope for some Reasons may depose the Emperor; his Imperial Majesty and all
others being subject to him, and to be punished by him according to their
faults. And to him we may join a great Cardinal, Johannes Hieronymus of Alba,
who tell us, Lucubrat. in Barthol. Tom. 1. fol. 83, 84
that the Pope being Judge of all things, nothing in the world can quit
themselves from his jurisdiction: and that Dante, that famous Italian Poet, was
in a manner condemned as an Heretic, because he did not think that the Empire
held its being from the Church; and in another of his De potestate Papae, part.
1. Sect. 67.
Books, gives us the names of some Kings deposed by the Pope.

Petrus Hurtadus de Mendoza, might by the rudeness and incivility of his
Country Biscay, suck in with his Milk some Principles of Rebellion; that
Country having an Antipathy against Bishops and good Government: But these
might somewhat be corrected by his severer Studies, were it not a Principle
amongst them, that Merito quidem Haeretici -- Regno privantur -- Hurt. de
Mendoz. Scholiasticae, disp. 21. Sect. ^04.
Heretical Kings against their Church are deservedly deposed, and others put in
their places. Yet methinks 'twas somewhat of boldness of him, to present this
Doctrine to his Sovereign, the Present King of Spain, Philip the Fourth: yet
this wonder will scarce last nine days, when we see Decisiones, q^aest. 58^.
Guido and De jure publico, lib. 3. Tit. 13. Sect. ^.
Leander Galganettus, those famous Lawyers, affirm the same by their own
Canons; and the latter to dedicate this falsity to no less than to God himself,
and the Virgin Mary. And Bartholomaeus Nardius says, We have no reason to look
upon this Authority as a strange thing, since Constituit namque dominus
vicarium suum super gentes and Regna, potestatenque ei dedit ampl^ssimam, ut
evellat and dist^uat, and des^e^^at, and aed ficet, and plantet B. Nard.
Expunctiones, cap. 4. page 172, 173.
God set the Pope over the whole World, not only to establish and plaint, but
also to abolish and destroy. And no less man than Johannes de Capistrano tell
us, that of this power we need not doubt, it being now as Clarum est hodie quod
ex justa causa Papa potest Imperatorem deponere and privare. Jo. a Ca^ist. de
Papae sive Ecclesiae ^^torit. fol. 61. ^.
clear as the Noonday, that the Pope may sometimes depose the Emperor: And at
this positive Doctrine, none must so much as smile, or seem offended; for of
this Book, thus sings his Countryman Antonius Amicius:

Quis te Docte liber vel subsannare cachinno
Audeat aut saevo rodere dente queat?
Cum graviter reseres decus and sublimia sceptra
Pontificis summi Conciliique simul.
And a great deal of ado, and some money has been spent by the Franciscans and
others, to get this man Sainted; but how it thrives, I know not.

As Q^aest. Criminale, p. 173. Sect 9.
Didacus Cantera, from the Canon Law; so De Bene^^^^is, lib ^ cap. 4.
Franciscus Duarenus, by few Examples and as little Reason, assert the Popes
Authority in deposing Kings. And I think (...) s^l^ct, lib. 1. cap. ^. pa^ 17.
Antonius Possevinus will not be displeased with the Prerogative, since he
tells us that the Scepters of Kings humble themselves to the Popes feet; and
that Christian Kings are not so positively of Gods apppointment, but they must
have his Holiness to confirm their Crowns. And In 2. 2 (...) A^^ ^. (...) ^1.
Sect. ^d ^^^^^m.
Franciscus Sylvius, Doctor and Professor at Doway, though he will not allow
the Pope to depose Kings upon every toy, yet he denies not, but that there may
be Reason sometimes for thus pulling down of Kings. And if we consult Loca
ple(...) 67. page ^^6, 31^, 3^^, (...).
Gregorius Polydorius, we shall find him rather to outstrip than come short of
the former: And this he thought would not be unpleasing to Urban the Eighth.
And to this Italian we may add Antonius Cordubensis, who in this cause speaks
out freely, that the (...) p^^^ci^^^ (...) and alios tollere and (...) Q^^st.
Th^^l^g (...)
Pope cannot only do every thing that secular Princes can, but also make New
Princes, and pull down the Old. And to this Spaniard may be joined Theolog.
Moral. Tom. 2. v. Papa. Sect 10.
Franciscus Ghetius of Corno, being of the same Opinion, moved thereto by
pretty Reasons, viz. Example, as if Emperors had not formerly done the same to
Popes; and because, as the soul rules the body, so may the Spiritual Popes
triumph over Temporal Monarchs.

If these Arguments of this Milanois do not sufficiently convince you, Rutilius
Benzonius a trusty Roman, will think to do it with his thrid-bare Allusion of
Heretical Kings to Wolves; and so they may be Jus depone^di, and abdicandi e
solio Reges ac Principes, non solum Ecclesiae, sed interdum populis competere
ratione, and exemplis os^^endit^r -- Potest [i. e. the Pope] -- ipso Principes
ac Reges, si ex ove aut ariete evadant lupi, i. e. ex Christiani fiant
Haeretici -- privare dominio, etc. Rut. Benzon. Com. in Canticum Magnificat.
lib. 3. cap. 27. dub. 6. p. 134.
turned from their Kingdoms, not only by the Pope, but also by the people,
forsooth: yet he would have them to take advice of his Holiness, before they
began their Rebellion; and then I warrant you, they are as surely free from
that Crime we call Treason, as the Chapel of Loretto, of which this Author was
Bishop, was dapperly carried by Angels through the Air. And in the Popes great
Power in Temporals, in another of his Disput. de Immunitate Eccles. contra
Venetos, page 68.
Books he gives us some hint.

And yet if after all these thwacking Arguments, you do not find your self
convinced, and will not believe the truth and honesty of this King-deposing
Article, you may assure your self to be no less than an Heretic; for Johannes
de Solarzano tells us plainly, that not to believe that the Pope can depose
Kings, is, and that deservedly -- Haec opinio -- merito ut Haeretica jamp^idem
damnata est. Jo. de Solarz. de Indiarum. jure, lib. 2. cap. 22. Sect. 4.
too, declared and damned for an Heresy. This may be good Doctrine to preach
amongst the Indians: the Spaniard pleading most of his Right from the Popes
Gift. And so whether the Author by his Office relating to those places, might
be encouraged to propagate such Principles, let others conclude; yet probably
he might have spared his dedicating of them to the present King of Spain, who,
two to one, if the State came in Question, would scarce consent to the Canon,
let the Heresy lie where it would.

From the same Root does his Countryman In 2. 2. Tho. page 224.
Petrus de Aragon draw his Authority, that Princes may sometimes lawfully loose
their Rule over their Subjects: and so does the great Portugal Lawyer, Pastoral
Sollicitud. part 1. p. 250. Sect. 90, 91.
Augustinus Barboza, that the Pope can depose the Emperor. Disputat. l. 3. c.
5. p. 371.
Marius Alterius runs upon the same account; and so does Bishop Johan. Maria
Bellettus, but that he thrusts up the Authority a little higher than the
former, affirming that this deposing of the King, may not Et non solum propter
Haeresim, aut Schisma, sed etiam propter aliud crimen intolerabile, ac etiam
propter insufficientiam. Jo. Mar. Bellet. Disquisitio Clericalis, part 1. page
282. Sect. 109, 100.
only be for his Heresy, or Schism, but for any other intolerable Crime, or,
if he be not sufficient, and not fit to Rule. To which there needs no Reply,
but what if the Lion do judge the Fox's Ears to be Horns?

With all this does agree Raymundus de Pennafuerte, telling us, that if he be
Non solum propter Haeresim, sed etiam propter negligentiam contra Haeresim
extirpandam, potest non solum excommunicari ab Ecclesia, sed etiam deponi, --
suerit inutilis, dissolutus and negligens circa Regimen and justitiam
observandam. S. Raym. Summa, lib 1. Tit. de Haereticis, Sect. 7. page 41.
negligent to extripate Heresy, to do Justice in his Government, unprofitable
or loose, the Pope may then take his Kingdom from him. Whether this Doctrine
was any motive, not long ago, to Clement the Eighth, for Canonizing this man
for a Saint; or those vast sums of money gathered in Catalonia (where this
Raymond was born) for the same purpose, was best known to the Court of Rome,
and is not two pence matter to our design. But yet for all his Saintship, his
great admirer and Glossographer, Johannes de Friburgo, will not agree with him
about the Popes direct Authority, though he allows him an indirect one to
depose Kings: and it is not a farthing matter whether he kill a man with his
right or left hand.

With the former Saint, does another, but of a far older date, viz. St.
Bonaventure, in the main agree, affirming with the rest, that Possunt
Sacerdotes and Pontifices ex causa amovere Reges, and deponere Imperatores. S.
Bonavent. de Ecclesiast. Hierarcha, part 2. cap. 1.
Priests and Popes for some Reason or other, may put down Kings, and depose
Emperors. But though our Learned Countryman, Alexander of Hales, used to say
by this famous and pious Cardinal his Scholar, That it seemed to him, that Adam
had not sinned in Bonaventure; yet for all his Title of Invincible, he shall not
persuade me, but that our Seraphical Doctor was wide from Truth, in this his
King-deposing Assertion.

Much about the same time with the former, lived another famous Cardinal
Henricus de Segusio, but now better known by the name of Hostiensis, who is as
resolute as any for the Domini Temporales non solum propter suam Haeresim, sed
etiam aliorum, quos dum possunt, admoniti, exterminare negligunt, Excommunicari
possunt, and Terrae ipsorum exponi Catholicis occupandae -- idem si Princeps
negligens inveniatur circa Regni Regimen and justitiam saciendam. Hostiens
Summa, lib. 5. Tit. de Haereticis. Sect. Quae poena seriatur. Sect. 11.
deposing of Kings by this Power, if they be either negligent in the
administration of their Government, or do not extirpate all Heretics out of
their Dominions, then comes a clap of Excommunication, and the Land lies
gaping for him that can first take it. To this Cardinal, we shall add another
of as great esteem as any, and one that had formerly been Master del sacro
Palazzo; and this is Johannes de Turrecremata, who affirms that the Pope cannot
only use his Ecclesiastical Censures against Kings, but also Verum etiam cos
notabiliter negligentes a dignitate deponere. Jo. de Tur. Su^ma de Eccles. cap.
14. propos. 44.
depose them. And with this Spaniard, does a Sicilian, one of their most famous
Canonists In V lib. Decretal. de Haereticis, cap. 13.
Abbas Panormitanus agree. And Super Canone Missae, lect. 23. fol. 41. page 1.
col. 1.
Gabriel Biel an old German Divine, upon the same foundation raises the same
destructive Principles.

To these subscribe the Sicilian Lawyer De Potestate Regia, Q. 76.
Antonius Corsetus, the Italian Tract. de officio legati de latere, lib. 2.
Tit. de variis ordinarium nominib. Sect. 220.
Petrus Andraeas de Gambara, and his Countryman De censuris Ecclesiasticis,
Tab. 2. cap. 23. Sect. 9. number. 8.
Bartholomaeus Vgolius, who also some years De justitia and validitate
Monitorii Pauli V in Venetos, page 16.
after, affirm the same Power to lie in Paul the Fifth; nor does the Pavian
Lawyer, Repet. Rubr. de Constitut. Sect. 76.
Boschus Codecha differ from the rest. Thus do they madly seem to dote upon
this Papal jurisdiction, as the Mantuan Galeatius did upon a young Woman of
this City, who upon her jeasting command drowned himself.

Nor is multitude of their Lawyers wanting to confirm this their Seditious
Doctrine: for here might we bring Repet. in C. Canonum Statut. de Constitut.
Sect. 32.
Johannes Baptista Ferretus, Repet. in Clem. ut Clericorum de offic. ord. Sect.
40, 43.
Stephanus Aufrerius, De Magistratibus, lib. 1. cap. 2. Sect. 5, 7, 8.
Garsias Mastrillius, yet for all this Principle employed by the Catholic King
about Sicily; Repet. in Rubr. de Haeret. Quaest. 9. Sect. 5. Rep. in C. quoniam
de Haeret. Quaest. 15. Sect. 34, 36.
Arnaldus Albertinus, Inquisitor General of Valentia, and Bishop of Patti in
the former Island; and Lancellotus Conradus, amongst other Privileges and
Prerogatives attributed to the Pope, for the Twentieth says, that he XX.
Deponit Imperatorem propter ipsius iniquitates, and etiam Reges, Lanc. Conrad.
Templum Omnium judicium, page 613.
deposes both Emperors and Kings.

Franciscus Vargas being desired by Pope Pius the Fourth, with whom he was very
gracious, to inform him of the jurisdiction and authority of himself, and other
inferior Bishops, (then somewhat discoursed of in the Council of Trent) tells
his Holiness plainly, That it belongs to Haec ^tem ea Potestas est qua idem
summus Pont. and non alius Imperatores and Principes nonnunquam private,
aliosque in eorum locum sufficit. Fr. Varg. de Episcoporum jurisdictione and
autorit. Pontis. Confirm. 10. Numb. 7, 8.
him alone to depose Kings and Emperors, and put others in their places; and
then for more confirmation of it, names some so used. And whether Fernandus
Rebellus, the famous Portugal Jesuit be not of the same opinion, let
indifferent parties judge, and they will soon conclude, that his Name did not
much differ from his Principles; telling us, That the Portugal had one title of
right to the Indies, by the gift of Alexander the Sixth, and the Quibus -- jus
competit super omnes Principes Christianos concedendi and auferendi, ordinandi
retendi ea quae opus suerint ad finem supernaturalem salutis genrium tam
fidelium quam Infidelium. Fer. Rebel. de Obligationib. justitiae, Part. 2. l.
18. Q. 23. Numb. 26.
Bishops of Rome have a great power in giving and taking away from Princes. And
this he dedicates to Claudius Aquaviva, then General of the Jesuits; nor could
he scarce hit upon a better Patron for such Doctrines, seeing by his License he
had formerly Priviledg'd several such principles of Sedition.

But now we have one that speaks to the purpose, viz. Ludovicus a Paramo, a
great Lawyer of Sicily, and Divine of Leon, who maintains in several places of
his writings the -- Potest summus Pont. antiquos Reges and Imperatores deponere
and novos instituere. Lud. a Param. de Origini and progress. S. Inquisit. l. 1.
Quest. 1. Opin. 4. Numb. 55.

Id. Numb. 49. Posse mutare Regna, and uni auserre atque alteri confer. --

Id. Numb. 58. Potest non solum omnia quae Princeps seculares possunt, sed and
facere novos Principes, and tollere alios, and Imperia dividere, etc.

Id. Numb. 94. Si Princeps aliquis aut haereticus, aut Schismaticus electione
fieret, tum etiam possit Papa uti gladio temporali, and adversus eum procedere
usque ad depositionem, and expulsionem illius a Regno.


Popes power in deposing Kings, and setting up new ones, and proceeding against
all heretical or schismatical Princes with the same Authority; and at last
falls into a fury, and rails pertly against those, who think that the Id. Numb.
145.
Pope has no jurisdiction this way in France, nor can depose Haeretical Kings.
This is good stuff, but of a far older date than this Spanish print: for above
three hundred years ago, Augustinus Triumphus de Ancona, being desired by John
XXII, to vindicate the Papal jurisdiction, amongst other grand Prerogatives
which he attributes to his Holiness, are these two, the Unde puto quod Papa --
justa and rationabili causa existente, per seipsum possit Imperatorem eligere.
Aug. T^i. de potest Eccles. Quaest.
election of Emperors and Kings, and the 35. Art. 1. Quest. 37. Art. 5. Quest.
46. Art. 3.

Id. Quest 4. Art. 1. Potest ergo te^ renum Imperatorem deponere.

Id. Art 2. -- Merito Imperator est deponendus.

Id. Quest. 46. Art. 2. Papa potest Reges deponere -- dubium non est.


deposing of them again: and of this latter, he says, there is no doubt.

This Poisonous Principle is also maintained by the Venetian De Imperat.
Magist. Orig. Quaero, 4. Numb. 7.
Petrus a Monte, Bishop of Brescia, and the Methodical Dominican Summa v. Papa.
Numb. 10, 11.
Sylvester de Prierio; and therefore might well expect a golden Rose from Pope
Leo the Tenth. And to him we shall join a learned Spaniard of the same Order,
In quartum sentent. did. 25. quaest. 2. art. 1, Numb. Tertio. Ad horum tamen
secund^^ ad eandem.
Dominicus Soto, who, though Confessor to Charles the Fifth; yet probably never
troubled him about this point. And next to this shall follow another of the
same Country, and Relation to Charles the Fifth; -- Hoc dominium etiam a
mittitur per haer esim manifestum, ita quod Rex factus Haereficus ipso jure and
Reg^o suo privatus -- nec mirari debet aliquis, quod Papa propter Haeresis
crimen Regem a Regia dignitate deponar, and Regno privet. Alph. a Castro de
justa Haereticorum punit. lib. 2. c. 7. col. 1245, 1246.
Alphonsus a Castro, who affirms it to be without dispute, That if a King turn
Heretic, he has no right to his Kingdom; and so no man ought to think it
strange if the Pope depose him.

But Ploydon, when he saw himself concerned, could say, The case is altered;
and there is never a Ruler amongst them, but would think it odd to loose a
Kingdom by a Fiat from Rome; yet they go on to propagate this doctrine: and
amongst the rest, Cunerus Bishop of Leweerden, thinks it very fitting, for an
Si Princeps hae^eticus sit, and obstinate vel pe^^inaciter intolerabilis deponi
potest. Cuner. de Offic. Princip. c. 8. p. 76, 77.
heretical King to be deposed, and another appointed in his place. And next to
him shall follow, one, though no Bishop, yet of such noted learning, that
Vittoria, the chief Town of Alava in Old Castile, does think it no small honor
to have brought forth and given a Name to such a famous Dominican, as
Franciscus a Victoria; yet for all his parts, he dotes too much upon this Papal
Authority, affirming that he cannot only Potest non solum omnia quae Principes
seculares possunt, sed and sacere novos Principes and tollere alios, and
Imperia divide^e and pleraque alia. Fr. a Victor. Relect. Theolog. Relect. 1.
Sect. 6. Numb. 12.
do what our secular Monarchs can do, but also turn them from their Thrones,
and set up new Potentates. And from the Canon Law does the Lawyer De
successione Regum. dub. 1. Numb. 30.
Guiliclmus de Monserrat suck in the same Doctrine. And though another of the
same Profession, In Mo'inaeum, page 106.
Remondus Rufus, seem unwilling either to meddle with the Popes power in this
case, or when he took upon him such Authority; yet by his signs and hints one
may have some reason to suppose his agreement with the rest.

But some other Lawyers of a far greater account, leave off hinting, and speak
more boldly to the purpose, as Repet. in C. canon. Statuta de Constitur. Numb.
9.
Petrus de Ancharano, the famous Italian; Cod. de legibus, l. Si Imperialis,
Numb. 4.
Bartolus de Saxaferrato, and his no less learned Pupil and Scholar, Cod. de
precibus Imperat. offeren. l. Rescripta. Numb. 8.
Baldus; the noted Frenchman, Repet. in C. Novit. de judic. Numb. 127.
Johannes Quintinus; Speculum, lib. 1. Parti^. 1. Tit. de legato, Numb. Nunc
ostendendum, Numb. 17.
Guillielmus Durandus, commonly known by the name of Speculator, Bishop of
Mande, and Scholar to Hostiensis, and In Cod. lib. 1. de sum. Trinit. and fid.
Cath. Numb. 13.
Johannes Faber; nor does Practica Criminialis, quaest. 35. Numb. 6.
Julius Clarus permit the Pope to part with this jurisdiction. And if you any
way doubt of the meaning of the last; Vrbanus Cancellarius a Spoleto, will
refer you to an Expositor in this quibling Distick.

Clarior ut fiat Clarus, sua Clara Johannes
Baptista his jungit Lumina luminibus.
That Clarus might be more clear, Don John Baptista
Adds his clear lights, to take away the mist-a.
And in obedience to his Poetry, let us consult the Annotations of Johannes
Baptista Baiardus, and the case will be as plain then as a Pike-staff; there he
telling us, that the Add quod Imperator a Papa potest deponi, and
excommunicati propter haeresim, Sacrilegium, Perjurium and exinanitionem seudi,
quod ab Ecclesia tenet, etc. Jo. Bap. Baiard. Additiones ad Julii Clari
Practicam Criminalem, Quaest. 35. Numb. 6.
Pope may depose the Emperor for several Reasons, amongst which he puts
Perjury and Sacrilege, two notable pretenses for the Pope, ever to take hold
on, at a dead lift.

Our Countryman In lib. Sapient. Numb. 300.
Robert Holaote says, it belongs to the Bishop of Rome to make the Emperor,
and to see that fit Kings be chosen: but Alphonsus Alvarez Guerrero concerns
himself most with the Popes power in pulling down Monarchs, and therefore he
tells us that Nonne igitur just Julius II. Johannem Regem Navarra
schismaticum, haereticum, Apostolicae sedis hostem publicum atque reum lesae
Majestatis, declaravit? Reghumque and omnia ejus bona publicavit primo
occupanti, atque nominatim Catholico Regi Hispaniarum concessit? -- Potestque
ita Papa Principes Apostantes a fide privare dominio temporali, quod habent
super fideles. Alph. Alvar. Speculum vel Thesaurus, cap. 16. Numb. 8. and cap.
31, Numb. 17.
Julius the Second did very well and justly to declare John Albret King of
Navarre, to be a Schismatic, Haeretick, an enemy to the Church; nay, and a
Traitor too: and so to give his Kingdom away from him to the Spanish King; for
he forsooth has power to depose Kings. And much about the same Opinion is
Petrus de Palude, affirming that the Pope can not only -- Potest deponere
omnem talem, non solum propter Haeresim, aut Schisma, aut aliud crimen
intolerabile in populo: Sed etiam propter insufficientiam, utpote si quis
Idiota sensu vel impotens viribus in Regno praeesset -- talis certum est qui
mireretur deponi. Petr. a Palud. de causa immediate Ecclesiasticae potestatis.
Art. 4.
depose a King for Heresy, Schism, or such like crimes; but also, if he be
insufficient, by being either weak in understanding or body.

A man might think it strange, that such good and honest-meaning men, as the
famous Spanish Lawyer, Relict. in C. Novit. de judicii Notab. 2. Numb. 3. 99.
Martinus Azpilcueta, but better known by the title of Doctor Navarrus, should
be for this Kingdeposing power of the Pope; but that it is a wicked Principle
maintained as we see by their chiefest Writers, doting too much upon that
irrational body of their Canon Law: And this also makes his Countryman Tract.
de unitate ovilis, c. 23. Numb. 12.
Michael de Aninyon subscribe with him to this Doctrine. And Johannes Driedo,
that Lovan Doctor, is so earnest for it, that he seems to be careful, lest he
should forget to tell the people, that the Verum hoc non est si^entio
praeteriundum, quod Papa ex plenitudine potestatis super universos Christianos
Principes, potest haereticos Reges ac Principes propter crimen haeresis privare
suis Regnis atque Imperiis. Jo. Dried. de liberate Christ. lib. 1. cap. 14.
Pope out of the greatness of his power, can deprive them of their Kings.

And this is no new opinion, it seems: for, above five hundred years ago,
Stephanus or Harrandus, the XIV Bishop of Halberstat in Saxony, declared to
Valtramus of Magdeburg, that he that was an Dominus Henricus haereticus est,
pro quibus nephandis malis ab Apostolica sede excommunicatus, nec Regnum, nec
potestatem a liquam super nos, quia Catholici sumus, poterit obtinere.
Dodechinus Append. ad chronicon Mar. Scoti, anno 1090. page 460. col. 1.
Haeretick and Excommunicated by the Pope, could have no right to rule over
those who were true Christians. And the truth of it is, Childerick the Fourth,
King of France, found by experience, that the Pope above nine hundred years ago
took upon him to depose Kings.

Donysius a Rickel, or Leeuwis, but now better known by the name of
Carthusianus, from his Order; though for his Piety, he procured the name of
Doctor Extaticus; yet this Doctrine of King-deposing, though it was no part of
Holiness, however it may be, that the Pope and others might have a better
opinion of him for it, because it is not Imperatorem potest deponere, and Reges
-- Regnis suis privare. Dion. Carthus. de Regimine Polit. Art. 19.
once only, but Id. de authoritate Papa and genesis Council. l. 1. art. 6.
twice, and for ought that I know oftener, that he boldly affirms it, let the
King have never so much right to the Throne. And to him we may add De origin
jurisdict. Quest. 4, 5, 6.
Petrus Bertrandus, who to confirm his opinion, says, that Christ had not done
wisely, if he had not left the Pope such power: and had he been of another
judgment, probably he had gone against his Church. The great Cardinal Council.
154. Numb. 1.
Francis Zabarella affirming, that it is not only a received Opinion, but that
the Canons also declare such power to lie in the Pope. And if a man so modest,
impartial, and learned, as this honor of Padoua, affirm thus much; we need not
admire that the Lovan Doctor De Ecclesia. c. 14.
Jacobus Latomus; the Italian Dominican, Judiciale Inquisitor verbo, D^m^mini
^emporales, p. 90.
Vmbertus Locatus; the same Country-Lawyers, Criminalis, lib. 4. c. 15. Numb.
6, 10. and lib. 5. c. 52. Numb. 8.
Tiberius Decianus, Super Dig. de legibus, l. non ambigitur, Numb. 6.
Paulus de Castro, De Imperatore, Quest. 53. Numb. 3. and 3.
Restaurus Castaldus; and our Countryman Super sententias, lib. 4. in Prologo.
Quest. 11. Art. 4.
Johannes Bacon, or Bacondrop, are carried along with the same current; and the
latter (of whom it is said, that he writ so much, that his little Body could not
carry his great Writings) might have left this out, though not for its weight,
yet for the trouble of penning it, but that he would be according to his name
Doctor Resolutus; and in all things with the rest, pin his Faith upon the Roman
Sleeve.

And from these, we shall not have the German Lupoldus de Bebenburg, above
three hundred years ago Bishop of Bamberg in Franconia, dissent, plainly
telling the world, That a Posset tamen propter crimen haeresis vel a liud
gravius crimen notarium de quo incorrigibilis appareret a Regno deponi, ^ud. de
B^b^nb. de juribus Regni and Imperii, cap. 12. page 65.
King not only for heresy, but other crimes also may be deposed; and shows
himself very valiant for the Pope. And whether it was his zeal for that Chair,
that procured him after (as I think) to be translated to the Archbishopric of
Mentz; let others judge: Nor do I know whether this Kingdeposing Opinion was
the result merely of his judgment, or his dependence as Prelate of Bamberg
upon the Pope; that See having been formerly snatched from the Metropolitanship
of Mentz, by Clement the Second, once Bishop of Bamberg, and annexed to the
disposition of the Pope.

Comment. in Directo^um Inquisitor. Nicol. Eimerici, part. 3. com. 158. p. 661.
Franciscus Pegna knew this Doctrine was pleasing to Rome, and agreeable to her
Laws; and so could find no better Patrons for it and himself, than Gregory the
Thirteenth, and the Cardinals who ruled the roast in the Inquisition
Purgatory-like Slaughterhouse. And let it displease who it will, so it be but
according to the Canon, it will be maintained, and held authentic, by the
observant Friar Minorite Rosella Casu^^n, vel summa Rosella, v. Haereticus,
Numb. 11.
Baptista Trovomala in his Rosella; the noted Lawyers, De Beneficio, part 4.
Quest. 8. Numb. 25.
Johannes de Selva, Council. 147. Numb. 22.
Augustinus Beroius; and the Learned Neopolitan, De jurisdictione, part. 1.
cap. 23. Numb. 1. Potentiam habet p^vandi Reges and Principes ex causa
Temporali, aliosque -- instituendi. Marta.
Jacobus Antonius Marta, though both by himself and others, vulgarly called
Doctor Marta, who in this place is somewhat large in proving it: yet probably
his reputation of the Pope was somewhat slackned before his death; if he and
the Novus Horno (sent to the Emperor, our King James, and some others, by way
of supplication against Paulus V.) were one and the same person, as has been
supposed.

^losculus de Clericorum excell^^^^^, Part. 2. Numb. 77.
Donysius Paulus Lopiz with the Canon Law affirms this power in the Pope; and
as if persuaded by the same authority and practice, La Politica, lib. 2. cap.
17. Numb. 5.

Abad y otros dizen, que en los graves y arduos negocios, y en las muy grandes
dificultades, que causan Ycandalo en la Christiandad, podra el Papa usar contra
legos de la potestad temporal, que tiene de Deos, y no de otra manera, y muder
el solo Imperio, y los Regnos con justa causa de Orient a Occidente, y de una
unotra Gente -- y el Papa Zacharias privo a Chulderino del Regno de Francia.


Castillo de Bovadillo steers the same course, though with as much truth and
right, as when at the same time he joins to our Queen Elizabeth the name of
Stuart. And to him we shall put a Catalonian Lawyer, Speculum Visitationis,
cap. 22. Numb. 46.
Gabriel Berart, one, I warrant you of no small esteem; Ludovicus de Cassanate,
looking upon him as the honor of his Country; Franciscus de los Herreros tells
us, that if we have a mind to know in a manner all things, we must get his
Books, in which he assures us, there is not one fault, though I cannot say so
of his Verse: Accipiat 'Speculum quod dat sine mendo Berardus. and to make up
the Distick, we will allow you the Pentameter of Antonius de loredo Coronos,
who thus rants it out in the Authors praise; Berart suus liber sapiens and leo
est. yet for all this, you may acknowledge the Authors Doctrine to be as false
as his friends Verses are.

Another Spanish Doctor, Johannes Blasius, at large assures us of the Popes
authority, not only in Reges ac temporalis Principes Regnis spoliate,
illorumque subditos a fidelitatis sacramento, quo suis Principibus erant
astricti absolvere. Jo. Blas. de sacro Eccles. Principatu, lib. 2. c. 12. fol.
63.
depriving Bishops, but also Kings, and absolving their Subjects from the
Obedience due to them. Another of the same Nation, but of greater repute than
the former, viz. Rodericus de Arriaga, a learned Jesuit, and no less man than
Chancellor of the University of Prague, exactly follows in this Unde necessum
fuit ut Ecclesia posset eos excessus fremare, si non posset rationibus and
monitionibus, saltem Censuris, si vero neque his, privando illos sua potestate,
dandoque aliis saecularibus licentiam, ut possint etiam vi eos privare
jurisdictione, Regno. Rod. de Arriag disput. Theolog. in 1. 2. S. Tho. Tom. 2.
disp. 18. Numb. 74.
case, those who went before him, teaching how Kings may be deposed, and their
Kingdoms given to others. And to these, I think, I may add another of their
Country, and of a greater sway than either of them, Index nover librorum
Probibit. 849.
Antonio Zapata, Cardinal, Protector, and Inquisitor-General of Spain: because
amongst other instances, in his late Index of prohibited Books, he is so
expressly earnest against that which supposes the Pope to have no such
Authority over Princes, witten by Roger Widrington, though his true name was
Preston, a Benedict an Monck.

And now that we have entered into Spain, before we leave it, let us consult a
noted Scholar of Toledo, Alphonsus Salmeron, the fifth Jesuit in the world; in
some places he tells us, That the -- Potest eos imperio and Regno privare, vel
eorum ditiones alteri Principi tradere. Alph. Salm. Tom. 4. Part. 3. Tract. 4.
Numb. Tertiam potestatem, P. 410. and Tom 13. in Epist. ad Romans lib. 4. disp.
4. Numb, ad objecta vero, P. 679. and in Epist. B. Pauli lib. 1. Part. 3. disp.
12. Numb. jam de postre mo, Page 251.
Pope has power to punish Kings by deposing them, and giving their Kingdoms to
others: and not only that this Authority lies in the Pope, but that other
Ergo per Episcoporum sententiam possunt deponi and debent, etiamsi Pauperes
Piscopi and inermes. Id. Tom. 13. Page 251.
Bishops, though never so poor and weak may throw down Kings. Though in some
places he is a good Expositor; yet here I fear he utters Doctrine that St.
Paul was never used to. And if at Ingolstad in his Sermons upon these Epistles,
he taught his Auditors these Principles; the Duke of Bavaria was too liberal of
his Reward, who instead of punishment, built a famous College for him and his
Brethren.

Johannes Paulus Windeck, though he speak nothing of our inferior Bishops, yet
he declares that he of Hinc firmiter deducimus Papam posse Principes deponere
and alios instituere. P. Wind. de Theolog. juresconsulto^um, Page 23.
Rome has power to kick down Kings, and put others in their Thrones. And of
the same Opinion is that voluminous Lawyer of Pavia, -- Jure potest summus
Pont. Regno privare non modo Regem ipsum haereticum, sed etiam ejus
discendentes. Menoch. Council. 808. Numb. 76.
Jacobus Menochius; and this, he says, can not only be done to the King, but
also to all of his Line or Race. And a Countryman of ours, a Doctor in
Divinity, but of what certain name I know not, lurking under the Visard of L.
C. in a Letter of his against the foresaid Roger Widdrington or Preston, is so
furious for this King-deposing Authority to rely in the Pope, that he says, to
think otherways, is not only Fidei Catholicae veritati aperte repugnare.
expressly against the Catholic Faith, but does also savor of Ethnicismum mihi
videntur, sapere, Numb. 4. See the letter it self, in Respons. Apologetica Rog.
Widdringtoni, Page 153.
Heathenism.

Though another of our Countrymen, viz. Cas. Conscient. lib. 5. cap. 10. Numb.
14. p. 442.
Gregorius Says, of the same Order with Preston, be not so furious as his
enemy L. C. yet he seems to comply with this Papal jurisdiction over Kings and
Kingdoms: And I believe, I shall not any way displease a learned Roman Doctor,
Comment. in D. Thom. in 2. 2. quaest. 10. art. 10 disp. 1. and quaest. 11. art.
4. disp. 1.
Alexander Pesantius, if I bring him in amongst the Champions against absolute
Monarchy; for besides that he makes it his business to prove that the Pope can
deprive Infidels of their Rule over Christians, and by the interpretation of
his Margin assures us, that Pope Zacharias turned out the King of France; in
the next Question he takes a step farther, and affirms, that for heresy, a man
does not only loose as a Father the Rule over his Children, as an Husband the
same over his Wife, and so she not obliged in any thing to be obedient to him,
and the same as a Master over his Servants; but also though a Prince and Ruler,
yet by this fault, he quite loses his Right and Authority over his Subjects.

Of the same humor is De Catholicis Institut. Tit. 46. Numb. 74, 75. and Tit.
23. Numb. 11.
Jacobus Simancas; and with this Doctrine, as the former clawed Paul the Fifth,
so does this Spaniard fob up Gregory the Thirteenth: Nor will he have the
Father only to loose his Kingdom, Propter Haeresim Regis non solum Rex Regno
privatur, sed and ejus filii a Regni successione pelluntur. Salman. Tit. 9.
Numb. 259.
but he also agrees with these, who throw out the Children too. Though this
Author would once dispute whether a Divine or Lawyer would make the best
Bishop; yet here we need make no Controversy, which of the Faculties amongst
them is the best assertor of this seditious Doctrine; since we see by
experience, that both Parties do their utmost to uphold it. It Is said, that the
fields adjoying to Badaioz, of which this Simancas was Prelate, are so pestered
with the multitude of Locusts, that the King is forced to provide many men for
the burning of them. And it would do well, if he and others by punishment would
restrain the publishing and maintaining of such mischievous Principles within
their Dominions.

Another Spaniard, and a famous Jesuit, De justitia, Tom. 1. Tract. 2. disp.
29. col. 213, 214.
Ludovicus Molina, though at first he seems a little modest in respect of the
Pope, but would have the Subjects take upon them to chastise their Kings; yet
that a little advice from his Holiness would do no harm: However, the farther
he goes, the more he imbraceth this jurisdiction of Rome; and then at last in
several places, boldly affirms the Potest summus Pontifex depone Reges, eosque
Regnis suis privare. Molin. de just. Tom. 1. col. 217.

Id. Col. 225. -- Imperatoris depositionem ex justa causa pertinere ad summum
Pontificem. Id. Col. 220. posse summum Pont. deponere Reges, eaque ratione
merito transtulisse Imperium a Graecis ad Germanos, deposuisseque Hildericum,
and privasse Regni administratione quendam Lusitanice Regem. Id. Col. 221. si
Princeps aliquis Haereticus aut Schismaticus fieret, posset summus Pont. uti
adversus eum gladio Temporali, procedereque usque ad depositionem and
expulsionem illius a Regno.


Popes power in deposing Kings: A Doctrine, which I dare say he never learned
from that pious Manuel, of his darling and daily companion, Thomas a Kempis;
and yet, this durst he offer to the King of Spain.

Another Spaniard, but a Dominican, Petrus de Ledesma, tells the people pretty
stories how to get rid of their Kings: for if the Prince, as he says, be an
Heretic, and that crime by his cunning, cannot be sufficiently proved against
him; then let him publicly be excommunicated, and all is as sure as a gun: for
Post sententiam declarativum de crimines haeresis aut Apostasiae Princeps
injuste possidet Principatum, and inique dominatur in Subditos, qui si viribus
polleant tenentur se eximere ab ejus obedientia, and bellum ipsi infer. Petr.
de Ledesm. Theologia Moralis, Tract. 1. cap. 7. conclus. 6, 7.

Id. Conclus. 5. Quam primum quis declaratur excommunicatus propter Apostasiam
a fide aut haeresim, privatur dominio and jurisdictione in subditos si quos
habet, and subditi absolvuntur a juramento fidelitatis quo antea tenebantur.


by this means he is absolutely deprived of all Rule whatever, and his Subjects
are obliged (if they be able) to raise war against him, and root him out; for
(as he says) by the aforesaid Excommunication, they are all absolved from
their Obedience and Oath of Allegiance, which they formerly owed to him. And
this he tells us, is the judgment of Thomas Aquinas and all his followers. And
I think in this, he does not at all wrong this famous School-man, who was so
great a Champion for the Romish See, that at last he was Canonized -- Quam cito
aliqui per sententiam denuntiatur excommunicatus propter Apostasiam a fide,
ipso facto, ejus subdito sunt absoluti a dominio ejus and juramento
fidelitatis, quo eitenebantur. Tho. Aquin. 2. 2. q. 12. art. 2.
by John XXII. yet for all his title of Angelical Doctor, he could maintain the
black position, that Subjects were not to obey nor acknowledge Excommunicated
Princes. And some of the Thomists to make the Authority of Temporal Monarchs
less valid, make use of his Book de Regimine Principis, but to what purpose, I
know not: However, Desceptat. Calvin. page 152.
Franciscus Panicarola, the preaching and worded Bishop of Asti is no enemy to
the Popes coercive Authority over Princes.

That the Italian Dominican, De literali ac Mystica Regularum juris Canon.
interpretat. Quest. 2. art. 4. punct. 2. Numb. 25, 26, 27. and Quest. 3. art.
9. Numb. 101. page 270.
Paulus Carraria is a great magnifier of the Popes power in Temporals, need not
be long in proving, if we do but consider, what Laws and Examples he makes use
of, to show that Kings may be deposed, and Kingdoms given away by him. And to
him we may join another of the same Order, Summa de Exemplis, lib. 8. cap. 60.
Johannes a S. Geminiano, since they both go the same way, and upon the same
errand.

Gregotius Nunnius Coronel, though but a Portugal Augustan Mendicant Friar, yet
is as furious and proud as the best of them against Temporal Government: and it
may be for this fault, Clement the Eighth, and Paul the Fifth, were so kind to
him, and got him to Rome to be near them. He declares that if they ^^^g. N^n.
Cor. d^ ve^a Christi Eccles. lib. 9. page ^45. T^^^ (...) quan* ^egi^ po^^ta^e
priva^^, (...) ^s sui vi and authoritate c^^litus sibi ^radit^, (...).
will not be obedient to his Church, then may the Pope by his great power from
Heaven, very justly turn them from all their Royalties and Government. Nay,
that sometimes, the Id. Page ^69. In illos a^ma capiant, and tanquam Regio
d^demate (...) a sede (...) agnosca^t.
Subjects themselves, if the Pope bid them, must take up arms against them, and
dethrone them. And in another of his Books, he says, that an De optimo Relpub.
(...) lib. 3. c. 13. page 508, ^^9 and p. 511. R^x ^^p^s ^ae^^icorum dogmaticus
^^^^mato animo (...) a Reg^^ (...) and a^ administratione Imper^^ quod in
Christianos habet amo(...)
Heretical King must not be permitted to rule, but turned from his Kingdom: an^
this not only for Heresy, but also, if Id. Cap. 14 page 521. Si Reges and
Principes gravissi^^, ^int dedi^ ^^ele^bus effic^tor proculdubio, u^ ^x his
d^abus ca^sis justissime Romans Pont. possit acri^er in Reges animad^ ertere, and
cos a Regal^ solio mune^is ^^ po^^sta^^ d^^rbare.
he be given to to any great sins: Nay, if by his weakness Cap. 16. page 545.
Non solum propter haeresim aut schisma, aut aliquod a^ud intole^abile scelus,
verum etiam propter insufficientiam.
he be not sit to Rule: Or, if by Id. Page 547. Posse sum. Pont^ex sui muneris
autho^i^ate Principes e solio de^^bare; si ob eorum negligentiam, and
inscitiam, aut malitiam, justitia conculcatur, and Status Re^p. p^^^^tatur.
his negligence, ignorance or wilfulness, justice be not done, and the
Commonwealth suffer. And that the Pope has this great Authority over Kings,
he says, is the Id. Page 557. Legantur tam veteres, quam recentiones Theologi
and uti iusque juris prudendes, certe omnes una mente una and voce hanc
sententiam amplectuntur.
Opinion of all their Divines and Lawyers: And he that denies this power, does
not only go Page 558. Non modo a veritate quam longissime aberrare, verum
etiam insanire mihi videantur.
against the truth, but seems to be mad: And thus he endeavors to prove this
power; which he says, unless Christ had left with his Vicars. Id. Cap. 14.
page 520.
he had not done wisely.

I need not trouble you at length, to tell you the humor and spirit of this
Portugal, when you do but know how heartily he desired the De vera Christi
Eccles. page 433, 434.
Murder of our Queen Elizabeth, affirming it to be but just, that her head
should be cut off, her body not to be honored with a burial, but by the
Hangman left, to be torn in pieces and devoured by Dogs. And yet was this
hot-spur, his Books and Doctrine in great favor and esteem at Rome: and
Gratianus, one of the chief of his Order, could thus sing in commendation of
him and his Writings:

Lumen es, and Columen fidei, rectique Magister. -- Responsaque sana ministras;
Nempe facis, per te, crescat ut Vrbis honos;
This Nunnius has Cardinal Ascanio di Colunna Patron to one of his Books; and
though I believe amongst their Eminencies he could not aim amiss, yet this it is
probable, he did by choice, as being well acquainted with his compliance with
this Doctrine, of which, at the desire of Paul the Fifth, he gave some hints to
the world, in his Sententia contra Reip. V^neta Episcopos, p. 2^.
Tra^^ against the Venetians.

Of this Nunnius, to show the Popes power over Emperors and Kings, Rationale
utriusque potestatis, page ^98, 1^^.
Thomas a Talamello, of the same Mendicant Order, makes some use, and give you
also St. Geminianus word for word. He tells you also in one place, that the
Pope has as Id. Cap. 3. p. 39.
much power in Temporals as in Spirituals: Nay, that Page 41.
in either of these, he can directly do more than any King; and that Kings
depend as much on the Pope, as effects on their Causes: and then makes use of
the Id. Cap. 11. p. 109.
Canon Law to prove his Authority in deposing of Emperors. And an Italian
Lawyer De verborum significatione, lib. 10. cap. 17. 24.
Camillus Gallinius, from the same puddle, draws out the same muddy Principle,
of the Popes right to dethrone Kings.

What was the Opinion of Cardinal Perron, and the chief of France in this case,
this following story will somewhat inform us. Lewis the Thirteenth being come
to his Majority, about fourteen years old, December. 1614. Jan. 1613/5.
summoned the three Estates to meet: two of them, viz. the Clergy and Lords [la
Noblesse] presently agreed for these two Propositions,

1. That the Council of Trent be published and received in France. 2. That the
selling of Offices be suppressed.
The third Estate, [whether to stop these two, some of them favoring the
Protestants, others of them having places, which they might sell, as well as
they bought; or out of mere loyalty (however they reasoned stiffly against the
Trent-Council) having had the two Kings before this murdered,] made a third
Proposition, much like our Oath of Allegiance; which being of public concern,
the cause of great disputes and animosities beyond Seas, and as I think, as yet
not known in English, take as follows with the Original.

Que pour arrester le Course de la pernicieuse doctrine qui s' introduit depuis
quelquees annees contre les Roys and puissances Souveraines establies de Dieu,
per Esprits Seditieux, qui ne tendent qu'a les troubler and subverter: Le Roy
sera supply de fair arrester en l'Assemblee des states, pour loy fondamentale
de Royaume, qui soit inviolable and notoire a tous; Que comme il est recognu
Souverain en son estat, ne tenant sa Couronne que de Dieu seul; il n'y a
puissance en Terre quelle qu'elle soit Spirituelle ou Temporelle, qui a^t aucun
droit sur son Royaume, pour en priver les persons sacrees de nos Rois, ny
dispenser ou absoudre leurs subjets de la Fidelite and obeissance qu'ils luy
doivent, pour quelque cause cu pretexte que ce soit.

Que tous ses subjets, de quelque qualite and condition qu'ils soient,
tiendront cete loy pour saint and veritable comme conform a la Parole de
Dieu, sans distinction, equivoque ou limitation quelcunque: Laquelle sera juree
and signee par tous les Deputes des Estats, and d'oresnavant par tous las
Beneficiers and Officiers du Royaume, avaunt que d'entrer en la possession de
leurs Benefices, and d'estre recens en leur Offices: Tous Precepteurs, Regens,
Docteurs and Predicateurs tenus de l'enseigner and publier, Que l'opinion
contraire, mesmes qu'il soit loisible de tuer and deposer nos Rois, s'elever
and Rebeller contr'eux secouer le joug de leur Obeyssance, pour quelque
Occasion que se soit, est impie, detestable, contre Verete and contre
l'Establissement de l'Estat de France, qui ne depend immediatement que de Dieu.

Que tous livres qui enseignent tell fausse and perverse Opinion, seront tenus
pour seditieux and damnables: tous Estrangers qui l'escriront and publieront,
pour Ennemis jurees de la Couronne: tous subjets de sa Majeste qui y adhereront
de quelque qualite and Condition qu'els soint pour Rebels, infracteurs des
loys fundamentales du Royaume, and Criminels de lose Majeste au primier Chef.

Et s'il se trouve aucun Livre ou discourse escrit par Estranger Ecclesiastique,
ou d'autre qualite, qui contienne Proposition contraire a la dite loy
directement ou indirectement, serontles Ecclesiastiques des mesmes Ordres
establis en France, obliges d'y respondre, les impugner and contredire
incessamment sans respect, ambiguite ny Equivocation, sur peine d'estre punis
de mesnie peine que dessus, comme fauteurs des enemis de cet Estat.

Et sera ce premier Article leu par chacun an, tant ^s Course Souveraines, qu'
es Bailliages and Seneschaucees du dit Royaume, a l'ouverture des audiences,
pour estre guard and observe avec toute severite and rigueur.

To hinder the spreading of the pernicious Doctrine lately taught and
maintained by some seditious spirits, enemies to good Government, against Kings
and Sovereign Powers: His Majesty shall be humbly desired, that there shall be
established by the three Estates, for a Fundamental Law of the Land, to be kept
and known by all men;

That the King being acknowledged head in his Dominions, holding his Crown and
Authority only from God, there is no power on Earth whatever, spiritual or
Temporal, that has any right over his Kingdom, either to depose our Kings, or
dispense with, or absolve their Subjects from the fidelity and obedience which
they owe to their Sovereign, for any cause or pretense whatever.

That all his Subjects, of what quality or Condition soever, shall keep this
Law as holy, true, and agreeable to Gods Word, without any distinction,
equivocation, or limitation whatsoever; which shall be sworn and signed by all
the Deputies of the Estates, and henceforward by all who have any Benefice or
Office in the Kingdom, before they enter upon such Benefice or Office; and that
all Tutors, Masters, Regents, Doctors, and Preachers shall teach and publish,
that the contrary Opinion, viz. that it is lawful to kill and depose our Kings,
to rebel and rise up against them, and shake off our Obedience to them, upon
any occasion whatever, is impious, detestable, quite contrary to Truth, and the
establishment of the State of France, which immediately depends upon God only.

That all Books teaching these false and wicked Opinions, shall be held as
seditious and damnable: All strangers who write and publish them, as sworn
Enemies to the Crown: and that all Subjects of his Majesty, of what Quality and
Condition whatever, who favor them, as Rebels, violators of the Fundamental
Laws of the Kingdom, and Traitors against the King.

And if there be a Book or discourse writ by any foreign Churchman, or any
other, that then the Clergy of the same Orders established in France, shall be
obliged continually to answer, oppose and confute them, without any respect,
ambiguity, or equivocation, upon pain to be punished, as abovesaid, as a
favourer of the Enemies of the State.

And this Article shall be read every year, in the Sovereign Courts, Bayliwicks
and Seneschalships of the said Kingdom, and at the opening of their Courts of
Audience, that they may be the better preserved and observed, with all rigor
and severity.

This startles the Clergy, who with the Noblesse, presently set themselves
against the third Estate (somewhat like our House of Commons) with a resolution
to expunge this honest and loyal Proposition; yet declared their continuable
obedience to their King: And as a main Engine to carry this their design about,
they desired Jaque Davie, the famous Cardinal of Perron, to endeavor to work
over to them the third Estate, knowing that his voluble Tongue, used to be
carried on with so much Learning, Judgment and Sweetness, that it seldom mist
of that it spoke for. Accordingly attended with some Lords and Bishops, (as
Representatives of their respective Estates; and so to show to the Commons,
that both the other did agree so in judgment in this case with the learned
Cardinal, that he spoke not only his own, but their Opinions too) He, though
at that time somewhat indisposed, went accordingly, where he made a very long
Speech to show the unreasonableness and absurdity of the foresaid proposition,
endeavoring to prove by Reason, that sometimes Kings should, and by Example
that they had been deposed, their Subjects being justly quit from their Oaths
of Allegiance, and so not bound to obey them. The Harangue it self being large,
I refer you to it in his Diverses Oeuvres.

Yet this Oration wrought little upon the third Estate, which hugely troubled
all their Cergy, and the Popes Nuntio then at Paris; and Hist. de Louis XIII.
page 49.
Scipion Dupleix, one of the Kings Historiographers can accuse the Article with
manifest absurdity, by which he shows his compliance with the rest in this
Doctrine. But the Pope Paul the Fifth showed himself most troubled, in his
Letter to Perron, dated from Rome, Febr. 1615. he called it a Detestable
Decree; and the voters of it, Enemies to the Common good and quietness, and
mortal adversaries to the Chair of Rome. But at the same time gives the
Cardinal all the commendations and thanks that can be. But our King James was
not so complemental, nor had he Reason: For the Cardinal in his Speech, having
several reflections against the Government of England, the cruelty of her Laws,
the persecution of the Roman Catholics, and showed himself mainly concerned
against our Oath of Allegiance, which did not a little reflect upon the King
himself: upon which his Majesty looking upon this Cardinal as somewhat too
busy in putting his Oar in another man's Boat, and so concerned to have
somewhat of justice done him, by his Ambassador publicly complained of this
affront to the young King, the Queen Mother and others, and himself publicly
answered the Speech. But this was no trouble to the Cardinal, who was hugely
complemented and magnified from several Bishops, and other great persons, for
this his Speech, and valiantly defending the right of the Church.

But how to end this grand Controversy amongst the Estates, was the cause of
some Consultations: at last the King was cunningly persuaded to take it to
himself; which he did, affirming he understood his own Right and Possession,
and so forbad them to determine any thing about it. However, the two Estates
were gallantly caressed by two Breves from the Pope, stufft with Commendations
and thanks for their Doctrine, and valor for the Church.

But enough of Perron and the French Estates (now in a manner neglected in that
Kingdom.) And should we look upon our own Oath of Allegiance, made only upon a
politic account, for the prevention of Treason, we might see it as strongly
opposed and girded at, as that of France: For no sooner was it made [that
horrid Gunpowder-plot being a main Motive] but Paul the Fifth absolutely forbad
it to be taken, by two Breves sent into England; and presently began a
Paper-scuffle on all sides, Bellarmine, Gretzer, Parsons, Coquaeus, Scioppius,
and many others by might and main opposing its taking; but they were instantly
answered, not only by King James himself, but several of his learned Subjects,
as Bishop Andrews, Dr. Abbot, Carleton, Done, Prideaux, Burbill, Widdrington
or Preston a Benedictan Monk (for which, there were Rods laid in piss for him
by the Romanists) and several others.

Amongst those who zealously opposed it, was one Adolphus Schulckenius; but
whether a true name or no, I know not: yet he is very furious in behalf of the
Popes deposing of Kings; and this he tells us the Pope may do, by the Apologia,
page 24.
Opinion of all Divines both Ancient and Modern, of all Catholic Lawyers, of
Ecumenical Councils and Popes: and that in this, there is no Id. P. 26.
disagreement amongst them, this power being Id. P. 59.
given to the Pope by God, and he cannot be held a Catholic that is against
it: For not one Id. P. 128.
Catholic Author can be brought out, who expressly denies it; nor can any Id.
P. 163.
Reason be brought against this Authority of the Pope: And that Zacharias did
not well, when he deposed honest Childerick King of France, cannot be said Id.
P. 596.
without great rashness and Blasphemy.

Another there is somewhat voluminous in this point, and of the more note,
because a Frenchman, and a great favorite, both there and in Italy; and this
is Leonardus Coquaeus, a Mendicant Augustine Friar, who in Opposition to King
James, says that the H^b^t authoritatem excommunicand^ and coercendi and
proscribendi Reges hae^e^^cos ovili Christi pernic^osos. L^m. Coq. Examen
praefat. Monit. page 103.
Pope cannot only Excommunicate, bridle or punish Kings, but also turn them
out of their Kingdoms. And to make this more convincing, in another place he
Id. Page 142, 143.
endeavors to prove by Example, that this has been done: Nor is this any Id.
P. 49.
usurped Authority of the Pope, but it is properly belonging to him; for as
Coquaeus says, Christ had not been careful enough of the Church, and salvation
of Souls, if he had not left the Pope a power over Kings. And in a larger
Ant^mernaeus, Tom. 1. page 380, 523. Tom. 2. p. 6, 17, 21, 105, 128.
Book, he harps very often in behalf of King-deposing.

Gregorio Servantio a Dominican and Bishop of Trevico, being angry with the
Venetians, gives the Pope power over them and other Temporal Princes: and to Se
un^ di pecorel'a divien Lupo, che si mangia iniquamente con tirannide le
pecorello de' suoi sudditi o la scia entrer la peste dell'Heresia, o diventa un
cane tanto timido come quel Childerico detto, che non val nie^e potra il Papa,
come vicario di Christo discacciate il L^po overo sost^uire un altro Cane
valente, che custodesca la gregg^a. Esc^l su^ prec^tto qualche volta non fera
esseguito, questo sara ce facto non de jure, secondo il quale, noi ragioniamo.
Defesa della potesta and Immunita E^^^^s. p. 68.
carry on his design the more cleverly, he makes a great deal of do with the
common allusion, that if the King, from a Sheep turn Wolf, and tyrannize over
bis Subjects, or let Heresy enter amongst them, or become a timorous Dog, that
then the Pope may turn out the Wolf, or put in a more valiant Dog. And for more
confirmation of this, he makes use of the Canon Law. And much to the same
Authority is hinted at, and implied by Nuova Risposta sopra le Censure di Paolo
V. contra la Signoria di Venetia, page 16. and page 59.
Giovanni Filoteo di Asti, to make good the Popes power in the disposing of
Kingdoms and Kings.

Of this humor of King-deposing, is the famous Spaniard Potest and talem
Principem dominio suo privare. Suar. Defensio fid. Cathol. l. 3. c. 23. Numb.
21.
Franciscus Suarez: And if the Pope do deprive him, and give his Kingdom to
another, the other may Id. Lib. 6. cap. 4. Numb. 19. Si Pontifex -- aliis
Regibus potestatem tribuat invadendi tale Regnum, tunc just fieri potest.
justly invade and take it. And this power of the Pope over Kings, he affirms
to be as Id. Lib. 3. c. 23. Numb. 16.
true and as certain, as that the Church is infallible in Faith. And to prove
this, I suppose was one of the main Reasons, if not the chief of his Hic est ut
dixi cardo and praecipuus scopus praesentis Controversia. Id. L. 3. c. 23.
Numb. 1.
writing that Folio, wherein he would gladly persuade King James, that he was
in an Id. Lib. 6. c. 4. Numb. 22.
error in denying the Popes power in deposing Kings.

And what was the sentiment of some of our English Priests in this case, you
may perceive by these following Remarks.

August 1. 1581.
EDmond Campion being demanded -- whether he does at this present acknowledge
her Majesty [Queen Elizabeth] to be a true and lawful Queen, or a pretended
Queen, and deprived, and in possession of her Crown only De facto; He
answers, -- That this Question depends upon the fact of Pius the Fifth,
whereof he is not judge, and therefore refuses further to answer.

Edmond Campion.
This was thus answered and subscribed by Edmond Campion, the day and year
above written, in the presence of us, Owyn Hopton, Jo. Hammond, Robert Beal,
Thomas Norton.


ALexander Briant, He is content to affirm that the Queen is his Sovereign
Lady: But he will not affirm, that she so is lawfully, and ought so to be, and
to be obeyed by him as her Subject, if the Pope declare or command the
contrary. And he says, That that Question is too high and dangerous for him to
answer.

May 6. 1581. Before Owen Hopton Knight, John Hammond, and Thomas Norton.


The Examination of Ralphe Sherwin, November 1580.
Being asked whether the Popes Bull of deprivation of the Queen, were a law
sentence or no, he refuses to answer.

Being asked whether the Queen be his lawful Sovereign, and so ought to
continue, notwithstanding any sentence that the Pope can give: He does not
Answer.

Being again asked whether the Queen be his Sovereign, notwithstanding any
sentence that the Pope can give, He prays to be asked no such Question as may
touch his life.

Ralph Sherwin.
November. 12. 1580.
Articles ministered to the Seminary Priests, who were in the Tower, and were
condemned; with their Answers to the same. May 13. M. D. LXXXII.
I. WHether the It deposed the Queen by Declaration, and absolved her subjects
from their obedience due to her.
Bull of Pius the Fifth against the Queens Majesty, be a lawful sentence, and
ought to be obeyed by the Subjects of England?

II. Whether the Queens Majesty be a lawful Queen, and ought to be obeyed by
the Subjects of England; notwithstanding the Bull of Pius the Fifth, or any
other Bull or sentence that the Pope has pronounced, or may pronounce against
her Majesty?

III. Whether the Pope have or had power to authorize the Earls of Who upon the
score of Religion, Rebelled against her, anno 1569.
Northumberland and Westmerland, and other her Majesty's Subjects, to rebel or
take Arms against her Majesty, or to authorize Sent into Ireland by Gregory
XIII to foment the Rebellion.
Dr. Saunders, or others, to invade Ireland, or any other Dominions, and to
bear Arms against her; and whether they did therein lawfully or no?

IV. Whether the Pope have power to discharge any of her Highness Subjects, or
the Subjects of any Christian Prince from the Allegiance, or Oath of Obedience
to her Majesty, or to their Prince, for any cause?

V. Whether the said Dr. Saunders in his Book of his visible Monarchy of the
Church; and Dr. Bristow in his Book of Motives [ writing in Both of them
affirming that Kings may be deposed by the Pope.
allowance, commendation and confirmation of the said Bull of Pius the Fifth]
have therein taught, testified, or maintained a truth or a to falsehood?

VI. If the Pope do by his Bull or sentence pronounce her Majesty to be
deprived, and no lawful Queen, and her Subjects to be discharged of their
Allegiance and obedience unto her; and after, the Pope or any other by his
appointment and authority, do invade this Realm; which part would you take? or
what part ought a good Subject of England take?

The Answer of Mr. Luke Kirby.
LUke Kirby. To the First he says that the Resolution of this Article
depends upon the general Question, whether the Pope may for any cause depose
a Prince? Wherein his Opinion is, that for some causes he may lawfully depose a
Prince, and that such a sentence ought to be ^beyed.

II. To the second, he thinks that in some cases, (as infidelity or suchlike)
her Majesty is not to be obeyed against the Popes Bull and sentence; for so he
says he has read, that the Pope has so done, de facto, against other Princes.

III. To the third, he says, he cannot answer.

IV. To the fourth, that the Pope (for Infidelity) has such power, as is
mentioned in this Article.

V. To the fifth, he thinks, that both Dr. Saunders and Dr. Bristow might be
deceived in these points in their Books: but whether they were deceived or not,
he refers to God.

VI. To the last he says, that when the case shall happen, he must then take
counsel what what were best for him to do.

Luke Kirby.
John Popham, Da. Jews, Thomas Egerton, John Hammond.


Mr. Thomas Cottoms Answer.
THomas Cottom. To the first, in this and in all other Questions he believes
as the Catholic Church (which he takes to be the Church of Rome) teaches
him. And other answer he makes not, to any of the rest of these Articles.

By me Thomas Cottom Priest.
John Popham, Da. Jews, Thomas Egerton, John Hammond.


Mr. Lawrence Richardsons Answer.
LAwrence Richardson. To the fifth he answers, that so far as Dr. Saunders
and Dr. Bristow agree with the Catholic Doctrine of the Church of Rome, he
allows that Doctrine to be true. And touching the first and all the rest of
the Articles, he says, that in all matters not repugnant to the Catholic
Religion, he professes obedience to her Majesty, and otherwise makes no
answer to any of them; But believes therein, as he is taught by the Catholic
Church of Rome.

Lawrence Richardson.
John Popham, Da. Jews, Thomas Egerton, John Hammond.


Mr. Thomas Ford's Answer.
I. THomas Ford. To first he says, that he cannot answer, because he is not
privy to the circumstances of that Bull; but if he did see a Bull published by
Gregory the Thirteenth, he would then deliver his Opinion thereof.

II. To the second he says, that the Pope has Authority to depose a Prince
upon certain occasions: and when such a Bull shall be pronounced against her
Majesty, he shall then answer what the duty of her Subjects, and what her right
is.

III. To the third he says, he is a private Subject, and will not answer to
any of these Questions.

IV. To the fourth he says, that the Pope has Authority upon certain
occasions (which he will not name) to discharge Subjects of their Obedience to
their Prince.

V. To the fifth he says, that Dr. Saunders and Dr. Bristow be learned men,
and whether they have taught truly in their Books mentioned in this Article,
he refers to answer to themselves, for himself will not answer.

VI. To the last he says, that when that case shall happen, he will make
answer, and not before.

Thomas Forde.
John Popham, Da. Jews, Thomas Egerton, John Hammond.


Mr. John Sherts Answer.
JOhn Shert. To all the Articles he says, that he is a Catholic, and swerveth
in no point from the Catholic Faith: and in other sort to any of these
Articles he refuses to answer.

John Shert.
John Popham, Da. Jews, Thomas Egerton, John Hammond.


Mr. Robert Johnsons Answer.
I. RObert Johnson. To the first, he says, he cannot answer.

II. To the second, he cannot tell what power or authority the Pope has in the
points named in this Article.

III. To the third, he thinks that the Pope has authority in some cases to
authorize Subjects to take arms against their Princes.

IV. To the fourth, he thinks that the Pope for some causes may discharge
Subjects of their Allegiance and Obedience to their natural Prince.

V. To the fifth, he says, the Answer to this Article depends upon the
lawfulness of the cause, for which the Pope has given sentence against her:
But if the cause was just, then he thinks the Doctrine of Dr. Saunders and
Dr. Bristow to be true. Whether the cause were just or not, he takes not upon
him to judge.

VI. To the last, he says, that if such deprivation and invasion should be
made for temporal matters, he would take part with her Majesty: but if it were
for any matter of his Faith, he thinks he were then bound to take part with
the Pope.

Robert Johnson.
John Popham, Da. Jews, Thomas Egerton, John Hammond.


Mr. John Hearts Answer.
I. JOhn Heart. To the first he says, that it is a difficult Question, and that
he cannot make answer thereunto.

II. To the second he says, that her Majesty is lawful Queen, and ought to be
obeyed, notwithstanding the Bull, supposed to be published by Pius the Fifth.
But whether she ought to be obeyed and taken for a lawful Queen,
notwithstanding any Bull or sentence that the Pope can give, he says he cannot
answer.

III. To the third he cannot answer; and further says, that he will not meddle
with any such Questions.

IV. To the fourth, he says, he is not resolved, and therefore he cannot
answer.

V. To the fifth he says, he will not deal with any such Questions, and
knows not whether Saunders and Bristow have taught well herein or not.

VI. To the last he says, that when such a case shall happen, he will then
advise what becomes him to do, for presently he is not resolved.

This he did acknowledge to us, after he had fully perused the same, but
refused to subscribe to it.

John Popham, Da. Jews, Thomas Egerton, John Hammond.


Mr. William Filbee's Answer.
I. WIlliam Filbee. To the first he says, the Pope has authority to depose
any Prince: and such sentences when they be promulgated, ought to be obeyed by
the subjects of any Prince: But touching the Bull of Pius the Fifth, he can say
nothing; but if it was such as it is affirmed to be, he does allow it, and
says that it ought to be obeyed.

II. To the second he says, it is a hard Question, and therefore he cannot
answer it; but upon further advisement, he answers as to the first.

III. To the third, he knows not what to say thereunto.

IV. To the fourth, he says, that so long as her Majesty remains Queen, the
Pope has no authority to warrant her Subjects to take Arms against her, or to
disobey her; but if he should depose her, then he might discharge them of their
Allegiance and Obedience to her Majesty.

V. To the fifth, he says, he will not meddle with the Doctrine of Dr.
Saunders and Dr. Bristow.

VI. To the last, when this case happens, then, he says, he will answer: and
if he had been in Ireland, when Dr. Saunders was there, he would have done as a
Priest should have done, that is, to pray, that the right may have place.

William Filbee.
John Popham, Da. Jews, Thomas Egerton, John Hammond.


And because some of these Answers depend upon the writings of Bristow and
Saunders, we must understand, that a little before this, one Richard Bristow
[or Bristolus] born in Worcestershire, and bred up a Priest in Flanders, had
made a little Book, which he called his Motives [which was after, either by
himself or others hugely enlarged.] In this writing, he did not only twit
Queen Elizabeth for not obeying the Motive 6.
Excommunication-Bull of Pius the Fifth against her; but also that Motive 40.
Subjects may sometimes be discharged from their subjection, and Princes
deposed: and then publicly declares that the foresaid Earl of Northumberland,
the Nortons, Plumtree and others, to be Motive 15.
most glorious Martyrs of the Catholics, though they were deservedly executed
as Traitors, for their notorious and actual Rebellion in the North against the
Queen. Yet Compend. vitae R^c. Brist. 6.
Dr. Thomas Worthington of Lancashire [who translated the larger Motives into
Latine] does give great Commendations to Dr. Bristow, for his learning and
valor in thus defending the Popes Authority; whereby he may justly go with
those who favor the Opinion of King-deposing.

As for Nicholas Sanders, he was born in Surrey, and at Rome got his Orders and
Degree of Doctor: Pius the Fifth had him in great esteem, knowing him to be a
man of mettle, and a great Zealot for the Authority of that Chair, as he shows
at large in his great De visibili Monarch. Ecclesiae, Vid. lib. 2. cap. 4.
Book dedicated to Pius the Fifth; in which he is so far from acknowledging
Queen Elizabeth to be a true Queen, that he calls her several times by no other
title than the Id. P. 734, 736, 737.
Pretended Queen, and other times only plain Page 275, 355.
Calvinistical woman: He says that the Popes power reaches to the Page 430.
altering of Kingdoms; that the Emperor Henry the Fourth was most Page 458.
justly deprived of his Empire by Gregory the Seventh; greatly Page 730, 731,
732, 733, 734, 735, etc.
commends those, who impiously rebelled against the Queen in the North, and
calls them Noble Martyrs: and this he aims at again in another of his De
schismate Angl. p. 363.
Tracts.

From this Sanders, we may collect what was the judgment in this case of John
Story an Oxford Doctor of Law; he in Queen Mary's time ruled the roast in our
English Inquisition, and in Queen Elizabeth's Id. Page 736, 737.
Reign being accused in Parliament of a great deal of cruelty in the
administration of his foresaid Office, replied like himself to this purpose,
That he had offended in nothing, but that whilst he cut off some Branches, he
neglected to pull up the Root; which if he had done, Heresy had not got up
again. And this he meant of the Queen, to whom he denied himself to be a
Subject, looking upon the King of Spain as his Sovereign, and the Queen
Elizabeth by the Popes Bull of Excommunication utterly deprived of all Rule and
Government: upon which cause he scorned to plead for himself, taking the Judges
under such a Princess to have no power or judgment over him.

And if any doubt of the Popes Authority in deposing Kings, Aelius Antonius
Nebrissensis will tell them that they need not, since both Civil and Canon Law
does allow it, and the learned Doctors of them; Per leges quoque Pontificias
and Civiles, Johan. Navar. Rex vere potuit Regno spolian, ex eo quod
schismaticus and schismaticorum fautor, atque proinde Haereticus laesaeque
Majestatis reus, atque eodem jure intestabilis ipse, and omni ejus Posteritas
Gentilico Regno mulctanda, quod utriusque juris Consultissimi Doctores multis
argumentis, and rationibus, exemplisque probant. Ant. Nebress. de bello Navar.
lib. 1. c. 1.
and all his Posterity may be deprived too, for which he produces the Example
of John Albret, King of Narvarre, whom he does not only call Schismatic and
Heretic, but, which is the prettiest of all, a Traitor, though he does not
tell us to whom: But the King of Spains Historian must write any thing to
vindicate his Masters Rapine: And yet they will think it hard that the Portugals
should redeem their own, or that Gaspar Sala and others should vindicate the
late revolt of Catalonia.

Antonius de Sousa de Macedo in all his writings hugely zealous for the honor
of his Country, Portugal, is as fierce against any pretense of the Castilians
as any; yet when he is the most endeavoring to fasten the Crown on the head of
Braganza, he makes his Master so open and weak on one side, that not only that
Family, nay, Nation may loose the sway; but they may once more fall a prey to
their politic Neighbor: For he acknowledges that the Pope may Lusitan.
liberata, proem. 2. 2. 25. page 117, 118.
depose his Master, by the same power he has over other Kings; and that they
may sometimes be thrust from their Thrones, upon their evil Id. Lib. 2. cap. 4.
page 510, 511.
administration of Government. And another dangerous Principle he maintains, of
a Kings not Ruling unless he has been Id. L. 2. c. 1. 7.
sworn and Crowned: And somewhat to this purpose he speaks in another place
concerning the ancient way of Proem. 2. p. 116.
Anointing. To these Opinions I perceive him not a little persuaded, by
Example, and the sentiments of others: Arguments of so great force to the
Divine Dr. Opus de dignitatibus, lib. 1. c. 2. page 9.
Nicolaus Rebbe, and the Lawyer De haereticus, lib. 4. cap. 14.
Conradus Brunus, that they also upon the same account embrace this
King-deposing Opinion: And of the same judgment is the Learned Hierarch.
Eccles. lib. 5. cap. 14, 15. fol. 260, 266.
Albertus Pighius; and as for a good proof to it, he several times remembers
you with the action of Pope Zachary.

Giulio Cerrio having been somewhat large (in respect of the bulk of his Tract)
in examples of the Popes power in deposing Kings, fairly concludes, that Hora
in simili casi and altri appertenenti alla Feed, niuno puo dubitare, che
l'autorita de i sommi Pontesici non se stenda assolutamente sopra qual si
voglia dignita Temporale. Certio Risposta per la verita.
no man must doubt of the Popes absolute jurisdiction over Kings, in some
causes; and this may be interpreted to the worst sense well enough, since the
whole drift of that Letter page 111.
is in opposition to those who deny this deposing power to be in the Pope.

To tell any man what Cardinal Bellarmine was, would be impertinent, since his
name is come into a Proverb. They say that many were formerly much beholden to
Lyranus for his Writings:

Nisi Lyra lyrasset,
Nemo nostrum saltasset.
Some think Cambden as much beholden to Leland, Pitseus to Bale: however, we
know that several have walked in English habit for Authors, which in truth have
scarce been so good as Translations; and so Samuel Clark, the poor botching
Presbyterian-story-teller, is a voluminous partial Plagiary beyond all mercy,
one as fit to write the Churchhistory, as Alexander Rosse to continue Sir
Walter Raleigh. As for Bellarmine, you may look through him like a
Multiplying-glass, and perceive multitudes of people toyling themselves out of
his Bowels to get themselves published in the world, that if he had never writ,
the Romish Church had wanted at least an hundred Authors to augment their
Catalogue; and in this sort our Countrymen make as bold with him as any, to
thrust their little English Pieces, both for gain and honor, amongst their
party in these Nations.

This learned Cardinal was a true son of his Church, as he shows through all
his writings, especially when he is concerned for her greatness and authority:
in one place he says, that the Pope can sometimes -- Potest mutare Regna, and
uni auferre atque alteri confer -- Bellarm, de Roman. Pont. lib. 5. c. 6.
change Kingdoms, take away from one and give to another, he being the judge
Ib. c. 7.
to determine whether a King be fit to be deposed or no; and if it be thought
fit that he should be deposed, then Nec ulla eis injuria fiet, si deponantur.
Ib.
there is no wrong done to him, if he be turned from his Throne: And this
jurisdiction he defends in another of his -- Possit eos Regnis atque Imperiis
exuere, eaque Regna and Imperia ab aliis ad alios transfer. Id. De Translat.
Imper. Romans lib. 1. c. 12.
Books; and in another Si quidem inter omnes convenit, posse Pontificem maximum
Haereticos Principes jure deponere, and subditos eorum ab obedientia liberare.
Mat. Tort. Respons. page 9.
Book he declares that this Opinion is agreed upon by all; and this power he
affirms in another of his Contra Barchaium, cap. 27.
Books.

Though it is Jac. Fuligatto, vita Card. Bellarm. l. 1. c. 2.
said of him, that he would never remember, that he either ever told lie in his
life, or beguiled the truth by excuse or jeasts; yet I shall scarce believe
that he speaks altogether truth, in his thus attributing so great authority in
temporal things over Monarchs to the Pope: yet for all that he was the Chief
Champion of that See, and allowed to its Bishops all the aforesaid power and
jurisdiction; yet we are assured by the Testimony of a learned Romanist, De
potestate Papae, cap. 13. page 101. and cap. 40. page 329.
Guilielmus Barclaius, that Pope Sixtus the Fifth was sometimes thinking to
Censure and extinguish all Bellarmines works, because, as he thought, he
allowed him too small authority in Temporals.

There were two of different Orders, viz. Johannes Epitome Controvers. ex
Bellarm. part. 2. quest. 21. p. 180.
Andraeas Coppenstein a Dominican, and Solida Christianor. fidei demonstratio,
lib. 3. cap. 10.
Baldwinus Junius a Franciscan, who have severally Epitomized this Cardinals
Controversies; and with him, they embrace this King-deposing Maxim: They were
after translated into French, by the appointment of Cardinal Perron.

Jacobus Gretserus, as an industrious a Jesuit as ever Germany brought forth,
whose resolution, zeal and speedy pen, made his Books almost innumerable; and
as in all other things, so in this of the Popes authority, he endeavors to
vindicate Gretser. defensio Controversiarum Card. Bellarm. Tom. 2. col. 1153,
1154. etc.
Bellarmine, and seems to wonder at King Commentar. Exegit. in Reg. Britan. c.
6, 7.
James for denying such power to be in the Pope: nay, when he seems to make it
his business to vindicate his Society from the suspicion of Rebellion, and to
tell to all the world what brave Subjects to temporal Kings they are and will
be; even then does he ruin all their loyalty by one exception: At si Pontifex
aliquem ab haeresin a regno arceat, ne subditos in haeresin inducat: tum libere
fateor, nos nostrum judicium ad Pontificis judicium aggregare, satiusque
reputare. Defens. Apol. Gal. page 591.
But yet, says he, if the Pope should deprive any King for heresy, marry then
I do freely confess, that we shall submit our selves to the Popes judgment. A
very good Item, for which they deserved the teeth as well as the heart of Henry
the Great.

Another of the same Order, Juris Canon. Compend. 984.
Petrus Alagonia, and Juris Canon. Compend. lib. 5. Tit. de Haeret. 13.
Johannes Honorius van Axel, with the Canon Law write down the same Principles
in their Compendiaries: and the Carmelite Friar, Giovanni Antonio Bovio, finds
fault with Father Paul the Venetian (famed for his learning, judgment,
moderation and integrity) that amongst the Offices belonging to the Pope, he
does not set down, Doveva anco, se volea numerare tutte le Opere del Carico
Pastorale, fac mentioner dello trasferire de gli Imperii d'Oriente in
Occidente, habilitare and inhabilitare alli Regni, instituere and destituere i
Re, che anco questo possono fare i supremi vicarii di Christo in Terra, quando
cio besogni per conservatione della feed and Religione Christiana, and l'hanno
fatto, quando e venuto l'occasione, and ha hanuto effe^to, e stato cio riceunto
and appovato da tutta la Christianica. Anton. Bovio, Risposta all
consideratione del M. Paolo, page 69.
his translating of Empires, setting up and pulling down of Kings, since he
has such authority. An Article, that I dare say Bovio never learned from the
Virgin Mary, whom they brag to be the Patroness and Foundress of their Order.

William Allen, or Allain, born in Lancashire, a great darling with the secular
Priests, for whom he was the first that made Seminaries at Doway; a severe
enemy to the Protestants, and as fierce a maintainer of the power of Rome, and
the King of Spain; of both which this one Example may satisfy. Queen Elizabeth
having sent some aid into the Netherlands against the Spaniard, Sir William
Stanley was made Governor of Deventer in Over-Issel, which he presently
(betraying his trust) delivered with himself and Garrison to the Spaniard; by
which he lost, by common consent, the reputation of Subject, Gentleman and
Soldier; but Dr. Allain thinking to quell these rumors, and to encourage the
new Renegado's, by a Letter from Rome, sends Stanley and his Regiment not only
thanks and Commendations for this their action, but as he thought, a sufficient
vindication too, part of which take in his own words. --

Yea, I say no more unto you Gentlemen, seeing you desire to know Dr. Allain's
Letter touching the render of Deventer, page 27, 28.
my meaning fully in this point: That as all acts of Justice within the Realm
done by the Queens authority, ever since she was by public sentence of the
Church, and see Apostolic declared an Heretic, and an enemy of Gods Church,
and for the same by name excommunicated, and deposed from all Regal Dignity;
as, I say, ever sithence the publication thereof, all is void by the Law of God
and Man; so likewise no war can be lawfully denounced or waged by her, though
otherwise in it self it were most just: because that is the first Condition
required in a just War, that it be by one denounced, that has lawful and
Supreme power to do the same, as no Excommunicate person has; especially, if
he be withal deposed from his Royal Dignity by Christ his Vicar, which is the
Supreme power in Earth, and his Subjects not only absolved and discharged of
their Service, Oath, Homage and Obedience, but especially forbidden to serve or
obey any such Canonically condemned person.

And in another place of the same Pamphlet, he thus tells them their doom, if
they had been faithful to their trust and the Queen; -- Id. page 30.
Any Excommunicate or Canonically condemned Prince, -- whom no man by law can
serve, nor give aid unto, but he falls into Excommunication.

Thus we see what small esteem he had of his Sovereign, and how easy it is for
these men to ease themselves of loyalty and Obedience. And that the Pope may
thus trample upon Kings, observe his Doctrine in another of his Writings, --
Defense of English Catholics, against the book called The execution of
justice, page 143.
The Pope may in some cases excommunicate, for some causes deprive, and in many
respects fight and wage War for Religion. -- And gain, -- Id. p. 207.
Plain it is, that Kings that have professed the Faith of Christ, and the
defense of his Church and Gospel, may be, and have been justly both
excommunicated and deposed, for injuries done to Gods Church, and revolt from
the same, as sometimes also for other great crimes tending to the Pernition of
the whole subject unto him. -- And gain, -- Id. P. 114.
By the fall of the King from the Faith, the danger is so evident and
inevitable, that GOD HAD NOT SUFFICIENTLY PROVIDED FOR OUR SALVATION, and the
preservation of his Church and holy Laws, IF THERE WERE NO WAY TO DEPRIVE or
restrain Apostata Kings. -- And then plainly declares to the world thus: -- Id.
P. 115.
Therefore let no man marvel, that in case of heresy the Sovereign loses his
superiority and right over his people and Kingdom. And in these Id. P. 72, 73.
Opinions he endeavors to prove that there is no harm: And gives the Earl of
(a) Westmerland Id. 48.
for his Rebellion great commendations, and of his fellow-Traytor gives you
this Character, The renowned Count of Northumberland dyed a Saint and holy
Martyr.

When the Spanish Armado invaded England, he printed a pernicious Admonition to
the Catholics of these Kingdoms, stuffed with horrid Rebellion and Treason,
persuading them by all means to take part with the King of Spain, and to Root
out their own Queen. What effect his Doctrine took, I know not, but it is well
known that the Fleet came to nothing: and enough of this Allen, who for his
zeal to the Spanish Faction, and the authority of Rome, was made Cardinal de S.
Martino by Pope Sixtus the Fifth, at the desire of Philip the Second.

And now let us see what a man with a long name will tell us in this cause;
Andraeas Eudaemon-joannes, a man suspected at first to sculk under a wrong
denomination; but when we know his Country and temper, we shall not think him
ashamed to own any thing, though never so bad or false: he was born in the
Island Crete (now better known by the name of Candia) at Canea (by the ancients
called Cydon or Cydonia) but bred up from his youth at Rome, and a Jesuit. If
that be true, that in the Island of his birth no venomous or harmful Creature
can live, 'twas well that he was forthwith transplanted to Italy; for his
native soil, and his malicious humor could never agree: His writings are only
stuffed with railing and vain repetitions; has impudence to deny any thing, and
affirm what he pleases: his whole books are composed of contradictions, all
along affirming that Kings may be deposed, nay, and sometimes cut off; and yet
at the same time vindicating himself and his Order from disloyalty; and yet so
shie in his affirmations, though bald in his hints, that his books may be read
over to as much purpose and satisfaction, as one of the Brethrens preachments,
or Olivers Speeches: so that I should wonder that such a generous Pope as Urban
the Eighth, and such a learned Cardinal as Bellarmine should have him in such
esteem and favor, if interest had no sway in this world. And though all along
one may know his meaning by his Moping; yet sometimes he speaks plain enough,
and declares that the Potuit enim non ut dominus, sed ut Minister Christi
deponere Principes. Andr. Eudaem-joan. Respons. ad Epist. Is. Casauboni, page
12.
Pope can depose Kings, and that this Id. Parallelus Torti and Tortoris, cap.
4. page 197. -- ultro concedamus, and facta a Pontificibus and jure atque
ordine fieri potuisse, ut contumaciam ac Tyrannidem Principum excommunicatione
ac depositione ulcisceretur.
has been done, and may be done sometimes lawfully.

In the year 1594, one Jehan Chastel intending to stab King Henry the Fourth of
France with his Kinfe, struck him into his Mouth, and though he mist of his
aim, yet he struck out two of his teeth, and wounded him sore: For this Treason
the Villain is excuted, but presently one Franzois de Verone writes an Apology
for Chastel, affirming that he had done nothing but what became a true
Christian and Catholic; his reasons being, because the King, as he said, was
an Heretic, and so might lawfully be killed or deposed.

That he was absolutely persuaded so in the latter [the first we shall treat of
in its proper place] you may judge by his declaring these following
Propositions to be Heretical.

I Qu'un Heretic relaps, and nommement Fran. de Verone Apology pour J^han
Chastel, Part 2. cap. 15. page 95.
excommunie du S. Siege, ne perd le droit de la Couronne.

II. Que tell est Roy legitime, done and Ordonne de Dieu.

III. Que l'eglise ne le peut priver de ce droit, ny les Estats, ny
generallement les Princes, de leurs dignitez, ou Royaumes, pour crime ou
Heresy quelcunque.

IV. Ny absoudre les subjects de l'Obeissance and fidelite a eux deue.

V. Qu'il fault resister a tells jugemens, and qu'ils n'obligent en conscience.

VI. Qu'il ne se fault enquirer des actions, ny de la Conscience de son Prince.

VII. Qu'il n'est loysible de resister a un Prince Heretic.

VIII. Qu'un Roy Catholic peut permittre deux Religions en son Royaume.

I. That a relapsed Heretic, and by name excommunicated by the Pope, does not
loose the right of his Crown.

II. That such an one is a lawful King, given and ordained of God.

III. That neither Church nor Parliament [ Estates] can deprive them of that
right; nor that Princes for any Crime or Heresy whatever, can be deprived of
their dignities.

IV. Nor that subjects can be absolved from their obedience and fidelity they
owe to their Kings.

V. That such sentences as these are not to be obeyed, being not obligatory in
Conscience.

VI. That the Actions and Consciences of Kings are not to be pried into.

VII. That it is not lawful to resist an Heretical Prince.

VIII. That a Catholic King may permit two Religions in his Kingdom.

What this Verone was I know not, only we may observe, that about Id. Apol.
page 29.
the same time there was a French Jesuit of the same name, who afterward writ
some Books: And that the same year, viz. 1595. that this Book was Printed, one
Le Bell was punished for endeavoring to convey one Franzois Veron, a Student
at Poictiers, out of France. This same Verone also in the same Book vindicates
Jacques Clement for murdering Henry the Third.

The which horrid murder was also publicly maintained as an act most lawful
and glorious, by another Frenchman, called Bouchier; and he that will thus
boldly affirm the greater, you may justly suppose he will not deny the less,
viz. the deposing of them. And this he tells us, the Pope can do if there be
need of it, and the Prince Cum ille Christi vicarius sit, ut videat ne quid
Christo, ne quid ejus Ecclesiae ac Religioni injuria fiet, ne quid vel populi
vel Regni, vel Regum ipsorum salutem impediat (cujusmodi sunt Haeresis,
schisma, perjurium, apostasia, and similia, quae sine gravi Ecclesiae
detrimento in Regibus esse nequeunt) id ei lic^re, ut cum nihil leniter admo
nuisse profuerit, cum censuras contemni audierit, cum periculum grave Ecclesiae
e tali regimine imminere, deponi denique and utile and commodum esse agnoverit,
tum populos Obedientiae vinculo eximat, decque operam, ut alteri commodiori
grex a Christo redemptus commi^tatur. De justa Henric* III. abdicatione, lib.
1. cap. 5. page 13.
contemn his inferior censures.

Nay, probable that a greater Authority than this Boucher, can more than
Countenance the deposing of Kings: For anno 1589, a little before the said King
Henry the Third was murdered, the College of Sorbone in Paris, being then
present about seventy Doctors, declared Id. P. 398, 399, 370, 373. Jan. de
Serres.
that all the Kings Subjects were freed from their obedience to him; of which,
Pope Sixtus the Fifth was informed, and desired to complete by his Authority.

One tells us with confidence, that the Pope can create and depose Vid. Phil.
Horn. Thesaur. Polit. p. 318, 319, 323, 361, 362.
Kings. Another wonders that some German Divines should deny him to have power
to translate Empires. And a third tells Cardinal Mont' alto (Nephew to the
foresaid Sixtus the Fifth) that amongst other Privileges which belong to the
Pope, is to give Titles to Emperors and Kings, to translate Empires from one
Nation to another, and to judge Princes. And our Countryman, Thomas Harding,
when he sees Childerick of France deposed by the Pope, cannot refrain from
telling us -- Confutation of the Apology, fol. 181. b.
What a strength of Authority is in that See, which is able with a word to
place and displace the mightiest King in Europe. And this is also approved of
by his good friend and great admirer, A brief show of the false wares in the
Apology, fol. 93.
John Rastell. And the Portugal Quaestiones Regulares, Tom. 2. Quest. 40. art.
1. and Quest. 63. art. 7. and Tom. 4. Tit. 4. c. 3.
Emanuel Rodericus, in several places of his Works, fob'd up by the Canon Law,
tells how the Pope can alter Kingdoms, and depose Kings.

What force either Loyalty or Obedience is with some Roman Catholics, may in
part be seen by their cavilling at our Oath of Allegiance, as where it says,
that the Pope has no power or authority to depose the King -- or discharge any
of his Subjects of their Allegiance and Obedience to his Majesty, upon any
cause or occasion whatsoever. -- They answer to the first: -- A strange
prevention to stir up humour^, Answer to the Penal Statutes against Catholics,
page 81, 82.
and to alter them with DANGEROUS Physic without necessity. -- And to the
second, they thus retort; -- Although the King should force them to be
Mahometans, Jews, Pagans, or Infidels.

To that part of it, which calls the opinion of the Popes power to
excommunicate or deprive Kings Impious and Heretical, -- They only say, -- How
came the English Parliament by Authority to censure Doctrine? who delivered
them this power? who made them assurance of Gods infallible Spirit? -- To that
part which says, That they do believe that the Pope, nor any other has power
to absolve them of this Oath; -- They deny the Article by their thus reasoning:
-- If they do not believe it, NOR INDEED CAN BELIEVE IT WITHOUT GROSS
IGNORANCE, why should they enforce them to swear False? or what get they by
this?

And to the last part of it, where it is said, that -- They do acknowledge this
Oath to be administered unto them lawfully, and by good and full Authority, and
that they do renounce all dispensations and pardons to the contrary; -- They
quite null the Proposition by this their answer: --

He that swears false, had need of absolution from the sin, but needs no
dispensation, because the Oath has no force to bind, as in this case. --

By which means they declare their approbation of these following Propositions.

I. To affirm that the Pope has no power or authority to depose the King, is
dangerous.

II. That in some cases [as if the Prince should force his People to be Allow
one or two Exceptions, and twenty will follow, if the Romanists be Judges.
Prateo lus [Elench. Haeret. Mahometes] compares the Protestants to the Turks.
Gifford. [Pr^f. in lib. D. Reinald Calvino-Turcismus] says that the
Protestants belief is worse than the Alcoran.
Mahometans, Jews, Pagans or Infidels] the Pope may discharge his Subjects of
their Allegiance and Obedience otherwise due to him.

III. That the King, Bishops, Peers and Commons in Parliament, cannot declare
or censure the opinion which allows the Popes power to excommunicate and
deprive Kings, to be Impious and Heretical.

IV. That it is gross Ignorance and False, not to believe that the Pope or any
other have power to absolve Subjects of their Oaths of Obedience and Allegiance.

V. That this Oath of Allegiance, though taken, is not obligatory, nor has any
power to bind.

Thus we see the foundation of Government shaken, Oaths and Obedience brought
to be but trifles, and Supreme Authority and Rule, upon the common-canting
whining pretense of Religion consumed to nothing.

Leonardus Lessius, a Jesuit of great repute, under the false name Discussio
Decreti Mag. Council. Lateran.
of Guilielmus Singletonus, is very zealous for this Authority to be in the
Pope: Tells us in one place, that if the Pope Si sam. Pont. non haberet illam
potestatem in T^mporalia, Ecclesia errar^t in Doctrina morum, and quidem circa
res gravissimas; Docet enim Principe per sententiam summi Pont. abdicato, omnes
subditos ab ejus obedientia esse solutos, and ditionem ejus ab alio posse
occupari, ut ex Conciliis constat. -- Discuss. Decret. Council. Lat. page 46.
have not this power, then the Church of necessity must err, because it
teaches such jurisdiction to lie in the Pope: but to affirm so of the Church,
viz. that she erreth, is Heretical; nay, that this error, viz. that the Pope
cannot depose Kings, Id. Page 90. -- Hic enim error long perniciosior erit,
magisque intolerabilis, quam error circa aliquod Sacramentum. --
is more pernicious and intolerable, than an error concerning some of the
Sacraments: for it is a Id. Page 100.
certain and undoubted received Opinion of the Church; and therefore he Id Page
123. --
conjures all Catholics, as they love the salvation of their Souls, to have a
care of doubting of it, or believing the contrary: for it -- Ad sidem
pertinere, sive ita cum rebus fidei and Religionis esse conjunctam, ut absque
sanae Doctrinae injuria non videatur posse nega^i.
belongs to faith, or agrees so near with it, that it cannot be denied without
great injury to sound Doctrine.

And whether this Lessius in another of his Books concerning the De potestate
summi Pontifici.
Popes power, maintains any Tenants more dangerous than these, I know not, no
more than I do the reasons that made them suppress it, though many years ago
printed.

The Lawyer, De sindicatu, Summar. 4. 56, 57, 58, 59.
Paris de Puteo, from the Canon Law, and other suchlike authorities, gathers
that the Pope may depose Kings or Emperors; and the old Did. 40, Si Papa.
Gloss.
Glassator upon Gratian, standing upon the same sandy Foundation, maintains the
same proposition against the latter; and with these agree another Lawyer, -- Et
Imperator debet confirmari a Papa tanquam superiore, and ab eo examinare,
approbari ac incongi, consecra^i and coronari, si est dignus, vel rejici si est
indignus, puta si esset sacrilegus, excommunicatus, licet esset electus, ab
Electoribus Imperii. Jo. Bapt. Plot. Consilium. 64.
Johannes Baptista Plotus.

In the year 1619. Frederick Elector Palatine of Rhine, being overperswaded by
the Bohemians [who had then denied Ferdinand the Emperor to be their King] to
take upon him the Government over them, was after some Wars overcome by the
Imperialists, and bereft not only of that Kingdom, but the rest of his
Territories. Upon this, great consultation is had privately at Rome to get
another Elector into his place, and for the person they need not study long.
The Duke of Bavaria, having his great expense in this War against the
Bohemians, and the Jesuits, [to whom he was a great Benefactor, had a
particular Devotion, and was in all things swayed by them] to speak loud in his
behalf; and besides, which was no small mover, his Zeal for the cause of Rome
(Frederick being a Protestant, and thus laid by) would thus over-sway the
reformed Electors in number, whereby the Empire probably would still be ruled
by that Religion. These and other like reasons, made Pope Gregory the
Fifteenth, and his Nephew and Favorite, Cardinal Ludovisio [who was also made
Protector of the Irish] to be earnest with the Emperor about it; which at last
(though the Spaniard at its first motion, seemed not to like) took effect, and
Maximilian, Duke of Bavaria, obtained that honor 1623.

But that which I most aim at in this story, is the Paper of advice or reasons
to persuade to this action, presented to the Pope and Cardinals by Michel
Lonigo da Esle, belonging to his Holiness: in which is strongly pleaded for
Bavaria, ranting and boasting in a whole beadrole, what pretty pranks and
tricks the Popes have formerly acted over Kings and Emperors, by interdicting,
excommunicating and deposing them; altering and changing of Empires and
Kingdoms: and in one place speaks boldly and plainly thus: -- It is in the
Popes hands, as appears by all Histories, to renew the Emperors in their
Empire; to translate the authority of one Nation to another, and utterly to
abolish the right of Election.

And that Rome did think her power over Kings by way of punishment, to be just
and really her own, you may partly guess from this following story.

No sooner came forth our Oath of Allegiance, for the preservation To.
Widdrington's Theological Disputation, cap. 10. Sect. 2. 52, 53. etc.
of the King, and security of his Kingdoms, but Father Parsons at Rome
solicited the Pope for his Breves against it, which were obtained; but before
they were sent into England, this Jesuit wrote a Letter hither, to intimate
(though falsely) that he was for mitigation, but that (true enough) the rest
were for the Popes power against the King; but take his own words, as they are
delivered to us by an honest Benedictine.

About some four or five Months ago, it was consulted by seven or eight of the
Learned Divines that could be chosen, who gave their judgment of it. Their
Reasons are many, but all deduced to this, that the Popes Authority in
chastising Princes upon a just account is de fide, and consequently, cannot be
denied, when it is called into Controversy, without denying of our Faith; nor
that the Pope, or any other Authority can dispense in this.

For if the Question were de facto, and not de jure; to wit, whether the Pope
might justly in this or that occasion, excommunicate or depose this or that
Prince, upon these or these causes; or whether precedent Popes have done well
therein or no, then might some of those reasons, which you say your Friends do
allege, be admitted into consideration; to wit, whether it would be in
aedificationem or destructionem, do hurt or good, be profitable or
improfitable, or whether the causes be sufficient or no; for without cause none
holds that the Pope may depose, or whether the due form of admonition,
touched in your Letters were observed. But for as much as the Question is de
Potestate, of the Sea Apostolic power; what it may do upon any cause, or
against any Catholic Prince whatsoever, these considerations of temporal hurt
cannot enter.

Besides these, I have conferred the matter with Cardinal Bellarmine, and
sundry others of great Learning and Conscience; and all are of Opinion in this
case, that the form of the Oath as it lies, is Heretical, and no way may be
admitted by him that will not deny the Catholic Faith.

I have had occasion twice to speak with his Holiness; the first in company of
Mr. Thomas Fitzherbert, where we proposed certain manners of Mitigation
suggested by Friends, etc. Where to his Holiness answered, That as for any
actual using Censures against his Majesty, he meant not, but rather all
courtesy; but as for the Authority of the Sea Apostolic ( to wit, for using
of Censures) he was resolved, and would rather loose his head, than yield one
jot. The second, he being informed that some Priests did seem to incline to the
taking of the Oath; he answered, He could not hold them for Catholics, etc.

What an enemy this Parsons was to his Native Country, we may discourse of
hereafter; only at this time we shall go no farther, than what belongs to the
Popes power now in hand; yet we may observe by the by, that whatever he writ,
he never put his own name to it, but sometimes false ones, and sometimes only
two Letters, which he commonly altered in every new Pamphlet, stuffed up only
with evasions; resolved to let the Romanists know what he meant, but would
never acknowledge any thing to be proved against him; yet an indifferent Judge
will acknowledge his hints to be bold enough. In one place, thus he tells the
Learned Morton:

-- You know that deposition of Princes is an effect of Excommunication, P. R.
Quiet and sober reckoning, page 64.
and can never happen by Ecclesiastical Authority, but where Excommunication
has gone before. And I would ask M. Morton, in good earnest out of his
Divinty, when a Christian Prince is lawfully excommunicated, and shut out from
all society of Christian Communion, and he persists Impenitent, how can he be
head of a Christian Commonwealth, for so much as he is no member, nor has any
place, or part at all in the whole body, the head-ship being the chief part of
all others?

In another place he tells thus his own Principles from his learned Opponent.
--

-- Catholic Subjects do believe that in some cases there is power Id. Page 80.
left by God in the Church, and the Head thereof the Bishop of Rome over
Princes, to use not only spiritual Censures for restraint of Exorbitant
Excesses, but Temporal Remedies also, either directly or indirectly, when
urgent necessity of the Commonwealth should require. --

All Catholic Subjects also of other Countries do hold and acknowledge Id.
Page 81.
this Doctrine.

In another of his Books against the foresaid Oath of Allegiance, to the
objection that some Roman Catholics had taken it, he thus answers: -- The
judgment of a Catholic Englishman, in a Letter touching the Oath of
Allegiance, p. 18. 30.


-- I cannot but in charity assure my self, that they being Catholics, took
the said Oath (for so much as concerns the Popes Authority, in dealing with
Temporal Princes) in some such lawful sense, and interpretation, as [being by
them expressed, and accepted by the Magistrate] may stand with the integrity
and sincerity of true Catholic Doctrine and Faith; to wit, that the Pope has
not Authority without just cause to proceed against them. --

But concerning the general Question, to deny simply and absolutely, -- Ib.
Page 19. 31.
That the Pope is Supreme Pastor of the Catholic Church, has any Authority
left him by Christ, either directly or indirectly, with cause or without cause,
in never so great a necessity of the Christian Religion, to proceed against any
Prince whatsoever Temporally, for his restraint or amendment, or to permit
other Princes to do the same: -- This, I suppose, was never their meaning, that
took the Oath, for that they should thereby contradict the general consent of
all Catholic Divines, and confess that Gods Providence for the Conservation
and Preservation of his Church and Kingdom upon earth, had been defectuous, for
that he should have left no lawful Remedy, for so great and excessive an evil,
as that way might fall out.

And if you look but a little Id. P. 85. 25.
farther, you will see where the Shoe pincheth; and that to deny the Popes
power to depose Kings, is one of the main reasons they have against this Oath;
the Affirmative being one of the greatest Pillars that upholds their puissant
Hierarchy, right or wrong. And in another of his Temperate Ward-word p. 53, 54.
Pamphlets, you will see him close with Cardinal Allen, Sanders, and suchlike,
against Princes, in behalf of the Popes power over them. Nor need we question
his attributing this Authority to the Sea of Rome, when he allows the same to
the People, not only telling them, that they may Rebel against, See his R.
Dolemans conference about the Crown.
but depose their King too, and it may be worse, of which in its due place.

But enough of Robert Parsons at this time, unless he were better. And if we
consult some others abroad, we shall find Con. in 2. 2. D. Tho. page 63. 151.
Johannes Wiggers, Com. in 2. 2. Aquin. Quest. 12. art. 2.
Hieronymus de Medicis the Dominican, In 2. 2. D. Tho. in Summario
Conclusionum, d. 57. conclus. 2.
Luisus Turrianus the Spanish Jesuit, Com. in 2. 2. Quest. 1. art. 10. disp. 8.
Johannes Malderus, Bishop of Antwerp; and De potestate Ecclesiastica, fol.
154. Potest and Papa jure optimo a gradu and dignitate sua omnem Regem and
Principem dejicere, non solum propter Heresim and Schisma and propter quam vis
aliam scele^osam impietatem, verum etiam propter secordiam, negligentiam, and
ad regendum ineptitudinem, si praesertim ejusmodi sit ut Regnum periclitetur
Christianorum.
Johannes Antonius Delphinus, allow that Kings may justly be deposed, and that
by the Pope: and to these we may add, Carolus Scribanius the Dutch Jesuit,
under the false name of Amphitheatrum Honoris, lib. 1. cap. 12.
Clarus Bonarscius.

What was the Opinion of that great-read Cardinal Baronius, you may guess by
this which follows: Henry the Sixth [by the Italian Writers called Henry the
Fifth] the eldest son of the famous Frederick Barbarossa, Emperor of Germany,
being at Rome with his Empress, Constance Daughter to William King of Sicily;
and being Jo. Trevisa translat. of Ranulph of Chesters Polyoron, l. 7. c. 26.
willing to be both Crowned there: Accordingly Pope Caelestinus the Third,
being set in his Bontifical Chair in St. Peter's Church, held the Imperial Crown
between his Feet, whence both of them, humbling themselves, by bowing down
their heads, received the Crown: but the Pope presently with his Foot kicked the
Crown from the Emperors head to the ground. Upon this Rogerus in short tells
us, that the Pope did it, to show that he had power to depose the Emperor. And
this is hint enough to a wise man: But Baronius likes the action so well, that
he must make a discant too, it being his design all along to magnify the
greatness of the Pope; and his Comment is this, U^ autem id fixum menti ejus
haereret, nempe dare custodire, conservare, and auferre, si causa exigeret
Imperium esse in voluntate Romani Pontificis: ejusmodi volu^ commonuisse
exemplo. Baron. Annal. Tom. 12. anno 1191. 12.
That the Emperor might remember, that it is in the pleasure of the Pope to
give, keep, preserve, and take away the Empire, if there be cause; and that
this Example might put him in mind of it. And this he in An. 1157. 13.
another place makes no doubt of.

I cannot but wonder at Vindiciae Concilii Lateranens. p. 4, 5.
Dr. Thomas Vane, (if he be the Author, for some think, that by agreement, he
fathers other men's writings) to be so strangely in passion, as to call Dr.
Cozens (now Bishop of Durham) Beast, Forrainer and Runagate, and suchlike
unhandsome language, since both were Englishmen, and both then living in
France, one as freely as the other, though their going over upon different
accounts, the Bishop for his loyalty being persecuted over, and probably in
this reviling Dr. Vane, forgot himself to be an Englishman, considering the
King himself took Asylum abroad upon the same account: and a prudent man would
not cast it as a Reproach upon Dr. Cozens, for not chopping and changing
Religions as Dr. Vane did. But do but view over a few Vindic. Council. Later.
page 69, 70, 71.
pages of his little Book, and then tell me, if he do not allow that the Pope
in some cases may deprive Kings.

Comment in D. Tho. Tom. 1. col. 145.
Michael Bartholomeus Salon, amongst other privileges which in some cases he
grants to the Pope, is that of deposing Kings. And the Lawyer Papa potest
deponere principes, si nimis gravant subditos. De Principibus, Quest. 7.

Id. Imperator non debet deponi a Papa, nisi subsit maxima and gravissima
causa, ultra quam dici potest periculosa. Imperator and alii Principes non
possunt deponi sine maximis periculis. Id. Quest. 35.


Martinus de Caraziis Laudensis, is of the same Opinion, though he seems to
desire that good reason should be given for so doing.

And this is also agreeable to the Learned, and one of the best Casuists of the
Jesuits, Johannes Azorius, who in several places of his Tom. 2. lib. 10. cap.
8. and lib. 11. cap. 5.
Institutions, confirms the same. De Privileg. Eccles. Art. 16. ^.
Johannes Philippus Maynardus in his zeal against the Venetians, not only with
the rest of his Followers in that Quarrel, exempts the Clergy from the secular
jurisdiction, but also allows the Pope Authority to depose the Emperor; and
Nullus possit esse Monarcha, nisi dependeat a Papa. De Monarch. Hispan. c. 5.
Thomas Campanella throws his Politics upon the same Pontifical Privilege:
And with him agrees Enchirid. Eccles. Tit. de Salario vasall. fol. 140.
Gregorius Capuccinus. Nor need we marvel to find Chron. Tom. 2. page 882. and
page 899. Edit. 1581.
Gilbertus Genebrard of the same Opinion, when many times his choler and zeal
was some discredit to his great learning.

Of the same extravagancy and passion was the Helvetian Jesuit, Laurentius
Forerus, one who thought to procure to himself no small name by his
multiplicity of Pamphlets, and Zeal for his Order; yet when he makes it his
whole design to clear them from any thoughts of treasonable or bad Principles,
even then he confidently affirms, that himself, and the rest of his Order, do
and did always maintain, that the Mantissa Ant-Anatomiae, Sect. 1. page 21, 22,
23, 25.
Pope has power to depose Princes; and for this, he says the Jesuits ought
not to be slandred or thought bad subjects, because they affirm no more --
Quaeque alii Theologi communiter ante ipsum [ viz. Greg. de Valentia]
docuerunt, -- apertissimum sit a plurimorum saeculorum decursu, eandem a
maximis Doctoribus Ecclesiae and traditam and defensam fuisse, page 23. --
Dudum ab aliis Catholicis Doctoribus communissime tradita and recepta, page 25.
than all other Catholic Doctors do.

Nay, the famous Piedmontois Geographer L'altra sort di corruttione, si o lo
scandolo de i Principi, che o per malignita depravano el ben publico, e
l'edificatione della chiesa di Dio; o per neligenza lasciano ruinare la
Religione ne gli stati loro, per l'uno e per l'altro capo, li Pontifici, se il
male e incorrigibile, si vagliono della scommunica, e dell' Interdetto. E si
queste arm fanno poco effet^o, li dichtarano in capaci de gli stati, e indegni
del grado nel qual Dio gli ha posti: assolvan^ dal giuramento della fedeltai
subditi e trasferiscano i Regni, e gli Imperii all'altri. E la ragione si e
perch nella Chiesa di Dio, la potesta secolare e quasi corpo, la spirituale
quasi anima: onde quella deve ubbere, questa commendate in tutto cio, che si
appartiene al ben publico di essa Chiesa. E i Principi scandalosi sono: come
membri putridi, o pecore scabbiose, che si debbono trancare dalle parti
sincere, o cacciare fuora del gregge. Et e cosa ridicola quella, che in questi
tempi dicono e scrivono alcuni Politici Francesi, che il Re loro depend
immediatamente da Dio; cos^, per la sua vanita, indegna di esser refutata:
conciosia che tutti i Regni legitimi hanno, hanuto origin dall' Electione de i
Popoli: e per questo, nella loro incoronatione li Re giurano di osservar i
Privilegi a i Popoli; e i Popoli d'esser fedeli a loro, e Dio ha dato
ogniauttorita di legare e di sciogliere il vincolo del giuramento al Pont. Romans
come habbiamo dimostrato sopra, etc. Botero le Relationi Universali, Part. 2.
lib. 4. page 125, 126, 127.
Giovanni Botero, (the first, I may say, that undertook prudentially to
discover the world) runs along in the same error with the rest of his Religion,
and will not only allow the Pope to depose Kings, but seem vexed and angry
against any that should deny it, and reasons the case with them too as largely
as if he had been chosen the sole Champion for his Church? and declares himself
a professed enemy against those who think that Kings have no Superior but God in
this World.

Discussio Decreti Council. Lateran. page 29.
Lessius the Jesuit, in behalf of the Pope, makes use of Johannes Parisiensis;
but A Theolog. Dispute concerning the Oath of Allegiance, Appendix, page 402.
18.
Roger Widdrington a Benedictine, affirms that Parisiensis and Antonius de
Rosellis, are rather for the Peoples power to depose Kings than the Popes;
though be it as it will, one is as bad as the other, and neither barrel better
Herring.

Johannes de Bromyardo, an English Dominican, and famous in his time for his
many writings, is also an assertor of this Opus Trivium, verb. Regimen.
King-deposing Doctrine; nor is it any strange thing amongst our Country
Romanists: for wherefore else should Epist. ad lectorem, praefix. N^c. Sander.
de Schismate A^gl.
Edward Rishton commend Saunders for his Rebellion in Ireland? Wherefore else
should Watson the Author of the Page 327.
Quodlibets desire that the Pope had, and would exercise as much power now in
England, as he did in Henry the Second, and Kings John's time? Wherefore else
should Everard Hanse the Priest say, that he hoped Pius the Fifth did not err
in declaring against Queen Elizabeth, and absolving her subjects from their
Allegiance? Wherefore else should John Mundine, Concertat. Eccles. Cathol.
Edit. 1594. fol. 78, 140, 153, 154, 163, 169, 170, 171.
being asked at his Trial, if he thought that the Pope could depose the Queen;
or if another Prince should invade England, whether he would assist the Queen
or the Invador, desire to be excused from answering? Wherefore else should
James Fenn, at his Trial, declare that the Pope had power to depose the Queen
and other Princes? Wherefore else should James Bele declare that he would
assist the Pope, or any other against the Queen? Coppie d'une lettre envoye d'
Angleterre an seminaire des Anglois a D^uay, contenant l'Hist. du Martyr de 4.
Prestres, An. 1616. page 10, 18, 49, 53.


Why should John Finch affirm the same, or Father Thomas Maxfield, that no man
under damnation could take the Oath of Allegiance? And Nicholas Atkinson,
refuse to take the said Oath, though he was promised his life, if he would take
it: As they promised the same mercy and favor to John Thulis, and N. Voren at
Lancaster.

And we are Vid. O. E. a new chalange made to N. D. p. 116. and Mat. Sutcliff's
challenge concerning the Romish Church, page 187.
informed from the Records of the Memorials of the Council at York, that a
House being searched for a Priest, styled David Engleby [their own Catalogues
mentions one Francis Ingleby, who suffered there 1586] there were found in the
said house these Positions:

That the Queen before the Popes Bull was not a lawful Queen.

That Catholics are not to defend her, or fight for her, if any come to
execute the Popes Bull.

That it is lawful to take arms against her, and to do what they please with
her, if they be sure to obtain Victory.

And the only reason that Father Vid. Rob. Abbot. Antilogia, page 156.
Garnet had against some insurrection against the King, was because they wanted
the Popes Authority or approbation. And if I mistake not, it is no less man than
Father A letter of a Catholic touching the Oath of Allegiance, page 47.
Parsons, who thinks it no small honor for his cause, that Robert Drurie,
Matthew Flathers, and George Gervis, three Priests, would rather dye than take
the Oath of Allegiance, when life was offered them upon that condition.

But what need I trouble my self with particulars, when Abraham Bzovius, who
thought himself fit to be joined with Baronius, tells us, that all the De Romans
Pont. cap. 46. page 621.
English Priests, who suffered in England, absolutely maintained that the Pope
might depose Kings; and he Id. Cap. 45, 46.
himself is of the same pernicious Principle.

Of this Opinion also is the great Spanish Lawyer, Emporium ^triusque juris
Part. 1. Tit. 2. de jurisdic. omnium judicum, Quaest. 4. 12.
Pet. Augustine. Morla: and to him it would be no news to add a Soldier of the
same Kingdom, and one that by the assistance of this Maxim, was to prove his
Sword could do no wrong by taking away another man's Kingdom, and joining of it
to his Masters. And this is Fadrique de Toledo Duke of Alva, who in a large
Speech, told the people of Navarre, pretty stories of the Popes power in giving
away Kingdoms. But the conclusion was, that by the same Authority, the Kingdom
of Navarre was given to his Master of Spain, and King Albret justly deposed.
And it is no great matter whether he or his Ael. Anton. Nebrissens. de Bello
Navarr. lib. 1. cap. 6.
Historian penned the Harangue. And no question, but that his Grandchild, Don
Fernando d'Alvares de Toledo Duke of Alva, was altogether of the same
judgment, when he conquered Portugal to the same Crown.

Nor is (the great, but none of the best Text-men) the Spanish Preaching
Jesuit Johannes Osorius of any better Principles. For amongst other
privileges granted to the Popes, he tells his Auditory, that he can -- Omnem
dare, auferre aut moderari jurisdictionem, Reges create, and iterum Regna
tollere. Concion. Tom. 3. Concio in Cathedra St. Petri, col. 2.
appoint and depose Kings. And in another of his (c) preachments, he tells the
people that by this Text, Behold here are two swords, is signified the
Spiritual and material Swords of the Church, whereby she does assault, beat,
and rob Kings of their Dominions and Authority. b Ecce duo gladii hic. Duas
Ecclesiae potestates, quibus in peccatores animadvertit, significat.
Ecclesiasticam and saecularem, gladium Spirituale and materiale, quo Ecclesia
uti potest, cum oportuerit Reges expugnando ac debellando, and a potestate
Regia expoliando. Tom. 4. page 87.


Of the same judgment is the Italian Lawyer and Divine too, Tract. de officio
S. Inquisit. Tit. 1. 67, 68, 93.
Caesar Carena, of so great repute at Cremona, and a favorite of the English
Overseer, Cardinal Francisco Barberino, Nephew to Urban the eighth.

But of this subject we have been too long, and so I shall conclude all, with
the Dominican, -- Non solum ei liceat Monarchae jus and nomen sibi ipsi
vendicare, sed etiam suae ditioni subditos ad Principatus, Regna, and Imperia,
utcunque ei visum fuerit, assumere, assumpto vero etiam sine Causa ab iisdem
Regnis deponere, and ea Regna ex uno ad alterum pro suae voluntatis arbitrio
transfer. -- -- Quod si forte in reprobum sensum traditi has [i. e. the Popes
Censures] quoque contempserint, tunc Pontifex (si tamen id Ecclesiasticae tran
quillitati expedire cognoscet) populos absolvere poterit a juramento
Obedientiae quo se Dominis illis devinxerant, cum adhuc just imperarent, ei
quoque licitum erit, ipsos Dominos incorrigibiles and Ecclesiae Rebels,
Principatuum suorum jurisdictione privare, and eorum jura ad alios Orthodoxos
Principes transfer. Sixth. Senens. Bibliotheca, lib. 6. Annotat. 72.
Sixtus Senensis, a man of great Reading: but in this case he thought it not
amiss to fin for company with the rest of his Party; now affirming that the
Pope, at his own pleasure, without any cause, can depose of Kingdoms; yet a
little after, he is willing to have a Reason, and then the deposition is lawful
enough.

CHAP. II. That the Pope can absolve subjects from their Oaths of Allegiance,
and their Obedience due to their respective Princes.
ME thinks it is an odd humor, that the Pope should be so much on Cock-horse
above all the world besides, as to expect that all Emperors and Kings should
swear absolute obedience to him, and yet allow other earthly Monarchs to have
but a conditional subjection from their Subjects: And this Allegiance, though
never so strongly tied up with Oaths and Duty, yet must the people be
persuaded, that an Item from Rome can quit them from its Obligation, as poor
Hortensius believed himself to be King of Poland, because Roguish Francion and
others told him so.

Though we abhor the action, yet we cannot choose but smile sometimes, to see
how many by the knavery of some Politicians, are gulled into villainy: many of
our wicked Statesmen, (as the Devil turns himself into an Angel of Light) wrap
themselves in Religon to catch those who know nothing of it but the word. And
though we be tied to Allegiance, with the strictest bonds of Birth and Oaths;
yet from these, if occasion serve, the Grandees of Faction will ease us,
either, as one Nail drives out another, by taking a contradictory Oath to the
former, or some way or other, procuring or making of and to our selves an
Absolution; the Pope and Disciplinarian being the Chief Masters of this Faculty.

Our Presbyterians, after they had above two years impiously rebelled against
their King and Church, to make their actions more plausible to the Vulgar, took
that abominable Covenant against both, and so declaring their disobligation to
either, as if a latter unlawful Oath could quit one of the former, which, Law,
Religion and Nature did bind him to. And I cannot but think here of the impious
Guisian league in France, who having fought a great while against their King
Henry the Third, and declared themselves not obliged to their Allegiance to
him; yet as a pretty trick to fool the world, they sent to Pope Sixtus the
Fifth, that he would declare their war Vestram, Beatissime Pater, opem
imploram^s. -- Primum ut juramento, quo nos Henrico III. quondam abstrinximus,
and soluti declaremur. Deinde, ut bellum, quod cum publica Religionis ac
libertatis oppressere necessario gerendum est, justum esse decernatur. De justa
Hen. III. abdicatione, page 398.
to be lawful, and quit them from their Obedience to their Sovereign: both
Knaves of a double dye, first to Rebel, and then to make that sin lawful.

And that the Pope has this power to absolve people from their Obedience, is
stiffly maintained by the Roman Champions. Amongst the rest, Martinus Becanus,
is thus persuaded, and he says, That nothing -- Pontifex absolvat subditos a
debito, seu vinculo subject^onis, quo obligati sunt suis Regibus, nam sublato
hoc vinculo ex part subditorum, jam sponte cessat potestas and jurisdictio
Regnum in su^di^os -- Pontifex qui utriusque [i. e. King and People.] praeest
in rebus ad salutem pe^tinentibus, potest manda^e and d^cernere, ut subditi non
teneantur praestare fidem regibus, quando Reges non servant ipsis fidem, nihil
certius apud Catholicos. Mart. Becon. Controvers. Angl. page 133. and 135.
is more certain, amongst the Roman Catholics, than that the Pope may do not
only so, but command the Subjects not to obey their Prince.

With him agrees another of the same Order, viz. a Jesuit, but more
voluminous, and of greater esteem, and this is Franciscus Suarez, telling us in
one place, that the -- Hos a ju ramento fidelitatis solvere, vel solutos
declarate. Fr. Suar. defens. fid. Cathol. lib. 3. c. 23. 21.
Pope can absolve Subjects from their Oaths of Allegiance. And in another
place, says, that to affirm the contrary, is to act Est contra Ecclesiasticum
morem, Conciliorumque generalium usum and approbationem, and contra
Catholicorum Doctorum consensum -- est etiam contra rationum. Id. Lib. 6. c. 2.
7.
against the Custom of the Church, the use and approbation of General Councils,
the consent of Catholic Doctors, nay, and against reason, and is plainly
Propositio illa Haeretica est, lib. 6. c. 5. 1, 2.
Heretical: And as for our English Oath of Allegiance, he says, a man Illud
juramentum, non ligat jurantem, quia non potest juramentum esse vinculum
iniquitatis, quale illud esset, and ideo nemo potest ab illo solvi: and the
words before these are, Nemo absolvi potest proprie qui legatus non est.
need never be absolved from it, because 'twas never binding to him.

De sacrorum Immunit. l. 3. Proem. 9, 10.
Anastasius Germonius, De Haeresi. cap. 30. page 293, 296.
Antonius Sanctarellus, Cardinal Contra Barclaium, cap. 27.
Bellarmine, De Orig. and progres. S. Inquis. lib. 1. Quest. 1. Opin. 4. 55.
and 145.
Ludovicus a Paramo, De potest. Eccles. Quest. 40. Art. 4.
Augustinus Triumphus de Ancona, Summa. V. Papa, 10.
Sylvester de Priero, and Comment. in Cant. Magnif. lib. 3. cap. 27. dub. 6.
page 134.
Rutilius Benzonius, with others, amongst the other Privileges, which they
allow the Pope to have to straiten the Authority and Grandeur of Kings, is the
power to absolve their Subjects from their Oaths of Allegance, and so to give
them liberty, either to choose or take new Masters. And De utriusque gladli
facultate, Tom. 2. page 119.
Robertus Cenalis is willing to bestow the same jurisdiction upon the Sea of
Rome.

As for our Countryman De visih. Monarch. l. 2. cap. 4.
Nicholas Saunders, in this cause he is as fierce as any of them; and his great
Animosity against there formed Religion, his Native Country, and his legal
Sovereign might prompt him to it, and much more: and with these do consent De
sacro Eccles. principatu, lib. 2. c. 12. fol. 63.
Johannes Blasius, Theolog. Moral. Tom. 1. v. Dominium, page 393. and v.
Apostasia, p. 5.
Franciscus Ghetius, and that ancient Jesuit, Tom. 4. Part. 3. Tract. 4.
Tertiam potestatem, page 410.
Alphonsus Salmeron.

Potest eum excommunicare, subditosque illius a juramento fidelitatis
absolvere, and ab illius obedientia eximere: atque ea non est Tyrannica vel
usurpata authoritas, sed legitima a Christo instituta, and illi concessa ad
Regimen optimum Christianae Reipublicae. Len. Coq. Exam. Praefat. Monit.
Jacobi, page 55. and page 103.
Leonardus Coquaeus endeavoring to confute King James, is very earnest, not
only for this Papal Authority in absolving subjects from their obedience to
their respective Princes; but also, would gladly persuade him and others to
think, that this is neither a tyrannical nor an Usurpt Authority, but a lawful
one granted to him by Christ. But King James would not be caught with such
Chaff; and a King that knows himself to be absolute, must have a strong
demonstration to the contrary, before he will throw himself upon another man's
mercy.

When a man's nursed up in an error, he will commonly swear to it: and though of
all Authorities or Decrees, the Canon Law has the least reason in it; yet
where men must think as they are bid, we need not wonder when we see the
chiefest of the Romanists with Disquisit. Clerical. Part. 1. page 282. 109.
Johannes Maria Bellettus, In decretal. de Haereticis, c. 13.
Panormitan, Summa de Eccles. c: 14. Propos 5.
Cardinal de Turrecremata, De jure Personarum extra Eccles. lib. 4. cap. 52. 1.
Antonius Ricciullus, Repet. in clem. ut clericorum de Offic. Ordi. 40.
Stephanus Aufrerius, and De Cathol. Constitut. Tit. 46. 73.
Jacobus Simanca, with may others, to affirm to the world, this absolving power
to lie in the Pope: since besides other reasons, it is one of the best Cards in
the Pack, that Rome has to keep up her greatness.

Whether Albertus Pighius read with these Spectacles or no, I know not; but
it is very probable that something else besides true reason, did a little sway
him in this case. And though considering his time he had more judgment and
learning than an hundred of your dull Canonists; yet we see him run with the
rest to embrace an error, though for his so doing, he says, he has the
consent of the Church for about -- Necesse est, ut Impia and heretica sit illa
ejus sententia, qua affirmat, esse haereticum, ut possint subditi absolvi a
juramento fidelitatis, quo ante adstricti fuerant suis superioribus fidelibus.
Alb. Pigh. Hierarch. Eccles. lib. 5. cap. 15. fol. 266.
eight hundred years; and so concludes, that to think that the Pope cannot quit
Subjects from their Obedience and Allegiance due to their Kings, is both
Impious and Heretical.

Nor is this strange, since a greater than he, and no less than Quam cito
aliquis per sententiam denuntiatur Excommunicatus propter Apostasiam a fide,
ipso facto ejus subditi sunt absoluti a dominio ejus and juramento fidelitatis,
quo ei tenebantur. D. Tho. Aquin, 2. 2. Quest. 12. Art. 2. --
Thomas Aquinas, does allow that Subjects may be sometimes quit from their
Allegiance and Oaths to their Kings; and to him consents Theolog. moralis,
Tract. 1. cap. 7. conclus. 5.
Petrus de Ledesma, and the Commentators upon him, such as Com. in 2. 2. D.
Tho. Quest. 12. Art. 2.
Hieronymus de Medicis, -- Com. in D. Tho. 2. 2. Quest. 1. Art. 10. disp. 8.
Johannes Malderius, and others: so that we need not doubt its validity amongst
them.

Nor is it any wonder to see De liberate Christ. lib. 1. c. 14.
Johannes Driedo, Rosella Casuum, verbo Haereticus, 11.
Baptista Trovomala, Apology pour Jehan Chastel.
Franzois de Verone, De justa Hen. III. ablicat. lib. 1. cap. 5.
Dr. Boucher, Discussio decreti Council. Later. page 46.
Leonardus Lessius, under the false name of Gulielmus Singletonus, Le Relationi
Universali, part. 2. lib. 4. page 124.
Giovanni Botero; yet the more wonder in him, because a great and understanding
Statesman, and several others, to be so much for the Pope, as to allow him
Authority to absolve Subjects from their Oaths of Allegiance, when they have no
less than the famous Cardinal Perron to be their Champion, and with him the
Nobility and Clergy in France; and this cause of the Sea of Rome to be by him
boldly maintained publicly in a long Speech to the third Estate; the occasion
of which, we have spoken more at large in the former Chapter.

In this Harangue, the Cardinal endeavors Harangue faite de la part de la
Chamber Ecclesiastique, en celle du tiers Estat, sur l'Article de serment. It Is
printed amongst several of his other Works, les diverses Oeuvres, and in
Recueil General des Affairs du Clerge de France. Imprim. a Paris 1636. Tom. 1.
page 295.
to prove at large, that subjects might be quit from their Oaths of Allegiance
and Obedience due to their Kings; nay, that Kings might sometimes be deposed:
of which formerly. As for the first, viz. That Subjects might be absolved from
their Oaths of Allegiance made to their Kings; he says, That Les diverses
Oeuvres, p. 599. -- Toutes les autres parties de l'Eglise Catholic, voir
mesme, toute l'Eglise Gallicane, depuis que les E'choles de Theology y ont
este instituees, jusques a la venue de Calvin, tiennent l'Affirmative,
ascavoir, que quand un Prince vient a violer le serment qu'il a fait a Dieu and
a ses subjets -- Les Prince-la peu estre declare dechen des ses droits, comme
coulpable de Felony envers celuy a qui il a fait le serment de son Royaume,
c'est a dire envers Jesus Christ. Et ses subjets absous en Conscience and au
tribunal Spirituel and Ecclesiastique, du serment de fidelite qu'ils luy ont
priest: and que ce cas-la arrivant, c'est a l'authorite de l'Eglise residente,
ou en chef qui est le Pape ou en son Corpse qui est le Concile de fair ceste
Declaration. Et non seulement toutes les autres Parties de l'Eglise Catholic,
mais mesme tous les Docteurs, qui ont este en France, depuis que les E'choles
de Theology y ont este instituees, ont tenu l'affirmative, Ascavoir, qu'en cas
de Prince Heretics ou Infidelles, and persecutans le Christionisme ou la
Religion Catholic, les subjets pouvoint estre absous du serment de fidelite.

Id. Page 602. -- Non s^ulement toutes les autres parties de l'Eglise, qui sont
aujourd 'huy au Monde, tiennent l'Affirmative, ascavoir qu'en cas de Princes
Heretics ou Apostates, and persecutans la foy, les subjects peuvent estre
absous du serment fait a eu^ ou a leurs Predecesseurs. -- And, que depuis onze
cent ans il n'y a eu Siecle au equel en diverses Nations ceste doctrine n'ayt
este crew and practiquee.


all Parties of the Catholic Church did hold it, and so did the French Church
ever since Divinity was taught in Schools amongst them, till the coming of
Calvin: and this has been Id. Page 602. -- Elle a este constamment tenue en
France, ou nos Roys and particulierement ceux de la derniere race, l'ont
protegee par leur Autorite and par leurs arms, ou nos Conciles l'ont appuyee
et maintence ou tous nos Evelques et docteurs scholastiques, depuis que
l'E'chole de la Theology est instituee, jusques a nos jours, l'ont e critte,
preschee et seignee, et ou finalement tous nos Magistrates, Officiers et
Jurisconsultes, l'ont su^vie, et favorisee, voir souvent pour de Religion plus
legers que l'heresie (...) l'Apostasie: Mais desquels neantmoins je ne me
pretend aider, si non entant qu'ils peuvent server a defendre ou la These
generale, ascavoir, qu'en quelque cas les subjets peuvent estre absous du
serment, fait par eux a leurs Princes: Ou ceste hypothese particuliere, qu'en
cas de Princes heretics ou Apostats et persecutans la foy, les subjets
peuvent estre dispenser de leurs ob^ir.
maintained by all the French Kings themselves, Councils, Bishops, and Doctors;
as also all their Magistrates, Officers and Lawyers. Nor is this all, for he
publicly declares that Id. Page 621. N'ont jamais peu trouver en toute la
France, depuis que les E'choles de Theology y ont este instituees jusques a
nos jours un seul Docteur, ny. Theologien, ny Jurisconsulte, un seul Decret, un
seul Concile, un seul Arrest de Parliament, un seul Magistrate ny Ecclesiastique
ny Politic, qui alt dit qu'en cas d'heresie ou d'Infidelit^e, les subjets ne
puissent estre ablous du Serment de Fidelite qu'ils doivent a leurs Princes.
there could never be found in France, since Schools of Divinity were there
settled, till his time, so much as one Doctor, one Divine, one Lawyer, one
Decree, one Council, one Order of Parliament, one Magistrate, neither
Ecclesiastic nor Politic, to have said, that in case of Heresy or
Infidelity, subjects might not be absolved from their Oath of Allegiance, due
to their Kings.

And should they believe the contrary, Id. Page 635. Et non seulement cet
Article [i. e. To believe that subjects cannot be absolved from their Oaths of
Allegiance to their King] nous jette en un Schism inevitable, mais mesme nous
precipite en un heresy eviden^e, nous obligeant necessairement de Confesser
que l'Eglise Catholic est perie depuis plusieurs Siecles en la Terre. Car si
ceux qui embrassent la doctrine opposite, tiennent une Opinion contraire, a la
parole de Dieu, impie et detestable; le Pape donc depuis tant de Siecles n'a
point este chef de l'Eglise et vicaire de Christ, mais heretic et Antichrist:
Et toutes les autres parties de l'Eglise n'ont point este vrayes parties de
l'Eglise, mais members de l'Antichrist. Or cela estant ou estoit demeure
l'Eglise Catholic? en la France seule? -- Mais comment sera t'elle de meuree
en France, si cet Article est vray, puisque tous les Docteurs Franzois ont denu
depuis ^ant de Siecles le Contraite, es casd' Heresy et d' Apostasy de la
Religione Christienne.
they should be plain Schismatics and Heretics, or else the Church must have
failed, and the Pope to have been so far from being Christ's Vicar, that he had
been an Heretic and Antichrist.

But enough of this, the former Chapter being long enough, and able to serve
for both, seeing those who grant that the Pope can lawfully depose Kings, will
not deny, but that he can also absolve their subjects from their Oaths of
Allegiance and their Obedience.

CHAP. III. That Subjects of themselves may depose their Kings and Governors.
IF we allow that the people themselves may lawfully Rebel against their
Princes, and at the same time be Judges of the justness of the Reason; to be in
Authority will be a slavery, the word Monarchy absolute nonsense, the King
obliged to obey every man's passion and folly; nor peace, nor justice can be
expected, the Nation b^ing in a perpetual hurlyburly, every other day, as of
late times, new Magistrates starting up by strength or Policy; and he that is
still uppermost of this Leap-frog-Government, will extort Obedience, confirmed
by Oaths from his supposed subjects, which will ruin the honest, and damn the
rest with Perjury.

Change, as a Novelty, at first is rather a pleasure than gain to the People,
and at last a burden and ruin; and what a factious people once resolve on,
they will never want pretense of Reason, themselves being judges. When the
Sacrilegious Prsbyterians, prompted by their Master the Devil, were resolved to
Murder that famous Archbishop of Canterbury (Dr. Laud) for fashion-sake, they
would have something to say, though if we go according to the Narrative of his
Pryn's Canterbury's doom.
Enemy, we shall find, that the Lords, Commons, and Prynne himself had but the
same Reason and Consequence for so doing, as according to the Proverb,
Tenterton Steeple is the cause of Goodwin-Sands.

I warrant you the ancient Jo. Magnus, Hist. Goth. Sueciumque lib. Id. Hist.
Metropol. Upsal. l 1. p. 11.
Swedes thought themselves as pretty Religious blades as any, when they slew
their good King Evic Stenchil, because he intended to bring in Christianity
amongst them. Our late Puritans made it one of their main pleas in Print and
Pulpit, for their fighting against the King, because forsooth, he intended to
bring in Popery: And the Earls of Northumberland, Westmerland, and others,
thought to pull down and destroy Queen Elizabeth, and some did also King James,
because they settled the Protestant Religion; and I do not know which were the
arranest knaves of the three parties: certain I am, that Christian Religion
does nowhere allow Rebellion; and if a Heathen and a Christian do the same
fault, it is not the unbelief of the former, that makes him more wicked in the
act than the Religion of the latter; and he that bauls out the liberty of
Conscience, and loss of Religion, to vindicate his Rebellion, has too much of
Atheism in him, to be a true Christian.

Thus would these men make the condition of Kings to be like that of Damocles,
with a drawn Sword hanging over their heads by a slender thread; His and the
Kingdoms settlement to lie at the mercy and alteration of every hot-brained
Zealot: For let him be of whatsoever Religion, yet we see he shall not please;
and that which should have no Arms but Prayers and Tears, must be made a
pretense to prove the Devil a Saint, and Treason an Article of Faith.

We have formerly seen how the Romish Favorites do hugely contend in behalf of
their Extra. Com. l. 1. Tit. ^. c. 1. Unam Sanctam.
Canon Law, that the Pope is Jer. 1. 10.
set over the Nations and over Kingdoms, to root out, and to pull down, and to
destroy, and to throw down. But as if this were not enough to overcloud the
Authority of Kings, they will allow the people also the power to trample upon
their Princes, by deposing them; and this in few words, is acknowledged by Jus
deponendi and abdicandi e solio Reges ac Principes non solum Ecclesiae sed
interdum populis competere ratione and exemplis ostenditur. Rut. Benz. Comment.
in Canticum Magnificat, lib. 3. cap. 27. dub. 6. page 134.
Rutilius Benzonius, Bishop of their Miraculous Loretto.

Leonardus Coquaeus, endeavoring to prove that the Pope has power to depose
Kings, in one place brings his Argument by way of comparison, that if Examen
Praefat. monit. p. 102.
Parliaments do sometimes depose Kings, why may not the Pope much more do it?
And in another place speaks more plain, That Imo judicarem, quod non expectata
sententia Summi Pontificis posset talem Principem a subditis deponi. Id. Page
49.
without the Pope the subjects themselves may pull their Kings from their
Thrones. But I warrant you, that King James, against whom he wrote, would never
be converted by this Frenchman.

Here we have the Brabantine Jesuit, Martinus Becanus, keep a great deal of
clutter about the old worne-out Argument, of a mutual compact between King and
People; and so he would conclude, that if Kings do not keep their Promises to
their Subjects, then the Controvers. Angl. p. 133, 134, 135.
people may slip their necks out of Collar, and throw by their King: and
something to this purpose he affords you an old Rhyme. Frangenti fidem, fides
frangatur eidem.


But this in this case is a false rule with us, being no compact, nor the
parties equals; so that, do but translate his Riming Proverb to agree with the
cause in hand, and we shall see the consequence to be false. Don breaks his
Troth, burns my poor house, what then?
May I his slave, go and burn his again?


This used to be common Logic to the borderers or Mosstroopers; but we see
ours, if held affirmatively, cannot prosper in a settled Kingdom. But he goes
farther yet to extol the power of the People, affirming, that when a King is
deposed, though there -- Plus dicam in haec re voluit concensus populi, ut
etiamsi superesset legitimus haeres cui Regnum deberetur, and hoc palam omnibus
constaret, tamen si populus praetermitto legitimo haerede, alium delegisset,
ille alius fuisset verus Rex. Mart. Becan. Controv. Angl. page 120.
remains a lawful Heir, to whom the Kingdom of right does belong, and this
too apparently known to all; yet if the people do choose another, and throw this
Heir aside, the other so chosen is the true King.

Almost an hundred years ago an Englishman, who calls himself John Rastell,
Master of Arts, and Student of Divinity, then living at Lovan, A brief show of
the false wares pack^ together in the named Apology of the Church of England,
fol. 9^.
wrote against Dr. Jewel in behalf of Dr. Harding, or rather as himself says,
gathered out of Dr. Hardings Book; and if so, about this cause, take both their
Opinions.

For whereas every Commonwealth is greater than the Prince which governs it,
and may depose the same upon lawful cause; and whereas Riot and doltishness are
causes sufficient so to do (as making the Prince unable to govern it well) it
follows consequently, that if the whole Estate of France deposed Chilperick,
and erected Pipine, there was NO FAULT committed in so doing.

Now certainly you would think that this Chilperick was a strange Tyrant, or
that his wickedness must be so great, that 'twas no fault to take the Crown
from him, and give it to one of his Subjects that had no right to it; nor is
this all, but the Kingdom by this means changed from one Family to another. But
we shall find his enormities not to deserve such punishment: that he wanted
discretion, I believe, but then they might have given him an assistant; and as
for his inclination, Hist. de' personaggi illustri Religiosi, lib. 3. cap. 18.
-- Essenda di natura pi^ -- Egli meno vita Angelica.
Paolo Morigi tells us that he was Godly and peaceful, and when he was put into
a Monastery, that he led an Angelical life.

Whether there was such an Englishman or no as this John Rastell, I know not,
because Pitseus makes no mention of any such, and does tell us besides, that
Page 764.
William Rastell, amongst other things, wrote several Books against Bishop
Jewel: whosoever be the man, it is not much to our purpose, though William the
Lawyer would have given more credit to the cause, though for so doing, would
somewhat have increased the wonder; those who are so much addicted to our
Common Law, not troubling themselves so much with the Romish Politics, or the
niceties of the Schools. And so much for Rastell and his friends Doctrine.

Recognit. lib. de laicis, cap. 6.
Bellarmine tells us, that Martinus ab Azpilcueta, the famous Spanish Lawyer,
was of Opinion, that the people never transferred their power so much upon, and
into the Prince, but that in some cases they might resume it again from him:
And of the same judgment does the Cardinal show himself in one place, that if
Videmus in ^ebus publicis temporalibus, si Rex degeneret in Tyran^um, ^icet sit
Caput Regni, tamen a populo deponi, and eligi alium: Bellar. de Council. l. 2. c
19.
the King turns Tyrant, the people may depose him and choose another. And again,
that Pendet a consens^ multitudinis, constituere super se Regem vel Consules
vel alios Magistratus, ut patet: and si causa legitima adsit, potest multitudo
mutare Regnum in Aristocratiam aut Democratiam, and e contrari^. Bellarm. de
laicis, lib. 3. cap. 6.
it is the consent of the people, that constitutes Kings or other Governments
over them; and so if cause be given, they may turn ^he Kingdom into an
Aristocracy or Democracy, or the contrary.

Defens. fid. Cathol. lib. 3. c. 3. 3.
Franciscus Suarez, in this case defends both Bellarmine and Dr. Navarrus; and
himself speaks plain enough to the purpose, when he affirms, that Si Rex
legitimus, tyrannice gubernet, and Regno nullum aliud subsit remedium, ad se
defendendum, nisi Regem expelle^e ac deponere, poterit Respublica tota pu^lico
and communi Concilio Civitatum and Proc^rum Reg^m deponere. Suarez. defens.
fid. lib. 6. cap. 4. 15.
if a King of a lawful Title and Possession govern tyrannously, then that the
people by their Parliament may depose him: yet he would have the people do this
in their own defense.

Guillielmus Estius, one of a great name, both for learning and moderation, an
honor both to his Country Holland, and his University Douay, though in one
Annotat. in Machab. l. 1. c. 2. v. 22.
place he speaks so much between the teeth, that he seems only to hint his
Opinion to the case in hand: Yet in another of his Books he speaks boldly and
to the purpose, confident enough of the truth of his cause, since he thinks
that he has the Scripture, and St. Augustine to back him. But let us hear his
own reason, which in short is this, because forsooth Ratio quidem videtur quia
in proceribus, and populo residet publica authoritas, quae and se a manifesta
Tyrannide vendicare and legitimum Principem eligere sibi possunt, atque etiam
electum si causa subsit imperio privare. Gu^l. Est. Com. in 4. libros Sentent.
lib. 2. page 444.
the Nobles and people, by the Authority residing in them, may defend
themselves from Tyranny, and not only choose themselves a lawful Prince, but
also, cause being given, may throw him from the Throne again.

Though the Dutch and Spaniards were thought to be mortal enemies, yet where
Religion links together, these can also agree, though in wickedness: For with
the Hollander does consent no less man than Tostatus, one so voluminous, that
it is thought that he wrote a sheet for every day he lived; which is thus
testified by this part of his Epitaph:

Primae natalis lu^i folia omnia adaptans,
Nondum sic fuerit pagina trina satis.
Compare his days and leaves, you will find to's praise,
He wrote as many sheets as he lived days.
That he was a great Scholar, is not denied; but 'twas no part of his learning
to assert that Kings may be Reges nostri in multi^ casibus possunt deponi sive
per Papam, sive ab ipsis Regnicolis. Tostat. Com. in III. Reg. cap. 11. Quest.
35.
deposed, not only by the Pope, but the people too, being Positus est ad
procurandas utilitates subditorum, and non suam -- and si secus agat, non est
Rex sed Tyrannu^, and deponi meretur, etc. Tostat. Com. in III. Reg. cap. 12.
Quaest. 4. And he agrees with this in other places, as, in II. Paralip. cap.
10. Quest. 9. in Jud. cap. 9. Quaest. 46. page 146. col. 2. G.
placed in that greatness for the good of the people, not his own; and if he do
otherwise, he is not a King but a Tyrant, and so may be deposed.

To the judgment of Abulensis does another Spaniard, a famous Dominican agree,
who though he gives great glory to the Pope, in his authority over Kings and
Potentates; yet as if all the world were brave fellows, and born to authority,
except Kings, he allows the same power to the people, Absque Pontificis
sententia potest Respublica se defendere and privare Principem dominio in
subditos. Dom. Bannes, in 2. 2. D. Tho. Quest. 12. art. 2. col. 480.
without having any liberty granted them for so doing from the Pope: Nay, Licet
Pontifex non puneat eum, Respublica tamen Christiana puneat eum, imo etiam si
Pontifex videns and sciens toleraret illum Apostatam, ad huc Respub. Christiana
possit illum pellere a Regno, quoniam Pont fex sine ratione permittit illum
impunitum. Bannes ib. col. 481.
though the Pope be so far from endeavoring to punish this King, that though
he do know and see his faults, and yet does tolerate him, yet may the people
deprive him. And immediately before this, Dominicus Bannes gives the people
sole authority over their Kings, to Ib. Respublica potest Principem pellere e
Regno and privare authoritate quam ab illa est sortius, quando sua gubernatione
and corruptis moribus destruit Reipub. commodum and leges quibus Respub. optime
gubernatur. Qua propter cum Princeps iste Apostata vel Haereticus destruat
leges quibus Respub. Christiana gubernatur and conservatur, Cives hujus Reipub.
authoritate hac communi Principem a Regno pellere.
depose them.

Nay, he says, that sometimes, as if the Pope should declare the King to be an
Heretic, Id. Col. 478.
then the Subjects are obliged to quit themselves from their obedience to him,
and fight against him: but yet he would have them to be so cunning, as to
consider first, whether they had strength and force enough to make themselves
Conquerours; and in this case our English Roman Catholics are very much
beholden to him, for putting in an excuse for them, for their not yet Rebelling
against their King, as if obedience were a reproach amongst them.

Something to this purpose is a Countryman of ours, under the name of Andraeas
Philopater; but who was the true Author under this Visard, I cannot swear. It Is
true, it was commonly supposed to be Joseph Creswell, an active Jesuit, of the
Spanish Faction, and an Enemy to his Queen and Country; and a Book of the same
Title, Bibliotheca soc. s^s. page 285.
Alegambe ascribes to this Creswell: others say Robert Parsons was the Author;
and in this Id. P. 415, 451.
Alegambe agrees also, but yet he leaves us in the Suds; and how in this case
to trust to him, I know not, since he has publicly in France been questioned
for his writings: and some think they both club'd to the making of it; and
indeed the brat is so like them, that you would easily judge it to have been
spit out of their Mouths; for such a wicked book must be made by such wretches:
well, let it be as't will; let us hear the Imp it self speak.

It Is certain, we must believe it, and it is the Opinion of all Divines -- Hinc
etiam infert Universa Theologorum and jurisconsultorum Ecclesiasticorum (and
est certum and de fide) quemcunque Principem Christianum, si a Religione
Catholica manifest deflexerit, and alios avocare voluerit, excidere statim
omni potestate ac dignitate ex ipsa vi juris, tum humani tum divini, hocque
ante omnem sententiam supremi Pastoris ac judicis contra ipsum prolatam, and
subditos quoscunque liberos esse ab omni juramenti obligatione, quod ei de
Obedientia tanquam Principi legitimo praestitissent, posteque and debere (si
vires habeant) istius modi hominem tanquam Apostatam, Haereticum, ac Christi
Domini desertorem and Reipublicae suae inimicum hostemque ex hominum
Christianorum dominatu ejicere. Andraeas Philopater, Responsio ad Edictum
Reginae Angliae, 157. page 106, 107.
and Lawyers, that if any Christian Prince fall from the Catholic Faith, and
would have others to follow him, he himself thereby, does forthwith, both by
Divine and Humane Law, though the Pope do no way censure him, fall from all his
Authority and Dignity, and his Subjects are freed from all their Oaths of
Allegiance, which they swear to him as a lawful Prince; and so they may, nay
and ought [if they have force enough to overcome] pull him down from the
Throne, as an Apostate, Heretic, a forsaker of Christ, and an enemy to the
Commonwealth.

This is excellent stuff, fit for Rome and Spain, who then had a Months mind
to England, and had many Irons in the Fire for that purpose, which he did not
question but to bring about, having such good Instruments to work withal,
hoping in time to persuade the English to be brave Rebels, and to believe this
their Doctrine. And the better to bring them about to this lure, Philopater is
at them again and again, several times earnestly persuading them, that this
Proposition about the subjects thus deposing of Kings, is Atque haec certa,
definita and indubitata virorum doctissimorum sententia, doctrinae Apostolicae
conformis plane and consona est. Ib. 158. Id. 160. Est igitur certissima and
indubitata haec communis Doctorum Catholicorum sententia de subditorum
obligatione ad Principes haeretices repell^ndos. -- Id. 221. -- Certe opinat
illa capita sunt doctrinae Catholicae, quae omni Theologorum scholatot retro
saeculis jarn docuit, Christianorum omnium ^nanimis consensu, etc.
the certain determined, and undoubted opinion of all learned men, and plainly
agreeable and consonant to the Apostolical Doctrine: Nay, that it is not only
lawful, but that they are Certe non tantum licet (ut jam dixi) sed summa etiam
juris divini necessitate ac praecepto, imo Conscientiae vinculo arctissimo and
extremo animarum periculo ac discri^^ne Ch^istianis omnibus hoc ipsum incumbit,
si praestare rem possunt. Id. 162.
obliged to do so upon their Conscience, and pain of their souls.

And as if with one stroke he would subdue two of the most potent Kingdoms of
Europe, by necessitating of them to submit to their then Enemy the Spaniard
(for then he endeavored to make himself Master over them both) he puts it down
for a Rule, that he who is not of the Roman Catholic Religion, and not yet
obtained the Crown, Id. 161.
must not by any means be permitted to be King, though his Title be good. In
this case he expressly nominates his design against France, by persuading of
them upon this reason never to admit of the King of Navarre for their
Sovereign: So that if that Nation have had any benefit from that Noble House of
the Bourbons (as they cannot deny, but their obligations to be many) they are
no way beholden to this English Counselor under the Spanish Habit. And for our
selves, we as little; for the same Engine aims also against our Family of the
Stuarts, upon the same account of Religion: and this is also used as an
Argument upon the same account, by his Friend and fellow-Rebel, Father Parsons,
in his Book about the succession of the Crown, under the counterfeit name of R.
Doleman.

Petrus de Ledesma, is willing in all things to harp upon the Authority of the
Pope, and therefore he would have the people before they warred against their
King, to have some recourse to the Pope, or the Emperor; so that here Kings
have got another Temporal Ruler over them: but if this be not so easy and
convenient to be done, what then? Poterit conventum agere, and talem Regem
Regno pellere, and si opus sit vita spoliare. Theol. Moral. Tract. 8. cap. 18.
page 512.
They may then, he says, call a Parliament and depose their King; nay, and
kill him too, says this good Spaniard.

And De justitia, Tom. 1. Tract. 2. disp. 29. col. 213, 214.
Ludovicus Molina another Spaniard, goes much about the same way to consult
his deposing. And now let us see what a Portugal says to this point; and this
shall be no less than Emanuel Sa, one of a great name amongst the Jesuits; he
says expressly in one place, that if Potest per rempublicam privari ob
Tyrannidem, and si non faciat Officium suum, and cum est causa aliqua justa,
and eligi alius a majore part populi. Em. Sa. Aphorism. v. Princeps, 2.
the King tyrannize, and do not execute his Office, and when there is any other
just reason for so doing, then the people may dethrone him, and elect another:
and this he confirms again in Tyrannicem gubernans just acquisitum dominium,
non potest spoliari sine publico judicio, lata vero sententia, potest quisque
fieri Executor: potest autem deponi a populo, etiam qui juravit ei Obedientiam
perpetuam, si monitus non vult corrigi. Id. V. Tyrannus. 2.
another place.

And you may suppose that he was very careful to find out the truth, and in
this case, what was the real meaning of the Roman Church, from which you must
think he would not swerve a jot: I say, you must take him here to be very
exact, since he tells us that he was about forty years in compiling this little
Book. Yet I durst fancy, that his Mother would never have persuaded him with
that earnestness to be a Disciple to the Jesuits, had she thought that the
Enemy of her Country, Portugal, would make use of such Principles as these to
enlarge his own Territories, and so to have made the Lusitanian Dragon, a prey
to the greedy-minded Lion of Castile.

We had formerly Leonardus Lessius, making the Pope swagger over Kings, under
the false name of Guilielmus Singletonus; but here we shall see him without
that Visard, boldly showing himself in his true colors, but upon as bad a
design as the former: Si tantum excre^ca^ Ty^^^nus [he means one of true t^tle
and possession] ut n^n videatur amplius tolerabilis, nec ullum aliud Remedium
supersit, primum a Repub. vel commitiis Regni, vel alio habente authoritatem
esse deponendum, and hostem declarandum; ut in ipsius personam quidquam
attentare. Tum enim desinit esse Princeps. Leon. Less. de justi^ia and jure,
lib. 2. cap. 9. disp. 4. 12.
If (says he) the Prince grow so much a Tyrant, that he seems intolerable, and
no other remedy appearing, the People, or Parliament, or any other in authority
may depose him, and declare him an Enemy; nay, and act against his very Person
too, he then ceasing to be a Prince.

Franciscus Fenardentius, one of the most furious of all the Franciscan Orders,
does somewhat agree with the former, as you will easily judge when you hear him
speak: Conventus legitimus Ordinum t^^us Regni, qui ex Eccle^asticis,
Nobilibus, and populi selectis viris coalescit, cum universi Regni Majestatem
potestatem and faciem referat, sicut Concilium Generale Episcoporum universam
representat Ecclesiam, Regem Religioni and populo perniciosum, Tyrannum and
infestum, potest exauthorare, and alium ejus loco substituere. Franc. Fenard.
Com. in Esther, page 87.
The Parliament composed of the Clergy, Nobility and Commons, representing the
Majesty and power of the whole Kingdom (as a general Council of Bishops does
the whole Church) may depose their King, being a Tyrant, and hurtful to
Religion and the People, and then may choose another into his place.

To these Divines we may add an old noted Lawyer Andraeus de Isernia, who tells
us, that to whom the Government of the Kingdom is given, to the same person is
also committed all things that belong to the Government, whereby the people
deprive themselves of all Relations to such authority, -- Non remansit apud
Populum, qui non potest revocare, nisi Rex male se gereret, tunc expelleret
Regem Tyrannizantem, sicut Tarquinium Romani, Andr. de Isern. Comment. in usus
Feudorum. Tit. Quae sint Regalia. V. Monetae, page 743.
Unless the King do not govern well, for then, forsooth, they may expel him the
Nation, as the Romans of old did Tarquinius.

Adamus Tannerus, a German Jesuit of great repute in his Country, both with the
Emperor and other Princes; yet for all the many favors received from them, he
must not contradict the Principles of his Order and Church; and therefore he
positively maintains that Kings may lawfully sometimes be deposed: and because
he would not seem to do any thing without Reason, he thus tells you upon what
goodly foundation this bad Principle stands, because forsooth, Ratio est tum
quia Respub. uti in Principem, suam potestatem contulit, ita ab eodem potest ex
justa causa auferre. Tum quia quaeque Respub. habet potestatem sibi
prospiciendi de legitimo C^pite, quale non est hic, qu^ ex Pastore populi in
Lupum degeneravit. Ad. Tanner. Theolog. Scholast. Tom. 3. disp. 4. Quest. 8.
dub. 3. Number. 32, 33.
as the people do deliver their power up to the King, so upon just account,
they can take it from him again: and also because every Commonwealth has the
Authority to see that they have a lawful head; and he, who from the Pastor of
the people turns to be a Wolf, is no lawful Governor.

But now let us see the Opinion of a Scotch-man, and that held one of the
learned of his time; his Divinity he got from Sorbonne, but where he got his
Politics, I know not, unless from the practice of his Church of Rome: however,
take it as it is: Totus populus est supra Regem, and in aliquo eventu potest
eum exauthorare, quemadmodum Romani Tarquinium superbum imperio exuerunt, sed
non potest de jure sine maxima and evidentissima causa. Jo. Major. in quartum
sententiarum. Did. 11. Quaest. 10.
The people are above their King, and in some cases may depose him, as the
Romans did Tarquin: yet this they cannot do lawfully but upon urgent occasions.

This was a fit man to be Buchanan's Master, who trod his steps to an hair in
these Principles, as appears by his ungrateful De jure Regni apud Scotos.
Dialogue presented to King James: But the Scholar had not so good esteem of
his Masters skill in History, as appears by the Satirical Epigram against him,
though Major deserved better.

Cum scateat nugis solo cognomine Major, G. Buchan. Epigram, lib. 1. page 337.

Nec sit in immenso pagina sana libro:
Non mirum titulis quod se veracibus ornat,
Nec semper Mendax fingere Creta solet.
Since, as he says, he is only Great in name,
And with false trifles does his story frame:
No wonder that he calls himself so right,
Since greatest liars sometimes truth may write.
But that we might not at this time think our Neighbors worse A conference
about the next succession of the Crown of England. Imprinted at N. with
License, 1594. Part. 1. cap. 2. page 32. Id. Page 36.
than ourselves; let us hear an Englishman speak to this case, and this shall
be the noted Jesuit, Robert Parsons, under the Visard of R. Doleman: -- Yea not
only in this point (says he) has the Commonwealth authority to put back the
next Inheritors upon lawful considerations; but also to dispossess them that
have been lawfully put in possession, if they fulfill not the Laws and
Conditions, by which, and for which their dignity was given them. And again:

-- So yet retains still the Commonwealth her Authority, not only to
restrain the same Prince, if he be exorbitant, but also to chasten and remove
him upon weighty considerations.

In one place he seems to vapor with his Compact, though I would gladly know
when, where, by whom, and how in England, (for that is his drift) this Agreement
was, and made conditional? and by what Laws the people are made Judges and
Punishers? but let us hear the Jesuit himself speak. --

-- Yea, with such plain Exceptions, Promises, and Oaths of both Id. Cap. 4. p.
73.
Parties (I mean between the King and Commonwealth at the day of his admission
or Coronation) as if the same be not kept, but wilfully broken on either part,
then is the other not bound to observe his Promise neither, though never so
solemnly made or sworn; for that in all Bargains, Agreements and Contracts,
where one Party is bound mutually and reciprocally to the other by Oath, Vow,
or Condition, there, if one side go from his promise, the other stands not
obliged to perform his.

In another place he turns the Condition into an Obligation, affirming, that
the people not only may, but that they ought depose their Kings, thus:

-- Then is the Commonwealth not only free from all Oaths made by Id. Page
77, 78.
her of Obedience or Allegiance to such unworthy Princes, but is bound moreover
for saving the whole body to resist, chasten and remove such evil heads, if she
be able.

And then again to weaken the succession by blood, and to make an Heir-apparent
but a trifle, and to make the outward Ceremonies too much essential to the
Office, he thus in his fury gives you his Infallible Decree: --

-- I must needs affirm to be most absurd, base and impious, that flattery Id.
Cap. 5. page 120.
before mentioned of Belloy and his Companions -- where he holds, that only
succession of blood is the thing without farther approbation, which makes a
King, and that the Peoples consent to him, which is next by birth, is nothing
at all needful, be he what he will; and that his admission, inunction, or
Coronation, is only a matter of external Ceremony, without any effect at all
for increase or Confirmation of his right. These, I say, are unlearned, fond,
and wicked assertions.

And, as if all the world agreed with him upon his main design, he thus
flatters himself and his Readers: --

-- That a King upon just causes may be deposed, I think both Id. Part 2. cap.
4. p 61.
Parties, though never so contrary between themselves, will easily agree.

But before I leave this wicked Book, I shall tell thee, that the Doctrine of
it was so pleasing to the Palates of our Independents, that about the beginning
of 1648, they got it reprinted, though in another garb; that of Father Parsons
his putting out, being by way of Dialogue, but the latter was by way of
Speeches or Orations, Gilbert Mabbot being Imprimator; and not long before the
happy Restoration of his Majesty, the Dialogue was publicly reprinted again,
and to good purpose I warrant you.

Johannes Mariana the Spanish Jesuit, sufficiently known for his variety of
Learning, and the smooth stroke of his Pen, and no less for his pernicious
Principles spread over the world to encourage Treason and Murder, amongst his
other Impieties, he persuades subjects to War against Certe a Repub. unde ortum
habet Regia potestas, rebus exigentibus Regem in jus vocari posse, and si
sanitatem r^spuat Principatu spoliari. Non ita in principem jure potestatis
trans^ulit, ut non sibi majorem reserva^t potestatem. Jo. Mar. de Regi and
Regis Institutione, lib. 1. cap. 6. page 57.
their Kings, telling them that in some cases they may also depose them, nay,
and Murder them too; of which in its due place.

But they may say that the Parisians received him with some Rigor, though yet,
I do not think that they will positively affirm, that this was justly done, for
the Position now in hand, unless they will also censure some of the main
Pillars of their Church. And the Germane Jesuit, Refutatio Aphorismorum, cap.
3. ad Aphor. 1. p. 158. 94.
Sehastianus Heissius, in this case does Apologize for him, declaring that in
this point (that Kings may be deposed by their Subjects) he writ not amiss.

Nor is this Doctrine unpleasant to all the French, as appears by one of the
noted writers amongst them Neque enim potest qui verus e^t dominus hostiliter
invadi^ sed via tantum juris a tota communicate moneri, and si incorrigibilis
fuerit, aut detineri debet ad tempus, aut de^oni. Quod non cadit adversus
Principem, nisi juxta allegata and p^obata, and quidem a tota Communitate. R^b.
Cenalis Arboricensis, de ut^ iusque gladii sacultate, Tom. 2. page 119.
Robertus Cenalis, who shows himself a lusty Champion for this cause against
Kings, whom, he says, may be brought to a trial and deposed.

To these I might add the Italian Jesuit, Moral. Quaest. Tom. 2. Tract. 29. c.
1. 12.
Vincentius Filliucius; the Spanish Friar Mendicant, In D. Tho. Tom. 1. col.
1157.
Michael Salon; and the learned Dominican of the same Nation, De justitia, lib.
5 Quaest. 1. art. 3.
Dominicus Soto, with whom the Benedictan of our own Country agrees, viz.
Denique and recte Sotus -- cum hujusmodi Tyrannus habeat jus and titulum justum
in Regno, non est nisi perjudicem deponendus, aut suo jure spoliandus. Greg.
Sayr. Clavis Regia, lib. 7. cap. 10. 3.
Gregory Sayer; but to be too particular, would be tedious: And so I shall pass
by Tyrannicidium seu Scitum Catholicorum de Tyranni internecione, Quest. 2, 3.
Jacobus Kellerus, the German Jesuit; and Mr. Grounds of Obedience and
Government, page 122, 123, 124, 133, 135, 136, 151, 154, 157, etc.
Thomas White an English Priest, well known amongst us for his odd style and
opinions, with several others.

CHAP. IV. That Kings may lawfully be killed by their own Subjects.
SOlon that ancient Lawgiver to the Athenians, though it was his design to put
a curb to all Vice, and root out Iniquity; yet amongst his many other good and
wholesome Sanctions, he made no law against a man's killing of his Father, not
thinking that men could be so unnatural, as to destroy that which gave them a
being, seeing the very Storks venture all, for the preservation of their
ancient Parents. And the more modern Inhabitants of Vicaragua in America Tho.
Gages survey of the West Indies, Page 74, 75.
Mexicana, though Infidels, had such esteem for their Governors, (the Fathers
of the Country) that they made no Law against the murdering of Kings: Happy
people! whose innocent simplicity, made them not capable to apprehend such
monstrous Villainy!

And must Christians be out-stript by these honest Heathens in virtue? or is it
decreed that Christianity should be a prop to wickedness? Must we (as they say
of the Gloss of Orleance) contradict the Text? when we are bid to obey, must we
Rebel? when we are bid to suffer, must we kill and Murder? Or must we think
that the nulling is the fulfilling of a Law? May we interpret all Commands, as
the Glossator upon the Canon Law, with Oppositions, that to Statuimus, id est,
abrogamus, did. 4. Statuimus.
Decree, signifies to abrogate or null; or as another does with the Civil-Law,
that by Quo magis, id est, quo minus. Cod. lib. 3. de judiciis, Tit. 1. c. 3.
Quoties.
so much the more, must be meant so much the less? No: yet such there are, or
else we do not rightly understand the Text, or their Comment.

The learned Lord Hist. Hen. VII. p. 134.
Verulam tells us, that conditional Speeches, with Ifs and Ands does not
qualify Treason: Burdet the Merchant in London suffered as a Traitor under
Edward the Fourth, only for saying, that he would make his Son Inheritor of
the Crown, meaning his own House: and Collingburn under Richard the Third, for
making this Pasquil upon his favorites Lovel, Ratcliff, and Catsby, with an
allusion to himself by a Bore, his Cognizance or Badge in Arms: The Rat, the
Cat, and Lovel the Dog,
Rule all England under the Hog.


Since the Crowns of Princes are so nice, people should be more circumspect how
they treat of them, especially when it concerns a mischief, and the people may
think that they are somewhat related to it; and though the Rule be but obscure,
they are apt to take the staff by the wrong end, and apply it to their own
pleasures and desires of Novelty. Though the Letter Edwardum occidere nolite
timere bonum est.
To kill Edward, do not fear, is a good thing.
was dubious, and might have a double interpretation; yet Gurney and Maltravers
had will and malice enough, to understand it for the murder of the King. When
Parry read in Cardinal Allans Book, that Queen Elizabeth had no right to the
Crown, being an Heretic, it encouraged him to endeavor her Murder: And the
two Henry's the Th^rd and Fourth of France, upon the same zealous account got
their deaths, by the assassinating hands of Clement and Ravallai^.

It Is but a poor plea that Andraeas Eudaemon-joannes makes in behalf Confutat.
Antico^ cap. 1. page 12.
of the Jesuits, when to quit them from Anticotons accusation, viz. that they
allow that Kings may be killed; replyeth, that Jesuits never writ that a
private man might murder a King: since those who only except against the
actions of private men, do thereby allow the same wickedness to be done by the
Magistrates or those in Authority. And he is as much a Villain, and as far from
Christianity, who allows that a Rump or Parliament may judge and kill their
Sovereign, as he that commends the same fact in a private person, be it a
Jacobin or any other.

Many we have [and some, I dare say, who speak cordially and with grief] who
rant bravely against the wickedness of the late Murder of King Charles the
First, and do lay it as a guilt too upon our Church; and yet a Jury might be
called of some of the chief Doctors of Rome, who would have eased the Rump of
their labor and iniquity, and would themselves have brought in the innocent
King guilty.

What shall we think of Leonardus Lessius, a Belgic Jesuit, of as great
repute, as most of that Order? However, take his judgment in short: if a King
do not Rule, but for the harm of his People, what must be done with him? He
tells you, That Secundo potest quis esse Tyrannus, ratione duntaxat
^dministrationis, ut si is qui est verus Prince^s, Regni administrationem
flectat non ad bonum publicum, sed ad sua privata compendia, onerando illud
injustis exactionibus, vendendo Oss^cio judicum, c^ndendo leges sibi commodas,
^ub^ico parum utiles. Talis non potest a Privatis interunis, (...). Leon. L^ss.
de justitia, lib. 2. cap. 9. dub 4. 10.
such a King cannot be slain by private men, as long as he remains a Prince.
Yet let us see this a little explained by the same Pen. Ib. 1^. Add, si tan^u^
exerescat Tyrannis, ut non videatur am^lius toletabilis, nec ullum aliud
rem^^^m sup^rsit, primum a R^pub. vel Comitus Regni, vel al^o haben^e
author^tatem esse deponendum, and (...) siem declarandum; ut i^ IPS^US PERSONAM
LICEAT QUICQUID ATTENTARE, TUM ^^IM DESINIT ESSE PRINCEPS.
But if (says he) his Tyranny grow to such an height, that he seems
intolerable, and no other remedy remaining, then the People, Parliament, or any
other having Authority may depose him, and declare him an Enemy; whereby ANY
THING MAY BE ATTEMPTED AGAINST HIS PERSON, because HE THEN cease to be a KING.

Here we have enough to ease Lessius of some Loyalty and honesty; viz. that
Kings may be deposed, and then are not Kings, so that they may be killed as
private persons. But had he weighed his Doctrine as he did his meat, in this he
would either have been silent, or appeared in another Opinion; or had he been
as temperate in one as the other, his Politics would not have thus much
out-swell'd his meager Carkas. As he had no Tutor for his Greek, it had been
well, if he had had no Church, or Example to have instructed him in such
pernicious Principles. If in his other writings, he affords no honester
Doctrines than such as these; for ought that I know, he might have been more
advantageous to Christendom, had he followed the first advice of his Parents,
and employed himself in a Trade. And he, who publicly repented, for the
breaking of a foolish glass, might in true reason be more troubled for his
divulging such wicked Principles: but this it may be, he thought would have
made him an Heretic, though 'twould have proved him more honest and a better
subject.

Another Jesuit, Gregorius de Valentia, speaks somewhat to the former purpose,
though a little mincingly, yet plain enough to understand his meaning: For
though he says, that a private Person may Nulli particulari licet eum
occidere, Nam id pertinet ad Rempub. quae posset jure oppugnare illum, and
vocare in subsidium cives. Valent. Tom. 3. disp. 5. q. 8. punct. 3.
not kill a King; yet observe his Reason, Because, says he, that belongs to
the Commonwealth, which may oppose him, and call the people in to their
assistance.

But Ludovicus Molina, another Spanish Jesuit, and of as great repute as any,
speaks a little more plainly; first, he says, that any body may kill a King in
his own defense: Upon which account a man may frame what silly pretenses he
will: it is true, he affirms, that otherwise it is not lawful for a private man
to kill him; but then let us observe what comes after: The people, says he,
may depose their King, and punish him when he is deposed. But because he names
not Posset ita Respub. ipsa quo ad Capita convenire, eique resistere, lataque
sententia deponereillum ab administratione -- atque illum depositum PUNIRE.
Ante latam tamen sententiam nefas privatis esset eum interficere. Molina de
justitia, Tom. 4. Tract. 3. disp. 6. 2.
exactly the way of his Punishment, let us take it by a consequence, in these
words: It Is not lawful for private men to kill the King, before he be declared
deposed: which plainly intimates that after his deposition it may be done.

And a little plainer than him does another Spanish Jesuit speak, viz.
Franciscus Toletus, a Cardinal, and the first that was of his Order, and held
to be the most famous of his time for Piety and Judgment: But let them be
never so wise or virtuous, something or other is in the wind, that
over-perswades them to maintain such abominable Principles as these. Tolets
Rule is this, that a wicked King Tyrannum administratione, qui habet verum
titulum, sed Tyrannice tractat subdiditos -- hunc non licet absque publica
auctoritate occidere. Tolet. Instruct. Sacerdot. lib. 5. c. 6. 10.
cannot be slain without public Authority: For which good Doctrine, the Rump
may rejoice to see their actions vindicated (if they supposed Virtue to be
Vice, and themselves a Parliament) by a man of such declared prudence and
honesty, one of great repute with several Popes, and Henry the Fourth of
France, who tasted to the purpose of the mischief of these Doctrines; and one
so hugely valued for his learning and discretion, that Gregory the Thirteenth
thought it not fit that his writings should lie under the censure of any man,
but might be Printed without license. But here, I dare say, the Cardinal has
been wide from Truth; yet has this Opinion of Tolet been several times printed
in several Nations.

And if you think that these Spaniards speak not plain enough yet, we shall
show you another Jesuit, but of another Country, viz. Brabant, yet under the
subjection of Spain. And this is Martinus Becanus, of great esteem amongst the
learned; honored by the Emperor Matthias, and Confessor to Ferdinand the
Second: but let us hear him speak, and then we shall scarce think him fit to be
employed so near the Conscience of so great a Monarch as Caesar, since he
attributes too much power to one, who thinks himself a better man in Temporals
one way or another than the Emperor: -- Sometimes Aliquando factum est, ut
etiam Reges essent leprosi, erg^ -- poterat pontifex manda^e ut feorsim
habitarent, and si nollent obedire, ut VITA PRIVARENTUR, NIHIL CERTIUS. -- H^nc
colligimus. Pontificem duplici titulo potuisse Reges privare suo Regno, primo
quia poterat eos si ^ONTUMA^ES es^ent PRIVARE VITA, Ergo and Regno, de hoc nemo
DUBITAT. Becan. Controvers. Angl. page 115.
(says he) it so falls out that Kings become wicked or Heretics, then the
Pope may command that they be removed; which if they disobey, they may be
killed; and then this, nothing is MORE CERTAIN. And again: -- The Pope may
deprive Kings of their Kingdoms upon a double account; for if they be
CONTUMACIOUS, he may have them Killed, and so they are also deprived of their
Kingdom; and that this may be done, no man does doubt.

But yet if you think that this is not plain enough, we will afford you another
Jesuit and a Spaniard, ^^z. Franciscus Suarez, a man that seemed to excel
Abulensis by the multitude of his writings, and one of the greatest esteem of
all his Order, Pope Paul the Fifth himself having honored him with several
Letters. That Kings may be killed, Suarez affirms no less than three times in
one Defens fid. lib. 6. cap. 4. 18.
Paragraph; but a little before this he speaks more plain, by endeavoring to
prove it by reason, after this manner:

Id. Lib 6. c. 4. 14. Postquam Rex leg^time depositus est, jam non est Rex
neque Princeps legitimus, and consequenter non potest in illo subsistere
assertio, quae de legitimo Rege loquitur. Imo si Rex talis post depositionem
legitimam in sua pertinacia perseverans, Regnum per vim retineat, incipit esse
Tyrannus in Titulo, quia non est legitimus Rex, nec justo titulo Regnum
possidet declaratur hoc amplius in Rege Haeretico, nam statim per haeresim ipso
facto privatur aliquo modo dominio, and proprietate sui Regni -- Post senten^am
latam omnino privatur Regno, ita ut non possit justo titulo illud possidere.
Ergo ex tunc poterit tanquam omnino Tyrannus tractari, and Consequenter a
QUOCUNQUE PRIVATO POTERIT INTERFICI.
When a King is deposed, then he is neither lawful King nor Prince. -- And if
therefore he endeavor to keep the Kingdom under him by strength, then he is an
Usurper, because he is no lawful King, having no true title to the Crown. --
For that after the Decree of deposition gone out against him, he is altogether
deprived of his Kingdom, so that he cannot with a just title possess it, and so
he may be used as a Tyrant or Usurper, and by consequence, MAY BE SLAIN BY ANY
PRIVATE MAN: And this he says, if he be an Heretic.

And is not this as clear as the noonday, and as plain as a Pike-staff? is not
this downright to call a spade a spade, and to say that Kings may be deprived,
and then killed by any body? Nor was this Principle set down without great
consideration, and firmly believed to be true, not only by Suarez, but the
chief of Portugal and others. As for himself, so far was he ever from recanting
or thinking this Doctrine to be amiss, but agreeable to the Church of Rome,
that the Jesuits tell us, that when he was told how his book had been burnt in
England, he declared his consent so freely to his Principles contained Phil.
Alegambe, p. 138.
therein, that he said, that nothing would be more pleasant and desirable to
him than to have been burnt in the same flames with his book. And he was so
assured that his principles were agreeable to all of his Church, that he had
the confidence to dedicate such stuff to all Kings and Princes, who were Roman
Catholics.

That it was held in great veneration with others, cannot be denied: for we
shall scarce see a book honored with such censures of approbation. Alphonso a
Castello Branco, Bishop of Coimbria, and Privy Councellor to the King of Spain,
Philip the Third, declares that he has read it exactly over, and finds all
things in it to agree to the holy Scriptures, Apostolical Traditions, General
Councils, and Papal Decrees. Fernando Martiner Mascaregnus, Bishop of Sylvis
says, that he has also read it over, and finds nothing in it but what is
Orthodox. And Martiner Alonso a Mello, another Privy Councellor and Bishop of
Lamego says also that he has read it over, and thinks it worthy to be
published, for the public good of Christendom. And the Provincial Jesuits of
Portugal and Germany allow it the same privileges, and so does the
Inquisition. Nor is this all, but the University of Alcala de Henarez, after a
serious view and consideration of it, declare that there is nothing in it
contrary to the Roman Catholic faith, nor any thing in it, but what ought to
be approved of and commended, every thing being according to their own opinions
and judgments.

All this put together, is enough to blot out the bad reception it received by
the Senators of Paris, the Kings Murder then fresh in their memories, and
their hatred to the Jesuits being strong motives. As for the Sorbone (an
Association really to be honored in many things) its Doctors, as most of other
Convocations, are often so carried on with interest and faction, that many times
in the most considerable things, we shall find their Decrees to clash one with
another.

It Is true, this ancient College of Sorbone [built about 1250, by Robert de
Sorbone] has for several ages kept up a great reputation and splendor; but
they have somewhat been troubled by the springing up of the Jesuits, with whom,
I may say, they and the University have had a continual bickering for this
hundred years, and of late have something lost ground, especially at Rome,
where the Fathers carry the bell away clearly from the Doctors, both in repute,
authority and preferments, which are such considerable Arguments, that of late
times, viz. since 1650, the interest of the Jesuits has got in a manner the
upper hand in the very College of Sorbone and Paris; the latter of which has
only a company of Curates, too weak to oppose against the subtle Loyolists;
and if the secular Authority do not intervene, they will all in time submit to
the Principles and sway of the wily Fathers of Clermont. And it is very
probable, that the Jesuits must either fall in the hight of their pride, like
the Knighttemplers, or else they will quite ruin the glory, if not the being
of other Religious Orders: more of envy than emulation still breeding between
them.

But it is not the Jesuits only who are guilty in spreading these wicked
Doctrines, but others too; for Petrus de Ledesma, a noted Dominican in Spain,
having proposed this Question, What may the people do, when a lawful King
tyrannizeth over them? and the result of his answer is, Poterit conventum
agere, and talem Regem Regno pellere, and si opus sit vita spoliare. Pet. de
Ledesm. Theol. Moral. de virtut. Theol. Tract. 8. cap. 18. page 512.
that they may call a meeting, and depose him, and if need be KILL HIM.

This Principle, as pernicious as it is, was by Ledesma first published in
Spanish, and after by Raymundus de Ledesou translated into Latin; and besides
other approbations, had the privilege of the King of Spain. It Is strange, if
this be not believed as Orthodox, that Kings should thus be persuaded to sign
an Order for their own execution, as if their Bigot-ministers took a pleasure
in gulling of them to set the weapon to their own throats, as the cunning
fellow did the Ape in the Barbers Shop.

The Guisian Faction in France, making a firm League or Covenant, pretending to
maintain the Roman Religion, but at last bandy'd against their King Henry the
Third, filled the Nation full of wickedness and rebellion: And every man fought
(as it is the fashion in all such troubles) according as he was qualified, so
that there was not only slashing, scolding and cursing, but scribbling too. At
last the Roman-Covenanters grew so stubborn, that they were resolved not to
acknowledge Henry for their King: and in vindication of this consultation, one
of their chief Boutefeu's sets himself to write; but before his Press had done
working, the King was murdered by one of their Gang, viz. Jaques Clement a
Jacobin.

However, out comes the De justa Hen. III. abdicatione.
Vindication, stuffed with lies and Villainy: In one place he observes by the by,
that Populo in Regem potestas est vitae and necis. Ib. Page 33.
the people have power over their Kings both of life and death. In another
place, that to kill a King who tyrannizeth, -- De medio sustu lerit, tam absit
perduellionis nomen, quam vere hoc justitiae ac zeli opus, antesignanis in eo
sanctis, probante natura, lege, Scriptura debet judicari. Ib. Page 64, 65.
is so far from being treason, that it should rather be esteemed an act of
justice and Zeal, being agreeable to Nature, Law, Scripture, and the practice
and precepts of holy men: And Ib. Page 269. De eo qui dubitet, hunc communi
sensu carere oporteat, ignorumque prorsus esse rerum humanarum.
he that doubts of it must want common-sence; nay, it may be done by any Ib.
Page 270.
private man, especially amongst Ib. Quod inter Christianos tanto magis licere
debe^, quanto magis est quod iis a Tyrannis non reipub. tantum, sed and
Religionis periculum creatur.
Christians.

This is plain enough to show his judgment: but when he heard that the King
was murdered, then he rejoiced to the purpose, saying that it was done to the
Id. P. 450.
triumph and joy of all good men; and a little after abuses Page 453, 454, 455.
several places of holy Scripture to make the abominable fact more glorious.

But probably 'twill be retorted that it is but a Pamphlet, the Author not
putting his name to it, and so not to be regarded. It Is true, no name is to it,
it being not safe so to do when it came out, for then Henry the Fourth was
King, and went on prosperously against the Leaguers, and the Author then
amongst them, his name was Jehan Boucher, born in Paris of a good Family, and
was Preacher at St. Benits, the ancientest Church, I think, in that City; but
an implacable fire-band amongst the Covenanters: and as he had thus showed
himself an enemy against his Sovereign Henry of Valois, so did he carry on the
same spirit in opposing Henry the Fourth of Bourbon, against whom he also
printed above once, nine of his zealous preachments, making the Cardinal of
Placentia their Patron. And for this good service against his own King and
Country, being forced to skulk into Flanders, he was there, for his zealous
deeds in behalf of Spain, made Canon of Tournay, and he was Doctor of Divinity
before this at Paris.

An obscure piece of Policy for Rebels thus to be protected and preferred, since
it is one of the main encouragements to Treason, (and this may be every Monarchs
case) for the Villain to know, that, let fortune be never so much his enemy in
his undertakings, yet he may be secure in another Dominions, where he may take
breath, and it may be, be encouraged to another enterprise: But these things
are above me, and not to my purpose.

But for the better clearing of this Doctrine, you shall see it vindicated by
as great a firebrand as the former, and both upon the King of Spains account,
though the first against his King and Country France, and the latter against
his Queen and Country England; and this is Robert Parsons, with whom formerly
Mr. Morton [after, the Learned Bishop of Durham] having some contest, he brings
in this Dr. Boucher, saying, that when the Commonwealth has condemned and
declared any Tyrant for a public enemy, he may be slain by a private man. To
which Parsons our English Jesuit thus replyeth:

Whereto I answer, that then he is no private man, for that he does P. R. Quiet
and sober rekoning, chap. 5. 44. page 321.
it by a public Authority of the Commonwealth, as does the executioner that
cutteth off a Noble-mans head, by Order and Authority of the public
Magistrate: so as in this, Mr. Mortons distinction serves him to no purpose,
for that neither for private or public injuries can a private man, AS A
PRIVATE MAN, that is to say, by private authority kill any Prince, though he
were a Tyrant, for any cause either private or public whatsoever.

And to afford you another hint of his judgment in this case, know, that in
another of his Answer to the fifth part of Sir Edward Cooks Reports, Epist.
Dedicat.
books, he does question whether Edward Squire committed treason or no, though
his crime was endeavoring to make away his Queen Elizabeth by Poison, at the
instigation as it is supposed of Father Walpoole an English Jesuit then
practicing in Spain against his Queen and Country.

As for Father Parsons, what by his treasons against his Sovereign, and furious
Zeal for Rome, he got so much repute amongst the people of his Order, that some
of them had thoughts and hopes to get him a Cardinals Cap; in the mean time, he
was several years Rector of the English College at Rome, where he dyed 1610,
and in its Chapel he is honored with a fair Marble Monument, with a long
commendatory Epitaph.

We have another Frenchman, who vindicates the murder of the aforesaid Fran.
Verone, Apol. pour Jehan Chastel, p. 29.
King Henry the Third as lawful; but this he only does by the by, yet plain
enough to show his treasonable malice: and this is one, who calls himself
Franzois Verone. But his design is upon another person, though much of the
same account. For, anno 1594, one John Chastel, a Scholar to the Jesuits, with
a knife wounded King Henry the Fourth in the mouth, and struck out one of his
teeth, intending to have murdered him: upon which Chastel was condemned to
suffer as a Traitor.

Franzois Verone undertakes the vindication of the Villain, declaring that it
was Apol. part ^ c 7 p. ^1. est un^ctege^^ue^, ^ertue^x, and heroique, com(...)
aux ^^^^grande and pl^s recommendabl^s, qui se so^ent veuz e^ l'antiquite, de
l'hi ^o^e tant sacree que pro^^^e.
a generous, virtuous, and an heroic act, and comparable to the most renowned
and great deeds of the ancients, either in sacred or profane History; and that
Chastel Page 23.
was a true Martyr. And he goes over again, that it was Part. 2. page 25.
Son^acte est purement just, vertueux and herioque.
an action purely just, virtuous and heroic: Nay, that it was Id. Part. 4.
cap. I. page 147. -- c'est un act tres-sainct, tres humain, tres digne, tres
louable and t^es recommendable.
most holy, most humane, most worthy, most to be praised and recommended, and
Id. Cap. 3. page 155, 156. -- Ce que Nature mesme enseigne, and qui est justify
par le droict, tant civil que Canonique -- Celle que la Nature enseigne, and
conformement a Dieu, aux loix, au Decrets and a l'Eglise.
justified by both the Civil and Canon Law; and that it is natural, agreeable
to God, and all Laws, and Decrees, and the Church. And as for Chaestel himself,
he calls him Part. 3. cap. 10. Ame heureuse! etc.
Happy soul! and runs on in a rambling commendation of him. And lastly, as for
those who condemned Chastel, he says, that Part 4. cap. 2. page 152. -- Ilz
ont juge contre Dieu and sa Parolle, contre l'Eglise, and les decrets, contre
les Estats and loix fondamentales du Royaume.
they have judged against God, against the holy Scriptures, against the Church
and her Decrees, and against the States and Fundamental Laws of the Kingdom.

What this Franzois Verone was, I cannot certainly tell; only this we know,
that somewhat about the same time there was a French Jesuit of the same name,
who a little after writ some books against the Protestants. But whether they
were both one and the same person, I cannot determine; yet Mr. History of King
James the Sixth of Scotland, p. 156.
William Sanderson says positively that he was a Jesuit.

See, Jesuita sicarius, p. 271, 272.
Another there is, who keeps a great deal of triumphing and rejoicing at the
murder of Henry the Third, as an action most commendable; but because he is
unwilling to be known, I shall trouble my self no farther with him: since we
need not make use of such obscure persons, seeing Pope Sixtus the Fifth himself
in a full Consistory of Cardinals, took the pains and pleasure to speak a long
Oration September. 11. 1589.
in commendation of that wicked act.

These have hit the nail on the head, speak to the purpose, without any mincing
or dwindling their cutthroat principles, plainly describing Laws and Methods
to murder in spite of either sacred or civil honesty. Nor are those without
shame and guilt, who allow villainy by a consequence, by making but one trifling
exception or so, open away for other means to the same end: the question not
being whether one may be killed this way or that way, but whether any way at
all; and it is but small comfort to a man, to tell him that he Quid interest an
ferro an veneno perimas. Jo. Marian. de Reg. Institut. lib. 1. cap. 7.
shall be murdered, but not after such a fashion; it is all one to Titius or
Sempronius, whether they suffer by a private or public way, it being not the
breath of this or that Authority, but the Instrument of execution, that does
the feat, and renders the body fit for the worms; and whosoever commands it,
it is probable that it is but one, and a private man too, that renders the other
a real sufferer.

And amongst these mutterers of King-murthering, we may esteem a Spanish Friar
Mendicant, viz. Michael Bartholomeus Salon, who says, that Nulli privato
liceat occidere, quia cum ille habeat justum titulum non est deponendus nec
puniendus quin prius audietur and judicetur, vel a superiore habente
authoritate ad id, vel ab ipsa Republica quando deest superiorem. Mich. Salon.
in D. Tho. Tom. 1 col. 1157.
a King may not be killed by a private man, because he having a just title, is
not to be deposed nor punished, till he be first heard and accordingly judged,
either by some having authority to do so [I know not what he means, unless he
grant some such Authority] or by the Commonwealth.

Nor should we abuse Theol. scholast. Tom. 3. disp. 4. Q. 8. du^. 3. numb. 32.
Adamas Tannerus, a German Jesuit, if we place him amongst those, who by
excepting against a private person, does hint a strange authority to be in the
people or Commonwealth, whereby the safety of Princes may be hazarded.

And Dominicus Soto, one of the most famous Dominicans of Spain, and one of the
chiefest Divines of the Tridentine Council, as also Confessor to the Emperor,
tells us that -- Communis consensus est, nemini licere ipsum privatim
interimere. Et ratio est quod cum jus habeat ad Regnum, non est illo, nisi per
publicum judicium expoliandus, ut scilicet audiatur. lata vero in eum
sententia, quisque potest institui executionis minister. Soto, de justitia,
lib. 5. Quaest. 1. Art. 3.
it is the common opinion, that it is not lawful to kill a King upon a private
account: and his reason is with the former, that seeing he has a right to the
Crown, he is not to be deprived of it, but by a public judgment, where he
must be heard: but if once a Decree be gone out against him, that then any one
may be the Executioner. And he also lays down for a positive rule, that any
one may kill a King in his own defense.

As for (d) Vincentius Filliucius the Italian, and Not in An. Senicae Tragoed
part 2. 920.
Antonius Delrio a Moral. Quaest. Tom. 2. Tract. 29. cap. 1. 12.
of Antwerp, both famous Jesuits, they both twang upon the same string of a
private person, by which means they leave an open gap for the Superior
Magistrates to bring their Sovereign to the block. And the High German Jesuit,
Sebastianus Heissius, treads much in the same way, though he leaves a sent
somewhat more rank behind him; for he expressly allows the Magistrates some
Authority in this case, affirming, that -- Teneo neminem privatum, extra
necessitatem se suosve defendendi manus infer posse legitimo principi, ante
publicum judicialiter latam sententiam, qua Tyrannus hostique Reipub.
declaretur, adeoque potestate qua poteabatur, ab his quibus fas est exciatur.
-- Habes communem Jesuitarum sententiam, ac proinde nihil principibus periculi
imminet, quando totius populi sensu pro Tyrannis habentur, si populus sequatur
Doctorum ac gravium virorum (quod Mariana exigit) consilium; iique Jesuit sint
ut jam audivisti. Sebast. Heiss. Refutatio Aphorismorum, cap. 3. ad Aphor. 1.
page 158. 94.
a King ought not to he killed by a private man, before judgment be pronounced
against him, as an enemy and a Tyrant: And this he says is the common opinion
of all Jesuits.

Here the Jesuit Heissius gives us an hint of one of his Order, Johannes
Mariana, who is as particular as any in the way of King-killing, laying down
the several Methods and means of that wicked art: but because part of his De
Rege and Regis ins^^t^tione, lib. 1. c 6, etc.
Book is large upon this subject, and is so plain, that some of their moderate
writers wish he had not been so open; I shall not speak more of it, it being
common to be had, and as commonly known, though Hisp^n. Bibl. Tom. 2. p. 285.
Andreas Schottas, Amphitheat. Honoris.
Carolus Scribanius, and some other Jesuits do rather commend than disprove it.
And whether the propagation of these opinions be not dangerous to Princes,
reason and example will over-say the mere negative of Heissius, unless his
authority were better grounded than upon his bare word.

But what need I trouble the Reader and my self with particulars, when the
whole Club of the French Jesuits (if we may credit their own title) when it was
their design to clear themselves from any bad Principles of Government, at the
same time confess, that Kings may lawfully sometimes be deposed and cut off?
And whether I slander the Jesuits or no, let the Reader judge by their own
words, Thus:

Addit Praedicans [viz. Phil. Heilbrunner, who wrote against the Jesuits]
Jesuitas in hac Questione [viz. whether Tyrants may be kill'd^] potius ad
partem affirmantem, quam ad negantem inclinare satis indicant illorum Scripta.
-- Non modo inclinamus ad illam partem, sed illam partem libentissime
amplectimur, quam amplectitur S. Thomas, Cajetanus, Sotus, Covaruvias, Salon,
and alii, qui ad hanc Quaestionem responderunt cum distinctione. Ex quorum
doctrina, hunc in modum scribit Quidem Magni nominis, and vobis Praedicantibus
non ignotus Jesuita [Greg. de Valent. Tom. 3. disput. 5. q. 8. p. 3.] Vel est
Tyrannus non per Arrogatam sibi injuste potestatem, sed solum per pravum
legitimae alioquin authoritatis usum, in gubernando: vel est Tyrannus, per
Arrogatam potestatem, quam vi obtineat. Si est Tyrannus primo modo, nulli
particulari licet eum occidere, nam id pertinet ad Rempub. quae posset jure
oppugnare illum, and vocare in subsidium Cives. Si autem est Tyrannus secundo
modo, quilibet posset eum occidere. Nam tota Respub. censetur gerere justum
bellum contra ipsum, and ita Civis quilibet, ut miles quidem Reipub. posset eum
occidere, etc. Unde quando in Concilio Constant. prohibentur particulares
occidere Tyrannum: intelligendum est de Tyranno primo modo, de hoc enim eadem
est ratio, atque de aliis malefactoribus, qui solum per publicam potestatem
puniri possunt. Haec ille, viz. Greg. de Valent.

Ex cujus etiam verbis habes quidnam Concilium Constant. damnaverit. Cujus
Concilii decretum eodem modo explicat Cajetanus, Sotus, and Alphonsus a Castro,
and satis liquet ex ipsis Concilii verbis, etc.

Ais, Quaestionem and doctrinam hanc adversari illi D. Petri praecepto, DEVM
TIMETE, REGEM HONORIFICATE. Vbique tui similis es, hoc est, ineptus Predicans,
and quidvis per quodvis and quovis modo probare solitus. S. Petrus non ait,
Tyrannum honorificate, sed Regem, Rex non est Tyrannus, maxim si Tyranni
vocabulum, secunda notione usurpemus, nec Tyrannus est Rex. Quod si Regum
quispiam, qui vere Rex est declinet ad Tyrannidem, atque adeo Tyrannus prima
notione hujus nominis fiat; tum jam ex sententia S. Thomae and aliorum
audivisti, privato nihil in eum potestatis esse: esse autem toti Reipublicae;
vel privato eatenus, quatenus, ei a Repub. conceditur, sicuti Privato in
quemlibet alium malefactorem jus esse potest, si id concedatur a Republica.
Apologia Societatis Jesu in Gallia, ad Christianissimum Gall. and Navar. Regem
Henricum IV. Scripta a Religiosis ejusdem societatis Jesu in Gallia, 1599. in
Append. page 115, 116, 117.

CHAP. V. That it is the Opinion of their Popes and Councils, that Kings may be
deposed.
HAving hitherto seen the Opinions of private persons, yet those of the
greatest repute amongst them; we shall now ascend a little higher, and with
them to their most authentic Authority upon earth: but whether this Supremacy
remain in the Pope, or a General Council; I must yet leave to the determination
of their French and Italian Doctors: and yet it is strange that hitherto they
will not agree to settle infallibility; that that which they make the judge of
other Articles, must thus it self want a certain foundation by Universal
consent.

As for their Councils, if practice may interpret, (and I am sure in this case
they make it none of their least Arguments) we shall find that Princes may be
lawfully deposed, and that confirmed by the grandeur of such meetings. Thus
their great Historian Cardinal Baronius, assures us that the Emperor Henry the
Fourth was exauthorated by two Synods at Baron. anno 1076. 16, 17, 18. Id. Anno
1080. 7, 8, 16.
Rome, one at Id. Anno 1118. 20.
Colen, and another at Ib.
Fritislar. And because that, some may object that these smaller Conventions
are not of sufficient Authority, we shall ascend a step higher, and tell you
that the same was done by two General Councils [for so Baronius calls them] at
Id. 1102. 1, 2, 3.
Rome, though the ^atter more particularized by the name of Id. Anno 1116. 5.
Lateran, and also by another Council at Id. Anno 1119. 11.
Rhemes, under Pope Callistus. And after this manner was the Emperor Frederick
the Second declared deprived, and his Subjects quit from their Oaths of
Allegiance, by Pope Innocent the Fourth, in the Council of Lions; the form it
self being large, I shall refer you to Anno 1245. 4.
Bzovius, and the Tom. 28. page 431.
Council it self, and the Sext. de sentent. and re jud. C. ad Apostolicae.
Decretals.

But let us step from practice, to some of their Decrees they confirmed in
their General Councils, to shackle Princes in future times. In the Laterane
Council, under Innocent the Third, amongst other things 'twas thus ordered by
them.

If a Temporal Lord neglect to purge his land from Heresy, being Abr. Bzovius,
anno 1215. 3. Binnius, c. 3. Crabbe. Ib. Greg. de Haeret. C. Excommunicamus.
desired and admonished by the Church, let him be by the Metropolitan and the
other Bishops Excommunicated: and if within a year he refuse to satisfy, let
the Pope be informed of it, that he may declare his Vassals free from that
obedience they formerly ought him: and that Roman Catholics may seize upon his
Lands, which the Heretics being thrust out, they may possess without any
contradiction, and keep it in the true Faith: Yet let not this be prejudicial
to the Principal Lord, so that he do no way hinder this proceeding:
NEVERTHELESS LET THE SAME LAW BE OBSERVED AGAINST THOSE WHO HAVE NOT PRINCIPAL
LORDS.

If any do dispute concerning this Council, or the meaning of any word in this
Canon, I shall not find my self concerned in it, having our Countryman
Vindic. Council. Lateran.
Dr. Thomas Vane, Controvers. Angl. p. 139, 140.
Martinus Becanus, Leonardus Lessius, under the name of Discuss. decreti Magni
Council. ^a.
Singleton, Cardinal Adversus G^^l. Barclaium in Praefat.
Bellarmine, and many others, great vindicators of this great Council as they
call it, whom I shall leave to the consideration of the Romanists: Yet I could
whisper Vindic. Council p. 69.
Dr. Vane in the ear, that he is not honest enough in his answer, by taking no
notice of the last clause in the Canon, which does not a little enlighten the
whole design.

And as I do not trouble my self to interpret any thing in the Lateran Canon,
seeing the chief of the Roman Champions, Lessius, Becanus, Bellarmine and
others, declare expressly that it is meant of the Popes Authority over Kings,
and for their deposing; so shall I not wrangle with any concerning that of
Trent, a Council of such Authority, that they make it the standard of their
Faith.

In the last Session of this Trent political Convention, Duels were Sess. 25.
c. 19.
censured as unlawful [and indeed, no honest, true and faithful subject can
fight one, he taking to himself power of his own life, and that of his
fellow subjects, against Law, Religion and Prerogative] and declares those
Princes to be held as deprived of those places, where they permit them. What
was the meaning of the words of this Decree, I shall say nothing my self, but
tell you, that the French Church took it to deprive Kings, for which they
bogled at it; and they had more reason to understand the meaning of it, than
any now: yet if these grave Divines mistook the sense of that Chapter, it is no
fault of mine, let the Romanists bandy it out amongst themselves, and either
tell us the reason, why that Council is not exactly received in France, and so
whether they be Heretics or no, in not complying with a General Council as
they call it, or that every part of it is in force there, and how it came to be
so.

These at this time may satisfy, to show in what a tottering condition their
Councils makes Kings to stand in. And if the Roman Catholics desire any more
instances, I shall refer them to their famous Discuss. Decreti Mag. Council.
Lat. page 90, 91, 92, 93, 94, 95, 96, 97, 98, 99, etc.
Lessius, whom in this case let them either agree to, or confute; fight Dog,
fight Bear: and so I quit my self, neither troubling my self whether they or
Dr. Remonstr. Hibernorum, part. 5. cap. 10.
Caron is in the right.

As for the Opinions of Popes themselves, I shall jumble them with their
Canon Law, the latter being in a manner the result of the others brain and
authority: and Pope Agatho ordered that the Popes Sanctions, should be received
with the same authority, Omnes Apostolicae seeds sanctiones acciptendae sunt
tanquam ipsius Divini Petri voce firmatae sint. Did. 19. c. 2.
as if they had been commanded by St. Peter himself. Nor according to Pope Q.
17. c. 4. Nemini est.
Nicolas, must any contradict or question the Orders of that See; for according
to Possit jur. Can. lib. 1. Tit. 3. Decreta.
Lancelottus, the Popes Decrees are of equal authority with the Canons of
Councils; and those of Sess. 4. Decret. 1.
Trent determine that some Traditions are to be of equal force with the holy
Scriptures.

I shall not here spend time in discoursing about the Privileges said to be
given to some Monasteries by several Popes, Franc. Bozzius de Temporal. Eccles.
Monarch. lib. 1. cap. 21, page 225.
with a tie by the way of the Kings good behavior; though some make use of
such Records for Arguments; it being plain by the practice of the Popes and
their Greg. de Elect. C. Venerabile^^: de Haeret. C. Excommunicamus. Sext. de
re jud. c. ad Apostol.
Laws, that they declare they have such Authority to depose Kings, and quit
their Subjects from their Oaths of Allegiance; of which several Popes are so
plain in their Q. 15. C. 6. auctoritatem, C. alias. C. nos sanctorum. Greg. de
Haeret. C. Excommunicamus and C. Absolutos.
Canon Law, that nothing can be more evident: whither I refer you for more
satisfaction.

And that Popes declare that Kings may be deposed, appears by their many
thundrings of Deprivation against former Princes, and of later times against
the King of Navarre, our King Henry the Eighth, and Queen Elizabeth. Read in
Annal. Boiar. lib. 6. page 506.
Aventin what Hadrian the Fourth says, concerning this case in his furious
Letter; and in Page 872. Nonne Rex Anglorum noster est vassallus, and ut plus
dicam, mancipium, qui potest eum nutu nostro incarcerare, and Ignominiae
mancipare?
Matthew Paris, how Pope Innocent the Fourth thus ranted concerning our Henry
the Third: -- Is not the King of England our Vassal, nay more, our Slave, whom
with anod I can imprison, and commit to a slavish reproach? And Father Parsons
assured our Countrymen, that Pope Pius the Fifth affirmed to him, Rog.
Widdrinton's Theolog. Disput. cap. 10. 56.
that he would rather loose his head, than not acknowledge this Authority to
lie in the Roman Chair. And Pope Sixtus the Fifth could make a See Will.
Warmingtons moderate defense of the Oath of Allegiance, page 127, 128, etc.
Speech in a full Consistory of Cardinals in commendation of the horrid murder
of Henry the Third King of France.

CHAP. VI. For how many causes according to the Romanists, a King may be
deposed.
THey say it is good to have many strings for a bow, if one fail another may
hold; and others think they can do any thing by a distinction, though it
signify nothing: he that divided himself between the Archbishop of Colen and
the Prince Elector, was well retorted upon by the Boor, If the Prince go to the
Devil, what will become of the Bishop? And the Scotch Presbyterian Hist.
Reformat. of Scotland, p. 392, 393.
John Knox, used this art, when he would not have the King but the Offender
suffer. Our English Covenanters thought they cleared themselves of Rebellion,
by declaring that they fought not against the King but his evil Council, and
that Ex. coll. p. 727.
Treason is not against the Kings person, as he is a man, but in relation to
his Office. And the Independent [when the Presbyterian had Declar. for
Non-address, 1647.
declared that they could not repose any more trust in the King, and made it
Treason for any to address to him, and so had laid him by as useless,] supposed
they vindicated themselves sufficiently, by affirming that they only beheaded
a private man, the Presbyterians having formerly killed the King.

And these quirks to further Rebellion, and to make the murdering of Kings
more plausible, are used by De justitia, lib. 2. c 9. dub. 4. 10, 12.
Lessius, Tom. 3. disp. 5. Q. 8. punct. 3.
Valentia, Institut. Sacerdot. lib. 5. cap. 6. 10.
Tolet, Defens. sid. Cathol. lib 6. cap. 4. 14, 18.
Suarez, De justa abdicat. Hen. III.
Boucher, Father Qu'et and sober reck^ning, page 321.
Parsons, -- De justitia, lib. 5. Q. 1. Art 3.
Soto, -- Refutat. Aphorism. page 158. 94.
Heissius, -- De justitia, Tom. 4. Tract. 3. disp. 6. 2.
Molina, Controve^s. Anglic. page 115.
Becanus, and several others of the chief writers amongst the Romanists; so
that these and our Covenanters need not be so earnest in upbraiding one another
with Treason.

When people are resolved for mischief, it is not difficult to pretend reasons,
and sinde out means to carry on the design, plausible enough to blind the
giddy multitude. To ruin the innocent, many and strange Articles and
accusations shall be framed against him; and though not one of them can make
him an Offender, rather than their malice should fail of its purpose, they will
jumble them all together to make him a Traitor; as the wicked-long-Parliament
did with the Earl of Strafford, and Prynns Canterb^ry's doom, page 51.
Maynard used the same plea and means to hasten the murder of Arch bishop Land.

O the strength of a Covenan^ing Reason! as if though one Elders Maid alone
could not make a Dog* an hundred of them could make a Mastiff: could number
thus a^^er its being, Pr^teus would be outvapour'd by this Argument, and
irrational and poisonous Creatures might once again ascend to be Classical
Assembly-men: for thus forty or fifty Asses together would be a Presbyterian,
though one by it self could not be a man. But it may be, they will thus prove
their Assertion, though one Assembly man's Especially the first Edition.
notes will not make a Diodate, or a Dutch Comment, all the Assembly together
will, because it may be they will say that they stole all their Annotations out
of them: if this be their Argument, I shall neither trouble my self to see
whether they confess truth or no, nor give them any reply to it.

What various Arts and devices, with impertinent and poor pretenses, have been
used by some Popes and their Part-takers, not only to lessen the authority,
but ruin the being of some Kings, History can best inform us. And some of
their several causes and reasons they bring to prove the legality of proceeding
against Kings, shall be briesly hinted at in this place.

I.
Com. in Esther, page 95.
Feuardentius the Franciscan, affirms that a King may be deposed, if he be too
prodigal in lavishing away the public Revenues, either by scattering them
amongst his cringing Courtiers, or some other spend-thrift-way.

That this is a fault no man can deny; but how either to judge of it, or hinder
it, belongs not to us, and it is too obscure either for our eyes or brains. But
we might retort upon the Chair of Rome, the excessive extortion that some of
them make to enrich their Kindred. And the extravagancy of Sixtus the Fourth
cannot be excused, bestowing such excessive sums amongst his Whores.

II.
Others say that a King may be deposed, if he be a breaker of his Mart.
Becanus, Controv. Angl. page 135. R. Parsons conference about succession, page
32, 36, 73, 77. Feuardent. com. in Esther, page 94.
promise to his Subjects, or a violator of his public Faith. And if so, why
may not Popes run the same Exit? who think it not lawful to keep Faith with
Heretics, and are as apt as any to break them upon every advantage.

III.
Another way to have a King deposed is this, if he either study, Feuard. page
91.
make use, or approve of the Art of Magic, or acquaint himself with those who
do so.

This accusation would serve the Vulgar, and the better because they are not
competent Judges. In former time 'twas almost dangerous to have above a common
style in the Mathematics, so that our Roger Bacon, Albertus Magnus, and other
famous Scholars, can at this day scarce quit themselves from being thought
Conjurers by the multitude; and some have been too bold in throwing such wicked
opinions upon Joseph, Solomon, and some others: for whom Monsieur Naude has
composed an Apology. As for the Popes, their own Platina affirms Sylvester the
Second to have dealt with the Devil; Card. Benno.
and some others think that Benedict the Ninth, and Gregory the Seventh were
too familiar that way, though the former Naude Apol. cap. 19.
Frenchman endeavors to clear them of that crime: and so I leave every man to
his own judgment.

IV.
If a King be guilty of Jo. Azorius, Instit. Tom. 2. lib. 10. cap. 8.

Jo. Bapt. Boiardus, Addit. ad Julii Clari practic. criminalem. Qu. 35. 6.
Feuard. 91.


Perjury, some of them say he may be deposed for that fault.

If they think Perjury to be such an horrid sin (as who can deny its
heinousness?) they should not encourage Subjects to run so easily into this
crime, by making them break their Oaths of Allegiance to their respective
Princes; by which wicked means their Popes make themselves also guilty: and
other ways they have been sufficiently infamous for this. Gregory the Twelfth
is in this case noted in story, for having taken a solemn Oath, that if he were
chosen Pope, he would lay down the Title and Authority again, if Pedro de Luna
an Antipope would do so too, the better to quell the Schism; but having thus
obtained the Papacy, I shall refer you to De schismate, lib. 3.
Theodore a Niem, to see how he cheated and jugled against his former Oath, not
only in this, but also in creating Cardinals: and the Perjury of Paschal the
Morney, page 287.
Second, against the Emperor Henry the Fourth, is as notorious.

V.
Feuardentius says, that if a King be guilty of Murder, he may Com in Est.
page 92.
justly be deposed, though he do nothing with his own hands, but consent to
other Instruments.

Though the crime be great, yet Interest will often judge amiss: Boucher and
Verone, look upon those as Murderers, who caused the deaths of Clement and
Chastel, though the first stabbed Henry the Third, and the other endeavored to
kill Henry the Fourth of France. And the Jesuit Garnet, has been several
times published a Martyr, though he worthily suffered for high Treason, in not
discovering the Powder Treason, though he knew of the design. But if these may
go for Martyrs, I know no reason but Pope Paul the Third may pass for a Saint,
for poisoning his Mother and Nephew, that the Pal^us, lib. 5.
whole Inheritance of the Fernese (of which Family he was) might come to him;
and for destroying by the same means his own Sister, because she was as kind
to others embraces as his own. And upon the same account might Alexander the
Sixth be canonized for poisoning G^^cc^ardin. lib. 2.
Gemes, brother to the great Turk, for filthy Avarice, as he also did several
Id. l^b. 6.
Cardinals upon the same account.

VI.
The same Franciscan assures the world, that if a King be guilty Com. in F^^h.
page 96
of Simony, by selling Ecclesiastical Benefits, he may be deposed.

This fault I suppose to be below Monarchs, who have several lawful means to
fill their Coffers; but I wish it were not practiced so much as it is, by those
who are but fellow subjects with the buyers. And the worldly gallant, who uses
it, may probably have his purchasing Parson, a roaring Chaplain to his wicked
Patronship in a world fitted for the covetous; but we shall not at this time
follow Truth too near the heels. But were not this Vice beneficial, Pope Paul
Platina.
the Second would not have been so given to it, who basely sold all the
Benefits both Civil and Ecclesiastical. And Alexander the Sixth G^^cc^ardin,
lib. 1.
got the Popedom more by Simony than any desert in himself.

VII.
Bannes in 2. 2. q. 12. art. 3. col. 478. Valent. Tom. 3. disp. 1. quaest. 12.
punct. 2. P^tr. de Aragon. in 2. 2. D. Tho. page 229. Hieron. de Medicis in 2.
2. q. 12. art. 2. conclus. 2. Baleus, Act. Pont. Estienne Apol. pour Herodot.
page 292.
Others of them say that a King may be deposed for Apostacy: And I warrant
you, they will make the interpretation of the word submit to their pleasures:
Yet in the mean time we are told, how true I know not, that Pope Leo the Tenth
should call the History of Christ a fable; and that Paul the Third in anger
once said, that he would renounce Christ, if the Procession went not faster on.

VIII.
If a King be guilty of Jo. Bapt. Plotus Consilium, 64.

Jo. Bapt. Bolard. addit. ad Julii Clari pract. Crim. q. 35. 6. Feuard. page 93.


Sacrilege, they say he may justly be deprived; and yet who has been more
criminal in this than some of their Popes? Alexander the Sixth was so noted for
it, that this Distick was made of him:

Vendit Alexander Cruces, Altaria, Christum;
Emerit ipse prius, vendere jure potest.
Alexander sold his Altars, Christ and Crosses;
He bought so sold them, men live not by losses.
And upon Leo the Tenth, Sannazarius the famous Neapolitan Poet, made this
smart Sarcasm:

Sacra sub extrema, si forte requiritis, hora,
Cur Leo non potuit sumere; vendiderat.
Leo could have the Sacrament no more,
Though dying, 'cause he would sold it long before.
And Ann. 1229. page 362.
Matthew Paris assures us that Pope Gregory the Ninth was such a gaper after
Church-moneys, that the Bishops in England were forced to sell and pawn all
their Plate and Furniture belonging to the Altar, to satisfy him. And whether
Authority does commit Sacrilege in commanding Images to be taken out of
Churches, let the busy Bigots determine: yet History will tell us, that Pope
Gregory the Third proceeded against the Emperor Leo for the same account.

IX.
If a King be a Azorius, Institut. lib. 10. cap. 8. lib. 11. cap. 6. Suarez.
defens. fid. lib. 6. c. 4. 22. Feuard. p. 91. Jo. Mar. Bellettus, disquisit.
Clericalis, page 282. 209, 210. Alph. Alvarez, Speculum, cap. 16. 8. Petr. de
Palude, Art. 4. Lud. a Paramo de origin S. Inquisit. lib. 1. cap. 1. Greg.
Nunnius Coronel. de optimo Reipub, statu, page 545. Jo. Anton. Delphinus de
potestate Eccles. page 154.
Schismatic, or a favourer of Schismatics, they say he may then be deposed:
And yet no Church has been so much rent with Schisms as that of Rome, having
sometimes at the same time several men declaring themselves to be the true
Popes, and justly elected; and every one of them having some Prince or other to
stand by them; and at last 'twas sometimes carried by strong hand. And that
which began in Pope Urban the Sixth's time, was so long and violent, that it
lasted fifty years.

X.
We are told that for violence done to Cardinals, the King guilty Feuardent.
page 94.
of that crime may be deposed. A people at first but of common repute, being
but Priests or Deacons belonging to this or that Church, and so far inferior
to Bishops; though since that, the Popes have raised them to be next to
themselves, and equal to Kings and Princes; and now carry such a sway in that
all-ruling Court at Rome, that happy is that Monarch that can get a friend by
much begging and greazing to be honored with that title: and sometimes a red
Hat covers both youth and ignorance.

Many of these have employed themselves in secular affairs; and if L'Homme
d'estat. page 257, etc.
either in this or the other they become faulty, there is no reason but that
they are liable to punishment as well as their Neighbors: if Queen Elizabeth
had got Cardinal Allen into her custody, she might with more reason have
punished him for his many Treasons against her and his Country, by declaring
her to be no true Queen, and in assisting the Spaniards against her in Eighty
eight, than Pope Guicciard. lib. 6.
Alexander did several Cardinals by poisoning them to satisfy his Malice and
Avarice.

XI.
What small authority has been allowed to Kings concerning the Church in their
own Kingdoms, may partly appear by Pope Nic. Harpsfeld. Hist. Eccles. page 431.
John the Eleventh, who interdicted England, and declared King John deprived,
and so persuaded the French to take the Kingdom from him: and why all this?
only because the King would not admit of Stephen Langton to be Archbishop of
Canterbury, whom the Pope would thrust into that See against the Kings
pleasure; King John not thinking it fitting, that one who was so great with the
French, should be of such great trust in his Dominions. And yet the Emperors
and Kings formerly had always a Did. 63. C. Agatho. C. Hadrianus. C. In
Synodo. C. cum long. Gloss.
power in the Election, not only of Bishops but Popes also, and calling of
Councils. And several instances might be given of the Emperors deposing of
Popes; but the Imperial Power appears plain enough in the deprivation of John
the Thirteenth by Otho the Great, the Italian and other Bishops then assisting
and commending him, who also deposed Benedict the Fifth. And if we consult the
practice of the Popes, we shall find that it was not so much the peace of
Christendom, or the good of Religion, that obliged them to proceed against
Temporal Princes, as to maintain their own pride and greatness, and to pleasure
a friend or Relation with another man's Dominions.

XII.
They also affirm, that if a King be lawful both by Title and Possession, Fean.
Suarez. def. fid. l. 3. c. ^. ^. and li^. 6. c. 4. 15. J^. A^^^. C^^peasi^in
Epit. Controvers. part. 2. Qu. 2. p. 180. Fe^ardent. page 95. Dlonys. Carthus.
de Regem. Polit. art. 19. Guil. Estius Com. in sent. lib. 2. page 444. Ab^lens.
in III Reg. cap. 12. Qu. 4. Eman. Sa Aphorism. V. Princeps. 2. and V. Tyrannus.
2. Lessius de ju^itia, lib. 2. cap. 9. disp. 4. 12. Pet. de Ledesma, Theol.
Moral. Tract. 8. cap. 18. page 512. Ad. Tanner. Theol. scholast. Tom. 3. disp.
4. Qu. 8. dub. 3. number. 32, 33. Sebast. He^ssius Refut. Aphorism. page 158. 94.
page 162. 97. Andr. de Isern. Com. in usus Fe^dorum, T^t. Qua sint Regalia, V.
Monctae, page 743. Greg. Servantio defesa della potesta Eccles. p. 76. Dom.
S^^o de j^stitia, lib. 5. Qu. 1. art. 3. Greg. Sayer clavis Regia lib. 7. cap.
10. 3. Gr. de Valent. Tom. 3. disp. 5. Qu. 8. p^net. ^. Bellarmin. de Council.
lib. 2. cap. 19. Mich. Salon in D. Tho. Tom. 1. col. 1157. Rob. ^enal^s de
utr^usque gladii facultate, Tom. 2. page 291. Hieron. de Medicis, in 2. 2. D.
The. Qu. 12. art. 2. conclus. 2. Azor. Instit. lib. 10. cap. 8.
yet if after he turn a Tyrant, and oppress the innocent and good people, he
may then lawfully be deposed: and some of them go a step farther, and say he
may justly be killed: And yet their own Histories will assure us, that there
have been as wicked and cruel Popes as ever there was Temporal Prince in the
world.

XIII.
If a King be an Heretic, or a favourer of Heretics, or if he be negligent in
driving Heresy out of his Dominions, then may he justly, as they say, be
deposed.

Fr. Feuardent. in Est. page 90. Jo. Azor. Institut. Tom. 2. lib. 10. cap. 8.
Id. Lib. 11. cap. 5. Mart. Becanus Controvers. Angl. page 131, 132. Lael.
Zaecchius Tract. Theolog. page 82. Gabr. Vasquez in 1. 2. D. Tho. Tom. 2. disp.
169. 42, 43. Jos. Stephanus de potestate coactiva Romans Pont. cap. 12. 17. Dom.
Ba^nes in 2. 2. Qu. 12. art. 2. col. 478. Ant. Santarill. de Haeresi, cap. 30.
page 292, 293. Tho. Stapleton, Tom. 1. Controv. 3. Qu. 5. art. 2. 4. Fr. Suarez
defens. fid. lib. 6. cap. 4. 22. Petr. Hurtad. de Mendoza, scholast. disp. 21.
304. St. Raymond. Summa, lib. 1. Tit. de Haeret. 7. page 41. Leon. Coq^^^s
Examen Prafat. page 102, 103. Rutil. Benzon. Com. in Cant. Magnificat. lib. 3.
c. 27. dub. 6. p. 134. Jo. Mar. Bellettus disquisit. Clerical. Part. 1. page
282. 109, 110. Host^ens. summa, lib. 5. Tit. de Haeret. qua poena fereatur, 11.
Ant. Corset. de potest. Regia, Qu. 76. Arnold. Albertin. Repet. in C. Quoniam
de Haeret. Qu. 15. 36. Lud. a Paramo de Origin S. Inquisit. lib. 1. Qu. 1.
Opin. 4. 55, 94, 145. Alph. a Castro de j^sta Haeret. punit. lib. 2. cap. 7.
Pet. C^^^rus de Officio Princip. cap. 8. page 76, 77. Jo. Bapt. Boiard. addit.
ad Julii Clari practic. Criminalem, Qu. 35. 6. Pet. de Palude, art. 4. Jo.
Driedo de libertat. Christian. lib. 1. cap. 14. Lupold. de Berbenburg. de
ju^ib. Regni, cap. 12. Tiber. De^ianus Tractat. Criminal. lib. 5. c. 52. 8.
Rosella Casuum V. Haereticus, 11. Rob. Bellarmin, de Pont. Romans lib. 5. cap. 7.
Id. De translat. Imp. lib. 1. cap. 12. Alph. Salmeron Tom. 13. in Epist. D.
Pauli, lib. 1. part. 3. disp. 12. Jac. Menochius Council. 808. 76. Adolph.
Schulckenius Apolog. page 546. Gr. Nunnius Coronel. de Optimo Reipub. statu,
page 511, 545. Card. Allen' s letter touching the render of Daventer, page 27,
28. Id. Defense of English Catholics against the book called The Execution of
Justice, page 115. Julius Ferrettus, de re militari, page 354. 26. Jac Simanca
de Cathol. Institut. Tit. 9. 259. Tit. 23. 11. Tit. 46. 74, 75. Lud. Molina de
justitia, Tom. 1. Tract. 2. disp. 29. col. 221. Jo. Ant. Delphinus de potest.
Eccles. page 154. Greg. Servantio defesa della potesta Eccles. page 68, 76.
Petr. de Ledesm. Theolog. Moral. Tract. 1. cap. 7. Conclus. 5, 6, 7.

For this supposed crime of Heresy did the Popes endeavor by their Bulls to
take the Kingdom from our Henry the Eighth and Queen Elizabeth, and from Henry
King of Navarre. And upon this pretty pretended account, was Raymund Earl of
Toulouse deprived of his Territories by Innocent the Third.

Heresy is a common word, yet all cannot agree in its application; some say
Pope * Liberius was an Arrian, and Anastatius II was a See Dr. Casaubon's
necessity of Reformation, page 37, 38. Vid. Caron. Remonstr. Hybe^norum, part
5. cap. 18. p. 18, 88, 89, etc. 98, 100, 101.
held little better; John the last of that name, amongst other crimes, was
accused of Heresy, by the Council of Constance: and that Popes may be
Heretical, needs no dispute, because that their own Writers confess that they
may also be deposed for that Crime.

XIV.
If a King be either Negligent, or Insufficient, or Effeminate, or Jo. Ant
Delphinus de potest. Eccles. p. 158. Camil. Gallinius de verborum signif. l.
10. c. 17. 24, 25. Greg. Servantio defesa della potesta Eccles page 68, 76.
Paris de Puter de syndicatu Summar. 4. 56, 57, 58, 59. Jul. Ferrettus de re
milit. p. 156. 113. and p. 354. 26. Giov. Filoteo Nuova Resposta contra
Venetia, p 16, 59. Celsus. Mancinus de juribus Principat. l. 3. c. 3. p. 76.
Dionys. Carthus. de authoritate Papae, lib. 1. a^t. 6. Jo. Mar. Bellettus
disquisit. Clerical. part 1. p. 282. 110. Hostiens Summa, lib. 5. Tit. de
Haeret. qua poena ferratur. 11. Greg. Nunnius Coronel de optimo Reipub. Statu.
p. 545, 547. Jo. Turrecremata Summa de Eccles. c. 14. propos. 4. Dom. Soto in
sentent. disp. 25. qu. 2. art. 1. Tertio. Petr. de Palude de causa Immediate
Eccles. potest. art. 4. Jo. de Seloa de Beneficio, part 4. qu. 8. 25. Jo. a S.
Geminiano Summa de Exemplis, lib. 8. cap. 60. Gabr. Berart. spectacul. visitat.
c. 22. 46. Paul. Carraria de literali ac Mystico Regularum j^ris
interpretatione, qu. 2. art. 4. punct. 2. 25, 26, 27.
by his indiscretion not fit for Rule, they say, he may then be deposed.

Thus they say, Childerick was deprived from being King of France, because he
was a little easy natured, not given to action, nor so wise as his Neighbors,
whereby he was unfit for Rule. This may make the being of Government most
unstable; the giddy multitude, and the factious, being apt to interpret this
Rule at any time to their pleasures, when before these late Wars, Sir Henry
Ludlow [Father to the notorious Edmund Ludlow] had the boldness publicly Ex.
Coll. p. 552.
before the Parliament to affirm that King Charles I. was not worthy to be King
of England, and no way punished for such abominable speeches; whereby it
appeared how pleasing they were to the rest of the Commons: what might be
expected when they were more heightened in wickedness, by their entering and
continuing in open Rebellion? If this one so virtuous, religious, learned and
knowing a King be censured as unworthy, what may other Princes think of
themselves and their condition?

And yet it is better to be thus soft-natured, than so abominable wicked and
cruel, as Sixtus IV, Alexander VI, and some other Popes were; amongst whom, we
may justly place John XIII (or XII) who I warrant you (at this time waving his
wickedness) was every inch of him fit to be Pope, being but Baronius, anno 955.
3, 4.
XVIII years old, if so much, when he ruled the Church as a Successor of St.
Peter. And if you think that this Youth was not young enough to be Christ's
Vicar, what will you object against Baron. an. 1033. 6. Papyr. Massonius de
Episcopis Urbis, lib. 4. fol. 174.
Benedict IX, a boy of XII years old, and yet at that age was his litttle
Holiness Pope of Rome, and as infallible too as the best of them?

It has formerly been a custom in P. Messia Selva Rinovata, part 4. c. 67.
Franconia, at our Jo. Gregory's Posthuma, p. 95, 133, etc.
Salsbury, at Cambray in Hanault, and many other Cities, for the young Boys
upon St. Nicholas his day to choose amongst themselves a Bishop, who with his
Myter, and other little Episcopal Ornaments used to govern them till Iunocents
day; but it may be the Council of Sess. 21.
Basil made a Decree against the Custom. The former John and Benedict would
have been pretty Popes for these Bishops: and if we add Baron. anno 925.
Hugo a Veromandia, who was made Archbishop of Rheims at V years old, and
approved of by Pope John X or XI, they would make up a dapper Council to govern
the Universal Church, and sufficient, and vigilant, and careful enough.

XV.
For what other reasons they may depose Kings, I cannot justly D^m. Paul.
Lopiz. flase. Clericorum, part 2. 77. Guil. de Monser rat. de successione
Regum, dub. 1. 30. Sylv. de Priero Summa v. Papa 10, 11. Alex. Carerius de
potest. Romans Pont. l. 2. c. 3. 18. Cells. Mancinus de jurib. Principat. l. 3. c.
3. p. 76. Tho. Stapleton Tom. 1. Controv. 3. Qu. 5. Art. 2. p. 710. Fran.
Bozz^us de Temporal Eccles. Monarch. l. 2. c. 16. p. 553. Arnald. Albertin.
Repet. in C. quoniam de Haeret. Qu. 15. 34. S. Bonaventur. de Eccles. Hierarch.
part 2. cap. 1 A^ast Germinus de sacrorum Immunitat. lib. 3. Proem. 9, 10. Jo a
Capistrino de Papae Authorit. fol. 65. a Jul. Caes. Madim de sacris Ordinib. 9.
cap. 9. 17.
determine, because many of their Writers will not particularize; but by
shooting at random, and excepting none, may give occasion for more than here
set down; and for ought that I know, may tacitly allow of any: for when they
say, That a King may justly be deposed, cause being given, without naming any,
they leave the people to judge them themselves.

And that they pretend more causes for deposing of Kings, than we here charge
them with, is somewhat plain from In 2. 2. p. 224.
Petrus de Aragon, who says, That a King may be deposed for any fault, to
which Excommunication is joined: And if we look upon Summa aurea Armilla, v.
Excommunicat.
Bartholomaeus Fumus, and some others, we shall find God knows how many causes
laid down by them, for Excommunication.

XVI.
But why need we search for Vices, or make such a clutter to prove a King to be
criminal? As if iniquity, wickedness, stupidity, or suchlike failings, were the
only causes for which a Prince might be removed: since we are informed, that
all these signify nothing to the purpose; it being not so much the defect of
the King, as the pleasure, or rather will forsooth, of his Holiness at Rome:
For thus are we told by no less man than Thomas Bozzius, whose Authority is
neither slighted by the Pope, nor his Romish Favorites.

Although that a King be lawful, and understanding in Government, Sitque
aliquis jure, solers, industrius, potens, Catholicus, pius, Tamen Pontifex,
Episcopique Pontifice approbante, jure natura^i Divino in Divini Scriptis
expresso ac tradito per Christum and Apostolos -- valent huic auferre Imperia,
Regna, alter^que nullum j^s alioque habenti adjudicare, ubi judicaverint id
esse non modo necessarium, sed and expediens. Tho. Boz. de jure Status, lib. 3.
cap. 4. page 287, 288.
Industrious, Potent, a good Roman Catholic, and godly; yet the Pope, and the
Bishops by the Approbation of the Pope, by Divine Law delivered to the Church
by Christ and his Apostles, have power to take away his Dominion and Kingdoms
from him, and give them all to a third person, who had no right unto them; if
so be, that they think that so doing to be not only necessary but expedient.

Most miserable must thus the State of Kings be, if they thus lie at the Mercy
of one, which sometimes is not only tyrannical, wicked and debauched, but a
simple Boy too, and some think also a whorish See Alexand. Cook's Pope Joan,
and les sieur Congnard traite contre B^ondel.
Woman to boot: So that it is no wonder that there is such striving,
canvassing, bribery, and underhand-dealing to be made Pope; if their so being,
instantly invest them with such an unlimited Authority over all the world, and
that by Divine right too; but of such a Nature, that none can see into this
Millstone but themselves or favorites.

And that there may not be any objection against this Authority of the Pope;
Bozius undertakes to demonstrate it by Examples, which you shall have as he
gives us them; and then judge either of the Heresy, or Authority of the Popes.
Thus he tells us that

Baldwin II was lawful Successor to the Eastern Empire; yet Michael
Palaeologus, by force of Arms and wickedness, took the Empire from him. However
for all this injury, as he says, did Pope Gregory X allow so much of it, that
he gave the Empire to the Invador, and excluded the lawful Inheritor.

Another instance he gives concerning the Western Empire, viz. that Richard
Duke of Cornwall, Son to King John, and Brother to Henry III of England, being
by one part of the Electors of Germany, [viz. by the Bishops of Mentz, Colen,
and the Palsgrave,] chosen Emperor; And Alonso X King of Castile, being by
another part, [viz. Archbishop of Trevers, King of Bohemia, Duke of Saxony, and
Marquess of Brandeburg] also chosen Emperor; And so by consequence, as he
says, it must of necessity belong to one of these two: Yet such was the
pleasure of the aforesaid Gregory X, that he threw them both by, and commanded
the Electors to pitch upon another; by which means Rodulph, Earl of Habspurgh
and Hessia, came to be Emperor.

And the same power, Bozius says, the Pope has over Infidels: and to prove
this by Example, he hints to us the Donation of America, by Alexander VI, and
his huge Authority, divided between the Castilian and Portugal. And I wonder
that before this time he has not given the World in the Moon to some of his
Favorites: And as Pope H. Estiene Apol. pour Herodot. p. 465, 466.
Clement VI commanded the Angels to carry such Souls into Paradise; so might
some of his Successors command some pretty vehicles or other, to carry his
friends beyond the Earths attraction, and so into the Dominions of the Lunary
World, where by a zealous Croisade, and a furious Inquisition, those pretty
people might be taught Rebellion.

THE REBELLIOUS AND Treasonable Practices Of the ROMANISTS: From the Year DC,
to the Year M. With a Blow at Constantines Donation, The Popes absolute
Temporal Authority, and Legality of his Being.
BOOK III.
CHAP. I. The Tale of Constantines Donation proved a mere Cheat and Forgery.
I Shall not here engage my self in the Dispute whether S. Peter was ever
Bishop of Rome or no, nor with the time of his presiding there: De Romans Pont.
l. 1. c. 6.
Bellarmine, their famous Addit. ad Platin. viz. S. Petri.
Onuphrius, and some others, not agreeing about the manner; and several Learned
Men have employed themselves on both parties in this Controversy: Nor by what
means the Popes came to that greatness they are now in, and pretend of right to
have.

Christ said Joh. 18. 36.
his Kingdom was not of this world; nor did S. Peter, or any of the rest of the
Apostles, endeavor to obtain either any such Temporal Government, or upon the
account of their Spiritual, to lord it with a coercive Power over Secular
Authority: And if any of their Successors plead such Prerogatives, they can
draw no Arguments either from the Precept or Example of the Apostles. Not, but
that the Clergy are as capable of Temporal Employments as any, if the Supreme
Magistrate so order it, without whose appointment the Layman himself cannot
pretend to Office.

What jurisdiction the Bishops of Rome exercised over Princes for the first
Ages, as History is altogether silent, so cannot we imagine that they did,
considering in what Persecutions they themselves lived, being for their own
preservation forced to sculk, and lurk about here and there, and that in
poverty too; insomuch, that if we consult their own Histories, we shall find
that the first XXXIII Bishops of Rome suffered Martyrdom, till An. 314.
Sylvester in the days of Constantine the Great.

In whose time, by the Emperors declaring himself a Christian, Christianity
began to appear more public, being thus countenanced by Authority, whereby
those who formerly lurked in Caves and Forests, wandered about Mountains, and
dissembled their Profession, for fear of persecution; now boldly showed and
declared themselves, and had places of Trust and Authority conferred upon them;
whereby they became more formidable to the Pagans, and Religion daily gained
more Proselytes, Splendor and Jurisdiction.

By this Emperor Constantine, they say that the Popes of Rome had not only
many Privileges, but God knows how much Land too given them, viz. not only
Rome it self, but also all the Provinces, Places, and Cities of all Italy, and
the Western Region; and that he might be more glorious and powerful in all the
World, than the Emperor himself. And thus we see them set on Cock horse, and
whence many of them plead a Prerogative. And for proof of this, they not only
say that they can show you the Decree it self, but from it and other Authors
tell the Reason of such a Donation; which because the Story is pretty and
miraculous, take as follows in short.

Constance, they say, being a wicked Tyrant and an Heathen, murdering his own
Son Crispus the Consul, etc. at last was sorry Baron. anno 324. 16, 17.
for his own wickedness, and desired to be cleansed therefrom; but his Pagan
Priests told him, That they had no means of purging such heinous Offenses. In
the mean time one Aegyptius [supposed by Anno 324. 27.
Baronius to be Osius Bishop of Corduba] a Christian, told the Emperor, That
the Christians had a way to cleanse a man from any guilt: To which Constantine
lent a willing ear, though upon that did not forsake his Idolatry, but
persecuted the Christians; insomuch, that Pope Slyvester, with some others, for
their own safety, stole from Rome, and hid themselves in the Mountain Soractes,
now called Or M. St. Oresto. Baron. 33.
Monte S. Tresto, corrupted, as they say, from Monte di S. Silvestro, North
from Rome, upon the Westside of Tiber.

For these crimes and oppressions, they say, he was as by a judgment,
strangely infected with the Leprosy [or Meselry according to the old
Translation of Translat. of Ranulphus of Chesters Polycron. fol. 212.
John Trevisa, Vicar of Barckley almost CCC years ago] to be cured of this
disease, he applies himself to his Physicians; but with no benefit: then the
Pagan Priests of the Capitol, advised him to make a Cistern, or Bathing-place
in the Capitol, and therein wash his body with the warm blood of Edict.
Constant. Rich. Broughton Eccles. Hist. Age 4. cap. 5.
little Children: and to effect this, upon his consent, the Flamens prepared a
great number of Infants, some write Pet de Natal l. 2. c. 22. Jac. de Vorag.
Hist. 12. Jo. Trevisa Policron. fol. 212. Alonso de Villigas Flos Sanctorum, 31
December. la vida de San. Silv^stre.
three thousand, and was going to kill them, to fill the Bath with their blood;
but Constantine being moved to compassion, by the cries and lamentations of
their Mothers, abhorred such cruelty and wickedness, causing the Children to be
restored to their Parents, with rewards and means to carry them to their
dwelling places.

The night following, the Apostles S. Peter and S. Paul appear to him, saying,
Because thou have hindered this wickedness, and have detested to shed the blood
of Innocents, we are sent to thee by Christ our Lord and God, to tell thee how
to be cured: Hear us therefore, and do what we admonish thee. Sylvester the
Bishop of this City flying thy Persecutions, with some others of his Clergy,
are hid in the Cliffs of Mount Soracte; send for him, and he will provide an
holy Bath, in which thou shall be washed, and so cleansed from thy disease.

Constantine the next morning sends to find out Sylvester; to whom being come,
he told the story of his Vision, and asked him what Gods Peter and Paul were,
and desired to see their Pictures; which being showed him, he declared that
they were the very same who appeared to him the night before: Upon this he was
Baptized by Sylvester, and so cleansed from his Leprosy; an hand from Heaven at
the same time touching him, as he himself saw.

Upon this the Emperor became hugely Munificent to the Church of Rome, by his
Decree ordering that she shall be above the IV Patriarchal Seats, Antioch,
Alexandria, (...).
Constantinople and Jerusalem; and that the Bishops of Rome shall be above all
others in the world, all things belonging to Christianity to be governed by
them. In proof of this, he built a Church in the Lateran, where to maintain
lights, he gave Lands and Possessions in Asia, Thracia, Graecia, Africa, Italy,
and several Islands; he gave his Palace also in the Lateran, with his Crown,
and all his other imperial Habiliments, Badges and Authority; and the more to
exalt him, the Emperor himself like a Footboy led the Popes Horse about by
the Bridle, and bestowed upon him and his Successors the City of Rome, with the
Provincias loca Civitatis. Edict. Constant.
Places, Cities and Provinces of Italy, and the Western Countries; and then in
a solemn manner, cursed and damned to the pit of Hell all those, whether his
succeeding Emperors or any others, who any ways opposed or violated this his
Donation.

And this Edict or Donation of Constantine is dated at Rome, Constantine and
Gallicanus being Consuls.

Thus we have the story, and the Imperial Decree of Donation, which have made
such a noise in the World, and all as true as the Tale of this Sylvester's
Guil. Gazet. Hist. des Saints, Tom. 2. 31 December. Pet. de Natal. l. 2. c. 22.
tying up, (and there to remain till the day of Judgment) a huge Dragon in a
Den, which every day only with its breath slew above Jac. de Vorag. Hist. 12.
three hundred; men which quite puts down the story of Sir Eglomore.

Now the better to batter down the imaginary Castle of the Popes Temporal
Authority, and that the Cheat and Forgerie may appear more visible, we shall
show that the Foundation of all is a mere lie; the occasion of such a Donation,
viz. the story, to be false; and then the Decree it self, as a consequence,
must vanish also. However, the Edict it self shall also be proved a
Counterfeit, by such Arguments and Authorities as Hottoman, Dr. Crakinthorpe,
Laurentius Valla, du Plessis, our Countryman Cook, etc. affords us, but with
as much brevity as can be.

That the story and occasion of such a Donation is false, appears plainly.

I. Valerius Crispus was alive after this supposed Baptism, and so his murder
could no way entitle Constantine to the Leprosy; and for Sozom. l. 1. c. 5.
Trip. Hist. Cassiodor. lib. 1. cap. 6. Evagr. l. 3. c. 40, 41. N^ceph. l. 7. c.
35. Platina. vit Marci Broughton's Hist. Eccles. page 476. 2. Id. page 494. 9.
Jo. Mariana de rebus Hispan. l. 4. c. 16.
truth of this, we need go no further than this, that they cannot deny but both
their Ancient and their Modern Authors declare this Crispus to have been
Baptized with Constantine, and alive after the Synod supposed to be held at
Rome, upon this christning of the Emperor: Nor was Constantine a Tyrant.

II. The Leprosy it self is confessed by their Vi^. Marci, and vit. Hadrian I.
Canus loc. Theol. l. 11. c. 5. 5. Naucler, generat. 11.
Platina and others to be a mere forgery, not mentioned by Eutropius, Orosius,
and suchlike ancient Writers; nor was there any cause for such a Disease,
Constantine being a good Emperor.

III. Constantine did not persecute the Christians till this supposed Leprosy;
Eusebius. vit. Constant l. 1. c. 5. l. ^. c. 1, 4, 12, 13, 14. l. 10. c. 16.
Cedren. Hist Sozom. l. 1. c. 8.
but on the contrary, hugely favored them; in so much, that Licinius the
Heathen Consul accused him to his Soldiers for so doing: And which is more, he
did not only countenance them, but was a professed Christian himself; his Father
Constantius favoring that way, and his Son Constantine instructed in it; and
some say in Britain, at Broughton's Eccles. Hist. p. 460, 461. 5, 6, 7.
Abington in Barkshire: but of the latter I say nothing.

IV. Being thus a Christian, he could not be ignorant what S. Peter and S. Paul
were, in that time of Sylvester; and so not to suppose them to be Gods, after
an Heathenish manner. And if he were ignorant, how came he to know what they
were? for in his supposed Decree, where the story is, he does not tell us that
they told him. If they did, it is probable that they would not leave him a
supposed Pagan in the dark, but also declare what they were, besides telling
their names, nor does he say they told him that.

V. Again, being thus a Christian, he would not make use of Heathen Priests,
either to cleanse him from his iniquities, nor need Aegyptius or Osius upon that
supposed infidelity, inform him of the Efficacy of Christ and his Religion:
Neither would he consent to the wicked advise of the Pagan Flamens for his
Cure, by the blood of so many Innocent Children.

VI. If Constantine had consented to this cruelty, yet it is not probably that
he need either have such a number slain, as some say, three thousand; nor would
he have had it so publicly done, as to be frighted from it by the cries of
their grieved Mothers.

VII. Constantine was not baptized by Sylvester, nor at Rome, Anno Eusebius. vit.
Constant. l. 4. c. 61, 62, 64. Socrat. l. 1. c. 26. Theodoret. l. 1. c. 31.
Sozom. l. 2. c. 32.
324: but after this, a little before his own death, at Nicomedia in Bithynia
in lesser Asia, and that by one Eusebius Bishop of that City.

This last quite overthrowing the occasion of the Donation, they bend all their
force to null it; but the chief of their Objections are thus answered.

Object. I. That he was baptized at Rome, and so not at Nicomedia, needs no
dispute: The Font wherein he was baptized being at Rome.

Answer. If so, it is nothing to the purpose, seeing several Monuments are
there, which were neither made there, nor first erected there; and by this
Argument their Relics and Bodies of Saints, will make some holy men to be
born, or have dyed here and there, and every where; for some of them by the
several places pretending to have them, must have several bodies apiece,
besides there is no good proof of such a Baptistory.

Object. II. Of this there is proof enough; for Ammianus Marcellinus an
Heathen, mentions Lavacrum Constantinianum at Rome, and is not this the Font of
Constantine?

Answer. No, but a Bath or Bathing-place so called, mentioned also by De Occid.
Imp. l. 7.
Sigonius; and both him and Lib. 27. prope Constantini lavacrum.
Marcellinus intimate so much themselves, by saying, That the people would have
set on fire the house of Lampadius, near or adjoining to the Bath of
Constantine: And of these sorts of Baths there were many of them at Rome, and
that very large ones too; and this shows that it could not be meant by a Font
or Baptistory in a Church: for if so, then reason would tell us, that the
Authors would rather have said, near such a Church.

Object. III. Constantine was present at the Nicen Council, and therefore
baptized before that Council; and so not at Nicomedia in his latter days.

Answer. This is no consequence, for long before this, Constantine called a
Eusebius vit. Constant. l. c. 37. Bin. not. in Council. Arel. ad.
Council at Arles, where he was also present; and yet not then baptized, as
they themselves confess.

Object. IV He was present at prayers with the Christians long before his
death, and therefore not baptized at his latter end at Nicomedia.

Answer. Nor will this hold water, for any might be at their prayers, till the
receiving of the Sacrament; at which time the Catechumeni, [i. e. such as were
instructed in the Faith, but not yet Christned] and others were to withdraw.

Object. V. But Constantine was present at the receiving of the Sacrament, and
so must be baptized.

Answer. He was not, nor can they gather any such thing from Eusebius: if he
were present, it will not follow that he received: Besides, an Emperor so
favorable to the Christians, and one that called their Religion Crakinthorp,
p. 70, 72, 73, 74.
his own, both for Devotion and Curiosity; as also, good Example to gain
Prosolytes, might be allowed more privilege than others, as being only
present, if he were so.

Object. VI. Eusebius Bishop of Nicomedia was an Arian; so that if Constantine
had been baptized by him, he would have showed his Communion with that Heresy.

Answer. If he had, it does not contradict the story, but he did not agree
with them. It Is true, this Eusebius was an Arian, but a cunning jugler, and
carried himself otherwise before the Emperor. But when Constantine perceived
that he was an Arian, he was so far from Theodoret. lib. 1. cap. 19.
favoring, or siding with these people, that he banished him, with a severe
Epistle or Order against him, and those of his Faction: Yet after upon his
seeming repentance, he had the liberty to return, where he carried himself as
against the Arians (though his heart was for them) and so the Emperor seeing
only with man's eyes, thinking his Conversion to be real, might lawfully be
baptized by him, and yet none of his way or faith in those points.

Object. VII. It was not Constantine the Great, who was baptized by Eusebius at
Nicomedia; but his Son Constantine, who was an Arian, and expelled Pope Faelix
from Rome; so that the old Historians mistook the Father for the Son, which
caused this error.

Answer. This Constantine the Son was dead or killed many years before Faelix
was chosen to sit in the Roman Chair: Nor was he an Arian that we know of. And
him who you aim at all this while, is Constantius another Son of Constantine
the Great, with whom and Faelix there was some clashing: Constantius being
looked upon as an Arian, and one that had been twice baptized, and one of them
by one Athanas. de Synod, p. 350. Socrat. l. 2. c. 37. l. 1. c. 26.
Fuzoius, Bishop of Nicomedia: And that you mistake in saying that this must be
Constantine the Great, Vit. Felius.
(Platina himself will assure you.

Object. VIII. Constantine the Great was not baptized at Nicomedia, but only
Bathed in hot waters for the health of his body.

Answer. Neither Barrel better Herring; certainly Aug. Steuchus Eugubinus is
put hard to it, when he brings such a childish reason as this; but the Country
Clown rather than say nothing, affirmed Tenterden Steeple to be the cause of
Goodwin Sands; and truly Steuchus at this time reasons after the same sort,
as appears by Eusebius who lived at that time, was well acquainted with the
Emperor Constantine: and at large writes this History of his Vit. Constantine,
l. 4 c. 61, 62.
Baptism, at Nicomedia, by the Bishop of that City. The Emperor himself
confessing that he staid so long for the receiving of this Sacrament, because
he thought to have gone and been Baptized in Jordan, after the Example of our
Savior Christ. But being thus overtaken with sickness, and near his end,
rather than dye without it, was Baptized, as abovesaid, at Nicomedia.

But because some of them have said, that though the supposed occasional story
may be false; yet the Donation is true, as appears by the Decree it self of
such a Donation, we shall prove here, that the Decree it self is a mere Cheat
and Counterfeit; and then the whole design must vanish: And that it is a
forgery, is plain; because

I. It says that Constantinople was then one of the four chief Sees or
Patriarchships; whereas I would have them to prove that that dignity was before
this, or then given to this City; for some write it was not till many years
after this, and so it must speak by Prophecy.

II. In this Decree is mentioned the very word (...).
Constantinople; whereas, at the time of this writing there was no such word,
the City being then called Bizantium; nor was the name changed till sev^^al
years after this supposed Baptism, viz. according to De Occid. Imp. l. 4. anno
330.
Sigonius VI years, at which time the Emperor made it his Imperial City for the
East.

III. The Decree says, that Constantine then intended to return to, and live
at Bizantium, and build there: And yet they assure us, that he was so far from
thinking of it, that when he went from Rome, his resolution was to settle the
Seat of his Empire of the East, at or near Ilium, or old Troy in Asia; in which
design he had gone so See R^ch. Broughto^^ Eccl^s. Hist. page 496. and Age 4. c
11. p. 500. etc.
far, as not only to have laid the platform of the City, but to have built
the Gates of it not far from the Hellespont. Nor is this all, but that he was
so resolved on this, that he had not left Asia, and come into Europe to
Bizantium, if he had not been thereunto admonished by some Heavenly Vision or
other, by which means the Sea of Constantinople in the Decree may be meant as
well of Troy as Bizantium. And it is also said, that after he left Ilium, he
fell in hand with Phil. Holland's Chronol. to Am. Marcell^nus anno Christi 328.
Calcedon before he went to Bizantium; quite contrary to the Decree.

IV. In this Decree Constantine is made solemnly to give unto Pope Sylvester
the Lateran Palace: And yet L. 3. an. 312.
Sigonius, An. 312. 82.
Baro^ius, and Not. in lib. de munif. Constant.
Binius confess that it was given before to Pope Meltiades. If Constantine gave
such gifts for the honor of Christianity before Sylvesters time; why do they
say he was a Pagan and Persecutor for the first XI years of Sylvesters Popedom?

V. If Constantine had given Rome and Italy, etc. to the Popes and Sozom. l. 2.
cap. 32, 35. Sonaras, Tom. 3.
their Successors, he would never have given the same again to his Sons, as he
did by Testament; and the Sea L^ur. B^^ck de Tv^an Papae, page 78, 357, 358,
359, 360, 361, 432, 433, 437, 441, 442, 443, etc.
Lawyers say, that had the gift been true, yet it is nulled, because he could
not give such Prerogative and Dominions from his Sons and Empire, to a third
person: but this dispute concern not me.

VI. This Decree makes Constantine to throw severe curses and execrations upon
any, be who they will, that shall violate his Edict of the supposed Donation.
Now it is not propable that good Constantine would thus have cursed himself, and
have invoked his own damnation, as he must have done, if he himself broke the
Decree, as he plainly did, by giving, as aforesaid, these places by Testament
to his Son, whch he had, as they say, formerly bestowed upon the Popes of Rome.

VII. If these Territories were thus given to the Popes and their sole Nic.
Coeffeteau, Response au Sieur du Plessis, page 245.
rule, why did the Emperors for a long time by their Deputies govern Rome,
etc. without any dependence upon the Popes? And this Decree of Donation never
pleaded by the Bishops of that City, against such Usurpations [as they must
have been, if the gift had been true and legal] of those Lay-Governours.

VIII. We cannot suppose in reason, that Constantine would have given so much
Lands and Territories, only to maintain a few lights and Candles in a Church,
as the Decree says he did.

IX. The story of the hands clensing of him at his Baptism from Heaven, sounds
like the rest of the lying Miracles we often meet withal in their writings.

X. The story in this Donation of the Emperor leading the Popes horse about
like a Page, looks also like a forgery, to propogate the Popes Pride; nor is it
probable that Constantine, now supposed a sober Christian, would thus by
telling this, boast of his own humility.

XI. Several of the Romanists themselves, confess that Authentic Ancient Mel.
Canus, l. 11. c. 5. Alex. Carerius, l. 2. c. 21. Nic. Cusan. de Concord.
Cathol. l. 3. c. 2. Jac. Almon. de potest Eccles. Aen. Sylvius in Dialog. Gasp.
Schiop. Eccles. c. 51. Hieron. Cathalanus.
Historians do not make mention of these things, though they writ at large the
other actions of Constantine: And why should this so famous a matter be left
out?

XII. Many of the learned Papists themselves will not stand upon this thing,
not knowing how to make it good: An. 324. 117.
Baronius when he should come to speak of it, though in all things in behalf of
the Popes Authority he endeavors to be Voluminous, and spends many leaves upon
Constantines supposed Convertion and Baptism; yet when he comes to this
Donation, will by no means undertake its proof, but hastily throws it by, and
desires you to look in other Authors, and lets every one think as he will, but
for his part he meddles not with it: but we are assured by a fiery Gretserus
Apol. pro Baronio, c. 12.
Jesuit, that Baronius looked upon this Decree of Constantine to be either
corrupted, or a false counterfeit thing. Response, au Mystere d'Iniquite, page
115.
Dr. Coeffeteau is in this case shie also, and lets du Plessis slip away
without replying to his Arguments, yet at last declares it to be a Ib. p. 1188.
cheat and false: And De falsa donat.
Laurentius Valla Senator of Rome writes bitterly against it in a long
Declamation.

Practic. Cancel. Apostol.
Hieronymus Cathalanus looks upon it as a cheat, and yet he was Chamberlain to
Pope Alexander VI. Cardinal Concord Cathol. ad Council. Basil. l. 3. c. 2.
Nicholaus de Cusa is much of the same opinion, protesting that he has taken
great pains to find it there, were any such thing, but all to no purpose: and
some of these you have printed together in a little book. And Aeneas Sylvius,
who was afterward Pope Pius II in a particular Dialogue, cited by the aforsaid
Cathalanus, looks upon it as a mere forgery: Nor will Franciscus Guiccerdine
give any credit to it. It Is true, the Hist. lib. 4.
Section which contains his judgment of this Donation, and the History how the
Popes rose to such greatness in Temporalities, is fraudulently left out in some
Foreign Editions: but it is to be met withal in the Edit. Land. 1618.
English, Edit. Paris. 1612.
French, and some others, as also in Tom. 3.
Goldastus. And De Tyran. Papae, page 335, 336.
Laurentius Banck tells us of other Romanists, who either doubt of, or oppose
this Donation.

To this exception I shall say no more, but that the Learned French Jesuit
Certum est mihi, Donationem Constantini, quae a quibusdam illiteratis
profertur, ineptam esse, absurdam, and omnium sibulis explodendam. Briet.
Parallela Geograph. part 2. lib. 6. page 889.
Philippus Brietius the Prince of Geographers, affirms that this Donation of
Constantine is a foolish and absurd forgery, to be disposed and hist at by all
men, being only maintained by a company of ignorant people: And De Script.
Eccles. Tom. 1. page 237.
Philippe ^ab^e another French Jesuit well versed in these things, confesses
that Baronius, Morinus and others may very well doubt it.

XIII. They write that this Baptism and supposed Donation of Constantine was in
the CCCXXIV; and yet the Decree it self of such a Donation with the story of
his Baptism is dated, Constantine and Gallicanus being Consuls: And yet
according to the Fasti of the Consuls, Crispus and Constantinus were then
Consuls, and not Gallicanus, who was Consul with Bassus some VII years before
this, and was again V years after the Nicen Council: and this false dating is
another sign of the cheat.

XIV. If Constantine gave all this to the Church of Rome in Pope Sylvesters
time, how comes 12. Q. 1. c. Futuram.
Melchiades, who was Pope before this Sylvester, to take notice of
Constantine's being a Christian, and expressly to relate his building of
Churches, his giving great things to Rome, and his leaving of that City to the
Popes? The truth is, they are both cheats, to the shame of the Collectors of
their Canonlaw, who would thus fob such forgeries upon us. And Gregory XIII his
amendments were to small purpose, leaving such gross lies as these in their
Canon, to deceive the more ignorant.

More might be said against the pretended Donation of Constantine: but this is
enough to satisfy any man of its forgeries, and that there was never any such
thing. However, because they pretend to give some reasons for it, take some for
example sake.

I. First, they say, that Eusebius in his book called Enneadoes, writes the
story of the Leprosy, Baptism and Donation of Constantine, and so why not
true?

Answer. This is a spurious and counterfeit Book, never made by Eusebius as An.
1191. 51.
Baronius and Var. Resol. l. 4. c. 16. 8.
Covarruvias confess, and the true Eusebius writes no such thing, but quite
contrary, as aforesaid.

II. Again, they say, that S. Hierome in one of his Beginning Saepissime
rogatus.
Epistles to Eustichius, affirms Constantine to have been baptized by
Sylvester, and so not at Nicomedia, as Eusebius says.

Answer. This is also a forged Epistle, never writ by S. Hierome, but by some
cheat or other, and fathered upon him (as many other writings are) as is
confessed by Not. in Martyr. Romans Aug. 1.
Baronius and Apparat. in Hier. page 752.
Possevine, with Tom. 4. page 202. Annot. ante Epist. and Praef. ante Tom. 4.
Hiero^.
Erasmus, and several See Jo. Hen. Hottinger. Elench. Scriptor. suppositiorum,
page. 83.
others.

III. Again, they say, that Did. 96. c. 14. Constantinus.
Gratian having collected the story of it into his Decrees, and so become a
part of the Canon Law: we need not suspect the Antiquity of it, no question but
they had good reason and true, for putting of it there.

Answer. I hope you will not take all to be Gospel in these Decrees; for if so,
Did. 34. c. 4. and 5. with the contents Edict. Ludg. 15, 44. and 1572. and
Edict. Paris, 1561.
Concubines will thank you for allowing them so fair a plea. But to the
purpose, it is confessed by Hist. part 1. Tit. 8. c. 2. 8.
Antonius, Bishop of Florence, by Antropol. l. 23. fol. 270. a.
Volateran, by De concord. Cathol. l. 3. c. 2.
Cusanus, and others that this was not inserted by Gratian, nor is it in the
Ancient Copies; and the Palea, or Chaff prefixed to its Title, tell you what
stamp and authority it is of. However, to prove this donation, though not
inserted by Gratian, yet to be set in these Decrees in his time. De jurisdict.
part 1. c. 30. 35, 36.
Dr. Marta tells us a story of a plagiary Cardinal, why such Chapters were so
called. But another Italian Lawyer, De juris peritis.
Catellianus Cotta says, that Palea was one who was Scholar to Gratian, and
probably one is as true as the other.

Several other suchlike spurious Authorities as these are alleged in behalf of
this Donation; to which I need not trouble the Reader with an Answer, but refer
him to Dr. Crakinthorp. And in truth, D^. Barw^ck's lite of Bishop Morton.
some of them are impudent to a miracle in this way of forgery, witness their
yet confident story of the Nags-head Ordination, as notorious a lie as ever
was spread abroad; witness their affirming that the Reverend Bishop M^rton
confessed the truth of the story in a Speech in Parliament, as true as the
other: But had the story been true, might not we say, we took the Example from
Pope John XII, who Baron. anno 963. 17. Binius Council.
ordained a Deacon in a Stable?

Here basely the Fathers and others have been abused, and corrupted in their
Additions: I shall not at this time undertake to declare, but refer you to
Corruption of Father. See also Blondel. Ps^udo-Isidor. W Crashaw's Romish
forgeries and falfications.
Dr. Tho James; and Archbishop Usher left a large Manuscript behind him much to
the same purpose.

The aforesaid Appendix to the Reader.
Dr. James (an industrious Toyler amongst all sorts of Books and Writings)
tells that in the Vatican Library, there are certain men maintained only to
write out the Acts of the Councils, or Copies of the Fathers works, who are
brought up to imitate the ancient Letters and writings of some of them; which
Possevine the Jesuit confessing that Manuscripts themselves need a Purgation.

To prevent the thrusting of these Abuses upon us, the Noble Prince Henry had
some thoughts to erect a Royal Library, with all sorts of Books and Editions;
as I think betwixt St. James and the Muze. And in the Proposition presented to
the aforesaid Prince, both to forward and to show the means to carry on such a
glorious design: I find these following words (according to my Manuscript)
confirming the former observation of Dr. It would be well if several of his
Books were re^^inted to show the abuse of some Editions of Fathers.
James.

The Pope gathers up all the Manuscripts he can into his Library the Vatican,
and there uses them at his pleasure. One of their tricks is Notorious, they
have men that can counterfeit any hand, and write the old hands that were
written 500 and 1000 years ago; then they have an artificial Ink, which within
three days after the writing, looks as it had been written 500 years before.
Thus having altered and taken out all that made for us, they suppress the old
true Copies, and produce these new ones (they written by themselves as before)
as the Authentical Books.

In this was also designed a noble maintenance for the Library-Keepers, and
other Officers thereunto belonging, to encourage their attendance and pains; as
also, for Factors in Foreign pa^ts to buy up Books: but all these things being
vanished by the death of that famous Prince, it would be well if some Noble
Benefactors in this covetous Age would think upon, and raise to themselves a
famous remembrance by their liberality this way to the public Library in
Oxford; which, though already it exceeds any yet in the World for number of
Books and free access (I wish never abused) yet it may want some thousands of
Books; for having no fit stipend to make yearly recruites from Franckfort and
other places.

To this I could wish, that we were as busy in printing all the Councils (the
better to discover the fraud in some Editions) as the Romanists beyond Seas
are; it being a hard case, that otherwise we must rely upon their Editions,
and we are not ignorant of unhandsome dealings amongst them in this very
business. Binius we know takes some of his counsels verbatim out of Baronius,
one very partial, and has left several necessary things out in his Volumns,
because against the Church of Rome, which were set down by Crabbe (now two hard
to be got) and several Councils, especially of our own Nation, are not
completed in the late Parisian Edition in 36 Tomes, besides L' Abbe the
Publisher of them is thought and See the pernicious consequences of the new
Heresy of the Jesuits, printed 1666, p. 102, 103, 104, 105, etc.
judged to be very partial.

To these I could wish a careful review, and reprinting of the Fathers; since
we find our selves at a loss in their Antwerp, Colen, and some other Editions;
and those of Erasmus by Froben at Basil, and other old Editions are hard to be
got. Praefat. in Indicem Expurg. Lovaniensem.
Junius tells a story of a notorious cheat done by them upon St. Ambrose; and
Dr. James at large tells you how they have abused St. Cyprian: to which I can
speak the more boldly, having my self compared several places of him with some
old Manuscripts, especially that De simplicitate Prae atorum, or de unitate
Ecclesiae.
Book which they make so much use of to prove the Popes Supremacy, in which
Manuscripts I find not the expressions they brag most of, and father upon St.
Cyprian, which may allow us to suspect some strange dealings by addition from
their own heads. Dr. James once in a Convocation at Westminster, moved strongly
for these reviews and reprinting of the Fathers, etc. but private interest and
faction was too strong, either to bestow so much cost or time upon such a noble
and public design.

And to these I could wish that there were some care taken to reprint some of
the Ancient Historians of Church and State; the want of which in time may put
us to a loss in dealing with our Adversaries; the old Editions being very hard
to come by, we must then (if care be not taken to the contrary) be content to
make use of such false and spurious ware as our Enemies will thurst upon us.
And that this complaint is not without good reason; many instances might be
brought of their abusing us in this sort: But at this time for Example sake, I
shall only make use of one, viz. Aubertus Miraeus of Brabant, a great
Antiquary, and a famous Scholar, and one that has been much read in
Church History; for which things he has got a fame amongst the Learned, his
several works having been greedily read of all sorts, and that with some repute
to the Author. This great and noted man, nay, and a Churchman too, being Canon
of Antwerp, can we think that his study was to deceive Posterity, and publicly
endeavor to cheat the world with his, or the inventions of others?

Well, do but peruse his Edition of Sigebertus, that ancient Historian of above
500 years standing; and amongst other places, look upon him in the years 773
and 4; compare them with other old Editions, and see how he has sometimes cut
off, sometimes added, and other times perverted the true sense; and all this to
take away some authority from the Emperor.

But to this may be objected, that he followed some ancient Manuscripts or
other; it is true, it is an objection with himself soon made; but what small
reason we have to believe this only saying so, shall be left to the judgment
of any man by this following story. This Miraeus also set forth a Notitia
Episcopatuum.
Register or Breviary of Bishoprics, with some small Annotations of his own:
and because formerly there has been some dispute of these things, that this
Tract of his may carry the more Authority with it: In his very Title Page, he
assures all the world, that this his Notitia is printed Ex vetusto Codice ante
annos fere quingentosscripto.
according to an Manuscript almost 500 years old.

And why may we not believe this good man of Bruxels? for if Antiquity study to
cheat the world with false Copies; well may others who are apt to take things
upon trust run into errors, and I fear this dealing has too much power upon
Faith and Religion. But to show this to be a villainous forgery, I shall pass by
other Countries, and only come to our own of England; though methinks it is
odd, if this Manuscript be so ancient, that he should not put down Dunkeld in
Scotland, as well as Ross, Brechin and Dunblane, since they were all founded by
one and the same King, viz. that pious and virtuous King David, who gave so
much to the Church from his own Crown Lands.

But to make the knavery more visible, lets see his dealing and ignorance of
England: In which I shall not trouble my self with his naming Chester or
Gloucester amongst our Bishoprics, because formerly some of the Bishops of
Liechfield were ignorantly called Bishops of Chester, because one or two of
them once lived there; and some think that Gloucester was an Episcopal See in or
before the Saxons time, but not under that name, but Cluviensis. But waving
these, though good enough to discover the cheat, I desire the Reader to
consider this following, against which there can be no exception, viz. if this
Manuscript was almost 500 years old, how comes it to fet down f^r Bishoprics
in England, Peterburgh, Oxford and Bristol, when none of them were made
Episcopal Sees till Henry the Eighth's time, little above sixty years before
Miraeus set out this false Notitia?

These cheats should oblige us to study prevention in time, otherwise hereafter
they may run us down by their false Fathers, and other Authorities: and when
they have thus forced us only to the protection of Scriptures, an endless
dispute may begin about the variae lectiones; by which means the poor people
and truth may be abused by both parties. But since they stand most upon
Authority and Quotations, it is fitting we should be more careful, that they do
not cheat us with false play.

But enough of this, and the supposed Donation, which the Venetians did once
prettily confute, and so shake off a close demand. Laurent. Banck de Tyran.
Pap. page 355.
The Pope asking them by what right they appropriated to themselves all the
jurisdiction and power in the Adriatic Sea, since they could not show any
Writings of Privileges granted to them for so doing? To which it is said, they
thus returned an Answer, That they greatly wondered, that his Holiness should
expect from them to show those privileges, which, yea, and the very Originals
the Popes themselves had carefully kept all along in their own Archives, as a
sacred thing; and might easily be found, if he would but look upon the backside
of the Deed of Constantine's Donation; for there might be seen the Privileges
granted to them over that Sea, written in great Letters.

And such another story they tell us how Pope Alexander the Sixth having asked
the same question, was thus answered by Girolamo Donato the Venetian
Ambassador, Let your Holiness show me the Instrument of St. Peter's Patrimony,
and you will find on the backside of it the Grant of the Adriatic Sea to the
Venetians.

CHAP. II.
1. When the Bishops of Rome had raised themselves up to some favor and
greatness, what odd striving and dealings there were to obtain that See, with
the manner of Elections?

2. That the Temporal Power had formerly the greatest stroke in the Election of
Popes, and that it yet has, though by underhand-dealings.

3. An Essay upon this Quere, Whether for some years past, there has been
according to their Decrees and Orders, really any true Pope?

THe Bishops of Rome, though formerly lived in great obscurity, Sect. I.
lurking privately here and there without any greatness or notice, by reason of
the Persecutions against Christianity: Now that they had the Emperors
embracers of the Gospel, and favorers of the Prelacy, appeared in public, in
great Splendour and Authority; and presently raised themselves to such a
Grandeur, that they seemed not only to overtop their Neighbors, but next the
Emperor to appear in greatest glory, sway and privilege; which made
Praetextatus (design to be Consul) drolingly say to Pope Damasus, Make me
Bishop of Rome, and I will quickly make my self Facite me Romanae Urbis
Episcopum, and ero protinus Christianus. Hieron. Epist. 61.
a Christian.

And now the ambition to be great made every one aspire to this Dignity; and
that sometimes with so much earnestness and indirect means, that Religion it
self, and the Bishops of that City lost much of their Reputation, not only
from the Heathen, but Christian too, as is plain by St. Hierome, and others,
who wrote against their faults. I shall not trouble my self concerning the
discention and schism about Liberius and Felix the Second, only that if
Liberius was an Heretic, as several accuse him, then a man may well plead the
other to be no Antipope; if that be true, which some of their own Church
confess, that a Pope for Heresy loses his Dignity and Chair.

But to wave this, An. 367.
Liberius being dead, the two Factions divide again, each of them striving to
make a Pope of their party. These who were of the Antipope Felix's side chose
one Damasus Jo. Marian. de Reb. Hispan. l. 4. c. 19. Villegas F. S. December. 11.
Am. Narcellin. Hist. l. 27. c. 2. Ruffin. l. 11. c. 10.
whether of Tarragona in Catalonia, or Madred in New Castile, or of Guimaranes
Antre Duero y Mino in Portugal Authors agree not] and those who were for
Liberius chose one Vrsicinus a Roman; at this Election the feud was so great
betwixt both parties, that in the Church of Sicininus, there was slain upon the
place CXXXVII persons; and it was a long time after before the rage of the
people could b^ assuaged; insomuch, that Vivensius Governor of Rome for the
Emperor, not being able to appease these Tumults, was forced to retire himself
out of the City. But at last Damasus got the upper-hand, and so kept the
Popedom by the assistance of the Emperor Onuphr. Annot. in Platin. vit.
Felicis II.
Valentinian.

Thus was this thing managed, besides voting, with Platin. vit. Damas.
Sabellic. En. 7. l. 9. Nausler. Genesis 13. p. 487. Genebrard. p. 576.
main force and arms. And those who formerly were held as Schismatics for
choosing and siding with an Antipope, are now brave boys for standing and
fighting lustily against those who were for the true Pope Liberius, as they
call him. And had the Emperor approved of Vrsicinus, for ought that I know, he
had been called infallible, and Damasus an Antipope.

And that the Emperors had some authority about the Election of Popes, will
appear by the story of another uprore and schism.

Pope Zosimus being An. 418.
dead, the people of Rome enter again into divisions; one party chose for
Bishop Eulalius in the Lateran Church, and the other Boniface in another
Church; and thus each faction cried up their Pope. Of this, Symmachus Governor
of Rome gives the Emperor notice, and tells him, that Eulalius had Baron.
anno 419. 1, 2, 3, etc.
most reason and right of his side. Honorius the Emperor acknowledges
Eulalius as Pope, as being chosen and approved of by a lawful number, time and
place, rejects Boniface as illegitimate, wanting these necessaries to an
Election, and bids him submit, or to be expelled the City; Symmachus sends this
news to Boniface, but the Messenger is beat. In the mean time the party of
Eulalius rejoice, he acting as Pope, and the City Gates being shut to exclude
his Adversary; the Governor being the more careful, by reason of the great
inconvenience and trouble the City underwent by the former Tumults and Riots at
the Election of Damasus.

Those who sided with Boniface, seeing themselves and cause quite lost, if
presently they procured not Remedy; drew up a Petition to the Emperor,
complaining Eulalius not to be lawfully elected, but Boniface to be truly
Pope; for which they desired Caesar's assistance. Honorius upon this orders that
both the elected should appear before him* where he would have the Case tried,
and accordingly see the right disposed of; and for more clearing of the
business, he appointed several Bishops to meet about it; but these not agreeing
concerning the Election, this meeting vanished without any determination,
whereupon he resolved upon another convention.

In the mean time, the better to keep good Order in R^me, now full of hubbubs,
by reason of this division, he ordered Eulalius and Boniface, the two heads of
these disorders, to depart the City; and Easter now drawing near, that the
people might not be without a Bishop to celebrate at that Feast, he appointed
Achilleus Bishop of Spoleto, one uninterest to either party, to officiate as
chief in Rome, and him, he called Beatitudo tua.
His Holiness, or Blessedness, and so did he Paulinus Bshop of Nola, and those
of Sanctitas vestra.
Africa.

And here Eulalius lost himself with the Emperor, for contrary to his express
command, he enters into the City; upon which new Tumults begin, and odd
threatening and bickering there was in spite of the Governor or Authority.
Symmachus himself being in great danger in this hurlyburly; all parties
striving to possess the Lateran. Upon this Honorius expressly orders Eulalius
for peace-sake to depart the City, and that in the mean time he should not be
acknowledged, and that the Bishop of Spoleto, according to the former Order,
only remain there, and solely have the possession of the Lateran Church for
the time of Easter.

These Orders, Eulalius also very unadvisedly withstands, and having gotten his
party together, thought by main force to have seized upon the Lateran; upon
this, more mischief falls out; but at last Eulalius is beat out of the City,
Achilleus remained possessed of the Church, and had good Guards appointed him
for his and its defense. Sigon. Hist. de Occid. Imp. an. 419.
Honorius the Emperor being certified of, and offended at this, expressly
excludes Eulalius, and settles Boniface in the Popedom, to which he had a
meeting of many Bishops consenting.

Thus we have seen in short the story of another riotous canvasing: and
because this is of no sma^l concern, Baronius would by no means have us to
think that Eulalius had any right by Election upon the Narrative of Symmachus,
because (as he says) he was partial, and seemed to favor Eulalius: But to
this may be returned,

I. That if the Governor favored Coeffeteau Resp. p. 245.
Heathenism, he might be as much an Enemy to the Christianity of the one as
well as the other; they objecting nothing against the soundness of either of
them for Principles of Religion.

II. Symmachus in his third letter to Honorius, (when the Emperor showed no
more favor for the one than the other) Religiosos viros Bonifac^um and
Eulalium.
names Boniface before Fulalius, which somewhat signifies rather his favor
for the former.

III. And lastly, Symmachus in his Letters to Constantius, Brother-in-Law to
the Emperor, writes virulently against Eulalius, accusing him of occasion of
misbehavour and riots; from which some may suppose that the Governor was
impartial and true, when he assured to the Emperor, that Eulalius was rightly
chosen.

But besides this, another dispute may arise upon this story, viz. Lib 4. cap.
160
Petrus de Natalibus, Generat. 15. page 511.
Nauclerus, Vit. Bon^fac. I.
Pl^tina, Cronicle Universale, fol. ^66.
Filippo, da Bergamo, Hist. de O cid. Imp. l. 11. anno 419.
Sigonius, Hist. Pontifical, fol. 74.
Gonzalo de Illiscas, and their ancient Vatican See the Councils.
Liber Pontificalis, with Epit Pontif Romans de Pontif. and Ca^dinalium crea
ione. Edict. venet. 1557. vit. Eulalii: But this is left out in the Colen
Edition, at the end of Platina: And in that of Jo. Gaulter. Chron. Chronicorum,
Tom. 1.
Onuphrius do declare, that the Emperor Honorius was at Milan at this time,
and thence sent his Orders; which if be true, (and these men had no reason to
affirm this if false, nor need the Roman Catholic question them being all
noted Historians of their Religion) then must those Letters in Baronius, which
carry their date to and from Honorius at Ravenna, concerning this Schism be
spurious and counterfeit, and so (for ought that I know) we may lose part of
the story; and if these be be false (and it is plain the two Vatican Manuscripts
contradict each other) I shall give the less esteem to the pretended Records,
that are produced from those Archives, for many cheating writings (not
forg^tting the Gift and Decree of Constantine) are shown to us for true and
authentic out of that Library; of which Platina was Keeper, and a diligent
searcher into the ancient Manuscripts of it; and Onuphrius had the liberty, and
was well read in every piece of Antiquity in it.

The often mention of Symmachus, Governor of Rome in the late Tumults, puts me
in mind of a Pope not long after of that name, noted also for a Schism in his
time.

For Anastasius the Second being an 498.
dead, those of Rome ran head long into a new disorder, some choosing for Pope
Symmachus, whilst others elected one. Laurentius; upon which great disorders,
riots, and mischiefs arises, which continued for some years; to be short, the
business was referred to Theodorick an Arian, King of the Ostrogothes, who had
then overrun Italy, and Symmachus carried it; those of the party of Laurentius
troubled at this, frame Articles against Symmachus, accusing him of some Vices,
and admit Laurentius; upon which new disorders growing, and the King being vexed
at this dissension, as Platina, vit. Sym. Fill. d^ Bergamo. Cronicle Universale,
fol. 245. Ant. Sabellic. En. 8. l. 2. Jo. Maucler. Gener. 17.
some say, sends Petrus Bishop of Altino [in the Territory of Venice, now
ruined, and no Episcopal Seat] to Rome, there to rule as chief, the other two
being turned out: to conclude, Petrus is rejected, Laurence his party strive to
carry all; all sorts of villainies are committed, Sacred places violated,
Priests slain; but at last, after suchlike infinite outrages and murders,
Symmachus is acknowledged as Pope, and in the Chair of Rome ruled several years.

But before I shake hands with this story, I hope you will give me leave to
tell you one Tale, in confirmation of the right of Symmachus to the Papal
Chair, and this upon no less authority than Pope Dialog. l. 4. c. 40.
Gregory the Great. But first, we must understand that one Paschasius stood
fiercely for Laurentius against Symmachus; and that this Paschasius for his
learning, honesty, and holiness, was especially famous in those times; yet for
all these noble qualifications, he would never acknowledge Symmachus, but on
the contrary, looked upon Laurentius to have all right, equity and law of his
side; and so steadfast was he in this, that to his dying day he would hold none
other for Pope. And this was not a little blot to the reputation of the Cause
of Symmachus, and by consequence to the true Succession of Popes, that this
Paschasius so knowing, so just, so virtuous, and one who has got an holy name
in the Roman Baron. Martyrol. Romans Maii 13.
Martyrologies should look upon Symmachus as an Antipope, and acknowledge
Laurentius as the only true one.

But though good Paschasius dyed in this opinion, yet we shall now here the
story of his punishment and repentance for so doing, and so the objection
cleared. It chanced upon a time, that Germanus, Bishop of Capua [now an
Archbishop See] being not well, was desired by his Physicians for healths-sake,
to go into an hot Bath, whither being gone, he finds there Paschasius (dead
long before) standing in a penitent and piping-hot condition; at which Germanus
being troubled, asked him, Why he, so good a man, had to do there? To which
Paschasius thus replyeth, Alas, I am here punished for no other fault, but
because I took part with Laurentius against Symmachus: But I beseech you pray
heartily for me; and if you do not find me here when you return again, then
you may conclude that your prayers are heard. Upon this Germanus gave himself
to prayer for him; and after some days returning to the same Bath, he found not
Paschasius there: Argument good enough that he was delivered out of Purgatory,
and pardoned of his fault, for thinking any right to be in Laurentius; and
lastly, that Symmachus must be true Pope, or else the Miracle is not worth a
Rush. And this pretty story An. 498.
Baronius would not have you to think unworthy your reading.

To run over all the factions, interests and feuds at the election of Popes
would be too tedious at this time; and if those of latter days were not fresh
in memory, we might tell at large the violent eanvasing at the election of An.
1590.
Gregory XIV between the Spanish party and that of Cardinal Montalta; the
French not pretending to any interest there, Henry the Fourth being King, and
then of the Prot^stant Religion: We might also tell of the hubbubs in the Vid.
Caes. de L^gny. les Ambassades du Ca^d. du Perron. lib. 3. an. 1605.
Conclave of Leo the Eleventh, and Paul the Fifth, between the Factions of the
Catholic and Christian Kings, of the crying out of Treason against the King of
Spain, because the Cardinal of the French party got the better, and some other
violences. And as great stir there was at the choosing of An. 1644.
Innocent the Tenth, every one striving to get a Pope of his party; Cardinal
Bentivolio that famous Statesman, had once like to have carried it, but the
French party oppose him, as a favourer of the Spaniards, and his dying at the
same time ended this dispute; then Sacchetti bid fair for it, but he also was
rejected by the Catholic Kings faction, as one who loved France and Portugal.
At last, after many plottings and contrivings, libelling and ripping up one
another faults, the Cardinals being boldly locked up in Sixtus the Fourth's
Chapel, and not to stir till they had agreed, Phamphilio carried it by a
Majority.

As for the election of the present Pope An. 1655.
Alexander the Seventh, there was as much faction and interest, as any of the
rest; the Spaniards having one party there, headed by the two Cardinals de
Medices, Charles and John, the first, Uncle; the last, Brother to the great
Duke of Tuscany: the French had their Creatures also countenanced by the two
Barberini, Francis, and Antonio the first, calling himself Protector of the
English: And besides these there was a third interest consisting against of
several Cardinals, and in Rome called the Squadrone Volante, who would seem to
be indifferent to the other two Parties; and Cardinal Imperiale a Genoese was
head of this Troop.

Sacchetti had not only Barberini, but the Squadrone Volante, and some others
zealous for him; yet though the most desired by the Romans, and was held the
best and worst worthy amongst the Cardinals, he lost it upon the same account,
(viz. as a lover of France and Mazarini) as he had done in the former Conclave.
However, for sometime many Cardinals were so resolved for him, that 'twas said,
That they would O Sacchetti, O Cataletta.
either have him Pope or dye there: And for a long time at every scrutiny he
had XXXIII Votes, in opposition to which, every one of the Spanish faction in
their Scheduls only writ Ego **** Card.
****
Accedo Nemini.


By which means they kept unanimous and entire, by not dividing themselves in
these scrutinies to other Candidate Cardinals: but this obstinacy of both
parties so lengthned the Conclave, that Cardinal Chigi [now Pope] said merrily,
that a Pope would never be chosen, till the Cardinals Nemini and Triginti tria
could agree.

Cardinal Corrado had several friends, but those of Castile rejected, him
because Barberini was for him, though he might have served being a severe
Canonist, and in truth knew nothing else; yet this may be enough, since of late
times they have not chosen a Pope, who had studied Divinity, but only some
Canon Law or Politics.

Caraffa was thought on, but the French reject him, because the Spaniards
intended his promotion; however, his death at the same time ended the dispute.
As for Cardinal Rapaccioli he had both hopes and many friends in the Conclave,
who voted stoutly for him; but de Medici and that party opposed him, and
Cardinal Spada in writing objected against him, that he had caused Prayers to
be said, that the Devils sins might be pardoned.

The story of which, being pretty odd and unusual, take as they report it. At
Teramo in Italy, of which place this Cardinal was Bishop, one being possessed
with a Devil, Rapaccioli for curiosity sake went to discourse with it; and
amongst other things, asked the Devil, if he endured great torments; the Devil
replied, exceeding great: The Cardinal inquired of him, Why he did not repent
for his sins, the causes of his punishment? The spirit replied, That he had
earnestly repented, but without any benefit. Then, quoth the Cardinal, if God
should pardon you, would you take such a forgiveness and mercy in good part? To
which the Spirit consenting, Rapaccioli commanded prayers to be said to God,
that the Devils sins might be remitted and forgiven him.

Cardinal Maculano, or St. Clement had once some hopes, having many votes, but
he had to oppose him Madam Her life is lately written by the well known Gualdo:
In it the world may see what a woman she was, and how she ruled Pope Innocent
X, and the Roman Church.
Olympia, Sisterin-law to the last Pope Innocent the Tenth; for she, with some
carried a sway in the Conclave: And she also gave a main stroke against
Cecchino, she and others taking him to be a fierce enemy against her and the
House of Pamfilio, Pope Innocent having sufficiently abused him, about the
forgeries of Mascambruno in the Porgugal Sodomists, and other base actions,
though Cecchino was clear and guiltless concerning these things. And as for
Fiorenzola, though many wished he were Pope, and had several Votes to forward
it; yet the same Donna Olympia his mortal enemy, and some other oppositions
hindered his promotion; and indeed Barberini by his Votes and Friends would
sometimes favor her designs, whom though most did hate for her imperiousness
in the last Popes days; yet they did not wish the ruin of the Family, and so
had no mind to choose an Enemy to the Pamfilii, being then a kin to the
Barberini. However, Alexander the Seventh has showed himself no Friend to
Olympia.

Several others were thought on, and adhered to, but to no purpose, the
Spaniards still oppsing those the French would have; and those, whom the
Catholic King desired. At last, after they had thus bafled, jugled, and
out-plotted one another for a quarter of a year; Cardinal Mazarini sends
privately to Barberini from Paris his approbation of Chigi; the Germans also
had some mind to him, being mindful of his dexterous carriage at the Treaty of
Munster 1644, and what the Emperor and Austria approve of, the Spaniards
usually must consent to. Besides this, the Squadrone Volante, and the house of
Pamfilii were his Friends, being made Cardinal but three years before by
Innocent; and he had had some sufferings formerly in this Conclave; and so at
last, though quite contrary to the first design, was this Cardinal Fabio Chigi
of Sienna chosen Pope, and called himself Alexander the Seventh, from his
Relation, both as Country and Kindred to Alexander the Third.

The way of choosing Popes in a closed-up Conclave, was first instituted, as
Annot. ad Platin. vit. Greg. X.
Onuphrius tells us, by Pope Gregory the Tenth. And there was good reason to
endeavor the restraint of the too much liberty then used by the Cardinals in
the election of the Pope [though we see the greatest care abused in our times
in such actions] by which means their Chair would sometimes be void a long
time, to the shame both of the Electors and their Profession; of which, this
Gregory the Tenth may serve for an Example: For Clement the Fourth being An.
1278.
dead, the Cardinals though then but a few, viz. XVII, could by no means agree
about a Pope; for though they met often about it, yet they would never conclude
upon the person; every one of them endeavoring to be the man, they would not
consent to another. Philip King of Saepius siquidem congregati negotium
conficere nulla ratione valuere, dum unusquisque ipsorum ad Pontificatum
aspirans, nemini cedere vellet. Onuphr. loco citato.
France, and Charles of Sicily, desired them to hasten the election, but all
would not do; which occasioned John Bishop and Cardinal of Porto, seeing the
self-obstinate ambition of the Cardinals, and yet calling upon the Holy Ghost
to assist them, jeeringly say to them, My Masters, let us open the top of the
Room, for the Holy Ghost cannot Domini, discooperiamus tectum Camerae hujus,
quia spiritus sanctus nequit ad nos per tot tecta ingredi.
come to us through so many Coverings.

And when they perceived that none of themselves, by reason of their dissension
could be chosen, after almost Two years nine months and one day.
three years wrangling and canvasing about it; at last Theobaldus Archdeacon of
Liege, then in the holy Land in promoting of that War, was pitched upon, who
upon notice went to Italy, and called himself Gregory the Tenth. Upon the
election of this Pope, the aforesaid Cardinal of Porto made these two riming
Verses, a way then much in Fashion.

Papatus munus
Tulit Archidiaconus unus,
Quem Patrem Patrum
Fecit discordia Fratrum.
Of Liege the Archdeacon
Was chose Pope from Acon;
By the Discord of Brothers
Made Dad of all others.
But of this tedious dissension amongst the Cardinals, voluminous Baronius,
because it is a blot to his Church, will scarce give you so much as one hint.
This Gregory the Tenth, amongst other Laws concerning the Election of Popes,
decreed in a Council at Lions in the fourth Rule, That not only Cardinals who
IV Non solum Cardinales absentes, sed omnes cujusvis Ordinis and Conditionis
homines in Romanum Pontificem creari possint. Onuphr. and Baron. anno Pap. 3.
were absent, but that any man of what Order or Condition soever might be
chosen Pope. But this is now laid aside, with some other of his Constitutions
concerning the Conclave.

Popes were formerly chosen by the suffrages of the Clergy then present, though
of inferior rank: After this, the power of election was restrained only to
Cardinals; and these sometimes not agreeing, but falling into diverse schisms,
one party holding him for Pope who they gave their votes for, others
acknowledging none but whom they nominated, and sometimes a third party would
stand to another: but to prevent this, Alexander the Third, who had like to
have lost the Popedom by these means, in a 1179.
Lateran Council, ordered a way by Scrutiny, and that none should be held for
Pope, but he who had at least two parts in three for him.

But this also in time was found not secure enough to bind up the self-ended
interest of the Cardinals: And therefore the aforesaid Gregory the Tenth in a
Council at 1274.
Lions by Decree ordered a close Conclave, all under one Roof, not divided by
any Walls, but only having the Cells of the Cardinals, divided one from
another by Wollen-cloath; and that the Cardinals should by no means be
permitted to go out of this Conclave, till they had chosen a Pope; and if any
of them got out before an election, they should be compelled to go in again:
That if after three days a Pope be not chosen, then their allowance of diet to
be lesned, and but one Ferculum unum.
Dish or Mess granted them: And none to be chosen till he had two parts of
three. But all these, except the last, are laid aside.

Other Did. 79. Clemens VII an. 1529. Pius IV, an. 1562.
Orders have been made by diverse Popes concerning this election, too tedious
here to mention: Of late days Dat. Romae 1621.
Gregory the XV made Rules for the Conclave by a Bull, and a quarter of a year
after a Caeremoniale, which were confirmed by Dat. Romae 1625.
another of his Successor Urban VIII, which XXXVII Cardinals, (the rest I
suppose absent) by their subscription promised, vowed and swear to observe, and
XLI subscribed the same to that of Gregory XV. Ego -- S. R. E. Card.
-- promitto, voveo and juro.


The Bulls themselves being very long, I shall refer the Reader to them.

Sect. 2. That the Temporal Power had formerly the greatest stroke in the
Election of Popes; and that it yet has, though by underhand-dealings.
TEmporal Princes finding themselves oftentimes disturbed and in danger, not
only by the diverse Factions arising about the Popedom, but also by the
imperious and incroaching humor of the Bishops of Rome, have also restrained
these Inormities by their Laws.

The Emperor Honorius (of whom we lately heard) being greatly troubled by the
Tumults and Factions between Bonifacius and Eulalius: To prevent such siding,
made a Law, that if Did. 79. c. Siduo.
two strove for the Popedom, neither of them should be capable, but another
election to be made. Pope Did 63. c. Agatho.
Vitalianus according to the custom, sent news of his election to the Emperor,
without which acknowledgement he should not be Pope.

Baron. an. 526.
Felix the Fourth chosen Pope by Theodorick King of the Ostrogoths, then ruling
in Italy: and Platin. vit. Severini.
Severinus retained the same Dignity by the confirmation of Isatius, then only
Exarch in Italy: Platina himself confessing, that in those days, the Election
of Popes Vana tunc enim habebatur Cleri ac Populi Electi nisi ad Imperatores
aut eorum Exarchi confirmassent. Platin. vit. Sever.
by the Clergy and People was of none effect, unless they were confirmed or
approved of by the Emperors or their Exarchs. And Pelagius the Second being
chosen Pope, when he and the City of Rome were closely besieged by the
Lombards, sent as soon as he could possibly to the Emperor at Constantinople,
to satisfy and pacify him, concerning the election without his Imperial
knowledge, laying the fault upon the siege. And Onuphrius here commenting upon
Platina, confesses the custom of the Emperor's approving the Pope; for which
approbation, the Elected was to pay a certain sum of money; Haec autem una fuit
causa, quare Pelagius injussu Principis, tum Pontifex creatus est, cum extra
obsessam ab host urbem mitti quispiam non posset. Nil enim tum a Clero in
eligendo Pontifice actum erat, nisi ejus electionem Imperator approbasset.
Platin. vit. Pelag. II.
and that at every election, there was a special care taken for the promotion
of one, who was a known friend and creature to the Emperor, and one who would
act nothing against the Emperor. But now the case is altered.

And why should we suspect the authority of Temporal Princes in these things,
having such good proof? and besides this, their own Canon Law assures us that
Pope Did. 63. c. Adrianus.
Hadrian the First freely granted to Charles the Great of France (after
Emperor of Germany) the sole power of choosing the Popes and other Bishops.
This being such a fair grant, and with consent too of the Clergy, whereby a
fatal stroke was then given to the Papal jurisdiction; Of this cheat in
Baronius, see more in Fran. Mason of Consecration of Bishops, lib. 4. cap. 7.
p. 166, 167.
Baronius, and others after him [for the Modern Historians do but according to
the Fable lick up his Spittle] bend their whole power and skill to cry down
this as a forgery, thereby to free their Church from this clog.

And to carry it on more clearly, An. 774.
Baronius takes upon him to rail dapperly against the ancient and noted
Chronologer Sigebertus Gemblacensis (i. e. of Gemblaurs in Brabant) looking
upon him as an Enemy to the Church, for An 773.
affirming such a story, which the Cardinal would persuade us to be a mere
forgery.

But before he do this, he must also clear the Canon Law from the same crime;
and thus he endeavors to do it: He cannot deny but that this story and Order
is in the Decrees; nor will he accuse Gratian, the Collector of them, to have
been dishonest in putting it amongst the rest: How then? only that Gratian
here might not be careful enough, to consider what he did, and so took it out
of Sigebertus, and put it down for authentic in the Canon.

But by the Cardinals favor, I shall bring this Argument for confirmation of
this Canon, which after so much pains he holds forth to disprove it; for they
both living at the same time, and hitting so exactly upon the same story, does
the more confirm its authentickness, it being very probable that neither of
them saw one another Writings, living so far distant, as the one in Brabant,
the other in Italy; and in those days there was neither friendship or
correspondencie between those places; if there had been, it is probable had the
Authors known one another, they had been as great Enemies as their Masters,
Henry the Emperor, and Pope Gregory the Seventh.

Baronius endeavors to overthrow this Canon by another Argument, viz. that the
word Investitura was not known in those times: but the Glossaries will assure
us the contrary; and for more satisfaction on this point against Baronius, I
shall refer you to the well-read Rationale Constitutionum Imperialium, p. 1, 2,
3.
Goldastus, Germ Caesar* in Carolo Mag. page 36, 37, 38, 39.
Boeclerius, and De Tyran. p. 157, 158, 159, etc. And their own Glossaries upon
this Canon, confirm the story.
Laurentius Banck

But before I leave this, I cannot but take notice of one pretty cheat. I told
you formerly of the knavery of their Antiquary Aubertus Miraeus in his
corrupting ancient Authors; and here he is tardy again: for in his Edition of
Sigebertus he quite leaves out this whole story, as if the Author had writ no
such thing; whereas Baronius himself assures the world that Sigebert writ it,
and rants against him bitterly for so doing; nor has any questioned the
integrity of old Editions 'till this Miraeus, whom I have formerly proved
(against his Notitia Episcopatuum) to be a notorious forger, even to the
putting forth of his own things for ancient Manuscripts; and so no credit to be
given to him, let him pretend what ancient Copies he pleases. I have seen one
ancient Manuscript of Sigebertus, which formerly belonged to our famous
Antiquary Mr. Cambden; but to this place I can say nothing of it, because this
very place, with above an hundred years besides, have been, God knows how and
when, conveyed from the rest of the History.

This Grant of Adrian is also mentioned (according to their Canon Law) by Pope
Did 63. c. In Synodo.
Leo the Eighth, in his confession of the same Privileges of electing of
Popes, to the Emperor Otho the First. But it is to small purpose to trouble my
self any more about these things; since, long ago, they have denied any such
prerogative to remain in Temporal Authority; nor will they grant to the
Emperor or Kings any interest of such an Election, but this only to be done
by the Cardinals, who no doubt will choose according to their Consciences, and
not by favor or reward, every one of them swearing so to do, before every
scrutiny.

The Oath. Testor Christum Dominum, qui me judicarus est, me Eligere quem
secundum Deum judico Eligi Debere, and quod idem in Accessu praestabo. And yet
when we consider the strange factions, canvasings, and designs in the Conclave,
we might think that interest swayed more there, than this Oath or Conscience.
Add to this, that there are always some Cardinals, whose own revenues will
scarce keep them in that splendor befitting the red Hat: And these are
commonly underhand-Pensioners to France or Spain, from whose Kings they receive
yearly stipends; and so must always act according to the pleasure of their
Play Master. Add further, that at every Election the Cardinals act under several
Chieftains; and though France and Spain in a manner divide the Conclave, yet
others, especially the Duke of Tuscany, have also their Creatures there, who
bestir themselves vigorously for the designs of these their Lay-Patrons; who
though excluded from voting, yet are the only chusers of the Pope by their
thus ruling the Cardinals.

As for instance, the death of a Pope being known, it is the custom of the King
of Spain, etc. to send instructions to his Ambassador, or some other Confident
at Rome, how to carry on the Conclave, that a friend of his might be chosen;
and also nominates five or six, any of which he is willing to be Pope; and at
the same time sends the names of some others, whom by no means he will not
allow to be elected; by which means Cardinal Baronius lost the Title of
Holiness, the Spaniard wholly excluding him, for An. 1097. This Tract is left
out in some Edition of his Annals, the King of Spain having made an Edict
against it. See D'Avily les Estats, p. 235.
scratching a little upon the Spanish Territories of Sicily. The instructions
being come, the Cardinals of his Faction act accordingly; And he (though he
deserve the Chair never so much; as for Example, Baronius) who is thus excepted
against by a King, it is an hundred to one he shall never change his red Hat for
a Triple Crown.

It Is true, sometimes a few Cardinals in the Conclave, when they see they
cannot bring their own ends about, exclaim pitifully against this mode of
submitting their suffrages and consciences to the pleasure of this or that
King; and now and then Pen and Paper are employed in making little Tracts of
Oppositions and Justifications of such Actions; but this scribbling and crying
out of a few Cardinals, never hinders the rest from prosecuting their intended
designs. And thus we see that yet the Temporal Authority has a main stroke, if
not all, in the election of Popes.

And here I cannot but smile at Thomas Bozius, who makes a great deal of noise
and blustering in behalf of the Popes jurisdiction; and De Italiae statu, lib.
4. c. 3. p. 388. 390.
what an horrid danger and judgment 'twill be, to cross the Bishops of Rome.
For, says he, the Emperors Honorius and Valentinian the Third restrained the
Popes of some Temporal Power; and then the Goths, Vandals, and Heruli wasted
Italy. Again, that the Emperor Justinian made a Law, that the Popes should not
be consecrated, without first consulting the Emperor, and paying a certain Id.
p. 395.
sum of money for it; and so the Plague or Pestilence seized upon Italy, and
Totila the Goth took Rome. Again, long after this another Law was made, that
the Pope should not be consecrated, but in the presence of the Emperors or
their Deputies; and therefore besides Page 403.
Plagues, great Earthquakes troubled Italy, and the Saracens and Huns lorded
it there also. And suchlike consequences as these he has store of, and all as
true as the Star fell down, and therefore the Astronomer shot it with his
Jacobs-staff.

And truly, the rest is much after the same fashion, the sum of his whole Book
being only this: Italy is more fruitful, has more and greater Cities and
Towns, brave Monasteries and Churches, better Houses and Colleges, and more
knowing men and women for these last twelve hundred years, than it was or had
before; Ergo, the Pope and his Authority is the greatest happiness that can
happen to Italy.

And is not this a notable wonder, that building should increase in so many
hundred years? If this way of Argumentizing be authentic, it is coming time,
not Scripture or Antiquity, that must prove any Religion, the which upon this
account must grow better and better; and so as they say, Modern Protestantism
must be held a greater blessing and benefit than that which they call ancient
Popery, in those Nations where the reformed Religion bears the sway.

Sect. 3. An Essay upon this Quere, Whether for some years past, there has
been according to their Decrees and Orders, really any true Pope?
HAving thus hastily discoursed something concerning the Election of Popes, it
will not be amiss to add these few following Observations, which may add some
light to the business; and by a farther prosecution, may be of greater
consideration, than at this time I shall trouble my self withal, but leave it
to the censure of every man.

In the time of Paul the Fifth [who began his Popedom in 1605] there lived in
Italy a great Scholar, and a severe Roman Catholic, who being troubled at the
odd carriage of the Popes and their Election, thought it convenient to have a
General Council to rectify all; but knowing the Bishops of Rome to have a
natural aversness from this, looked upon himself obliged, as a true son of the
Roman Church, to endeavor as much as lay in his power, the promotion of such a
public benefit to his Religion.

And therefore, (knowing the Popes against it) he drew up a Supplicatio ad
Imperatorem, Reges, Principes, super causis Generalis Concilii convocandi.
Petition to the Emperor and other Christian Kings, to bring this noble and
charitable design about. And possibly fearing, that if this his supplication
should only come into the hands of the Potentates of the Roman Catholic
persuasion, it might there be stifled by the over-perswasion of their
interested Favorites and Counselors: To prevent this, seeing our King James
of a public spirit for the benefit of the Church; he directs it only to him,
that by his means his necessitating reasons might be discovered to the Emperor
and the other Christian Princes. Upon this the Author An. 1611.
dies at Rome, leaves this Petition with a dear Friend of his, who delivers it
to an English Gentleman then there, who accordingly conveyed it to King James,
who presently dispersed it all Europe over.

As for the Author, I shall positively say nothing, but that he appears one to
have been very well versed in the Roman affairs: the common opinion is, that it
was the famous Neapolitan Civilian Dr. Marta, of whom we have formerly hinted;
and indeed his very subscribing himself to the Supplication NOVVS HOMO, does
intimate that he had now in something changed his Opinion: and we cannot but
observe that this Supplication carries all along a grand respect and
veneration to Temporal Authority over Rome it self in some things; whereas Dr.
Marta in his other Volumes is so resolute a Champion for the Popes very
Temporal Prerogative, that he screws up the power and jurisdiction of the
Romish Bishops, even to trample upon all other Potentates in this world. If
Marta be the man, it must be the discovery of some grand iniquities that could
thus alienate his affection from Pope Paul the Fifth.

In this his discourse is endeavored to prove a failing in the succession of
Popes, raising the Foundation from the Simoniacal entrance of Sixtus the Fifth.
But probably one might fetch a farther rise than this, even by viewing over
their own schisms, where sometimes we shall find such odd chopping and
changing of Popes, that the wisest then living could not tell which or where
was the Head of the Church; and yet every party creating Cardinals, and
declaring himself Christ's Vicar. Now this is certain, [since the time they
have acknowledged that none but Cardinals can elect a Pope] that if ever a
Bishop of Rome was chosen by those Cardinals who were created by an Antipope,
or one not truly (as they say) Christ's Vicar, that then such an Election is
of no validity, being made by those who were not truly Cardinals, and so
wanted an authentic Authority to make such an election. And if the succession
once fail, I know not how or when it must begin again.

But because the aforesaid Italian foundeth his main design upon Simony, I
shall only Preface a little on the same crying sin, and that but a few years
before his Sixtus the Fifth.

When they declare that the sin of Gondissalv. de Villadiego, contra haereticam
pravitatem Quaest. 1. 3. Flav. Cherubinus Compend Bullar. Tom. 1. page 152.
Card. Jacobat. de Council. l. 8. art. 8. 8. Id. l. ^. art. 4. 53. and so their
Canon Law. 1. q. 1. c. Presbyter. c. Quicunque. c. Cumliqueat. c. Eos qui. c.
Fertur. c. Statuimus Decretum.
Simony is Heresy; and so he that is guilty of the first, must also be an
Heretic; and when they also confess that if a Pope be Petr. de Balsius
director. Electionum, cap. 14. Hieron. Monfred. deces. 321. Eman. Sa, Aphorism.
v. Papa. 1.
chosen by Simony, then that Election is null and void: and seeing they go yet
farther, as to affirm, that if a Pope be Heretical, he is not only Mart. de
Caraziis de Principibus, Quaest. 199.
inferior to all other Christians, but Jo. Hieron. Alban. de potest. Papae, p.
1. 6. Card. Jacobis. de Council. l. 9. art. 1. 12, 3. Martinus de Caraziis de
Principibus, Quest. 522. Eman. Sa, Aphorism. v. Papa, 6.
falls from his Popedom; and so not being Head of the Church, it is no
difficult matter from these Principles (thus granted by them) to prove a
failing, if not an end of their succession.

And that Popes ought of old to be deposed for obtaining their Dignities by
Simony, or suchlike unlawful means, is undeniable from the Si quis pecunia ve^
g^atia humana, aut populari mihtarive tumultu, si^e conc^rdi and C^^o^^^a
Electione Cardinaltum in throno Petri collocatus, is non Apostolicus, sed
Apostaticus, id est, a rationed ficiens merito vocetur: liceatque Cardinalibus,
Clerius and Laius Deum colentibus, illum ut pradonem anathematizar^, and quovis
humano au^^^o a sede Apostolica propellere: atque quovis in loco, si in Urbe
non liceat, Catholicos hujus^e rei causa congregare. P^at^na vit. Nichol. II.
and D^st. 97. c. si q^^s.
Decree made above DC years ago in the time of Nicholas the Second, in a
Council at Rome. And since that time, Julius the Second made a more vigorous
Bull against the Simoniacal Election of Popes, and the nulling of such a
choice; of which we shall speak more hereafter.

Now, if that horrid and unmanly sin of Simony make an Election illegal and
void, what shall we think of Pope Alexander the Sixth, who by this corrupt
means obtained the Papal dignity? as their own De rebus Hispan. lib. cap. 2.
Mari^na, Vit. Alexand. VI. apud Plat^n.
Onuphrius, with Lib. 1. beginnin^g.
Guicciardine do declare; and though Anti Mornaeus, Tom. 2. p. 305.
Coquaeus is unwilling to meddle with this objected crime, yet his Countryman,
and fellow Doctor of Paris, I^^ne faut point chercher tant de Tesmoins pour
proves une chose que tout le monde avoue. Coeffet. R^sponse au Mystere
d'Iniquite. page 1209.
Coeffeteau, not being able to confute the Objection, does profess, that we
need not trouble our selves to bring out Testimonies to prove it, since all the
world does confess it.

If this Alexander by his illegal obtaining that dignity was no true Pope, then
the Cardinals by him created were also false ones; and so the Popes by them
elected, of no true Authority or Jurisdiction to be Christ's Vicars.

This Alexander remaining Bishop of Rome above eleven years, at several
Creations (others dying in the time) made these following XLIII Cardinals.

1. Jo. Borgia 2. John Morton, Archbishop of Canterbury 3. Jo. Anton. de S.
Georgio ^ 1 4. Jo. de la Grolaye 5. Bernardinus Coravagial ^ 2 6. Raymund.
Perauld 7. Caesar Borgia, Bastard to Pope Alexander the Sixth: for this Pope
had three Sons and two Daughters. 8. Hippolitus Estiensis 9. Fridericus
Cassimirus, Son to the King of Poland. 10. Julianus Caesarius ^ 3 11. Dominicus
Grimanus ^ 4 12. Alexander Farnesius ^ 5 13. Bernardinus de Lunate 14.
Guillielmus Brissoneta 15. Bartholomaeus Martinus 16. Johan. de Castro ^ 6 17.
Johan. Lopez 18. Johan. Borgia, Nephew to the Pope, poisoned by Caesar Borgia
19. Aloysius de Arragonia ^ 7 20. Philipp. de Lucemburgo 21. Georg. de Ambosia
^ 8 22. Thomas ex oppido Herdouth, Hung arus 23. Jacobus Serra, al. Casanova ^
9 24. Petrus Issualies 25. Diego Hortado de Mendozza 26. Franciscus Borgia,
supposed to be Son to the Pope Callistus the Third. ^ 10 27. Johan. Vera ^ 11
28. Ludovicus Podacatharus ^ 12 29. Jo. Anton. Trivultius ^ 13 30. Jo. Baptist.
Terrarius 31. Amanatem de Albreto ^ 14 32. Petr. Ludovic. Borgia ^ 15 33.
Marcus Cornelius ^ 16 34. Jo. Stephanus Ferrerius ^ 17 35. Johan. Casteller ^
18 36. Franciscus Remolinus 37. Franciscus Soderinus ^ 19 38. Melchior Copis
39. Nicholaus de Flisco ^ 20 40. Franciscus de Sprata, al. Spares ^ 21 41.
Hadrianus Castellensis ^ 22 42. Jacobus Casanova ^ 23 43. Franciscus Iloris ^
24

After the death of this Alexander, XXXVII Cardinals, after some disturbance
and fears, enter into the Conclave, to elect another Pope; and of this little
number, there were XXIV of this Alexanders Creation, whose names you see marked
with this ^. In this Conclave was Pius the Third chosen; but how could he be
legally elected, if almost two parts in three of the Cardinals had no lawful
voice?

But again, supposing all the Cardinals to belegally created; yet, how can the
election of this Pius be true and lawful, seeing he was so far from having the
voices of two parts in three, or a Majority (though this would not make a true
election) that he only obtained the Alphons. Ciaconius vit. Pii III.
less part or number in the Conclave for him? and yet was, I know not how,
declared for Pope.

What in part has been objected against Pius the Third, may also pass upon
Julius the Second: for though at his election there were XXXVII Cardinals in
the Conclave, yet XXVI were of Alexanders creation: And if this stand good,
then we may affirm that there has been no true Pope since.

But let us proceed: this Julius the Second (it may be being troubled at the
clamours against the Simoniacal election of Alexander the Sixth, a Pope
composed of wickedness) with the consent of his Cardinals in Consistory, made a
notable Bull to prevent these inconveniences, part of which take as follows.

Nos -- de fratrum nostrum S. R. E. Cardinalium concilio and unanimt concensu;
hac nostra perpetuo valitura Constitutione, Apostolica authoritate, and de
potestatis nostra plenitudine, Statuimus, Ordinamus, Decernimus and Definimus,
Quod si (quod Deus sua Clementia and ineffabili bonitate avertat) contigerit,
postquam nos vel successores nostros successive, ipse Deus ab hujusmodi
universali Ecclesiae Regimine absolverit (humani generis inimico procurante,
and Ambitione vel cupiditate ad hoc inclinate seu impellente) electionem Romans
Pontificis ab eo quem eligi contigerit, vel ab aliquo seu, aliquibus de Coetu
Cardinalium, quomodo libet votum dantibus per Simoniacam haeresim, in dando
promittendo vel recipiendo Pecunias, Bona cujusque generis, Castra, Officia vel
Beneficia, seu promissiones and obligationes commissam, per se vel per alium,
seu alios quomodocunque and qualitercunque etiam in duorum partium vel omnium
Cardinalium unanimi concordia, quomodo libet etiam per viam Assumptionis
unanimiter, nemine discrepante, etiam sine Scrutinio facto celebrari vel fieri:
Non solum hujusmodi Electio vel Assumptio eo ipso nulla existat, and nullam
eidem sic electo vel Assumpto administrandi in spiritualibus and Temporalibus
facultatem tribuat; sed etiam contra dictum sic Electum vel Assumptuus de
Simoniaca labe, a quocunque Cardinali qui eidem Electioni interfuerit apponi
and excipi possit sicut de vera and indubitata Haeresi, ita quod a nullo pro
Romans Pontifice habeatur. Quinimo ipso sic Electus a priori suo Cardinalatus and
alio quocunque honor, Ecclesiis Cathedralibus etiam Metropolitanis and
Patriarchalibus, Monasteriis, Dignitatibus, and aliis quibuscunque Beneficiis
and Peasionibus, quae tunc obtinebat in Titulum vel in Commendam, aut alias
quomodocunque eo ipso absque alia declaratione privatus existat. Et Idem
Electus non Apostolicus sed Apostaticus and tanquam Simoniacus and
Haeresiarcha, and ad praedicta omnia and singula perpetuo inhabilis habeatur
and sit.

Nec hujusmodi Simoniaca Electio per subsequentem ipsius Inthronizationem, seu
temporis cursum, aut etiam omnium Cardinalium Adorationem seu Obedientiam, ullo
unquam tempore convolescat, etc.

Datum Romae aput S. Petrum 1505.
With the advice and unanimous consent of our Brothers the Cardinals of the
holy Church of Rome: By this our perpetual Constitution, Apostolical Authority,
and fullness of our power, We do Appoint, Ordain, Decree, and Determine, That if
it shall hereafter fall out (which God of his mercy and goodness prevent) that
when we or our Successors shall by Gods appointment be removed from the
Government of this Universal Church; that then (through the Devils malice, the
Enemy of Ma^kinde, or the Ambition or Coverou^ess of the Chusers) the Election
of the new Pope be made and done, either by him who is so chosen, or by any
other, or more of the College of Cardinals, by the Heresy of Simoniacal
Compact; by giving, promising, or receiving moneys or goods of any kind, or
Lands, or Castles, or Offices, or Benefices, or by making any other Promise or
Obligation whatsoever; whether it be by themselves or any other, or others, or
what other way soever it be, and whether that Election be accomplished by two
parts, or unanimous consent of all the Cardinals; and whether it be by
Assumption, or Adoration, all agreeing, though without Writing or Scrutiny, yet
that the Election or Assumption so made, shall be from that very moment Void
and of none Effect; And that no power or faculty shall accrue thereby to him so
thrust in, of any Administration, Government or Jurisdiction in matters
Spiritual or Temporal: But also that it shall and may be lawful to any Cardinal
present at the same Election, to except against the same Elected or Intruder,
to call him in Question for the crime of Simony, as of a true and undoubted
Heresy, that so he may be accounted and held of all men as no Pope or Bishop
Rome. And moreover, that he, thus Elected, shall hereby from that time forward,
though without a Declaration, remain deprived of his Cardinalship, and any
other honor whatsoever, whether Cathedral, Metropolitan, or Patriarchal
Churches, Monasteries, Dignities, and all other Benefices and Pensions, which
then he either held by Title, or in Commendam. And that he thus Elected shall
not be held as Apostolical, but as an Apostate, one guilty of Simony, and an
Arch-heretick, and never to be capable to enjoy or have all or any of the
aforesaid Benefits.

Neither shall such Simoniacal Election be any time afterward made good, or be
in force by any subsequent Inthronization, Adoration, or Obedience, or homage
done to him by the Cardinals, or by any Continuance or Course of time, etc.

Given at Rome 1505.
Having thus seen the severe Bull for the avoiding and annihilating of
Elections obtained by Simony, or suchlike illegal means; let us now see whether
it has been observed or no: and if not, according to their own Law, down
falls succession.

Pope Gregory the Thirteenth being An. 1585.
dead, the Cardinals in the Conclave according to custom fell into several
Factions about the Election; some being for de la Terre, some for Tarnesius,
some approved Savellius, others favored Sertettus; Castagneus wanted not
Friends, Paleotto had hopes, and others were now and then thought on: Fernesius
headed one party, Altemps another, Alexandrino a third; S. Sixtus by his
Authority carried a great stroke there, de Medici ruled some; and Aloysius de
Este, Son to the Duke of Ferrara, had a great party of Cardinals at his
Devotion.

These heads of interest drawing several ways, enlarged the Faction: at last
Cardinal Montalto had some hopes, finding Alexandrino and de Medici his
Friends, and at last to stand really for him; but these with their dependants
not being strong enough to carry it, he gets some to tamper with S. Sixtus,
whilst himself feels the pulse of Aloysius de Este, with whom at last he
strikes up a Bargain, the Condition of which was this: That whereas there was
one Hieronymus Matthaeus a Roman Bishop of great esteem in the Court, but one
that de Este above all men hated; that if Montalto would promise never to make
this Matthaeus Cardinal, Aloysius would give his own voice, and the suffrages
of all those Cardinals who were many depending on him, to make the said
Montalto Pope: this was agreed on between them; to which Montalto did not only
give him his promise by mouth, but by open writing subscribed and ratified
under his own hand, and so he carried the Popedom from all the rest, and called
himself Sixtus the Fifth.

But now let us see how things worked to bring this Simoniacal Bargain to
light. Pope Sixtus, after this his Election, having got what he aimed at, broke
his Promise and Faith made to de Este, and contrary thereunto, made Hieronimo
Mattheo Cardinal: which unfaithfulness Aloysius took so much to heart, seeing
his Enemies thus advanced to affront him, that he fell deadly sick; but before
his death, to be revenged of Sixtus, he sent the Agreement and Covenant, even
the very Original signed with Montalto's hand, to Philip the Second, King of
Spain; who thereupon in the year 1589, sent the Duke of Sessa Ambassador to
Rome, to give the Pope notice hereof, and to intimate to him the present
necessity of a General Council concerning this Simoniacal Election; and to
require the Cardinals (created by his Predecessors) and others of the Clergy,
to appear in the said Council, which he intended to hold at Sivil in Andaluzia.
The King of Spain liking this well enough, having about this time fallen out
with the Pope, for not showing himself vigorous for his Castilian interest,
then troubling France: But upon Duke Sessa's coming to Rome, Sixtus dyed, and
so this Council for a new Election fell to the ground.

Yet the story of this Simoniacal Election was not forgot; insomuch, that when
a few years after Clement the Eighth [who was made Cardinal by the aforesaid
Sixtus the Fifth, and to whose Election about thirty illegal Cardinals
concur'd] did absolve Henry the Fourth, and so acknowledged him King of France,
several Spaniards openly undertook to prove, that this Clement was not lawfully
elected Pope, and so had no power to absolve King Henry; to which purpose also
several Books were writ by them. For if Sixtus was guilty of Simony, then by
the Bull of Julius the Second he was no true and lawful Pope, and so could not
make Cardinals, nor these so supposed to be created, to elect a Pope: However,
he undertook to coin these thirty three Cardinals.

1. Alexander Perettus de Montalto, Nephew to this Pope Sixtus the Fifth: he
was but fourteen years old. 2. Henricus Caetanus. 3. Georgius Drascovitius. 4.
Jo. Baptist. Castruccio. 5. Fr. Fridericus Cornelius. 6. Dominicus Pinellus. 7.
Hippolitus de Rubeis. 8. Decius Azolinus. 9. Hippolito Aldobrandino, afterward
Pope Clement VIII. 10. Hieronimo du Ruvere. 11. Philippus de Lenoncourt. 12.
Hier. Bernerius de ^orrigio. 13. Anton. Maria Gallius. 14. Constantinus
Buccafocus Sarnanus. 15. Hieron. Matthaeus, Enemy to Cardinal de Este. 16.
Benedictus Justinianus. 17. Ascanus Columna. 18. William Allen, an Englishman.
19. Scipio Gonzaga. 20. Antonius Saulius. 21. Jo. Evangelista Pallotta. 22.
Petrus Gondius. 23. Stephanus Bonuccius. 24. Johan. de Mendoza. 25. Hugo
Verdala. 26. Federicus Borremaeus. 27. Jo. Francisc. Maurocenus. 28. Augustinus
Cusanus. 29. Franciscus Maria de Monte. 30. Marianus Perbenedictus. 31.
Gregorius Petrochius de Montelparo. 32. Carolus de Lotharingia. 33. Guido
Pepulus.
If these Cardinals be illegal, then will the following Popes be also unlawful:
for this Sixtus the Fifth being dead, fifty three Cardinals enter the Conclave,
twenty five of which number were made by Sixtus; and being headed by his Nephew
Montalto, having got some others to join with them, they chose Cardinal
Castagneus, who called himself Urban the Seventh, who dyed a few days after;
and after him, not without a great deal of clutter, canvassing and faction, was
chosen Cardinal Sfondratus, who called himself Gregory the Fourteenth: and in
this Conclave was as many of Sixtus his Cardinals, as in the former headed by
Montalto: after ten Months this Bishops dyed; and after the same way was
Cardinal Facchinetto chofen, who called himself Innocent the Ninth, who after
two Months rule also dyed.

And the next that sat in the Chair, was Cardinal Aldobrandino, who called
himself Clement the Eighth; who before his Election was not so much as a
Bishop, and so was afterward, but before his Coronation, made one. Besides
this, if Sixtus the Fifth was no true Pope, nor could this Clement be one also,
being made Cardinal (which qualifieth him for the Popedom) by Sixtus. But
another exception may be brought against his Election.

For the Cardinals being in the Conclave, two parts in three of them agreed
upon Cardinal de S. Severina, whom they nominated, took and led into the
Chapel of S. Paul [January 11.] where they set him in the Papal Chair, and by
public scrutiny proclaim him Pope, and so the very Decretal Greg. de Elect. c.
lice^ de vitanda.
Canon does acknowledge him. But let us now see an after-game, the third part
remaining perplexed without the Chapel; from them comes in two Cardinals,
Gesualdus and Sfortia, the first crying out, My Lords, let us number the voices,
to see if two full parts have consented; and with that he began to count, but
so leisurely, that in the mean time Sfortia had played his part so well with two
of the Cardinals, that he got them out of the Chapel, whereby two parts in
three did not continue: Besides this, at his return into the Chapel, he
behaved himself so cunningly with the other Cardinals, by laying open to them
the rigor and severity of San* Severina (good Arguments to some of them) that
several of them left their thus Elected Pope, and joining with the third party,
who stayed without the Chapel, and nominated Clement the Eighth, of the
validity of whose Election there was a great doubt and dispute at Rome, as a
Life of Father Paul, page 62.
Romanist confesses.

Now I suppose that when two parts in three (the number to make an Election
good) have freely given their suffrages to such a one to make him Pope, and
moreover, in confirmation of it, have declared the same more fully by some
other ceremonies, as setting of him in the Pontifical Chair, and suchlike, that
they cannot recall their Voices again. Nay further, that if their number had
not been sufficient to complete an Election, they could not with honesty recant
at the same time: However, the very carrying on of this opposition was a mere
juggle and trick of Sfortia and Gesua^dus, and so illegal and null according to
the Did. 23. c. In nomine Domin^
Canon.

Nor is it material to say that he wanted Inthronization or Adoration, or
kissing of the foot. All these being but effects and consequences of a true
Election, but not essential to the Election; and are appointed to be done to
him that is Elected, but do not help forward his Election. Besides this, their
own Loco citato.
Canon does not make these necessary to an Election; if they cannot
conveniently be done, by the opposition of some cross-grained and wicked-minded
men, either by force or cunning, as at this time.

If this Sant-Severina was truly Elected, then could not Clement the Eighth be
a true Pope: and if Clement had no right to the Popedom, no more could Leo the
Eleventh, the Conclave in which he was chosen, being ruled by the Cardinals
made by this Clement, thirty nine of them being present, he having created
fifty three in all.

And the same objection might pass against his Successor Paul the Fifth, at
whose Election forty Cardinals made by Clement the Eighth assisted. Besides
this, we are told of suchlike dealings in this Conclave, as there was in that
when S. Severina had the go-by, viz. that in this Conclave sixty one Cardinals
entered, forty four of whom [full two parts in three] chose Cardinal Tuschus,
and took him, though sick and lying in his bed, and had him carried into the
Chapel of Sixtus the Fourth, that they might Inthrone and Adore him as a Pope;
and whilst in the mean time, they expected the rest of the third part,
according to custom to increase the solemnity, they altogether used Tuschus as
Pope, both by their demeanor, some exhibiting Petitions, others begging
favors; at last, in haste comes Cardinal Baronius, Justi^iano, and Montalto,
the Ringleaders of the third party or faction, and being got to the
Chappel-door, Baronius cries out, What, will you choose a Pope, that at every
word speaks -- Qui in omni verbo Priapum miscet.
bawdily and filthily, to the great scandal of Christians? Upon which, and some
other discourses, the other Cardinals were tolled away; and so poor Tuschus was
there left sick of a Fevour in his bed: and so at last Cardinal Borghesi was
chosen, and called Paul the Fifth.

As for this Dominicus Tuschus, Cardinal de S. Onufrio, in relation to Baronius
his accusation, I shall say little, only that he showed himself to be a
Lombard, [he was born at Reggio] where custom makes some bad words proverbially
familiar, even with the best of men; and Tuschus himself was naturally of a
free, debonnaire, and jocant spirit and humor, being all heart, and full of
merry stories and jests; which never agrees with a morose and
zeal-pretending-gravity: And yet was Tuschus as famous for his skill in Law, as
Baronius in Church-story; and for ought that I know, as diligent a Student as
the other, as his eight large Volumes can testify, dedicated (a great sign of
good nature) even to this Paul the Fifth: they were both of them made Cardinals
by Clement the Eighth.

But enough of this, though a discourse might be renewed concerning the awe, if
not bribery, that many Cardinals lie under in a Conclave, both of Temporal
Princes, and others ruling them in these Elections, sufficient to satisfy us,
that neither Heaven nor a true Spirit has always an influence in the choosing
of this infallible Vicar.

As for that sneaking vice of Simony, as it is most triumphant in the Court of
Rome, as practice can testify; and their old Taxa Cancel. Apost. sect. 4.
Tit, 6.
Taxa declares it to be but a puny Peccadiglio, yet by them far greater than
Id. sect. 3. Tit. 6, 7. sect. 4. Tit 4.
Murder: so I could wish it were no where else, and 'twould be well if Patron
as well as Parson were obliged by Oath against it: But it may be, it is
dangerous too speak too plain on this case, since story tell, us that the good
B^ron. an. 1066. 19, 20.
Arialdus was publicly murdered for accusing one though justly, of this vice.

Yet I cannot but think of Rudolphus [Son to Simon the Second, Duke of
Lorreign] Bishop of Liege in Germany, and I think by some made Bishop of Ments;
who gloried so much in this Simony, that Caesarius Hist. lib. 6. cap. 5.
one time having sold a Prebendship, showed publicly the money to many people,
boastingly said, I have hugely enriched the Church of Liege, and enlarged her
Revenues: for that Prebendship which my Predecessors used to sell for ten
Marks, I have now skrew'd up to pass for forty. And this, we may suppose, was a
good price in his time, about five hundred years ago.

But though the vice with this man went unmasked and at noonday, one of the
Philips of France by an ingenious trick showed his dislike of it; in short,
thus: According to mine old Author, the Abbot of S. Denis being dead, one came
to the King, begged the pref^rment, Ib. cap. 1^.
and offered him 500 pounds: the King would consider of it, but bid him give
the money to the Chamberlain: another knowing of this, comes with the same
Petition and Sum, and receives the same Answer: and so to a third, all unknown
one to another. At last the King appoints a day for the disposing of the place;
and being set in the Chapter House, every one of the three moneygivers thinking
to be the man, at last, after some discourse, the King looking about, saw a
poor Monk sitting in a corner, never thinking of any preferment; he calls him
to him, and bid him take notice that he made him Abbot of St. Denis: The poor
Monk desired by all means to be excused, as one no way fit for such an honor;
and besides all that, the Abbey was in debt, and had not wherewithal to pay it
sufficiently: But the King bid him take no care for that, for he would give him
moneys to defray those things; and forthwith ordered the 1500 pounds (given to
the King by the three former Competitors) to be given him. And so he became
Abbot, whilst the other three deservedly lost it.

And such a story as this there goes on our King William the Second, who
though he used to be guilty in selling Church-places, yet one time it seems in
a* frolic he crossed the humor; for an Abbey being vacant, two Monks went to
him to beg it or buy it, in opposition one to the other; and in thus
out-bidding one another, offered great sums. Whilst these were thus chaffering,
the King espied another Monk at the lower end of the Chamber, who, by chance,
for company sake had come along with one of the Competitors: The King asked
him, what he would give for it? who answered, that he neither had any thing to
give, nor if he had, would he give any thing: Well (quoth the King) thou have
spoken like an honest man, and art fitter to be Abbot than either of these; and
so bestowed the Abbey upon him freely. The truth is, it must be something else,
besides true Politics, that prefers the covetous man to Church-dignities,
because the very Office or Order through him gets an Odium amongst the people.

The Learned Italian in his Supplication to the Emperor, etc. from the Popes
guiltiness of Simony, concludes the necessity of a General Council, to amend
and restrain these enormities: And though he be a serious Romanist, yet he
confesses, that upon these and suchlike faults, the Temporal Princes have good
and sufficient Authority to call such a Council, and earnestly persuades the
Christian Princes to effect it.

But experience tells us, that these meetings are as terrible to the Pope, as
tumults to the Grand Seignior; the latter upon sight of these up-rores, fears
his ruin and end not to be far off; and the Bishops of Rome suppose Councils,
especially the latter, do rather take away then give them any jurisdiction,
whereby such conventions are both chargeable and troublesome to them, in the
carrying on of their interest; and therefore they use all their cunning and
reason to draw such power and thoughts from Temporal Princes, and with a
thousand slights will prolong the time: To which purpose the Italians say not
amiss of them.

Coll' art el' Inganno
Lui passa Mezzo anno,
Coll' Inganno e coll' art
Se vive l' altra part.
With art and with guile
Of The year they past one while,
With guile and with art
They live the other part.
And for confirmation of this, we need go no farther than their Council of
Trent, it being a long time before the Popes would be persuaded to call it; and
when 'twas held, 'twas carried on with so much cunning and juggling, even to the
trouble and grief of many Eminent Roman Catholic Divines there, that the
Legates would permit nothing to be concluded upon, but according as they
received directions and orders by Letters from the Pope; which occasioned the
unlucky Proverb, That the Council of Trent was guided by the Holy Ghost, sent
to them from Rome in a Cloak-bag. Insomuch, that several of the Divines there
did diverse times publicly complain, that it was not a Paolo, page 507, 508,
530, 551, 623, 635, 644, 659, 661, 683, 566, 569.
free one: and both the Id. p. 279.
Emperor, and the King of Id. p. 818.
France called it a Convention.

As for the Testimonies in the Italians supplication, I have no reason to
suspect them; it having been above these fifty years dispersed all Europe over,
and not (that I know of) in the least contradicted; besides, several of their
own Historians do almost confess as much.

CHAP. III. The Murder of the Emperor Mauritius, with his Empress, Children,
etc. by wicked Phocas: with Pope Gregory the First, surnamed the Great, his
judgment and opinion of that barbarous action; and his Authority pretended
over Kings.
HAving hitherto briefly seen the forgery of Constantine's Donation, Rome for
some hundreds of years, the power and practice of Temporal Princes over them in
their Nominations or Approbations, with some short Observations concerning
their Elections: We shall now proceed to what we first designed.

Their great Lawyer De Repub. lib. 2, 6. cap. 7. 10.
Gregorius Tolosanus tells us, that though the Christians endured grievous
oppressions and cruel torments, yet for the first three hundred years they
never rebelled against their Kings or Temporal Governors: And had not the Pope
encouraged and fomented it, this sin of witchcraft had never been, I am
certain, so much practiced by those who call themselves Christians. But here
Cardinal ^e Romans Pont. lib. 5. cap. 7.
Bellarmine the Jesuit joins hand in hand with De jure Reg.
Buchanan the Puritan, to free the Primitive Christians from this scandal of
Obedience, and would have the fault to lie not in Religion, but the want of
strength; though the former Loco citato.
Gregorius will dash this Argument in pieces, by telling you that they had
force and number enough to perpetrate such wickedness, if their wills and piety
would allow of it.

As for the Popes Temporal Authorities, Guicciardine will tell you that they
had none long after these Nel qual tempo i Pontefici Romani priva^i in tutto di
potentia Temporale. Gu^cciard. Hist. d'Ital. lib. 4.
times. It Is true, this Section is knavishly left out in some Italian Editions,
and others who followed them; but you have it at large in the French 1612.
Paris, Engl. 1618.
London, and some others; and it has been several times printed by it self, as
at 1561.
Basil in three Langues, viz. Italian, French and Latin; and at 1595.
London in four, the English being added to the sormer; of which the Italian
according to Guicciardines own Manuscript in Florence. As for the Popes
spiritual Power, as Bishop of his own See, I They are also lately, (with
amendments of Thuanus) printed at Amsterdam 1663.
have nothing to do with; nor shall I trouble my self with the Excommunication
of the Emperor Anastatius by the Popes Platina.
Gelasins, (h) Anaestatius the Second, or by Baron. an. 502.
Symmachus, because it may be, all will not agree of, what was the meaning and
authority of such censures in those times. We are also told that Euphemius,
Patriarch of Constantinople, threatened to depose this Anastasius: if so, then
it seems others besides Rome can unthrone Princes; but I wonder why An. 491.
Baronius brags so much of this, it being quite contrary to the Roman greatness
and prerogative. But let us come to realities.

Tiberius the Second being dead, there succeeded him in the Empire Mauritius,
famous in War, but he was tainted with covetousness. In this time, John,
Patriarch of Constantinople, made the means to have himself called Universal
Bishop: at this Title, Gregory the First, surnamed the Great, Bishop of Rome,
takes great offense; and hoping to get this nulled by his acquaintance with
the Emperor Maurice, having formerly been at Constantinople with Tiberius and
him to prove a confirmation for Pelagius the Second in his Popedom, having also
been Godfather to one of Mauritius his Sons; as also himself confirmed in the
Papal Chair by the same Emperor.

Upon these, and suchlike good turns and acquaintance, he questioned not but to
have this Title taken from John of Constantinople; to which purpose he sends to
Mauritius, his Empress and others, Letters after Letters, affirming it to be a
Lib. 4. Epist. 32.
New name against Gospel and Canon; a title of vanity, profaness and blasphemy;
a Id. Epist. 38 and 39.
horrible and wicked word; Epist. 36.
that none of his Predecessors had ever used such a profane title, to be
abhorred by a Christian mind; and suchlike, to be read in his Epistles. But the
Emperor did not care to trouble himself with these paper-squablings, only
wished that they would not bring a scandal to the Church by this railing.

This troubles Gregory; yet he gives the Emperor all the noble Titles that
could be, calling of himself only Lib. 6. Ep. 62, and 63, and 64.
Dust and very Worm of the Earth, his most unworthy man or servant, etc. And
indeed, he as well as Duarenus de sacris Eccles. Minist. lib. 1. cap. 5. and
see more of this in Andr. Rivet. Jesuita Vapul. cap. 28. 37, 38, 39, 40, 41,
42. page 539, 540, 541, 54^, etc.
other Bishops of Rome in those times were exactly obedient to the Emperors
(however the case is altered now) of which one instance at this time may
satisfy.

This Emperor perceiving that every one in those zealous times, thought
himself either cock-sure of Heaven, or lived more idle, or lazy, or freer from
trouble or danger, if he got but a Monks Cowl on, and lived hum-drumming in a
Cell or Monastery, made a Decree against (as I may say) runaway Soldiers
(against whom I only concern my self in the former censure:) In which he
Ordained, that no Soldier, unless he was dismissed, should enter himself in a
Monastery to turn Monk, except he were lame, or otherwise unfit for the Wars.
And this he sends to Pope Gregory, ordering him to see it put in practice and
divulged. Gregory looks upon this as an unjust law, even contrary to
Christianity; and desires the Emperor to consider how he can answer it at the
day of Lib. 2. Ep. 62.
Judgment; yet declared that he had fulfilled his duty, by yiedling obedience
to his commands, and so had accordingly published the Order abroad. But I
warrant you Gregory the Eighth, and our Modern Popes, would not thus obey the
Emperors; and yet they will not say, that this Gregory the Great, an holy
Saint in their Calendar, in this his obedience and humility was erroneous, or
committed a fault.

In the Emperors Army there was one Phocas, a common Captain or Centurion, but
a most cruel and wicked man, who upon a Mutiny in Sclavonia, made himself very
active, so that they flew into open Rebellion; and in this humor, he played his
Cards so well, that he became the only Ringleader (those that were loyal
being forced to flee) insomuch, that they heaved him upon a Shield (an old
Ceremony not only in Armies, but also in France and Spain, in proclaming their
Kings) and shouted him up for Emperor.

Having gone thus far in villainy, he proceeds; and to loose no time, in all
haste marches to Constantinople; and that with such a strength, that the
Emperor Mauritius (who of late had led a very religious life, having sent to
all places to be prayed for) was forced to flee, and so in a little Bark with
his Wife and Children, stole out of the City over the Chanel to Chalcedon [now
called Scutari or Calcitiu] but being overtaken by Phocas his Soldiers, was
brought back to Constantinople, where Phocas had the Emperors Children, (which
then he had seized on) murdered before the Fathers face; the poor Mauritius
only repeating that of the Psalmist, Just art thou, O Lord, and righteous are
thy judgments. And, which was more, the Emperor having there one of his Sons
a little Child, the kind Nurse of it, through a strange pity, love and
loyalty, stole it away, and put her own Child in its stead to be slain. But
the Emperor not to be out done in compassion, unwilling to allow of such a
cruel charity, withstood the design, and so had his own innocent Infant murdered
before his face, and at last was himself also slain; then their heads were cut
off, and their bodies exposed to all manner of contumelies. There were also
murdered Petrus, Brother to the Emperor, and many of the Loyal Nobility.

Theodosius, eldest Son to Mauritius, who had also been some years before
Crowned Augustus and co-Emperour to his Father, being sent upon this Rebellion
to Cos^hoes of Persia, to desire his aid and assistance against Phocas, was
also overtaken and beheaded. And to make the Tragedy complete, one Scholasticus
an Eunuch having saved the Empress Constantina [Daughter to the Emperor
Tiberius; thus a Father-in-law and Predecessor to Maurice] and her three
Daughters, hid them secretly in a Church; yet was not this so privily done, but
Phocas heard of it, and sent to have them delivered. Cyricius the Patriarch of
Constantinople made some opposition, nor would he yield them up, till Phocas
had by Oath sworn to do to them no violence; which for some time he kept,
thrusting them into a Monastery, but at the years end, had them all four most
barbarously butchered.

Here we have Phocas one of the most absolute Villains in the world: as for
Mauritius, An. 602. 23.
Baronius himself cannot but give him many commendations; yet he will quickly
shoot his bolt to find out the Reason of all these Judgments against him; and
all this, because forsooth he would not comply with the liberty of the Church,
as they call it, and was not a sure Friend to Gregory; for this is that which
he aims at.

And now let us see how Pope Gregory behaved himself toward this Villain; he
no sooner hears of this abominable Murder, and how the Tyrant had made himself
Emperor, but he has the Statues of Phocas and his Wife carried through Rome
in triumph, with a great many pretty cantings; and then with a great deal of
state and glory placed up amongst the other Emperors. Nor was this all: for he
writes to Phocas, congratulating his good success, as the Angels did the
Nativity of our Savior, -- Baron. an. ^^3. 3.
Glory be to God in the highest, who, as it is written, changes the times, and
translateth Kingdoms; -- For which we rejoice that thou art come to the Empire:
Let the heavens rejoice, and let the earth leap for joy; and of your gracious
actions, let all the people be exceeding glad. -- In another Id. 5.
Letter to the same Tyrant, he rejoices, and thanks God that he is Emperor,
and that Mauritius was taken away. And in another to Leontia, Wife to Phocas,
he thus begins, -- Ib. 6.
What tongue can declare? what mind can conceive, the thanks which we owe to
God for your Empire? --

And yet if we consult Historians, they will assure us, that this Phocas was
not only a cruel, furious and bloody fellow, but also a drunkard, wencher,
yea, and an Heretic too. But Ib. 9.
Baronius and Tom. 1. page 333.
Coquaeus are very busy to quit him of the last fault, and so make him a good
Roman Catholic. But be as bad as he will, it is confessed that his Wife Leontia
was guilty of the same vices. Whereby I can scarce think of Pope Gregory's
Letters, but I must at the same time remember the flattering and wicked
Addresses, of late days, made to Oliver and his Son Richard, by their canting
Armies, and suchlike knavish Phanaticks; who in the hight of their wickedness
would impudently pretend the Spirit of God to be their Informer. I do not here
compare Pope Gregory to these Villains; yet I can easily persuade my self, that
he had not (as the Turks story of their great Prophet) the Pigeon or Holy
Ghost, at the writing of these Letters, directing him at his ear, as they say
sometime he had; and so they always paint him.

The Patriarch of Constantinople having (as aforesaid) somewhat angered Phocas,
for not delivering the Empress Constantina and her Daughters to his cruelty,
without an oath of security; and the Tyrant seeing himself thus bravely courted
by the Infallible Roman, condescended to the request of Pope Boniface the
Third, and so decreed, That the Church of Rome should be the Hic Rogante Papa
B^nifacic, statuit sedem Romanae Ecclesiae ut Caput esset omnium Ecclesiarum;
quia Ecclesia Constant ^^^politana primum se omnium Ecclesiarum scribebat.
Paul. Diac. de gessis Romanorum, lib. 18. in vit. Phocae.
Head or Chief of all other Churches; and this in opposition to the
Constantinopolitan Church, which had appropriated to her self the style of the
first Church. And her Patriarchs had took upon them the Title of Universal
Bishops, which greatly troubled this Gregory the First, who in opposition to
that other [f] Profane and As Gregory himself called it.
Blasphemous Title [viz. Vniversal] (but now made use of by all Popes) termed
himself the servant of servants of God; upon which Title their 1 Q. 7. c.
Quoties cord^s. Gloss. and per te.
Gloss affords us this Distich:

Servi erant tibi Roma prius Domini Dominorum,
Servorum Servi nunc tibi sunt Domini.
The greatest Kings once served thee Rome, but now
To the least of servants thou thy neck do bow.
This Title has been ever since used by his Successors, and not only by them,
but also other Bishops sometimes write themselves so, as Epist. to H^n^mer of
France.
Rabanus of Mentz, Will. Somners Antiq. of Cant.
Agelnoth of Canterbury, Coquaeus, Tom. 2. p. 70.
Anselme of Ravenna, Ib.
S. Augustine himself, and many others; and indeed they confess, that that Title
is Coeffeteau, page 807. il est commum a tous les Evesques.
common to all other Bishops; and so is the word Vid. Fran. Duaren. de sacris
Eccles. Minist. lib. 1. cap. 10.
Papa too. But though Pope Gregory styled himself so humbly, yet we are told
that he declared, that he had Authority to depose the greatest Kings; in proof
of which, thus they frame their Arguments.

About the time that this Gregory the Great was a Young man, there flourished
in France one Medard, famous (as they say) for his holiness and miracles, and
since Sainted; who was at the same time Bishop of two Places, viz Noyon in
Picardy, and Tourney in Flanders; and this by the Popes approbation: though I
doubt that Monsieur Hist. des Saints, Tom. 1. p. 689.
Gazet is out, when he makes it to be Pope Hormisda, who must have dyed before
this, according to the computation of Hist. Episc. Gal. p. 310.
Chenu.

St. Medard dying, King Clotaire had his body carried to Soissons in Picardy,
and there buried, where he began to build a Church for him; but being murdered,
his Son Sigebert finished it. To this they say, this Lib. 2. Indict. 11. post
Epist. 38.
Gregory the First gave great Privileges, with an express Order that that King
or Potentate should be degraded or Fran. Bozzius de Temporal. Monarch. p. 225.
Bellarm. de Romans Pont. l. 5. c. 8.
deposed, who violated them: Of this -- Vides lector Pontis^cis Romani esse
sancire leges, quibus si ipsi Reges non pareant Regno priventur. Baron. an.
593. 86.
Baronius makes a great boasting, how thus the Pope can depose Kings; and
Gregory the Eighth made use of this instance for an Argument against the
Emperor Henry.

And what might not Gregory the Great do upon Earth over poor Mortals, whose
jurisdiction reached so far, that they say he relieved the tormented soul of
Trojan the Heathen Emperor out of Hell, and sent it packing to Heaven; in
proof and vindication of which pretty action, their famous Vid. Ciacon. vit.
Greg. I.
Alphonsus Ciaconius wrote a particular Book.

Another instance they give us of Gregory's jurisdiction over Kings, viz. that
Queen Brunechilde or Brunehaut built a Vit. Borth. Cassanaeum. Catal. glor.
mundi, part 12. consid. 60. fol. 332.
Monastery to S. Martin at Authum in Burgundy, where she her self was buried.
To which our Lib. 11. Indict. 6. Epist. 10.
Gregory the First granted also many Privileges, but with the same Decree
against those who violated any of them: Of which Anno 603. 17.
Baronius also takes special notice, and triumpths thus of the Papal Authority
in deposing of Kings, as he did formerly. But some think these Deeds and
Privileges are Vit. Caron. Remonstrant. Hybernorum, part 5. page 68, 69.
forged.

And truly, S. Martin Archbishop of Tours deserved both a good Church and
great Privileges, if that be true which they Pet. Natal. l. 10. c. 47.
story of him; as how he raised three people from the dead, and cured folk by
kissing, who had Angels to cover his arms with plates of gold, and those holy
Choristers to sing his soul into Heaven, who was compared to the Baron. an. 583.
Apostles and Elias, and of whom they tell many suchlike pretty stories; yet
methinks his charity was very odd, to turn away his man, only because he was
V^lleg Flos Sanct. November. 11.
goodnatured and virtuous.

CHAP. IV.
1. The deposing of Suintila, King of Spain.

2. The Murder of Childerick the Second, King of France, with his Queen great
with Child.

3. The unfortunate Rule and Murder of the Emperor Justinian the Second, and
the troubles of Constantinople.

4. The Popes censures and troublings of the Emperor Leo the Third about
Images.

5. The deposing of Childerick the Third, King of France.

Sect. 1. The deposing of Suintila, King of Spain.
ANd now let us turn to the West, and in Spain we shall find the Pens of
Authors in as much opposition, as the Swords of Soldiers: for though all
confess that An 621.
Suintila was lawful King of the Goths in Spain, yet Writers will not agree of
his life and exit. For though Chronicon.
Isidorus, Lib. 2. c. 17.
Rodericus, Toletanus, Cap 33.
Alphonsus de Carthagena, and the other ancient Spanish Historians do declare
him to be one of the bravest Princes in the world, not only for his Justice,
Charity, Humility, and other excellent Virtues, but also Valor joined with
Success, whereby, they say, he drove the Romans out of those Territories; and
so was the first of the Goths that obtained the absolute Monarchy of Spain:

Yet some of our Modern Writers lay all manner of Tyranny and Vices to his
charge, drawn thereunto, I suppose, by that which they find set down in the
Fourth Council of Cap. 75.
Toledo. Though methinks it is somewhat odd, that learned Isidore, the great
Bishop of Sevil, and one Sainted in the Roman Calendar, should so soon write
contradictions, as not only by his subscription to this Council, to commend
the usurping Sisenandus; but to declare Suintila [Cintila, Santila, or
Suinthila] to be abominable vicious, tyrannical, a fugitive, and what not? whom
a little before he had Praeter has militares gloriae lands plutimae in eo
Regiae Maj^statis virtutes, fides, prudentia, industria in judicus examinatio,
st^enua in regendo regno cura, prac^pua circa omnes munificentia, largus erga
indigentes and I^opes, misericordia satis premptus; ita ut non solum Princeps
Populotum, sed etiam Pater Pauperum vocari sit dignus. l^^dori Chron.
magnified for a brave Soldier and King, for one virtuous, faithful, prudent,
industrious, just, munificent, and liberal; that he ought to be called the
Prince of his people, and Father of the poor. He had done well if his
Subscription had been true, to have corrected his History, that they might not
stand thus at defiance against each other to deceive Posterity; we cannot plead
^sidores ignorance, seeing he lived in the same time and Country: and why may
not this good Character in his Chronology be more true and authentic, than
that other testified by his and the others subscription, since the first was
writ freely, and privately, without any obligation to flatter, only to inform
Posterity, whilst the other (as is very Marian. de rebus Hispan. lib. 6. cap. 5.
probable) was only subscribed to gratify and pleasure Sisenandus, a
dissembling and powerful Usurper? But it is all one to my purpose, were he good
or bad.

And here we have another rancounter amongst Historians: for, the aforenamed
Rodericus Ximenius, Archbishop of Toledo; and Alphonsus de Carthagena, Bishop
of Burgos; with De Reg. Hispan lib. 2.
Michael Ritius, Arbori delle famiglie Regal di Spagna. page 34.
Cesare Campana, and several others, give not the least hint of any opposition
that Suinthila had in his Government, but that he dyed at Toledo: and the
learned Belgic Jesuit, Bibl. Hisp, Tom. 1. p. 163.
Andraeas Schottus agrees to the last, whilst other Writers are confident of
his deposition; the story of which is rather hinted at than told, but in sum
thus:

One Sisenandus or Sisnandus, but of what relation Pens will not agree, great
in Wars and Authority, having a desire to make himself King, plotted Treason
with some others of the Nobility: and the better to carry on this Rebellion, he
sent to Dagobert, King of France, to desire his assistance; the which he
obtained, by his great promises and treasure which he sent to this Dagobert
(who sent the Wealth to St. Denis, where he had built the great Church; since
that, the burying-place of the French Kings.) A strange piece of Policy
(commonly in practice) for Kings not only to assist, but (if beaten) to
protect Rebels against their Sovereigns, when two to one it may a little after
be their own case. And as this is a strengthing, so it is an encouragement, by
the certainty (if overcome) of a refuge to Rebellion.

Dagobert accordingly sends Abondant and Venerand (or Jo. de Bussiers Hist.
Fran. Tom. 1. page 183.
Venerabandus) with an Army of Burgundians, who enter Spain, and march
straightway to Saragoza: Upon this the Gothic Rebels revolt, join to
Sisenand; by which he grew so powerful and strong, that Suinthila with his
Queen and Children were forced to flee, and so Sisenandus by his treason
obtained the An. 631.
Crown.

The Laity having thus proved themselves bold Rebels, let us see if their
Church be clear from this vice. Sisenand having thus usurped the Throne,
cunningly courted peace with all people; and in the third year of his Reign,
pretending forsooth a great care for Religion and the Church, [though his Jo.
Mariana, lib. 6. cap. 5.
design was to get himself fully settled, and the through extirpation of
Suintila and his Relations] called a Council at Toledo, where met some LXX
Spanish and French [i. e. that part of it then under Spain] Bishops.

The Bishops being met at Toledo in the Church de Santa Leocadia, [a An. 305.
9. December.
Virgin-Martyr] Sisenand like an Hypocrite, humbles himself before the Council;
and with many tears and sobbings, upon his knees desires their blessings and
prayers, and to mend the faults they found in the Church, and suchlike good
words. After some Consultation, and the making of some Canons, they gratify
Sisenando to the purpose, not only by declaring of him true and lawful King,
and confirming of him in the Throne, but by dashing in pieces all the hopes of
Suintila (whom they call Suinthilanis) against whom they raunt very dapperly,
calling of him Fugitive and Runaway from his Authority. A pretty jest, that
Titius should be called coward, Qui propria scelera metuens se ipsum Regno
privavit, and potestatis facibus exuit.
and worthy to loose his Lands, when being overpowered by a company of
Robbers, he is forced to flee to save his life. And thus they deprive Suinthila
his Queen and Children of all benefit there.

Having thus confirmed Sisenando, they go on and make strange curses and
threats against any that shall endeavor to disturb him in his Throne, or, who
shall intend by sinister ends to aspire to the Crown. A pretty Type of Oliver
Cromwell and his Parliament, who having beat out the true Heir to the Crown, and
so made himself Lord Paramount, they vote it High Treason for any to oppose
that Government, or deny the Authority and Rule of his Highness forsooth; as if
it were virtue and godliness in him to depose a lawful Prince, but Treachery
and Villainy in others to withstand an Usurper. And Mariana the Jesuit himself
(though a great Patron to De Institut. Reg. c. 6.
Treason) does confess that Sisnandus obtained the Kingdom, either by Treachery
or Rebellion, though to me in the conclusion there is no difference. Another of
the same Society, Sisenandi proditione an rebellione Suinthila sublatus est.
Jo. Marian. de reb. Hispan. lib. 6. cap. 4.
viz. Andraeas Schottus, does confess that Sisenando obtained the Kingdom by
force or Sisenandus rex creatur, qui per Tyrannidem Regnum fuit adeptus. A. S.
Bibl. Hispan. Tom. 1. page 163.
Tyranny: and so to conclude this story, we see not only an action, but also a
Vindication of Treason and Rebellion, and that by one of their Councils. Nor is
this any such wonder; for they say that the twelfth Council of Toledo did the
same courtesy to Flavius Ervigius [or Ervingius, Erigius, or Hermigius] after
he had Traitorously endeavored the poisoning of the renouned King Bamba, or
Wamba, and so got the Crown, to which he had no Hist. of Spain, page 150. Rob.
Tolet. l. 3. c. 12. Alphons. de Carthag. cap. 1940. Andr. Schott. page 170. Jo.
Marian. l. 6. c. 17.
right. And so much at this time for Spain.

Sect. 2. The Murder of Childerick the Second, King of France, with his Queen
great with Child.
ANd now let us walk over the Pyrenean Mountains, and take a turn in France,
where we shall find Childerick the Second, King, but in short time most
barbarously murdered; the story thus in short:

This Childerick, (but for what fault Authors will not tell us) had caused on
Bodilo [or Gaguin. fol. 22.
Bolidus] to be bound and whipped with Rods: Upon this he and some others of the
Nobility contrive a Plot against their King, though at first in their Councils
they could not agree; for though they concluded to take the Kingdom from him,
yet some were only for depriving him, and to have him shorn, and so thrust
into a Monastery for a Monk; whilst others would be satisfied with nothing but
his death, to which at last the rest consented.

Accordingly Bodille seeing the King one time hunting, and but few with him,
having called his fellow-Traytors together, went and presently Anno 667.
slew him; but this not satisfying, to increase their Villainy, they took his
innocent Queen Blitide, great with Child as she was, and murdered both her and
the Infant.

Sect. 3. The unfortunate Rule and Murder of the Emperor Justinian the
Second, and the troubles of Constantinople.
SOme few years after this, the Emperor Constantinus Pogonatus the Fourth
dying, his Son Justinian the Second succeeded in the Empire; and being then but
young, did several things unadvisedly, which procured him the ill will of many
of his Subjects.

Amongst the rest Leontius, a'famous Soldier, and one that had been General,
resolved to rebel, and make himself Emperor; which design he discovered to
Gallicanus, Patriarch of Constantinople, and other friends, who consented to
the Treachery. Upon this, he privately armed a great many men, who upon a day
appointed, went to his house, where he headed them; thence went to the Goals,
and set all the Prisoners at liberty: And thus having gathered a sufficient
company, he went to the Emperors Palace, where he was proclaimed Emperor: and
thus apprehending Justinian, very cruelly cut off his Ears and Nose, and some
say his Tongue, and then banished him to Chersonesus.

Leontius having thus made himself Emperor, sends an Army, but not big enough,
against the Sarazins: the General John with this little Army troubled the
Sarazins as much as could be, but earnestly solicited Leontius for more
supplies, but without effect; whereupon he himself posted privately to
Constantinople to persuade Leontius, and in his absence left as General one
Tiberius Absimarus. The Army at last began to murmur to see themselves thus
neglected, and proceeded so far as to persuade Tiberius to make himself
Emperor.

Tiberius having thus taken upon him the Title of Emperor, left his design in
Asia, and in all speed ships his Army for Greece, where being landed, many of
his friends joined to him, and so went straight to Constantinople, where
Leontius had fortified himself; but Tiberins by force took the City, and
Leontius Prisoner, and cut off his Nose and Ears, and slew many of his Friends;
and grew so jealous, that he banished one of his own dear Friends, viz.
Philippus, only for saying he dreamed that an Eagle alighted upon his head, as
if by this he would aspire to the Empire, which after accordingly happened.

For more security, Tiberius Absimarus resolved to kill Justinian; of which he
hearing, escaped, and fled into Sarmatia, where he married Theodora, Daughter
to King Chaganus: but this King being corrupted by Tiberius, resolved to
deliver up the Emperor; of which Justinian being informed by his Wife, fled
secretly thence: and after long wandering up and down, he got to Trebellius,
King of Bulgaria; who pitying his case, raised an Army for him, with which he
marched to Constantinople, and took it and Tiberius, whom with Leontius he made
to be carried in disgrace through the principal Streets of the City; and then
being brought before him in irons, they fell flat down at his feet, upon whose
necks Justinian troad, and then they were both only beheaded; and Calli^icus
the Bishop had his eyes put out, and himself* sent as a present to the Pope.
They say farther, that he was so incensed against the Rebels who had done those
great indignities to him, that he never wied or blew his cut Nose [whence he
was called Rhimetus] but he caused one of Leontius his faction to be slain.

Justinian being thus again restored, resolved to be revenged upon the people
of Charsenesus, who had formerly designed his distraction, and abused him; and
accordingly sends an Army against them. Upon this they prepare for defense, and
desire the formentioned Philippus to head them; which he does, calls himself
Emperor, and many of Justinians Army revolt to him; and so being very strong,
he marches toward Constantinople in two divisions, one commanded by Maurus,
who took Tiberius (a young Son to Justinian, but crowned also Emperor) in a
Church begging mercy at the Altar, whose head he presently cut off; and the
other Army was commanded by Elias, who seized upon Justinian himself, and
beheaded him with his own hands. And this was the end of unfortunate Justinian;
and Philippus, surnamed Bardanes, was held for next Emperor.

This Justinian desiring to see Pope Constantine, then sitting in the Chair at
Rome, sent to him, and Hic Constantinum Papam ad se venire jubens honorifice
suscepit ac remisit. Paul. D^acon. vit. Justin. and Anastasius Bibl.
commanded him to come to him at Constantinople; who accordingly obeyed, the
Emperor going out to meet him, and in sign of humility, not only embraced
him, but kissed his feet. And this we are Genebrard. Chron. Tom. 2. page 706.
Coeffeteau, page 481.
told was the first Emperor that kissed the Popes Toe; which was not so much a
fault in Justinian, as in Constantine to permit: which in my opinion is since
that aggravated by placing a Cross at the end of the Shoe or Pantofle, to take
away the objection of worshipping a man, since it would be a greater sign of
Religion to place that Badge in a more honorable place; but whatever be the
pretenses, pride and policy (to promote greatness and reverence) is the
reason. Though for mine own part, since I find the greatest Potentates submit
themselves to such a salute, I should not scruple to kiss a worse part, if
custom gave it authority; for those men's consciences are the worst part of
their Religion, which take pet or boggle at those ceremonies, which time and
fashion have made signs of civility: and who can now deny the Pope to be a
Temporal Prince within his own Territories? And besides this, curiosity is a
good prop to the Argument.

And thus by the An. 711.
Murder of Justinian the Second, and his Son Tiberius, ended the Imperial
Family of Heraclius, which had continued just an hundred years.

Philippus Bardanes having thus made himself Emperor, the Pope [Constantine]
and he fell out about Religion; and so the Pope excommunicated him, and
declared him an Heretic [but said nothing against his Rebellion or Murder:]
but to end the strife, Artemius his Secretary and others conspire against him:
and one day, he resting Artemenius Emperor, who changed his name to Anastasius.

Anastasius the Second sends a great Army against the Saracens, but they took a
gig in their heads and revolted, choosing for Emperor one Theodosius, a good
man, but of no great birth, being only a Collector of Subsidies.

Theodosius thus Emperor, though really against his will, took Anastasius, and
gave him his life, but made him a Monk: but he continued not long, for Leo who
was General to Anastasius the Second, resolves in vindication of his former
Master to oppose him; and so having got a great Army, marched toward
Constantinople, and in the way, took prisoner a Son of Theodosius. Upon this
the Father began to grow fearful; and not daring to resist so great a power,
yielded himself upon promise to have his life secured, which was granted:
Theodosius and his Son, as they say, being both shorn and made Monks. And Leo
being thus successful, was made. Emperor, having three, who had sat in the
Imperial Throne, his Prisoners, viz.

I. Philippus Bardanes, whom Anastasius had cast into prison, and plucked out
his eyes.

II. Anastasius, who was forced into holy Orders by Theodosius.

III. Theodosius, who thus submitted to Leo, and was also put into holy Orders.

Sect. 4. The Popes censures and troublings of the Emperor Leo the Third about
Images.
LEo the Third before this, called Isaurus Conon, from his Country Isaurus in
Asia, surnamed also by his Enemies Iconomachus from his hatred to Images, for
which cause Pope Gregory the Second falling out with him, was the occasion of
great mischief to Christendom.

This Leo Tollendi ut ipse dicebat Idolatriae causa, Platin. vit. Gregor. II.
declaring against Idolary, as he said, commanded that all Images in the
Churches of Constantinople should be taken down; and sent to Gregory the Second
at Rome to have his Orders there also obeyed: but this the Pope stiffly
withstands, affirming the Emperor to have nothing to do in things of Religion,
and persuaded all people in this to oppose the Emperor; which took such
effect, that in Constantinople it self, some men did not only reason against
the Imperial Decree, but the women assaulted those who according to Order went
about to execute Leo's commands; insomuch, that he was forced to use severity
against those who opposed his Edicts.

And in Italy, so zealous were the people by the persuasion of the Churchmen,
that in Ravenna, where the Imperial Authority most resided, they flew into such
open Tumults or Rebellion, that they murdered Paulus the Fourteenth Exarch,
being the Emperors Lieutenant or Deputy; in Rome it self they took Petrus the
Duke, and put out his eyes; and in Campania they beheaded the Duke Exhilaratus,
and his Son Adrian, who there took the Emperors part against the Pope, who now
began to show themselves Enemies; and two to one, if the Emperor could have
got the Pope into his clutches, he had made him smart for his opposition.

But Gregory on the other side had played his Cards so well, that he had
dwindled the Imperial Jurisdiction in Italy to nothing, by his Excommunication,
and suchlike Censures, not only forbidding any more Tax or Tribute to be paid
him, but that he should not at all be obeyed. And here Quo tonitru exitati
fideles Occidentale mox desciscunt penitus a Leonis Imperio, Aposto^ico
Pontifici adherentes. Sic dignum posteris idem Gregorius reliquit exemplum, ne
in Ecclesia Christi regnare sinerentur haere^ci Principes, si saepe moniti in
errore persistere obstinato animo invenirentur. Baron. anno 730. 5.
Baronius according to his custom, huggs and applauds Gregory for his Censures
against the Emperor, whereby he got the people to his own Devotion; and also
left a good Example to Posterity, not to permit obstinate Heretical Kings to
Rule; as the Cardinal says, who never lets any piece of Rebellion pass without
commendation.

But for all this, Leo kept his Imperial Seat in Constantinople, and continued
in his resolution against Images, and so had them pulled down; nor could
Gregory the Third, who succeeded his Namesake, stop his proceedings, though by
his Censures, with the consent of the Roman Clergy, he did not only declare
him deprived from the Communion of all Christians, but also deposed from his
Empire. But Leo never thought himself the worse for these brutish Thunderbolts,
and so reigned as Emperor to his dying day, having sat in the Imperial Throne
twenty four years. And his Son Constantine the Fifth carried the same Opinion
against Images, which did not a little perplex the Popes in his time.

But the Popes quarreling about these trifles, was the occasion that the
Emperor of Constantinople lost his jurisdiction in Italy, Ravenna being about
this time taken by Aistulphus, the two and twentieth King of the Lumbards, in
Italy: Eutichus the Fifthteenth and last Exarch forced to flee (this Exarchical
Government having ruled as the Emperors Deputies, almost CC years in Italy,
keeping their Seat at Revenna) but the Popes gained by this; for the Popes (as
some say) having made Pepin King of France, in requital desired his assistance
against the Lombards, who accordingly marched into Italy, beat Aistulph, took
Ravenna from him; which with many other Cities he gave to S. Peter, whereby the
Pope in a manner held himself Master of that which he now does in la Marcha di
Ancona, Romagna, di Vrbino, Bononia and Ferrara: which they say was confirmed
by his Son Charles the Great, with the Addition of the Dukedoms of Spoleto and
Tuscany, and the Islands Sicily, Corsica and Sardinia, reserving to himself the
Sovereignty of them: but some men give that which is none of theirs to give,
and so might Charlemaign; but right or no right, the Popes do not use to loose
any thing that is to be had. This Charles the Great also An. 774.
beat Desiderius who succeeded Aistulph, and was the last King of the Lombards;
and so that Kingdom and Rule ended, after they had triumphed in that part of
Italy (from them) called Lombardy, and the adjacent parts, for above CC years;
and now the Pope began to strut it with the proudest, throwing off the
jurisdiction of the Western Empire, having his daring Lombards thus brought to
naught; and Charles the Great, the Champion of Europe his friend, doubly
engaged to him the Sea of Rome, authorizing his Father Pepin to be King of
France, the first step to Charles his greatness; and after, as they say,
Crowned him the first Emperor of the West, in opposition to that of the East
or Constantinople.

Sect. 5. The deposing of Childerick the Third, King of France.
HAving here treated somewhat of Pepin and Charlemaign, let us see how they
came to their greatness and government. There having reigned in France Eighteen
Kings, since Merouce (some say Grandchild to Pharamund) who was the first
that brought these German people into France, and there settled them; there then
succeeded in the Kingdom Childerick or Helderick, by some falsely called
Chilperick, of which name there has also been two Kings of France.

About the year DLIX Clotaire the First set up the Office of the Du Haillan
fol. 316. lib. 4.
Majordom [Maire du Palais] being the principal Officer in the Kingdom, one
Landregesile being the first that was chosen; these by little and little raised
their Authority so high, that they disposed of all things. For though at first
they were only Stewards to the Kings Household, and could stretch their
jurisdiction no farther; yet after the death of Clotaire the Second, they began
to increase their power; and at last taking opportunity by the negligen^e and
weakness of some Kings, they began to rule all things. The first that advanced
the Majordoms was Ebroin, in the time of Theodorick or Thierry the First, a
very meek and patient King. In this Kings reign was also Pepin the Gross, Major
of the Palace: Son to this Pepin was Charles surnamed Martel, who had himself
called Prince and Duke of the French; and in his Tomb at S. Denis he is styled
Carolus Martellus Rex.
King; and the truth is, he ruled both King and People. Son to this Charles was
Pepin surnamed the short, who deposed his Sovereign, and made himself King; the
story thus:

Pepin agitated by an ambitious humor, resolves to make himself King of
France; and to facilitate his Treachery, he had several of his Creatures
prompted to sound nothing but his commendation; and having thus got a good
esteem amongst the Vulgar, (who love nothing more than novelty) and having also
gained over to his Faction and interest, what by former favors, future
promises, and some awe, many of the great ones; he procures an Assembly or
Parliament to be held at Soissons, by the Prelates and Nobility: for as then
the third Estate or Commons had no authority in voting, only the liberty of
preferring their complaints.

The Assembly presently agrees to the preferment of Pepin: nor was there any
thing which lay in the way, but one scruple, viz. the Oath of Allegiance they
had formerly sworn to Childerick. And if they could be but disingaged from
this, they were then resolved to pull down their King, and set up the little
Candidate.

To cut in pieces this Gordion-knot, it is concluded to send to the Pope
Zachary, whom (to gratify themselves) they would fancy to have the power to
absolve Subjects from Allegiance and Oaths. And so two are pitched upon to go
as Ambassadors to his Infallible Holiness, about the pretty, loyal and honest
Errand.

The first was called Burchard [but now by a French Jo. de Bussieres Hist.
Fran. Tom. 1. page 244.
Jesuit erroniously called Richardus] acknowledged by all men to be a Britain
by birth; but of what Kingdom is the Question, since both Jo. P^ts de Scriptor.
Angl. page 164.
English and Dav. Camerar. de Scot. fo^titud. p. 100. Tho. Dems^^r. Apparat^s
ad Hist. Scot.
Scotch declare him to be theirs; some will also have him to have been Bishop
of Jan. de Serres, page 184.
Bourges in France, but I see little reason for that opinion; neither Claudius
Robertus, nor Chenu making any such name or man in their Histories of that
Archbishopric: And therefore we shall with the common opinion, conclude him to
have been the first Bishop of Wirtzburg in Franconia: However, he is well
enough, being Sainted in the Roman Calendar. The other employed in this
Ambassie was Tulrad, chief Chaplain to Pepin, and made Abbot of S. Denis.

These being got to Rome, and brought to the Popes presence, Burchard, as the
better man, told his tale at large, stuffed with the commendations of Pepin, and
his Father Charles Marte^, what great maintainers they had and would be to the
Romish See: And as for King Childerick, they rendered him the worst of all
Creatures; but what was worth all the rest, they promised him, that if he would
do Pepin this favor, that he, when he was King, would assist the Pope against
his Enemies the Lombards, and by reducing of whom, the Pope would in a manner
Rule all Italy.

This was that which Zachary looked for; and so the bargain being thus struck,
the Pope by some pretty knack or other, declares the French disingaged from the
Oath of Allegiance, they formerly swear to Childerick; and with this good news
the two Ambassadors return joyfully to their Associates at Soissons, the Pope
having delegated S. Bonifacius to annoint Pepin King.

This Boniface was then the first Archbishop of Mentz [which before him had
only Bishops] he was first called Wenefrid; but when N^c Se^ar. Hist. M^gunt.
p. 341.
Gregory the Second consecrated him Bishop, he changed it to Bonifacius, from
his good deeds: he was born in Britain, but both Scoth and English strive for
him: and it may be that Hist. Mogunt. p. 438.
Serarius mistakes the Italian Bonifacius for Spotswood, page 20.
this, who is called the Father and Apostle of the Germans, he being the chief
means of their Conversion to Christianity; and he was in all things a true man
of the Popes, by whom he is declared a Saint and Martyr.

Bonifacius being accordingly come to Soissons, anoynts Pepin King; and then
according to their ancient Custom, being lifted up by some of the Nobility upon
a Shield, to be seen of all, is by the acclamation of the people shouted out
King of France.

And thus was Childerick deposed, whose Heir they rounded or shortened, as a
badge of infamy and degrading: and the better to understand the ignominy of
this, we must know that Clodion or Cloion the Second, King of the Francks or
France, and Son to Pharamond, Jan. de Serres.
made a Law, that none but the King, his Sons, or Princes of the Bloud-royal
should wear long Hair, it being as with the Romans a sign of Rule and
Authority; which occasioned their cropping of Slaves or Servants: and this
Custom confirmed by this Law of Clodio^, continued a long time in France;
insomuch that Clodamire, Son to Clouis, being slain in Battle by the
Burgundians, was found and known from the rest of the dead men, by his long
Hair. And which is more, this badge they observed with such Reverence and
Devotion, that their Histories tell us that Queen Clotilde would rather allow
her Sons heads to be cut off than their hair; as if she expressed by that, an
honorable death before an ignoble life. This King Clodion, for his
establishing this Custom amongst his people, was surnamed the Le Chevelu.
Hairy.

But the dishonorable cropping was not all they did to their King Childerick;
but as if to make him ever after incapable to sit in the Throne again, they had
his Pole shorn or shaven, his Robes pulled off, and a Religious Habit put on;
and so forcing of him to be a Monk, thrust him into a Monastery: and they
served his Queen G^selee after the same way, making of her be veiled, and so
thrust into a Nunnery. And thus ended the Royal Family of the Mer^uingiens [so
called from King Merouce, the first that brought them out of Germany] after
they had reigned over the French CCC years.

As for Childerick, I believe he was easie-natured-enough, apt to be cheated by
every knave, being none of the wisest: but yet it will not follow, that he
should therefore be deposed; but on the contrary, upheld by good assistants and
councsels, himself being tainted with no vice or wickedness; but on the
contrary, as Chilperico non si moss punto dell' ingiuria fattagli, per haverlo
privato del Regno, anzi essendo di natura pia, e pacifica, si arrecco a gloria
l'esse fatto Monaco. Perch tutto il tempo che visse nel Monasterio, egli meno
vita Angelica. Paolo Morigi Hist. de Personaggi illustri Religiosi. lib. 3.
cap. 18. page 138.
Paolo Morigi will assure us, very religious, good-natured, and peaceful: and
all the time to his dying day in the Monastery led a very heavenly life.

Here some raise an objection concerning the anointing of Pepin, surnamed the
Le bref.
short, for his littleness: for some will have him only anointed by S.
Boniface, Archbishop of Mentz; others only by Pope Stephanus the Third. But
Hist. Mogunt. lib. 3. not. 38. page 522, 523, 524.
Serarius thinks it no great wonder to have them both true, it being not the
first time, as he shows, that a King has been twice anointed, as amongst the
Israelites; and that Pepin was also Crowned by Pope Stephanus the Third, they
with joy confess; and thus tell the story:

The Lombards being rampant in Italy, the Pope for his security, and to beg
assistance, fled to Pepin, at his coming into France: P. Mexia vite di gl'
Imperadori, vit. Constantin. V. fol. 306. b. Jo. de Bussieres, Tom. 1. page
249, 250. Grimston's Imp. Hist. page 371.
Fulrad the Abbot, and Duke Rotaldus, were sent to congratulate him in the
Kings name; and moving forward in his journey, Charles his Eldest Son waited
upon him; and three miles off Paris, Pepin himself met him, alighted off his
Horse, prostrated himself before him, kissed his feet, and [the more to
curry-favour with that See, whence he had his Crown, and was now to desire
another courtesie] very humbly played the part of a Lackey, himself refusing to
ride, but on foot very dapperly leading by the Bridle the Horse on which Pope
Stephanus rode. Whilst this Pope stayed in France, he anointed at S. Denis
Pepin for King, Bertrad his Wife for Queen, and his two Sons Charles
[afterwards Emperor, and called Charlemaign] and Caroloman, as Princes to
succeed their Father; whom he publicly declared to be the true and lawful
King; and that it should be unlawful hereafter for the French to have any King,
but of the Race of Pepin. The Pope having done this good turn to Pepin, he in
requital beats the Lombards, and the Towns taken from them bestows upon St.
Peter for the good of his soul; and having thus resetled the Bishop of Rome,
returns to France. And this Pepin, as Hist. de France, Tom. 1.
Scipion Dupleix says, was the first. Christian King that ever was anointed.

I shall not trouble my self with the dispute of this Id. page 338. 4.
Dupleix against d^ Haillan and Hotoman, whether the Kingdom of France be
Hereditary or Elective: for if these great French Lawyers and Historians cannot
agree, they will never grant a stranger to be Umpire; though I shall willingly
grant that Monarchy absolute and Hereditary.

And again, though some will have this deposition done only by the Authority
remaining in the French; yet I find most of the Bellarm. de Romans Pont. l. 2.
c. 17. l. 5. c. 8. Gasp. Sciop. Ecclesiast. page 511, 512. Di^nys. Carthus. de
Author. Pap. l. 1. art. 6. Celsmancinus de jur. Principat. l. 3. c. 3. Fran.
Duarenus de Benefic. l. 1. c. 4. Fran. Ghetius Theol. Moral. v. Papa, 10. S.
Raymond. Sum. l. 1. tit. de Haeret. 7. page 41. Jo. de Turrecrem. Sum. de
Eccles. c. 14 propos. 4. Lud. ^ Param. l. 1. Q. 1. Opin. 4. 55. Sylvest de
Priero Sum. v. Papa, 11. Dom. ^ Soto did. 25. Q. 2. Art. 1. Alpho^s. d Castro
de Haeret. punit. lib. 2. c. 7. Guil. de Monserrat de success. Regum. dub. 1.
30. Jo. Quintinus Repet. in C. Novit. de judic. 127. Jo. de Selva de Benefic.
part 4. Q. 8. 25. Fran. Duarenus de sacris Eccles. Minist. lib. 1. cap. 4.
Romanists affirm it acted only by the Popes authority; and so vapor with
this story, as an example of the Popes power to depose Kings. And so I leave
it, as I found it.

CHAP. V.
1. The Murder of Constantine the Fifth, Emperor of Constantinople, by his
Mother Irene.

2. The miserable and troublesome Reign of the Emperor Jews le Debonnaire, by
the many Rebellions against him.

3. The Murder of Michael, Emperor of Constantinople: with Pope Adrian the
Second his opinion of the Murderer.

4. Several Insolences and Murders committed by the Venetians against some of
their Dukes, about this time.

Sect. 1. The Murder of Constantine the Fifth, Emperor of Constantinople, by
his Mother Irene.
WE have formerly seen a quarrel between the Emperor and Pope, about the
worshipping of Images; and now we shall perceive a giddy zeal make a Mother
monstrously unnatural.

Leo the Fourth Emperor of Constantinople being dead, his Son Constantine the
Fifth succeeded; but being then young, his Mother Irene governed all: she was
very earnest for the worshipping of Images, and (which hugely gratified the
Pope of Rome) she had the use of them confirmed by a Council at Nice: and
though she was a woman, and the handsomest of her time, yet she wanted neither
policy nor courage to sway the Imperial Scepter; and for that time she
governed, she was esteemed by most.

But Constantine being now come to years, takes the Government upon himself,
has his Mother Irene to live by her self, shows himself, as his Father and
Grandfather had done before, zealous against Images, and willing that Priests
should marry; and commands Stauratius, an Infant of his Mothers, not to meddle
any more with State Affairs: though at last he let Irene have a great hand in
the Empire.

But she not content, unless she had all, conspires against her Son; and with
the assistance of Stauratius, won the Army over to their Faction, and so
violently seized upon the Emperor, (who endeavored an escape, but could not)
whose eyes she unnaturally ordered to be plucked out; which was acted with such
violence upon him, that he dyed presently after. And some Historians tell us
(which must be left to every man's belief) that the Christ. Besold. Synopsis
Hist. Univers. p. 307.
Sun, as disdaining to shine upon those who had wickedly plucked out the eyes
of their Sovereign, veiled himself up in blackness and mourning, that for
seventeen days together there was no light upon the Earth.

As for Irene, there were some Overtures of a Marriage between her and Charles
the Great, so to unite the Empires. But Charlemaign's Ambassadors coming to
Constantinople, found that design spoiled by a great alteration: for one
Nicephorus having made the Army sure to him, besieges Irene, takes her
prisoner, is himself declared Emperor, gives an Oath of Allegiance to the
Army, banisheth Irene, confining her to the Island Lesbos, where she pines away
with anguish and grief: and so Nicephorus struck up a peace with Charlemaign,
and the Empire's divided.

The Charles was the first that was Emperor of the West or Germany, at whose
Coronation the Pope did Adore him, as used to be done to ancient Emperors;
that is, as (b) Dupleix says, the Pope a Alors le Pape (au report de nos
Annals) adora Charles a la maniere des anciens Empereurs, c'est a dire,
s'humilia devantluy les genoux a terre, le recognoissant comme Empereur Romain.
Scipion. Duple^x, Tom 1. page 449. 4.
kneeling on the ground, humbled himself before him, acknowledging him to be
Emperor of Rome.

The French and Spaniard are yet at dispute concerning their Relation to this
Charlemaign and the Empire; the Castilian affirming himself to have much of
this Charles his blood in him, being in part descended from him, and so has
more right to the Empire than the other; the Royal-line of Charles ending in
France, by the coming in of Hugh Capet. This is as furiously opposed by the
French; but being nothing to my purpose, I shall refer those of the Spanish
Interest to the Reasons of Vindiciae Hispan.
Chifletius; whilst those who stand for the French may consult the Answers to
them by David Blondellus, where the Monsieur may clog himself with a bad
method, and multitude of Genealogies; with a Preface, as some say, of the Gate
of Myndus, bigger than all the other work or Building. And almost an hundred
years ago, Matthaeus Zampinus wrote an Apology for Hugh Capet, as descended
from the ancient French Kings, and related also to Charles the Great. But this
by the by.

Sect. 2. The miserable and troublesome Reign of the Emperor Jews le
Debonnaire, by the many Rebellions against him.
CHarles le Maigne [or the Great] being dead, there succeeded him, as Emperor
and King of France, his Son Jews le Debonnaire [i. e. the Courteous or
Affable] by the Latins called Ludovicus Pius; one, though very good-natured
and religious, yet was his life nothing but trouble and misery: I shall not say
any thing of the Tumultuous Saxons, Hunns, Normans, and suchlike people; but
tell you what oppositions he received from his own Kindred, and what Rebellions
and Treasons were waged against him by his own Sons.

Bernard, Son to Pepin, Son to Charles the Great, and so Nephew to this Jews
le Debonnaire, was called King of Italy, and there Jews, he lost both it, with
his liberty, eyes, and life too

Jews having made Laws to restrain the excess of some Bishops, procured him
the hatred of some of the proud Clergy; amongst the rest, three were most
eminent in this Faction and Rebellion, viz. Anselmus Bilius the First,
Archbishop of Millan; Wolfeldus, Bishop of Cremona in Italy; and Theodulphus,
Bishop of Orleans in France: these fob'd up Bernard with strange hopes of
success, if he would war against his Uncle Jews; and in several discourses
with him, played their Cards so well, that having at first breathed into him
discontent, to which his own proud humor persuaded him; then hopes of carrying
all, at last engaged him to appear in open Hostility, titling of himself P.
Berthault Florus Francicus, page 118. J. de Serres.
King of France, which he also resolved to seize upon; to which purpose he had
got a strong Army, and fortified the Alpean passages into Italy.

The Emperor Jews informed of this, imploys his whole care to provide himself
with a sufficient force; which having gathered together from several places,
marched toward his Enemy. Bernard understanding the great strength of Jews,
and his own Soldiers running away from him, whereby he knowing that he was not
able to stand against him, having consulted several ways for his own safety, he
found none that were probable to succeed, but his submission; and knowing the
Emperor of all men to be most merciful and good-natured, taking his
opportunity, he goes to Jews, acknowledges his fault, and humbly begs his
pardon; and so did others, the chief of this Rebellion; by which means a full
discovery of the design was made: but that which incensed most, was, that the
Emperor by these confessions understood, that some of his own chief
Counselors, and most intimate familiars, were privy to, and engaged in the
Treachery.

They are all imprisoned, and an Assembly being held at Aken in Germany, they
are all there declared, according to their old Laws, guilty of High Treason,
and so the chief of them adjudged to death. The Emperor was very willing to
spare Bernard, only to have confined him to perpetual imprisonment. But the
other Counselors about him so aggravated the pride, arrogancy, and this
Treason of Bernard, that Jews, though with grief, consented that he should
have his Jo. de Bussieres, Tom. 1. page 333.
eyes pulled out (it being the common punishment in those times) which
accordingly was Giacop. Filip. da Bergamo in his old Italian Chronocle, (it may
be, through a mistake) declares the punishment thus: Bernardo essendomenato in
Aquisgrana fu decapitate, fol. 304. b.
done; and the third day after he dyed for grief. The Bishops, who were found
guilty of this Treachery, were deprived of their Dignities, and thrust into
little Covents.

As for the Emperor Jews, he no sooner heard of Bernards death, but he was
hugely troubled, publicly repenting that he had consented to such counsel,
openly confessing his cruelty, as he called it, and ordered all the Plotters to
be set at liberty, and restored to their former Beings.

But now let us proceed to a more unnatural Rebellion; and first, for the
better understanding of it, the Reader, if he please, for memory-sake may
glance upon this small Scheme.

Charles the Great, the First Emperor.
Jews le Debonnaire, to him was first given France; but outliving his two
Brothers, he became Emperor. Hermingardis, Daughter to Earl Nigranus.
L^tharius, after the overthrow of Bernard made King of ^aly, and was by his
Father joined with him in the Empire. Pepin had Aquitane given him; he dyed
before his Father, leaving two young Sons. Jews had Bavaria given him by his
Father, and his Brother Lothaire was forced to give all Germany, and is called
King of it.
Judith, Daughter to Welfo, Earl of Altdorf.
Charles the Bald was King of France, and at last Emperor: he was poisoned, as
some say, by his Physicians.

Some have endeavored to declare the true grounds of this unnatural Rebellion,
but others suppose that ambition was the real cause, whatever might be the
pretense; one of them being this: Jews fighting against the Moors in Catalonia
(as his Father, Grandfather, and Great-grand-father had done before him) there
was one Imperial Hist. page 392.
Bernardo del Carpio, Nephew to King Alonso, who was so famous in those Wars
against the Saracens for his great prudence and success, that the Emperor
Jews took a special liking to him; and being of such great Birth, and Duke of
Barcenona, he took him to him into France, making him a special favorite. At
this promotion of a Stranger, the French took pet; and at last, by rumors and
false news so increased the charge, that the crime also fell heavily upon the
Empress Juditha, as one too familiar with the said Bernardo, and as one that
had so much possessed the Emperors affection, that she not only ruled all,
but intended also to get all for her Son Charles, from the Emperors other
three Children.

But the truth is, these reports are by the Wisest held to be false and
impertinent; for the Emperor, to satisfy the world of the first, ordered
Bernardo to depart from him; which accordingly he did, returning into Spain:
and for any other crime laid to him, having begged leave, he publicly
challenged (according to the custom of those times) any his accuser, against
whom he would clear his innocence by Combat; but none appearing, he purged
himself by Oath.

As for Judith, Jews for peace-sake had sent her into a Nunnery; nor would he
receive her again, till before her Enemies she had cleared her self: And a late
judicious Jo. Henr. B^^eler. Comment. de reb^s saeculi IX and X pa^. 65.
Historian shows us, that the ancient Writers of those times do confess, that
the accusations laid against Judith were all false and lies. And their other
pretense, viz. the endeavors to have young Charles to overtop his Brothers,
is very impertinent, considering how he had given to one a great part of
Germany, to another a great command in France; and the Eldest, viz. Lotharius,
he had had him crowned Emperor (though himself then living) according to the
custom of those times, the better to confirm his succession in the Empire.

But were these pretenses true, I see no Authority to warrant this Rebellion,
which all Authors cry out against, and acknowledge the cause of all, to be
merely Ambition, Arrogancy, with hopes of domineering.

To this Rebellion, several of their proud Prelates had an itching De
Bussieres, Tom. 1. page 349.
humor, nourishing within themselves an hatred against the Emperor, because
he had by Law restrained their Military Pomp, most of them then going habited,
and acting like Soldiers, not troubling their thoughts with their Office as
Bishops, only to sweep up the Revenues. The chief of these were Ebo or Ebbo,
Archbishop of Rheims, at first a beggarly fellow, but by the Emperors favor
thus preferred. Jesse, Bishop of Amiens, and such like; and some of the chief
Nobility were great promoters of this villainy, as Hilduin, Hugo, Monfredus, etc.

And who must head these, but Pepin the Emperors Son? and so having got a
considerable Army together, he marches against his Father, and in his way
takes Orleans.

The Emperor upon notice of this, sends his Empress for security Anno. 830.
or policy to a Nunnery at Leon in Picardy, himself going to Compeigne nearer
Paris. Pepin hearing of this, sends a party of his Confederates to Laon, where
by force they take out Juditha, and carry her to their General; where she is
threatened with all manner of torments and deaths, unless she will use all her
Arguments and Interest to persuade Jews to become Monk, and resign the Empire,
and she her self to turn Nun. Upon this, she is carried to Compeigne, where she
privately persuades the Emperor to be as cunning as possible in this great
concern: and having discovered to him some other hints, she returns to the
Confederates, by whom she is sent to Poictiers, and there thrust into the Abbey
of De S. Croix.
S. Radegonde, and there by force veiled as a Nun: Pepin, and his Confederates,
publicly rejoicing at this fine act of theirs, thinking that now they had all
at command, and as heart could wish.

Whilst these Insolences were acted in France, Lotharius or Lotaire, the
Eldest Brother, was in Italy at his command; but that he leaves, and comes to
be an Actor with the rest. At his first coming in, his Councils were divided;
for though he declared against any incivility to be done to his Father, yet he
punished all Don Bernardo's Relations he could met withal; one he banished, and
another he commanded to have his eyes pulled out, and then did as much as
approve of all that had been hitherto done; and so the Emperor remained
without any Power or Authority, excepting the bare Name.

Having gone thus far, 'twas at last supposed the most plausible means to bring
their designs about, to have a public Meeting or Assembly held; where they did
not question, but their actions would be approved of, and the Emperor forced
to resign. Upon this, it behooves Jews to play his Cards well now or never;
and having consulted all ways, at last he found none that had any hopes of
security, but to trust to his old Friends the Germans, where if he could
procure the Assembly to be kept, he questioned not but all would go well; for
he thought that at this time he had little reason to confide in his Countrymen
the French, who had thus in time of such need left him in the lurch.

And accordingly he behaved himself so cunningly, that he not only got the
Parliament to be held in Germany, but a so that none should appear at this
meeting in a Warlike posture, and accompanied with no more than his own Family
and Attendants. And having thus secured himself, he goes to the place
appointed with his Son Lotharius, where seeing himself strengthened with the
affection and assistance of a great many Germans, he plucked up his courage,
and began to oppose the vapors of his Enemies; and in full Parliament, being
informed that the two Lord Abbots, Halduin and Walachus, his main opposers, had
come to the Meeting attended with Armed men, boldly asked them, how they durst
appear so accompanied against the Edict? and to punish this their insolency,
commanded both of them with their Soldiers to depart the place, confining the
first to reside and winter at Paderborn in Westphalia, and the other at Corbie
in Picardy.

This action quite broke the hearts of the rest of the Conspirators, and put
them to their wits ends; and scarce knowing which way to turn themselves, the
next night, the chief of them went to Lotharius, to consult what should be
done: nor need this take up much time of consideration; for they found but two
ways, either presently to put it to the venture of the Sword, or to withdraw
themselves from the Parliament, till they could increase their force, either to
carry all France, which they doubted not of, or by some policy to get the
Emperor out of the Germans protection; but by all means they persuaded
Lotharius never to comply with his Father; and having thus vented their wicked
counsels, they returned to their Lodgings.

The Emperor Jews was not idle all this while, but kept his Spies on foot, by
whom he understood the design of this Conventicle Upon which, next morning he
sends to his Son Lothaire, advising him not to be ruled by such wicked counsel;
nor to trust to such false Friends, who had rebelled against their Sovereign,
and would in time, to a^dvantage themselves, desert him too, for all their
present fair promises; desiring him to leave the Confederates, and to come to
him, where he should be lovingly received.

Lotharius at last thinks it best to obey his Fathers good advice, and
accordingly goes to him, where he was accepted with the dearest affection of a
Father. The Conspirators informed of this, knew not what to do; but at last
thought it best to persuade the Vulgar to Sedition, and so presently gave out
that Lotharius was seized upon, closely clapped up in prison, and by the
appointment of his enraged Father was presently to suffer, unless by violence
he were released. The people upon this hurry into Tumults, and so in a
tumultuous manner reel toward the Palace, breathing forth nothing but
destruction, and the relief of the supposed Prisoner; and in this fury fall
upon the Emperors Lifeguard, who loyally and valiantly, for preservation of
their Master, defend the Palace-gates, and keep off the enraged Rabble and
Confederates. Jews informed of this outrage and danger, resolved to undeceive
them; and taking with him Lothaire, showed themselves to the insolent Rebels,
whom he desired his Son to satisfy and pacify. Lotharius having commanded
silence, and obtained it, informed the people of their mistake; and in a large
Speech declared the agreement and amity between his Father and himself.

The multitude by this means being pacified, the whole design of the Faction
and Rebellion fell to the ground; by which means Jews obtained so much courage
and authority, that he had the chief of the Confederates seized upon, and in
public Parliament convicted of High Treason, and so condemned to death. But
such was the mercy of the Emperor, that he only had the Clergymen deprived,
and some of the Laity, for security sake, confined to Monasteries: And as for
his Rebellious Son Pepin, forgetting all animosity, he received him into the
height of his paternal affection. And having thus eased himself of one
Rebellion, he sent for his Empress Juditha from the Abbey of Poictiers, whom
yet he would not receive to his bed, till according to his Laws, she had purged
her self from all the crimes and objections laid against her. And thus peace
being made between him and his Children, he dissolved the Parliament, sending
his Sons to their respective charges, viz. Lotharius to Italy, Pepin to
Aquitaine, and Jews to Bavaria. But not content with this favor and mercy,
to complete his Charity, after the holy Feast of Easter was finished, he by a
general Act of Oblivion pardoned all those whom he had before punished,
deprived or confined, freely granting to every man the liberty of departing and
enjoying what they did formerly, according to their own humors and pleasures.

Now we might suppose that all would be quiet, the chief of the Rebels, by the
Emperors mercy, not only being shamed, but obliged into loyalty: but we
shall find the contrary. For the aforesaid Bernardo, having by his entreaty
procured another Parliament to be held for the public clearing of himself from
all accusations laid against him; accordingly he came, and according to the
unjust and heathenish custom of those times, offered to prove his innocence by
Combat; but none appearing to fight him, by Oath he publicly proved himself
unguilty. The Emperor to satisfy all parties, sent to his Son Pepin, who
seemed the greatest Enemy, to be present at this meeting and purgation of
Bernardo. But Pepin does not presently obey, but protracts the time till the
Parliament was dissolved, and all finished; which affront so much incensed
Jews, that he commanded Pepin to be seized upon, who at last giving his
Keepers the slip, escaped and fled to Aquitaine, where (upon what account I
know not) he got Bernardo to revolt from the Emperor, and join with him in the
same Rebellion: But Pepin being seized upon again, was, to prevent his farther
mischief, carried whence he had most sway, and confined to Trevers in Germany:
but from this restraint and judgment he also escaped; and being at liberty,
made it his whole design to molest and oppose his Father, filling all places he
could with Insurrections; which so incensed Jews, that (seeing by fair means
he could not reclaim his Son) he deprived him of all jurisdiction over, and to
Aquitaine, and whatever else he possessed, giving the same to his Sons Lotharius
and Charles.

Pepin seeing himself thus deprived of all, resolved to make others as bad as
himself; and first, he felt the pulse of his Brother Lothaire, which with a
little bad counsel, he moved to beat according to his own desire; and in this
humor, they both resolved to renew the Rebellion, to depose their Father, and
so rule all: and to this Treachery their Ipsique Antisti^es Buccinatores belli
p^ae caeteris, voce, scripto, op^, and multo maxim exemplo sactionem
promovent. Jo. de Bussiers, Hist. Franc. Tom 1. p. 359.
Prelates and Clergy were the main Trumpeters, by their preachments, scribbling,
and bad Example.

According to the plot, the Sons marched against their Father: Pope Gregory the
Fourth coming from Italy (some say with Lotharius) to the quarrel, but whether
to end it, or foment it, I cannot swear; but the report went then strong, that
the Pope assisted the Sons. By this time the Armies drew near one another in
Alsatia, and were ready to join Battle in a large Field, called by the Germans
(b) Lugenfeld [i. e. the Field of lies or deceit] between a Campus Mendacii.
Basel and Strasbourg. But here the Pope seemed to offer his assistance to a
reconcilement.

The Sons perceiving that the more they delayed, the stronger they would grow,
by the hourly coming over to them of some of the Emperors Army, desired Pope
Gregory to enter into a treaty with their Father; who accordingly goes to
Jews, whom he found armed amongst his Officers and Army. To be short, time is
thus delayed for several days, and then conditions granted by the Emperor,
with which Gregory returns to the Confederates. But this was the ruin of
Jews; for whilst this design was cunningly driven on, the Sons by their
Agitators, had so wrought with the Imperial Army, that the morning after
Gregory's return, they did not only run away by piecemeal, but upon a sign
given, by whole Troops, Regiments and Squadrons, they basely revolted, and
marched over to the Sons, leaving the poor Emperor only attendant with a few
of his faithful and loyal Servants: from which cheating and treacherous action
the place has ever since, to this day, been called, as aforesaid, Lugenfeld.

The Emperor seeing himself thus left in the lurch by his perfidious Army, and
so near his Enemies, that there was no hope of escaping, and if he could, knew
not whither to go; desires his Friends, then left with him, to depart and
shift for themselves, that so they might avoy'd the fury of their Rebellious
Enemies, not willing that they should suffer ruin for their fidelity and
honesty: and having thus persuaded them, with tears and sighs of both parties
they stole away. And being thus left only with his Wife, his young Son
Charles, and a few Servants, he sent to his Rebellious Sons, that he would
deliver himself into their hands; provided they would take care that no affront
or violence should be done to him, and those few with him: the Sons consent to
it, and command him to come to them; who forthwith mounting on Horseback, with
his few Friends, rode to their Camp, where the Empress was taken from him,
delivered to his Son Jews, and by him sent into Italy, and there thrust into a
Nunnery at Tortona, in the Dukedom of Milan; and the Emperor with the rest of
his Companions were also confined: And now they parted all amongst them, and
rewarded themselves; Pepin was restored to Aquitaine; Jews had Bavaria, with
some other Additions; and Lothaire possessed the Empire, and most of France; and
so the other Brothers departed to their Dominions.

Lothaire had his Father in his custody, whom he carried to Soissons, and there
thrust him into the Abbey of St. Medard, and his Son Charles into another
Monastery; and having appointed a Parliament (for the better color to his
Rebellion) to be held at Compeigne, at the time appointed they met, where the
condition of the Emperor was considered, a company of lying accusations
brought in against him, invented crimes falsely laid to his charge, and what
not? to make him odious to the people. Hebo, the Archbishop of Rheimes, and
other Prelates (the Ringleaders of the Rebellion) spoke and acted furiously
against him. In the mean time they sent to him, to see if he would quietly and
freely resign the Empire, which he absolutely refused to do, declaring he would
never part with his Authority; protesting against them as no Judges over him,
he being their Sovereign, and they only his Subjects.

But this put not the least stop to their villainy; on the contrary, rather
increasing their insolency: and so in a formal way (like our bloody High-Court
of Justice) proceeding against him; whom, though not heard, nor permitted to
approach or speak for himself, they adjudged not worthy to Rule; and by their
pretended authority, did there deprive him of all Right, Power, Jurisdiction,
or interest he had to the Diadem; and so adjudged him to a Monastical life,
never to meddle hereafter in any Business. Nor was this all, but, that the
Action might carry the greater show of Equity with it, they by some false
Friends had so cunningly dealt with the Emperor underhand, that for all his
former resolution, for peace-sake he was over-perswaded or threatened to confess
himself guilty, and that in the most public and vilest fashion, to procure to
themselves the greatest honor with the people, and most ignominy to himself.
And the manner was thus:

Jews was carried to Compeigne, and then in the great Church of the Blessed
Virgin, before the Parliament and People, he kneeled down upon an Hair-cloth,
and did publicly confess before them all, that he had done many things amiss,
whilst he swayed the Scepter: But this they thought not sufficient, and
therefore the Bishops commanded him to make a farther and fuller
acknowledgement of his crimes and offenses; to which purpose, they had
aforehand drawn up a large writing, of a great company of sins, abuses and
enormities, of all which he was there declared guilty. The forged Charge it
self being long, false, and imperfect, I shall refer you to An. 833.
Baronius, and the excellent French Antiquary, Hist. Franc. Scriptor. Tom. 2.
page 331, 332, 333.
Andre du Chesne, to whose learned Collections his industrious Son Francis,
five years after, added two other large Paris 1641.
Volumes.

This slanderous Paper being given into the Emperors hand, he was made to read
it before them with a loud voice, and with trickling tears, to acknowledge
himself guilty of all those untruths; which done, the Prelates subscribed their
names as Witnesses; and for a farther confirmation of it, 'twas then laid upon
the High Altar, as a full and complete Testimony against Jews. Yet did not all
this satisfy, for as yet the Emperor had not been dispossessed of his Imperial
Badges; and so to finish their malice, first, they make him take off his Sword
and Belt, both which were laid also upon the Altar; then the Bishops pull off
his other Royal Robes, instead of which, first they put on him an Hair-shirt,
then the other Weeds belonging to a Monk; so Mass being ended, the people are
dismissed, and poor Jews thrust into a Monastery, whence the Parliament being
dissolved, Lotharius leads him in that pitiful habit and condition to Aken (or
Aix) in Germany.

Here have we seen a good, pious, and virtuous Emperor brought to the worst of
ignominies, by his own Rebellious Sons and Subjects; and now his unnatural
Child Lothaire ruled and swayed all according to his own pleasure, which
stirred up discontent in many, whilst the patience of the holy Jews, at the
long run, moved pity and compassion in others. But not to dwell on this
sorrowful subject too long: to be short, several consult seriously about the
business, resolve to be eased from their bondage, determine the restoration of
Jews; to which purpose after some consideration, some Grandees levy men, which
at last, increase to a considerable strength, and so send to Lotharius to have
his Father restored; who replyeth, That none can grieve more than he for the
hard dealings against his Father; but he being deposed by the Decree of the
Bishops, he cannot be restored without their consent; and desires the presence
of some of those Gentlemen to consult with him. In the mean time he had
departed from Germany, carrying his Father Prisoner with him to Paris, and
thence to S. Denis. But perceiving himself not able to cope with his Enemies,
who came too suddenly upon him, he withdrew into Burgondy, leaving his Father
behind him. In the mean time, those who intended the Restoration of the
Emperor, came to S. Denis, release Jews; to whom they offer their service,
and desire him to take upon him the Empire again. This he denies, unless he
were declared innocent, and restored by Bishops, because by them he had
formerly been deprived. Upon this some Bishops are got, who in the great Church
at S. Denis, declare the former sentence illegal, with their own hands take off
him his Monkish Attire, invest him with the Sovereign Purple, gird his Sword
and Belt to him again; and all this publicly before the people. And so we have
him Emperor once again.

But his Son Lotharius was far from submitting to, or acknowledging any
legality in this action; and so having got a considerable Army, he ruineth all
before him, making Vienne in Dauphine, and other places there, submit to him;
thence he returns into Burgondy, where he takes Chalons upon the great River
Soane, which he destroys, and he headeth the two loyal Noblemen, Gosselinus
[or Gotselin] and Sanila [or Samila] and to highten his cruelty and Rebellion,
takes the Lady Gerberg out of a Nunnery where she professed, made her be put into
a Wine-vessel, and so thrown into the River Soane, where she was drowned; and
^hence proceeded in his fury to other places in France. But the patient
Emperor sent to his Son Lothaire a pardon, and took him into his favor again;
the Son being the more willing to accept of it, because he now found that he
was not able to withstand his Father.

And now we might think again that all would be quiet, and after so many
pardonings and favors, they would let the good Emperor live in peace. But we
find quite contrary; for his Son Lotharius troubles him again in Italy: but
this being pacified, his youngest Son Jews raised forces and rebelled in
Germany; the news of which being brought to the good Emperor, so hugely
troubled and perplexed him, that it put him into a disease, which never left him
till his dying day, which followed not long after; all which Anno 840.
would be too tedious here to relate, the former action being satisfactory
enough to any man, of the heinousness of these unnatural Rebellions.

We have formerly hinted of Pope Gregory the Fourth, coming from Rome into
France, in the time of these late Rebellions; and how by his means, time was
protracted at Lugenfeldt, to the ruin of the Emperors Cause, and his
Dethronization: To which I shall add nothing, but only this by the by, that
some will not at all grant, that the Pope himself had any design against Jews,
but merely came upon a good intent to make peace amongst them: Against which
Objection I shall not trouble my self with a Reply, but only refer the Readers
to the Learned Collections of De rebus seculi I^ and X. page 68.
Henricus Boecherus, and the Lord Mist. Iuique page 157.
du Plessis, where they may find, by some instances, that it was the opinion
of the ancient Historians, and those who lived too about the same time, that
the Pope joined with the Sons in Rebellion against the Father. However it be,
it is confessed by all parties, that in France the Pope left a very ill name
behind him, for his too much (as they thought) compliance with the Sons.

The truth is, the Emperor might very well take some distaste against Rome,
for that noted sedition there; in which Theodore, chief Secretary to the Church
of Rome, and Leo the Nomenclator, had their Eyes pulled out, and Noses cut off,
and so slain in the Lateran it self; and no one crime objected against them,
but their affection to the Emperor: Of which action Pope Paschal the First was
accused by some; but he endeavored by his Agents to clear himself of this
crime to the Emperor: but this not satisfying, and seeing Jews farther
resolved to find out the business, he by his own Oath declared himself
guiltless; and yet at the same time so stout was Paschal, that he would not
permit those who had slain them to be punished, or to fall under any secular
Judge; and the reason of all this was, because they were people that belonged
to the Family of S. Peter. A pretty Maxim; yet were it worse, it would be
authentic enough in that household. And Jaques de Montholon [a false name, I
suppose, for I think the true Author was the great Plaidoye pour les Peers
Jesuits, res Jesuits, p. 403, etc.
French Jesuit Pierre Cotton] when in this case he makes it his design to make
an Apology for his Society, handles the Question so slightly, cunningly, and
with such Leger-de-main, shifting himself (according to his other Writings)
this way and that way, that every man may take him as he thinks fit, and so may
be of any side, either accusation or vindication. But this by the by.

It Is true, Pope Paschal did also declare those who were slain to be guilty of
death, and that they justly suffered; but this was so little satisfactory to
Jews, that he sent some again to Rome to examine and try the business: but the
death of the Pope, in the mean time, rendered that Journey useless. By this we
see that the Emperors yet kept up their Jurisdiction over Rome; nay, and the
Pope too, in relation to their Elections. For when Gregory the Fourth was Hon.
Boecl^rus, page 84.
chosen at Rome, he was not Consecrated, nor acknowledged as full Pope, till
the Emperor Jews his Ambassadors had been at Rome, and thoroughly examined the
Election, and informed the Emperor, who consenting, he was then Consecrated.
And V^^. Greg. IV.
Platina himself confesses somewhat to this purpose, viz. This Gregory was of
such modesty, that being chosen by the Clergy and people of Rome, he would not
enter into the Popedom, till he had been confirmed by the Emperors
Ambassadors, sent for that intent to Rome, and who diligently examined the
Election: And the reason why Jews did thus concern himself with the Popes
Chair, was, as the same Platina says, Ne jura Impe^i^ amitteret.
That he might not lose the Rights and Privileges of the Empire. And some
years after this, Leo the Fourth being chosen Pope, and Consecrated, without
acquainting the Emperor Lotharius with it, yet was this action winck'd at by
the Emperor, upon a reasonable and necessitating excuse, viz. the Saracens
raging up and down Italy, they could not conveniently send with the accustomed
Grandeur information to Lothaire; and by reason of such Pagan Enemies, the
delay of having an authentic Bishop was then dangerous. And their own Page
497. -- lls n' os^ent le Consacrer sans le Consentement de l'Empe^eur, qui s'en
estoit reserve la Connoissance, and qui d'ailleurs vengeoit severement le
mespris s'^l n'y estoit appelle. Parmi cela c'estoit comme chose impossi^le
d'envoyer verse luy, tout le pais estant convert de ces I^fidelles.
Coeffeteau does make this Apology, confessing that otherwise they durst not be
Consecrated without the Emperors approbation or confirmation.

To which we may add, that the people of Rome at these times, and by the Popes
order or consent, swore Allegiance to the Emperors. These things (with some
other Du Plessis, p. 154, 155.
reasons mentioned by others) well considered, may give a notable blow to that
which they call the Donation of Jews to the Popes [as for those of Pepin and
Charles the Great, they are talked of, but I have not seen them set down in set
words.] And the vast Falmen Brut^m. page 181, 182, 183.
disagreements in the Copies themselves, and yet all held authentic, may add
to its suspicion.

But as this is not exactly the intent of my design, no more is the History and
Assertion of Pope Joane, who is said to have flourished about this time. But to
be free, as for those who are resolved to deny the story and being of such a
Woman-Pope, they may strengthen their Faith by the reading of Annotat. in
Platin.
Onuphrius, De Romans Pont. lib. 3. cap. 24.
Bellarmine, An. 853.
Baronius, Fabula Joannae Papassae.
Floromundus de Raemond, and of late Familier Es^laircisment de la Question.
David Blondell, a French Protestant. As for those who are willing to believe
it, I shall refer them for more confirmation to Mist. of Iniq. p. 167.
du Plessis, Hist. Eccles. tom. 1. cap. 9. p. 616, 617.
Hottingerus, our learned Countryman Pope Joane, a Dialogue.
Mr. Alexander Cook, with the two Frenchmen, Joannae Papissa restituta.
Samuel Marisius, and Le Sieur Traite con^^e D. Blon^ell.
Congnard. As for my own judgment, I shall wrap it up without partiality or
passion in this, that I am so far from being satisfied with the reasons brought
against the being of such a woman Pope, that I may fancy those who assert a
Pope Joane, afford better Authority, Testimony, and Arguments, than those who
deny it: And as Cook in English has sufficiently answered Floromondus and the
rest, so does Marisius in Latin, and Congnard in French abundantly confute
David Blondel, though a man of great reading. But be it this way or that way,
it shall never trouble me; and so let every man think as he pleases, for so
they must and will: Nor do I positively determine any thing here my self. And
so much for our Pope or No-Pope Joane, a story that has drawn forth to open
Battalia, and siding, the greatest Pens in Europe; some to vindicate, others to
annihilate the sitting of such a Lady in the Porphyrie Chair, as Infallible
Head of the Romish Church: nor to this day will either party give ground or
yield, but still fight it out; and which is more, both singing Victoria, and
triumphing as Conquerours: and thus it has the happiness or misfortune to
fare, as some other Articles of the greatest consequence in Religion, never to
want Friends and Enemies

Thus have we seen the pious and victorious Emperor, Jews le Debonnaire,
miserably banded to and fro by his own unnatural Children and rebellious
Subjects, and by the consent of the chief of his Clergy [and those too, as
Historians observe, whom himself or his Great Father had raised and preferred
from the meanest condition to these chiefest places of Honor and Riches] used
with all manner of reproach, villainy, and ignominy; yet they farther observe,
that severe judgments fell upon the chief of them, who within Jo. de
Bussieres. Tom. 1. p. 368.
a year were taken away by a Plague or Pestilence from Heaven. And as for the
sons themselves [except Pepin, who dyed whilst his Father lived] after the
decease of the Emperor Jews, we may find them all together by the ears,
prosecuting one another with all manner of violence and fury.

But we shall conclude this Tragical story of good Jews with his Epitaph, as
it is in the Monastery of St. Arnulf at Metz in Lorraine, which is according to
the riming fashion of those times; by which we may judge the height of their
Wit and Poetry: for it is to be supposed that such a great Emperor had none of
the worst Poets of those days to celebrate his fame and memory thus upon his
Tomb [and yet we have had many worse made since upon other Emperors and Kings.]

Imperii fulmen, Francorum nobile culmen,
Erutus a seclo conditur hoc tumulo.
Rex Lodowicus pietatis tantus amicus,
Quod Pius a Populo dicitur and Tumulo.
Heldegard sobiles Karoli Magni pia proles,
In Pacis metas colligit hunc pietas
Rumelicum villam, quicquidve refertur ad illam,
Arnulfo sancto contulit, huicque loco.
Stirps a quo Procerum, Regumque vel Imperatorum,
Quorum muneribus sistitur ille locus.
After this Jews succeeded in the Empire his Son Lothaire, who at last
willingly resigned [making himself a Monk] to his Son Jews the Second; of whom
I shall say nothing, but that in his time the Popes began by degrees to neglect
to have their Elections confirmed by the Emperors, whom by little and little
they began to trample upon; the greatest Monarchs being now, I know not how,
fob'd into a servile reverence of those, whose Predecessors had formerly been
their Inferiors, of which this Jews the Second may serve for an Example.

Nicholas the First being chosen and Consecrated, this Emperor being then at
Rome; one time the Pope in great State attended Anastas. vit. Nichol. I.
Platina.
with all the chief of the City, went to give Jews the Second a visit; who
hearing of it, resolved to meet his Holiness; and being met, the Emperor
alights from his Horse* and on foot with great humility like a Footboy led the
Popes Horse by the Bridle, and at his departure did the same; though certainly
it might have been commendable in Nicholas, not to have permitted so ignoble an
action, if not manners to have descended too, and gone a foot with the
Emperor: but with the Proverb, When Humility vamps on foot, Pride may ride on
cock-horse.

Sect. 3. The Murder of Michael, Emperor of Constantinople: with Pope Adrian
the Second his opinion of the Murderer.
BUt as this Chapter begins with blood, so let it end: And first, we have about
this time Michael [one whose life and rule I shall not commend] Emperor of
Constantinople, murdered in his Chamber by Basilius, one whom Michael had
raised from the basest condition, to the highest preferment; from a common
Horse-courser, to the greatest Authority; and had declared him the next
Emperor, as now he made himself by the Murder of his Master and Sovereign.
But Photius, Patriarch of Constantinople [made so by Michael, Ignatius being
turned out] denied to give him the Sacrament, as guilty of such an abominable
crime; and yet they declare this Basilius to be Basilius vero pius Orthodoxus.
Coquaeus Antimorn. tom. 1. page 455.
Pious and Orthodox, which we may English, a good Roman Catholic. And the
truth is, no sooner was the murder done, but Pope Adrian the Second
congratulates him by his Apud B^n. Council. General.
Letters, calling of Michael a Tyrant; but as for Basilius, thus he salutes
him: Thou art in our time as another peaceful Solomon, who have hearkened to the
words of God thy father, and have not forsaken the Law of thy Mother; that is,
as they say, the Church. Which words put me in mind of Richard Baxter [that
motly of Presbytery] who called his friend and namesake Dick Cromwell, the
wise Solomon, and son of a valiant David.

Basilius, and his friend Adrian the Second, agree to have a Council at
Constantinople, in which Photius is turned out and cursed, and Ignatius
restored: and here things were so carried, that the Pope by the Power of
Basilius had what he could desire. Can. 3. aequo honor cum libro sanctorum
Evangeliorum.
Images [which the former Emperors of the East always withstood] are now
declared to be held in equal honor with the Gospel, or Word of God. Can. 21.
That the Church of Rome is above other Patriarchships; that none might speak
or write against the Pope under pain of Anathema. That Can. 14.
Bishops should not go forth to meet Princes, and if chance to meet, not to
alight from their Mules or Horses, or kneel before them upon the score of
reverence. That Bishops may be equal to Kings or Emperors. That these Can. 22.
secular Monarchs should not interest themselves in the promotion or election
of Bishops: Nor is it fitting that they should be present in their Can. 17.
Synods, unless they be General Councils. And thus Basilius and Pope Adrian
gratify one another. And this they call the An. 869.
Eighth General Council, though the Greeks since that will scarce acknowledge
it so, but rather that held (some hundred years since this) at An. 1435.
Florence.

Other Histories might here be enlarged upon, which happened about these times,
as that of Donald the Fifth, King of Scotland, one vicious enough, who was
close imprisoned by his own Subjects; which so troubled him, that (as most
Writers confess) he became his own Executioner, and An. 859.
killed himself. And here I might speak also of Ethus, King of the same Nation,
who was also put in prison by his Subjects, and within three days An. 875.
dyed of grief. This Ethus is surnamed the Swift or Light-foot; for that, they
say, he could run as fast as a Buck or Hare.

Sect. 4. Several Insolences and Murders committed by the Venetians against
some of their Dukes, about this time.
ANd from these might I turn to a people held in those times more Petr. Marcel.
de vit. Princip. Venet. Tho. de Fougasses. Ja. Howel Hist. of Venice. Will.
Thomas Hist. of Italy.
civilized, and whose Government and Prudence has been held, not only the
wonder of the World, but by some the Bulwark of Christendom, viz. the
Venetians, of whom I might at large relate; they being weary of their popular
Government, declared themselves a Bastard Monarchy, by their An. 697.
Ducal: And here I might tell how they slew their third Duke An. 737.
Orso Hypato, and so changed their Government again to an annual Master or
Consulship: the first being Dominico Leone. 2. Felix Cornicula, or Cornacchino.
3. Deodato, Son to the former Orso. 4. Juliano Ypato or Copario. And the fifth
and last Zianus Fabritius, or Giovanni Fabritiaco, whose eyes the people put
out, and so turned him out of his Office, and agreed to be governed by Dukes
again; An. 742.
electing to that purpose the forenamed Deodato, Son to their former Duke
Orso; and having ruled thirteen years, they put out his An. 755.
eyes too. Then was Galla the Fifth Duke, whose eyes they also An. 756.
put out. After him they appointed to be Duke Dominico Monegario, or
Menicaccio, whose eyes they also An. 764.
put out: After succeeded Mauritio; then his Son Giovanni, whom they An. 804.
banished: To him succeeded Obelerio, whom the people An. 809.
cut in pieces, drew his guts about the streets, and slew his Wife of the
Bloud-royal of France. The next Duke was Angelo Partitiato; then Justinian;
then his Brother Giovanni Partitiatio, who going to prayers to St. Peter's
Church, was seized upon, disrobed, and his beard and head being shaven, was An.
836.
thrust into a Monastery in Grada. And after him was elected Duke Pietro
Tradenico, or Gradenico, who was An. 864.
murdered as he came from St. Zacharies Church. And so for this time I take my
leave of the City Venice.

Chap. VI.
1. The deposing of the Emperor Charles the Third, surnamed the Gross.

2. The jumbling of Emperors, by the obstinacy of the Pope; all which are
made more plain by an exact Chronology.

3. The hurly-burly amongst the Popes themselves, whereby their personal
Succession is shaken.

Sect. 1. The deposing of the Emperor Charles the Third, surnamed the Gross.
NOw began the Popes Authority to increase to a wonder; and every man thought
himself cock-sure, if he had but that Bishop of his party, who now in all
Countries, and over the greatest Monarchs, held himself an Infallible Judge;
and if not submitted to, had the strength of his Coercive Power, and the
terrible virtue of his Censures and Paper-thunder-bolts, vapor'd and prattl'd
up by his Hirelings, to affright an ignorant and poor deluded people.

And to make this his Prerogative more formidable, and so to gain an easier
passage, and firmer settlement into peoples belief; their Priests daily made
use of pretty stories of Gods Miracles and Judgments [imitated by our late
Puritans and Phanaticks] sometimes in Purgatory, and sometimes God knows where:
and this staple-cheat of reverence and aw was had up on every occasion. Are
Images to be worshipped? then what strange Go^onus sec. 7, 8. Dauroult. c. 3.
Tit. 67.
stories have they against those who reject them! Is the Roman Church to be
Supreme? then they have pretty Dauroult. c. 4. Tit. 17.
Tales to confirm it. Must not Kings and Emperors meddle with Church Affairs?
they will tell you strange Id. ib. Tit. 18
wonders to prove it. And if any man question the Popes going to Heaven, they
will assure you how Pope Id. cap. 8. Tit. 22. 3.
Pius the Second flew up thither, not only clothed in white, but with his
triple Crown on his head too: and with suchlike fopperies as used the ancient
Monks and Friars to stuff their Preachments, to the terrifying of old women,
and seducement of the wiser. And well might those ignorant times give credit to
such fancies, when of late days the chief of their Writers, such as Baronius,
Nieremburgius, Gononus, Dauroultius, Waddingus, Surius, etc. fill up their
voluminous Pages with such lying trifles.

And that which made the way more easy for the Popes now to rise to their
greatness, and overtop all secular jurisdiction, was the gross ignorance of
the times of which we now speak; insomuch, that the Ninth Age is ignominiously
branded by all parties, for the unhappy and ignorant Century, in which we can
scarce find any thoughts of good Literature, learning being in a manner quite
forgot. Thus staggered the Temporal Jurisdiction; the greatest Monarchs
themselves, either by easiness, or bad counselors, neglecting their own
Authority; and sometimes led by a zealous fear, other times by policy, or
interest, were willing to think, and easily persuaded, that the Pope had a
greater power than St. Peter ever exercised, or any of his ancienter and
honester Predecessors ever thought they had, in relation to a Coercive
Authority over Temporal Princes. And what they have once got or made, the
people believe [right or wrong:] for the first they will never part with; and
the second, they will make an Article of Faith.

And the truth of this may be testified by approved History. The Emperor Jews
the Second (of whom we formerly hinted) dying without Sons, a dispute arose
about the Succession: but Charles the Bald, King of France, obtained it of Pope
John the Ninth, as some call him, and that, as some say, according to the
confession of their Vite di gl* Imperadori, fol. 326. b.
Mexia, by gifts and Bribery: But after this, Charles le Chaune being An. 877.
poy soned at Mantoa, by his Physician Zedechias a Jew, the canvas began again.

Pope John was resolved for Jews the Third, King of France; but many of the
Italians were for Charles the Fat of Germany: and in this resolution both
parties were so stubborn, that the chief of the Romans took Arms, seized upon
the Pope, and imprisoned him; from whence he getting free, fled into France,
where he bestowed the An. 878.
Empire upon Jews the Third, the Balbus, le Begue.
Stammerer or Stutterer. But this humor lasts not long; for a little after,
the Pope being assisted by Charles against the Moors, then invading Italy,
disanull'd the Coronation of the said Jews the Third, and declared and Crowned
for An. 880.
Emperor this Charles, surnamed the Gross or Fat. Though I wonder what honest
man gave the Pope this power or right of disposing Kingdoms. But as the Proverb
says of Dogs, we may justly affirm, that whilst two strive for a Temporal
Title, the Pope is sure to gain, if not the Thing, yet the esteem or honor to
dispose of it, a foolish Zeal or Interest being the conveyers.

Yet was the end of this Charles the Fat deplorable enough; for having been
Emperor eight years, and by reason of his excessive fatness, growing very dull
and lazy, he was An. 887.
forsaken by all his Subjects; who having cunningly ordered their plots,
elected into the Government Arnulph his Nephew, bastard to Carloman, Son to
Jews the Second. Thus was Charles the Gross, one of the greatest sway then in
the world, being Emperor of Germany, King of France, and other Territories,
suddenly thrown down from his Glory: and though a man Nic. Serartus, Hist.
Mogunt. l. 4. p. 664, 665.
noted in History for his fortitude, piety, and liberality; yet thus in a
moment was he deposed, neglected of all men, insomuch, that within three days
he had not one to assist him, or take care of him: he that had commanded so
many Dominions and Armies, has not a boy to wait upon him; and he that had fed
so many, had now scarce a bit of bread to put in his mouth, only what Bishop
Lintbert of Mentz, through mere charity and pity did sometimes afford him; and,
some say, that after Arnulph, upon his Supplication and Petition, granted him a
little allowance. And thus being deposed at a Convention at Fribur near Mentz
in Germany, he went into a poor Village in Swaben, Grimston Imp. Hist. p 4^4.
where, somesay, he lived in great want and misery, and so poorly dyed.

It Is not unworthy the observation, that this Charles the Gross was the first
that dated his Letters and Patents with the year of He^r. Bo^^ler. page 189.
Christ, which has since been used by Christians: Whereas, the Eastern
Princes, even until the Council of Basil, as Continuat. of Sir W. Ral. p. 138.
Rosse says, used no other Computation in their Subscrip^i^ns, but that of the
world, according to Eusebius his account, which, as some think, is erroneous
enough; yet two to one, that amongst such variety and learned Chronologers, we
shall find never a Computation true from the Worlds Original.

And thus much for the unfortunate Charles the Gross, of whom they tell a
strange story of a Vision he had, by which he saw many Will. Malmesbur. de gest.
Reg. Angl. l. 1. c. 2.
Princes and Bishops tormented in Hell or Purgatory, for their factious
humors, and fomenting of wars; of which I shall oblige no man to credit any
more but this, that as the Dream might be true, so the punishment there
declared might possibly be a reward for such bloud-zealous Instruments.

Sect. 2. The jumbling of Emperors, by the obstinacy of the Pope; all which
are made more plain by an exact Chronology.
THe deposing and death of Charles the Fat being known, the Empire fell out
into great divisions; for the Italians had formerly began to grumble, that the
Emperors, for so long time, had not been elected within their Country,
affirming Italy to be the true Seat of the Empire: On the contrary, the Germans
stood as stiff for their soil, declaring that by Charles the Great, the Empire
was translated thither, and there it must remain; and so accordingly they choose
Arnolph for Emperonr, and acknowledge none other. In the mean time, the Popes
(now also divided into Factions) and Italians crown other men for Emperors;
and so for almost LXXX years did each Nation live under their respective
Emperors or Kings. And to this day, so resolved are most of the Writers of both
Countries, that the Germans acknowledge none for Emperors, but who were chosen
in their Country; whom, on the other side, the Italians reject as only
inferior persons, and write only those to be Caesar's, who were elected on
their side the Alps. And herein, Baronius is very zealous for his Popes and
Country (viz. Italy) dashing out all along those of the German Elections; for
which doing, he gives you this thundering reason, Eo quod nefas esset
Imperatoris nomen assumere, nisi illud esset ab Apostolica sede collatum.
Baron. an. 887. 3.
Because one cannot be truly Emperor, unless the Pope confer it upon him.

But the better to understand this jumbling of Emperors, take this following
Chronology, in which I shall time the affairs according to Baronius, Panvinius,
or other their chiefest Historians.

CHARLES the GROSS deposed.
Germany. A. D. A. D. Italy. ARnolph, Son to Carloman, Son to Jews the Second,
was chosen Emperor of Germany at Tribur, upon the deposing of Charles le
Gross. 887 888 BErengarius, Duke of Friuli, and Guido Duke of Spoleto, upon
the voyding of Charles the Fat, called themselves Kings of Italy, which by
their factions was miserably divided, making fierce Wars against each other.
But Guido was more strong, being countenanced by the Pope Sergius; yet
Berengarius counterfeited to Arm for Arnolfus. In Italy at this time was a
great Faction about the Popedom; some stood for Formosus, others were as fierce
for one Sergius: but by this means Rome it self was Ruled by force, the friends
of Sergius being there more powerful. Formosus to get himself eased of these
troubles and enemies, sends privately to Arnulfe, and invites him to his
assistance. 892 Guido or Wido, Duke of Spoleto, in Rome is crowned Emperor by
Pope Formosus: for which he confirmed those Donations, pretended to have been
formerly given to Rome. Arnulphus having raised a potent Army, marches into
Italy, and at last gets before Rome it self; which he summoned to yield, but
they refuse: upon this lays siege to it, and several times attempted to take
it, but to no purpose, being still beaten off: At last he became Master of it
by an unexpected accident, which was thus: 893 Lambert, Son to Guido, (his
Father yet living) was also declared Emperor by the same Pope. An. 904.
But Baronius, though he does confess this, yet will not let him begin his
Empire, till after the death of Jews the Fourth, Son to Boson, viz. An. 904.
But upon what account he does this, I know not. But Vid. Jo. Gualt. Chron.
Chronicorum, tom. 2. page 163.
Onuphrius makes him the sole Emperor after the death of his Father Guido,
viz. 894. But in another De Regn. Ital. An. 896.
place he will not let him be Emperor till 896, and then Crowned by Pope
Stephanus. A Lepusculus. Car. Sigon. de Regno Italiae, an. 896.
Leveret or young Hare being one time got near the Army, and affrighted with
the noise of Soldiers, ran toward the City; 894 Guido or Wido dies in Italy.
a party of the Soldiers in a frolic ran after her: the Roman Watch seeing
them run so siercely toward the City, and not knowing the cause, thought they
came to assault the City, and ran away. The Germans seeing this opportunity,
made up to the Walls, which some of them presently s^al'd, whilst other with a
Ram battered down the Gate: And thus they entered the U^bs L^onina, so called
by Leo the Fourth, who compassed it about with a Wall, that it might not lie
open to all Invasions, An. 848. (...) vit. L^onis the Fourth.
Vatican, and so took the City: Sergius fled, but all his partakers, who
opposed Arnulfus, were slain without mercy. Arnulphus being conqueror, had
himself Crowned Emperor with a great deal of pomp in St. Peter's Church, by
Pope Formosus; and the Romans take this Oath of Allegiance to him. 896 899 De
Regno Italiae.
Carolus Sigonius says, that in this year Lambert was anointed Emperor by
Pope Stephanus the Sixth, having declared the Coronation of Arnulph to be void
and null. Testor Deum omn^sque Devos, and per Divina Mysteria juro, me quoad
vivam, fore in potestate Imperatoris Arnulfis, neque Lamberti aut Matris ejus
rebus fauturum, neque ut dignitatem al^q^am ad^p^scantur, a^t hanc ^bem
servitute premant, operam daturam. Sigonius de Regno g^or^^. An. 896.
I profess before God and all the Saints, and swear by the holy Sacraments, to
be a true Subject to the Emperor Arnulf, so long as I live; and never to favor
the party of Lambert, or his Agestruda, Age^trud^s, or ^ngultrude.
Mother, or to assist them to the obtaining of any dignity, or to their
bringing this little City into Bondage. This done, Arnulf quits Rome, and Pope
Formosus dies; after whom Bonifacius the Sixth sits a few days; and then
Stephanus the Sixth, who was an Enemy to Formosus, and all his actions;
wherefore, they say, he presently calls Lambert to Rome, whom he creates
Emperor, and declares the Coronation of Arnulf by Formosus to be void.
Sigonius loco cit. 898 And for the better confirmation of Lambert in the
Empire, as about this time, we are told how Pope Coquaeus Antimorn. tom. 1.
page 477, 478.
John the Tenth, (or the Ninth) called a Synod of LXXIV Bishops (Lambert
himself being also there) at Ravenna. In which, amongst other things, Arnulph
is declared no Emperor, and Lambert held for the only Caesar: and if so, then
it must be either in 898, or the next year, as is probable from the sitting of
this Pope John, according to Onuphrius. About this time Arnulphus quitted this
world. Jews the Fourth, Son to the Emperor Arnulph (his Father being dead)
was solemnly elected by the Germans at Forchaim (in the Bishopric of Bamberg
in Frankenlandt) he was but very young, and so had Governors or Tutors
appointed for him; and he was Crowned at Aix by Hatto (the Tenth) Archbishop of
Mentz. 900 900 Jews the Fourth, Son to Boson, Earl or King of Province, was
called into Italy to oppose Berengarius (of whom formerly) and by Pope Benedict
the Fourth was declared Emperor. An. 904. Berengarius and he had some
fighting; but at last Berengarius cunningly (as some say) seized upon him at
Verona, plucked out his Eyes, of which he dyed presently after, viz. 904.
Historians do now and then mightily mistake these two Leweses one for another;
and sometimes by their grand errors about these other divided Emperors, the
History of these times are very obscure. Anno 904. 2.
Baronius tells us, that this Berengarius entered Rome with a great Army, and
commanded Pope John to Crown him Emperor, which accordingly was done; but no
sooner was he gone from Rome, but the Pope desires Lambert to come thither,
whom he publicly Crowned for Emperor: and having called a Synod at Rome, and
the business proposed, the Coronation of Berengarius was declared void, but
that of Lambert was pronounced legal, and so they held him for Emperor. By the
by, take one story of Equivocation: Adelbert or Albert, Earl of By some old
Authors Babenberg.
Bamberg in Franconia, rebelled against the Emperor; and in this broyl slew
Earl Conrade. Jews besieges him in Bamberg; but after many attempts, found
no probability of taking it, or him. Upon this, the aforesaid Hatto, Archbishop
of Mentz, persuades to policy, and undertakes the plot. Hatto goes to Albert
in his strong Castle of Bamberg, promises Serar. Hist. Mogunt. p. 671. Rosse
p. 140.
his pardon; however, to restore him safe again to his Castle. Albert goes out
with him toward Jews; but being gone no farther than the next Village
Theurstat, Hatto pretends the convenience of dining: Upon this, they return to
Bamberg, dine, and then go to ask pardon of Jews; whither being come, as a
Traitor he is condemned to death. Albert challenges Hatto of his promise, who
replyeth, That he had kept it, because he had once returned him safe and sound
to his Castle: And so Albert was beheaded; but how Hatto dyed Authors will not
agree. 904 Lambert, Son to Guido, though he had formerly been declared
Emperor, yet Baronius will not let him begin to Rule as Emperor till this
year, being just after the death of Jews the Fourth, Son to Boson. Jews the
Fourth of Germany dyed at Ratisbone 921 910 Lambert was slain by Hugo, Earl of
Milan, as he was hunting. (or Regenspurg) in December. Conrade, Duke of
Franconia, came thus to the Empire: After the death of Jews, the Nobily met,
and elected Otto or Otho, Duke of Saxony; but he being old, desired to be
excused, and so recommended this Conrade to their choice, and so was
accordingly Crowned at Aix by Hatto, Archbishop of Mentz. 912 This Conrade
(Otho dying a year after this Election) was very jealous of Henry Duke of
Saxony, Son to the said Otto, who got him the Empire; and upon this suspicion
endeavored his ruin several times, both privately and openly; for which some
censure him of ingratitude. But at the last he made amends for all, appointing
this Henry, his supposed Enemy, to succeed him in the Empire. 915 Berengarius
formerly mentioned, was now again declared and anointed for lawful Emperor, by
Pope John the Eleventh (or Tenth) and so 3.
Baronius before this year will not acknowledge him for a lawful Emperor; with
which exception I shall not trouble my self, but let him and others like it as
they please. Henry the first, surnamed Auceps, or the Fowler, for his love of
Vid. Boecler. p. 244.
Birding, Son to Otto Duke of Saxony, thus got the Empire: Conrade his enemy,
finding himself sick and near his end, throws by all his jealousy and
interest, assembled the Nobility together, 920 and made a long Speech to them
in commendation of this Henry, whom he desired them to accept for Emperor
after his death: they consented to it; only Everard, Brother to Conrade,
grieved a little that he was not the man: but Conrade persuaded him to
Patience. Then causing the Sword, Scepter, Robes, and the other Imperial
Ensigns to be brought him, he ordered his Brother Everard to carry them to
Henry; which he obeyed, and lived a faithful Subject to Henry. This Emperor
Henry used also an excellent piece of moderation. Arnold, Duke of Bavaria,
having by his many Rebellions much troubled the Empire, Henry raised a great
Army against him; and both parties being ready to join battle, Henry, though
half certain of a Conquest, desired to speak with him; and then to Arnold so
laid open the wickedness of Rebellion, with a promise of pardon and favor,
that Arnold presently submitted himself to him, and lived ever after a faithful
Subject to him. 923 Rodulph, Duke of Burgondy, was called into Italy against
Berengarius; he went thither with a great Army, and called himself King of
Italy: some call him Emperor. 924 Berengarius was overcome by Rodolf; and
being in the City of Verona, the only place then left him, he was murdered by
the treachery of one Flanbert, whom this Berengarius had preferred. An. 924. 1.
Baronius says, that Berengarius was deservedly killed. However, Flambert was
hanged for it by one Melo, friend to Berengarius. 926 Hugo, Earl of Arles in
Province, was called into Italy by the Nobility against Rodulph, and at Pavia
was saluted King of Italy. Upon which, Rodolph left Italy, and returned into
Burgondy, of which he is called King. Henry the Emperor perceiving himself
near death, he commended his Son Otho to their choice. 932 Arnold, Duke of
Bavaria, intended to make himself King of Italy; but Hugo in fight overcame
him, and so that design failed. Otto or Otho, surnamed the Great, the first of
that name, as they Otherwise the Second, if you reckon from julius Caesar: the
Eighth Roman Emperor being called Mar^us Silvius Otno.
commonly say, and so we shall take him: upon the death of his Father, Henry
was declared Emperor, and accordingly Crowned at Aken, or Aix, by Hiltibert or
Hildebert, (by Pedro Mexia, corruptly called Olderick:) a Narrative of all the
Ceremonies of that great solemnity, you may read in Mogunt. page 677, 678, and
vid. Boecler. p. 282, 283, 290, 291.
Nicholas Serarius. 936 Lotharius, Son to Hugo, was by his Father at Pavia
declared King of Italy, and so they both ruled together. Yet though thus he was
declared, acknowledged, and Crowned for Emperor in Germany; Anno 962. 1.
Baronius will not allow 937 Rodulph dyed in Burgondy. him that Title or
Honor, till above twenty years after, that he had got his Consecration from,
or by the Pope, viz. 962. Henry his Brother rebelled against him, by the bad
counsel of discontented Eberard.
Everard, and others; and though he was several times pardoned, yet he as often
rebelled; but, some say, that at last submitted himself, and acknowledged his
fault, and so obtained a full pardon. 946 Hugo dyed in Province. Luidolphus,
Eldest Son to Otto, rebelled also, which was the occasion of great mischief;
but at last, he also submitted: the Emperor being on hunting, Luidolph came to
him bareheaded, barefooted, kneeled before him, and with abundance of tears
confessing his fault, desired pardon; which moved Otto so much, that he
commanded him to arise; and with tears of joy forgave and restored him to all
his former honors, and so he continued obedient till his death, some few years
after. But the most implacable and dissembling enemy that the Emperor Otto
had, was Frederick, Archbishop of Mentz. 949 Lotharius, Son to Hugo, called
King of Italy, dyed in Italy. 950 Berengarius the Second was called King of
Italy. Albert or Adelbert, Son to Berengarius, was called King of Italy with
his Father. Of Otto's particular actions in Italy, at his several times being
there, I shall not here enlarge. Against these two the Emperor Otto marched
into Italy, and made them flee or submit. OTTO. 962 Otto, that had formerly
been called Emperor of Germany, was in this year Crowned and Consecrated
Emperor in St. Peter's Church at Rome, by Pope John the Twelfth: And thus he is
acknowledged Emperor by both parties. Baronius and others being so zealous,
that they will let the West want an Emperor for many years, if not consecrated
by his Holiness.

Thus we see the pretty whims and variations of Time and Pride, by the too much
easiness and credulity of the one side, with the cheat of a terrible zeal on
the other: that whereas formerly a Pope could not be without the Emperors
approbation, the case is altered, and forsooth, a Caesar cannot Rule without
the Popes Consecration. As for Berengarius and his Son, they were forced to
yield up their interest to An. 964.
Otho. Though the An. 965.
next year after, Adelbert or Albert the Son, with the assistance of the
Lombards, made some opposition against the Emperor, and for some three years
held up his head by War. In the mean time his Father Berengarius the Second (b)
dies in Germany, and was buried at c An. 966.
Bamberg. After which, Albert was overpowered by Otho, had his Authority and
Title taken from him, and not long after he An. 968.
dyed. And thus much in brief, for the better understanding the jumbling and
crossing of Emperors.

Sect. 3. The hurly-burly amongst the Popes themselves, whereby their personal
Succession is shaken.
ANd now methinks it will not be amiss (by the by) somewhat to take a view of
the tossings, tumblings, and hurly-burlies of the Popes, whilst these Politics
^^re acting, which may affor'd some farther light to the former story: Though I
shall not here undertake to give you an exact series of the Popes for this
time, not knowing where certainly to find or have it, the chief of their own
Authors not in this agreeing, and yet every day we hear the meanest of their
Tribe brag that they can show a continued and uninterrupted Succession; but
many talk of Archery, who never saw Robin Hoods Bow, and some may talk of
succession, who never undertook to compare their Historians or Chronologers.
And he who in this, and the timing of their Popes, shall make their chiefest
Authors agree, not only those who have diligently read over the ancient
Writers, but also with sweat and pains viewed and compared their Monuments and
Originals (as they call them) in the Vatican it self, shall do more than
Baronius, or any other that have done to this day.

But to the business in hand: We heard formerly how Pope John the Ninth (or
Eighth) was imprisoned by the Romans for favoring the Empire of Jews the
Third; and how after this, unconstrained, on his own head he took upon him the
Whim of nulling the Coronation of Jews, and crowning Charles the Gross for
Emperor. After this John, we have An. 882.
Martinus, or Marinus, some calling him one way, some another: if the first,
you may call him Martinus the Second; if the other, then Marinus the First, of
whom there is nothing observable, but that he obtained the Popedom by Malis
artibus pontisicatum adeptus. P^atina
indirect and unlawful means. After him we have An. 884.
Adrian the Third, who was of so Tanti animi fuit.
great a spirit, as Platina says, that he made a Law, that in creating of
Popes, the authority of the Emperor should not be expected or required: but we
shall not find this always observed. After him followed An. 885.
Stephanus the Fifth (or Sixth) who is said to make this Decree, Did. 10. c.
4. Co^f. page 575.
Whatsoever the Church of Rome does ordain or appoint, must be observed by all.

And now we come to the beginning of some notable garboyls and cross-grained
actions, upon the score of the Election of Formosus Pope after the death of
Stephanus; of which thus briefly: Formosus (before his Popedom) was Bishop of
Porto; from which Pope John the Ninth (or Eighth) had deposed him,
Excommunicated him, and degraded him to a mere Layman; who departed the City,
having sworn never to return, or to be Bishop again. After this, Pope Martin,
or Marin, absolves him from his Oath, and restores him to his dignities. After
the death of Stephanus, the people of Rome fell into Factions, one party
choosing this An. 891.
Formosus for Pope, the other elected one Sergius, of a powerful acquaintance,
related to the Marquess of Tuscane, then chief of the Tusulans: But Formosus
kept the Chair, though the great Guido or Wido also favored Sergius: Yet at
last, not able to withstand such opposition, he calls in to his assistance
Arnulph the German Emperor, who takes Rome, beats away Formosus his Enemies,
and is by him Crowned Emperor, of which formerly; and at last Formosus dies.

Upon the death of Formosus, An. 896.
Boniface the Sixth, Son to Adrian the Bishop, is chosen. Platina, Chron fol.
301.
da Bergamo, and some others, make him lawfully elected, and speak nothing
against him; but Page 576.
Coeffetean will have him to come in by Faction, and one that had been formerly
for his wickedness degraded by a Synod at Rome, of his Deaconship and
Priesthood: let them agree about it, and if they can, of the years of his
P^pedom.

After him we have Pope Stephanus the Sixth, Son of a Cardinal Priest; he was
of the Faction of Sergius, and so grand an Enemy to Pope Formosus (though they
say Formosus made him Bishop, and gave him the Sea of Anagni) that he did not
only abrogate and null all his Orders, rescind all that he had done; but,
which was most inhumane, he commanded (and that publicly in a Habito Concilio
Platin. Luitprand. l. 1. c. 8. S^gonius, de Regno Ital. l. 6.
Council) his body to be dig'd out of the grave, and his rotten carcass,
adorned with Priestly Garments, to be placed in the Popes Chair; and then
gravely examined him, why he durst take upon him to be Bishop of Rome? and this
formality of trial being finished, and the Corpse condemned, he had him disrobed
of his Vestments, and commanded his Coquae us, tom. 1. page 477.
three or Pl^tina.
two fingers, wherewith he used to bless the people, to be cut off, and thrown
into the River Tiber; and the rest of his body, as Il^^sto del corpo fece
sepillire nella sepoltura de secolari simplici and villi.
Baronius and Platina says, was buried amongst the simple and vilest Laymen.
Nor was this all, but he also degraded whom Formosus had Ordained, and himself
gave them new Orders: And which was most of all, he had all these actions
confirmed by a Synod at Rome, their own Tom. 1. p. 477.
Coquaeus does confess. And all this, because he thought Formosus no true Pope,
Pub^ice in Concilio Episcoparum decernit Formosum nunquam fuisse legitimum
Pontificem. Bellarm. de Pont. Romans l. 4. c. 12.
being elected against his former Oath. And this he confirmed by a Council or
Synod.

Addit. ad Platin
Onuphrius, at the inhumanity of this action, seems so much troubled, that he
will not take it for any thing, but to be a mere fable and lie: but in this
case one Swallow makes no Summer, especially when Platina, Coquaeus,
Bellarmine, Baronius and the whole body of their Historians, both before and
after Onuphrius and Platina, tells us, that in his time Pius the Second being
dead, by the Conclave was elected for Pope An: 1464.
Pietro Barbo, a Venetian, who being a comely and proper person, intended to
take upon him the name of Formosus; but some Cardinals well versed in History,
persuaded him from it, by setting this Formosus, as a bad man, before him; upon
which he called himself Paul the Second. Nor need we trouble our selves any
farther, for the proof of this sacrilegious story against Onuphrius; their
French Champion, Il n'est donc point besoin d'amasser les Tesmoignages des
Autheurs, pour exaggere l'enormite de cette action, puisque nous avouons
ingenuement que c'a este un horrible Sacrilege, digne d'estre brusle du feu du
Ciel. Et encor qu' Onuphre remitte en doubt cette Histoire, elle est
neantmoins receue par la Commune voix de tous les Escrivains. Coeffet Response
au Mornay, page 576.
Nicholas Coeffeteau, of his own accord quitting of us from this labor.

As for Pope Stephanus, they say he was at last imprisoned by his Baron.
Coeffet.
Enemies, and there strangled; yet some only say, in the common phrase, he
dyed. To him succeeded An. 897.
Romanus, being chosen by a prevailing Faction of the Romans (as Page 477.
Coquaeus says) against Albert, Marquess of Tuscany: this obliged Romanus, as
an Enemy to Sergius and his party, to favor Formosus, whom in a Synod he
vindicated, condemning all that Stephanus had done against him; so did his
Successor An. 898.
Theodorus the Second. After him there was great strivings to have the former
Sergius settled in the Popedom; but the contrary party carried it, who elected
John the Tenth (or Ninth:) his interest also lay for Formosus, whose actions he
presently Platina.
began to vindicate; but in this a great number of Romans opposing him, the
Seditions and Tumults rose to such an hight, that both parties had like to have
gone together by the Ears, and fought it out: but to carry his business more
clearly, John leaves Rome, goes to Ravenna, where he gets LXXIV Bishops
together, with Sigonius, an. 898.
whom he condemns the proceedings of Stephanus against Formosus, and declared
as sacrilegious those who had taken his body out of Coef p. 577.
its Grave, and cut off his Fingers; and yet at the same time called Stephanus,
a Pope of Id. p. 582. St^phanum p^ae recordationis. Baron. an. 904. 4.
holy and blessed memory. And something he also did here in Temporals,
according as his interest led him; for though he loved one, and hated the other
^ope never so much, yet self ends persuaded him to reject and approve at his
own liking; for here he nulled the Coronation of Arnulph for Emperor as
illegal, though 'twas done by his Friend Formosus; and on the contrary,
received and declared as authentic that of Lamberts, though crowned by his Foe
Stephanus: the truth is, he loved not the German greatness to have too much
countenance near him, for which cause he desired L^^mbert to be present at this
Synod, for a farther confirmation of his honor. And having now a King or
Emperor according to his hearts wish, the better to confirm the Popedom to his
own associates or party, he established by Decree, or renewed the ancient Laws,
viz. Coef. page 577.
That from that time forward, the Popes should not be Consecrated, but in the
presence of the Ambassadors, or Deputies of the Emperor: Thus was Adrian the
Th^d his Constitution (contrary to this) nulled. And so much for this John, who
is branded by Platina, as a Renewer or Reviver of the former broyls and
seditions, which were almost neglected or forgot.

After John succeeds Benedict the Fourth, elected by the Tusculan interest, and
Consecrated according to Contra Legem, sine author^tate Re^ia Sigon. anno 899.
Sigonius against the Law, wanting the Royal or Imperial Authority Next to him
we have Leo the Fourth, neither humane nor divine Law being then observed; and
he was one neither wise nor fit for affairs, as the same Sigon. an. 904.
Historian observes. Christopher his Chaplain, taking opportunity by Leo's
weakness, assisted with other his Companions, seized upon and imprisoned him,
and settled himself in the Popedom: but ungrateful Christopher remained not long
in this glory.

For An. 906.
Sergius the Third, who had formerly twice attempted Christopher, shut him up
in a Monastery, and after into close imprisonment, where he miserably dyed.

This Sergius the Third again stirs up the dispute about Formosus, and was so
zealous an Enemy against him, that he not only thwarted all that had been done
in vindication of Formosus by other Popes, by his nulling and abrogating all
that Formosus had decreed or done, having all those re-ordained, who had
formerly received Orders of Formosus: but not content with this, he had his
body Platinada B^rgamo, fol. 311. Genebrard, page 811. Carranza, page 7^6.
Naucler. Generat. 31. page 656. Volaterran. lib. 22. fol. 252. Ant. Coc.
Sabellic. Ennead. 9. lib 1. fol. 209 La Cronique Martinian^, fol. 103.
dig'd out of its Grave again, and beheaded as a Malefactor, and so thrown into
the River Tiber, as unworthy of Christian burial; and Acta Romans Pont. page 129.
Baleus says, that the rest of his Fingers left on his righthand, were now
also cut off.

But some I find of late to be very willing to have this inhumanity of Sergius
toward Formosus his Carcass, somewhat suspected or doubted, because they tell
us, that Historians might mistake, though in this we find them very positive.
However, if this will not be granted them, yet if any question the innocence
or Religion of Formosus, they have a Miracle at hand to help bravely at a
dead-lift, viz. that it chanced upon a time, that some Fishermen found this
body of Formosus, which they carried to St. Peter's Church, which whilst they
were burying, all the Images there, did reverence to the Carcass: and if this
be not good proof of his Infallibility, I know not where I can satisfy, or
better my self.

And here I find De Romans Pont. lib. 4. cap. 12.
Bellarmine, Page 579, 580. etc.
Coeffeteau, Tom 1. page 479.
Coquaeus, and some others in a peck of troubles how to quit these
contradictory Popes, assisted by their contradictory Councils or Synods, from
Fallibility, or being erroneous. But here they only beat about the Bush; and
let them toil never so much, they will scare quit these infaliible Popes from
two Fundamental Errors, not only of Fact, but of Judgment and Doctrine, viz.
the acknowledging, or not acknowledging of the true Pope; and the re-ordaining
those who had formerly, rightly, and legally received Orders, as if they had
been but mere Tanquam nihil ab illo accepissent. Bellarm. de Romans Pont. l. 4 c.
12.
Laymen, for all their former Ordination; since they themselves confess, that
an Episcopal Character is indelible, though he were never so wicked, otherwise
they would make the virtue of the Sacrament depend upon the sanctity or
wickedness of the Priest. Yet rather than grant Fallibility, their great Bell.
ib.
Cardinal would gladly insinuate into us, that Stephanus might either not know,
or not believe, that Martin had absolved Formosus from his Oath of never being
Bishop, and so might judge him not to be capable of the Popedom. Very pretty
indeed, that Stephinus an intimate acquaintance of Formosus, who gave him the
Bishopric of Anagni, should not know this as well as Bellarmine and others
after him. But I knew a merry old Gentleman, who in 1645, being asked by some
Troupers, whether he was for King or Parliament, ^unningly seemed so far from
understanding their meaning, that he said, he never heard that they were fallen
out, and desired to be in formed of their worships, who let him alone as a
madman or sool. And I think they would persuade us to believe Pope Stephanus
to have used the same Art or Policy.

But to proceed, passing by Anastasius the Third and Lando, we have in the next
place An. 916.
John the Eleventh (or Tenth) whose story take thus in short: Theodora,
Mother-in-law to Albert, Marquess of Tuscany, ruled all in Rome as she pleased;
and being one who chused her own recreation, she oast her affection upon this
Luitprand. lib. 2. cap. 13. Sigon. lib. 6.
John, when only a Priest, whom she got Lando to make Bishop of Bologne, and
then procured him the Archbishopric of Ravenna. Here the people had no good
wishes for him, yet Theodora had, not liking this distance (Ravenna being about
200 Miles from Rome) resolved to have her Friend in a corner nearer her; so
getting of him to Rome, after the death of Lando, she had him made Pope, Nihil
ex legibus autem est -- neque cleri suffragiis, sed propriis opibus. Sigon.
anno 913.
without observation of any law or voices of the Clergy, but bribery, and the
riches or power of her Son Albert. Thus have we seen his beginning, and now to
his exit.

This Theodora had two Daughters, Marozia and Theodora; the first she married
to Albert, Marquess of Tuscany (and so she became his Mother-in-law;) Albert
dying, Marozia was then married to Guido or Guy, Marquess of Tuscany: these two
resolved to rule all; but Pope John a little thwarting this design, they
plotted against him, and taking opportunity, seized upon the Lateran Palace,
slew Peter, Brother to John; and for the Pope himself, they cast him into
prison, and choked or smothered him with a Pillow or Cushion.

Platina says, that after him another John succeeded, who was thrust out
again; and the same is affirmed by the ancient Fol. 104. b.
Cronique Martiniane: but I find some others in this silent. After him we have
a Leo; then a Stephanus; then John the Twelfth, a bastard begotten by Pope
Sergius the Third and the aforesaid Maroza, as all their own Authors confess,
only Fol. 104. 2.
la Cronique Martiniane makes the former John (Paramour to Theodora, and who
succeeded Lando) to be bastard to Sergius; and it would be pretty if they
should both be true. This John was thrust out, and with his Mother Marozia
clapped up in Coquaeus, page 483.
Prison by Alberick, Son to her and Marquess Albert. Then comes Leo the
Seventh, after him Stephanus the Eighth (or Seventh) a German: Alberick, Son to
Marozia, liked not this Election; and the Romans fell upon the Pope, beat him
so grievously, that he was after that ashamed to appear in public, by reason
of his wounds and sores, and so dyed with grief. Coef. p. 589.
After him sits Martin, or Marin; then Agapetus, who was followed by John.

This John the Thirteenth (or Twelfth) (a Youth of Baron. an 955. 3, 4.
eighteen years old (if so much) when he was made Pope) was Son to the former
Alberick, Marquess of Tuscany, by whose power and greatness he obtained that
Chair: A man given over to all manner of wickedness, but especially women
pleased him most. Thus as Rome was ruled by women, so was all Italy troubled
with Berengarius; against these, Otto the First the German Emperor was called,
and was nobly received at Rome, he swearing to defend the honor of St. Peter,
and Po^e John never to assist Berengarius, or his Son Adelbert. But upon Otho's
departure, John forgets his Oath, leagu^s himself with Berengarius, and so
plots against the Emperor. Otho is troubled at this, but the Pope confesses
his fault, and pleads his youth; yet again, runs into the same error, and joins
with Adelbert. The Romans inform Otho of this, and desire his assistance; they
in the mean time rise up, and seize the Castle of St. Paul. The Pope and
Adelbert perceiving themselves not able to oppose, flee for it; and Otho is
received into the City, the people swearing Allegiance to him; and, which was
more, by express Oath add farther, that they would never choose or ordain any
Pope without the consent and election of the Emperor Otho and his Son.

Then was a Synod held of many Clergy, wherein the Pope was accused of many
crimes, as, That he had celebrated Mass, and never Communicated: That he gave
Orders to a Deacon in a Stable amongst Horses: That he had made Bishops for
money: That he had made one of ten years old Bishop of Todi: That he was guilty
of Sacrilege and Adultery: That he put out the eyes of Benedict his Confessor:
That he slew Cardinal John, after he had gelt him: That he used to drink an
health to the Devil: That playing at Dice, he used to call upon the name of
Jupiter, and Venus, and all the Devils to help him, etc. These crimes they sent
to him, and desired him to come and purge himself. This he refuses, and
expressly Excommunicates them all, if they proceed any farther against him: but
they slighted his threatenings; and as one not fit to be Pope, by an unanimous
consent, with the approbation of the Emperor they depose him.

This John, before he was Pope, was called Octavian; and not thinking that
Heathenish name fitting for St. Peter's Successor, was the first of the Popes
(as Annotat. in Platin.
Onuphrius says) that changed his name; but Platina says, that it was Sergius
the Second, by reason of his ugly name, being first called Bocca^di Porco.
Swines-face: But this the Learned Lib. 7. c. 16.
Dr. Brown places amongst his Vulgar errors.

John being thus thrust out, they elected for Pope Leo the Third, who with the
Emperor called another Synod, where amongst other things the Emperor is
declared Patricius, and that for the future no Pope shall be chosen, but by the
consent of Otho or his Successors; the Decree it self you may see at large in
Lib. 7.
Sigonius, and the Did. 63. c. In Synodo.
Canon Law.

The Emperor departing, John returns to Rome, where the women were active for
his cause; he calls another Synod, deposes Leo, and degrades those whom Leo
had Ordained, and was very fierce against the Imperialists, cutting off the
hand of one, the tongue, fingers and nose of another: but this triumph lasted
not long; for one night lying with another man's wife, he was slain, some say by
the Coef. page 596.
Devil, others by the Woman's Jo. Marius de schism. part 3. cap. 3.
Husband.

Upon this deposition of John, De schismate, lib. 3. cap. 9, 10, 11.
Theodorick a Niem, who lived two hundred years ago, and was Secretary to
several Popes, is very zealous in vindication of the Imperial Authority, and
endeavors at large to prove that Emperors have Authority to depose Popes.

John being dead, the Romans chose Benedict the Fifth, without the consent of
Otho, contrary to their Oaths; which so troubled the Emperor, that he marched
against the City, besieges it, and takes it; deposes Benedict, degradeth him
of his Priestly Orders, and resettles Leo. And here I find the Romanists in a
grand bussle to preserve their Succession, not being able to agree about the
lawful Pope. An. 963. 38.
Baronius, De visib. Monarch. l. 7. 687.
Sanderus, and some others, will have Benedict to be a true Pope. But Onuphrius
rejects him as a Annot. in Plat. vit. Benedict. V.
Schismatic, and in plain terms calls him an Epit. Pontif.
Antipope, and will acknowledge none but Leo the Eighth to be authentic; yet
him Baronius will not place amongst the legal Popes: and Cron. page 827.
Genebrard confesses; that their Historians in this cannot agree: Tom. 1. page
486.
Coquaeus for the honor of his Church would gladly reconcile all; yet I know
not when they will all pitch upon the Infallible Pontif.

Nor is it in this case alone, that they are nonplust to make good their
personal Succession, and point you out the true Vicar; for they are in this to
seek in several other persons, as their own De visib. Mon. l. 7. 692.
Sanderus is forced to confess.

But to return: Leo the Eighth being dead, the Romans sent to Otho to know his
advice about the next election; who sent to Rome the Bishops of Spire and
Cremona, in whose presence was elected John the Fourteenth (or Thirteenth) Son
of a Bishop; yet the tumultuous Romans imprisoned him also in the Castle St.
Angelo; upon which the Emperor returns to Rome, and severely punished the
Authors of these garboyls. After his death, their Authors are again at odds
about the Order of the next Vicars; with which I shall not trouble my self, but
follow Platina. After John comes Benedict the Sixth, who by the advice of
Cardinal Bonifacius, was also imprisoned in the Castle St. Angelo, and there
strangled or famished: Then follows Onuphrius in his Pontifices Maxim^ set
out by Jo. Gualter in his Cron. Cronicorum, does not name any such Pope.
Donus, or Do^^nus the Second; after him Boniface the Seventh, who occasioned
the murder of Benedict the Sixth [some will not reckon this Boniface amongst
the tru^ Popes.] But Benedict the Seventh thrusts this Boniface out of the
Church, who rich with the robbing of Churches, fled to Constantinople. Benedict
dying, John the Fifteenth (or Fourteenth) succeeds; which being known to
Boniface the Eighth, he returns, imprisons John, who is starved; and Boniface
once again is Pope; after whose death, John the Sixteenth (or Fifteenth) is
Pope: he was the Son of Leo a Priest, and, they say, begot in Coquaeus, page
488.
lawful Matrimony.

After him there is another John, who was forced to leave Rome for fear of
Crescentius, a powerful Citizen there. But the people being informed, that John
had desired the assistance of the Emperor Otho the Third, desired him to
return to Rome, and all should be quiet: John consents, and is honorably
received there; Crescentius, and the chief Authors of these troubles,
confessing their faults, Platina.
and kissing his Feet. Yet Crescentius grew haughty; Otho marches into Italy.
Pope John dying, the Emperor at Ravenna appointed to be Pope his Cousin Bruno,
a German, wh^ called himself Gregory the Fifth: And this L' Empereur au
contentement de tout le monde establit. en sa place son Nepueu Bruno, qui
depuis fut nomme Gregory Cinquiesme. Coef. page 601.
Coeffeteau confesses was done to the satisfaction and content of all men; and
this may be one Argument of the Imperial Power.

But yet we have not peace: for Otho the Third being no sooner returned, but
Crescentius, who was made Consul by the Romans, oppose the German interest; so
that Gregory was forced to flee into Germany for assistance. In the mean time,
the Romans chose for Pope, the Bishop of Placentia, who calls himself John the
Eighteenth. Upon news of this, Otho returns into Italy, takes Rome, and
besieges Crescentius in the Castle St. Angelo: at last Crescentius yields,
upon hope of pardon, and is slain; and as for this Pope John, he had his hands,
nose and ears cut off, his eyes plucked out; then set upon an Asses back with
his face toward the Tail, and so led about the City. And thus was Gregory the
Fifth restored.

Platina says, that this Pope Gregory the Fifth granted the Germans liberty of
choosing their own Emperors by the Electors; but Onuphrius affirms it to have
been done first by Gregory the Tenth. Another dispute arises about the Papal
Authority in this case; and De Translat. Imp.
Bellarmine is zealous for his Patrons: but for answer to him, I shall refer
you to (e) Hermannus Conringius, who can tell you of f De Imper. Germanici
Republica, p. 106, etc.
others.

We need not question the misery of the Romish Church; which as we have here
seen, has been governed for so many years, only with an high-hand. The Popes
themselves being given to all manner Baron. an 912. 5.
of corruption and wickedness, not he that was the best, but he who was the
strongest, sitting in the Infallible Chair; a thing that their own Authors do
much complain of, and declare their wicked stories with grief: insomuch, that
Hoc vero uno infaelix, quod per annos fete 150. Ponfices circiter 50 -- a
virtute majorum prorsus de fecerint, Apotactici Apostaticive potius quam
Apostoli^i, Cron. p. 807.
Genebrard himself does declare, that for almost an hundred and fifty years,
there ruled in Rome near fifty Popes, wicked people, being rather Apostates
than Apostolical. But yet he would gladly quit the Romans from the blame, all
which he throws upon German Emperors; but how deservedly, let any judge, the
Otto's being commended in story for their affection to the Roman See; nor did
they use to trouble Rome with their company, but when they were called thither
to quell the Tumults and Seditions. But this, by the way, may be enough to see
that Rome it self is as capable of Treason, Rebellions, Murders and Seditions,
as other places, by them made incapable of Salvation. But before I end this, I
must observe, that sometimes, as John the Eleventh (or Tenth) John the
Thirteenth (or Twelfth) to serve their turns, they will grant one to be a true
Coquae. page 482, 483.
Pope, though illegally elected; and at other times, for their own ends, will
deny one to be a true Pope, merely for some fault in his Election: nor can they
always agree, who was the true Pope; and yet the Succession of their Popes is
infallible.

CHAP. VII.
1. The deposing of Charles the Third le simple, King of France.

2. The Murder of Edmund, and Edward the Martyr, Kings of England.

3. The Murders of Malcolme, of Duffe, of Culene, of Kenneth the Third, Kings
of Scotland.

Sect. 1. The deposing of Charles the Third le simple, King of France.
BUt now leaving off the quarrels and seditions amongst the Popes themselves at
Rome, let us move a little Northwards, and see what Loyalty and Obedience we
can find toward Temporal Princes: and France in the first place offers it
self, where passing by some troubles, we behold An. 892.
Charles le simple in the Throne; a well meaning King, and Religious.

But against him Robert, brother to Eudes, and Major-domo, and Grandfather to
Hugh Capet, gets a party, and has himself Crowned King of Rheims by Merivee,
Archbishop of that City: Charles informed of this, marches against him; both
the Armies meet near Soissons, fight, in which Robert is slain, some say by
Charles himself, D^ Buss^eres, tom. 1. page 477.
who ran his Lance into his mouth, and through his tongue. However, though
Charles here remained victorious; yet by negligence, or too much fear or
confidence, he lost all; for instead of prosecuting his Victory, he desired
peace and assistance of O^ Heribert.
Hebert, Earl of ^ermandois (or St. Quentin) his enemy, and Cousin to Robert.

An. 923.
Heribert glad of this, desires Charles to come to St. Quentin, that they might
the better consult about his safety: Charles thinking all promises to be true,
consents, and freely goes thither. Herbert perceiving him now in his power,
seiseth upon him, and tells him that France must now consult for a wiser King;
so he is carried to the Castle of Thierry, thence to Soissons, where the
Parliament being Cha^^eau-Thierry, a Town in ^a Ha^te Campaign.
called, according to Heberts humor, the innocent King is deposed, and Rodulph
[by the Frencb called Raoul] Duke of Burgondy (of whom we have formerly heard
as King of Italy,) is declared and Crowned King of France by Seulfus,
Archbishop of Rheims; which Prelate was Jo. Chenu, Hist. Archiepisc. Gall. page
270.
poisoned after by Hebert.

As for poor Charles, sometimes he was favored by a little liberty; but at
last, he was clapped up close prisoner in Perone Castle in Picardy, where (having
thus, for the space of five years, been hurried from prison to prison) he An.
928.
dyed, being overwhelmed with grief, and the nastiness of his Goal.

But before I end this story, it may be the Reader will not take it amiss, if
we tell him what device and policy was used by Jews, Son to Charles the
simple, to make Hebert suffer by his own judgment, for his Treason against his
Sovereign.

Eguina the Third, Daughter to Edward, surnamed the Elder, King of England, and
Sister to Ethelstan, or Adelstan, King also of England, was married to this
Charles the Third, surnamed the simple, by whom she had Jews the Fourth. She
perceiving the misery of her Husband and King; to escape the same danger, with
her Son Jews, she takes her opportunity, and slips into England; where they
stay with her Brother Athelstan, till the people weary of Rebellion, and other
opportunities, settle him in the Throne of France; and from his thus living
beyond Seas here in England, his Countrymen called him Ultramarinus, or
Transmarmus.
D'oultremer.

Jews, surnamed D'oultremer, being thus restored, was resolved to be revenged
on Heribert, Count of St. Quentin, for the deposing and imprisonment of his
Father, Charles le simple: and having as he thought sufficiently secured
himself with his Nobility and People, he held a Parliament at Laon, composed of
his sure Friends; and thither, as to advise about the good of the Nation,
Hebert came also amongst the rest. In the mean time, King Jews had provided a
trusty fellow, to whom he gave a Letter written by himself, with express Orders
to the fellow, to put himself into an English Habit; and when the Assembly met,
to come in and bring the Letter, as if from the King of England.

Accordingly the fellow comes in, delivers the Letter, which was read
whisperingly to the King; and whilst the Secretary was thus reading it, the
King smiled: the Nobles at this thinking it to be some jesting business,
desired of his Majesty the reason: Well, quoth the King, now I perceive the
English are not so wise, as I took them to be; for my Cousin, the King of
England, writes to me, that in his Country, a laboring man inviting his
Landlord or Master to dinner at his house, caused him to be slain: and now, my
lords, he desires your advice, what punishment this fellow deserves, and what
he should undergo. Upon which, they with Hebert unanimously declared their
Opinions, that he should be hanged, that death being most ignominious.
Whereupon, the King turning to Heribert, said, And thou, O Hebert! art this
false servant, who by imprisonment murdered in the Castle of Perone thy Lord
and Master, King Charles my father; and so receive thy reward according to
thine own judgment. At this, the Kings Officers provided on purpose come in,
seize upon Hebert, carry him out to a Mountain close by, where he was hanged or
strangled: from which action, they say, the Hill is to this day called
Mont-Hebert.

Tom. 1. p. 693. 9, 10.
Dupleix will have Heribert to dye a natural death, and is very angry with de
Serres for asserting this story; though I can assure him that Serres was
neither the first nor only Author of this Passage; for before him De l'estar.
de France, l. 1. fol. 56.
du Haillan has it, and long before him again we have it told at large by De
gestis Franc. l. 5. fol. 40.
Robertus Gaguinus: but however it be, there is no stress of any business lies
upon it.

Sect. 2. The Murder of Edmund, and Edward the Martyr, Kings of England.
BUt now let us look a little nearer home, where we find Edmund, Brother to
Ethelstan, reigning in England, and commended for his good Government and Laws;
yet was he murdered, but Hollinshead. lib. c. 21. Speed, l. 7. c. 39. Jo.
Trevisa, l. 6. fol. 290.
how, Authors will not agree: some say, that being at his Manor of Puclekirks
in Glocestershire, seeing one of his Servants in danger at a quarrel, stepping
in to save his Servant, was himself An. 946.
slain. Others will have it, that at the same place keeping a Feast upon St.
Augustine (Archbishop of Canterbury) his day, and seeing one Leof (whom for his
misdemeanors he had formerly banished the land, and now returned without
license) sitting at Table near him, was so enraged to see such an Outlaw in his
presence, that he suddenly rose from the Table, fell upon Leof, took him by the
hair, and threw him to the ground: but the Villan having fast hold on the King,
pulled him down also; and then with his Knife ripped up the Kings belly, that his
bowels fell out, and there he dyed: As for the Outlaw, the Servants there fell
upon him; but before they could dispatch him, he slew and wounded diverse of
them. John Harding, who flourished above two hundred years ago, says it was
done at Canterbury: And thus relates the story according to the Poetry of those
times.

This King Edmond was slain by a Felon, Fol. 115.

Which of Malice and his false Treason,
That forfet had, and dampened was to dye,
For his forfet, and for his felony.
At Caunterbury, as the King him saw on a day,
For ire on him, he ran and sore him wound;
For which he stroke the King for ay,
So they both two, there in that stound,
Each of them, of his mortal wound:
Which to a Prince, accorded in no wise
To put himself in dread, where law may chastise.
After this Murder, we have another more execrable: Edgar, surnamed the
Peaceable being dead, his Eldest Son Edward, surnamed the Martyr, was An 975.
Crowned King at Kingston upon Thames, by St. Dunstan Archbishop of Canterbury;
of whom they tell so many pretty Miracles, to the great content and
strengthening of Children and old Women.

Of this Kings virtues, there need not much be said, because all Historians do
sound forth his commendations; and so passing by the grand Controversy about
this time, viz. whether Priests might have Wives; and the Monkish story, how
this dispute was decided by the speaking of a Crucifix in the Rood at
Winchester, and the falling down of the Floor of the Chamber at Calne in
Wiltshire, only St. Dunstan, forsooth, remained dapperly perking up. We will
come to the sad story of his Murder.

King Edgar had two Wives, 1. Elthelfled, her Son was Edward. 2. Elfrida, her
Son Ethelred.

Edward as Eldest, and of the first Wife (though some here make a But
Harpsfield is for him, page 188.
doubt) is King; Elfrida, his Mother-in-law, at this is troubled, wishing that
the Crown were set on her son Ethelred's head: but this she kept cunningly to
her self, nor had good King Edward any suspicion of her designs.

It chanced that King Edward hunting in the Island Purbeck in Dorsetshire,
either by chance or design was separated from his company; and perceiving
himself near Corfe-Castle, where his Mother-inlaw Elfrida, and her son Ethelred
then lived, to both which persons he bare a great affection; he resolved to go
see them, and accordingly rides up to the Gate. His Stepdame comes to him with
a cheerful countenance, seeming very glad of his visit and kindness, and
desired him to alight; but this he excused, pleading haste, and that he only
slipped from his company at that time, and then to his company again, just to see
her, and his Brother; and so desired a cup of Wine to drink to them, who might
be troubled by a long missing of him, they not knowing the occasion.

She perceiving that she could not bring her designs about within doors,
resolves to do it without: so she appointed one of her servants to stab him
there. To be short, Wine is brought, given him; and he no sooner had the cup at
his mouth, but the fellow struck him with a knife into the back. The King
perceiving himself sore wounded, set spurs to his Horse, thinking to gallop
away, for his preservation, to his more faithful Friends; but the wounds being
great, and he fainting through loss of blood, fell from his horse, one of his
feet being entangled in the Stirrup, by reason whereof his Horse dragged him up
and down through Woods and Lands: And thus was that good King Edward An. 979.
murdered, and was surnamed the Martyr; though Hist. Eccles. p. 188. in the
Margin.
Harpsfield, or somebody else for him, will not stand upon it, that he ought in
strictness to be called so, being not murdered for his Religion, but his
Kingdom.

After this murder, they go on, and tell a great many stories of him; as how
his Stepmother Elfritha (for so some call her) had his body dragged into a
little house hard by, and there covered over with straw for the present
necessity, that it might not be found; L. Surius, March. 18. Zach. Lipell.
Guil. Garet.
but a poor woman, who was born blind living there, by miracle had that night
her sight given her: Elfrida troubled at this, fearing that by this discovery
the body might be found, had it taken thence and thrown into the Marshes: but
this would not do neither; for a year after God revealed to some men that the
body was in those Waters; but the certain place could not be found out, till a
fiery Pillar was pleased to point them to it, whence it was carried and buried
at Warham, and having laid there some years uncorrupted, 'twas thence with
great solemnity translated to Shaftsbury, near the borders of Wiltshire.

And here might I tell the strange Miracles wrought by the virtue of this holy
Edward, of blind receiving sight, deaf hearing, the lame and sick their limbs
and health; but that I cannot oblige the Readers belief. As for the murdering
Elfrida, although, they say, that at first she was punished by Miracles, as
desiring to see the Tomb of her Son-in-law, the Horse on which he rode would by
no means carry her thither; and though she tried several, yet we find all
commanded by the same stubbornness, which making her more keen, she resolved to
go on foot; yet though her will was never so strong, they say, she could not
possibly do it. However, at last, we need not question Elfrida's Religion and
pardon, since to quit and expiate her from the guilt of this horrid murder,
she built two Nunneries, Ambresbury.
Almesbury in Wiltshire, and Warwell in Hampshire. An easy way of recompense
for rich people, to ease themselves of the most crying sins: And though I am
not obliged either to censure one, or vindicate the other; yet some may justly
fancy, that several of those ancient buildings being thus founded upon blood
and rapine, might as by a judgment call a destroying hand upon them. But far
be it from me to oppose Monuments of Charity, which without question may hugely
advance the glory of God upon Earth, and smooth the Founders way to Heaven: And
I could wish that those ancient Monuments of Piety (for without doubt many of
them were really so) nobly spread about by our Forefathers liberality, had
either continued as good Examples, or been better employed at their
Dissolutions. But this by the way.

Sect. 3. The Murders of Malcolme, of Duffe, of Culene, of Kenneth the Third,
Kings of Scotland.
ANd now let us cross the Tweed, and take notice of what obedience we find
there; and here we meet with Constantine the Third, King of Scotland, who being
troubled at the great An. 937.
Victory the English had over him, where most of his Nobility were slain,
withdrew himself from the rule of his Kingdom, and became a Canon in the Abbey
of St Andrews, where he liv^d some years, and then dyed. In the mean time,
Malcolme, formerly declared Heir apparent, had the Government allotted to him,
and upon the death of the other was An. 943.
King, and commended for a good one; of whose actions we shall say nothing, but
that being exact in the Execution of justice upon Offenders, procured to
himself some Enemies, who conspired against him, and taking their opportunity,
at Vlrande a Village in Murreyland An. 952.
murdered him.

After him succeeded Indulph, who in battle having beaten the Danes, through
mistake chanced amongst some of them, and was slain; and then was An. 962.
Duffe King of Scotland, who severely punished all Thieves and Vagabonds, and
made all people that had nothing to live on, to learn some Trade, that by their
rapine and villainies, they might not oppress the Commons and honest laborers.
This amongst the wicked got him a great many Enemies; and, which might seem
more strange, several of the Nobles also hated him, because thus they were kept
from their Tyranny and Oppression; many of their younger Sons having little to
live upon, but these villainies; and most of them grumbled that Gentlemen,
forsooth, should thus be hindered from rapine, and forced to get their livings
by honest Employments. But the chief murmuring was in Murreyland, who at last
fell from words to blows, and slew the Kings Officers.

And that which most imbolden'd them to these Rebellions, was their knowledge
of the Kings grievous sickness, whereby himself was disabled from prosecuting
them; nor indeed would his Physicians let him know of their insolences, lest
trouble and perplexity might hasten his end.

As for the Disease it self, I shall not determine any thing; but because the
story of it is somewhat strange and unusual to be equaled in Chronicles, take
it as I find it in Hector Boethius, Holinshed, and some other Historians, upon
whose credit let the truth of the story lie.

The Nobles of Murreyland being, as aforesaid, incensed against the good King,
employed Witches to bewitch the King to death. The King falls sick, and that
into such a languishing Disease, that his Physicians could not tell what to
make of it, so that all their Skill and Medicines was to small purpose. At
last, no man knows how, or by whom, a report and rumor went amongst the
people that the King was bewitched, and that by some of the Town called Forres
in Murrey: In which Town was a Castle, the Captain of which was one Donwald,
who had been faithful to the King amongst the Rebels.

Duffe informed of this flying rumor of Witches, sends some privately to
Donald to inquire out the business: It chanced that one of the Soldiers of the
Castle kept a young Wench of the Town as his Lemmon; which being Daughter to
one of the Witches, knew their actions, and in part discovered it to the
Soldier, who upon this inquiry told it to Donald; who sending for the Wench,
then in the Castle, made her by threats, and other means, confess all she knew:
whereupon, learning by her in what house these actions were done, he sent some
Soldiers forth about midnight, who breaking into the house, found the Witches
roasting by a gentle fire an Image of Wax, resembling the King, made, as they
thought, by the Devil; and by it a Woman sat reciting certain words of
Enchantment, basting the Image with a certain liquor.

The Soldiers upon this seized upon them, and with the Image led them to the
Castle; where, upon examination they confessed, that their design was to make
away the King: That the Nobles in Murreyland had hired them to do it: That as
the Image wasted, so would the King: That their canting words kept them from
sleeping, etc. Upon this, the standers by immediately broak the Image of the
King, and had the Witches burnt to death; and it is said, that at the same time,
the King was delivered from languor, and shortly restored to present health
again. But however the story be, no sooner was the King well again, but he
marched into Murrey against the Rebels, whom he forced to flee: as for them
whom he took, he had them hanged up, without respect of person or quality.

But if witchcraft fail in the Kings destruction, his own intimates under the
visage of friendship will bring it about. In this Rebellion Donwald or Donaeld
had some of his own Relations, for whom he begged his Majesty's pardon, but
'twas denied, and so they with the rest were executed; which moved a great
discontent in Donald, which boyld in him so much, that his Wife perceived him
troubled, nor would she let him alone till she understood the cause of his
displeasure: she added fuel to his malice, and so thrust him on to revenge,
that he was willing to make the King away; which, at last, by her evil
persuasions, he resolves on; which was easy enough for them to accomplish, the
King putting so great a confidence in Donald, that when he was in those parts,
he used to lie in the said Castle of Forres.

At last they laid the plot, and pitched upon the night; which coming, and the
King being in the Castle, they made all things ready. At the same night, the
King suspecting nothing, thanked all those who had assisted him against the
Rebels, and gave them honorable gifts; and amongst the rest Donald was one:
But for all this reward, he proceeds in his wicked design. And that night two
of his Chamberlains having got him to bed, left him there, and went to Donald
and his Wife, who had provided a noble Collation for them, where they plied
their cups so well, that being drunk, they were carried to rest.

Donald having thus made all secure, called four of his Servants, whom before
he had fee'd to this wickedness, who secretly enter the Kings Chamber, An. 966.
cut his throat, conveyed the body out of the Castle by a Postern-gate, threw
it upon an Horse provided for that purpose; but whither they carried it,
Authors do not agree.

The common opinion is, that they carried it two Miles from the Castle, where
being a little Brook, they got certain Laborers to turn the Course of it; then
dig a deep hole in the Channel, in which they buried the body, ramming it up so
closely with stones and gravel, that turning the water again into its right
course, nothing of digging was perceived: And this, they say, they did upon the
Vulgar opinion, lest the body being found, the Murderer might be discovered by
its bleeding at their presence. As for the Laborers whom they gat to turn the
water, no sooner was the work finished, but they slew them, lest they should
tell tales; and then the four Villains fled into Orkny.

But Buchanan rejects this story as improbable, but rather that they buried it
in some obscure place under a Bridge, which might be covered over with Turf, to
hinder the appearance of their fresh delvings. And Mr. Scet^^, Murray.
Cambden tells us the place was Kinloss, and that the body was found there; at
which time and place Flowers did miraculously spring up, whence at first it was
called I. e. The Kirk or Church of Flowers.
Kill-flos, but by corruption Kinloss or Killoss, where was formerly a famous
Monastery belonging to the Cistercians, founded by St. David King of Scotland.

As for Donald, to prevent suspicion, about the time of the Murder, he went
amongst those who kept the watch, as he had been careful of the Kings
preservation, and there he continued till morning; but when noise was raised
that the King was murdered, and his body not to be found (for they had taken
special care that no blood should be seen out of the Chamber; but his bed was
all bloody) he, as if amazed, and ignorant. of such a thing, ran suddenly to
the Chamber, where finding the Chamberlains he slew them, as guilty of that
heinous murder; and running up and down every place, as if to discover,
finding the Postern-gate open, he threw the fault upon the Chamberlains, whom
before he had slain, affirming them to have had the Keys of the Gates committed
to their keeping all that night: And the truth is, he made himself so strangely
busy in the discovery, that several began to mistrust him, though at that time
they durst not speak of it. At this horrid murder, their Authors tell us, that
for six Months after, neither Sun nor Moon appeared in that Kingdom; but they
had enough of strange tempests and thunders, which put the people out of their
little Wits.

After this horrid Murder, Culene was King, who made it his business to find
out and punish the Murderers of King Duffe, which within half a year he
accomplished, found and took up the body of the King; which, they say, was no
sooner done, but the Air cleared, and the Sun appeared gloriously again. The
body was by order buried in the little Amongst the Hebrides.
Western Island of Scotland, called Colmekill, or Columbkill, from the The
Irish say he was their Countryman
Scotch Apostle St. Columba, who sometimes lived there (some think it the same
with the Island Iona.) In which Island was a famous Abbey or Monastery, built
by King Fergus the Second, which for many years was the burying place of the
Kings of Scotland.

As for King Culene, he gave himself wholly over to sensuality and negligence,
which made the Nobles resolve to depose him; to which purpose they summoned a
Parliament at Scone (the place where the Scottish Kings were Crowned:) Culene
informed of this, and knowing himself not strong enough to oppose, resolves to
go thither also; but being on his journey, he was An. 971.
murdered at Meffen-Castle, by one Radard or Cadhard, Lord or Governor
thereof, whose Daughter the King had ravished.

Upon this Murder, Kenneth the Third is King at Scone, one hugely commended
for all manner of Kingly virtues; nor had he any thing to blemish that great
Reputation he had justly deserved and got, but one wicked crime, viz. the
poisoning of his Cousin Malcolme, Governor of Cumberland; which heinous fault,
though no man suspected him, yet his own Conscience accusing him, he confessed it
himself, and did really repent of that crime. But leaving this, let us see the
manner of his end.

Cruthnet, Son to Fenella (of whom hereafter) the Chief Governor of Merres,
having been the occasion of great troubles, fewds and murders, was at last with
his Companions taken, whom with the other chief Actors were executed by the
Kings command; the poorer sort, as a people ignorant and misled, were pardoned,
and let go to their respective habitations; which Justice and Mercy was much
commended in his Majesty.

It chanced that the King having been at Fordon, a Town in Mernes, to visit the
Relics of St. Palladius (a holy Grecian, who came into Scotland about the
year 431) which, they say, lay here in a little Church, to this day corruptly
called from him Padi^kirk, went for curiosity to see the Castle of Fettercarne;
then pleasantly seated in a Forest, well stored with wild Beasts, though now
no such pleasantness about it. The Lady of this Castle was the forenamed
Fenalla, or Finabella, as some call her, who received the King with a great
deal of seeming kindness and nobleness.

Yet she resolved upon his Murder, being incensed against the King, for
executing her Son Cruthnet; and what she intended, she brought to pass, but by
what means I cannot positively conclude. Some there are that tell a pretty
story of rare inventions and contrivances to entice the King to his own ruin;
as, that she knowing the King to delight much in buildings and rare
curiosities, had provided a place in the Castle richly hung with Tapestry and
rich Arras; and in it a noble brazen Image, holding in one of his hands a fair
golden Apple, set full of precious Stones: all which was framed with that Art
and Cunning, that if any one took the Apple out of its hand, several Arrows
from artificial Cross-bows placed so cunningly, would fly out and kill him. The
King after dinner was led into this Chamber by Fenella: Kenneth was presently
delighted with the glorious Furniture, but above all with the Image; and asking
the meaning of it, was answered by the Lady, that that rich Apple was placed
there, as a poor gift, for himself. At length, after some looking and
admiration, he went to remove the Apple, and presently the Cross-bows
discharged their Darts, by which the King was An. 994.
killed.

This story, though related by several old Chronicles, George Buchanan does not
think worthy of belief; nor indeed is it probable that such great riches as
their stories here speak of, such Art and such Workmanship, should meet
together under the power of such a Lady, in such a part of the World, so long
ago, and in such a little while. Whereupon he rather agrees with some other
Writers, that he was murdered by four Horsemen, laid purposely for that
wickedness in ambush, by the said Finabella; and his body was afterward buried
at Colmkill.

I shall not here question by what Right or Title An. 987.
Hugh Capet came to be King of France (because the present powers of that
Kingdom may think themselves concerned in that dispute) only it is confessed of
all hands, that Charles of Lorraine was the true Heir; and Page 495.
Jean de Bussieres could even the other day, and that by public Authority,
call Capet an Invadour. And this was the beginning of the Capevingien Family,
which yet continues; and the end of the Carlovingiens in France, that Imperial
Line having before this ended in Germany.

The end of the third Book.
A CONTINUATION
BOOK IV.
CHAP. I.
1. The Murder of Edmund Ironside, King of England.

2. The Murder of Malcolme the Second, and of Duncan, Kings of Scotland.

3. The clashing of Popes, and the Emperors power over them at Elections.

Sect. 1. The Murder of Edmund Ironside, King of England.
HAving now past over the Millenary year, we shall proceed, and with grief
begin at home, where we shall find a Noble Kingdom ruined by Treachery, and
betrayed to Forraigners by an abominable Murder.

And for the better understanding of which sad story, we may know, that the
Danes for some time made it their business to possess these flourishing
Nations: and what by dissentions at home, and their multitudes, joined with the
terror of their Cruelty and Heathenism, they bid fair for the carrying of the
whole; but were still manfully opposed, and might for ever have lost their
designs, if Treason had not been a better gamester than Valor.

Here lived in England one Edrike, Son to Egilricus, a man of a low Kindred;
but what he wanted in birth, he supplied by knavery and a fluent tongue. Page 90.
Stow calls him Edrike of Straton: L. 7. c. 44. 17. and 49.
Speed says he was sirn^med Streton, or Streattane, or Hol^nshed, l. 7. c. 10,
11.
Streona, for his covetousness: This fellow by his cunning raised himself to
such an esteem, that King O^ Egelred, or Etheldred.
Ethelred created him Duke of Mercia, and gave him his second Daughter Edgith
in Marriage; yet could not all his favors keep him from Treachery; but
perceiving the Daenes to be very powerful in England, to raise himself also by
them, he betrayed not only the Kings Council, but his Armies and Country to
those Danish Invadors. But here passing by his many Treasons, and his as
oftentimes receiving again into favor; I shall hasten to his murdering of his
Sovereign Edmund.

This Edmund was Son to King Ethelred; and for his strength, valor and
hardness, was surnamed Ironside. He had pardoned this Edrike, Duke of Mercia,
many faults, and winked at several of his treacherous actions, still receiving
him into favor; and this too much lenity, they say, proved his own ruin: for
this Edrike thinking to make himself more beloved and trusted by the Danes,
took An 1017.
the opportuuity, and one time when King Edmund was Thus also was slain
Godfrey, Duke of L^rra^ne. Baron. an. 1076. 38.
easing himself, he procured him to be thrust from underneath into his body,
with a Spear or Spit; which being done, Edrike de Streona cut off his head, and
presented it to Canute, King of the Danes, with this fawing salutation -- All
hail, thou now sole Monarch of England; for here behold the head of thy
Copartner, which for thy sake I have adventured to cut off. --

Canute amazed at this so disloyal an action, and thinking that he who had thus
murdered his own Sovereign, might in time betray him; dissembling his intent,
replied, and vowed, That -- in reward of that service, the bringers own head
should be advanced above all the Peers of his Kingdom. -- Which words hugely
contented Edrike, who for some time thought himself in great favor; but at
last, Kanute made his words good, by commanding Edrike's head to be cut off,
and placed upon the highest gate in London.

I shall not here enter into a dispute with those who question the manner of
the death, both of King Edmund, and the Traitor Edrike, seeing Authors will not
in this case exactly agree amongst themselves: but be it as it will, I shall
look a little farther North.

Sect. 2. The Murder of Malcolme the Second, and of Duncan, Kings of Scotland.
IN Scotland we shall find ruling Malcolme the Second, famous for his several
Victories against the Danes, and his other excellent Virtues and Laws for the
benefit of his Dominions. And having reigned several years with great prudence
and liberality; at last, in his old age he grew very covetous (a vice commonly
incident to such doting years:) upon which, several conspired against him; and
being at Glammys in Anguis, several of the Plotters were conveyed into his
Lodging, by his own faithless servants, where they murdered him. Then thinking
to escape on good Horses laid for Anno 1034.
them, the Snow then covering the earth, they missed their way, rid to the
Lough of Forfair, then frozen over, which having rid some part, the Ice broke,
and they were all drowned; and upon the thaw their bodies found.

This is the common opinion; others tell it another way; yet all agree that he
was Murdered.

The next that succeeded in Scotland was Duncan, who having reigned a few
years, was An. 1040.
murdered at Ennerness by one Mackbeth, who seized upon the Kingdom, and was
Crowned at Scone; and having Governed seventeen years, was also An. 1057.
slain by one Mackduff.

Here I might recreate the Reader with some pretty stories about these times:
As how three Weirds, Witches or Fairies told Mackbeth, as he was going to
Forres Buchan. p. 200.
others say, 'twas a Vision or Dream by night) that he should be King, but be
slain: And Banquho, or Bancho, that though he should not be King himself, yet
that from him should proceed those who should continue Kings. And that Mackbeth
was told that he should not be slain, till Birname-Wood should be brought to
Dunsinan Castle in Perth shire; nor by a man that was born of a woman. And how
that King Malcolme the Third fulfilled the first, by making every one of his
Soldiers carry a bough of that Wood to the Castle; and how Makduff
accomplished the latter, by being ripped out of his Mothers belly, and killing of
Mackbeth. But I shall leave such Tales as these to the Miraclemongers; which
being as pretty as most they make use of, I marvel Baronius (who, upon every
occasion stuffs up his Voluminous Annals with such thwacking wonders) passes
by this jest in silence. But possibly the Cardinal was not skilled enough in
the Caledonian Histories; for had he been as diligent in it, as he was in idle
Miracles, he would never have so much enlarged himself upon Marianus Scotus, as
to make us believe, that at this time a King of Scotland Anno 1050. 15.
should go in Devotion to Rome, the name of the King being Machethad, Mar.
Scot. MS. in B^bl. Bodl. Oxon.
Machetad; whereas it is well known there was never any such King, unless by
mistake we may take Mackbeth, who ruled in Scotland at the same time, but never
went so far for Devotion. Be it as 'twill, it served his turn to promote a
greatness and reverence in Rome; yet Page 207.
Leslaeus has a fancy that Marianus meant Malcolme the Third, though Scotus
his words may well enough be understood, that the King had his liberality
distributed by others, and not himself at Rome; and so the knot is untyed. As
for the stories of these Elves, Witches or Hobgoblins, they may consult Hist.
Scot. lib. 12.
Hect or Boethius, or from him our Holinshed.

I shall say nothing here to the killing of Duncan by Makpender, Earl of
Mercia; nor of the imprisonment of Donald, the putting out of his eyes, and
miserable death in prison, because their Titles may be questioned. Nor shall I
travel more Northward, and enlarge upon the An. 1088.
Murder of King Canute of Denmark whilst he was at his Devotions; nor enter
upon the more frozen parts, to insist upon the treacherous end of Ingo the
Fourth, King of Scotland, because Religion was not there in a settled condition.

Sect. 3. The clashing of Popes, and the Emperors power over them at Elections.
BUt if I would trouble my self at the very Fountain of their Religion, viz.
Rome, we might here show that obedience yields place to sedition, and how
troubled their Champions are to find out an Infallible and true Vicar.

Here might I tell at large how Platina and some others declare Pope Sylvester
the Second to be a Magician, and to have kept correspondence with the Devil;
though others at large Apologize for him; nor shall I interest my self in the
dispute. Here could I amuze the honest Roman Catholic, by telling him that
Benedict the Ninth was once held for the Infallible Head of their Church, and
yet was but a Baron. an. 1033. 6.
boy of ten or twelve years old: And here might we puzzle their Succession, and
make them pump and invent Reasons for a true Pope, when at the same time this
Benedict said he was Pope, Sylvester the Third assured the World, that he was
Christ's Vicar: and also one John affirmed, that he was the only man that was
S. Peter's true Successor; and every one of these Popes had many Followers. And
to make up the wonder and number, Gregory the Sixth with money hired these men
to lay down the Cudgels, and so made himself Pope also; which Title and Honor
he was over-perswaded to yield up by a Genebrard, Cron. p. 865.
Council; and yet this man must be a true Pope, and no way tainted with Simony:
and to him by the consent of the Emperor succeeded Clement the Second, who
being poisoned, Benedict the Ninth the third time entered into the Papal Chair:
but the Emperor hearing of these troubles, sent Poppo, Bishop of Brescia, to
Rome, who was chosen, and succeeded as Pope, though his Reign was but short.

But be it short or long, their Authors are here in open War about the legality
of his Rule. An. 1048. 1.
Baronius, and some others, making him legally elected, and so a true Pope. On
the other hand, Platina, Page 867.
Genebrard, and some others, declare him to be an intruder, and so no true
Pope. And what must be the foundation of his crime, but because the Emperor
had an interest in his promotion? though if this Argument will hold any water,
they will quite break to pieces the Line of their Succession, by throwing aside
many Popes formerly elected or confirmed by Emperors, and other secular
Potentates. But fight Dog, fight Bear, I shall not trouble my self to reconcile
them.

Yet though they now seem so dapperly against the Temporal Authority, it is not
unworth the notice, that no sooner was this Damasus (first called Poppo) dead,
but the Cardinals, and other Romans, sent into Germany to the Emperor, to
desire him to appoint them a new Pope, who accordingly sent them Leo the Ninth:
and whatsoever they tell for excuse of Leo's changing his Opinion, at the
persuasion of Hildebrand, is not much to the purpose, since it appears that
they durst not refuse him; and Hildebrand's policy (if true) was but a mere
trick and juggle.

And this practice will better appear by the next Vicar; for no Platina.
sooner was Leo dead, but the Clergy, and others of Rome, sent Hildebrand into
Germany to the Emperor, to desire him to give Baron. an. 1054. 53.
them a Pope; who accordingly yielded to grant them Victor the Second, who by
the Imperial Order was elected at Mentz, and thence sent to Rome. And thus
humbly they behaved themselves to the Emperor, that they might not offend him,
nor break their Oaths and Duty, which they had made to him. And something to
this purpose we find a little after; for this Victor the Second, and Stephanus
the Ninth being dead, some at Rome elected and declared for Pope Benedict the
Tenth. But the Chief of the Romans sent presently an excuse to the Emperor;
protesting that for their parts they would keep their Allegiance, and not
acknowledge any Coeffeteau, p. 644, 645.
for Pope, but whom he approved of; and therefore desired him to send to Rome
for Pope whom he pleased, who accordingly sent them Nicholas the Second; and so
Benedict the Tenth was thrust from the Chair, as not capable of that honor,
because he had intruded himself into that Dignity Qui sine jussu Regis and
Principum. Lamb. Schafnaburg. Hist. Germ. an. 1059. Edict. Francof. 1583. --
Qui injussu Regis, etc. Edict. Tubing. 15. 33.
without the approbation of the Emperor and other Princes.

But we need not trouble our selves here with many Examples of the secular
Authority in the Popes Election, having formerly in several other places, as
they fell in my way, hinted at the practice: and besides all, at this very time
they cannot but confess, that the very Romans yielded up their interest in the
Election of Popes, Genebrard, page 866. Coqnaeus, p. 505. Sigebert. an. 1046.
and gave it to the Emperor; and, which is more, both in Gregory the Sixth's
time, and Clement the Second his time, engaged themselves by Oath to the
Emperor, never to choose or consecrate any for Pope, but whom he should approve
of, and consent to.

CHAP. II. The troubles and deposing of the Emperor Henry the Fourth, by the
pride of Pope Gregory the Seventh, and other Incendiaries.
SHould I trouble my self to reconcile all the exceptions that might belong to
this Chapter, I should be Voluminous to a wonder, and possibly not satisfy the
Reader. But to leave such Disputes, in short, the question is betwixt the
Emperor Henry the Fourth, and Pope Gregory the Seventh; which of them was in
the right, and which to blame: though one may affirm without offense, that both
of them had their faults; yet Goldastus (and from him of late Father Remonst.
Hybern. part 2. p. 89, 90, etc. part 5. p. 1, 2, etc.
Caron) has taken a great deal of pains to vindicate the Emperor, whilst
Gretserus is as large in his several Apologies for the Pope; whither I shall
refer the curious for farther satisfaction.

And it was no small misery to Christendom, that the Emperor being very young,
the Popes acted what they pleased without control; though at last they drive
on so furiously, that instead of making the Empire happy by tranquillity, they
procured its ruin by fomenting new troubles and rebellions. For, whereas
formerly the Emperors had the main hand in making Popes, and the power of
nominating Bishops in his own Territories, whom he left to be Consecrated by
others; Now, on the contrary, the Pope would take all power into his own hands,
allowing no man to be Bishop, of what Country soever, but whom he pleased; by
which means he would wrest all favors from the Temporal jurisdiction to
himself.

And whereas formerly Clergymen were commonly married, and their Did. 28. c.
si qu^s docuerit c. si quis discernit. did. 31. c. Om^no confitemur. c.
Quoniam Romani. c. Aliter se Orient.
Canon Law it self grants them some favor in this case; Now the Pope proceeds
severely against the married Clergy by Excommunication; and so in a manner
deprived them of their Beings; which was the cause of great troubles in
Germany. Nor was this all, but also Gregory the Seventh thrust himself up above
all Dominions and Authorities in the world, by the assistance of a puny Synod
at Rome, thus declaring his Prerogative, -- viz. --

That only the Pope of Rome can depose Bishops. Baron. an. 1076. 31, 32, 33.

That his Legate must take place of all other Bishops in a Council, which
Legate has power to depose other Bishops.
That the Pope can depose those who are absent.
That it is lawful for the Pope only, according to the necessity of them
Time, to make new Laws, etc.
That the Pope only may use the Imperial Ensigns.
That all Princes are to kiss the feet of the Pope only.
That his name is only to be recited or mentioned in Churches.
That he has Authority to depose Emperors.
That he only can translate Bishops.
That no General Synod ought to be called without his command.
That no Book is Canonical without his Authority.
That his sentence ought not to be revoked by any body.
That no man ought to be Censured for Appealing to Rome.
That all Causes of great Importance, of what Church soever, must be referred
to him.
That the Roman Church neither ever did or can err.
That there is but one only name in the World, i. e. the Pope.
That the Pope of Rome, if he be Canonically Ordained, is undoubtedly made Holy
by the merits of St. Peter. And some other suchlike Privileges as these were
also then concluded upon.
Thus by little and little did the Roman Bishops dwindle the Temporal Authority
to nothing, by making themselves so great and powerful. Alexander the Second
had nulled all Lay-Patronage, by making it unlawful to receive any Benefice
from a secular Authority, which then they called Simony (though gave Coquaeus,
p. 513.
nothing for it) as Page 874, 875. Id. page 868.
Genebrard says. And a little before this, Leo the Ninth seemed to ease the
Papal See from the Imperial jurisdiction; but to no purpose, that Chair falling
after into the Imperial Nomination, as it did also in him. But Gregory the
Seventh, by a particular 26. Q. 7. Quoniam Investituras, Baron. an. 1078. 26.
Canon, nulled and voided all Investitures that should be made to Bishops, etc.
by the Emperor, or the secular Prince: Though we are told that his Master, S.
Hen. Spelman. Gloss. v. Investur.
Gregory the Sixth, mainly commended this way of nominating or designing
Bishops by a Pastoral Staff and Ring, by the Temporal Prince, whereby the other
Bishops might with more Authority, and less prejudice, Consecrate him; and that
this had also G. Carleton's jurisdiction, page 137, 138, 139, etc.
formerly been the practice, cannot be denied: and the power of Nomination is
yet used by all Christian Princes within their respective Dominions.

Suchlike actions as these procured some heart-burnings betwixt the Emperor
and Popes, which at last fell to open divisions and animosity; to which the
troublesome Saxons were not the least Authors, who had for some time born a
spite against the Emperor; from whose Authority and Protection they had
several thoughts and consultations of withdrawing themselves. To prevent this,
Henry had built several strong Castles and Forts amongst them, which incensed
them more; insomuch, that they did not only fortify and defend themselves,
but sent to Rome complaints against the Emperor of Oppression and Simony
(which, Vrspergensis says, were Accusationes blasphemas and inauditas.
false accusations.) Alexander the Second, then Pope, upon this took the
confidence to send to Henry, commanding him to appear at Rome, to answer before
him such complaints as were laid to his charge; but the Pope An. 1072.
dying presently after, this Trial fell to the ground for a time.

After him was Pope Gregory the Seventh, who was first called Hildebrand, and
under that name commonly met withal in History; but the Germans, who above all
things hated him, for jestsake used to call him Hellebrand, i. e. a Firebrand
from Hell; they looking upon him to be the cause of all their misfortunes,
whilst some others magnify him no less than a Saint.

Gregory had not been above a year Pope, but he sent his Legates into Germany,
who, though they behaved themselves stoutly to the Emperor, yet could not
procure the Privilege of having a Synod held there by them, the native Bishops
not being willing to submit to such Masters; the chief of the Opposers being
Liemarus, Archbishop of Breme, whom they undertook to suspend; and the Pope
afterward thought he had completed it; and at last, An. 1075.
excommunicated several Bishops, who adhered to the Emperor. And not long
after, sent an express summons to Henry himself to appear before him at Rome;
and that if he were not there by such a day, he should be forthwith
excommunicated.

The strangeness and boldness of this Papal summons moved the Emperor so much,
that he not only sent away the Legates with scorn, but sent forth Orders to all
Bishops and Abbots to meet him at Worms, there to hold a Council; who
accordingly appeared in a very great Am^l^ssimo numero. ^am. Schaf^ab. anno
1076.
number; where having drawn up many Accusations and Crimes against Gregory,
they adjudge him not fit to be Pope; declare his Election void; whatever he
shall do as Pope after that day, to be null and of no effect; and so deprive
him from the Popedom: And to this having subscribed, they sent Rowland of Parma
to declare the same at Rome.

In the mean time Gregory had called a Synod at Rome; which being met, Rowland
appears amongst them, and there boldly declares to the Popes face how the
Emperor, and the Bishops of Italy, Germany and France, in a Council had
deprived the said Pope. But Gregory to requite this kindness, the next day,
excommunicates and deprives the chief of the Bishops who were at Worms; and for
the rest, he appoints a set time for them to repent and submit to him; which if
they did not obey, then were they also partakers of the same sauce. Nor does he
forget the Emperor, but very dapperly excommunicates and deprives him of his
Dominions and Authority: The chief part of which Deposition runs thus:

Beat Petre Apostolorum Princeps, inclina, quaesimus, pias aures tuas, and
audi me servum tuum, quem ab infantia nutristi, and usque ad hunc diem de manu
iniquorum liberasti, qui me pro tua fidelitate oderunt and odiunt: tu mihi
testes es, and Domina mea Matter Dei, and B. Paulus frater tuus -- Pro Ecclesiae
tuae honor, and defensione, ex part Omnipotentis Dei Patris, and Filii, and
Spiritus Sancti, per tuam Potestatem and Authoritatem, Henrico Regi filio
Henrici Imperatoris, qui contra tuam Ecclesiam inaudita superbia insurrexit,
totius Regni Teutonicorum and Italiae gubernacula contradico, and omnes
Christianos a vinculo Juramenti, quod sibi fecere and facient, absolvo; and ut
nullus ei sicut Regi serviat, interdico.

O Blessed Peter, Prince of the Apostles, incline, I pray, your pious ears, and
hear me, your servant, whom thou have nourished from his infancy, and till
this day have delivered from the hands of wicked men, who hate me for my
trusting in thee: Thou art my Witness, and our Lady the Mother of God, and your
Brother St. Paul -- that, -- For the honor and defense of thy Church, on the
part of Almighty God the Father, Son and holy Ghost, by thy Power and
Authority, I deprive from any Government and Rule of all Germany and Italy King
Henry, Son to the Emperor Henry, who with an unheard of pride has opposed and
rise against thy Church: And I absolve all Christians from the Oaths of
Obedience which they have or shall make; and do here interdict and forbid any
to serve him as a King.

In this I follow An. 1076. 25, 26.
Baronius, which is worded otherwise than that set down by Page 177.
Platina: the reason of which difference and variations, let those look to it,
who boast of Originals in the Vatican; though in this we may make one serve to
interpret the other.

Presently after this, Gregory sends to the Germans to know whether Henry would
submit himself, and acknowledge his offenses against St. Peter's Church; but if
he would not, that then another King might be chosen, who would be obedient to
the Roman See, and he would confirm the Election. Upon this, the Chief met at
Tribur near Mentz.

The Emperor perceiving his case to be but bad, many of his chief friends
forsaking him, and others for fear durst not seem for him, [so apt were the
simple people then to be gulled and terrified by those Roman bibble-babbles, or
the seditious Nobles] was in a peck of troubles, seeing himself so neglected.
And thus finding few friends, and no remedy, he sends to those who met at
Tribur, desiring their favors and pardon for what he had formerly done amiss,
and promises amendment, if they would only look upon him as a Monarch: all
this they refuse, pretending his Excommunication and Deposition by Gregory, and
several other suchlike trifling excuses.

Henry thus seeing all hopes lost in Germany, resolves to submit himself to the
Pope: to effect which, he designed a journey into Italy. The factious Germans
informed of this, resolve to waylay him, and if they could possibly entrap him,
and get him into their clutches; but by making the farthest about, the nearest
way to his journies end, he escapes all their Ambushments and Malice. Yet was
his journey most difficult and hazardous, by reason of the extremity of the
Frost, which put him several times in great danger, in his passage over the
Alps. Having entered Lumbardy, many Italian Bishops and Nobles wait upon him,
entertain him with all respect, complain to him of the Popes actions, and wish
that he had friends and strength enough to depose Gregory, of whose Popedom
they were really weary.

Yet did not this much better the Emperors poor condition: Anno 1077.
For those who had been his friends and well-wishers in Germany, and other
places, seeing Henry himself brought so low, as to drudge for pardon, thought
it their securest way to do so too; and so they also gad to Italy, and
barefooted, without any linen about them, humbly beg absolution of the Pope;
which after some hardship and waiting they obtain, with an injunction never to
acknowledge Henry, till he had asked pardon of, and satisfied his Holiness.

Henry thus seeing his condition grow worse and worse, thought it wisest to
make the best he could of a bad Market; and unwilling to loose the Empire,
resolves to satisfy the Pope, if any thing can do it; and being informed that
Gregory was at Canossa, a strong place in the Territory of Reggio, in the
Dukedom of Modena; thither he goes to supplicate for pardon and restoration.
This Castle of Canossa was compassed about with three Walls, and belonged to
Mathilda, or Maude, a Lady of great Revenues, and intimately acquainted with
the Pope, seldom parting from him. 'Twas now the depth of Winter, nor had the
memory of man known a severer Frost; yet does Henry (some say also with his Fox
Acts and Mon. vol. 1. page 332, 233.
Empress and little Son) without any Princely Attire, or Linen; and which was
more, without Shoes, or Stockings, or Hat; thus barefooted, bare-leg'd, and
Blondus Ital. I^lust. de Lombard. page 357.
bare-headed; some say, with a Mornay, page 253.
pair of Sizzers and a scourge in his hands, (intimating that he was there
ready to be polled and whipped) trudge it to Canossa, hoping to be let in to the
speech and favor of his Holiness: to which purpose, he thought he had made way
by some of the Popes friends; but here he found himself deceived: yet we may
suppose he had some favor, being permitted to enter within the second Wall,
where in this pitiful plight, he waited to be let in all day long fasting; but
the Popes spirit would not yet come down. The night comes, the Frost
continues, and his stomach might well think his throat Blondus Hist. Decad 2.
lib. 3. page 200.
cut; yet does he not stir, but with this cold comfort expects compassion.

Having thus with pain, cold and hunger past over the tedious night, two to one
but next morning he might hope for better success; but he was served with the
same sauce as the day before: And thus he past over three days and three
nights, enough to get desperation, if not death, in a better man than Pope
Gregory, who thus despised the birth, dignity, and patience of so great an
Empeperour. But the fourth day, some others with Mathilda, as if ashamed of the
arrogancy of Gregory, and the unparalleled humility of Henry, with much ado
persuaded Hildebrand to allow the Emperor his presence: but yet before this
was done, Henry was to deliver up his Crown, and the rest of his Royal Badges
and Ensigns to the Pope, and acknowledge himself not fit or worthy to Rule. And
having gone thus far on his knees, he humbly begs Absolution; which, after a
great deal of clutter, was granted, though the remedy was as bad as the
disease, by the hard conditions and proviso's it was clogged withal; As, that he
shall submit himself to answer Baron. an. 1077. 9, 10, 11. Coeffetean, page 687.
in the Assembly of the German Princes, to such accusations as should be laid
to his charge. That he should submit to the judgment there given; insomuch,
that though he should there be deprived or deposed of all sway, that he should
not take it as an injury done to him. That in the mean time, he should not use
any Royal Ornaments or Ensigns. That he should not concern himself with the
Government, nor command, or determine any thing as a Ruler. That all people,
who had sworn him Allegiance, should remain absolved and free from obedience.
That those, who had been his chief Counselors and Friends, should be removed
from him. And that, if at last, upon trial and favor, he should be restored
again to his Government or Empire, that he should not only be a Defender of
the Roman Church, but obedient to it. And Chro. tom. 2. page 880.
Genebrard mainly commends Gregory for his making the Emperor thus to dance
attendance to him, in that naked posture and frozen weather.

History tells us, that Alexander the Fifth dying, the Cardinals then at
Bologna, thought upon several as fit to succeed; but none of them would please
Balthazar Cossa, Cardinal and Legate there; insomuch, that seeing no remedy,
they desired him to nominate: upon which, quoth Cossa, Give me St. Peter's
Cloak, and I will give it to him who is to be Pope. The Mantle being given him,
he puts it on his own shoulders, and said to them, I am Pope. Nor durst they
oppose that Election, since it was the will of Cossa, who called himself John
XXIII.

No man can be but satisfied, when he has the power or liberty of setting down
his own conditions, as Cossa had his hearts-wish when he had the Popedom; so
could Gregory the Seventh desire or expect no more, than thus forcing the great
Emperor to submit to his will and pleasure. Now he might suppose he had the
world in a string, and had shown a fair president to make Temporal Monarchs
obedient; and the truth is, he had raised up his Seat many degrees above any of
his Predecessors; though after-stories will show this equaled, if not
out-thrown some bar-lengths.

But having now seen the disrespect of Gregory, with the humility and
absolution of Henry; let us cast a glance on the actions in Germany. We gave an
hint before of some heart-burnings between the Emperor and Saxons; which upon
the Popes Excommunicaon, and ridiculous Deposition, they advanced to more
formality, thinking then they had sufficient right and authority to renounce
their Sovereign; and in his absence in Italy, about his absolution, they struck
the nail on the head, quite renouncing their obedience to Henry, and choosing
for their King or Emperor Rodolphus, Earl of Reinfeldt, and Duke of Schwaben,
by some Historians curruptly called Duke of Saxony. No sooner was this done and
known, but both Henry and Rodolph desire the Popes assistance. Gregory gave
good words, commanded them both to appear before his Legates in Germany, where
they should have justice done them: And to his Legates, he gave express command,
to reject him that seemed refractory, but to confirm him that was obedient as
King.

How they behaved themselves I know not, but An. 1077. and Matt. Paris, anno
1077. Guil. Barclay, de potest. Papae, page 40, 41.
Sigebert, a diligent Chronologer, who lived in Germany at this time, tells us
that this year the Pope sent to Rodolph an Imperial Crown with this
Inscription: Petra dedit Petro, Petrus Diadema Rodolpho.


The Rock did give this Crown to Peter,
And Peter sends't to Ralfe as meeter.
But Chron. Sclavorum cap. 28. lib. 1.
Helmoldus affords us another Verse, though not much differing in the sense or
purpose. Petra dedit Romam Petro, tibi Papa Coronam.


The Rock gave Peter the Roman Town,
And the Pope does give to thee this Crown.
And here methinks it is pretty to see what a clutter they make, to prove the
Rock not to be the confession of, but Peter himself; the better thereby to
intail Infallibility upon his Vicars; and yet here a great Pope makes them
different things. But waving this, I wonder who gave Peter a Crown or Rome! or
by what right he came to possess any Lands or Temporal Jurisdiction in Italy;
not denying but that people may give away their own (provided they do not
thereby beggar and ruin themselves, Children and Families) but putting no
trust or truth in that common saying, That Dominion is founded in Grace or
Saintship; seeing without doubt, an Heathen has as much right to what is his,
as a Christian, were he St. Peter himself, to what is his.

As for the first Verse, Baronius will not have it to be sent to Rodolph this
year, but three years after, viz. 1080; but for this he shows no Authority,
only his own conjecture, not enough to weigh down the Testimony of Sigebert,
living at the same time, and of old Matthew Paris. But I shall not trouble my
self with the timing of these Verses, nor with a Narrative of every Battle and
Victory betwixt Henry and Rodolph: For now were they hard at it; Henry no
sooner hearing of Rodolph's Election and Coronation by the Archbishop of Mentz
(once his great friend,) but he raises what force he can, hastes for Germany,
and does his utmost to regain his Empire: but passing by the bloodshed, which
continued sometime with eagerness of both sides, let us see what Gregory does
at Rome.

Where we find him in a Synod, cursing with Bell, Book and An. 1080.
Candle all Emperors, Kings, Dukes, etc. who shall give any Investitures, i.
e. nominate (as all Kings do now) any man to avoid Bishopric, or other
Ecclesiastical Livings or Benefices, within their own Dominions or
Jurisdictions, because (forsooth) he could have all those Donations to belong
to him and his Successors; for which you may suppose, they good men desired no
Politic Benefit, either the enriching of their Pockets, and the beggering of
all other Countries by making all their Angels flee to Rome: Or, by thus having
all the Clergy of the World at their Devotion, they might with more facility
raise Rebellions at pleasure, and make the Temporal Jurisdiction but a mere
shadow; the Kings themselves to be deposed, when their Holynesses pleased to
withdraw their favors.

And this Council will afford us a good instance to this purpose, and that
concerning our Emperor Henry. For here we have him again Excommunicated, and
deprived, with the salvation of all his Enemies. The form it self is long; but
that which most concerns us is this.

Beat Petre, Princeps Apostolorum, and tu beat Paul doctor Gentium,
dignamini quaeso aures vestras ad me inclinare, meque clementer exaudire. -- O
Blessed Peter, Prince of the Apostles, and O thou Blessed Paul, Doctor of the
Gentiles, vouchsafe, I pray you, to bow down your ears, and favorably hear me.
-- And then he tells to these Apostles a long tale in vindication of himself.

Quapropter confidens de judicio and misericordia Dei, ejusque piissimae Matris
semper Virginis Mariae, fultus vestra authoritate; Saepe nominatum Henricum,
quem Regem dicunt, omnesque fautores ejus, excommunicationi subjicio, and
anathematis vinculis alligo. Et iterum Regum Teutonicorum and Italiae, ex part
omnipotentis Dei, and vestra, interdicens ei, omnem potestatem and dignitatem
illi regiam tollo; and ut nu^lus Christianorum ei sicu^ Regi obediat,
interdico: omn^sque qui ei juraverunt, vel jurabunt de Regni dominatione, a
juramenti promissione absolvo.

Ipse autem Henricus cum suis fautoribus, in omni congressione belli nulla
vires, nullamque in vita sua Victoriam obtineat. Vt autem Rudolphus regnum
Teutonicorum regat and defendat, quem Teutonici elegerunt sibi in Regem. Ad
vestram fidelitatem ex part vestra, dono, largior and concedo omnibus sibi
fideliter adhaerentibus absolutionem omnium peccatorum, vestramque
benedictionem in hac vita, and in futura, vestra fretus fiducia largior. Sicut
enim Henricus pro sua superbia, inobedientia and falsitate, a Regni dignitate
jusie abjicitur; ita Rudolpho pro suo humilitate, obedientia and veritate,
potestas and dignitas conceditur.

(b) Agite nunc quaeso, Patres and Principes sanctissimi, ut omnis mundus
intelligat, and cognoscat, quia si potestis in Coelo legare and absolvere,
potestis in Terra Imperia, Regna, Principatus, Ducatus, Marchius, Comitatus and
omnium hominum possessiones pro meritis tollere unicuique and concedere, etc.

Wherefore trusting in the judgment and Mercy of God, and his holy Mother the
Virgin Mary, backed by your Authority; I do hereby excommunicate and curse the
said Henry, whom they call King, and all his favorers and partakers. And I do
again, in the Name of God Almighty and you, interdic^ ^he said Henry the
Kingdom of Germany and Italy, and take from him all Royal Power and Dignity;
and command that no Christian shall obey him as a King: and all who have or
will swear obedience to him, I absolve them from the said Oaths.

As for Henry and his partakers, let them neither have strength or force in any
Battle, nor ever gain Victory: But for Rodulph, chosen King, let him govern and
defend his Kingdom of It seems the Pope would keep Italy to himself.
Germany. And in your names I do give, bestow, and grant to all those who shall
adhere faithfully to the said Rodolph, absolution of all their sins, and your
Benediction in this life, and in that to come. For as Henry for his pride,
disobedience and falsity, is justly deposed from his Royal Dignity; so i^ the
same Royal Power and Dignity given to Rodolph for his humility, obedience and
honesty.

Go on therefore, and assist, most Agite igitur Apolostolorum sanctissimi
Principes, and quod dixi vestra autho^tate interposita confirmate, ut omnes
nunc demu^ intelligant, si potestas in Coelo l^gare and solvere, in Terra
quoque Imperia, Regna, Principatus and quicquid habere mortales possunt auferre
and dare, nos dare posse, etc. Platina vit. Pont.
holy Fathers and Princes of the Apostles, that all the World may understand
and know, that you who can bind and loose in Heaven, can also on Earth take
away Empires, Kingdoms, Principalities, Dukedoms, Marquessdoms, Earldoms, and
all men's Possessions, and give them to any other, etc.

Platina, here again, much differing from Baronius; I have placed the latter
part of Platina in the Margent, that one may give a light and addition to the
other.

The Emperor informed of this harsh dealing against him, calls a Synod at
Brixen in the County of Tirol in Germany, next the Territories of the
Venetians, where several Bishops of Germany, Italy, and France met, who declare
the Pope Gregory guilty of Simony, Usurpation, Persecution, Perjury, Homicide,
Negromancy or Conjuring, and other crimes; for which they depose him by Vote,
and elect into his place as Pope W^^^rt, or G^^^rt, or W^chert^s, or (...), or
^^gbert.
Guibert, Archbishop of Ravenna, who called himself Clement the Third.

This done, the Emperor Henry marches against Rodolph; both Armies meet in
Misnia, not far from Geraw, where they contend v^^antly for an Empire: But at
last, Rodolph having the misfortune to have his right hand cut off, he was
carried to Mersburb for ease and cure, but there he dyed. Some H. Mut^us, lib
15. page 130. Jo. Na^cier. genesis 37. p. 708. ^^lmold. Hist. Sel^^. c. 28, 29, 30.
Authors report, that, perceiving himself near his end, by the great effusion
of blood, to some Bishops then about him, he showed the cut* off right hand,
confessing it to be a just judgment, because by that he had formerly sworn his
Allegiance to Henry. Before this Ba^tle happened, An. 1080.
Sigebert, an Author then living, tells us, that the same year Gregory
undertook to Prophecy, that this year the false King must dye, meaning Henry;
but it seems his Friend and Champion Rodolph proved to be the man. Rodolph thus
dying, was buried very nobly; of which magnificent Funeral, when some asked the
Emperor, Why he would permit such pomp to a Rebel? Henry replied ingeniously
-- I wish all mine Enemies were as honorably buried.

Rodolph being thus slain, Germany began to submit; so Herny An. 1081.
perceiving not much work there to do, resolves for Italy, to perfect what he
had begun; and thitherward he marches with his Clement the Third: but by the
hardness of the Winter he could not be there as soon as intended; yet at last
he enters Italy, marches An. 1082.
against Rome, lays siege to it, which was famous for the many skirmishes and
length, it continuing three years. In the mean time, the unruly Germans elect
against Henry one Herman; but he wanted strength to make any great Opposition.
The next year Henry took the Civitas L^^^mana.
Vatican, and Clement the Third was Inthronized as Pope; and the An. 1084.
year after this, he took the City it self. But Hildebrand with his Cardinals,
and some other friends, had withdrawn themselves, for security, into the strong
Castle St. Angelo, where all the Imperial Force could not reach them, or make
them submit, knowing they should be relieved.

In the mean time, Henry and his Wife Bertha are Crowned Emperor and Empress
by Clement in the Lateran: From which time Baronius begins to reckon this Henry
for an Emperor, though he had Ruled twenty seven years before; all which time
he acknowledges to be no Emperor, and so makes a vacancy for so many years;
and all this nullity, because he was not Crowned by a Pope: And this is the
humor of many Roman Historians, though others account without any such Papal
Ceremony.

Gregory perceiving himself at a loss, had formerly sent to Robert G^iscard,
Chief of the Normans, and Lord of Pulia and Calabria, to beg his help at a
dead-lift; who, though then in Wars against the Grecian Emperor Alexius, sends
him sufficient relief, who deliver him from Castle St. Angelo; thence they
convey him to Salerno in the Kingdom of Naples, where he An. 1085. Baron. anno
1098. 13.
dyed. Sigebert, and lately Father Remonstrantia Hibernorum, part 5. p. 2.
Caron tells us, that being near his death, he confessed that he had stirred up
all these troubles by the suggestion of the Devil, etc. But the Popes Champions
would not have us to believe this; but, on the contray, that he is a Saint: for
more confirmation of which, they have placed his name in their 25 May.
Calendar; and if we look for Miracles to prove it, we might begin at his
Infancy, where we find him, being the Son of a Carpenter (which An. 1073. 16.
Baronius thinks a good hint) strangely to foretell by his Fathers Chips, his
own Dominion over the World from Sea to Sea. And if we take him toward his
latter end, lest his actions (which so many question) should be held as
illegal, or any what amiss; we are told Baron. an. 1084. 10, 11, 12.
pretty stories, how they were all approved of, and declared authentic from
Heaven by the holy Ghost. And thus much for Gregory the Seventh, or Hildebrand,
after whom his partakers in Italy chose Victor the Third, who followed the
steps of his Predecessor Gregory; by which divisions Italy and Germany were
pitifully harassed, especially Rome, having daily wars and fightings in her
very streets, between the Soldiers of the two Popes, Clement and Victor; but
the latter lived not long, dying the second year of his Popedom.

After whom the Anti-Imperialists chose Urban the Second, by An. 1088.
some jeeringly called Turbanus, who also showed himself a fierce Enemy against
the Emperor; which broyls were no small detriment to Christendom, Clement and
Urban cursing one another and their adherents to the purpose; insomuch, that
between them, there were few Christians in Germany and Italy left uncurst or
damned, and blessed and save^ again at the same time. But that which greatly
strengthened Urban, was the revolt of Conrade, Eldest Son to Henry, whom the
Emperor leaving in Italy in his absence, he rebelled An. 1093.
against his Father, and took part with Urban, who acknowledged him to be King
of Italy, and accordingly was Crowned so at Millan; and to make him more sure,
they had him married to the Daughter of Roger, Duke of Sicily; besides this,
they had taught this their young King so much obedience to the Sea of Rome, as
to hold the Popes Baron. an. 1095. 8.
Stirrup. And this revolt or unnatural rebellion lost Henry all his interest in
Italy; many of his old Friends adoring the rising Sun, not thinking but Conrade
would be Emperor.

But death spoils many a design, for Conrade dyed before his Father, Urban and
Clement: Upon which, several pretended to the Chair of St. Peter; but Paschal
the Second got the surest footing, between whom and the Emperor was no more
agreement than with those gone before: This Paschal confirming all the
thundering Excommunications and Deprivations against Henry, who was now fallen
into a great trouble.

For his now Eldest Son Henry (Conrade being dead) was persuaded by wicked
counsel, that it was best to look about him, and take the Government upon him,
his Father having no right to Rule by reason of the Roman Decree against him.
And many fine words did they tell him of St. Peter, of Christ's Vicar, of the
power of the Church, etc. And thus under the pretense of piety, was he
persuaded to rebel against his Father. This being known, Germany was divided;
some standing for the Father, others for the Son; and both parties behaved
themselves so carefully, that both their Armies were powerful, and between them
much blood was shed: but at last, the Marquess of Austriae and the Duke of
Bohemia An. 1105.
turned tail, and fled over to the Son, basely leaving the old Emperor in the
lurch; which so lesned his Force, that he was constrained to take advice, and
shift for himself, with a few trusty Friends.

Being thus down the wind, there were small hopes of recruting, every one now
running over to the Conqueror. To be short, a meeting is appointed at Mentz,
where meet many Bishops and Nobles, and trusty cards for young Henry; and to
carry more Authority, Paschal had sent thither his two Legates; and to make all
sure, young Henry himself was there, who made pretty canting Speeches to the
people, telling them, that he intended no harm to his Father, neither desired
his deposition, only took care for the Glory of God, and the honor of St.
Peter, and Christ's Vicar, etc. which hony-words pleased the seditious people
exceedingly; so that here they conclude the old Emperor not fit to Rule, and
that his Son ought to be the man and Governor.

Having gone thus far, it was not now for them to look back; and so they very
fairly go and have him deposed: The story it self being somewhat lamentable,
take as follows out of their own approved Authors.

The Bishops of Mentz, Colen, and Worms, were ordered to go to Car. Sigonius de
Regno Ital. anno 1106. Helmoldus Hist. Sclavorum, c. 32. A^b. Krantzius Hist.
Saxon. lib. 5. c. 20, 21, 22, 23, 24.
him, and to bring from him the Imperial Ensigns, viz. the Cross, Lance,
Scepter, Globe or Golden-ball and Crown, with the Sword: They went and demanded
of him these Badges; of which things he demanded the reason; they replied,
Because he had committed Simony in nominating to Bishoprics and Abbeys. To
whom the amazed Emperor thus answered: You, my Lords of Mentz and Colen, tell
me, by the Name of God, what I have received from you. They confessed that he
had received nothing. Then, said the Emperor, Glory be to God, that in this We
are found faithful; for your great Dignities might have brought great gain to
me, had I gone that way: My Lord of Worms likewise knows that he received his
Bishopric freely. My good Fathers, break not your Oaths: I am now old, and you
need stay but a little. But if there be no remedy, I shall deliver the Crown to
my Son with mine own hands.

But they making offer to lay hands upon him, he retired himself, put on his
Imperial Ensigns, and returned to them, saying, The goodness of God, and the
election of the Princes, gave these to me; and God is able to preserve them
unto me, and to withold your hands from this action, although We want Our
Forces, though I doubt not of any such violence, etc. Hereupon the Bishops
stayed a while, as if they knew not what to do; yet at last, encouraging one
another, they bolted up the Emperor, took the Crown from his head, and then
taking him out of his seat, took from him all his Royal Robes. The grieved old
Emperor fetching a deep sigh, spoke to this purpose, The God of vengeance
behold, and revenge this iniquity you commit against me: I suffer ignominy, the
like whereof was never heard of: But it is God that justly punishes me for the
sins of my youth: Yet for all this, are not you free from this offense, having
broken your Oaths, and so shall not avoid the revenge of a just Judge. Let God
never prosper you upon earth, but let your portion be with him who betrayed
Christ.

I know some hint so slightly on this story, as if they were willing to pass it
by in silence: And others, to mitigate the crime, would gladly persuade us,
that the Emperor did willingly on his own head depose himself. But it is a poor
excuse, to conquer a man by force, beat him soundly with an intent to make him
deliver, and then to say, that he gave his purse freely, when he was not able
to keep it, and you were resolved to have it. And that the Father had really no
mind to part with his Authority and Dominion, his former battles against his
Son for keeping them may testify, and his after-actions may sufficiently
confirm it: for getting liberty, as conveniently as he could, he withdrew
himself to Colen, thence to Liege, and by his Letters declares to all Christian
Princes and People, how basely he had been used: for a taste of which hard
usage, you may peruse his complaining Letter to Philip King of France; it being
somewhat long, I shall refer you to the reading of it in An. 1106.
Sigebert. And that he endeavored to restore himself by Arms, by the
assistance of the Duke of Lorraine, History will tell at large: And are all
these signs of a willing and free resignation?

But at last, young Henry gets his old Father again into his clutches, where we
cannot but suppose that the ancient Emperor was brought into excessive misery;
for proof of which, take this one story testified by their own Historians.

This Henry, amongst other buildings of Devotion, had built at Spire a
Monastery, dedicated to the Virgin Mary; and seeing thus all means of a free
livelihood taken from him, applied himself to Gebhard, Bishop of Spire, one to
whom he had been a special Friend, having not only endowed the Church well,
but also advanced him to his honors: Of this Bishop, he desires one favor,
and that but a poor one too, viz. that he would grant him the courtesy to live
as an assistant in that Church, which he himself had built and endowed; telling
of him withal that he was somewhat qualified for such an employment, because he
had been brought up at his book, and had some skill to assist in the Chair. To
which small request, the ungrateful Bishop tartly replies with an Per Matrem
Domini non faceam tibi quod petis. Helmold. Hist. Sclav. cap. 33.
Oath, that he should not there be entertained; though according to their 16.
q. 7. Quincunque fidelium. Et Lancelot. Inst. Can. f. 1. Tib. 28. defertur
autem.
Canon Law, he should not have been denied, being the Founder. Which
uncharitable denial so afflicted the ancient Emperor, that he could not
refrain from tears and sighing; only saying to the people then about him, in
the phrase of the patient man, Job 19, 21.
Have pity upon me, have pity upon me, at least you my friends; for the hand of
God has touched me. And thus overwhelmed with grief and poverty, he presently
after dyed at Liege, having swayed the Scepter above fifty years.

Now may we suppose that the living friends of the old Emperor went all to
wrack, when the dead could not escape the tyranny of their Popish Enemies.
Clement the Third his body, after it had laid in the Grave five years at
Ravenna, was dig'd up again as unworthy of that holy Earth; and so were the
Bishops of his Consecrating served. Nor did the Corpse of the deceased Emperor
fare any better: for though at first it was buried at Liege by the Bishop of
that City; but these men being under Church Censures for their affection to old
Henry, they were not permitted to be received into Absolution and
Church Communion again, till they had dug up the Imperial Corpse, and without
any Ceremony laid it on unconsecrated ground; and to this their Archbishops and
Bishops gave their consents. This being done, with the approbation of young
Henry, it was conveyed to Spire, and there laid by the Ant. Dauroult. Flor.
Exempl. cap 7. Tit. 16. 8. Baron. an. 1110. 4.
Popes command without the Church and Churchyard, in a Sepulcher, without any
form of buryal, where it remained five years: At the end of which time, it
pleased his Holiness, Paschal, to consent that it might have Christian buryal;
yet to this Christianity he was forced, being then a Baron. an. 1111. 20.
Prisoner to Henry the Son.

As for Henry, he is much commended in History for his Nobleness and Valor,
having fought bravely in sixty two battles, more than Caesar himself had done:
And his good benefaction to Churches makes him no enemy to Devotion; yet would
the Popelings from him raise up a new name of Heresy, with which they severely
brand him: and this they called in those times Henrician (and some Guibertine,
or Clementine, from Clement the Third) Heresy, which they would make to be the
same with Simony: and what great Monster this Henrician Heresy is, one of
their great Rabbis, and enemy to all good Government, viz. Ex ejus nomine,
quod ipse jus Investiturae mordicus sibi vendica^et, simonia dicta est
Henriciana heresi^, Cron. p. 898.
Genebrard, shall inform you; only this, to challenge to himself the power of
giving Investitures to Bishops, which now all Christian Kings do: And yet about
this did the Pope then keep such a clutter, as if Religion it self were singing
her Requiem. But this puny supposed Heresy, Lib. 8.
Pr^teolus passes by without any notice, though he affords us an Henrician
Heresy: but from another man, and upon different Principles, which are nothing
to my purpose here.

A man might think that young Henry the Fifth having thus got the Empire,
should be great friend to the Pope, and they two be hand and glove: But story
tells us the quite contrary; insomuch, that now he thinks he is obliged to
vindicate the rights of the Empire, though against the Pope himself; which he
formerly looked upon really, (or was persuaded by the flattering Romanists to
fancy so) to be no less than abominable Heresy.

He being Emperor, Pope Paschal declares his intent to meet him at Ausburg in
Germany; but upon some jealousy, he turns into France, and at Troyes holds a
Synod, where they fell to taking away the Emperors power of Investitures: but
against this, Henry by his Ambassadors protested, alleging, that the Bishops
of another Country were not to be judges of his jurisdiction. Upon this, the
business is here laid aside, and put off till a Synod at Rome; and so the Pope
returns for Italy.

Henry the Fifth intended to be Crowned by the Pope, marches for Italy, and at
last gets to Rome; where (to be short) he kisseth Paschals Toe, desires
Coronation, and the right of Investitures. The Pope is puzzled; the Citizens
and Soldiers fall out; and the Italian and German Writers here, are in as
great contradictions as their Countrymen fighters; all which I pass by: yet
the Pope and some of his Cardinals are seized upon by the Imperialists, and
imprisoned, nor restored till Henry was satisfied in his requests: So he is
Crowned, and Investitures given him, part of which form is this following:

Paschalis Episcopus, servus servorum Dei, charissimo in Christo filio Henrico
glorioso Teutonicorum Regi, and per Dei omnipotentis gratiam Romans Imperatori
Augusto, salutem and Apostolicam Benedictionem. ********* Illam ergo dignitatis
praerogativam, quam Praedecessores nostri vestris Praedecessoribus Catholici
Imperatoribus concessere and privilegiorum paginis confirmavere, nos quoque
dilectioni tuae concedimus and presentis privilegii pagina confirmamus ut, viz.
Regni tui Episcopis and Abbatibus libere praeter violentiam and Simoniam
electis, Investituram virga and annulo conferas; and post Investituram,
canonice consecrationem accipiant ab Episcopo ad quem pertinuerint. Si quis a
Clero vel a populo praeter assensum tuum electus fuerit, nisi a te
investitiatur, a nemine consecretur (a) [Exceptis illis qui vel in
Archiepiscoporum vel in Romani Pontificis solent Investitura consistere] sane
Archiepiscopi vel Episcopi libertatem habeant a te investitos Abbates and
Episcopos canonice consecrare. ********* Si quis vero inflato spiritu ad
periculum animae suae contra hujusmodi authoritatis nostrae decretum agere
praesumpserit, sciat se vinculo Apostolicae maledictionis and Anathematis in
hoc seculo and in futuro nisi resipiscat esse alligatum atque submersum.
Paschal the Bishop, servant of the servants of God, to my dear Jo. N. ucler.
Genesis 38. p. 738.
Son in Christ, Henry the renowned King of the Germans, and by the Grace of God
Emperor of the Romans, greeting and Apostolical Benediction. *********
Wherefore the same prerogative, which our Predecessors did grant and confirm,
as a privilege to your Predecessors the Catholic Emperors, We do also grant,
and do hereby confirm to you, viz. that you may bestow Investiture by a Staff
and Ring, to the Bishops and Abbots in your Dominions freely elected, without
force and Simony; and that after such Investiture, they may according to the
Canons receive Consecration from their respective Bishops. And if any, either
Clergy or Laymen, be elected without your approbation or Investiture, let none
dare Consecrate him; Baronius has not this Exception in his Copy, an. 1111. 25.
[but still excepting those (as some Priviledge-places) who by custom are to
receive Investitures from their Archbishops, or the Bishops of Rome] and
undoubtedly Archbishops or Bishops may have liberty to Consecrate canonically
those whom the Emperor has Invested. ********* But if any to the danger of
his soul shall presume to act against this our Decree, let him know himself to
be bound and ruined in the Chain of the Apostolical Malediction and Curse, not
only in this world, but in that to come, unless he repent. Besides this
confession of the Pope, all the Citizens in Italy swear this following Oath of
Allegiance to the Emperor.

Ab hac die in antea fidelis ero Domino in Regi Henrico: non ero in Concilio
vel in facto, quo ipse perdat vitam vel membrum, vel quo capiatur, vel
assiliatur contra suum velle: adjutorio ero ei retinere Civitatem nostram, and
Burgas and suburbia, Episcopatum, comitatum, omnem usum and honorem Regni and
Imperii, quem Praedecessores sui Reges and Imperatores habuerunt in praedictis
locis, contra omnes homines qui voluerint auferre vel minuer^: nulli mortalium
in praedict a Civitate vel locis obediam pro Episcopo, immo pro posse eum
prosequor, nisi illi soli, quem praedictus Dominus Rex eidem Civitati
concesserit Episcopum dono and Investitura sua: haec omnia observabo, it a me
Deus adjuvet. From this day forward I will be faithful to our Lord King Henry:
I will do nothing by advice or action, whereby he may loose life or limb, or be
taken or set upon, against his own will: I will be assistant to keep to him our
City, the Towns and Suburbs, the Bishopric and County, with the benefit and
honor of the Kingdom and Empire, which his Predecessors Kings and Emperors
had in the said places, against all those who would take away or lessen them. I
will obey no man as Bishop in the said City or Places (but on the contrary,
according to my power withstand him) but him only, whom our Lord and King
shall grant to be Bishop by his Gift and Investiture: all these things will I
keep and perform, as God me help. Yet for all this, no sooner was the Emperor
gone out of Italy, but the Pope calls a Council in the Lateran, where he nulls
the former grant of Investiture, as being 'Quod est contra Spiritum Sanctum.
against the holy Ghost, and obtained by force; though he had formerly damned
-- Divises sit a Regno Christi and Domini qui pactum istud rumpere aut violare
tentaverit. Baron. anno 1110. 26.
those who should break it. In Germany, Albert Archbishop of Mentz bandies
against Henry, and is by Order imprisoned: but the Emperor going to that City
to hold a Diet or Parliament, is assaulted by the Citizens, and in danger of
his life, they threatening to kill him, if Albert be not set at liberty, and
other favors granted him. Yet was he further troubled, some Bishops, and
others at Colen, seeking to deprive him, because Excommunicated by the Pope;
but having blown away these, he marches to Italy, where he had himself Crowned
again by Maurice Archbishop of Braga in Portugal, whom afterward (Paschal
being dead) he nominated Pope, and was called Gregory the Eighth, in opposition
to Gelasius the Second, whom Henry said could not be Pope, because elected
without his consent.

But at last, Henry was so pestered in Italy and Germany, that to save himself,
he was forced to be reconciled to Pope Calistus the Second, (who succeeded
Gelasius) and to grant to him the Investitures of Bishops; and so was absolved
from his Excommunication. So much mischief had the Popes stubbornness to keep
Investitures made in the World, though now all Catholic Kings keep the same
Privilege, either by Conge d'eslires, or suchlike nominations.

Some Historians tell us, that formerly the Popes used to date their Bulls,
Epistles, etc. from the years of the Emperors Reign; but Paschal the Second
first altered this, and dated his Letters from the year of his Popedom. And now
I talk of datings, I might speak here of Philip the First of France, of his
Excommunication; An. 1100.
and how some would thence conclude, that he was thereby deprived from his
Kingdom, and bring for a proof some datings not with the Reign of the King, but
the year and Rule of Christ, under this form -- Regnante Christo: -- But seeing
Hist. de France, tom. 2. p. 89. 5.
Scipion Dupleix slights it as of no validity, and that vastly read David
Blondellus has in a particular large De formulae Regnante Christo usu.
Treatise shown its mistake, and that such Forms have been many times used when
no Excommunication or Censure obliged it; I shall not trouble the Reader nor my
self any farther with it.

CHAP. III.
1. The Kings of England denied the Popes Coercive Authority over them, or
their Dominions.

2. The troubles of England, by the arrogancy and obstinacy of Thomas a
Becket, against his Sovereign, King Henry the Second.

Sect. 1. The Kings of England denied the Popes Coercive Authority over them,
or their Dominions.
HAving now seen in part how the greatest Emperors have been tossed about by the
Popes, it will not be amiss, to hint at their endeavors to reduce England to
the slavery of their humors; and what may we not expect from their pretended
grand Spiritual jurisdiction, when we shall see an Archbishop, and a born
Subject too, bandy against his Sovereign, Henry the Second? which story is here
related.

As for England, the Pope would be Lord over it, as well as other Nations; nor
did his Religion any way advance the Obedience and Allegiance of Subjects. For
though one Pope had approved of King William the First his Conquest, by sending
him a Speed, book 9. c. 2. 2.
consecrated Banner, an Agnus Dei, and one of St. Peter's Hairs, in way of his
good speed: Yet the next Pope, viz. Gregory the Seventh, demands fealty from
him, as may appear by the Kings Dr. Geo Hakewell's Answ. to Dr. Cariers Letter,
page 141.
Answer, in Sir Robert Cottons Library.

Hubertus Legatus tuus (Religiose Pater) ad me veniens, ex tua part me
admonuit, quatenus tibi and successoribus tuis fidelitatem facerem, and de
pecunia quem Antecessores mei ad Romanam Ecclesiam mittere solebant melius
cogitarem; unum admisi, alterum non admisi: fidelitatem facere nolui, nec volo;
quia nec ego promisi, nec Antecessores meos Antecessoribus tuis id fecisse
comperio. Hubert your Legate (Holy Father) coming unto me, advertised me as from
you, that I was to do fealty to you and your Successors; and that I should
bethink my self better of the Money which my Predecessors were wont to send the
Church of Rome; the one I admitted, the other I admitted not: The fealty I
would not perform; neither will I, because neither my self promised it, nor do
I find that my Predecessors performed it to yours. Upon which refusal, some
suppose Gregory returned that furious and uncivil Letter (seen amongst his
other Lib. 7. Ep. 1.
Epistles) to his said Legate Hubert; in which he accused the King of Impudence,
and that he had done more against the Church, than all the Nemo omnium Regni
etiam Paganorum, contra Apostolicam sedem hoc praesumpsit centare, quod is non
e^ubu^^ facere. Ib.
Pagan Kings themselves had offered.

Nor did his Son, King Henry the First, acknowledge any subjection to the Sea
of Rome; for though Pope Paschal the Second expected it, and accordingly thus
wrote to him, to put him in mind of it.

Paschalis servus servorum Dei, dilecto filio Henrico illustri Anglorum Regi,
salutem and Apostolicam Benedictionem.

Cum de manu Domini largius honorem, divitias, pacemque susceperis, miramur
vehementius, and gravamur, quod in Regno potestateque tua Beatus Petrus, and in
B. Petro Dominus honorem suum justitiamque perdiderit: Sedis enim Apostolica
Nuntii vel literae praeter jussum Regiae Majestatis, nullam in potestate tua
susceptionem vel aditum promerentur: nullus inde clamor, nullum inde judicium
ad sedem Apostolicam destinatur. --

Paschal the servant of servants of God, to our beloved Son Henry, the renowned
King of England, health and Apostolical Benediction.

Since you have plentifully received Honor, Riches and Peace from the hand of
the Lord; We exceedingly wonder, and take it in ill part, that in your Kingdom,
and under your Government, St. Peter, and in St. Peter the Lord has lost his
Honor and Right, in as much as the Nuntio's and Breves of the Sea Apostolic
are not thought worthy entertainment or admittance into your Dominions, without
your Majesty's Warrant: No Complaint now, no Appeal comes from thence to the
Apostolic See. --

To which King Henry the First (after some terms of Complement) replies in this
manner:

-- Eos Honores and eam Obedientiam quam tempore Patris mei Antecessores vestri
in Regno Anglia habuerunt, tempore meo ut habeatis volo; eo videlicet tenore,
ut dignitates, usus and consuetudines, quas Pater meus tempore Antecessorum
vestorum in Regno Angliae. Ego tempore vestro in eodem Regno meo integre
obteneam, Notumque habeat Sanctitas vestra, quod me vivente, Deo auxiliante,
Dignitates and usus Regni Angliae non minuentur: Et si Ego (quod absit) in
tanta me dejectione ponerem, Optimates mei, imo totius Angliae populus id nullo
modo pataretur.

Habita igitur, (Charissime Pater) utiliori deliberatione, ita se erga nos
moderetur benignitas vestra, ne (quod invitus faciam) a vestra me cogatis
recedere obedientia. --

-- That Honor and Obedience which your Predecessors had in the Kingdom of
England, during the reign of my Father, my will is, that you should have in my
time, with this condition, That my self fully and wholly enjoy all the
Dignities, Prerogatives and Customs, which my Father enjoyed in the said
Kingdom, in the time of your Predecessors. And I would that your Holiness
should understand, that during my life, the Dignities and Prerogatives of the
Crown of England, (by Gods Grace) shall not be diminished. And if I should so
far debase my self (which God forbid) my Lords and Commons would by no means
endure it.

Wherefore (most dear Father) upon better advice, let your gentleness be so
tempered toward us, that I be not enforced (which I should unwillingly do) to
withdraw my self from your obedience. --

But to save my self trouble, I shall refer the Reader to Sir Rep. part 5.
Edward Coke and Mr. Hist. of the the Popes intolerable Usurpations.
Prynne, where he may abundantly satisfy himself, that the Kings of England
not only slighted the Papal Coercive Power, but all along exercised Authority
in and over Ecclesiastical Causes: Though the Pope made it his business to
trample upon all Temporal Jurisdiction, and make it a mere ridiculous shadow,
without life or soul, but as it received a being from Rome.

But leaving these, we might tell you, how a little after, the English had got
the Whim of a conditional Covenant, and which is as bad, Perjury. For though
they had sworn Allegiance to Maude Speed, 1, 4, 30.
the Empress, yet her they reject, and swear a broken conditional subjection to
Stephen: Yet when they saw him a little downward, then they cast him off, and
play the same conditional knack to the Empress Maude.

Sect. 2. The troubles of England, by the arrogancy and obstinacy of Thomas a
Becket, against his Sovereign, King Henry the Second.
HOwever, waving these, (though treasonable enough) we shall come to the next,
viz. King Henry the Second, of part of whose Reign it will not be amiss to give
some hints, seeing so great a man as Thomas Becket is concerned in it, whom,
some call Saint and Martyr, whilst others allow him no better title than a
Traitor. But of this with all brevity.

This Thomas Becket was Son to one Gilbert Becket, a Citizen of London; and by
the favor of Theobald, Archbishop of Canterbury, was made an Archdeacon in
that See, and was placed about the person of Henry, then but Duke; who coming
to be King, advanced him to be Lord High Chancellor of England; and upon the
death of the former Theobald, made him Archbishop of Canterbury. Having thus
seen the great rise of Thomas by the Kings love, grace and favor; let us now
see how he lost the affection of King Henry.

For some time he thus lived in great repute with the King, though Henry was a
little troubled at the humor or design of Thomas, to throw up his
Chancellorship without acquainting him with it. After this, the Pope called a
Council at Tours, whither went the two Archbishops, and several Bishops of
England; having first procured the Kings Per missione Regis. Matt. Paris, an.
1164
leave for going thither: Where an ancient Guil. Neubrig. lib. 2. c. 16.
Historian tells us, that Thomas privately surrendered up his Archbishopric to
the Pope, as if the Kings Nomination or Investiture had not been sufficient,
which was restored again by the Pope, and so Thomas was cocksure of both
Presentations and Authorities. And probably this underhand-dealing, and nulling
of his jurisdiction, might somewhat alienate the affection of Henry, although
[c] Baronius d An. 1163. 29.
will not allow of any such surrender at this time, though for his dissent we
must not be content only with his word, neither producing Reason or Authority
for his so doing; since it is probable enough, being thus backed with the
Testimony of Neubrigensis, that Thomas might yield it up now in his Prosperity
for a farther confirmation; and in his low condition do it also, to procure
pity, and so make his party there the stronger against his King and Sovereign,
which was then his main design.

Add to these, the strange Privileges the Clergy boasted of, by exempting
themselves from all secular jurisdiction, were the crime never so villainous;
insomuch, that a Priest of the Diocese of Sarum having murdered one, Thomas had
him deprived and placed in an Abbey, that so he might not fall under greater
punishment (according to his desert) by the Kings Justiciaries, lest, forsooth,
he should suffer twice for one fault. And upon this last pretended Privilege
may we lay the Foundation of the following troubles.

For the King perceiving no signs of Peace and Tranquillity amongst his
Subjects, if this exception of the Clergy was permitted, the people of that
Coat having committed above an hundred Murders in the short time he had yet
Reigned; was resolved, that all the Clergy, who were taken in any Robbery,
Murder, Felony, burning of Houses, and the like, should be tried in Temporal
Courts, and suffer, as well as Laymen. Against this wholesome Law, the
Archbishop opposes himself, and will only grant that Speed. 14.
all Clergymen so offending should be tried in the Spiritual Courts, and by
men in Orders; who, if they were found guilty, should for the first time only
be deprived of their Office and Benefice; yet he granted that for the second
time they might lie at the Kings pleasure, as some think, though Baron. an.
1163. 31.
others confess that he would not allow them at any time to be delivered over
to the Temporal Authority.

And for these irrational Privileges, Thomas was so resolute, that at
Westminster he openly opposed the King, and got others to do so too; which
mightily incensed his Majesty, but pleased Pope Alexander the Third to the
purpose; yet fearing their hearts might fail them, he sends his encouraging
lines into England, commanding them by virtue of their obedience, to stand firm
for the Exemption of the Clergy, nor at all to consent to the King; and that if
he, or Baron. an. 1163. 39, 40.
any of the rest had in these times promised obedience to the King, not to keep
such promises: but all this did not much prevail.

For the King was resolved to have the Laws and Customs of his Ancestors kept
up in full force; and carried his business so well, that at last, he had not
only the other Bishops of his opinion, but Thomas also consenting, who
faithfully promised, and swear to observe them. And for their farther
ratification and authority, the King calls an Assembly at Clarendon in
Wiltshire, where the Bishops and Nobility meet him, and John of Oxford sat as
President. But here Thomas, for all his former promise, at first absolutely
falls off, and denies consent to the Constitutions; though at last he was so
far worked upon, one way or another, that he there publicly swear, that in the
word of a Priest, and sincerely, he would observe them to the King and his
Heirs for ever. But when the King would have him to Subscribe and Seal to them
(as the other Bishops had done) he absolutely refused, and retracted what he
had formerly sworn.

The Constitutions in all were sixteen; but those which Thomas opposed, were
such as these:

That Priests guilty of Felony, Murder, etc. should be tried before the
Secular Judges. That it should not be lawful for any Archbishop or Bishops to
depart the Kingdom, and go to the Pope upon his summons, without the Kings
License. That no Bishops should Excommunicate any holding of the King in
Capite, or put any other of his Officers under interdict without the Kings
License, or information to the Judge. That if the Archdeacon cannot decide the
Controversy they may go to the Bishop, and from him to the Archbishop, and
lastly ^^ the King; so that none shall appeal to the Pope of Rome, for any
cause whatsoever, without the Kings License, etc.
These and suchlike were approved of at Clarendon by all, only Thomas
excepted, who thought himself to have sinned so grievously for the former
consenting to them, that by way of Penance, he suspended himself from his
Priestly Function; but the Pope presently Matt. Paris, anno 1164.
restored him to that, and absolved him.

The King, we may suppose, was more and more incensed against Thomas for his
obstinacy: and for to close up all, a Parliament was held at Northampton,
where Thomas was to appear, though he had endeavored to flee beyond Seas; but
being beat back by cross winds, he concealed that purpose, and looked as if he
had intended no such thing. All being met at Northampton, Thomas is accused of
several things; and whilst they are consulting concerning him, he caused to be
sung before him at the Altar, The Princes sit and speak against me, and the
ungodly persecute me, etc. Thus would he have the Office for St. Stephen,
though it was not then his day; and against the Custom, he wore the Pall. This
being finished, he took up his Silver Crosier in his hands (an action not heard
of before, as they say) and so enters into the Court, though several of his
well-wishers persuaded him from such a defying posture, as if thereby he
carried his Protection, Exemption or Appeal. The Bishops advised him to submit;
but he refusing, they adjudged him guilty of Aliquando noster fuisti
Archiepiscopus, and tenebamur tibi obedire; sed quia Domino Regi fidelitarem
jurasti, hoc est vitam membra and terrenam dignitatem sibi perte fore salvam,
and consuetudines, quas ipse repetit conservandas, and tu eas interis
destruere, praecipue cum spectent ad terrenam suam dignitatem and honorem:
idcirco te reum perju^iis dicimus, and perjuto Archiepiscopo d^caetero non
habemus obedire. Bar. 29.
Perjury, which they declared to him by Hilarious, Bishop of Chichester, and so
disclaimed from that time forward all obedience to him, as a perjured man.

The Nobility also pronounce him a Traitor: but he, slighting them all as no
competent Judges over him, holding up his Crosier, appealed to the Pope of
Rome; and so withdrawing himself, with what speed and secrecy he could, he
wafted himself over into Flanders, and so to go to the Pope; to whom he
resigned his Archbishopric, but had it presently confirmed to him again. Thus
was Thomas caressed by the Pope and King of France, let the King persuade what
he will to the contrary; yet the King thought it was good policy and security,
to show his disdain and resolution against him and his: Whereupon he Orders the
Sheriffs and Judges of England, to seize upon all those who appealed to the
Pope or Matt. Paris, an. 1164.
Thomas, with the near Relations of all such men as were with Thomas; had also
Thomas's Revenues seized upon, and the livings of those who went with him
sequestered; and St. Peter's Pence to be gathered, but not paid to the Pope
till farther Order.

However, there were some means used toward a settlement, to which purpose
Messengers were sent to and fro, between the King and Pope; and at last, a
meeting agreed on between them, the better to decide the business: But this
design was spoiled by Thomas, who persuaded the Pope to have a care of the
Kings cunning, and not to treat with him, unless he were also present,
intimating Baron. anno 1165. 10.
to ^^e Pope, as if the King were a jugler or dissembler. Thus did Thomas gain
so much upon the Pope, that this meeting vanished; the Pope over-perswaded not
to treat, but in the presence of Thomas, though against the former Agreement.
And so Henry was resolved not to confer any thing with the Pope, in the
presence or competition of Thomas his Subject.

This meeting or half-agreement thus broke off, not long after Thomas writes to
the King, beginning, -- Expecting, we have expected, Baron. anno 1166. 45.
that the Lord would look upon you; and that being converted, you would do
penance, departing from your perverse ways -- And then tells him how Bishops
used to Excommunicate Kings; and also writes to the Bishops of England,
commanding them to issue out Censures against those who hinder Appeals to the
Pope, etc. absolves Id. 54.
all from the Oaths they made to keep any contrary Constitution. And to carry
up Thomas against all opposition, and to make his Authority more glorious and
formidable to his Enemies, the Pope creates him Legate in England.

Alexander servus servorum Anno 1167. Bar. 21.
Dei, Dilecto fratri Tho. Archiepiscopo Cant. salutem and Apostol.
Benedictionem.

Sacro-Sancta Romans Eccles. digniores personas, and eas maxim, quas honestate,
prudentia and literatura, and eminentia virtutum praefulgere cognoscit:
ampliori consuevit charitate amplecti gloria and honor praevenire. -- -- Inde
est, quod nos tibi Legationem totius Angliae (excepto Episcopatu Eboracensi)
benigno favore concedimus, ut ibi vice nostra corrigas quae inveniri
corrigenda, and ad honorem Dei and Sacrosanctae Romana Ecclesiae, and salutem
animorum, statuas, aedifices and plants, quae statuenda fuerint and plantanda.
--

Dat. Anagniae.

Alexander, servant of the servants of God, to our beloved Brother, Thomas
Archbishop of Canterbury greeting, and Apostolical Benediction.

The most Holy Church of Rome always used to embrace with great chariry, and
prefer in glory and honor persons of eminent worth, and them especially whom
she knows to be most famous for honesty, wisdom, learning, and excellency of
virtues. -- -- This is the cause, that with Our loving favor, We grant and
bestow on you the Legantine Authority over all England (excepting only the
Archbishop of York) to the end, that within your jurisdiction, in Our place and
authority, you correct what you find worthy amendment; and that to the honor
of God, the holy Church of Rome, and for the salvation of Souls, you do
constitute, build and plant, whatsoever is to be settled and planted. --

Given at Anagni.

Being thus raised above himself, countenanced and upheld against all
opposition, he hurries into England to the Bishops a threatening Letter against
the King, and the Constitutions confirmed at Clarendon, telling the Bishops --

That We have too long, and too much forborne the King of England; Baron. 26.
nor has the Church of God gained any benefit by this Our enduring. It seems
dangerous and intolerable for us to leave any longer unpunished (as hitherto
We have done) so great excesses of Him and his Officers against the Church of
God, and Ecclesiastical persons; especially, since We have very often
endeavored by Messengers, Letters, and all manner of means (as became Us) to
recall him from his perverse purpose: Because therefore, he will hardly afford
Us the hearing, much less attentively listen unto Us; We have, with Invocation
of the Grace of the holy Ghost, publicly condemned and declared as void, that
Deed of Writing, with the Authority of that Indenture, wherein are contained
not the Customs, but rather the wicked divices, whereby the Church of England
is disturbed and confounded. And have hereby also Excommunicated all the
Observers, Exactors, Counselors, Assistants, and Defenders of the same. And do
also absolve by the Authority of God and Us, all you Bishops from that promise,
whereby you were bound, contrary to the Constitution of the Church, for the
observation of them. And then he rehearses the said six Constitutions in
controversy between the King and Him; and then names several persons of
Quality, whom he did thereby Excommunicate.

Of these things he also gives the Pope notice, repeating in a manner the same
reproaches against the King, with an additional Id. 34.
commendation that he grows worse and worse, whom he was also resolved to
Excommunicate. Upon this, the English Bishops write to Thomas, how they had
once some hopes of a peace, hearing how he gave himself to prayer, fasting,
etc. -- The way to recover the Id. 43.
benefits of a peaceable reconciliation: hereby was conceived an hope that you
might from above bring into his Majesty's heart such favor, that he would out
of Kingly mercy relent in his wrath toward us, and never recall to mind the
injuries offered by reason of your departure. Your friends and well-wishers
regained some access unto his Majesty, whilst these things were thus divulged
of you; insomuch as he graciously admitted all such as were suitors for
restoring you into his former favor. But now, by the relation of some, we
understand, which we cannot but with grief remember, that you published against
him a severer Commination; wherein you let pass all salutation; wherein you
practice no Counsel or Petition for Grace; wherein you neither advise, nor
write any thing that savoureth favorably; but with all extremity do rigorously
menace Interdiction or Excommunication against him: Which were it as sharply
executed, as it is bitterly spoken, we should not then hope for peace, but
should fear to be inflamed with an irrevocable and eternal hatred. -- Thus, --
whilst, as it were, with a drawn sword you join battle, you have not left for
your self any place for Petition. Wherefore (O Father) we charitably advise
you, not to heap labors upon labors, and injuries upon injuries; but setting
threatening aside, you would rather embrace patience and humility. Commend your
cause to Divine Clemency, and your self to the grace and mercy of your
Sovereign; and in so doing, you shall heap and cast together coals of fire upon
the heads of many. -- It is better to be highly commended for voluntary
poverty, than to be openly taxed by all men for ingratitude for a received
Benefit. It is deeply rooted into the minds of all men, how gracious our Lord
the King has been unto you; unto how great dignity he has raised you from
poor degree, and received you into his favor so freely and frankly, as the
ample bounds of his Dominions, reaching from the Northern Sea, to the Pyrenean
Mountains, were by him so absolutely subject unto your power, as through all
those Principalities, they were only accounted happy, who could find but
favor in your sight: And that no worldly mutability might overthrow your
prosperity and glory, he laid your foundation most firm, in the possession
belonging to God: And, notwithstanding his Mother dissuaded, the Kingdom cried
out against it, and the Church of God (so far as she could) sighed and groaned
thereat; he endeavored by all means possibly to raise you unto the dignity of
your present preferment, hoping he should hereafter Reign blessedly, and enjoy
your assistance and counsel with exceeding security. If therefore, where he
expected security to defend him, he shall find a sword to offend: What rumor
will be spread of you by all men? what a reward? what a remembrance will this
be of a requital never heard of before? Forbear therefore (if you please) to
wrong your fame: forbear to injure your Renown, and endeavor to overcome with
humility your King, and your son with charity, etc. -- And at the end, tells
him of his preposterous and rash Excommunication of the ^ocelin.
Bishop and John of Oxford.
Dean of Salisbury, before the offense was examined. -- A new order of
Judgment, and hitherto in the Laws and Canons (as we hope) unknown, first to
condemn, and then to examine the offense* --

The English Bishops write also to the Pope, giving great commendations of
their King, and telling the Pope the occasion and story of these troubles
between Henry and Thomas, viz. How that the King -- finding sometimes the peace
of his Kingdoms not a little molested with the outrageous excesses of some
insolent Clerks, with due reverence to the Clergy, referred their offenses to
the Bishops, Judges of the Church, that one sword might assist another, and
that the Spiritual Power might confirm and establish in the Clergy that peace,
which he maintained in the people. Wherein the zeal of each party appeared more
plainly; the Bishops affirming that murder, or any other like crime, should
only be punished in the Clergy by degradation: The King, on the contrary,
being of opinion, that this punishment did not sufficiently answer the offense;
neither was it provision enough for maintenance of peace, if a Lector aut
Acolythus.
Reader or Subdeacon killing some famous man renowned for Religion or Dignity,
should escape free, with loss only of this Order.

The Clergy therefore upholding the i. e. of holy Orders, or Clergy.
Order established from Heaven, and our Lord the King persecuting only the
offense (as we hope) with a just haetred, and intending to plant his peace more
deeply; a certain holy contention arose amongst us, which (we trust) the plain
and honest intention of both parties may excuse. Hereupon, not with any
ambition of enlarging his Dominions, not with any conceit of oppressing the
Churches Liberties, but with a desire of settling and confirming peace; it went
so far, that the King would produce to light the Customs of his Kingdom, and
Dignities anciently observed, and quietly and reverently yielded by persons
Ecclesiastical to former Kings in the Kingdom of England: and to the end that
hereafter no longer the thread of contention might be spun, he would have the
same openly known. Wherefore the most ancient Bishops and great Peers of the
Realm, being first sworn by their faith, and the hope which they had in
Almighty God; and then making search into the state of fore-passed times, the
Dignities of the Crown being sought, were laid open, and by the testimonies of
men of the greatest account in the Kingdom were published. Lo here the cruelty
of our Lord the King against the Church of God, which fame has so spread over
the whole world! Behold here his persecution! And these are the works so
divulged for wicked, both here and every where!

And then they tell him, how willing the King is to be advised by the Church,
that peace might be -- -- And truly (Father) our solicitation had long since
(as we hope) obtained the desired end of this wished peace, had not our Father
the Lord of Canterburies bitter provocations stirred up afresh this discord, now
laid asleep, and almost absolutely extinguished. For he from whose patience we
hitherto expected peace, from whose modesty the recovery of the Kings favor,
assailed him afresh, and without respect of his Majesty (at such time as he led
his Armies lately against the Peacebreakers) with severe and terrible Letters,
nothing savoring of fatherly Devotion, or Pastoral Patience, but most bitterly
threatening him with sentence of Excommunication, and his Kingdom with an
Interdict: whereas, on the otherside, he rather ought with admonition to have
mollified him, and with merits and meekness overcome him. If the Kings humility
be so requited, what will be determined against the stubborn? If the ready
devotion of obedience be esteemed so slightly, in what manner shall wilful
obstiuacie be revenged?

Nay father, to these so grievous threats, are added yet matters far more
grievous; for he Excommunicated some of his Majesty's Liegemen, most inward
with our Lord the King; the Principal of his Privy Council, who managed the
counsels of the King, and the affairs of his Kingdom: and all this, being
neither cited, nor impleaded, neither (as they say or call it) guilty of any
crime, nor convicted, nor confessing any thing.

Yea, he went farther yet, insomuch, as he suspended from his Priestly and
Episcopal Office, our reverend Brother, the Bishop of Salisbury, being absent,
undefended; neither confessed, nor convict; before ever the cause of his
suspension was approved of by the advice of those of the same Province, or any
others If therefore this course of proceedings in judgments so preposterous
(we spare to say inordinate) be followed concerning the King and Kingdom, what
will be the end (considering the time is evil, and yeildeth great occasion of
malice) but that the band of grace and favor, whereby the Kingdom and
Priesthood have hitherto been united, will be rent asunder, etc? -- And so they
appeal against the Archbishop Thomas.

The Church being somewhat troubled with these divisions, it was the earnest
desire of several to procure a peace; and this the Pope himself wished, having
work enough to do with the Emperor Frederick. To accomplish this, upon the
desire also of Henry, An. 1168.
he sends two Legates a Latere, viz. Cardinal William and Cardinal Otto; and
accordingly empowered them with instructions to manage that accommodation in
France. He writes also to Bar. anno 1168. 3, 4.
Thomas, desiring him by all means to give himself to peace; and rather than
not to have concord, to wink at some things, and yield for a while. Yet, as if
Thomas were not great enough before, he intended to raise him above all in
France; to which purpose, he resolved to make him Legate also over all those
Churches; but before he could bestow upon him that Legantine Authority, he was
to desire the King of France his leave, which accordingly he did by 7, 8, 9.
Letter.

As for the manner of the Treaty of Peace between the King and Thomas, take the
story of it from the Legates themselves to the Pope. 33.


To our most blessed Father and Lord, Alexander, etc. William and Oddo, by the
same Grace Cardinals, etc.
Coming to the i. e. in France.
Dominions of the renowned King of England, we found the controversy between
him and Canterbury aggravated in far worse sort (believe us) than willingly we
could have wished. For the King with the greatest part of his followers
affirmed how the Archbishop with great vehemency Speed, 29. This Accusation
Thomas denied.
incensed the most worthy King of France against him; and in like sort induced
his Cousin, the Earl of Flanders, (who before did bear him no malice) to fall
out with him, and raise the most powerful war he could against him: and this he
knew of a certainty, and it appeared so by several evident demonstrations. For,
whereas the said Earl departed from the King very friendly; the Archbishop
coming into his Province, to the very seat of the War, incited, as much as in
him lay, as well the King of France, as the said Earl to Arms -- The King
affirmed also, that the Informations concerning the ancient Customs of England
delivered to you, were false and not true; which also the Bishops there present
did witness. The King offered also, that if any Customs since his time were
devised contrary to the Ecclesiastical Laws, he would submit them to your
judgment.

Calling therefore to us the Archbishops, Bishops, and Abbots of the Kings
Dominions, that the King might not deprive us of all hopes of peace, but rather
suffer himself to be drawn to have a Conference with the Archbishop, as well
concerning the peace as the judgment: Sending therefore Letters unto i. e.
Thomas.
him by our Chaplains, we appointed a certain and safe place, where we might
have conference with him, on the Feast of St. Martin: he nevertheless
pretending excuses, put off this Conference until the Octaves of that Saint;
which truly vexed the King more than could be imagined. But when we saw that
the Archbishop (although we offered him safe conduct) would nevertheless give
us no meetings in any part of the Kings Dominions next the French; we being
willing to yield to him, that there might be nothing wanting in us which might
redound to his profit, came to a place in the Realm of France, which himself
appointed.

Being come to the Conference, we began most earnestly to persuade him, that he
would behave himself to the King, who had been his singular Benefactor, with
such humility, as might afford us sufficient matter on which to ground our
Petition for peace. At which retiring himself aside with his friends, after
some consultation with them, he answered, that He had sufficiently humbled
himself to the King, without impeaching the honor of God, the liberty of the
Church, the reputation of his own Person, the possessions of the Church; and
farther, the justice due to him and his friends. These things so numbered up, we
seriously persuaded him (as it was necessary) to descend to particulars; but
when he would allege nothing, either certain or particular, we demanded of
him, if in the matters specified in your Letters, he would submit himself to
our judgment, as the King and Bishops had already promised to do: to which he
presently replied, that he had received no Mandat from you to this purpose: But
if he and all his might first be fully restored, he would then proceed,
according as the Apostolic See should direct him. So returning from the
Conference, since his words neither tended to judgment nor agreement; nor yet
would he by any means enter into the matter: We manifested unto the King some
things; but concealing other passages (as it was convenient) and tempering
other things what we heard, etc.


Thomas Bar. 38, 39, etc.
writes also to the Pope, and informs him of the same conference, and in a
manner confesses all here set down, expecting his instigating the French
against King Henry. And another 53, 54.
Letter he writes to the Cardinals at Rome, pitifully complaining that King
Henry is not punished, against whom he rants to the purpose.

The Legates again endeavor a peace, and therefore they try Henry, to see how
far he would yield. To whom the King replied, That for his part, for the love
he bore to the Pope and Cardinals, he would permit the Archbishop, Thomas, to
return in peace 67.
to his See, and dispose of his Church, and all things thereunto belonging; and
because there had been long contention about the Customs, he said, That he and
his Children would be content with those which his Ancestors had enjoyed. And
yet if this condition of peace did not satisfy Archbishop Thomas, he affirmed
he was ready to stand to the determination, as well of the Bishops of England,
as those beyond Seas, as of Roan, Baieux, and Le Man's: And if this were not yet
enough, he would submit himself to the judgment of the Pope, with this Salvo,
that he would not impeach his Childrens right; for during his own life, he was
content that the Pope should abrogate what he pleased: But yet could not these
condescentions do any good.

All these endeavors failing, Jews the Seventh, King of France, undertook the
business, he and Henry being now made friends: and in this he behaved himself
so wisely, that he had wrought pretty well upon Thomas; and so having procured
a meeting, Thomas 85, 86,
humbled himself at the feet of Henry, saying, I commit to your determination
the whole controversy, which has been the cause of dissension between us,
still excepting the honor of God: Which last reservation greatly troubled
Henry, Thomas always making use of such Salvo's that rendered all but
conditional, and so void when himself fancied. Henry at this turns to the King
of France, saying, See, my Lord, if it please you, let any thing not fit this
man's humor, and he presently condemns it as contrary to the honor of God,
whereby he challength not only his own, but also whatsoever belongs to me.
But that it may appear, that I withstand not the honor of God, nor yet of him
(i. e. Canterbury) I make this offer. There have been many Kings of England, my
Predecessors, of greater or less Authority than I am: and there have been many
Archbishops of Canterbury before him, of great worth and holiness; what
therefore the more eminent and virtuous of his Predecessors, have done to the
least of my Predecessors; let him allow the same unto me, and the Controversy
shall be ended. Upon which followed great Acclamations that the King had
humbled himself enough.

Thomas holding his peace, the King of France said, My Lord Archbishop, will
you be greater than other holy men? will you be greater or better than Peter?
what do you doubt? lo, peace is even at the door. At last Thomas fell a
commending his Predecessors, but that they had left something for him to do;
and then extolled Peter, for resisting the Tyrant Nero with the loss of his
life, etc. Thus the Peers of both Kingdoms, England and France, seeing no good
to be done with him, turned all against him, imputing the want of peace to his
Imputantes arrogantiae Archiepiscopi impedimentum pacis, Bar. an. 1168. 87.
Arrogancy; one Earl protesting he ought to be cast out of France, as he had
been out of England; nay, the very Courtiers who had been Mediators for his
peace, did now in his presence deeply charge him, that he was Semper superbus,
elatus, sapiens in oculis suis, propriae semper sectator volunta and sentencia,
etc. 88.
always proud, highminded, wise in his own conceit, a follower of his private
fancy and opinion. Adding moreover, that it was an exceeding mischief, and
great damage and danger to the Church, that he was ever made a Governor
thereof; and that the same being already partly ruinated, by him, would now be
quite overthrown. Yet they tell us that the King of France presently altered
his opinion, and countenanced Thomas as much as ever.

All these endeavors failing, the Pope once again undertook the Nontio's,
Gratian an Vivian, to take up the Controversy: but when it came near the
conclusion, they could not agree about the formality of the words* and so
returned as wise as they came. Yet did not the Pope give over, but sent two
other, Simon and Bernard, who earnestly persuaded Thomas to humble himself to
his King, and so to please him with prayers Baron. an. 1169. 39, 40, 43.
and ready service. And to work more upon him, the King of France, the
Archbishops, Bishops, and other Lords there present, earnestly advised him to
the same.

Thomas seeing no remedy, and all against him, condescended to their desires,
went to King Henry, and kneeling down, submitted himself to God and the King;
but still with this reservation of the honor of God and his holy Order. But
this Henry rejects as imperfect, alleging that Thomas, by that Salvo, would
upon any occasion exclude the honor of his King. However, Henry declared that
he required nothing of him, but that he, as a Priest and Bishop, should before
them all truly promise without any deceit to observe the Customs which the
holy Archbishops of Canterbury had observed to their Kings, and which Thomas
himself had once promised him to do. But Thomas would consent to nothing,
without such Salvo's as formerly mentioned; which conditional obedience so vexed
the King, that he affirmed, Thomas should never enter England, till he had done
to him as he ought to do; and had undertaken to observe what others had
observed, and what himself had formerly promised. And thus broke off this
business.

And the truth is, the King might have some reason to be more and more incensed
against Thomas, who instead of seeking the favor and friendship of his
Sovereign, had excommunicated his chief Friends; and went so far against
others, that there was Speed 32.
scarce found in the Kings own Chapel and presence, such as might perform the
wonted Ceremonies. And besides, did daily threaten an Interdict against his
whole Dominions; and had done it, but that some more prudent over-perswaded him
to the contrary; and the Pope himself thought it best to lay his commands on
him not to do it till farther Order.

But this was not all, for they proceed yet more and more to vex his Majesty:
For he being now about fifty years old, and seeing the uncertainty of
obedience, and not knowing what the pretense of Church Authority might do to
his Children, if he should dye excommunicated, as it was daily threatened him;
or not in favor with the Pope, as he might suspect upon Thomas his account:
Upon these and other reasons, he rosolved to settle his Succession by the
Coronation of his Son Henry, now fourteen years old.

This resolution being made known, the Pope thought that now Thomas, or neglect
the Coronation, under the pretense that that Ceremony belonged of right to the
Archbishop of Canterbury; and so to hinder any other from performing it, he
wrote an Bar. anno 1170. 3.
Express to the Archbishop of York, and the other Bishops of England, not to
anoint him, or meddle in the business; thereby to necessitate the recalling of
Thomas. But this design wrought otherwise than intended; for the King enraged
at this Prohibition, forthwith caused all his Subjects from twelve years old to
sixty, Stow. page 151. col. 1. Speed 35.
to abjure the Popes Obedience, or take an Oath not to obey the Popes
Constitutions: And then had his Son Crowned at Westminster by Roger Archbishop
of York, the other Bishops assisting; where the young King was Speed, 36. Bar.
16.
sworn to observe the ancient Customs of the Nation, without any mention of the
Churches liberties.

This resolution of the King, or something else, did a little cool the Pope;
and having put on his considering cap, he seemed not so violent against the
Coronation, as formerly, though Thomas cried out, that he and his authority was
undone by it: but to pacify him, the Pope sent him a Paper-remedy, viz. that
that action should not for the future be any Bar. 14.
prejudice to his rights and privileges: And to give Thomas more content, he
Id. 17.
suspended Roger, Archbishop of York; and this terrible sentence he sent to
Thomas himself, to make the best use of it.

Now had the world for almost seven years been troubled with this quarrel
between a King and his Subject; insomuch, that all parties grew almost weary of
it. And now once more to try if any good could be done, a treaty was brought
about again. For this, the Pope sends his Legates, and some threats against
Henry, if peace not presently made; and Thomas also used his humor to procure
an Agreement, viz. threatening to Id. 24.
Interdict the Kings Dominions, and ranting against his Sovereign to the
Legates, declaring him to be no other than a Id. 25.
Deceiver, Jugler and Corrupter. And are these words savouring of an obedient
and peaceful subject?

But in brief, a Conference was had between the King and Thomas, in a place
called by the Inhabitants, Pratum Proditorum.
Traytors-Meddow, where, [though Thomas took upon him to upbraid the King for
opposing him and the Church, and resolved not to yield to him about the
Customs, his Sons Coronation, or the loss of his own liberty and honor, as he
called it; yet] the King showed himself so pliable, that a peace was struck up
between them; Thomas himself confessing to the Pope -- That Ille verbum
acceptans, annuit and nos and nostros qui aderant, recepit in gratiam suam.
Baron. anno 1170. 30.
the King accepted all in good part, yielded us our request, and received us
with all ours there present into his favor. In this Treaty the King twice held
Thomas his Horse Matt. Paris, an. 1170. page 122.
bridle, whilst he mounted on Horseback: was not Thomas proud to permit it, or
not dislike it?

Now might we suppose all to be calm and quiet, but we shall find nothing
less; for Agreement thus made, Thomas hastes for England, where being come, he
having desired the Pol. Virg. l. 13. p. 212.
Popes Authority, suspends or Excommunicates the Bishops for Speed, 40.
Crowning the young King: And thus instead of being peaceable and patient, he
renews the old broyl, and provokes again to displeasure, by Censuring those,
who had been the Kings friends; and by so doing, r^flected upon his Majesty.
Upon this, the King would have Thomas to absolve them again; but that he
refused, unless they would swear absolute Obedience to the Pope; which, they
said, they would not do, without the Kings consent, whose dignity it did most
touch upon.

The Father-King, then in France, being informed of these extravagant actions
of Thomas against the peace and tranquillity of his Subjects, fell into such a
displeasure, that in a sudden rage and passion, he wondered revenge was not
done upon Thomas: which four of his Courtiers hearing, interpreting the words
to a wrong sense, without any Warrant or Authority, thought they could not do
the King better service, than by killing the Archbishop. For which purpose they
haste into England, so to Canterbury, where they cruelly murdered Thomas in the
Cathedral Church, at a place yet called the Martyrdom. But the Barth. Gavant.
Thesour. Sacrorum Rituum. tom. 2. page 140.
certain day on which he suffered, they cannot positively tell, yet they
confidently appoint a day in the Calendar, as they do many others, upon
uncertainties.

The names of these four Courtiers were
Sir Richard (or Hugh) Breton or Brito; the name of a Family yet Tho. Fuller's
Church-Hist. l. 3. 66.
extant in Northamptonshire. Sir Hugh Morvill of Kirk-Oswald in Cumberland,
where his Sword wherewith he slew Becket, was kept a long time, in memory of
that fact: his Family at this day extinct. Sir William Tracy, Stow, p. 152.
col. 2.
Baron of Brains and Morton, whose heirs yet flourish at Todington in
Glocestershire. Sir Reginald, or Reynold (some say Richard) Fitz-Vrse, or Bears
son: his Postery was afterward men of great Lands and Commands, in the County
of Monaghan in Ireland, being there called Mac-Mahon, which in Irish signifies
the son of a Bear. To these was assisting one Hugh, called the Ill-clerk, an
Officer of the Church.
But though these killed him never so surely; yet are we told a pretty Bar.
anno 1170. 59
story, how that the next morning, prayers being ended, he lifted up his hand,
and gave the Monks his Benediction: and well he might, when Pet. de Natal. lib.
2. cap. 13.
Angels in the Choire appeared, and helped to sing his Requiem. These four
having slain Thomas, fled into the North, and for some time hid themselves in
Knaresbrough Castle in Yorkshire, whence they went to Rome; where (though at
first the Pope had Excommunicated them) they obtained their Bar. anno 1172. 22.
Absolution and Pardon from Alexander the Third, being enjoined by way of
penance to visit the Holy Land. And we are told that the Clergy having thus
exempted themselves from the temporal Laws; so the Speed, 44.
punishment of a Priest-killer, was not then Death, but Excommunication: till
about the year 1176, it was declared by this King Henry, that such Murderers
should suffer loss of life. We are also told, that whilst these men remained
under Excommunication, that Bar. an. 1172. 22.
Dogs, though never so hungry, would not take bread from their hands: as true
as many other old-wives tales in Baronius, befitting the credit of a learned
Cardinal. However, that the memory of the men, and their bloody action, might
not be forgot, their Will. Somner's, Antiq. of Cant. p. 164.
Statues of Stone were set up in the Cathedral Churches Porch at Canterbury, as
a premonition, that no man for the future should lay violent hands on Bishops,
or their Possessions. But if the Statues of all such sacrilegious people were
now to be erected, neither the Porches nor Churches themselves in all England
and Scotland could contain them.

Old King Henry was now at Argentan in Normandy, when news came to him of the
Murder, which so afflicted him, that he was overwhelmed Bar. anno 1171. 4.
with tears and lamentations, changing his Royalty into Hair cloths and Ashes,
almost for three days together, retiring into his private Chamber, not
receiving either meat or comfort; insomuch, that the people about him feared he
would pine away with grief: though for the clearing of his innocence he
protested, -- Omnipotentem Deum se testem invocare in animam suam, quod opus
nefandum nec sua voluntate nec Conscientia commissum est, nec artificio
perquisitum. Baron.
As Almighty God should judge his soul, that that accursed deed was neither
acted by his will or consent, nor done by any device of his.

Neither was this any counterfeit or dissembling grief, but real and true; and
that so great, that as a -- Sa Penitence fut si grande, qu'on nec lit point es
Histoires, que au^un Prince Christien ayt faict Penitence avec plus grande
humilite. Guil. Gazet, Hist. des Saints, tom. 2. page 980.
Romanist confesses, never could any History afford such an Example of Penance
and Humility in a Christian Prince.

For the King did not only submit himself to the Papal Censures, and (as they
say) reject the ancient and wholesome Constitutions (which we are told, were
not long after Spelman Consil. tom. 2. page 111.
confirmed again in the presence of the Popes Nuntios) but also the Pope Bar.
an. 1173. 6, 7.
having Canonized Thomas for a Saint in Heaven, Henry to complete the rest of
the Penance Speed, 75. Bar. an. 1174. 6.
enjoined him by the Legates, went into England; and being come within Speed, ib.
three or Fullers Chapter Hist. l. 3.
four miles of Canterbury, clad only in one woollen Coat; went all that long
way barefooted to the Church, the blood running from his tender feet, by the
piercing and cutting of the sharp stones; and in the Church bestowed a whole
day and night in fasting, watching and prayer; and the next day returned,
without eating and drinking all the while, barefooted as he came. Nor was this
all, for he also received on his bare back from the Monks, above fourscore
lashes with Rods. To such an height of Extravagancie had the awe of Papal
Censures and Absolutions flown over the greatest Monarchs, though really no way
subject, either to them, or their brutish-Thunderbolts.

The Kings purse paid for it also, by maintaining a great number of Soldiers,
by the Popes Order, in the Holy Land. And what good will he really had for
Thomas, may appear by his charity and care for his Relations: one of his
Sisters called Mary, she not intending Fullers Chapter Hist. l. 3. 6^.
to marry, he made Abbess of Berking-Nunnery: and another of his Sisters being
married to one of the Botelers, or Butlers, he transplanted with her Husband
and Children into Ireland, conferring upon them high Honors and rich Revenues;
from whom the Dukes of Ormond are descended. Nor was this all, for he founded
an Abbey, called Thomas-Court in Dublin, in memory of our Thomas Becket,
indowing it with large Revenues.

Thus have we seen the story of Thomas Becket, which we have taken out of the
Histories writ by his friends and admirers; and followed that which has most
probability of Truth. And we cannot but suppose, that where a man is declared a
Martyr for the Church, and a Saint in Heaven, but that Church History will be
crowded with his commendations, by which we can expect but a partial relation,
at least little or nothing against him; it being held an unpardonable crime,
not to believe with the Pope, or to hint any thing against him whom his
Holiness has thrust into Heaven: Yet enough may be gathered, not only from
those who most commend, but also from some ancient Historians, whereby we may
justly lay the fault rather upon him, than his Sovereign.

For the King looked upon his cause to be so just, having all the other Bishops
of his Dominions approving of him, that he freely offered the Controversy to
the Trial, even of the Speed, ^4.
Parisian Divines, and the Church of France, though their King showed himself a
great friend to Becket. But Thomas was so cunning, that he would stand to no
man's judgment but his own and the Popes; for then he was sure to come off
Conqueror.

And if Thomas durst not stand to the determination of those Churches, who in
all probability understood the business best; and to oppose all his own Country
Bishops, as if none of them were as wise or honest as himself: And farther,
seeing presently after Thomas his death, nay, and Canonization too, it was a
strong dispute amongst the Divines beyond Sea, whether Thomas was Caesarius
Hist. Memorab. l. 8. c. 69.
damned for his Treason, or a true Martyr; I see no reason why we should be so
confident of his Saintship and merits, however, as to use his blood for a means
to our Salvation, as those do, who pray

Horae B. Virg. secundum usum Sarum. Paris 1534. fol. 53. b.
Tu per Thomae Sanguinem, quem pro te impendit,
Fac nos Christ scandere, quo Thomas ascendit.
For Thomas his blood sake, which he for thee did spend,
Let us, O Christ! where Thomas is, ascend.
Again, when we consider the malapert humor of Thomas with his betters; as,
because the King would not agree to his humor, he must accuse him of Bar. an.
1166. 45.
perverse ways, as Id. anno 1167. 26.
criminous; that he 34.
grows worse and worse; that he is a Id. anno 1170. 25.
jugler, a corrupt man, and a deceiver. Again, when we consider how all the
other Bishops declared him guilty of Id. anno 1164. 29.
Perjury, of An. 1167. 45.
injuring the King, of ingratitude, of his rash and preposterous
Excommunications; that he by Ib. 61.
his bitter provocations stirred up the discord; that his actions savor nothing
of fatherly devotion, or pastoral patience; and that to the Pope himself they
all Ibid.
vindicate the Kings actions. And farther, when we see the Peers not only of
England, but also of France, impute the want of peace to his An. 1168. 88.
arrogance; and those who had been the very Mediators for his peace, yet could
not but tell him that he was Ibid.
always proud, high-minded, wise in his own conceit; a follower of his private
fancy and opinion; and that it was a mischief to the Church, that ever he was
made Archbishop. Nay more, when we see the Popes Legates, and the Archbishops
and Bishops of France, earnestly persuade him to humble himself to his King:
And again, the Legates to accuse him even to the Pope, of his An. 1168. 33.
provoking the King of France, and Earl of Flanders, against his own Sovereign;
of writing lies to his Holiness against his own King; and that his words
neither tended to judgment nor peace. And lastly, when he hears the Nobility,
and others of his own Nation pronounce him a Speed, 23. Bar. anno 1164. 3^, 31.
Traitor to his face: And John Harding, a zealous Romanist, and one that
bestowed most of his time in search into our English History, above two hundred
years ago, could boldly thus pronounce him a Rebel:

He exiled then Thomas of Canterbury Chron. Chap. 1^1.

Out of England, and Feel of his liance, so a Manuscript.
many of his aliaunce
For cause of the Churches governaunce: So have I read it in an old Manuscript,
Arch. Seld. in Bodle^an. Oxon. But one may perceive that the Manuscript has
herein been abused, by some bodies scraping out the first copy.
For cause of his rebellious governaunce;
And as he came fro Rome, by France away,
With language fell, he prayed the King that day.
We might suspect that he was not so good and true a Subject as some would have
him; however, not to deserve to be Bar. anno 1173. 2.
yoked with St. Thomas the Apostle, or to Ib. 7.
exceed all other Saints, or to be honored with more Devotion and Will.
Somners Antiq. of Cant. p. 248.
Offerings than Christ himself.

When again we consider that it is the Cause that makes a Martyr, and yet all
the English Bishops declared to the Pope himself, that this Controversy was
merely about Ex levi and minus utili occasion. Bar. anno 1164. 47.
Trifles; when also we know, how strangely the word Martyrdom has been
mistaken by hasty Zealots, as the Prat^ol. l. 4. 14.
Donatists, who would seek their own deaths, when others desired it not; and
would kill others, unless they would Parsons three convers. part 3. page 168.
kill them, to make them, forsooth, Martyrs; as if they were all of Prateol. l.
14. 16.
Petilians opinion, who affirmed him a Martyr that killed himself for his own
sins; or like the Id. l. 3. 19.
Circum cellions, who would kill themselves, if others would not do it for
them. Why should Thomas Becket be a Martyr, when he might have saved his own
life, as is very probable, either by Guil. Gazet. Hist. des Saints, page 999.
tom. 2.
withdrawing himself, as his Monks persuaded him, or, by making resistance,
which he forbad; insomuch, that he would not have the doors shut or defended
against them?

But farther yet, since Vid. Andr. Rivet. Jesuita vapul. p. 127, 2^8.
they tell us, that the people did for a long time Bellarm. de Purgat. l. 1. c.
7.
worship one for a Martyr, who took the pains afterward to tell them that he
was damned; And the An. D^ur^^^t. ^a. 8. T^. 14. 4.
Parisian Doctor was held a virtuous and holy man, till being dead, he told
them he was damned; and Hyrcanus, whom Albertus Magnus put into his Letany, is
declared by T^h^res lib. 2. cap. 28.
Serarius to be an Heretic: Why should we be so confident that Thomas Becket
is in Heaven, as to make him the W^ll. Somner, p. 250.
Titular Saint of Canterbury, or to flock in Pilgrimage to him, to have the
benefit of his merits, in such numbers, as at one time there was about an Id.
page 249.
hundred thousand worshippers of him in Canterbury from several places?

And when they tell us, that presently after his death, they began to
Caesarius, Hist. Mem. li^. 8. c. 70.
counterfeit the Relics; and experience tells us, that the Jo. Polyand.
disput. p. 4^, etc.
Teeth of Moles, the Bones of Mice and Cats, the Tails of Beasts, and suchlike,
have been worshipped for Relics of great Saints: Why should they be so
confident of having truly his body, as to bestow so much good and precious
Stones upon it, as Stow, page 576.
twelve or fourteen men could scarce carry? And that the world was cheated with
false ware, will thus appear: His Bar. anno 1172. 17.
brains were sent to be kept in St. Maria Maggiore a^ Rome: His Erasm. Colloq.
perigrinat. Relig. page 270.
face was set in gold, and showed in a little Chapel behind the high-Altar at
Canterbury; his Ib. p. 269.
Skull in another place of the Church; a Foot of his in the Vestry; and a great
deal of his blood, and a piece of his Crown was conveyed to Will. Somner, p.
167.
St. Augustins Abbey in the same City; for which the Abbey gave to the
Cathedral Church several houses, and a piece of ground. And yet when in Henry
VIII's time the Shrine was defaced, there was found in it Will. Lambard's
Peramb. of Kent, 337.
a whole entire body, head and all, as of one but lately dead. And much of the
same truth was that Erasm. ib. p. 273.
upper-leather of his old Shoe, which they offered to Travelers to London to
kiss, but really to beg by.

And lastly, if that be true which they tell us, viz. In Barth. Fumus Summa
Aurea. verb. de Canonizat. 2.
that those Relics must not be worshipped, if there be any doubt that they are
not really of Saints; then has the world been cheated by the supposed Relics
of Thomas Becket: And I know no reason by the same rule, why they should so
venerate Thomas, since they cannot positively swear his being in Heaven, unless
they will subscribe to that fond Rule in De Purgat. l. 1. cap. 9.
Bellarmine, that the Pope is also infallible in Canonization, so that, whom he
declares a Saint, must of consequence be in Heaven, though he were in Hell
before.

As for my self, I am superstitious and curious enough in things of Antiquity;
but seeing of Relics there is scarce one true amongst five thousand, I am
less credulous and careful. To conclude with Thomas, as I have no power or
authority to determine of his Saintship, so I shall suspect his Martyrdom and
Allegiance, but freely grant that he was murdered. The most memorable actions
fell to him upon Matt. Paris, an. 1169. page 116.
Tuesdays, as some observe Thursdays have been the worst days to the Kings of
England.

CHAP. IV.
1. The murders and misfortunes of several Kings and Princes.

2. The Imperial Authority despised by the Popes, and made a mere slavery.

3. King Jews VII. of France Interdicted.

4. The troubles of the Emperor Frederick Barbarossa, and the odd Coronation
of the Emperor Henry VI. by Pope Caelestine II's feet.

Sect. 1. The murders and misfortunes of several Kings and Princes.
HAving wearied our selves in England, though I might have enlarged, how King
Henry II was also troubled by the rebellions of his own sons; Let us take a
short turn or two beyond Seas.

And here I shall not tell all the circumstances how King Suercherus Swedland
was murdered by his ignoble groom; how St. Ericus IX, Monarch of the same
Dominions, was made away by the Treachery of his own Nobility, lying open to
the corruption Dane; nor of the untimely death of Suercherus III, as a Prologue
to which, the Swedish Historians will tell you an odd story Jo. Loccen. p. 44.
of a devilish Horse, flying through the Air: possibly wanting Shoes, the hard
ground might hurt his feet; and the story in part confirms this conjecture.

Nor shall I here enlarge how Pope Callistus II had William the great, Duke of
Apulia, as his footboy, and Yeoman of his Baron. an. 1120. 12.
Stirrup; nor how the inconstant Neapolitans imprisoned their King William I,
and promoted his Son Ruggieri, or Roger, whom they also, altering their
humors, presently besieged in his Palace; and which was more, shot to death,
and then restored his Father William. Neither will I trouble my self to
unriddle the doubt in the Polish Historians, concerning the death of their good
King Casimire

Mista dedit domino scelerati aconita ministri
Inter solennes perfida dextra dapes. Alex. Guagnin. Rerum Polon. tom. 1. p. 90.

A wicked Varlet, void of grace or fear
Mixed deadly poison amongst his Royal cheer.
And here I might also tell you how the furious Venetian murdered their
innocent Duke Vitalis Michele II, because the wellmeaning man was not as
successful against his deceitful enemies,

Sect. 2. The Imperial Authority despised by the Popes, and made a mere slavery.
BUt waving these, let us see how the Popes lord it over the Emperors, as if
they had been their Vassals or Slaves; but the others, by I know not what whim,
the Infallible disposers of the world: And so I warrant you, they are not a
little proud of Cardinal Gratianus his answer to King Henry II of England, when
he seemed somewhat angry at the Popes actions against him -- Domine noli
minari, nos enim nullas minas timemus, quia de talis curia sumus, quae
consuevit Imperare Imperatoribus and Regibus. Baron. an. 1169. 12.
Sir, Threaten not, we fear no menaces, because we belong to that Court, which
uses to command both Emperors and Kings.

And the truth is, by degrees they intended to sweep up all the Imperial
Privileges to themselves; and as formerly they had made a good progress, so
they now continue; for here we find Pope Helvic. Chron. an. 1107.
Paschal II to alter the date of the Papal writings: for whereas, formerly,
they used to be dated with the year of the Emperors Reign, he rejects that
form, and subscribes the year of his own Popedom; which custom has been since
continued by his successors. But the chief of all was the pretty conceited
custom of their Crowning the Emperors, which as they had hitherto several
times carried on under pretty pretenses, and a specious awe of their
Papercensures; so would they not willingly leave off that design, making
thereby an Argument, that none can be Emperor, but of their Coronation or
Approbation; and from their making, drawing out another of their power in
nulling or disposing.

And thus had they awed or gulled the greatest Monarchs to their Lure. Thus the
Emperor Lotharius II, who succeeded Henry V, meeting Pope Innocent II at Liege
in Germany, became the (b) Yeoman a Baron. an. 1131. 9.
to his Stirrup, in one hand carrying a Switch, as if it were to keep off the
throng; and with the other leading his Holiness his white Palfrey. And thus did
the Pope permit the Emperor to wait upon him in this servile posture on foot.
And two years after, he guarding the said Pope into Italy, was by him Crowned
in the Lateran; upon whose walls he caused to be painted himself sitting in his
Pontificial Chair, and Lotharius on his knees receiving Sigon. de Reg. Ital.
Krantz. Metrop. l. 6. c. 35.
the Crown of the Empire from his hands, with these wise Verses.

Rex venit ante fores, jurans prius urbis honores:
Post homo fit Papae, sumit, quo dante, Coronam.
The King does come before the Gates,
Swears the Customs of the Town:
Then him the Pope his Liege-men makes,
And after does him Crown.
Sect. 3. King Jews VII of France Interdicted.
LEaving Germany, I might step into France, and tell you a story, how Alberic,
the Archbishop of Bourges, dying, this Pope Innocent II taking upon him to be
Lord of all Nations, consecrated one Peter, his dear friend, as Prelate of that
City, against the Kings will; which so enraged his Majesty, viz. Jews VII,
that he publicly Ma^t. Paris, an. 1146.
and solemnly swear, that the said Peter should never enter into that City:
Upon which (as my Author says) the Pope Interdicted the King; insomuch, that
into whatsoever City, Town or place the King entered, there was no Divine
Service said: And this Interdiction continued for three years time; and then
the King was forced to submit, and not only admit of the said Peter to be
Archbishop, but for a farther Penance, was to visit the Holy Land. Thus the
Thief would steal Rushes to keep his hand in ure; and the Pope will take any
occasion to trample upon Temporal Princes; so that the Vicar takes more upon
him, than either Christ or St. Peter would do. And thus thanks to his Holiness
for making the King infallibly forsworn, the Oath, though hasty, being lawful;
he having, for ought that I know, as much power then in his Dominions, as the
French King has at this time, who will not let the Pope thrust Bishops into
his Cities.

Sect. 4. The troubles of the Emperor Frederick Barbarossa, and the odd
Coronation of the Emperor Henry VI, by Pope Caelestine II's feet.
BUt well may the Kings of France endure this, when they see far greater
Ignominies done to the Emperor, of whom, passing Conrade III, let us see what
was done to Frederick I, surnamed (from his red beard) by the Italians
Barbarossa. Being chosen in Germany, he must trudge to Rome too to be Crowned,
or else all the fat was in the fire. And now was Pope Adrian, or Hadrian IV,
born at Abbots-Langley near Kings-Langley in Hartfordshire, and was first
called Nicholas Break-spear, the only Englishman that ever was Pope, though
Apparat. ad Hist. Scot. p. 48.
Dempster would willingly hook him in to be a Scotchman, and (b) Fuller would
increase the number of English Popes, and both with the same Authority, that
is, c Chapter Hist. l. 3.
none at all.

Frederick come into Italy, meets Adrian at Viterbo, where the Emperor held
his Stirrup, whilst his Holiness alighted from his Horse. But the mischief was,
Barbarossa not used to such slavery, Bamberg (who had made a Speech in Aelmold.
Hist. Sclav. c. 18.
Commendation of Frederick) that what he had said, was but mere words; for that
the Emperor instead of honoring had dishonored St. Peter; for instead of
holding the right, he had held the left Stirrup. The Emperor as well as he
could excused himself, alleging it was merely through ignorance, that being
the first time that ever he held one in his life. But this no way satisfied the
Pope, intimating, that if he pleaded ignorance for his neglect of small things,
there was little hopes of his performing the greater. The Emperor a little
angry at these frumpish humors, desired to know whence that custom came: for
if it were only of good will, he had done enough; and if it were upon duty, he
had showed his humility, though he mistook the Stirrup. And thus in a pet they
both parted for that time; the Pope affirming he would not Crown him, till he
had done his duty.

This story related by that ancient Historian, Helmodus, who lived at this
time, and so might know best, is a little varied from by An. 1155. 12, 13, 14.
Baronius, who tells it to this purpose: The Emperor and Pope being met,
Frederick refused to hold his Stirrup; whereupon the Cardinals were out of
their little wits, and shuffled away; and the Pope was as troubled as any of
them, not knowing what to do, yet he permitted the Emperor to kiss his feet;
but denied him the kiss of peace; and why he did so, he thus tells the Emperor
-- Because thou have not done to me that wonted and due i. e. to hold his
Stirrup -- Reddi Romani Pontificibus Stratoris obsequium, Cogu. tom. 2. p. 71.
honor, which thy Predecessors, the Orthodox Emperors used to perform, even
till this time, to my Predecessors the Popes, for the honor of the Apostles
Peter and Paul; until thou do satisfy me in this point, I shall not receive
thee to the kiss of peace. -- To whom Frederick reylyed, that it was not his
duty. Well, this Controversy held all the next day; and at last, it went
clearly against the Emperor, and proved, forsooth, that he ought to do it.

And so he yielded to it; and for the more honor of the Play, the Emperor
must go a little out of the way, and all his Army drawn up to see the show,
then must his Holiness be mounted upon his bonny Palfry, ride along, as if
nothing were; whom the Emperor seeing a pretty way off, very mannerly met him,
and very dapperly performed his duty at the Stirrup: and then his Humbleness
received Frederick into his favor, and no question but he buss'd him to the
purpose.

And thus take which of the stories you please, no question but you will think
that the Vicar thought Christ mistook himself, when he said, his Kingdom was
not of this world. So now, thanks to our Countryman Adrian, we see it brought
to that pass, that if you will not be a slave at my Stirrup, you shall not be
Crowned; and so according to them no Emperor. For now that Frederick had
proved himself a white boy, and pliable to all manner of drudgery; the Pope
took the pains to Crown him, but told him, that he should win Apulia, and
suchlike petty lands to the Church, thereby to show his respect to St. Peter:
the Emperor in the mean time, looking very demurely at these canting
documents, though showed his indignation at the Picture of Conradus his
kneeling to Innocent, and the verses, of which there was promised amendment.

But here before I go any farther with the Pope, let me tell you one remarkable
passage which happened in Germany, which may be as an Item against Rebels, and
disturbers of the Peace.

Whilst Frederick was thus busy in Italy to obtain his Coronation, Arnoldus
Archbishop of Mentz, and Herman [by some through mistake called Pezel. part. ^.
page 249.
Henry] Count Palatine fell out, between whom there was a great deal of
mischief done in Germany: but upon the Emperors return, all was quiet; yet not
so forgot, but he was resolved to have the Laws inflicted Nic. Serar. Hist.
Mogunt. p. 818, 819.
upon the guilty. Now we must understand, that it was the custom amongst the
Francks and Schwablanders, that if in the Monarchs absence a Riot or Sedition
began, the guilty Noblemen, by way of Ignominy, were each of them to carry
lugging at their shoulders a Ott. Frinsingens, de pestis Frid. l. 2. cap. 28.
Mart. Crusius Annal. Suev. part 2. l. 10. c. 14. Rosse, page 176.
Dog, holding of him by the hindmost-legs, into the next County; and this
publicly before all people, and then to be condemned to dye as a Traitor: the
inferior sort were to undergo the same Ceremony; only instead of a Dog, they
carried a Sella.
Seat or Bench: a Plough-man carried a Wheel of a Plough. And accordingly
Frederick at his return, calls a Diet at Worms, where Herman, and several
others of the Nobility were adjudged to undergo this Sab. M^nster. Cosmogr.
page 475.
Harenscaran punishment, as they call it; which accordingly was performed, to
the terror of all evildoers. As for the Archbishop, considering his Age and
Function, they were persuaded to pardon him that ignominy, though some
favorably offered to carry Dogs for him. The thing it self is thus related by
Guntherus Ligurinus, an ancient Historical Poet.

-- Vetus mos est, ubi si quis Rege remoto, Lib. 5. p. 351.

Sanguine, vel flamma, vel seditionis apertae
Turbine, seu crebris Regnum vexare rapinis,
Audeat: ante gravem quam fuso sanguine poenam
Excipiat, si liber erat, de more vetusto
Impositum seapulis ad contigui Comitatus
Cogatur per rura Canem Confinia far,
Sin alius, sellam. Cujus dispendia poenae
Ille Palatinae custos Celeberrimus aulae
Non potuit vitare Comes, cunctisque videndus
Portavit scapulis passus plus mill latrantem.
Hanc quoque tunc alii simili pro crimine poenam
Sustinuere december Comites; totidemque coacti
Foeda tulere canes generoso pondera collo.
Cujus inauditae poenae timor altus in omnes
Irruit, ut null us Procerum praesumeret ultra
Armata certare manu; sed pace sequestra,
Judicis arbitrio sua quisque reposceret aequi.
By ancient Law, if when the King is gone;
Any presume to raise sedition
Fie Sword, Fire, Rapines, for his final doom,
For his deserved peace-breaking crimes do come:
If nobly born, must on his shoulders carry
Unto the Confines of the next Territory
A Dog; but if he be of low degree,
An heavy Bench or Seat for Infamy.
Nor could the Palsgrave Herman shun the shame,
But publicly to satisfy his blame,
Upon his shoulders for above a Mile
Behind him lug'd a Dog, howled all the while.
Ten more Earls for the same crimes did so too,
Bearing Dogs on their necks as he did do.
This Strange disgrace and punishment so feared
The sturdyest Nobles, that no more was heard
Of Rout or Violence; but all relied
To be in peace by justice rectified.
And after this manner of shame, Ludovicus surnamed Ferreus Lantgrave of
Duringen Otho Meland^r ^ocoseria, 328.
whipped his Rebellious Nobles at the Plough.

And now let us return to the Pope, whom we find at some odds with Frederick:
one cause of this dislike was, as they say, because a Bishop of London
returning from Rome into Spondan. Epi^. Baron. an. 1157. 2: Co^ffeteau, page
809. Ba^. anno 1157. 15
England, was seized upon by some certain (but we know not what) people in
Germany, and there detained; although I have no reason confidently to affirm
this story to be true, though Pope Adrian tells it boldly enough, as we find
it in his Letter, afforded us by Lib. 2. cap. 9.
Radevicus Frisingensis the continuator of Ottho. For at this time I cannot
find any Bishop of England whose name begins with an Venerabilis f^ater noster
E. Londonensis Archiepiscop^^. Baror. anno 1157. 4.
E. Nor can we suppose, that London was an Archbishops See at this time, as the
Pope words it in his Letter, which he, an Englishman, might infallibly know to
be no such thing. It Is true, Hist. Angl. anno 1134.
Matthew Paris tells us of a Bishop of Landaff, and another of London, dyed in
their journey to Rome; but the first was called Urban, and the other Gilbertus
Vniversalis; besides, these dyed twenty years before this Letter. And lastly,
it is strange that none of our English Historians should take notice of any such
thing, many of them at that time being b^s^e in lesser concerns.

But however it be, and let the design of sending on this errand two Legates a
latere seem never so fair; yet it is confessed that there lurked in it a --
^ome^tum and occasionem masorum latuisse. Baron. 2.
nourishment or design of farther mischief. For in this Letter, the Pope
several times accuses the Emperor of dissembling and negligence; and besides,
tells him that it was the Beneficium.
grace and favor of him the Pope to confer the Imperial Crown upon him; which
did not only incense the Emperor, but all his Nobles; insomuch, that Count
Palatine Matius chron. ^erm. page 163.
Otho would have slain one of the Legates for vindicating the Popes
expressions, if the presence and counter-commands of Frederick had not detered
him. But Barbarossa with all speed returned the Legates to Rome, expressly
prohibiting them to turn out of their way, to visit either Cathedral Churches
or Abbeys, lest they should rob such places of their Treasury and Ornaments, or
sow discontent and treason amongst his Subjects, according to the custom of
such Creatures; for which purpose, they had many Bar. 12, 1^.
blank Schedules sealed about them to employ as occasion Id. an. 1159. 7.
served: of which he presently gave notice to all the Empire: And gave express
command, that Monks and suchlike should not Id. 18, 22.
trudge to Rome upon every bibble-babble, but when they had good reason, and
the consent and testimony of some Bishops.

The Pope upon this sent a complaint to the Bishops of Germany, but their
answer was not altogether to him as his heart could wish, they tooth and nail
vindicating their Emperor, Id. 20.
and complaining that his Letter first gave the occasion.

At last Hadrian upon In melius mutato consilio. Baron. anno 1158. 1.
better advice sends other two Legates a latere to undeceive Frederick; who
being brought to the Emperors presence, very reverently and modestly began
their speech, telling him that -- Prae^ul S. R. Ecc^^ae -- ^a (...) ves --
^anquam Dominum. and Impera^^^em (...) and or^^s. Bar. an. 1158. 3.
The Bishop of the holy Roman Church -- did salute him -- as the Lord and
Emperor of the City and the World. -- At these words Baronius is a little
troubled, and without fear or wit would gladly give his Friend Radevicus the
^ye; all his reason being, because Gunther the Poet does not set down the very
same words in his Verse; and yet he does as much as could be expected in Verse.

Te velut eximium Regem dominumque salutant.
They do salute you as their Lord and King.
Having ended, they deliver the Popes Letter, in which he thus interprets the
offending expressions in his last Epistle to the Emperor: Id. 4. 5.
That by Beneficium, he did not mean feudum a foe, or mere grace on condition;
but only bonum factum, a good deed, and so that he had done well in Crowning
him. And that by the other phrase of exception, [ Imperialis Insigne Coronae
li^ e^^^lime conse^ens, the words of the first Letter. Bar. anno 1157. 5.
Contulimus tibi insigne Imperialis Coronae] We have given to thee the sign or
bage of the Imperial Crown, he intended no such thing as was suggested, only
that he did Crown him; for by the word Contulimus, he meant nothing but
Imposuimus, that is, set the Crown upon his head: in sum, that he only
intended the action, not any power or right. And thus a peace was struck up
between them. And thus the Popes interpretation of his own Authority is worth
remembering.

But this quietness lasted not long: for Adrian not Bar. anno 1159. 1.
forgetting his supposed injuries (e) took any occasion to fall out with
Frederick, to whom he sends, taxing him with ingratitude; and to increase the
affront, sent this message to him by an unworthy and vile Fellow, who as soon
as the Letter was delivered, before it was read over, sneaked away: which
strange contempt, with the denial of some other requests, somewhat troubled
Barbarossa; but he requited it by commanding his Secretary for the future to
set the Emperors Id. 5.
Name before the Popes, and to salute the Pope in the singular number; giving
this reason, That either the Pope should write to him after the custom of his
Predecessors, or he would in his letters do as other Princes had done.

This nettles Adrian to the quick, writing thus to the Emperor, -- Bar. anno
1159. 6. Jo. Naucler. genesis 39. page 761.

Mutius Hist. Germ. l. 18. p. 162.


We marvail not a little at your wisdom, for that you seem not to yield so much
reverence to St. Peter and the holy Church of Rome as you ought to do; for in
the Letters which you wrote to us, you set your name before ours; whereby you
do incur the note of insolenc^e, not to say arrogancy. -- Nor was this all,
for the Bar. an. 1158. 11, 12, 13.
Milanois and other Lombards having a little before yielded themselves as
Subjects to the Emperor, and given him all their Regalia and Privileges as
their Sovereign; Adrian sends several Id. anno 1159. 9. Naucler. Genesis 39. page
764.
Letters amongst them to incite and persuade them to Rebellion; and as another
aggravation, sends presently to Frederick (then in Italy) to demand a grant of
him to several Articles, which Eberard Bishop of Babenberg (once greatly 14.
commended for his Piety and knowledge) does confess were very Capitula
durissima, 16.
hard and difficult to desire; yet the Emperor offered to do the Pope justice
in these, if he would do the like to him in other matters; but this was denied,
for Adrian would receive a benefit, but do none; and all this, forsooth,
because the Pope is not to be judged by any. And whatsoever Overtures of Peace
were proposed, vanished to nothing: for the Pope, as 22.
Frederick complains, stood upon several new grievous and unheardof businesses.

And we may well believe that he opposed the Emperor as much as possible he
could, seeing he was just now going to excommunicate him, being thereto Dota
pecunia ^mmensa Domino Adriano Papae, ut Imperatorem excommunicaret. Naucler.
page 764. Bar. anno 1160. 25, 30, 31. 1159.
bribed and hired by moneys, as Nauclerus confesses. But this trouble had a
little stop by the death of Hadrian at Anagni; but whether he was choked by a
Fly or the Squinsey, is nothing to my purpose. Yet before his death, he had so
carried his design, that he had brought his favorites to swear, not to choose
any after him, who wished well to the Emperor.

Upon this a Schism arises, two pretending for the Popedom; Roland, who was
one of the Legates that carried the Popes offensive Letter to the Emperor in
Germany, was one, and called himself Alexander III; Octavian was the other, who
called himself Victor IV. Though it is confessed that Alexander had above four
suffrages in the Conclave for the others one, yet both of them having many
followers, they made a great hubbub in the World, and Excommunicated, cursed
and damned one another to the Pit of Hell.

Frederick to end this Controversy, Bar. anno 1159. 64. and anno 1160. 2.
according to the custom of other Emperors in the time of Schism, calls a
Council at Pavia, whither he summous both the Popes; Alexander refuses, Victor
obeys; the Council Ib. 2.
meets, where are from several Kingdoms fifty Archbishops and Bishops, with an
infinite company of Abbots, besides the Ambassadors of many Countries: The
Emperor withdraws himself from the Council, leaving the business wholly to the
determination of the Clergy; who after VII days consultation, declared Victor
to be the true Pope; for which they declared many Bar. an. 1160. 3, 4, 5, 6. ad
18, 20, 21, 22, 23, etc. 33. 35.
Reasons, too long here to be repeated; and so having Ib. 24.
cursed Alexander, adored Victor, and kissed his Toe, which also the Emperor
did, with the addition of the holding his Ib. 23.
Stirrup and Nau^ler. page 76^.
leading his Horse, the Council broke up. The Emperor by Ib. 44.
Edict commanding all to acknowledge Victor for Pope; yet Alexander again Ib.
44.
Excommunicated Victor, and all his Accomplices, especially the Emperor, whose
subjects he also absolved from their Oaths of Allegiance. But these
thunderbolts made no great noise; a little after, another An. 1161. 21.
Council at Lauden in Franconia confirming Victor.

Yet Alexander had the Kings of England and France as his favorers; and so
seeing no safety for him in Italy, he sails to France. And here give me leave
to tell you one story of a queer come off, upon the credit of Genesis 39. p. 767.
Mutius p. 169.
Nauclerus, and others. Frederick having a mind to end the quarrel, desired
Jews VII. to give him a meeting, and to bring with him Alexander, and he would
bring Victor, that the business might again be examined: the thing is agreed
upon, and by oath; the place appointed was near Dijon in Burgondy, at the River
Soane. Alexander refuses to meet, though Jews would, to save his promise. Yet
having no mind to discredit Alexander for his refusal, the trick was thus
ordered; Jews goes to the River at the first day appointed betimes, washes
his hands in it, and has a Crier to call the Emperor to the meeting; and so
saying he had kept his word, away he hasts home again. The Emperor presently
comes, with the Kings of Scotland and Bohemia; but finding how he had been
gul'd, returns angry into Germany, and sends Victor to Rome.

And that Alexander thought himself no small man in France, we may guess by
these following honors done to him, where we have our Henry II. going to visit
him, Bar. an. 1162. 14.
kissing his feet; and a little after, the same King of England, and this Jews
of France, meeting Alexander at Tossack upon the Loyre, very prettily played the
B^^. an. 1162. 15, 16. ^. Bussieres Hist. Gal. Tom. 2 page 59. Genebrard Tom.
2. page 9^1.
Yoemen of his Sti^r^p, the one of one side, and the other of the other,
tripping along on foot, leading his Holinesses Rosonante by the bridle.
Baronius at this story is quite overjoyed, and out of his raptured zeal,
cannot refrain from running to his Bible, as if he had a mind to prove it to be
of divine right: but much good may do the cockles of his heart with this one
story of two Kings, since I believe he is never like to have such another:
Though the very next year, we find the King of France acting Bar. an. 1. 1163.
1164.
the same part of the Comedy, and bussing his feet to the purpose.

The next year Victor dies, in whose place is elected in opposition to
Alexander, one Guido, who called himself Paschal III. But Alexander now began
to gain ground; whereupon he left France, and returned to Italy, and was kindly
received at Rome. Paschal was acknowledged and confirmed as a true Pope, by a
Council or Diet at 1166.
Wortzburg, with Fredericks approbation. But Alexander is quit with the
Emperor, not only excommunicating, but An. 1168. 69, 70, 71.
depriving him by sentence of all his Dominions, and absolving all men from his
obedience. At last Paschal dies, and then the Romans chose one John, who calls
himself 1170.
Calixtus III.

But to leave off these wranglings, let us come once again to a peace. Some say
that Alexander by flight stole privately into Venice, where under the disguise
of a Cook or Skullion he lived some ^177.
time; till by chance he was known, and then by the Duke honored as a true
Pope. Others say, that he was publicly conducted in with a great deal of joy:
but be it as it will, there we find him. At last the Emperor and he came to
capitulations; and an agreement being struck up, Frederick comes to Venice,
waits upon the Pope at St. Marks Church. Alexander bids him humble A phons.
Ciaconi ^^ ^^ vit. A^ex. I^I Paprr. Masson. l. 5. fol. 205. Trist. Calchus
Hist. Mediolan. l. 12 p. 247. Hub. Goltz. and Casp. Gevart. Icones Imp. Romans
page 286. Azor I^stit. Tom. 2. lib. 5. c. 43. Naucler. page 776. Phil. da
Burgamo fol. 351. Mutius p. 176. Pet. Justinian. Hist. Venet. lib. 2. p. 48.
Fran. Duarenus de sacris Eccles. Minist. lib. 1. cap. 2. vid. Rivet. Jesuit.
vapul. c. 28. 4. p. 496.
himself, and ask pardon: Frederick prostrates himself at his feet: the Pope
set his foot upon the Emperors neck, saying, It is written, Thou shall walk
upon the Asp and the Basilisk, and shall tread upon the Lion and the Dragon.
The Emperor replied, that he did not humble himself so to him, but to Peter.
Nay, quoth the Pope, Both to me and to Peter. This being done, the Pope
received him into favor, and then peace was made.

Baronius is not a little troubled at this, it savouring of so much pride and
insolency, that he cannot fancy that a Pope would be guilty of, and so throws
it by as a An. 1177. 12.
Fable. But when I consider how many Popish Historians do confess it, and the
narrative of it is carefully preserved in the Archives of the great Bar. an.
1177. 2, 4, 5.
Library at Venice, even to this day; how the Laur. Banck, de Tyran. Pap. page
468, 469.
Picture of this story hangs yet publicly up in the Senate House of that City;
and, which is more, the same story, with the Popes foot on his neck, is yet
also to be seen painted by the door of the Chapel where the Pope himself and
Cardinals commonly go to Prayers; all which must have some reason for their
being: I say, upon these considerations I shall not yet neglect it as a Fable;
however, the ostentation of those Pictures is almost as bad as the fact; though
there is examples enough besides this, to testify the pride of the Popes; and
so Baronius need not make this an argument against it, if he did but remember
how Gregory VII. made the Emperor Henry dance attendance several days, almost
naked, in an hard ^rost.

Alexander for the great kindness shown to him by the Venetians, bestowed
several privileges or graces to the Dukes of that City; as, to go under a
Canopy, to have silver Trumpets before them, to seal with lead, whereas before
they did in wax, etc. and gave the Adriatic gulf to the City, to which once a
year, viz. on Ascension-day, the City is married, by the throwing in of a gold
ring; the Duke and Senate being rowed along in that large Barge, by them called
Bucentoro, or Buccintoro, which is yet kept in the Arcenal, and, as they say,
is the same that Pope Alexander was carried in; but with such alterations and
amendments, that you may suppose not an inch of the old wood in her.

Passing by the several wars that this magnanimous Emperor Frederick
Barbarossa had in Europe, and the Holy Land, I shall tell you a story of his
Punishment of Rebellion; which, with the former of the dog-carrying Count
Herman, may terrify the unruly into peace and obedience.

The Empress Beatrix, wife to Frederick, being in Italy, had a Krantz. cro.
Saxon l. 6. cap. 36. Sab. Mu^st. Cosmogr. page 165. Propos. Memorab. p. 19. 20.
desire to see Milan; to which purpose thither she goes: but being entered
within the City, the people having no affection to the Emperor, took her, set
her on a Mule, with her face backwards, making her hold the tail in her hands
for a bridle; and in this posture of derision, led her through the City, out of
another gate. The Emperor justly incensed at this affront, besieged the City,
and at last forced them to yield upon mercy, or conditions as bad, which were
these, That those who would redeem their lives, should take or catch with their
Teeth certain Figgs hanging at the Genitals of a Mule: some preferred life, and
did it; others suffered rather than would do it. Hence they say, that saying of
reproach amongst the Italians, putting one Finger between two, -- Ecco il fico,
See here a figg for thee. And the truth is, that the Milanois had so often
enraged the Emperor, that one time having taken it, he destroyed it to the
very ground, and some say, made the Earth be Plough'd and Sown with Salt. At
which time, amongst other things, the Bodies of the Magi or Wisemen, said to be
at Milan [first carried to Constantinople by St. Helen, thence to Milan by St.
Eustorgius Archbishop of that City] were conveyed to Colen by Reinoldus Prince
Elector of that See, where they yet lie, commonly called the three Kings of
Colen. But for the farther knowledge (true or false) of these Magi (let their
Bodies be where they please) I shall refer the Reader to the History of them,
as it hangs up in Tables in St. Peter's Church at Colen, which he may see in
honest Crudities, page 594, 595. etc.
Tom Coryat.

But at last Frederick dying much lamented, his Son Henry VI succeeded in the
Empire, and was Crowned by Pope Caelestine III at Rome; the manner how, take as
follows: -- Baron. an. 1191. 12.

R^ger Hov^d^n Annal part. 2. page 689.


The Pope being set in his Pontifical Chair, holding the Imperial Golden Crown
between his Feet; then the Emperor Henry, and the Empress Constantia, bowing
down their Heads, thus The Pope let fall the Crown upon the ^m^erours head. J^.
Trevis^'s Translat. of Ran. (...) Polycron. ^^. 7. cap. 26.
receive the Coronation from the Popes Feet: Then immediately the Pope striking
the Emperors Crown with his foot, kicked it from his head to the ground. --
And what was the meaning of the Papal Complement, the same Authors will tell
you -- signifying, that he had power to depose him from the Empire, if he
desired it. And then the Cardinal standing by, took up the Crown and put it
again on the Emperors head.

But as if this Interpretation were not large enough to make the Catholic
Reader understand the Popes meaning by his moping action, or lest we should not
from hence gather some strange jurisdic^ion adherent to his Holiness; Baronius
adds his learned Comment, viz. That it is in the pleasure of the Pope, to give,
keep, maintain, and take away the Empire: And by this action he would have
Henry to know as much. And if any man should be so wise as to doubt of this
Author, the Cardinal, in another place, will silence him with this doughty
Question: An. ^157. 13.
What, is it not in the power of the Pope, upon cause, to take away or give the
Empire to whom he pleases and thinks worthy? for whosoever shall receive the
Empire without his consent, is no Emperor, but a Tyrant and an invader.

And so I leave his Holiness to make good cheer with this Infallible Doctrine;
and the German Electors to shake their ears, having nothing to do, according to
this Principle, but to gape for, expect, and obey the Dictates and Hests of the
Pope, who is as cock-sure as Infallibility it self; and whose Power and
Authority is far above Pembrokes Parliament, that would do all things, but make
a man a woman, and a woman a man.

The end of the fourth Book.
A CONTINUATION
BOOK V.
CHAP. I.
1. The Murder of the Emperor Philip.

2. The Emperor Otho the Fourth deposed.

3. The troubles and deposing of the Emperor Frederick the Second.

4. The Guelfs and Gibillins, with other troubles of the Empire.

Sect. 1. The Murder of the Emperor Philip.
THe Emperor Henry VI dying, the Germans fell into divisions, some choosing
Philip his Brother, and son to Frederick I, and Duke of Schwoben, whilst others
elected Otho Duke of Brunswick for Emperor.

Both parties would willingly have the Pope, then Innocent III, to befriend
them. But Philip, though the Popes Legate honored his Coronation in Germany by
his Pet. Mex^a, fol. 416.
presence, and also Sporidan. anno 1198. 7.
^bsolved him from his former Censures; yet the Pope himself had such an I^. 8.
Bzov. anno 1198. 13.
hatred to him for the cause of his Father and other Relations, that he would
by no means permit of his Rule; yet he would fairly tell Philip's Ambassadors,
that he neither would, nay, nor Se nequaquam contra j^s aut ^as posse aut velle
decernere. Bzov. anno 1199. 22.
could decree any thing but the right: yet he as confidently affirmed, that it
was his jurisdiction to C. Venerab. de Elect. Bzov. anno 1199. 24.
approve of, or reject an elected Emperor. And having thus voted himself an
Infallible authority, he (though the Germans had formerly chose young
Frederick, son to Henry King of the Romans, and sworn Allegiance to him)
declares himself for Otho, Excommunicates Philip and all his partakers.

But passing by the several mischiefs that fell upon Germany by these
Divisions; Otho at last being not able to withstand Philip, the Pope was
consulted for a Peace, who desired on his part that the Emperors Daughter
should be married to his Holinesses Nephew, so to renown his own Family in
Italy with diverse Lands: but at this Rex and Principes audita Roma^^ Pont.
petulant^a, in ^i^^m permo^. Naucler. Genesis 41. p. 802.
malipert request the Germans (d) laughed heartily. Well, at last it was
concluded that Philip should Marry his said Daughter to Otho; to make way for
which, he should be divorced from his first Wife Mary, Daughter to the Duke of
Brabant, and be espoused to Beatrice Daughter to Philip, for which the Pope
must grant another Dispensation to null their propinquity in blood. All this
being done, Philip is to be Emperor, and after his death Otho. And the Pope is
now as infallible for Philip, as he was formerly for the other.

Yet here peace lasted not long: this which Philip hoped to have been his
quiet, was his ruin; for the Palsgrave Otho de Wit^lspach having been formerly
a Suitor to Philip's Daughter, and seeing himself thus deprived of her, for it
might be till now he might have some hopes, though Philip had formerly Besold.
S^nops-Hist. Univers. p. 435.
denied him for a murder that he committed, is resolved to revenge himself on
her Father.

To this purpose he conveys himself to Bamberg, where the Emperor then was;
and joining to him Eckenberg Bishop of the same City (whom yet I find much Jo.
Gault. Cron. Cro. ^icor. page 1101. Tom. 1.
commended) and some others, he goes to the Palace, where the Emperor that
day after dinner, had laid himself down on his bed, being newly let blood.
Witilspach calls at the door, and Philip being informed who it was, commands
the door to be opened, though he had then none with him, but his Chancellor the
Bishop of Spire, and a Page without any weapons: the Palsgrave at his entrance
draws his Sword, and wounded the Emperor in the throat; of which he presently
Witilspach himself was not long after slain by Philips Steward. This Murder was
committed in the year 1208 according to this old Distich.

Anni milleni, bis quatuor atque duceni
Extant, quando pius Rexoccidit ense Philippus.
Sect. 2. The Emperor Otho the Fourth deposed.
PHilip being thus murdered, Germany was mainly troubled by the Hoc uno
Ph^lippo perempto, Germania summis Insidus Pont. Romans agitata. Naucler. page
^0^.
Treacheries or ground-deceipts of the Pope, as one of their own Historians
words it. But now Otho IV goes current for Emperor, Pope Innocent Bzev an.
1208. 2. 1209.
forbidding any to be elected but him, whom also he lets know how much he is
beholden to his Holiness for undergoing a great deal of ill will for his sake;
how zealous he had been for his promotion, and bids him have a care of the
hopes or designs of young Frederick, and suchlike good words.

Otho IV being acknowledged and elected in Germany, goes to Rome for his
Coronation, where he must also dance attendance at the Popes S^irrop. Yet peace
would not continue; the Romans and Germans falling out, above a thousand of the
Emperors men were slain; which did not a little trouble Otho, who Naucler*
page ^05.
suspecting the Pope as contriver of that uprore, withdrew himself from Rome,
and demanding several Lands as belonging to the Empire, by force endeavored to
have them. Innocent adm^nisheth Otho of his actions, telling him, that he the
Pope is appointed etc. And then Excommunicates him and all his Partakers; and
at last deprives him by Censure from his Empire, and absolves all his Subjects
from their Oath and Allegiance which they had sworn and owed to him. All which
Censures are also hasted into Germany, and pronounced by Sigefrid Archbishop of
Mentz, whose Commendatory riming Epitaph is as follows.

Migrans vir fidus, quinto Septembris in Idus,
Praesul Sigfridus, fulget Coelo quasi sydus.
The Germans terrified at the Papal Fulminations, withdrew their Obedience from
Otho, and according to the Popes desire Elected Frederick for Emperor,
alleging that it was his right Romans; at which Innocent greatly rejoiced,
though he Pet. Mexia, fol. 423.
could not but know that this reason was as valid, when he was formerly so
zealous for Otho, and resolute against all others whatsoever.

Frederick comes into Germany, is Crowned at Aix. Otho makes what opposition he
can, but is overthrown, and so forced to withdraw and neglect the Empire: And
thus being deposed again, Frederick remained as Supreme, and so had himself,
with the Popes consent, the second time Spon. anno 1215. 4.
Crowned at Aix. In the mean time was held a Great Council at the Lateran,
whereby Transubstantiation got a good footing, and Temporal Princes were to be
by the Pope deposed, and their Subjects absolved from their Allegiance, if they
neglected to extirpate out of their Dominions that which the Pope called
Heresy.

Otho having been three years turned out, dyed; but, they say, so penitently,
that he made the Bzov. an. 128. 19. Spond^n. 7, 8.
Skullions of his Kitchen tread upon his neck; and though he remained a while
in Purgatory, yet at last he was helped into Heaven. Nor need we question his
sanctity, seeing, as they tell us, being sick and weak, his side opened to let
the Eucharist fly in, and then closed again; and I believe it was as true in
him as it was in Bonaventure.

Sect. 3. The troubles and deposing of the Emperor Frederick the Second.
FRederick II being thus Emperor, goes to Rome, where he ^220.
was Crowned by Honorius III: but this peace lasted not long, Frederick having
been abused by several in Italy, pretended that the Pope took their parts: On
the other side, Honorius would have the Emperor to go and reduce the
Holy Land: Frederick pretended to retreeve and regain the Territories that
formerly had belonged to the Empire; Honorius affirmed they now belonged to the
Church and St. Peter: And thus bandying to and fro, some say that Honorius
threw about his Excommucations.

Honorius dying, Gregory IX succeeds, and threatens Frederick Holy Land by such
a time. The Emperor neglecting, is Excommunicated, and so seeing no remedy,
sails to Syria, where he makes peace 122^.
with the Sultan, having Jerusalem and other places delivered to him: And yet
is Gregory Pap Greg. ^^nus molo^re ferens, quod Romans Imp. Excommunicatus and
Rebellis, ad terram Sanctam transierat. Mat. Paris, anno 1229.
angry that he went thither, being Excommunicated, and a Rebel against him; and
so intends to dethrone him: sends into Asia to the Nan^^er. page 818.
Hospitallers and Templers, that they should no way assist Frederick, but look
upon him as a public Enemy: who accordingly endeavored to Matt. Pari^. p 35^.
betray him to the Saracen; but the Souldan out of a Noble Spirit scorned
Treachery, and discovered it to the Emperor.

The Pope in the mean time having as he thought ^ut him out work enough to do
in the Holy Land, resolves to take opportunity in his absence: so he sends into
England, Mat. Paris, p. 361.
accusing of him of horrible-terrible Piccadiglio's, that he being Page 368.
Excommunicated, should enter the Church at Jerusalem, and be Crowned, and
then go to his Palace before his Soldiers with his Crown on; and then inviting
several of the Noble Saracens to a Feast, did for recreation-sake let some
Christian women dance before them. And to aggravate these, how he had taken
some Church-monies probably to pay his Army, etc. but the burden of the
lamentation was, that he might have some English moneys to help him in his Wars
against the Emperor, whom he thinks it Justum esse and fidei Christianae
necessarium, ^t tam vali^ius Ecclesiae persecutor a fa^^u Imporii depelle^etur.
Mat. Paris, Ib.
just and necessary to have deposed from the Empire.

And what vast sums these canting stories obtained, is easily guessed, when in
England, Wales and Ireland, the very Church-Ornaments and Plate were sold or
pawned to satisfy the Matt. Paris, anno 1229. page 361. 362. anno 1234. p.
400, 401, 40^, 554, 566, 613. 622, 623, 641, 645, 655, 658, 659, 660. 667, 691,
699, 700, 716, 722, 728, 818, 875, 956. Nic. Harpsfield Hist. Eccles. page 477.
Fox Tom. 1. page 369, 370.
avarice of Rome: for if they gave not presently, the Nuntio threatened
Excommunications and Interdictions; such a childish fear had the Papal Censures
then possessed men with, and to such an height of tyranny and impudence, to say
no worse, had the Bishops of Rome stuffed out and swelled themselves to, as if
they had a Divine right over all the Moneys and Riches in the World: and thus
is the case altered; Christ and St. Peter, rather then not pay their dues and
tribute to their Temporal Prince, would be at the expense of a Miracle; but now
the Kings and Princes must beggar and ruin themselves and Subjects, to
satisfy the avarice of the Bishop of Rome, who pretends to be but a Vicar to
the former; for if you deny this, he has an hobgobling in his Budget, to
boggle you to your ruin here, or damnation hereafter; though wise Kings should
not regard such Censures upon such unjust grounds, and from those who have no
Authority over them.

Gregory having thus got Money enough, falls upon those Lands which the
Emperor pretended to in Italy, making the people Naucler. page 818.
rebel, and withdraw themselves from their (b) Allegiance, whereby he took many
places: Frederick hearing of this Papal dealing, having made peace with the
Souldan, resolves to return. The Pope informed of this, Matt. Paris, anno 1229.
page, 364.
way-lays him, hoping to seize upon him when he little thought of it; but
Frederick having notice, escaped all his snares, and landed safely in Sicily;
and having strengthened himself, regained some places again. At last a 1230.
peace is made between him and the Pope.

Not not longer after, the Pope and the Romans fell out, insomuch that Gregory
was glad to leave the City; but here the Emperor Matt. Paris, anno 1^34. page
408. 409.
helps him at a dead lift, joining his Forces to the Pope's, whereby the Romans
were banged to the purpose. But let us see how the Pope requites this good
turn. The Milanois a little after rebelling against the Emperor, he resolves
(as it became him) to reduce those Traitors to obedience: Gregory persuades him
from that design, and would have him again forsooth to turn his Army into the
Holy Land. But Frederick wisely thought Matt. Par. an. 1236. page 433.
it was fitting to pacify all at home first, and did not a little marvail that
the Pope should interest himself for such perfidious people. But for all his
wondering, Gregory assists the Milanois, sends them a great deal of money, and
for further encouragement promises them more: the Milanois take courage; but
whilst the Emperor is engaged against them, the Austrians, stirred up either by
the Id. page 4^4, 439.
Pope, or Fredericks Enemies, rise up against him, whereupon he was forced to
forsake his design at Milan.

But having quiered all in Germany, he returns against the Rebels Italy,
earnestly desiring the Popes assistance against these Traitors. But Gregory
after a Matt. Paris, p. 444. 1238.
dissembling manner made show as if he also feared the Imperial Armies, and so
neglected his aid. Frederick marches on, beats the Milanois, conquering all
the Rebels before him. The Pope seeing thus all to go well on the Emperors
side, sends to him to spare the people, and accept of a peace. But these things
not fadging according to the Popes humor, he Leagues himself with the
Venetians and Genovois against Frederick, and then 1239.
Excommunicates him, and absolves his Subjects from their Allegiance. And this
be sends all over, with many aggravations against the Emperor, all which
Frederick undertook to Matt. Paris, p. 493, 494, 495, 496, 501, 520, 521. Pet.
de Ven. lib. 1 Ep. 1. 50.
answer.

At last, the breach widening, (and who would not be angry to loose an Empire?)
disdain turned their Prose into Poetry: And Bzov. anno 1239. 7
thus they Libel one another; which you may take as themselves relate it, with
their variations. And first, they say, the Emperor thus shows himself.

Roma diu titubans Variis.
longis erroribus act a
Totius mundi.
Corruet, and mundi desinet esset caput.
Rome so long shook with diverse errors, shall
Now cease to be head of the World, and fall.
To which the Pope thus returns:

Niteris incassum navem submergere Petri,
Fluctuat, at nunquam Mergitur illa.
desinet esse Ratis.
In vain thou striv'st to drown St. Peter's boat,
It never shall cease to be, but always float.
To which thus again Frederick:

Fata Docent.
volunt, stellaque Moment.
docent, aviumque volatus,
Totius malleus unus erit.
Quod Fredericus ego Malleus Orbis ero.
The Fates, the Stars, and Auguries decree
That I the Conqueror of the world shall be.
And at last Gregory gives this return:

Fama resert.
Fata volunt, Scriptura docet, peccata loquuntur,
Quod tibi vita brevis, poena perennis erit.
The Fates and Scripture tell, your sins report,
Your pains shall never end, though life but short.
Acts and Mon. Tom. 1. p. 409.
John Fox affords you other Verses to this purpose.

Gregory having thus, by his toyish Censures, deprived Frederick, as he
thought, [and some Italian writers look upon him for the future as no
Emperor,] consults for a new Election, and at last pitcheth upon Robert
Brother to the King of France. But this by the French St. Lewis is rejected as
ridiculous, alleging the Matt. Paris p. 517, 518. Jo. de Bussieres, Tom. 2.
page 134.
Pope to have no power over the Emperor, and that Frederick was a good
Christian, Neighbor, Friend and Ruler: And so this design fell to the ground.
The Pope being thus frustrated by so great a Monarch, entered into a Treaty with
Frederick; but though agreement made, being fickle-humoured, he would Id. page
541.
stand to nothing, to the amazement and grief of his own Legates. However,
Gregory resolved to undo the Emperor, summoned a Council to confirm his
deposition; but this was hindered by Fredericks seizing of some Cardinals and
Bishops going thither, and the Popes Mutius, page 209.
Indulgences to all those who would take up the Croisaidy against the Emperor.

The death of Gregory ended not the troubles of Frederick; for Innocent IV was
as furious against him as the former, though a friend to him when a Cardinal;
which made the Emperor, upon notice of his Election (knowing that Authority
commonly alters the man, and Popes used to be enemies to the Empire) say, That
he had lost a good Cardinal friend, but got a mortal enemy being Pope: And this
proved true. Yet the Emperor being stronger in Italy, Innocent fled into
France, where he excommunicates Frederick; of which Mat. Paris tells us this
following story.

A certain Curate of Paris having received the Order to excommunicate Give ear
all good people, I have received order Mat Paris an. 1245. p. 654.
to pronounce the solemn sentence of Excommunication against the Emperor
Frederick, the Candles put out, and Bells ringing. But not knowing the reason,
though I am not ignorant of the great quarrel and inexorable hatred between
them; and I know also that one of them does injure the other, but which is the
offender I know not: Therefore, so far forth as my power does extend, I
excommunicate and pronounce excommunicated one of the two; namely, he that does
injury to the other: and I do absolve him that does suffer the injury, which
is so hurtful to all Christendom. -- At which honest meaning humor, the
Emperor was very well pleased, whilst the Pope on the other hand was as much
offended. Who, to make his cause more plausible, gets a Council called at
Lions, where the Emperor is again excommunicated, though the Pope would not
permit him to come there in person to answer for himself, nor remit any of his
fury toward him, though the Kings of France and England would engage for his
good behavior and due obedience.

Frederick being informed how the Pope and Council had declared him deposed,
plucks up his spirits, plays the man, despises their trifling authority over
him, affirms himself no subject to their Mat. Paris p. 679.
deposition, calls for his Crown, puts it on his head, and bravely and wisely
resolves to keep it there.

On the other side, those on the Popes faction looking upon 1245. 1246.
Frederick as deposed, consult another election, and at the Popes Instigation
chose Henry Lantsgrave of Turinge, (of whom or some other they had Mat. Paris
p. 608.
formerly the same thoughts) and Crown him at Aken. Though St Jews King of
France, upon many reasons would gladly have Id. p. 697.
persuaded the Pope to a reconciliation with the Emperor Frederick, but
Innocent would not.

Henry the Lantsgrave enjoyed not his Title long, being wounded Vlme; after
whom, and a design upon some Mat. Paris p. 808.
others, by the same means was elected William Earl of Holland, who Notae in
Hadr. Barland. Hist. com. Holland, p. 67. 1250.
some say was afterward Crowned by Pope Innocent at Genoa, whom we shall leave
rejoicing at the departure of Frederick, who dyed in Italy, some say poisoned,
others think stifled. However it be, he was an excellent Scholar and Linguist,
speaking French, Italian, German, Latin, Greek and Arabic; and endued with
many rare virtues: yet some do so dote upon a blind Pontifical Obedience, that
they will impudently take upon them the part of an Omnipotent Diety, and tell
you that he is V^d. Spondam. an. 1250. 19.
damned; and all this, I suppose, because he would not let his Empire be
childishly and foolishly taken and plucked from him by his Holiness, who has
as much authority to depose Kings, as Cromwell or Ravillac to murder them.

Sect. 4. The Guelfs and Gibbillins, with other troubles of the Empire.
AT these times those who took part with the Popes were called Guelphs, and
those who sided with the Emperors, Gibbilins; the occasion of which
denomination some Authors tell as follows, though the beginning of the story
every man may believe as he pleases.

Irmentrudis, Wife to Isenbard Earl of Altorff, not only abusing Pezel. part 3
p. 109.
a poor woman for having several children at a birth, but also causing her to
suffer as an Adulteress, as if by a judgment, was the next year after her self
brought to bed of twelve Sons; and fearing to suffer by her own former
judgment, ordered a woman to drown eleven of them, she reserving only one.
The woman hired to obedience, goes toward the River, meets the Earl, who
asked her what she was carrying; she replied, Whelps: he desired to see them;
she denies, but by force he obtains, makes the Woman confess the truth, at
which we may suppose him not a little troubled: he has them conveyed to a
Miller, there privately nursed up, and the woman to keep Counsel, but to
return, and tell her Lady that she had drowned them. Six years after the Earl
makes a great Feast, has these eleven Boys clad as the twelfth was, and
brought in; and inquired of his guests what punishment was fitting for those
who would have killed such pretty children: at which the Lady suspecting,
swounded; but coming to her self again, upon her knees confessed all, pleaded
simplicity, and desired pardon, which was granted her: but for memory of the
story, the Earl ordered that their sirnames should be Whelps, or Guelfs, i. e.
little young dogs or whelps. Thus much for the original name of these after
Dukes of Saxony and Bavaria. But Hist. de Guelfis principibus. vid. Hen. Can^s.
Antiq Lection Tom 1. page 179.
Altorfensis, or Weingartensis tells other stories of this name, as probable as
the former, and it may be all alike.

As for Gibelin, the common opinion is, that the Emperor Conrade III. or his
Son Henry, was either born or nursed at a Town so called in Schwaben; and that
this Emperor being very powerful in arms, the Italians feared him, and so the
better to keep him employed at home, Roger King of Sicily stirred up the
Bavarians Naucler p. 750.
and others against him. The two Armies joining, the Bavarians cried out, Hie
Guelff, their General being called Guelpho; and the Imperialists shouted out as
loud, Hie We^b^ingen a Castle not far from Stutgart^ in the Dukedom of
W^rin^burg in Se^^^^^n.
Gibelin, in relation to their General, young Or Conrade himself. Christ.
Bes^ld. Synopsi^ hist. p. 406
Henry, so called from the Town of his birth or nursery. And the Pope in this
was concerned too; Innocent II. being supposed to have an hand in this Revolt
and war against the Emperor. But these Names, some say, were almost forgot,
till they were again revived in the days of Frederick the II.

Others will not go to Germany for this story, but lay its original in Italy,
and that when there were deadly feuds between the Pet. Mexia, selva rinovata,
part 2. c. 39.
Cancellieri and Panciatici in the City Pistoia in Tuscany, at what time also
there chanced to be two Potent Brothers called Guelfo and Gibellino, the one
siding with one party, and the other with the other, and that with such
eagerness, that from them each faction after took denomination, (as Tho. Lans.
consult. orat. contra Italiam; p. 816.
Italy has been several times rent by such private feuds) and afterward
Frederick adhering to one, and Gregory joining to the other, the Imperialists
were called Gibbelins, and the Popelins Guelfs; under which two names Italy for
several years suffered infinite miseries; not only Cities and Towns, but
Families and nearest Relations being divided in this quarrel, whereby they
prosecuted one another with all fury imaginable; Father against Son, Brother
against Brother, nay, the Wife and Husband oftentimes endeavoring one another
destruction. Of which unnatural Hatred and Tyranny, the old Mendicant Friar
Figurae Bibliae, for. 65, 66.
Anthonius a Rampengolis, according to his old way, will tell you many
Scripture-Allusions. But to conclude, some say they took beginning first at
Pisa, there the Faction first arising.

After the death of Frederick II. some of the Italianized Historians are
willing to have the Empire void for some years, some more or less; but be it as
it will, I shall hastily run over some passages between the Popes and those, by
others held for Emperors of the West.

William, we see the Pope cannot well deny, having been so great an instrument
to his promotion, and Bzov. an. 1251. 2. Spond. 1.
persuading of him again to it: and yet we find him very earnest with Mat.
Paris an 1251. p. 808.
Haco King of Norway to take the Empire upon him.

Now Innocent seeing Frederick dead, resolves for Italy; and it is pretty to
observe with what a complement he took his farewell of Lions, where he had been
entertained all this while. For the more glory of the business, by a Crier all
the Citizens are Mat. Paris p. 819.
warned to attend his Holiness; and being all met, Cardinal Hugo, in the Name
of the Pope, made a Farewell-Sermon to them, concluding thus, -- Loving
friends, we have performed much good, and done great Alms since our being in
this City: for when we first came hither, we found but Tria vel quatuor
Prostibula inven mus, sed nunc recedentes unum solum relinquin^s, verum ipsum
durat continuatum ab orientali p^rta ^lvita it is usque ad occidentalem. Mat.
Paris p. 856: Mat. Paris p. 892.
three or four common Stews or Brothel-houses; but now at our departure, we
leave you but one, but such an one that extends it self all along from the
Eastgate even to the West-gate of the City. --

Innocent being in Italy, bends himself against Conrade, Son to Frederick, by
the Germans called Emperor, by others King of Naples and Sicily; whom he
persuaded William to root out of the Empire, assisted with his Excommunications
and Deprivations, and sollicites Richard Brother to our English Henry III. to
take upon him the Protection of Conrades other Territories in Italy. For this,
Richard desired some assistance from the Pope, and some Frontier Towns, whither
upon occasion he might retire: but the Pope denying all conditions, as if all
people were obliged to fight for him, and he take his ease; Richard knowing
that without these concessions he could not be able to conquer Conrade, wisely
replied to Albert the Legate, that the Pope might as well say, Lo, I sell or
give to thee the Moon, ascend and take her. Whereupon this treaty fell. But the
Pope then falls to work with King Henry himself, whom he knew to be Ad damna
propria pronum, and credulum. Ib.
credulous, and apt to run into his own ruin. Henry easily consents to this,
sending the Pope a great deal of Money; and the Pope, as if to requite him,
stays the Croisado-Forces designed for the Holy Land, that they might serve the
King of England against Conrade, to the grief of the Christians in Palestine:
which must be a crime in him, if it were any in Frederick.

And to make Conrade more odious, he bespatters him with multitude of
Accusations; to all which Conrade Vid. Will. Wats Additamenta Matt. Paris, apud
fi^em, p 192, 193, 194.
answered at large, and at last dyed, as most men say by Poison. Not long
before him, dyed at Bugden in Huntingtonshire Robert Grost head (Capito or
Great-head) Bishop of Lincoln. The Pope no sooner heard of the death of
Conrade, but with a cheerful heart, a smiling countenance, and a triumphing
voice, he cries out -- Matt. Paris, p. 89^.
Truly I rejoice, and let all us that belong to the Roman Church be glad,
because two of our greatest Enemies are taken away, Robert Bishop of Lincoln,
and Conrade King of Sicily. -- And yet for Robert of Lincoln I dare boldly
say, that he was the greatest Scholar and most knowing man in his days in the
World. And the Nic. Harpsfield Hist. Eccles. p. 477. Jo. Pistreus, p. 326, 227.
Romanists themselves will magnify him for all manner of Virtues and Holiness,
and not stick to say that his many Matt. Paris, p. 876, 880, 88^, 903.
Har^sfie^d, p. 47^.
Miracles were evident signs of his Saintship.

But to pass by these things, Pope Innocent himself dyed presently after. And
if they will put now any credit in Visions, [of which they have formerly so
much gloryed, as to bring Arguments from them to prove their Religion, as you
may see at large in Daurovetius] both a Pope and a Cardinal will assure them of
the Matt. Paris page 897, 903, 904.
miserable condition of this Innocent in the other World, for his bad living in
this. But this I leave to them only, who delight in and vindicate themselves
by such ware.

Yet before I part with this Innocent IV, give me leave to tell the Reader,
that this is him, who once in a rant, thus vapour'd out his Authority -- Nonne
Rex Anglorum noster est vassalus? and ut plus dicam, mancipium; qui potest eum
nuta nostro incar^erate, and ignominiae man^ p^^e. Matt. Paris, anno 1^53. page
872.
What, is not the King of England our Vassal? nay, and to say more, our SLAVE;
whom at a beck I can cause to be imprisoned and exposed to all ignominy. --

After Alexander IV, Urban IV, then Clement IV sat in St. Peter's Chair (as
they phrase it:) which Clement before his Popedom was B. Carranza, sum.
Council. page 814. Bzov. anno 1265. 1. Spondan. Io. Guil. Rishanger continuat.
Matt. Paris, p. 999 Genebrard Con p 9^5. 1272. (...) p. 975, 976.
married, and had several Children. After his death the Sea of Rome was void
three years, the Cardinals not agreeing, but wrangling amongst themselves,
every one hoping to be the man. These self-ended interests and designs, and yet
all pretending the Elections to be by the Infallible inspiration of the Holy
Ghost, made one of the Cardinals, it seems of a more free humor than the rest,
thus jeeringly advise them, -- Let us open the top of the Conclave, for the
Holy Ghost cannot descend upon us through so many Roofs. -- At last Theobald
Archbishop of Liege is chosen, who called himself Gregory X. Of this wrangling
Election the former Cardinal of Porto made this riming Distick.

Papatus munus, tulit Archidiaconus unus,
Quem Patrem Patrum, fecit discordia fratrum.
An Archdeacon's made Pope, and at Rome sits a vicaring,
Made Father of Fathers, by the Cardinals bickering.
But returning to Germany, William of Holland departing out of this World by
violence, some say, the Prince Electors differ about a new Emperor: Some stand
for Richard Duke of Cornwall; and him, they say, the Pope favored, the main
reason being his Riches, according to the Proverb, Nummus ait pro me, nubit
Cornubia Romae.


For me the money speaks it self;
Rome Marries Cornwall for his pelf.
Other Electors chose Don Alphonso X, King of Castile and Leon, so famous for
his love to Astronomy and other Sciences. But Richard made more haste, and was
Crowned at Aken: yet some will account neither of these for Emperors, though
De jure status, l. 3. c. 4. p. 287, 288.
Bozius confesses that of necessity one of them should and ought to be
Emperor; yet the same Romanist will easily dash away the necessity with his
almighty Argument, viz. because it was not the Popes pleasure to confirm either
of them. And yet they confess that Pope Spondan. anno 1259. 8.
Alexander IV earnestly desired our English Richard to go to Rome and receive
the Imperial Crown. And after Richards death, Alonso of Spain could not obtain
it. But the Electors then went to a new Election, and chose Rodulph Earl of
Habsburg (upon the Northern Coasts of Helvetia.) I shall not trouble my self
here with the Original of this Family, whether German or Italian, but refer you
to a late Tract, said to be a Posthume of that busie-pated Gasp. Sciop. de
August. Dom. Austria Origin.
Scioppius, and a later and more large Volume by Germania, Part. 3. and vid.
M^c. Eyzinger: Genealog. Princ. Aust^^ae, and Spond. anno 1273. 8.
Gabriel Bucelinus, who will refer you to others. Yet this we must grant, that
from this Family, the famous House of Austria, and almost all the German
Emperors to this day have sprung.

This Emperor Rodulph, the Pope would gladly have had gone into Italy to
receive his Crown of him; but Rodulf utterly refused it, Pet. M^xia, fol. 444.
Spond^ anno 1277. 3.
alleging for his reason Aesop's Fable, how the Fox would not go to the Lion,
because he observed no Foot-prints of any beasts returning safe out, of those
who had formerly go^e to visit him. And this he took to be the case of the
Emperors his Predecessors, few of them but loosing by their journey, and
having cause to repent of their expensive and abused travails. And this some
others observing, Italy in time fell off from the Empire: The Pope by no means
allowing of a Neighbor so near and so potent.

Rodulph dying, Adulph Earl of Nassaw was elected, by the cunning Gerhard
Archbishop of Mentz his Kinsman. But having ruled VI years, and Albert son to
Rodulf being strong in Arms, the Prince Electors meet, and depose him, and
elect the said Albert Duke of Austria. Adulf, not willing to loose his Empire
so easily, raises what force he could; meets his Enemy, fights him, and is
slain in the field. The time of his death or murder, his Nic. Serar. Hist.
Mogunt. p. 847. Na^cler. p. 867.
Epitaph in the Monastery of Frowenfeldt will tell; some place it a year or two
sooner.

Anno milleno Trecentis bis minus annis
trecenteno minus uno
In Julii mense, Rex Adolphus ruit ense:
CHAP. II.
1. The troubles of John King of England.

2. The Murder of Erick the Sixth, and Erick the Seventh, Kings of Denmark.

3. The deposing of Baldwin the Second, Emperor of Constantinople.

4. The beheading of Conrado the young King of Naples.

Sect. 1. The troubles of John King of England.
HAving lately seen the troubles of the Empire, by means of Papal Tyranny, let
us now take a view of some other parts of Christendom; and first at home, we
may meet with King John in a lamentable condition, by the Popes Usurpation, and
his own Subjects disobedience: of which briefly thus:

Hubert Archbishop of Canterbury dying, a company of the Adolescentes, Matt.
Paris, page 212.
young Monks, that they might have their humor, presently, at midnight, before
ever Huberts Corpse was buried, without ever acquainting the King with their
design, meeting secretly together, made a solemn Election, and chose Reginald
their Sub-prior, placing him upon the High Altar, then in the Archiepiscopal
Chair, singing Te Deum. But lest the King should have knowledge of this their
actings without his consent, they oblige Reginald by Oath not to behave himself
as Elect, till their farther allowance; nor to discover it to any, till he had
got to Rome and designed the Popes Confirmation.

Reginald with some of the Monks, the same night, departs in haste toward the
Pope; but being got into Flanders, he would not keep Oath or secrecy, bravely
telling what he was. The Monks hearing of this, thought it best to send to the
King to have an Election; some say, the Fox, Acts Mon. Tom. 1. page 324.
Elder Monks sent to the King to desire his license to go to Election, as if
they had known nothing what the younger had done. The desire of the Monks for
an Election, the King very Benign (...). Mat. Paris.
favorably granted, recommending to them John Gray Bishop of Norwich, it
behooving of him to have such a trusty Friend in that great Place, remembering
that all went not well with him by the late Hubert's too much complying French.
Accordingly the Monks of Canterbury Elect John; and to make him without all
exception, the Pope was sent to for confirmation.

In this business the suffragan Bishops of Canterbury bestir'd themselves,
sending also to Rome their complaint, because the Elections were made without
them: but the Pope stopped their mo^ths, by declaring that they neither had, nor
should have to do there.

And now the Monks act their parts before the Pope; the younger fry standing
for Reginald, the others for John Gray; alleging that the election of
Reginald could not be of any force, being stolen, cheatingly done, at midnight,
without the Kings consent; and so desired the confirmation of John, as being
done by the graver and Paris, p. 22^.
major part of the Monks, publicly at day time, the King present, and
consenting. To these the other party had nothing to say, but that if Reginalds
election had been just or unjust, they ought to have nulled it before they went
to a second. And Innocent willing to be satisfied with this poor shift of the
younger Monks, and to strengthen himself by another election, nulled both,
commanding neither John nor Reginald should be held for Archbishops of
Canterbury.

This being done by his potent Holiness, he commends to their choice Stephen
Langton an English Cardinal; but the Monks desire excuse, honestly alleging,
that they would not do it without the Kings consent; and farther, that they
had no authority for such an action committed to them by their Covent; and
indeed they were but a few sent to Italy, to plead about the two former
elected. The Pope angry at these reasons, too too strong and honest for him to
answer, dishonestly told them, that they had the whole and complete power of
Canterbury committed to them; and farther, Paris, p. 222, 225.
that it was not the custom to attend the consent of Princes touching
elections made before the Pope; a Doctrine too ridiculous to be confuted, and
therefore he did command them upon their obedience, and pain of the highest
curse, to choose him for Archbishop whom he had appointed. To these non*
sensicall Thundrings, the poor Monks for fear of excommunication obeyed; though
very unwillingly, and not without grumbling; only one played the Christian and
Honest man, and refused to consent to such stuff.

This being done, Pope Innocent, hoping to work the King to his will, very
gravely sent him four gold rings, and as many stones, for a bribe; for every
Goose must be a Swan that comes from Holy Rome: and lest the King should not
know the meaning of such a sanctified present, his Holiness takes a great deal
of pains to tell him, after this (I will not say canting) fashion. -- The
roundness of the Ring signifies eternity; their number, the four chief virtues,
Justice, Fortitude, Prudence and Temperance. As for the four Stones, the
Sapphire signifies Hope, the Pomegranate Charity, the Emrald Faith, and the
Topaz a good work. The King at first was a little newfangled with them, but
then rejected them as trifles.

After this Pageantry, Innocent shows his design, desiring the King to admit
of Langton for Archbishop. But though to the King he made his request humbly,
yet to the Prior and Monks of Canterbury he altered the case, commanding them
upon their obedience to admit of Langton; whereby, under his humble Vizard to
the King, was discovered a peremptory injunction, resolving that at least he
should be as obedient as the Monks.

At this the King was angry, but most at the Monks of Canterbury, for bringing
him into this noose, declaring them guilty of Treason, for choosing Reginald
(the occasion of all this mischief) contrary to the Prerogative of the Crown;
and then again for electing in Italy, Stephen Langton, his Inimicum suum
publicum.
public enemy; for which he had them banished his Dominions: then writes to
the Pope, wondering at the intrusion of such a man as Langton, one altogether
unknown to him, and one brought up all along amongst his enemies in France, and
one not rightly elected. Adding, that for his part he would stand for the
liberties of his Crown till death; Nor would he let the election of John Gray
be nulled; and if in these things he were slighted, he would permit no more of
his subjects to trudge to Rome.

The Pope atts him again, whetting his style, bidding him remember how Becket
dyed for the Church; and writes to the Bishops of London, Ely, and Worcester,
to interdict the whole Kingdom, if they found the King Contumacem and Rebell^m.
disobedient and rebellious. They acquaint the King with this Mandate, who is
willing to condescend, with the Salvo's Pr^ns Hist. of Popes intol. u^u^pat.
bo^k 3. c. 1. p. 251.
that his rights, liberties, and dignities may not be violated. But the Bishops
would allow none of these conditions, (and yet we must think it hard that
Becket might not have the liberty of Salvo's) which provoked the King so much,
thus to be trod upon by his own subjects, that he swore (per dentes Domini)
that if they or any other of his subjects should presume to interdict his
Dominions, he would send them with the rest of their fraternity to their friend
the Pope, and confiscate their goods; and so warned them from his presence.

Stephen Langton had in England a Brother called Simon, who also came in the
presence of the Bishops, to desire the admittance of his brother to Canterbury:
to whom the King proffered to do so, Pryn p. 252
saving only his right and dignity. But no sooner began the King to mention
this Salvo, but Simon replied in an insolent manner -- He would do naught for
the King therein, unless he would wholly refer himself into his hands, without
any such saving. -- The Bishops seeing the King would not dance after their
pipe, without fear or wit interdict the whole Kingdom; which continued almost
six years; by which means there was no use of divine service, only Christening
of Children, and giving the Sacrament to the dying; insomuch that the
Church-doors were shut up, some say, walled up, and the bodies of the dead
carried out into the fields, and thrown into ditches or highways like Corpora
defunctorum decivitatibus and villis ^fferebantur, and mora canum in biv^is and
fossatis sine orationibus and sacer^o^^n ministerio sepelieba^tur. Paris p 226.
Dogs, without any prayers or Christian offices. An excellent sign of the
meekness and charity of him that glories to be Christ's Vicar, to unchristen (as
I may say) a whole Kingdom for one man's fault, supposing him an offender;
though the case being truly stated, the contrary will appear, or at least not
meriting so grand a punishment. For, if the Pope has power to nominate to all
Bishoprics, he must have it either by divine right, and so unalterable (and
therefore the now Roman Catholic Kings, who deny such power, are guilty, and
the Popes too, for allowing or winking at it) or by the Kings concessions,
which is of no validity; no Monarch having authority to transfer his
Prerogatives to a foreign power; and if they do so, of no force to bind their
successors: besides, story tells us, that a little before this, the Bishops of
England rejected the designs of the Bishop of St. David's, merely because he was
elected at ^^rus Hist. of Popes usurpat. l. ^. c. 1. p. 236.
Rome: whereby we may judge Pope Innocent to have been more faulty and
extravagant than King John.

The Bishops aforesaid perceiving to what inconveniency and danger, being
Subjects, they had run themselves into, by opposing their Sovereign, in behalf
of a Foreign Power, stole out of the Kingdom, Excommunicating those who obeyed
the King.

The King seeing himself and Nation thus trampled upon, seized upon all the
Church-mens Lands that obeyed this Interdiction, and refused to celebrate
Divine-Service; yet was so favorable, as to allow the Dissenters and Rebels to
sell their Corn for their better provisions. And the white Monks, in obedience
to God, the King, and their Duty, continuing to say Divine-Service for the
benefit of Christian people, were again suspended by the Pope, and for their
compliance to their duty, they were not after allowed the same Privilege as
others, who right or wrong obeyed the Pope and his Foreign Authority.

The King weary of these troubles, was willing to comply with 121^.
the admission of Langton, and the restoration of others, whom he had exiled
for their disobedience. But give a little, take an Ell; if he condescended so
far, they doubted not to make him grant more; and therefore they would have him
refund the Treasures of the vacant Churches, by reason of the banishment of the
turbulent spirits. This he refused as an impossibility, having employed them
for the security of his Dominions in these tulbulent times. Being not satisfied
in this trifle, they scorn to agree with him; which made many leave their
Flocks here, and go beyond Seas to the Kings Enemies. Upon which the King
wisely and bravely, by Proclamation, orders all to return to their respective
Churches by such a day, or to forfeit their incomes; and that all should be
seized upon, who brought any Order or Bull from the Pope into his Dominions for
that time; knowing such things could then bring no peace to him or his Kingdom.

The Pope seeing King John stand so resolutely for his Prerogative, deprives
the King of his Dominions, absolves his Subjects from their Allegiance, curses
all those who take the Kings part. And because this of it self has no more
power then a Dogs barking over the Moon, he sends to the King of France, P^^is,
p. ^31.
desiring him to seize upon the Kingdom of England; for he, liberal man, had
given it to him and his Heirs, (he might as well have given the Moon:) and to
carry this the more clearly, he commanded all the Nobles, Knights, and other
Warriors in several Countries to assist the King of France, and cross
themselv^s (a Military Badge appointed for those who went against the Infidels
in the Holy Land) for this enterprise: and they need not doubt of a reward, he
having ordered that their souls in this warfare, shall have the same benefit as
those who visit the sacred Sepulcher; which we may suppose to be no less than
the In remissionem suo^um peccaminum. Pari, p. 233, 238. Paris, p. 232. ^ryn,
p. 266.
pardon of all their sins.

And the better to withdraw Englishmen (observed to be apt to give credit to
tatling Prophecies) from their obedience, they had thrust up one Peter of
Prontfract. Stow. p. 169.
Peter Wakefield of Poiz, to Prophecy the death or downfall of the King by such
a day; to which a great many idle people gave too much credit; but being found
a false cheating knave, according to his deserts he was hanged.

The King, to preserve himself and people from the French, had Pandolphus (who
had been in England once before) the Popes Legate, landed at Dover, tells King
John with what a great force the French were coming against him, with whom
joined many of the English Clergy, and that almost all his Nobility would fall
from him, having contrary to their Allegiance engaged so to do: And therefore
persuaded him to submit himself to the Pope, to hinder those inconveniences,
and thereby to keep himself a King.

The King m^inly troubled at these treacherous dealings of his own Subjects,
not knowing where to turn himself, was I know not how terrified and
overperswaded into an Ignominious condescension to the Pope, by admitting of
Stephen Langton to be A^chbishop, and the rest of his Rebellious Subjects to
their former conditions; and then, unkingly, to resign up the Kingdoms of
England and Ireland to the Pope, by taking off his Crown, kneeling, giving it
to Pandolphus, and laying the Royal Scepter, Robe, Sword and Ring at the
Legates feet: which Pandolf kept five days, and then allowed the King to have
them again. A thousand Marks ^^ Silver he also paid there for the Pope, which
the Legate as in a triumph trad upon: for we must not think that he despi(...)
and left it behind him.

(...) so having thus gotten all that heart could wish, takes off the (...)ict,
and lets England turn Christian once again: Though (...) us that King John's
submissions were of no force to (...)erity, no King having power to give away
his King(...)ache it tributary to a Forreigner, no way akin to the (...). Nor
could a Christian Bishop, by following our Saviou(...)s, whose Foundation lay
only on Spirituals, thus make it h^^ business, and wicked haughty design, to
make all Kings and Kingdoms Tributary or subject to his deposing and disposing
of. But for a farther nullity of King John's grant and concession, I shall
refer you to Mr. Hist. of Popes Usurp. p. ^0^, ^91, 2^2. ^0 page ^20.
Prynne. And as for this Innocent III, who thus domineered over Temporal
Princes, though these actions were enough to tell you what he was, yet Matthew
Paris in plain words will inform you, that he was Super om^es morta^es
(...)osus (...), and su^^^bus, pe(...)que sititor insatia^ilis, and ad ^^nia
scelera pro praemus, datis v^l p^o^^sis cer^um and (...), M^^. Paris, page 245.
the proudest and ambitious man in the world, most greedy and covetous of
Silver; for which he was apt to do all manner of wickedness.

When the Pope had thus, as he thought, obtained King John to be his Vassal,
and so the Kingdom his, he took his part after against his Enemies, thereby the
better to preserve what he had at last got in England. And so passing by the
several Rebellions against the King by his own Subjects, their renouncing their
Allegiance to him, and declaring themselves subject to Jews of France, and
suchlike; King John dyed, but the cause of his death is not agreed upon, some
saying a surfeit, others grief, and others that he was poisoned by the Monks of
Swinsted-Abby in Lincolnshire, who were of the Cistercian Order, who thought
themselves oppressed by King John.

Father W^r^ (...) page (...) ^20.
Parsons is very furious against any that shall say this King was poisoned, nor
will he grant any Authority for it before Caxton and Trevisa: though by his
favor, besides those ancient Authors mentioned by Speed and Fox, ^ryn, page
366.
others, I my self have seen several old Fol. F. ^2. fol. R. 67. Q^arto l. 35.
Arch. Cant. in B^bl. Bodleian. Oxon. and Chron. Antique in English Verse
Manuscript, lib. Digb. numb. 196. and Manuscript Digb. numb. 186. in Bibl.
Bodl. Oxon.
Manuscript-Histories of England writ before Caxton, who expressly declare the
manner of his poisoning. But be it as it will, it is certain that it is no
Protestant invention, but first recorded by Romanists themselves.

Sect. 2. The Murder of Erick the Sixth and Erick the Seventh, Kings of
Denmark.
HAving entertained you somewhat long in England, we shall be the shorter
abroad; and first, looking Northward into Denmark, Ericus VI [Henry] was
murdered by the contrivance of his Brother Abel. The story in short thus: Abel
longing for Krantz. Dan. lib. 7.
some Soldiers appointed rush into the Chamber, take out the King, carry him
on Shipboard, cut off his head, tie some weight to his body, and throw it into
the Sea, not far from Sleswick.

And not long after this, was King Erick VII of the same Kingdom,

Sect. 3. The deposing of Baldwin the Second, Emperor of Constantinople.
I Have not troubled you a long while with the Eastern Empi e, because they
would object it not to be of the Fellowship with Rome: but now a word or two
will not be amiss.

Baldwin II being Emperor of Constantinople, and a Tho. Bozius, de jure
status, page 287, 288.
lawful one too, as they confess, was by force without any pretense or right
thrust out of it by Michael Palaeologus, who to add wickedness to wickedness,
contrary to his Oath, put out the eyes of John the young Heir; yet because
there is no villainy without some sign and pretense of sanctity, An. 1259. 6.
Bzovius flies out in commendation of his Piety and Holiness, because when he
was about this Rebellion, he had the Image of the Virgin Mary carried before
him into Constantinople.

Baldwin complains to other Princes, and he is like to have assistance, Pope
Spond an. 1261. 10.
Urban IV being for him too against Michael. Upon this, Palaeologus is in a
peck of troubles, fearing to have more Enemies upon him than he can cope with;
and in this sad condition, he finds no remedy like making the Pope his friend.
A strange attempt, to fancy that the Infallible holy Father would have any
friendship with such a Rebel: but on he goes, cunningly pulls out his bait,
and sends to the Pope that a S^ond. an. 1263. 6, 7.
Union might be made between the Grecian and Roman Churches; and, which must
not but be bragged of, he gave him all the finest good morrows and glorious
Titles of Bzev. an. 1203. 13.
Holiness, Father of Fathers, Prince of all Priests, Universal Doctor of the
Church, etc.

Pope Urban at the receipt of this Letter is almost mad for joy, Id. anno 1264.
2.
writes back to Palaeologus, adorning him with all the glorious Titles he can
think of, not a little proud that now there was hopes for enlargement of the
Popes Dominions, by his Sub unus pasioris regimine.
sole governing the Eastern as well as the Western Churches: a Sway and
Authority which for many Ages the Popes had earnestly gaped after.

In the mean time Urban IV dying, Clement IV succeeds, with whom the same
League was driven on: but some might have thought that all would have been
spoiled, when the Pope perceived Michael to play the jugler, and underhand to
Id. anno 1266. 9.
plot with Romes Enemies, and that all his fair pretenses were only to get the
ruin of his Lord Baldwin. But no such matters; for if the Pope got but his
design, he would wink at the others petty contrivances. But this Pope ruled not
long; and after him the Sea being void for above two years, by reason of the
wrangling of the then few Cardinals, no great matter was done, only Michael to
look to himself.

At last Gregory X is set in the Roman Chair. In the mean time Baldwin, to
strengthen himself, marries his Son to the Daughter of Charles King of Sicily
or Naples. Charles seeing himself so near related to an Empire, resolves to
gain it; to which purpose he raised many Forces. This puts Michael to his
witsends, in this distress scarce knowing whither to turn himself: at last he
knew the Pope used to be good Friends to such as he at a dead lift; and
therefore he sends to Gregory X newly made Pope, to have the Union between the
two Churches settled, provided he would Modo Ca^ol^ expeditionem averteret.
Bzov. anno 1271. 5.
hinder Charles from his attempts against him. And so the story of the Union
goes on, not belonging to my purpose.

In short, Michael Palaeologus must be true Emperor of Constantinople, and
Baldwin rejected; nor must we think any injury done in this, only because it
pleased this Gregory X so to order it: and of this Example and Jurisdiction De
jure status, l. 3. c. 4. p. 287, 288.
Thomas Bozius is not a little proud; and how should the Pope, who is
infallible, and has power over all Kingdoms, do injustice or wrong?

Sect. 4. The beheading of Conrado, the young King of Naples.
HEre I might enlarge in relating the Popes Usurpations over the Kingdom of
Naples and Sicily. But I shall only instance in the misfortune of young
Conradino, who without any show of Reason or Justice was basely deprived, by
the plots and contrivance of Pope Clement IV, who putting his Oar in another
man's Boat, and French Charles of Anjou, and accordingly Crowns him King; though
I wonder how either he or St. Peter came to have any right to dispose of those
Territories. But thus is Theft, Robbery and Treason sanctified and made legal
by the Popes fiat.

Young Conradinus marches out of Germany to redeem his right Inheritance,
knowing none but Fools or Knaves would value such an Antichristian Donation.
Clement seeing Conradino not willing to loose his Kingdom, sends to him to
desist, or else he will curse him with Bell, book and Candle, and prohibits all
people to assist him. Conradine knowing such Censures not to have been
Dog-tricks, Excommunicates and deprives him, and all those who take his part,
and q^its their Subjects from their Allegiance. And because Conradine would not
desist from his lawful engagement, Bzovius in a fury shoots his Bolt, and calls
him an Insolens juve^^s, an. 1268. 2.
Insolent youth.

The young Prince thus put to it, makes his lamentable case known to the World,
in which his Secretary, or the Historian does sometimes play the quibler. He
complained how -- Pope Innocent Naucler. gener. 43. p. 839.
had abused him an Sibi innocenti nocuerit.
Innocent; for Conradus his Father King of Scicily, by will left him a young
thing in the care of the Church; and then that Pope Innocent, under the
pretense of a Tutor, seized upon the whole Kingdom; then endeavored to
extinguish his name, distributing his Lands amongst his own Kinsfolks: that
Manfredo pretending to be his friend, had cheated him too: That Innocent dying,
Pope Alexander succeeded, who also abused him, inviting others to take
possession of his Kingdom: That Pope Urban dealt very Sibi ^^erat ^^urbanus.
inurbanely, persuading Manfredo to take the Kingdom to him; but this bargain
failing, he would have Charles to undertake the business: That this Pope dying,
the next, viz. Clement, had used all Con^^a ^um inclementer egerit.
inclemencie againct him, setting up a Antiregem.
false King, Excommunicating him, and depriving him of his lawful Title. --

But see the misfortune of War! the Armies of Conradinus and Charles meet;
Conradinus is overcome, he and Frederick Duke of Austria are taken, carried to
Naples and there imprisoned. Then a Convocatis ex toto Regno Syndicis
Civitatum. Spond. anno 1269. 7.
Parliament (or bloody Rump) called, where King Conradinus and the Duke are
condemned to dye; a Scaffold is set up publicly in the City, and for more pomp
covered with Silk-Tapistry; the two innocent Princes are had thither: Frederick
of Anstria is first beheaded, whose head Conradinus kisseth; then the young
King having declared the injustice, vindicated his own innocence, and
pronounced Some say Peter of Arragon.
Frederick (some say Henry) of Castile, his Aunts Son, to be the Heir to the
Kingdom of Naples and Sicily; as a token of which Investiture, he threw his
Glove amongst the people, kneeled down, and had his head cut off.

Thus dyed Conradinus and Frederick, neither of them being eighteen years old;
and to add more ignominy, their Corpse were not permitted to be buried in
Consecrated ground, because not absolved from the Popes Excommunication; yet
they tell us that Frederick of Austria's Bzov. an. 1268. 11.
head called upon the Virgin Mary, after it was cut off; and that a wonderful
Mark remains in the place where this execution was done.

That the Pope persuaded to this cruelty I cannot say positively, though Page
841.
Nauclerus hints as much, and others affirm, d Page 841.
that his advice being asked about it, he returned this answer, that -- Vita
Conradini mors Caroli, mors Conradini vita Caroli.
Conradines life is Charles his death, and Conradines death is Charles his
life. -- However it was, no sooner was this wicked act done, but the Heads-man
was also slain, that he might not boast of his spilling such Royal Blood. A
poor come off! as if those who pronounced judgment, by this act could clear
themselves from the guilt. And some make it the worse, and with reason, because
Charles himself was a spectator all the while to this bloody Execution. Though
certainly the Pope might have saved all this bloodshed, by permitting young and
innocent Conradine to possess that which was left him by his Father: and how
unjustly his life was taken away, Page 841, 853.
Nauclerus will inform you.

CHAP. III. The troubles of Philip the Fourth, surnamed Le bell, King of France;
with the pride of Pope Boniface the Eighth.
THe first thing that offers it self in this Century, is the Boniface VIII, and
Philip IV surnamed Le Bell [i. e. the fair] where the Pope will appear most in
the fault, being a busie-body, meddling with that with which he had nothing to
do. But first it will not be amiss to see how he came to the Pontifical
greatness.

Nicholas IV dying, the Chair was void about two years: the Cardinals not
agreeing in the choice, at last one Petrus de Morone a pious Hermit was
elected, and called Caelestine V. All of their Authors acknowledging him for a
true and legitimate Pope, and accordingly the several Cardinals by him created,
legal.

Yet if their Canon Law be Authentic, and in this case ought to be observed,
as the Pope severely injoyneth, then must this Caelestine be no Pope, because
he was never a Did. 79. c. Oportebit. c. Nullus unquam.
Cardinal, out of whom only the Popes are to be chosen: (nay farther, I am not
assured that he was in Fr. Mason Consecrat. of Bishops, page 25, 16.
Orders:) and if this hold water, then I fear Clement V and his Cardinals will
run the same hazard, and then I know not how they can make up a true Pope since
that time; by which rule the Bead-roll of their Pontiffs ended above three
hundred years ago.

As for this Caelestine V, he was but a small Politician, more acquainted with
his private Devotion, than State Affairs, easily to be cheated by his crafty
Courtiers; his good and easy nature prompting him to think the best of bad
men, and give too much credit to flattering words.

This made some, after he had been Pope a little while, consult his deposition;
to which they thought it no hard matter to get his own consent; and he who most
concerned himself to procure this degradation, was (according to the common
Opinion of their own Writers) Cardinal Volater. l. 22. fol. ^56 Ant. Sab^l. en.
9. fol. 258. Naucler. p. 865, 866. M^x^a, fol. 441 L. Wadding. Hist. Minor.
Tom. 2^ an. 1294.
Benedict us Cajetanus, who, as some say, cheated him with false Miracles, as
by a counterfeit Gen^bra^d, p. 998. Platina^ Carranza sum. Council. page 818.
voice conveyed into his Chamber by a Pipe or hollow-Trunk, persuading him to
resign up his Popedom, the better to save his own soul: and this stratagem was
carried so, as if it had been a voice from Heaven.

However it was, at the last Caelestine was over-perswaded to resign, as one
unfit for that employment; and then, as the Fill. da. Berga^o, fol. 377.
Plot was laid, the said Benedict Caetan was elected for Pope (he making fair
promise to the King of Naples) and called himself Boniface VIII. It Is true, at
that time, 'twas a grand dispute whether a true Pope could resign up his
Office; of which it seems the then Cardinals were somewhat aware, and therefore
that no rub might stop their designs, they persuaded Caelestin^ before he was
degraded, to make a Decree that a Pope might resign: a pretty trick, if he
could not do it without such an Order. However, the J. Rubeus de Bonifac. p.
144.
French and some others strongly maintained the Negative, and therefore for
some time held Boniface but for an Antipope. And 'twas somewhat strange to have
him deposed for insufficiency, since as long as Cardinal Latinus lived, affairs
were carried well enough; and had he been weaker than he was, rather than
disturb the Church with such an innovation, Benedict (wise and cunning enough)
or some others, might by advice and assistance have prevented any
inconveniencie to arise from his too much good nature, or negligence of worldly
things.

But the Vizard is too open, and the design so thin, that every Child may see
through it: For it must be private ends to make them lay aside a man whose
Election (as themselves confess) was as by Vid Coeffeteau, p. 1003. Coquae.
Tom. p. 177. Ciacon.
Divine Inspiration; that himself was not only good and virtuous, but of such
exemplary Holiness, that when alive, he did many Miracles; and when dead, a
glorious Saint in Heaven, and as such have they placed him, by their
Canonization, in their Martyrologies and Calendars; so that it seems he was too
good to be a good Pope.

Yet against all this, the Cardinals reasoned that the Church might be in
danger by such a man; and therefore they must mend themselves by the choice of
one more fit for Christendom, and to be Christ's Vicar. But this objection is
formerly answered; but suppose not, their after-Election quite destroys the
supposition: for who does their wise judgments (and we must not doubt of the
Holy Ghosts Jo. Rubens de Boniface VIII. p. 18.
assistance) pitch upon, but the foresaid Cardinal Caetan, now called Boniface
VIII?

And if you would know what he was, their own Writers will assure you, that
though he was a subtle man, well learned, and a good Lawyer, yet withal that he
was Platina, M^x^as, Bargamo, Nauclerus, Sabellious, Ciaconius, B^nius,
Massonus, Trevisa, lib. 7. cap. 40. Rob. Gagu^n, Jo. Marius, de Schism. Guil.
Barclay de potestat. Papae, page 34, 36.
Proud, Dissembling, Arrogant, Scornful, Malicious, and a Wicked man, a stirrer
up of Wars and Discord, a great Persecutor of the Ghebillines, a Trampler upon
Kings and Kingdoms, and one very ungrateful, for he clapped up poor Caelestine in
prison after his resignation, which they suppose shortened his life. And to
these they add some of his other virtues, viz. that he was Vid. Jo. Marian.
Hist. Hisp. lib. 15. c. 6. Spond. anno 1303. 14.
cruel, and sordidly avaritious and covetous, and an astonishment and wonder to
all the world. And to these we may give the more credit, seeing Monsieur
Coeffeteau endeavoring to clear him from what blemishes possibly he could, yet
does not deny, but that he was guilty of Response, page 1005.
great faults, and it may be a Pastor vicious enough; and plainly confesses
that he was Page 1008, 1009.
not moderate in his doings, but too much passionate: and the Church of Rome
has disavow'd some of his actions.

These are the common sentiments of him of their own Writers; but against all
these, within these few years, one It may be an Englishman under that foolish
Vizard of Latinizing of Sirnames, a custom too much vainly used by some men, as
if they were ashamed of their Country or Relations, being scarce known under
such a fond disguise.
Johannes Rubeus has undertaken an Apology for this Boniface VIII, being
thereunto persuaded by the Cajetans (of which House this Pope was) and by them
furnished with materials, to try if he could possibly make Boniface a good
Religious Pope, and so wipe an old blot from their Family.

Rubeus falls to work, and with a resolution to do as much in this grand and
daring enterprise, as his Skill and Materials would afford: and two to one his
eagerness made him affirm more than he was really able to prove; for at the
first step he boldly declares him one of the glories of the World, for Proem.
p. 31, 32.
Prudence, Temperance, Fortitude, Holiness, Justice, Wisdom, and suchlike
Virtues. And if this be not enough, he will bring out Scripture too, to prove
that there was not Page 265.
his like amongst all the people. But these things are sooner said than made
good; and with the judicious, will go amongst the Paradoxes of Erasmus in
commendation of Folly, Cardan of Nero, Dedekindus of Nastiness, Opsopaeus of
Drinking, and suchlike pieces of Raillery; seeing he has so many of their own
Writers and Historians to oppose him. But I dare say the Romanist will think
this Prologue too long; and so let us go to the story.

The Popes had for a long time made it their common and cunning practice, when
they saw any King great and powerful, to persuade (I and threaten too) them to
go to the Holy land, and redeem it from the Saracens: and so zealous or
foolish, for this laudable Enterprise, was then the giddy world, that all sorts
and sexes, without fear or wit, conduct or discretion, would gad and trudge
thither, never doubting of Heaven, if they had but the happiness to be knocked
on the head by an Infidel; such a blessing was it to belong to the Crossado,
and so had the Popes deluded the world by their Indulgences, and suchlike ware;
insomuch, that at one time, we find an Army of Senar. hist. Mogunt p. 743.
Bishops, who deserved punishment for gadding from their Flocks; at another
time we meet with an Army of almost twenty thousand Spondan. an. 121^. 2.
boys, only fit for the rod, nay Fullers Holy-war.
Women, Cripples, etc. all must be Martyrs in the Holy Land. And when the Pope
had got the Princes employed there, he knew how to make himself more formidable
in Europe: for those whom he could delude nearer hand, he might easily abuse
abroad.

Pope Boniface VIII, of a stirring humor, sends Bernard Bishop of Apamiensis.
Some mistake, and would have it to be the Bishop of R^mini in Italy. Spond. an.
1300 9.
Pamiers in the County of Foix (then newly from an Abbacy raised to a
Bishopric) to King Philip le Bell, to exhort him to go to the Holy Land, and
there to bestow his men and treasury. Philip excused himself, as being engaged
in war against Flanders. Bernard, who must (forsooth) take no denial, coming
from the Pope, from this falls to threatening, and that in no moderate way,
being no less then the loss of his Kingdom, viz. a deposing, if he obeyed not,
and marched to the holy war, as they called it.

Philip troubled at this boldness, but which was more, Bernard Spond. an. 1301.
5, 6.
being his subject, and yet proved to be in actual Treason against him, by
plotting with the Aragonians, and other his enemies, against him, by falsely
aspersing the King as a Bastard, a cheater of the people with false coin, etc.
Accused of 32. Articles.
had Bernard seized upon, and delivered to the security of Aegidius Ancellin
Archbishop of Narbonne: nor was this done in a passion, but by the serious
advice of his Parliament, both Lords Spiritual and Temporal; and Bernard
himself took it for a favor to be delivered up to a Churchman.

The Pope informed of this, sends Jaques de Normandis Archdeacon of Narbonne
to King Philip, to release the Bishop of Pamiers, to go to the Holy Land, to
meddle with his Temporal businesses, and let the Clergy alone: if not, that he
should know that the Kingdom of France devolved to the Apostolic See, and so
he to be excommunicated and deprived, and his subjects absolved from their
Oaths to him, and their Duty and Allegiance: and farther, that the Bishops and
Doctors of France should come to Rome, there to hold a Council, how to dispose
of their King, and the affairs of the Kingdom.

The King was highly offended that the Archdeacon of Narbonne, his own
Subject, should offer to come upon such an errand, especially to be the
conveyer of such mad and insolent letters and threats, which were so scandalous
even to the French Nobility, that the Earl of Artois snatched them from the
Archdeacons hands, and threw them into the fire, where they were burned. Yet
for all these extravagancies, the King released Bishop Bernard, but commanded
him and Jaques de Normandis forthwith to depart the Kingdom.

Philip forthwith summons a Parliament, where the Pope is accused as a
busie-body, or a troublesome fellow; his strange actions against the King and
his Prerogatives are censured; the King declares that he holds his Kingdom
immediately from God only; the layety defend the King, the Bishops do so too,
and consent to all; desire the Pope to use moderation, (in which Vid. Bzov an.
1302. 6. and John Fox Acts and Mon. Tom. 1. page 453, 454.
Letter of theirs to him, his faults are reckoned up) and entreat the King that
he would be pleased to give them liberty to wait upon the Pope; but that is
expressly denied them.

For, the King doubting lest some of his Clergy, according to the then
seditious custom, should upon this falling out, leave their flocks and trudge
to the Pope, carrying with them vast treasuries, to the impoverishing of his
other faithful subjects, and the enriching of his enemies; and also suspecting,
that the Pope, according to the vanity of these times, would send out his
interdicts and curses against him, absolve his subjects of their Allegiance,
which the Fools and Knaves were apt to obey: Upon these and other
considerations, the King, wisely to provide for the security of himself and
people, by express order forbids any gadding to Rome, and transportation of
Gold, Silver, and suchlike riches out of his Dominions; and upon the borders
appointed several to take care that no Popish Bull or Censure be brought into
his Kingdom.

The Pope angry at this, nulls all the privileges and favors formerly granted
by the Popes to the French (and what were those toys, that the King and they
would not enjoy without his concession?) prohibits all Clergymen to assist the
King with any aidmony, or to part with any of their riches, to be employed in
Temporal affairs; and, as some Historians say, thus writes to the King:

Boniface Bishop, Servant of Gods Servants, to Caron. Remonstr. Hybernorum,
part 5. p. 13, 14 Be l^forest les Chroniques de France, 10. 178. Nic. Vigni^r
Hist. de l'Eglise, p. 515. Idem Biblioth. Historiale, tom. 3. p. 428. Premes de
libertes de l'Eglise Ga^licane, p. 124.
Philip the French King.
Fear God and keep his Commandments. We will thee to understand, that thou art
subject to us both in Spirituals and Temporals. No collation of Benefices or
Prebends belongs to thee; and if you have the Vacation of any, reserve the
fruits thereof to the successors: If you have made any Collation, we judge that
to be of no force, and do revoke them as null. And we think all to be Some
cop^es read fatuos, others Haereticos.
Fools (or Heretics) who think otherwise.

Dated at the Lateran, etc.

To which was returned this following answer. Philip by the Grace of God, King
of the French, to Boniface bearing himself a Pope, little health or none at all.
Let your great Sciat tua maxima fatuitas.
Foolship understand, that in Temporal affairs we are subject to no man; That
the Collation of Churches and Prebendaries belong to us by Royal Prerogative,
and the fruits thereof during their vacancy. That the Collations already made,
or hereafter to be made, are of good force and validity; and that we will
defend the possessors thereof against all men; reputing all to be fools and
madmen who think otherwise.

Given at Paris, etc.

The Pope seeing the King resolute for the privileges of his Kingdom, goes
another way to work, Jo de Bussieres, Tom. 2. p. 220, 221. Jo ^u^^us p. 211.
Spondan. an. ^^03.. 11
stirs the people of Flanders to rebel against him, desires the King of
England to fall upon him; curses, excommunicates, interdicts, and by his fond
censures deposes the King, absolves his subjects from their Allegiance,
persuades them to rise against their Sovereign, entreats Albert Emperor of
Germany to invade and seize upon his Dominions, which he gives to the said
Albert, for winning and keeping. And because the University at Paris stood for
their King, he declared them to be no University, nulling all their
privileges, prohibiting all exercises, etc.

The King seeing the Pope thus madly to run on against him, summons a
Parliament, where the King is vindicated, and the Pope accused of Heresy,
Nigromancy, Simony, Sodomy, Murder, Usury, Uncleanness, etc. all which
Articles being too long for this place, I shall refer you to Acts and Mon tom.
1. p. 448, 449, 450, 451, 452, 453.
Fox, and the two late Volumes of the Traites des droit and libertes de
l'eglise Gallicane, Tom. 2. page 140, 141, 14^.
liberties of the Gallican Church, collected and set forth by the learned
Frenchman, Mons. de Pais [Puteanus.] But for all this, the next Pope but one
clears him, and makes him a good man. In this Parliament the King appeals from
the Pope to the next Council.

But this trouble ended by the sudden death of the Pope, though after what
manner Authors will not agree; some say by a Fever, others grief, and many
affirm by despair, if not madness, yet Fu^enti similis. Spond. an. 130^. 13.
Marian hist Hispan. l. 15. c. 6.
next door to it. However it was, considering with what subtlety he attained
the Popedom, with what pride and arrogance he domineered, and his talked-of
strange death, he procured this Proverb to be fastened upon him -- Intra vit ut
vulpes, regnavit ut leo, mortu^s est ut canis.
He entered like a Fox, ruled like a Lion, and dyed like a Dog. -- Lucretius
describes the Poetical Monster thus: Prima leo, postrema draco, media ipsa
Chimaera.


And of this Pope, thus another alludes:

Ingreditur vulpes, leo pontificat, canis exit, Jo. Rubeus, p. 258.

Et sic revera, nova dicitur illa Chimaera.
I have formerly given you the Character of this Pope, according to the
Romanists themselves; and for farther proof, you shall hear Platina himself
speak. Pope Boniface Qui imperatoribus, ^egibus, principibus, nationibus,
populis, terrorem potius quam Religionem injicere conabatur; quique dare regna
^^auferre, pellerehomines, and reducere pro arbit ^^ animi conabatur, aurum
undique conquisitum plus quam dici potest, sitiens. Platina vit. Bonifacii VIII.
rather endeavored and studied how to terrify Emperors, Kings, Princes,
Nations and People, then to promote Religion; he strived and endeavored to
give and take away Kingdoms, to trample upon all men according to his pleasure,
being covetous of wealth beyond all report.

This judgment of Platina is also confirmed by Gener. 44. p. 870.
Nauclerus: and his own actions will testify as much; for having appointed a
Jubilee, the first day he appears in his Pontificalibus, but the next day he
shows himself in an Krantz. Saxon. l. 8. c. 36. Cus^ nian vit. Albert.
Imperial habit, with a Crown on, having a naked sword carried before him,
crying out, Luke 22 3^.
Behold two swords; childishly alluding to his own blockish Extra Commun. de
major and obed. c. unam sanctam.
comment upon the Apostles and our Saviors words, as if the two Swords there
mentioned, employed the Pope of Rome to have spiritual and temporal authority
over all men. Another story they tell of him. Jacobus de Voragine Archbishop
of Genoa, that great writer of pretty miracles, dying, Porchetto Spinola
succeeded; and being at Rome on an Ash Wednesday, he amongst others fell down
at the Popes Feet, to be signed on the Forehead with a Cross of holy Ashes.
Boniface thinking him to be his Enemy, alters the Platina, Nauclerus, Coquaeus,
Tom. 2. page 178. Spond. anno 1296. 11.
Scripture, telling him thus: -- Remember that thou art a Gibellin, and with
the Gibellins thou shall return to Ashes; -- and so cast the Ashes in his eyes,
and deprived him of his Archbishopric; but gave it him again, when he heard
that he was mistaken in the man. At this action Page 1005.
Coeffeteau is a little troubled, and does confess that (if it be true, as
there is no reason to doubt of it) that it was a kind of Sacrilege that
cannot be excused.

Of this Boniface, who before his Popedom was called Benedict, one made these
Verses.

Nomina bina bona tibi sunt praeclarus amictus, Eberhardi Annal. an. 1303. apud
Hen. Ca^^s. An^^que. lec^^on. Tom. 1.

Papa Bonifacius modo, sed quondam Benedictus,
Ex re nomen habe, Benefac, Benedic, Benedicte,
Aut cito perverte, Malefac, Maledic, Maledicte.
But for diversion sake, you may here peruse the Rimes of John Lydgate, the old
Monk of St. Edmondsbury,

Among these woeful Princys three The fall of P^^nces, lib. 9

Which showed them so uggly of their chere:
Pope Boniface by great adversite,
The VIII of that name began to approach nere,
A thousand IIIC accounted was the year,
Fro Cryst's birth by computation,
When that he made his lamentacion.
This same Pope caught occasion,
Which undre Petre kept governaunce,
To Interdict all the Region,
Time of King Philip regnynge tho in France,
Direct Bulls down into Constaunce,
To Nicholaus Benefractus Archdeacon of Constance in lower Normandy, being sent
by the Pope, to carry the Orders to Interdict the King, was seized up on at
Tryers, and imprison^d.
Nicolas made by Boneface
Archdeacon of the same place.
Of holy Church the Prelates nygh each on,
Busshoppys of France felly have declared;
Prevynge by Of these Articles against him I spoke before, telling where you
might see them, viz. in Jo. Fox. p. 448, 449. and Traitez des droits and
libertes de l'Eglise Gall. Tom. 2. p. 14^, 141.
points many mo than one,
In a great sin pleynly and not spared,
By him the Church was ^urte and not repared:
Put on him crimes of great mysgovernaunce,
Denonucynge enemy to all the Land of France.
Put on him many great outrage,
Wrongly how he had done offense
To a Cardinal born of the lynage
B^n^face was a mortal enemy to the Family of the Colonne, banishing the
Cardinals, and making them and others of that house incapable of any
preserment; and it may be they might provoke him to it: they were restored
again by Benedict IX and Clement V.
De Columpnys a kinrede of reverence;
For which cause he kept him in absence,
Out of the Court drough where he was born,
By which occasion the Pope his life has lorn.
De Columpnys the Lynage has so wrought,
Sciarra Co^lonna and others s^ddenly s^ized upon the Pope in Anagni: some say
they carried him prisoner to Rome; others say that he was rescued, and went to
Rome of his own accord; and if so, then he was not imprisoned in Castello S.
Angelo.
Took Bony face for his ^ruelte;
With great force and power they have him brought
Unto a Castle which stood in the Cite,
Called Sancta Angeli, gave auctorite
To Cardinal, and by commyssion,
Power to do full Execution.
Of these matters hanging in balaunce,
A twene parties, were it right or wrong;
Both of Romans, and Prelates eke of France:
The Pope ay kept within the Castle strong,
Of aventure abiding there not long;
Fill in a flixe, and afterward for need,
For hunger So says Boccace, Trevisa, Walsingam; but some others deny it.
ete his handys as I read.
How af his dyeinge it is made mention,
About the Castle was mervelous lightnyng,
Where the Pope lay fettred in prison,
None such a form was seyn in their lyvynge, etc.
The death of Pope Boniface might be reckoned for a blessing to Christendom:
for if this quarrel between him and the King of France came to such an height
and extravagancie in the small time of two or three years, with what combustion
and miseries would it in all likelihood have filled Europe, had the lengthning
of this Popes life prolonged, and so more stirred up the mischief?

Boniface VIII dying, Benedict IX succeeded, who ruled not long, being taken
away as is supposed by poison. Then after him was elected Clement V, though no
Cardinal; and besides, he basely and illegally obtained the Chair, by the
interest of this King Philip; to whose feet he humbled himself, not only
Simoniacally promising, but also Jo. Rubens page 288. Bzovius, Spondanus.
swearing before the Eucharist, and giving farther security too, that if he
would let him be Pope (for the King then carried a main stroke) to gratify
Philip in several Concessions, as to condemn or raze out the very memory of
Boniface, etc.

Clement V having thus obtained the Popedom, removes the Papal Seat from Rome
into France, where it continued many years. At his Coronation at Lions there
was a great deal of hurleyburley by the falling of an old Wall, whereby Charles
the Kings Brother, the Duke of Britanny, with several others, were hurt; the
Pope himself tumbled from his Rosanante, by which fall he lost a rich Jewel
from his Tiara, or Pontifical Diadem. And the King hardly escaped the scowring,
having like a dapper Page on foot waited on his Holiness and his Horse, holding
the Spond. an. 1305. 6.
reins of the Bridle; and when he was weary of that unkingly slavery, or
thought he had done enough, Coeffe^. page 1018.
his two Brothers, others say Charles, and the Duke of Britanny, one on one
side of his Horse, and the other on the other, performed the same humble
service; but the stones of the old Wall so knocked them for their pains, that
ten to one they repented of their servility, and wished themselves farther off
his Holiness.

After all these glories, Clement reconciles all between France and the
Popedom, absolving those whom Boniface had Excommunicated; restored the Family
of the Colonni, vindicating the King from any bad intentions in his actions
against Boniface; yet he would not be as good as his Oath to dash out the very
memory of Boniface, though Philip several times urged him earnestly to it. But
Boniface he makes no Heretic; yet as unwilling that his actions in this
quarrel should be remembered, he commands under pain of Excommunication, all
Spond. an. anno 1310. 3.
Acts, Writings, Registers, etc. of these things to be taken off the File,
abolished, and razed out; nor never for the future to be reassumed, or
discovered to any. And we are told that he also granted, that the Coeffet. p.
1024.
Kings and Kingdom of France should never for the future be Excommunicated or
Interdicted. The which, if true, must be thought a brave privilege in those
wrath-denouncing times.

To conclude with this Clement, take one story: several Monks had bought great
privileges of the Pope, of which they were as proud, as he glad of their Cash.
The Friar Minorites go to Market too, and offer Clement above forty thousand
Florences of Gold, for a dispensation to possess Riches contrary to their
Order. Tho. Walsingham in ^aw. I. p. 19. Fox, p. 480.
Clement bites at this goodly bait, asked them where their Money was; they
reply, In the Merchants hands, and ready: The Pope bids them come again the
third day. In the mean time the Pope absolves the Merchants of their Bond made
to the Friars, and commanded them to deliver him the Moneys. The Merchants
absolved, obey; and the Pope tells the Friars, that he would not violate the
Rule of S. Francis. And so the poor Friars went sneaking away gulled of their
Moneys. Clement being too cunning for such hoorders up of Wealth. And so much
for Clement, who was a lover of Women as well as Riches.

CHAP. IV.
1. The Murder of the Emperor Albert.

2. The death of the Emperor Henry the Seventh.

3. The troubles of the Empire by reason of the Papal arrogance.

4. The strange Tumults acted at Rome by Nicholao di Renzo, and Francisco
Barencello.

5. The Dog-trick used by the Venetians to take off the Popes Censures against
them. 6. The bloody actions in Hungary.

Sect. 1. The Murder of the Emperor Albert.
YOu were formerly told how Adolph the Emperor was deposed and slain by Duke
Albert, which Albert now carried himself as Emperor, having the voice and
consent of the Germans; and though at first Pope Boniface VIII refused his
confirmation, yet at last, hoping to make use of him against King Philip the
fair of France, he also acknowledged him for Emperor, confirmed him in the
Throne, approved of all that he had

But we shall see his end to be miserable: for John his own Nephew troubled
that he kept some lands from him, conspired with some others his death, which
thus they brought to pa^s: Albert riding once out to take the Air, accompanied
only with these Conspirators, who seemed his great friends, at last they took
their opportunity, so that the Nephew John stabbed him into the

Sect. 2. The death of the Emperor Henry the Seventh.
THe Imperial Chair being now void, after some canvassing, the Electors by the
Popes Instigation, (fearing they otherwise they would have elected Philip of
France) chose for Emperor Henry VII Earl of Lutzenburg; which Election is
confirmed by Clement V, then at Avignion in France, provided Henry would go
into Italy, there to do his drudgery.

The Emperor marches for Italy (which no Emperor had done for many years
before, and at Buonconvento in Tuscany, not far from Sienna, dies, not without
great suspicion of being poisoned, (and that too at the receiving of the
Sacrament) as many of their Platina, vit. Clement V. Genebrard, page 1011. Jo.
Bapt. Egnat. lib. 3. Raph. Volaterran. lib. 23. fol. 279. Mexias, p. 459.
Nauclerus, p. 876. Da. Bergamo, fol. 383. Anton. Sabellicus, En. 9. fol. 261.
Compilatio Historica apud Scriptor. Germ. anno 1313. Paul. Langius, Chron.
Citizens. Wern. Rolewinck fascic. Temp. Albert. Argent. chron. Jo. Cuspinian.
de Caesaribus. Alb. Krantz, in Saxon. l. 9 c. 7. Gabr. Bucelin. German. Annal.
anno 1313. Hubert. Goltz. and Casp. Gevert. Icones Imperatorem. Gonzal de
Il^escas, Hist. Pont. part. 2. fol. 8.
Historians do confess, though others will allow of no such thing.

As for any to be poisoned by the Eucharist, it is not impossible; and they
report the like to have happened to Matt Paris, anno 1154. p. 91.
Henry Murdack Archbishop of York, and also of Pope Alph. de Carth gena.
Anacephal.
Victor III. Of the Emperors being poisoned at the receiving the Sacrament, by
a sacrilegious Priest, thus laments one of their old Poets:

Jure dolet mundus, quod sit Jacobita secundus
Judas, quod restat, mors Caesaris hoc manifestat
Anno milleno tercenteno duodeno
Vno non pleno, privati luce Veneno.
Another as good a Rimer as the former, thus: Caesaris Henrici mortem
plangamnus amici,
Qualiter hic vitam finivit per Jacobitam,
Per Corpus Christi venenum tradidit isti,
Hinc in land Dei moritur die Bartholomaei,
Est Pisam latus, and cum fletu tumulatus
Anno milleno Tricenteno Terdeno.
But methinks that famous and learned Henry Estiene (to whose Family the
Commonwealth of Learning owes very much,) upon this subject is most unluckie
and biting.

Les Pagens nec vouloyent mettre au nombre des Dieux Apol. pour P^rod. page 284.

Ceux qui au genre humain estoyent pernicieux.
Si le Dieu de Paste, est un Dieu qui empoisonne
(Don't l'Empereur Henri tesmoignage nous done)
Que diroyent les Pagens de ces gentiles Docteurs,
Qui les hommes ont faict de luy adorateurs?
Car si leur Dieu ne fait de meurdris Conscience,
Enter leur Diable and Dieu quelle est la difference?
Heathens no Gods ordained, but such as did
Do good to man, and wickedness forbid.
If your Cake be a God that takes away
By poison life, what may the Pagans say?
For if he thus will murder and do evil,
What difference 'twixt your God then and your Devil?
Sect. 3. The troubles of the Empire, by reason of the Papal arrogancy.
AFter the death of this Henry VIII (be as it will) some a^count the Empire to
be void for above XXX years. Others esteem Jews of Bavaria for the Emperor,
whilst some think no less of Frederick of Austria, though several, as
aforesaid, reject them both. However, by this dissension Christendom suffered
much, and may justly be supposed, that much bloodshed and mischief had been
saved, had the Popes been less stubborn, and more studious for the benefit of
Religion, than their private passions and interests.

For the Electors dissenting, one part chose Jews of Bavaria, the other
Frederick Duke of Austria; the first having Genebrard, page 1016.
four to the latters third; though Fredericks party retorts, that the Duke of
Brandenburgs Ambassador or Representer (for himself could not come) voted
against his Masters commands, and so would have it null. Be it as 'twill*
Authors differ in their Narrations, and An. 1314.
Spondanus scarce knows what to think of it. However, both parties declared
himself Emperor, and was Crowned, both sent to the Pope for Confirmation, and
both denied; nor did he trouble his pate with the mending of the business, so
that it seems 'twas all one to him, fight Dog, fight Bear; the lesning of
Emperors, being some cause of his greatness.

By these divisions Germany was pitifully rent to pieces: for now the sword
must try the business; and at last Jews is Victorious, and takes his
Antagonist Frederick prisoner, whom some thought he would have put to death,
but he was more noble, only Frederick at first hired a Villain to assassinate
Jews, who was discovered, and punished for his desert.]

Jews now thought all was done, but he found another sort of warfare; for Pope
John XXII favoring Frederick, pulls out his tools against Jews, accusing him
of seizing upon the Empire (and why did not the Pope then long before provide
for this?) assisting of Heretics and Schismatics, (and no wise man but will
look every where for assistance) and so gave him three months time to appear
before him, and clear himself of those things alleged against him. Jews sends
Ambassadors to him, to vindicate himself; but the Pope cares not for this, and
so Excommunicates him, declares him deprived of the Empire, and curses all
those who take his part. Against these, Jews vindicates himself, and the
Imperial Authority, and appeals from the Pope to a General Council.

And now the Pens fall to work, every man vindicating as he was persuaded: The
Pope had Alvarus Pelagius a Spaniard, Petrus de Palude a Frenchman, but above
all, Augustinus Triumphus of Ancona, a Mendicant Italian Friar, who by the
commandment of this Pope John XXII, undertook to display the Papal Authority;
who according to his Masters humor, has made him so great, powerful, and
supreme above all things, that, but that a Cat may look upon a King, no mortal
eye durst behold his Holiness.

On the other hand, Jews wanted not learned Champions, such as were Marsileus
Patavinus, Johannes de Janduno, Dante famous for his Poetry, Wit and Memory,
and our famous Countryman William Ockam, who used to say to this Jews Defen^e
me gladio, and ego te desendam verbo.
Protect me with your Sword, and I will defend you with my Pen or learning; but
the Pope used his usual tool to confute their Arguments, viz. cursing and
Excommunication.

In this hurly-burly, Jews makes peace with Frederick his Prisoner, Frederick
retained the Title of Emperor, others deny it; however it was, they were both
good friends; by which means the Pope by using more moderation, might have
shown himself a good friend to Peace and Christendom. But though it seems that
these two were agreed on the business, Pope John would not by any means permit
Jews to be Emperor, but damned him again with his Censures: Which made Jews
reject John as much, proceeding also against him with his Censures, nulling all
that he had done against him, and at last by advice declares him to be no Pope,
and so ^ashe^rs his Holiness: which made some wags call him but Presbyter-John,
or Prester-John; which being done, he creates a new Nicholas V.

The quarrel having gone so far, Frederick of Austria dies, and Jews remains
alone, and peace might have been concluded at an easy rate: to which purpose
also Jews himself writes to Pope John, but nothing is done in the business;
and some time after John dies, and Benedict XII is elected to sit in the Papal
Chair. John had done. However, Jews sends to him that an Agreement might be
struck up; which Benedict seemed to hearken too; but the conditions were so
intolerable, that the design fell to the ground. Yet the Bishops of Germany
pitying the distractions and miseries of Christendom by these divisions, send
also to the Pope, to desire him to hearken to peace; but the Messengers after
long stay, returned home as wise as they went, nothing being granted them.

Jews seeing nothing would do, summons a Diet (or Parliment) where the state
of the Question being canvas'd, he vindicateth his Imperial Authority, denies
the Popes jurisdiction over Canting and Quakering style) and worth the reading,
but too large for this Breviary, a Generat. 49 page 8^6, 887, ^88.
I shall refer you to (b) Nauclerus.

Benedict dying, Clement VI succeeds, who also renews the Thunderbolts against
Jews, who sends to his Holiness, desiring an Agreement. Clement shows himself
willing, provided Jews will declare -- himself no Emperor, acknowledge all
the Errors, Heresies 134^.
a^^irm'd against him, and that he was a Schismatic; to renounce all right to
the Empire, resign it up unto the Pope, nor to undertake it again, unless the
Pope thought good to give it him; and farther, that Jews his person and his
sons should be at the Popes disposing. -- Jews his Ambassadors, how
circumventing I know not, subscribe and swear to these intolerable Articles, at
which the Pope did not a little wonder.

But when they were brought to Jews, he was amazed to the purpose at such an
action done without his acquaintance, and, forsooth, summons a Diet at
Franckford, where by the unanimous Jews offered himself then ready to obey the
Pope, if they pleased, but they would not yield upon such harsh and severe
conditions.

Pope Clement informed of this, runs to the Papal Dog-trick, pulls out his tool
of Censure, declares Jews an Heretic, Schismatic, And Bella^m^ne ma^es th^se
C^ns^es an A^gument of the Popes Temporal Authority to depose Princ^s. Bellarm.
de Romans Pont. lib. 5. ^2^ 8.
and what not? pronounces him deprived of the Empire, curses all those who
take his part; for which cause also he deprives Henry III Archbishop of Mentz,
and commands the Electors to look upon Jews as no Emperor, and so to go to
the Election of another; recommending to them Charles, son to John King of
Bohemia. Some of the Electors obey the Pope, meet, and elect accordingly the
said Charles, which is confirmed by the Pope. And not long after, to the great
comfort of Clement and Charles, Jews unfortunately ended his days by an
unluckie ^all from his Horse, which was hastened and occasioned by poison given
T^ Deum laudamus was sung to the People.

Thus, after above XXX years troubles and vexations, ended Jews, whom I find
grealy commended for his Devotion toward the Gononus, page 312.
Virgin Mary: yet did not Germany enjoy peace and happiness; for several of the
Electors not submitting to Charles, elected and sent to Edward III King of
England for Emperor, but he for some reasons refused it; then they chose
Frederick Marquess of Misnia, who also desired to be excused; then by a
Majority of the Electors was nominated Gunther Earl of Swarzenburgh, who
accepted of it, and was Crowned, and had many followers; but he at last being
poisoned, Charles obtained his desires. But of these things an hint is
sufficient.

Sect. 4. The strange Tumults acted at Rome by Nicolao di Renzo, and Francisco
Barencello.
WHilst these things were acting in Germany, there happened an odd passage in
Rome, that had it gone on, would have altered and non-plus'd all the Counsels
and Contrivances both of Pope and Emperor; which being somewhat strange, not
unlike the late bravado of Thomas Anello at Naples, take it thus in short for a
diversion.

Whilst Jews, Charles, and Pope Clement were bandying it for the Empire, there
started up at Rome one Nicolaus Gabrinus, son Laurentius or Rentius, and so by
some Italians called Nicolao Bzovius. Spond.
di Renzo, who was by profession a public Notary, but one well seen in
History, politic, and bold to any undertaking. This man considering that the
Popes for several years had lived at Avignion, at which he knew the Romans to
be somewhat discontented, took this opportunity, persuades the people to redeem
their ancient Privileges and Liberties. They apt to change, join with him,
whereby he became so strong, as to seize upon the Capitol, depose the Senators,
and take all the Government to himself.

Having thus got absolute Authority, and all the people obedient to his beck,
through an odd humor he would have himself again baptized; which was performed
with great solemnity in the Lateran Church. And the more to advance his own
vainglory, in all his Letters and Deeds he appropriated to himself lofty and
swelling Nicolaus cand^datus Sp^^tus Sancti miles, sever^s and clemens,
liberator U^^is, zelator Italiae, Am^or orbis, Tribut us, Augustus.
Titles, as the Candate Soldier of the Holy Ghost, the Tribune of Peace,
Liberty and Justice, the Redeemer of the Roman Commonwealth, Augustus, and
suchlike.

He made and Ordained Senators, disposed of all places as he pleased; yet
behaved himself so, that the people admired and loved him as one sent from
Heaven: and for that time, never was there more Peace and Justice in Rome, so
that all men remained satisfied; and by consequence he grew so strong and
powerful, that his fame ran all Europe over; the inferior people loved him,
the greater sort, and Princes of Italy, feared him, sent Ambassadors to him,
sought his friendship and favor.

And being thus raised to the top of greatness, he thought himself secure and
strong enough, and so enlarged his pretended jurisdiction; he sent to Pope
Clement to come to Rome by such a time, or else he would depose him, and elect
another: he also sent to Jews and Charles to appear before him, and to show by
what title and pretense they laid claim to the Empire; and also commanded the
Electors to come to him too. He declares Rome to be the Head of the world, and
the Foundation of Christianity; all the Cities of Italy to be free, and Rome
and all Italy to belong to the Imperial Monarchy.

This vanity having continued a few months, he perceives great designs against
him, and the people weary of their own Idol; wherefore he steals from Rome, and
is found with Charles, who sends him to the Pope, by whom he is imprisoned.

He remained a prisoner about VI years, at latter end of which he grew into
great favor with Pope Innocent VI. About which time there happened an action
somewhat like the former.

One Franciscus Baroncellus, a Notary too, considering the greatness and glory
that Nicolao di Renzo once had, fancyed, had he been in his Authority, he
should have kept it better: full of these thoughts, he resolves to play the
same game, contrives his Confederates, raises a Tumult in the City, cries up
Liberty, seizes upon the Capitol, thrusts out the Senators; by his fair
speeches charms the people to applaud him, who finds fault with several
Tyrannies and Vices, and rails dapperly against the Pope at Avignion. Thus
having brought all to his lure, he becomes their Governor under the specious
(b) title of Tribune and Consul a Fran. Ba^oncel ^^ Dei gratia, secundus
Tribunus Almae urbis ac Romanus Consul.
of Rome. This being done, he writes to the Princes of Italy to join with him,
and to Charles to come and receive the Empire. And he did not forget to do
Justice, that is, to have any one killed and robbed whom he pleased.

Pope Innocent informed of these mad-pranks, by advice, thinks it best to drive
out one Peg with another; and so having made Nicolas Renzo his friend, sends
him for Rome with Cardinal Aegidius to quiet these Tumults.

The people hearing of Renzo's coming, turn with the Tide, and join with him,
and kill their late favorite Barencellus, after he had scarce triumphed four
months. Renzo and the Cardinal are received with all joy that can be imagined;
Olive-branches carried before them, Triumphal Arches erected; the Streets
straw'd with Flowers, and all sorts of Music and Hymns. Renzo is made Tribune
again, and the people think themselves now the most happy in the world under
such a Governor.

But this joy lasted not long: for Nicolas turns Tyrant, oppresses them to the
purpose; whereupon they rise up against him, seize upon him, and kill him, and
happy was he that could get a stroke at his body, which for more reproach they
hang up by the feet for two days and a night, then burn it to ashes, and threw
them into the River. And thus much by the by for the giddy-headed Romans.

Sect. 5. The Dog-trick used by the Venetians to take off the Popes Censures
against them.
ANd here comes into my memory a pretty Dog-trick of the Ant. Sabel. En. 9. l.
8. fol. 261. Petr Marcel. Hist. Ven^t.
Venetians to redeem themselves from the Censures of a stubborn Pope. Azzo da
Este II Marquess of Ferrara, having by his first Wife one Frisco, upon her
death Marries again. Frisco upon some account fearing by this means to be out
of favor, and at last to loose his right of Government, by the advice of some
of the Ferrarians, seizes upon his Father, imprisons him, where he dies, and
then takes the Government upon himself.

The people upon this is divided, some for Frisco, whilst other oppose him: in
this condition, Frisco not being sufficient of himself to conquer all, desires
the assistance of his Friends the Venetians; they yield to his request, by
which means Ferrara is reduced. Pope Clement the V (of whom we spoke formerly)
informed of this, Excommunicates the Venetians, and persuades all people to be
their enemies, as opposing a City which the Pope declared to belong to the
Protection of St. Peter. By this means the Venetians either in Travail or
Traffic are abused every where; and, as some say, people thought they could do
no better service than kill them where ever they met them.

However it was, the Venetians still went home by weeping cross; they sue, send
and entreat for pardon, but it will not be granted. At last they sent Francisco
Dandalo, one of great repute amongst them, to use all his endeavor to get off
this Interdict: Dandalo goes to France, where the Pope then kept his Court,
and after much entreaty, was admitted in, but denied. Dandalo resolved, if any
thing could do it, not to return without it; gets a great Iron chain, one end
of which he puts about his neck, with which like a Dog, under the Popes Table,
he lies on the ground so long, that the Pope being thus overcome, recals his
Censures, and nulls the Interdict. A great sign of the Ambassadors patience;
but it is need makes the Old Wife trot: and the Venetians were forced to this
Slavery, by the great misery they were brought into by the Popes Interdiction,
whereby every one looked upon them to have no benefit of Christian Law or
favor. And if every one ought thus to truckle, that either seized upon other
men's Dominions, or assists others so to do, how many Popes before this time had
had their necks honored with an Iron-collar, and dragged a Chain after them to
the Table of Kings and Emperors? And a worse punishment and ignominy does he
deserve, that dispossesseth another wrongfully. But the Pope after so many
entreaties and confessions of fault, might have indulged this renowned
Commonwealth, Fulgas. Hist. of Ven^ce.
without this Dog-like disgrace: And some accordingly are apt to think, that
the Venetians were not only freed from these Censures, but also favored with
a Privilege, never to be Excommunicated, Censured, or Interdicted again: Which
if true, Pope Paul V, of late days, looked upon it but a piece of nonsense, and
of no validity, by his contrary actions against that Republic.

Sect. 6. The bloody actions in Hungary.
ANd here might I speak of the miseries of Hungary, what dissentions Bzov.
1327. Spond. 1330
and broyls that Kingdom was troubled withal, by the Popes intermedling with
their affairs, betwixt whom and the Natives there was no small strife, whether
they or he should nominate the King. What great danger their King Charles I.
was in by the treason of one Felicianus, who entered the Presence Chamber,
draws his Sword, wounds the King, cuts off four of the Queens fingers; and if
he had not been slain by Johannes Palochus, had designed to have murdered the
King, Queen, and their Children? And from him might I go to Charles II; who
Jews I. dying, and leaving his Eldest Daughter Mary for Queen, by the
instigation of some Nobles, comes from Naples, and thrust her from the Throne.

Nor did his enjoy this honor long: for Elizabeth the Widow of Jews, and
Mother to Mary, takes her opportunity, and invites him to a private meeting,
where he was slain or poisoned; in revenge of which, Johannes Banus de Horvath
has the Heads of the Assassinates cut off, and Elizabeth drowned in the next
River; and had proceeded against Mary too, but that he was terrified by the
approach of Sigismond Marquess of Brandeberg her Husband, with a great Army to
her relief. Which Sigismund was then made King of Hungary, and was after that
Emperor of Germany.

CHAP. V.
1. The deposing and Murder of Edward the Second, King of England.

2. The deposing and death of King Richard the Second.

3. The grand dispute and troubles amongst the Cordeliers, concerning the
trifling and childish Questions of the largeness of their Capuchin or Hood, and
the usage and right of the Bread and meat which they eat.

Sect. 1. The Deposing and Murder of Edward the Second, King of England.
BUt leaving these mischiefs abroad, if we look at home, we shall not find
England better or more Christian, yet as much Roman Catholic as their
Neighbors.

Here now rules Edward II, surnamed of Carnarvan in Wales the place of his
birth, and son to Edward I. A Prince too apt to be abused by his self-ended
Courtiers, and, as the Nation thought, too much complying to the Dictates of
the Spencers; by which means he obtained the displeasure of some of the people;
and which was more, several of the Bishops turned his Enemies; but which was
most of all, his own Queen Isabel, Daughter to Philip le Bell King of France,
was his greatest Enemy, and made it her whole business to procure his
deposition and ruin.

And to make the way more easy for this their wicked design, they had spread
abroad that Pope John XXII had Bzov. an. 1326. 10. Spond. 3.
absolved all the English of their Allegiance to their King Edward. A brave
World and Faith, that people should be so Antichristian, as to think the Pope
had really any such power: but when the Bishops of Rome had the Impudence to
affirm as much, well might the simple people be gulled and cheated by such
Popes, and such a faith, to any Villainy or Rebellion.

The Nation thus abused, the King was not able to defend himself; whereupon the
Queen and the rest march boldly to Oxford, where Adam de Orlton Bishop of
Hereford preaches to them a Comfortable but wicked Sermon, taking this for his
Text -- My head grieveth me --: From which words he declared to them, that a
bad King ought to be removed, though by the same rule his head ought to be cut
off for aching.

From thence they marched to London, where they were joyfully received; and a
Parliament being held, King Edward II is judged unfit for the rule, and so
declared deposed, and his Eldest Son Edward III, (the Father being at last
forced to consent) made King; the Archbishop of Canterbury making a Sermon as
bad as the former, from these words: -- Vox Populi, vox Dei. -- When the King
had thus been forced to resign, being a close Prisoner, (some Lords and others
being sent down to him at Kenilworth Castle to procure his resignation) S.
William Trussel Knight and Speaker to the Parliament, thus bespake the King, --

I William Trussel, in name of all men of the Land of England, Trev^sa, 17.
cap. 43.
and of all the Parliament Procuratour, I resign to the Edward the homage
that was made to the sometime. And from this time forthward I dyffye the, and
Deprive.
pryve the of all Royal Power, and I shall never be tendaunt to the as for
King ofter this time.

And then Sir Thomas Blunt, Steward of the Kings Household, brake his white Rod,
resigned his Office, and thereby signified that the Kings Household had free
liberty to depart, and serve Edward no more.

King Edward II being thus deprived of his Dominions, Isabel Tho. de la Moore,
Hist. de vita and Mor^e Eaw. II. Jo Stow's Chron. Galfrid. le Bak^r de
Swynabroke c^er. de v^ a and morte Regum Edwardorum I. and II. fol. 107.
Manuscript. Cod. XL super A. B. A^t. in Bibl. Bodl. Oxon.
his Queen, who is thought to hate him mortally, thinks he is too well used at
Kenilworth Castle, by Henry Earl of Leicester his Kinsman; and therefore with
the advice of the Bishop of Hereford, he is thence removed, and delivered to
the custody of Sir Thomas Gurney, and Sir John Maltravers his mortal Enemies,
who convey him to Corf-Castle, thence to Bristol, and so to Barkly Castle. In
which private journeys, the King endured all manner of ignominy and scorn by
these two villainous Knights; as they made him ride bare-headed, would scarce
allow him any sleep or victuals, and contradicted and crossed him in every
thing. One time Gurney made him a Crown of Hay, and put it on his Head, and
crying with the rest -- Tprut avaunt Sir King, and Fare forth Sir King; (i e. go
on.) Another time they would shave as well the hair of his head as his Beard:
for which purpose they made him light from his jaded Horse, set him on a
Molehill, took water out of a Ditch close by, saying, that should serve for
that time: which so overwhelmed the King with grief, that he told them, That
would they nould they, he would have warm water for his head; and so at their
inhumanity began to weep and shed tears plentifully.

And when he was a Prisoner in Barkly Castle, they used him much after the same
way, (though Thomas Barkley then Lord of the place, greatly pittyed his sad
condition, wishing it in his power to redress it). At last Queen Isabel and her
sure friend in mischief Adam de Orlton, upon advice thought it best to have him
taken out of the world; whereupon they chid his keepers for keeping him so
delicately, and gave hints enough to discover their meaning; but the most
cunning of all was, the direction which the crafty Bishop of Hereford sent down
to them, in these words: Edwardum occidere nolite timere bonum est.
To kill Edward will not to fear it is good.
Or thus rendered into verse by Stow, To seek to shed King Edwards blood
Refuse to fear I think it good.


All which being written without any Point or Comma, carries a double sense
like the Pagan Oracles, either to kill or save Edward; by which means the
knavish Bishop could interpret it for his own vindication, if he were
questioned for it.

Gurney and Maltravers receive the direction, and interpret it according as it
was desired; and so they bend their studies to procure his Murder. Once they
endeavored to stifle him by the stench of Carcasses and suchlike Carrion.
smell; but that failing, they went a sure way to work; for one night, they,
assisted with some fifteen other villains, rushed into his chamber, he being in
bed, and with many Feather-beds and Tables laid upon him they smothered him;
and for more sure work and torment, they th^ust an hot piece of Iron into his
bowels, through a certain instrument like a Glyster-pipe in at his fundament;
and that instrument they used, that no wound might be found upon him.

As for the Murderers, they found (contrary to their expectations) Isabel and
the Bishop of Hereford their mortal enemies, construing their directions for
the preservation of the King, by which means they endeavored to vindicate
themselves to the people; but Gurney and Maltravers being thus overpowered by
their own Patrons, fled for it.

Such another like double-meaning sentence as this, are we told of concerning
Gertrude Queen of Hungary and Mother to S. Elizabeth, Jo. Fox Mon. Tom. 1 page
348.
so famous amongst the Germans.

Reginam interficere nolite timere bonum est, and si omnes consenserint non ego
contradico. To kill the Queen will ye not to fear it is good, and if all men
consent thereunto (yet) not I (I) my self do stand against it. And these
devilish knaveries and double dealings, possibly took their first thoughts
from suchlike delusions as these of the Pagan Oracles, let Satan or Man be the
inventor and speaker, Ibis, redibis nunquam per bella peribis.


Thus Croesus that wealthy King of the Lydians was ruined by trusting to this
Oracle, Croesus Halyn penetrans magnam pervertit opum vim.
as Iyrrhus King of Epire was by this of Apollo, Aio te Aeacide Romanos vincere
posse.


But to leave Heathen Fables, let us return to Romanish Rebellions.

Sect. 2. The deposing and death of King Richard the Second.
ANd here passing by King Edward III, so famous in Wars, and that impudent
Rebellion of Wat Tylor, Jack Straw, and suchlike beggarly Villains in King
Richard II's time; a Prince unfortunate to be left to rule very young, and
under bad counsel, which brought him into some inconveniences in his
after-Reign; which procured him the ill will of many, whereby he was made more
capable of loosing not only his Kingdom, but his life.

For having Reigned some twenty two years, and whilst he was in Ireland, in
quelling the Rebellion there, Henry Bullenbrook Duke of Hereford and Lancaster
landed in Yorkshire, whither most of the Nobility and Bishops flockt to him,
raiterously owning him as their Lord: and to make his way more easy, Thomas
Arundel Archbishop of Canterbury preached to the people against King Richard;
and (which Rebellion never can want,) showed a Bull procured Stow, p. 3^0.
from Rome, promising remission of sins to all those who should aid the said
Henry against King Richard; for which treason Romish Bishop, who is privileged
with an unerring spirit.

By suchlike irreligious tricks as these, the Duke increased to an hundred
thousand strong, seizes upon the King, who upon this news was returned out of
Ireland; has him up to London, where a Parliament being called, he is
overperswaded to resign his Crown, which the Duke claims, and has it: The
Archbishop J. Haywardes Hist. Hen. IV. page 96. 1 Samuel 9. 17. Behold the man
whom I spoke to thee of, this same shall reign over my people.
of Canterbury making a Sermon upon this Text:

Henry being Crowned, King Richard was removed to Pontfract in Yorkshire,
where he dyed: some hint as if for grief he pined away; others, that every day
he had good cheer set before him, but not permitted taste of it; but the common
Opinion is, that (and by the desire and hints too of Henry) he was murdered
violently by Spond. an. 1^99. 8. W^ll. ^^x^on co^^^uat. of Polycion. lib. ult.
cap 9.
Weapons; the wicked Author of which, they say to be Sir Pier^ of Exton, a
Knight and favorite of Henry's.

However it was, for diversion sake, take it thus from the Poems of Samuel
Daniel, one held to be very knowing in our English Histories and Antiquities.

The Wars of York and Lanc^^ter.
Book II. 99.
And now the whilst King R^chard II and his Queen Isabel meeting together and
lame^ting their conditions.
these Princes sorrowed,
Forward ambition came so near her end,
Sleeps not, nor slips the occasion offered
TO accomplish what he did before intend:
A Parliament is forthwith summoned
In Richards name, whereby they might pretend
A form to grace disorders, and to show
Of holy right, the right to overthrow.
100.
And could not Majesty be ruined
But with the fearful power of her own name?
And must abused obedience thus be led
With powerful Titles to consent to shame?
Could not Confusion be established,
But Form and Order must confirm the same?
Must they who his Authority did hate,
Yet use his style to take away his State?
101.
Order, how much predominant art thou,
That if but only thou pretended art,
How soon deceived mortality does bow
To follow thine, as still the better part?
It Is thought that reverent Form will not allow
Iniquity, or Sacred Right pervert:
Within our souls, since then thou dwel'st so strong;
How ill do they that use thee, to do wrong?
102.
So ill did they, that in this formal course
Sought to establish a deformed right:
Who might as well effected it by force;
But that men hold it wrong, what is wrought by might:
Offenses urged in public are made worse;
The show of Justice aggravates despite:
The Multitude that look not to the Cause,
Rest satisfied, so it be done by Laws.
103.
And now does Envy Articles object
Of Rigor, Malice, private favourings,
Exaction, Riot, Falsehood and neglect;
Crimes done, but not to b' answered by Kings:
Which Subjects may complain, but not correct;
And all these faults which Lancaster now brings
Against a King, must be his own, when he
By urging others sins a King shall be.
104.
For all that was most odious was devised
And published in these 32. or 38.
Articles abroad;
All the errors of his youth were here comprised,
Calamity with Obloquie to load:
And more to make him publicly despiz'd,
Libels, Invectives, Railing Rimes were sowed
Among the Vulgar, to prepare his fall
With more applause, and good consent of all.
107.
Upon these Articles in Parliament
So heinous made, enforced and urged so hard,
He was adjudg'd unfit for Government,
And of all Regal Power and Rule debarred:
For who durst contradict the Henry IV.
Dukes intent?
Or if they durst, should patiently be heard?
Desire of change, old wrongs, new hopes, fresh fear,
Being far the major part the cause must bear.
The King being thus deposed, the Poet goes on to declare how Henry, the
better to keep himself secure, wished the death of Richard, and how his meaning
being understood, the murder was barbarously accomplished.

Book III. 56.
He knew his time, and yet he would not seem
Too quick to wrath, as if affecting blood;
But yet complains so far, that men might deem
He would 'twere done, and that he thought it good,
And wished that some would so his life esteem,
As rid him of these fears wherein he stood:
And therewith eyes a Sir Piers Exton.
Knight, that then was by,
Who soon could learn his lesson by his eye.
57.
The man he knew was one that willingly
For one good look would hazard soul and all;
An Instrument for any villainy,
That needed no Commission more at all:
A great ease to a King that should hereby
Not need in this a Court of Justice call,
Nor seem to will the Act; for though what is wrought
Were his own deed, he grieves should so be thought.
58.
So foul a thing O thou Injustice art,
That tortrest both the doer and distressed:
For when a man has done a wicked part,
How does he strive t'excuse to make the best,
To shift the fault, t'unburthen his charged heart,
And glad to find the least surmise of rest;
And if he could make his seem others sin,
What great repose, what ease he finds therein?
59.
This Knight, but yet why should I call him Knight,
To give Impiety this reverend style?
Title of honor, worth, and virtues right
Should not be given to a wretch so vile:
But pardon me if I do not aright,
It is because I will not here defile
My unstained Verse with his opprobrious name,
And grace him so to place him in the same.
60.
This Caitif goes, and with him takes eight more
As desperate as himself, impiously bold,
Such Villains as he knew would not abhor
To execute what wicked act he would;
And hastes him down to Pomfret where before
The restless King convaid, was laid in hold:
There would he do the deed he thought should bring
To him great grace and favor with his King.
61.
Whether the soul receives intelligence
By her near Genius of the bodies end,
And so imparts a sadness to his sense
Foregoing ruin whereto i^ does tend^^
Or whether Nature else has conference
With profound sleep, and so does warning send
By prophetizing dreams what hurt is near,
And gives the heavy careful heart to fear.
62.
However so it is, the now sad King
Tossed here and there, his quiet to confound,
Feels a strange weight of sorrows gathering
Upon his trembling heart, and sees no ground;
Feels sudden terror bring cold shivering:
Lists not to eat, still muses, sleeps unsound;
His senses droop, his steady eyes unquick,
And much he ails, and yet he is not sick.
63.
The morning of that day which was his last,
After a weary rest rising to pain;
Out of a little gate his eyes he cast
Upon those bordering Hills and open Plain;
And views the Town, and sees how people past,
Where others liberty makes him complain
The more his own, and grieves his soul the more,
Conferring Captive Crowns with Freedom poor.
64.
O happy man, said he, that lo I see King Richards complaint in Pomfret.

Grazing his Cattle on those pleasant Fields!
If he but knew his good, how blessed he
That feels not what affliction Greatness yields,
Other than what he is he would not be,
Nor change his state with him that Scepters weilds:
Thine, thine is that true life that is to live,
To rest secure, and not rise up to grieve.
65.
Thou sit'st at home safe by thy quiet fire,
And hear'st of others harms, but feel none;
And then thou tell of Kings, and who aspire,
Who fall, who rise, who triumphs, who do moan:
Perhaps thou talk of me, and do inquire
Of my restraint, why here I live alone,
And pitiest this my miserable fall;
For pity must have part, envy not all.
66.
Thrice-happy you that look as from the shore,
And have no venture in the wrack you see,
No interest, no occasion to deplore
Other men's travails, whilst your selves fit free.
How much does your sweet rest make us the more
To see our misery, and what we be?
Whose blinded greatness ever in turmoyl,
Still seeking happy life, makes life a toil.
66.
Great Dioclesian, and more great therefore,
For scorning that whereto vain pride aspires,
Reckoning thy Gardens in Illyria more
Than all the Empire, all which the earth admires:
Thou well did teach, that he is never poor
That little has, but he that much desites;
Finding more true delight in that small His Garden in Solonia, a City in
Dalmatia, after he had resigned up the Roman Empire.
ground,
Than in possessing all the Earth was found.
67.
Are Kings that freedom give, themselves not free,
As meaner men, to take what they may give?
What! are they of so fatal a degree,
That they cannot descend from that and live?
Unless they still be Kings, can they not be,
Nor may they their Authority survive?
Will not my yielded Crown redeem my breath?
Still am I feared? is there no way but death?
68.
Scarce this word death had sorrow uttered,
But in rusht one, and tells him how a Knight
Is come from Court, his name delivered.
What news with him, said he, that traiterous wight?
What, more removes? must we be farther led?
Are we not sent enough yet out of sight?
Or has this place not strength sufficient
To guard us in? or have they worse intent?
69.
By this the bloody troop were at the door,
When as a sudden and a strange dismay
Enforced them strain who should go in before;
One offers, and in offering makes a stay;
Another forward sets, and does no more;
A third the like, and none durst make his way:
So much the horror of so vile a deed,
In vilest minds hinders them to proceed.
71.
At length, as to some great assault, the Knight
Cheers up his fainting men all that he can,
And valiantly their courage does incite,
And all against one weak unarmed man.
A great exploit, worthy a man of might!
Much honor, wretch, therein thy valor wan!
Ah poor weak Prince! yet men that Presence fear,
Which once they knew Authority did bear.
72.
Then on thrusts one, and he would formest be
To shed another blood, but lost his own;
For entering in, as soon as he did see
The face of Majesty to him well known;
Like Marius Soldier at Minternum, he
Stood still amazed, his courage overthrown:
The King seeing this, starts up from where he sat,
Out from his trembling hand his weapon gate.
73.
Thus even his Foes that came to bring him death,
Bring him a weapon that before had none,
That yet he might not idly loose his breath,
But dye revenged in action not alone:
And this good chance that this much favors,
He flacks; not for he presently speeds one,
And Lyon-like upon the rest he flies,
And here lies one, and there another lies.
74.
And up and down he traverses his ground,
Now wards a felling blow, now strikes again,
Then nimbly shifts a thrust, then lends a wound,
Now back he gives, then rushes on a main:
His quick and ready hand does so confound
These shameful beasts, that four of them lies slain:
And all had perished happily and well,
But for one act, that O! I grieve to tell.
75.
This coward Knight seeing with shame and fear
His men thus slain, and doubting his own end,
Leaps up into a Chair that lo was there;
That whilst the King did all his courage bend
Against those four that now before him were,
Doubting not who behind him does attend,
And plyes his hands undaunted, un^ffear'd,
And with good heart, and life for life he stirred.
76.
And whilst he this, and that, and each man's blow It Is said that some of the
strokes of the Swo^ds were to be seen in the Walls, till these late times when
the Castle was demolisht; and that King James by reason of this murder had no
m^nd to take so full a view of the Castle at his coming out of Scotland, as he
at first intended, being told of it as he was beholding the Castle.

Does eye, defend, and shift, being laid to sore;
Backward he bears for more advantage now,
Thinking the wall would safeguard him the more,
When lo with impious hand, O wicked thou!
That shameful durst not come to strike before,
Behind him gav'st that woeful deadly wound,
That laid that most sweet Prince flat on the ground.
77.
Monster of men! what has thy fury done
Upon an overpressed Innocent,
Laboring against so many, he but one,
And one poor soul, with care, with sorrow spent?
Could thine own eyes endure to look upon
Thy hands disgrace, or did thou not relent?
But what thou did, I will not here Divine,
Nor stain my thoughts to enter into thine.
78.
But leave thee wretch unto black Infamy,
To dark eternal horror and disgrace;
The hateful scorn to all Posterity:
The outcast of the world, last of the Race,
Of whose cursed seed, Nature did then deny
To bring forth more, her fair-works to disgrace:
And as ashamed to have produced that past,
She stays her hand, and makes this worst her last.
79.
There lies that comely body all imbrude
With sacred blood, a midst the foul he shed;
Those holy streams became with that vile, rude
Unhallowed stains confusedly interspred:
Ah! why was grosness with such grace indude,
To be with that sweet mixture honored?
Or served it but for some vile grave, ordained
Where an unbalmed Corpse should be contained?
80.
Those fair distended limbs all trembling lay,
Whom yet, nor life, nor death their own could call;
For life removed had rid all away,
And death, though entering, seized not yet on all:
That short-tim'd motion (that soon finish shall,
The Mover ceasing) yet a while does stay.
As the Organ sound a time survives the stop,
Before it does the dying note give up:
81.
So holds those Organs of that goodly frame
The weak remains of life a little space;
But ah! full soon cold death possessed the same:
Set are those Sun-like Eyes, bloudless that face,
And all that comely whole a lump became;
All that fair form which death could scarce disgrace,
Lies perished thus, and thus untimely Fate
Has finished his most miserable state.
Though King Richard II thus lost his Kingdom and life by the Invasion of Henry
IV; yet no sooner came Henry V to the Crown, but he showed his respect to
Richard, having his Corpse conveyed from Langley to Westminster, where he had
him honorably buried, Stow, p. 343, 344.
close by his Queen Anne his first Wife, according to his desire when living;
and, which was more, observed yearly a day in memory of the said Richard. The
Epitaph of the said King Richard runs thus, according to the Monkish mode of
Poetry in those times.

Prudens and Mundus Richardus jure Secundus, R Holinshed vol. 3.

Per factum victus, jacet hic sub marmore pictus,
Verax sermon, fuit and plenus ratione,
Corpore procerus, animo prudens ut Homerus;
Ecclesiae favit, Elatos suppeditavit,
Quemvis prostravit, Regula, qui violavit.
And so much for King Richard II his miseries and murder; and as for his
Epitaph, the ignorance and well-meaning of the Rimer shall pardon his Poetical
faults, being held famous, and of great esteem in those times. As of later
times, Ortuinus Gratius, and the rest of the Magistri nostri and Virtuosi in
the Epistolae obscurorum virorum, thought their own Latin and Learning far
above that of Erasmus, Reuchlin, and such others, truly famous and immortal
for their Learning and Oratory.

Sect. 3. The grand dispute and troubles amongst the Cordeliers, concerning the
trifling and childish Questions of the largeness of their Capuchin or Hood, and
the usage and right of the Bread and meat which they eat.
ANd now amongst all there Tragedies, take one piece of foolish gravity, where
you shall find the Pope and his Cardinals as serious about mere trifles, as if
in the Consistory they were met, only to invent the Game of Goose; and his
Holiness sitting, consulting, and troubling his head as wisely, as Pantagruel
in Rabelais in deciding the nonsense Law-case between the two foolish Lords.

I have heard of two Italian Brothers, who fell out and killed each other, upon
the dispute which of them should possess the Heavens, and command the Stars;
and History tells us, that the Sir Hen. Wottons State of Christend. p. 147, 148.
Aetolians and Arcadians had cruel Wars for a Wild-Boar; that the
Carthagenians, and the people of Piraca for a Sea-rovers-ship; that the Scots
and Picts for a few Mastiff-Dogs; and that the Wars between Charles Duke of
Burgundy and the Switzers, began for a Cart-load of Sheepskins. And some will
tell us, that that great hatred and antipathy betwixt the Car. Garcia Antipatia
de los Franceses y Espanno^es, cap. 17. page 236. Epit. of the French Kings, p.
280 this happened anno 1463.
French and Spaniards, began merely because the French were not so gloriously
clad as the the other, at an interview betwixt Jews XI, and Henry IV the King
of Castile. And the Indian Histories assure us, that the King of Pegu having
three white Elephants, wanted a fourth for his Coach: which to obtain from the
King of Siam, who had one, Mist. of Jesuitis. Part 3. page 54.
raised an Army of a Million of men; in which were three thousand Camels, five
thousand Elephants, and two hundred thousand Horses; whereby he destroyed the
Kingdom of Siam, and forced the poor King to kill himself for the loss of his
whole Empire; and all this ado for one white Elephant to join to his other
three.

Though these actions might persuade some to pity, others to smile at them;
yet here we shall have a Papal Controversy or two more ridiculous; which I
shall give you in the words of a late ingenious Author, as it is now rendered
out of French, whereby we may see how obstinate people are in mere trifles.

For there is no question but that when the Cordeliers were at Mist. of Jesui.
part 3. page 59, 60, 61, 62, 63, 64, 65, 66.
a difference between themselves concerning the form of their Capuchin (Cowl or
Hood) when those who would be called the Spiritual Brethren would have their
Hood narrower, and others which they named the Brothers of the Communalty would
have theirs of a larger size; they thought their dispute wonderful
considerable: And in good earnest the quarrel lasted almost a whole Age, with
infinite heat and animosity on both sides, being at last with much ado
determined by the Bulls of four Popes, Nicolas IV, Clement V, John XXII, and
Benedict XII. But now it looks, as if really it had been to make the world
sport, when men but mention this Dispute; and I verily believe there is hardly
a Cordelier at present that cares a Rush for the size of his Capuchin. For so
in truth a wise Friar would have said, when the Contest was at the highest, --
Let us but have patience a while, and we shall both be laughed at.

The same might likewise have been said upon another Question sprung about the
same time, and which is of a nature so thin and airy, that it almost vanishes
with a touch.

It Is a certain truth, that what the Cordeliers eat and drink, is as well
devoured, as that which is eaten or drank by those who never made profession of
their Rule: This is undeniable. But there sprang a Question amongst them,
whether the right to those things which were consumed by the usage, as Bread
and Wine, appertained to them or not; or whether they had only the simple
usage of them, without any right. The greater part perceiving this to be a
certain degree of Perfection, which cost them nothing but their quitting of all
right to those things which they devoured by the use (since this Renunciation
did not at all hinder the usage, for which they were only interessed) greedily
embraced the Opinion, that the Cordeliers had indeed but the simple usage of
things, without any title to them: That the right appertained to the Roman
Church, and that theirs was the Poverty, of which Jesus Christ gave them an
Example.

S^m^ call him N^colas III.
Nicolas IV, who had been taken out of the Order of the Cordeliers, made a
Sext. de v^^oo^. signis. c. Ex^^t (...)
Bull wholly advantageous to this pretension, and defined, that in effect they
had but the simple usage; and that Jesus Christ had given us the Example of
this present Poverty, which consists in the general Renunciation of all Right
to Temporal goods.

Thus continued matters for some time; the Cordeliers eat and drank as well as
other men, though without Right or Title. But John XXII, who was of a fiercer
humor, being raised to the Pontificate, found himself importuned with this
unprofitable Right which the Cordeliers attributed to the Roman Church, from
whence he saw no profit to come; and therefore he took a fancy to end this
Question, without any regard to the Decision of his Predecessor Nicolas.

The Cordeliers alarmed at this, being assembled in their General Chapter at
Perouse [Perugia in Tuscany] solemnly protested to adhere to the Definition of
Pope Nicolas the IV.

But for all this, John took the adverse party, Ex^^^^. a ^^ XXII. de (...) and
B^^^. anno 1^2^. 4.
declaring that he cared not for this Right to the Bread and Wine of the
Cordeliers, and other things which they consumed by the usage, since there
accru'd no profit by it to the Church of Rome; that the Cordelier Friars were
never the poorer; and that their ^
intention was, that none but themselves should derive any profit from it: That
it was a dishonor that the Roman Church should interest it self for an Egg or
piece of Cheese: That in things which they devoured after that manner, the
Usage and the Right of Usage was not to be distinguished; and that all this
aerie and spiritual refinement was but a pure illusion. In fine, he ^
determined, that it was a plain Heresy to affirm that Jesus Christ possessed
nothing in this World, neither in particular nor in common; and that he should
have no Title to the things which he used.

These Divisions of John XXII appeared quite repugnant to those of Nicolas IV:
and the difference did so perplex Cardinal Bellarmine, as he really professed
they were not to be thoroughly reconciled.

De Romans Pont. 4. c 14.
He acknowledged that Nicolas IV did teach that one might separate the Right
from the Usage; and that John XXII had declared the contrary.

He confessed also that Nicolas has determined that this is a holy Poverty; and
on the other side, that John XXII looked upon it as Hypocrisy. And upon these
two points unlucklly takes the part of Nicholas against John.

But for as much as in the third point that concerns the Poverty of Jesus
Christ, the Cordeliers opinion is taxed o^ Heresy by John XXII; that the two
Popes should not seem at variance in a point of Faith, he endeavors to piece
them together by distinguishing of the times.

He says therefore that Jesus Christ did possess Temporal things at one time,
and that he was absolutely bereaved of them at another: That so it is true,
that as to one season he prescribed us an Example of perfect Poverty, by an
absolute renunciation of the possession of all things, as says Nicolas: And
that it is true, he at another time possessed Temporal goods which he made use
of, as John XXII had decided it.

But this way of according the Decision of the two Popes, does not appear so
solid: for John XXII does not pretend that Jesus Christ was Master of the
Temporal things he used at one certain time only, but that he was so always,
as appears by the general Principle which he makes use of to prove it, which
is, that the Usage is unjust, which is unaccompanied with Right: Whence it is
easily inferred, that Jesus Christ having made use of Temporal things, and never
having used them unjustly, he had always a Right to the Use of them.

But however the matter was, diverse of the Cordeliers did take themselves to be
justly condemned, and mangre the Pope, they obstinately maintained that their
Bread belonged to the Church of Rome; so as the Emperor Jews of Bavaria [of
whom we spoke so much formerly] being then at variance with the Pope about his
Election to the Empire, they joined themselves to him, and stoutly sustained
his Right against John XXII. The Emperor on his part upheld the Cordeliers,
reproaching to the Pope as a foul error, his Decision touching the Poverty of
Jesus Christ.

In sum, the Animosity of both these Antagonists came at last to that height,
that the Pope (according to the style of that Age) 1324.
Excommunicated the Emperor, declared him Heretic, favourer of Heretics;
deposed him from the Empire, and caused all the poor Cordeliers to be burnt
that he could lay hands on. On the other side, the Emperor 1327.
enters Italy with a puissant Army, 1328.
seizes on Rome, declares Pope John (then at Avignion) unworthy of the
Pontificate, creates a new Pope, or rather Antipope, namely a Cordelier,
called Peter Raina iutius.
Ramuceus of Corbaria, who chose the Title of Nicolas V, and who for the first
action of his Pontificate, vacated the Bull of John XXII against the
Cordeliers, himself Excommunicating and deposing him.

And thus in short have we taken a view of this tedious and bloody quarrel
about a mouthful of Bread and Cheese; a Controversy not worth a wise man's
thought: for let me but have my belly full, and eat and drink when I please,
let his Holiness or any body else that has such a longing humor, take the
Excrements, I, and if he please, wrapped up or sawced in the Notions of Right or
Usage, and twenty suchlike distinctions, if by this means both parties are
pleased; for I am confident to be no looser, and his worship has an easy
Stomach that is thus satisfied. All which being as mere fopperies, as he that
was angry that his Hat was buttoned up on the wrong side.

Though John XXII got the better of the Emperors New Pope Nicolas, yet was he
so much incensed against the Cordeliers, that he was once thinking to Spondan.
an. 1322. 14.
extirpate the very Order; for which, and his strongly opposing them in this
trifle, he has since been vilified by their pens to the purpose: Of which
Annal. Minorum, Tom. 3. an. 1322, 1323.
Lucao Waddingus will afford you some instances: But as simple and ridiculous
as the dispute is, yet even at this day cannot the Schoolmen leave off
troubling their moldy Cobweb-heads, and the world about it. And thus much for
this blockish Quarrel and dispute.

CHAP. VI.
1. The great Schism amongst the Popes, with some Reflections on some of their
Actions.

2. The troubles of Naples; and the wicked design against the Medici and
Florentines; with the murder of Juliano de Medici.

3. The murder of James the First, and James the Third, Kings of Scotland.

4. The deaths of Henry the Sixth and Edward the Fifth, Kings of England.

5. The troubles in Spain, and the miseries of Don Henry the Fourth King of
Castile and Leon, by reason of his proud and rebellious Nobility.

Sect. 1. The great Schism amongst the Popes, with some Reflections on some of
their Actions.
WE have several times seen how the Popes of Rome have disturbed the peace and
happiness of other men's Dominions, and have been the ruin and destruction of
many Princes; and now methinks it will not be amiss to take a slight view of
the destruction of Rome it self, where many wise men, through variety of
pretenders, could not discover the true Vicar, and Infallible Bishop.

Part of this story belongs to the former Century, yet it is more convenient to
place it all together here, the greater portion of it belonging to this.

Clement V being 1305.
chosen Pope by his Simoniacal Promises to Philip le Bell King of France, and
being before his Election Archbishop of Bordeaux, and also that Countryman,
being in France when he was chosen Pope by the Cardinals at Perugia, would not
for some reasons remove out of France, but (though the Cardinals earnestly
persuaded him for Italy) settled the Pontifical Seat at 1308.
Avignion.

By this removal into France, Rome was deprived of the Popedom or Papal Seat
above LXX years, till what time Gregory XI 1377.
restored it again to Rome.

This Gregory dying, the Cardinals chose Urban VI; but presently after
declaring they were forced by the Romans to such an Election, they declared
this void, and chose Clement VII; by which means the Schism began; the story of
which being large and intricate, take this following Chronology to make it
more plain and intelligible.

Gregory XI dyed 1378.
Emperors. A. C. Popes. Popes. Wenceslaus. 1378 (a) Urban VI. (b) Clement VII.
(a) The Onuphrius.
Germans, Hungarians, English, and part of Italy stood for Urban. Some say he
was Coquaeus, Tom. 2. page 228.
legally Elected, others doubt it. He created LIVE Cardinals. 2 1379 2 2 3 1380
3 3 4 1381 4 4 5 1382 5 5 (b) The Onuphr.
French and Spaniards stood for him. He kept his Seat at Avignion, and created
XXXVI Cardinals. 6 1383 6 6 7 1384 7 7 8 1385 8 8 9 1386 9 9 10 1387 10 10 11
1389 11 11 12 1390 (c) Boni face IX. 12 (c) He was Scribendi atque canendi
imperitus. Theod. d Niem de Schismat. l. 2. c. 6.
unskilful in singing (then much looked after in a Churchman) and also in
writing; a great Seller of Indulgences, and very guilty of Simony. He created
XI Cardinals. 13 1391 2 13 14 1392 3 14 15 1393 4 15 16 1394 5 (d) Benedict XI
or XIII. (d) He promised to resign up his Popedom, if Boniface would do so too,
so that another Pope might be chosen, and the Schism ended, but had no mind to
do so: so he held himself for Pope, and created VIII Cardinals. 17 1395 6 2 18
1396 7 3 19 1397 8 4 20 1398 9 5 21 1399 10 6 Rupertus. 1400 11 7 2 1401 12 8 3
1402 13 9 4 1403 14 10 5 1404 (e) Innocent VII. 11 (e) Before his Election he
swear to resign the Popedom, if Benedict would: but neither of them had any
stomach to it. He created XI Cardinals. 6 1405 2 12 7 1406 (f) Gregory XII. 13
(f) He also before his Election swear to resign his Popedom for union-sake, if
Benedict would; but how long in this he jugled, Theodorick a Niem will tell
you. He created XIII Cardinals.

Emperors. A. C. Popes. Popes. Popes. 8 1407 2 14 9 1408 3 15 (g) Alexander V.
(g) The Cardinals thinking to end this Schism, called a Council at Pisa, where
they declared Gregory and Benedict guilty of many crimes, and pronounce them
deposed, and so chose this Alexander V: Though neither Gregory nor Benedict
obeyed the Council, but would be Popes still. And Alexander dyed before he had
sat a year. 10 1409 4 16 Jodocus. 1410 5 17 (h) John XXIII. (h) Some say that
by scrce he nominated and chose himself Pope, Fell de Bargamo. He created XVI
Cardinals. Signismond. 141 6 18 2 2 1412 7 19 3 3 1413 8 20 4 4 1414 9 21 5 5
1415 ^ 22 ^ ^ To break this Schism of three Popes at a time, a Council is held
at Constance, where Gregory deprives himself, and John with much ado is
overperswaded to deliver up his Pope dom; but Benedict would by no means
submit; yet he is there declared ^^^ Pope, and so the Council elects Martin V.
6 1416 23

Emperors. A. C. Popes. Popes. 7 1417 Martin V. 24 8 1418 2 25 9 1419 3 26 10
1420 4 27 11 1421 5 28 12 1422 6 29 13 1423 7 30 14 1424 8 (i) Clement VIII (i)
Benedict Some say he was poyoned: see Grimstons History of Spain, l. 18. p.
687, 688:
XI dying in Spain, the Cardinals there of his Faction chose for Pope this
Clement VIII. But at the four years end, seeing he could not m^ke good his
party, he quietly yielded up his Pontifical name and honor. 15 1425 9 12 16
1426 10 3 17 1427 11 4 18 1428 12 19 1429 13 20 1430 14 21 1431 (k) Engenius
IV. (k) A Council being held at Basil, Eugenius took distaste at them, calls
another at Ferrara, which he removes to Florence; declares that to be none at
Basil. Against this the Council of Basil protests, declares the Pope to have no
power to dissolve or remove that Council, and that a Council is above the Pope:
lay several Accusations against Eugenius, and so pronounce him deposed and no
Pope; in whose stead they elect Felix IV. But Eugenius would not obey this,
ranted as much against them and Felix, and created XXVII Cardinals. 22 1432 2
23 1433 2 24 1434 4 25 1435 5 26 1436 6 27 1437 7 Albertus II. 1438 8 2 1439 9
Felix IV (l) Felix was formerly Duke of Savoy, and had many that adhered to
him, and several stood Neuters; he created XXIV Cardinals. Frederick III. 1440
10 2 2 1441 11 3 3 1442 12 4 4 1443 13 5 5 1444 14 6 6 1445 15 7 7 1446 16 8 8
1447 Nicolas V. 9 9 1448 2 ^ ^ Felix upon the earnest entreaty of the Emperor
Frederick III, and other reasons, resigned up all his interest to the Popedom,
and so Nicolas V remained sole Pope; and thus this Schism ended. 10 1449 3 11
1450 4

By this Schism or Schisms which continued so many years, Christendom received
much detriment, each Party and Faction maintaining it self with all
earnestness. Urban VI to strengthen himself, because Joan I. Queen of Naples (a
lover of change) adhered to Clement, pronounces her deposed from her Kingdom,
which he gives to Charles Durazzo. To counterpoise this, Joan (by the counsel
of Clement) declares Jews Duke of Anjou Heir to the Kingdom, (and Pope Martin
V confirmed it afterward) which increased the trouble: But in brief, Durazzo
proves too strong, enters Naples, seized upon Queen Joan, and caused her to be
hanged.

And with that severity did Urban persecute those of whom he was any way
jealous, that he took Platin. p. 270.
five Cardinals, had them tied up in sacks, and so thrown into the Sea: but
others tell worse things of him.

Nay, so zealous were the people of those days for Schism, that neither the
Councils of Constance or Basil could presently end this disturbance; for what
Pope soever they nominate or approve of, falls presently out again with them,
concerning whose Authority is greatest, the Councils or the Popes; they
declaring themselves to be above the Bishops of Rome, whilst on the other side
his Holiness pronounces himself above all.

And these disputes went so far, till at last it came to an equal Muster, Felix
and the Council of Basil against Eugenius and the Council of Florence, so that
either party was backed with a Pope and Council.

As for the Council of Constance, I may fancy that they took no great care for
the preservation of Kings, since they decreed only this, that it was not
lawful to kill Tyrants, with this knavish condition, Without the command or
sentence of a Judge; yet this Council (and so did Basil) declare it self above
the Pope, and that he ought to be obedient to a Council: yet will not all the
Romanists believe this, though thus decreed by a lawful Council, as they say;
for if this be not legal, how can Martin V be a true Pope, being set up and
chosen by it? and if he fail, there cannot have been a true one since. And
besides this, we may suppose that there has been a notable jumbling of
Cardinals, when in this very Schism there was about two hundred created,
besides those who were made by Martin V, and Nicolas V.

But though this Schism was some trouble to Christianity, yet the succession of
the Emperors went peacebly on; only Wenceslaus was deposed for his vicious
life, as if the troubles of the Popes were the peace of the Empire; and at
these times, probably, the Popes are too busily employed to disturb the German
Government.

As for the Council of Basil, Aeneas Sylvius, afterward Pope Pius II, has
wrote much in its vindication: But when he came to be Pope, he changed his
note, and declared against his former writings, decreeing that the Pope is
above a Council: thus Interest can work Miracles; but for his unconstancie he
is pointed at by this Proverb, What Aeneas approves of, that Pius condemns. And
Quod Aeneas probavit* P^us damnavit.
to this Proverb which others made of him, we will add this saying of the
Clergy -- Sacerdoti^us magna ratione sublatas Nuptias, majori restituendas
videri. Platin. edit Antiqu.
Marriage has been for great reason taken away from Priests; but yet for
greater, it ought to be restored to them.

After Pius sat in the Roman Chair, Paulus II, such an Enemy was he to all good
Learning, that Humanitatis autem studia ita oderat and contemnebat, ut ^jus
studiosos, uno nomine Haereticos appellaret. Hanc ob rem Romanos adhortabatur,
ne filios diutius in studiis litterarum paterentur, satis esse si legere and
scribere didicissent. Plat. p. 340. -- Is enim nec literatur nec moribus
probatus. Volaterran, lib. 2. fol. 259.
Platina tells us he used to call Scholars Heretics; and the better to carry
on his design of Ignorance, he persuaded the Romans from bringing up their
children in Learning, to write and read being knowledge enough.

He would have been an excellent companion for the Emperor Suetor. in vita
D^mit. 10.
Domitian, that banished all Learned men, and had one killed for making a Map
of the World: yet if in this he came not near him enough, he might for
greediness of money; for which in his time at Rome all Church-preferments were
publicly Platin. ib. Genebrard, l. 4 p. 1080. Carranza sum. Council. page 879.
sold. However, he loved something else as well as Money, or else he is
shrew'dly belyed. For Janus Pannonius, who lived in his time, and was Bishop of
Funfkirken [by the Hungarians called Eutegyhazac, commonly known by its Latin
name Quinque-Ecclesiae] in lower Hungary, and well acquainted with the affairs
at Rome: This Janus, I say, as soon as this Paul II came to his Popedom, sent
him good Delit. Poetar. Hungar. page 250.
advice: but a little after we find the matter altered; for thus he quits his
Holiness.

Pontificis Pauli ne testes Roma requiras, Ib. page 284.

Filia quem similis te docet esse marem.
Pope Paul' s a man, Rome, seek no farther trial;
He gat a daughter makes it past denial.
And again thus: Sanctum non possum, patrem dicere possum,
Cum video natam, Paul secunde, tuam.
I cannot call thee Holy, Paul, but rather
Now I your Daughter see, can call you Father.
And in another place thus he sings to the same purpose: Cum sit filia Paul,
sit tibi aurum;
Quantum Pontifices habere raros
Vidit Roma prius: Pater vocari,
Sanctus non potes, at potes Beatus.
To him succeeds Sixtus or Xystus IV, of whom Cornelius Agrippa gives this
noble Character, That he built at Rome a very famous Sed and recentio^ibus
Tempor^^us Sixtus Pontifex Maximus Romae Nobile admodum^ Lupanar extr^xit. --
Romana scorta in singulas Hebdomadas sul^um pendent Pontifici, qui census
annuus non nunquam viginti millia Ducatos excedit; adeoque Ecclesiae procerum
id munus est, ut uno cum Ecclesiarum proventibus etiam lenociniorum numerent
merc^dem. Sic enim ego illos supputantes aliquando audivi. Habet (inquientes)
ille duo Beneficia, unum curatum aureorum viginti, alterum prioratum d^catorum
quadraginta, and tres Putanas in Burdello, quae reddunt singulis ^debdomadibus
Julios viginti. Hen. Corn. Agrippa de vanitat. scientiarum, cap. 64.
Bawdy House: but this, you may suppose, was for the profit of his Holiness;
for the same Author goes on and tells us, that every Curtisan of Rome pays
every week to the Pope a Julio [every Giulio is about an English Six pence]
which yearly rent sometimes surmounts the sum of twenty thousand Ducats. And
how his Disciples gained under him, the same Agrippa assures us, that he has
heard them thus cast up their Incomes and Rents, -- He has two Benefices, one
Cure worth twenty Ducats, a Priory worth forty Ducats, and three Whores in the
Brothal-house, which every week brings him in the gain of twenty Giulios, i. e.
ten shillings.

This Agrippa was in this time so famous for all manner of Learning, that he
was courted by all Persons and all Countries, though some object to him the
Magic Art; but to quit him from this, Monsieur Apology pour les Personages
sou^ zonnez de Mag^e, cap 15. page 400, 401, etc.
Naude has lately written a large Apology, whither I refer the Reader. And
Lib. 22. sol. 259.
Volaterran tells us, that this Pope Sixtus IV loved his kindred so well, that
to prefer them he would go against and violate all Laws Humane and Divine; a
great pity that such a fault should over-cloud so excellent a virtue.

To him succeeded Innocent VIII, who is said to have followed (...), Tom. 2.
page 204. C^ef^^. p. 1209.
married, and so honestly had them before he obtained the Papal dignity. But
Lib. 22. ^^l. 261. in (...) Alexand.
Volaterranus does more than hint that they were Bastards, by comparing him and
them to Pope Alexander VI and his offspring.

As for Pope Alexander VI, who succeeded this Innocent, I need not say much,
seeing all the Roman Historians themselves do confess him to have been a
Monster amongst men; and that as he basely got his Popedom, viz. by Simony, so
lived he ever after very wickedly. Before his Popedom he enjoyed one Or
Vanocia, or Vannocia, or Lanosia, or Lanozia, Onuphrius in vita Alex. Jo.
Marian de rebus Hispan. lib. 26. cap. 2.
Zanoccia, and afterward reserved her for his especial Curtisan; he had by his
love to Women four Sons and Daughters; the best of the latter sort was called
Lucretia, with whom he was thought a little too familiar (as her two Brothers
were also:) wherefore upon her was this Epitaph.

Hoc jacet in Tumulo Lucretia nomine, sed re
Thais, Alexandri filia, sponsa, nurus.
Lucrece by name, Thais indeed lies under this stone,
Alexanders Daughter, his Sons Wife, and his own.
At Tournay in Flanders there is an Epitaph, which will somewhat Fran. Sweert.
page 515.
out-riddle this of Lucretia.

Cy gist le Pere, cy gist la Mere,
Cy gist la soeur, cy gist le Friar,
Cy gist la famme and le mary,
Et n'ya que deux Corpse icy.
Here lies the Father, and here lies Mother,
Here lies the Sister, and here lies Brother,
Here lies the Husband, and here lies the Wife;
Yet here are but two bodies to make all this strife.
Many biting Verses might be collected against this Alexander out of the works
of that so famous Italian Poet, Jacobus Sannazarius [or Actius Syncerus, being
called both wise] Mantuan, and such other like Scholars that then flourished;
but it would be to no purpose, seeing they confess the worst of him, and all
since are ashamed of him.

As for the manner of his death, take it thus according to Lib. 6.
Guicciardin. Caesar Borgia his Son, resolving to poison Adrian Cardinal of
Corneto, sends some Flagons of poisoned Wine to the Vineyard, where they with
the Pope were to sup. The Pope coming too soon, before any other Wine was
brought, and being very thirsty, Borgia's man, (not knowing of his Masters
design, but thinking it to be most excellent Wine) filled some of it to the
Pope, who drank heartily. It chanced at the same time Borgia came, and through
ignorance pledged his Father; who having took some Antidotes before, and being
young and lusty, lived, though he endured an hard sickness; but his old Father
Alexander VI dyed upon it.

But Dr. Page 1^ 12.
Coeffeteau will rather follow Onuphrius, viz. that it was the Pope himself
that contrived the poison to take away several Cardinals, the better to enrich
himself by the seizing upon their wealth, and that the man through mistake gave
only the poisoned cup to Alexander and his Son Borgia, whereby the rest
escaped: and this makes the Pope more wicked, and may well enough be believed;
for Guicciardin confesses that this Pope and his Son used this trick several
times, to the murdering of several Cardinals, against whom they had but the
least pick.

Here I might tell the several mischiefs that this Alexander brought upon the
World, for the preferring of his wicked Bastard Caesar Borgia; but it will be
too tedious for this place. And he (f) Theodoric a d De Schismate, and Nemus
umonis.
Niem, who was Secretary to several Popes in that Rupture.

Sect. 2. The troubles of Naples, and the wicked design against the Medici and
Florentines, with the murder of Juliano de Medici.
ANd now a glance at some State-troubles and murders will not be amiss: Yet
here passing by the murder of Galiazzo Duke of Milan, the troubles and
dethroning in Bohemia, and the leap-frog-government of the Kingdom of Naples;
though we might tell what a coyl the Popes made to have one King to thrust out
another; to which Charles VIII of France was assisting.

This Charles was so well bred up, that he could not T^m male (...) ut n^
^egere qu them n^s^^^ a^t (...) B^^^res Tom. 3. p. 8.
read a word; for which want of Learning, he might thank his Father Jews XI,
so great an Enemy to good Literature, that he would have his Son know no more
Latin but these Io. p. 82. (...) Tom. 2 page 1^82 1085.
five words: Qui nescit dissimulare, nescit Regnare.


This Charles de Valois VIII of France pretending a right to the Kingdom of
Naples upon the Anjouan account, marches into Italy, carries all before him.
Pope Alexander VI is out of his little wits, but fortifies himself in Castle
St. Angelo. Charles enters (...) d^ Chapter VIII. c. 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 24, 25.
Rome a Conqueror; several Cardinals apply themselves to depose the Pope; but
they are both made friends: Alexander invests Charles with the Kingdom of
Naples, and intitles him Emperor of Constantinople. On the other side, Charles
humbly in the Vatican ^^^cciard. (...)
kisseth his Holiness Foot, and another day (c) held the Basin of Water whilst
Alexander wafh'd his hands: which humble Ceremonies, lest they might be forgot
by Posterity, the Pope appointed to be painted in a Gallery in the Castle St.
Angelo.

Thence Charles marches to Naples, whence the young King Fernando, and his
Father Alphonso [though the Pope had invested that Kingdom in the House of
Aragon] were forced to flee, and Charles was there Crowned; and stayed there
some time, and so returned for France. In the mean time, the French behaved
themselves so oddly, that there ('it is said) Europe first knew the Venerian
disease; and by their behavior, the French lost the love of the People, and so
the Neapolitan Kingdom; for no sooner was Charles departed, but Fernando
returns, and retakes the Kingdom: The Pope at this time (for all his former
dissembling Agreement with Charles at Rome) having a greater kindness to the
Aragonians than the French; Alexander himself being a Neighbor of Valentia in
Spain: yet Dr. De ^e^fis Fran. lib. 11. fol. 16^. and la C^onique Martiniene,
fol. 30^.
Robert Gaguin, a good Orator and Historian [but it seems his Lord Ver^^^m's
Hist. ^en VII. page ^4.
Poetry was too uncivil to our English Henry VII, when he was Ambassador from
the said Charles hither] affirms that the French King took this expedition into
Italy at the entreaty of Pope Alexander VI. Though it appears that his Holiness
presently turned his note, and not only secretly wished him farther off, but
at last became his open Enemy.

But leaving these hurly-burlies, as being too common in History, let us take a
short glance of the Popes wicked design upon Florence, where Murder and
Sacrilege we shall find raging in their height.

The City and Commonwealth of Florence now flourished under O^uphrius in Xysto
IV. Macciaveli^ Hist. Flor. l. 8. Coeffet. page 1206. Spondan. an. 1578. 4, 5,
6, 7.
the Medici; at which prosperity, not only some rich Malecontented Citizens,
but Pope Sixtus IV also looked with an envious eye. And his Holiness took every
occasion to thwart the interest of that City, and lessen its Credit and
Reputation.

At this time the two Brothers, Lorenzo and Giuliano de Medici, sons to Pietro,
son to Cosmo, bare the greatest sway and love over the Florentines. At this the
House of Pazzi (a rich and powerful Family there) took exceptions; and in this
distaste the Pope joins wi^^ him. And their result was, that nothing would
bring their designs about, but the destruction of these two Brethren.

Many Consultations they had how to bring this damnable deed to pass, and many
great men had they drawn to this Conspiracy; insomuch, that Fernando King of
Naples consented to the design against the Medici, though I cannot say that he
knew of the intended Murder: Though Francesco Salviati Archbishop of Pisa was
a great stickler in this inhumane action.

After long Consultation, the Conspirators go to Florence; the Pazzi, the
Salviati, Giovan Baptista da Montesecco a noted Commander under the Pope,
Giacopo di Poggio son to the famous Orator, and many others. The better to
cover the villainy, they persuaded Cardinal Riario to come toward Florence;
which he does, and is nobly feasted by Giacopo de Pazzi at his Town Fiesole
about four Miles from Florence, whither the Medici were invited, with a design
there to murder them: but Julian not coming, that plot failed.

Upon this they had the Cardinal to Florence, where they doubted not, but by
this means to obtain their ends, Being there, they vizarded their numbers and
meetings, under their w^i^ing upon and civilities to the Cardinal, and against
the next Sunday prepare a great Feast; but being informed that Giuliano could
not be there, they resolved to put their black design off no longer, fearing to
be discovered by their lingering. The place appointed by them for this Murder,
was the Cathedral Church of St. Reparata, where they knew both the Brethren
would not fail to be: And they thought no time fitter for them, than when Mass
was fingng: as for the manner how, they ordered Antonio de Volterra and
Stephanus a Priest to kill Lorenzo, and Francesco de Pazzi with Barnardino
Bandini to do the same to Juliano; and that upon this uproar, Salviati the
Archbishop of Pisa, with Giacopo de Pazzi, and their followers, should seize
upon the Palace and Senate.

This day (Sunday the 26 of April) and time being come, they go to Church,
where they see the Cardinal and Lorenzo de Medici, and the Church full of
people, and Service begun, but Giulian^ not come; wherefore Francesco de Pazzi,
and Barnardo Bandini, who had the charge of killing him, went to his House, and
persuaded him to Church, talking merrily to him all the way; and in a gayety
and friendship, de Pazzi took Juliano in his arms, whereby to feel if he had
any privy Armor on.

Being come to Church, Bandini with a Dagger stabbed Giuliano to the heart, and
de Pazzi wounded him in other places, and by chance himself also in the Leg.
Giuliano thus slain, Bandini slew Francesco Noxi, a great friend to the Medici.
In the mean time Antonio Volterra, and Steffano the Priest, assault Lorenzo,
and wound him a little in the Throat; and thus hurt, he escapes from them into
the Vestry. And the Cardinal retires himself to the high Altar.

In the mean time the Archbishop Salviata, with James Pazzi, and a number of
their gang, went to the Palace; he and some others going up (leaving the rest
below) and found the Senate sat down to dinner: Cesare Petrucei, that year
Gonfaloniere di Guistitia, perceiving some mischief by the Archbishops
carriage, and amazed countenance (for now when he should be desperate he began
to be fearful) boldly thrust Salviati out of the Ch^mber, and seized upon
Giacopo de Pazzi by the hair of his head, and delivered him to the Sergeants.
The rest of the Senators at this taking alarm, with what weapons they had, fall
upon those who went up with Salviati, and plied themselves so well, that they
presently overcame those Conspirators, killing some, throwing others alive out
of the Palace-Windows; and the Archbishop had the reward of hanging.

Whilst this was doing, the Citizens encouraged with the news of the
preservation of Lorenzo de Medici, hurry in Arms to the Church, conduct him
from the Vestry to his own House, and recover the Palace from the Conspirators,
who had possessed the door and the lower Rooms of it, killing all of the plot
they could meet with.

And having thus redeemed themselves and City, nothing was cried about but
Medici, Medici, every one striving who should show their hatred most upon the
Traitors; insomuch, that the parts of their dead bodies were carried about the
streets, some stuck upon Lances, others upon Swords, others dragged along; and
not any of them escaping that could be laid hands on. And so the people having
thus for some time satisfied themselves upon their Enemies, the Corpse of
Giuliano di Medici were buried with a great deal of state, and lamentations of
the Citizens.

The Popes Forces, who had lurked upon the Florentine Borders, to have taken
advantage of their surprizal, to have fallen into their Territories, and so to
have made a perfect Conquest, hearing of the miscarriage, retreated: But Pope
Xistus seeing this murder and hidden treason would not bring his designs
about, pulls off his Vizard, and shows himself an open enemy, draws out his
Pontifical Weapon, and first falls a Cursing and Excommunicating them, and then
with the assistance of Ferdinando of Naples, resolves to overrun them by War.
Against these the Florentines oppose themselves: as for the Interdict, they
neglect and despise it, and commanded their Priests to continue their
Celebration of Divine-Service; and for the other, they strengthen themselves by
Arms: But the story of the War I shall wave, as too tedious for this place.
This being sufficient to show what

Sect. 3. The murder of James the First and James the Third, Kings of Scotland.
BUt now let us look a little nearer home, and we shall behold the murder of a
Prince in Scotland, famous by their Writers for his Virtues, Learning, sweet
disposition, Valor, and what not? And this is King James I. The chief of this
Conspiracy Will. Drummonds Hist. of Scotland. Georg. Buchanan, lib. 10.
was the Earl of Athole, assisted with his Nephew Robert Stuart and Graham.

The first inckling that the King had of this Treason, was whilst he was
besieging Roxbourgh in Teveot-dale, then defended by Sir Ralph Gray and his
English: for when he had brought the Castle to that extremity, that they were
consulting of yiedling; his Queen in all haste possible speeds to him, and
gives him some hints of the Treason, and that it was such, that if not quickly
prevented, would endanger him and his. Upon this he raises the Siege, through
jealousy disbands most of his Army, and with those whom he thought he might
trust, much troubled in mind with this villainy, he goes to Perth (now called
St. Johnstons) where he remains in the Black Friars, a Covent near the
Town-Walls belonging to the Dominicans.

Here the King bends all his wits to find out the bottom of the Treason: which
design of his being known to the Traitors, they resolve for a speedy execution,
lest delay might bring a farther discovery, and a stop to their wickedness.
Accordingly, assisted by the darkness of a night, they got undiscovered to the
Black-Fryars, one John belonging to the Court being their guide, and had also
procured them entrance into the Gallery before the Kings Chamber Door, where
they attended some of their Confederates, who should have let them in farther
in, by taking out the Bar on the inside of the door; and Robert Stuart, being
a favorite with the King, and so familiar at Court, took off all jealousy,
and was a main assistant to their approach and entrance.

Whilst they were thus in expectation, Fortune was favorable to their Treason;
for Walter Stratoun, one of the Kings Cupbearers, having not long before
carried in some Wine, came forth of the Chamber, and finding some armed men
rudely rushing to force their entry, with a loud voice cried out Treason; upon
which they fall upon him, whom whilst they were killing, a young Maid of
Honor, named Douglass, others say Lovel, claps to the Door; but not finding
the Bar, and seeing no other remedy for their preservations, thrust her Arm in
the hole or staple, thereby to keep the Door fast. But this tender Bolt being
soon broke, the Traitors rush into the Chamber, killing all such as they found
to make any assistance; amongst which was Patrick Dumbar, Brother to George
sometimes Earl of March.

At last they strike down the King, whom they there left dead 14^6.
with XXVIII wounds. Nor did it go well with the Queen, who thinking to save
her Husband, interposed her own body, whereby she received two wounds, but not
Mortal.

As for the Traitors, the common sort of them were hanged, Robert Stuart was
hanged and quartered, Walter Earl of Athole was thus punished for three days
together:

The first day, he was stripped naked to his Shirt, and by a Crane sixth to a
Cart, after hoysted aloft, his joints put out; and thus hanging, showed to the
people: and thus dragged along the high Street of Edinbourgh.

The second day, he was mounted on a Pillar in the Marketplace, and Crowned
with a Diadem of hot Iron, with this Inscription:

THE KING OF ALL TRAITORS. And this they say was done to him, to make his words
good, he confessing one motive to this design was, because he had been told by
some South sayers or Witches, that he should once be Crowned King.

The third day, he was laid naked along upon a Scaffold, his Belly was ripped up,
his Bowels taken out and thrown into a fire, he looking upon them: then was his
heart taken out and thrown in also; lastly, his head was cut off and fixed upon
the most eminent place of the City, and his body divided, and parts of it sent
to the chief places in the Kingdom.

As for Robert Graham, he was thus punished: a Gallows was raised in a Cart,
then he had his right hand nailed to it, and so drawn along the streets, whilst
the Executioners with burning Pincers t^re pieces from his Shoulders, Thighs,
and suchlike fleshy places which were farthest from his Vitals, thereby to keep
him the longer alive, and in greater pain: yet did these terrors bring little
repentance to him, as may be gh^st by his impious answer; for being asked,
during all these tortures, How he durst lay hands on his Prince? made this
Reply, -- That, if he had Heaven and Hell at his choice, he durst leap out of
Heaven and all the joys there, into the flaming bottom of Hell. -- At last,
having all his flesh almost pulled off, his Heart and Intrails were thrown into
the fire, his Head stuck up, and his Quarters sent to several places for a
terror to others.

And here I shall hastily pass by the unfortunate Reign of King James III; how
his own Subjects covenanted against him, confined or forced him to Edinbourgh
Castle, and at last came to open Battle against him at Bannoch-Burn, not far
from Sterlin, where his Army being beaten, he was after in cold blood murdered
in the Mill: but whether this abominable murder was done by Patrick Lord Gray,
Robert Sterling of Keer, or Andrew Borthwick a Priest, or all of them, must be
left as their Histories has it, uncertain.

Sect. 4. The deaths of Henry the Sixth and Edward the Fifth, Kings of England.
BUt leaving Scotland, here might I treat of the miseries of England at the
same time, of the long but unfortunate Reign of good Henry VI, of his
dethronement, and, which was worst, of his London, as the common opinion goes,
by Bacons Hist. Hen. VII, page 2.
Richard Duke of Gloucester, afterward called Richard the III. Though Mr. Hist.
Rich. III. page ^0.

Spondan calls him a Martyr, an. 1471. 6.


Buck of late would deny the fact, and clear the said Richard from this, and
all other imputations laid to him by all other Historians.

The body of this King Henry was carried to Chertsey in Surrey, and there
buried in the Monastery belonging to the Benedictines. And it is said that many
Miracles have been done at his grave, above two hundred of which was gathered
into one V^d. Har^sfield Hist. Eccles. p. 595.
Volume; nor was there any disease, but they say was cured by him, Blind, Lame,
Dumb, King's Evil, and what not? And as if these were not enough, they make him
cure another Miracle, viz. a Woman that used to go with Child above Ib. p. 596.
two years.

Richard III (envying the fame of Henry, if we may believe King Spelman.
Council. tom. 2. page 71^.
Henry VII) removed the Corpse from Chertsey to the Chapel of Windsor, where he
was also worshipped by the name of Holy King Henry; and here they say that his
Red-velvet-Hat Stow, page 424.
healed the Headache of such as put it on their heads: there his body rested
for a time; but now his Tomb being taken thence, it is not commonly known what
is become of his body. It Is true, King Henry VII had a desire to have it
removed to Westminster; to which purpose the Abbot desired the Spel^. Council.
page 712, 71^.
consent of Pope Alexander VI.

King Henry VII also desired to have this Henry VI Canonized: to which purpose
he wrote to the said Alexander, who gave the Archbishop of Canterbury, and the
Bishop of Durham Spelm. page 720.
Authority to inquire into his Miracles and Life. Nor did Henry VII cease here,
but Alexander dying, he solicited Harpsfield page 594.
Julius II very earnestly; and some think, that had the King lived a little
longer, he had obtained his request: But this I shall leave with these words of
Edward Hall -- These and other like Offices of Holiness Ed. Hal^'s Ch^on. fol.
223. b.
caused God to work miracles for him in his lifetime (as old men said,) By
reason whereof King Henry VII, not without cause, sued to July Bishop of Rome
to have him Canonized, as other Saints be: but the fees of the Canonizing of a
King were so great a quantity at Rome (more then the Canonizing of a Bishop or
a Prelate, although he sat in St. Peter's Chair) that the said King thought it
more necessary to keep his money at home, for the profit of his Realm and
Country, rather then to impoverish his Kingdom for the gaining of a new
Holy Day of St. Henry: remitting to God the judgment of his will and intent.
--

And here passing by the cruel death of the young Innocent Prince Edward,
eldest Son to this King Henry VI in cold blood, after the fight at Tewkes-bury,
I might come to Edward V, and show how he was deposed by his Uncle Richard, by
means of his wicked Instruments, Stafford Duke of Buckingham, Dr. John Shaw,
Brother to Edmond Shaw Goldsmiths, then Lord Mayor of London, and suchlike; and
from this I might lead you to the making away of the said young Innocent
Prince, Edward and his Brother, by the means of the said Richard III: but
because all Histories will not exactly agree upon the manner how, I shall refer
you to the Chronicles themselves, where the juggle, if not the murders, may be
seen at large.

Sect. 5. The troubles in Spain, and the miseries of Don Henry the Fourth King
of Castile and Leon, by reason of his proud and rebellious Nobility.
IF we look into Spain, we shall find those Territories miserably wasted by
Tumults and Rebellions; we might see how the young King of Castile Henry III
was so neglected by his proud and L. de May^^^ Hist. d'(...), li^. 18, 19, 20,
21.
greedy Nobility, who pocketed up his Revenues, that once he was forced to pawn
one of his Robes for two Shoulders of Mutton to help out his Supper. And we
might see their Rebellions against his Son King John II, whose troublesome
Reign might be an Item to Kings to beware of confiding in and favoring too
much one Subject, by the neglect of the rest: And the unhappy end of the
Constable Don Alvaro de Luna, may be a caution to the greatest favorites in
their carriage; for Kings at last (in whose protection lies their greatest
safety) may be persuaded to leave them to Justice; and then no mercy can be
expected from the solong-abused Law and People. But proceed we to greater
troubles and misfortunes then these.

This King John II had by his First wife Maria of Arragon, HENRY IV King of
Castile and Leon. Leonora. Catharine dyed young.
Second Wife, Isabel of Portugal, Daughter to D. Jean Master of S. Jago and Son
to John I. King of Portugal. Alphonso, whom the people in opposition to Henry
Crowned King. ISABEL, upon her Brother Henry's death Queen of Castile, and
Married Ferdinand of Arragon, whereby those two Crowns were joined.


This Henry IV succeeded in the Kingdoms of Castile and Leon, John II. Henry
was civil and courteous, never Thou Would any body, were he never so mean; he was
also liberal, a lover of peace; but that which spoiled all, he was too careless
in his Government, not desiring to trouble himself much with the affairs of his
Kingdom: which with his Clemency made his proud Nobles neglect, and in the end
despise him.

To tell all his misfortunes, would be too tedious: In short, several of his
Nobility made a League against him, one of the chief of whom was Don Alphonso
Carillo the Archbishop of Toledo. They carried their plot cunningly and secret;
and if a discovery should happen, they had either fair pretensions, or a
juggling carriage, with which they knew it was an easy matter to pacify the
King.

The King had notice of their League, and desired to confer with the Marquess
De Villena, one of their Chieftains, and some others: they refuse to come to
him. At last, De Villena, upon Hostages given to his party, and a safe conduct,
meets the King, but comes well provided and guarded with his Faction and
Friends, by whose assistance he was so strong, that he resolved to seize upon
the King, and the Infanta's [Isabel and Alphonso] and once made

Another time they had laid a plot to be let in secretly into their Lodgings,
there to seize on the King, the Queen, the Infanta's, and to dispatch their
Enemies; but this was by chance also discovered, and so prevented: yet would
not the King punish Villena, because he had given him his word of security.

These failing, they contrived to seize upon him, under pretense of a
Conference; but of this also the King having intelligence, he prevented their
Treachery. The Covenanters finding their plots discovered, flee to open Arms,
and draw up several Articles against the King; and the better to countenance
their Cause, they pretended great care and friendship to the Kings Brother
Alphonso. At last a kind of peace is struck up; Alphonso declared Heir to the
Crown, and Commissioners on both sides appointed to end all differences; and
Alphonso is sent to the Confederates, to render them more peaceable by his
presence, and their thus enjoying of what they desired.

Now the King hoped nothing more than an happy peace; but he found himself
betrayed on all hands. For whilst the Commissioners were consulting, the
Archbishop of Toledo, and Don Frederick the Admiral, made show as if they had
fallen out with Marquess De Villena, were weary of the League, and so came over
to the King, to whom they profer'd their service. His Majesty rejoices at
this; but was presently in troubles again, by reason of the treachery of his
Commissioners, who being won over by the Confederates, had consented to a
dishonorable peace, whereby nothing remained to the King save only the name.

And this grief was doubled by another misfortune; for he having sent to Don
Gomes de Cacerez Master of Alcantara, and Don Pedro Puertro Carero Earl of
Medillino, his trusty friends, to come to him; it fortuned that whilst they
were upon their journey, they met with Alvaro Gomes Secretary to the King, and
Ganzalo of Sahavedra, one of the Kings Commissioners, both now turned to the
Confederates. These two Traitors told the other two Nobles a smooth and sad
story of the Kings displeasure against them, how he had given order to have
them seized on, and so it would not be safe for their Lordships to fall within
the reach of the King. These Lords thus falsely persuaded of the Kings
displeasure, forgot their honors, and joined themselves also with the Leaguers.

But yet the Kings misfortune grew worse and worse; for the Archbishop of
Toledo, and the Admiral, carried themselves so cunningly, that Henry ever put
his greatest confidence in them. And though he was secretly advised not to
trust too much to them, nor to commit any Forces to their charge, assuring him
that they waited but that opportunity, and then would deliver them with
themselves over again to the Leaguers; yet to all these Informations would he
give no credit, but conferred upon them several places of strength, furnished
them with money, and gave them Commissions to raise Soldiers, with an Order to
meet him with their Forces at Arevalo, which place he designed with their
assistance to besiege.

To ^his Siege the King goes; and wondering the Archbishop came not, he sent
Fernand Badajos, one of his Secretaries, to hasten his March. The Secretary
meets him and his Troops marching toward Avila, the Rendevouz of the
Confederates, delivers his message; but from the Archbishop gets nothing but
this answer -- Tell your King from me, that I am weary both of him and his
affairs; and that shortly the true King of Castile shall be known.

This was sad news. At the same time comes information, that the Admiral also
had played the knave, seized on Valladolid, proclaimed young Alphonso King, so
joined himself also with the Rebels. At which the King, full of grief and
amazement, kneeled upon the ground, lifting up his hands to Heaven, thus humbly
prayed.

O Lord God! unto whom belongs the defense and protection of Kings, and by
whom they reign: I recommend my Cause unto thee, and commit my life into thy
hands: I yield thee infinite thanks, that it has pleased thee thus to punish
me for mine offenses, which are worthy of a sharper scourge: And I confess,
that the same which I suffer is very small in respect of my deserts. May it
please thee (O Lord!) that these troubles may diminish the pains which are due
to my soul, in regard of my sins; and if it be thy will that I shall pass
through these miseries and afflictions, I beseech thee from the bottom of my
heart, to give me patience to endure them, and reason and understanding to
guide my self in them.

In the mean time the Confederates meet before Avila, before June, 1465.
which City, in the plain fields, they erect a great Scaffold, on which was
placed the Statue of King Henry in a Mourning Habit, sitting in a Regal Throne,
the Crown on his head, the Scepter in his hand, and the Sword laid before it.
Upon the Scaffold the Archbishop of Toledo, with some others ascended, and a
Paper was read, by which Henry was degraded: it contained four chief points.

I. As deserving to be deprived from the dignity of a King: at which the
Archbishop took the Royal Crown from its head.

II. That he was no more worthy to administer Justice: at which the Earl of
Placencia took away the Sword.

III. That he was unfit to govern the Kingdom: then the Earl of Benevent took
the Scepter out of its hand.

IV. That therefore he was deprived justly of his Royal Throne: then was the
Statue thrown down from the Seat, with many unworthy and outrageous speeches,
by Diego Lopez, brother to the Earl of Placencia.

This done, the other Lords, with Henry's young brother Alphonso (who had stood
a little off as spectators) mounted the Scaffold, took and lifted Alphonso upon
their Shoulders, crying out Castile, Castile for the King Don Alphonso; so the
Trumpets sounded, and they all went to kiss his hand as their true King.

Poor King Henry received this news patiently, saying with the Prophet Esaias --
I have nourished and brought up children, and they have despised me. -- But
although these treacherous and disloyal servants have so wronged and scorned me
by the Statue which they have degraded, and thrown away all respect and duty
which they owe unto me; yet they cannot keep me, who am the true King, from
having strength and courage to chastise and disperse them: For I hope in our
Lord Jesus Christ, who is the just Judge of Kings, that their wickedness shall
be destroyed, and mine innocence made known to the whole World. And then
considering how many Places and Nobles revolted from him, and the powerfulness
of his enemies, he would oftentimes say, -- Naked I came out of my Mothers
Womb, and the earth must receive me naked; no man can become so poor as he was
born: And if God does now chastise me for my sins, he will comfort and preserve
me hereafter: for his infinite power kills and gives life; hurts and
heals; gives kingdoms, and takes them away; lifts up Kings, and throws
them down again, even as he pleases.

Yet did not the disconsolate King absolutely despair, but sent to all places
he had any hopes in to assist him against the Rebels; and amongst the rest, Don
Garcia Alvares de Toledo Earl of Alva de Tormes, was very active for his
service.

In the mean time, the Con^ederates lay siege to Simancas upon the River Duero
in Leon; which was valiantly defended by Don Juan Fernandes Galindo, and other
Royalists. And here the very boys and Lackeys showed their zeal against
Rebellion; for understanding that the Archbishop of Toledo was the chief of the
Faction, in de^ision of him and the League they made an Image representing him,
which they named the New Don Opas the Apostate.

The Reader may here understand by the by, that about the years 712, 713, 714,
Julian Governor of Ceuta in the Streights on the African shore, falling out
with his Lord Roderigo the last King of the Goths in Spain, in revenge joins
himself with the Moors; with them enters Spain, routs his Prince; and by this
treachery the Moors became Masters of all that Continent, excepting the
mountanous parts in las Asturias, Biscay and Navar; and so retained it for many
hundred years, till by degrees they were beaten out: And thus was the name and
rule of the Gothic Government lost.

In this wicked treachery against their own Country and Christian Religion, was
as a principal Actor Opas or Oppa Archbishop of Toledo, who joined himself with
unbelieving Moors, to the shame of himself, and the loss of Christianity in
those parts. And this is that Don Opas to whom these boys alluded.

The Image of the Archbishop being in all sort prepared, one of the boys sat
down as Judge; and the Treason being palpable, commanded the Image to be
imprisoned, and at last pronounced sentence against it; thus:

Whereas Alphonso Carillo Archbishop of Toledo, following the steps of the
ancient Bishop Opas, the ruin of Spain, for that he had betrayed the King his
Natural Lord, rebelling against him, and detaining his Money, Towns and
Fortresses, which he had committed to him, is therefore condemned to be drawn
up and down the streets, and public places of Simancas; a Trumpet to go
before, proclaiming that the King did command this justice to be done to the
Traitor Opas, as a recompense due for his Treacheries and Treasons; and that
then it should be burned.

This sentence pronounced aloud, we need not question but the young Judge was
obeyed in every thing. Then was the Image carried out of the Town, attended on
with above three hundred boys, and burned with a great deal of triumph in the
very sight of the Confederates Army: which at last despairing of taking the
Place, raised the siege.

King Henry we may well suppose was not idle, having in a little time got an
Army of near upon an hundred thousand men. This vast strength terrified the
Leaguers; so they fell to private plots, and instigated one Juan Carillo to
kill the King: but this Carillo being taken prisoner in a skirmish, and
perceiving he could not live long by reason of his wounds, was sorry for what
he had undertaken, desired to speak with the King, asked pardon of him, had it,
confessed how his life was sought after, and revealed to him other wicked
practices against him; and the next day Carillo dyed of his wounds.

The King with his potent Army might have quel'd all before him; but through
his love to peace, and carelessness, he lost all opportunities; allowed of a
Conference, where it was concluded, that every man should lay down his Arms,
and return home; a Truce to continue for five Months, and that in the mean time
Commissioners should treat of a Peace.

Thus the King lost his cause; his Army by his negligence wasting and slipping
away. Nor did the Confederates disband according to promise; De Villena
watching all occasions to see if he could get the credulous King into his
clutches. In the mean time Don Alphonso led a miserable life with the Leaguers;
and suspecting either their bad intentions, or the success of his cause, would
willingly have agreed with King Henry, and go to him; but they kept him
strictly, threatening to Petiturum veneno, nisi r^^aret. Jo. ^arian. l. ^3. cap.
9.
poison him, if he receded from his Government.

Both parties now seemed weary; so another peace is clapped up, but very
dishonorable to the King, considering what an Army he lately had: But this
quiet lasted but a while; they flee to Arms; both Armies meet by Olmedo in Old
Castile, where the Archbishop of Toledo appears in his Arms, upon which he wore
his white Stole poudred with red Crosses: The Battle is fought, and both
parties Mariana, cap. 11.
ten horsemen.

At last, after some trouble, Alphonso dies about XVI years old; upon this,
the Confederates consult about a new Head: they generally Donna Isabella his
Sister, send to her to accept of the Government, and they would proclaim and
Crown her Queen. She upon good advice refuses all such profers, declaring her
obedience to her King and elder Brother Henry; and conjures them also to
loyalty, to throw away all private Interests and Factions, and conclude in a
firm peace and union.

The Confederates perceiving that they wanted an Head, and so a main pretense
to countenance their Arms to the people; and that, whatever they had hitherto
gained, was more by their dissembling then strength; that also the Pope Paul II
had censured them if they continued in open wars: For King Henry was held an
obedient son to the Bishops of Rome, for which Calixtus III had sent him
formerly an Hat, and a consecrated Sword (which they use to bless upon
Christmas-Eve at night, laying them upon the Altar, where they say Mass.) And
farther, they recollected, that upon Henry's death, Isabella was like to be
Queen; whereby they could procure no favor or benefit to themselves, by
opposing her peaceable desires.

Upon these considerations they consented to an Agreement; so Articles are
drawn up, a Peace concluded on: Donna Isabella is declared Princess of the Las
Asturias formerly of a larger extent, is now, ^ little Province between
Galicia, Leon and Biscay, lying upon the Cantabrian sea. ('It Is twofold; Asturia
de O^iedo, and Astur. de Santillana.) As the Heirs of England are called
Princes of Wales, and those of France les Dauphins; so are those to the Crown
of Castile, called Princes of the Asturias. Upon what occasion, this ^hort
Scheme may show.

Alphonso XI, had amongst other Children Henry a Bastard, Earl of Trans^amara,
took the Kingdom from the Tyrant Pedro, and stabbed him with his dagger: he had
John I. who had Henry III.

Don Pedro el Cruel, had, amongst others, a bastard, called Constancia; she was
married to John of Gant, Duke of Lancaster, son to Edward III King of England.


Upon the death of Don Pedro surnamed the Cruel, though his bastard-Brother
Henry II. seized upon the Crown, and was acknowledged for King; yet John of
Gant, Duke of Lancaster, pretended the right to lie in him, by reason of his
Wife Constance: and made some bustle about it. Henry dying, there succeeded his
son John I. with whom and Lancaster a peace was concluded; Lancaster to
renounce all his Title to Castile, and King John to marry his son Henry to
Lancaster's Daughter Catherine; which accordingly was accompish'd, so both
their pretensions united. And for more honor, Don Henry the young son was to
be called Prince of the Asturias; since which time the eldest sons of Castile
were called Princes, and the younger are titled Infantas. This happened about the
year 1388. And so much by the way concerning the Title of Prince of Asturias;
yet do I find Jehan Froissart, who lived at this time, to tell us that Henry
was called Prince of Gallicia; in his French Edition, 1530. vol. 3. fol. 96.
and fol. 143. In the old English Edition, vol. 2. cap. 154. fol. 170. and cap.
176. fol. 214.


Asturias, and lawful Heir to the Kingdoms of Castile and Leon with their
dependants.

What troubles happened in Castile after this treaty, being not considerable, I
shall pass over. Donna Isabella now declared Heir, several matches were
consulted of; but she secretly joined her self with Don Fernando Prince of
Girona, and the eldest son living to John II King of Arragon. At this marriage
King Henry was greatly vexed, as being contrary to his desire, and without his
knowledge. But at the long run, the King becomes more pacified; and at last
1474.
dying, she succeeds as Queen of Castile and Leon; although some busled for
Joane, the supposed Daughter of King Henry; but she is generally thrown by as a
bastard, being begot of his Queen Joane, by one Don Bertrand de la Cueva,
afterward preferred for his kindness, being created Earl of Ledesma, Master of
Santiago, and Duke of Albuquerque. As for Henry himself, he is by all esteemed
as frigid, and incapable of such loves. Not long after, John II King of Arragon
1479.
dying, that Kingdom was united to Castile, by the fortunate former marriage of
Ferdinand and Isabella.

Here might I descend into the troubles of Navar, and tell how Don Carlos
Prince of Viana, took up Arms against his Father John King of Navar and
Arragon. Upon which quarrel began the great Factions of those of Beaumont and
Grammont; the first adhering to the Prince, and the latter to the King: and the
feuds of these two potent Families, was one of the main causes of the loss of
Navar to the Spaniard, those of Beaumont assisting Don Ferdinand in the
conquest, against their own King and Country: Of which more hereafter.

In short, the Prince being not able to keep the field, withdrew himself to
Naples for sometime; thence returns, endeavors new troubles, upon which he is
taken and secu^ed. Upon this the Catalonians rebel; and though Prince Carlos
was set at liberty, and Some say he was poisoned by his Step mother D. Joane,
to make way for he^^^son Ferdinando to the Crown of Arragon.
dyed presently after, yet they continue their Treasons: The people of
Barcelona publicly declare King John an Enemy to his Country, and so they
would withdraw themselves from his obedience: And the Catalonians sent to Henry
IV. of Castile, to desire him to take them under his protection, they being
resolved no more to obey the Crown of Arragon.

Don Henry accepts them; so they set up the Banners of Castile. At last, after
a tedious War, they are vanquished, forced to submit; and King John gives them
all freely a pardon. But of Spain more in the next Century.

A CONTINUATION OF THE REBELLIONS AND Treasonablepractices OF THE ROMANISTS,
Particularly in Spain, Scotland and Ireland: From the year MD. to MDC.
BOOK VI.
CHAP. I.
1. John and Catherine King and Queen of Navar deprived.

2. Pope Julius II.

Sect. 1. John and Catherine King and Queen of Navar deprived.
THe Conquest of Navar being acted suddenly, we

At the beginning of this Century, we find John d'Albret (or Don Juan de la
Brit) and Donna Catherina, King and Queen of Navar, which had boasted it self a
Kingdom almost DCCC. years.

Ferdinand II King of Arragon, having by his marrying with Isabella Queen of
Castile, enlarged his Authority and Dominions, as also by his banishing the
Jews, and subduing the Moors to him in Granado, made his Government more
secure; cast many a greedy Jo. de Bussieres, lib. 15. 16. Spondan. an. 1512. 21.
thought upon the seizing the Kingdom of Navar; and then all of Spain (Portugal
excepted) would be his own.

At last opportunity (good enough, as he thought) offered it self, which was
thus:

Pope Julius II. (a zealous Hotspur) falling out with Lewis XII. King of
France; Fernando sides with the Pope, and having raised an Army, not only
demands passage for it through Albrets Territories, but the command of his
strongest Castles and Fortifications; and, which was most, the possession and
custody of Prince Henry, eldest son to Navar; and all these as a security of
Albrets good behavior to him; and to be restored again, when Ferdinando
thought good.

King John thought these demands unreasonable, justly suspecting a difficulty
of ever outing the Castilians, if they were once so strongly settled in his
Dominions: especially at this time, when the Factions of the two Families
Gramont and Beaumont had made some disturbance with him at home, and the last
of them wishing too well to Fernando. Add to this, there was no necessity of
such demands for passage, seeing they might march several ways into France
without troubling Navar. Thus Albret fearing the worst, by smelling out the
design, thought to strengthen himself by joining interests with the French
King.

The backwardness of Navar being known, Pope Julio falls a Bulling, with the
consent of his Cardinals, declaring John d'Albret and Catherine his Wife, with
their Posterity, for Heretics and Schismatics, so deprived of all Royal
Dignity and Honor; freely giving their Kingdom and Dominions to Ferdinand, or
any that will take the pains to have them.

Ferdinand now thinking that the Popes blessing and cursing gave him right and
title good enough to the Kingdom: And having his Army ready in Alava (a little
Province between Biscay and Navar) made it march on a sudden under the command
of Don Fadrique de Toledo Duke of Alva, Grandfather to Don Fernando d'Alvarez
de Toledo, Duke of Alva, so noted in the Netherlandish Histories, and who after
that, in a little time conquered Portugal to the obedience of his Master Philip
II. For the Narrative of which, I shall refer those that desire to read it, to
Jeronimo Conestaggio of Genuoa. But the Portugais 1640 make quicker work in
regaining of it from Philip IV. And so they might without a wonder, if they
surpass the Castilians so much in courage, as (b) Antonio de Sousa de Macedo
relates it. a Lusitania liber. l. 3. c. 9.


But to return: the Castilians made such haste, that they entered Navar before
Albret expected them; which so amazed his unprovided Court, that he presently
July 22. 1512.
fled for it into France, leaving his Queen, Children, and People to shift for
themselves. All hopes thus lost, the Queen, with her son Prince Henry and three
Daughters, two days after quits Pamplona to follow her husband; whom having
overtaken, she thus (amongst other speeches) tartly upbraids. -- -- O Roy! vous
demeu^erez Jean d'Albret, and ne pensez plus au Royaume de Navatre, d'Autant
que pour avoir este superfluement bo^, vous en avez este moins estime des
vostres, and vous estes pardu vous and vostre Royaume. L. de Mayerne, l. 25.
page 1191. -- O Roy! vous demeurez Jean d'Albret, and ne penses plus au Royaume
de Navarre, que vous avez perdu par vostre nonchalance. Olhagaray, p. 455.
O King! King! thou shall remain John d'Albret, and never think more of the
Kingdom of Navar; for that having been superfiuously good, you have been the
less esteemed of your subjects, and have undone your self and your Realm.

Thus the Kingdom of Navar became an easy prey to Ferdinando, from which time
it has continued an Appendix to the Crown of Spain, whilst the French are
forced to be content with its empty title.

As for Albret, though he was a lover of splendor and learning, himself being
well skilled in Heraldry, and a great Collector of Books for his Libraries; yet
he made himself cheap, by being two good-natured, and too familiar even with
the meanest of his Subjects; so that, when it came to a stress, his former
freedom rendered his name of Majesty contemptible. Nor gained he a little
Ill Will by his wholly affecting the French modes and humors, too light and
Airy for a Mountanous, rough-hewn people; especially such, who breath nothing
but the Spanish air: but, which was most, his preferring many Strangers or
Foreigners, not only by giving them good Estates, but by intrusting them with
the greatest Offices and Places in his Kingdom; whereby the Natives grumbled to
see themselves so neglected and slighted.

To these we might add the Factions amongst the Nobility; but that which was
the fountain of all, was his giving of himself up so much to his Vid. Michel
Baudier Hist. du Cardinal Ximenes, page 106, 107.
pleasures, that he wholly neglected the Government, not troubling himself with
the management of any thing in it; nor caring how things went right or wrong,
so they would but let him alone to his own fancy; so thus (like some other
Kings) he had the Title, others the sway and Authority: so that he himself lost
nothing by the want of these his Dominions, seeing he carried the name of King
along with him, whilst the Spaniard took the trouble and care of Government
upon him. And all such are but pictures of Kings.

Francis I. King of France, [who succeeded Lewis XII. to whom our Albret fled]
who, for his great love and care to the Church, Learning, and his people, is so
renowned by all Historians; upon his deathbed, with his blessing gave his son
[Henry II.] these two Rules.

First fear God:
Then be careful for the good of your subjects.
Upon which excellent advice, the famous French Antiquary Lawyer and Poet,
Steven Pasquier (by the folly of Latinizing names called Paschasius) composed
this following Epigram.

Nato haec Franciscus dixisse novissima verba St. Paschas. Epigram, lib. 5. and
vid. Delit. Poet. Gal. vol. 2. page 971.

Fertur, and in gemitus prosiluisse pios.
Imprimis venerare Deum, Charissime Fili;
Mox tibi sit Populi cura suprema tui.
Dixit and occubuit. Duo ne Praecepta putato:
In duo peccat, qui peccat in alterutrum.
Nam cui nulla Dei cu^a est, nec cura suorum est;
Et cui non populi est cura, nec ulla Dei est.
Frances (whilst death was closing his heavenward eyes)
Bequeathed unto his Heir, thus, his advice:
First worship God, dear son: Then, see you bend
Your ways, as most to your subjects good may tend.
This said, he dyed. Nor think these Rules but two;
For who breaks one, must break the other too.
Since, who loves not God, loves not his own affair;
And, who slights his peoples good, for God cannot care.
Thus was Albret the loss of himself and Kingdom; it being a certain Rule, that
subjects take their influence from the actions of their Princes; an active,
vigorous and valiant King infusing courage into his meanest vassal: whilst the
negligent and effeminate [and all such are observed to be too good natured, and
so negligent, which in a King is worse then tyranny] renders the people
unactive, and though jealous, yet careless; which stupidity makes them more
stubborn, because they see themselves tyrannized over and abused by such
base-spirited cringing favorites, as usually domineer under the Protection of
such breathing Statues of Kingship.

But to return. And yet who can be but troubled at the sad fortune of poor
Albret? who dyed of grief 1517. his Queen Catherine some eight months after;
both of them out-living their Conqueror Ferdinando about a year, who dyed 1516.

Au. 1512. 23, 24, 25.
Spondanus here takes upon him to deny that Pope Julio II made any such Censure
of deprivation against Albret and his Queen; and in this opinion he is so
earnest and prolix, that Annals, an. 1512.
Brietius the Jesuit and his Country man, twits him of being a better
Frenchman then an Historian.

But seeing this Bishop of Pamiers (one very well read, but biased in
Church History) was the first (I know of) that has called this Papal
deprivation in question, and that but the other day too. And again, perceiving
that so many Pru. de Sandoval vida del Carl^s V. And e Fav^n Hist. de Nava^re,
l. 12. Gonzalo de Illiscas. Hist. Pontifical y Catholica, lib. 6. cap. 23. 3.
Alphons. Ciacon. in vita Julii II. Pierre Olhagarray Hist. de Foix, Bearn and
Navarre, page 455. Phil. Briet. Geograph. part 2. l. 5. page 284. P. Berthavlt
Florus Francicus, lib. 4. cap. 8. Cesare Campana Arbori delle Famiglie Regali
de Spagna, page 89. nuphrius in Julio II. Johan. Mariana de Rebus Hispan. lib.
30. cap. 8. Pierre d'Avity le Monde, Navarre. Ael. Anton. Nebrissensis, de
bello Navar. lib. 1. Gasp. Sciop. Ecclesiast. cap. 141. page 512. Camill.
Borellus Comment. de Hispanica Legatione ad sum. Pont. cap. 4. 73, 74. Id. de
Regi^ Catholici P^aestantia, cap. 46. 109, 110. Lud. Nonius de Hispania, cap.
80. Giovanni Botero le Relationi Universali, part 1. lib. 1. page 13. Navarra.
De Ivigne dictionair. v. Navarre.
Romanists themselves do confess and acknowledge it, I shall trouble my self no
more about it.

However, it happens no better to his son Henry, who was excommunicated, and
declared D. Michel Lonigo da Este, delle Co^one de Principi Christia^i, Tavola
IV. di Navarra.
deprived by Pope Leo X, as a Zealous Romanist assures us. And thus much for
the loss of the Kingdom of Navar, by the Christian Fatherly care and Charity of
their spiritual Infallibility; the French thinking the case very hard, whilst
the Spaniard looks upon it as lawful enough, not so much by -- Que el Catholico
Rey Don Fernando quinto lo gan^, y ayunto con los Reynos de Castilla y Leon,
cobrandolo con justo Titulo, y no de hecho, como algunos penseron. Pedro de
Medina de Grandezas y cosas memorables de Espanna, cap. 128. f^l. 131. 6.
Conquest, as by a just and legal Title.

Sect. 2. Pope Julius II.
ANd as for Pope Julio II, we need not question but that he was apt enough to
act mischief against any that had not an affection for him, having been the
Author of many Spond. an. 1510. 6.
Divisions and Wars before he attained to his Pontifical greatness, being
naturally of a furious and turbulent humor, insomuch that he is Uncharacterized
to be one more fit for a Julius Papa n^n tam Apostolicae sedis claviger, quam
Armiger. Paulut Langius Chron. Citizense, anno 1513.
sword than the Popedom. And we shall find him oftener commended for his feats
in Bellico nomine clarus septuagenarius senex. Michael Bucchingerus Historia
Ecclesiastica, page 279. -- A nullis parum probatus, quod armis magis, quam
sacrosanctum Pontificem decerat, deditus esse videretur. Onuphrius Continuat.
Platinae. -- Julius II. Papa Egregius Bellator. Abrah Bucholcerus Isagoge
Ch^onologica, an. 1503. -- Et certes il saut consesser que Jules aima trop les
Arms and la Guerre, pour acque^ir la qualite and la gloire de parsait Pontise.
Nic. Coeffeteau Responce au du Plessis, page 1224. -- Bellica gloria clarus.
Barth. Caranza summa Council.
War, than his Devotions; not but that it might be as lawful for him or any of
his Successors, to defend by Arms the rights of his Chair and Territories, as
any other Temporal Prince.

Certain I am, that it is delivered to us by good Authority, that after he was
Pope, at the siege of Mirandula, without any consideration of his age,
infirmity, or peaceable Office, he prosecuted that War clad in his Jo. de
Bussieres, Tom. 3. page 206, 207. Spond. anno 1511. 1. Guil. Barcla. de
Potestate Papae, page 295. Paul. Long. Chron. Citizense, anno 1503.
Armor, or Coat of Male, with a Sword girt to him, now and then mounting the
Cannons, and lying in his Tent obvious to all danger, not at all regarding the
extremity of the cold or snow.

Above all other people, he had the greatest Pique against the French, for
which they twit him with ingratitude. However, to show his zeal against that
Nation, he did not only ( Spond. anno 1512. 19.
) Interdict Lewis XII. and his Dominions, but ( Will. Drummond's Hist. of
Scotland, page 138.
) absolveth his Subjects from their Oaths of Allegiance, gives his Kingdom to
any that can take it; and by Decree in the Lateran Council, takes away the
Title of ( Will. Drum. ib. Jo. de Bussieres, Tom. 3. page 231. lib. 15. Fr.
Guicciardin, l. 11. Spondanus, anno 1513. 2. Sir Rich. Bakers Chron. of
England. Laur. Banck de Tyrannide Papae, page 495.
) MOST CHRISTIAN from the French King, and confers it upon the King of England.

Nay, some say that his fury was such, that at his marching out of Rome against
the French, he threw his Keys into the River Tiber, saying, -- Since St. Peter's
Keys would do him no good, he would Morney's Mysterium Iniquitatis, page 565.
make use of St. Paul' s sword. That the story was really true, I shall not be
positive, though many have exercised their wits upon it; amongst the rest, they
tell us that the well-tempered Melancthon made these following verses, though I
do not remember any such amongst his Poems.

Cum contra Gallos bellum Papa Julius esset
Gesturus, sicut Fama vetusta docit:
Ingentes Martis turmas contraxit, and urbem
Egressus saevas edidit ore minas.
Iratusque sacras claves in flumina jecit
Tibridis, hic urbi pons ubi jungit aquas,
Inde manu strictum vagina diripit ensem,
Exclamansque trucitalia voce refert:
Hic Gladius Pauli nos nunc defendit ab host,
Quandoquidem clavis nil juvat esse Petri.
But shorter is Gilbertus Ducherius, thus: In Gallum (ut fama est) bellum
gesturus acerbum,
Armatum educit Julius urbe manum;
Accinctus Gladio, claves in Tibridis amnem
Projicit, and saevus talia verba facit:
Quum Petri nihil efficiant ad Praelia claves,
Auxilio Pauli forsitan ensis erit.
This latter is comprehended in the design or project of the first, somewhat
to this purpose.

When fierce Pope Julio (as fame declares)
Resolved against the French to wage his Wars;
He mustered up his men of War so strong,
Threatening destruction as he marched along;
And mad that here his Priesthood did no good,
He whirled his Keys into proud Tibers flood:
Then brandishing his glittering blade on high,
Thus to his Troops with direful voice does cry;
Since Peter's Keys will here no help afford,
I Will now defend and quell with Paul's sharp Sword.
And to show that this Julius was of no peaceable disposition, not only the
French, as Delit. Poet. Gal. vol. 3. p. 1098.
Hadrians Turnebus, but also his own Country men, as Poet. Itall. vol. 1. p.
527.
Caelius Calcagninus, who poetizeth upon his Statue melted into a Cannon: Nay,
his own friend and admirer, Poet. Itall. vol 1. p. 1334. and Poem. post
Hieroglyph. p. 105.
Johannes Pierius Valerianus, could not think of his Picture, but as a dreadful
spectacle to terrify the beholders. Poet. Germ. vol. 2. p. 734.
Euricius Cordus allows him no place in Heaven, as if he had formerly sold
it. And Huldricus Huttenus, a good Scholar for his time, and as great a
Soldier; nor need we question his courage, he confessing to us how he once
encountered and beat Poet. Germ. vol. 3. p. 6^3.
five Frenchmen: This German Knight is very fiery against Pope Julio; and
indeed his too much zeal was one of his greatest faults; and his verses and
railings are so many against this Pope, that I shall rather refer you to Id.
page 666, 667, 668, 669, 674.
himself, then trouble my self to transcribe them.

Amongst the multitude of others, who employed their pens to upbraid this
Julius, for his warlike humor, was our Epig^am. v^l. 2. l^b. 1. E^^gr. 77.
page 1^0.
John Owen, who according to his usual brevity thus girds at him.

Ecce duo Gladii Christo Petrus ensifer inquit;
Ecce duo Claves, O Petre, Christus ait:
Deposuit Petrus Gladium, Clavesque recepit;
Deponis Claves Tu, Gladiumque rapis.
And yet for all this, I meet with one Italian Poet Poet. ^al. ^^l. 1. p. 972,
973, 974, 975, 97^.
John Antonius Flaminius, who does not only commend this Julius, as an
excellent incomparable person; but also, as if his Temper were too peaceable,
he earnestly solicits his Holiness to wars, and seems (as it were) grieved and
troubled, that his Country Italy is like to suffer, by the too much placable
and sweet disposition of the Pope.

It Is storyed of this Pope, that one hinting to him the unagreeableness of his
holy calling, with his warlike actions and humor, Propos Memorables, p. 1.
by telling him that Christ said to St. Peter, -- Put up thy sword into the
sheath: That the Pope should reply, -- It Is true; but that was not till after
St. Peter had struck with the Sword. --

I have formerly hinted of the hatred which this Pope carried against the
French; nor did their King Jews XII. show himself insensible, calling a
Council at Pisa to depose him; which Julius counterplotted by another of his
summoning at the Lateran: where it was odd sport to see these two cursing and
degrading one another. Nay, the French King went so far, as to stamp upon his
Golden Coin this Inscription:

PERDAM BABYLONIS NOMEN. It Is true, of late, some are willing to deny this,
because they say they cannot meet with any such Coin nowadays. But this
Argument is not strong enough to quash the Testimony of the famous and faithful
Historian Monsieur de Thou (and a Romanist) who -- Cuso etiam aureo nummo, qui
Titulos Regis Franciae Regnique Neapol. cum Effigy sua ex una part, and
insignia Franciae ex altera referebat, cum hoc E^ogio, PERDAM BABYLONIS NOMEN.
Quales adhuc hodie multi reperiuntur. Jac. Aug. Thuanus Histor. lib. 1.
affirms, there were many of them to be found in his time.

In behalf of the French, I suppose, these following verses were made upon the
Pope, who used to call them Wine-Pissers.

Genua cui Patrem, cui Matrem Graecia, partum
Pontus and unda dedit, number bonus esse potes?
Sunt vani Ligures, and Mendax Graecia, Ponto
Nulla fides; tute haec singula solus habes.
Who Is born at Sea, whose Mother's of Grecian blood,
Whose Sire's of Genoa can never be good:
For the Sea's inconstant, Ligurians are vain,
The Greeks are liars; all these in thee remain.
The latter Editions of George Buchannan's Poems amongst the Page 376.
Miscellanea, afford us this Copy under his name; but the so doing does not
render him the Poet. I am apt to think they were made whilst Julius was living;
and certain I am, that at the death of the said Pope, Buchanan could not be
above seven years old: and Les Chroniques de France, fol. 536. b.
Belleforest, who flourished at the same time with our Scottish Poet, gives us
the verses, but nothing of the Author: But this by the by. However it be, we
find the Pope thus vindicated by some of his friends.

Est Venus orta mari, Graium sapientia, solers
Ingenium est Ligurum; Qui malus esse potest,
Cui genus ut Veneri? a Graiis sapientia? solers
Ingenium a Genua est? Mome proterve tace.
Greece famed for Wisdom, Ligurians have wit at will,
Fair Venus sprang from the Sea; then he is not ill;
Whose Wit's from Genoa, learning from Greece,
Whose birth is Goddess-like. Mome hold your peace.
But to conclude with this Julio II; we are told by De Episc. u^bis, lib. 6.
Papirius Massonus, and In vita Julii II. Phil. Briet. anno 1503
Alphonso Ciaconius, that he was the first of the Roman Bishops who wore a long
beard; since which time, they say, the custom has been in force amongst them,
though Nullus enim antea Pontisex barbatus extiterat. Pap. Mass.
before him, they are said to have shaved all off.

But whether this be true or no, is nothing to my purpose; though certain I am,
that the bearded Portraitures in the last Editions both of Ciaconius and
Cherubinus his Bullaria and other Copies do sufficiently contradict the
foresaid Assertion. However, a little after this, some were so zealous against
the Beards of Ecclesiastics, that the famous Pro sacerdotum berbis.
Pierius Valerianus a zealous Romanist thought himself obliged to write a
Vindication of Priests Beards. In which having now and then to do with their
Councils and Decrees, concerning this small matter of Beards; yet he finds
such Bone Deus! quam multa ea sunt quae omnibus in Antiquorum Codicibus passim
mendosissime leguntur? quot immutats, quot adempts? quot inculcata? Atque
utinam multa quorundam iniquitate quotidie non perverterentur. Id. page 9.
cheatings, falsifications, Forgeries and corruptions in those very Books and
Copies, that the good man cannot withhold from putting up his complaint to God
against such villainies.

CHAP. II. The Holy Junta, or the rebellious League of Spain against Charles V.
TO relate at large all the troubles of Spain, would be endless, especially
those agitated against the famous Cardinal Ximenes, whilst he governed those
Dominions.

This great Minister of State, of the Family of the Cisneres, was first
Christened Alfonso, which afterward in his Cloister he changed to Francis:
being a Franciscan by Order, first he studied at Alcaela de Henares, then read
the Laws at Salamanca: for some time acted as an Advocate in the Court of Rome:
In short, he grew so famous for his learning and integrity, that he rose to be
Archbishop of Toledo, got a Cardinals Hat, and the Government of all Spain to
be in his hands.

This Grandeur from a mean beginning, procured him no small envy and ill will
from many of the Nobility; but he kept his ground, nor would he lose an inch of
his Authority: he was civil where he met with civility; but was so great a
friend to Justice, that he would not let the Laws be like Spiders webs, for he
made no distinction, the greatest Grandee lying as open to Chastisement, as the
meanest Vassal.

It would be too tedious to relate how he reduced the revolted Moors in
Granada; how he conquered Mersalcabir and Oran in Africa: the latter of which
they say was not acted without some miracles; as how a Cross appeared to them
at their landing, and that the Sun stood still for above four hours, as an
Assistant and Spectator of their Victory.

At home he was ever now and anon alarmed with Conspiracies and Seditions, but
still he was himself undaunted and victorious. One of the first who flew out,
was Don Pedro Portocarrero, brother to the Duke Del Escalona, who made some
disturbance to make himself Grand Master of St. Jago; but this uproar the
Cardinal over-topt. The next was more formidable, the Ringleader being Don
Pedro Giron, eldest son to the Earl Vregna, who by force of Arms would seize
upon the Dukedom of Medina Sidonia; and in this he was seconded by many of the
chief Nobility. But this was also quelled by the prudence of out Cardinal.

But that which threatened him most, was the insurrections of Valladolid, and
the other chief Cities in Old Castile, persuaded to this Revolt by many of the
Nobles; I, so zealous were they, that they mounted their Cannons, fortified
themselves, crying along the streets -- This is against Ximenes the peoples
Tyrant: But this faction he also over-topt; yet he is not quiet, for those of
Malaga mutiny, beat out the Judges and the Admiralty, fortify themselves,
mount their Cannon, making one piece bigger then all the rest, with these words
Engraven on it; Malacitanae libertatis Assertores F. C.

The Defenders of the Malaquins liberty have caused this Gun to be made.



This he also suppressed, as he did the Sedition of D. John Velasques of Cuellor,
who would right or wrong keep the Town or Arevalo: Nor did it fare any better
with those Noblemen, who had affronted the Cardinal, and violated all justice
in Villefratre; and the Duke of Alva's contention for the Priory of St. John of
Jerusalem, came little better off, being conquered, and forced to submit.

In short, this great Cardinal held up his head against all opposition; and the
better to strengthen his Authority, he first raised in Spain the Train-bands,
consisting of above thirty thousand substantial house-holders, all which he had
ready at a small warning. And though many dependants of the Nobility, who must
follow their Lords Example, hated him, yet never was there any favorite in all
Spain better beloved then he, by the generality of people; such was his
impartiality to Justice, Charity to the Poor, and care for the welfare and
honor of his Master and his Dominions.

One time, some of the discontented Nobility desired to know by what right he
acted as he did; the Cardinal replied, By the will and power of his Catholic
Majesty. This not satisfying, he showed them his Guards; then showing his
Franciscan Girdle, and k^acking his Fingers, added -- This is enough to tame
the proudest Vassals. And lastly, the better to inform their curiosity, he
ordered a Train of Artillery to be discharged, concluding, -- This is the power
by which I do, and will govern Spain, until the Prince our Lord come to take
the charge of it himself.

And in this he was as good as his word. King Charles arrived in the Asturias
in 1517.
September, and the Cardinal dyed in November alter, not without a grand
suspicion of poison: he was bu^yed at Alcala de Henares, where he had built an
excellent College, and where, to his immortal honor, and vast expenses, he
had caused his Biblia Complutensia to be printed in diverse Languages, as
Hebrew, Caldee, Greek and Laetine; to accomplish which, he had procured many
Copies from the Vatican, and hired many excellent Linguists from sundry places.

And thus much in short of this great Cardinal, of whom you may see more in
Alvaro Gomez, and Michael Baudier; the first having writ his life at large in
Latin, and the other in French: who in him endeavors to pattern out an exact
Minister of State, to the great Cardinal de Richelieu: Nor does envy it self
find any fault in him, but that some fancy him to be one too lofty, and one
that could not brook an opposition; qualifications which some think agreeable
enough with a Governor.

But leaving him (though I could say no less, seeing he was Prud. de Sand. val
Hist. del Carlos V. part 1. lib. 6. Ja. Wadsw^^th.
such a grand Patron to Learning) let us take a view of a more formidable
Rebellion.

In Spain we find ruling Don Carlos I. a young Prince not well acquainted with
the Kingdom, having been brought up in Flanders [he was born there in Gendt
1500.] where the Flemings had so inveagled themselves into his favor, that at
his coming into Spain for the Crown, they ruled all as they pleased, and got
the chiefest Preferments and places for themselves, to the no small grief and
trouble of the Natives.

Of the Forraigners Guillermo de Crouy Lord of Xeures or Cheures [Duke of Sora
in Naples, and of Arschot in Brabant] was the chiefest favorite, and indeed
swayed the King and Kingdom as he pleased; and in his actions was so partial
and covetous, that he became abominable to the Spaniards, who for his faults
lessened their Affection and Loyalty to their King. And here, by the way, take
one merry and instructive story of a favorite.

A Petitioner having presented this Xeures with an handsome Mule with rich
Furniture, that his desire might be the sooner granted: Xeures being asked
presently by another Gentleman, where he had got that curious Beast, replied,
He knew not. The poor Petitioner being by, and seeing himself so soon
forgotten, and so his business neglected, went his ways; and orders his Mule to
be cried, declaring all her Marks and Furniture. Which the other Gentleman
hearing, went presently and told Xeures, that according to the Marks it must
needs be, that this Mule had been stolen: by which device the poor Petitioner
recovered his Mule, which he had given before to small purpose. Thus much for
Cheures, though related to the Royal Blood of Hungary, yet base, cruel and
covetous; as most Favorites are, by such vices getting their preferments: All
such grand Flatterers, Pimps and Pick-thanks, being the greatest bane and curse
that can happen to a King and Kingdom.

Carlos had not been long King in Spain, but the Emperor Maximilian Franck-fort
by the Electors, and so was called Charles V. The Electors send him news of it,
desiring him to come into Germany to receive the Imperial Crow^. He consents,
and prepares for his journey; at which the Spaniards take an Allarum, the great
City of Toledo leading the way, protesting against his going, desiring the
other Cities to join with them, the better to hinder his departure.

The Emperor, in hopes to get some money for his journey, summons a Parliament
to be held at St. Jago in Galicia. Toledo obeys it, and [according to the
custom of that City, which was for the Aldermen (Regidores) and
Common-council-men (Jurados) then present, to draw lots, and one of each to go,
upon whom the Lot falls] it was Don Juan de Silva's chance to go as Regidor,
and Alonso de Aguirre as Jurate for Toledo: But the Citizens knowing these two
Burgesses not to be of their Faction, would not afford them a full, but a
limited power; which the other not accepting, they went not: Whereupon the
Toledians chose four others of their own party to go, and persuade the Emperor
not to depart out of Spain.

These Commissioners hasted to Valladolid where Charles was; Xeures and the
other Flemings; but this plot failed; though some hours after opportunity
offered it self, if they could have taken hold of it. For a Rumor being
suddenly spread in the City, that the Emperor was departing, and that the
Magistrates had granted him his desire; the people in a hurly-burly ran madding
about the streets, showing a willingness to hinder the Emperors journey. In
this hubbub and confusion, one runs up into the Steeple of A very ancient
Pa^^sh, where hung a great Bell, commonly called the Council-Bell, which never
used to be ru^g, but in times o^ war, up^oars, or Alarms.
St. Michael, and rings the Bell; which being heard by the people, without fear
or wit they hurry to Arms. Charles informed of this dangerous Tumult, resolves
to depart, though in a most stormy rain. Being come to the Gates, there he
found some of the rabble, who had seized upon them, began to shut them, and
Barricado up the way; but the Emperors Guards presently made them quit their
Post: so having got ^ut, he hastes to Tordesellas with such speed, that n^ne
but Xeures could keep him company. But the Magistrates of Vallidolid plead
their innocence in this last uproar, laying the fault only upon the Rabble,
many of which were severely punished.

The Emperor hastes to St. Jago, to meet his Parliament, where the
Commissioners or Burgesses show nothing, but their resolution to oppose the
Emperors desires. Though he promised a return after he had received the
Imperial Crown; Germany now falling into some distractions by reason of his
absence. From St. Jago, Charles goes to Corunna (or the Groyne) where the
Commissioners of the Kingdoms go also; and at last, most of them grant him some
moneys, for which they got no thanks from their Cities.

In the mean time Toledo falls into distractions; the chief Authors of their
troubles being Hernando de Avalos, and Don Juan de Padilla, with his
high-spirited wife Donna Maria Pacheco, all of good Families; who filled the
peoples heads full of many whimsies. Insomuch, that in a Religious Procession
the Royal party were abused, to the no small joy of the Rabble.

The Emperor informed of these things, summons Juan de Padilla, and some
others, to appear before him. To put a plausible pretense to their
nonappearance, they desired some of their kindred to make a muteny, and
apprehend them, and not to let them go: but this trick failing, they persuaded
the Friars of St. Augustine, and those of St. Juan de los Reyes to seize upon
them in their general Procession: but this by another accidental disorder
^ailing also, they addressed themselves to some mean and scandalous Fellows, who
consenting to their Plot, then de Avilos and de Padilla made show, as if they
intended to obey the Emperors commands, and appear at the Court. Upon which,
the hired Rabble came and seized upon them, declaring they would not part with
such good Commonwealths men; so carried them to a Chapel, where they made them
promise not to go to the Emperor; though the other seemed teeth-forward
earnestly to protest against such dealings, and that they were willing to obey
the Emperor. This done, the people made the Cowardly Governor of Toledo, Don
Antonio de Cordova, to approve their actions, and to forbid their friends to go
to Court.

The mischief being gone thus far, Hernando de Avalos and Juan de Padilla push
them on farther; for which they had the Friars and Priests at their service,
who in their Pulpits incensed the people to the purpose, who according as they
were instigated, (though with the loss of some blood) seize upon the Gates,
Bridges, and and Fort of the City; and so all was their own, they now publicly
calling themselves the La santa Comunidad.
HOLY COMMUNALTIE. And this was the Order they governed themselves by: every
time they were to treat of any business, the Inhabitants of every particular
Parish were to assemble, and two public Notaries with them; before whom every
man, how mean soever, was to sit down and declare his Opinion.

The Emperor being at Corunna, and fitting for his departure, news comes to
him of these Tumults of Toledo, which did not a little trouble him; but hoping
that as their beginning was in haste, so they would not last long. Thus all
things being ready, he goes May 19.
aboard, lands at Dover in England, where and at Canterbury being nobly
entertained by Henry VIII, he returned to his Fleet, which carried him to
Flushing, thence by degrees he went for Aken, there to receive the Imperial
Crown, where we leave him.

The Emperor before his departure had made Governor or Viceroy Cardinal
Adrian, who had been formerly his Tutor, and was afterward Pope Adrian VI, for
he would not change his name according to the custom.

Upon the Emperors departure, the Nobility and Gentry which waited upon him as
far as the seaside, returned to their own houses, and the Commissioners or
Burgesses to their respective Cities; and the Cardinal took his way toward
Valladolid.

And now began the people to be stark mad, and the City of Segovia led the way;
and thus it was: It is a custom in Segovia every Tuesday in Whitson-week, that
the Collectors meet to treat concerning the Revenue of Corpus Christi Church.
Here being now met, one of them falls a railing against the Governor of the
City; for which rashness he was warily reprehended by one Melon; which reproof
was so ill taken by the people, who also hated Melon for his Office, being a
Sergeant, that in a fury they took the poor Catch-pole, threw a Rope about his
neck, and dragged him out of the City, with a design to hang him; but they
bruised him with so many stripes, that he was dead before they got him to the
Gallows, however they hung up his body there.

This done, as they returned, they met with a Companion of Melon's, called
Roque Portalejo, whom without farther ado, they haled to the Gallows, hanging
him up by the feet till he dyed. The next day being informed that their
Alderman and Burgess Antonio de Tordesillas, had granted the Emperor some
moneys, and was then at the Town-Council; thither they ran in an hurry,
climbing over the Doors, breaking in at the Windows; and violently laying hands
on him, they dragged him out of St. Michaels Church (where the Council meets)
nor could all his entreaties and reasons satisfy them, but they set him clad
in crimson Velvet on a M^le, with an intent to carry him to prison; yet they
had not carried him far, but they knocked him off again, put a Rope about his
neck, dragged him along the streets; punching him on the head with the pummels
of their Swords; nor would they allow him Confession or Sacrament, but so
trail'd him to the Gallows, where they hung him with his head downwards betwixt
the two other. This done, they turned out all the Kings Officers of Justice,
putting others in their places, and ruled all, having seized on the City Gates:
but the Forts were gallantly defended by Don Hernando de Bobadilla, Earl of
Chinchon, and his brother Don Diego. And the chiefest of the City endeavored
to excuse themselves to the Cardinal and his Council.

At the same time with the former tumult, the City of Zamora fell into the like
fury against their Commissioners and Burgesses for granting the Emperor a
Subsidy: whereupon the Members fled, and hid themselves in the Monastery of
Marta, a little days journey off; which so enraged the people, that they made
Statues and Pictures resembling them, which they dragged about the streets with
many reproachful exclamations; and threatened the Monastery to fire it, if the
Commissioners were not delivered, whom they resolved to murder.

The people of Vall adolid had the same freaks in their noddles: But those of
Burgos could not be kept within any bounds, assaulting the Lord Constables
house, environed the house of the Duchess Donna Maria de Tabar, shooting down
part of its Tower, whereby they entered, and sought for her; but she saved her
self by hiding. They ran to Garci Ruiz de la Mota's house (who had been
Commissioner, and was Brother to the Bishop of Badajos and Palencia) resolving
to kill him; but he saved himself by flight; yet they burned his house, with a
great number of Deeds, Charters, and other Papers belonging to the King and
Kingdom. Nor did they spare the consuming of his richest goods and movables;
as fine Linen, rich Tapistry-hangings, etc. with all which they made a great
Bonfire to satisfy their fury, and make their worships sport. And to continue
the Frolic, they burned down the House of Garci Jofre, one of the Emperors
Harbingers; and not content with this, they took the poor fellow, clapped him in
Prison, where with blows and thrusts they soon dispatched him; and being dead,
they tied his feet together, so dragged him to his own door, cutting and pinking
his body with their swords all the way: and thus drawing it through all the
streets, at last they hanged it up with his head downwards.

Madrid was also possessed with the same Devil of Rebellion, seizing upon all the
Arms, and setting Guards to maintain their own whims all the City over: and in
like manner rose up Siguenza, Salamanca, Murcia, Illescas; and as mad as the
rest was Guadalajara, who not being able to get their Commissioners into their
Clutches, rased down their houses; the foundations of which they plowed up, and
sowed with salt, saying that, -- In regard they were traitors houses, they must
be salted, lest they should infect the rest with their infidelity. --

Cardinal Adrian and his Council having considered of these distempers,
resolved by punishing of Segovia to terrify the rest: to which purpose they
sent as Judge Ronquillo, a famous Lawyer in those times, with a thousand horse
for his security; and if the City denied him entrance, and to be judged by him,
to make his way by sorce. The Segovians upon this fortify themselves, and make
resistance, being assisted by those of Toledo, Avila, and Madrid, with other
inferior Towns, whereby several skirmishes were performed. The Cardinal, upon
this, orders Antonio de Fonceca (Captain General of the Kingdom) to go to the
assistance of Ronquillo. Fonceca marches first to Medina del Campo, where the
Emperors Artillery lay, with them to strengthen himself; but the people
denying to deliver them, they fell to blows, in which exploit, nine hundred
houses with the Monastery and Library of St. Francis were accidentally burned
to the ground, and Fonceca beaten off.

The Citizens of Medina enraged at the burning of their houses, flew to Arms,
elected one Bobadilla, a furious Cloth-worker their Captain, under whose
conduct they presently destroyed all they could meet with, that had any
familiarity or kindness with Fonceca; against whom they sent their complaints
to the other Cities.

At this, the Citizens of Valladolid fell stark mad, ran in a fury to Pedro de
Portillo's house (the chief and richest there) which they plundered and pulled
down; the like they did to General Fonceca's house, and the habitation of
Alonso Ninno de Castro their chief Judge; and turned out of their City Don
Alonso Enriquez, Bishop of Osma, and other Gentlemen, whom they supposed would
not be partakers with them: the rest they made take an Engagement or Covenant
to their Holy Commonalty.

The City Cuenz^ also declares for the people, and suffers themselves to be
governed by one Calahorra, and a Bridle maker, as Salamanca and Segovia were by
two Skinners; and of the same humors were Toro and Ciudad-Roderigo, and other
places; insomuch, that of eighteen Cities in Castile which had votes in
Parliament, Toledo, Madrid, Guadalaxara, Soria, Murcia, Cuenza, Segovia, Avila,
Salaman^a, Toro, Zamara, Leon, Valladolid, Burgos, Ciudad-Roderigo.
fifteen were risen for the Commonalty. Besides, the people of Murcia had risen
and killed their Governor, a Judge, and one of the Sheriffs, with other
persons, and threatened the same to any that should be sent to try or question
them for so doing: And Sevilla it self was running the same risk, but that it
seems, the Nobility, the Veynte y Quatras, the fou^ and twenty, or Aldermen.
four and twenty, and other Justices at that time were too loyal to be
persuaded to such wickedness, and so presently quelled their Tumults.

The Emperor being at Lovain in Brabant, journeying for his Imperial Crown,
received news of these Tumults in Spain, which did not a little perplex him;
and thinking by fair means to reduce them to obedience, he wrote gracious
Letters to all the Cities, offering them pardon, desiring them for the future
to be peaceable, promising to return shortly into Spain amongst them: Commands
that the Subsidy which was granted him by the Commissioners at the Groyne,
should not be exacted from the Cities that were Loyal, or would be so: That no
Office should be conferred but upon the Natives. But these gracious Letters
gained nothing upon the people, who were now resolved over shoes over boots.

And the better to carry on their contrived Sedition, they appoint a meeting of
the Commissioners of their Cities, to be held at Avila in Old Castile, and
there to sit and act for the good of their Holy Commonalty; and this Meeting or
Conventicle they called THE HOLY JVNTA or ASSEMBLY. This was held July 29.
1520. La santa Junta. ^
in the Chapter of the Cathedral Church; and in the middle of the Commissioners
was placed a little Form, whereon sat a certain Cloth-worker, named Pinilles,
with a wand in his hand, whose Office was such, that no Commissioner durst
offer to speak one word, till by pointing to him with his stick, he had given
him the sign.

But this Junta was presently after removed to Tordesillas in Leon: for Juan de
Padilla having marched out of Toledo with two thousand men, which were
increased with other forces from Madrid and other places, and relieved Segovia
by making Ronquillo retreat; he then marched to Medina del Campo, where he was
joyfully received, and where Bobadilla (the forementioned Cloth-worker) in a
furious zeal whisks out his sword, and without any Authority, at one blow cut
off Gil Nieto (an Alderman) his head, and had his body thrown out of the
Regimiento, or Casa del Regimiento; The house where the Citizens meet about the
Cities affairs.
Town Hall Windows upon the Soldiers Pikes which stood below; the reason was,
he conceal^d the coming of Fonceca, which he knew of.

From Medina, Padilla marches to Tordesillas, where the Queen Mother had been
kept up for several years, being held indisposed for any business by reason of
her cracked brain. To her he goes, and soothes her up so cunningly, that she,
poor woman, undertook to give him the Command of Captain General in that
Kingdom; and so she joined her self to the Junta, which she commanded to adjurn
to Tordesillas, which accordingly was joyfully obeyed; and here they sat with
her for the future.

The Emperor thinking to quiet all, by taking away their exception from the
Cardinal who was a stranger, orders Don Inigo de Velasco, Lord high Constable
of Castile and Leon, and Don Fadrique Enriquez, Lord Admiral of Castile to be
in joint Commission and Authority with Adrian in the Government; but all would
not do.

The Junta having now the weak-brain'd Queen Mother at their disposal, looked
upon themselves as great enough to act any thing; so they turn out those who
were about her that favored the Emperor. Then they send a Dominican Friar to
Valladolid, who from the Pulpit of St. Maria la Mayor, persuaded the people to
seize upon the Kings Council there, declaring it unfitting that they should sit
in opposition to the holy Junta: the Citizens at this were a little divided;
however they concluded, that they themselves would not lay hands on the
Council-Royal (being of a dangerous consequence,) but if the Junta, (which they
would not dis^bey) had a desire to have them, they might send their own
Soldiers, and should have liberty to seize upon them. From which time several
of the Kings Council began to steal away.

The Junta informed of this answer, sent Dr. Alonso de Medina a Francisean, who
being come to Valladolid, desired the people to meet him at the Monastery of
St. Francis, where, in the Pulpit, he renewed the old request, that the Royal
Council might be seized on, and sent prisoners to Tordesillas; telling them,
that there were soldiers without the City to act it. To this the Citizens
agreeing, the next day Juan de Padilla enters the City with above a thousand
men, seized on all the Council he could find, with the Books of the Treasury,
and the Great Seal, all which he carried to Tordesillas: Yet would not the
Citizens let Cardinal Adrian be affronted, whom they looked upon as an holy and
good man. But he considering the unconstancie of the people, thought good to
consult his own safety; for which endeavoring once publicly to withdraw
himself, the Citizens in a tumultuous manner stayed him, and forced him to
retire to his Lodgings, whence not long after in a disguise he October. 20. 1520.
stole, and went to Medina de Rioseco in Leon, whither many of the Nobility
went with their forces to wait upon him; by which means he had gathered
together a considerable Army, and so was resolved for the future to put the
trial to the Sword.

In the mean time the Junta was not idle, having over-perswaded the crasie
Queen Mother Donna Juana to head and countenance them, and appointed her a
Council out of themselves to advise her, which got them no small repute amongst
the vulgar, which was pressed home to the purpose by the seditious Friars. And
having thus constituted themselves Supreme, they sent a large Dated at
Tordesillas, October. 20. 1520
Paper of Propositions (some of them very extravagant and pernicious) to the
Emperor, to have him declare them as perpetual Laws: but Charles needed
neither such Governors nor Constitutions.

And now the sword must decide the quarrel; the Junta raise men on all hands,
seiseth upon the Kings Revenues to pay them; Proclaim the Lord high Constable,
and the rest of the Royalists Traitors, and all their Estates forfeited; wrote
Letters to all the Cities and Towns of their faction, to encourage them to
Arms; nay, and sent to Don Manuel King of Portugal, thinking to gain him to
their party. They chose Whom they now began to call Duke of Medina Sidonia, to
which he pretended.
Don Pedro Geron, one of a noble Family, and of great Relations, for their
Captain General; which did not a little displease Juan de Padilla. Giron
marches presently to Valladolid, which receives him with joy, and takes an
Oath to assist the Junta for King and Commonalty (like our Covenanting
distinction King and Parliament:) the refusers of this Engagement, were
declared Malignants, and laid open to Punishment.

Before we proceed any further, let us take a short view of the troubles in the
Kingdom of Valencia. Before the Emperors departure, the people there began to
despise the Nobility, and to confederate together: It happened that in the City
Valencia, two Moors turned Christians.
Morisco's belonging to Don Ramon de Cardona, passing along the streets, the
Tradesmen began to jeer them; and upon a reply, fell upon one of them, whom
they murdered; and had acted the same Tragedy on the other, but that he was
rescued by one Diego Pisador: which prevention, at last so enraged the people,
that they fell upon Pisador, pursued him to his house, assaulted it, so that he
thinking to take sanctuary in St. Nicholas Church, they seized upon him, and
killed him with their daggers. Having thus ran into mischief, they proceed, and
rescue a fellow from execution, though justly condemned for very heinous
crimes. They despised all Justice and Magistrates; scorned and flouted at all
Noble and Gentlemen, whom (like our Levellers) they intended to root out and
destroy all the Kingdom over; which occasioned a Hat-makers wife in St.
Catherines street, seeing some Gentlemen go by, bid her Children look at them:
the boys desiring a reason, she replied, -- Porque quando se ais g^andes,
podais dezir que vistes los Cavalle^os, Pru. Sandoval, l. 6. 20. Part 1. ^
Because when you come to manhood, you may say that you have seen Gentlemen.

The confederate Rabble chose one Sorolla, a Cloth-worker, for their Captain,
an impudent base fellow; and then the better to carry on their mischief, they
framed this Plot: Sorolla was to hide himself in his house, and they were to
report about, that Don Diego de Mendosa the Viceroy, either had or was going to
hang him. This report being cunningly spread through the City, the people grew
mad, flew to their Arms, and so marched with Drums and Colors to Mendosa's
house, crying out, Let the Viceroy dye, if he deliver us not Sorolla. --
Mendosa defended himself all day long, and by chance was thus preserved from
their fury. A good woman by hap espying Sorolla in his house, went and told it
to the Bishop of Segorbe, who hastes to Sorolla's house, which he caused to be
broke open, and the villain found, had him set on a Mule, himself riding by on
another, and so they rode to the Viceroy's house, to undeceive the people; who
seeing him thus alive, raised their Siege and Battery, which had continued all
day and most of the night. This plot not fadging against the Viceroy, they gave
out that he was raising men to punish their insolences; upon which the people
besiege his house again; which forced him to send his Lady out of the City, and
steal out himself; all the Nobles and Gentry doing the like with their Families
for their own security: whose houses the villains pulled down or burned, and
plundered all they could lay their hands on; went to the Kings Custom house,
broke the Records, took away the Books, defied the Emperor, appointed XIII. to
govern them; and for the General of their Armies, chose Juan Caro a
Sugar-baker. The City Xativa, the Marquisate of Helche, Alacante, and Orihucla
run into the same Rebellion; the latter choosing for their Lord and Governor
one Palomares, a poor Serving-man. And now the Kingdom of Valencia seemed to be
overrun by a gang of Rebels: but they had a notable shock at a place, to this
day called The Field of slaughter, where they left above 5000 of their
frateraity dead on the ^^or.

After this they chose for their Captain one Vincent Perez, a Fellow whose
trade was to gather up Acorns; but their chief General of all was ore Or John
of Bilbo.
Juan de Vilvao, who made them believe that he was Do^ Juan, the only Son to
Fernando and Isabella, King and Queen of Castile and Arragon, and so the true
heir to their Crowns; though that Prince dyed young at Salamanca. However the
giddy people put so much credit to him, that they swear Allegiance to him as
their King, magnifying him as their Redeemer, calling of him the El Encubicito.
Disguised man, and one sent from God to their relief.

But what this Impostor was, take thus. He was the Son of a Jew, and was
carried by his Father into Barbary the same year that the Jews were driven out
of Castile. A Biscan Merchant, called Juan de Bilbao, met with him on ship
board 1512, as he was trading to Oran on the Coasts of Barbary, and finding him
to write and read well, and speak several Languages, as Spanish, Arabic and
Hebrew, took him for his Factor. The fellow calling himself from his Masters
name Juan de Bilbao, with him he lived four years, till 1516 he turned him away
for being too familiar with his Wife.

The Corregidor, or Mayor of Oran, not knowing the sault, entertained him for
his Steward. This Mayor of Oran being a young man kept privately a little
wanton in his house, to whom this Fellow showed much affection and Courtship;
but she being trusty to her Master, tells him all, and that he also persuaded
her to witchcraft. Upon this the Corregidor has him imprisoned, and upon a
Market Day set upon an Ass, and so whipped through all the principal streets of
the City, to the amazement of the people, who had a good opinion of him, so
cunningly did he carry himself.

Being thus banished Oran, he returns for Spain, lands upon the Coasts of
Valencia (just in these distractions) under the name of Don Henrique Manrique
de Ribera; and here he behaved himself so cunningly, taking hold of the
opportunity, that at last he made the people believe that he was their true
King, and for such they acknowledged him.

He carried his business politickly, kept correspondence with diverse Cities in
Arragon and Catalonia, and might have given a main stroke for the whole
Kingdom, had not the valiant and loyal Marquess of Cenete, and Don Pedro
Faxardo the Governor or Lord Lieutenant [Adelantado Mayor] of the Kingdom of
Murcia, with other noble Cavaliers, by their valor and industry put a stop to
his carreer. The chiefest loss to the Rebels was in Valencia it self, where
Vicente Periz had almost carried the whole City: but the Marquess here carried
himself so cunningly, that he out-braved the Rebel, making most of his
followers disband and retire to their own dwellings. This day and plot was so
happy to that City, that to this time, it is called the Thursday of Vicente
Periz: yet Periz received fresh supplies from Juan de Bilvao, with which he
grew so hardy, that he fought de Cenete in the very streets of the City, though
to his own ruin, being beaten, himself taken, and his head presently struck
off. After which the Impostor Kingling John of Bilbao was also taken by the
Marquess, the nineteenth of May 1522. who, according to his desert, was drawn,
hanged and quartered, and his head stuck upon a Lance. After which, Valencia
began to be more quiet, and wholly submitted themselves upon the return of the
Emperor Charles. And thus much, in brief, for the Rebellion of the Kingdom of
Valencia; not to tell of all their Church-robbings, Plunderings, Burnings,
Devastations, and Factions even in the very Cloisters and Monasteries
themselves, insomuch that one party in the same Covent would pray to God for
the King, whilst the other prayed as heartily for the Rebels.

But now to return to the Junta in Castile, we find their Army (consisting of
seventeen thousand foot, besides good store of Horse and Artillery) (b) marched
into the field, with an intent to a Nov. 23. 1520,
fight the Imperialists lying about Rioseca.

One of the most furious sticklers for the Junta against his King, was Don
Antonio de Acunna, Bishop of Zamora (one who had formerly been honored with an
Embassy into France.) He was threescore years old, but lively and vigorous,
and excellent in handling his Arms; he had above four hundred Priests under his
command in this Rebellion, well armed and stout, himself always charging at the
head of them, crying out, Here my Priests! And if he saw but any of them (c)
handle or read on his Breviary b L. de Mayerne, Hist. Genesis d'Espaigne, l. 27.
Grimston, page 961.
or Prayer book, he would cudgel them for it.

Between the two Armies there were now and then some skirmishes; but the
Royalists thought it no wisdom to put it to a main Battle, their enemies being
double the number; besides, they had some underhand dealings with some
Chieftains of the Commonalty, which made the Rebels too negligent, and retire
into Quarters: Upon which opportunity, the Imperialists on a sudden marched to
Tordesillas, which with the loss of some blood they took; and here the Bishops
Priests fought it out desperately.

Tordesillus thus taken, the Nobility waited upon the Queen Mother, who
received them kindly, not that she cared how things went, being indisposed in
her senses, from understanding what was either good or bad for the public,
though the Junta, to delude the Commonalty, gave out that she was not only
well in her wits, but fit for Government, and that she had taken it upon her,
and acknowledged their interest; and accordingly they acted all things in her
name, not mentioning the King. Here some of the Junta were taken, others
escaped; and the honor of this exploit was justly thrown upon the Earl of Haro
the Kings General.

The taking of Tordesillas did not a little terrify Valladolid, whither the
remaining part of the Junta fled and sat in Commission: and the people now
growing jealous of Don Pedro Giron, chose Juan de Padilla for their Captain
General, who prosecuted the Rebellion more vigorously then the former.

And now Biscay and Guipuscoa ran a gadding into the same mischief; nor would
the Province of Alava be behind; in which Rebellion Don Pedro de Ayala, Earl of
He was also E^rl of the valleys of Ayala, Quartango and San Milan.
Salvatierra had a main stroke, being of a proud humor, and distasted with his
Coun^ess Madama Margarita, whom the Court favored; and he went the nearest way
to work, by getting the Friars to countenance his party and interest.

The Royalists hearing of his Rebellion, surprised Ampudia, or Fuente Empudia,
belonging to the Earl; but this they kept not long, the Commonalty retaking it:
at this assault, the Bishop of Zamora is reported thus to have encouraged his
men, -- So, my boys, get up nimbly, fight and dye courageously, and let my
soul go at a venture along with yours, since you dye in so just and holy an
Enterprise. -- A bold Rebel.

By this time, some of the Junta were willing to see their error, Juan de
Padilla, the Bishop of Zamora, and others, were stark mad against any such
thing: by which villainy, these two got such a love amongst the people, that
they protested they would serve under none but them, hooting and crying along
the streets of Valladolid, -- Let Juan de Padilla live, let the Bishop live;
long may Juan de Padilla live, who takes away the Taxes of Castile: -- we will
have none but Juan de Padilla and the Bishop. -- And the truth was, these two
were as fit for their turns, as a Rope for a Traitor. As for the Bishop, he
questioned not but to gain well by these broyls. The Sea of Toledo being void
by the death of Guillermo de Crouy, Nephew to Xeures, he made himself
Archbishop of it, went to the City, was nobly received by the people, who
placed him in the Archiepiscopal Chair, and gave him good store of Money and
Church-plate wherewith to pay his S^uldiers. But for all this, he is neither
held nor reckoned amongst the Archbishops of Toledo, being but an Intruder.

To tell all the Murders, Rapines, Sacriledges in this Rebellion, all the
Tumults in the Old Castile is divided into VII Merindades, viz. of Bu^gos,
Valladelid, Calah^r^a, Osma, Seg via, Avila and Soria. The Kingdom of Navar is
divided into V Merindades: But here Old Castile is only intended.
Merindades, the burning of about three thousand people in the Church of Mora;
and to relate the diverse over^ures they had for a general peace, would be too
tedious.

In short, the people were mad against any Treaty: the Junta upon an erected
Scaffold in the chief Marketplace in Valladolid, adorned with rich Hangings,
with Drums, Trumpets, the Kings at Arms with Maces, Coats, etc. March 17. 1521.
proclaimed the Admiral, Constable, the General, and others for the King, to be
Traitors against the Queen Mother, and the Holy Commonalty. And the people were
so mad with delays, that they began to threaten the Holy Junta it self, if they
were not more vigorous in the War, and laid aside all thoughts of Treaty; being
resolved to put all upon the fortune of a Battle. And in truth, the City of
Valladolid, and some other places for the Commonalty had suffered very much,
all Trade being spoiled, Corn very dear, their moneys all gone in paying the
Soldiers, and no safety for any without the venturing of blows.

And now the fatal day drew near. Juan de Padilla with his Army was in
Torrelobaton (where he had trifled away too much time) The Royalists march
toward him, thinking either to besiege him, or force him to battle, before he
could get any more succor; the Imperialists being toward 10000 men, and the
Commonalty at that place almost nine thousand.

Padilla informed of the design, was resolved not to be besieged; so, drew out
his men, intending for Toro, there to stay till more succors came to him. The
Royalists having notice of his private march, mend their pace; now and then
skirmishing them, till they come near to Villalar (a Town in Leon between
Medina de Reoseco and Tordesillas) where they fell upon them in three several
bodies; and presently putting them to the rout, the pursuit being several
miles, in which many of the Commonalty were slain.

This victory was gained on St. Georges day, the Imperialists word was Sancta
Maria y Carlos.
St. Mary and Charles, the Commonalty was Santjago, libertad.
St. James and Liberty. This was the ruin of the Rebellion, and the
restoration of the people to Peace and Loyalty. Here amongst others, where
taken their Captain General Juan de Padilla; Juan Bravo, Captain of the 6000
Commonalty, which formerly came from Segovia, Salamanca, and Avila; and
Francisco Maldenado, who now commanded the Salamanca forces: who had all their
heads cut off, and stuck upon several Nails over the place of Execution.

The Army of the Commonalty being thus routed, the Junta which was in
Valladolid sneaked away: The City it self submitting, which was graciously
pardoned, though they had been the chief maintainers of the Rebellion. And now
Medina del Campo, Palencia, Duennas Mota, and other Cities acknowledged their
faults.

But Toledo would be brought to no reason; the chief Incendiary of that City
being Donna Maria Pacheco Mendoza, Daughter to the Earl of Tendilla, and wife
to Don Juande Padilla (lately beheaded) a Lady of a daring and resolute spirit,
wherefore she was generally called The valiant woman (La Muger valerosa) and to
excite the Citizens to compassion, she made her Son be carried up and down the
streets on a Mule with a mourning hood and Cloak on, and a Streamer with the
Picture of her husband Padilla beheaded.

The Imperialists did not question, if they could either get her out of the
City, or to join with them, to reduce the place to his Majesty; to effect
which, they sent a Captain (who freely offered himself) with a few men
disguised thither: Being arrived at Toledo, he went directly to the Fort where
she was, desiring to speak with her: But the people having some notice of the
design, made an Alarm, and ran in great multitudes to the Castle, where
finding the Captain in discourse with her, they presently laid hands on him,
and flung him out of the high window; by which fall he was broke all to pieces.
This done, they cut the throats of all those who came along with him.

And now they resolve to fortify themselves against all attempts; filled their
stores full, took all the gold and silver plate out of the Cathedral Church,
which they coined; and they were not a little animated by the coming of the
French, who taking opportunity of these troubles, entered Navar, thinking to
regain that Kingdom; but all to no purpose: and so at last the Toledians were
brought to better terms, and received into mercy: Donna Maria Pacheco being
forced for her own safety, in a Country-womans disguise, riding upon an Ass
with some Geese in her hands, to escape out of the City, living the rest of her
days in Exile, and as some think dying in Portugal. And now for Example was the
house of Juan de Padilla pulled down to the ground, the foundation of it plowed
up and sowed with salt, that the soil where the Chieftain of so great troubles
and mischiefs had his birth and habitation, should not produce so much as grass
or weeds; and a Pillar was erected there, with an Inscription declaring the
manner of his life and death.

And now all is reduced to obedience, the Emperor returns to Spain, (having
received the Imperial Crown) and on a Scaffold covered with Cloth of Gold and
Silk, erected in the chief Marketplace in Valladolid, the Emperor himself
with his They are so called, whom the King gives leave to stand covered before
him. All Dukes in Spain are Grandes.
Grandees and Council about him; being there, Peace is October. 28. 1522.
proclaimed, and a general pardon granted, only some few excepted for example
sake.

But before we leave this story, let us see the end of one or two Chieftains;
the first shall be the Earl of Salvatierra, who made such Tumults in Alava. At
last being taken Prisoner, he was carried to Burgos, where he was let blood to
1504.
death; then carried to his grave, his feet hanging over the Bier with irons on
them, exposed to the public view.

This unfortunate Earl, whilst in prison, was brought to such poverty, (being
forsaken of all his Friends) that he had nothing ^^ eat but a poor mess of
Pottage, which one Leon Picardo a Do^^estick Servant and Painter to the Lord
high Constable sometimes brought him. His Son Don Athanasio de Ayala, then Page
to the Emperour^, out of a filial compassion, sold his Horse to buy his Father
the Earl Victuals; for which the Master of the Pages would have the young
Gentleman punished, and complained of him to the Emperor. Carlos calls Don
Athanasio to him, and asking him for his Horse, he presently answered, That he
sold him to buy Victuals for his Father: at which the Emperor was so far from
being displeased, that he forthwith commanded forty thousand A little Span^sh
coin of lets v^lue th^n ^ur English ^^^^ing, which the Spani^^^ commonly
account with.
Maravediz (which is about thirty pound English money) to be given him.

And now let us see the exit of Don Antonio de Acunna the furious and zealous
Bishop of Zamora, who seeing all his Confederates quelled, and so no safety for
him to stay in Spain, resolved to make France his refuge: For this purpose,
having in a disguise got as far as the Borders of Navar (at the same time that
the French entered) he was discovered and seized on by one Perote, at a village
called Villamediana, not far from Legronno; th^nce was carried to Navaretta,
not far from Najara in Rioscia, a little Province in Old Castile; after which
he was sent prisoner by the Emperors Order to Simancas in Leon.

The old Bishop having been here kept some time, at last consulted an escape.
To perform which, he one time cunningly conveyed a Brick into his Bag, wherein
he used to carry his Breviary, wherewith he knocked out the Governors brains,
that had the charge of him, as they were in discourse together by the
fireside. And so upon this opportunity might have made an escape, but that the
Governors Son discovering him, brought him back again, and carefully locked him
in his Chamber, without doing any thing else to him, although he had thus
basely murdered his Father; which was held and commended for a great piece of
wisdom and patience in the young Gentleman.

The Emperor informed of these his wicked Prancks, sent Judge Ronquillo (of
whom formerly) to sit on him; who condemned him, and caused him to be 1526.
strangled within the said Fort: and some report that he had him hung upon one
of the Pinacles of the Tower, to the end that he might be a spectacle and
memento to all that passed that way; but the Emperor was not pleased with such
Examples.

And thus much for these three years troubles in Spain, passing by some other
Tumults and uproars there both before and after these, as not of so general and
dangerous concern.

CHAP. III. The Plots in Scotland against King James VI.
HEre passing by the Excommunication of Ferdinand King of Hungary and Bohemia,
by Julius III. for the death of Friar George Martinusius, Bishop of Waradein,
and after Archbishop of Gran, and by the said Julius created Cardinal; a man
powerful in Arms, and noted for his great actions in Hungary. Which Friar
George (for so is he commonly called) is by 1551. Gi^l B^ai vita d^^ o^i^^ol^,
^^giunte a^le (...). p. (...), ^7^. 15^8.
some h^ld an honest man, whilst others accuse him of no less th^n or
under^^and-dealings with the Turks, into whose power they s^y ^e designed to
deliver up the Kingdom.

And passing by also the troubles the said Ferdinand I* received at h^s
Election into the Empire by the Resignation of his Brother Charles V, Pope Paul
IV rejecting him and his Title, alleging none to have power to resign, but
into his hands; and ^o be (and not the Electors) is to nominate; nor would he
at any time acknowledge him for Emperor, though upon his death his Succ^ssor,
Pius IV, willingly admitted him for a lawful Emperor: and what need Ferdinand,
or any other care whether the Roman Bish^p ^^nsented or no, it being no way
necessary, and the outside but a Complement? But leaving these and suchlike
Beyond Sea ^^^^res, let us come a little nearer home.

And first, if we look upon Scotland, we shall find it a Kingdom miserably
rent between two Factions, the Puritan and Popish. Of the insole^eies of the
first, I have elsewhere treated; nor can the latter excuse themselves from the
same crimes, if not worse, by endeavoring to betray their King and Country to
a foreign power and usurpation, as may appear by these following Observations.

Here we find Reigning King James VI, a Prince made wise and wary by the
several troubles he had run through. The Span^a^^^ preparing his great Armado
to invade England, several 158^.
P^^^^t^ and Jesuits went into Scotland to get those people to assi^ the
design. And amongst the rest, the Lord Maxwell was (...) a^^ive, coming out of
Spain, and landing at Kirkudbright Gallo^ay, gathered together some men; but
they were presently ^^pp^^st, and himself taken and imprisoned. The Lord
Bothwell (who troubled himself not much with this or that Religion, having no
ends but interest) the Admiral of that Kingdom, had also secretly listed many
Soldiers, giving out they were for the safety of the Nation. Amongst others
also Colonel He afterward lived a Pensi^^^r in Spain, where he began the
Foundation of a Scotch Semenarie, intending to make his bastard Hugh Sempill
(whom he trained up with the Je^uites) the Rect^^ o^ it: He was living there
about the beginning of King Charles I his Reign; and was very mallepert in the
designs of his Spanish match. James Wadsworth his English-Spanish Pilgrim,
cap. 7. page 61. Edit. 2.
Sempil, who for some time had resided with the Duke of Parma (having betrayed
the Town of Lire to the Spaniards) landed at Lies, with an intent to farther
the plots; but he, by the mistrust of some papers, was seized on by Sir John
Carmichael Captain of the Kings Guard; but being rescued by the Earl of
Huntley, escaped the law.

But the hopes of the Romanists were quite blown away by the overthrow of the
Spanish Fleet; yet the Duke of Parma chears them up again, by telling them of
another Army and Fleet to be set out next Spring. This good news he sends by
Robert Bruce to the Earl of Huntly, to be communicated to the rest of that
Faction; the chief of which was the Earl of Arrol, the Lord Maxwell (who called
himself Morton) the Earl of Crawford, the Lord Claude Hamilton, and suchlike.
And a little after, Parma sent over ten thousand Crowns by John Chesholme.

Thus encouraged, (and also thrust on by Father Hay, Father Creighton, and
other Jesuits) they resolved to undertake some noble act, the better to credit
themselves with Spain and Parma. And nothing is thought better then to seize on
the Kings person. In this plot there was Montross, Bothwell, Crawford, Arrol,
Huntley; the Lairds of Kinfawns, of Fintrie, and others. The design was laid to
meet all at the Quarry-holes between Lies and Edenbrough, thence to go to It Is
sometimes also called the Abbey. It Is the Kings Court, at the East End of
Cannygate at Edinborough.
Halyrood house, to seize on the King, to kill the Chancellor and Treasurer,
and then they need not fear to carry all as they pleased. But Huntley coming
before the rest, and suspected, is imprisoned; upon which the rest retire.
Montross and Crawford submit and ask pardon, whilst Bothwell and Arrol are
declared Traitors for refusing to come in upon summons.

Huntley is by the Kings favor set at liberty, upon promise to be quiet for
the future; but in his going home in the North, he meets with Crawford, who
join together again, and fall upon the Treasurer; then having joined themselves
with the Earl of Arrol, they raise what forces they can, and enter Aberdeen:
The King upon notice, marches against them; upon which, the Lords are
discouraged, retreated, and divided one from another at the This day and action
is called, The Raid of the Brig of Dee.
Bridge of Dee. The King thus victorious, the Confederate Lords seeing no other
safety, submit themselves to the Kings Mercy and Trial. They are accused,

For practicing with Jesuits and Seminary Priests, and the receiving of
Spanish Gold to hire Soldiers to disturb the Kingdom. For entering into Bond
and Covenant with the Earls of Arrol and Montross, and others, and treasonably
to have surprised (b) Perth ^ Now better known by the name of St. Johnstons.
with intent to keep it against the King. For conspiring to take the King
prisoner at Halyrud-house, and to kill his Servants and Counselors. For
besieging the house of Kirkhill, firing it, and forcing the Treasurer, the
Master of Glammis, to yield himself. For summoning the Subjects by Proclamation
falsely in the Kings name, falsely giving out that he was a prisoner, and
desired them to set him at liberty. For marching to the Bridge of Dee, to fight
and invade the King. For taking the Kings Herald at Arms in Aberdeen, spoiling
him of his Coat and Letters, when he was to proclaim them. And that Bothwell
for his part, had hired Soldiers, as well strangers as others, with an intent
to seize on Lies in the Kings absence.
Upon trial, they are found guilty, but the sentence by the Kings favor and
warrant was suspended; in the mean time they were imprisoned, Bothwell in
Tantallon, Crawford in Blackness, and Huntley in Edinborough Castle.

Now for the better and clearer discovery of their plots and designs for the
King of Spain against their own King and Country, take these following Letters.

Mr. Robert Br^ce (the chief Agent) his Letter to the Duke of Parma, Governor
in the Netherlands for the King of Spain.
My LORD,
MR. Ch^sholme arrived in this Country five days after his departure from you,
and with requisite diligence came to the Earl of Huntley, in his own house at
Dunferme^^ng, where having presented to him your Highness Letters of the 13 of
October, he declared amply unto him the credit given him in Charge, conformable
to the tenor of the Letters from your Highness: wherein they perceived your
Highness great humanity and affection to the advancement of the glory of God in
this Country, with other consolations most convenient to moderate the dolor
and displeasure conceived in the hearts of the Catholics, by reason of the
success of your Viz. the Spanish Fleet, 1588.
Army, contrary to their hope and expectation.

Also some days after, (as the commodity offered to me to receive the money)
the said Chesholme delivered to me six thousand two hundred threescore and
twelve Crowns of the sun, and three thousand seven hundred Spanish Pistolets:
and likewise has carried himself in all his actions since very wisely, and as
becomes a man of God; chiefly, when (upon the suspicion conceived of his sudden
return) the King sent to take him.

I shall behave my self by the Grace of God (in keeping and distributing of the
money last sent, and of that which rests yet of the sum) according to your
Highness prescription; and as I ought to answer to God in conscience, and to
your Highness in credit, and to the whole world in the Reputation of an honest
man: and will manage it in such sort, that by the grace of God, there shall be
fruit drawn thereof pleasant to your Highness. It is true, that I find (as all
others would do, that would enterprise such a charge here) my self involved in
great difficulties: For on the one part I am in great danger of the Heretics,
and them of the Faction of England, by reason of the open Profession that I
make of the Cath^lick Religion, and of the suspicion that the last has of my
secret practices and dealings against them. On the other part, I have much ado
to moderate the Appetite that some Catholic Lords have, to have the money
presently, for the hope which they give of some pretended occasions, which will
never fall out as they promise. The Earl of Huntley made instance to have the
third part of the sum which was sent hither, as soon as it was delivered to me;
but he has not touched, nor shall he touch hereafter a halfpenny, but upon
good tokens. I have paid him in the mean time with inexpugnable reasons,
wherewith in the end he is contented.

I beseech your Highness, by the first Letter it shall please you to write into
these parts to the Catholic Lords, to remove one error from Huntley, Lord
Maxwell (alias Mortoun) and Lord Claud Hamilton.
three of them, who have written in the name of the rest: which moves them to
think, that because they were the first who made offer of their service to the
Catholic King, that all the money which comes hither, should be parted into
three, and immediately after the arrival thereof delivered to them, without
giving any part to others; who besides them, are a great number at the service
of the Catholic King and you; and who are resolved to hazard all according to
their power, for the advancement of this Cause: Nor will they in any sort
depend on the other, in the accepting of the Treasure that comes from your
liberality, but acknowledge it as coming directly from your Highness, to whom
only they will be bound and obliged, and not to the other three; of whom the
Earl (q) Mortoun has hitherto contented himself with reason: As b Lord Mazwell.
also the Earl of Huntley has never shown himself subject to money, but since
he has been induced by the third, to wit, my Lord Claude Hamilton his Uncle,
who is somewhat covetous of gain, and thought under such pretext to make his
profit.

The said Earl of Huntley is constrained to remain at Court: he is fallen from
his constancy in his outward profession of the Catholic Religion; partly for
having lost all hope of your support, before the returning of the said
Chesholme, because of his long stay there; partly by the persuasion of some
Politics; partly to avoid the perils imminent to all them that call themselves
Catholics; partly to keep himself in the favor of his King, who pressed him
greatly to subscribe to the Confession of the Heretics, and to be at League
with England. But for all this, his heart is no whit alienated from our Cause;
for he has always a good soul, although he has not such vigor to persevere
and execute so as is requisite in so great an enterprise: But they may help the
defects, by joining with him a man of Credit, resolute to assist him; as we
have advised to do, since the Baron of David Graham Lord of Fintrie. In
Scotland, the Barons were either Great or Small; of the latter were Knights and
Lairds, and none were such formerly but those who held Lands of the King in
Capite, and had power of life and death; but now every one will be a Lord, as
in England an Esquire, forsooth.
Fintrie is put in custody by the King in the Town of Dundee, so that he durst
not go out of the Gates thereof, under the pain of a great sum, until occasion
may be offered to depart the Country, within the limited time. And I by the
Kings commandment am forbiden to come near the said Earl, because they have
attributed to the said Lord of Fintrie and me, his constancy in the Catholic
Religion, and his absence from Court against the Kings will. i. e. Lord of
Fintrie.
His securement has somewhat hindered our course, and permits me not to move
him, as it has pleased you to command me, and as I desire, to dispose of the
money jointly with me. So that for the supplying of his want, I have associated
to the same end a very honest and wise man, called Father William Creichtoun
Jesuit, who was detained some years in the City of In the Tower of London.
London, after he was taken upon the Sea coming hitherwards from France.

Likewise I shall help my self by the prudence of Sir James Chesholme, eldest
brother to the said John who brought the money from your Highness; for he is a
man confident, wise, one of our part, and very little suspected. In the mean
time, one part of the money is in the principal house of my Lord Levingston, a
very Catholic Lord: the other parthere in Edingborough, in surety enough to
help as it shall need the Catholic Lords, who will come hither presently, to
resist the designs of them of the English Faction, which think to remain at
Court with forces, to order all things according to their fancies. As for the
like sum, or greater, which your Highness intents to send hither, it would be
very expedient that it were very soon sent hither, secretly to help the
necessity that may fall out, and to cause things to incline to our side, when
they are in Balance, as there is great appearance they will be by the occasion
aforesaid. and in case that necessity requires no distribution, the said sum
shall be kept and reserved to better occasions, or till the arrival of your
forces in this Island.

There is suspicion, as also Arguments probable enough, that Thomas Tyrie, who
has brought hither your Highness Letters to our King, has not behaved himself
according to his duty; for he has accommodated himself in his behavior, more
of the affection of our S^r J^hn Maitland.
Chancellor (who is of the faction of England, and abuses the credit he has
with the King) then according to the instructions given him. He has not
presented nor made mention to the King of Colonel Simpills letter, whereof I
have caused the Copy to be presented to his Majesty by the Earl Bothwell, as if
it had been sent to him with another of the said Colonels to himself, which he
received from Thomas Tyrie at his arrival, who has reported to the said
Chancellor, as that Seigneur Don D^n Bernardino de Mend^za the Spanish
Ambassador in France to carry on the Spanish interest and League against the
French King.
Bernardino spoke to him in Paris, to the disadvantage of the Chancellor. Also
he has reported to the King, that my Lord He means Mr William Chesholme, Uncle
to Sir Jame^ and Mr. John.
Bishop of Dumblane, being returned thither, spoke to your Highness and to
others many things to the great prejudice of his The King.
Highness: And it is believed also, that he is the cause of the suspicion which
was conceived of the coming of the said John Chesholme newly to the said
Bishop. However it be, the other reports aforesaid which he has made, have not
served to conciliate, but to alienate the affection of the King, of the
Chancellor, and many other Heretics, from the said Seigneur Don Bernardino,
the said Bishop and Catholics here that have to do with them.

As for my self, although I speak not willingly to the disadvantage of any
whatsoever, chiefly of them whom I have recommended, as I did the said Thomas
Tyrie to the said Don Bernardino, yet I will prefer the love of the truth to
men, and would not by concealing thereof, bring prejudice to the common good,
nor to the fidelity that the one owes to the other; and especialy to that we
owe all to the King of Spain, and your Highness, to whom I am presently
servant, particularly addicted by the obligation of five hundred Crowns of The
Scotch calls it -- 500 Crowns of ^e^il.
fee, and forty for monthly entertainment, which it has pleased your Highness
to give me freely in the name of the King of Spain, not being required for my
part, nor other thing for my particular to this present: By reason whereof I am
the more bound to give your Highness most humble thanks, and to endeavor my
self to deserve by my most humble and faithfal service, as well the said
entertainment as the recompense it has pleased your Highness to promise me of
your grace and favor. The said gift of your liberality, came well for my
purpose, seeing by reason of the danger of my person, it behooved me to augment
my ordinary train for my greater surety; which I was not able longer to have
born out without help. For from all the Lords of Scotland, I have not retained
but a part only of the money, which I spent traveling, for the advancement of
this Cause in Spain with his Catholic Majesty, and with your Highness in the
Low Countries: As for the four hundred Crowns employed for the deliverance of
Colonel Simpill out of prison, I have put it in Count with the residue which I
disbursed of the first sum, according as it has pleased your Highness to
command me.

The Earl of Morton, to whom I have given consolation by writing in prison*
has instantly pray^d me also by writing to remember his most affectionate care
to your Highness finding himself greatly honored, by the care it pleased you
to have of him. By the grace of God, he is no more in danger of his life by way
of Justice, it being impossible for his enemies to prove against him any thing
which they had supposed in his accusation: as also the Kings affection not so
far alienate from him, as it has been heretofore: And in case he were in
danger, or that it were requisite for the good of our Cause presently to
deliver him, we can at any time get him out of prison: However, in the mean
time we wait the Kings pleasure toward his liberty, o^^ly to avoid all pursuit
that they would make, if we deliver him by extraordinary means. When in the
Kings Name they offered him his liberty, if he would subscribe the Confession
of the Heretics faith; he answered, He would not do it for the Kings Crown,
nor for an hundred thousand lives, if he had them to loose; and has offered to
confound the Ministers by public disputation. I shall solicit the Lords his
friends to procure of the King his liberty very soon; for he imports more to
the good of our Cause, then any of the rest, by reason of his Forces, which are
near England, and the principal Town of Scotland, and the ordinary Residence of
our King; as also he is a Lord the most resolute, constant, and of greatest
execution of any of the Catholics.

It is no small marvel (considering the means the Heretics have to hurt us,
and their worldly wits so far passing ours* and their evil will and intention
against us) that me subsist. Truly, we cannot but attribute the effect thereof
to God, who [when the certain news of the returning of the The Spaenish Armado
being beat, a great part of them fled No^h wards, round about Scotland, and so
^eturn'd home by Ireland.
Army of Spain by the back of Ireland, was dispersed through the Country; and
the Heretics of the Faction of England triumphed, and the constancy in the
outward profession of the Earl of Huntley and others was alter'd] caused the
Earl of Archibald Deuglas Earl of Ang^s dyed at Sme^^ near Dalkeith, Jaly 1588
supposed by witchcraft or other evil means.
Angus to dye, who was the chief of the English Faction. And the same time grew
some dissentions amongst the Heretics, by reason of some Offices which some
pretended to usurp above others at Court. And by the instant prayers, and
holyperswasions of two Fathers Jesuits, converting to our holy faith two
Heretic Earls of the chiefest of Authority amongst them; the one whereof is
called the Earl of Arrol, Constable of Scotland, converted by Father Edmund
Hay; the other called the Earl of Crawford, converted by the foresaid Father
William Creichton. They are both able and wise young Lords, and most desirous
to advance the Catholic Faith, and your enterprises in this Island; which they
are determined to testify to his Catholic Majesty and your Highness by their
own Letters, which by the Grace of God I will send by the first opportunity. In
the mean time they have required me to make you offer of their most humble and
most affectionate service, promising to follow whatsoever the same Jesuits and
I shall think good to be done, for the conservation of the Catholics, and to
dispose and faciliate the execution of your enterprises here, which they may do
more easily then they that are known to be Catholics, whose actions are ever
suspicious to the Heretics for their Religion, whereof these two Earls have
not yet made outward profession; but in that, as in the rest, they submit
themselves to our will, and to what we think most expedient.

The said Fathers of that company do profit very much in Scotland, and so soon
as any Lord or other person of Quality is converted by them, they forthwith
dispose and incline their affections to the service of the King of Spain and
your Highness, as a thing inseparably conjoined with the advancement of the
true Religion in this Country. If I had commandment from your Highness, I would
give them some little Alms in your name, to help them and eight others whereof
four are also Jesuits, and the other four are Seminary Priests of Pont a
Mousson in Lorrain, which are all the Ecclesiastics that produces so great
spiritual fruit in Scotland, and acquires to you here such augmentations of
your friends and servants.

After the parting of Colonel Sempill from hence, the Lords sent Letters with
the foresaid Father Creichton and other Gentlem^n after the Army of Spain, to
cause it land in this Country; but it had taken the way to Spain few days
before their arrival at the The (...), where ^^^i^hten thought to meet the Fleet
Islands, where it had refreshed it self, so that it was not possible for them
to attend on it. They of this Country, who are of the Faction of England, were
in a mavelous fear, during the uncertainty of the landing of the said Army,
and confessed plainlte, that if it had landed here, they had been utterly
overcome.

The Earl Bothwell, who is Admiral of Scotland, and as gallant a Lord as any is
in the Country, although he make profession of the new Religion, yet is he
extremely desirous to assist you against England, having waged and entertained
all this Summer (under pretense to order the Isles) some Troops of men of War,
which together with his ordinary Forces, should have joined with yours if they
had come hither. He suffers himself to be peaceably guided by me,
notwithstanding the diversity of our Religion; and has often times said, that
if the Catholics would give him surety to possess, after the restitution of
the Catholic Religion, two Viz. the Abbeys of Coldingham and of ^else.
Abbeys which he has, that he would even presently be altogether one of
yours. He intends to send Colonel Halkerstoun, to accompany certain Captains
and Gentlemen to Spain, and almost four hundred Soldiers all safe from the
shipwreck in our Isles. And because they are in great necessity, he is
purposed to furnish them with Ships, Fictuals, and other things necessary* to
testify thereby to the King of Spain the affection he has to do him most
humble and affectionate service. And if we think it good, has offered himself
to go to your Highness in the Low Countries, and by your advice afterward, do
the like to his Catholic Majesty of Spain. But hereupon we will advise what
is most expedient: If we may always be assured of him, he will be as profitable
for the good of our Cause as any Lord in Scotland, for he has great dependence
about this Town, which is the principal of Scotland, as also upon the Frontiers
of England. He has offered to maintain and defend me against all that would
attempt any thing against me.

We have chosen for every Catholic Lord, a Gentleman of the wisest and
faithfullest Catholics, and best beloved of their friends, to serve them in
Council, and to meet at all occasions, to resolve upon the most expedient
courses, that may concern the good of our Cause, according to the will and
intention of their Lords, who have obliged themselves to approve and execute
their resolutions, and in no wise to contradict the same: and by that means we
hope to proceed with greater security and effect, then we have done
heretofore. They shall never know any thing of our Intelligences there, nor our
final intentions; but according to the exigence of the affairs which shall be
in hand, and that superficiously, and without discovering our selves too much.

Your Highness shall understand by the particular Letters of the Lords, what
remains to be said to you by these presents: by reason whereof I will make an
end, most humbly kissing your Highness hands, and praying God to give you all
the good hope and felicity you desire.

Your Highness most humble and most affectionate Servant, Robert Bruce.
From Edinbrough this XXIV of January, M D LXXX X.

At the same time with this, some of the Nobility, in name of all the rest (as
this Letter also testifies) writ to Philip II King of Spain; which take as
follows.

SIR,
WE cannot sufficiently express by speech, the great grief we have conceived,
being frustrate of the hope we have so long had, to see (the last year) the
desired effects which we hoped of your Majesty's preparations. And our
displeasures have been so much the greater, that your Naval Armies should have
passed by so near us, without calling upon us, who expected the same with
sufficient Forces for the peaceable receipt and assistance thereof, against all
enemies in such sort, that it should have had no resistance in this Country,
and with our support should have given England work enough. At least, if it had
come in to refresh it, it had preserved a number of Vessels and Men, which we
know have perished near our Isles, and upon the Coasts of Ireland; and had
discovered an incredible num^er of friends, in full readiness to have run the
same fortune with it, in such sort, as we dare well affirm, it should not have
found half so many in England, for all that is spoken by the English Catholics
Refugit their, says the Scotch Copy.
fled into Spain, who by emulation, or rather by an unchristian envy, too much
lessen our power of aiding you, thereby to magnify their own only, and make
themselves to be able to do all, so to advance themselves in credit with your
Majesty, and such as are about you: but the experience of this their passage,
has sufficiently testified, that they have not shown themselves in such num^^r
to assist your forces as we have done. And therefore your Majesty, as most
wise as you are, should, if it please you, make such account of the one, as not
to neglect the other; and so serve your self with both, to the design you aim
at, without hazarding your Forces, for the particular of the one or the other.

We refer even to the judgment of some of your own subjects who have been
here, the Commodities and Landing in these parts, where the expense bestowed
upon the Equipage of one Galiasse, shall bring more fruit to your service, then
you may have of ten upon the Sea And we may assure your Majesty, that having
once six thousand here of your own with money, you may levy here Forces of
this Country as freely as in Spain, who will serve you no less faithfully then
your own natural subjects.

And although we cannot without censure of presumption give your Majesty
advice in your affairs in Spain; yet in that which may concern your service
here, we may speak more freely, as being upon the place, and knowing by
ordinary experience many things unknown to any of yours that are not here. The
over late arrival of your Army in our Waters, took from it the Commodity to
retire it self in such safety, (as it might have done coming sooner) by reason
of the great Winds that are ordinary here in Harvest; as also lack of Pilots
experienced upon the Coasts of England, Scotland and Ireland, appears to have
bred great harm to the said Army: which we could have remedied concerning
Scotland, to have sent Pilots from hence, if it had liked your Majesty to have
served your self with them.

Likewise (saving better advice) it seems to us altogether unprofitable, to
fetch the Army by Sea, if it may be avoided, for many causes: And amongst
others, because such as shall have fought by Sea, shall be unable, being
weary, to fight again by land against new Forces: So the best should be to
shift by one way or other, for sp^ring of your men and Vessels; and so the
English Forces staying upon the Sea unfought with, shall be disappointed, and
shall not come in time to assist them that shall be assailed by land.
Afterward sending hither a part of your forces before the other which should
go the right way to England, and that secretly by the back of Ireland, Your
Majesty should compel the enemy to divide their Forces, and it may be should
cause them send the greatest part hither, where we might make them believe the
greatest part of your Forces were arrived, at least should make them The Scotch
Copy runs thus: -- At leist s^ld cause them di^g rn^is as ^^^ikle of England,
and d^a^ a great (...) of their Forces, quhilk wald. resist, etc.
weaken a good part of England, and draw away a great part of their Forces
which would resist your landing and invasion on that Coaest. And we may well
promise, that having here 6000 of your men and money to aid others here, we
should within six weeks after their arrival be a good way within England, to
approach and assist the Forces which your Majesty should cause to enter there.

The Knight William Sempil Colonel, can show your Majesty the whole, to whom
we leave it. Also we have caused to be writ both before and since his
departure, our several suchlike advises, by Mr. Robert Bruce, causing them to
be addressed to my Lord Duke of Parma, to whom your Majesty referred us, at
the beginning of these affairs. And seeing your Majesty is duly advertised
and informed, we will conclude, kissing most humbly your Majesty's hands;
heartily praying God to grant you full accomplishment of all your holy
enterprises.

Your Majesty's most humble and most affectioned Servants, Earl of Morton, G.
Earl of Huntley, Claud Lord Hammiltoun, In the name of the other Catholic
Lords in Scotland.
From Edinborough this XXIV of January, M D LXXXIX.

The King, one might think, had no reason to mistrust Huntley, having not long
before married him to a gallant Lady Being Sister to the Duke of Lennox.
a kin to his Majesty; and also got him to subscribe to the Confession of
Faith, then used by the Reformed in Scotland; and conferred many favors upon
him. But all this to no purpose; he is yet a friend to Spain, and sorry for his
subscription, as may appear by his Letter to the Duke of Parma, thus:

My LORD,
I Have received from John Chesholme the Letters it pleased your Highness to
write the XIII of October, full of most Christian affection to the welfare of
our Cause, for the which I give your Highness most humble thanks. The support
of ten thousand Crowns sent to that end, is received by Mr. Robert Bruce; which
shall not be employed, but for help of the most urgent necessity of the said
Cause, as it has pleased your Highness to direct.

After the Or rather Escape, in which he assisted.
departure of Colonel Sempil, I found my self so beset on all hands, and
pressed in such sort by our King, that it behooved me to yield to the
extremity of time, and subscribe with his Majesty (not with my heart) the
Confession of their Faith, or otherwise I had been forced immediately to have
departed the Country, or to have taken the fields by resisting his Forces, and
such as he might have drawn out of England to his aid; which I could not have
done, especially then, when by the returning of your Army into Spain, all hope
of help was taken from us.

But if on the one part I have erred, by the apprehension of dangers that
threatened my ruin, I shall on the other part endeavor my self to amend my
fault (whereof I repent me with all my heart) by some effect, tending to the
weal and advancement of the Cause of God, who has put me in such credit with
his Majesty, that since my coming to the Court, he has broke up his former
Guards, and caused me to establish others about his person of my men; by means
of whom and their Captains (who are also mine) I may ever be master of his
person; and (your support being arrived) spoil the Heretics of his Authority,
to fortify and assure our enterprises.

Whereupon I beseech your Highness to send me your advise, and assure your self
of my unchangeable affections in my former resolutions, although the outward
actions be forced to conform themselves, sometimes, to necessity of occasions,
as Mr. Robert Bruce will more amply write unto your Highness; to whom I
farther remit my self. Praying God (having first kissed your Highness hand) to
give you accomplishment of your holy enterprises.

Your Highness most humble and affectionate Servant, G. Earl of Huntley.
From Edinbrough this XXIV of January, B^th the Scotch and English Copy has
1592. but by a mistake.
M D LXXXIX.

The Earl of Arrol being turned Romanist by the persuasions of Edmund Hay the
Jesuit, is also by the same reasons very zealous for the Spanish interest, as
appears by his Letter to the Duke of Parma; thus:

My LORD,
SInce God of late by the clear light of his holy Catholic Faith, has ch^sed
from my understanding the darkness of ignorance and error, wherein I have been
heretofore nourished; I have been as soon persuaded in acknowledging of so
great an effect of his divine grace toward me, that I am chiefly obliged to
procure, since I know the enterprises of his Catholic Majesty and your
Highness tend principally to that end; as also the advancement of some ^^ it
against their own King, for the King of Spain? or what else?
civil cause, which has very great affinity and conjunction with ours here.
That I may testify by this present, the affection that I have to the Weal of
the one and the other, having ever before my conversion been one of the number
of your friends and servants for the respect of the last; to the which, the
first of Religion, which is the greatest and most important that is in the
world, being joined thereto, I am also become altogether yours, which I most
humbly beseech your Highness cause to be signified to his Catholic Majesty,
and to promise him in my behalf, that he has not in this Country a more
affectionate servant then I, neither yet your Highness, as you shall understand
more amply of my intention in particular by him, by whom your Highness shall
receive this present. To whom (after I have most humbly kissed your hand) I
beseech the Creator to give you the accomplishment of your holy desires.

Your Highness most humble and most affectionate Servant, Francis Earl of Errol.
From Edinbrough this XXIV of January, M D LXXXIX.

At the same time, the foresaid Mr. Robert Bruce the chief Agent, writ to
Francisco Aguirre a Spaniard then at Antwerp, telling him, that when he is
again sent into Scotland -- Cause your self to be set on land near Seaton,
where I pray you to enter secretly, and there you shall be kept till I come and
find you, etc.

The following part of this Letter was writ in such cunning and obscure terms,
that they could not understand it.

We formerly heard of the imprisonment of some Lords for their Rebellion, and
now the King thinking for ever to make them his by his grace and favor,
releaseth them all freely, only Morton entered bond of an hundred thousand
pound Scotch, not to practice any more against him or Religion. But in most the
King found himself mistaken.

For, William Creichton the Jesuit, being forced to leave Scotl^nd, Spain,
where he becomes Agent for the Old Cause: Has several consultations with King
Philip how to advance the business; and having brought all things to a fair
pass, sends Mr. William Gordoun, son to the Lord of Abiryeldie, with Letters
to Mr. He dyed at Paris 1620, aged 77 years: he writ Controversiarum
Christianae fidei Epitomen* 1591.
James Gordoun a Jesuit, and brother on the Fathers side to George Earl of
Huntley; whereby he gave him and the Romanists in Scotland to understand what
pains he had taken with the Spanish King; and that the said King had confessed
to him, that he had been deceived by the English, and so would for the future
follow the way and advice given him by the said Creichton, both for the
invading of England, and the alteration of Religion in Scotland. And the better
to carry all on, the said Creichton desired as many Blanks and Procurations as
could be had of the Scotch Noblemen, for the greater credit and assurance of
his dealings and agitations.

At this the Romanists take heart, and not to seem wanting on their parts, they
deal with some of the Nobility; from whom they get Blanks subscribed, two of
which were procured of them by Sir James Chesholme, one of the Kings chief
Servants: one of them French.

De vostre Majesty tres humble and tres obeisant Serviteur, Guiliame Compte de
Anguss. Another thus subscribed. De vostre Majesty tres humble and tres
obeisant Serviteur, Franzoys Compte de Errol. Other two Blanks were procured of
them in Latin by Robert Abircrumby the Jesuit, one of the main sticklers in
these plots; Thus:

Guilielmus Angusie Comes. Another thus: Franciscus Errollie Comes. Other two
Blanks were procured by Mr. George Ker, brother to the Lord Newbottle, thus
subscribed:

Georgius Comes de Huntlie. All these several Blanks should have been filled up
and supplied by way of Letters to the King of Spain, and Credentials or
Certific^^^s in behalf of the said Creichton, at the discretion of the ^^^d
Creichton and There was one J^mes Ty^ie a Scotch Je^^i^e, w^o dy^^ at R^me
1597, and w^it under the n^^e o^ G^^^g^ (...) de An^^^^ita^e E^cles. S^^ti^*
bu^ whether this was the same T^rie I know (...).
James Tyrie, who should have writ over them, what he thought most fit to carry
on the Ca^se.

Besides these, there were two other Blanks, thus subscribed in the midst of
two open sheets of Paper: Guillielmus Angussie Comes.

Georgius Comes de Huntlie.

Franciscus Errollie Comes.

This ^^ Patr^^k ^^d^n (...) of (...), was Un^^^^ the ^ -- ^o^ Han^^^.
Patricius Gordoun de Auchindoun, Miles.



One of these two last Blanks should have been filled up with Procurations, and
whatsoever the said Creichton and James Tyrie should think fit, for the
confirmation of that which Mr. George Ker (who was to carry them) had in
direction and credit from the Subscriber^: The other to contain the Articles to
be concluded on ^or the better security both of King Philip and the Scotch
Nobility.

The sum of which credit, was an assurance that these Noblemen should raise a
power of Horsemen, and meet the Spanish Army at their landing, and to assist
and accompany them into England. And for farther encouragement, these ^
Subscribers took the burden on them, and engaged that all the Romanists in
Scotland would join and assist in the said Cause. Besides these Subscriptions,
the Earls of Anguss, Huntlie and Arrol, delivered their Seals or Coats of Arms
in wax for a further confirmation.

Nor did they doubt of carrying all before them, the King of Spain having
promised to send them by the latter end of Spring 1592, an Army of thirty
thousand men, to have landed either at Kirkudbricht in Galloway, or at the
mouth of Clyde, according as the wind served. And besides this, to send good
store of money to raise Forces in Scotland, and to supply the said Army:
whereof In this I follow the Scotch Copies of the Examin^tions, but Archbishop
Spotswood has 15000. (page 390.) which I suppose to be a mistake in the
Printer.
four or five thousand should remain within Scotland, who with the assistance
of the Romanists there, should alter the Religion; and the rest of the Army was
to pass into England.

For the carrying of these Blanks and some Letters into Spain, they had once
concluded that Sir James Chesholme, one of King James his chief Servants,
should be the Messenger, being throughpaced for the Cause; he having then
occasion to pass over to his Uncle William Chesholme (by them called Bishop of
Dumblane) but the said Sir James being let by some private business, that he
could not be ready soon enough, they pitched upon the foresaid Mr. George Ker,
Doctor of the Laws, brother to the Lord Newbottle. But he was December. 27. 1592.
he was taken by Mr. Andrew Knox, Minister of Pasley, and afterward Bishop of
the Isles. Ker was imprisoned, but afterward escaped.
apprehended as he was taking Ship, and his blanks and other Letters seized on;
some of which Letters take as follows.

Part of a Letter from an English Jesuit (the first of it nothing to the
purpose) take as follows.

Good Father,
THe enclosed to my Lord, I pray you read, and take it as written to your self,
etc. -- The Lord Seatoun in whose house I sojourn sometimes, salutes you. Of
the affairs of the Catholics here, I leave it to them to write and relate, by
whose means these Letters shall be conveyed. My Lord Seatoun has an It may be
he means some eight miles East off Edinbrough, upon the South shore of the
Fy^th, viz Cokeny-Haven.
Haven of his own, which may be hereafter very commodious for our purpose.
Commend me, I pray you, to F. Barth. Pere, etc. Mr. Dudley Ilper Knight, and
John Thules, which upon some sudden pushes of persecution, have made their
repair hither, are in health, and salute you. And Mr. Syal a Priest dyed here
lately in Edinbrough, Love me, and pray for me, I beseech you all, Solito. And
if you send any into these parts, let them come furnished with as ample
faculties as you may. Let them enquire for one Mr. Jonas, which will be a token
betwixt us. Our Lord bless us, and send us to meet once ere we dye.

Yours ever most assured, Joan. Cecilio.
Seytoun this 2 of October. 1592.

A Letter from the Earl of Angus to Mr. William Creichtoun.
MY most affectionate commendations premitted, this present is only to know of
your well fair, and friends, and of the estate of matters where you remain, and
to show a testimony of my good affection toward you. For (God be praised) if
you were in this Country, I could do you greater pleasure then I was able to do
before, albeit good will lacked not at any time, as you know.

The Mr. George Ker.
bearer hereof can inform you of such things as occur with us, for we are daily
subject to alteration; you may credit him as my self, for so his virtues do
deserve. It is not needful that I trouble you with his commendation, seeing he
is to you that he is: you know his honesty and good intention, and the causes
of his departing, to whose sufficienc^e referring the rest; my hearty
salutations, and my bed fellows, with all our company young and old remembered
unto you and your company; commits you with them to the protection of God.

Yours ever to his power, Anguss.
Edinbrough the X of October MDXCII.

Mr. James Gordon sent also a Letter to Creichton, under counterfeit and false
names, which runs thus:

The Superscription. To his assured friend William Creichton.
George Crauford.
Trusty friend,
AFter most hearty commendations, your friends who are here have directed this
George Ker.
Bearer to you, for full resolution of all your affairs in these Quarters: we
have delaid overlong, I grant, but he will show you the cause of all. The best
is, that next you use all expedition in time coming, against the next Summer,
otherwise you will loose credit here with your i. e. The confederate Romanists.
Factors. If you come, you will find more friends then ever you had, but
otherwise you will find fewer; because the next Summer many are bound to other
Countries, and will not stay for you any longer. Haste hither some word to your
friends, that we may put them in good hope of you, and they will tarry the
longer.

The Bearer is an honest man, and very sufficient, you may credit him as my
self I should have come with him my self, were it not, that I was persuaded
that you would remain satisfied with our Answer, and because I had a stop from
Flan^ers. As the Bearer can show you, you have gotten all that you i. e. The
Blanks.
desired, therefore make haste. The Bearer is come unto you on his own charge,
therefore you must have respect to him. The last Messenger that you sent, came
behind hand here, and has got no satisfaction as yet, because nothing could
be gotten here, and we could find no man but this that would pass on his own
charge; and I fear, if he had not undertaken it on his own expenses, you should
not have received an answer so soon, and therefore you should entreat him the
better.

We look for your self here shortly, and I would that you brought the rest of
your i. e. The Spanishe ^y
friends with you, that are beyond the Sea. For if your (...) in the (...) Copy.
purpose pass forward, they must be also present, otherwise we must come and i.
e. be fo^ced to fl^e the Co^unt^y.
visit you. All other affairs of this Country, I will commit to the Bearer,
who is faithful.

Your ^he (...) and (...)
wife and your (i) children commend them unto you, and look to se^ you
sho^^lie. If I or (...). b^^^umby.
Sandesoun your friend, receive any silver from the Bearer, you shall be
advertised by another Ticket how much it is, and subscribed with both our
hands. The rest I will refer to the Bearer. God preserve you ever from all evil.

Your most affectioned to his power, i. e. James Gordoun.
J. Christesoun.
At Dundee the XX of. November M D XCII.

There was a Letter also writ by Robert Abircrumbie the Jesuit to the said
Creichton, under false names, part of which take as follows.

To his trusty friend Will. Creichton.
George Crauford.
AFter my due and humble salutations and offer of service, I grieve and lament
heavilie the sloth and negligence your The Catholics.
Merchants have used in answering of your last suit you proposed unto them: For
apparentlie if they had made answer in due time, our The Spanish Army.
wares had been here in due time, with our great profit and consolation. The
stay and stop of the matter apparentlie was lack of expenses, that no man would
of his own charges take that voyage in hand; yea, some craved a thousand Crowns
for his expenses. So the matter was once wholly given over, and almost clean
forgot, until it pleased God of his Divine Providence to stir up this Dr. Ker.
Bearer, to take the matter in hand on his own expenses; as he has been ever
bent in that Cause, not only to spend his goods, but also the thing that is
more dear to him, that is, his life. Therefore I think he should be more
acceptable, as also for the affinity of blood; for both his Grand-mothers were
Creichtons. And as for wit and ability in treating of those affairs, he is not
inferior to any of your Merchants which you desired, as you will perceive by
experience, God willing. And albeit, that he of his courageous liberality and
Zeal to the Cause, has taken the matter in hand on his own charges, yet all
your friends in these Quarters think it were reasonable, that all should be
repaid him again, cum usura, with promotion till any other accident should fall
out, for the weal and furtherance of this Cause, etc. But now I will sayone
word of him, and so come to some other purposes of our own. If I had a thousand
tongues, with so many mouths, with Cicero' s Eloquence, I could not be worthy
enough to commend this Gentleman to you, and all your company, as I shall let
you understand, God-willing, if ever we do chance to meet face to face; and
therefore, whenever you may prevent him with any benefit, either by your self
or any other, abide not till he crave it of you, for he is the worst asker in
his own cause that ever you conversed with Here follows some private
lawbusiness concerning some lands in the Lairdship of Spot.
--

My Lord Levingstone is departed out of this world: You heard before that David
Graham, Lord of Fentrie; yet there was also a rich Citizen of Sterling,
called* David Forrester, who was killed or murdered, 1595.
David Forester had one son, and now has another born in the Castle of
Striveling, where he is in custody, hardly handled.

There is but one of our Nobility which has of the King of Spain any pension
well paid of twelve hundred Crowns; the which apparentlie are evil bestowed,
for he, nor any of his as yet, has ever done any kind of good in the
promotion of the Kings Matters: wherefore such pensions were better bestowed on
others, who travel daily and hourlie, putting in hazard both their goods and
lives, as the Beare^ has done and daily does, and others as he can show you,
etc. Because I have no other thing to write, and have been long enough, I
commend me to your prayers, and you to God.

Yours at his Power, i. e. Rob. Abircrumby.
Robert Sandesoun.
At Scotland the XV of December. M D XCII.

The surprisal of these Letters discovered all, and spoiled the design. David
Graham of Fintrie was tried and found guilty, and 15 or 16 of February 1592.
beheaded in the High Street of Edinbrough. The Earl of Angus, having been
employed by the King (who then doubted not of his loyalty) to quiet some
troubles in the North, not knowing any thing of the seizing of Kar, and the
discovery of the Spanish design, returns to Edinbrough, where he was presently
arrested by the The Mayor and Aldermen.
Provost and (c) Bailiffs of the City, and sent prisoner to the Castle.

But from this imprisonment he escapes, flees into the North, joins himself
with Huntley and Arrol, and raise what Forces they can. But upon the report of
the Kings marching against them,

In the mean time the Presbyterian Kirk grow very mally part, and a Club of
their Ministers being jumbled together on their own heads, they forsooth would
condomn them; and so they Excommunicate the Earls of Anguss, Huntley and Arrol,
the Lord Hume, and Sir James Chesholme; nor could the King by all his Authority
and desires, get the Brethren to forbear or stay the publication of their
sentence. Though the Earls had waited upon the King, submitted themselves, and
desired a Trial.

But the truth is, the Popish Lords gave no signs of real repentance: no,
though the King had used diverse means to gain them, and was willing to wink at
their past crimes, upon assurance of their good behavior for the future, yet
all his Majesty's endeavors were in vain, the Jesuits prevailing too much over
them with their bad counsels, and feeding them daily with hopes of foreign
aid. No, though the King through love exhorted them to enter themselves in
custody (to pleasure the Kirk, and make some signs of a trial) would they give
any obedience to the Kings desires.

These contempts rendering them more odious, a Parliament is held, and the Roman
Lords brought to Trial, and are found Patrick Gordon Lord of Achindown; their
S^u^checas of Arms are torn by the Herald, and their Honors, Lands and Estates
declared forfeited.

Yet the King had some favor for them; but they grow worse and worse: for
joining themselves with the Earl of Bothwell, they make a Covenant or Bond
amongst themselves at the Church of Memmore, and so flee to Arms; the main
stickler in this business being Sir James Douglas of Spot. And opportunately to
assist them, arrives a Spanish Ship at Montrose, which brought some gold for
their supplies.

The King informed of all by the apprehension of Allan Orme, servant to
Bothwell, sends Argile Northwards to quell them: Argile gets an Army of 10000
men, but The Battle of Clenlivat, October 3.
are beat by 900 commanded by Huntley, who here lost his Uncle of Achindown,
and Arrol was sore wounded in his armand leg.

But for all this, the Confederate Lords at the long run were so put to it,
that they desired liberty to depart the Kingdom, giving security to practice no
more against the King or Religion: so away they went, and Bothwell steals into
France, thence into Naples, where he lived miserably, and dyed beggarly, about
the year 1624.

The banished Lords, not finding themselves in that favor beyond Seas as they
expected, resolve to return home; Huntley steals North, sends a supplication to
the King, desiring that he might be permitted to stay in the Country, upon
security to be no more troublesome: the King is willing, and conditions are
consulting of. Arrol thinking to slip through the Low Countries, is seized on,
and delivered to Mr. Robert Danielstone, the Kings Agent there; but from him he
makes an escape, and returns.

Huntley for some time keeps off the conditions, the Kirk being his enemy. And
his Uncle James Gordon the Jesuit came into the Angus and Arrol submit,
subscribe to the Faith of Scotland, are absolved at Aberdene from their former
Excommunications, and received into grace and favor of the King.

About the same time there was discovered a design to fortify the Isle of
Elsay, in the West Seas. This Island is a great Rock, four miles in compass,
wherein an old ruinous Tower is built on the steep ascent of the Rock: the plot
was, that by seizing on the Island, the Forces that the Spanish King had
promised to send, might here be received.

The main actor in this, was Hugh Barklay Lord of Lady-land, who having been
the year before committed in the Castle of Glasgow, had made an escape and fled
to Spain; and this year returned to pursue his old design.

Having got some followers, he enters the Island, with an intention to have
well victual'd it. But Mr. Knox (the same who took Ker) understanding his
purpose, gets hastily a company of men, and makes toward the Isle. Most of
Barklays men were otherwise employed, dreaming of no such thing; and himself
not thinking that his plot was known, did not take Knox his men (though he saw
them coming) for enemies: thus careless, Knox lands, and encounters him on the
very shore; upon which Barklay resolved not to be taken, runs into the Sea and
drowns himself: and so there is an end of him and the Popish troubles in
Scotland for this time.

CHAP. IV. The troubles in Ireland against Queen Elizabeth.
TO run through all the Rebellions of Ireland, would be troublesome both to my
self and Reader; their whole stories and life being but an heap or chain of
Troubles, Riots, Misdemeanors, Murders, Treasons, and suchlike enormities;
whereby they have not only vexed and molested their Governors, but in the end,
brought ruin to the disturbers and such undertakers of disobedience.

Nor could any thing else be expected from the ancient Irish, to whom civility
and discretion were strangers; but the Robbery of Cambden Britan. page 790,
791, 792.
others held a piece of Devotion, insomuch, that they never undertook such
mischief, without first sending up their prayers, and after to give God thanks
for such a good booty. Though they professed themselves good Catholics, yet they
supposed no small holiness to remain in Horses Hoofes, and that the Lords
prayer mumbled into the right ear of a sick beast, was cure enough for its
distemper; and any man was held past living in this world, if he desired to
receive the Sacrament. Nor need we look for many cures amongst them, when to
Ric. Stanihu^st. de ^ebus Hibe^n. lib. 1. page 44.
beat Eggs together, to squeeze out with ones fingers the juice of shred herbs,
to probe and find out a wound, were signs of an able Physician; and thus
qualified, he may go for an Hippocrates. And no doubt but others of them were
much of the discreet hardiness of Id page 42.
him, who having received four desperate wounds, and seeing his sword not hur^,
gave thanks to God that these wounds were given to his body, and not to his
sword.

And what else might be expected from those of former times, when even within
these few years, they Sir John Temples Hist. of I^ish Rebe^lion, the Prefa^e,
ld. page 84
threatened to burn and ruin Dublin, to destroy all Records and Monuments of
English Government, make Laws against speaking English, and have all English
names changed. Nay, to put their thoughts into practice, they endeavored to
destroy all the goodly breed of English Cattle, by killing many thousand Sheep
and Cows, merely because they were of English breed; and so to leave them lie
stinking in the Fields: and as others testify, to destroy the very Corn 'cause
sown by English men. And yet it is known they had not only Government, Civility,
and what else is praise worthy spread amongst them by the English; but stately
Buildings, and other Ornaments of the Country: whereas Dublin it self could not
afford a place sit for King Henry II to lie in, so that he was there forced to
set up a long house composed of Id page 4.
Wattles, after the manner of the Country, therein to keep his Ri^h.
Stanibu^st, lib 3. page 129.
splendid Christmas.

But these glories and advantages, some of them may think a discredit, if not a
ruin to their Nation, and may fancy it as good to have their Kings (as Speeds
Theater of Great Britain, in Ireland in Vlster, 6.
formerly) to lap up their Coronation-sustenance without the assistance of
Spoons or Hands, and to sit in state naked, within the bottom of a ^aldron at
his Inauguration, as to have Decency and Manners, Thrones or Magnificence
amongst them. However, that which they supposed to ruin all, you may guess at
by this their complaint, as old at least, as King Edward the Thirds time, as
Discovery of Ireland, page 184.
Sir John Davies supposes.

M S. F. 99, Laud p. 332. in Bibl. Bodl. Oxon. ex albo libro scaccarii Dublin.
By granting Charters of peace,
To falce English withouten less;
This land shall be much undo:
But Gossipred, a custom amongst them of trusting too much to Godfathers, as
they thought their Nurces and Forster-Children akin to them as Mother and
Sister.
Gosipride and alterage,
And leesing of our Language,
Have mickley help thereto.
The truth is, above all people they hated the English, being willing that
French, Spaniard, or any body else should rule them, but those who do. But of
their Combinations and Overtures I shall go no higher then Queen Elizabeth;
though this following note, by the way, will not be amiss.

M S. F. 99. fol. 185. Land. in Bibl. Bodl. Oxon. Jehan du Tillet Recuil des
Guerres and Traitez d'ent^e les Roys de France and d' Angleterre, fol. 157.
Articles agreed upon, between Francis I. King of France, and James Fitzjohn
Earl of Desmond: Extracted by Tillet out of the Records in Paris. Anno 1523.

Francis I. King of France in a Treaty with James Fitzjohn Earl of The French
Copy calls him, Jaques Conte de Cymonie, Prince ^n Hybernie.
Desmond, wherein he is styled a Prince in Ireland: It was accorded,

That as soon as the Kings Ships should land in Ireland, the said Earl in
person, and at his own charge, should take Arms against his Sovereign King
Henry VIII. not only to conquer that part of the Kingdom wherein he lived
[which should be to the proper use and benefit of the said Earl, except only
one Port, which should be reserved for the French King for ever, for to harbor
his Ships in; and that Port to be left at the Election of the King, out of one
of these three, viz. The French Copy reads thus, Quinquesalle, Core ou Drudal.
Kinsale, Cork or Yoghal] but also for to As if he ever had it, but no such
matter.
restore the Duke of Suffolk to the Crown of England, from whence he was
banished, and at the present living in France.

The Earl of Desmond for this War was to raise 400 Horse, and 10000 Foot; and
if need required, to increase them into 15000, or more.

The King Covenanted to entertain them at the rate of two Angels ^e piece for
every man armed with Corsselets and Mayle for three months; and for every man
furnished only with Swords and Halberts, at one Angel le piece for the like
time.

That for the draught of the Artillery which should be sent into that land by
the King and the Duke of Suffolk, the Earl should provide horses sufficient.

That after the War was begun, the French King should not at any time make
Truce or peace with the King of England, without comprehending therein the said
Earl and Turloghe O Brian with his Nephews.

That if King Henry VIII should, after a Truce or Peace accorded, make War upon
the said Earl, the French King was to send them aid of Men, Ships and Artillery.

That if during the said Truce or Peace, the said Earls Subjects or Tenants
should refuse to pay him such Rents and Duties as anciently they were
acc^stomed, that then the said King at his own charge, was to send two Ships
well appointed to be at his command, until the said Subjects or Tenants were
reduced to their former obedience, and the said Ships to be victualed by the
Earl.

That the King should give unto the Earl of Desmond a convenient Pension during
his life; and unto David Mac Maurice, the Earls Senesch^l, an yearly Pension of
500 Livres, is about to pound Ste^ling.
five hundred Livres during his life.

But this Treaty and its Conditions were never executed, by reason the said
French King Francis I was otherwise employed in the Wars of Italy about the
Dukedom of Milan, and at the Famous battle of F^b^ua^y 24. 15^^.
Pavia, was taken prisoner and carried into Spain^ and at the said fight was
Richard de la Pole, called Duke of Su^^^olk (and by some also termed the White
Rose) slain. And some years before (viz. ^513) was his Brother Edmund Earl of
Suff^olk beheaded on the Tower Hill in London for Treason.

Here we might also tell of Thomas Fitz Girald Earl of Kildare, who solicited
the Emperor Charles V to seize upon Ireland; Ca^^^d. in Co^^tain ^idar.
and fell into open acts of Hostility and Treason: but leaving these, let us
haste to Queen Elizabeth's time, where we shall find the Tir-Oens, who would
entitle themselves O-Neals, the greatest sticklers.

Con O-Neal, surnamed Bacco (i. e. the lame) was such an enemy to the English
(though Henry VIII bare him some favor) that he left a solemn curse upon his
Posterity, if they ever sowed Wheat, (...). page ^4.
spoke English, or built houses; yet he was by Henry VIII created Earl of ^
Tyrone; and to him his son (John, i. e.) Shan succeeded; but not content with
that Title, would make himself greater, by a b^rb^rous kind of Election, viz.
throwing up his shoe over his head, took upon him the Title of O-Neal, and
takes up Arms against the Queen; but finding himself too weak, he went into ^
England, no question in pomp enough, having his Guard of ^
Gall^ glasses, bare-headed, curled long hair, yellow Frocks (...) Saffron or
Piss; long Sleeves, short Coats, with hairy (...). Thus falling down at the
Queens feet, confessed (...) and Rebellion with howling, and so obtained pardon.

(...) continued not long in this obedience, and scorning the ^i^le of Earl of
Tir-Oen, Baron of Duncannon, conferred upon him by Queen Elizabeth, he would
again on his own head re^ssume the great name of O-Neal, vaunt himself the King
of V^^^^r, leavie Forces, offer the Kingdom of Ireland to Mary 15^^.
Queen of Scots; and so hated the English, that he built a Castle in ^
Lake Eaugh, [which some also call Logh-Sidney, in honor of (...) Henry
Sidney, then Lord Deputy of Ireland] which he named ^e^ghnegall, i. e. Hatred
to the English. Nay, he went so far, as to strangle some of his own men,
because they eat English bread. Thus he created some troubles; but at last, in
his Cups, was stabbed by those he most confided in. Of him it is Recorded, that
he was such a Drunkard, that to Camdens Elizab. anno 1567.
cool his body (when too much inflamed with Wine and Uskabagh) he would cause
himself to be buried in earth up to the chin.

Shan thus dead, a Parliament met at Dublin, where 'twas Id. in Britan, page
776.
enacted, that for the future none should take upon them the name and title of
O-Neal; yet Queen Elizabeth winked at Turlogh Leinigh of the House of O-Neal,
when by a popular Election he was saluted by the name of O-Neal; thinking to
get no disturbance by him, being of a quiet spirit; but in this she was
mistaken, so powerfully did his friends work upon him in opposition to her
Majesty.

Now when nothing but peace was expected, Edmund and Peter Boteler, The M S.
life of Sir John Perot, says -- The Earl of Ormonds three Brethren.
Brothers to the Earl of Ormond) with James Fitz-Morice of the House of
Desmond, and Mac Cartie-More, with others, flee into Rebellion, thinking with
the Assistance of the Pope and Spain to thrust out Elizabeth: to inflame this
the more, Don Juan de Mendoza was sent out of Spain. But the Earl of Ormond
troubled at his Brothers actions, hastes out of England to them, persuades them
to submit, and obtained the Queens pardon for them. The rest were pursued as
obstinate and rebellious.

As for James Fitz-Morice, he was so hunted from place to place by the care and
industry of Sir John Perrot, Lord President of Munster, that at last he was
forced to submit himself unto the Queens Mercy: so the President being at
Church in Kilmalock, Fitz-Morice comes to him howling and crying for Pardon:
Perrot caused him to prostrate himself, and take the M S. life of Sir John
Perot.
point of his (the Presidents) naked Sword next to his heart, in token that he
had received his life at the Queens hands.

But waving such as these, let us hasten to more dangerous exploits: and first,
it is not amiss to know, that there was one Thomas Stukley, of an ancient and
good Family near Illfracombe in Devonshire; and of him a few words by the by.

Though his parts were good and quick, yet his prodigality soon made an end of
his estate, which in a younger brother (as he was) is quickly spent; yet having
a lofty mind, he cast about how to live, and command over others. At last
Florida, then newly found out in America, came into his thoughts; and this
forsooth he would people, not doubting but in time to make himself Prince
thereof, as may appear by his bold and ambitious Speeches with Queen Elizabeth,
upon the desire of her assistance for these his projects. Concluding with her,

Stuk. I prefer rather to be Sovereign of a Molehill, then the highest Subject
to the greatest Monarch in Christendom: For I am certain to be a Prince before
my death.


Q. Eliz. I hope I shall hear from you, when you are settled in your Kingdom.


Stuk. I will write unto you.


Q. Eliz. In what language?


Stuk. In the style of Princes, To our dear Sister.


At which the great Queen was so far from indignation, that she rather pityed
and smiled at his impertinences.

But this his vain design for Florida sailing for want of money, and having
spent all, he was forced to flee into Ireland, where after some stay, the
better to support his wants, he endeavored to obtain the Stewardship of
Wexford; but being disappointed of it, he fell into a rage, dapperly venting
his passion against the Queen and her Government; and in this beggarly fury and
discontent, ships himself for Italy, where (according to his nature) boasting
of his own worth and actions, and carrying himself so cunningly, that at last,
by his own commendations and flatteries, he inveagled himself into the esteem
and favor of Pius V, Bishop of Rome; whom this Stukely had persuaded, that
with three thousand Italians, he would drive the English out of Ireland, and
fire all their Fleet: Things which old Pius greedily wished for, with the
destruction of the Queen.

But this Pope [whom they have almost sanctified, and made a a Worker of
Miracles] dying, there succeeded to him Gregory XIII, who carried on with the
same desires, bare the same favor to poor Stukely, hoping to get the Kingdom
of Ireland for his own son Giacopo de Boncompagno, whom a little before he had
made Marquess of Vineola; and of this Royalty Stukely assured him, and made
proud the Bastard. Thus the Pope and his Son full with hopes of a new Kingdom,
the better to countenance this their beggarly boasting Factor, Gregory, as if
all Ireland and Authority were his own, honors Stukely with the Noble Titles of

Baron of Ross, Vicount Morough, Earl of Wexford and Caterloghe, And Marquess
of Leinster.
Thus with a muster of Titles, and a Band of eight hundred Italian Foot [some
say Jeron. Conestaggio.
600, others Cicarella in vita Gregor. XIII.
6000] with a plenary Tho. Bell's Motives, p. 34.
Indulgence for Stukely's soul to avoid Purgatory, he embarked in a Genoa Ship
at Civita Vecchia.

In the mean time Sebastian, the youthful King of Portugal, had raised a Potent
Army, some think to fall upon Ireland. But a dissension falling out for the
Kingdoms of Morocco and Fez, between Mulei, signifies a Lord (...) and (...)
Royal blood.
Mulei Moluc (some call him Abdala Meluc, or Abdelmeluch) the Uncle, and his
Nephew Mulei Mahomet; in which it happened the latter to have the worst, and to
be beat out of the Kingdom, which for some time he had possessed as eldest Son to
old Abdala.

Mulei Mahomet the Nephew thus routed, addresseth himself by his Agents to
Sebastian for assistance. The King of Portugal spurred on, as some have fancyed,
by the Jesuits [the better to make way for the Spanish sway over that Kingdom,
should Sebastian miscarry] promises to relieve and resettle him; and so
provides for his passage into Africa.

Whilst things are preparing, Stukely arrives with his Titles and Followers, at
the mouth of the River Teio in Portugal, lands at Oeras, whither Sebastian
goes to see him, and persuades him and the rest to venture with him in his
Mauritanian expedition.

The King and his Army take Ship, and land in Africa; the Chieftains more like
Courtiers then Soldiers; the other liker Pesants then men at Arms: Thus under
the fickle conduct of a rash King, they meet the Moors in the plain of Tamita,
fight, are routed and cut to pieces; and this by some is called the Battle of
the three Kings, because here three ended their days, but in different fashions.

I. Don Sebastian King of Portugal was slain valiantly fighting. But some would
have him to live many years after, and appear at Venice, to the fobbing up of
some Portugals, the little trouble to the Spaniard, but a certain imprisonment
and ruin to the undertaker, though he had a mind to King it for a while. II.
Mulei Meluc came sick to the Field, and dyed before his Victory was fully
accomplished. And after the fight and Victory, his younger Brother Mulei Hamet
(who here acted as General of his Horse) was saluted King of Morocco and Fez.
III. Mulei Mahomet, the Nephew and Competitor, seeing his friends the Portugals
beaten, thinking to save himself by flight, was drowned as he thought to pass
the River Mucazen.
And amongst these great ones, our Thomas Stukely had the fortune and honor to
end his days. And thus Ireland escaped a mischief: for the carrying on of which
Treasons of Stukely, Dr. Lewis Archdeacon of Cambray, Referendarie to the Pope
(and afterward Bishop of Cassano) though born a subject to England, was very
forward and active, very much soliciting Gregory XIII in behalf of the said
Stukely and his projects, against his own Queen and Country.

About the beginning of King Charles I his Reign, I meet with one called James
Wadsworth his English-Spanish Pilgrim, chap. 7. page 64. Edit. 2.
Sir Thomas Stukely living at Milan as a Pensioner to the Spanish King, and him
I find branded as a Traitor and Enemy to his Country; but of what relation or
kin to the former Stukely, I know not.

Thus this mischief intended against Ireland, was for a time cut off. For
Portugal thus deprived of her King, his great Uncle Cardinal Henry was
proclaimed, who being old, the Spaniard after his death resolved for the Crown:
for the better securing of which, he staid and kept his great forces lately
levied in Italy (as some think for Ireland) to pour upon and win Portugal when
occasion served; which he afterward accomplished; of which see at large
Istoria dell' Unione del Regno di Portogallo alla Corona di Castiglia.
Jeronimo Conestaggio, an excellent and understanding Genoes Historian, (though
I meet with a A Book called in Spanish, Trattade Parenetico, and Fuoro Villaco,
as Dralymont translating it into French, la Liberte de Portugal. The English
bad Translator calls it, The Spanish Pilgrim; and so the Author subscribes
himself in his Dedicatory Epistle to Henry IV of France.
Portugallized Spaniard very sharp and severe with him) which Kingdom the
Portugais regained again (1640) in the name of Don Juan Duke of Braganza, whom
they Crowned, and saluted King John the Fourth.

This storm thus blown over, another appears. We heard formerly how James
Fitz-Morice submitted himself to Sir John Perot; but in his pretended loyalty
and honesty, he could not long continue; for he steals into France, addresseth
himself to Henry III, offers him the Kingdom of Ireland, but desires a few
Forces to beat out the English, and so to subdue that Nation to the French
obedience. Henry having his thoughts at home, straightened between the Guisian and
Hugonot, wisely rejects such idle thoughts: Upon which Fitz-Morice hastes to
Spain, where he makes the same offers to the Catholic King.

Philip II lends him an ear, sends him to Gregory XIII, who Nicolas Sanders an
Englishman born in Surrey, well known by his writings; and one Allan an Irish
man, both Doctors and Priests. The first was by the Pope declared his Nuncio
for Ireland, and blessed with a Consecrated Banner, to be known by its
Cross-Keyes. Thus sanctified w^^h an Infallible Authority, and a little money
in their fists, with Letters of Commendation to the Spanish King; they haste to
Spain, thence ship for Ireland, and land in Kerry. Upon which the English
Romanists at Rome (...) cap. 11. page 156, 157, 158.
rejoice and triumph, not qu^stioning but all would be their own. And for a
farther re^r^i^, the Pope orders more Soldiers to be raised in his Domini^^^,
and had got 3000 Calivers in a readiness to be shipped at Legorne; but the news
of their Friends overthrow, stopped the rejoycings of the one, and the
preparations of the other.

In the mean time, the Irish informed of the coming of these Papal and Spanish
Friends, by little and little rise up in Rebellion, in which Desmond was not
the least, though he had sworn All^gi^nce to the Queen: And thus carried on to
wickedness, he (...) ^^^rther'd, or rather butchered Henry Davils, an English
^^d G^n^^eman and brave Soldier, and his intimate acquaintance, (...) to call
him Father; and after the same unmanly fashion ^e ^^^w Davils servants; they
and their Master in bed dreaming of (...) and this Sanders commended as a sweet
sacrifice (...) the ^^ght of God.

As (...) ^itz-Morice, he thinking to raise the Rebels in other parts (...) his
h^lp, his H^r^^^tyring, plundered some fresh ones from Wil^^^^ a Burgh's
Ploughs: a Burgh's sons follow for rescue, charge ^^^z-Morice, kill him, but to
the loss of some of their own lives; (...) whi^^ Queen Elizabeth comforts up
old a Burgh, honors him with the Title of Baron of Castle Conell, and gives
him a yearly (...). Fitz-Morice thus slain, John Desmond, brother to the (...)
Earl, has his place given him: fights the English, (...) with the Popes
hallowed Banner, but is routed; and in (...) Allan the Priest, who had assured
them of Victory, is (...). And now was the Earl of Desmond proclaimed Traitor,
(...) dealt with Foreign Princes for the Conquest and de(...) of Ireland, for
relieving Sanders, Fitz-Morice, and other R^b^^^, for harboring the Spaniards,
for hanging the Queens faithful (...), and for displaying the Popes Banner
against the Queen.

The Italians and Spaniards who had landed at ^
Smerwick in Berry, under the command of San-Josepho an Italian, build there,
and strengthen themselves, and call it Fort del Or. Against ^5^^
them, Arthur Lord Gray, Lord Deputy of Ireland, the Earl of Ormond, and
others, march, and by Trumpet sends to demand what they were, and what was
their business: they returned answer, That they were sent from the Pope and the
King of Spain, to whom the Pope had given Ireland, for that Elizabeth had
justly forfeited her title to the Kingdom by her heresy; that they would keep
what they had got, and get more if they could. But a few days cooled their
courage, they being forced to yield upon mercy: the Chiestains are saved, but
the rest suffer death; which the Queen her self thought too severe, though the
Lord Gray offered some reasons for it.

As for Nicolas Sanders, seeing that neither the Popes blessing, nor his
consecrated Banner, nor his Legatine power, nor his foreign Associates, nor
the Native Rebels, could prevail against the Queen and her Subjects, he rambled
up and down for his own security in Mountains and Woods, loosing himself and
his senses too (for some say he fell Cambd. Annals an. 1583. Bishop Charltons
thankful Remembrance, cap. 5. page 49. The execution of justice D. III.
mad) thus finding no comfort, dyed miserably. When he was dead, there was
found in his Scrip some Prayers and Epistles written to confirm the Rebels,
stuffed up with great promises of the Pope and Spaniard. Hist. Cathol. Iberniae,
Tom. 2. lib. 4. cap. 16.
Philip Osullevan, tells us of his death, and how it was sudden, and that he
was privately buried; and of one Cornelius, whom he calls a Bishop: to all
which I shall object nothing, but that it is no honor for Sanders to be
commended by Osullevan; which Irish Story-teller, is as bold as ignorant, falls
as impertinent a Scribler, as ever yet has seriously troubled the world with
the Irish Purgatory, or a defense of their Rebellions. To conclude with
Sanders, Epist. ad Lectorem before Sander' s his book de Origin and progressu
Schismatis Anglicant.
Edward Rishton the Priest will confess to you, what straits and poverty he was
reduced to before his death; which methinks Osullevan's Father and other men of
note would not have permitted, had they fully known of his haunts.

As for Pope Gregory XIII, he was not wanting on his part to promote and
patronize the Rebellion, as appears by his Breves to them, wherein he exhorts
the Fitz-Geralds, and the rest of the Irish Romanists, to war stoutly against
the Queen and her Subjects: and the better to encourage them in so doing, he
grants them as plenary a pardon and remission of all their sins, as formerly
used to be granted to those who fought against the Turks, or ventured in the
recovery of the Holy land. One of the Papers takes as follows, as I find it.

Gregorius Papa XIII, Universis and singulis Achiepiscopis, Episcopis, Phil.
Osullevan. ib. cap. 17. fol. 100. 101.
caeterisq, Prelatis, nec non Principibus, Comitibus, Baronibus, Clero,
Nobilibus and Populis Regni Iberniae, Salutem and Apostolicam Benedictionem.
CVm proximis superioribus annis per nostras Litteras vos hortati fuerimus, ut
ad vestram libertatem recuperandam, eamque adversus Haereticos tuendam, ac
conservandam bonae memoriae Jacobo Geraldino, qui durum servitutis jugus vobis
ab Anglis Sanctae Romans Eccles. desertoribus impositum depellere summo animi
ardore cogitabat, provirili nostra adesse eumque contra Dei and vestros hosts
ire parantem prompte ac strenue adjuvare velletis, and quo ^d ^^^crius
effeceretis, omnibus contritis and confessis, qui ipsum Jacobum Ducem ejusque
exercitum Catholicae fidei assertorem and propugnatorem secuti fuissent, and se
illi adjunxissent, aut concilio ^^^^re commeatibus, armis aliisque bellicis
rebus, seu quacunque rati^^^ in hac expeditione opem dedissent, Plenariam
omnium Pecca^^^um suotum Veniam and Remissionem, and eandem quae profi^^^
^^^tibus ad bellum contra Turcas, and ad recuperationem Terrae (...), per
Romanos Pontifices impertiri solita est, concessi^^us.

Nuper autem non sine gravi animi nostri dolor, per nos excepto psum Jacobum
fortiter cum hostibus dimicando (sicut Domino (...)) ^^^ub^isse: Dilectum vero
filium Johannem Geraldinum ^jus Consobrinum in expeditione hujusmodi eximia
pietate and ani^^ ^^gnitudine, authore Deo, cujus causa agitur, successisse,
compl^^ (...) ^gregia facinora de Catholica fide been merendo jam edi^^sse
(...) vos omnes and singulos majori quo possumus affect is ^^rt^mus,
requirimus, and urgemus in Domino ut eundem Johannem ^^^^m ejusque exercitum
omni open, quemadmodum dictum Jacobum ^^^ntem ut faceretis, vos admonuimus,
contra dictos Haereticos ad^^^are siudeatis.

N^^ enim vobis omnibus confessis and Communicatis and vestrum singulis in
dictis litteris contenta pro ipso Johaune and ejus exercitu ^^^^^ntibus, and
post ipsius obitum si forsitan contigerit, quod Deus aver^ere dignetur, Jacobo
ejus fratri adhaerentibus atque faventibus, ^andem Plenariam Peccatorum
vestrorum Indulgentiam and Remissionem, quam adversus Turcas and pro
recuperanda Terra Sancta bellentes consequuntur, de Omnipotentis Dei
misericordia, (...) Beatorum Petri and Pauli Apostolorum, ejus authoritate
confisi tribuimus, and elargimur praesentibus, quoad dicti Johannes and Jacobus
fratres vixerint duraturis.

Quoniam autem difficile esset, has nostras Litteras ad omnium quorum interest,
notitiam pervenire, volumus, ut earum exemplis ^^^am impressis manu Notarii
Publici subscriptis, sigilloque pers^nae in dignitate Ecclesiastica constitutae
obsignatis, plena ac certa sides ubique habeatur, ac si praesentes essent
exhibitae vel ostensae. D^tis Romae apud Sanctum, Petrum sub Annulo Piscatoris,
die XIII Maii, MD LXXX, Pontificatis nostri anno VIII.



Caes. Glorierius.
(...) per D. Generalem S. Cruciata Commissariorum Johannes de la Rumbide.

As for Desmond (the chief of the Fitz-Geralds) having run so ^^r into Treason,
and so resolved for his wicked cause, that he ^wore that -- He would rather for
sake God then for sake his (...) -- And having no where to secure himself, he
wandered from (...)
place to place, and was at last found out in a poor Cottage by a common
Soldier, who there show him, cut off his head, sent it into England, where, as
the Head of an Arch-Traytor, it was set on December. 13.
London Bridge.

Now was Sir John Perot sent over Lord-Deputy of Ireland: having received the
Sword according to custom, he set himself to bring the Nation wholly unto the
Queens obedience; he justly prosecuted a Friar, for bringing Letters and Bulls
from the Pope M S. life of Sir John Perot.
to encourage the Rebellion, and hunted him out of his Bishopric, which the
Friar foolishly thought he had lawful right to, and possession of, because the
Pope and such Foreign powers had given him a paper-Authority under their
fists, to enter into and exercise the charge and jurisdiction of the said
Bishopric.

He also summoned a Parliament at Dublin consisting of the three Estates,
whither [to make them more affected with decency, and in time to wean them from
their rudeness] he commanded all to appear in English Habits; for the better
performance of which, Id. M S.
he f^eely bestowed both Gowns and Cloaks of Velvet and Satin on Turlough
Leinigh called O-Neal, and others the chief of them; yet did the Irish think
themselves more glorious in their beggarly Mantles or Ruggs, then in such
Gentile and Civil Habits; cufrom weighing more with some men, then reason or
convenience; as Cooree, and the rest of his Country men in the Bay of
Souldania, near the Cape of Good hope in Africa, had rather adorn their heads
with Cows-dung, their Necks with Guts and Garbage, and their bodies with filthy
skins, then wear Hats, Jewels, and other comely Attire.

The Queen, to work more upon the Irish, winked at their Religion, and
commanded that the Oath of Allegiance should not be offered or administrated to
any of them; and farther, restored Hugh O-Neal Baron of Dunganon to the Title
of Tyr-Oen, and those of his Ancestors: yet would not these favors gain them;
the Chieftains still expecting assistance from Spain; to be better informed of
which, Sir John Perrot kept several spies in that Kingdom; Id. M S.
four of whom were once taken and put to the Rack by the Marquess Santa la
Crusse, whereof three of them dyed.

To name all the Tumults and Rebellions that happened in the several parts of
this Kingdom, would be tedious; the landings of the Hebredian Scots, High
landers or Redshanks; the rising up of the a Bourghs, the Mahones, of Brien
O-Rork, of Hugh O-Donnel, of Mac-Guire, of O-Madan, of Mac-Hugh, and several
others. Nor shall I mention the famous exploits acted against them by Sir
Richard Bingham (of Dorcetshire) and several others, to bring them to obedience.

In short, the Arch-Rebel of all was Tir Oen, one that had received both pardon
and many favors from the Queen, and had several times vowed obedience to her.
He had for some time kept himself outwardly pretty fair, but in the mean time
persuaded all the rest to Rebellion. And at last himself flees out too, and
boldly arrogates to himself the Title of O-Neal (a Title that the Irish Dublin
it was declared Treason to take up that Title.

The next year Tir-Oen submits himself on his Knees to Sir William Russel
(youngest son to Bedford) then Lord Deputy of Ireland, and so he was dismissed.
But this good outside lasted not long, presently flying out to open Rebellion,
seizing on what places he can; for which he was proclaimed Traitor, by the Name
of Hugh O-Ne^l, Son of Matthew i. e. The Black^^ith Matthew being supposed to
be the son of a Blacksmith of Dandalke: yet C^n was acquainted with his wife.
Fadareugh, Bastard to Con O-Neal, etc. Tir-Oen with one hand begs assistance
from Spain; with the other, with false Treaties, and a dissembling tongue,
cheats Sir John Norris the famous (but in Ireland too credulous) Soldier, and
the Lord Deputy, by which he got another pardon.

But the same month that he got his pardon, he flees out again to his old
trade, and carried his business so cunningly, that he got many followers,
several Provinces and places revolting to him; Spaniards, wherein he magnified
his own Victories, and withal desired the King, that if any should inform him,
as if he desired to make peace with the English, or submit to the Queen, not to
believe such reports, for that he was resolved against all such Treaties or
Submission, but would constantly keep his faith given to the Spaniard. And yet
at the mean time, the more to amuse the English, he did both by Letters and
Messengers intercede to be taken into pardon once again. But this was upon
capitulations, where his extravagant demands showed the intention of the man.

The next year Robert d'Eureux, Earl of Essex, being Lord Tir-Oen had too much
discourse and familiarity together, and clapped up an odd Truce for some time; so
Essex returns for England, is secured, tried, condemned and executed. In which
Protestants Plea and Petition for Priests and ^apists, page 58.
conspiracy were also engaged M. Catesby, Tresham, Thomas Winter, the two
Wrights, and Grant, who afterward suffered in the Gunpowder-Treason. In the
mean time Tir-Oen takes opportunity to break the Cessation, falls to open war;
to which he was encouraged by the promises of the Spaniards, and the Letter of
the Pope: and thus puffed up, he looks upon himself as Monarch of all Ireland,
and so makes James Fitz-Thomas Earl of Desmond, as one who was a professed enemy
to the English Government, but slave enough to the Spaniard, though he hated
his own Queen, as appears by his slanders against her, and his respect to
Philip; both which these following Letters will testify.

To the most Mighty Monarch of World, the Great King M S. F. 97. Laud. in Bibl.
B^dl. ^xon. fol. 180.
of Spain, give this at his Princely Palace of Madril.
Most Mighty Monarch,
I Humbly salute your Imperial Majesty, giving your Highness to understand of
our great misery, and violent order wherewith we are of long time oppressed by
the English Nation: Their Government is such, as Pharaoh himself never used the
like; for they content not themselves with all Temporal Superiority, but by
cruelty desire our blood, and perpetual destruction, to blot out the whole
remembrance of our Posterity, as also our old Catholic Religion, and to swear
that the Queen of England is Supreme of the Cburch.

I refer the consideration thereof to your M^jesties high judgment, the
rather, for that Nero in his time was far inferior to this Queen in cruelty.
Wherefore, and for the respects thereof, Right Mighty Potentate, my self, with
my followers and retainers, and being also requested by the Bishops, Prelates
and Religious men of my Country, have drawn my Sword, and proclaimed Wars
against them for the recovery first of Christ's Catholic Religion, and next for
the maintenance of my own Right, which of long time has been wrongfully
detained from me and my Father, who by right succession was lawful heir to the
Earldom of Desmond; for he was eldest son to James my Grandfather, also Earl of
Desmond: and for that my Uncle Gerald (being the younger Brother) took part
with the wicked proceedings of the Queen of England, to farther the unlawful
claim of Supremacy, usurped the name of Earl of Desmond in my Fathers true
Title; yet notwithstanding, he had not long enjoyed his name of Earl, when the
wicked English annoyed him, and prosecuted Wars, that he with the most part of
those that held of his side was slain, and his Country thereby planted with
Englishmen. And now by the just judgment and providence of God, I have utterly
rooted these Malepart Boughs.
bowse out of the Orchard of my Country, and have profited so much in my
proceedings, that my d^sterly Enemies dare not show their faces in any part of
my Country; but having taken my Towns and Cities for their refuge and strength,
where they do remain, as it were Prisoner, for want of means to assail them, as
Cannon and Powder, which my Country cannot yield.

Having these wants, most noble Potentate, I have presumed with all humility,
to address these my Letters to your High Majesty, craving the same of your
gracious clemency and goodness, to assist me in this godly enterprise, with
some help of such necessaries for the Wars, as your Majesty shall think
requisite; and (after the quiet of my Country) satisfaction shall be truly
made for the some, and my self in person, with all my forces, shall be ready to
serve your Highness, in any Country your Majesty shall command me.

And if your Majesty will vouchsafe to send me a competent number of Soldiers,
I will place them in some of my Towns and Cities, to remain in your gracious
disposition, till such time as my ability shall make good what your Majesty
shall lend me in money and Munition: and also your Majesty's high Commission
under the Broad Seal for leading and conducting these Soldiers, according to
the Prescript, Order and Articles of martial discipline, as your Majesty shall
appoint me, and as the service of this Land shall require. I praise the
Almighty God, I have done by his goodness, more then all my Predecessors; for I
have reclaimed all the Nobility of this part of Ireland, under the dutiful
obedience of Christ's Church, and mine own Authority; and accordingly have taken
Pledges and Corporal Oaths, never to swerve from the same: and would have sent
them to your Majesty by this Bearer, but that the Ship was not of sufficiency
nor strength to carry so Noble Personages; and will send them whenever your
Highness please.

So there rests nothing to quiet this part of the World, but your Majesty's
assistance, which I daily expect. Thus, most Mighty Monarch, I humbly take my
leave, and do kiss your Royal hands, beseeching the Almighty of your Majesty's
health and happiness.

Your Majesty's most humble at all command. James Desmond.
From my Camp the XIV. of March, MD XCIX. Copia vera concordans cum Originali,
examinat. per Tho. White Mayor of Waterford.


Another Letter of the same date.
To the most mighty Monarch of the World, the Great King of Spain, give these
at his most Princely Palace at Madrid.
YOur Majesty shall understand, that the Bearer hereof Captain M S. F 97. fol.
188.
Andrew Roche, has been always in the service of the Queen of England, and
has performed her manifold services at Sea: whereby he had great preferment
and credit; and being of late time conversant with Catholics, and ^eachers of
Divine Instructions, that were sorry for his lewd life, made known unto him the
danger wherein his soul was. So that by their godly persuasions, he was at that
time reclaimed and converted to be a good Catholic, and to spend the residue
of his life in the defense and service of the Church. Since which time of
reconcilement, he was to repair to your Majesty with his Ship and Goods, as
it is well known to your Highness Council, who consiscated that Ship to your
Majesty's use; himself being at that time stricken with extreme sickness, that
he was not able to proceed in the Voyage: and when his company returned into
Ireland, they reported that the Adelantado, or the Spanish Admiral.
Lantado wished rather his Person then his Ship; which made him fearful ever
since to repair th^ther, till he should deserve his freedom by some worthy
service to your Majesty.

The Let some Romanist tell us the meaning of this, for none was H^^bu^ King
(...) V^. of (...) the (...) England.
Heir Apparent to the Crown of England, had been carried ^y him to your
Highness, but that he was bewrayed by some of his own men, and thereby was
intercepted, and himself taken prisoner, where he remained so long, till by the
providence of God, and the help of good friends, he was conveyed into Ireland
to me in a small boat; ^^d having th^se occasions to your Majesty, and being
assured of his trust, faith, and confidence toward me, have committed this
charge into his hands; the rather, for that I understand your Royal Fleet is
directed for England this year, to the end he may be a Leader and Cond^ctor to
them in the Coast of England and Ireland, being very expert in the knowledge
thereof, and in the whole Art of Navigation. And thus with all humility I
commit your Highness to the Almighty.

Your Majesty's most humble at all command, James Desmond.
From my Camp the XIV. or March, MD LXXXXIX. Copia vera concordans cum
Originali, examinat. per Tho. White, Mayor of Waterford.


These two Letters you may see in the honorable Pacata Hibernla, lib. 2. cap.
3. page 142, 143, 144, 145.
Sir George Carew, afterward Earl of Totnes; but with some mistakes by the
Printer; wherefore, I have followed the Authentic Manuscript Copies whence he
took his. And thus much for the troubles in Ireland, till we come to the next
Century.

Though here it may not be amiss to add, that several of the Irish Nobility
(either by the Queens or their own instigations) conveyed themselves over to be
Instructed in our English Universities; as M S. Matricul^ Antiqua Univers. Oxon.
Richard Bourke, Baron of Dunkellyn, studies at Christ-Church; after this his
Brother Thomas, Baron of Dunkellyn, at Magdalen College: Bernard Orwoirk, a
Knights son of Conaught, at New-Colledge; and Thadeus Bryan, an Earls son, at
Lincoln College in Oxford: and in Cambridge I find the Lord Sir George
Paule's life of Archbishop Whitgift, p. 17. 35.
Dunboy's son at Trinity College, under the Tuition of the then Dr Whitgift,
afterward the careful and worthy Archbishop of Canterbury. So at the beginning
of King James his Reign, Henry O Brian, Baron of Bryken, and his younger
Brother Brian O Brian, entered themselves together in Brazen-Nose College in
Oxford.

Thus was the Kingdom of Ireland, by the well bringing up of their Nobility,
designed to be well civilized, that they might the more appear like men and
Christians: which would the better oblige them to their Queen and her
Government.

This makes it convenient to nurture up your very Enemies (the better to
reclaim them) in Religion, Learning and Morality. But Sir John Perot was out in
his Politics, when he taught the Irish the use of Arms, whereby they
afterward became more formidable to the English, and put them to far greater
troubles and straits to reduce them to obedience.

The end of the Sixth Book.
A CONTINUATION OF THE REBELLIONS AND Treasonablepractices OF THE ROMANISTS IN
ENGLAND: From the year MD, to MDC.
BOOK VII.
CHAP. I. The Supreme HEAD of the Church, King Henry VIII, declared deprived of
his Dominions.
BEing now come to England, here we might find matter

But first a word by the by concerning Henry VIII, who procured to himself a
great deal of ill will, by declaring himself an absolute King over all his
Subjects, by being Supreme Head under Christ, both of Church and State within
his Dominions

At this many of his Subjects boil, and grew scrupulous; would find many
faults which were neither made nor intended, and so cry down what was never set
up. Queen Elizabeth willing to give them content, left out the word Head,
(which was the main word they started at) and was called the -- 1 Elizabethae
cap 1.
Supreme Governor of this Realm, and of all other her Highness Dominions and
Countries, as well in Spiritual or Ecclesiastical things or causes, as
Temporal. And in the form for Bidding Prayers, thus -- Q El^z. ^^^^nctions anno
155^.
Supreme Governor of this Realm, as well in Causes Ecclesiastical as Temporal

At this the Romanists not only took exceptions, but falsely spread abroad,
that by this Title, the Kings or Queens of England took upon them to be in Ade^
quid^m, (...) in administran lis Sacramentis sacerdotalem potestatem arrogari.
Sanders de (...) and v^d. page 316, 317. Inso^uch, as if He, (i. e the King)
pleases, he (...) persona^ly. R^fl^ctions upon the Oaths of Supremacy and
Allegi^^^ ^w^g 11. (...).
Holy Orders, might admin^ster the Sacraments, and had Sacerdotal
Qualifications and Authority.

To take away this Rub, and the better to satisfy the people, the Q^^^n and
her Convocation published this following Interpr^^^^ion.

An Admonition to simple men, deceived by Malicious.
(...) Majesty being informed, that in certain places of (...) sundry of her
Native Subjects, being called Ec(...) ^
Mini^try of the Church, be by sinister persuasion, and (...) induced to find
some scruple in the form of (...) by an Act of the last Parliament is
prescribed to be (...) persons for the Recognition of their Allegiance (...),
which certainly never was ever meant, nor by any (...) or good sense can be
thereof gathered: would that (...) subjects should understand, that nothing
was, is, or (...)meant, or intended by the same Oath, to have any other Du(...)
or Bond required by the same Oath, then was ack^^w^^^ged to be due to the most
Noble Kings of famous memory, (...) the VIII. her Majesty's Father, or King
Edward the (...) Brother.

(...) her Majesty forbids all manner her Subjects to (...) credit to such
perverse and malicious persons, which (...) malicious^ie labor to notify to
her loving Sub(...) of the said Oath it may be collected, that the (...) of
this Realm, Possessors of the Crown, may (...) and Power of Ministry of Divine
Service in (...) her said Subjects be much abused by such evil (...).

(...) her Majesty neither does, nor ever will ch^llenge (...) the^ that was
challenged and lately used by the (...) Kings of famous Memory, King Henry
the VIII, and (...) VI, which is, and was of ancient time due to (...) of this
Ream, that is under God to have the (...) Rule over all manner of persons born
within (...) ^ominions and Countries, of what Estate, ei(...) Temporal, soever
they be; so as no other Foreign Power shall or ought to have any Superiority
over them.

And if any person that has conceived any other sense of the form of the said
Oath, shall accept the same Oath with this Interpretation, sense or meaning,
her Majesty is well pleased to accept every such in that behalf, as her good
and obedient Subjects, and shall acquit them of all manner of Penalties
contained in the said Act, against such as shall peremptorily or obstinately
take the same Oath.

And as if this were not authentic enough, she took care that this
interpretation of hers, should be confirmed by Act of Parliament, in this
following Proviso.

Provided also, that the Oath expressed in the said Act, made in V Elizabetha,
cap. 1.
the said first year, shall be taken and expounded in such form, as is set
forth in an Admonition annexed to the Queens Majesty's Injunctions, published
in the first year of her Majesty's Reign: that is to say to confess and
acknowledge in her Majesty, her Heirs and Successors, none other Authority
then that was challenged, and lately used by the Noble King Henry the eighth,
and King Edward the Sixth, as in the said Admonition more plainly may appear.

And as if this were not satisfactory, she provided to have the Interpretation
of this Oath thus inserted amongst our Articles of Religion, thereby the better
to demonstrate how far we are from giving any Priestly Function to our
Sovereigns.

XXXVII. Of the Civil Magistrates.

THe Queens Majesty has the chief Power in this Realm of England, Articles of
Religion, anno 1562. Art. 37.
and other her Dominions, unto whom the Chief Government of all Estates of this
Realm, whether they be Ecclesiastical or Civil, in all Cases does appertain;
and is not, nor ought to be subject to any Foreign Jurisdiction.

Where we attribute to the Queens Majesty the Chief Government, by which
Titles we understand the minds of some dangerous folk to be offended: We give
not our Princes the Ministering, either of Gods Word, or of the Sacraments; the
which thing the Injunctions also lately set forth by Elizabeth our Queen, do
most plainly testify: But that only Prerogative which we see to have been
given always to all Godly Princes in holy Scriptures by God himself, that is,
that they should Rule all Estates and Degrees committed to their charge by God,
whether they be Ecclesiastical or Temporal, and restrain with the Civil Sword
the stubborn and evil Doers. The Bishop of Rome has no jurisdiction in this
Realm of England. The Laws of the Realm may punish Christian men Taken out of
King Edward VI. his Articles, anno 1552. of Civil Magistrates.
with death, for heinous and grievous offenses. It is lawful for Christian men,
at the Commandment of the Magistrate, to wear weapons, and serve in the Wars.

And with these agree the Articles agreed upon by the Archbishops and Bishops
in Anno 1615. 57, 58, 59, 60, 61, 62.
Convocation at Dublin, for the Kingdom of Ireland.

And because at the present, I cannot remember any Historian to have taken
notice of it, I shall assure the Reader of one Passage concerning a Convocation
of Divines.

In King James his time, the Romanists on the one hand were so busy and
zealous to advance the Popedom over all Principalities and Powers, that the
Crown it self must be disposed according to the pleasure of that Myter: And on
the other hand, the Presbyterian H^t-spurs were so rigoro^sly malepart, that
they would advance their seditious and blockish Assemblies, or rather
Conventicles, above all Law, Reason, Loyalty, Royalty, and Divinity it self; as
appears by their continual countenancing of Rebellion and Schism against their
Kings and Bishops.

The first kept a great deal of clutter with St. Peter and is S^ccessors; the
latter despised both him and all Bi^hops. ^he first would prove out of the
Prophet Jer. 1. 10. Ex^rav Com. c. unam sanctam. G^^g. de ^ajor and obed c
solita.
Jer^my, that the Pope was set -- Over the Nations, and over the Kingdoms, to
root out and to pull down, to destroy and to throw down, to build and to plant.
-- The latter affirmed that they were -- Psalm 149. 8.
T^^^nde ^h^r Kings with chains, and their Nobles with je^lers of I on The
first would tell us that the Pope Extra. 16.
had two swords, that all must be obedient to him upon pain of damnation; (...)
he excels a King as much as the Sun does the Moon, or Did. 96. c. du sunt.
Gold does Lead: That Ex^^^. Joh. XXII. Tit 5 and did 22 ^. omnes Gloss.
God has delivered to him the Power and ^ule, not only of Earth, but of
Heaven too. Nay, that Council. Edi^. Reg^a Paris, Tom. 34. page 440.
he was above all Power both of Heaven and Earth. The latter desp^^ed all these
Rodomontado's, as coming from the Whore of Babylon and the Horned Beast; but
would fright the poor People out of their little wits, by bauling out a --
Curse ye Meroz, curse ye bitterly the Inhabitant thereof; because they came not
to the help of the Lord, to the help of the Lord against the M^ghty. And with
this they would Judge. 5. 23.
carry on their Cause and Presbytery.

Regal Authority being thus designed to be noised and pushed down, it wanted
not many famous and Learned Champions, as well here as beyond Seas. Nor would
King James himself be only a Spectator in this Pen-Combat, but he also falls
to work; and slighting the railing Rabble, and inferior Pickeerers, he
assaults and vindicates his Right against their greatest Cardinal; who at first
durst not encounter his Royal Aversary in his own shape, but under the disguise
of Tortus.

In the mean time, a Synod being held in the time of that vigilant and
industrious Prelate Archbishop Bancroft, to the Reverend Divines there met, was
presented a large Tract containing M S.
XXXVI Chapters, to prove the Sovereignty of Kings and Chief Civil Governors,
above the Highpriests, from the Creation, to the end of the Jewish State;
which being read in the Convocation, was wholly approved of by joint consent.
And then being sent down to York, it also past the Convocation there, as
appears by the Subscriptions to the said Treatise of Constitutions in
vindication of Regal Supremacy.

It Is said, that there was a second part of it, to prove the same Authority and
Supremacy, from Christ to these times; but whether there was any such second
part, or whether it past the said Convocation, I shall leave to others inquiry.

And by the way, the Reader, if he pleases for variety sake, may take our
XXXVII Article, as it (with the rest) was turned into Latin Verse, near
threescore years ago by one Mr. John Glanvil of the University of Oxford.

Obtinet Imperium Majestas Regia summum
Angliacis ejus sinibus, atque aliis:
Cujus in omnimodis sacrata potentia causis
Omnibus (ut par est) imperat Ordinibus:
Sive Sacerdotes sint, seu Civilia tractent
Munia, nec peregri est subjicienda foro.
Nos ubi Principibus primas damus, inde sinistris
Mentibus ansa sui Schismatis esse solet.
Non tamen aeternum datur illis copia verbum,
Sive ministrandi Pignora sacra Dei.
Legibus hoc patuit quas Elizabetha beati
Nominis, auspicio condidit ante suo.
Tale sed Imperium nostris concedimus, olim
Quale p^is tribuit Regibus ipse Deus:
Nempe gradus hominum soli dominentur in omnes,
Quos Dominus proprio subdidit Imperio,
Quos vel publica res capit, aut Ecclesia cunctos
Civilique queant ense donare malos.
Non habet Imperium Romanus Episcopus ullum,
Finibus (O felix terra Britanne) tuis.
Jura Potestatem Civilia gentis in omnes
Impia patrantes Crimina mortis habent.
Far (Magistratus si jusserit) arma vel ipsis
Christicolis, etiam bella ciere licet.
To which the Poet afterward subjoyns these following Verses.

Subditus in proprium miser ut ferat arma Monarcham
Quem feriet bruto fulmine Papa jubet;
Non ita Mat. 12. 17.
Caesareas abrupit Christus Mart. 17 27.
habenas,
Papa tamen Christi gestit habere vices,
Falso, nam pedibus tenebrarum Ephesians. 6. 21.
Principis instat
Luc. 4. 6.
Omnia qui mendax se dare Regna refert.
India magniloquo dives sic cessit Ex donatione Alexand^i VI. Guiccard. lib. 1.
Ibero
Hoc tulit invisum jure Navarra jugum.
Barbarus insulsum sed Rex Lop. Gomar. cap. 113.
Atabaliba Papam
Risit, and Insanit Papa superbus ait.
Regna datignotis qui sic aliena Dynastis,
Excidit Imperio sed tamen ille suo.
Heu quantas peperit Papa Donatio strages!
Millia Joseph Acosta, lib. 4. cap. 3. Bar. de Casao, Epise. This last, viz
Barthomaeus Casaus a Godly Spaniard, and a Dominican, and Confessor to the
Emperor Charles V, went into the West Indies to preach the Christian Religion
amongst those people. And did write (anno 1542) a particular Treatise to show
the barbarous cruelty, and abominable Inhumanity of his Countrymen against
those poor, naked and simple Americans. The which bloody Butcheri^s are scarce
to be paralleled in all Histories.
nudorum quot cecidere virum!
Exuit humanum crudeli ex pectore mentem,
Qui legit and salsis temporat a lachrimis,
Qualiter innocuos affixit Celtiber Indos,
Sed penes Historicos sint ea Lecta suos.
Thus we see, that by the foresaid Articles, neither our Kings, nor the Church,
never intended any Spiritual Power (and yet I know no reason, but that a King
or Queen may enjoy as much as some Female Romanists, viz. their Lady Abbesses)
but only a Civil jurisdiction, and a coercive Power, for the better Regulating
their Dominions against homebred Traitors and Foreign Enemies, as you have
seen it here interpretated: and not only our His Notes upon the 37 Article.
Thomas Rogers and Certamen Religiosum, p. 159.
Chr. Cartwright will inform you farther of it, but also some Romanists
themselves, as one lately in his Cap 6. page 25, 26, 27, 28, etc.
Reflections upon the Oaths of Supremcie and Allegiance. Another more ancient,
designedly written in Latin against the Book called God and the King: the
Romanist book is also called Edit. Colon. 1619. page 48, 49.
Deus and Rex. And Father Caron, a true son to the Papal Chair, is unwilling to
boggle at this N^s enim Regem solum, nostrum and Ecclesiae Britanniae and
H^berniae caput esse Civil; Supremumque Gubernatorem agnoscimus, nec aliud Rex
ipse praetendl^, aut Protestants reipsa volunt. Redmund. Caron. Remonstrantia
Hibernorum, part V. page 64. 4.
Supreme ^itle, as people have formerly done. And it is not the Sex that spoils
the business; 1 Mar. 2 Parl.
Queens being capable of, and do enjoy all jurisdictions and Q^alifications
that Kings do.

But enough concerning this Oath of Supremacy; which was one of the main
things that vexed the Pope, supposing by this his own Authority and gain struck
at: and indeed the -- Post Divortiom, nisi quod Pontificiam Po^estatem
execratos, se Caput Ecclesiae constituit, nihil in Religione mutavit. Jac. Aug
Thuan Hist. lib 3. -- In which Religion [i. e. the Roman] the King dyed. Tho.
Baily' s life of John Fisher, Bish^p of Ro^hester, cap. 21. page 164. --
Haereses paeue omnes, praeter illam quae Romani Pontificis Prima^um, and
Mon^sticas Religiones oppugnabat, cohibuit, and repressit. Nic. Sander. de
Schism. Angl. lib. 2. page 228. Parsons conversions of Engl. part 1. p. 170,
235, 238, 241, 242, 244, 246. part 2. p. 541, part 3. vol. 2. p. 408.
Romanists confess that Henry VIII. retained all the Articles of the Roman
Church but this one, and dyed in their Religion.

But let the King think as well as he pleases of his own Authority, the Pope
will have as good opinion of his own; and to let King Henry see how far his
jurisdiction reaches, Paul III 30 Aug. 1535.
draws up a thundering Bull against his Majesty, in which he deprives him of
his Dominions: this for some time he keeps by him, but at last sent it roaring
It was published December. 17. 1538.
abroad; and what a notable thing it was, Father Paul, (one of the most
judicious Friars that ever set Pen to Paper) shall tell you. -- Hist. Council.
of Trent. lib. 1. page 86.
A terrible thundering Bull, such as never was used by his Predecessors, nor
imitated by his Successors.

The thing it self being very long, and as tedious as idle, I shall refer you
for it to their Bullaria; but the substance of it take as follows.

IT begins with a Canting or Quaking Preface, (as most other Bulls do) odly
misapplying of the Holy Scripture to fob up the Papal power.

Rants dapperly against the King, and his Subjects that obey him.

Interdicts all Cities, Churches, Places, which favor or adhere to him.

Declares Him, his Friends, and their Children deprived of all benefi^s and
privileges, and incapable to obtain any.

Absolves all his Subjects from their Oaths of Obedience or Allegiance to him
their King.

Pronounces that he and his adherents shall be held as infamous; their Wills,
Testimonies, Credits and Authorities not to be of any validity.

Prohibits under Papal punishment, to Deal, Trade or have any meddling with such
wicked people.

Injoynes all Ecclesiastics forthwith to avoid the Kings Dominions, nor to
return thither but by a Papal License, upon sure Certificate of the said Kings
repentance and submission.

Commands the Nobility, Gentry, and others to make it their care and business
to expel and depose the said Henry from his Dominions.

Declares all Leagues, Treaties or Agreements made by the said King, with other
Christian Princes, to be null; which if the said Kings and Potentates do not
forthwith submit to as void and of none effect, that then their respective
Territories to lie under Interdiction, and so to remain till the said Princes
shall renounce all Amity and Alliance with the said Henry.

Exhorts and commands all the said Princes and others, by virtue of their
obedience, to invade, spoil, take Arms and fight against the said King, and all
those who are subject to him. And as for the Goods, Ships and whatsoever else
they take from the said English, He by his Infallible and Papal Authority,
gives to the said takers all right and propriety.

Wills all Patriarchs, Archbishops, Bishops and all other Ecclesiastics,
under pain of the severest Censures, publicly to declare by Bell, Book and
Candle, the said Henry and all his Adherents Excommunicated.

Requires that none under the guilt of the same Censures any way hinder the
publication of this Bull against the King.

And if any do withstand, contradict or gainsay by any means, signs or tokens
whatever this Bull, that then he or they so opposing shall incur the wrath of
Almighty God, and the Blessed Apostles Peter and Paul.

Dated at Rome at St. Marks, anno 1535. III d. Kal. September. In the first year
of our Popedom.
And that neither King Henry, nor any else should plead ignorance of these
things, it was therein provided and commanded that the said Bull should be
affixed to the doors of the Neighboring to England, or the Kings Dominions;
and should be publicly read in the said Churches, especicially at Tornay,
Bruges and Dunkirk; from which place it was boldly taken down by one William
Lock a Mercer of London.

They were also posted up at Bolloigne and Diepe in France, and St. Andrews in
Scotland: And so liberal was his Holiness, that by a Breve he freely offers
England to James V King of the Scots, promising to assist him in the gaining of
it; and for a further encouragement, by his Legate Giovanni-Antonio Compeggio
presented him with many Ceremonies, and Apostolical Benediction, a Cap and a
Sword newly before Consecrated on Christmas night.

But for all this, sturdy King Harry (who above all things hated a bassle) kept
his Crown, Kingdom and Authority; the Paper not putting him to the tenth part
of trouble (if it were any at all to him) as some Northern Rebels did, who
being fob'd up that Lincolnshire their number was supposed to be about twenty
thousand, who at last growing jealous one of another, dispersed themselves;
some being after taken and executed, amongst whom was their Ring-reader, being
a stu^die Monk, called Doctor Makerel, though in this expedition he nominated
himself Captain Cobbler.

Yet no sooner is this stisled, when another, and that more terrible, began in
York shire, and the other Northern Counties; their strength supposed to be
about forty thousand, formed into a compl^at Army, not wanting a Train of
Artillery. They called their March, -- The holy and blessed Pilgrimage -- and
the -- Pilgrimage of Grace. On the one side of their Banner^ was painted Christ
hanging on the Cross: On the other, a Chalice with the Wafer in it. The
Soldiers upon their sleeves had represented the five Wounds of Christ, and in
the midst the name of Jesus. And thus are they thought to be brave Roman Blades
(by De Schi^m. lib 1. page 155.
Nicholas Sanders) who would thus take up Arms for their Religion. But for all
this, their designs came to nothing, being persuaded upon better advice to
creep home again; which troubled Sanders so much, that he cannot think on this
opportunity, without accus^^g the King of Perjury and Knavery.

As for King Henry VIII, it fares with him as with other Princes, most
speaking of him as their interest lay; being honored by some with as great
Commendations as Fancy or Flattery could reach, whilst by others he was looked
upon as the worst of Tyrants, and loaded with all the Reproaches and Infamies
that Satyr or Malice could invent: for as the worst of Kings and Actions will
never want Flatterers and admirers, so the best will never escape the slanders
of the envious.

The truth is, though he was Learned above the custom of Princes; yet if ever
any man had his faults, our Henry had his share to the purpose: his Will being
both Law and Reason, as far as his Dominions reached; and to contradict his
humor, was little less then to be next door to another world; and which might
make him worse, was, that amongst all his Favorites and Courtiers, there was
scarce any, but either Knave or Flatterer, if not both, since it is hard to
separate them. So that in many things where that King did amiss, whether he
acted them by his own inclinations and judgment, or by the suggestions and
instigations of his griping and base-soul'd Courtiers and Minions, shall be
left to every ones opinion; nor is it much material where the fault should be
laid, being both so guilty.

Yet this is certain, that when he followed his own proper Genius, viz. Martial
exploits, none came off with greater glory then himself for his personal Acts
and Valor. And the whole Kingdom is beholden unto him for the great Fame and
Renown she gained abroad by her Victories and Warlike Achievements under his
conduct. And what cannot Englishmen do, under an Active and Martial Prince? But
in brief, I shall not undertake to quit him from that short but comprehensive
Character given him of old, viz. -- That he never spared man in his Anger, nor
woman in his Lust.

As Henry VIII was no sooner set in the Throne, but In his English Translation
of Dr. Sebastian Brant's Stultifer^ Navis, fol 205, 206.
Alexander Barklay endeavored to declare his Renown and Virtues; so no sooner
was he dead, but one William Thomas undertook his Apology. This Thomas (as
himself words it) being constrained by misfortune to abandon the place of his
Nativity, meets (after the said Kings death) several Gentlemen at Bologna in
Italy, against whom he enters into discourse [in the Month of 1546/7.
February, in which Month the King was buried at Windsore] in Defense of that
Noble Prince, whose honor had been wrongfully touched, as he expresses it;
which he draws up into a Treatise by way of a Dialogue, which he directed to
Pietro Aretino the well known Tuscan Poet, as famous for his Satirical Wit, as
infamous for his life and death.

This he did, he says, the better to inform the said Aretine of the Kings
worth; telling him also, that the King, -- Has remembered thee with an
honorable Legacy by his Testament; the which his Enemies pretend, proceeded
of the fear that he had, lest thou should after his death defame him. --

But certain I am, that the King in his Will and Testament makes no mention of
this Poet: so in this Mr. Thomas, was misinformed; a thing of no great wonder.
And that the King stood in any fear of Aretines writing against him, or that
Aretine intended to write of him, I cannot say: but true it is, that though
this Florentine was no great Clerk, yet in his Mothers Tongue he laid so about
him, and with that rage and fury, that he was styled the Scourge of Princes;
and his Epitaph in St. Lukes Church in Venice will further tell the Temper of
the Fellow; in Italian I meet with it thus:

Qui giace l' Aretin P^eta Tosco
Chi disse mal d'Ognun, fuor chedi Dio,
Scusandosi, dicendo, n'il conobbi.
But I think it is more true and Authentic thus in Latiue.

Condit Aretini cineres lapis iste sepultos, Phil. Labbe Thesaurus E^^^aph.
Fran. Sweet^. select. delit. page 156.

Mortales atro qui sale perfricuit:
Intactus Deus est illi, causamque rogatus,
Hanc dedit, ille (inquit) non mihi notus erat.
Here the Poet Aretine Entombed does lie,
Who against all let his spiteful Pasquins fly:
But God escaped him, and why? being asked fro' him;
Thus cleared himself, 'Twas cause I did not know him.
But Orat. contra Aretinum.
Joachimus Perionius will assure us, that he neither spared the Apostles,
Christ, or God himself. As some called him the Scourge of Princes, so others
entitled him the Divine; both which Venetia descritta.
Sansovino tells us, Ariosto thus mentions in his Orlando Furioso.

Ecco il Flagello --
De Principi, il Divin Pietro Aretino.
But as for the Title of Divine or Penitent, I see little reason he should have
them, although there be some Meditations on the Penitential Psalms carried
about under his name: yet a wicked man may make a good Book, as the greatest
Rebels pretend the most Religion; but that he did ever really repent, I am not
convinced, because then they would have given him a better Epitaph: besides,
the story of his death makes him then as bad as ever. But enough, if not too
much of this.

As concerning the foresaid William Thomas, take as follows.

1544. He got into Italy. 1547. He wrote the foresaid Dialogue at Bologna la
Grossa; it is called M S. B. 2. 7. in Bible B^dl. Oxon.
le Pelegrine, and never printed that I know of. 1543. He finished his Italian
Dictionary and Grammar at Padoa, undertook at the desire, and for the
instruction of Mr. John Tamworth, then living at Venice; and was afterward
(viz. 1567) printed by the appointment of Sir William Mildmay. 1549. I meet
with him returned to London, when and where he Printed his short but methodical
History of Italy, which was Reprinted 1561. He was made Clerk of the Council to
King Edward VI. 1553. He designed the Murder of Queen Mary, or Jo. Bal. de
Scriptoribus, Appendix, p. 100.
Steven Gardener Bishop of Winchester. 155^/^. February 20. He was sent to the
Tower of London. February 26. He had almost killed himself by thrusting a Knife
under his Paps. 1554. May 9. He was arraigned and condemned at Guild Hall. May
18. He was drawn from the Tower to Tyborn, and there hanged, headed, and
quartered.
It Is said that he was an intimate with Parsons th^ee C^nversious of Engl. part
3. page 220, 221.
Christopher Goodman, that enemy to the Rule of Women, and a fiery Puritan; and
no doubt that Thomas was too much warped that way, and one of more misguided
zeal, then true Religion or Wisdom. He translated some Books out of Italian;
and besides those Printed, wrote a Tract called The Common Place of State, for
the use of King Edward VI, discoursing whether it be expedient to vary with the
time: which, with several other of his Writings, may be seen in Sir Robert
Cotton's Sub Effigy Vespasian^. D. 18.
Library. And so much of King Henry and his Champion William Thomas.

To this King succeeded Edward VI, a most virtuous and hopeful Prince, but too
young to correct the villainies of the Grandees about him, who loved the
Churches better then they loved God: yet a Reformation of Religion was carried
on, which so vexed some in the North, that they took up Arms to restore Popery,
though to no purpose. But those in the West were more stubborn, especially the
Devonshire and Cornish men, who formed themselves into an Army, besieged
Exeter, which bravely defended it self against all their power and spite.

Nor would their Holy Zeal render them victorious, though as a means to be so,
they marched into the Field with a Crucifix under a Canopy, which instead of an
Altar, was set in a Cart, accompanied with Crosses and Candlesticks, Banners,
Holy-Bread and Holy Water, to drive away the Devils, and dull their Enemies
Swords, as Speed wordeth it. And though they fought fiercely against the King,
his Commission and good Subjects, yet they could conclude their demands, or
rather commands, with an Item, We pray God save King Edward: for we be his,
both body and goods.



And this way of canting, is always used by all other Traitors, who the higher
they run into Rebellion, declare themselves the better Subjects. In short,
though these peoples cause was bad enough (and were soon quelled) yet De
Schism. lib. 2. page 260.
Sanders will not let them pass without some Papal holy Water, being true
Romanists; and Father Three conversions of Engl. part 2. page 594, 619.
Parsons will not allow them to be faulty, because (forsooth) they fought for
the Roman Religion; as if to take up Arms for any Religion against their true
and lawful Sovereign were warrantable; for if so, every Opinion and Phanatick
will be its own judge and carver, so that there will be no end of Wars and
Bloodshed, yet every man in the right, at least the strongest can do no wrong,
however not commit Treason; according to the too-much-practis'd Rule, thus
wittily condemned by Sir John Harrington:

Treason does never prosper, what is the reason? Epigram, 5.

For if it prosper, none dare call it Treason.
CHAP. II. A Vindication of Queen Elizabeth.
ANd now we come to the prosperous Reign of the so much famed Elizabeth, in
whose time England was in the height of its Glory and Repute; being as an
Umpire to the whole World, flourishing at home, and victorious abroad: but
prudent Cecils and vigilant Walsinghams are not always to be had; and so we
must be content with our decaying Laurels.

And here (by the by) because De Schism. A^gl. lib. 3. page 319.
Sanders and other Romanists are pleased to render her as the worst of all
women-kinde, I shall take the boldness to say something in her Vindication, the
better to confute her former Revilers, and to satisfy the more ignorant
somewhat in her behalf.

Her Piety and Religion have been celebrated by many Pens; her Learning and
skill in variety of Languages was admired by her greatest Enemies. Besides her
English, Argh^^ium Prae^a, Elizabetha.
Christopher Ocklande (whose Books were once ordered to be read in all
Grammar-Schools will tell you of six other Languages she was perfect in.

Elizabetha piis primos imbuta per annos
Moribus, and sophiae studiis instruct a sacrata
Doctrina, and linguae Latiae Graiaeque perita.
Linguas Europae celebres intelliget omnes,
Quid Teuto, Hispanus, Gallusve, Italusve loquatur.
Mr. His nine Worthies, page 282.
Thomas Heywood, one who loved to write concerning Women, concludes thus of our
Elizabeth.

Chaste Virgin, Royal Queen, beloved and feared;
Much on the Earth admired, to Heaven indear'd;
Single and singular (without another)
A Nurse to Belgia, and to France a Mother;
Potent by Land, sole Sovereign of the Main,
Antagonist to Rome, the scourge of Spain.
Though she was excellently skilled in all manner of Needle Work, was admired
for her neat Dancing, was very skilful and knowing in Music, playing well upon
diverse sorts of Instruments; yet these and suchlike little pleasures, could
never call her thoughts from her Subjects good, and the care of Government.

La. Epist. ^^urmi^.
Roger Ascham speaks wonders of her ingenuity and knowledge; and he had as much
reason to know her as any: but these you may say were Englishmen, and so
bribed by their birthright; though this with some of her Enemies is no Rule.

But should we run to all her Commendations beyond Seas, we might be endless.
Poet. Ital. vol. 1. page 79.
Cornelius Amaltheus, a zealous Italian Romanist, cannot withhold his Muse from
her Encomiums. Poet. Germ. vol 5 page 827.
Laurentius Rhodomanus is as earnest in his Anagrammatical mode. And his
Countryman Paulus Melissus seems, as it were, to bestow his whole time in her
Poet. Germ. vol. 4. page 342, 418, 425, 428, 440, 441, 443, 452, 462, 468, 478,
486, 493.
praises; and at last endeavors to go as high as his wit could reach, so far
will he have her above all other Goddesses.

Id. page 475.
Te Venerem, te Junonem, te Pallade quisquis
Dixerit, haud abs re dixerit ille puto.
Quin idem Charin and Musam te dixerit: imo
Musa es Musarum tu, Charitumque Charis.
Ignoscas Regina minus quam par sit and aequum
Dicenti laudis copia quanta tui est!
Divitiis Juno, forma Venus, Indole Pallas,
Dote Charis, cedit nomine Musa tibi.
Junones, Veneres, Charitas, Musasque Minervasque
Omnes una simul tu superare potis.
Cui culper, si te Divis ex omnibus unam
Natam Pantheiam virgo Britanna, loquar?
Amongst the Belgians, Poet Belg. vol. 2 page 681, 718, 719, 721,
Janus Gruterus, so famous for his Learning, is her great admirer. And of later
days, De laudibus and vica Elizabetha.
Adolphus van Dans has wrote a whole book in her Commendations. Nay, Johannes
Bochius of Bruxels, who was so inveterate against her Government and Religion,
that he assisted Richard Verstegan in the composing of his lying and bloody
Theater, yet cannot let her pass without this grand applause.

Poet. Belg. vol. 1. page 800.
Pallas, Juno, Venus, nemorosae in frondibus Idae
Discrimen formae cum subiere suae,
Inter formosas, si tu Dea quarta fuisses,
Vicisses reliquas, O Dea pulchra, Deas;
Quam Juno jejuna foret! quam pallida Pallas!
Quam Dea vana Venus! quam Dea sola fores!
How ready she was to answer Ambassadors and other people in several Languages,
on the sudden, Historians do Edm. Howes enlargement of Stow, page 813, 814, 815.
testify at large. But one thing I find Recorded of her which is not usual,
that when three Ambassadors, viz. the Imperial, French and Swedish, addressed
themselves to her; at the same time, she on the sudden Rog. Ascham, Epist.
Sturmio.
answered each of them in different Languages: the first of them in Italian,
the second in French, and the third in Latin.

Epist. dedicat. ad artem. Gram.
Vossius, Hist. Belg. l. 1.
Meteranus, Lib. 82. l. 119.
Thuanus, and a world of other Learned Writers, have weilded their Pens in her
Commendations: and though some Popes have endeavored as far as in them lay to
over-cloud her Reputation, by commanding the Commendatory expressions in her
behalf to be dashed out of Index librorum Prohibitorum.
Cambden and some other Writers; yet I find Pope Sixtus V (a very Zealous
Assertor of his Pontifical Chair) to bestow upon her and Henry the Fourth of
France, this following noble Character, -- Persaepe auditus est, cum dicerat,
toto orb, se unum virum and ^oeminam videre dignos (nisi labe sectaria infecti
essent) qui Regnarent, and quibus cum ipse de inge^ribus rebus consilia, quae
animo agitabat, communi caret; Navarrum and Elizabetham Reginam intelligens.
Aug. Thuan. Hist. lib. 82, and Perefixe Hist. Henry le grand, part 1.
That amongst all the Princes of the world, he could find but two, viz. Queen
Elizabeth and Navar (setting aside their opinions in Religion) who were worthy
to Rule, and with whom he could most fittingly consult and take advice. --

Having thus somewhat hinted on her Commendations, and at last brought the Pope
himself to be an Advocate for her Discretion, Prudence and good Government, we
may now the more exactly perceive where the Shoe pincheth, and what is the
cause of the ill will against her. Not denying but that she, as well as the
best of Monarchs, might have some miscarriages and oversights, in such a long
Reign as she continued; especially since the Earl of Leicester, and some
others, had the Fortune to sway in her time; it being granted, that Robert
Dudly was as great an Oppressor, as ever breathed for a Favorite, and so let
him and all such never be mentioned but with ignominy.

As for her Religion, whether Haeretical or not? As the Question is too large
to be here discussed; so is it nothing to the purpose, seeing Religion does not
entitle one to Kingdoms, nor is Dominion founded in Grace; a Pagan having as
much right to his Goods and Territories, as the best of Christians to what is
his.

As to her personal concerns, no question but she thought her self in the best
and surest way to her Salvation. And as she was a Princess of great Ingenuity
and Parts, understood many Languages, read many Books, and was so studious as
to translate some her self out of Greek, Latin and French; so we need not
doubt but thus furnished and industrious in Learning, she was able to give a
good account of her Religion, and to vindicate it and her self.

And as for Religion, as it related to the public, it has had famous
Champious and Martyrs to justify it, and to wipe off all the pretended blots
of Schism and Heresy, which malice or ignorance could throw upon it; for a
farther proof of which [it being not material to my History in hand] I shall
refer the Reader to Bishop Bramhal, Bishop Morton, Dr. Hammond, Mr. Hooker, Mr.
Mason, and suchlike Learned Defenders of our Church. Certain it is, that every
Kingdom is supreme within it self; and it is as true, that the Religion in
England was reformed in a peaceable and legal manner, by the greatest Authority
in it, viz. the Prince, Parliament, and Convocation of Divines: Regulation here
did not begin at the wrong end, it was not carried on by any Vid Chr. (...)
C^ta (...) Relig. ^^ag. 11.
Rebellious Leagues or Covenants: The Sovereign was free, and not fought to a
compliance; and as we may suppose the reasons to be just, so are we certain
that it was acted by the highest Authority in the Kingdom, which is according
to the Laws of God and M^n, and the practice of other Potentates both ancient
and mode^^.

As (...) ^he alteration it self, we may suppose it was done with d^e
^^^sideration, being acted by such a considerable Body and Auth^rity, and not
on a sudden, but by degrees, as they found just occasion to reject and admit.

And as on the one hand we may suppose it was agreeable to the Majority of the
Laity, considering it past their Representives the Parliament, nor opposed by
any considerable number after: so Clergy, seeing that the Parishes, Headships
of Colleges and Halls in the Universities, with the Prebendships, Bishoprics,
and the other Dignities of the Church in England and Wales, did then amount to
the number of very near ten thousand.

Yet of all that number of Preferments, adding to them the Lord Abbots, Priors
and Lady Abbesses, and the whole number of these Roman-Nonconformists would not
amount to 200.

But waving her Religion, I find the greatest crime objected to her, is her
cruelty against others for their opinions in Religion; and with this her
Adversaries have made no little noise in the world.

To this I shall return some satisfaction, with as much brevity as can be; all
this being but a digression, and by the by.

As for several years of her Reign, not one Priest had suffered death; so when
they did (as afterward) I fear many of them are yet held for blessed Martyrs,
who justly dyed as wicked Traitors. And in this I would have the unbiased
Romanists but to consider,

That even long before the Reformation,
25 Edw. 3. cap. 2.
IT was Treason to compass or imagine the death of the King, the Queen, or
their eldest Son and Heir. Ib.
It was ^reason to Leavie war against the King, or to adhere to the Kings
enemies, or to give to the said Enemies aid or comfort. Cokes Institut. part 3.
chap. 36. 13 Rich. 2. Stat. 2. cap. 2.
It was Felony to bring or send into the Kingdom any Summons, Sentence, or
Excommunication against any person of what condition soever. 16 Rich. 2. cap. 5.
He incurred a Praemunire that got such Bulls or Excommunications from the Pope.
Coke, part 3. chap. 84.
None was to go out of the Realm or beyond seas without the Kings leave or
license. Of these things see more at large in Coke's Institut. part 3. cap 36.
and his Reports, part 5. fol. 12, 15, 17, 21, 22, 23, 27, 28. and Bishop
Bramhals just vindication of the Church of England from Schism, cap. 4.
It was of old expressly against the Law of the Land, to procure or bring in any
Bull of Excommunication against any subject [much more in all reason against
the Soveraign] in respect it gave way to Foreign Authority; the Popes
Excommunications, according to our old Laws, being of no force in England. Coke
Institut. part 3. cap. 67.
It was not lawful for any Subject of England, to take a Pension, etc. of any
foreign King, Prince, or State (without the Kings license) although the said
Princes or States be in Peace or League with England.
Let the honest Romanist farther consider, that before any Priest did suffer
death, it was Enacted, that
28 Hen 8. cap. 10. and 5 Eliz. c. 1.
THey should incur a Praemunire who did any ways assert or teach the Pope to
have jurisdiction over, or in this Kingdom. 26 Hen. 8. c. 13.
It was Treason for any to write or affirm the King to be an Heretic, Infidel,
Schismatic, Tyrant or Usurper. 13 Eliz. c. 2.
It was Treason to bring, procure or publish any Bull from Rome. 13 Eliz. c. 2.
It was a Praemunire so to acknowledge the Popes jurisdiction, as to bring or
procure from him any Agnus Dei, Crosses, Beads or Pardons; being trinkets and
trifles of themselves not worth a Rush, but as they are held privy Tokens of
Papal Obedience or Allegiance.
Here we see a fair way of Caution; and he is a madman, and no Martyr, who will
needs hasten his own death, when neither God nor man requires any such
indiscreet Zeal at his hands; Christianity and Salvation being not destroyed by
these Laws, the substance of them being in force, when the Romanists themselves
confess England was of their side: and the Lawgivers declare (as appears by
the Prefaces to the Acts) that these Regalities and Laws tended for the better
Government, Constitution, Peace, and happiness of the Kingdom; of which we are
to suppose them to be best Judges, seeing no Article of Faith confirmed either
by the Holy Scriptures or the Primitive Church, were nulled or made void by
these Statutes.

Yet the better to expose the Queen, and render her actions odious all the
world over, they were very careful to publish what lies they could, of her
pretended cruelties; amongst whom we may account John Gibbins, Robert Parsons
Jesuits, and John Fen Priest, who were the chief Authors of that Pamphlet
called Concertatio Ecclesiae in Anglia. Add to them the Book called Ecclesi^e
Anglicanae Trophaea, drawn in Pictures in the English Coll^^ge at Rome by
Nicholao Circini, engraven by Jo. Bapt. de Cavalleriis, and published by
Gregory XIII his Approbation, anno 1584. where people are said to be worryed in
Bears skins, etc. and printed by Bartolomeo Grasso. To vindicate the
English-Romanists from the false Aspersions and falsities against their
Sovereign and Country mentioned in this Book, I find a Over throw of the
Protestants Pulpit-^abels, against Mr. ^^^sha^, page 10.
Romanist [I. R. whether May the Priest I know not, though I am Tho. James
corrupt* ^^ Fathers in the Appendix to the Reader.
told that such an one wrote against Mr. Crashaw, as this also di^] to offer
something, by affirming, that there was never any such Book printed in the
English College at Rome. But nothing is got by this, since it cannot be denied
but that the foresaid Book was printed at Rome, and published by the Popes
express Authority, as appears by his Breve prefixed. And farther, the foresaid
supposed cruelties were painted upon the Colledge-Walls by Nich. Circini, by
order and appointment of the English there. Nor need we trouble our selves to
show the disaffection of the English of that College to their Queen and
Country, seeing Histories do testify their Actions, and A. Mundy, the English
Roman li^e.
Travelers their railing and bitter words.

To these we may add Richard Verstegan, who put forth a Book called Theatrum
Crudelitatum Haereticorum Nostri Temporis: where, in his Pictures he offers to
view the former lying Bear-skin Tales. Of this man (because he afterward
afforded some light to Antiquities, and our Historians are silent of his life
and extraction) a word or two by the by.

His Grandfather was called Theodore Rowland Verstegan, born in Gelder-landt;
came into England about the latter end of King Henry VII; married here, and
presently after dyed, leaving a Son nine months old, who afterward, to get a
livelihood, took upon him the profession of a Cooper in London. Nor is this any
discredit, Wolfangus Musculus his Father being of that Trade.

This Cooper was Father to our Richard Verstegan; which Richard was born in the
Parish of St. Catherines in London; he gave himself to the study of good
Letters, and employed himself in Painting; which makes me think that he
engraved the Cuts in his own Books, as the Learned Hevelius does now. Being a
Zealous Romanist, he left England, went into the Spanish Netherlands, where he
composed the foresaid Theatrum Crudelitatum: the Verses were made by Vid.
Delic. Poet. Belg. vol 1. page 760, 761, 762, etc.
Johannes Bochius, born at Bruxels; but if I mistake not, Register to Antwerp.

Afterward the Rebellious League now beginning, he conveys himself and Books
to Paris, where the English Ambassador complains of him to King Henry III, and
desires that, being born a Subject to the Queen, now a Fugitive, and one that
had so abused her, he might be delivered into his hands, to be sent to England,
there to receive his reward. And the Ambassador had reason for his request, if
that be true which is Guil. Barcla. contra Monarchomachos, lib 6. cap. 7. page
439.
reported, viz. that Henry III was so much possessed with those cruel Pictures,
and put so much credit in them, that he accused Queen Elizabeth of great
Cruelty, calling her a wicked and cruel woman.

Yet at the Ambassadors desire Verstegan was imprisoned; at which De justa
ab^icatione Hen^ici III. page 123.
Jean Bouchier, that active firebrand of the League, is not a little troubled,
and lays it as one heretical fault to Henry. At last Verstegan is released;
who quits France, and returns to Antwerp, where he reprints his Book, and lives
after an handsome fashion. The Jesuits and the Secular-priests falling out in
England, each party defends it self by Pen; in this quarrel Verstegan concerns
himself, joining with the Jesuits, and writing in their behalf, showing himself
as zealous a Railer as the best of them; and indeed never was there quarrel
composed of so many bad words, either side considered.

Thus he continued till after the death of Queen Elizabeth, where he 1605.
published his -- Restitution of decayed Intelligence in Antiquities of
England, -- Dedicating of it to King James, expecting better fortune and;
favor which -- E^ Rege cum novo novum assume Fatum. -- Poet. Belg. Vol. 3. p.
364.
Justus Lipsius claps to the Nation a good luck in Verse. What he got by it I
know not, nor when he dyed: only toward the latter end of King James his
Reign, amongst the rest of the English Fugitives, who lived in Antwerp under
the Notion of Spanish stipendiaries, I meet with these words -- James
Wadsworth, the English-Spanish Pilgrim, cap. 7. page 67.
There is also one Mr. Versteagan, who, did not his wife keep up his credit,
might be yoakt with the rest, -- That is (as I suppose) in a mean condition.
And thus much for Verstegan, of whom Q^odlibets, page 257.
Watson the Priest will give you a sharper Character.

But why must Queen Elizabeth (of all other Sovereigns) be deprived of this
Prerogative of life and death? Must Campo Flori in Rome smoke by the burnt
bodies of people by the Authority of the Pope, in this acting only as a
Secular Prince, (for Ecclesiastics excuse themselves from such severities) and
may not Queen Elizabeth be as great a Monarch in her Dominions?

Must the King of Spain glory in his Inquisition, thereby destroying multitudes
of Strangers and Natives, and that with such severity and cruelty, that their
stories either American or Domestic cannot be read without tears; and had not
Queen Elizabeth as much right to, and Authority in England, as the entitled
Most Catholic has in his Dominions?

Has the French King a Prerogative to burn Anne du Burg, and many others of
his Subjects, for Opinions in Religion and may not Queen Elizabeth, having as
much ^i^nt of Government, use her Authority as well as the former? Not that I
vindicate any such severities, but use these comparatives to show that Queen
Elizabeth did no more then the Romanists themselves.

But to show what a great thing interest is, take this following observation:
but the bloody narrative of the story is so long and mournful, that the Reader
must pardon me, if I refer him to other Thuanus.
Historians for it.

Charles IX, King of France, under the pretense of the Grand Solemnities of the
King of Nava^'s Marriage, invited all the Grandees of the Hugonots of France,
with Ca^bden, Eliz. an. 1572. Eujeb. Ph^la^^lph. ^^smapol. Dialog. 1. page 30.
Leicester and Eurghley out of England, and the Sons of the Palatine Elector
out of Germany, intending by this means to ruin the Protestant Religon. The
French obeyed and appeared, where they were entertained with all manner of
Gaye^ies and Triumphs: but for all this Court holy Water, they were, by order
of the King, in ^^g 24. ^^?
one day, as many as could be met withal, (which came to s^v^^a^ (...)) slain
without respect to Sex, age or quality; (...) of whom was old Admiral Coligny,
whose (...) ^b 52.
head was (...) grateful present to Rome. Nor did this Massacre end ^er^, but
by the Kings Order was also acted all France over, to the unthought of
slaughter of many thousand Protestants.

This Carnage, though it made such an impression upon some, that several set
themselves to work, and U'^^ae 15^3. ^^ 4.
published a Book of Verses in Detestation of it; yet others employed their
wits as much in its Commendation, amongst whom I find Id. page 30.
accused Johannes Auratus, Regius Professor of the Greek Tongue in Paris, and
one of the chiefest Poets in his time: if so, it seems he could weep and bewail
more the killing of one Poet Gall. vol. 1. p. 314.
Sparrow by his Cat, then of so many thousand Christians.

As for the Romanists in France, they celebrated these slaughters as one of the
most glorious actions in the world; great rejoycings at Court for it, public
thanks rendered to God; and as a farther memorial of its Gallantry, the King
had Thuan. lib. 53. Cambden, Eliz. anno 1572.
new Medals or Coyns made with Inscriptions to perpetuate the Fame of that
bloody day. And to complete the triumph, a Miracle must be wrought to testify
Gods approbation of it, which you must find in ^^uan. lib. 52.
St. Innocents Churchyard at Paris. So here this Churchyard may boast of
another Miracle, besides its Andre du Chesne les Antiquitez de^ villes de
France, chap. page 63. 7
consuming the buried Carcasses in less then ten days. But as for this new
flourishing White-thorne-Tree, the famous Thuanus does somewhat mitigate the
wonder, by affirming that the thing might be as well Sive sponte, quod
aliquando contlngit, cum natura deficiente in co planta est, ut penitus
exarescat, five aqua tepida ab impostoribus infusa. Aug. Thuan. Hist. lib. 52.
Naral or artificial.

But the greatest joy of all, for this slaughter, was at Rome, Cardinal Loraine
giving the Messenger that brought the first news of it, a thousand Crowns; the
Letter was read in the Conclave, public thanks were given in their Churches,
the Cannons discharged, Thuan. lib. 53. Spondan anno 1572. 20.
Bonfires made, a Jubilee published throughout Christendom. And a grand
Procession was made to the Church of St. Lewis [Lewis IX King of France,
canonized by Pope Boniface VIII, his festival day is the XXV of August] where
was the Nobility, Bishops, Cardinals, the several Ambassadors, the Pope under a
Canopy, his Train being held up by the Emperors Ambossador. And the better to
retain in Memory this Massacre, the Pope had it George Whe^ston's English
Mirror, page 17^.
painted about his great Hall in the Lateran, and there Recorded in Jo.
Ni^h^l's Pilgrimage B. 8
Marble.

And what must be the cause of all these Catholicorum Apologiis propugnata,
quae ^t Romae, atque in Hispania immensis landibus celebrata. Jo. de Bussiers
Hist. Fran. Vol. 4. page 120. -- De e^, Laetitia ob vindicatos Haereticos
piorum animis concepta non parum est. -- Summar. ad Hist. Hispan. Jo. Mariana.
anno 1572.
Joys, Gaities and Triumphs in France, Spain, Italy, and where not amongst the
Romanists? but that thirty thousand Protestants were in a small time destroyed
by diverse sorts of deaths; some drowned, some hanged, some starved, some
Pistol'd, others had their throats cut, their bodies dragged about streets,
denied Christian buryal, etc. without any consideration of Age, Sex, Quality or
Relations: And all this in a supposed time of security and tranquillity, a
peace being made, and the King passing his word and promise for their safety.

Now here would I ask the Romanists whether ever Queen Elizabeth did such a
cruel Action as this? If not, then why must Charles IX go away with all these
Glories and Trophies, and our Queen laden with nothing but black accusations of
cruelty? As if Religon entitled one to more authority over his Vassals then the
other.

The year (viz. 1572.) of this Massacre, some have troubled themselves to lay
down in these Numeral Letters.

Upon Gaspar Coligny the Admiral.

gVIsano oCCVbV It Pius ah CoLLIgnIVs astV:
LVX qVater August I sena DoLen Da Ven It.
Or thus:

bartho Lo MaeVs fLet, qVIa FranCICVs oCCVbat atLas.
And upon the City of Paris this.

LVtetI a Matter sVos natos DeVoraVIt.
And here I cannot but take notice of one pretty cheat the Pope makes use of,
to show to the world his great liking of this Massacre, viz. that whenever
the famous Catholic Thuanus in his Narrative of this Butchery, hints (as he
does several times) of the cruelty of these Throat-cuttings,

These expressions sound so harsh in the ears of his good Romanists, that in
the Index Expurgatorius they are all ordered to be dashed out, and to appear no
more in print, lest good people should be corrupted by them; so woe be to them,
who dare think amiss of this Parisian slaughter. But it is not here alone, but
in many other places, that they have endeavored to falsify and corrupt this
Learned Thuanus, though one of their own Church, yet one that hated lying. For
which Jacobus Gretser, Johannes Baptista de Machand, or Macaldus, under the
false name of Jo. Baptista Gallus I. C. with Adam Contzen, and other Jesuits,
cannot pass him by without throwing some dirt upon him.

But though de Thou's book were Adam Cantzen, Discep^atio de Secretis Societat.
Jesu, page 40.
burnt at Rome, yet will it remain as an instructive Monument to future Ages,
though endeavored to be corrupted, as appears by the Index Expurgatorius; and
possibly has been, as is manifest by the late little Thuanus Restitutus.

But leaving these foreign comparisons, let us return home, and take a short
view of our two Sister-Queens of different perswasisions in Religion.

Queen Mary, whose Piety and Mercy is much commended by Sanders and other
Romanists, Reigned about five years; yet in that short time were put to death
for Religion above 260, without any regard to Sex, Quality or Age, Rich and
Poor, Learned and Ignorant, Old and little Children that knew not the
right hand from the left; one springing out of its Mothers Womb, whilst burning
at the Stake, and unhumanely the little infant thrown into the fire, to burn
with its Heretical Mother, as they termed it.

In twice this time, viz. for the first ten years of Elizabeth, not one
Romanist suffered death for Religion; and though she Reigned above 44 years,
yet in that long Rule, there were not so many put to death of the Romanists for
Treason, or what else the Romanist pleases, almost by an hundred, as there
were in the short time of Queen Mary. To which we may add, as is confessed by In
numerabiles Ang lica^i Martyrs Du^em Ed mundum Campianum secuti -- docuetunt
-- Pontificem Romans -- posse quemcunque etiam Regem -- dig. nita^e Reg^a exuete.
Abr. bzovius de Romans Pont. cap. 46. page 621.
Bzovius their Papal Champion, that there was not any that suffered in Queen
Elizabeth's time, but did teach the dangerous Doctrine, That the Pope could
depose Kings.

This were enough to testify, that Queen Elizabeth was as happy and merciful
to her Subjects, as her Sister Queen Mary: And to persuade those who throw so
many commendations on the latter not to rob the former of her due praise.

The first that the Romanists pretended Martyrologist puts down to have
suffered in Queen Elizabeth's days, is one John Felton; by the Cause: in short
thus; for I shall have occasion to speak more of him hereafter.

Queen Elizabeth having triumphantly Reigned above X years in the Nation, to
the great joy and comfort of her Subjects; at last Pope Pius V takes a humor
in his head, and he, forsooth, must declare her to be no Queen; to which
purpose he thunders out a Bull, declaring her Heretic, Excommunicated,
Deprived and Deposed from her Dominions: Absolves all her Subjects from
Allegiance, and interdicts any that shall obey her, etc.

Felton gets this Bull, hangs it upon the Bishop of Londons Palace-gates,
scorns to seek an escape, boldly vindicates the Pope and himself in what was
done, defying the Queen and her Authority; for which he was arraigned,
condemned and hanged, August 8.
near the same place in St. Paul's Churchyard.

Now for any thus to contemn and vilify his Sovereign, null her Authority,
renounce his Allegiance, and so far to submit himself to a Foreign
jurisdiction even in Temporalities, as to declare his own Sovereign deprived
and deposed from her Kingdom; I say, what punishment this man incurred, let the
Reader judge; provided he will also consider, that had a Protestant thus
renounced his Obedience in Queen Mary's days (not but that there were some
Calvinistical firebrarnds then) the party should have dyed for it; and those
who commend Felton, would have called the other Traitor. And yet Felton did it
to procure a National Rebellion.

This and some other Disturbances, occasioned the next Parliament to put forth
some 13 Eliz. cap. 1. 2, 3.
Acts for the preservation of the Queens person, and the better quieting and
securing her Subjects and Dominions; all people having time given them to
consult either their own safety, or a compliance. So that who suffered
afterward, was for their disobedience to these Acts, and the other Laws of the
Realm. And the several designs and plots against her to take away both her
Kingdoms and Life, might not only oblige her to look to her self, but also
move her to a greater severity then she was naturally addicted to.

Yet hitherto it was not death for Priests or Jesuits to be in England, if they
did nothing else. But some XIV years after this, the Queen and Parliament
supposed they had Reason to 27 Eliz. cap. 2.
Enact it Treason and Death only for being found here; yet they were so far
from catching any one in a Trap, or without warning, that by the said Act they
all had time given to transport themselves freely without any Attachment, with
liberty to take Ship at what Port they pleased, the time allotted them being
forty days after the ending of that present Session of Parliament. Nay farther,
that if any were sick, then upon security they might remain in the Kingdom six
Months longer, and then to depart. And all this was more favorable then the
Protestants received from Queen Mary.

Let us also add, that those, whom she had in prison, she sent over upon her
own charges, and with kind usage (so far was she from thirsting after blood,
as some would have her:) for confirmation thereof, take one Certificate of
twenty Jesuits and Priests, and one Gentleman, sent from the Tower of London,
Marshalsee and King's Bench.

TO all Magistrates, Officers and Ministers within the Realm of England, or
elsewhere, to whom it may any wise appertain. This may be to give
certification, that we whose names are here underwritten, who were embarked at
the Tower-wharfe of London, the 21 of January 1584, and there received into the
charge of Mr. One of the Yeomen Ushers to the Queens Chamber.
William Bolles, and Mr. A Skinner of London.
Antony Hall, by Commission from their Lordships, and other her Majesty's most
honorable Privy Council, Have been by them the said William Bolles and Antony
Hall, very friendly and honestly entreated, and with careful diligence safely
conducted, transported and conveyed to the Province of Normandy, and by them
left this third day of February, according to the English Computation in the
year of Christ 1584.

Which said Bolles and Hall have in Our presence, paid the Matthew S^^u^t.
Master of the Called the Mary Ma^tin of C^lch^ster.
Bark which Transported us, for the whole Fraught and Victuals in the Ship, for
the time of our remaining aboard: And generally so well used us in all
respects, that we cannot but acknowledge our selves much beholden to them, and
fully satisfied in having been committed to the charge of so courteous
Officers, since the case stands so with us, that we are banished our Country,
contrary to our desires, wherein we take no little grief of mind.

For Testimony whereof, we have hereto set our several hands, this present
third of February 1584. The first Jesuit that came into England; he was son to
the Epig^ammatist.
Jasper Heiwood Disputed with Dr. Jo. Rainolds.
John Heart William Tedder Arthur Pits Richard Slake Richard Norris Returned
into England, called Bishop of Calcedon, and wrote.
William Bishop A Jesuit, returned into England, and wrote some Books.
Thomas Stephanson Christopher Tomson John Barnes Continued Sanders de
Schismate, ungrateful to the Queen.
Edward Rishton James Bosgrave Samuel Coniers Returned into England, wrote for
the Oath of Allegiance.
William Warmington William Hartlie Returned, and executed at Mileend Green.
1588.
William Dean Returned, executed at Lancaster, 1560.
Robert Nutter Returned, wrote in behalf of the Secular-Priests.
John Colleton Returned, wrote several Books, was the chief man in putting out
the Doway Notes on the Old Test.
Thomas Worthington William Smith Henry Orton Gentleman


The next year also, the Queen sent over XXXII more Priests and Jesuits; and
with what civility and kind usage they were Transported, I shall refer you to
Chron. fol. ^10. col. 1.
Stow or Howes for their own Certificate.

But to proceed: we might show at large, even by the Confession of Romanists
themselves, that the Queen did nothing against the said Romanists, but even
what she was necessitated to do, for the preservation of her self and Kingdom:
of which two or three instances will not be amiss.

William Watson, a zealous Roman Priest, and one who afterward suffered for
Treason, confesses how the Quodlibets page 265.
Pope plotted her destruction, and that (as he hinteth) by the Instig^^on of
some English; before which -- Her Majesty used us kindly for the space of the
first ten years of her Highness Reign* the State of the Catholics in England
that while was tolerable, and after a sort in some good quiet. Such as for
their conscience were imprisoned or in durance, were very mercifully dealt
withal (the state and change of things then considered) some being appointed to
remain with such their friends as they themselves made choice of; others were
placed with Bishops, and others with Deans; and had their Dyets at their
Tables, with such convenient Walks and Lodgings, as did well content them. They
that were in ordinary Prisons, had all such liberty and commodities, as the
place and their Estate could afford them. Yea even thus much, and more, does
Parsons confess in his Philopater: as also Father Creswell in his Scribe to the
like effect. -- Id. page 266.
How great quiet the State and Court was in for twelve years space! no talk of
Treasons or Conspiracies, no Jealousies nor Suspicions, no Envy nor
Supplications, no fear of Murtherings nor Massacrings, no question of
Conscience nor Religigion; all lived in quiet content, and right good
fellowship was amongst them, etc. and then he confesses, that the Jesuits were
the cause of the Laws against them, Agnus Dei, Medals, Holygrains, etc. He
goes on thus -- Page 267. 268.
I held directly -- that both her Majesty's Laws and Proceedings against all
sorts of Catholics have been mild and merciful; the opinion and judgment of
her Highness in Religion one way, and their foresaid practices against her
another way, duly considered.

The same Romanist having almost above measure commended the Queens Id. page
274, 276.
Wisdom and Government, seems to wonder why the Priests should be molested: and
though he says their Afflictions have been extraordinary, yet he also
acknowledges -- so also has the cause thereof been extraordinary; and so far
beyond the accustomed occasions of persecution given to any Prince in
Christendom, or Monarchy that is, or ever was in the world to this hour
(unless the PURITANS of Scotland, which P. 277.
may in some sort equal the offense here to be set down) as rather it is to be
wondered at (all things duly considered) that any one Catholic is left on life
in England, then that our persecution has been so great.

For name one Nation (I know none can) under Heaven, where the Subject
(especially if they were Catholics) ever sought the death of their Sovereign,
(though of a different Religion from them:) The conquest of their Native Land;
the subversion of the State; the depopulation of the Weal public; the
alteration and change of all Laws, Customs and Orders; and in few, the utter
Devastation, Desolation, and Destruction of all the Ancient Inhabitants of
their Land, in so unnatural, unchristian, uncatholick a manner, as the Spanish
Faction have sought it in our own flesh and blood against this Realm, etc. --
Id. page 278.
which seeing her Princely heart has forborne, as no Sovereign on Earth would
ever have suffered the like to have past unpunished as she has; I must
conclude and end as we began, THAT HER LAWS AND PROCEEDINGS HAVE BEEN BOTH
MILD AND MERCIFUL. -- And at Id. page 303, 3^4.
last does confess that she was even bound to do as she did, such was their
Treasonable Practices and Opinions for deposing of Princes.

To him we might add Clark the Priest, who also suffered death with W^tson for
Treason against King James: he Reply to a Lybel, fol. 43. ^
confessing and declaring that the Queens Laws and Government were not to be
defamed, traduced, and cried out against so much for tyranny, seeing their
Treasonable Actions were the occasion of them. And to them we might add Father
Concert. Ecciel. Angl. pa^^ 2. fol. 39. b.
Parsons himself, when he writes his mind freely to his friend.

But leaving these single Testimonies, take these following, confirmed and
subscribed by above a Jury of true Sons of the Papal Religion. -- The
Protestation it self you may see at large in Roger Widd^ingtons Theological
Dispute concerning the Oath of Allegiance, part 2. Sect. 1. page 346, 347, 348,
349.
Having first thanked the Queen for her Clemency, and testified that she
desired nothing of them but a true Profession of their Allegiance. --

We whose names are underwritten, in most humble wise prostrate at her
Majesty's feet, do acknowledge our selves infinitely bound unto her Majesty
therefore. -- Whereas for these many years past diverse conspiracies against her
Majesty's Person and Estate, and sundry forcible attempts for invading and
conquering her Dominions have been made under we know not what pretenses and
intentments of restoring Catholic Religion with the Sword [a course most
strange in this world, and undertaken peculiarly and solely against her
Majesty and her Kingdoms, among other Princes departed from the Religion and
Obedience of the Sea Apostolic, no less then she] by reason of which violent
Enterprises, her Majesty otherwise of singular Clemency toward her Suctjects,
has been greatly moved to ordain and execute severer Laws against Catholics
[which by reason of their Union with the Sea Apostolic in Faith and Religion,
were easily supposed to favor these Conspiracies and Invasions] then perhaps
had ever been Enacted or thought upon, if such Hostility and Wars had never
been undertaken.

William Bishop All Sec^lar-Priests.
John Colleton Concerned in the Quarrels at Wi^bich, wrote in behalf of the
Priests.
John Mush Robert Charnock John Bossevile Antony Hebborne Such an one preached
and dyed by the fall of the Chamber at Blackfrie^s, 1623.
Robert Drury Wrote against Mr. Mason.
Antony Champney I find two Brothers of that name at the latter end of King
James his Reign.
John Jackson Francis Barneby Oswald Needham Translated Theodorets History into
English.
Roger Cadwallader Robert Button

November 5. 1602.
In short, we have it from good Cambden, Eliz. anno 1581.
Authority, that the Queen used to complain with grief, that she was driven by
necessity to prosecute such Laws, for the preservation of her self and
Subjects. And an honest Roger Widdrington's Confutation es the intemperate
Reply of Tho. Fitz-Herbert, Preface, page 66. 81.
Benedictan Monk does assure us, that the Queen designed a mitigation, upon
security of their Allegiance, but that this toleration was both talked and
written against at Rome, as very disadvantagious to the Papal Cause.

If they thus oppose her Favors, it is not her fault: If they be angry with her
for banishing the Priests, she did no more then France and Venice once did with
the Jesuits: If she did amiss in taking their lives away, yet was she not so
cruel as the Spanish Inquisition, or the French Massacre; nor so fiery as her
Sister Mary: If she be blameable, why should the others be commended? Her
Prudence may be shown by her prosperous Reign; Her Courage, by overcoming all
difficulties and assaults; Her Clemency, by her often pardoning her Enemies;
Her good Government, by the Love and Honor her Subjects bare her, and the
esteem which England yet has for her. And as she was beloved at home, so was
she indear'd and feared abroad; and as she was blessed and happy in all her
undertakings here, so let her not be vilified and bespattered now she is gone
to another world honored with many years and triumphs.

CHAP. III. The Pope undertook to depose Queen Elizabeth, which occasioned some
troubles in England, to the ruin of the undertakers.
QUeen Mary being dead, her Sister Elizabeth succeeded in the Throne, though
White Bishop of Winchester, and Watson Bishop of Lincoln, were very forward and
eager to have her Excommunicated; which they would have undertaken to perform,
but that others more wary advised them against such rashness.

For some years of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, we hear of no great troubles, the
Papists themselves privately within their own Houses exercising their own
Religion quietly enough without any disturbance, and others of them without any
scruple [but deeply herein charged by De Schism, lib. 3 page 342, 343.
Sanders for their dissimulation] going to the Reformed Churches, there to hear
and enjoy Divine-Service. Nor could they perceive any thing in the
English-Liturgy, that might any way offend a wisemans conscience, it being
judiciously composed of Godly Prayers, waving all Disputes, and the nicer
Points of Controversy. And in this peaceable condition they might have long
continued, if Father Parsons, and some such Zealots, had not baul'd against
such a security, and got a Beyond Sea Order against their joining with the
Reformed, in any of their Pious Devotions.

No sooner is Elizabeth acknowledged Queen, but we are Peter Heyli^'^ Ecclesia
Resta^^ata, page 102, 103.
told that she sent to the English Agent at Rome, viz. Sir Edward Karn (sent
thither by Queen Mary) to acquaint the Pope, Paul IV, of her Sisters death, of
her own Succession, desiring that all good Offices might be reciprocally
exchanged between them. But the Pope Answered that the Kingdom of England was
held in Fee of the Apostolic See; that she being Illegitimate, could not
succeed, and therefore it was great boldness to assume the Name and Government
of it without him. Yet if she will renounce her Title, and refer her self
wholly to him, he would do what would stand with the honor of the Apostolic
See.

As for the Queen, she never troubled her thoughts to satisfy his Holiness in
his demands; and for Sir Edward Karn, he dyed some (c) years afterward at
Rome, being the last Ambassador d 1561.
that went from the English Crown to the Pope.

This angry Pope dying, another succeeded of a milder temper, who, though he
was earnestly pressed to thunder out his Bulls against the Queen, yet, now
knowing that Princes were too wise to deliver up their Kingdoms at the noise of
such Paper-claps, he goes another way to work. He sends Vincentio Parpalia,
Abbot of St. Saviors, with a civil penned Letter for the Queen: His Romish
Church, and acknowledge the Primacie of that Chair, that he would disanul the
sentence against her Mothers Marriage as unjust, confirm the English
Common Prayer Book by his Authority, and grant the use of the Sacraments under
both kinds to the English. Add farther, that several thousand Crowns were
promised to those who would procure her compliance. But this Parpalia went no
farther then Bruxels, being not suffered to enter England.

Yet the said Pope would not desist here, but resolves to try again, and send
another Nuncio, viz. Abbot Martinego; but he also England: the very noise of
his coming having already fob'd up some indiscreet Romanists to vent themselves
more boldly then formerly, to spread abroad false News of the Queens
conversion, some by Astrology, and other ways to consult the length of her
Reign and Life; and the Popes Nuncio then in Ireland, did not only join
himself with the Rebels against her, but also by his pretended Authority
deprived her of all Right and Title to that Kingdom.

That which they call the General Council of Trent now sitting, Sanders de
Sch^^m. l. 3. page 360.
the Queen is desired to send some thither: but this she thought would be to
little purpose, seeing the design of that Convention (as the Emperor and the
French King Hist. Council of Trent, page 279, 318.
called it) was more of Interest then real honesty: Besides, it had now
continued about XV years, and so improbable to alter any thing upon her desire.
Nor was the Council it self free, as appears by the several Id. page 167, 168,
507, 508, 530, 551, 566, 569, 635, 644, 659, 661, 683.
complaints put in there against such forcible abuses; some things, as the Id.
page 589.
Institution of Bishops, not being permitted to be discussed, the Pope fearing
to be the looser: Nor was the Id. page 660.
Secretary just in taking and setting down the suffrages; whereby he turned the
Votes as he pleased. Nor would they allow any thing to be concluded on, but as
they received Id. page 497, 703.
Instructions from the Pope; which occasioned the Proverb, That the Holy Ghost
was sent from Rome to Trent in a Cloak bag.

Besides, Ambrose Goligna, a Dominican, publicly Id. page 374.
preached against the Protestants, affirming that Faith and safe conduct is not
to be kept with them. And when some of the Reformed Divines went thither, the
Id. page 374, 375.
Legate brake off the Debates, not l^tting the Council proceed; and suspended
the Council for two years, pretending fear of Wars: against which action the
Spanish Bishops Id. page 366. 367.
protested. And when the Legates party fears to be out-voted, then do they send
to the Pope to make more Bishops, and convey them to Id. page 254, 255, 256, 257.
Trent: which Legates undertook not only to direct, but command the whole
Council; which spoiled its Freedom.

To these may be added the tricks used to carry on their designs, and prevent
a baffle, either by new making of Bishops, the better to out-vote, or
suspending of all from acting or voting; or by removing them to other places,
so to divide the Council; as when they were adjourned to Id. page 267, 268, 269,
277, 278, 279, 281, 282, 283, 284, 285, 286, 300, 301, 302, etc.
Bologna, whither those that depended on the Pope went, the rest refusing,
staid still at Trent, not submitting to this removal or division.

And little might here be expected but partiality, seeing the Italians were
almost three to one of the number there; all the Subscribers amounting to no
more then 255, of which 187 were Italians; so that bating the interested
Italians, there remains but a poor Catalogue of Bishops, in respect of the
great number that are in the Christian World; yet must this be looked upon as
one of the most famous General Councils in the whole World: yet the Romanists
cannot agree about its Jurisdiction or Authority; for though the Id. page 661,
719
French hold the Council to be above the Pope, yet his Holiness looks upon
himself as no wise Page 818.
bound to observe the Canons of Trent

In short, should the English Clergy have appeared in this Council, they must
either have been there as Freemen, frankly to Dispute and Debate as others
did: But thus they could not, having been before condemned as Heretics by
Julius III. And at Trent here they were so Zealous, as to Excommunicate the
Archbishop and Elector of Id. page 165, 189, 259, 260.
Colen for Heresy, before they had determined what was Heresy. If they could
not appear as Freemen, then they must under the capacity of Offenders, as it
were to receive sentence of condemnation: but to this they thought they had no
reason to submit themselves; and we need not doubt how things would have gone
with them. For we find those of Trent so busy and zealous, that they were
going to throw their Sanders de Schism. lib. 3. page 3^1.
Censures against the Queen, but that the Emperor Ferdinand I. used his
Interest to d^sswade them from it, thinking by this to ingratiate himself wi^h
her, hoping to marry his Son to her. But no more of this, seeing that the
Learned Bishop Jewel wrote an Apology for our English Bish^ps not going to
that Council; which may be seen at the latter end of Father Paul's History.

But leaving these Disputes, and passing by the design of Arthur Pool, Antony
Fortiscue, and some others, who contrived to join themselves with the Duke of
Guise, so from France to land Wales, to Proclaim the Queen of Scots, and make
her Queen of England; we shall proceed, and find the Pope himself to be the
greatest Stickler in the troubles against Elizibeth.

Pope Pius the Fifth being strongly bent not only to get Queen Elizabeth
deposed, but to have her -- De medio t^^^e^e c^gitaba.^ An^^^ Gabuti^s vita P^^
v^ 3. o.
Murdered; and in this humor, he was pleased to throw his charity upon her by
calling of her Ma^o^u^n omnium sentinam, flagitiorum servam, ib. -- La sentina
di tanti mali. Girol. Catena, vita de^ Papa Pro V. page 113.
filthy and base names.

Thus resolved, he procures one Roberto Rodolfo, a Rich Florentine England
under the color of Merchandise; and thus disguised, to stir up the people
against the Queen. Then for more strength, he works underhand with the French
and Spaniard to assist in the action; nor was the Portugal left unsolicited,
all promising fair. But the Spaniard was most vigorous, sending Chapine
Vitelli, Marquess of Cetona, under the Alva was to send over on that design
from the Netherlands: for more surety of which, La Motte the Governor of
Dunkirk had come privately in the habit of a common Saylor to sound the Ports.

In the mean time Rodolpho having his Pockets full of the Popes money, spread
it abroad by his discretion, gaining thereby many Proselytes. They endeavored
to make Thomas Howard, Duke of Norfolk, Head of their Plot; promising him in
Marriage Mary the unfortunate Queen of Scots, now secured in England: And at
last, they over-perswaded the good-meaning Duke to engage farther then was
fitting for a Subject, being cheated thereto by some false friends. And into
the same design was drawn Thomas Percy, Earl of Northumberland; Charles Nevil,
Earl of Westmerland, with several others of Quality; who at last perceiving the
Queen to have discovered their plot, submitted and begged pardon.

Nor was the Pope himself idle, but so zealous for this Rebellion, that he
assured the Spaniards, if need be, he would go himself in person to assist
them, and in that service engage all the goods of the Apostolic See, as
Crosses, Chalices, and Girolamo Catena vita del Papa Pio V. page 116.
holy Vestments. And the better to encourage the English, and make them more
ready for such Treason, he falls to the old trick, dapperly undertaking not
only to vilify, but to deprive her of her Dominions, and absolve her Subjects
of their Allegiance. Before which time, (as the famous -- Frustra astu and per
Insidias Anglorum Reginam adortus esset. Thu. lib. 44.
Thuanus tells us) he had craftily and treacherously, though in vain, conspired
and attempted against her. Which accusation does so offend the Pope, that those
words are ordered by the Index Expurgatorius to be dashed out. The Bull it self
take as follows.

S. D. N. Pii Papae V. Sententia Declaratoria contra Elizabetham praetensam
Angliae Reginam, and ei adhaerentes Haereticos. Quaetiam declarantur Absoluti
omnes Subditi a Juramento Fidelitatis, and quocunque alio debito; and deinceps
obedientes Anathemate illaqueantur.
Pius Episcopus servus servorum Dei, ad futuram rei Memoriam.
REgnans in excelsis, cui data est omnis in Caelo and in terra Potestas, unam
sanctam Catholicam and Apostolicam Ecclesiam, extra quam nulla est salus, uni
soli in terris, videlicet, Apostolorum Principi Petro, Petrique Successori
Romano Pontifici, in potestatis plenitudine tradidit gubernandam.

Hunc unum super omnes Gentes and omnia Regna Principem constituit, Qui Jer. 1.
10.
Evellat, destruat, dissipet, disperdat, plantet and aedificet; ut fidelem
populum mutuae Charitatis nexu constrictum, in unitate Spiritus contineat,
salvumque and incolumem suo exhibeat Salvatori.

Quo quidem munere obeundo, Nos ad praedictae Ecclesiae Gubernacula Dei
benignitate vocati, nullum laborem intermittimus, omni opere contendentes, ut
ipsa unitas and Catholica Religio (quam illius Auctor ad probandam suorum fidem
and correctionem nostram tantis procellis conflict are permisit) integra
conservetur.

Sed impiorum numerus tantum potentia invaluit, ut nullus jam in Orb locus sit
relictus, quem illi pessimis doctrinis corrumpere non tentarint: Adnitente
inter caeteros, Flagitiorum Serva Elizabetha praetensa Angliae Regina, ad quam
veluti ad Asylum omnium infestissimis profugium invenerunt. Haec eadem Regina
Regno occupato supremi Ecclesiae Capitis locum in omni Anglia, ejusque
praecipuam authoritatem atque jurisdictionem monstrose sibi usurpans, Regnum
ipsum jam tum ad fidem Catholicam and bonam frugem reductum, rursus in miserum
exitium revocavit.

Vsu namque verae Religionis quam ab illius desertore Henrico VIII, olim
eversam, clarae memoriae Maria Regina Legitima hujus sedis praesidio
reperaverat, potenti manu inhibito, secutisque and amplexis haereticorum
erroribus Regium Confilium ex Anglia Nobilitate confectum diremit, illudque
obscuris hominibus Haereticis complevit, Catholicae fidei cultores oppressit,
improbas Concionatores atque Impietatum administros reposuit; Miss,
Sacrificium, Preces, Jejunia, Ciborum Delectum, Caelibatum, Ritusque Catholicos
abolevit: Libros manifestam Haeresim continentes toto Regno proponi, impia
Mysteria and Instituta ad Calvini praescripta and observata, etiam a Subditis
servari mandavit. Episcopos, Ecclesiarum Rectores and Sacerdotes Catholicos
suis Ecclesiis and Beneficiis ejicere, ac de ill is and aliis rebus
Ecclesiasticis in Haereticos homines disponere, deque Ecclesiae causis
decernere ausa, Praelatis, Clero and Populo ne Romanam Eccles. agnoscerent,
neve ejus Praeceptis Sanctionibusque Canonicis obtemperarent, interdixit:
Plerosque in nefarias leges suas venire and Romani Pont. Authoritatem atque
Obedientiam abjurare; seque solam in Temporalibus and Spiritualibus Dominam
agnoscere, jurejurando coegit; Paeuas and supplicia in eos, qui dicto non
essent audientes, imposuit, easdemque ab iis qui in unitate fidei and Praedicta
Obedientia perseverarunt, exegit: Catholicos Antistites and Ecclesiarum
Rectores in vincula conjecit; ubi multi diuturno languore and tristitia
confecti, extrenium vitae diem misere finierunt.

Quae omnia cum apud omnes Nationes perspicua and notoria sint, and gnavissimo
quamplurimorum Testimonio ita comprobata, ut nullus omnino locus excusationis,
defensionis aut tergiversation is relinquatur: Nos multiplicantibus aliis atque
ali is super alias impietatibus and facinoribus and praeterea Fidelium
persecutione, Religionisque afflictione impulsu and opera dictae Elizabethae
quotidie magis ingravescente; quoniam illius animum it a obfirmatum atque
induratum intelligimus, ut non modo pius Catholicorum Principum de sanitate and
conversione praeces monitionesque contempserit, sed ne bujus quidem sedis ad
ipsam hac de causa Nuncios in Angliam trajicere permiserit, ad armae Justitiae
contra eam de necessitate conversi, dolorem lenire non possumus, quod adducamur
in unam animadvertere, cujus Majores de Republica Christiana tantopere meruere.

Illius itaque Authoritate suffuiti, qui nos in hoc supremo Justitiae Throno,
licet tanto oneri impares, voluit collocare, de Apostolica potestatis
plenitudine Declaramus praedictam Elizabetham Haereticam and Haereticorum
Fautricem, eique adhaerentes in praedict is, Anathematis sententiam incurrisse,
esseque a Christi Corporis unitate praeeisos.

Quin etiam ipsam praetenso Regni praedicti jure, necnon omni and quocunque
Dominio, Dignitate, Privilegioque privatam.

Et etiam Proceres, Subditos and Populos dicti Regni, ac caeteros omnes qui
illi quomodocunque juraverunt, a juramento hujusmodi, ac omni prorsus Dominii
fidelitatis and obsequii debito, perpetuo absolutos; prout Nos illos
praesentium Authoritate Absolvimus, and Privamus eandem Elizabetham praetenso
jure Regni, aliisque omnibus supra dict is.

Praecipimusque and Interdicimus universis and singulis Proceribus, Subditis,
Populi, and aliis praedict is, ne illi ejusve monitis, Mandatis and legibus
audeant obedire, qui secus egerint, eos simili Anathematis sententia innodamus.

Quia vero difficile nimis esset, Praesentes quocunque illis opus erit
perferre; Volumus, ut eorum Exempla, Notarii Publici manu, and Praelati
Ecclesiastici, ejusve Curiae Sigillo obsignata, eandem illam prorsus fidem in
judicio and extra illud ubique Gentium faciant, quam ipsae praesentes facerent,
si essent exhibitae.

Datum Romae apud S. Petrum, Anno Incarnationis Dominicae Millesimo
Quingentesimo Sexagesimo Nono. Quinto Kalend. Their Bulla^ia Edit. Romans 1638.
by a mistake has V K al. Maii, but the former Edit. viz. Romans 1617. in this is
right enough.
Martii: Pontificatus nostri Anno Quinto. Cae. Glorierius. H. Cumyn.


The Sentence declaratory of our Holy Lord Pope Pius V. against Elizabeth the
pretended Queen of England, and the Heretics adhering to her: Wherein also all
her Subjects are declared Absolved from the Oath of Allegiance, and whatever
else due unto her; and those who hereafter obey her are hereby Anathematized.
Pius Bishop, servant of the servants of God, for a future Memorial of the
matter.

HE who Reigns in the Highest, to whom is given all power in Heaven and in
Earth, has committed one holy Catholic and Apostolic Church (out of which
there is no Salvation) to one alone upon Earth, namely to Peter the the chief
of the Apostles, and to Peter's Successor the Bishop of Rome, to be governed in
fullness of power.

Him alone he made Prince over all People and all Kingdoms, with power (a) To
pluck up, destroy, scatter, consume, plant and to build; that he may continue
the Faithful, who are knit together with the bond of Charity, in the Unity of
the Spirit, and present them safe and unblameable to their Savior.

In discharge of which Function, we who are by the goodness of God called to
the Government of the foresaid Church, do spare no pains, laboring with all
earnestness, that Unity and Catholic Religion (which the Author thereof has,
for the trial of his Childrens Faith, and for our amendment, suffered to be
punished with so great afflictions) might be preserved whole and incorrupt.

But the number of the ungodly have gotten such power, that there is no place
left in the whole World, which they have not endeavored to corrupt with their
most wicked Doctrines. Amongst others, Elizabeth the Pretended Queen of
England, and the servant of wickedness, has assisted thereunto; in whom as in
a Sanctuary the most pernicious of all have found a refuge. This very woman
having seized on the Kingdom, and monstrously usurping the place of Supreme
Head of the Church of all England, and the chief Authority and jurisdiction
thereof, has again brought back the said Kingdom into miserable distraction,
which was but even then newly reduced to the Catholic faith, and an hopeful
condition.

For having by strong hand forbid the Exercise of the true Religion, which Mary
a lawful Queen of famous Memory had by the assistance of this See restored,
after it had been overthrown by Henry VIII, a Revolter from the Truth; She
following and embracing the errors of Heretics, has removed the Royal
Council, consisting of the Nobility of England, and filled it with obscure
Heretical fellows; has suppressed the embracers of the Catholic Faith; settled
dishonest Preachers and wicked Ministers; abolished the Sacrifice of the Mass,
Prayers, Fastings, choice of Meats, unmarried life, and the Catholic
Ceremonies; commanded all the Kingdom over, Books manifestly Heretical to be
read, and impious Mysteries and Institutions, according to the Rules of Calvin,
which she her self entertains and receives, to be likewise observed by her
Subjects. She has presumed to throw Bishops, Parsons, and other Catholic
Priests out of their Churches and Benefices, and to bestow their and other
Church Livings upon Heretics, and to determine of Ecclesiastical matters; to
forbid the Bishops, Clergy and People to acknowledge the Church of Rome, or to
obey the Precepts or Canonical Sanctions thereof: Has compelled most of them
to obey her wicked Laws, and to abjure the Authority and Obedience of the
Bishop of Rome; and by Oath to acknowledge her to be sole Governess, as well in
Spiritual as Temporal Affairs. Has imposed penalties and punishments upon
those who obeyed not the same; has exacted them of those who persevered in the
Unity of Faith and their foresaid Obedience; and has cast the Catholic
Prelates and Parsons into Prison, where, many of them being spent with long
languishing and sorrow, miserably ended their lives.

All which things seeing they are manifest and notorious to all men, and by the
clearest Testimony of very many so sufficiently proved, that there is no place
at all left, either for excuse, defense or evasion: We seeing that impieties
and wicked actions are multiplied one upon another, and moreover that the
Persecution of the Faithful, and Affliction for Religion, grows every day
heavyer and heavyer, through the instigation and means of the said Elizabeth:
We therefore understanding her mind to be so hardened and obdurate, that she
has not only contemned the Godly requests and admonitions of Catholic
Princes, concerning her amendment and conversion, but also has not so much as
permitted the Abbot Parpalia (...) Martiningo, 1560, 1561.
Nuncio's of this See to pass into England; are necessitated to betake our
selves to the weapons of Justice against her, not being able to mitigate our
sorrow, that we are drawn to take Punishment of one, to whose Ancestors all
Christendom has been so much beholden.

Being therefore supported by his Authority, who has placed Us (though unable
for so great a burden) in the Supreme Throne of Justice; We do out of the
fullness of our Apostolical power declare the foresaid heretical Elizabeth,
being the favourer of Heretics, with all her adherents in the matters
aforesaid, to have incurred the sentence of Anathema, and to be cut off from the
unity of Christ's body.

And we also declare her to be deprived of her pretended Title to the Kingdom
aforesaid, and of all Dominion, Dignity and Privilege whatsoever.

And also declare the Nobility, Subjects and People of that Kingdom, and all
others who have in any sort sworn unto her, to be for ever absolved from any
such Oath, and from all manner of Duty of Dominion, Allegiance, and Obedience
to her. As We also do by the Authority of these presents Absolve them, and
Deprive the same Elizabeth of her pretended Title to the Kingdom, and all other
things abovesaid.

And We command and forbid all and every the Noblemen, Subjects, People, and
others aforesaid, that they presume not to obey her, or her Monitions, Mandats
or Laws; and those who shall do otherwise then here commanded, we do involve
them in the same sentence of Anathema.

And because it would be a matter of too much difficulty to convey these
presents to all places wheresoever it should be needful: Our will is, that the
Copies thereof, under a public Notaries hand, and sealed with the Seal of an
Ecclesiastical Prelate or of his Court, shall carry altogether the same credit
with all people judicially and extrajudicially, as the The Original.
presents should do, if they were exhibited or showed.

Dated at Rome at S. Peter's, in the year of Christ 1569. 24 of February, in the
Fifth year of Our Popedom. Cae. Glorierius. H. Cumyn.


As I shall not trouble the Reader with the diverse Readings and Words (though
the sense be the same) which happens some times in several Copies and Editions
of this Bull; neither shall I concern my self with the true Date of it, as how
the fifth year of this man's Popedom comes to be 1569, which rather falls out
1570, in which year some also Date it: but in what I have done, I follow the
Lord Reports, part 5.
Coke, Mr. Eliz. anno 1570.
Cambden, De Scotorum fortitud lib. 4. cap. 1. p. 265.
David Camerarius, Summa Constitu^onom. page 624, 625.
Peter Matthaeus, De S^hismate Anglican^, lib. 3. page 368, 369, etc.
Nicolas Sanders, with some others: Though all is not Gospel which drops from
the last man's pen, his tongue being no slander; yet out of his inventions will
Spondanus and suchlike Foreigners spoil their Church-stories of England.

Mr. Cambden says, that the Pope did secretly Anathematize the Queen in 1569,
but did not publish it till the year after. But let it be as it will, the
Learned Juel, Bishop of Salisbury, writ a Tract (a little after Printed)
against it, as coming into England, and to his hands 1569. And they themselves
confess, that this year, the Pope sent Dr. Nicolas Morton, a Priest, from Rome
into England, to -- Anno D^mini 1569. R. D. Nic. Mo^ton S. T D. -- In Angliam
misit ut ce^t^s i^lust. ibus and Catholicis vit is, Authoritate Apostolica,
Denunciaret, Elizabetham, quae tune retum poti^batur, H^ e^cam esle; ob eamque
causam omni Dominio and potestate, quam in Catholicos usurpabat, jure ipso
excidi^le, i^puneq, ^b illis velut Ethnicam and Publicanam haberi posse, nec
cos illius legibus aut Mandatis deinceps ob^^ire cogi. Nic. Sanders de visibili
Monarch. lib. 7. page 730. 2036, 2037.
declare in his name that the Queen was an Heretic, and so had no right to
rule; and that she ought to be looked upon no otherwise then an Infidel Pagan,
nor in any thing to be obeyed.

Accordingly Morton gets into England, shows the Papal Curse or Censure,
Argument enough to authorize a Rebellion: the design is laid every where; many
are prepared and in a readiness, the Plot being thought glorious and Illorum
Nobilium laudanda Consilia. Sanders ib.
praiseworthy: but the main let it seems was, that the Queens deprivation by
the Bull was not spread carefully enough about, to let all Romanists know of
it. But in the North remained the greatest resolution. Upon which, the Queen
especially suspecting the Earls of Northumberland and Westmerland, sent to them
to appear before her; but they jealous of their own guilt, in this neither obey
her, nor her Lord Lieutenant of the North, Thomas Radclyffe, Earl of Sussex,
Resident at York.

So being pusht on by their followers, hoping not to want friends and partakers
in England, to have some help from Scotland, and that Succors would not be
wanting them from Alva in the Netherlands in behalf of Spain, which were
appointed to land at Hartilpool in the Bishopric of Durham; the great
contriver and carrier on of all these designs, being Pius V, as Bishop Answer
to Sir Anthony Weldons Court of King James, p. 55. a M S.
Goodman himself does confess. Thus encouraged, they flee to Arms, tear and
trample under feet the English Bibles and Common prayer-Books, command all
people to join with them, by Proclamation declaring now this, now that; in some
of their Colors being painted the five wounds of Christ, in others the
Chalice: at last they get to Clifford-Moor, not far from Wetherby in the
West Riding of Yorkshire, where they Muster, and found their strength to
consist of betwixt four and five thousand.

Sussex and others making head against You may see some of their names in the
Act 13 Eliz. cap. 1^.
them, they retreat Northwards; and at last perceiving their weakness, divide,
flee, every man shifting for himself. The two Earls get into Scotland; thence
Westmerland slips into the Netherlands, and lived at Lovaine, very poorly,
under the Spanish Pension. But Northumberland was delivered up to the English,
and beheaded at York 1572, and was looked upon by the Romanists as a glorious
and holy Concertat. Eccles. Cathol. in Anglia, part 2. fol. 46, 49. Sand. de
Schism. Angl. l. 3. p. 363. de visib. Monarch. page 732
Martyr, and the drops of his blood as Sanctified Relics. And in many other
places of the North several were executed (the better to terrify Posterity)
who also are reckoned as renowned Martyrs. But here passing by the
Insurrections of the Dacres's, as coming to no great head, I shall return to
the foresaid Papal Bull.

This Bull being Printed at Rome, was by some Ita divinitus comparatum est.
Sand. de visib. Mon. page 374.
Heavenly means (for so they word it) conveyed into the hands of one John
Felton, who (that the good Romanists might have cognizance of such their
Rebelling Privileges) boldly sticks it up, on the Bishop of Londons
Palace-gates in Paul's Churchyard [May 25. 1570.] and so stout he was, that he
scorned to withdraw himself, or flee for his own security; upon which he is
seized on, clapped up in the Tower; confesses what he had done, and vindicates
the fact; being so far from acknowledging the Queen to be his Prince or
Sovereign that he only called her the Pretended Queen, affirming he had done
her no wrong, she, forsooth, having nothing to do in the Throne, being justly
deprived by the Pope. For which he is condemned, and suffered as a Traitor in
the said Churchyard (August 8) And though he thus denied his Allegiance and
obedience, renounced his Sovereign and her Authority, and by this action, as
much as in him lay, deprived her of Title, Rights and Dominions; yet we shall
find no man more commended by the Romanists for this deed, then this Felton.

If the Learned Lib. 44. Ingenti five audacia five timeritate.
Thuanus say, that it was a very bold or a rash action, the Index Expurgatorius
will not have those words to stand, as if they derogated from the glory of the
action; and so orders them to be blotted out of his History. Father Respons. ad
Edict. Reginae 352.
Parsons will assure us, that he was a glorious Martyr; of which Title De
visib. Mon. page 734. Concertat. Eccles. Cathol. in Anglia, part 2. fol 42.
Sanders and others declare him abundantly worthy: And in this opinion, joins
with them, no less man then Anno 1570. 4.
Spondanus, Bishop of Pamiers, who shows his partiality, by his willingness to
trust too much to lying Sanders,

But above all, well fare Hilarion de Cost, a zealous Friar, as you may
suppose; for he will have him to outdo all the Worthies and Heroes in the
world; calls him -- -- Ce Valeureux Soldat and brave Champion de Jesus Christ,
avec une force d'Esprit invincible, and l'Ardeur de la foy qui le poussoit, eut
bien le courage and l'asseurance d'attacher en plein ville de Londres --
Certainement cette action fut merveilleusement genereuse and Heroique. -- Aussi
l'Eglise d' Angleterre met son Martyr parmy les plus glorieux Trophies and au
range de ses Victoires plus signalees, comme celuy par lequel ainsi que j'ay
desie dit, elle semble avoir triumph plus glorieusement de l'Heresie: avssi ce
coup genereux sait par ce brave Gentilhomme Anglois est chante and rechante par
tons les Escrivains qui ont traitte de Schism de la persecution d' Angleterre,
lequels universellement le l^uent and extollent comme un act courageux and
comparable a ces miracles de valeur and ces Prouesses que fi^ent jadis un
Mutius, un Horace, and one Clodia vierge Roman, qui mirent leur vie au hazard
pour salut de la Pat^ie and de la Republique, and qui pour cela sont and sero^t
eternellement renommez dans l'Histoire. Hill. de Cost Histoire Catholic, l. 3
page 560.
The valiant Soldier and brave Champion of Jesus Christ; commends his
invincible courage and zeal for the Faith, which was sowonderful, Noble and
Heroic, that England does place his Martyrdom amongst her most glorious
Trophies, and most signal Victories, having thus bravely triumphed over
Heresy, whereby his fame is renoun'd in all Writers, who for his valor and
courage do praise and equal him with Mutius, Horatius, and Clodis, who ventured
their lives for the safety of their Country.

Thus much for the honor of Felton; yet when the same Pen comes to tell us of
Elizabeth, it will allow her no other commendation then -- Cette impie and
maudite Reine Elizabeth, vraye Izabel de nostre temps. ib.
The impious and wicked Queen, the true Jezabel of our Days. Thus our late
Puritans or Presbyterians, and this man, seem to have the same Schoolmaster,
who can commend an Oliver, and suchlike Rebels, but throw all the filth and
slanders imaginable upon their Sovereign King Charles the Martyr.

Another remark there is concerning this Bull, the determination whereof shall
be left to the judgment of the Reader; and for his greater light, let him take
this following Narrative.

One John Nichols born in Wales, thence went to Oxford, staying one year in
White Hall, since called Jesus College, then removed to Brazennose College,
so to his own Country, where he taught a Gentleman's Children; is Ordained,
turns Curate in Sommersetshire; at last gets to London, whence he ships himself
for Antwerp; goes to Rheimes, and at length to Rome, where he is admitted
English College. Here he staid about a year, returns again into England, is
seized on at Islington, and sent to the Tower of London, where he makes a
public Recantation, and in a little time publishes these following Books, for
no more are come to my knowledge.

His Pligrimage,
A declaration of his Recantation.
His Oration and Sermon made at Rome, with his Answer to an infamous Libel.
In one of his Declaration of the Recantation, K. VIII
Books he has these words:

About 1580.
Midsomer (...) was twelvemonth, they renewed these Bulls of Excommunication,
granted by this Pope Gregory XIII.
Gregory, under the color and name of Pius Quintus published. There were five
hundred Copies printed at Rome, as two of you (my Brethren) can verify the
same; and how they were published (as I heard at Rome) in the English Seminary
at Rh^ims, and were put fast to Pillars in the City Those Bulls of
Excommunication were scattered throughout all Italy, Spain, and part of Germany.

Then a little after he proceeds thus -- One of your Readers in
Divinity-positive, I am certain before two hundred Scholars, and not so few,
(as one of you may testify the same) most impudently and devilishly spoke,
that it was lawful for any man of Worship in England, to give Authority to the
vilest wretch that is, to seek the death of our Sovereign Queen.

But this Nichols stays not long in England, but slips again Mahumetan, as
Sanders de Schism. lib. 3. page 415, 416.
one would hint to us: however it was, being got as far as Rouen, he is seized
on, clapped up in prison, and like to pay for his old Tales he had vented against
the Romanists. In this perplexity and restraint, they tell us how he De Schism.
page 415, 416, 4^7, 418, 419, etc. Card. Allens Answ. to the English Justice,
p. 30, 31.
recanted all he had formerly uttered against them, protesting that what he had
formerly divulged, was either through vainglory, envy, fear, or hopes of
Reward.

That he did recant, we only have from themselves; and I can trace him no
farther then his imprisonment at Rouen: for what they did with him, or what
became of him afterward, I know not; this I am certain, that after they say he
went out of England, that Dudley Fenner (an old Puritan) published a Called An
Answer to the Confutation of John Nichols his Recantion, London, 1583. In
quarto.
Book in his behalf: and it is as true, that Nichols himself does several times
protest and call God to witness, that he has published nothing but truth; to
which purpose, he himself did in print answer the objections and imputations
laid against him by Father Parsons. But however it be, I think no great stress
is to be laid upon it or him; and so shall not conclude that Gregory XIII
renewed this Bull, but rather think that Nichols might mistake the reforcing of
it for the Popes interpretation or qualification of it: Yet might not they
forge and falsify Nichols his Letters, as they did afterward Anthony Tyrrel's
Vid. Concertat. Eccles. Angl. part 3. at the end.
Recantion, and that in Print?

For so it was, that Pius V in the Bull Anathematizing all people whatever
(without any distinction) that did any way obey the Queen, the
English-Romanists looked upon themselves as under that Curse and Censure,
seeing they were forced to obey her, till they had strength enough to Oppose or
Depose her. Upon this, Parsons and Campion, then at Rome, Petition Gregory
XIII, (who succeeded Pius V) in the name of the English, to free the Romanists
from that Curse by his Papal Authority, and a favorable interpretation: Which
is granted thus:

Facultates Concessae P P. Roberto Parsonio and Edmundo Campiano, Pro Anglia,
die 14 Aprilis, 1580.
PEtatur a Summo Domino Nostro, Explicatio Bullae Declaratoriae per Pium
Quintum contra Elizabetham and ei adhaerentes, quam Catholici cupiunt intelligi
hoc modo, ut obliget semper illam and Haereticos, Catholicos vero nullo modo
obliget rebus sic stantibus, sed tum demum quando publica ejusdem Bullae
executio fieri poterit. etc.

Has praedictas Gratias concessit Summus Pontifex Patri Roberto Parsonio and
Edmundo Campiano in Angliam profecturis, die 14 Aprilis, 1580. Present Patre
Oliverio Manarco assistente.

Faculties granted to the two Fathers, Robert Parsons and Edmund Campion, for
England, the 14 day of April, 1580.
LEt it be desired of our most holy Lord the Explication of the Bull
Declaratory made by Pius the Fifth against Elizabeth, and such as do adhere to
or obey her; which Bull the Romanists desire to be understood in this manner,
viz, that the same Bull shall always oblige her and the Heretics, but the
Romanists it shall by no means bind as affairs now stand, but hereafter when
the public execution of the said Bull may be had or made, etc.

The Pope granted these foresaid Graces to Father Robert Parsons and Edmund
Campion, now to go for England, the 14 day of April, 1580. being present, the
Father Oliverius Manarcus assistant.

And that the Bull it self was thus qualified, or better timed, as we commonly
say, appears by the Testimony of Mr. John Heart (one of the most Learned of
their Priests then in England) in these following words.

The Bull of Pius Quintus (for so much as it is against the Queen) Lord
Burghley's execution of Justice.
is holden amongst the English Catholics for a lawful Sentence, and a
sufficient discharge of her Subjects Fidelity, and so remains in force; but
in some points touching the Subjects, it is altered by the present Pope.

For where in that Bull, all her Subjects are commanded not to obey her; and
she being Excommunicate and Deposed, all that do obey her, are likewise
Innodate and Accursed; which point is perilous to the Catholics. For if they
obey her, they be in the Popes Curse; and if they disobey her, they are in the
Queens danger.

Therefore the present Pope, to relieve them, has altered that part of the
Bull, and dispensed with them to obey and serve her without peril of
Excommunication; which Dispensation is to endure but till it please the Pope
otherwise to determine.

Thus the Romanists conclude themselves free and quit of the Papal Curse for
their not Rebelling against their Sovereign; though this interpretation or
qualification does no way lessen their Treachery, seeing it was not so much
their loyalty, as her strength and prosperity that secured her in her Throne;
their Obedience being only a compulsion; the want of a sufficient force and
opportunity being their only let and hindrance, whilst their prayers, hearts,
and resolutions were for her Deposition: such powerful and direful effects have
such Papal Bulls over some men's souls and consciences, to the anulling of Oaths
and Allegiance, and the distraction of Kingdoms. But enough, and it may be too
much concerning this Bull.

CHAP. IV. William Parry his diverse attempts and Treasons against the Queen.
NOt to trouble the Reader with every small attempt, I shall John Sommervil, of
Elstow in Warwickshire, whose hot brain took such fire by their treasonable
Doctrines, that he resolved to kill the Queen; but in this raging intent, was
seized on, carried to prison, where he laid violent hands of himself. Nor shall
I here trouble my self with Throcmortous tampering with Mendoza.

It seems all their spite laid at the Queen; and the better to procure her
ruin, there was a little Book composed, and called A Treatise of Schism, which
amongst other things exhorted the women at Court, to act the same against the
Queen, as Judith had done with commendations against Holofernes. The Author of
this pernicious Pamphlet, was one Gregory Martin, formerly of St. John's
College in Oxford, and contemporary with Campion. The Duke of Norfolk made him
Tutor to his eldest Son: and indeed his Learning was noted, being a good
Linguist, and one who had read much; but in his Writings was very passionate,
and so sometimes inconsiderate: he dyed at Reimes, 1582.

In London now lived one William Carter, who had formerly been Amanuensis to
Dr. Harpsfeld, and now the chief Printer for the Romanists, keeping two Presses
at their devotion: he gets this Book, commended by Allen, and prints above a
thousand; for which he is tried, confesses his printing it, vindicates all
contained in it, is condemned and executed, and has the honor to be
Registered amongst their Concertat. Eccles. Cathol. Angl. part 2. sol. 127,
etc. Ruston de Schism. Angl. l. 3.
Martyrs.

But let us go to a more settled contrived Treason, and this acted by William
Parry (for so he called himself) a Doctor of Law, and a sworn servant to the
Queen: Which take as I gather it out of his own confession, letters, trial, and
examination.

In the year 1580, having outlived his incomes, he became much indebted to one
Mr. Hugh Hare of the Temple, who suing him for his debt, so incensed Parry,
that meditating a revenge, one night he went to Hares Chamber in the Temple,
broke open the door, assaulted him, and left him there for dead (though he
afterward recovered); for which offense he was committed to Newgate, indicted
of Burglary, tried, found guilty, and condemned to be hanged; and so had
suffered, if the Queen through her mercy had not pardoned him, and given him
his life.

But now let us see how he requites the Queens grace and favor. In 1582, he
gets a License for travel, and so passes beyond Seas: goes to Paris, thence
to Lions, to Milan, and so to Venice, where he fell acquainted with Benedicto
Palmio, a great Jesuit, and one received into that Order in the Founders days.
Parry to him opens his bosom, telling him that he had some desire to relieve
the oppressed Romanists in England; which he would resolutely undertake, if the
Pope and other learned Divines would warrant the lawfulness of the Action.

Old -- By him it was resolved, that he might lay violent han is upon her
Majesty; and commended in that resolution, and encouraged thereunto. -- These
are the words of W. C. that is, Clarke the Priest, in his Reply to a Libel of
Fa. Parsons, fol. 60. b.
Palmio assures him of the lawfulness of the Enterprise, commends his Zeal, and
incourageth him in it. This done, he commends him to Campeggio the Popes Nuntio
at Venice; by whose means he wrote to the Pope Gregory XIII, declaring to his
Holiness his design, and desiring of him a Passport, or Safe Conduct to go to
Rome, to confer with him about it. The Safe Conduct is sent him, but not ample
enough; and so desires one more full, which is promised.

In the mean time he falls acquainted with Christofero de Salazar, Secretary to
the Spanish King in Venice, to whom he had also opened somewhat of his intent.
For the better carrying on of the journey and good will, he gets the said
Secretary to commend him to the Duke di Nova Terra, Governor of Milan, and to
Conde Olivaris, then Spanish Ambassador at Rome; which is promised.

Parry having staid at Venice some time, returns to Lions, whither was sent to
him a sufficient Safe Conduct from Rome, assuring him that he might go and come
in the -- In verbo Pontificis per omnes jurisdictiones Ecclesiasticas, absque
impedimento.
word of a Pope, through all the Church-Dominions, without any let or
hindrance. But this came too late, he being obliged to go to Paris, where he
meets with On^ that sol^^^ted the Queen of Se^s ^ffairs: of him see mo^e in a
Book ca^l'd* The Estate of the English Fagu^ves, page 51, 52, 53, printed 1596
Thomas Morgan, who told him, that it was now expected that he should do some
notable service to God and the Catholic Church. In short, Parry there
undertook to kill the Queen, if it were warranted to him by some Learned
Divines, and if his Holiness would grant him a full pardon.

Aniball a Codretto, a noted Jesuit then in Paris, and Provincial of Guienne,
lovingly receives him, commends and confesses him. Morgan recommends him to
R^gazzoni, the Popes Nuncio then at Paris, who received him kindly, sent his
Letters to the Pope, promised to remember him in his Prayers, and wished him
good success. And the better to encourage him, Morgan assured him d Thomas Ka^,
a faithful f^^^nd to the Q^^en of Sco^s, and so at this time forced to ^ecu^e
himself in France. He was Father ^o Rob. Car Earl of Somm^rset. 1583.
that the Lord (b) Ferneburst then in Paris, should presently go into
Scotland, and be ready upon the first news of the Queens fall, to enter England
with 20 or 30000 men, in behalf of the Queen of Scots (then in England.)

Parry thus encouraged, leaves France, lands at Rye, so goes to London: where
he contrives, the better to get access to the Queen, and credit with her, to
discover how he had been persuaded to kill her; which he does at White Hall as
cunningly as he can: the Queen gave him hearing, and began to put some
confidence in him.

In the mean time the Mastership of St. Catherines falls void, which, thinking
he had gained the Queens favor, he endeavors by Petition to get for himself.
Whilst he was following this suit, Letters came to him from Rome, from Cardinal
Como, wherein he found his enterprise commended and allowed: the Paper it self
take as follows.

Mon Signo^e,
LA Santita di N. S. ha veduto le lettere di V. S. del primo, con la feed
inclusa, and non puo se non laudare la buona dispositione and resolutione che
scrive di tenere verso il servitio and beneficio publico; nel che la Santita
sua essorta di perseverare, con fern riuscire li effetti che V. S. promette.

Et acchioche tanto maggiormente V. S. sia ajutata da quel buon Spirito che
l'ha mosso, le concede sua Beneditione, plenaria Indulgenza, and Remissione di
tutti li peccati, secondo che V. S. ha Chiesto: Assicurandosi che oltre il
merito, che n' ha vera in cielo, vuole anco sua Santita constituirsi debitore a
rico noscere li meriti di V. S. in ogni miglior modo che potra; and ciotanto
piu, quanto che V. S. usa maggior modestia in non pretender niente.

Metta dunque ad effetto li suoi Santi and honorati pensieri, and attenda a
star sano. Che per fine io me le offero di cuore, and le desidero ogni buono
and felice successo.

Al piacerdi U. S. N. Cardinale di Como.
Di Roma il 30di Gennaio MD LXXXIV.

Sir,
HIs Holiness has seen your Letter of the first, with the Certificate
enclosed: And cannot but commend the good disposition and resolution which you
write to hold toward the service and common good; wherein his Holiness does
exhort you to persevere, and to bring to effect that which you have promised.

And that you may be the more assisted by that good spirit which has moved you
thereunto; His Holiness grants unto you his Blessing, Plenary Indulgence, and
Remission of all your sins, according as you have desired: Assuring you, that
besides the Merit which you shall receive for so doing in Heaven, His Holiness
will farther make himself debtor to acknowledge your deservings in the best
manner that he can: And the more, because you use the greater modesty, in not
pretending any thing or reward.

Put therefore to effect your Holy and Honorable purposes, and regard your
health. And to conclude, I offer my self unto you heartily, and desire you all
good and happy success.

At your service, N. Card. di Como.
Rome January 30. 1584.

What was the meaning of this Letter, Parry himself shall tell you; of which in
his Confession thus: In March last, while I was at Greenwich (as I remember)
suing for S. Katherines, came Letters to me from Cardinal Como, dated at Rome
the last of January before, whereby I found

The Enterprise commended and allowed, and my self absolved (in his Holiness
name) of all my sins, and willed to go forward in the name of God. -- It
confirmed my Resolution to KILL her, and made it clear in my Conscience, that
it was LAWFVL AND MERITORIOVS.



Here we have him And Bishop G^odman in his answer to Sir Ant. Weldons Court of
King James, says that Car. Como encouraged Parry to kill the Queen, page 85,
86. a Manuscript.
confirmed in his wickedness; and it was no small addition to this, the denial
he had of St. Catherines Mastership.

In this passion he addressed himself to Mr. Edmund Nevil [who claimed the
Inheritance of the Nevils, Earls of Westmerland, and the Title of Lord Latimer,
as next Heir-male] which Nevil Parry offered to call cozen; in him he
endeavors to foment a discontent; and having, as he thought, fully brought
over, discourses more openly with him. At last he opens to him about killing
the Queen, which he called -- An Act honorable and meritorious to God and the
world. -- At several times they consult about it, either of killing of her in
White Hall Garden, and so to escape by water, or by St. James's on horseback.
But at all this Nevil seemed staggering.

Parry, to take away all doubts from him, lent him a It was called -- A Defense
of English Catholics, against the Book called, The Execu^ion of Justice; which
Book was made by the Lord Burleigh.
Book made by Dr. Allen (afterward for his Treasons made Cardinal) which had
been sent him out of France. And now this Book wrought with Parry himself, you
shall see by his own confession, thus: It redoubled my former Conceits; every
word in it was a warrant to a prepared mind: it taught that Kings may be
Excommunicated, Deprived, and violently handled: It proves that all Wars Civil
or Forregn undertaken for Religion is honorable.



Nevil also declares himself convinced of the lawfulness and braveness of the
action: and so they both swear in Parry's lodging secrecy, and to kill her; of
which thus Parry in his Confession. -- He came to me the next morning to my
lodging in London; offered to join with me; and took his Oath upon a Bible, ^o
conceal, and constantly to pursue the enterprise, for the advancement of
Religion; which I also did, and meant to perform: THE KILLING OF THE QVEEN WAS
THE MATTER.

The manner and place to be on Horseback, with eight or ten Horses, when she
should ride abroad about S. James, or some other like place.



All this while, Parry carried himself pretty fair with the Queen, several
times conferring with her, telling her of Cardinal Como's Letter: by which
discoveries [though he did it only the better to gain opportunity and credit]
he obtained so much favor of the Queen, that she not only thought him a
trusty loyal Subject, but intended him a liberal Pension or Allowance.

Whilst he thus gets esteem with the Queen, and at the same time contrives her
death, Nevil resolves to discover all; does so, and is examined by Leycester,
and Sir Christopher Hatton. The Queen wonders at the juggle and contrivance,
but had it kept secret; and the better to find out the Plot, Parry is sent for
by the Sir Fran. Walsingbam.
Secretary to his house; there to see (according as the Plot was laid) if he
would any way confess this, who had showed himself so ready on his own head, to
discover the Foreign designs against her Majesty.

The Secretary entertains him kindly, telling him, that the Queen had
appointed him to deal with him in a matter that highly concerned her Majesty,
knowing him to be one, who bare an extraordinary Devotion to her. Having thus
begun, the Secretary told him, that the Queen had been advertised, that there
was some plot in hand against her own person; wherewith she thought, he could
not but be made acquainted, considering the great trust that some of her
greatest Enemies reposed in him. Of this she desired to understand his
knowledge; and whether he himself might not some time have let slip some
suspicious words, not with any real design against her, but to discover the
intention of others.

Parry (strongly confiding in Nevil) earnestly denied it again and again, with
several protestations, that he was neither party nor privy to any such motion
or enterprise. Walsingham dealt fairly with him, telling him that there was a
Gentleman, and his friend, who would prove the contrary to his face. Yet Parry
denies all; though probably had he confessed (and these were hints enough) and
accused Nevil at this first asking, he might have saved himself: and in this
his great cunning was overseen.

Parry thus obstinate in denyals, is not permitted to go home, but lodged that
night at Mr. Secretaries house within London. This puts him in a peck of
troubles, fills his head full of suspicions; and having consulted with his
pillow, the next morning he desired to speak with the Secretary: which granted,
he confesses, that now he had called to remembrance, that he once had speech
with one Nevil concerning a point of Doctrine contained in one of Dr. Allens
books, where it was maintained, that it was lawful to take away the life of a
Prince, to benefit the Roman Religion: but protested that he talked nothing of
the Queen.

That night he was examined at Leycester-house before several; but still he
denied all: whereupon Nevil was brought before him, who punctually justified
every circumstance before his face; yet the other, as formerly, denied all.
However, he is sent to the Tower, where perceiving the exactness of the proof
against him, he freely, and of his own head, confessed all, and sent his humble
Letter to the Queen, which take as follows.

YOur Majesty may see by my voluntary confession, the dangerous fruits of a
discontented mind; and how constantly I pursued my first conceived purpose in
Venice, for the relief of the afflicted Catholics, continued it in Lions, and
resolved in Paris to put it in adventure, for the restitution of England to the
ancient obedience of the Sea Apostolic.

You may see withal how it is commended, allowed, and warranted in Conscience,
Divinity and Policy by the POPE, and some great Divines; though it be true or
likely, that most of our English Divines (less practiced in matters of this
weight) do utterly mislike and condemn it.

The enterprise is prevented, and conspiracy discovered, by an honorable
Gentleman, my kinsman, and late familiar friend, Mr. Edmond Nevil, privy, and
by solemn Oath (taken upon the Bible) party to the matter; whereof I am hardly
glad, but more sorry (in my very soul) that ever I conceived or intended it,
how commendable or meritorious soever I thought it God thank him, and forgive
me, who would not now (before God) attempt it (if I had liberty and opportunity
to do it) to gain your Kingdom. I beseech Christ that my death and example may
as well satisfy your Majesty and the world, as it shall glad and content me.

The Queen of Scotland is your prisoner, let her be honorably entreated, but
yet surely guarded.

The French King is French, you know it well enough; you will find him
occupied, when he should do you good; he will not lose a Pilgrimage to save you
a Crown.

I have no more to say at this time, but that with my heart and soul I do now
honor and love you, am inwardly sorry for mine offense, and ready to make you
amends by my death and patience. Discharge me a Culpa, but not a Poena, good
Lady.

And so fare well, most gracious, and the best natured and qualified Queen that
ever lived in England.

from the Tower the 14 of February, 1584. W. Parry.


In short, Parry is Arraigned and Tried at Westminster, where at first, he
confesses all, and that he had a design to kill the Queen; but at last, falls
into a rage, denies it, lays his blood upon the Queen and the Judges, and
summons the Queen to answer for his blood before God. However, he is condemned,
and afterward (b) executed in the Palace yard. a 2 March 1584/5.


And here it will not be amiss to tell what this flaunting and boasting Parry
was, seeing his impudence pretended great kindred, worth, and no small favor
abroad.

His Father was called Harry ap David, who kept an Alehouse in a little
Village, Northop, not far from the River Dee in Flintshire in North Wales; his
Mother was a Bastard, begot by one Conway, the Priest of Haulkin, a poor Parish
close by. Upon the death of his Father, his Elder Brother kept the Alehouse,
and did so after our Parry was executed.

The Traitor now in hand was one of the younger Sons, and was called William ap
Harry, (according to the custom of Wales). When young, he learned a little to
write and read, went and served one John Fisher of Chester, who pretended to
the Law; with him he continued some years, serving as his Clerk; in which time
he learned the English Tongue, and at some spare hours went to the
Grammar School, where he got some skill in Latin.

About the year 1560, he ran away from his Master, got up to London, where for
some time he lived after a shirking fashion, all his study being to fill his
belly and cover his back: at last he found a good Master, and by degrees, with
him and other Masters, he got some money in his purse. He scorns his old name
ap Harry, but called himself Parry, pretending a kin to all of that name: and
from his Mother, Daughter to one Conway a Priest, he pretends a kindred to the
Family of Sir John Conway, and so allied to the foresaid Edmund Nevil. Thus
having voted himself a Gentleman, he marryeth a rich Widow in South Wales; she
dies; he lives bravely, wastes all, and runs into debt: His chiefest care is
for some time to avoid the Sergeants: at last he falls in with a rich Widow,
Mrs. Heywood, old enough to be his Mother; and her at last he marryeth, but
lies with her Daughter; ruins the Estate, and runs far in debt to Mr. Hugh
Hare of the Temple (aforesaid) whom in his Chamber he endeavored to
assassinate, and is himself executed for Treason.

Of this ap Harry or Parry, several Couplets were made in those times; some of
which for diversion take as follows, where you may see his life and Qualities
also Epitomized.

William Parry,
Was ap Harrie,
By his name;
From the Alehouse
To the Gallows
Grew his fame.
Gotten Westward
On a Bastard,
As is thought;
Wherefore one way
Kin to Conway
Has he sought.
Like a Beast
With Incest
He begun;
Mother married,
Daughter carried
him a Son.
Wales did bear him,
France did swear him
To the Pope:
Venice wrought him,
London brought him
To the Rope;
Wherewith strangled,
And then mangled
Being dead;
Poles supporters
Of his quarters
And his head.
And thus much for Parry and his Treasons; which stuck so close upon the Papal
Reputation, that their Index Expurgatorius commands the whole story to be dashed
out of Thuanus.

CHAP. V.
1. Babington, etc.'s Treasons against the Queen.

2. The Romanists endeavor to inve^gle the more ignorant People to them by
their false and cheating Exorcisms.

Sect. 1. Babington, etc.'s Treasons against the Queen.
THe former Treason was scarce ended, when another begun; which was briefly
thus:

In the English Seminary at Rheimes in France, there were some who pined their
faith so much upon the Popes sleeve, that they thought his Authority could do
any thing; and that the Deposing Bull of Pius V against Queen Elizabeth was
dictated by the Holy Ghost: thus wickedly persuaded, they Cambd. Annals, an.
1586.
thought it meritorious to take away her life; and to dye in the attempt, would
be a glorious Martyrdom.

Amongst the rest, Dr. William Gifford, Rector of the Students there, and the
finisher of the Book called Calvino-Turcismus (William Reinolds, of whom
formerly, was its first Author.) He and one Gilbert Gifford, and one Hodgson
Priests, so inculcated this treasonable Doctrine into one John Savage (said to
be a Bastard) that he willingly and solemnly vowed to kill the Queen.

To make the day more sure, John Ballard, an English Priest of Rheimes, plyeth
it about England and Scotland, to carry on the Cause, and to prepare his
Disciples; then goes into France to treat with Don Bernardin de Mendoza the
Spanish Ambassador there, and some others, about the invading of England.
Having done his errand, he returns to England; to forward the design, gets to
London, where in a Soldiers habit, under the false name of Captain Foscue, he
agitates his plots.

At London he opens the business to one Mr. Anthony Babington of Dethick in
Derbyshire, a young Gentleman, rich, well bred, and somewhat learned; he had a
little before gone to France, (without License) and fallen in acquaintance with
the Archbishop of Glascow Ambassador for the Queen of Scots, and Thomas Morgan
an English Fugitive, but a great stickler for her.

Babington is against an Invasion, as fearing it would not take effect as long
as the Queen lived. Ballard tells him that that need not trouble him, because
Savage had sworn to kill her. Babington likes the murder, but moves that five
other resolute Gentlemen might be joined to Savage. This agreed on, they carry
on the design for the Invasion. In the mean time Babington gives notice to
the Queen of Scots of the designed Murder, and desires her that -- The
Heroical Actors in this business might be rewarded, or else their Posterities,
if they perished in the attempt; for so he worded it. And in this conspiracy,
several Gentlemen of Quality were assistants.

Sir Francis Walsingham, that saithful and cunning Secretary, by his Spies
discovers all, and informs the Queen: and in this, Gilbert Gifford, Pri^st (who
lurked in England under the name of Luson, to mind Savage of his Oath) was
somewhat assistant to Walsingham, who had such a liberal hand to intelligence,
that though he left himself poor, yet so trusty he was to his Sovereign, that
there was scarce a plot against her, but some of his Spies were intimate and
Actors with the chiefest of them.

This Plot having run on for some time, the Queen thought it dangerous to go
too far: so Ballard is apprehended. Babington jealous of a discovery, he with
some of the Confederates hide themselves in St. John's Wood near the City.
Notice being given of their withdrawing, they are proclaimed Traitors; at last
are found and seized on, and the rest of their Fellow-rebels. Fourteen of whom
were September, 1586.
executed in St. Giles's Fields, where they used to meet and consult about the
Murder and Invasion.

Sect 2. The Romanists endeavor to inveagle the more ignorant people to them
by their false and cheating Exorcisms.
THe English Romanists about this time had great hopes of their deliverance
from their Queen, by reason of the great helps and forces they expected from
beyond Seas. And the better to strengthen their own party, and gain Proselytes
in England, they fell a conjuring, and playing the fool with the Devil,
persuading some simple people that they were possessed; and then, forsooth, they
must be Exorcised: and to carry on the design, what abominable cheating and
ridiculous tricks they used, may be seen by the Sea a Book called. A
^^eclara^ion of Egr^^^ us Popish Impostutes in casting out of Devils. The
Author of ^^ was D Some. ^a s^et, after Bishop o^ Norw^^h, and at last
Archbish^p of York.
Examinations of the parties themselves. And yet to this day, do we find many
fond people deluded by these Exorcising Stage Plays, by which cheats these
Gypsies in Divinity gain to themselves the favor of good lodging and diet, and
the disposal and impoverishing sometimes of the Estates of their too credulous
Patrons.

And to these Hobgoblin-Mountebanks, we may add such Miracle-Mongers, as the
simple Irish Priest, who in 1663, pretended to do pretty feats in England; and
in the latter end of July, the same year, was so confident as to appear at
Oxford, where several Diseases crowded to him, all which he undertook to cure,
with half a dozen words of false Latin; but to little purpose Godwot; yet had
he the formality of a Scribe, to write down the names, places of abode, Trades,
and Diseases of the Patients; which for ought that I know, may hereafter, (when
the storie's forgot, and the parties dead) be published as an excellent
preservative against Heresy, and a confirmation of their Cause.

That in these sort of Exorcisms, there lurks also a Rebellious Devil, may
appear by the Confession of one of their own Priests, Anthony Tyrrel, written
with his own hand, and avouched upon his Oath 25 of June 1602; part of which
take as follows.

-- In the year 1584, I and John Ballard Priest (since executed with Mr
Babington and the rest) coming together from Rome through Burgundy, found there
a great press of Soldiers, and were advertised, that they were to serve under
the Duke of Guise. When we came to R^an, we heard then directly, that the said
Preparations were against England.

The same year (as I remember) Mr. Creighton, a Scottish Jesuit, was taken at
the Sea, and after brought into England; who by the occasion of certain This
William Creichton is the same who acted in Spain for the Invasion of Scotland;
and at his return into Scotland, was taken by the Dutch: the Papers which he
had, he tore and threw overboard, but the wind blew them back again into the
Ship: Sir William Wade, with a great deal of pains laid them together again,
whereby he found out the d^signe of the Pope, Spania^d, and the Guiset to
invade England.
Writings which he had, was driven to confess at large (as I have been
informed) what the whole Plot was, and how far both the Pope and the King of
Spain had engaged themselves in it* Here of I doubt not but that sundry
Catholics in England had sufficient notice from beyond the Seas, and
especially Mr. Edmunds, alias Weston the Jesuit, who was then the chief, as
Mr. He was afterward executed as a Traitor in the Gun-powder-treason.
Garnet (as I take it) is at this present, and therefore could not be ignorant
of such important matters, wherein principal men of his own society was
engaged.

Not long after my coming into England, in the year 1585, Mr. Martin Array, a
Priest, meeting me at the end of Cheapside, as I was turning to enter into
Paul's Churchyard, took me by the hand, and whispering me in the ear, bad me --
Be of good cheer, for that all things went now very well forward: The King of
Spain (quoth he) is now almost ready with his Forces to come into England, and
we shall be sure to hear some good news thereof very shortly: Wherefore it
stands us now in hand, that be Priests, to further the Catholic Cause, as
much as possibly in us lies -- or to this effect. And this was the State of
that time, nourished (as I well perceived) with great hope of some great
alteration, by the means before expressed.

About the time of Mr. Arayes aforesaid Communication with me, Mr. Edmunds,
alias Weston, had lately (as it was reported) cast a Devil out of one Marwood:
Whereupon he the said Mr. Array, at the time before mentioned, did highly
commend unto me the Exorcisms of Fa. Edmunds, saying that he (the said Edmunds)
-- would make the Devils themselves now confess, that their Kingdom was near at
an end. Upon the pretended dispossession of the said Marwood, sundry other
Priests, moved thereunto (I am persuaded) by the instigation of Mr. Edmunds, or
for that they meant to show their zeal in imitating of him, did take upon them
to Exorcise, and cast Devils out of diverse persons, viz. These, viz. Sara and
^^^swr a Williams, ^rne Smith, and Richard Mainy confessed all the P^^^sts
legel. ^e main with them.
Sara and (a) Friswood Williams, William Trayford, (a) Anne Smith, (a) Richard
Mainy, and Elizabeth Calthrop, whose Neck was found broken at the bottom of a
pair of Stairs (as the brute went then amongst us)

When I saw this Course, I liked it well, and was my self an Actor in it; and
did well perceive, that it was the matter whereat Mr. Array had aimed, when he
told me, that -- It stood us Priests in hand to further the Catholic Cause, as
much as possibly we could -- And indeed our proceedings therein, had for a time
wonderful success. I cannot in my Conscience esteem the number fewer, that in
the compass of half a year were by that means reconciled to the Church of Rome,
then five hundred persons; some have said three or four thousand.

As touching the several manners of dispossessing the said Parties, and of
their fits, trances and visions; diverse discourses were penned, amongst the
which I my self did pen one. Mr. Edmunds likewise writ (I am persuaded) a quire
of paper of Mr. This Mr. Richard Mainy did under his own hand, and upon ^^th,
confessed at larg all their ^^g^ing and chea^ing tricks with him.
Mainy's pretended Visions; for he thought, as it seemed, to have wrought some
great matter by him, but was disappointed very ridiculously, etc. -- We omitted
not the Relics and Bones of Mr. Campian, Mr. Sherwi^, Mr. Brian, and Mr.
Cottam, to have some little Testimony by implication from the Devil, to prove
them holy Martyrs

-- We that were Priests, were thereby greatly magnified by Catholics,
Schismatics, and weak Protestants; the two former being confirmed in the Roman
Catholic faith; and the third sort thereunto reconciled, as has been before
mentioned. And that cannot be denied, but that in the Course which we held with
the said pretended Demoniacks, many occasions were given, and aptly taken, to
scorn and deride the Orders and Service now established by her Majesty's Laws
in the Church of England.

Likewise I must confess, that the Course we held was so pleasing to such as
saw it, or were informed of it by those that they trusted, as it proved very
gainful unto us all that were Priests. We had, out of Question, procured unto
our selves very great Favor, Credit and Reputation: So as it was no marvail,
if some young Gentlemen as Mr. Babington, and the rest, were allured to those
strange attempts which they took in hand, by Mr. Ballard, who was an Agent
amongst us. They saw, as they supposed, (for both Mr. Babington, and diverse of
his Company were oftentimes at the Exorcisings) that we had a great commandment
over Devils, which prevailed greatly with them, as I think. It would have been
a very strange thing (I am persuaded) that we could not have wrought men at
that time to attempt: which was prudently foreseen by Father Edmunds of purpose
(as I am resolved in my conscience) to prepare the hearts and minds of
Catholics by those practices, that when such forces as were intended should
have come into England, they might have been more readily drawn by him, and us,
to have joined their forces with them. And this is that I can say concerning
the occasions, or inducements, that such matters were taken in hand at the time
articulated.

Now as touching the substance of the general Interrogatory it self, I have
perused the several Examinations and Confessions of Sara Williams and Friswood
her Sister, of Anne Smith, and of Richard Mainy Gentleman; and am fully
persuaded, that they have deposed the truth, in such points whereof they were
examined, belonging to their pretended Possession and Dispossession.

The effect whereof is, that they were drawn by our cunning carriage of
matters, to seem as though they had been possessed, when as in truth they were
not, neither were there any of the Priests ignorant, in my conscience, of their
dissimulation; nor the parties themselves (as now it appears) of our
dissembled proceeding with them.

After I had been my self first at one of their Exorcisings, it was my chance
to lie that night with Mr. Thomson, a Priest, and a great Actor in those
matters, at his chamber by the Spittle; and falling into some conference about
it, I used some such words, as though I doubted whether the party were actually
and really possessed. For I my self being not acquainted with any plot devised
by Fa. Edmunds, or any other, spoke my mind somewhat more plainly then I
perceive Mr. Thomson well liked of.

His answer to me was in effect, that -- He being my friend, did earnestly wish
me to cast forth no such speeches, whatsoever I did think: For (quoth he) the
matter is judged to be so by Father Edmunds, and some others that are Priests.
Besides, such Catholics as have been present at such fits, have received it
for a truth, that the parties are possessed. And although I for my part will
not make it an Article of my Creed, yet I think that Godly credulity does much
good, for the farthering of the Catholic Cause, and for the defacing of our
common Enemies, and their proceedings: Or to this effect.

Not long after also talking with Mr. Stamp, at the Lord Vaux his house in
Hackney, concerning these matters; and demanding of him seriously his opinion
what he thought of them; his answer was, -- That they were things of such
importance, as would farther the Catholic Cause, more then all the Books, that
had been written of late years, about the controversies in Religion with the
Protestants. -- With which answer I seemed to rest contented, because I saw
thereby he was not willing to enter into any plainer course with me.

-- For although both my self (as I said before) and so I think of the rest,
did know that all was but counterfeit; yet for as much as we perceived, that
thereby great credit did grow to the Catholic Cause, and great discredit to
the Protestants, we held it lawful to do as we did, etc. --

Anth. Tyrrell.
June 25. 1602.
Mr. Foot out of the snare. New shreds to the old snare. Hold fast.
Gee will afford you more hints of their cheats and juglings; whither I refer
the Reader: and the Page 64. F.
Author of Father Paul^ life, writes against such Stage-play-Exorcisms, or
Puppy-Devils.

But to prosecute our History: the Queen was seldom without dishonorable
attempts against her: Don Bernardin de Mendoza, the Spanish Ambassador in
England, and afterward a busy blade for the Covenanters in France; here he
disingeniously forgetting his place, falls a plotting against the Queen, and
incourageth others to it; for which he was forbid the Kingdoms, and so sneaked
into France.

But we shall presently meet with another Ambassador more unworthy then the
former, and this is l'Aubespine the French Ambassador, then lying in England;
one wholly given up to the Guisian faction* Nothing will serve him but the
murder of the Queen; to effect which, he t^mpers with one Mr. William
Stafford, a Gentleman of good Relations. And at last, by his Secretary Trappie,
deals more openly and plainly with him; promises him, not only Riches, but
great Honor, and special favor with the Pope, the Duke of Guise, and with all
Catholics whatever.

Stafford refuses so bloody an enterprise; but tells him of one Moody then in
Prison, as one desperate enough for any design. Moody is talked with; gladly
undertakes it, provided he might be freed out of Prison. They consult of the
manner. Moody propounds Poison, or a bag of Gunpowder laid under her bed,
and secretly fired. But neither of these pleased Trappie, who better discovered
his meaning, by wishing that such another bold fellow might be found, as was
that B^ltazer Gerard, who pistos^d William Prince of Orange in Delfe, anno
1584. 10 of July. Some say that he was instigated by some Jesuits to perpetrate
this murder. However, Orange deserved better at Gerards hands, having showed
him some friendship and favor. Gerard was taken, and suffered death, without
any repentance or sign of grief for his fault.
Burgundian, who had killed the Prince of Orange.

Mr. Stafford having considered with himself the heinousness of this Treason,
goes and reveals it to the Queens Council: whereupon Trappie is seized on,
just as he thought to have passed into France; and upon examination confesses
all.

Upon this the Council sends to speak with the Ambassador; he Jan. 12. 15^^.
waits upon them; they tell him the reasons wherefore they secured his
Secretary: l'Aubespine rants against the Council, and pleads the privilege of
his place: Stafford and Moody are brought in, confess the Treason, and
positively accuse the Ambassador as the Instigator. He on the other hand at
first denies it, then pleads that had he known it, yet being an Ambassador, he
ought not to discover it, unless it be to his own Master. After some discourse,
Cecil Lord Burghley gravely admonished him, to beware how he committed Treason
any more, or forgot the Duty of an Ambassador, and the Queens Clemency; and
that he was not exempted from the guilt of the offense, although he escaped the
punishment.

But let others dispute the Privilege of Ambassadors: and so I leave him as I
find him.

CHAP. VI. The Spanish Invasion.
THe greatest Enemies the Queen had, were those whose births obliged them to
obedience; but whether their Religion, its interest, or some bad Principles of
the Parties, prompted them to such Treasons, let others judge. It Is certain the
Jesuits, and other English Priests, were the occasion of the Queen of Scots her
ruin; they still thrusting her on to so many inconveniences against the Queen
and Kingdom, that Elizabeth was the sooner persuaded to consult her own safety,
by taking away that which sought her overthrow.

As for these people, when they saw no hope of restoring the Roman Religion,
either by Mary of Scotland, nor her Son; they Camden, anno 1586
began to find out new Masters; and none more fit for them then the Spaniard,
whom they vapour'd to be Heir to the English Crown. And concerning this, Vita
Vincent Laurei Card. page 72.
Ruggerius Tritonius, Abbot of Pinaro, in his life of Cardinal Vincentius
Laurens, tells us an odd passage, viz. that Mary the Queen of Scots, the day
before she suffered death, did under her own hand in the French Tongue declare,
that her Son James should not Inherit England, if he remained a Protestant, but
that the right of the Kingdom should be translated to Philip of Spain. And
these Papers were sent to the said Cardinal Laureus, being by Sixtus V. made
Protector of Scotland; who gave them to Conde Olivares, then Ambassador for the
King of Spain at Rome, with order to send them to his Master Philip: and this
did Robertus Titius publish [though without Tritonius the Authors knowledge,
and then living] in Italy 1599. dedicating it to Cardinal Montalto.

And this is somewhat agreeable to one of the charges laid against her at her
trial, that she sent a Letter to Mendoza the Spanish Ambassador, wherein she
promised to give her right of England to the King of Spain, if her Son James
would not be of the Romish persuasion.

The first of these Stories History of Queen Mary and James VI, page 120.
Mr. Sanderson looks upon as a mere trick and fable; and whether she was really
so concerned for her Sons Religion, as to use any means for his conversion to
Popery, King James can tell best himself: and thus he says,

-- Monitory Preface to the Apology, page 34.
In all her Letters (whereof I received many) she never made mention of
Religion, nor labored to persuade me in it; so at her last words, she
commanded her Viz. Melvyn.
Master-houshold, a Scottish Gentleman my servant, and yet a live; she commanded
him (I say) to tell me, that although she was of another Religion then that
wherein I was brought up, yet she would not press me to change, except my
conscience forced me to it. For so that I led a good life, and were careful to
do Justice, and govern well, she doubted not but that I would be in a good case
with the Profession of my own Religion.

But whether she undertook to give away the Title of England from her Son, was
no great matter, it being against all Law, Justice and Reason, she having no
power to dispose of the Inheritance of England: yet the Romanists, when all
other endeavors failed, to rob King James of his Kingdoms and life, had the
confidence about the year 1613. to Jesuitica per unitas Belgii provincias
Negotiatio. E 4.
publish a book, affirming King James to be but a mere cheat or counterfeit,
and a mock-King; denying him to be the Son of the aforesaid Queen Mary.

But laying aside such Forgeries; that the Spaniard has had a design not
only to rule these Islands, but to be the Universal Monarch, has been the
opinion of many men: amongst others, I find Dessein perperuel des Espagnols a
la Monarchy Universelle, P^inted 1624. in quarte.
one has made an Extract from their Original Papers, whither I shall refer the
Reader. But whatever his former attempts have been, of late he has rather lost
then gained. And though Naples, Flanders, Arragon, Catalonia, etc. might do him
some injury, if they were in the possession of others; yet as they stand
divided, and in a posture of defense, he can never grow rich by their Coin. But
to return home,

Where we happen in the year, which above an hundred years German Astronomer,
Johannes Regiomontanus, had affirmed would be most wonderful. The Prophecy it
self Originally in the German Language, went about by Tradition; and Johannes
Schoenerus repeated them to the noted Bohemian Mathematician Ephemeridum Novum,
Ec. 10.
Cyprianus Leovitius, who first published them 1577; which because they have
made a great noise in the world, [though I find no great matter in them,
seeing such general predictions may serve almost for any year] take thus in the
Original.

Tausent funff hunder^ achtsig acht,
Das is it das Jar das ich betracht;
Geht in them die Welt nicht under,
So gschicht doch sunst gross merctlich wunder.
Often have I been troubled at the fate
Of the year fifteen hundred eighty eight;
And (if the world it self don't end) you will see,
For its events, most wonderful 'twill be.
In this year I think France was the greatest sufferer, the Covenanters or
Leaguers there by their Barracado's forcing the King Henry III out of Paris;
and he to prevent his greater danger, cut off the Cardinal and Duke of Guise,
which occasioned so much war, and his own Murder. And besides these two, the
third party in that Kingdom, viz. the Hugonots, received a great loss by the
Death of the Prince of Conde, supposed by some to be poisoned. England was in
some fear, and at some charges by the noise of the Invincible Armada: but
Spains loss was inestimable by its overthrow. The Lord Maitland Chancellor of
Scotland, undertook in short thus to give us the year.

Poet. Scot. vol. 2. page 138.
Papa Dei, petit Orbis Iber, Dux Guisius Orci
Regna, annus mirus, si potientur, erit.
And Id. page 133.
Andrew Melvyn has a Copy of Verses somewhat to the same purpose. Upon this
great Navy, Poet. Germ. vol. 6. p. 310.
Simon Stenius, Poet. Gall. vol. 3. p. 655.
Adeodatus, Seba, Beza, and several other Foreigners bestowed their Poetry, to
the no small trouble of the Index Expurgatorius, which was forced to take the
pains to casheer some of them.

For some years had this great Fleet been in preparing from several parts in
the world: but the History of the preparations, fight and victory, I shall
leave to other Writers, and follow mine own design. Certain it is, the
Spaniard scarce doubted of a Conquest; which made one thus to despise the Queen.

Tu qui Romanos voluisti spernere leges,
Hispano disces subdere colla jugo.
Thou who the Pope does scorn, his Laws revoke,
Shall yield thy neck unto the Spanish Yoke.
And in this hight of idle fancy, Mendoza the Spanish Ambassador at Paris, in
the great Church of Nostre Dame, flourished his Rapier, crying out Victoria;
but when the contrary News was known, the very waggish Pages in the Streets
would beg some small Gifts or Preferments in England from his Lordship, as such
little Villages as London, York, etc. Thus would they jeer the haughtiness of
the Spaniard, who aimed at the Government of the whole world; and it may be
Alexander-like, not content with it neither: to which purpose I remember this
Distich.

Praeda licet non sit mundus satis ampla Philippo,
Ampla satis mundo praeda Philippus erit.
But though the Spaniard thought his Fleet and Forces invincible; yet to make
all Cock-sure, he would have the Royal-Standard belonging to them to be blessed
and sanctified; and that with as great Ceremony and Devotion as heart could
invent.

There was then in Portugal one Maria de la Visitation, Prioress of the
Monastery De la Anunciada at Lisbone; She for some years Vid. Cyprian Valera at
the end.
had so cunningly carried her self as a great Saint, pretending to be so well
acquainted with Christ, that she used to call him Husband; had (St.
Francis-like) his Wounds or Marks imprinted on her; undertook to Prophecy and
do Miracles; insomuch as Pope, King, and Bishops, as well as other credulous
Romanists, put no small trust and confidence in her Sanctity.

This is the good wench they pitched on, to bless the Royal Standard with
Victory. It was carried in Procession by Don Francisco de Cordova, the tallest
blade amongst them; there being present, the better to honor this grand
Ceremony, Albert the Archduke, and then Cardinal and Governor of Portugal;
the Papal Nuncio, the Archbishop Prime Inquisitor, the Duke of Medina Sidonia
Commander of the great Fleet, with many Nobles, Prelates, Gentry and others;
that such a concurse of people had scarce been seen.

Maria the gifted Nun, with many Ceremonies gives it her grave and pretty
blessing; presents it to the Conde Medina Sidonia, pronouncing good success,
with Victory to him and his Fleet, and that he should return a Conqueror. At
this good and sure Token, we may suppose the people mad with joy; but the bad
Event cooled their courage; and, which was to them as great a wonder, the
latter end of this same year, this their Holy Maria proved a mere Cheat and
Imposture: yet in her predictions concerning the good endeavors of Pope Sixtus
V, our Sed supra omnes alias praesumptiones laetasque hominum praesagiones de
hac Pontifice, illud unum maxim omnium animis inhaeret a^ spe quadam ^erta
replet suturorum bonotum, quod FOEMINA ILLA SANCTISSIMA V^siponensis, cujus
hodie tam evidentia cernuntur evidentia miracula, ac per Universum mundum
Testimoniis certissimis confi^mantur, multis diebus priu^quam moriretur, aut
aegrotaret Gregorius XIII praedixit illius mortem revolatam fibi a Domino,
alteriusque successionem, in cujus Pontificatu, sua Divina Potestas
constituisse dicebat magna quaedam facere ad s^um honorem Ecclesiaeque
utilitatem, etc. Crudelitatis Calvinianae Exempl^ duo recentissima ex Anglia.
Printed in octavo 1585.
English-Romanists put no small confidence.

And the truth is, Sixtus V was as furious against Elizabeth as their hearts
could wish, and very active in this Spanish Invasion; for the carrying on of
which, he had not only promised the assistance of his Ant. Cicarella in vita
Sexti V.
Treasure, but his Papal Curse to boot, whereby he undertook to deprive the
Queen of her Kingdoms and Dominions; Absolving her Subjects from their
Allegiance, publishing his Crusaido, as against Turks and Infidels, whereby out
of his kinde-heartedness to Rebellion, he gave Plenary Indulgences and Pardon
of all sins, to all who gave their helping hand.

With this goodly stuff William Allen, a little before made a Cardinal, is sent
into the Netherlands, the better to encourage the English Romanists to
Rebellion. Allen pulls out his Papal Tool, which he forgeth into a Pamphlet in
the English Language, which he prints at Antwerp, calling it,

The Declaration of the Sentence of Sixtus Quintus.

And as a farther interpretation of the Papal intent, and the better to engage
the English to Rebellion, he joins a second Part to it, called,

An Admonition to the Nobility and People of England.

And that the Reader may better understand the honesty of the Paper; take the
sum of it thus:

IT begins with calling the Queens Government impious Em. Meteram. Hist. Belg.
lib. 15 p. 473, 474. Sam. Purchase Pilgrims, vol. 4. lib. 10. cap. 11. page
1895, 1896.
and unjust; her self an Usurper, obstinate and impenitent, and so no good to
be expected, unless she be deprived. Therefore Pope Sixtus V, moved by his own
and his Predecessors zeal, and the vehement desire of some principal
Englishmen, has used great diligence with diverse Princes, especially with the
Spanish King, to use all his force, that she might be turned out of her
Dominions, and her Adherents punished. And all this for good Reasons. Because
she is an Heretic, Schismatic; is Exommunicated by former Popes, is
Contumacious, Disobedient to the Roman Bishop, and has taken to her self the
Ecclesiastical Jurisdion over the No such thing.
souls of men. Because she has against all Law and Right usurped the Kingdom;
seeing none (forsooth) must be Monarchs of England, but by the leave and
consent of the Pope. Because she has committed many Injuries, Extortions and
other wrongs against her Subjects. Because she has stirred up Seditions and
Rebellions, between the Inhabitants of Neighbour-Countries. Because she has
entertained What did the Pope and Spaniard do?
Fugitives and Rebels of other Nations. Because she sent and procured the A
slanderous untruth.
Turk to invade Christendom. Because she persecuted the English Romanists, cut
off the Though I wish it had not been done, as being an Enemy to bloodshed, yet
the Romanists were the chief Promoters of her death, by continually thrusting
her on to new designs against Queen Elizabeth. But whether is worse, Queen
Elizabeth to put to death the Queen of Scots, no way engaged to her; or the
English Romanists to seek and endeavor the Murder of Queen Elizabeth, their
own Sovereign, to whom they owed all Allegiance and Service? Nor is this so Bad
as the poisoning of the Queen of Navar, and the Massacre at Paris, 1572.
Queen of Scots, and abolished the Roman Religion. Because she has rejected
and excluded the ancient Nobility, and promoted to honor obscure people, and
also uses Tyranny. Wherefore seeing these offenses, some of them rendering her
incapable of the Kingdom, others unworthy to live: His Holiness by the power of
God and the Apostles, Renews the Censures of Pius V and Gregory XIII against
her; Excommunicates and deprives her of all Royal Dignity, Titles, Rights and
Pretenses to England and Ireland; declares her Illegitimate, and an Usurper of
the Kingdoms, and absolves all her Subjects from their Obedience and Oaths of
Allegiance due to her. So he expressly commands all under pain and penalty of
Gods wrath, to yield her no Obedience, Aid or Favor whatsoever; but to employ
all their power against her, and to join themselves with the Spanish Forces,
who will not hurt the Nation, nor alter their Laws or Privileges, only punish
the wicked Heretics. Therefore by these presents We Declare, that it is not
only lawful, but commendable to lay hands on the said Usurper, and other her
adherents; and for so doing, they shall be well Rewarded. And lastly, to all
these Roman assistants, is liberally granted a Plenary Indulgence and remission
of all their sins.
Here we have the sum of this Treasonable Libel, with which Allen thought to do
great matters against his Queen and Country; and these were prepared to be
spread abroad the Kingdom upon the Spaniards landing; yet no sooner is the news
known of their defeat, but Allen calls in the Impression, burning all he could
lay his hands on; only some few escaped his Fingers; both he and the Printer
having before given some Copies to their Friends. The Romanists for the most
part prized it dearly: though some more sober disliked it as too severe, yet
some others (we need not Question) might be of the Jesuit Currey's opinion,
viz. That -- it was a work of tha^ worth, as it would yet bite in time to
Quodlibets, page 240.
come. --

This Invasion was very much assisted by the English Romanists (though not by
all, for the Lord Montague and some others were against it.) In Flanders lay
Charles Nevil Earl of Westmerland, the Lord Pagit, Sir William Stanley, with
about seven hundred more English, engaged and ready to join with the Prince of
Parma against their own Country.

What Company in England would have taken their parts, I know not. This is
certain, that Philip Earl of Arundel, the unfortunate Eldest Son of Norfolk,
was unhappily too much Priest ridden, which procured his imprisonment and a
trial; the cause of all which might be laid to Allen, who had such a sway and
power over the said Earl, that he could make him do any thing. And the Earl was
over-perswaded to set his affection on the Spanish Fleet, rejoicing at its
coming, praying heartily for its success, and grieved beyond measure at its
overthrow. But he is not the first Nobleman who confided too much in bad
counsel, and whose Zeal for Religion hurryed him on to inconveniences.

As for Cardinal Allen, he was born in Lancashire of good Parentage; was bred
up at Oxford in Orial-Colledge, where he was Proctor; was preferred to a
Canonship in York; in Queen Elizabeth's days quits England, becomes Pensioner
to the Spaniard, to carry on whose designs against his Queen and County, he
was very industrious; for which service Sixtus V. created him a Cardinal 1587.
August 7, and he dyed at Rome 1594. October 16.

We have formerly shown his seditious and King deposing Principles, of which
his foresaid Admonition will give a farther Quodlibets, page 240, 241, 247.
proof: and who were the Promoters of this Invasion, his own words will best
tell you.

-- The King of Spain at length, as well by his Holiness Authority and
Exhortation, as by his own unspeakable Zeal and Piety, moved also not a little
by My humble and continual suit, together with the afflicted and banished
Catholics of our Nation, of all and every Degree, who have been by his special
compassion, and Regal Munificencie, principally supported in this our long
Exile, has condescended at last to take upon him this so Holy and Glorious an
Act, etc.

And then proceeds to encourage, nay and threaten too, the English to take up
Arms against their Queen, and to join with the Spaniards, and the other
Invaders. -- If you will avoid the Popes, the Kings and other Princes high
indignation, let no man of what degree soever, Obey, Abet, Aid, Defend or
Acknowledge her, etc. -- Adding -- That otherwise they should incur the Angels
Curse and Malediction, and be as deeply Excommunicated as any, because that in
taking her part, they should fight against God, against their How comes Philip
to be lawful King of England? Vid. Tho. Bells Anatomy, page 98, 124.
lawful King, against their Country; and notwithstanding all they should do,
they should but defend her bootless, to their own present destruction and
eternal shame.

As for the Secular Priests, you shall hear Watson and Bluet, the chief of
them, thus Confess -- We had some of us greatly approved the said Rebellion,
highly extolled the Rebels, and pitifully bewailed their ruin and overthrow.
Many of our affections were knit to the Spaniards; and for our obedience to the
Pope, we all do profess it.

The attempt both of Pope and Spaniard failing in England, his Holiness, as a
Temporal Prince, displayed his Banner in Ireland; the Plot was, to deprive her
Highness first from that Kingdom if they could, and then by degrees to depose
her from this. In all these Plots, none more forward then many of us that were
Priests. -- These are the words set down in the Book called Page 15.
Important Considerations, composed by Bluet and Watson two Priests.

As for the Jesuits [but of Parsons I shall treat more particularly hereafter]
you shall hear what C. W. A Reply to Father Pa^sons Libel, fol. 64, 65.
Clark the Priest says, who with Watson suffered afterward for Treason
against King James.

First, it is most certain, that all the world had very admirable expectance of
that Army, and the Jesuits more then any.

Secondly, it is plain by the Cardinals Book [ They would hint to us, as if
Parsons were the Compiler of the Admonition; but it is certain, that Allen was
the Author of it; his name being to it, and Pitseus with the other Romanists,
confessing Allen to be the Author.
if it were his] written as a preparative to that action, that he was made
Cardinal of purpose for that Exploit, and to have been sent hither presently
upon the Spaniards Conquest. But Father Parsons says that he labored to set
forward at that time the Cardinals preferment (if you will believe him) which
makes it evident a primo ad ultimum, that Father Parsons was a dealer in that
action.

Thirdly, it is certain, that the Jesuits in Rome were great with the Spanish
Ambassador-Leger there, and had great recourse unto him when the matter was on
foot; does not this then argue them to be concurrers thereunto?

Fourthly, it is likewise most true, that the English Jesuits in Rome,
appropriated certain Palaces in London to themselves, to fall unto their lots
(when this matter was in handling) to wit, Burghley-house, Bridewel, and
another which I have forgot; making themselves cock-sure of their
already-devoured Prey. This all the Students that lived in the Viz. The English
College at Rome.
College at that time will witness with me. Now would I demand of you, what
reasons they might have to be their own Carvers, if they had not some interest
in that affair?

Fifthly, we know, that they were more forward in Rome concerning this matter,
then the Cardinal or any other; Insomuch, as at the first news of the Spaniards
coming down into the Narrow-Seas, they would have had Te Deum sung in the
Colledge-Church for joy of Victory, if the Cardinal had not stayed it.

-- And to conclude, does not the posting of Father Parsons into Spain,
presently after the overthrow of this Army, for farther dealing with the
Spaniard for the time to come, and his better information in English affairs;
and Father Holt posting into the Low Countries for the like purpose, to keep
the Spaniard still in hope of future times, that this mishap might not withdraw
him from ever enterprising the like afterward, show that they were dealers in
the former? Doubtless all these Circumstances cannot but sufficiently prove it,
that they were, in the judgment of wisemen.

And many other passages in confirmation of these things might be produced, but
that they are needless, the truth of them being sufficiently known; and we
shall hint somewhat more in the story of Father Parsons.

However their goodly pretenses were for the propagation of Religion, the
settlement of the Kingdoms, with the security of the Natives; yet we are told,
that as there were severe Cabala, page 372, 373.
punishments appointed for those they were pleased to call Heretics; so the
Romanists themselves were to expect no Watsons Quodlibets, page 176, 177, 242,
249.
favor from their hands, affirming that their conquering Swords should make no
distinction between the one and the other; their business being more to make
way for the Spanish Dominion then his Religion.

And we need not question, the better to carry on this their pretended Holy
War, but that in Spain (Presbyterian-like) as the Learned and Ingenious Poet
does word it, the

-- Gospel-Trumpeter, surrounded Hudibras Canto 1.

With Long-ear'd Rout, to Battle sounded;
And Pulpit, Drum Ecclesiastic,
Was beat with fist, instead of a stick.
Their Priests and Friars to make no small clutter to persuade the people of
the glories and rewards of such a Noble Enterprise. Amongst the rest, I find
Johannes Osorius the Jesuit not a little concerned in this work.

Two Sermons he makes in justification of the War, and in Concionum, Tom. 4.
page 72 73, etc.
commendation of the Spaniards, his Countrymen, for thus fighting against
Heretics; and is so credulous, that he falls a giving Id. page 84.
thanks for a supposed Victory. But a little after is forced to alter his Note,
and make Id. page 90, 91, etc.
three Preachments of Humiliation upon the overthrow of the Navy; in the second
of which, the zealous man grows a little Page 106. Cum ergo pote^emus a Deo
Daemonium p^ssimum ab Anglia pelli.
pettish and angry.

What Relation this Castillian was to the Portuguise Hieronimo Osorio, I know
not; but it seems, that they were both grand Enemies to Queen Elizabeth, and
were willing enough that the English Romanists should enlarge and quit
themselves from all ties of Loyalty and Obedience, though it were to the
destruction of their Native Country and Nursing Princess; as some observe, that
formerly one Antonto de Torquemeda, ^a^din de ^lo^es curiosas. Colloq. 1. p^g 26
Diego Osorio was born by the ripping up of his Mothers belly.

It Is Jo. Evelyn's Sylva, o^ Forest-Trees, cap. 32. 4. page 108.
said, that in this Expedition, the Spanish Commanders were expressly enjoined,
that if when landed they should not be able to subdue the Nation, and make good
their Conquest; they should yet be sure not to leave a Tree standing in the
Forest of Dean; by which, they thought, they might in time ruin us, or hinder
us from harming them, by thus weakening us, in destroying the means of our
Shipping. But it is well they failed in all their designs: and a shame take
those (be their pretense or Religion whatever), who have since assisted to the
destroying those Noble and hearty Oaks: And I fear private interest or knavery
have too much endamaged our other Nurceries of Shipping. But it is now held
modish and in fashion to cheat the Public; though to take a few pence from a
private man, must be branded with Thievery, and very gravely condemned to the
Gallows.

CHAP. VII. Lopez, Squire, York, and other's Treasons against the Queen.
THis grand intended Invasion of the Spaniards being ruined and brought to
naught, England might now afford it self some ease, her Enemies not being able
on a sudden to recruit their great losses; this defeat in a manner breaking the
back, and cracking the credit of Philip. But as by degrees he recovered, so by
the instigation of the English Fugitives was he persuaded to carry on the same
ill will toward the Queen of England.

And here we cannot forget Richard Hesket, who being set on work by Sir William
Stanley, and other English, undertook to persuade Ferdinand Lord Strange, (a
little after by the death of 1592. 1993.
his Father Henry, became Earl of Darby) to depose the Queen, and take upon him
the Title of the Crown; making Pedegrees for him, drawing his pretended right
from Mary his great Grandmother, Daughter to Henry VII. And for a better
encouragement, they gave him large promises of assistance of men and money from
the Spaniard; but withal threatening him with assured destruction, unless he
would undertake the design, and conceal it.

But the Earl far contrary to their expectation discovers Hesket, who
confessing all, is executed. As for the Earl, he presently after ended his
life, tormented in a strange manner, not without John St^w, p. 767.
suspicion of Poison, others say of Witchcraft. As for the Treason it self,
thus confesses Bluet and Watson, two of their chief Priests, in their Book
called, Important Considerations. Vid. Tho. Bells Anatomy, page 32.


-- While the Invasion was talked of, and in preparation in Spain, Richard
Hesket was set on by the Jesuits 1592, or thereabouts, with Father Parsons
consent and knowledge, to have stirred up the Earl of Darby to Rebellion against
her Highness.

This failing, we have another more dangerous, set on by persons of the highest
rank; but it seems not unworthy the basest actions, though any Religion
might'be ashamed of them.

As a Prologue to this, we may understand, that Don Sebastian, the forward King
of Portugal, having ruined himself in the African Expedition, and his great
Uncle Cardinal Henry succeeding him in the Kingdom, and dying unmarryed,
several made claim to the Portugal Crown. Amongst the rest, Don Antonio Prior
of Crato, natural Son to Lewis brother to Henry. To him, being a Portugaise,
many of the people bare an affection; so that at last the rest let their Titles
sleep, and the Quarrel only remained between Philip II of Spain and this
Antonio. But Philip having the longest Sword, under the conduct of Alva wan the
Kingdom; so that Antonio was forced to flee for refuge to our Queen Elizabeth,
who afforded him some assistance and favor; by which means and protection,
many Portugaise shipped themselves for England, where they were received as
friends, with all respect and honor.

Amongst the rest was Roderigo Lopez a Jewish Physician, whom the Queen
entertained in her own Service, making him Physician to her Household; and
Stephano Ferreira de Gama, with Emanuel Loisie. These three were enticed by the
Spaniard to undertake the murder of the Queen; for which they were promised
great rewards: but Lopez was to be the main instrument.

1. Lopez confessed, that of late years he had been allured to do service
secretly to the King of Spain; which he did by the means of one Manuel Andrada
a Portugal, an Agitator under Don Bernardino Mendoza, the Spanish Ambassador in
France.

2. That the said Andrada brought him from Christofero de Mora [a Portugaise,
but a great favorite of King Philips, and an especial Instrument for reducing
Portugal under the Spanish Crown] a rich Jewel, and an encouragement from
Philip himself.

3. That he was informed of the King of Spains hopes of him, not only by
Andrada, but by Roderique Marquis a Portugais also, but employed by the
Spaniard on such wicked designs.

4. That he the said Lopez did assent to these wicked Counsels.

5. That he did secretly advertise the Spaniard diverse times, of such affairs
of the Queens as he could learn.

6. That he did also assent to take away the Queens life by poison, upon a
reward promised him of fifty thousand Crowns.

7. That he sent Andrada to confer with Count Fuentes about it.

8. That he directed Stephano Ferreira de Gama to write Letters to Stephano
Ibarra, the Kings Secretary at Bruxels, to assure the said Earl Fuentes and
Ibarra, that he would undertake as he had promised to destroy the Queen by
poison, provided that he might have the said 50000 Crowns.

9. That he sent these Letters by one Gomez Davila a Portugal: That the reason
why the murder was not executed according to promise, was, because he
perceived the delivery of the 50000 Crowns deferred, though promised him from
day to day.

10. That to take away this delay of the Execution, Count Fuentez, by the King
of Spains order, did sign and deliver Bills of exchange for the said Money.

This money, or part of it, for security to Lopez, was delivered Tho.
Robinson's Anatomy of the Nunnery of Lisbone, p. 9.
to the custody of the English Nuns, then at Rhoan in France; which moneys [the
Plot failing, and Lopez executed] was given to the said Nuns, who carried it
with them to Lisbone in Portugal, where they settled themselves in a Nunnery, as
appears by their Register-book. And at the same time, by one of the Lords of
the Privy Council, through the interception of Letters, this design was
discovered, and Lopez seized on: he was forward also to Jo. Speed's Hist. in
Queen Eliz. 117.
purge old Lord Burghley out of this world.

All this was also confessed by Stephano Ferrera, and Emanuel Loisie; and that
Dr. Lopez his Children were to be advanced by the King of Spain, and several
other circumstances. And that the Count de Fuentez, and Ibara, were privy to
all these actions, take this following Confession to assure it.

The Confession of (a) Manuel Loisie Tinoco, by his own b One of great credit
with the Spanish Counselors at Bruxels.
handwriting, the 22 of Febr. 1593/4.
I Manuel Loisie Tinoco, Gentleman of Portugal, confess that the Count de
Fuentez, and the Secretary Ibarra called me into the Cabinet of the Count; and
both of them together, either of them for his own part, took my hands, putting
them within their own, and told me, that before they would declare unto me a
certain business of great Importance, -- Thou must give unto us thy faith and
homage to keep it so secret, that although thou happen to be taken there of the
English, thou shall not discover this secret, because it imports the
Quietness of all Christendom.

And after I had given them my word and faith, with all fidelity and service in
such an affair, they told me, Stephen Ferrera de Gama has written to us, how
D. Lopez has offered and bound himself to kill the Queen of England with
poison, with condition the King of Spain should recompense his services
according to the quality of them. All which passed in the City of Bruxels, in
the house of the Count de Fuentez; and as far as I can remember, it was the 9
day of December past. All this I certify to have passed in great truth and
certainty, and do affirm it under mine Oath.

Again.

I Manuel Loisie Tinoco, a Portugal Gentleman, do confess that it is true, that
being in Bruxels, in the house of the Count Fuentes, he caused me to be called
for, and demanded of me, of what Quality and Country Andrada was: And after
that I had told him all that I knew of him, he commanded his Secretary to show
me all the Letters that Andrada had written to him from Calice: He showed me
three Letters; in the first he signified, that he was come from England, where
he had been prisoner a long time; and that he was sent by order of Dr. Lopez,
who [as a man very zealous and friendly to the service of the King of Castile]
was determined to do the King such a piece of Service, as thereby he might with
great safety satisfy himself on the English Nation. But so, as the King should
recompense his said services with honors and favors, according to the quality
thereof: For he was old, and many ways indebted, and would now find rect for
his old age.

And declaring the quality of the service, he told him, that Dr. Lopez bound
himself to dispatch the Queen with poison. Wherefore it behooved him to
advertise the King of Spain thereof with all speed, and he would attend at
Calice until the answer came from Madril.

The same design was also carried on to murder Don Antonio, who then called
himself King of Portugal. Concerning which, take part of Stephano Ferrera de
Gama's Confession taken the 18 of Febr. 1593/4.

-- He says, that Manuel D' Andrada, about a month before he went out of
England, did declare to him, that if the King of Spain would, that D. Lopez
would poison the Queen of England, and the King Don Antonio also. Which speech
being afterward uttered to D. Lopez by Ferrera, the Doctor answered, -- As for
the King, he shall dye with the first sickness that shall happen to him: But
for the Queen, we have no Meaning, that the business was not as then fully
concluded on, the Doctor being not fully assured of his money, without which he
declared he would not poison her.
answer as yet from the other side.

In short, Lopez, Ferrera and Loisie, were condemned and executed at Tybourn;
where Lopez thinking to make some Vindication, affirmed that he loved the Queen
as he loved Jesus Christ: at which the spectators could not but smile, knowing
Lopez to be of the Jewish Profession.

At the same time that Lopez was dealing withal about the Queens Murder, they,
to make more sure, persuaded one Patrick Cullen an Irishman, and a Fencer, to
commit the same villainy against her Royal Person. In this Treason Stanley was
very active, who, with Sherwood and Holt, two Jesuits, confirmed him in the
lawfulness of the action; giving him thirty pounds toward his journey into
England* (being then in the Low Countries*) But he was taken, confessed all,
and is executed.

At the same time also, lived in the Netherlands one Edmund York, Nephew to the
Traitor Rowland York. This Rowland was a vapouring Londoner, the first that
brought into England the use of Tucks or Rapiers in single Duels; before which,
the manly Back-sword and Buckler was only in practice by the greatest
Gallants: This was that scandalous Rowland York also, who basely betrayed his
trust, and delivered Zutphen (of which he was Governor) with himself, unto the
Spaniards, and persuaded Sir William Stanley to do the same with Deventer; both
of them for the future fighting under the Spanish Colors against their own
Sovereign Queen and Country.

The English Fugitives beyond Seas, persuaded this man's Nephew, Edmund York,
and one Richard Williams, with others, to kill the Queen. And this wicked
Treason was agitating the same time, that Lopez and Cullen were consulting
about theirs. But these Traitors were also seized on, and suffered.

1. They confessed, that for an encouragement, Hugh Owen (a noted Traitor) at
Bruxels, had an assignation subscribed by Ibara, the Spanish Secretary, of
forty thousand Crowns, to be given them, if they would kill the Queen.

2. That the said Assignation was delivered to Holt the Jesuit, who showed also
the same to York, and produced the Sacrament and kissed it, swearing that he
would pay the said moneys, when the murder was committed.

3. That Stanley did earnestly persuade York to undertake it, animating him
with the Example of his Uncle Rowland.

4. That to forward the plot, there were several consultations, Holt the Jesuit
sitting as President.

5. That Holt said if this design failed, they would then employ no more
English, but Strangers.

6. That at these consultations, there used several to be present, as Thomas
Throgmorton, Charles Paget, Hugh Owen, Dr. William Gifford, the finisher of
Calvino-Turcismus, of whose Treasons we have heard formerly; Dr. Thomas
Worthington, the chief promoter of the Doway-Bible, adding some notes to it: He
also turned Bristow's Motives into Latin; and in his old age turned Jesuit at
Rome.

7. It was also confessed, that there were designed to come into England, to
attempt her death, one Tipping an Englishman, one Edmund Garret an Ensign,
with a Wallon and a Burgundian.

8. That one Young had undertaken a Treasonable action too.

9. It was also confessed that these three, York, Williams, and Young,
determined at their coming into England, to have put themselves into the
service of some great Noblemen of the Queens Council, thereby to have free
access to the Court; and every one of them to seek their opportunities.

10. That Williams, through zeal to the Cause, had wished his sword in the
Queens Guts.

11. That they had vowed, come what will of it, to be the death of her. And how
furious and abominable James Archer the Irish Jesuit and others were, in this
Parracide, Dr. Antilogia, cap 8. fol 116, 117, 118, 119, 120.
Robert Abbot (and a little after Bishop of Salisbury) has abundantly from
their Confessions confuted the Impudent Andraeas Eudaemon-Joannes, and
satisfied all Forraigners.

And besides those common rewards of riches and favor with advancement here,
they were promised the highest of Spiritual Benefits, because their Treasonable
Actions could be no less then meritorious, by which they would be certain to
enjoy Heaven and its Glory hereafter: For no less rewards and enjoyments did
these evil Counselors impudently promise to these bloody Traitors. As if these
Casuists were related to the old Heretics, the Gabr. Prat^ol. Elench. Haeret
p. 110.
Cainani, who reverenced Cain for killing his brother Abel, and worshipped Judas
for betraying our Innocent Savior. But why might not they promise as much,
when they knew that the Pope, who cannot err, had formerly bequeathed such
blessings to the enemies of Queen Elizabeth?

All these designs failing, the Fugitives and other Traitors were at their
wits end, seeing the Queen reign prosperously and successful; and all their
attempts against her ruined, always discovered, and the main instruments seized
on, and deservedly executed. But at last another opportunity offered it self.

In the year 1595, Sir Francis Drake making his last voyage against the
Spaniards in America, in which he dyed, there was one Edward Squire, who was
first a Pettifogging Clerk, afterward an under-servant in the Queens Stables;
and now would try his fortune, as a Soldier in this voyage. It was his chance
to go in a little Pinnace, which unluckily straying from the rest, on the
Coasts of America, was taken by five great Spanish Ships. By which means, much
of Drakes design was discovered; and so a great part of the exploit prevented.

Squire at last was carried into Spain as a prisoner. Here There were three
Brothers of Norfolk all Jesuits, viz. Henry, Michael, and Richard Walpoole.
Walpoole a Jesuit meets with him, and procures him as an Heretic to be put in
the Inquisition; where with afflictions and fair speeches he drew him to be a
zealous Romanist.

This done, he persuades him to kill the Queen; commends the action to him as
piou^ and meritorious, offers him large promises: And at last Squire is fully
persuaded, and undertakes the murder. At this, the Jesuit Walpoole rejoices,
hugs and incourageth him, binds him by several Oaths, under pain of Damnation,
to be secret, and perform his promises, and not to fear death: For, says he,
what does it profit a man to gain the whole Rob. Abbot* Antilog. fol. 122, 123.
world and loose his own soul? Assuring him that if he did but once doubt of
the lawfulness and justness of the Action, that mistrust would be enough to
damn him, such a sin being seldom pardoned.

This said, he imbraceth him; then throwing his left Arm about Squires neck, so
hugging him with his right hand, he makes the sign of the Cross upon Squires
forehead, thus blessing him: -- God bless thee, my son, and strengthen thee; be
of good cheer; I will pawn my soul for thine, and thou shall always have the
benefit of my prayers; and whether thou live or dyest, thou shall enjoy a
full pardon and remission of all thy sins. And another time thus encouraged
him: There is one thing necessary, which if thou prefer before all other
things, and do fulfill it, I have my desire, and thou shall be a glorious
Saint in Heaven.

Squire thus devilishly resolved, gets into England, goes to Greenwich, where
the Court then was; watches opportunity; and being informed that the Queen was
to ride abroad, goes to her Horse, holds him according to his place, and
cunningly puts strong poison upon the Pummel of the Saddle; yet saying with a
loud voice as she mounted, God save the Queen. But such was the providence,
that her Majesty, neither in getting up, riding, or getting down, once touched
the Pummel: yet he doubted not, but that in time it would work the intended
ruin, fully persuaded the Queen had laid her hands on it.

Presently after this, the Earl of Essex set sail for the Islandvoyage against
the Spaniard: And in this Fleet Squire ventured once more as a Soldier, with
which he returned into England, and lived for some time securely, not thinking
that he should ever be discovered.

But see the luck on it: of this poison, being great expectation amongst some,
and seeing no signs of any such effect, they became incensed against Squire,
thinking that he had left them and the Cause in the lurch, and merely deluded
them. Thus jealous and enraged, a revenge is resolved on, and Squire cunningly
accused of some design against the Queen. Squire upon the noise is examined,
and wondering how any thing should be known against him; yet suspecting Walpoole
his Confessor, and believing

Of these late bloody Treasons, Watson and Bluet, two Priests, thus in Print
declare to the world.

-- Father Holt the Jesuit, and others with him, persuaded an See Bells Anatomy,
p. 22, 23.
Irishman, one Patrick Collen (as himself confessed) to attempt the laying of
his violent and villainous hands upon her Majesty. Shortly after, 1593, that
notable stratagem was plotted, for Dr. Lopez the Queens Physician to have
poisoned her. This wicked designation being thus prevented, by Gods providence,
the Traitorous Jesuit Holt and others did allure and animate one York and
Williams, to have accomplished that with their bloody hands, that the other
purposed to have done with his poison, we mean her Majesty's destruction.
Hereunto we may add, the late villainous attempt 1599 of Edward Squire, animated
and drawn thereunto, as he confessed, by Walpoole that pernicious Jesuit. These
words are set down in their Important Considerations, page 33. And yet Father
Answer to the fi^th part of Sir Edw. Cokes Reports, Epist Dedicat. v. 2.
Parsons doubts, whether Squire for all this committed Treason, or no; such was
the loyalty and honesty of this Jesuit.

Thus in part have we seen the great dangers Queen Elizabeth run through; her
life being continually sought after, both by her own subjects and Foreigners;
nor did they want encouragements to oppose their own Queen and Country: Pope
Gregory XIII allowed them a See the Bull, tom. 2. p. 319.
College at Rome, the Guisians in France another a^ Sixtus V by Bull desires
all to assist it. ib. p. 411.
Rhemes; the Spaniard gave them one at Clement VIII confirmed this: vid Sand.
de Schism. lib. 4. sive Appendix, p. 104.
Valladolid in Castile, and allowed them See Thomas Fuller's Church-Hist. lib.
9. Cambden, anno 1595.
others in other places; besides allowed the chiefest of them Pensions, and
maintained many hundred English in his Wars; though his pay and Pensions were
but badly paid to them, yet more and better then such Traiterous Fugitives
deserved.

And for all these Pensions, private fees for Treason, and vast Treasure spent
in his attempts against the Queen; what did the Spanish King expect for a
recompense, but the Crown and Kingdom of England? for the obtaining of which,
the nearest that he came, was once (viz. July, 1595.) when Diego Brocher, with
four Callies, got very early in a morning unperceived, upon the Co^sts of
Cornwall, struck into Mounts Bay by St. Michaels Mount, fired Paul's Church,
standing alone in the Fields, Mouseholes, Meulin and Pens^ns, three poor
fisher-Towns, and presently stole home again, without killing one man.

This beggarly enterprise was all the reward and recompense of his vast
Treasure and toil spent against England. And let them never prosper otherwise,
who attempt any mischief against it, and so unworthily foment and maintain
Traitors, against their respective legal Sovereigns.

But better had it been for Philip and Spain, if he had followed the advice of
his Grandfather Charles V, that famous Emperor, who used often to lay down
this for a certain Rule, insomuch that it was one of his Proverbs,

Con todo el mundo guerra,
Y puse con Inglatierra.
With all the world make War,
But with England do not Jar.
Whilst these Murderers were, according to their engagements, consulting the
death of the Queen, we must not think the Spanish interest altogether Idle, but
they had also their other Instruments and preparations on foot, the better to
secure this Kingdom to them upon her fall.

As for the Jesuits, how active they were for the disturbance of England, a
Romanist himself shall tell you; his words are these.

We have also certain intelligence, that the Jesuits have devised a A. ^. Reply
to a notorious Libel, p. 81, 82.
means to have had the Tower of London seized into their hands, and how they
would have it held until the Spaniard came to rescue them. Diverse of their
Letters have been showed to diverse prisoners for proof against them, when they
have answered in defense of the Jesuits, that they thought them free from such
stratagems; and amongst the rest, there is one of the XX of June 1596, wherein
there are these words. It may be, if the Kings faintness and pusillanimity
hinder us not (as heretofore it has) the Armado will be with you about August
or September. This is one good help, Ireland will be only for us. The Earl of
Tyrone and Odonnel would gladly have help from hence, and they are well
contented to let the Spaniards have certain Holds and Forts for their uses.
This will greatly pleasure to trouble and disquiet England; and in the mean
time serve for Harbor for their Ships that shall pass that way, etc.

It were necessary you should make it known aforehand, that no Catholic man or
woman shall take harm, either in body or goods. Let every man be quiet till the
Spaniards be landed, then shall there presently Proclamation be made of all
security.



Of these Proclamations there were two hundred printed in Spain.

Amongst other contrivances to bring this Kingdom into confusion, was the
design of Anthony Rolston an English Fugitive, Cambden, an. 1598.
who was sent over into England by the Spanish Agitators, and Father Creswell,
under pretense of procuring a Peace, but the truth was (as Rolston himself
confessed) to discover what provisions there were for war, to encourage the
Romanists, and by Bribes and fair promises to corrupt some great Lords about
the Queen, amongst the rest Essex, as the said Earl confessed himself.

And the better to make cock-sure, and carry all before them, another Fleet is
prepared to invade England; and for a further encouragement, as well of English
as others to be assistants in this enterprise, their Lord high Admiral draws up
a Proclamation, which was printed and published; and you may Dr. Mat.
Sutcliff's Blessings on Mount Gerizzim, or the happy Estate of England, page
292, 293, 294, 295.
take it as follows, as I meet with it.

COnsidering the Obligation which his Catholic Majesty, my Lord and Master,
has received of God Almighty, to defend and protect his holy Faith, and the
Apostolical Roman Church: he has procured by the best means he could, for to
reduce to the ancient and true Religion the Kingdoms of England and Ireland, as
much as possibly has been in his power. And all has not been sufficient to
take away the offense done against God in damage of the self-same Kingdoms,
with scandal of whole Christianity; yea rather abusing the Clemency and
Benignity of his Catholic Majesty, the heads and chief of the Heretics, which
little fear God, have taken courage to extend their evil Doctrine with the
oppressing of Catholics, Martyring them, and by diverse ways and means taking
from them their lives and goods, He has forgot the Spanish Inquisition.
forcing them by violence to follow their damnable Sects and Errors, which
they have hardly done to the loss of many souls.

Which considered, his Catholic Majesty is determined to favor and protect
those Catholics, which courageously have defended the Catholic Faith; and not
only those, but such also as by pusillanimity and humane respects have
consented unto them, forced thereunto through the hard and cruel dealings of
the said Catholics Heretical Enemies. And for the execution of his holy Zeal,
he has commanded me, that with force by Sea and Land, which be and shall be at
my charge, to procure all means necessary for the reduction of the said
Kingdoms unto the obedience of the Catholic Roman Church.

In Complement of the which, I declare and protest, that these Forces shall be
employed for to execute this holy intent of his Catholic Majesty, directed
only to the common good of the true Religion and Catholics of those Kingdoms,
as well those which be already declared Catholics, as others who will declare
themselves such. For all shall be received and admitted by me in his Royal
Name, which shall separate and apart themselves from the Heretics. And
furthermore, they shall be restored to the Honor, Dignity and Possessions
which heretofore they have been deprived of. Moreover, every one shall be
rewarded according to the Demonstrations and Feats which shall be shown in this
Godly enterprise. And who shall proceed with most valor, the more largely and
amply shall be remunerated with the goods of obstinate Heretics.

Wherefore seeing Almighty God does present to his Elect so good an occasion,
therefore, I for the more security, Ordain and Command the Captains General of
Horse and Artillery, the Master General of the Field, the Captains of
Companies of Horse and Foot, and all other Officers greater and lesser, and men
of War; the Admiral General, and the rest of the Captains and Officers of the
Army: that as well at Land as Sea they use well, and receive the Catholics of
those Kingdoms, who shall come to defend the Catholic Cause, with Arms or
without them: For I command the General of the Artillery that he provide them
of Weapons which shall bring none.

Also I Ordain and straightly command, that they have particular respect unto the
Houses and Families of the said Catholics, not touching, as much as may be,
any thing of theirs, but only of those that will obstinately follow the part
of Heretics: in doing of which, they be altogether unworthy of those favors
which be here granted unto the good, who will declare themselves for true
Catholics; and such as shall take Arms in hand, or at least separate
themselves from the Heretics, against whom and their favorers all this War is
directed, in defense of the honor of God, and good of those Kingdoms; trusting
in Gods Divine mercy, that they shall recover again the Catholic Religion so
long agone lost, and make them return to their ancient quietness and felicity,
and to the due obedience of the holy Primitive Church.

Moreover, these Kingdoms shall enjoy former immunities and privileges, with
increase of many others for time to come, in great friendship, confederacy and
traffic with the Kingdom of his Catholic Majesty, which in times past they
were wont to have, for the public good of all Christianity. And that this be
put in execution speedily, I exhort all the faithful to the fulfilling of that
which is here contained, warranting them upon my word, which I give in the name
of the Catholic King my Lord and Master, that all shall be observed which is
here promised.

And thus I discharge my self of the losses and damages which shall fall upon
those which will follow the contrary way, with the ruin of their own souls,
the hurt of their own Country, and that which is more, the honor and glory of
God. And he which cannot take presently Arnis in hand, nor declare himself by
reason of the tyranny of the Heretics, shall be admitted from the Enemies
Camp, and shall pass to the Catholic part in some skirmish or battle; or if he
cannot, he shall flee before we come to the last encounter.

In testimony of all which, I have commanded to dispatch these presents,
confirmed with my Hand, sealed with the Seal of mine Arms, and Refirmed by the
Secretary underwritten.
Though Father Parsons was very solicitous to understand the W. Clerks Reply
unto a Libel, fol. 65.
success of these preparations, yet he did not expect any great matters to be
performed by them: and so it fell out, to the no small grief (we need not
question) of many Romanists. And to augment the sorrow of the Hispanioliz'd
Faction, the death of the Spanish King happened the same year; to whom succeeded
his son Philip III, of whose attempts against Queen Elizabeth you may hear in
the next Century.

The end of the seventh Book.
THE HISTORY Of the HOLY League AND Covenant IN FRANCE.
BOOK VIII.
CHAP. I. An INTRODUCTION to the HOLY LEAGUE.
THE Beginning of this Century had like to have been Germany by a mischievous
League, designed in the Bishopric of Spire, by a Company of barbarous,
clownish, rustic High-shooes, and so by the Germans it is Nicol. Basel Addit. ad
Chro^. Naucleri p. 394. L. ur. S^r^^ Com p 3^.
called Bundiscuch. These, like our Levellers, were to raise themselves into as
high a Grandeur as any, by swearing to reduce all other men to their meanness,
by equalling all mankind into the same condition, by rooting out all
Magistracy, Dignities and Laws.

As for the Church, (which is continually struck at by Traitors and such
Sacrilegious Wretches) she was not to escape their Villainies, they designing to
rob her of her Revenues, Titles and Decency, to vilify and discourage her
Priests, thereby to make her contemptible to very Pagans; yet for all this, as
all other Rebels do, they make a grand show of Zeal and Religion; appointing
such Prayers daily to be said for good success, viz. The Pater Noster and Ave
Maria, and these five times a day, and as a word of Cognizance they had the
Virgin Mary, and St. John the Evangelist. And thus constituted, they were
resolved to give no quarter, but kill all their Opposers as Enemies and
Traitors to God. But by the assistance of the Emperor Maximilian I. and
Lodowick the good Bishop of Spire, this intended Rebellion was crushed in the
very bud, by a timely discovery being quelled, which occasioned the deserved
punishment of several of the chief Undertakers.

But from this we shall proceed to another sort of Leaguers or Covenanters, who
carried on their Rebellions with more success and vigor, which had like to
have ruined the whole Kingdom of France.

In this League there were three Families chiefly concerned, of whom for the
better understanding of the History we shall with all haste speak a word or
two; not that we design to set down all their Children (leaving that to the
Heralds) but only those who may afford some light to the more common Readers
of this short Essay of the French League. The Families are those of

I. VALOIS, ending by the death of Henry III.

II. BOURBON, next Heir to the Crown, beginning with Henry IV. King of France
and Navarre.

III. GUISE, assisted by their Chief, LORRAIN.

FRANCOIS I. de VALOIS.
Henry II. de Valois King of France, wounded in the eye at Tilt by Count
Beheaded at Paris as a Rebel 1574, and the sentence of Treason revoked 1576.
Montgomery, of which he died, 1559. Francois II. King of France, died 1560.
Charles IX. King of France, died 1574. Hen. III. King of France, murdered by a
Monk 1589. Francois Duke of Alencon, Anjou, Brabant, etc. died 1584.
Catherine de Medicis, daughter to Lorenzo Duke of Urbin, Cousin to Alexander
Duke of Florence. She died at Bloys 1589.
By the death of King Henry III. the Line of Valois (so called from a little
Territory North-East of Paris, betwixt Picardy and Champaigne) failed, and that
of Bourbon as next Heir succeeded to the Throne, in the Person of Henry IV.

ALENCON, a Town in lower Normandy; it was formerly an Earldom, but King
Charles VI. raised it up to a Dukedom, 1414. though Le ^ray ostat de la France,
page 65.
du Verdier by a mistake would make us believe, that it was made a Duchy by
King Lewis IX. surnamed the Saint.

BOURBON.

This Family is so named from a Town in Aquitaine called Bourbon, with a
differ^nce of l'Archambault, to distinguish it from another in Burgondy called
Bourbon l'Ancien, but by corruption of speech Bourbon Lancy.

It was erected from a Barony into a Dukedom by Charles IV. surnamed le Bell,
1327. It would be endless to speak of the Antiquity of this Family, according
to some men; and for its Commendations Les Antiquitez, p^g. 628.
du Chesne has said enough by affirming, that the Women of it were born to
people Christendom, and the Men to defend it. They draw their relation to the
French Crown from Robert Son to S. Lewis IX.

Charles de Bourbon the first Duke of Vendosme, died 1536. Antoine de Bourbon
married to Jane daughter and heiress to Henry d'Albret second King of Navarre,
and so by his Wife became King of Navarre. He was wounded at the siege of
Rouen, of which he died 1562. Henry III. King of Navarre, and the IV. of
France, was murdered 1610.
Charles the old Cardinal de Bourbon, by the Leaguers called King Charles X. He
died in prison 1590. Lewis de Bourbon Prince of Conde, slain at the battle of
Jarnac 1569. Henry. Prince of Conde died 1588. Henry born 1588. died 1646.
Charles the Younger Cardinal of Vendosme, after the death of his Uncle called
of Bourbon, died 1594. He was Head of the Thirdlings or third party.

-- Francoise Daughter to Rene Duke of Alencon, died 1550.
VENDOSME, a Town in Beausse, was from an Earldom erected to a Dukedom by King
Francis I. 1514.

CONDE', a Town in Hainault or Henegow, whence these Princes of the House of
Bourbon took their Title.

GUISE.

This Family is a branch of the House of LORRAIN; the Antiquity of which has
been undertaken by Francois de Rosieres, born at Bar-le-Duc, and Archdeacon of
Thoul, and so being born a Vassal to that Family, we may allow him to ramble as
far as he pleases for Originals; and though he Preface his History with Adam
and his Children, yet his modesty allows him to fetch this Family no higher
then the story of Troy: as it was the fashion of old Monkish Tale-tellers to
draw the beginning of most Kingdoms from the Legendaries of that scattered
People

Lotharius Emperor of Germany (and the rebellious son of Lewis le' Debonnaire)
made his younger son Lotharius or Lothaire King of those Territories, which
from him were called Lorrain, as if it were Lotair-Riick, and Lot-Reyck, the
Dominion, Possession, Jurisdiction, or Kingdom of Lotaire or Lotharius, which
was then in a far larger extent then that which is now the Dukedom, to which
now the name only belongs.

Rene Duke of Lorrain, who also called himself King of Sicily and Hierusasem,
and his eldest Son Duke of Calabria. Philippe Sister to the Duke of
Guelderlandt, and after his death her Husband Rene took upon him that Title
also.
Antoine Duke of Lorrain and Bar, Count de Vaudemont, Marquess de Pont, died
1544. Renee daughter to Guilbert de Bourbon, Count of Mont-pensier; died 1439.
Francois Duke of Lorrain, died 1545. Charles III. married to Claude daughter
to Henry II. King of France. He died 1608. Francois Count de Vaudemont. Charles
de Lorrain, a Cardinal, chosen to be Bishop of Strasburg, which occasioned
great troubles. He died 1607. Henry II. Duke of Lorrain.

Nicolas Conte de Vaudemont, and Duke of Mercoeur. died 1576. Charles de
Lorrain, Cardinal de Vaudemont, Bishop of Toul. He died 1587. Philippe-Emanuel
Duke of Mercoeur, died 1602. Louyse de Lorrain Wife to K. Henry III. of France.

Claude Duke of GUISE, Baron de Joinville, came to the Court of France, and
obtained the Government of Champaigne and Burgondy. He married Antoinette
daugher to Francois Count de Vendosme; she died 1583. This Claude de Guise was
the first and top of that House, which by his children divided it self into
these following branches. Francois Duke of Guise, killed by Poltrot at
Orleance, 1653. Anne d'Este Sister to the Duke of Ferrara, and Widow to this
Francis Duke of Guise, was afterward married to the Duke of Nemours. Henry
Duke of Guise killed at Bloys 1588. Charles Prince of Joinville, after his
Fathers death called Duke of Guise.
Charles Duke of Mayenne died 1611 Catherine wife to the Duke of Nevers. Henry
slain before Montauban, 1621.
Lewis Card. de Guise, killed at Bloys, 1588. Catherine second Wife to the Duke
of Montpensier. She died 1596.
Charles Cardinal of Lorrain, a Legate in the Council of Trent. Of him Francois
d'Isle makes his Legend. He died 1573. Lewis de Guise made Card. by Julius III.
He died 1578 Claude Duke of Aumale slain at the siege of Rochel 1573. Charles.
Rene Marquess of Elboeuf died 1566. Charles Duke of Elboeuf. Charles Duke of
Elboeuf and Count de Harcourt.

Francois called the Grand Prior died 1562.
Jean Cardinal of Lorrain, lived in the French Court a great Favorite with King
Francois I. He died 1550.

GUISE, a little strong Town in Picardy, which King Francis I. raised to a
Dukedom, and honored Claude one of the sons of Rene Duke of Lorrain with thit
Title.

BAR, a little Dukedom in Lorrain; the chiefest Town of it is now called
Bar-le-Duc, so called to distinguish it from other Bars upon the Seine, the
Aube, etc. it was erected into a Dukedom by Philippes de Valois VI. 1329. The
eldest son of Lorrain (if married) has this Title.

PONT, now better known by the name of PONT-A-MOUSSON, a Marquesset and Title
of the eldest son (if unmarried) of the Duke of Lorrain.

VAUDEMONT, or Vauldemont, a Town in Lorrain, being the Title of an Earldom.

JOINVILLE, a little Town on the borders of Champaigne toward Lorrain, a
Principality of the Guises.

MERCOEUR, a Town in Languedoc, raised to a Dukedom by Charles IX. 1569. for
Nicolas Nephew to the Duke of Guise.

MAYENNE in Beausse in the little Territory Le Maine (Coenomanensis Ager)
erected to a Dukedom by Charles IX. 1573. for Charles brother to Guise.

ELBOEUF in higher Normandy from a Marquesset raised to a Duchy by Henry II.
1581. and given to Charles Granchild to Claude Duke of Guise.

AUMALLE, (Aubmalle, Aumarle, Albemarle, in Latin Alba Mala, Arturus du
Monstier Neustria Pia, p. 731, 732, etc.
for thus and more variously has it formerly been writ) a Town in higher
Normandy, anciently an Earldom, with which Titles the Kings of England as Dukes
of Normandy used to honor some of their Subjects; and the French Kings having
the possession of it have used the same liberty. Charles VII. made it a Peerdom
of France 1458. and Henry II. raised it to a Dukedom for one of Guises sons
1547. but it is now honored by George Monck Duke of Albemarle.

By this the common sort of Readers may the better distinguish and understand
the variety of Cardinals to be met withal in the Histories of the French
Troubles, and may also see to what Greatness and Honors the Guisian Family
has in a short time been raised to in France, but whether they were answerably
grateful to that Crown let others judge.

Some are apt to tell us that Claude de Vaudemont (afterward the first Ant.
Colynet, p. 1 and le Contre-Gui^e.
Duke of Guise) came into France in the Reign of Lewis XII. (Predecessor to
Francis I.) in no splendent condition, but by wheedling himself into the Favor
of King Francois I. obtained to be the Kings Falconer, whence by degrees he
raised himself and his Posterity above the Princes of the Blood Royal. And they
also tell us, that Francis I. was so sensible of the Aspiring humor of that
Family, that upon his deathbed he advised his son Henry to have a care of
them, otherwise Mon fills* j'ay bien apperceu and cognois pur vray que la Race
n'en vaut rien, and que si vous faites le contraire, ils vous mettront en
pourpoint, and vostre peuple en chemise. Francois de l'Isle, fol. 6. b.
They will turn you into your doublet, and your subjects into their shirts.

Some may look upon Lewis XI. of France as a cunning King, being Jean Bodin de
la R^publ^que l. 6. c. 2 p 952, 953.
Master of Hypocrisy; others may conclude him rich, when they see his Account
run so thriftily (if not beggarly) as

20 Sols.
Two shillings for two new sleeves for the Kings old doublet.
15 Deniers.
One penny halfpenny for a box of grease to grease his boots.
But certainly he was none of the wisest for turning away his Fathers old
Faithful Counselors and Servants, for neglecting and despising the old
Nobility, and pleasing and sorting himself with the Plebeans and those of the
meanest rank; insomuch that his Tailor was his Herald, and his Barber his
Ambassador.

This way of meanness and negligence is seldom without a mischief attending it;
and this Family of Valois now growing toward its end, wanted the vigor and
prudence of her former Kings: now were they Sardanapalus like, more apt and fit
to accompany the worst of Women, and hold a Distaff, then to manage a Scepter,
or protect a People. Pleasures were all their study, and to neglect business
all their care: they were only the picture of Kings, having neither life nor
action to Government or Majesty; leaving affairs to be managed by any that
could thrust themselves uppermost. By which easiness they had the honor to be
commended by some, hated by others, pitied by most as good-natured Kings, born
to enrich a few Favorites, but ruin the whole Kingdom besides. Though some
cunning Minister of State can throw all their own Extortions, Cheats, and
Villainies upon the King, thereby making a double Cheat, abusing both the King
and People.

And thus it happened with these of France, to whose very Name and Family I
find some to have such a spite and hatred, that I meet with a Cordelier (called
Melchier) publicly in the Pulpit to have told the People, 1559. that As long
as any of the Line of Valois reigned the people could Guil. Ribier Le^tres and
Memoires d'Estat, tom. 2. p. 799, 800.
not be free from oppression, all that Family being so highly addicted to
tyranny. And another time he affirmed to his Auditors, that It was very
convenient that four of the greatest in the Kingdom ought to be rooted out, for
the easment and comfort of the people.

That this Gray Friar meant the King then in being (viz. Henry II.) I cannot
say; but for number sake it is not unworth the observation, that besides the
King there were but Four men (viz. his Four sons) living then in the whole
world of that Family, after whose deaths it ended, and the Crown fell to that
of Bourbon. Nor is it unworth the notice, that the people were then so apt to
Sedition, that Antoine King of Navarre who (under his own hand gave the King
notice of these expressions) was pussled or at a stand how to behave himself in
this affair, fearing the rage of the people, should he forthwith call the Friar
to an account.

But it is not only the House of Valois that is aimed at, but that of Bourbon
too, as being next Heirs to the Crown of France. And this design is heavily
laid in the dish of the House of Guise, who (as they say) had for many years
consulted how to make themselves Possessors of the Throne of that Kingdom; and
finding none so much capable by Right, Title, and Interest, as those of the
Family of Bourbon, to thwart and oppose their designs it was their best policy
to procure their ruin: to which purpose take this following Narrative (but in
short) of the Guisards against the House of Navarre (being the chief of that of
Bourbon) which though An 1564. 8.
Spondanus looks upon as a Fable, and it may be according to Perefixe, that the
young Prince of Navarre might be then at Paris; yet take the story (though
possibly with some mistakes) upon the credit of Thanus and Gomberville, now one
of the French Academy, and so let him and the present Archbishop of Paris (also
of the Academy) bandy and rectify it as they please.

Antoine de Bourbon King of Navarre, at the Siege of Rouen being shot Guise
consulted how to make their best benefit De Gomberville. Les Memoires de M. de
Nevers, v l. 2. p. 579, etc. Thuan. lib. 35. M^moires d'Estat, vol. 2. ensuite
de c^ux de M. de Villeroy, page 35, 36, etc.
by the said death. Jane the Widow Queen of Navarre lived at Pau, the chief
Town in the Territory of Bearne, adjoining to the Pyrenean Mountains, and with
her she had her young Prince Henry (afterward called the Great) now about 9
years old.

At this time Philip II. King of Castile having wars with the Africans and
Moors, his Recruits from Italy and Germany were to rendezvous at Barcelona in
Catalonia.

Now does Charles Cardinal of Lorrain, and his brother Francois Duke of Guise,
consult how to extirpate this Race of Navarre; to which purpose they pitch upon
one Dimanche to act as Agent for their Interest in those parts of Aquitaine,
where he had as his Assistants Monluc an experienced Soldier, d'Escars,
Viscount d'Ortes, with the Captain of Ha Castle adjoining to Bourdeaux, and
several others, great Favourersand Dependents of Guise. But the prosecution of
these designs was somewhat cooled by the death of the Duke of Guise, who was
shot by Poltrot Orleance.

Upon this, though a Peace was struck up between the King and the zealous
Huguenots, where the later were gainers by the Agreement; yet the Cardinal
Lorrain carries on his former Contrivements against the House of Navarre,
making his Nephew the young Duke of Guise Head of the Plot. And to give a
better color to all, they pretend Religion their Foundation; so all Heretics
ought to be rooted out, amongst which the young Prince of Navarre and his
Mother, to which Friends could not be wanting, seeing the King of Spain would
assist them.

To this purpose Captain Dimanche is dispatched into Spain to the Alva, to
obtain the assistance of the aforesaid Forces at Barcelona, which on a sudden
might fall upon Bearne, take Pau with the Queen, her Son Henry, and Daughter
Catherine; and to prevent any of their Escapes, the Friends of Guise would
way-lay them on the French side; to which end they had several trusty
Commanders and Forces conveniently placed thereabouts. And the Princes thus
taken should be conveyed into Spain, put into the Inquisition as Heretics, and
then they would be sure enough. Thus the Guisards would have their desire, and
as a persuasive argument to the Castilian; they told him that things brought to
this pass, the dispute for the Kingdom of Navarre would cease, the Pretenders
to it being thus in his possession.

Accordingly Dimanche gets into Spain, waits upon the Duke of Alva, who having
heard and approved the design, orders him to go to the King, who was then at
Moncon or Monson, a Town in Aragon where they used to keep their Parlements (or
las Cortes) for Aragon, Valencia, and Catalonia.

For this place Dimanche passing by Madrid, he fell dangerously sio^ of an high
Fever, and being but badly accommodated in a poor Inn, a Frenchman called Anne
Vespier (one of the Queen of Spains servants) took pity on him, removed him to
his own house, where he was better attended on, and by the assistance of the
Queens Physicians recovered. For which kindness and other great favors
Dimanche and Vespier enter into a strict Familiarity and Friendship. In short,
Dimanche thinking to make use of him in his absence for some Intelligence,
discovers his business and the Plot to him.

Vespier being born at Nerac in Gascogne, so a Vassal and Subject to the King
of Navarre, was guided by so much Loyalty as to resolve to prevent the ruin of
his Sovereign; for which purpose he had this advantage: The present Queen of
Spain was Elizabeth daughter to Henry II. King of France, and so sister to
Charles IX. then reigning King of france, and thus near related to the House of
Navarre. Vespier, a servant to this Queen Elizabeth, thinks upon the most
convenient way to inform her of all; for which he addresseth himself to the
Grand Almoner and Tutor, by whose means all is fully discovered to her, who
resolves to write of it to her Brother and Sister the King and Queen of
France. Notice is also given to Sieur de St. Suplice the French Ambassador
then in the Spanish Court at Moncon, with a desire to inform the Queen of
Navarre at Pau, that she might better consult and provide for her own safety.

Dimanche gets to Moncon, opens all to King Philip; in the mean time de St.
Suplice (one well acquainted with State matters, and after employed by the
French Court) dispatcheth his Secretary Rouleau into France with the Letters
and Intelligence: whereby the Queen of Navarre had means to secure her self,
and the Plot was spoiled by this discovery. Yet Dimanche having done with Spain
hasts to Paris, where he is privately lodged in the Duke of Guise his house,
and for some time after at a Monastery belonging to the Friars called Bons
hommes, adjoining to the Wood of Nostre Dame de Boulogne near St. Cloud, not
far from Paris.

And though the Spanish Money and Interest at this time had such a sway in the
French Council and Court, that Captain Dimanche (though it was desired) was not
suffered to be seized on in his return from Spain, (whereby they might have
discovered further into the Plot by himself and his Papers) yet was Philip and
Guise both gulled, and the House of Navarre preserved to sit in the Throne. And
though the Queen of Navarre complained of this Conspiracy, and desired justice
of the House of Lorrain, yet Catherine de Medicis (one not apt to be commended
in History) the Queen Mother, turned it off by telling her, that it was best to
forgive those injuries they could not punish. And indeed the Interest of the
Guises was then so powerful, that it was dangerous to call them to an account.

Whilst these things were closely carrying on, Pope Pius IV. was also 1563.
Spond^n.. 48. 49, 50, 51. Davila. p. 191.
solicited to use his Authority against the Queen of Navarre, which would give
a greater color and encouragement for others to attaque her accordingly,
because she was of the Reformed Religion. He falls to work, publishes a
Citation or Monitory against her, concluding that if she did not turn a
Romanist within six months, he would deprive her of her Dominions, and give
them to any that would conquer them.

At this the French King is not a little troubled, looking upon it as a thing
of dangerous consequence, as the common cases of all other Kings; nor did he
like that any third party should have any pretense to seize upon those
Territories which lay so near to and convenient for Spain, whom possibly he
might suspect, though it is said that Philip complemented Queen Jane with an
assurance, that he would protect her and her Dominions against any that should
assault them.

Besides this, another thing happened which did not a little perplex the King,
the Council of Trent (as they call it) being now ended, Cardinal de Lorrain
desired the Pope to use his Interest with the French King, that it should be
received and approved of in his Dominions, that he would root out the
Huguenots; that he would break the late Peace made with Guise, etc. And that
these Petitions might carry the greater awe, an Ambassador is sent as from the
Pope, the Emperor, the King of Spain, and the Duke of Savoy, to demand them
from Charles, who is not a little puzzled how to behave himself in this case.

For to refuse the Council of Trent would render him suspect to the Pope; to
receive it would be against the Liberties of the Gallican Church: to make war
against the Huguenots would not advantage him, as he had found by experience,
and he did not much care for Foreign assistance; to extirpate them quite was not
probable to be done, and if he should he must destroy many of his nearest
Relations; however so weaken and impoverish the Kingdom, that at last it might
b^come a prey to a third party. As for the death of the Duke of Guise, Poltrot
(who shot him) was executed for it; and though he had accused Admiral Coligny,
Beza, and some others, as Instigators of him to it, yet they had publicly
disowned it both by Oath and Declarations: besides, Poltrot did vary in his
Accusations, and so his Credit not possitively to be stood to. However the King
by his cunning doubtful Answers and Delays wheedled all these things off, to
the no small trouble of the Guisians, who hoped for a war and troubles, that
being the only way to raise themselves, and carry on their designs.

Yet was not the House of Navarre free from danger, for Pius V. advised 1568
Spo^d. 26.
the Queen Mother to seize upon their Dominions, seeing Queen Jane was an
Heretic; or if she approved not of this, that he might by his Papal Authority
appoint one of the Family of Valois to be King of those Territories: that for
his part if neither of these liked her, he was resolved to give to the King of
Spain that part of the Kingdom which Jane possessed. I suppose he did not mean
all those Territories in France, which for her Son she governed as Queen of
Navarre, but only that little spot of ground which lies North of the Pyrenean
Mountains in Gascogne, which the French do call the lower Navarre, having St.
Jean-Pied-de-Port, St. Pelage, and a few other little Towns in it.

But which of them the Pope meant is no great matter, for both of them if
gained must be won by the Sword, which it seems at this time Philip had no mind
to, whereupon this went no further then a vapor, and so I leave it.

But nothing can more clearly demonstrate the intent and design of the
Guisards, then the Massacre of Paris, (a slaughter so much the worse because of
its long contrivance before the action, viz. almost Davila p. 346, 350, 355,
356, 357.
two years, for so long was it concluded on before) where the Id. p. 370.
Duke of Guise was very urgent and earnest that the young King of Navarre and
his young Cousin the Prince of Conde (the next Heir to the Crown after Navarre)
should be both slain with the rest; but others (though cruel enough) opposed
this, as not willing to imbrue their hands in the Blood Royal, which would seem
so abominable all the world over.

But whether at this time the Guisards had any design to secure themselves of
the French Crown I shall not say any thing, though that they had afterward is
apparent and confessed by all Historians. And thus much by the way, though one
might enlarge himself on this bloody story, by observing how the King
endeavoring a vindication of himself, did make the thing worse by his many
Contradictions, as appears by his Vid. Ernest. Varamund. de Furoribus Gallicis.
Letters and Declarations.

Sometimes declaring how sorry he was for the death of his Cousin the Massacre
was acted without his knowledge, how it was contrived and done only by those of
the House of Guise, upon some quarrel between them and the Admiral; that it was
not in his power to hinder it, he having enough to do to secure and guard
himself, his Queen, his Brethren, the King of Navarre, etc. in his Palace the
Louvre; that he is for peace, and desires all to keep the Edict of
Pacification, etc.

Othertimes he declares that the Massacre was done by his express will and
commandment; that it was acted for the security of himself and Friends; that
the Admiral and Huguenots had plotted and determined to destroy him, his Queen,
his Brethren, the King of Navarre, etc. Now orders all of the Reformed Religion
to be turned out of their Employments, Places, and Estates; and then that they
shall be Davila, p. 735.
massacred after the same manner all France over, etc.

And as a forerunner to all these slaughters happened the sudden death 12 June.
of Jane the stout Queen of Navarre, who being come to Paris (upon earnest
Invitations) about her sons Marriage, was (as is commonly believed) poisoned by
order of the King and Queen-mothers private cabal. Certain it is, though all
the rest of her body was dissected and opened to view, yet the King would
Thuan. l. 49.
not by any means let her Head be touched, he knowing (as p. 364.
Davilla says) that the poison (of the Perfumed Gloves prepared for her) had
only wrought upon her Brain.

But for all this the Marriage went on, and was solemnized between 18 August
the young King of Navarre (for now Henry after the death of his Mother took
upon him the Title of King, being before only called Prince) and Margaret
Daughter to Henry II. of France, and Sister to Charles IX. a Lady of excellent
parts, as appears by her writing, though it may be truly said of her Memoires,
that she wrote them more to justify her self, and wipe off some stains, then
to inform posterity of what was true, for all is not current that she attests.
However it be, having been married many years without either Children or
Affection to her Husband, she was at last divorced from him 1599, as being
married against her will, and to one that was then an Heretic, and too near a
kin to her, besides the Spiritual Relation, her Father Henry II. having been
Godfather to her Husband; and all these Nullities confirmed, and to the Divorse
ratified by Clement VIII. though Pope Gregory XIII. had formerly dispensed with
them, and approved of the Marriage.

But for all these pretenses the truth of it was, that this King naturally gave
himself up to the pleasure of variety, to which he wanted not many flattering
promoters, insomuch that some of his Dames of pleasure wanted but a lit^^e to
fit in the Throne; and Margaret having been thus for 27 years fruitless, the
people desired succession by some other means, which afterward happened from
Maria de Medicis daughter to Francisco Grand Duke of Tuscamy, married upon the
Divorce to this Henry. Margaret (who yet kept the Title of Queen) died 1615,
who does Men o^r^s p. 31.
confess, that the Contrivers of this Massacre did design it not only against
the Huguenots, but also against the Princes of the Blood Royal, and that they
were not a little angry when they understood that the King of Navarre and the
Prince of Conde were preserved from the slaughter.

And what virtue or goodness could then be expected in the French Court, of
which a late excellent Author does give this Character? Hard. de Perefixe Hist.
Hen. le (...)
That then it, never was there any more vicious or more corrupted; where then
Atheism, Sorcery, Impiety, Ingratitude, Perfidiousness, Poisonings, Murderings,
and such like horrible wickednesses, did sway in the highest degree.

To which we might add the designs of Catherine de Medicis, the Queen Mother,
one that has left a very bad and black Character behind her, some making her
the Authoress of the many miseries of that Kingdom, and amongst many others I
find one thus very biting against her.

Tres Erebi Furias ne posthac credit vates, Tho. Lan^. Consult. Germ. p. 272

Addita nam quarta est nunc Catherina tribus:
Quod si tres Furias a se dimitteret Orcus,
Haec Catherina foret pro tribus una satis.
That the Furies are but three now speak no more,
Since Catherine does make the number four:
And yet should Hell cashier those three, this Kate
Alone would serve to plague grim Pluto's State.
And we might also suppose, that the ill will these Brothers of Valois bare one
to another might be some advantage to these troubles; and one tells us, that
they endeavored to ravish the French Crown one from Hist. Hen. le Grand.
another, on which he remarks (as it were by a judgment) that they all died
unhappily. And possibly these Garboils and miseries might be somewhat promoted
by the natural humor of that Nation, which is said to be very Phil. Brist.
Geogr. vol. 1. p. 78.
Fickle and Quarrelsom; the Sieur Montaigne himself confessing and asserting,
That Mettez 3 Francois au deserts de Libye, ils ne seront p^s un mois ensemble,
sans se harceler and esgrat ner. L^s Essais de Mo^taigne l. 2. c. 27. p. 666.
if three Frenchmen were put together in the wild deserts of Libya (where
self-preservation might oblige them to assist and befriend one another) before
a months end they would be provoking, scratching, and falling out one with
another. As for the Brother Kings, Fuseb. Philod. lp. Cosmopolit. Dialog 1. p.
75 76, 77, 79.
some think that the famous French Poet Pierre de Ronsard, (though a zealous
Romanist) did design their Characters and vices, under counterfeit names, in
the end of his La Tranciade, but whether so or not, let others judge.

However, though these accidents might make the way more easy for the
following mischiefs, yet we shall find that horrid League more highly carried
on by those of the house of Lorrain: of which pretended holy Covenant we
proceed now to speak more particularly, passing by in the mean time those worse
then Civil Wars, between the King and Huguenots, where all things went to
wrack, and the Kingdom was almost ruined, of which thus an Tho. Dane^t. Hist.
of France in Epist. Dedic. Dr. Pet. du M^ulin's Vindication of the sincerity of
the Prot^stants Religion, c. 2. p. 29, 30, etc.
eyewitness does testify, 1577. We found such a Wilderness in all the
Country between Bayonne and Bourdeaux, that whole Forests and Woods were
turned up and consumed, the Towns utterly desolated, the people dispersed, the
Churches quite subverted, and the Children, (a lamentable thing to be recorded)
remaining unchristned by the space of ten years.

And wherever the fault lay, I shall not Apologize here for the Huguenot, who
was too zealous in his way, and too much biased by fury and indiscretion, as
it commonly happens to those holy people, who cry up Religion with the sword in
their hands, as if it were lawful for subjects to rebel upon the account of any
Religion, or such pretense in the world. But nothing here is intended against
the Huguenot, since it is said in their Vindication, that these troubles were
neither upon the account of Religion, nor between the King and them, but rather
a begun Quarrel 'twixt the Princes of the Blood and the Guises with their
Minions; the first taking it ill, that the latter should sway all, by excluding
them from the management of public affairs, to whom, as Princes of the
Blood Royal, by the Custom of France, it did belong, especially in the Minority
or indisposition of their Kings, and so one time were willing to gain that
which they thought their right, and another time thought it best to defend
themselves; but of these things I shall not judge, being at this time nothing
to any purpose.

CHAP. II. The Articles of the Holy League, and the Guisards Under* plotting
against the King.
SIgismundus II. surnamed Augustus, King of Poland, and much commended 1572 1573
for his Prudence, Valor and Learning, dying, the people choose for their King
Henry Duke of Anjou, Brother to Charles IX. King of France, who accordingly
goes into Poland, and is there Feb.
crowned.

But here he stayed not long, for the same year his Brother 30 May.
Charles dying, France belonged to him as next; and so upon notice of his death
he June.
steals out of Poland, to the no small trouble of the Natives, and posts to his
Hereditary Throne, which he thought more worth then the other Elective; yet in
France he always kept the Title of King of Poland, though that people, (seeing
Henry would not return to them again) had chosen for their Sovereign Stephanus
Battorius an Hungarian, Transylvania.

Henry III. being thus Crowned or Consecrated the French King at Rbeimes, was
the next day married to Louyse de Vaudemont, Niece to the Duke of Lorrain; and,
as a show, that nothing should be wanting to the prosperity of that Nation, a
firm peace was struck up and concluded, whereby a free Exercise of Religion is
granted to the Huguenots; Liberty to erect Schools or Colleges, of calling
Synods, to 14 May, 1576 Edict de May.
enjoy Offices and Dignities, etc. But none of these Conditions were observed,
to the no small discontent of the Huguenot.

Nor were the Romanists pleased, that any such Articles should be granted,
though they were winked at, to break them according to their humors. And
whoever was the Instigator of the said Agreement, some laid their designs by
it. For now was it spread abroad, how prejudicial the said Peace was to the
Roman Religion, how dangerous to the French Nation, that the King showed
himself none of the wisest in concluding it; nay, it was whispered, as if the
King might have a twang of Calvinism, by this showing a favor to the
Heretics; though it is supposed that the Guisians were the main Promoters of
this Peace, thereby to have an occasion to raise these Discourses, the better
to get the King disliked, so neglected by his people. Though they need not have
taken so much pains to obtain that, which the King himself by his negligence,
facile humor, wanton tricks, hypocrisy, and his odd carriage Vid. Journ^l du
Roy Hen. III. Ao^st. 1576. and Fevrier. 1577.
in his Momeries and such like disguises, was naturally apt to procure, and
accordingly was slighted and despised, as appears in part by the many Lampons
and such like Raileries against him, and the Honourary Titles the Wags were
then pleased to bestow on him.

The House of Guise (in spite of the Interest, Priority, and Favor; France
grants to the Princes of the Blood Royal) had used of late times to rule all,
and dispose of the King and Kingdom as they pleased; and having now the Queen
of their Family, questioned not but to rule and sway all as formerly, nay and
to drive a little higher. And because Peace was an enemy to their designs, it is
plotted how to break that and the Kings Reputation together, as aforesaid.

By the late Edict of Agreement the Prince of Conde was made Governor of
Picardy, and in it the strong Town of Peronne assigned to him. At this many
Reports are thrown out disadvantageous to the King, and at last the People are
secretly cheated to an opposition, so they resolve Conde shall not enter into
Peronne, nor have any thing to do over them: for security of which and their
Religion a Manifesto of their humors and designs is drawn up by their Leaders,
and they are all secretly obliged to submit and subscribe to it: the Paper it
self being long, and much of it of no great matter, I shall refer you to other
d'Aubigne Hist ^re Vn^ne^selle, tom. 2. l. 2. c. 3. Andr. Favyn Hist. de
Navarre, l. 15. p. 927, 928, etc.
Writers.

But the sum of it was:
After many fine specious Cantings and Good morrows of their Loyalty, Religion,
and Obedience, to Enter into an Holy Union or Covenant. To honor, follow, and
obey him that shall be chosen the They do not name their Chief, but all
conclude it was the Duke of Guise.
Chieftain of their League, and to assist him in all things against any (be who
it will) that shall attempt any thing against him. To defend and keep the
people from oppression better then has been done heretofore. To spend their
very lives for defense of the Towns and Castles which shall associate with them
and their Chief. To keep secret the Counsels of their Covenanters, and to
discover any thing that may be prejudicial to their League. To be faithful,
loving, and assistant one to another; and that all the private Quarrels amongst
them shall be ended by the Council (which shall be chosen) of their
Confederation, to whose determination they will submit themselves. And the
better to strengthen their League it shall ba remonstrated at their next
meeting, the necessity of appointing some amongst them in several places, to
inform the Gentlemen of their parts or neighbourhoods, what is necessary to be
proposed, to receive their Answers, and to determine what is fitting to be set
on feot. To give secret notice to their adjoining Cities of their designs, and
to get them to join with them in the same League and Covenant. That some should
be dispatched to the No question but Spain in the first place.
neighboring Nations with Credential Letters, to persuade them to join, and
run the same fortune with their League. That in the Cantons, Divisions, or
Wapentakes of the said Province of Picardy there shall be one appointed to
inform the Associats or Covenanters about him, of whom there shall be a Roll or
List made, and that every one shall procure as many Proselytes as he can. That
every man shall have his Arms in readiness. That a Rendezvous shall be pitched
upon when time shall require; and that the Places, Towns, and Castles of the
King, and of those belonging to their Associats, shall be endeavored to be in
confiding hands. That they must have some trusty friend at Court to give them
Intelligence. That they must promise and swear all fidelity and service as far
as their lives and estates go to their Chief and Head.
And so zealous were they for this Association, that they protest in their
Manifesto to spend their blood as freely for it, as Christ did his for the
Redemption of Mankind.

This their Manifesto they spread abroad with a great deal of care and cunning,
persuading and getting multitudes to subscribe it; and amongst other places
they were very busy at Paris: but it is said thus, Christopher de Thou, the
chief President and Father to the Famous Jacobus Augustus Thuan. l. 63
Thuanus, gave some stop to it in that City, by showing his dislike of it.

They had also a great mind to inveigle Ludovico Gonzago (the Duke Gomberville,
les Memoires de Nevers, v^l. 1. p. 437, 458.
of Nevers) into something like it and its Subscription, but he very cunningly
refused it, as if not willing to enter into any League or Association without
his Kings knowledge and desire; but though he would not subscribe, yet either
Opinion or Interest engaged him more then was fitting to the Leaguers for some
time.

Yet the Guisians perceiving their number to increase, drew their designs into
a closer compass, and after the following Form framed their HOLY LEAGUE AND
COVENANT, which was to be signed and sworn by all their Confederates.

THE LEAGUE.
Au nom de la saint Trinite, I.
Pere, Fills, and Saint Esperit, nostre seul vray Dieu, au quel soit Glory and
Honneur.

L'Association des Princes, Seigneurs, and Gentils-hommes Catholics, Andr.
^avyn reads only -- ^st faicte --
doit estre and serra fait pour restablir la Ley de Dieu en son entier;
remettre and retenir le saint Service d'icelui selon la form and maniere de
la Saint Eglise Catholic, Apostolic, and Roman; abjurans and renoncans
touts erreurs au contraire.

Secondement, pour conserver le II.
Roy Henry III. de ce nom, D' A^bigne and the Hist. des derniers troubles de
France ^ave it thus, -- Henry III. de ce nom, par la grace de Dien and ses
Predecesseurs Roys tres Chrestient, which may be as right as the other; and so
their pretended Loyalty to the Valoises spoiled by a ju^gle.
and ses successeurs Roys tres-Chrestiens, en l'estat, splendeur, autorite,
devoir, service, and obeissance, qui lui sont deubs par ses subjects, ainsi
qu'il est contenu par les Articles qui lui seront presentez aux Estats, les
quels il jure and promet garder and son Sacre and Couronnement, avec
Protestation de ne rien fair au prejudice de ce qui y serra ordonne par
lesdits Estats.

Tiercement, pour restituer aux Provinces de ce Royaume and Estats d'icelluy,
les Droicts, Preeminences, Franchises, and Libertes anciennez, tells qu' else
estoient du temps du Roy Clouis premier Roy Chrestien, and encores meilleurs
and plus profitables, si else se peuvent inventer sous la Protection susdicte.

Au cas qu'il y ayt Empeschement, Opposition, ou Rebellion a ce que dessus,
part qui and de quelle part qu' ils puissent estre, serront lesdicts Associez
tenus and obligez d'employer tous leurs biens and moyens, mesmes leurs propres
Persons jusques a la mort, pour punir, chastier, and courir sus a ceux, qui
l'auront voulu contredire, and empescher, and tenir la main que toutes les
chooses susdictes soyent mises en execution reellement and de faict.

Au cas que quelques-uns desdicts Associez, leurs Subjects, Amiss, and
Confederez, fussent molestes, oppressez, and recherches pour le cas
dessusdicts, par qui que ce soit, ser^nt tenus les dicts Associez employer
leurs Corpse, Biens, and Moyens, pour avoir vengiance de ceux, qui auront faict
lesdicts oppresses and molestes, soit par la voye de justice, ou des arms,
sans nulle acception de persons.

S' il advient qu' acun des Associez apres avoir faict serment en la dicte
Association, se vouloit retirer ou departir d'icelle sous quelque pretexte que
ce soit (que Dieu ne vueille) tells refractaris de leur consentement, seront
offencez en leur corpse and biens, en toutes sorts qu' on se pourra adviser,
comme Enemis de Dieu, Rebels, and Perturbateurs du repos public, sans que
lesdicts Associez en puissent estre inquietez ny recherches, soit en publec ny
en particulier.

Jureront lesdicts Associez toute prompte obeissance and service au Chef que
serra depute, suivre and donner conseil, comfort, and aid, tant a
l'entretenement and conservation de ladicte Association, que ruin aux
contredisants a icelle, sans acception ny exception de persons. Et seront les
defaillants and dilayants punis par l'Authorite du Chef, and selon son
Ordenance, a laquelle lesdicts Associez se soubmettront.

Tous Catholics des Corpse des villes and villages seront advertis and sommez
secretement par les Governeurs particuliers d'entrer en ladicte Association,
fournir deuement d'armes and d'hommes pour l'execution d'icelle, selon la
puissance and faculte de chacun.

Est defendu ausdicts Associez IX.
d'entrer en debats ny quarrels l'un contre lautre sans la permission du Chef,
a l'arbitrage du quel les contrevenants seront punis, tant pour la reparation
d'honneur, que touts autres sorts.

Que ceaux qui ne voudront entrer X. This Article is not in ^avil^'^ Hist. l. 6.
en ladicte Association, seront reputez pour enemis d'icelle, and poursuivables
par toutes sorts d'offences and molestes.

Si pour fortification ou plus XI.
grande surete des Associez se faict quelque Convention avec les Provinces de
ce Royaume, elle se fera en la form susdicte and aux mesmes conditions,
soitque ladicte Association soit poursuivie envers les dictes villes, on par
else demandees, si autrement n'en est advise par le Chef.

THE LEAGUE.
In the Name of the Holy Trinity, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, our only true
God, to whom be Glory and Honor.

The Confederacy and Covenant of the Princes, Lords, and Gentlemen of the
Catholic Religion, ought to be and is made for the complete establishment of
the Law of God, and to restore and settle his holy Worship, according to the
form and manner of the Catholic, Apostolic, and Roman Church, abjuring and
renouncing all errors contrary unto it.

Secondly, for the Preservation of King Henry III. of that name, and his
Successors the most Christian Kings, in the State, Honor, Authority, Duty,
Service and Obedience, due unto them by their subjects, according as it is
contained in those Articles, which A conditional obedience: and here they make
the King tru^kle to the Parliament.
shall be presented to him in the Assembly of Estats, the which he swears and
promises to observe at his Consecration and Coronation, with protestation not
to do any thing against that which shall be there ordained by the said Estats.

Thirdly, to restore unto the Provinces III.
of this Kingdom, and the States of it, those ancient Rights, Preeminences,
Privileges, and Liberties, which were in the time of A pretty tr^ck to run
above 1000 years back for a Government, and so they might pretend any thing.
Clouis the first most Christian King, or yet better and more profitable (if
any such can be found) under the said protection.

In case there be any Impediment, IV.
Opposition, or Rebellion against the aforesaid, let it be by Here they will
not except the King himself.
whom or whence it will, the Covenanters here shall be obliged to venture not
only their fortunes and goods, but their very lives too, to punish, chastise,
and prosecute those, who shall offer to disturb or hinder this League; and
shall never cease till the aforesaid things be really done and perfected.

In case any of the Covenanters, V.
their Vassals, Friends, or Confederates, be molested, oppressed, or questioned
for this cause, be it by Nor will they here except the King from their fury if
he oppose them, that is, side not with them to his own ru^ne.
whom it will, they shall be bound to employ their Persons, Goods, and Estates
to take revenge on those who have so oppressed or molested them, either by the
way of justice or force, without any exception of persons whatsoever.

If it shall happen that any man, VI.
having united himself by oath to this Confederacy, shall desire to withdraw
himself or depart from it, upon any pretense whatsoever, (which God forbid)
that then such wilful breakers of their former promises, shall be punished in
bodies and goods by all means possible, as Enemies to God, Rebels and
Disturbers of the public peace: neither shall any of the Covenanters be A good
prevention against just^^e, and a way to get the wicked to join with them. VII.
liable to trouble, or to be questioned either in public or private for such
their revenge.

The said Covenanters shall likewise swear to yield all ready obedience and
service unto that The D. of Guise. But it was his policy not to be named at
first.
Head or Chief which shall be appointed; to follow and give counsel, help, and
assistance, as well to the entire conservation and maintenance of the said Nor
e^e will they except the King, whom they design^d to ruin.
League, as the ruin of all that shall oppose it, without any partiality or
exception of persons: and the failers and neglecters of it shall be punished by
the Authority of the Chief or Head, and according to his Orders, to which all
the said Covenanters shall And why not submit to the Kings Authority? VIII.
submit.

All the Catholics of any Towns, Corporations, or Villages, shall be secretly
advertised and warned by the particular Governors to enter into this Covenant,
and without fail to provide arms and men for the carrying of it on, every man
according to his condition and ability.

It is also prohibited to the Covenanters to enter into debates or quarrels one
against another, without leave of their Head or Chief, by whose arbitrament all
offenses of that nature shall be desided, as well for reparation of credit as
other things.

That those who will not enter into this Covenant shall be held as enemies to
it, and to be prosecuted with all manner of punishments and mischief.

This Article is neither in Davila nor Thuanus l. 63. but in Favyn, d'Aubigne,
and Hist. de derniers troubles de France l. 1. fol. 8.

THE OATH.
Je ^ure Dieu le Createur (touchant ces Saints Evangiles) and sur peine
d'Anatematization and ma damnation eternelle, que j' ay enter en ceste Saint
Association Catholic, selon la form du traicte qui m' y a este leu
presentement, justement, loyaument, and sincerement, soit pour y commander ou^y
obeir and servir: Et prometz sur ma vie and mon honneur, So reads Favyn it, but
d'Aubigne and Hist. des derni^rs troubles de France thus, -- de m'y conservir
-- however the sense is all one.
demeurer en la dicte Association jusques a la derniere goutte de mon sang,
sans y contravenir, ou m'en retirer pour quelque Mandement, Pretexte, Excuse,
ny Occasion que ce soit, This l^st clause is ^n Favyn.
and de tenir secret ce qui s'y traictera.

THE OATH.
I swear by God the Creator (laying my hand upon the Holy Gospel) and under
pain of a Curse and my eternal damnation, that I enter into this Holy Catholic
Covenant, according to the form now read unto me, truly, faithfully, and
sincerely, whether it be to command or to obey and serve: And I promise upon my
life and honor to continue in this League or Covenant unto the last drop of my
blood, without transgressing it or departing from it for any Command, Pretense,
Excuse, or Occasion whatsoever, and to keep secret whatsoever shall be agitated
by it.

Thus (as a Davila Hist. l. 6. p. 451.
Romanist confesses) these men making a show to obey and maintain the King,
they took from him all his Obedience and Authority, to confer it upon the Head
of their Confederacy. And Page 927.
Favyn and others confess the same. Nay, so zealous were they for this
Covenant, that they did ( Catiline like) -- ^ laquelle ils est^yent si
furie^sement transport^z, qu' ls signoi^nt ce serment de leur propre s^n^.
Andree Favyn Hist. de Navarre, p. 932.
subscribe it with their very blood, as some Pagan Nations anciently used to
Tertul. apol. c. 9.
drink their blood at the solemnity of their Treaties.

These designs were privately and cunningly sent abroad, and with so much
industry that Paris it self, with Poictou, Tourain, and other Provinces and
places, presently entered themselves into the League.

Having gone thus far, they thought it convenient to have their Plots
countenanced at Rome, to which purpose they sent Nicolas David (an Advocate of
the Parliament of Paris) thitherward with Instructions: but David being seized
on in his way in Dauphine by the Huguenots, much of the Plot was discovered,
and David himself Favyn p. 927.
slain. Yet Nicolas Cardinal de Pelleve (a Creature of the Guises) agitated the
business at Rome with Pope Gregory XIII. in the mean time Philip II. of Spain
was presently persuaded to join his Interest with the French Covenanters.

The French King had some Item of these doings, yet not knowing fully what the
aim at was, he seemed to take not much notice, being willing enough to rest
secure between these and the Huguenots, both which were powerful and mortal
enemies.

And now the Assembly of the States meet at Blois, composed most of the Favyn
p. 896. Davila p. 460, 461. 6 December. 1576.
Guisians or Covenanters. The King is willing for a firm Peace, but the other
party desire no such thing; and seeing that the King by his N^gative voice
would frustrate all their Councils, they invent a trick to avoid that by
desiring of the King, that he would elect a number of Judges, not suspected by
the States, who together with XII. of the Deputies might hear such Motions, as
from time to time should be proposed by every Order, and conclude and resolve
upon them: and whatsoever should be jointly determined by the Judges and
Deputies should have the form and vigor of a Law, without being subject to be
altered or revoked.

But the King smelling the design offered them fair enough, but resolved to
keep the power in his own hand.

The Leaguers foiled here go another way to work, and desire him to extirpate
the Huguenots. The King is puzzled at this request; for should he not comply
with it they would declare him to be a Favourer of Heretics, whereby he would
lose his Interest with the Romanists; besides considering that the Covenanters
were too strong for him at present, he thought it his wisest course to comply
with them, thereby to get that Authority to himself which they endeavored to
settle upon another; and so he was politickly forced to take the Covenant, and
declare himself the Head of it.

Having done this beyond their expectation he resolves to be as cunning as
themselves, and so he desires (since they seem willing for war) to furnish him
with Moneys to carry it on. At this they demur; for though they loved mischief,
yet were unwilling to lay their Moneys at the Kings disposal: by which trick
Henry seemed left to his own discretion.

The Covenanters thus non-plus'd try other means. First, they move that the
Council of Trent might fully be received into the Kingdom: but this is rejected
by a Majority of Nobility and Commons, and a great part of the Interested
Clergy, as thwarting the Privileges of the Gallican Church; for though they
love the Religion, yet they care not for the Popes Authority over them. This
not fadging they consult how to restrain the Kings power, for which purpose
they propound that his Council might be reduced to the number of XXIV, and that
the King should not choose them but the Kingdom: but this was also rejected,
many of the Covenanters themselves thinking it not safe too much to exasperate
the King. And thus the design but half done the Assembly break

And the King doubting the greatness of the Guisians might too much enlarge
their Interest, a little to clip their wings, by public Spond. an. 1576.. 11.
Order confirms the Preeminence and Priority to the Princes of the Blood.

The Covenanters perceiving that the King had seen too far into their designs,
conclude it safe for some time to forbear all open endeavors, but were very
sedulous in their private Consultations, by which means they whispered the
people into discontent against the King and his Government, scattering abroad
Libels, bewitching many Jo. de Bassieres, tom. 4. p. 205
Nobles and others to their Faction. And several other Plots and Contrivances
they had, to carry on which they took hold of any opportunity; insomuch that
many Fraternities being now brought into use for Devotion, as Processions,
Prayers, etc. the Guisians under this Davila, 16. p. 447.
pretense would meet the more boldly and openly to disperse their poison, by
their seditious discourses amongst the people.

The King also did not want his ways of Devotion, assisting often in their
Processions, undergoing Penances, wear Hair shirts, had his Beads openly
hanging at his girdle, would observe Canonical hours; and by such like shows of
piety some of the people were persuaded, that for all the ill speeches given
out against him he was a good Romanist in his heart, and so were the more
willing to have the better opinion of him. Journal du Hen. III. Mart 1583.
Spond. anno 1583. 11.


But others who pretended to see a little further were of a quite contrary
judgment, looking upon it to be but Hypocrisy. Amongst the rest Dr. Maurice
Poncet (a Benedictine at Paris) preached very bitterly against his new-invented
Brotherhoods and their Processions, calling of them Hypocrites and Atheists.
And indeed it cannot be denied, that this King has sometimes carried on his
Vid. d'Aubigne tom. 2. l. 4. c 1. Confession Catholic de Sancy, c. 8.
Love-tricks under these shows of Religion, being too much addicted to ease and
pleasures, as appeared by his other Carnival actions, for which he was Journal
du Hen. III. Fevrier 1583.
twitted in the Pulpit by Dr. Guillaume Rose (afterward Bishop of Senlis) and
others.

Yet necessity did force him sometimes to look about him, and nothing did he
dread more then the Guises and their League, whose power must now be all his
study to diminish. To which purpose he promotes as many into Places of Trust as
he could conveniently, and whom he could confide in, and knew to be no
Favorites of the House of Lorrain.

The Guisards not ignorant of this design, and knowing full well that the King
had really no good affection for them, endeavor what they can to have the
Peace broken with the Huguenot, to which purpose a P^erefixe Hist. Hen. le
Grand.
thousand affronts are committed against the King of Navarre, the Prince of
Conde, and their Adherents. But passing by these things, the number of Male
contents was increased; for though the King advanced some of his trusty
Friends, yet many times Preferment went more by favor then desert, and others
were discontented to see themselves slighted: these Male contents the Guisards
attaque, and more easily won to join with them, and enter into their League.

And that the House of Lorrain might appear in its greatest luster, the
Antiquitiy and Glories of that Family are thought fit to be shown to all. To
which purpose Francois de Rosieres (Archdeacon of Toul) puts pen to paper,
and writes a large Book of their Pedegrees and Relations, making them as
ancient and as near related to the French Crown as he could invent: and this
was printed at Paris 1580. by the Kings License. But sometime after the Book
being more nearly looked into, several things were taken notice of, which gave
some great offense.

For besides the unseasonable timing of it, considering the designs of the
Guises, and his declaring Fran. Ros. St^mmatum Lothar. fol. 451.
Hues Capet to be an Usurper, which sounded the harsher seeing some will have
the Valoises issued from Hues his Line* but besides he had several odd
Reflections on the Id. fo. 369 1583
King himself, of Idleness, Luxury, and bad Government. In short, Rosieres is
cast in prison, the Duke of Lorrain comes to Paris to pacify the King; at
last Rosieres publicly confessing his faults, craving pardon on his knees, by
the intercession of the Queen Mother, is released, and the book torn before his
face.

Yet was it carefully spread abroad that the Guises were descended from Charles
the Great, related to Hugh Capet, and had Title good enough to the Crown. But
against this by the Kings Command Pontus de Tyard (afterward Bishop of Chalon,
Cabilonum) writ, but for fear of the Faction concealed his name, and Matthaeus
Zampinus a Lawyer also took the task. And the same year also (I mean 1583) came
out a little French Discourse sur ^e droict pretendu par ceux de Guise sur la
Couroune de France.
Tract of about two sheets of paper, in opposition to the pretense of the
Lorrainers; but for all this the people will believe as they please.

CHAP. III. Duke of Anjou ( the only Brother to the King) dying, the Guisards
rejoice, not doubting but to make themselves next Heirs to the Crown by
wheedling in Cardinal Bourbon: with the several Declarations and Proposals
between them and the King.
THE Leaguers, who for some time (that the King might not be too suspicious of
them) had proceeded but leisurely, had now an encouragement offered them to be
more brisk in their designs.

For Francis Duke of Anjou, of a fickle and hair-brained humor, Phil. Briet.
Ann^l. Spond. 1.
signs of poison, which some Andr. Favyn p. 926, 935.
think was administered by the Covenanting Faction; yet at his Funeral the Duke
of Guise could Journal du Hen. III. Mart. 25.
show as troubled and melancholy a Visage as any.

His death reviveth the hopes of the Guisians, for perceiving the King (having
been about nine years married) without any probability of having Children, for
all the assistance of Journal 23 Jan. 1579. Spond. anno 1583. 11.
hallowed Shirts and Smocks, and so the Line of Valois to end with him; and
though the next related to the Crown was the House of Bourbon, yet here they
had raised a doubt, whether the Uncle or the Nephew was to succeed, whether
Cardinal Bourbon or the King of Navarre were next Heirs; and the Guisards made
it their business to raise up the Cardinals right, by his Interest thinking to
secure their own designs, for it was his main plot to get Navarre excluded.

And this might the better be performed seeing he (as also his Cousin the
Prince of Conde, the next Heir after Navarre) was a Protestant, and so it would
be an easy matter to get him declared incapable of the Crown as an Heretic.
And as for Charles Cardinal of Bourbon, being crasie, infirm, and none of the
wisest, and one that was ruled in all things by Guise, was the more fit to make
a Property of; and if he should come to the Throne, Guise did not doubt but to
manage his Affairs so well, that being already very popular with the Romanists,
he might secure the Succession to himself, having got many to vaunt much of his
Pedigree and Relations. However things went, it was good at the beginning to
act under the feeble Cardinal, as the first Prince of the Blood, as they called
him. And that the Cardinal looked upon himself as so, is confirmed by this
story which they tell us: That a little after the 'foresaid death of the Duke
of Anjou, King Henry III. asked the Cardinal, Journal S^^t. 158^.
that supposing himself should die whether he would take upon him the
Government, and precede the King of Navarre? To which the Cardinal replied,
That upon his death the Crown did belong to him, and that he was resolved not
to lose his right. At which it is said the King laughed and jeered him.

Yet Guise carried on his business so well, that he gained a multitude of
Followers, some being Malcontents, others that loved trouble and mischief, as
their Lawyers; some led by Interest, as their Priests and Jesuits; and others
persuaded by an holy Zele, thinking Religion was now at the last ga^p, and no
way to recover her, but by entering into this Holy League and Covenant.

Yet the designs of the Guisards were not carried so closely, but the King had
some hints of them, which did not a little trouble him. However to prevent all
danger he had some thoughts of joining with Navarre, yet with a desire that he
should turn Romanist, for which purpose he sends the Duke of Espernon to him,
to persuade his Conversion; but in this Navarre desired to be excused, however
offers him the Assistance and Forces of the Protestants, to be when he pleased
at his service, either to secure him from, or to quell, the Covenanters.

The Leaguers informed of these Consultations, take opportunity thence to
bespatter the King, calling him Heretic, giving out that he designed the ruin
of the Roman Religion, that for that end he was joining himself to the
Huguenots; and in proof of this they made no small noise of his receiving the
Order of Garter from the English Queen Elizabeth, (by the Earl of These urn^l by
a mistake says Warwick.
Derby) whom they calumniated as the worst of all Heretics. And the better to
possess the peoples heads with mischief and Sedition, they kept in pay diverse
Priests, who daily taught their Flock,

That Princes ought to be deposed who do not sufficiently perform their
Perefixe Hist. Hen. le Grand.
duty.
That no Power but what is well ordered is of God.
That that which passes its due bounds is not Authority but Usurpation.
That it is absurd to say any should be King who knows not how to govern.
And we need not question but from these Heads they framed what Interpretations
pleased them best, and of all they themselves must be Judges. And so I meet
with a Batchelour in Divinity of the Sorbonne, who at that time publicly
maintained in Disputation, published, and dedicated to the Abbot of Cluny, this
Position, That

It was lawful for any man, private or otherwise, to depose or kill any Ant
Colyn^^ p. 23.

King or Prince, which were wicked, evil men, or Heretics.
But the mischief fell upon the Disputants head, for the King offended at this
strange kind of pretended Divinity, intended to call him to an account, but was
prevented by another accident, for the Sorbonnist was found shot to death in
the Court of the College, but by whom I know not, yet the story supposes by
some of his friends the Leaguers, thereby to prevent his Trial, and some
further discovery it may be of those who set him on work.

In these Divisions and diverse Interests we may suppose France to be but in a
bad condition, every Faction pretending and striving to be greatest; and
amongst the many Lampons that then flew abroad, this following was held not
amiss, wherein (as in a Play) each party speaks his own desires and aims.

LE ROY Je desire la paix, and la guerre je jure.


LE DUC DE GUISE Mais si la paix se faict mon Espoir n' est plus rien.


LE DUC DE MAYENNE. Par la guerre nous vient le credit and le bien.


LE CARDINAL DE GUISE Le temps s'offre pour nous avec la couverture.


LE ROY DE NAVARRE C' il qui compte sans moy pensant que je l'endure,

Comptera par deux fois je m' en assure bien.


LE CARDINAL DE BOURBON Chacun peut bien compter ce qu' il pense estre sien.


LA ROYNE MERE La dispute ne vaut, pendant que mon fills dure.


LE DUC DE LORRAIN Poursuivons neantmoins la LIGUE and ses projects.


LE DUC DE SAVOYE Le Roy donques perdera la FRANCE and ses Subjects.


LE ROY D' ESPAGNE. Si la FRANCE se pert je l'aura tossed trouve.


LA FRANCE Tout beau! il ne faut pas tant de chiens pour un os,

Et ceux la ont bien mal ma puissance esprouvee,

Qui pour l'Ambition me troublent le repos.


THE KING Peace I desire, all war I 'd have repelled.


DUKE OF GUISE But by a peace my hopes and plots are quelled.


DUKE OF MAYENNE We'll make our selves by war, gain glory thence.


CARDINAL OF GUISE And we 've occasion cloak'd with fair pretense.


KING OF NAVARRE Who plots without me, thinking I Will remain

So unconcerned, shall surely count again.


CARDINAL OF BOURBON But each may reckon what he thinks his own.

QUEEN MOTHER CATHARINE.

For what? whilst my Son lives and wears the Crown.


DUKE OF LORRAIN Yet let us the LEAGUE and her designs pursue.


DUKE OF SAVOY Then the KING will lose FRANCE and his Subjects too.


KING OF SPAIN If FRANCE does lose her self I shall her gain.


FRANCE Puh! for ane Bone so many Dogs are vain.

And to their cost my might and force they 've tried,

Who durst disturb my Quiet by their Pride.


The Covenanters having with what diligence and secrecy they possibly could
contrived their designs, the Duke of Guise pretended to retire to his
Government in Champaigne, but in truth to consult the better about their
Affairs, and to get the Duke of Lorrain to subscribe their League. To all which
purposes he held a Treaty or Conventicle at Joinville, a place of his on the
borders of Champaigne, where met him 31 Dec^m. 1584.
Juan Baptista Tassi, a Knight of St. Jago, and Dom Juan Morreo of Rhodes, the
King of Spains Commissioners; the Duke of Mayenne Brother to Guise, Francois
Roncerole Sieur de Meneville, Agent in the League for Cardinal Bourbon, with
some other Favorites of the Faction.

At this Caball amongst other things was 2 Jan. 158^
agreed on,
That supposing King Henry III. should die without a Son lawfully begotten,
that then the old Cardinal of Bourbon should be declared King, all Huguenots or
Heretics excluded from the Succession. That in the mean time all care,
industry, and force should be used to root out the Huguenots. That Cardinal
Bourbon coming to the Crown, a firm Peace should be made betwixt France and
Spain. That he should restore unto Spain all that had been taken from it by the
Huguenots, namely Cambray. That he should assist the Spaniard in the recovery
of the Netherlands. That the Council of Trent should be received in France, and
that it and no other Religion should be permitted. That the Spaniards should
have free Traffic into the Indies, and not not be molested by the This
complained on 1571. D^vila, p. 353,
French Pirates. That the King of Spain should monthly contribute fifty
thousand Crowns for the maintenance of the League, and afford men also if need
be. That he should receive into his protection Cardinal Bourbon, with the
Guisians, and all other Covenanters. That no Treaty or Agreement whatsoever
should be made with the present 1585
French King without mutual consent of both parties, viz. the Spaniard and
Leaguers. That the Articles of this Confederacy should for some reasons be kept
secret, till a more fitting opportunity.
Besides these the Spaniard secretly promised to the Duke of Guise the
Assignment of two hundred thousand Crowns per annum, for his own particular.

In the mean time the Covenanters had Cardinal Pellevee soliciting their cause
at Rome with Pope Gregory XIII. to whom they also sent their Agitator Claude
Mathieu an active Jesuit: and as there they intended to consult their
Interest, so were they not negligent at home, and amongst the rest were very
careful to secure Ludovico Gonzago Duke of Nevers in his approbation of their
Cause.

For though at first (being a zealous Romanist) he had been overpersuaded to
adhere to the League, really thinking that nothing else was intended thereby,
then the propagation and maintenance of the Roman Religion; and possibly his
Wife Catharine, daughter to the Duke of Mayenne, and so Niece to Guise, might
somewhat work upon him, to put a greater credit in that Family then was
necessary; yet upon better considerations or Interest he began to cool, and at
last resolved to do nothing but what was (as he said) legal and honest, being
determined upon any terms whatever not to violate his Conscience or Loyalty;
the Gomberville les Memoir^ de M. d^ Nevers, vol. 1. p. 649
better to secure which he draws up and desires to be satisfied in these
following Quaere's.

Whether it be lawful for the Subjects of a Christian Prince to take up arms on
their own heads or accord (without the Popes leave signified to them in
writing) to root out the Heretics of their country, seeing the Prince himself
neglects to punish them according to his duty, though desired and petitioned so
to do by the three Estates?

Supposing this, and that the King should so far dislike the Resolution of his
said Subjects as to withstand and oppose their Declarations and Sentiments, and
therein to call to his assistance the said very Heretics:

Whether in this case the said Subjects shall be quit and free from the Oath of
Fidelity and Allegiance they owed him?

Whether it is lawful for them to fight against the said Prince, even to conquer
him in battle or otherwise, with intent to obtain their Design, viz. to root
out the aforesaid Heretics?

And to this purpose, whether it be lawful for them to seize on, employ, and
use the Towns and Treasuries of the said Prince, though against his express
will and pleasure?

Of these Nevers for his better satisfaction would not only have the opinion
of some private persons, in whose judgment and learning he much confided, but
also of the Pope himself.

For the private persons he sends the Quaeres to his Confessor Monsieur
Berthonnier, conjuring him in the Name of the Living God to give him his advice
and resolution, and therein to consult with Monsieur Faber. Accordingly they
return to him that he ought forthwith to take up arms, and that in so doing it
will be so far from harming his Conscience, that it will on the contrary be a
Meritorious deed, an immortal Honor to him and his Family, and very grateful
and agreeable to God himself.

As for the Pope, Cardinal de Pellevee, Jaques la Rue alias Martelli, and the
aforesaid Claude Mathieu assure him, that the Pope does so much approve of the
Quaeres, that he does not only declare it to be just and lawful to fight
against Heretics, but also against any that shall favor or adhere to them,
though it were the -- De qu^lque qualite on estat qu 'ils fussen^, mesme Royale.
King himself; yet he would not have them to attempt any thing against his
life, though he would allow them to seize uhon his person, and so dispose and
command him. Yet that his Holiness would not publicly declare this by Bull or
Brief, it at this time being not convenient (as he thought) so to do,
considering the humors of the Protestants in Germany, Switzerland, the
Low Countries, and in France it self; and so hopes that Nevers and the other
Leaguing Princes will be content with his Verbal declaration, which he will
stand to and never revoke. And for the better security of this Martelli brought
from Rome some pretty Beads sanctified by the Pope himself for the Cardinal de
Bourbon, that he might bestow them upon the Covenanting Princes, and the other
Chieftains and Commanders of that design. But these things not fully satisfying
Nevers, he posts to Rome, though contrary to the Popes desire, and growing
daily more jealous of the Leaguers intentions, is very sollicitous for a
perfect Agreement and Accommodation, writing several times to Cardinal de
Bourbon, not to press too much upon the Kings patience: and at last being fully
convinced that the Guises had more a private Interest then a public good in
their thoughts, quite forsook them and their Cause, and joined with the King.

The King in the mean time somewhat informed of the troublesome and warlike
designs of the Covenanters, was persuaded to consult his own security, and
therefore by a public Decree forbids all raising or gathering 28 March.
together of Soldiers, unless by his express Command and Authority, commanding
all his good Subjects at the ringing of the Toquesaint (the Alarm bell) to fall
upon the said Soldiers as declared enemies.

But the Leaguers proceed cunningly and vigorously, and having strengthened
themselves (as they thought) pretty well, were resolved to make an open Rupture
according to their former determinations. To which purpose they overpersuade
Cardinal de Bourbon to quit the Court under color of keeping Lent at his
Archbishopric of Rouen, so he went to Gailon a Palace belonging to that See in
higher Normandy, where a great company of the Covenanters of Picardy waited
upon him, and for his more pretended security conducted him to Peronne, where
the League was first framed as aforesaid; and here he was met by the Dukes of
Guise, Mayenne, Aumale, Elboeuf, and other Covenanting Nobles, where a large
Declaration is drawn up in his Name whom they call the First Prince of the
Ploud, and subscribed by him: the substance of it is as follows.

In the Name of God Almighty, King of Kings, be it known unto all, etc.

That a design to subvert Religion has been the cause of the late troubles.

That it is feared (the King dying childless) the Church and Kingdom may be
ruined, over which they are resolved never to let an Heretic sway; the people
being bound neither to admit or obey any Prince but of the Roman Religion.

That to hinder all mischiefs some remedy is to be applied.

That the great preparations of the Huguenots are sufficiently understood.

That it is also not unknown, but Chiefly ^^ming at the Duke of Espernon.
some people have so possessed themselves of the Kings affection, that they have
as it were seized upon his Authority, and excluded those who ought to be more
near him.

That these Favorites or Minions have got the chief Governments and Places of
Trust, whereby they may command all by Land or Sea.

That they have imbezell'd the Kings Revenues, thereby making themselves more
powerful and obeyed, to the great oppression of the people, which daily
increases.

That though the Amendment of Abuses was hoped for at the meeting of the Estats
at Bloys, yet Private Interests spoiled all.

That these Abuses are now grown so great, that the Kingdom is almost ruined by
them, the Clergy surcharged and despised, the Nobles debased, abused, and
ruined, and all the people in a manner beggared and impoverished by strange
Taxations, etc.

Therefore We CHARLES de BOURBON, first Prince of the Blood, assisted with the
Princes, Cardinals, Peers, Bishops, etc. being the best and soundest part of
the Kingdom, DECLARE that we have sworn and faithfully promised, to continue in
Arms till the Church and Roman Religion be established in her former Dignity,
the Nobles enjoy their Privileges, the people eased, the new Taxes abolished,
the Parlements left to their wonted freedom and liberty, etc.

These and such others are the causes of our Arming, which by these necessities
is made justifiable, (though otherwise we should disclame such courses;) and so
believing we cannot have a more honorable Funeral, then to die in so holy and
just a cause. Yet protesting that we do not intend any thing against the King,
but on the contrary in defense of his Person, Life, and Estate, being willing
to lay down our Arms when he shall remedy these evils, in doing of which he
shall be more honored and obeyed by us.

That seeing the Laws and their good Intentions are clear enough, therefore
they will not force the King to declare a Successor, though in so doing the
Nation might hereafter be eased of Troubles and Factions about it.

That as they have all a grand Veneration for the Queen Mother, so they hope
she will have a good opinion of them.

Humbly desire all people to assist them in this their good design, and to have
a favorable construction of their actions.

Protesting never to lay down Arms till we have accomplished all these our
desires; and so desire all good Romanists to assist them in their Prayers and
Devotions.

CHARLES, Cardinal de Bourbon.
At Peronne, 31 March 1585.
But this Declaration was drawn up and confirmed by the Cardinal some time
before, and also Copies of it sent abroad by the Leaguers, the better to
confirm their Party: for I meet with a Letter sent by the Dukes of Guise and
Mayenne to the Parliament of Province, (meaning Aix the chief City of that
County, where that Parliament sits) in which they tell Memoi^es de Nevers, vol.
1.
them,

That they have sent the copy of the said Cardinal de Bourbons Declaration to
them, by which they might perceive how unwilling they were to take up arms, yet
that in the quarrel they were resolved to venture life, goods, and friends too;
exhorting and adjuring that Parliament to assist them, telling them, that as
they shall aid those who join with them, so they will endeavor the ruin of
those who oppose their League.

Your most Affectionate Servants, HENRY de LORRAIN. CHARLES de LORRAIN.

Joinville, 19 March 1585.

As for the Declaration it self, it was rejoyned to by the King in another well
and cunningly worded, endeavoring to answer all their Objections, desiring
them to lay down their arms, and admonishing all his Subjects not to believe
their idle pretenses, but to confide in and join themselves to him.

But it was not words that were to befriend the Covenanters: so they draw their
Forces together, rendezvous at Chalons in Champaigne, whither the Cardinal
Bourbon is conducted to them by the Duke of Guise, with as great demonstrations
of Honor and Joy as could be, the better to ensnare and bewitch the old man,
whose Name and Interest they wero to make so much use of. And now Guise tampers
again with Nevers, assuring him that all things go better and better, desires
his speedy assistance, and is much troubled that Rochette (one of his cunning
Agitators) is taken and carried prisoner to Paris, fearing thereby some of
their Plots may be discovered.

Yet they look upon themselves strong enough to defy any opposition, having
mustered about 12000 men, expecting daily Recruits of German and Spanish Forces
hired to join with them; and thus fortified they seize upon several strong
places. As for the King, he is at a stand what to do, not having strength
enough to oppose his Enemies, nor certain where to secure himself, fearing if
he left Paris it would rise against him, and if he stayed there he might be
seized on, so zealously bent was that City for the Covenant. However he gets a
strong Guard about him, and sends the Queen Mother to treat with the
Confederates. And what a grand conceit they had of their enterprise may in part
be Gomberville, vol 1. p. 648.
seen by their Cardinals Letter to the Duchess of Nevers, wherein he tells her,

How pleased he is with the good will which she and her Duke bears to their
designs, which is only for the honor of God, though others traduce them as
Ambitious. That they shall shortly have the bravest Army that has been in
France these five hundred years. That though the Queen Mother now talk to them
of peace, yet their demands are so many for Religion, that she will not grant
them, etc.

Your most humble Uncle to serve you, CHARLES, Cardinal de Bourbon.
Chalons, 23 May 1585.

But in short, the Treaty is carried on very cunningly on both sides, and at
last both Parties growing jealous of their own Force, and Guise doubting the
Cardinals constancy by reason of his easy nature, a Peace was clapped up
advantageous enough to the Covenanters, for by Agreement 7 July.
the Huguenots were to be prosecuted, several Cities and strong places given to
the Guisards, strong Horse-guards appointed and paid by the King to wait upon
their Chieftains; Guise himself is to have one hundred thousand Crowns, his
Forces paid, and all things forgiven, etc. And for better satisfaction upon
this Reunion of his Subjects (as they called it) the King in Parliament must
publish an Edict (which Perefixe calls a Bloody one.) The sum of it was thus:

HENRY by the grace of God King of France and Poland, etc. 18 July. Edict de
Juillet.


How God and Man knows his care and endeavors to have all his Subjects of
one Religion, i. e. the Roman, the want of which has been the occasions of so
many troubles.

Wherefore with the advice of his Mother and Council he does ordain and command
this unalterable Decree and Edict.

That in his Dominions there shall be but one, viz. the Roman Religion, under
pain of confiscation of Body and Goods, all former Edicts to the contrary
notwithstanding.

That all Huguenot Ministers or Preachers do avoid and depart the Kingdom
within one month.

That all his other Subjects, who will not change their Religion, shall depart
within six months, yet shall have liberty to sell and dispose of their goods.

That all Huguenots or Heretics shall be incapable of any Office or Dignity.

That all Courts (...) in sever^l pl^^ces by former Edicts, 1576, 1577. wherein
half were to be Romanists and half Huguen^ts. These were restored ag^in by the
Edict of Nant^s, 1589. with ma^y other favors to the Hug^enots, many or which
have been since nulled and taken away.
Chamber mi-parties and tri-parties shall be taken away.

That all those Towns and Places formerly given to the Huguenots for their
security shall by them be delivered up.

That what has hitherto or formerly been done shall be pardoned on both sides.

And that for the better preservation of this Edict all Princes, Officers,
Governors, Justices, Mayors, etc. shall swear to keep it, and their said Oaths
to be registered.

HENRY.
By the King in his Council. Broulart. Read and published in Parliament, the
King present. De-Hevez.
The King of Navarre seeing himself thus aimed at, not only challenges Guise
to single Combat, (which the Duke answered only by Libels) but also vindicated
himself by an Apologetical Declaration, drawn up by Philippe Morney Sieur du
Plessis, whose Pen and Learning that King used to make much use of, as appears
by his Memoirs, and whose Life was afterward writ by one of his Amanuenses,
and in whose commendations you may read a large Ode in Monsieur Le Pa^nasse des
Poets Francoises, tom. 2. fol 69, 70, etc.
D'Espinelle's Collections.

King Henry III. perceiving that the Leaguers made great noise against him for
not prosecuting the war against the Huguenots, or rather against the King of
Navarre, told them his willingness to such a war, and therefore desired them to
put him in a way to have Moneys for the raising and paying the Armies: but this
they cared not for, being unwilling that he should be either strong or rich,
yet to stop their clamours, he gave order for the levelling of three Armies to
fight Navarre and his Associates. Thus were their three several Interests in
France at the same time.

I. The King and his Royalists. II. The King of Navarre with his Huguenots, in
their own defense, as a Andr. Favyn Hist. de Navarre, p. 936. Davila p. 579.
Romanist confesses. III. The Guisians or Covenanters, designing the ruin of
the two former, and to advance themselves.
And now Pope Gregory XIII. dying, there succeeded in the Chair Sixtus V. who
upon solicitation of the Guisards thunders out a Bull against the King of
Navarre and the Prince of Conde, which being too long for this place I shall
refer you to the reading of it in other Pet. Math. S^^mma Constitut. Romans Pont.
p. 901, 902, 903. Fran. Ho^oman. ^ulmen Brutum. Goldest. Monarch. Romans tom. 2,
3 p. 124, 125, 126.
Authors. But because it is in none of the Editions of Cherubinus his
Bullarium, (possibly since that time thinking it not convenient to exaspe^^te
that Kingdom) as they have either fraudulently or politickly left out some
other Bulls, take the sum of it as follows.

First it tells us what a fine thing a Pope is; that by his right and power
can throw down and depose the greatest of Kings.

Then what favors and kindnesses this Henry has received from the Pope, for
Gregory XIII. abolished and pardoned his former sins and Heresies, and gave him
a Dispensation to marry his Queen Margaret, and the like done to the Prince of
Conde.

Yet for all this they have adhered to Calvinism, opposed the Roman Religion,
and endeavored to carry on that which they call A Ref^rmation, for which they
have by Arms and Council withstood the Romanists.

Wherefore according to our duty we draw the sword of vengeance against these
two Sons of wrath, Henry sometimes King of Navarre, and Henry Prince of Conde.

And therefore declare them and all their posterity deprived of all their
Dominions, Principalities, Titles, Places, Jurisdictions, Offices, Goods,
Rights, etc.

And that both they and their posterity are and shall hereafter be incapable to
succeed in or possess any of the premises.

And we also absolve all Nobles, Feudatories, Vassals, Subjects, and all other
people from their Oaths of Allegiance, Fidelity, and Duties they owe or
promised to them.

And do hereby command and forbid all and every one, that they in no wise obey
the aforesaid Henry's, or any of their Laws or Commandments; and those that do
otherwise we excommunicate with the same sentence.

And we exhort and admonish Henry III. King of France to employ all his
Authority, Power, and Courage to see this sentence executed.

And command all Archbishops and Bishops in France, Navarre, and Bearne, in
virtue of Holy Obedience, that they cause this our Bull. to be publsh'd and
effected.

And if any presume to oppose or infringe this sentence, he shall incur the
Indignation of Almighty God, and his blessed Apostles Peter and Paul.

A. de Alexiis.
Subscribed by XXV. Cardinals.
At Rome, 9 September. 1585.
The Guisards now thought their Game half done, not doubting but that this Bull
would take so much effect, as for ever to exclude these two Bourbons and their
Posterity from the French Throne, which then would be the more easy for them
to ascend. But the Paris Parliament (most of which saw no further into the
League then the specious outside) looked upon it as a thing of dangerous
consequence, that the next heirs to the Crown, should thus so slightly be
Excluded, without advice either of the King or them, to the violation (as they
thought) of the Privileges of the Gallican Church. And therefore in a full
body waited upon the King, desiring to have the Bull torn in pieces, and the
Procurers of it to be enquired after, and severely punished, and affirming to
the King that it ought publicly to be burnt. But the King (though he disliked
the manner of the Bull) yet at this time, thinking it best, neither to offend
Pope, Parliament or Guisards, said he would consider of it; and thus the
business was past over, though the Covenanters spread their Copies abroad with
Triumph.

But the King of Navarre would not brook his Reputation thus to be blasted, and
therefore gallantly (as Perefiue says) opposed himself against the Papal Bull,
his Answer being short, brisk, in an unusual style, and not yet (as I know of)
clad in English, take as follows.

HENRY par le Grace de Dieu Roy de Navarre, Prince Souverain de Bearn, Premier
Pair and Prince de France,s' oppose a la Declaration and Excommunication de
Sixte cinquiesme soy disant Pape de Rome; la maintient faux and en appella come
d'abus en la Cour des Pairs de France, desquels il a cest honneur d'estre le
Premier.

Et en ce que touch le crime d'Heresie, and de laquelle il est faussement
accuse par le Declaration; dict and soustient que Monsieur Sixte soy disant
Pape (sauve sa Sanctete) en a faussement menti, and que luy mesme est
Heretic, ce qu' il fera prouver en plein Concile, libre and legitiment
assemble. Auquel s' il ne consent, and ne s' y soubmit, comme il est oblige par
ses droicts Canons mesmes, il le tient and declare pour un ANTICHRIST and
HERETIC: and en ceste qualite veut avoir guerre perpetuelle and
irreconciliable contre luy. Proteste cependent de nullite, and le recouvir
contre luy and ses Successeurs pour reparation d'honneur de l'injure qui luy
est faicte, and a toute la Maison de France, comme le faict and la necessite
present le requient.

Que si par le pass, les Princes and Roys ses Predecesseurs ont bien sceu
chastier la temerite de tells Gallans, comme est ce pretendu Pape Sixte, lors
qu' ils se sent oubliez de leur devoir and pass les bornes de leur Vocation,
confondant le Temporal avec le Spirituel. Le dit Roy de Navarre, qui n' est en
rien enferieur a eux, espere que Dieu luy fera la grace de venger l'injure
faicte a son Roy, a la Maison, and a son sang, and a toutes les Course de
Parliament de France, and sur luy and sur ses Successeurs.

Implorant a cest effect l'aide and secours de tous les Princes, Roys, Villes,
and Communantez vrayement Christiennes, auquel ce faict touch. Aussi pry tous
Allies and Confederez de ceste Couronne de France, de s'opposer avec luy contre
le Tyranny and Usurpation du Pape, and des Ligues Conjurateurs en France,
ennemis de Dieu, de l'Estat, and de leur Roy, and du repos General de toute la
Christianite.

Autant en proteste Henry de Bourbon Prince de Conde.

HENRY by the Grace of God King of Navarre, Sovereign Prince of Bearn, first
Peer and Prince of France, does Protest against the Declaration and
Excommunication of Sixtus V. calling himself Pope of Rome, does affirm it to be
false, and does Appeal from it as an Imposture to the Court of Peerage in
France, of which he has the honor to be the Chief or First.

And as for that which concerns the crime of Heresy, and of which he is
falsely accused by the said Declaration; he does affirm and maintain that Master
Sixtus calling himself Pope (with reverence to his Holiness) has lied in his
throat, and that he himself is the Heretic, as he will prove in a General and
Free Council legally assembled. To which if he will not consent and submit
himself, as he is obliged by the very Canons themselves, he will then hold and
dclare him for an ANTICHRIST and HERETIC, and so will have a p^rpetual and
irreconcilable war against him. Nevertheless protesting his sentences of no
force, which Nullity he will recover against him and his Successors, for a
reparation of the injury which is done to him, and all the Blood Royal of
France, as the present necessity requires.

And if formerly the Princes and Kings his Predecessors, knew well enough how
to chastise the hairbraindness or foolhardiness of such dapper Gallants (as
this pretended Pope Sixtus is) when they forgot their duty, and passed the
bounds of their callings, by hand-over-head blending or jumbling the Temporal
power with the Spiritual. The said King of Navarre, who is no way inferior to
them, hops that God will assist him to revenge upon the said Sixtus and his
Successors the injury done to his King, the Royal Family and Blood, and all the
Courts of Parliament of France.

And to this purpose he imploreth the help and assistance of all the truly
Christian Princes, Kings, Cities, Corporations, or Associations which are
herein concerned. And he also desires all the Allies and Confederates of this
Crown of France, to join themselves with him to withstand the Tyranny and
Usurpation of the Pope and the Covenanting Conspiratours in France, enemies to
God, their Country, and King, and the Common peace of all Christendom.

The same is also protested and testified by Henry de Bourbon Prince of Conde.

And this Protestation was fixed upon the corners of the Streets of Rome the
6th. of Novembe^* 1585. And there were several Scholars who undertook the
defense of the King of Navarre, amongst which were the two famous Civilians
Francis Hotman and Pierre de Belloy, the last of which suffered a tedeous
imprisonment.

As for the Pope, being of a fiery disposition, we may suppose him not a little
netled at this Paper; but as by degrees his passion cooled, so did he affect
Navarre, and admire his courage and noble resolution.

And Guise questioned not but that all would go well enough with him; for
though once (self-Interest being all his design) he and his brother the Duke of
Mayenne had made some Overtures to the King of Navarre to join themselves with
him, with an intent to ruin the French Kings Favorites or his Party, that so
the Leaguers might command that Kings person and Councils; yet he also plotted
the overthrow of Navarre and his Associates, the better to secure all Authority
to himself: to which purpose the French King was so worked upon, as to 7 October.
1585.
decree all Huguenots to turn Romanists, or depart the Kingdom within 15 days,
and their goods to be seized on and sold, but the women had 6 months granted
them.

Yet the French King justly distrusting the Guisards greatness and designs, had
(the better to keep the Scales even, and to secure himself between both
parties) favor enough both for Navarre and a Peace with the Huguenots, and
always looking upon Henry to be next Heir to the Crown, wished he would change
his Religion, the better to render him more capable to enjoy it. And
accordingly began to enter into some Treaties with him, which so madded the
Covenanters, that they and the Pulpits ranted very malapertly against the King,
as one inclining to the Heretics, and an enemy to the Roman Religion; which
falsities and slanders were no small trouble to Henry of France, by them daily
losing the goodwill and affection of his Romanish Subjects: nor was Henry of
Navarre any whit less offended at the Duke of Joyeuse, who had obtained from
the Pope, the Confiscation of all the said Kings Hereditary Territories, upon
his deprivation by the former Bull or Sentence.

CHAP. IV. A Council of Sixteen appointed at Paris to act all for the League.
Where they daily contrive to seize upon and murder the King, but are discovered
to him by Poulain. The Guisards desire the King to shackle himself. Guise comes
to Paris. The Barricadoes. The King steals out of Paris. Aseeming Peace made by
the Edict of Union. The Duke of Guise, and his Brother Lewis Cardinal of Guise,
killed at Bloys.
VVhilest the Country now tended to War and Sedition, we cannot suppose Paris
to lie unconcerned; and (as some say) her River Pap. Masson de flum. Gall.
Seina is not so heavy as other waters, so the story of this wicked League
might argue her Inhabitants to be more light, fickler, and apt to Rebellion
then any other people, and dash out those Commendations of Loyalty which the
Learned Les Antiquitez des Villes de France, l. 1. c. 3.
Andre du Chesne has appropriated to this City.

Who designs a Rebellion must be sure to secure the chief City to his service,
which once done half his work is finished. And this was neither unknown nor
neglected by Guise, who for a long time had made it Parisians to his Interest,
by his Creatures and Ministers fobbing into their heads strange stories of the
bad and gasping condition of the Roman Religion, by reason of the Kings
Inclination to Heresy, and endeavors to have Navarre succeed him.

To prevent all, a Council of XVI. active Leaguers are appointed at Paris to
carry on the Solemn Covenant, to whom the Duke of Guise sends Le Sieur de
Mayneville, there to reside and advise the best means to stir up the people to
join with them, which they thought could not be better done, then by persuading
the people of the danger of Religion, and how many thousand Huguenots lay
skulking in the City well armed, with a resolution to cut the throats of the
Romanists.

This close Committee of Covenanters first met secretly in the College de
Fortet, (so called from its Founder Pierre Fortet) upon which occasion it was
afterward commonly styled Le Be^c^a^ de la Ligue.
The Cradle of the League. Afterward they assembled in the Covent of the
Dominicans or Jacobins, and at last for fear of being suspected or discovered,
they met not at any certain place, but sometimes at one private house and
sometimes in another.

At this time was Provost of the L'Isle de France is properly called that Tr^ct
of ground containing Paris, S. Denis, Montmorancy, Dammartin, Poissy, S.
Germain en Lay, Luzarche, etc. but the Provosiship or Government is of a
l^rgor ^x^ent.
Isle of France one Hardy, who being old (and so not very active) did usually
act by his Deputy or Lieutenant (as they call it) which was now one Nicolas
Poulain, born at S. Denis, him the Leaguers have a desire to draw into their
Caball, because they could make special use of his Authority: nor did they
doubt much of his compliance, being greatly in debt, and so the hope of gain
and reward would prove strong motives.

Accordingly Jean le Clerc Sieur de Bussy and Georges Michelet, two active men
of the close Committee, and zealous Guisards, assault the aforesaid Poulain
with many persuasive Arguments to join himself to their designs, to which at
last he consents, takes an Oath of Secrecy, and they all swear to one another
another Oath, That if any one of them were seized on or imprisoned for this
their cause, that then every one of the rest should venture life and estate for
his delivery. But Poulain continued not long firm to them, for whether he was
troubled at their wicked designs, or to ingratiate himself with His Majesty,
thereby to better his Fortunes, he discovers all privately to the King,
though kept on his usual meetings with the Leaguers; and when with them, seemed
as zealous as the rest; what he knew of them he afterward drew up into a
little Le Proc^^ du Nicolas Poulain, y^u man (...) in Claude Malingre Sieur de
S. Lazare, Annals Generales de Paris, p. 329, 330, 331, etc. And it i^ al^^^ry
l^^ely r^printed in the Recuil de diverses Pieces servant a l'History de Henry
III. R^y de France, etc. Octavo, 1666.
Narrative, out of which we shall take what we think most material.

The better to increase their Number and strengthen their Cause, they had
chosen ou^ several cunning Fellows, one out of each Trade, Company, or
Profession, even amongst the several Courts of Judicature, Law, or Justice, who
were to in^eigle themselves amongst their respective Trades and Faculties,
noise up the Honor of Guise, the Danger of Religion, the Growth of Heresy,
the Faults of the King, the Tyranny of his Favorites, and so the Necessity of
the League to defend themselves, Country, and Religion. And for their better
security they consult how to provide themselves with Arms. The King suspecting
some mischief, had by express Order forbidden all Gun-smiths, Cutlers, and such
like Artificers, to sell any sort of Arms, but to those who were well known and
allowed to buy them. Upon this account they pitch upon Poulain as the only man
in this case to serve them, who by virtue of his Place and Office might buy up
store of Arms without suspicion, and besides might pretend several reasons if
any jealousy grew of him. And accordingly he had so bestirred himself, that in
a short time he had bought up a multitude of Arms, and according to directions
had in the night disposed of them in l'Hostel de Guise, and several other
places of the City.

And now they think it best to bring over to their Association the Grandees and
Zealots of other Cities and places: to which purpose they dispatch Ameline to
sound the Inclinations of the Romanists in the Beausse, as Touraine, Anjou, and
other Provinces; who according to his Instructions posted up and down, to the
gaining of many Proselytes.

But thus encouraged by their Number, they are willing to dally no Caball being
held one day in the Jesuits College near S. Paul's, the surprisal of Boulogne
(a Port-town in Picardy) was proposed, which might be advantageous to the
Spaniards, either for their Fleet in their attempt upon England, (now
contriving) or to land Forces to assist the League, which the Duke of Parma
might easily do from Flanders. And this was concluded on, and the Plot laid
down how to bring it to pass. But Poulain discovers all to the King, by which
means the Town was saved.

The people seeing nothing done against the King, murmur that the Heads of the
League are not more forward for action; some voting for surprising the King and
Killing him, whilst others thought it would do as well only to put him into a
Monastery, which is the same to Deprive him. Another time the King returning
from Boys de Vincennes, with no other Company but two Horsemen and four
Laquais, they had some Plots to seize on him then in St. Antoine's Street,
(being far from the Louvre and so his Guards) in an hurry to kill his Coachman
and those with him, and then others to cry out, O Sir, these are the Huguenots
who would seize on you. Which words they supposed would so affright him, that
he would quit his Coach, and then they would take him and carry him whither
they pleased, as to St. Antoine's Church, in whose Tower they would secure him
till they were more strengthened by raising up of the people their Associates.
But this upon better advice was held too dangerous for them, and so neglected:
yet Poulain informs the King of it, who resolved for the future to go better
guarded; and would willingly have punished these Conspirators, but he perceived
his Credit too much lost in Paris, and so his Force far inf^riour to the
Leaguers there; which made him the more willing to have a Peace with Navarre,
thereby to be strengthened by his assistance; but this neither durst he do for
fear of the clamours and threats of the Leaguers, unless Navarre would change
his Religion.

In the mean time some of the Covenanters began to grumble, that the Duke of
Guise did not in person come out of the Country to head them according to his
promise. However his brother the Duke of Mayenne being returned to Paris from
his Wars in Guienne, some of the chief of the private Junto waited upon him at
ten a clock at night, told him their designs, and desired his assistance, which
he promised them.

And now after some Consultations thus they conclude of their grand design,
that they would seize upon the Chevalier du Guet.
Captain of the Ordinary Watch, (one of great Authority) whom by fair promises
and fear of death they would force to open the In nature of the Tower of London.
Bastile, let them in, and then they would cut his throat. That the gate of the
Arcenal should be opened unto them by two Founders of Cannon who were of their
Conspiracy. That the A Court Judicature like Guildhall. Here also some are
imprisoned.
Grand Chastelet and the The Name of a Prison.
Petit Chastelet should be opened to them under pretense of bringing in certain
Prisoners: and by some such other means would they seize upon the other places
of the City; kill the Chief President, the Chancelour, the Attorney General,
with others of Note who were not of the Party: and with Barrels, Dirt, Chains,
and such like so barricado up the Streets, that no Forces could come in to
annoy them. As for the Kings Palace the Louvre, they would with ease beset and
gain it; which done to cut in pieces the Kings Favorites and Counselors, put
the King himself in a Monastery till a future Government was resolved on: and
in this enterprise they should cry out to encourage the Romanists, -- Let the
Vive l^ Mess.
Mass flourish -- and then to send to all other good Towns in the Kingdom, to
take their part and second them: and the better to root out all the Huguenots,
the Duke of Mayenne and the Spanish Forces should destroy the King of Navarre
and his Associates in Guienne.

Poulain informs the King of all, who presently provides for his own safety,
secures the places of greatest Trust, and draws some Soldiers near the City,
which did not a little perplex the Covenanters to see their secrets discovered;
and Mayenne also was in some amazement; but to put a better gloss on the
business he feigned himself sick, and went not to the Louvre for some weeks; at
last resolving to quit the City, he goes to take his leave of the King, who
willingly gave him liberty to depart, but with this Complement, -- How now
Cousin, will you forsake the Covenanters? -- the Duke only replying, that he
knew not what ^ Comment Cousin ^uittez vous leparry de la ^ig^e?
His Majesty meant, and so departed.

The King is glad at Mayenne's departure, by which means the Parisians wanted
an Head amongst them; yet the Duke left behind him several expert Captains and
Officers to assist the Covenanters if need be; who were now grown so zealous
and confident, as to intend the seizing of the Kings Person at St. Germains
Fair, being to dine at the Abbey, but Poulain discovering this he went not, and
so that failed. The Duke of Guise informed of these enterprises was very angry
with them, as being too hasty and bold to act so high without his knowledge or
allowance; nor was he pleased, that they had discovered themselves and plots to
his brother Mayenne; and so sends le Sieur de Mayneville to chide them. They
confess their grief for thus offending the Duke, excuse themselves, desire his
pardon, and give Mayneville a Gold Chain to stand so much their Friend as to
pacify the Duke.

Whilst these things were acting in Paris their Instruments were not Mem. de
Ne^ers vol. 1. ^. 753. 755.
idle in other places, especially at Rome, where Pills Abbe d'Orbais, Agent
for Cardinal de Guise, and some others were great sticklers for the League,
countenanced there by Cardinal Pelleve^. The actions of which Cardinal (being a
Subject of France) did so vex King Henry III. that we are Journal De 1586. 1587
told, that he ordered his Revenues to be seized on and distributed to the poor.

The King being gone from Paris with an Army to oppose the Germans then
marching into France to assist the Huguenots, the Covenanters had some thoughts
of seizing on the City in his absence, according to Guise his Instructions, who
phansied that he might secure the Kings Person in the Country. To this purpose
they sent Lauchart to Guise for further information; who upon maturer advice
would not allow of the plot, s^eing the King then to have such a Force about
the City, and a good Army under his command. However they assure the Duke of
their strength and willingness to attempt any thing that he shall command.

And the better to incite the Rabble to Rebellion, the Pulpit (the worst
Instrument in Seditious design) is made use of; several turbulent Priests or
Ministers being set on work to bespatter the King and his actions: one of the
chief of these Firebrands was Jean Boucher, Preacher of St. Benoist, a zealous
wall-ey'd Fellow, of whose wicked Doctrines we have told you formerly out of
his book De justa abdicatione Henrici III. The King sent for him, and publicly
told him of his lies and slanders; as how he had told the people in the Pulpit,
that the King caused one Burlart of Orleans to be put into a Sack and thrown
into the River, although the said Burlart was yet alive, and daily kept company
with the said Boucher; by which the King told him he had committed two grand
faults, first so basely to belly his lawful Sovereign, and then after telling
such a lie in the Pulpit to go forthwith to the Altar and Sacrament, without
acknowledging his foresaid falsities, although all confess that every one ought
to confess his faults before he receive the Eucharist: yet the King told him
that at this time he would forgive all, though he might revenge himself as Pope
Sixtus V. did, who Franciscans to the Galleys for traducing him in their
Sermons.

Another called Prevost, being Preacher of St. Severin, amongst his many other
Seditious prattlements had from the Pulpit told his Parishioners, that -- The
King was a Tyrant, and an Enemy to the Church and People -- Upon which the King
(as became him) sent for him; which so netled the Covenanters, that they
forthwith spread abroad, that the King was resolved to punish and imprison all
the good and godly Preachers. A thing very offensive to all manner of Zealots,
of what pretended Opinion soever; Rebellious Experience making it a certain
rule, that none clamor up Preaching more, then those who pretend to know
Religion better then their Teachers; the more ignorant the people be, the more
apt they are to think they comprehend the deepest mysteries, and though they
are bid to obey for Conscience Sake, yet (for all their crying up of the Bible)
they make a contrary fundamental-Rule, viz. Rebel for Conscience Sake: yet let
these Toleration, comprehensive, or in sum Rebellious Villains (for their
actions hitherto in History has not separated them) be worse then can be
imagined, they shall never want some rascally upstart Nobles, who raised
themselves by fighting the King and cheating the Church, to be their
Treasonable and Sacrilegious Patrons, especially where their Twatling Dames
have more zeal then honesty, and from such Vagabonds in Religion, good Lord,
deliver all Kings, Kingdoms and Churches! but when Kings are subjects, people
will be Kings, but a brave and daring Prince durst never yet be opposed, to the
ruin of the Undertakers, but such can never be, whose Favorites are more for
pleasure then true honesty and a National interest, as it happened now in France.

Prevost informed that he was sent for, was secured in an house of one of his
Neighbors called Hatte a Notarie; and for his farther protection Jean le Clerc
Sieur (or Landlord) de Bussy, one of the chief of the Covenanting Sixteen, with
several other Armed men put themselves into the foresaid house, opposed and
fought against those whom the King sent to enquire for the same Delinquents,
and made such an Hubbub and Riot, that the Kings Messengers, though headed by
Seguier the Lieutenant-Civil, or one of the Judges, were forced to withdraw
themselves and shift for their own security.

These and such like seditious actions so encouraged the Leaguers, that the
Town sounded nothing now but the misdeeds of the King, and the Glories of
Guise, that if it had not been for him the Ark would have fallen into the hands
of the Philistines, and Heresy would have triumphed over the true Religion.
Nay, the Sorbonists were so bold as to make (as we are told) a secret Decree,
That Princes might be deposed from their Government, Journal.
if they did not what became them, as the charge taken away from a negligent
Guardian.

And toward the latter end of this year, it is said, that the King was Id.
informed that the Duke of Guise, had posted disguised to Rome, where he stayed
only three days with Cardinal Pelleve, and that the Pope sent him a rich sword.
Another tells us, that one Viliers was sent to Rome, to desire the Popes
assistance, and that a Letter was found about him, said to be writ by the
Duchess of Lorraine, Mother to the Duke, containing thus much.

I am very glad to understand the state of your Affairs, and I advise you to
Ant. Colynet. p. 173, 174.
go forward, for never a fairer Occasion was offered you, to put the Scepter in
your hand, and the Crown upon your head.

The two last years we could not expect much matter from the Leaguers (though
we see their designs bad enough) seeing most of the Soldiery in France were
employed against Navarre and his Huguenots, many of the Covenanting Nobles
being engaged in those wars, which diverted them from their attempts upon the
King: but we shall see the next year make amends for all.

The Duke of Guise (the better to make all things sure) has a meeting 1588
Davila p. 667, 669. D Aubigne tom. 3. l. 1. c. 21. Spond^nus.
of the Chieftains of the House of Lorrain at Nancy, (a strong Town in that
Dukedom) where it is talked high of deposing the King, of putting him into a
Monastery, of destroying the House of Bourbon, to dispose of all things
themselves, and such like extravagancies. But at last it was concluded, that
the Duke of Lorrain should keep the Forces of the League in action, and that
Guise and others should unite with Cardinal Bourbon to present a Petition to
the King, much for their own advantage, which if granted their business might
easily be done without clamor or any great opposition; if denied, they had
force sufficient to obtain it. Accordingly the Paper is presented to the King,
in which (after many fair words) they demand,

That the King should really and briskly join himself with them, and root out
the Huguenots.

That he would put such persons as they should name from his Court, Council,
and their Offices or Employments.

That he would make the Council of Trent be received in his Dominions.

That he would grant some strong places unto the Covenanting Princes, where
they might keep Garrisons and make Fortifications at the charge of the Crown.

That he would maintain an Army near Lorrain under the Command of one of the
Leaguing Princes.

That he would cause all the Estates of the Huguenots to be sold, to satisfy
the expenses of the late wars, and to assist the Covenanters in their future
designs.

That he would settle the Inquisition in the chief Cities of his Kingdom, and
such like.

The King received the Propositions with a seemingly contented countenance, but
deferred his Answer; nor did the Duke of Guise care much whether he satisfied
their demands or no, the design being only to render His Majesty odious to the
People, as an Enemy to them and Religion, and a Friend to the Heretics. And
the fair and dissembling carriage of Guise, for the Ease of the People, Good of
Religion, and Scorn of the Kings pimping, flattering, upstart Favorites, (who
raised themselves by cheating the King and the oppression of the Poor) had in
procuring favor and esteem far the advantage of the Kings carriage and
actions, whose only care was Luxury and Idleness, Dancing, Fooling with little
Dogs, prattling with Birds, and such like childish gayeties.

All which were sufficiently known to the Guisards, upon which they daily
spread abroad (as is usual upon such neglects and occasions) their Pamphlets,
Libels, and Lampons; whilst the Zele and Honor of Guise is celebrated in
every street and corner, styling him -- the new David, the second Moses, the
Deliverer of the Catholic people, the Prop and Pillar of the Holy Church, the
new Gideon, the Safety of the Kingdom, and such like.

In the mean time the secret Council of the Covenanters in Paris was not idle,
and having (as formerly said) for the better carrying on their Plots (the City
being divided into Les Seize Quart^ers, every one of which is usually governed
by a Qua^tinier or Alderman.
XVI Wards or Quarters) appointed a trusty Covenanter to supervise every Ward,
and the Leaguers in that Division, from which number the chief and Council of
the Guisards in Paris was commonly called The Sixteen, (Les Seize.) But Guise
now perceiving the business daily to ripen for action, thought this Division
not close enough, therefore sends back La Chapelle (one of their busiest
Counselors) to tell them his desire, who forth with pulls out of his pocket a
Map of Paris, purposely divided into V Quarters, every one of which had now by
the Duke a Colonel appointed over it, (their names were Count de Brissac, the
Sieurs de Bois-Dauphin, de Chamois, d'Eschavoles, and Colonel St. Paul) and
under every Colonel were several Captains, and so to every one was given a Note
what to do, where any might have Arms that wanted. Besides, he had ordered the
Duke of Aumale and other his Associates, to be in readiness with their Forces
at appointment.

And to the no small joy and encouragement of the Guisards now died Henry de
Bourbon Prince of Conde: poisoned he was, as is confessed by all; and with him
might that Branch have ended, but that his Princess (imprisoned upon suspicion
as guilty of her Husbands death) a little after was brought to bed of a young
Prince, and was called Henry. The King of Navarres Life had formerly several
times been attempted, of which D' Aubigne will afford you a couple of odd
stories. And in this Year Tom. 2 l. 5. chapter 5
Monsieur de Calliere will tell you of another design against his person: and
we need not question but that his death, be it any way, would Hist d M. ^u
Matignon, p. 219, 220* 221.
have been very acceptable to Guise and his Party, who about this time did
spread abroad that he was really dead, whether to encourage their Associats, to
dismay the H^guenots, or that they knew of some Attempts Ant. Colynet. p. 214
against his Life, and hoped they would accordingly take effect, let others
judge.

In the mean time the Parisians carry on their Plots, and all things being now
in a pretty readiness, they resolve to take opportunity of the time of Lent, it
being the Kings custom then to go in Procession in the habit of a Penitent
amongst the Whipping-Friars, without any other Guards or Retinue, and thus they
thought they might without much difficulty seize on him, clap him up in a
Cloister; then the Duke of Guise to summon the States General, tell them of the
Kings unfitness to rule, and so the League might sway all as he pleased. But
Poulain discovering this to the King, he feigned himself sick, went not abroad
that day, and so escaped the snare: yet the Covenanters proceed, make a secret
Muster of their Forces which they find to be about XXX. thousand stout men, and
perceiving their designs discovered, (but by whom they could not tell) thought
it not fit to waste time, or give the King opportunity to seize upon any of
them, or prevent their Contrivances, wherefore they send to Guise to come
without fail, who promi^^th, and in the mean time sends many Officers, to
lurk secretly in the City against his coming.

The King informed of this, advises for his own safety; but the Factions at
Court did somewhat weaken the Determinations, yet he gets some Companies to
strengthen himself in the Louvre, procures what Friends he can secretly to
join with him; yet after all he perceived himself not able to cope with his
Enemies, though they were somewhat cooled at his Preparations.

About this time His Majesty being at Bois de Vincennes, accompanied 5 May.
not with abovn six or sevee, the Sixteen designed to entrap him in his return,
then to Alarm the City by giving out that the Huguenots had surpised him, and
in tended his death; thinking by this trick to raise up their Confederates: but
Poulain discovering this, the King sent for his Guards, and so this also
failed. In this designed Treachery Catharine Duchess of Montpensier, and
Sister to Guise, was an active Instrument.

The King being also informed by the same Poulain, that the Duke of Guise was
now resolved to come to Paris, and the Covenanters ready to receive him,
sends several Messengers to him with express command not to approach; to
which he gives cunning and doubtful answers, with an intent to disobey, and
accordingly with all possible haste, attended with but a very few of his
Gentlemen and Servants, (not keeping the High road, but through by and private
passages, that he might not meet any other of the Kings Prohibitions, and so
seem publicly to disobey His Majesty) enters the City, the people running mad
with joy out of their houses and shops to follow him, insomuch that he had
presently above thirty thousand Followers, crying out Long let Gnise live, 9
May. Davila p. ^80. D'Aubigne tom. 3. l. 1. chapter 23.
the Pillar of the Church. All ^hewed their greatest affection to him, some
thanking him, others bowing to him, some kissing the hem of his garment, others
that could not get so near by their hands and gestnres showed their zele and
joy; some adored him as a Saint, touched him with their Beads, kissing (as they
thought) the then said hallowed stuff, or touching their Eyes and Foreheads
with them; the Women strowing leaves and flowers from their windows, Madam
Vitri crying out, O good Prince, seeing you are come we are safe: others
adding, Shall we not die for joy when we have seen you King? To such an height
of madness and wickedness will a giddy Zele for Religion transport the
indiscreet Rabble.

Guise on the other side with a popular Face and and smiling Countenance showed
himself affable and courteous to all by Words, Salutations, or kind Looks; and
thus passing along with his Hat in his hand, omitted nothing that might gain
their Affections and Applause, and in this complemental Triumph he rode
directly to St. Eustache, allighted at the Filles Repenties, where the
Queen Mother then lay, with whom having some discourse, she in the mean time
informs the King of his coming by her Gentleman Usher Luigi Davila, (a
Cyprian by birth, and elder brother to Henrico Caterino Davila, that excellent
Author of the History of the Civil Wars of France) which so perplexed His
Majesty, that he was fain to rest himself upon his Arm, hanging his Head down
almost to the Table.

Guise having had some discourse with the Queen Mother (who was not a little
frighted at his coming) waits upon her on foot to the Louvre, she being carried
in her Chair or Sedan: being come before the King, he endeavors to excuse and
vindicate himself, and so returns to his own house in St. Antoine's Street.
And here not only Pope pon^. an. 1588. 3.
Sixtus V. but several others condemned the King, that he had not Guise
forthwith killed whilst he was in his power in the Louvre, and some of his
Counselors advised him then to do it, whilst others thought there was no
policy or safety in that, seeing the People so furiously resolved for him. Yet
probably the King being then in an high passion, might have ordered his
dispatch, but that Guise by whisperings and other demeanours perceived their
Resolutions not settled, so very cunningly taking hold of their uncertainties,
pretending a weariness by reason of his travels, took his leave and went to his
House, attended with the former multitude of his Admirers.

And now the Plot begins to work* Guise that night gets above four hundred
Gentlemen and Commanders to his House, sends for the Council of Sixteen, and
the Like our City Sheriffs. Paris has 4 Eschevins.
Eschevins, (then of his Faction) with whom he consults, orders Guards to be
kept in every Ward, all the Covenanters to be ready upon notice, and had his
own house well stored with Arms. And the same care was also taken by the Court
to fortify the Louvre. The next day Guise attended with above four hundred
Gentlemen, privately armed with Pistols under their cloaks, (for upon his
former jealousy 10 May.
he would not venture himself so unprovided as he was before) went to the
Louvre, waited upon the Queen his Cousin, then the King, and so ^eturn'd, and
held a deep consultation with Pierre Depinac, Archbishop of Lions, his chief
Confident and Counselor. After dinner he went to the Queen-mothers house,
whither the King came; and after several discourses concerning the faults of
the Government and the People, each endeavoring to vindicate himself and
Favorites, they departed.

The next day the King ordered all strangers to depart the City, thinking 11
May.
by that means to lessen and divide the Forces of the Guisards, but this could
not be performed nor obeyed: and Guise, to render His Majesty more odious, gave
out that the King intended to put to death LX. of the chief Romanists, (a
counterfeit List of whom he framed and sent abroad by his Creatures, in which
were named the Eschevins, the chief of the Sixteen and Covenanters) and then
all their Curates and Preachers; and to make this more terrible, it was
confidently reported, how that the The Townh^us^.
Hostel de ville was full of Gibbets to hang the said people on. All which so
incensed the Rabble, that they were thinking to rise up that very night, their
Commanders being settled in every Quarter.

And that which most confirmed these Opinions to the People, was the approach
of the Kings Forces; for His Majesty perceiving the high Attempts of the
Leaguers, determined to put it to the push, to secure himself and daunt or
quell his Enemies; to which purpose he had sent for the several Regiments of
the Swisses and French who quartered near Paris, who accordingly were led into
the City on Thursday morning by 12 May.
Marshall Byron, and agreeable to the Kings Orders, had taken up their
Stations or Posts in several places of the City, especially near the Court,
which some think was not done to the best advantage, seeing they kept too great
a distanc^ from L'Hostel de Guise in S. Antoine's street, whereby with the
greater ease all his Associates and Rabble might come to him, and unite without
any opposition.

However at the noise of these Royal Forces the people shut up their Shops, fly
to their Arms, and according to their former Instructions, what with Tubs,
Barrels, and such like materials, stop, Therefore the French do yet call this
day and action -- Les Barcieades de Paris, or Journee des Barrieades.
barricado, and chain up the Streets, Lanes, and Passages, and that with such
cunning and quickness, that the Kings Forces being as aforesaid divided, could
not come to or assist one another: whereupon after a little resistance and a
few slain, they yielded themselves. And thus this vast City became subject to
Guise, who rode through the streets exhorting the people to stand upon their
Guard, since God had been so merciful to them as to secure their Lives,
Families, Liberties, and the Honor of the Holy Church, desiring them to depend
upon him, and all would be well.

On the other hand the King and Court found themselves in a sad condition, and
seeing no help, after many Consultations the Queenmother is sent to treat with
the Duke, and being with a great deal of difficulty (by reason of the stoppages
and barricadoes) brought to him, upon discourse she finds him haughty and
exorbitant in his demands, more like a Conqueror then a Subject, not departing
a jot from such as these.

That he should be Lieutenant General in all Provinces and places in the
Kingdom.

That the States should be called at Paris, who with the King should confirm to
him that Power.

That the King of Navarre, with the other Princes of Bourbon his Adherents,
should be declared to have forfeited their Right and Title to the Crown.

That a Form of Government should be made, which the King should not have power
to alter.

That such of the Kings Favorites should be banished the Court, and turned out
of all Offices and Places.

That War should be made against the Huguenots, and the absolute Command of it
committed unto him.

That the King should have no extraordinary Guards about his Person, and so
dismiss his Guard 45 Gentlemen.

That the Dukes of Aumale, Elboeuf, and Nemours should have the Government of
Picardy, Normandy, and Lions, and that the Leaguers should have six other Towns
as they should name.

That the Duke of Mayenne should be Admiral, and his Creature De la Chastre be
Marshall instead of Byr^n.

That Brissac ( an active Leaguer) should be Governor of Paris.

And at last concluded,

That he was resolved either to lose his life, or secure Religion and the
Estate of his Family.

The Queen Mother returns, and the King finding no m^ans by staying there to
escape his snar^s of the Enemies, (who were now forming 13 May.
a Siege against him) res^lved to withdraw himself, so stealing through the So
cal^'d from the (...) of T^les the^e form^rly.
Tuilleries (the Gardens by the Louvre) he took horse with a dozen Gentlemen,
posted to Trapes, and the next day to Chartres, where he was received with
great demonstrations of joy. It Is said that the people were so bewitched with
this Solemn League and Covenant, that seeing him thus fly for his safety, they
Jo. de ^^^ssieres tol 4. l. 21. p. 259.
shot at him cross the River, calling him all the Contumelious names that
malice could invent. And that the King was so troubled at these Villainies and
Indignities, that having got a little from Paris, he turned him about uttering
some threats and menaces against that ungrateful City.

The Courtiers hasted after the King with what speed they co^ld make, most
trudging afoot, for in this burly-burly happy was he that could procure an
horse though never so bad, many Persons of Quality being content to make use of
their own legs ^^ preserve themselves: and amongst those who fled to the King
was Ni^^las Poulain, not daring to stay in Paris, suspecting himself
discovered: and well was it for him that he so escaped, for the Leaguers were
so mad against him for his Loyalty, that they imprisoned his Wife, threatened
his Children, rifled his house; and as for himself, he got to Chartres and the
King without ever a Penny of money; nor do I hear of any reward (excepting
Promises) that he received for his faithful service in so often saving the
Kings life, it being the custom for such good-natured or negligent Princes, not
to understand worth and virtue, and so to be Misers in rewarding of such, but
Prodigals in heaping Riches and Honors upon their fantastical and flattering
Minions or Favorites; and it may be Poulain was too grave and serious for such
a wanton and frolicksom Court as Henry III's. was.

And here the Skill or Policy of Guise has been much called in question, for
not speedily following his blow, having all the advantages that possibly could
be expected; his great neglect being his letting the King escape, the seizing
of whose Person might have completed his Triumphs, and (by his Enemies so
wanting an Head) might have brought France to submit to his pleasure; all which
might with ease have been accomplished, had he but forthwith begirt the Louvre,
by which he might have taken the King: but this nelect he remembered too late,
and afterward repented of so grand an oversight.

Though here he had failed, yet he resolves to secure himself; to which
purpose having gained all the strong places in Paris, put out and imprisoned
the Like the Lord Ma^or of London.
Prevost des Marchands, and others whom he suspected to favor the King, and
settled his own Creatures in their Places; he surpriseth all the Neighboring
places, and presently Orleans, Bourges, Amiens, Abbeville, Montrovil, Rouen,
Rheims, Chaalons, and above twenty other considerable places submitted to him,
the mad people everywhere crying out, -- Long live Guise! long live the
Protector of the Faith! -- And his Sister the Duchess Dowager of Montpensier
was so zealous against the King and Peace, that she would brag how the King
should be Jo. de Buss. vol. 4. p. 261.
shorn for a Monk, and show the Scisars which should do the feat.

And for a good encouragement the Spaniard sends 600000 Crowns, supposing
that the League would make rare work for him. And thus D'A bigne tom. 3 l. 1.
chapter 23.
Guise commanding all, the King can find no safety for himself but by Peace,
though upon never so bad Conditions; and that which was no small argument of
his Compliance, was the approach of the Spanish Armado (by them called the
Invincible) and the vast Preparations of the Duke of Parma in Flanders, which
though in the main designed against England, yet he understood not what (if
Conquerours, as most supposed they would) they might act against him and
France, knowing full well the Catholic King to have all along assisted the
Covenanters.

In short: The King thus forced to shackle himself, lest the Mischief and
Rebellion should run too far, he submits to Guise, granting him and his Faction
all the Proposals they desired, and so by a Decree (called the Edict of Union
or July) a Peace is hudled up between them. The Edict it self being somewhat
long, take here the Heads of it.

HENRY by the Grace of God King of France and Poland, etc. We ordain and decree
these following Articles as an unalterable and fundamental Law in our Kingdom.

We swear and renew the Oath made by us at our Coronation, to live and die in
the Roman Religion.

We ordain and would have all our Subjects to swear as we do, and to join
themselves with us in the extirpation of Heretics.

We swear that we shall never favor or advance them, and command all our
Subjects to swear never to admit of an Heretical King, or one that favors
Heresy to reign over them.

We promise never to promote or employ any but of the Roman Religion, and
expressly forbid any to be received into any Place or Employment, but who have
proved themselves of the said Religion.

We swear and promise to protect and use our Subjects, who join with us in
these our undertakings, as becomes a good King.

We would have our said united Subjects to swear to assist one another against
the Heretics.

And that our said Subjects swear to live and die in their Allegiance to us.

And that they swear to depart from all Practices and Leagues contrary to the
said Union, our Person, and Authority.

We declare all to be Rebels who will not sign this said Union, and all Towns
who will not admit it shall be deprived of all their Privileges and Franchises.

And to make the Peace more sure and durable, all former Leagues, Plots,
Actions, especially those of the 12th. and 13th. days of May last at Paris,
done by the Guisards and their Party, are pardoned and forgot as if they had
never been done.

HENRY.
At Rouen, 15 July, 1588. By the King in his Council, Published in the
Parliament at Paris, Published by sound of Trumpet by the Crier, Visa.
Afterwa^ds better k^own by the name of Villeroy.
De Neufville. Du Tillet. T. Lauvergnat.


Thus we see how careful some were to have this Agreement ratified, published,
and confirmed. But this was not all, for besides this two Armies must be raised
and paid against the Huguenots, one commanded by the King, the other by the
Duke of Mayenne: the Leaguing Lords are to retain for six years the Cities and
Fortresses granted them 1585: and that Orleans, Dourlans, Bourges, and
Montereau should be added to them: the Duke of Guise to command all the Forces
in the Kingdom: that in October next the States General should be held at
Blois: and several such like advantages were granted to the Leaguers. Upon
which Guise waits upon the King, and none seem so kind as those two, but it was
but from the teeth outward; of which we are told one story, how the King at
dinner asked the Duke to whom they should drink: To whom you please, quoth
Guise: then said the King, Let us drink to our Journal, Ao^st 12. 1588.
good friends the Huguenots: It Is well said, Sir, replied the Duke: Yea (added
the King) and to all our good Barricadors at Paris: to which Guise yielded a
counterfeit smile, not well pleased that the King should compare the
Barricadors with the Huguenots.

And now behold the greatest wonder that Toute la Cour fut veue habillee a l'
Espagnole, le long Estoc a la guard Crossee a l' Espagnole, les gross
chausses, les jartieres houpees, le pourpoint colle sur le corpse, la grande
fraize bien godronnee, la Monstache, la barbe and le chappeau a l' Espagnole;
tout leur parles Espagnol, Rodomontades Espagnoles: bref, vous eussiez dict,
qu' en ce temps la le Francois avoit en horreur and mispris de parler and se
dire Francois, and qu' on luy faisoit tort de ne l'appeller Espagnol -- Andre
Favin Hist. de Navarre, p. 940.
ever yet happened in France! The whisking Monsieur converted to a grave Don,
all the Court clad after the Spanish garb, a long Tuck with a cross-bar'd Hilt,
great Trunckbreeches, tufted Garters, strait and close Doublet, a great
high-set Ruff, staring Mustachoes, with Beard and Hat after the Castilian mode;
all they speak is Spanish, and that Rodomontadoes too: insomuch that one might
think that now Monsieur was ashamed or scorned to speak his own language, or
call himself a Frenchman, nay would take it in snuff not to be thought a
Spaniard. Such an esteem and love had the Castilian got amongst the people, for
his assisting them in their wicked League and Covenant against their King and
Sovereign. And by this also appeared not only the Boldness, but Authority and
Power of the Guisian Faction, to whose caprichioes and Interest, the Royalists
were thus forced to submit and truckle.

Guise thus having all sway and glory, the better to advance his Reputation
Pope Sixtus V. sends him long Congratulatory Letters, giving him many thanks
for his Zele and Actions, comparing him to the old Maccabees, bidding him go on
as he had begun, and telling him that he would send a Legate into France to
assist at the approaching States: which Letters were spread abroad by the
Leaguers in great triumph, to the no small discredit and regret of the King,
who in these Papal Commendations and Blessings had no share, nor taken notice
of; and such Pontifical Neglects used to be the Forerunner of Laying aside or
Cutting off.

Well, the Assembly of the States General meet at Blois, the major part 16
October. 1588.
being Covenanters, by which Guise was so strengthened, that it is thought that
he at least aimed at the same Authority that the ancient Major-domes had in
France, whereby the King would be but a mere Cipher, whilst the Duke might
make himself King when he pleased. So to gratiate himself with the people, and
remove all obstacles, he proposes that Taxes and Impositions might be
lessened, which was thought irrational, seeing at the same time he will have
the war vigorously carried on against the Huguenots; yet he gained his desires.

Then he moves that the Council of Trent might be received, but this is denied
by most as contrary to the Liberties of the Gallican Church.

But (which was the main of all) he proposes that the King of Navarre and his
Relations (as Heretics) shoul'd be declared incapable of Succession, which was
presently granted him by the Three Estates, but it was not so rec^ived by the
King, who (though he was forced to consent to it in dubious and general terms,
yet) told them that he would think further of it, and would take care himself
to have the Decree drawn up. But before this Navarre understanding their
designs, had at an Assembly at Roc^el framed a Protestation, pronouncing all
their Votes and Actions against him and his Right null, as being no stubborn
Heretic, willing to submit to a General Council, and to be instructed that the
States were not free nor full, and that they could not justly condemn him
before they heard him.

Whilst these Proposals were vexing the King, news is brought that Charles
Emanuel Duke of Savoy had seized on the little Marquessate of Saluzzo, (toward
the head of Po in Italy) who had also pretended a right to it, end so took
advantage at the Kings Expulsion out of Paris, and these French Troubles;
though at this time he pretended a necessity, viz. that otherwise the Huguenots
from Dauphine would have taken it, and Favyn p. 93^.
others suppose that he wanted not assurance from the Leaguers.

However it was, the Kings j^alousie and anger did daily increase; and it is
said that here Guise expressly refused (though commanded) to Ant. Colynet p.
303, 304, 305, 306.
swear Allegiance to the King, saying, He would not, and if he offended they
might punish him. But this is not so bad as a further design plotted by him and
his Accomplices, which they say was to take away the Kings life, of which it is
said the King had private Information. In short, the Spond. 18.
King considering what Favors the House of Guise had received from the French
Crown, yet how many Rebellions he had raised against him, Hist. des d^r^iers
troubles de France, l. 4. fo. 142 143, 144, 152, 158.
what Combinations he had made against him and the Crown with the very Enemy to
both, viz. the Spaniard; that for all his outward pretensions for Religion, yet
he had made secret Overtures to join with Navarre; how he had beaten and driven
him from his Royal City and Palace, killing his Guards who endeavored his
defense; seized on his Revenues and Treasures: He called to mind his many
Plots, how to get the true Heirs of the Crown made incapable of Inheritance,
had taken all Authority and Command from him, aspired to be greater yet, etc.
And thus persuaded that Guise his design was to Hard. de Perefixe Hist. Hen. le
Grand.
dethrone him, he resolved to save himself, and ease the Kingdom of this
troublesome Subject.

The Kings Counselors confess necessity now or never required it: but to
seize on him, try him ^or Treason, condemn and execute him was dangerous, if
not impossible, by reason of his many Favorites, and the power of his Faction;
and so the safest way was to kill him now at Blois, a place far enough from
Paris, the head and nest of the Covenanters: and accordingly he was 23 Dec.
1588.
slain at the Court or Castle, being gone thither to sit in Privy Council:
there was also taken Lewis de Lorrain, the Cardinal of Guise, brother to the
Duke, and a zealous and furious Covenanter, who by the Kings Order was slain
the next day, though being 24 Dec.
a Clergyman, many had refused to imbrue their hands in his blood.

Their flesh was presently co^sum'd in quick Lime, their bones burnt, and ashes
thrown into the River, or secretly interred, thereby removing all tragical and
woeful objects, and preventing any part of them to be found and looked upon as
holy Relics of Martyrs, which was supposed many of the Leaguers would nor
stick to do and reverence. Such a love had these Lorrainers gained, of whom
some said, If they were so zealous for the Roman Religion, why did they not
fight against the Jews, who are so numerous even in Italy it self? If they were
such Favorites Le Contre- Guise.
with the Spaniard, why did they not see the Moors expelled thence? If they
thought themselves Kings of Jerusalem, why did they not thrust out the Turks?
If they were Princes of the Empire, why did they not war against the Lutherans?
If they loved the Honor of France, why did they oppose the regaining of
Saluzzo? And must they needs come to disturb France, wherein they were looked
upon as strangers?

CHAP. V. So^bonne decree, That they are absolved from their Allegiance, and so
may fight and act against the King with all their might. Their Letter to the
Pope. They order that the Kings Name shall not be used in any of their Missals
or Collects whatsoever. Lion joins its Interest with Paris. The Duke of Mayenne
made Head of the Leaguers.
A Little after the death of the two Guises departed out of this world 5 Jan.
1589.
Catherina de Medicis (the Queen Mother) at Blois, a Lady of a politic deep
reach and understanding, fit to manage and carry on any business; but withal
being an Italian very deceitful and cruel, not regarding what means she used,
or what blood she shed, so she did but ob^ain her designs. She was buried at
Blois, though she intended her body to be carried to St. Denis, and there laid
by her Husband Henry II. for which purpose she had built a neat round little
Chapel in the Churchyard: but the Parisians were too zealous and powerful, some
of the Guisards declaring Journal.
they would throw her body (if they could get it) into the River.

No sooner were the Guises dispatched, but King Henry III. hastes to his
Mother, telling her, -- I am now King of France, having put to death the King
of Paris -- And some think his words might have proved true, had he been more
active and followed his blow: but instead of mounting presently to horse,
(whereby by his presence he might have encouraged his Friends, and daunted the
Covenanters, now in a maze for want of an Head) he staid trifling away the time
at Blois, examining and troubling himself with the Acts of the States there, so
that the Leaguers had time to recollect themselves, throw off their amazement,
regain their spirits, and to convert their former fear of themselves, and pity
of the late Guises, into the height of rage and fury against their King and his
Adherents.

At Paris the people run into all manner of extravagancies, the Pulpit being
then the worst Instrument in the Kingdom, sounding nothing but the commendation
of the Guises and the honor of Rebellion: amongst the rest Father Lincestre
was very zealous, one time commanding all his Auditors to swear to revenge the
death of the Guises, in token of which to hold up presently their hands (as was
done at the taking of the late English cursed Covenant) and had the impudence
to call aloud to Ach^lles Journal.
de Harlay, chief President of the Parliament and a great Royalist, to hold his
so high up that all the people might see it; which Harlay was forced to do for
fear of his life. And another time he told his Auditors, that He would not then
preach to them the Gospel, because it was common and they knew it well enough;
but he would declare to them the abomi^able life and act^^^s of that perfidious
tyrant Henry de Valois, meaning the King; telling them how he used to invoke
the Devils, undertaking also out of his sleeve to show them some of the Devils
which Henry used to adore and pray to. Another time affirming, that for his
part if he were at the Altar, and the Eucharist in his hand, yet he would not
scruple then and there to kill the King. Another in his Preachment concluding
his large Commendations of Guise, addresseth as it were himself to the Duchess
of Nemours (Mother to the Duke) sitting just over against him, bawleth out, O
holy and glorious Martyr of God, blessed is the womb that bore thee, and the
breasts that gave thee suck!

The people put forth a Declaration, wherein they swear,

To live and die in the Roman Religion. 30 Jan. 158^.


To defend according to their uttermost power Paris, and all other
Confederating places.

To defend and protect all their fellow Leaguers against all other their
Opposites, of what Quality or Dignity soever; and to withstand all those who
were any way concerned in the late killing and imprisoning at Bloys.

And they also propose two Quaeres to the Doctors of Sorbonne, which take as
follows with the Determination of that College.

Anno Domini Millesimo quingentesimo octuagesimo nono, die septima mensis
Januarii, sanctissima Facultas Theologiae Parisiensis congregata fuit apud
Collegium Sorbonae, post publicam supplicationem omnium Ordinum dictae
Facultatis, and Missam de sancto Spiritu ibidem celebratam, (postulantibus
clarissimis D. D. Praefecto, Aedilibus, Consulibus, and Catholicis Civibus
almae urbis Parisiensis, tam viva voce quam publico instrumento and tabellis
per eorundem actuarium obsignatis, and publicae urbis sigillo munitis)
deliberatura super sequentibus Articulis, qui deprompti sunt ex libello
supplici praedictorum Civium.

I. An populus Regni Galliae possit liberari and solvi a sacramento Fidelitatis
and Obedientiae Henrico III. praestito?

II. An tuta conscientia possit idem populus armari, un^ri, and pecunias
collegere and contribuere ad defension^m and conservationem Religionis
Catholicae and Romanae in hoc Regno, adversus nefaria consilia and conatus
praedicti Regis, and quorumlibet aliorum illi adhaerentium, and contra publicae
fidei violationem ab eo Blesis factam, in praejudicium praedictae Religionis
Catholicae, and Edicti sanctae Unionis, and naturalis libertatis convocationis
trium Ordinum hujus Regni.

Super quibus Articulis, audita omnium and singulorum Magistrorum (qui ad
septuaginta convenerunt) matura, accurata, and libera deliberatione, auditis
multis and variis rationibus, quae magna ex part tum ex Scripturis sacris tum
Canonicis Sanctionibus, and decretis Pontificum in medium dissertissimis verbis
prodita sunt: CONCLUSUM est a Domino Decano ejusdem Facultatis, nemine
refragante, and hoc per modum Consilii ad liberandas Conscientias praedicti
populi.

PRIMUM, quod populus hujus regni solutus est and liberatus a Sacramento
Fidelitatis and Obedientiae praedicto Henrico rei praestito.

DEINDE, quod idem populus licite and tuta conscientia armari, uniri, and
pecunias colligere and contribuere potest, ad defensionem and conservationem
Religionis Catholicae, Apostolicae, and Romanae, adversus nefaria consilia and
conatus praedicti Regis, and quorumlibet illi adhaerentium, ex quo fidem
publicam violavit in praejudicium Religionis Catholicae, and Edicti Sanctae
Unionis, and Naturalis Libertatis convocationis trium Ordinum hujus Regni.

Quam Conclusionem insuper visum est eidem Parisiensi Facultati, transmittendam
esse ad S. D. N. Papam, ut eadem Sanctae Sedis Apostolicae autoritate probare
and confirmare, and Ecclesiae Gallicanae gravissime laboranti opem and auxilium
praestare dignetur.

In the year MDLXXXIX, the 7th. day of January, the most holy Faculty of
Theology at Paris was convened at the College of Sorbone, public prayers of
all the Orders of the said Faculty being said, and the Mass of the Holy Ghost
there celebrated, to consult upon these following Articles, as they are
extracted from the Petition of the Citizens, according to the desire of the
Illustrious Persons the Prevost de Marchands, the Eschevins, the Consuls, and
the Catholic people of the famous City of Paris, testified as well by their
words as by Instrument and publish Act, signed by their Register, and sealed
with the common Seal of the City.

Whether the People of France may not be discharged and set free from the Oath
of Allegiance and Obedience made to Henry III.

Whether the said people may with a safe conscience arm and unite themselves,
collect and raise moneys for the defense and preservation of the Catholic
Roman Religion in this Realm, against the wicked counsels and practices of the
said King and all other his Adherents, and against the breach of Public Faith
committed by him at Bloys, to the prejudice of the said Roman Religion, and
Edict of Holy Union, and the Natural Liberty of the Assembly of the three
Estates of this Kingdom.

Upon which Articles having been had a careful, advised, and free deliberation
of all the Masters of that Faculty, being then LXX in number, as also being
heard many and sundry Reasons, most excellently produced and delivered, not
only from Holy Scriptures, but also from Canonical Sanctions and Papal
Decrees: it is agreed and CONCLUDED on by Master Dean of the said Faculty, not
any gainsaying it, and that by way of counsel or advice to deliver the
consciences of the said people.

FIRST, that the people of this I.
Kingdom are discharged and freed from the Oath of Allegiance and Obedience
made to Henry III.

SECONDLY, that the said people II.
may legally and with a safe conscience arm and unite themselves, collect and
raise moneys for the defense of the Catholic, Apostolic, and Roman Religion,
against the wicked counsels and practices of the said King, and all other his
Adherents; seeing he has violated the public Faith in prejudice of the
Catholic Religion, the Edict of the holy Union, and the Natural Liberty of the
Assembly of the three Estates of this Kingdom.

Moreover, the said Faculty of Paris do think fit to have their said Decree or
Conclusion to be sent to our most Holy Lord the Pope, that he would vouchsafe
to ratify and confirm it by the Authority of the Holy Apostolical See, and
afford help and assistance to the French Church, now in great stress and hazard.

And accordingly a Letter was drawn up and sent to the Pope, which take as
follows, being now very difficult to be met with; and at Paris it self all
Papers concerning these insolences were taken from the Registers or off the
Files, at the re-entrance of Henry IV. into that City, whereby many Villainies
of this League were lost.

S. D. N. SIX TO PAPAE V.
^EATISSIME PATER, quae spes nobis ante aliquot dies s^mma erat, fore ut post
tot procellos, quibus annos pene jam triginta jactati sumus, constitutam in
Galliae Ecclesia pacem aliquando videremus, atque de ^a renuntium BEATITUDINI
vestrae laetum brevi offeremus, eam vero crudeli atque immani fortissimi ac
pientissimi Ducis Guisii, atque illustrissimi Cardinalis ejus fratris caede
acerbissimo luctu commutatam esse, tanto gravius pertulimus, quanto durius est
in medio ardore belli ereptum eum nobis esse, cui ut hoc reliquum nobis
Religionis ac vitae est acceptum ferimus, ita eo amiss^ ne haereticorum
faucibus prostituatur, merito formidamas.

Quae si tamen Divini Numinis constitutio fuit, ut and invictissimi Principis
labores gloriosissima morte consumaret, and latens dudum sub Catholica
professione impietatis virus tam chari capitis praetio aperiret, ut
omnipotentis Dei judicia in ea re taciti suspicimus, ac veniam Petimus, ita
Sanctitatis vestra pedibus provoluti, opem vestram per viscera misericordiae
Jesu Christi imploramas, ut dum rem qualiter paucis exponimus, tuum auxilium
quod decet etiam impetramus.

Non enim ut Interfectoris ars atque existimatio fingere perfecto scelere
necesse habet, transversum optimum Ducem ambitio egit, qui quod in Regem toties
nullo negotio potuit, hoc unum peccasse (fortasse merito) a multis dictus est,
quod noluit. Quem si non usque eo domus Dei ac publica salutis Zelus
^omedisset, ut in certissima pericula toties inermis se dederit, si non
conscientiae puritas and animi candor ejus a quo ad necem petebatur, dolis
opportunum ^ecisset, cum ille quae de paratis sibi insidiis dicebatur, toties
intrepidus contemneret, sic nimirum affectus, ut optimi and probissimi quique
solent, qui alios improbos esse d^fficillime suspicantur, and vivum adhuc
haberemus, and tanto super^^it^ Ecclesia Dei vindice gauderemus.

Nisi forte quod Haereticis omnino pro libidine in aula gerentibus, jamque
extincto Regis (...) Anjo^.
fratre, atque ipso non obscure favente Rege, Navarrum ad Sceptrum vocantibus,
ab Illustrissimo Cardinali Borbonio primum, mox a beatissima memoria Gregorio
XIII. P. Dux Guisius excitatus, ut videret, nequid Religio Tagoedia spectat
nisi ut Navarro, Duke of Espernon (...) Hugu^not, but the Kings F^v^urite.
Spernonio, ^ri^^ Cazimir, Cent^ral of the German Army 1587, that ca^^ to
assist Nav^^re.
Cazimiro, A ^oven^n^ing Compl^ment to an English Queen.
meritrici Anglicanae, caeteris foederatis haereticis Inferia dentur, and
talibus hostibus litetur? ut moerentibus ac dejectis Catholicis exultent
Heretici, and in suis illis cogitatis furoribus (quod jam undique fit) liberius
debacchentur?

Add vestram (Pater Beatissime) and totius Sanctae Sedis laesam dignitatem,
cum and praesente Sanctitatis vestrae Ca^^nal Giov^n. Franc. Morosini, (...) ^^
Be^gamo, (...) at ^^ys.
Legato scelus tantum parricida designaret, and monenti audientium denegaret.
Denique Cardinalem confodiens, totum sacrum istud ^c purpuratum Collegium
violaret. Cui enim tandem sacro parcet qui caput petierit? qui sedem vestram,
quam verbo si vereri fingit, facto oppresserit? qui Patrem, a quo Hen. III. was
cons^or (...) at Rheims by Lewis Card^nal ^f Lorrain. The st^ry of the Saint
Ampoule and H^ly Oil kept at Rheims may be seen in L^^enls and French Histori.
s.
coel^sti oleo tinctus est occiderit? aut quae sub illo Christiano homini
securitas esse potest: aut quo tandem processura est impietas, qua sic jam in
praecipiti st^tit:

Quae cum sint ejusmodi ut jam vitam potius profundere, quam Tyranni them hanc
nostris atque Ecclesiae universa cervisibus impendentem, and postrema omnia
minitantem far parati sint omnes boni: eoque jam ventum sit, ut Francorum
prisca fides virtus ac pietas hic se totam debeat explicare, vel ipsi exemplo
praeeuntibus pueris atque infantibus, quos ingenti numero plusquam december
millium, non sine miraculo clamores sua sponte per vicos in coelum tollentes,
and altionem sceleris in Tyrannum poscentes; alios etiam Tyranni imaginem ( sic
enim vocabant) flagris ^esam ac fratrem igni admoventes in hac urbe audivimus
and obstupuimus; id nimirum est in quo vestram (Beatissime Pater) opem
imploramus, ut cum tria nobis a vestra Beatitudine praestari in hoc negotio
necesse sit, ea nos ad beatissimos pedes prostrati vehementer flagitemus.

Primum, ut juramento quo nos Henricum III. quondam obstrinximus I.
and soluti declaremur.

Deinde, ut bellum quod cum publicae Religionis ac libertatis oppressore II.
necessario gerendum est, justum esse decernatur.

Postremo, ut nequid tam necessario operi, tum precum apud Omnipotentem III.
Deum, tum facultatem humanarum, desit, ad utrunque tum externi Principes, tum
nostri praecipue homines Apostolicae vestrae gratiae, atque per Jubileum
Indulgentiae beneficio provocentur.

Nam priora illa duo eo confidentius petimus, quod cum juris nihil in
Christianos ei esse debere, qui se Haereticum aut fautorem Haereseos manifest
praebuerit,
qui publicam fidem tum divinam tum humanam tam insigni parricid^o fregerit,
qui Regni and Sceptri judices tam foede violarit, qui per Assasinos Christianum
Principem occiderit, qui Sacerdotem, Pontificem, Cardinalem, and in Comitiis
Ecclesiastici Ordinis praesidem trucidarit, qui Anathematis d^ras omnes ac
fulmina incurrerit, qui parato ad perdendum omnia, and foede conculcandum animo
sit, ipsa nos dudum ratio and vetus traditio docuerit, praesertim cum Gallia
ipsa Reges quondam isto (quo pejorem nunquam habuit) long tolerabiliores
authoritate vestra excluserit, imo etiam voce propria nos juramento hoc
liberos, si quid praeter promissa faceret, non semel pronuntiarit, tum vero in
praecipiti negotio, cum responsum Beatitudinae vestrae expectandi tempus non
esset, nec tamen quicquam dubia and fluctuante conscientia facere certum esset,
gravissimo adhibito Theologorum Sorbonae Parisiensis jud^cio, qui iterum and
tertio, rogatu nostro, magno numero ad Septuaginta usque super hac re
convenerunt, and rem accuratissime disceptarunt, secure nos in utroque agere,
and tuto a vestra Beatitudine caput utrunque postulare ac sperare debere ab
iisdem dedicimus: Quinetiam eos ad vestram Beatitudinem suam ea de re
sententiam, quibusque rationum momentis impellantur, scripturas accipimus,

Vestrae vero (Pater Beatissime) sapientiae erit, si quid fraus, si quid
solita, qua dudum asstigimur, Impostorum ars contrarium iis Beatitudina vestrae
obtruserit, huic fidem adhibere nolle: aut si quid (quod plus timemus) nobis
consternatis, and vix a tanto dolor animum colligentibus, praeoccupando
impetrarit, id ne Christianissimo Regno, ne Ecclesiae nocet providere: imo
irritum (quod trementes and veniam petentes dicimus) urgente ac premente
negotio statuere neve committere, ut in tanto Ecclesiae periculo, in quo bis
peccare jam non licet, illusisse se dignitati vestrae, quod non semel factum
antea est, versuta nequitia gloriari possit.

Tum nos qui loquimur, quos reliqui Galliae Catholici intuentur omnes, si quid
Francorum quondam genus, si quid Gysiorum Principum virtus, and fusus toties
pro Christi Ecclesia sanguine, si quid Parisiensium civium fides de republica
Christiana atque adeo Apostolica sede promeruit, si quid nobilissimi Regni
pessum euntis, and jamja^ haeresi colla subdituri, universamque Ecclesiam eodem
motu concussuri causa atque periculum, si quid bonorum omnium, and testamentum
Patrum relantium fletus movere eum debet, qui in apice Ecclesiae constitutus,
ut confirmet fratres divinitus monitus est, vestram (P. B.) paternam
providentiam per eum qui est, qui erat, qui venturus est omnipotens,
obtestamur, ut in re tanta, tam periculosa, tanti in reddenda ratione apud
summum judicem momenti futura, quam res ipsa necessariam esse clamat,
sollicitudinem ac curam adhibere, and quae antea diximus, quaeque iterum
devotissime petimus donare ac tribuere non gravetur. Denique non committat, ut
Sixto V. Pont. fidem in Christianissimo regno periisse, aut non satis per nos
vestramque dignitatem tanto malo provisum fuisse posteri dicere jure possint.
Quod nos impetraturos ut speramus, sicuti sperare certe debemus, ita post
sanctissimcrum pedum oscula, Beatitudinem vestram uti nobis Deus Opt. Max. sic
diu incolumem servet, summis precibus ab co petimus atque obsecramus.

Beatitudinis vestrae Humillimi, Devotiss. and Obsequentiss. Filii, Cives
Parisienses, pro reliquo Catholicorum and Fidelium in Gallia coetu.
Parisiis, 14 Jan. 1589.

And now the Covenanters run into all manner of extravagancies against their
Sovereign, whom they no more call or acknowledge for King, terming him only
Henry de Valois, Heretic, Tyrant, and what not? throw down his Arms and
Statues, which they break to pieces, and drag along the streets: nay, so mad
were they, that to have but his Sc^lus putaba^ur morie plect^ndum, s^uts
Henricum R^gem ap^^^a^et, ant ta^ul^m ^us pi^um d^mi (...). Jo. de Buss to. 4.
^. 287. Journal.
Picture or to call him King, was thought crime enough to deserve death: yet
the Painters set themselves on work to draw him, but in the most ridiculous and
shameful habits and postures their zealous phansies could invent.

And their Priests were as wicked as the worst of them, thundering from their
Pulpits all manner of falsities and accusatious against him, accusing him of
Magic and Witchcraft, persuading their Auditors to fight against that Belial,
to give no quarter to him nor his friends; for the Kingdom was sick, and
nothing could cure it but a good draught of French blood. Some made little
Images of him in Wax, which they set on the Altars whilst Mass was saying,
then mumbling some old Wives Charms, pricked the Images to the heart, thinking
by that way of Witchery to kill the King. Others carried lighted Tapers up and
down, repeating several superstitious words, and putting out their Lights,
thinking so to hasten his death.

Others employed their Wits to render him odious, making many De insta Hen.
III. ab^ic. ^. 4. 38
wicked and malicious Anagrams of him, as HENRI DE VALOIS:
Anagram,
Vilain Herodes: or Julian Herodes: or
De horse le Vilain: or Ha, ruin de Loys!
HENRYC DE VALOIS:
Anagram,
O Crudelis Hyena!
HENRICUS TERTIUS DE VALLESIO:
Anagram,
O Deus! vere ille This it may be was in opposition to that Anagram made
formerly of this HENRICUS TERTIVS, Anagr. In te vere Christus.
Antichristus:
and such like. And for Libells and Satyrs they were innumerable, the Press and
Pen laboring continually with infamous Defamations against their Sovereign.

And now they consult how to carry on their designs; and first they run to the
Parliament at Paris, seizing on all whom they thought to favor the King,
clapping them up in the Bastillc; the Rump, or those who complied with the
people, being about CLX in number, chose Barnabe Brisson for their President,
one of great Learning as his Works testify; but whether his Zele or Fickleness
might engage him in this action I know not, or whether his fear of the peoples
fury should he refuse it; and I meet with a Protestation said to be his, and by
him subscribed, Journal, 1589, 22 Jan.
declaring his Innocence, how he was forced to do what he did: Be it as 'twill,
the Leaguers were pleased to have a man of his Repute, Honesty, and Learning,
to seem to espouse their Cause.

To maintain this war and their designs, which they called THE HOLY UNION, the
people contributed with abundance of freedom, insomuch that Moneys which had
been whoorded up for many years, now flew plentifully abroad, and the Women or
Holy Sisters are never behind in wicked Zele: most of the Cities and Provinces
revolt from the King, and so the war is carried on against one another under
diverse Titles.

The Kings Party is sometimes called The Covenanting Party is sometimes called
Royalists Leaguers Minions or Favorites Covenanters Huguenots Catholics
Heretics Confederates Navarrists Rebels Politics Holy Union Bearnoises [K. of
Navarre born in that Territory. Lorrainers Les Ma^eutres, or Mad Hacksters, now
corruptly Hectors. Guisards or Gusians Zealots Bandees blanches or Escarpes
blanches, i. e. White Forces or White Scarfs. The Godly Party

White was the Colors of the Kings Party, especially the King of Navarre
always wore it, he and those for him wearing white Ribands or white Scarfs: the
Color worn by the Leaguers was commonly Green, though some in imitation of the
Spaniards wore Red.

Besides the former long Letter to the Pope, they sent others also to several
Cardinals, in which they renounced all Acknowledgments to the King, still
calling him in their Letters only The late King of France; and the same
Complements they afforded the King of Navarre: and the better to gain their
designs, they sent to Rome to agitate their Affairs with the Pope these four
active Blades:

Le Sieur de Dieu, Knight, and Commander of the Order of Saint John of
Jerusalem.

Mr. Lazare Coquelei, Counselor in the Parliament of Paris.

Jean de Piles, Abbot of Orbais, who had formerly been at Rome in behalf of the
League, 1586, 1587.

Pierre Frison, Dean of Rheims.

To these they gave several private Instructions (30 in number;) the sum of
them being to this purpose:

To wait upon the Pope, and tell him of their Affairs in France. To inform him
of the Massacre at Bloys, and aggravate them by the circumstances, as the Time,
Place, Manner, and Breach of promise. To justify all the actions of Guise,
with the necessity of his former taking up Arms, with the willingness of the
Leaguers to come in to the King, (though they were very powerful) when he
promised to fight the Heretics. How the designs of the contrary Party was to
ruin the Clergy. To satisfy him of the Barricades in Paris, as that the King
designed to murder the good Catholic people. How the Catholics are very
hardly used, whilst the Favorers of Heretics are preferred; which plainly
discovers the heart of the late King, (i. e. Henry) whose abominable
wickedness and hypocrisy they must also discover. How he has now joined
himself with the Heretics, is no good Romanist, has no reverence for
Religion, being at Church sometimes with bis Hat on. To tell him the Reasons
why they chose Mayenne for their Head or Chief. That for their parts they will
neither spare their lives nor estates in this quarrel, and so to desire his
assistance to afford them his spiritual and temporal Treasures, to pronounce
some Decree against this cruel Tyrant, not to entertain or hear his
Ambassadors and Messages. To send forth a Jubilee through all Christendom, to
implore Gods assistance. To grant a Croisado, that all good Catholics might
help them. To excommunicate all that oppose them. To send a Legate into their
Army, that all may know that the Pope undertakes their quarrel. To desire that
all Catholic Princes would enter into a League in defense of their Religion,
etc.

SENAULT.
25 May, 1589.
Nay, the Sorbonists were so zealous, that some one or other having Mem. de l^i
Ligue, v^l. 3. p 557.
drawn up a short Paper, containing the reasons of taking up Arms against the
King, and it concluding,

XIII. How one Bodille being no more then a Gentleman, yet because Childeric
See backw^rd^, l. 3. c. 4. 2.
II. had caused him publicly to be whipped, the said Bodille took thence
occasion to kill that King, for which he is commended by Historians: and
therefore may not the Injury done to a better then Bodille, viz. to a brave
Prince (Guise) be also revenged?

So zealous (I say were the Doctors of Sorbonne, that having red over this
Tract they approved it, affirming nothing was in it contrary to the Roman
Church,

J^lie^ de Moranne.
17 May, 1589.
Nor is this all, for the people being obliged to pray for their King by the
Canon of the Missale, some of the City of Beauvois (in la France, about midway
betwixt Paris and Amiens) upon this made a scruple whether they were not
thereby obliged to pray for Henry de Valois, seeing they used to pray for --
Our King Henry.

Whereupon it was concluded by the Sorbonne, that in any prayer 5 Apr. 1589.
whatever the word Henry should not be expressed, that he should not be prayed
for, and that it should be dashed out of all Prayers or Collects: and further,
if any of their Faculty of Paris agree not to this, they shall also be held
culpable and guilty of Excommunication, deprived of the Prayers and Privileges
of the said Faculty.

And it was also concluded, that instead of these words -- For our King -- some
prayers shall be drawn up for the Catholic or Leaguing Princes, which
accordingly was done.

In the mean time many places joining with the Leaguers, amongst the rest those
of Lions drew up a long and tedeous Declaration, wherein they say,

That Lions has formerly been one of the most Loyal Cities in 2 March, 1589.
France.

That Obedience may be wronged by being too much or too little.

That therefore for the future they will consider all the Kings commands,
whether they are for the better or worse, and accordingly obey or oppose.

That Kings being appointed by God for two ends, to preserve Religion, and keep
the people from oppression, that therefore they will and ought to oppose all
commands contrary to these two ends.

That seeing he has violated the Edict of Union, killed and imprisoned the
good Romanists, countenanced the Heretics, favored Espernon and his
creatures; therefore they have entered into the Holy Union, taken up Arms,
resolving to take the King from his b^d Council, which if they had not done
they had been worse then Jews.

That to say Kings ought not to be resisted upon any occasion is false
Doctrine, seeing they are only to be obeyed conditionally, viz. in that which
is not prejudicial to Religion, Gods Service, and the good of the State.

Doubt not but God will bless their good Undertakings: And so after the telling
of some stories conclude.

This done, they draw up a Form of an Oath, whereby they swear to 12 March.
these Articles:

To continue in the Roman Religion. To defend their City of Lions. To preserve
the Foreign Merchants in their Privileges. To act in defense and behalf of those
of Paris. To obey no Command whatever that is prejudicial to their Union. To
observe exactly the Edict of Union. To obey the Duke of Nemours their
Governor. To stick close one to another. And desire all good people to join
with them.
And for their further encouragement those of Paris send a Letter to these
Hotspurs of Lions, wherein they mind them

Of the Killing and Imprisonments at Bloys.

That the Assassinates had no other design in it but to ruin Religion, bring
in Heresy, maintain their Tyrannies, and to bring all good people into
slavery.

So being Frenchmen and Catholics we are bound to defend our Religion and
Estate against any he who it will; and by all Obligations of Religion, Law,
Nature, and Interest, we must not leave the Kingdom to the mercy of this
prodigal, perjured, cruel, and murdering Prince.

That the two Henry's are agreed, Heresy allowed of, the Catholics
persecuted, and all things seem to go as in England.

Therefore rowse up and take courage against these oppressions, and send some
of yours to consult with us, and afford us your assistance.

SENAULT.
Paris, 25 May.

Nay, so confident were they in their courses, that they sent a Letter Mem. d^
M. de Nevers, vol. 2. p. 205. -- horse d'icelle, il ^'y a point de salut, soit
au Ciel ou en la Terre
to the Citizens of Nevers, exhorting them to stick close to this Cause,
assuring them that without so doing -- There was no hopes for their salvation
either in Heaven or Earth.

Whilst these things were doing, the Swordmen and their Counselors were not
idle; for the Duke of Mayenne no sooner hears of his brother Guise's death, but
he consults his own security, secureth many strong places to his Interest, and
at last gets to Paris, where he was received with all demonstrations of joy and
honor: and here he falls to work how to carry on the war, and such a vogue
with the multitude had this Holy League, that strong places and Cities daily
submitted themselves to its Authority: nay, a Company of Bumkin
Tatterdemallians in Normandy, to the number of Sixteen thousand, having rose on
their own heads, and for their own Interest, resolving to defend themselves and
goods against any whatsoeve^ be he Royalist or Leaguer, that should come into
their Country, were at last by the persuasion of some Priests and Jesuits
wheeled over to fide with the Covenanters; but having no experience and but
poorly armed, were quickly routed by the Duke of Montpensier. These Clubmen
were afterward called the Gautiers, from the little Town la Chapelle Gautier
in higher Normandy, where they first began their Insurrections or Rendezvouz'd.

The King in the mean time had writ friendly Letters to the Duke of Mayenne,
giving him reasons for the death of his brother, persuading him to live
quietly; but Madam de Montpensier (his zealous sister) and other thoughts would
not let him hearken to the Kings desires: so at Paris he is made Head of the
Covenanters, and declared Lieutenant General of the Crown of France: the
Sixteen and others would have had him to take upon him the Title of Perefixe
Hist. Hen. le Grand.
King, but this he refused, however he had all the Power. They broke the Kings
Great Seal, making another in its stead, on one side of which was the Arms of
France, with this Inscription:

THE SEAL OF THE KINGDOM OF FRANCE. On the other side was an empty Throne,
about which was this:

CHARLES DUKE OF MAYENNE, Lieutenant of the Estate and Crown of FRANCE. Mayenne
thus entered as it were into the Throne, appointed a Council consisting of
Their Names may be seen in Jan de Serres, l'Inventaire.
XL of the chiefest Covenanters, and this was called The General Council of the
Union, which with his assistance was to treat of and conclude all the most
weighty business; however the Council of Sixteen was left chiefly to look to
Paris, and now was added to the former Oaths this new one: We do all swear to
be obedient to the General Council of Catholics newly appointed at Paris, and
also engage as much as in us lies to see it submitted to by others, and
whatsoever shall be there ordained to be accomplished.

But a little after Mayenne added some other of his Creatures to this Council,
the better to bring them to his lieur.

And now the Leaguers prosecute the war against the King every where, though he
freely offers all pardon that will acknowledge him for their King, and sends to
Mayenne again and again to have Peace made, but this the Duke absolutely
denies, nor will allow so much as a Truce, though Moresini the Cardinal Legate
interposed for the gaining of it; so that the King is obliged to proclaim
Mayenne and all his Adherents Traitors, and to remove the Parliament and Courts
of Paris to Tours by Proclamation, himself then residing there, and many of the
Loyal Parlement-men had fled to him from Paris.

Yet for all the low condition of the King, and the great power of the
Leaguers, the City of Senlis testified their Loyalty; for though at first Ant.
Colynet, p. 392, 393.
that place had adhered to the Guisards, yet now upon honester thoughts they
declare for the King, upon which it was closely besieged and battered by the
Duke of Aumale and the Parisians; and being put to some straits, and summoned
to yield, they promised to make answer next morning, which they did by hanging
out a Pourtraicture over the Walls* by them newly painted, wherein was
represented the Dukes of Mayenne and Aumale hanging on Gibbets, and their
sister Catharine Duchess of Montpensier kneeling at their feet, tearing her
hair, weeping and bewailing their sad misfortune: at last the Siege was raised,
and so these Royalists escaped the fury of the Leaguers.

But not to trouble my self with their fights and skirmishes, the King seeing
the Covenanters resolved to ruin him, and seeing no means for his own
preservation but to throw his thoughts upon the King of Navarre, (though above
all things he abhorred an Huguenot) who had under his command a good
experienced Army, and from whom he need not doubt of assistanee, Navarre having
by a Manifesto protested against the Covenanting Rebellion, and proferred his
service to fight against them in behalf of the French King.

In short: A Peace or Truce was concluded between these two Kings, at which the
Spanish Ambassador Bernardino Mendoza forsakes the Vide d'Aubigne tom. 3. l.
2. c. 30, ^1.
Court without taking leave, goes to Paris, resideth with the Covenanters,
where he became an active Instrument to carry on the Spanish designs; and
Cardinal Morosini (the Popes Legate) quits the Kingdom for Rome: And now was it
that the Kings Name was dashed out of all Prayers as aforesaid. And though the
King had used great means and Interest to get the good will of Pope Sixtus V.
yet the Agitators of the League were so persuasive and prevalent at Rome, that
the King is not only denied, but a Monitory Bull is thundered out against him,
whereby he incurred the Censure if within 30 days he released not Cardinal
Bourbon and the Archbishop of Lions, and gave him notice of it, and within 60
days to make his due submission to the Pope for the death of Cardinal Guise:
and if these things were not done, he should then be no King, nor his Subjects
bound to obey him, but absolutely free from their Oaths of Allegiance.

The Bull it self being not to be met with in any of the Roman Bullaria, and so
very difficult to be had, take as follows.

SIXTUS Episcopus, Servus servorum Dei, ad futuram rei memoriam.
Inscrutabilis Divinae Providentiae altitudo, cujus nutu coelestia simul and
terrena gubernantur, Apostolorum principi beato Petro, ejusque successoribus
Romany Pontificibus, Claves regni Coelorum ac totius Apostolicae tradidit
plenitudinem potestatis, simulque supra soliditatem ejus fidei suam sanctam
aedificavit ecclesiam, secundum verax Domini verbum, Ego dico tibi, quia tu es
Petrus, and super hanc petram aedificabo Ecclesiam meam, and portae Inferni non
proevalebunt adversus eam, and tibi dabo claves regni coelorum; and quodcunque
ligaveris super terram erit ligatum in coelis, and quodcunque solveris super
terram erit solutum and in coelis.

Unde nos ad sacrosanctam ejusdem Beati Petri Cathedram (meritis licet
imparibus) divina disponente clementia vocati, and in throno justitiae
constituti; and secundum Hierimiae propheticam vocem, Ecce constitui te super
gentes and super regna, ut evellas and destruas, disperdas and dissipes,
aedifices and plants; supremam in omnes Reges ac Principes universae terrae,
cunctosque populos, gentes and nationes, non humana sed divina Institutione
nobis traditam potestatem obtinentes, ipsum Dominum imitari debemus, qui pius
and misericors ultionem ^ei, qui illum praevenit, paratam temperat, and quos
impoeniteutes videt non prius severa vindicta coercet, quam antea comminetur:
In assidue autem peccantes and in peccatis perseverantes, cum excessuum
gravitas misericordiae fines transierit, ut saltem timore poenae ad
poenitentiam redeant, coelestia justitiae arma exercet. Ita and nos quoque pro
commisso nobis a Deo universalis Ecclesiae regimine, salubriter cogimur
providere, ^e per insidias humani generis hostis, eorum salus qui curae nostrae
crediti sunt, in exitium ruat, aut in discrimen adducatur; sed peccatores
paterna nostra monitione and redarguatione, aut corrigantur ab erroribus and ad
poenitentiam revertantur, aut si charitatis zelus per exhortationis and
monitionis remedia nihil proficiat, ipsique incorrigibiles apparuerint, tandem
spiritualis gladii mucrone non ad perniciem sed ad salutem vibrato, veluti
putrida membra a sincero Ecclesiae corpore (quod ab omni macula purum custodire
debemus) abscindantur and seperentur.

Sane cum superioribus mensibus ad aures nostras, non sine ingenti animi nostri
perturbatione and horrore, fama publica ita reference and increbrescente,
pervenisset; and deinde per literas dilecti filli nostri Joannis Francisci
(tituli Sanctorum Nerei and Archilei, Presbyteri Cardinalis Mauroceni
nuncupati, nostri and Sedis Apostolicae in Regn) Franciae de latere Legati)
certiores facti fuissemus, quemadmodum etiam notorium universis existit: Quod
Henricus III. Francorum Rex, Ludovicum bonae memoriae Sanctae R. E. Presbyterum
Cardinalem Guisium, Metropolytanae Ecclesiae Rhemensis Archiepiscopum, seu
perpetuum administratorem, ac nostrum and Sedis Apostolicae Legatum natum, capi
and in carcere conjici, ac die sequenti in vigilia Nativitatis Domini nostri
Jesu Christi necari: necnon dilectum filium nostrum Carolum (Tituli Sancti
Chrysogoni, ejusdem Sanctae Ecclesiae Presbyterum Cardinalem Borbonium,
Avenionensis Civitatis and Comitatus Venaisini, nostrum etiam and Sedis
Apostolicae de latere Legatum:) ac venerabilem fratrem nostrum Archiepiscopum
Lugdunensem, pro quo nos eodem tempore idem Henricus Rex, ut illum in Sanctae
R. E. Cardinalem assumeremus instanter rogabat, similiter capi, ac etiam in
carcerem detrudi, and in eo custodiri mandaverit, prout etiam capti and
carcerati impraesentiarum existunt, detinentur and custodiuntur, in
Excommunicationis sententias and alias censuras Ecclesiasticas and poenas, in
sacris Canonibus ac diversis Constitutionibus (tam generalibus quam
particularibus) Sanctorum Generalium Conciliorum and Summorum Romanorum
Pontificum praedecessorum nostrorum, ac in literis nostris die Coenae Domini
legi consuetis, contentas and promulgatas, una cum consciis, complicibus,
fautoribus, defensoribus and receptoribus, ac iis qui consilium, auxilium,
opem, operam, custodiam and ministerium praebuerunt, tulerunt and
praestiterunt, incurrendo.

Nos qui dictum Henricum Regem paterna charitate and praecipuo amore semper
complexi and prosecuti fuimus, non potuimus ob hujusmodi delictorum and
sacrilegiorum atrocitatem non maximo affici dolor and moerore, prout alias in
Consistorio nostro secreto coram venerabilibus fratribus nostris S. R. E.
Cardinalibus retulimus, ac dolentes conquesti fuimus: dumque expectabamus quod
idem Henricus Rex facti poenitens, and culpam suam agnoscens ad cor rediret,
and dictos Carolum Cardinalem and Petrum Archiepiscopum carceratos relaxaret
and liberos dimitteret, and absolutionem a praemissis humiliter postularet,
prout soepe soepius Joanni de Vivonne Marchioni de Pisanni Ordinario, and
Hieronymo Gondio Extraordinario, suis apud nos Oratoribus, and etiam venerabili
fratri Claudio Episcopo Coenomanensi, ab eo ad nos specialiter destinato,
paterno affectu significavimus, and vehementer hortati sumus, ipse Henricus
Rex, non ut vere poenitens, nec peccatum sincere confitens, nec ea cordis
humilitate qua debebat, and quemadmodum fideles and poenitentes Reges and
Principes hactenus fecerunt, absolutionem hujusmodi a nobis postulare curavit,
verum salutaria ac paterna nostra consilia non amplectens, usque in hodiernum
diem eosdem Carolum Card. and Petrum Archiepisc. distulit dimittere and
liberare.

NOS igitur, qui licet ad Declarationem contra eundem Henricum Regem super
praedictis antea procedere potuissemus, nihilominus pro paterna ac singulari
nostra erga eum pietate, and pro Regii honoris dignitate benign cum eo agendo,
ipsum plusquam par erat (jam enim quintus agitur mensis) ut resipisceret
expectavimus, non possumus nec debemus amplius differ, quin his malis pro
ejusdem Henrici Regis animae salute and conservatione, quae nobis prae omnibus
charior and antiquior semper fuit, Canonica and opportuna remedia adhibeamus.
Sed cum ex debito Pastoralis Officii cunctorum Christi fidelium, praesertim
vero S. R. E. Cardinalium, etiam Praelatorum securitati consulere and providere
teneamur, ne cum tanto Regni Franciae and totius Christiani orbis scandalo, and
nostrae Sedis Apostolicae dignitatis discrimine, dicti Carolus Card. Barbonius
and Petrus Archiep. Lugdunensis diutius in carceribus detineantur, neve a nobis
de hujusmodi neglecta cura ac muneris nostri administratione in districto Dei
judicio rationem reddere cogamur, de venerabilium fratrum nostrorum ejusdem S.
R. E. Cardinalium consilio and assensu, ac matura deliberatione praehabita,
praedictum Henricum Regem per viscera misericordiae, and aspersionem sanguinis
Dei and Domini nostri Jesu Christi, quo and per quem humani generis Redemptio
facta est, ex toto cord hortamur, atque authoritate Apostolica tenore
praesentium primo, secundo, and tertio monemus, requirimus, ac eidem virtute
Sanctae Obedientiae praecipimus and mandamus, quatenus ab hujusmodi
carceratione and detentione dictorum Caroli Card. and Petri Archiep.
carceratorum, sive sub custodia, aut alias quomodolibet detentorum desistendo,
illo per se vel alium, seu alios intra terminum december dierum immediate
sequentium a die publicationis praesentium, modo and forma infrascriptis
faciendae, omni postposita mora, exceptione vel excusatione aut praetextu,
libere dimittere and liberare, ac in pristinam and plenam libertatem cum omni
securitate, tuto commeatu ac recessu, realiter and cum effectu restituere and
reponere, teneatur and debeat, seu libere dimittat, liberet, atque in pristinam
and plenam libertatem cum omni securitate, tuto commeatu ac recessu restituat
and reponat, seu dimitti, liberari, restitui and reponi (ut praemittitur)
faciat and mandet; ac de eorundem Caroli Card. and Petri Archiep. libera
dimissione and liberatione, and in pristinam and plenam libertatem cum omni
securitate, tuto commeatu atque recessu, restitutione and repositione, per suas
literas Regia manu and sigillo subsignatas, seu per publicum and authenticum
Instrumentum, ad nos and Sedem Apostolicam transmittendas, intra triginta dies
a die dicta dimissionis and liberationis, intra ipsos december dies faciendae,
numerandos, doceat and certioresreddat.

Quod si praedictus Henricus Rex paternis his nostris exhortationibus,
monitionibus and requisitionibus, ac mandato non paruerit, and intra praedictos
december dies eosdem Carolum Card. and Petrum Archiep. non libere dimiserit aut
liberaverit, and in pristin. plenam libertatem cum omni securitate, tuto
commeatu and recessu non restituerit vel reposuerit, seu libere dimitti,
liberari, restitui and reponi non fecerit (ut praefertur;) and de libera
dimissione, liberatione, restitutione and repositione praedictis nos (ut supra)
intra dictos triginta dies non docuerit, aut certiores non reddideret, ipsum
quidem Henricum Regem, ac omnes and quoscunque qui in notoria violenta manuum
injectione, captura, carceratione, detentione and nece praedictis conscii,
accomplices and fautores fuerunt, quive consilium, auxilium and opem, operam,
custodiam and ministerium praebuerunt, tulerunt and praestiterunt, cujuscunque
conditionis, status, gradus, ordinis and dignitatis tam Ecclesiasticae quam
mundanae exsistant, in Excommunicationis majoris sententiam and Anathematis
vinculum, and alias Censuras Ecclesiasticas, in praedictis sacris Canonibus and
Constitutionibus generalibus and particularibus, atque in literis die Coenae
Domini legi consuetis, contentas and promulgatas damna biliter incurrisse and
incidisse, ex part Omnipotentis Dei and beatorum Petri and Pauli Apostolorum
ejus authoritate and nostra, and nunc prout ex tunc dicimus, pronunciamus and
declaramus, illumque and illos universis Christi fidelibus excommunicatos, and
ab unitate corporis Christi seperatos, and ut tales ab ipsis omnimodo vitandos
palam and public denunciamus.

Et nihilominus eundem Henricum Regem, ac universos and singulos praedictos
conscios, accomplices, fautores, defensores and receptores, quive consilium,
auxilium, favorem, opem, operam, custodiam and ministerium in praemissis
praebuerunt, tulerunt and praestiterunt, tam super dictis publica and notoria
violenta manuum injectione in praefatos Ludovic. Card. Guisium, Carolum Card.
Borbonium, and Petrum Archiep. Lugdunens. and illorum captura and detentione,
quam nece ejusdem Ludovici Card. and aliis criminibus and excessibus desuper
admissis, ac latius deductis, and deducendis and exprimendis, eadem Apostolica
authoritate, primo, secundo and tertio monemus, requirimus and citamus,
quatenus ipse Rex perse, vel alium seu alios, suum vel suos, procuratorem seu
procuratores, legitimum seu legitimos, sufficienti ad id mandato instructum seu
instructos; reliqui vero personaliter per seipsos, intra terminum 60 dierum a
die executionis and publicationis praesentium computandorum, (quorum 60 dierum
20 pro prima, alios vero 20 pro secunda, reliquos autem 20 pro tertia and
ultima canonica monitione, ac ultimo and peremptorio termino eisdem praefigimus
et assignamus) coram nobis comparere teneantur et debeant, ad dicendum,
opponendum et allegandum; quare non debeant d^clarari et denuntiari propter
hujusmodi violentam manuum injectionem, comprehensionem, necem, et detentionem
personarum Card. et Archiep. respective et alia praemissa, in alias sententias
et poenas spirituales et temporales in praedictis sacris Canonibus et
Constitutionibus contentas et inflictas, incurrisse et incidisse, et quare tam
ejusdem Henrici Regis quam aliorum supradictorum feudatarii, subditi et
vassalli propterea a juramento fidelitatis, quo ei vel eis quomodolibet
astringuntur, absolvi, vel illi jam absoluti declarari non debeant, et alias
super praemissis ad se legitime excusandos et defendendos.

Alioqui etiam ipso Henrico Rege, vel suo legitimo procuratore, seu legitimis
procuratoribus non comparentibus, aut consciis, complicibus, fautoribus, et
aliis praed. etiam in executione praesentium (si videbitur) nominandis
personaliter non comparentibus, aut etiam compar. et nihil quod ipsos legitime
excusare vel defend. valeat, aut relevare possit adducentibus; Nos nihilominus
etiam nulla alia monitione vel citatione praecedente, (nisi forsan per officium
Audientiae contradictorum, si nobis visum fuerit) procedemus, justitia mediante
ad omnes and singulos actus in praemissis quomodolibet necessarios and
opportunos, etiam usque ad praedictarum sententiarum and poenarum in eisdem
sacris Canonibus and Constitutionibus contentarum and inflictarum, seu illarum
incursus declarationem and denunciationem, necnon ad Absolutionem seu
Absolutionis declarationem funda^oriorum subditorum and vassallorum a juramento
Fidelitatis, quo tam eidem Henrico Regi, quam aliis supradictis quomodo libet
tenentur vel astringuntur, prout juris fuerit, and ordo dictaverit rationis.

Caterum ab Excommunicationis majoris, Anathematis vinculo, and aliis censuris
praedictis, nec ipse Henricus Rex nec ullus alius praedictorum, neque etiam in
foro Conscientiae a quocunque seculari, vel cujusvis ordinis regulari
Presbyteris, vel Praelato quavis dignitate and authoritate fungente, nisi a
nobis vel Romano Pontifice pro tempore existente, and praeterquam in mortis
articulo, nec tunc nisi de stando Ecclesiae mandatis and satisfaciendo
praestita cautione absolvi possint, etiam praetextu quarumvis facultatum and
indultorum, etiam occasion Jubilei plenarii vel Cruciatae sanctae, seu
Confessionalium, quibuscunque personis Ecclesiasticis secularibus and quorumvis
ordinum, etiam Mendicantium and Militiarum, Regularibus, etiam Episcopali, vel
alia majori dignitate praeditis, ipsisque Ordinibus, ac eorum Monasteriis,
Conventibus and Domibus ac Capitulis, Collegiis, Confraternitatibus,
Congregationibus, Hospitalibus and locis piis, necnon Laicis, etiam eidem
Henrico Regi and forsan aliis Franciae Regibus ac caeteris personis
supradictis, per nos and dictam Sedem and cujusvis Consilii decreta, verbo,
literis aut quacunque scriptura in genere vel in specie concessorum,
innovatorum, etiam si in eis casus in literis die Coenae Domini legi soliti
expressi comprehenduntur, nisi de praesentibus nostris literis specifica and
expressa, non autem per clausulam, quorum tenores, aut alias quascunque
clausulas generales idem importantes, mentio fiat.

Nonobstantibus Privilegiis, Indulgentiis and literis Apostolicis generalibus
vel specialibus, etiam ipso Henrico Regi, ac ejus praedecessoribus seu aliis
supradictis, vel eorum alicui seu aliquibus aliis, cujuscunque ordinis, status
vel conditionis, dignitatis and praeeminentiae fuerint, etiam si Pontificali,
Regali, seu quavis Ecclesiastica and mundana praefulgeant dignitate, vel eorum
Regnis, Provinciis, Civitatibus, seu locis a praedicta Sede ex quavis causa,
etiam per viam Constitutionis perpetuae, contractus aut remunerationis, and sub
quavis alia forma and tenore, ac cum quibusvis clausulis, etiam derogatoriarum
derogatoriis concessis and sapius approbatis and innovatis, etiam continentibus
quod Excommunicari, Anathematizari vel Interdici non possint per literas
Apostolicas, non facientes plenam and expressam ac de verbo ad verbum de
Indulto hujusmodi, ac de ordinibus, locis, nominibus propriis, cognominibus and
dignitatibus eorum mentionem, necnon consuetudinibus and aliis quibuslibet
observantiis scriptis vel non scriptis, per quae contra has nostras literas,
sententias and censuras, quominus eis ligentur and afficiuntur, si juvare
valiant vel tueri.

Quibus omnibus eorum omnium tenores, ac si ad verbum nihil penitus omisso
insererentur praesentibus, pro expressis habentes, ad effectum praesentium
duntaxat specialiter and express derogamus, caeterisque contrariis
quibuscunque.

Ut autem praesentes nostrae literae ad ipsius Henrici Regis and aliorum
supradictorum notitiam facilius perveniant, seu pervenire possint, ad quos
personaliter monendos and citandos tutus his turbulentis temporibus non patet
accessus, prout nobis notorie constat, and praesentium tenore declaramus,
easdem nostras literas, tam in alma urbe nostra, and in Basilicae Principis
Apostolorum and Cancellariae Apostolicae valvis, ac in acie Campi Florae, per
aliquem ex Cursoribus nostris, quam etiam in partibus regni Franciae, in valvis
duarum vel trium ex infrascriptis sex Cathedralibus Ecclesiis, viz. Pictavensi,
Aurelianensi, Carnotensi, Meldensi, Agennensi, and Coenomanensi, more solito
legi and publicari, and inibi affigi, and per aliquod temporis spatium affixas
dimitti, eisque postmodum inde detractis, earum exempla in eisdem locis pariter
affixa relinqui mandamus.

Decernentes ut earundem literarum publicatio sic facta, tam contra eundem
Henricum Regem quam alios in praemissis conscios, accomplices, fautores,
defensores and receptores, ad eos qui consilium, auxilium, opem, operam,
custodiam and ministerium praebuerunt, tulerunt and praestiterunt, supradictos
and eorum quemlibet perinde arctet and afficiat, ac si literae ipsae eis vel
eorum singulis personaliter lectae and intimatae and insinuatae fuissent: cum
non sit verisimile ea, quae tam patenter and public facta fuerint, ipsos posse
quomodolibet ignorare.

Quia vero difficile foret praesentes literas ad singula loca deferri ad quae
oporteret, VOLUMUS, ut earum transcriptis, etiam impressis, manu publici
Notarii subscriptis, and sigillo personae in dignitate Ecclesiastica
constitutae obsignatis, eadem prorsus fides ubique gentium and locorum in
judicio and extra illud adhibeatur, quae eisdem originalibus adhibeatur, si
essent exhibita vel ostensa.

Nulli ergo omnino hominum liceat hanc paginam nostrae Hortationis, Monitionum,
Requisitionum, Praecepti, Mandatorum, Pronuntiationis, Declarationum,
Denunciationis, Citationis, Praefixionis, Assignationis, Decretorum,
Derogationis and Voluntatis infringere, vel ei ausu temerario contraire: Si
quis autem hoc attentare praesumpserit, Indignationem Omnipotentis Dei ac
beatorum Petri and Pauli Apostolorum ejus, se noverit incursurum.

Datum Romae apud Sanctum Petrum, anno Incarnationis Dominicae MDLXXXIX. tertio
nonas Maii, Pontificatus nostri anno quinto. A. de Alexiis. M. Vestrius
Barbianus.


And so wonderfully powerful was this Bull against Henry and his De justa
abdie. Hen. III. l. 4. c. 14. p. 418.
well-wishers, that they tell us by way of Miracle how one at Venice (but
offering to speak in behalf of the King) sunk presently down, and no sooner was
carried home but he died.

CHAP. VI. King Henry III. murdered by Friar Clement. The Pope's Speech in
Commendation of the Murder.
THe King as aforesaid being not a little perplexed at the late Papal Monitory
Bull, R. de Beaune (the Archbishop of Bourges) endeavored to comfort him, by
suggesting that the Pope would alter his mind when he better understood the bad
Designs of the League. To whom the King after a deep sigh replied, -- He
thought it very hard, that he who had ever fought and labored for Religion
should be rashly Excommunicated, because he would not suffer his own throat to
be cut by his Rebell-Subjects; since those who had Emperor Charles V. b^ his
General Lewis de Bourbon, anno 1527.
sacked Rome, and kept the Pope himself prisoner, had never been Excommunicated
-- But the King of Navarre (then present) gave him the best counsel and comfort
by his Answer, -- But they were Victorious, Sir: Let your Majesty endeavor to
conquer, and be assured the Censures shall be revoked: but if we be overcome,
we shall all die condemned Heretics.

Accordingly it was resolved to augment their Army as much as they could, to
lay siege to Paris (the Head of the Leaguers) which obtained would make all the
Kingdom submit, and the design of that siege would draw multitude of Soldiers
and Adventurers in hopes of good plunder. In short: what by the joining of the
two Kings Armies, by the coming in of the Swisses (raised by Monsieur de Sancy)
to the Forces of the Duke of Longueville, and other daily Additions and
Volunteers, the King presently found himself at the head of above forty
thousand fighting men.

With this strength he presently besieges Paris, which was such a cooler to
the Leaguers, what by the sickleness and cowardice of the people then (as
usually happens to such great Cities) what by the scarcity of Victuals, the not
sufficient number of Soldiers, nor Pay to encourage them, with their
stubbornness and threats to quit the Service if not presently paid and
victuall'd; with these Inconveniences (I say) the People and Soldiers were so
disheartened, that they were even ready to revolt, but that the Priests and
Friars affoarded them much encouragement, not only by their example in taking
up Arms themselves, but also by their Seditious Preachments, which usually
works very much upon the ignorant, and can countenance Knaves and Rebels to
act for their Interest, (that is) to do any wickedness and villainy whatever.
And lest any badge of Royalty should remain to put them in mind of their
Loyalty and Allegiance, the Cordeliers struck out the Head of the Figure of
J^urnal.
the King, which was painted kneeling before the High Altar of their Church;
the Jacobins also defaced the Kings Picture in their Cloisters.

But nothing did more persuade the people from a Revolt, then the assurance
which the Priests and other chief Leaguers gave them, that they should be freed
from their Enemies within a few days; in hopes of which the Citizens were more
active in opposition, though they understood not the means of such a delivery.

In the mean time the Council of Sixteen with some other Chieftains consult
their deliverance; the plot is not long finding out: for there then living in
Paris one Jaques Clement (a Friar of the Order of St. Dominick, commonly called
Jacobins) one very ignorant, and so more sturdy, bold, and apt for any
wickedness, of which he was more capable by his extravagant Davila p. 815, 816,
817, 857.
And Favyn H^st. de Navarre, p. 949.
Hist. des derniers troubles d: France, l. 5. fol. 6.
Satyr Menip. p. 125, 126, 127.
Laurence bocuhel Hist. de l. justi^^ criminelle de France, tit. 11. chapter 12.

Zele, and not a little augmented by the daily Preachments he had heard against
the King. Thus puffed up they used to call him Captain Clement; and thus
determined, he confesses that he is boldly inspired to kill the King. The
Father to whom he confessed it imparted it to Edmond Bourgain (Prior of the
Covent of Jacobins, and one of the chief Counselors of the League) who bid
Clement consider, whether it might not be a temptation of the Devil, and so
that he should fast and pray, begging of God to enlighten him what to do.

A little after Friar Clement returns, telling them that he now found himself
strengthened and confirmed for the deed: upon which they encourage and engage
him to it, telling him that he shall be well recompensed for the fact; if he
die, he shall surely fly to Heaven as a Saint, and be enrolled amongst the
Roman Martyrs on Earth; but if he live, he and his shall be provided for, that
he shall have a Bishopric if not a Cardinalship. And that Ant. C^l^net p. ^03.
there might be some hopes of his life, it is said that the Duchess of
Montpensier and others assured him, that there were many Leaguers and their
partakers in the Kings Guards, Camp, Court, Chamber, and his Council too, who
would be ready to assist, defend, and rescue him, if any danger should happen.

The Friar thus resolved, three things are next consulted of, viz. Access to
the King; The manner of Execution; And the Secrecy. As for the first, it was
concluded to get some Letters from Count de Brienne, or the Chief President
Achilles de Harlay (then Prisoners for their Loyalty in the Bastile) the sight
of which with the reverence of his Coat would get him admittance. As for the
second, nothing like a Stab with a Knife, which might conveniently be hid in
his wide sleeve. And lastly, to prevent that none should discover it before the
blow be given, the Gates should be ordered to be strictly shut, with sure
Guards and Watch at all Avenues, that none but himself should go out.

Well, the Monk has a Knife given him by the aforesaid Il recoit de son Prieur
un Coustea^. Favyn. ib.
Prior, which is impoison'd, and (as The mutability and wo^ering st^te. France,
printed in solio Anno 1597, page 132. Ant. Colynet p. 405.
some write) he entreated the Popes Legate to bless it and him for his better
speed; and Jan de Serres Inventaire.
others say, that he acquainted Father Cammolet and other Jesuits with his
design.

In brief: the Letters cunningly procured, as if to do the King some good
service, and thus prepared he goes to St. Cloud (a Village near Paris, where
the King then quartered) where he is seized on, examined, confesses his
business is to the King, to whom he has Letters and other secrets to deliver,
but such as he will discover to none but the King himself. The The Monk thus
believed is the next morning carried to the Kings Lodgings, where he presents
him with a Letter, which whilst the King is reading Clement pulls the Knife
out of his Friars sleeve, ^
stabbed the King in the belly, of which wound he died that night. And this
murder, was well timed for the Leaguers, the King having determined to storm
the City the next day. And thus ended the Line and Family of Valois by the
murder of this King Henry III. whose Commendations have been undertaken by
some of the French V^de ^'Espinel^e le Parnasse, tom. 1. fol. 315, 316, 329.
Delit. Poet. Gal. vol. 3. p. 114.
Poets, whilst others are as much against him.

As for the wicked Monk James Clement, he was [unadvisedly] instantly slain,
his body thrown out of the window, burnt by the Soldiers, and his ashes
scattered in the River, and upon him was made this Anagram:

Friar Jaques Clement:
Anagram,
It Is Hell that created me.
C'est l'enfer quim' a cree.
But on the other hand the Covenanters rejoice, throw off the mourning which
they had worn for Guise, appeared in their greatest glory, clad themselves in
flourishing green tossing Feathers, made Bonfires, had the Monks Picture made
and showed publicly, his Mother and Kindred Satyr Menip. p 128. Vide Mem. de
la Ligne, tom. 4. p. 14, etc. Thua^. l. 96.
sought out to be rewarded and gratified, the better to encourage others to the
like murder; nay had thoughts to set up his Statue in their Churches instead
of the Kings pulled down. And no sooner was the Siege raised but a Company of
them goes in Triumph to St. Cloud, (called so from a son of King Clodomire)
where the King and Monk were slain: and because the Friars body was burned as
aforesaid, so that they could procure none of it, they pared off the ground
which had been died with his blood, which as Holy Relics they place in a
Boat, intending to convey them to Paris to be worshipped as sanctified stuff by
the people: but see the luck on it, and the end of themselves in the height of
this their religious Trophy; a wind arises, turns over their Boat, whereby the
people and their Relics were lost and drowned.

As for the Preachers, they magnify the Action as Heroic and Noble: Burgoin
the foresaid Prior of the Jacobins compared him in his Sermons to Judith, the
murdered King to Holofernes, and the delivered City to Bethulia: Father Robert
(a Franciscan at Vendosme) publicly commends the deed: Dr. Boucher comes out
in Print by Authority of the Union in vindication of it, affirming it to have
been done Incredib^li bonorum omnium gaudio and exultatione. De^usta He^. III.
(...). l. 4. c. 23. Id. ^. 450, 451, 452, 453, 454, 455.
to the unspeakable joy of all good men; comparing the Friar to Ehud for
killing Eglon King of Moab; that he had done a greater work then Judith in
killing Holofernes, David Goliath, or Sampson his thousand men; observes a
Providential Miracle for honor of the Roman Church, viz. that it was committed
on the day of St. Peter's Feast ad vincula, and another for the preservation and
justification of the Sorbonne School and her Doctors, viz. that this Monk was
born at a Village called Sorbonne, in the Territory of the City Sens by the
lower Champaigne; at last abuses many Texts of Scripture in his commendation,
and will have the action ascribed to Quod factum nuper and probatum divinitus
etiam gratulamur. Id. epist. ded.
Heaven, to the no small comfort of the Covenanters: And we are also Tho. L^ns.
Consul. German. p. 281.
told, that Claudius Sanctius writ in vindication of this murder.

Nor will A^^l. p^^. Jean Chastel part. 3. c. 1. ^ p. 122.
Francois Veronne let him pass without a favorable nod. V. d. Jesuit. Sicar.
appendix, p 27^.
Another lays it down as a brave subject for Historians, Poets, Orators, and
Preachers to exercise their parts with, affirming it to be -- Tam generosum,
tam glorios^m, tam necessarium Gali^, tam utilem atque fructuosum, toti
Christiano orbi tam acceptam and approbitum ab authoritate Canonum, a Ratione,
Consilio and Sententia tot hominum sapientissimorum and devotis^imorum in
mundo. Ib. p. 272.
A generous and noble action, necessary for France, and profitable for
Christendom, agreeable to and approved of by the Authority of Canons, with the
reason, advice, and judgment of the wisest and godliest of men. To give all the
commendation and encomiums, which this Writer sets down at large of this
Optimus ille Jat^binus.
best of Jacobins, (as he calls the Villain) would be too tedcous: nor need I
here mention the impudence of James Cammolet the Jesuit, and the rest of the
Leaguers, who (if we may believe some English Roman See their Preface to the
Jesuits Catechism, 3. p. 2.
Priests themselves) would not give Absolution to the Gentry of France, unless
they would take Arms against their King Henry III. of whose murder thus one of
their Poets:

Qui Monachi virtutem habitu simulaverat olim,
Hunc Monachi virtus non simulata necat.
The counterfeited Monk his death does feel,
Being stabbed by one was Monk as true as Steel.
Nor need we question their commendations of this Parricide, since they held
him for a blessed Spondan. au. 1589. 17. Will. Warmingtons Moderate Pef^nce of
the Oatho o^ Allegiance, p. 147.
Martyr, not only in Words and Writing but in Pictures too, and this not only
in France but at Rome it self. And further it was the opinion of some, that if
this wicked Friar had been a Franciscan (Pope Sixtus V. being of that Order) as
he was a Dominican, he might have been declared a Saint.

And what opinion the Chieftains of Rome had of this action, may in part appear
by the Letter sent to the General Council of the Holy Union by Cardinal
Montalto, Nephew to Pope Sixtus; the which take thus:

Illustrissimi Domini,
Valde hic dubitabamus, number rumor de morte Henrici III. Gallia Regis verus
esset aut falsus. Nam licet is e^diversis locis ad nos adcurrebat, autorem
tamen clarum aut certum non habebat: quandoquidem id quod narrabatur fabulae
similius videbatur quam veritati. Verum adventus Nicolas Nivelle and Rollin
Tierry were the two Booksellers and Printers privileged and appointed at Paris
by the Holy Union to print and publish their affairs, as Jean Pellchotte was to
the Holy Union at Lions.
Nicolai Nivellii, civis Parisiensis, qui adhuc adpulit 25 die mensis
praesentis, cum literis quarto die scripti a Duce Mayennio ad sanctitatem ejus,
omne nobis dubium exemit. Idem attulit secum instrumenta publica Monitorii
Apostolici, in effectum illic producti: non habebat tamen literas ullas a vobis
ad sanctitatem ejus, quod ingratum sane ei accidit.

Quanquam autem dicta sanctitas ejus libenter cognovit liberatam esse Lutetiam,
and imminutas vires Hugonotorum, tristitia tamen non parva perfusa est, and
sum obstupefacta, audians tam magnum admodum and nobilem Regem, morte tam
miserabili peremptum, adeoque finem ejus conformem non fuisse illi, quem
sortiti sunt tot antecessores ejus, qui longa serie per plurima secula gloriose
regnarunt in Gallia, and postea ex hac vita in meliorem transiverunt cum gloria
sempiterna.

Verum quia sanctitas ejus desiderat (vel ut copiosius nomine ejus ad Ducem
Mayennium perscripsi) videre tandem, and quidem durante tempore Pontificatus
sui finem imponi turbis, tempestatibus, and miseriis funestissimis potentissimi
illius regni, utque extirpatis haeresibus, pristinam recuperet Majestatem suam,
floreatque ibi usus S. Catholicae, Apostolicae, Romanae Religionis nostrae;
ideo notum vobis facio, sanctitatem ejus paratissimam esse (siquidem
necessarium a vobis judicetur) ad mittendum Legatum Cardinalem, qui
necessitatibus vostris succurrat, partim suppeditando vobis milites and
pecunias (quas per Dei gratiam alibi
mutuo sumere haud oportebit) partim autoritate and consilio suo complures
principes alliciendo; ut ita eodem consilio juvetur, conservetur, and
promoveatur causa Dei, Fidei, and Religionis nostrae.

Sed quum apud nos, qui vestro nomine rem agere possit tam arduam sit nemo,
sanctitas ejus exhortatur vos, ut tempore provideatis, and quoad ejus primum
fieri potest; idque aut per literas, aut per Deputatum quempiam nostratim, cui
res vestrae omnes probe notae sint; aut mittendo ex professo quempiam e vestris
partibus, qui authoritate and ingenio polleat sufficienti tractando negotio tam
gravi and primario. Et quandoquidem constat, adversarios attonitos valde esse,
and quasi divino ictos fulmine; antequam unire iterum se, and consilium atque
vires corroborare possint: omnis ideo lapis movendus erit, ut TAM PRAECLARA ET
RARA OCCASIO ne amittatur, de qua dici aliud non possit, QUAM DIVINITUS A
POTENTI ET BENIGNA MANU DEI oblatam esse.

Et proinde sanctitas ejus exhortatur vos non tantum ut conservetis, sed etiam
amplificetis and propagetis concordiam and unanimitatem IN SANCTO VESTRO
FOEDERE; omnia siquidem pessum ac perditum irent, cum perpetuo nostro dedecore
atque damno, si inter vos and alios unitos vincula pacis and unionis firma
atque fortia non essent. Dominus noster adsit vobis spiritu sancti consilii
sui, and concedat vobis PLENAM VICTORIAM IN HOSTS NOSTROS, and Divinae ipsius
Majestatis.

Vestri studiosissimus ut Frater, A. Cardinalis MONTALTUS.
Roma, 26 Augusti, 1689.

Though by this Letter and what has been said it appears plainly, that the
Pope sided with the Covenanters; yet to sum up all, take here the Popes own
Speech, which he made in the Consistory to the Cardinals upon the Kings murder.

Animo meo saepe ac serio revolvens, mentisque aciem intendens in ea, quae
nuper Dei voluntate acciderunt, videor mihi vere posse illud Prophetae 1. 5.
Abacuch usurpare, -- Quia opus factum est in diebus vestris, quod nemo credet
cum narrabitur -- Mortuus est Rex Francorum per manus Monachi; nam ad istud
potest recte applicari, licet de alia re, nempe de incarnatione Domini, quae
omnia mira ac mirabilia superat: Propheta proprie locutus sit, sicut and
Apostolus Paulus eadem verba v. 41.
Actorum 13. ad Christi resurrectionem verissime refert.

Quando Propheta nominat opus, non vult innuere aliquid vulgar vel ordinarium,
sed rarum, insigne, ac memorabile facinus, quomodo de creatione mundi, -- Opera
manuum tuarum sunt Coeli -- Item, -- Requievit die septimo ab omni opere quod
patrarat -- Cum vero factum ait, eo verbo tale aliquid in Scripturis exprimi,
quod non temere, casu, fortuna, aut per accidens evenire dicitur; sed quod
expressa Dei voluntate, providentia, dispositione ac ordinatione obvenit. Ut
cum dicit Salvator, -- Opera quae ego facio vos facietis, and majora horum
facietis -- and similia in sacris literis plurima. Quod autem loquatur in
praeterito factum esse, id more aliorum Prophetarum facit, qui propter
certitudinem eventus solent saepe de futuris, ac si jam facta essent
praedicere. Dicunt enim Philosophi res praeteritas esse de necessitate,
praesentes de inesse, futuras de possibili tantum; ita illi loquuntur. Propter
quam certitudinem Isaias Propheta long ante vaticinatus est de morte Christi;
sic dixit, sicut in Act. Apost. c. 8. etiam recitatur, -- Tanquam ovis ad
occisionem ductus est, and sicuti agnus coram tondente se non aperuit os suum,
etc. -- Atque hoc de quo nunc verba facimus, and quod his diebus nostris evenit
vere insigne, memorabile, and pene incredibile opus est, nec sine Dei Opt. Max.
particulari providentia and dispositione perpetratum. Occidit Monachus Regem,
non pictum aut fictum in charta aut pariete, sed Regem Franciae, in medio
exercitus sui, milite and custodia undique septum, quod revera tale est, and ^o
modo effectum, ut nemo nunc credat cum narrabitur, and fortasse apud
posteritatem pro fabula reputabitur.

Quod Rex sit mortuus, vel etiam Frave Comparisons.
peremptus, facile creditur; sed eum sic sublatum, vix est credibile: sicut
Christum natum ex foemina statim assentimur; sed fi addas porro ex foemina
virgin ortum esse, tunc secundum hominem non assentior: ita etiam quod mortuus
sit Christus facile credimus, sed quod mortuus jam resurrexerit ad vitam, quia
ex privatione ad habitum non fit regressio, redditur secundum intellectum
humanum impossible, and propterea incredibile: quod homo ex somno, ex morbo,
etiam ex Syncope vel Exstasi resuscitatur, quia id saepe secundum naturam fit,
humanitus credimus; sed resurrexisse a mortuis ita secundum carnem videbatur
incredibile, ut Paulo apud Philosophos Athenienses de hac resurrectione
disserenti improperarent, quod esset novorum doemoniorum annunciator: and alii
(sicut D. Lucas narrat) irridebant, alii dicebant -- Audiemus te de hoc iterum
-- De talibus igitur, quae secundum naturae leges and ordinarium cursum fieri
non solent, dicit Propheta, -- Quod nemo credet cum narrabitur -- sed hujusmodi
tantum fidem adhibemus ex consideratione Omnipotentiae Divinae, and per
subjectionem intellectus nostri in obedientiam Fidei and obsequium Christi. Nam
hoc modo quod erat incredibile naturaliter fit credibile. Igitur qui secundum
hominem non credo Christum de virgin natum, tamen quando additur, hoc factum
esse supra naturae terminos per operationem Spiritus Sancti, tunc vero
assentior and credo. Ita quando dicitur, Christum ex mortuis resurrexisse,
humanitus non credo, sed cum id factum esse per divinam (quae in ipso erat)
naturam affirmatur, tunc omnino credo.

Eodem modo licet tantum Regem in medio exercitus, tot stipatum militibus, ab
uno simplici and imbelli Religioso occisum esse, secundum prudentiam carnis and
intellectum humanum sit incredibile, vel omnino impossible; tamen considerando
ex altera part gravissima Regis peccata, and specialem Dei Omnipotentis in hac
re providentiam, and quam inusitato and mirabili modo justissimam voluntatem
suam erga ipsum impleverit, omnino and firmiter credo.

Rem etenim istam tam grandem and inusitatam alio refer, quam ad particularem
Dei providentiam, (sicut quosdam ad alias causas ordinarias, vel etiam ad
fortunam and casum, aut similes accidentarios eventus perperam refer
intelligimur) prorsus non licet: sicut ii, qui totius facti seriem pressius
observant, facile videre possunt, ut^ plurima intervenerunt, quae ab homine
nisi Dei speciali concurrente auxilio, expediri non quiverunt. Et sane Regum ac
Regnorum rations, caeteraque tam rara tantique momenti negotia, a Deo temere
administrari non est existimandum.

Sunt in Sacra Historia nonnulla hujus generis, nec eorum quidquam potest alio
quam ad Deum authorem referri: tamen nihil est, ubi magis claret superna
operatio, quam in isto de quo nunc agimus. Lib. Maccab. 1. cap. 6. legimus,
Eleazarum, ut Regem populi Dei persecutorem ac hostem tolleret, seipsum certae
morti obtulisse. Nam in conflictu conspiciens Elephantem caeteris eminentiorem,
in quo videbatur Rex esse, concito cursu in mediam hostium turmam se
conjiciens, hinc inde viam vi sternens, ad belluam venit, atque sub eam
intravit, subjectoque gladio peremit, quae cadens oppressit Eleazarum and
extinxit.

Hic quoad zelum and animi robur, reique tentatae exitum, aliquid hujus nostri
simile cernimus, tamen in reliquis nihil est comparabile. Eleazarus erat miles,
armis James Clement a bett^r man then Eleazar.
and pugna exercitatus, in ipso proelio constitutus, ardoreque animi and furore
(ut fit) accensus: iste Monachus, proeliis ac pugnis non erat assuefact. and a
sanguine vitae suae instituto ita abhorrens, ut nec ex venae incisione fusum
cruorem forsan far potuerit. Ille noverat genus mortis, simulque locum
sepulturae suae, nempe quod ruina belluae inclusus magis quam oppressus suo
sepeliretur triumpho: iste mortem ac tormenta crudeliora and incognita
expectabat, sepulcroque se cariturum non dubitabat. Sed and alia multa
dissimilia sunt.

Nota quoque est insignis illa historia sanctae mulieris Judith, quae and ipsa
ut obsessam civitatem suam ac populum Dei liberaret, cepit consilium (Deo sine
controversia suggestore) de interimendo Holoferne hostilis exercitus principe;
quod and perfecit. In quo opere licet plurima, and apertissima supernae
directionis indicia appareant, tamen long majora divinae providentiae
argumenta in istius Regis occisione, The Mo^k more assisted by God then Judith.
ac civitatis Parisiensis liberatione; sicut certe quoad hominem, hoc fuit illo
magis difficile vel impossible. Nam illa sancta soemina intentionem suam
aliquibus urbis Presbyteris aperuit, portamque civitatis and custodiam
pertransiit illis praesentibus ac approbantibus, ut proinde scrutioni vel
explorationi, quae obsidionis tempore solet esse tam exacta, ut ne musca fere
sine examine egredi queat, non potuerat esse subjecta. Apud hosts vero, per
quorum castra and varias excubias transeundum erat, saepius explorata and
examinata cum foemina esset, nec quidquam haberet vel literarum vel armorum,
unde suspitio oriri potuit, deque adventu in castta, and a suis, fugae
probabiles reddens rations, facile dimittebatur. Sicut tam propter easdem
causas, quam propter sexum and formae excellentiam ad principem impudicum
introduci, and in temulentum facile quod designavi^ perficere valuit: ita illa.
Hic vero Religiosus aggressus est, and confecit rem long majorem, pluribusque
impedimentis ac tantis difficultatibus periculisque obsitam, ut nulla prudentia
aut astutia humana, nec alio modo, nisi aperta Dei ordinatione ac succursu
confici potnerit. Debebant obtineri literae commendatitiae ab iis, qui erant
contrariae Factionis, transeundum erat per eam urbis portam, qua itur ad castra
hostium, quae ita sine dubio in illis obsidionis angustiis custodiebatur, ut
cuncta haberent suspecta, nec cuique sine curiosissima exploratione, de
literis, nunciis, negotiis, armis pateret exitus. Sed iste (res mira!) vigiles
pertransiit sine examine etiam cum literis credentiae ad hostem, quae si
fuissent interceptae a civibus, sine mora ac sine ulteriori judicio de vita
fuisset actum, atque apertum hoc Divinae providentiae argumentum. Sed majus
miraculum est illud, quod idem mox fine omni exploratione transierit quoque
hostium castra, varias militum excubias, ipsamque corporis Regis custodiam, ac
totum denique exercitum, qui fere erat conflatus ex Haereticis, ipse Religiosus
exsistens, and in habitu ordinis sui, qui ita erat exosus talibus hominibus, ut
in illis locis quae paulo ante prope Parisios vi ceperunt, Monachos quosque vel
occiderint vel pessime tractaverint. Jud^th erat foemina, minimeque odiosa;
tamen examinata illa saepe, illa nihil secum tulit unde sibi oriretur
periculum: iste Monachus, and propterea odiosus ac suspectissimus, etiam cum
cullello ad hoc propositum praeparato, non in vagina condito (unde poterat esse
probabilis excusatio) sed nudo, ac in manica absc^ndito, quem si invenissent,
mox fuisset in crucem actus. Ista omnia clariora sunt particularis providentiae
divinae argumenta, quam ut negari queat: nec aliter fieri potuit, quam ut a Deo
occoecarentur oculi inimicorum ne agnoscerent illum.

Nam (ut antea diximus) licet quidam ista absurd tribuunt fortunae aut casui,
tamen nos hoc totum non alio referendum censemus, quam in Divinam voluntatem.
Nec profecto aliter factum crederem, nisi captivarem intellectum in obsequium
Christi, qui hoc modo admirabili and liberare civitatem Parisiensem (quam
variis viis intelleximus fuisse in summo discrimine, maximisque angustiis
constitutam) and istius Regis gravissima peccata punire, eumque tam infausta
and infami morte e medio tollere statuit.

Atque nos (dolentes sane) aliquoties praediximus fore, ut quemadmodum erat
familiae suae ultimus, ita aliquem insuetum and dedecorosum vitae exitum esset
habiturus. Quod me dixisse non solum Cardinalis Joiosa, Lenocortius, and
Parisiensis, sed etiam qui tunc apud nos residebat Orator, testes esse possunt.
Neque enim hic mortuos, sed viventes in testimonium hujusmodi verborum
nostrorum adhibemus, quorum isti omnes probe meminisse possunt. Quicquid tamen
in hunc infelicem Regem hoc tempore dicere cogimur, nullo modo volumus ut
pertineat ad nobilissimum illud Galliae Regnum, quod nos in posterum, sicut
hactenus, semper omni paterno amore ac honor prosequcmur.

De persona ergo Regis tantum ista cum dolor diximus, cujus infaustus simi
eximit quoque ipsum ab iis officiis, quae solet haec sancta seeds (quae est pia
matter omnium fidelium, and maxim Christianorum Principum) Imperatoribus and
Regibus post mortem exhibere: quae pro isto libenter quoque fecissemus, nisi id
fieri in hoc casu sacrae Scripturae vetarent. Est, inquit Joannes, peccatum ad
mortem, non pro illo dico ut roget quis -- Quod vel intelligi potest de peccato
ipso, ac si diceret pro illo peccato, vel pro remissione illius peccati nolo ut
quisquam roget, quoniam non est remissibile: vel quod in eundem sensum redit,
pro illo homine qui peccat peccatum ad mortem, non dico ut roget quis. De quo
genere etiam Salvator apud Matthew. Quod illi qui peccat in Spiritum Sanctum non
remittetur, neque in hoc seculo neque in futuro. Ubi facit tria genera
peccatorum, nimirum in Patrem, in Filium, and in Spiritum Sanctum; atque priora
duo esse minus gravia and remissibilia, tertium vero irremissibile: quae tota
differentia (sicut ex Scripturis cholae tradunt) oritur ex distinctione
attributorum, quae singula singulis personis Sanctissimae Trinitatis
appropriantur. Licet enim, sicut eadem est essentia, sic eadem quoque est
potentia, sapientia, and bonitas omnium personarum (sicut ex Symbolo S.
Athanasii didicimus, cum ait -- Omnipotens Pater, Omnipotens Filius, Omnipotens
Spiritus Sanctus) tamen per attributionem Patri applicatur potentia, Filio
sapientia, Spiritui Sancto amor: quorum singula eo modo quo attributa dicuntur,
ita sunt propria cujusque personae, ut in aliam referri non queant. Ex quorum
attributorum contrariis, and distinctionem and gravitatem peccatorum
dignoscimus. Contrarium potentiae, quae attribuitur Patri, est infirmitas, ut
proinde id quod ex infirmitate seu naturae nostrae imbecillitate committimus,
dicatur committi in Patrem. Oppositum sapieutiae est ignorantia, ex qua cum
quis peccat, dicitur peccare in Filium, ita ut ea quae vel ex humana
infirmitate vel ignorantia peccamus, facilius nobis condonari soleant. Tertium
autem attributum quod est Spiritus Sanctus, nempe amor, habet pro contrario
ingratitudinem, vitium maxim odibile. Unde venit, ut homo non agnoscat Dei
erga ipsum dilectionem aut beneficia, sed obliviscatur, contemnat, ac odio
etiam habeat. Ex quo tandem fit, ut obstinatus reddatur atque impoeniteus.
Atque his modis multo gravius and periculosius peccatur in Deum, quam ex
ignorantia aut imbecillitate: proinde hujusmodi vocantur peccata in Spiritum
Sanctum; and quia rarius ac difficilius, and non nisi abundantiori gratia
condonantur, dicuntur irremissibilia quodammodo, cum tamen sola impoenitentia
sit omnino and simpliciter irremissibilis. Quicquid enim in vita committitur,
licet contra Spiritum Sanctum, potest per poenitentiam deleri ante mortem: sed
quis perseverat usque ad mortem, nullum locum relinquit gratiae ae
misericordiae. Atque pro tali peccato, seu pro homine sic peccante, noluit
Apostolus ut post mortem oraremus.

Jam ergo quia magno nostro dolor intelligimus, praedictum Regem ex hac vita
sine poenitentia, seu impoenitentem excessisse, nimirum in consortio
Haereticorum, ex talibus enim hominibus confecerat exercitum suum, and quod
commendaverat moriens Regnum in succe^sione Navarrae, declarato Haeretico and
excommunicato; necnon in extremis, ac in ultimo fere vitae spiritu, ab eodem
and similibus circumstantibus petierit, ut vindictam sumerent ab iis, quos ipse
judicabat fuisse causas mortis suae. Praeter haec and similia manifesta
impoenitentiae indicia, decrevimus pro ipso non esse celebrandas exequias.

Non quod praesumamus quidquam ex hoc de occultis erga ipsum Dei judiciis aut
misericordiis, qui poterat secundum beneplacitum suum in ipso exitu animae suae
convertere cor ejus, and misericorditer cum illo agere; sed ista loquuti sumus
secundum ea quae nobis exterius patent.

Faxit benignissimus Salvator noster, ut reliqui hoc horrendo justitiae
supernae exemplo admoniti, in viam salutis redeant: and quod misericorditer hoc
modo coepit, benign prosequatur ac perficiat, sicut eum facturum speramus, ut
de erepta Ecclesia de tantis malis and periculis, peren^es illi gratias agamus.

Considering oftentimes with my self, and applying my whole understanding unto
these things, which now of late by a just judgment of God are come to pass; I
think I may with right use the words of the Prophet Habakkuk -- I have wrought
a work in your days, which no man will believe when it is told him -- The
French King is slain by the hands of a Friar; for unto this it may justly be
compared, although the Prophet spoke of another thing, namely of the
Incarnation of our Lord, which exceeds and surmounteth all other wonders and
miracles whatsoever: As also the Apostle S. Paul refers the same words most
truly unto the resurrection of Christ.

When the Prophet said A work, his mind was not to signify by it some common
or ordinary thing, but a rare and notable matter, worthy to be remembered, as
that of the creation of the world, -- The Heavens are the works of thine hands
-- And again, -- He rested the seventh day from all the works which he had made
-- When he says, I have wrought, with these words the Holy Scriptures are wont
to express things not come to pass by casualty, fortune or accident, but things
befallen by the determined providence, will, and ordinance of God, as our
Savior said, -- The works which I do you shall do also, and yet greater -- and
many more such like in the holy Scriptures. And that he says that it is done
in times past, herein he follows the use and order of the holy Prophets, who
for certainty of the event are wont to prophecy of things to come as if they
were past already. For the Philos. say, that things past are of necessity,
things present of being, and things to come only of possibility. For which
certainty the Prophet Isaiah long before prophesying of the death of Christ
has thus spoken, -- He was led as a sheep to the slaughter, and like a lamb
before his shearer so opened he not his mouth -- And this whereof we speak at
this present, and which is come to pass in these our days, is a famous,
notable, and almost incredible thing, nor done or achieved without the
particular providence and disposition of Almighty God. A Friar has killed a
King, not a painted one, or one drawn upon a piece of paper or a wall, but the
King of France, in the midst of his Army, compassed and environed round about
with his Guard and Soldiers: Which truly is such an act, and done in such a
manner, that none will believe it when it shall be told them, and perhaps
hereafter it will be held but for a fable.

That the King is dead or slain, is easily believed, but that he is killed
after this manner, is hardly to be credited: even as we presently agree unto
this, that Christ is born of a woman, but if we add of a Virgin, then
according to natural reason we cannot assent to it: even so we easily believe
that Christ died, but that he is risen again from death unto life, is according
to humane understanding impossible, and therefore incredible: that one is
awakened again out of sleep, ecstasy, or a swound, because it often happens so
according to nature we naturally believe; but to be risen again from the dead,
it seems so incredible unto flesh, that S. Paul disputing at Athens of this
point was disliked, and accused to be a setter forth of new Gods; so that many
(as S. Luke witnesses) did mock him, and others said, -- We will hear thee
again of this thing -- Of such things therefore which befall not according to
the Laws of Nature, and the ordinary course thereof, speaks the Prophet, that
none shall believe it when it shall be told them. But we give credit to it by
consideration of the Omnipotency of God, and by submitting our understanding
under the obedience of Faith, and the Service which we owe unto Christ. By
these means this that was incredible by Nature becomes credible by Faith.
Therefore we that believe not after the flesh that Christ is born of a Virgin,
yet when it is added unto it, that this was done supernaturally by operation of
the Holy Ghost, then truly we agree unto it, and faithfully believe it. So
likewise when it is said, that Christ is risen again from the dead, as we are
only flesh we believe it not; but when it is affirmed, that this was done by
the power of Divine Nature in him, then without any doubting we believe it.

Even so when it shall be told us, An infallible Comparison.
that such a mighty King was killed by a poor, simple, and weak Friar, and that
in the midst of his Army, environed with his Guard and Soldiers, to our
natural reason and fleshly capacity it will seem incredible, or altogether
improbable; yet considering on the other side the grievous sins of the King,
and the special providence of Almighty God herein, and by what accustomed and
wonderful means he has accomplished his most just judgment against him, then
most firmly we believe it.

Therefore this great and miraculous work we must ascribe only to the
particular providence of God, not as those who refer all things amiss unto some
ordinary causes, or unto fortune, or such like accidentary events; but as those
who (more nearly observing the course of the whole matter) easily see, that
here in this befell many things, which could in no wise have been brought to
pass without the special help of God. And truly the state of Kings and
Kingdoms, and such like rare and weighty affairs, should not be thought to be
governed by God rashly and unadvisedly.

In the Holy Scripture some are of this kind, and none of them can be referred
unto any other thing but unto God the only Author thereof: yet there are none
wherein the Heavenly operation is more seen, then in this whereof we speak at
present. We read in the Maccabees, how Eleazar offered himself unto a sure
death to kill the King, who was an enemy and persecutor of the people of God.
For in the battle espying an Elephani more excellent then the rest, whereon it
was likely the King himself was, with a swift course casting himself in the
midst of the troops of his enemies, here and there making a way per force, g^t
to the beast, went under her, thrust his sword into her belly and so flew her,
and she falling upon him killed him.

Here we see some things as to zele, valiantness of mind, and the issue of the
enterprise, not unlike unto ours, though in the rest there is no comparison to
be made. For Eleazar was a soldier, exercised in weapons, trained up in arms,
set in battle, emboldened with courage, and inflamed with rage and anger:
whereas this Friar was not used to fighting, and so abhorring of blood by order
of his profession, that perhaps he could not abide the cutting of a vein.
Again, Eleazar knew the kind of his death, as also the place of his burial,
namely, that he should be entombed under the fall of the beast, and so buried
in his own triumph and victory: but this Monck looked only for death, and
expected nothing but unknown and most cruel torments, yea and doubted that he
should want a grave to rest in. But in this are yet many other things that can
suffer no comparison.

The famous history of the holy woman Judith is sufficiently known, who
consulted how to deliver her city and the people of God (no doubt but by Gods
inspiration) to kill Holofernes, Chieftain of the enemies forces, which she
also accomplished. Wherein although appear many and most manifest tokens of
heavenly direction, yet far greater arguments of Gods providence are to be seen
in the killing of this King, and the delivering of the city of Paris; as being
more difficult and harder to be brought to pass. For this holy woman disclosed
part of her intention unto the Governors of the City, and went out with the
approbation and in the presence of the said Elders and Governors, and by that
means was not subject to the examination and searching, which in time of siege
is used so strictly, that a Fly can hardly without examining get by. She being
come to the enemy, through whose Camp and Watchas she was to go, and often
examined and searched, yet being a woman, carrying no letters nor arms, whence
any suspicion might arise, and yielding probable reasons of her coming there
and abandoning her own country, was easily discharged. As also for the same
causes, and for her sex and exquisite beauty, being brought before that
lascivious and drunken Prince, might with ease perform what she had determined.
But this Religious man had undertaken a matter of greater weight, and also
performed it, though it was compassed with so many impediments, difficulties,
and dangers, that by no humane means it could have been brought to pass without
the manifest ordinance and aid of Almighty God. For Letters of Commendation
were to be procured from the contrary Here the Pope in his Infallible
Consistorian Chair calls the Kings Party a Faction, as if the Covenanters were
in the right.
Faction, then was he constrained to go through that gate of the City, which
directly went to the enemies camp; which without doubt was so narrowly kept and
watched in the extremity of that siege, that every trifle bred suspicion, and
none were suffered to go forth without curious searching touching their
letters, business and affairs. But he (a wonderful thing!) went by the Watch
unexamin'd, yea with letters of commendation to the enemy; which if they had
been intercepted by the Citizens, without delay or further sentence he had
suffered death, and therefore this is a manifest A good argument, that the
chief of the League knew his design, and so ordered his departure.
argument of Gods Providence. But yet behold a greater No such w^nd^r, for he
was presently taken by the Kings Guards, and sh^w'd them the Sup^rscription of
the Letters he had to the King, so they carried him to Sieur de la Guesle, the
Kings Attorney General and Auditor of the Camp, who kept him all night, and
next morning bad him to the King.
miracle, that he without searching went through the enemies camp, by diverse
Watches and Sentinels, yea and past the Kings Lifeguard, and finally through
the whole Army, composed almost of none but Another mistake; for the King of
Navarre and his Huguenots kept different Posts and Quarters from these under
the French King.
Heretics, he being a Religious man, and habited according to his Order, which
was so odious unto them, that they None ^^^e merciful than Navarre, though
quarter and favor is seldom shown in places stormed; nor had th^se prattling
Rebels reason to expect equal favor with the simple L^ymen, by them misled and
seduced.
killed, or at least grievously misused, the Friars they found in the places
not long before taken by force about Paris. Judith was a woman, and so nothing
odious, yet often examined, though she carried nothing about her that might
have endangered her. But this was a Friar, and therefore hated and most
suspected, having also a Knife prepared for that purpose, not put up in a
sheath (which might have affoarded him a probable excuse) but it was bare, and
hidden in his Monkish sleeve; which if it had been found about him, he had
presently suffered death. All these are such clear arguments of the particular
providence of God, that they cannot be denied: and it could not be otherwise,
but that God blinded the eyes of his enemies, so that they could not see or
know him.

For (as we said before) although some absurdly ascribe this to fortune or
chance, yet we think fit to refer all this to nothing else then the will and
ordinance of God. And truly I could not believe this to have been done
otherwise, unless I should captivate and submit my understanding under the
obedience of Christ, who had determined by these miraculous means to deliver
the city of Paris, ( which as we have heard has been in great danger and
extremity) and justly punish the heinous sins of that King, and take him away
out of this world by such an unhappy and infamous death.

And truly we (not without grief) have often foretold, that as he was the last
of his family, so he would make some strange and shameful end of his life.
Which that I have often said, not only the Cardinals Joyeuse, Lenocurtius, and
he of Card. Gondi Bish^p of Paris.
Paris, but also the Maquess de Pilani.
Ambassador at that time here resident, can sufficiently testify. Nor do we
here call those who are dead to witness our words but the living, of whom some
yet can very well remember them. However, what we have here been forced to
speak against this unfortunate King, we would in no wise that it should reflect
against that most noble Kingdom of France, which we shall cherish hereafter, as
we have hitherto done with all fatherly love and ^steem.

This therefore which with grief we have now spoken concerns only the Kings
person, whose unhappy end depriveth An infallible and charitable Doctrine and
Exposition of his Holiness.

But if the King was so damnable, what was the Friar that murdered him, and
the rebellious Covenanters, whose Faction and Treasonable actions the Po^e
favors?


him of those Duties which this Holy See (the tender mother of all the
faithful, but chiefly of Christian Princes) is wont to affoard unto all Kings
and Emperors: which we most willingly would likewise have bestowed upon him,
if the Holy Scriptures in this case had not altogether forbidden it. There is,
says S. John, a sin unto death, I say not that any should pray for it -- Which
may be understood either of the sin it self, as if he should say, for that sin
or for the forgiveness thereof I will that none should pray, because it is not
pardonable: or else in the same sense, for that man who commits such a sin
unto death, I say not that any should pray for. Of which our Savior himself
has spoken in S. Matthew, saying that He that sins against the Holy Ghost
shall not be pardoned, neither in this world, nor in the world to come. Where
he sets down three sorts of sins, viz. against the Father, the Son, and the
Holy Ghost; and that the two first are less heinous and pardonable, but the
third unpardonable. All which difference proceeds from the distinction of the
attributes, as the Divines teach, which severally are appropriated unto every
several person of the Holy Trinity: And although as the essence of all the
three persons is but one, so also is their power, wisdom, and goodness, (as we
have learned by Athanasius his Creed, where he says -- The Father is Almighty,
the Son Almighty, and the Holy Ghost Almighty) yet by attribution power is
ascribed unto the Father, wisdom unto the Son, and love unto the Holy Ghost:
whereof every several as they are termed Attributes, so are they proper unto
every several person that they cannot be referred to another. By the contraries
of which attributes we can discern the distinction and, greatness of sin. As
the contrary to power, which is only attributed unto the Father, is weakness;
and therefore that which we do amiss through infirmity of nature is said to be
committed against the Father. The opposite to wisdom is ignorance, through
which if any man sins he is said to sin against the Son; therefore that
which we commit through natural infirmity or ignorance, is more easily forgiven
us. The third attribute, which is the Holy Ghosts, is love, and has for its
contrary ingratitude, a fault most odious; for hence it happens, that men do
not acknowledge the love and benefits of God, but do forget, despise, and hate
them; whence it follows that they become altogether obstinate and impenitent.
And this way sin is committed against God with greater danger and peril, then
if it were done through ignorance or weakness of the flesh, and therefore it is
termed a sin against the Holy Ghost. And because such sins are seldom or
difficultly pardoned, and that not without a great abundance of grace, and so
in some fort are said to be unpardonable, whereas indeed they become simply
unpardonable only through unrepentance. For whatsoever is done amiss in this
life, although it be against the Holy Ghost, yet by repentance may be forgiven
before death: but they that persevere therein till death are excluded from all
grace and mercy. And therefore for such sins and sinners, it is that the
Apostle has forbidden to pray after their decease.

Now therefore because we understand, not without our great grief, that the
aforesaid King is departed out of this world without repentance and impenitent,
to wit, in company of Heretics, his Suppose it did, would any w^se man l^^^^
is Kingdom, rather then borrow another man's sword, who agrees not with him in
every circumstance in Religion?
army consisting of such men, and that by his last will he had commended the
Kingdom and Crown to the succession of And good reason, being the lawful next
Heir.
Navarre, a declared Heretic and excommunicated; as also when dying and ready
to yield up his Ghost, he desired of him and such like standing by him, that
they would That this is false read Davila l. 10. p. 818. Spondan. anno 1589. 15.
revenge his death upon those whom he judged to be the cause thereof. For these
and such like most manifest tokens of unrepentance, we have decreed that his
death be not solemnized with Funerals.

Not that by these we would seem to determine any thing concerning the secret
judgments of God against him, or of his mercies; who could according unto his
good pleasure at the point of his expiring convert and turn his heart, and deal
mercifully with him: but this we have spoken, moved by these external signs and
tokens.

God grant therefore that the rest being admonished by this fearful example of
Heavenly judgment, may repent and amend: and that it may further please him to
continue and accomplish that which be has so mercifully begun, as we put our
trust he will, to the end we may give everlasting thanks to him, for delivering
his Church from such great and imminent dangers.

Thus with his blessing he brake up the Consistory; and by this may appear with
what Davila, p. 868.
great demonstrations of joy he received the news of the Kings murder.

But here it may be we may meet with a blunt and bold Objector, who possibly
may affirm, that there was never any such Speech made by the Pope.

To answer this we shall take Bellarmine for our Adversary.

First, then the Under the name of Mat. Tortus. Respon. ad Ap^l. Angl. p. 70.
Cardinal does not possitively deny there was any such Speech, and if he had
known there had been no such thing, he would at this time (being pleaded
against him by King James) have boldly denied it, and he could not be ignorant,
being then famous and Praelector of Controversies at Rome, intimate with the
Pope and Cardinals, and so not willing to be caught in a lie, he endeavors to
shuffle it off as well as he can.

One time he says, it was only published by the enemies to the Roman Church.
But to this we answer, that it was first published by the Romanists themselves,
presently after it was spoke and Antifixtus in answer to this Speech was
printed at London, 1590.
printed at Paris 1589. by Nicolas Nivelle and Rollin Tierry, by Authority of
the Holy Union, and the approbation of these three Sorbonne Doctors, Boucher,
Decreil, and Anceline.

Then again the Cardinal argues, that the Pope himself did neither publish the
Speech, nor command it to be published. This we may grant, and yet never the
worse, this being no argument to prove he never spoke it.

Bellarmine proceeds, intimating no such Speech could be divulged seeing none
took notes of it as it was spoke.

To this may be answered, that it is true that the Cardinal, whose office it
was to have noted the Popes Oration, not dreaming of such a design, neglected
the providing of Pen or Ink; but yet how it was taken this following story will
tell.

The Oration and Consistory being ended, and the Pope departed toward his
Chamber, certain Cardinals with a greedy desire flocked about Cardinal Allan
(an Englishman, created 1587) there in the Chamber, entreating him that he
would call to remembrance, and write down what he had heard there spoken. Allan
won by their importunity (they being his friends) promised to do his best. The
same Afternoon he began to write the Speech as near as he could remember. Which
done, he commanded Mr. Warmington one of his Chaplains, and two other his
Gentlemen, to write out Copies thereof, which he afterward presented to the
Cardinals his friends, for which they thanked him, and upon perusal affirmed it
to be the very Oration which Sixtus had uttered in the Consistory. And (as his
Chaplain confesses) it is said, the Pope liked his doing therein,
acknowledging it to be really his Speech. And all this the said A Mode^ate
De^^^^^, p. 148.
Mr. William Warmington, Chaplain to Cardinal Allan, and an honest and loyal
Roman Priest, does publicly confess and testify. And so we need trouble our
selves no more about it, since Bellarmine at last does in a manuer acknowledge
it, and falls a vindicating of it.

Amongst the rest, who in these troubles set themselves to scrible down
obedience, was an Englishman, viz. William Reynolds, then in the Low Countries
under the Spanish Dominion, what he writ on this subject was by the desire of
some of the chief French Covenanters, and under the false name of His book was
cal^'d -- De justa Christianae Reipub. in Reges impios and Haereticos
autoritate.
Guillielmus Rosseus, Mr. Warmington sent a Copy of the Popes speech from Rome
to him, for which Reynolds returned him many thanks, glad that he had so got
the approbation of the Roman Bishop to vindicate his Arguments of a Conditional
subjection; of whom (I hope by the way) will not be taken amiss this following
story as we find it.

This Mr. William Reynolds was at first a Protestant according to the Church of
England, and of New College in Oxford, and Brother to him was John Reynolds
(him of Corpus Christi College in Oxford, famous for his great Reading) who was
bred up in Popery beyond Sea. William (as the story goes) with an intent to
reclame his brother John makes a journey to him beyond Sea, where in a
Conference it so fell out, that John (as they say) being overcome by his
Brothers Arguments returns into England, and (as people use to love and run
into extremes) was a little te^^ing to Puritanism, as his siding in Hampton
Court Conference may somewhat testify, yet he died a true Church of England
man, every way conformable to the Canons, nor was he ever but peaceable and
moderare, loving obedience and his studies more then frantic zele and
innovations, according to the giddy fury of our hotheaded Puritans. On the
other side his brother William (as they say) being convinced by the reasons of
his brother John, staid beyond Sea, where he proved a violent and virulent
Papist, by his writings declaring that Protestants were no better then Turks,
nay that they were worse then Pagans.

Of this strange change Dr. William Alabaster, an excellent Poet, and one who
had made trials also of both Religions, made this following Epigram.

Pella inter geminos plusquam civilia fratres
Traxerat ambiguus Religionis apex:
Ille Reformatae fidei pro partibus instat,
Iste reformandum denegat esse fidem.
Propositis causa rationibus, alterutrinque
Concurrere pares and cecidere pares.
Quod fuit in votis, fratrem capit alteruterque;
Quod fuit in fatis, perdit uterque fidem.
Captivi gemini sine captivante fuerant,
Et victor victi transfuga castra petit.
Quod genus hoc pugni est, ubi victus gaudet uterque,
Et tamen alteruter se superasse dolet.
Which is thus rendered by the Ingenious Doctor Peter Heylyn: Cosmogr. l. 1. p.
267.


In points of Faith some undetermined jars
Betwixt two brothers kindled civil wars:
One for the Churches Reformation stood,
The other thought no Reformation good.
The points proposed they traversed the field
With equal skill, and both together yield.
As they desired, his brother each subdues;
Yet such their fate, that each his Faith does lose.
Both Captives, none the prisoners thence to guide;
The Victor flying to the vanquished side.
Both joy'd in being conquered (strange to say)
And yet both mourned because both won the day.
I have been the longer upon this William Reynolds, because he was a great
stickler in the French Covenant, after the murder of the King, coming from the
Netherlands to Paris, where he vindicated their actions by finishing his former
book, and dedicating it to the Duke of Mayenne, and it was sometimes after
printed at Antwerp, with great applause of the Roman Party.

CHAP. VII. Cardinal Bourbon declared King by the Leaguers. Paris besieged, and
its Famine relieved by the Duke of Parma.
HENRY III. a little before his death declared Henry of Navarre to be next Heir
to the Crown of France, desired all the Nobility so to acknowledge him, and
advised him himself to turn a Romanist, as being the only way both to gain and
continue without danger in the Throne. And some will tell us of some prophetic
observations in behalf Andre du Chesne les Antiquitez de France, p. 109, 632.
of the Family of Bourbon.

As how Louis de Bourbon, the third Duke of that Line, (who died 1410) building
his house called Hostel de Bourbon near to the Louvre, caused to be written
over the Portal in Capital Letters this word ESPERANCE, viz. Hope; as if he
expected some of his Race would ascend the Throne, and join the two Houses. And
it is further observed, that in the fine Chapel of Bourbon l'Archambaut de Lys,
that the same day that the former Henry was stabbed, a clap of thunder whisketh
away a Bar, which crossed and touched the said window, without any damage or
harm to the Glass or Painting.

But leaving these guesses as nothing to our purpose, we shall find our Henry
IV. (no more called Navarre, but King) in great perplexities how to behave
himself at this mishap. For though the Huguenots freely acknowledged him as
King of France, yet he was not to trust too much to them, lest he should offend
the Romanists, some of whom showed also a willingness to allow him for their
King without any conditions, but the greater part absolutely denied it, unless
he would assure them to maintain the Roman Religion, and give hopes of his own
Conversion; whilst others of them absolutely renounced him, and presently ran
over to the Leaguers: By which jealousies and Factions this conquering great
Army was on a sudden so dwindled away, that the King was necessitated to raise
the siege, and retire for his own security.

On the other side the Covenanters rejoice and daily increase, many of them
persuade the Duke of Mayenne to take upon him the Title of King; but this for
the present he waveth, as thinking his own Interest as yet not strong enough,
and so with a general consent of the Leaguers old Cardinal Bourbon (then in
prison at Chinon) is declared in their Paris Parliament, and publicly proclaimed
in the streets of Paris King of France, under the names of CHARLES the TENTH,
coining their moneys with the Effigies, Name, and Title of King, yet is not to
this day held or reckoned amongst their Kings.

And the better to make all cock-sure the Duke of Mayenne sends forth an
Edict or Declaration, wherein

He desires all to stick close to the Holy Union for the preservation of
Religion and the Crown. And seeing it has pleased God of his mere goodness,
singular providence and justice, to deliver us from him who had joined himself
with the Heretics, contrary to the holy admonitions of the Pope: Therefore
waiting for the liberty and presence of our King and Sovereign Lord, we desire
and command all good people to join themselves with us, and to swear to die in
the Roman Religion.

SENAULT.
Paris, 5 Aug. 1589.
And the Parliament of Toulouse is as brisk as any; for no sooner had they news
of the Kings murder, which was committed on the first of August, but they put
forth a Decree, wherein

They command all to unite in defense of the Roman Religion.

That all Bishops within their Churches give thanks to God for the deliverance
of Paris and other places.

Ordain that the first day of August shall for the future be every year
celebrated with Processions and public prayers, in acknowledgment of the great
benefits they received that day.

Forbid any to accept or allow of Henry de Bourbon for their King, or to assist
him.

du TORNOER.
Toulouse, 2 Aug. 1589.
Nor is it the French only, but other busy people will not by any means allow
this Henry to be King. Amongst the rest I find our Father Persons or Creswell
(if not both) lays it as a grand fault upon -- Fit manifestissimum, nullo
jure neque Divino ne ue Humanno, Regis Gallia nomen aut dignitatem Nava^ra^
posse competere. Responsi^ ad Edictum R^ginae Angliae sect, 2. 148, 153. p.
184, 190.
Queen Elizabeth for acknowledging him to be King, of whom they are so
confident as to affirm, that it is not possible for him to be truly King of
France by any Law either Divine or Humane.

But to return to France, where the war is carried on vigorously, but to the
loss of the Covenanters, to whose aid Pope Sixtus sends Cardinal Cajetano as
Legate into France, and with him amongst other Scholars came Bellarmine; but
what was most powerful, they brought with them Bills of Exchange for large
sums of money, to be disposed of as the Legate thought best for the advantage
of the Cause.

King Henry IV. being informed of the Legates coming, caused to be published,
that if he came toward him, that then he should be received with all honor
aad safety; but if he went toward his enemies the Covenanters, then none
should acknowledge him for a Legate, or receive him under pain of Rebellion. But
Cajetan after many turnings and windings at last arriveth at Paris, where he is
received in great pomp, lodged in the Bishops Palace, richly furnished with the
Kings goods taken Louvre.

In the mean time the Kings Parliament met at Tours, declares against the
Legate: on the contrary, the Paris Parliament or Rump with the Sorbone Doctors
stand for him, order all to acknowledge to him; and that he being then the
Supreme Spiritual Authority in the Kingdom, no power there could meet and act
in opposition to him. For the Legate did not a little fear that the Royallists
(considering how much the Pope favored the Rebels) would choose a Jac. Fuligott
vit. Card. Bellarmin, ^. 2. c. 9.
Patriarch for that Nation, which would have spoiled his Holinoss markets. And
now concerning this Legate the Pens on both sides are more busy then the Swords.

Amongst the rest who expected to gain by these Troubles was the King of Spain,
who also had assisted the Leaguers, and for their further encouragement sets
forth a Declaration, the sum of it being:

Philip by the grace of God King of Castile, Leon, Arragon, etc.

Is sorry for the Troubles and Heresies in France.

Therefore commands all Christian Catholic Princes to join with him to
extirpate Heresy, and deliver the most Christian King of France Charles X.
that (France being once cleared of Heresy) they may proceed to purge other
Heretical Countries, all which being exterminated, they may recover the Holy
Land from the Turks.

Protests that he designs nothing but the exaltation of the Roman Church, the
repose of all good Catholics under their lawful Princes, the extirpation of
all Heresies, the peace and concord of Christian Princes; to obtain which he is
willing not only to employ his means but his life also.

Juan de Vasquez.
Madrid, 8 March 1590.
A little before this some of the Royallists spread abroad such like
Propositions as these following:

That Henry of Bourbon might or ought to he King.

That with a safe conscience the people might assist him and pay Tribute.

That an Heretic, though relapsed and put out of the communion of the Church,
may have right to the Crown of France.

That the Pope of Rome has not right to excommunicate Kings.

That now it is not only lawful but necessary to make a Treaty or League with
the Bearnois and his Heretics.

Which Propositions were presently condemned by the Sorbone Doctors, the Decree
of theirs was confirmed by the Cardinal Legate, and subscribed 10 Feb. Spond.
an. 1590. 3.
and sworn to by the Bishops and Curats.

Yet their courage was somewhat cooled by the Kings success, nor was the League
prosecuted with that eagerness as was expected, by reason that the Duke of
Mayenne and the Spaniards mistrusted one another, besides the great jealousies
amongst the Covenantiug Chieftains themselves, every man seeking his own
Interest, all expecting to make themselves great, and several designed the
Crown for himself. Add to these the unwieldiness of Mayenne their General,
being very fat, heavy and slow in all his actions, and one that spent much time
in eating and sleeping. And the truth is, the most vigorous and earnest
promoters of the League were the Priests and Women, the first acting as well by
the Sword as their Seditious Preachments, the later encouraging and gaining by
their boldness and insinuations; nay, so zealous were they in this Cause, that
from the highest to the lowest they were not ashamed to act any thing to gain
Proselytes; so that the King supposed, that what his Armies wan in the Field
they lost by these Love-tricks, several of his Officers being now and then
wheedled over to the League, when they came under the lieur of such attractive
baits at Paris.

Yet the Leaguers were quite crest-fallen after the King had totally routed
Mayenne and his great Army at the battle of 14 March, 2590.
Yory (of which Du Bartas has a long Poem.) But as a little before, when Henry
conquered the same Duke at September. 1589.
Arques, the better to keep up the hearts of the people and Parisians, the
Duchess of Montpensier had the confidence to publish abroad that the
Covenanters were Conqueronrs, that Navarre himself was taken and conducting to
Paris, which was so far believed, that many Ladies hired Windows in S. Denis
street to see him pass by: but they were convinced of the error when a little
after they saw the said King take their very 1 Novem. 1589.
Suburbs of Paris.

So after the aforesaid battle of Yory the Leaguing Chieftains fearing lest the
Parisians would mutiny at the sad news of it, gave out many lies concerning it,
and at last perceiving all could not conceal the story, to make the best of a
bad market the Legate, the Spanish Ambassador, and the Archbishop of Lions, got
the Priests to use their cunning in the Pulpits to deceive the people, who as
yet were not certain of the Defeat.

Amongst the rest Father Christino de Nizza from these words -- Those whom I
love I rebuke and chasten -- seemed to foretell them, that God would prove the
Faith and Constancy of the Parisians, as he was wont to try the courage of his
children, for which he clapped together a great store of Examples out of
Scripture; and then making a show as if Letters were just then delivered to
him, he showed them to the people, saying that he was very sorry that he had
done the office of a Prophet, and that God had been pleased by his mouth to
advertise the People of Paris of that Temptation which was to fall upon them,
as now it troubled him to relate it; and so told them that the Catholic Army
had lately come off with the worst. To all which he added such effectual
prayers and exhortations, that the people seemed rathor heartned then
di^couraged. The same trick was used by Guilliaume Rose (Bishop of Senlis) Jean
Boucher, Prevost, Feu-ardent, Peletier, with the other Preachers: amongst the
rest was Francisco Panigarola Bishop of Asti, who came along with the Legate,
who (though he preached in the Italian Tongue) was continually followed by
abundance of people, being famous for his great eloquence. And to these stories
may be added the former zealous Widow Montpensier, who said, that truly the Duke
had lost the battle, but that the Bearnois was dead; which by many was believed
for some days, which satisfied to restrain their first fears, and so to gain
some time to give orders, and to send to raise new succors.

The Parliament at Rouen proceed desperately, putting to death some prisoners
they had, because they were Servants to the King, and then make an Act that all
should be guilty of High Treason who joined with the King of Navarre, and did
not side with their King Charles X. 10 April.
as they termed him.

However King Henry goes on prosperously, and with his Victorious Army lays
close siege to Paris it self, which so cooled the fury of those people, that
many of them began to stagger in their resolutions to prevent which the chief
of the Citizens and Leaguers drew up these three following Quaeres.

I. If it should happen (which God forbid) that the most Christian King Charles
X. should die; or, if whilst he is unjustly kept in prison, he should yield up
his right of the Kingdom to Henry de Bourbon:

Whether then the French be bound to or may with a safe conscience receive for
their King the said Henry, or any other Prince who favors Heresy; although it
were supposed that he were absolved from his crimes and censures, considering
the evident danger of his falsehood, of the destruction of Religion and the
Kingdom?

II. Whether he may be said to be suspected of Heresy, or a Favourer of it,
who procures or permits a peace to be made with the said Henry, when the
said Party may hinder it?

III. Whether these things be of Divine Right, and may be neglected by
Catholics without mortal sin and pain of damnation? And on the contrary,
Whether it be meritorious to oppose with all ones endeavorus the said Henry?
And if the said Opposer be killed in this cause, Whether he may not be called a
Martyr?

With these Proposals they wait upon their Assembly of Divines at the Sorbone,
desiring their Resolutions and Determinations of them, which take in their own
words as follows:

Anno Domini Millesimo quingentesimo nonagesimo ineunte 7 May.
mense Maio, etc.

Super quarum dubitationum determinatione Sacra Facultus per juramentum
convocata, soepiusque cum public in Collegio Sorbonae post Missam de Spiritu
Sancto, tum privatim vocato selectorum Magistrorum coetu congregata, matura
deliberatione praehabita, cunctisque capitibus serio sigillatim ac diligenter,
quoad fieri potuit, examinatis and discussis, in hunc tandem modum censuit.

Jure Divino prohibentur Catholici Haereticum hominem, aut fautorem Haeresios
and hostem Ecclesiae notorium, multoque magis relapsum, and a sancta sede
nominatim excommunicatum, ad Regnum admittere.

Quod si ejusmodi quispiam absolutionem a criminibus and censuris in foro
exteriore impetraveri, and tamen subsit manifestum simulationis and perfidiae,
and eversionis Religionis Catholicae periculum, is nihilominus eodem jure
excludi debet.

Quicunque autem satagat ut is ad Regnum perveneat, aut ei studet ac favet, aut
etiam ad Regnum promoveri permittit cum impedire possit, and ex officio debeat,
sacris Canonibus est injurius, de Haeresi merito suspectus, and Religioni atque
Ecclesiae perniciosus, contra quem eo nomine agi potest and debet, cujuscunque
gradus and eminentiae sit.

Cum igitur Henricus Borbonius Haereticus, fautor Haeresios, hosts Ecclesiae
notorius, relapsus and nominatim excommunicatus sit, and si forte absolutionem
in foro exteriore impetraret, manifestum appareat simulationis ac perfidiae,
and eversionis Religionis periculum, eum Christianissimi Regni aditu, etiam
absolutione obtenta, and quovis alio legitimo Haerede mortuo vel cedente,
Franci prohibere, and a pace cum eo facienda abhorrere tenentur, and qui ei
favent, Canonibus injurii, de Haeresi suspecti, and Ecclesiae perniciosi, ac ut
tales ^erio seduloque coercendi ac puniendi sunt.

Ut autem qui dicto Henrico ad Regnum aspiranti favere, suppetiasve quovis modo
ferunt, Religionis desertores sunt, and in continuo peccato mortali manent: sic
qui se illi quocunque possunt modo zelo Religionis opponunt, plurimum apud Deum
and homines merentur: and ut illos, Satanae regno stabiliendo pertinaces,
aeterna poena damnandos: sic hos, si ad sanguiuem usque resistant, aeternum in
proemium and ut fidei propugnatores Martyrii palmam consecuturos judicare par
est.

Conclusum (nemine repugnante) in tertia congregatione generali super ea re
facta in majore Aula Collegii Sorbonae, omnibus and singulis magistris per
juramentum vocatis, septima die Maii, MDXC.

In the year of our Lord God One thousand five hundred and ninety in May, etc.

Upon the determination of which doubts the Sacred Faculty being called
together by oath, and many times assembled, as well in public congregation at
the College of Sorbone, having celebrated the Mass of the Holy Ghost, as also
privately at the meeting of the Delegates, mature deliberation being had, all
the particulars being carefully, truly, and severally examined (as much as
could be) at last have declared their judgments in manner following.

All Catholics by Divine Law are forbid to admit any into the Throne that is
an Heretic, or a favourer of Heresy, and a known enemy to the Church, much
more one that is relapsed, and by name excommunicated by the Pope.

If it should chance that any guilty as aforesaid, should procure a sentence of
Absolution from these crimes and censures, yet if there be evident danger of
his hypocrisy, perfidiousness, and the ruin of the Catholic Religion, he
then for all his said Absolution is (by the said Divine Law) to be excluded
from the Kingdom.

Whoever also endeavors that he should be King, or does partake with or favor
him, or does suffer him to be set in the Throne, when he might prevent it, and
was obliged so to do; he for so doing does violate the holy Canons, is justly
suspected of Heresy, and is mischievous both to Religion and the Church,
therefore he may and ought to be opposed, be he of whatsoever degree or
quality.

Therefore seeing Henry de Bourbon is an Heretic, a favourer of Heresy, a
known enemy to the Church, is relapsed and by name excommunicated; and though
he might obtain sentence of Absolution, yet there being evident danger of
hypocrisy and perfidiousness, with the ruin of Religion; and though he had
Absolution, or any other lawful heir dead, or yielding up his right, yet are
the French obliged to keep him from the most Christian Crown, and to abhor the
thoughts of making peace with him; and those who do favor him are violators of
the Canons, may be suspected of Heresy, are enemies to the Church, and as such
ought to he earnestly and carefully chaflized and punished.

As therefore those who favor the said Henry in his aspiring to the Throne,
and do any ways affoard him any help, are deserters of Religion, and remain in
a perpetual mortal sin: so those, who for their love to Religion do oppose him
as much as in them lies, do very much merit both of God and Men: And as on the
one hand it must be supposed, that those people so obstinate in strengthening
the Kingdom of darkness will be eternally damned; so on the other, it is most
mtet to conclude that these, who are slain in this cause against the said
Henry, as Champions of the Faith, shall obtain an everlasting reward, and be
crowned with the Trophies of Martyrdom,

And this is concluded on (not one gainsaying it) in the third general
congregation held upon this business, in the great Hall of the College of
Sorbone, all and every one of the Masters being summoned thither upon oath, 7
May 1590.

In the mean time Mayenne was very busy in raising Forces, in consu^ting with
the Duke of Parma, then Governor in the Spanish Netherlands, to get Supplies
from him, the better to force the King to quit the siege: and the truth is,
this affair did greatly perplex him; for if he lost Paris the Cause was undone,
and if he relieved it by the Spanish assistance (and without them he could not
do it) his own Interest might be lost. For the Sixteen wished him not well,
because he had broken up their Council of Forty, (which contrary to his
expectation bridled his Authority) and they thinking to introduce a
Commonwealth Government, h^ had crossed that by creating another Council, a
Keeper of the Seals, and four Secretaries of State, with which he governed
affairs, without calling them, except when he had need of money. And thus
having displeased the Sixteen, he feared they would engage Paris under the
Spanish Yoke, if they saw Spaniards enough to deal with all: But of two evils
the last is to be chosen; and so he resolves to reinforce his Army with
Spanish Supplies.

In his absence he appoints his Brother the Duke of Nemours (a courageous young
man) to command the City, and assigned him a Their nam^s in d'Aub^^ne to. 3. l.
3. ^. 7.
Council: care is taken to fortifi^ all su^pected Avenues, and the people are
Sermon'd up to such an height of madness, that a great scarcity of provisions
being in the City, some for letting slip but some words, as if peace were
better then to be starved with hunger, were by the fury of the Zelots either
executed in public, or cast headlong into the River a^ damned persons, enemies
to the Catholic Faith, and infected with the poi^on of Heresy.

Whilst the Parisians were thus eager for the Cause, their Kingling Charles X.
or Cardinal Bourbon dies in prison at Fontenay, being 66 9 May, 1590.
y^ars old, much troubled with the Stone, and greatly addicted to old Wives
Prophesies, which pleased him the more because now and then he was told some
which denoted his Kingship. His death troubled some of the Leaguers, having now
no King, and so one of their grand pretenses vanished; yet they continue
resolute; Mayenne keeps to himself the Title of Lieutenant Gen^ral of the
State and Crown of France, and the States General are ordered to meet for the
Election of a new King; the Sorbone renew their Decrees against the King as an
Heretic, and so not capable of the Crown.

And the better to keep the people up in their humors, by order of 31 May,
As^er si^. (...).
the Legate a Procession is made of the Clergy to implore Gods assistance: at
the Head of these went Roze Bishop of Senlis, with a Cross in his left hand and
an Halbert in his right; then followed the Monks and Friars according to their
several Orders, Capuchins, Minims, Franciscans, Dominicans, Fu^llans,
Carmelites, etc. In the Procession the Prelates, Priests and Monks walked in
their sever^l accustomed Habits, but over them armed openly with Head-pieces,
Croslets, Coats of Mail, etc. all of them with Swords girt to their sides, and
in their hands carrying some sort of Arms or other; some with Guns, some with
Spears, others with Halberts. Thus marched they along singing Hymns, shooting
off their Guns, with which one was slain by chance; and with them they carried
all their Relics, as notable Assistants and Well-wishers to their Solemn
League and Covenant; and thus they foot it to the great Church.

After this follows another Procession of the Duke of Nemours, the Officers
of the Army, the Magistrates of the City, with the Archbishop of Lions, and
some other valiant Bishops. These trudge also to the great Church, where upon
the great Altar laying their hands upon the Gospel, they swear to defend the
City to their u^most, and to oppose the Heretical Prince. And a little after,
to make all sure, their Parliament at Paris by Act forbid any upon pain of death
to talk of any Agreement Peace or Composition with Henry of Bourbon, for so
they called 15 June.
him.

By this time the City began to be in great want by reason of the Kings cutting
off all assistance from them; therefore to encourage the people Cardinal Pietro
Gondy Bishop of Paris ('it was made an Archbishopric 1622) pitying the poor,
had all the Church-plate turned into money for them, the Legate caused all his
own Plate to be melted and coined, Mendoza the Spanish Ambassador promised
them six score Crowns a day in bread, and of all his Plate he left himself but
one Silver Spoon; the Ladies and richest Nobles sold their Household Stuff,
Jewels and Ornaments; the Legate also got fifty thousand Crowns for them from
the Pope.

But all th^se helos were not enough for two hundred thousand persons then in
the City, provisions growing so scarce, that a Bushel of Wh^at wa(...) for one
hundred and twenty Crowns, the flesh of Horses, D^gs, Asses, Mules, etc. are
publicly vended; but the poorer sort wanting moneys to buy such dainti^s, were
forced to feed upon such H^rbs and Grass as they found in the Yards, Ditch^s,
and along the Ramparts, which ma^e them ^i^ in h^aps, yet were the Chieftains
(as if they were related t^ the old Saguntines) so far from yi^lding, that they
caused several to be ex^cuted for desiring Br^ad or Peace.

An^ here we need not trouble our ^elv^s with the stories of former great
Famines, as of Jerusalem, amongst the Turks 1595, in Poland and Bohem^a 1312,
in Transylvania 1604, at Leyden 1574, at Sancerre and Rochel, of Peg^ 1598, of
Caifung in China 1642, and several others, since (as is confessed by all) this
Famine at Paris was not inferior to any of them, many being forced to make
bread of dead men's bones, and not only feed upon Skins, Tanned hides, etc. but
men eat one another, and some women their own children; and we may justly
suppose a grand scarcity, when there was but one little Mem. de la Ligue, tom.
4. p. 332, 333.
Dog in all the City, which the Duchess of Montpensier kept for her self, and
refused two thousand Crowns only for its brains, though it was to preserve the
life of Monsieur d Orlan one of her friends. In short, above tw^lve thousand
died of very Famine, yet did the people really think themselves Holy Martyrs
for dying in so good a Cause. At last the King for mere pity permits as many to
depart the City as would; at one time there crauled out above four thousand,
glad they were delivered from such a misery; then he sent Pasports to the
Scholars, Churchmen, Ladies, and even to his greatest enemi^s.

In the mean time the King presses more upon them, takes S. Denis, 7 July.
(the Leaguers before their yielding it up having d'Aubigne, tom. 3. l. 3. c.
poisoned the Wells, the better to d^stroy the Kings Forc^s) at which siege the
King himself was so vigilant, that he ^at^ on horseback forty hours together.
Being entered S. Denis. in the Presence Chamber were two Franciscan Friars Ant.
Colynet, p. 476.
and another Priest s^iz'd on in the habit of Gentlemen, who being imprisoned
and strictly examined, conf^st that they were three of the six and twenty who
had sworn the Kings death, for which they were hanged. Then the King assaults
and takes the Suburbs of Paris, which so startled the Leaguers, that they
desire a Treaty only to spin out time, daily expecting relief; the King grants
it, but their Propositions are so extravagant that nothing is done.

However the King having now the Parisians as it were by the throat, the
Doctors of Sorbone are at their wits end, suspect the Integrity of the Legate,
grew angry at the Pope for not affoarding them more assistance, and in this pet
and fury drew up a Letter to be sent to his Holiness; but the City was so
closely besieged, that the Letter and Messenger were seized on, and so never
got as far as Rome; which the better to show what fears, jealousies and
distractions they were possessed with at the writing of it take as follows, as
I meet with it then translated into English out of the Latin Copy.

Most Holy Father,
By those continual Letters, partly touching the cruel and lamentable slaughter
of our most Christian Brethren, which your Holiness at sundry times has
received, was easily to be known that all France has fixed her eyes only upon
the Sea of Rome, the Cause concerning the state of the whole Church; and
therefore the rather because it has been always the chiefest refuge of those
that were afflicted for the defense of Religion in their greatest misery and
extremity. Besides, the good report that we daily hear of your Holiness Zele,
Wisdom, Sincerity, Justice, and Hate of all Ungodliness, did not a little
increase our hop^, the tokens whereof being brought unto us, were very severe
against all the wicked, as are the heavy Censures and Sentences pronounced by
your Holiness own mouth against the Heretics and Politicians of our time, and
the Orations made in the sacred Assemblies of the Cardinals, which we read with
a great desire, being now printed: and also because there is ordained a Council
of most reverend Cardinals for the redress of the state of France, and
favorable and Fatherly Letters written to the Princes and Magistrates of this
Realm, and moreover to many of sundry degrees and qualities; whereby we
perceive that your Holiness did commend and approve our purpose and enterprise,
promising us all aid and assistance to the furtherance thereof. And lastly, the
sending of your Holiness Card. Ca^etan.
Legate through such long and dangerous ways, being a man of great parentage and
singular wisdom, with the full consent of all the most Honorable Council of
Cardinals, nothing more comfortable and to be desired in this our general and
common grief.

We of our side, for to encourage the hearts of the common people, have caused
to be printed in both the Languages (that every man might understand them)
those Letters, the which (with great commendation of our College) the renouned
Cardinal of Nephew to this Pope Sixtus V.
Montalto has vouchsafed to send, wherein was specified that your Holiness
Legate was sent with men and m^ney: and that the only and chiefest care of your
Holiness was touching this Realm, how best to refresh and succor the afflicted
and distressed people thereof, that therefore we should not doubt but that your
Holiness will out of hand in this our distress send us sufficient relief. The
private Communication of your Holiness Legate did also confirm your singular
good will and affection toward us, and the exquisite eloquence of The old
Transl^tor might as well have said The Bishop of Asti. H^^ name was Franciseo
Panig^ rola. He was an ^^qu^nt P^ea her, a^^ came into France with Gaecano the
L^gat.
Astensis did greatly enlarge and commend it in the Pulpit. Wherefore we cease
not daily to publish and declare unto all the world this your great benefit so
ready and certain, and are not afraid with a wonderful contentment to assure
our selves in our public and private communications of your Holiness
favorable inclination toward us.

But seeing that our grief daily increases, and that honest and godly men
daily sustain and receive hourly great loss and damages, that it lacks but
little but that we (God punishing our sins in his heavy judgment) begin to feel
the ruin of the State of France, and (which worse is) the uttermost decay and
overthrow of Catholic Religion; the people beginning to waver, and to be
removed from their accustomed constancy, suspecting that the goodwill of your
Holiness, and the Credit and Authority of your Preachers, and which is more
(not without our great grief) almost esteem little or nothing of the Legacy of
the most renowned Cardinal Cajetan, that wheresoever we can turn our selves,
are importuned and wearied with these continual complaints, that our want is
not relieved by the plentifulness of the Sea Apostolic,; and that these
fifteen months (somewhat more or less) being spent in hoping and Watching, the
foresaid Legate has not had or used a particular power of Excommunicating and
Deposing, therewith to bridle and subdue all the ungodly and enemies of the
Church, of what Quality or Condition soever they be: seeing that as yet no
special Excommunication of Henry of Bourbon and his Favorites has been
published, which long ago should have been done they say, before they being
hardened in their impiety would have despised it: so that it is very easy to
persuade unto the weak, wavering, and discontented people (being already
discouraged with long wars, with poverty and need almost dismayed and dead)
that which the Politicians whisper in their ears, namely, that your Holiness
either favors Henry of Bourbons side, or at the least will not contraid or
displease them, or else that you make but a small account of our affairs: and
that to content the minds of honest and good men your Holiness has sent your
Legate, as to Adversaries void and destituted almost of power and money: and
therefore being infected with the pestilent policies of this time, (for this
the wicked ones seek to persuade) endeavors to please both Parties, and
therefore cease not to affirm that your Holiness has excogitated and invented
only these delays. And to that intent Francis Duke of Luxenburg ( a strict
Roman Catholic) sent to Rome to see if he could get the Pope and King Henry
reconciled, 1589.
Luxenburg (the greatest enemy of the Catholics) has been received at Rome
with such humanity, and was entertained so liberally, and in great
dissimulation excluded, but afterward most friendly recalled again, unto whom
they say your Holiness has promised that Navarre should be used favorably,
and that another shall be sent (the first Cardinal being called back again) in
a most honorable Legacy.

Moreover we are not a little grieved that some of the better sort (astonished
and dismayed through the imminent dangers unto the Catholic Religion, and
wearied with long delays) foreseeing partly the issue of our affairs by the
present state thereof, begin (to confess that which is true) to have an ill
opinion of our actions, and to interpret all things to the worst. And further
to testify that which we have seen, we know that not long since out of Italy
Letters have been written in plain words by men of Authority and Account, whose
Credit was never yet suspected in like or greater matters, that in vain we look
for money and assistance from the Sea of Rome, because all things are not done
there plainly and sincerely as they should be. Whereby as much as we can guess
it is probable enough that all things stand in danger of Schism, and that a
most perilous fire (unless God provide otherwise) is already kindled to the
overthrow of the whole Church.

O what a painful and troublesome striving and wrestling sustain we against
those noisome rumors and tidings? O with what a great labor is this to be
drawn again out of the peoples minds? (if in any wise it can yet be rooted out
again) which if it go further and take faster hold, we pray your Holiness to
judge what shall at the end become hereof; and likewise to consider if there
can be any cross more grievous unto honest and good-zeal'd men then this: so
that not without cause our lives are unto us altogether unsavory and
unpleasant.

And although we invent certain probable causes of your Holiness delay,
therewith something contenting the peoples minds and easing their griefs;
notwithstanding we cannot satisfy our selves herewith, ceasing not to bewail
these long delays, but chiefly when we remember the words of the Poet, saying,

A wound which at first was to be cured with ease
With lingering is come a dangerous disease.
But this is far worse, that all things almost are come into an extremity, as
much as any mortal man is able to judge; and, which is worst of all, now every
one says that this is come to pass through the negligence of the Sea of Rome,
and we are not able any longer to disprove their objections. To no other end
tend our daily and mighty Meetings and Assemblies with the most renowned
Cardinal Cajetan and his Assistants, (whereof they will perhaps complain unto
your Holiness) inquiring importunately, and with full Assembly daily desiring
to know what there is done at Rome as touching our matters, and the occasion
that we are kept thus long in suspense, and if there be yet any hope left where
to rest upon; which as often as we do and bring home nothing else but the
common answer, and always one song, namely, that his Holiness has a great care
of our affairs, and that he will never abandon our Cause, being our most loving
and careful Father, very wise and expert in that he has to do, and that ere
long will quench this burning Fire, and that he has not in vain ordained this
worthy Legacy, and such like things many more. We see, and not only we but
every particular man, that this is told us but to drive us off; as those that
mask their faces with mirth and cheerfulness, but being sifted narrowly, this
which the Poet says fitteth them of right:

In sight they feign good hope, and mirth in countenance bear;
But pinching grief in heart and mind closely they wear.
Of what mind thinks your Holiness we should be, or how to repose any trust
in those answers which are altogether without substance and frivolous? Well, to
what end soever this Council tends, this generally we fear, that whiles you
in lingering seek for fitter opportunity, and in the mean time the Romans take
council, Meating pa^is.
Saguntum shall be assaulted and won, and your Instruments and Engines of war
(as Brutus said) shall come too late after the battle. In the mean while the
Henry IV.
Heretic prospers in his succeedings, and the unconstant people speak well
of him, but we must often with grief approach near unto the gates of death.

Moreover (most holy Father) they sow and cast out every where these spiteful
and disdainful scoffs, that at Rome are oftentimes rehearsed and remembered the
singular and great benefits of this Realm unto the Sea Apostolic; but now the
same Kingdom being grievously distressed, is not once requited with like, no
not with necessary thanks and reward. That this Realm is honored with the
Title of The First begotten of the Church, but that it is altogether handled as
a Bastard, and abandoned as an untimely Fruit. That the Bishop of Rome
challenges unto him the name of a Father, and succoureth not his most obedient
and dutiful Children, enduring now extremity, and stretching forth their humble
entreating hands, but rather provokes them to anger. Finally, that all these
lingerings are of small effect, and these excuses not worthy to be written in
water.

It is also very grievous to hear, and is now upon every man's tongue, that it
cannot be done without our great shame, that all the Treasure of England,
Germany, and other Heretical Nations, is spent, wasted, and consumed in an ill
and an ungodly Cause; and that from every place power is sent, and comes in
savor and aid of the Heretics: But that the Catholic Princes (* one only
excepted, of whom France receives Philip King of Spain.
a great and continual succor in such important Affairs, but notwithstanding
insufficient) look one upon another careless, being in a most just and weighty
Cause altogether faint, cold, and unwilling. Which as it is in great grief to
be lamented in other, yet especially in him unto whom it belongs to surmount
them all in this kind of duty, for to encourage them with word and deed to
defend the Cause of that particular member of the Church, whereof he is set and
appointed by God a Governor and a general President, and always armed with
present money wherewith to defend her. And rather should by Letters and
Messengers pawn and engage his Credit, for to encourage the hearts of the
Catholics, then to abate and dismay their hope, in fearing in vain to look for
that, whereunto reason and equity does persuade and bind him; chiefly by that
the Bishop by whom Navarre himself, and other attending unto Divellish
Doctrines, and other walking after the design of the flesh in impiety, scoffing
the name of Catholics, the wisest and most learned men have always judged were
excommunicated and cursed.

For what is he (most Holy Father) that with one eye cannot see, that they
only gape after the Goods and Possessions of the Catholics, by all means seek
to entrap their lives, greedily thirst after their blood, and only wish the
destruction of Christian souls, and utter decay of true Religion? This the
conquered Cities do witness, this the sacked and spoiled Goods of honest and
godly men, this the rewards granted or at least promised unto the Heretics;
this the Consecrated Relics, nay rather the most sacred body of Jesus Christ
cast before Dogs; this the hard and impenitent hearts of the corrupted
Nobility, this the Soldiers ready to the spoil and overthrow of Churches, this
the new established Synagogue of the Ministers of Satan corrupting and
falsifying the pure Word of God, this the manifold Gibbets of Preachers, this
the bodies of sundry Captains and Soldiers beheaded, this in great heaps the
murdered Catholics, this the members of the Franciscans and Dominicans
quickly torn in pieces with wild horses, this finally the cruel slaughters of
Christians, and chiefly of Ecclesiastical persons, manifestly declare and
confirm. Amongst whom the bright and thining Lights, and worthy to be beloved
and desired, and the stays and pillars of their Orders, It may be his name was
Robert Chessa^^^s, Davila page 861. he had publicly commended the Murder ^^
Henry III.
Chessaeus President in his Country, and one of S. Francis Family, drawn by
violence from Gods service and committed unto the Hangman, being at Vendosme,
not without great grief of all good Christians, in the spring and prime of his
age, hanged and deprived of his life. The Director and worthy Reg^nt of the
Dominicans at Paris, N. Demonte, threescore and ten years of age, first in
infinite places stabbed, and not far from the City almost torn in pieces. And
of the same calling before a most worthy and valiant maintainer and defender of
the truth, He advised Cl^ment to mu^der Hen. III.
Burgonius, after diverse torments with horses at Tours, being dismembered, have
all (now laureated and crowned with their innocent blood) yielded up their
Ghosts int) the hands of the Almighty.

Whereupon when we think, we have thought good, diligently to do two things by
the liberty which Christ freely has bestowed upon us. The first is, which
although others can do it better, yet after our small and slender skill to
declare unto your Holiness the whole state of France, whose earnest zeal and
desire to aid us, we doubt not shall be driven in the rest, as the Letters of
your most Renowned Card. Montalto.
Nephew written unto the whole body of the Holy League, most plainly witness.
The other, that we by all means will seek to comfort and strengthen the careful
minds of the people, partly heavy and wavering by the subtilty of the
Politicians, and partly by their own natural weakness, and move and stir them
up with all diligence and earnestness to expel and drive out Navarre, and
refuse and deny him boldly even in the midst of Sword, Flame, and Fire, all
service and obedience, and exhort them to prefer rather what misery soever,
before an ungodly and wicked peace, although he should seem to have forsaken
and forsworn his Heresy, and for it should have obtained a Pardon, (whereunto
yet notwithstanding his is nothing near) and should profess himself a Catholic
again, submitting himself under the Holy See, for the manifest danger which
might ensue and befall unto the true Religion by this deceitful Conversion and
feigned repentance: and he that shall favor him counselling any to agreement,
or else consenting and according thereunto, when by any means shall be able to
stay and hinder it, to be esteemed dangerous and suspected of Heresy, and
altogether unworthy of men's company.

Whereupon our minds and heads are altogether so occupied, that we are fully
determined ere long to put in print to the view of the world certain Articles
concerning these points, and send them first unto your Holiness, and afterward
disperse them in all places of the world, partly to a perpetual reproach and
upbraiding of the Inhabitants of this Realm, if (so often times admonished)
with baseness and cowardliness of heart, they should consent to submit
themselves under the yoke and bondage of an Heretic; partly to stir and raise
up every man's affection, to send with all expedition aid and relief unto our
distressed Affairs. And lastly to leave behind us for our Successors sure
witnesses and tokens of our care and loyalty to our Country, and so to
disburthen our Consciences, and purge and discharge our selves before God, his
Angels, and the World, not to have forgotten our duties in time of persecution,
but constantly to have confessed the name of Christ.

It therefore concerns your Wisdom (most Holy Father) to foresee (seeing we
are now in these dangerous days, whereout we cannot escape without great
miracle) that this evil turn not to the destruction of your Holiness, and the
utter overthrow of the Apostolic See; and that the judgment of God (as S.
Peter says, and the continual and known threatenings of Navarre seem to
confirm) begin not at his house, and that that Serpent (which has till now
been nourished, defended, and by those unto whom it did not become most
courteously used) spit and cast not his poison and venom upon him, by whom it
was expedient his head should have been broken and bruised, to the perpetual
reproach and shame of Sixtus V. but notwithstanding by a just revengement and
secret judgment of God.

And while there is any hope remaining, that with all speed your Holiness
linger not to draw the two-edged sword, although too late we fear (but who
knows if God will be appeased and forgive us our offenses?) upon this noisome
beast, and display all force and power against it. For it is now long enough,
nay we fear too long tarried, delayed, lingered, and loitered. And this is that
we crave of your Holiness for the tender love and mercy of God, if there be
left any regard of duty, same and estimation, or any care of the public, or
the particular health and welfare, deeply to think and consider, that it
concerns the uttermost danger of the Church, and the safety of Christ his
flock so dearly bought, and committed unto our charge; and whiles you are able
to slay this wild Boar, that consumes the Vineyard of the Lord, and drive
away, bridle, and repress with thy double Sword all the small Foxes breaking
and throwing down the same; for fear this being wilfully neglected, his anger
be not ready to punish and chasten us, who will reproach us the hardness of our
hearts, and require at our hands the innocent bloud-shedding, and the great
quantity of souls lost for ever; who because his flock is become a prey, and
his sheep a spoil unto the wild beasts, and his Vineyard trodden under foot,
and made waste, will grievously complain, and we be not snared and wrapped in his
just but most fearful and terrible judgment, eternally to be lamented and
bewailed.

Wherein we protest before the same Almighty and High God, and his Angels, that
herein we have performed our charge and duty; and therefore if here be written
any thing somewhat bitterly, we pray your Holiness to take it in good part, as
coming from a burning zeal, toward the Church now periclitating and ready to
fall; and therefore the rather, because it behooves that all our thoughts be
fixed in the defense of Sion, whose duties we judge it to be to leave nothing
undon, whereby we might by all means possibly both things above and beneath,
and all that is in Heaven and Earth move and provoke for to pity her distressed
estate, because it is more then full time so to do.

Farewell, And as your Holiness pitieth the French, nay, the Universal Church,
ready to fall; so God be favorable and merciful unto you.

In Paris, from your Holiness College of Sorbonne, 1590. 29 July. Your
Holiness Affectionate Orators, and most Humble Servants, the Dean and the rest
of the Sorbonne at Paris.


The Duke of Mayenne intent (as aforesaid) upon the relief of Paris, at last
joyneth with Alessandro Farnese Duke of Parma, and marches toward the City;
the King wirh a Resolution to fight them raises the Siege; but Parma carried
his designs so cunningly, that in spite of all opposition he conveyed great
store of Provisions into the City, nor could the King force or oblige him to a
Battle; yet the King resolved to give one lusty storm to the City, to which
purpose Ladders being provided, and silently be in the night set to the walls,
the City had been won, if by chance a Jesuit (as Page 958.
Davila says) or a few Jesuits (as Page* 343.
de Bussieres says) who stood Sentinel without the Corpse du Guard, which was
kept by those Fathers, and Nicholas Nivelle the Covenanting Bookseller, (all
the rest being asleep and negligent) had not discovered them, given the Alarm,
and fought stoutly against them upon the walls.

The King seeing himself disappointed by Parma, the Parisians well stored with
Victuals, and a Sickness in his Army; raises the Siege, disposes his Forces
into Quarters; the Duke of Parma returning also to his Government in the
Low Countries.

Many Stories are we told of some men's foolish contempt and scorn over their
supposed Superiors, some whipping their Gods if not agreeable to them, Augustus
Caesar could defy Neptune, The Thracians would rant against the Heavens if
Thundered, Xerxes would shackle the Hellespont, and though the Ancient Poets and
Lucian villifyed their Gods (it may be upon good reason) by making them guilty
of all the villainies in the world; yet none could be so extravagant as that
which the Ingenious Le^ E^sa^s ^ 1. c, 3.
Montaigne tells us of one of the late Kings (neighboring to France) of Spain
as some think, who having his Expectations disappointed by Heaven, swore to be
revenged on God himself, and (if the story be true) be commanded his subjects
not to pray to God for ten years, nor to speak of, or believe in him. I shall
not say that these Covenanters proceeded so far, but may justly affirm that
never any people acted more against Gods Vicegerent then they. Their
stubbornness may here be seen by their miseries, and thus their contempt of
favor, law, life, duty and obedience, does show their disrespect to the Divine
Oracles, and God himself.

CHAP. VIII. The Thirdlings. Young Guise escapes out of Prison. Barnaby Brisson
Strangled. The Duke of Mayenne overaw'd the Sixteen. The Mock State General
meet at Paris. King Henry the Fourth declares himself a Romanist, and received
absolution at St. Dennis.
VVHilest Parma is returning to the Netherlands, Pope Sixtus the 27 Aug^st.
Fifth dies; upon which the Cardinal Legate departs France, leaving behind
him in Paris, Filippo Sega, Bishop of Piacenza (he came from Italy with him,
and was also a Cardinal) to act as Vice-Legat. Urban VII. is elected Pope, who
dying thirteen days after, Cregory XIV. is * chosen to sit in the Chair. ^
D^^^mb.


In the mean time the King is pinched on all hands, the Parisians vapor ^s
Conquerors, Emanuel de Loraine Duke of Mercoeur carries all for the League in
Britain, with whom above four thousand Spaniards join: the Duke of Savoy
conquereth in Provence, and by the Parliament of Aix, is Declared Head of their
Government, having also some Intentions for the Crown; nor was the Duke of
Lorraine idle. But these prosperous proceedings did not altogether please
Mayenne, fearing their greatness would Eclipse him: Yet by these was the King
brought so low that he borrows aid from England, Holland, and the German
Princes; and Mayenne sends to desire the like from the Pope and King of Spain.

By this time Barnaby Brisson, chief President of the Covenanting Paris, for
foam reason or other, was more agreeable to the King then formerly, and several
in the City began to wish a Reconciliation with him. The King himself knew,
that he had some friends in the City, by whose assistance he had a design to
surprise it, by having several of his Captains disguised in Country habits,
pretending to carry Horse-loads of corn or meal into it by night [the usual
time so to steal in, by reason of the Kings Forces scouring the ways and
Country:] But this plot being discovered, it failed, and is yet called the 20
Jan. Journee des farines. Farinarum dies, or Nox farinarum.
Day of Flour or Meal. These caused the Parisians for the more strengthening
themselves against any such like attempts, to receive into their City Four
thousand Spaniards, to the displeasure of Mayenne, who feared that Nation and
Faction might in time be too strong for him there.

But he was very male-contented with the forwardness of the new Pope Gregory
XIV. who espoused the quarrel of the League with a great deal of earnestness,
sends Marsilio Landriano of Milan Nuncio into France, with two They may be
seen at large in a Book, called de Christianissimi Regis pericu^^s, or de
periculi Henrici IV. Printed 1591.
Monitory Bulls.

I. One relating to the Clergy, whom he interdicted if within 15 days they
forsook not the obedience and part of the King. And further, if within 15 days
more they departed not from him, then to be deprived of their Livings,
Benefices, and Functions.

II. The second concerned the Princes, Nobility, and the rest of the Laity,
wherein under great pains he also warned them to depart from the King, whom he
called Heretic, Persecutor of the Church, an Excommunicated Person, and
therefore deprived of all his Dominions and Possessions.

To these the Pope adds Arms and Money, sending his Nephew Hercole Sfondrato
(newly for Honors sake made by him Duke of Montemarciano) with an Army, which
he will maintain with the moneys gathered up by Sixtus V. and kept in Castle
St. Angelo; and besides this he allows 15000 Crowns a month to the Leaguers.

The Royallists are greatly offended at these Papers and Proceedings. Those of
the Soverein Court (for convenience then sitting) at Chaalons, by Decree
declare that the former Bulls and actings against Henry III. as also these
against the present Henry IV. to be odious, seditious, false impostures,
contrary to all holy Decrees, Canons, Constitutions, Councils, the Rights and
Liberties of the Gallican Church, and so to be idle, vain, null and void, and
to be burnt by the hands of the Hangman. Ordain also that Landriano calling
himself Nuncio, to be seized on, and suffer according to Law, forbid any to
entertain him; declare that all Cardinals, Prelates and other Ecclesiastics,
who any way promote a Consent to these Bulls, or approve of the late Murder of
Henry III. shall be deprived of all their Benefices in this Kingdom, and that
none hereafter carry any money to Rome, or procure any Benefices thence, etc.
Yet I have a Copy of it (that year printed) bearing date 29 Aug.
10 June 1599. The same in effect was decreed by the Parliament then sitting at
Tours, but with this addition, prohibiting any upon pain of Nigh Treason to
publish and obey any of the aforesaid Bulls. And which was best of all -- -- A
declare and declare Gregoire, se disant Pape, quatoriesme de ce nom, ennemie de
la p^ix, de l'union de l'Eglise Catholic Apostolic and Roman, du Roy and
de son Estat: adhe^ant a la Conjuration d'Espagne, and fauteur des Rebels,
coulpable du tres cruel, tres cruel, tres inhumain, and tres detestabable
parricide, proditoiremen^ commis en la person de Henry III. Roy de tres
henreuse memoire, tres Christen and tres Catholic.
Has declared, and does declare Gregory ( calling himself Pope) the XIV. of
that name, an Enemy to the Peace, to the Union of the
Chatholick-Apostolick-Roman Church, to the the King and his Estate, a Partaker
of the Spanish Conspiracy, a favourer of Rebels, guilty of the most cruel, most
inhumane, and most detestable Parricide, Traitorously committed on the Person
of the most Christian King, and most Catholic King Henry III. of most happy
memory -- 5 August, 1591.

The same Language was used by the Parliament sitting at 3 Aug.
Caen: on the contrary the Parliament at Paris thunder out their Decrees,
commanding the Nuncio and Monitory Bulls to be received and obeyed, as
proceeding from an Authentic Authority, threatening severe punishments to all
those who submit not to them.

And here having mentioned several Parliaments, the common Reader may
understand once for all, that France had then, and has now, several Seats of
Parliament (or rather Courts Judicature) having command within their respective
Precincts, and instituted by several Kings, as this following Scheme will show.

Order Where Settled by Anno I. Paris. Philippe IV. le Bell. 1302. II. Toulouse.
Charles VII. 1443. III. Grenoble. Charles VII. 1453. IV. Was constituted 1447
and so it was then the th^rd Parl^ment, ^u^ it l^st that ^ank and ^d^r^^y a
rebelli^n.
Bourdeaux. Louis XI. 1462. V. Dijon. Louis XI. 1476. VI. Rouen. Louis XII.
1499. some say 1503. VII. Aix. Louis XII. 1501. VIII. Rennes. Henry II. 1553.
IX. Pau, said first to be instituted afterward confirmed. Louis XIII. 1620. X.
Mets Louis XIII. 1633.

I order and time these as they were made, fixed, or sedentary; otherwise we
might say that Parlements were had at Paris 577, at Toulouse 1302, and at Rouen
1443. In the time of this League Paris and Rouen being in the hands of the
Covenanters, King Henry III. removed the Sessions of those Parlements to Tours,
Caen, etc. whither accordingly as many of the Royal Members as could go went
and sat, acting for their Kings, whilst those of the other persuasion staid,
and were as busy and zealous for the Leaguers.

But to return; the Nuncio, the Ambassadors of Spain and Savoy, the Lords of
the House of Lorrain, Nicolas de Pelleve, then Archbishop of Sens (and not of
Card. de Lenoncourt was now liv^^g and Archbishop of Rheims.
Rheims till the year after, as Page 1014.
Davila mistakes) with some others meet at Rheims, where every man seeming for
the League, yet under that vizard to carry on their own designs and Interest,
their Consultations broke up without any determinations.

In the mean time spang up a third Party, which had like to have foiled both
King and League. Charles Cardinal of Bourbon, who whilst the old Kingling
Cardinal Bourbon lived was called Cardinal of Vendosm, he seeing the Pope,
Spaniard and Covenanters, and all resolved to exclude King Henry the IV. if he
turned not presently Romanist, hoped that change would never be, and so doubted
not (being of the Royal blood) to get the Crown to himself. This Plot he
carried on secretly by his Favorites, amongst whom was Jaques Davy Sieur du
Perron (though now but young, and of mean birth, yet of great parts and
Learning, and afterward a Cardinal:) This Plot being discovered, Mayenne was
not a little troubled at it, as aiming to take away his greatness, and the King
not satisfied as offering to rob him of the Crown: However, though his Party
was potent, and in the Opinion of the Romanists, grounded upon good reason, yet
the King seemed outwardly to despise and slight it, by jeeringly calling them
the Les Tiercelets.
Thirdlings, as being neither for the King nor Covenant.

And another accident did not a little trouble Mayenne; viz. The escape of
Charles the young Duke of Guise from his Imprisonment at 15 August
Tours, for he had been secured ever since the killing of his Father at Blois;
but whether this escape was by the Kings desire and permittance, the better to
divide, and so weaken the Leaguers, or by Bribery, or chance, is nothing to our
story. The truth is, Mayenne, though he seemed pleased at his Nephews liberty,
yet he liked not the great rejoycings the Covenant^rs made at it, by Bells and
Bon-fires, whereby he feared himself might be neglected, and by such divisions
and jealousies, the King might assure himself no loser.

Mayenne himself also dreading the event of these distractions, procures a
Private Meeting with the Duke of Lorrain, and some others; where it was
secretly concluded to unite together, never to permit (if they could prevent
it) any to the Crown, but of their Family; but if they should be constrained to
yield further, yet that no stranger should be, but a Prince of the Blood, and
of the Roman Religion: This is signed and sealed by them, and of it they inform
the Duke of Guise, who desires time to consider.

Nor is Paris free from sidings and fear; for the Council of Sixteen (which had
been the foundation of the League, and the raising of the Duke of Mayenne)
began now to distrust his proceedings, as a man thwarting their greatness, not
active and fierce enough against the King and H^gonots, and one that regarded
self more than the Public: And he of late being commonly far absent from them,
had not that aw and respect as formerly; so they began to neglect him, and cry
up the young Guise: And considering themselves strong enough, having the
Preachers, the People, the Spaniard, the Bishop of Piacenza (lately Vice-Legat)
on their side, resolve to have things carried as they please. To this purpose,
they send their demands and complaints to Mayenne; who not consenting to them,
vexed their Worships so much, that they resolved to lay him aside, and consult
some other Head or Chieftain. And to this purpose, (being also instigated by
Mendoza the Spanish Ambassador) in the Jesuits College (where their deepest
Plots used to be made) a Letter is drawn up, and by the Sixteen and others,
sent to Philip II. King of Spain, by one called Father Matthieu, and by Lib.
10^* * p. 1041.
Thuanus, and Davila, nominated Claude Mathe^.

But because Francois Montagne, Rene de la Fon, and Louis de Beaumanoir; or if
you will have the plain truth of it, the Jesuit Luys Richeome (for he was the
French Author that writ the but th^se with his ^ath^r Ap^logies are not printed
amongst his Works in 2 vol.
Apologies for the Jesuits under the former false names) Because, I say they
deny his name to be so, alleging, that Claude Mathieu dyed above two years
before, viz. 1588. at Ancona in Italy, though there might be others of that
name besides him, and because Matthien may as well be a Christian Name as a
Surname, as the Advocate Pl^^-day.
Arnauld and the Author of the Book 3. fol. 200, 201.
Jesuits Catechism do intimate, that this was so; and the late Memoirs d'Estat
en suite de ceux de Mons. de Vill^^^, tom. 3. p. 44 where you may (...) the
who^e Lett^r it self.
Prints from Paris assure us that his name was Matthieu Aquarius. I shall say
no more, this being enough to overthrow one objection, and Davila, Thuanus,
Arnauld, Perefixe and others, being enough to testify the truth of the thing,
supposing the name were not in all things exactly set down. Part of the Letter
take as follows.

Most High and Mighty Prince,
Your Catholic Majesty having been so gracious unto us, as to let us
understand by the most religious and reverend Father Matthew, not only your
holy intentions for the general good of Religion, but more especially your
great affections and favors toward this City of Paris, etc. Then after great
commendations of young Guise, and the telling of their own miseries, they go on
to tell him --

We trust in God, that before it be long the Forces of his Holiness and your
Catholic Majesty's being joined together will free us from the oppressions of
our enemies, who have hitherto for an^ year and half so blocked and hemmed us in
on all sides, that nothing come into the City but by chance or force of Arms,
and would press further, stood they not in fear of the Garrisons your Majesty
was pleased to send us. We can boldly assure your Catholic Majesty, that the
prayers and desires of all the Catholics are to see your Catholic Majesty
sway the Scepter of this Kingdom and Reign over us. As we most willingly cast
our selves into your arms as into the arms of our Father. Or that your
Catholic Majesty would be pleased to appoint some of your posterity.

And if it shall stand with your good pleasure to appoint any other besides
your self, that it may please you to make choice of a The Duke of Guise, or
^om^ ^th^r Frenchman, to marry his (...) Isabel. Clara Eng.
Son in Law, whom we will receive as King with all our best affections, all the
Devotions and Obedience that a good and loyal people can, and are Daughter to
Alphonso IX. of Castile and Leon, married to Louis VIII. of France, and so
Mother to St. Louis IX. She was a wise Queen Rege^t, q^elling all the Cons^^
(...) of the Crown and Kingdom,
bound to yield to their Liege and Sovereign. For we hope so well of the
blessing of God upon this Alliance, that what we have already received of that
most puissant and most Christian Princess Donna Izabella Clara Eugenia, el
(...) Daught^ to Philip II. ( by his (...) wife Elizabeth ^r Izabel ^ France
Daughter ^ Henry II.) (...) have to ^^ (...) of France, and to marry with (...)
French Prince ^^ N^^l^man to be ^ing.
Blanch of Castile, Mother to our most Christian and most religions King St.
Louis; we shall receive it, yea twofold, of this great and virtuous Princess (
c) daughter of your Catholic Majesty; upon whom for her rare Virtues the eyes
of all men are fixed and set, as a most pleasant object, and in whom most
gloriously shines the Blood of France and Spain, to no other end or purpose,
but by a perpetual Alliance to fraternize and join in one brotherhood, as it
were these two great Monarchies under their Government, to the advancement of
the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ, the beauty of his Church, and union of all
the Inhabitants of the world under the Ensigns of Christianism.

As your Catholic Majesty with so many notable and triumphant Victories by the
favor of God and his aid has mightily prevailed and advanced the same; so we
most heartily pray to God (who is the Lord of Battles) to continue your
proceedings therein, with such accomplishment, that the whole work may be
finished and perfected in all points. To which end and purpose that it would
please him to prolong your Catholic Majesty's days in perfect and happy
health, accompanied with daily success of Victories and Triumphs over all your
Enemies.

From Paris this second of November, 1591. The reverend Father Matthew this
bearer, who has greatly comforted us, and fully instructed with the state of
our affairs, shall satisfy your Catholic Majesty in all things which may seem
defective and wanting in our Letters: Beseeching your Majesty most humbly to
credit him in whatsoever he shall report unto you from us.




Whether this Matthew Aquarius the Agent of the League was a Jesuit or no, I
shall, not possitively affirm, though there be good Authority for it, but the
best Authors may have their mistakes. I shall only observe by the by, that
there was at this time one Matthaeus Aquarius a Domini^an, and in vogue as well
for his Philosophy as Schoolmanship, both in Rome and Naples; so a trusty
servant both to Pope and Spain. And though the Jesuits will attribute the
title of Fathers to themselves, yet I find this Aquarius (as oftentimes others
are also) before his printed books so entitled, that any might mistake him for
a Jesuit, because called Father; I shall not say, nor can I affirm that this
Aquarius the Dominiean was the same man with the Leaguers Agent.

This Letter was intercepted near Lions by Gilbert de Chaseron Governor of the
Province of Bourbon, and by him sent to the King, whereby their Honesty,
Religion, and Loyalty was discovered.

Now as the Sixteen and their Associates had laid the Design to humble the
Parliament of Paris to them, which they thought to depend too much upon Mayeune;
they began to stir up the people, persuading them Religion was betrayed, their
Cause and good Covenant quite undone; that the Parliament intended to deliver
the City into the hands of the Navarrois, i. e. the King. And to obtain their
designs with greater ease and facility, they consulted about a new 5 November.
Jo. de B^ssie^es vol. 4. p. 364, 3^5. Gomberville Me^^ de M. de Nevers Tom. 2.
page 623.
Oath, whereby all that favored them not should be driven out of the City, and
all the Blood Royal to be excluded from the Succession and the Crown.

In the mean time they take an occasion to be stark mad; for one Brigard (once
a violent Covenanter) being suspected by them of too much favoring the King,
was hurried to prison, resolving to have him hanged for it; but the Parliament
not agreeing in this with their humors, cleared him in a full trial; and he at
last finding means to escape from their fury out of the City, they in a giddy
zele turn their malice upon his Judges.

Thus resolved they hurry the people to Arms, seize upon Barnaby 15 Nov.
Brisson the Chief President, Claude l'Archer Counselor of the Chastelet,
with Jean Tardif, whom they carry to the Sessions House, there in a haste
condemning them without rule or reason. Brisson desires them to spare him a
little time, till in prison he had finished his book De Formulis (so much cried
up by learned and knowing men) but no favor or mercy being granted, they are
all three instantly strangled in prison, scarce a quarter of an hour being
allowed to Brisson to confess in. Thus murdered, he is presently hung out of
his own Chamber-window, and the next day hung on the Gallows publicly to be
seen of all. Such was the end of the learned but unfortunate Brisson, who
before had in Poet. Gal. v l. 1. p. 713, 714.
verse bewailed the mischiefs of a Civil war, and it may be in relation to this
League.

This done, they meet at the house of Pellettier, the Covenanting Lecturer of
S. Jacques de la Boucherie, where they conclude that a Court of 17 Nov.
Justice shall be formed of men of their Faction, to proceed against Heretics
and the Favorers of the King, that the moneys and Treasuries how expended
shall be looked into, that the Council of State shall be filled up, and the men
were there named by them; that a Council of war shall be chosen, upon whose
consent the Governor ( de Belin left by May^nne) should act nothing; that the
Seals of the Crown which Mayenne carried about with him, should for the future
always remain in the City, etc. To these they add the sending of the Letter to
the King of Spain formerly writ, with which they now forthwith dispatch Mathieu.

Yet Thuanus dates the Letter the 20th. of November, and Memoires en suite de
ceux de V^lleroy, tom. 3. p. 24, 25.
another the 20th. of September; but herein I follow Arnauld, who makes a
particular observation upon the timing or dating it, the Jesuits themselves not
objecting any thing against his date, viz. 2 November. and Davila says it was
sent this day, viz. 17 November. and so most probably writ before, this day they
being too busily implied in other mischiefs. However the day is no great
matter, the difference being but small, and probably a mistake in the writing
or printing.

This done, they arise from Council, get the Council of State presently to
assemble, to whom they propound the Articles, to the end to have them confirmed
and executed: but at this time they are put off, it being alleged the day was
too far spent, and the Duchess of Nemours carried her self so powerfully with
them, that they were willing to let the execution of them alone till they had
heard from her son the Duke of Mayenne, who being informed of these
hurly-burlys, thought it best to quell them before they went any further, for
which purpose well guarded he hastes toward Paris: at whose approach the
Sixteen discouraged, 28 N^v.
crave pardon, let him enter the City, the Bastile is also yielded to him, then
he seizes on Lauchort, Emmenot, Auroux and Ameline, great Sticklers amongst
the Sixteen, whom he caused to be strangled in the Louvre, and publicly hung
on the Gallows, and others had tasted the 3 Dec.
same sauce had they not fled for it.

At this the Priests and Doctors of Sorbonne were wonderfully terrified, but he
not willing to lose them quite, knowing such men to be dangerous enemies
amongst the people, waited upon them himself, gave them good words, told them
all was pardoned, and Justice satisfied, which he ratified by an Edict. At the
same time he also decreed, Union with the sense of the lawful Magistrates,
which being registered in full consent of Parliament, put an end to the power
and greatness of the Sixteen, and somewhat spoiled and cooled the designs of
the Spanish Ministers. And an Oath was also drawn up and read in Parliament for
all the Soldiers in the City to take, the better to keep them in Obedience.

Whilst these things were acting, Pope Gregory XIV. dying, Innocent IX.
succeeds him, who allowed the League fifteen thousand Ducats a month,
desiring them to fall to work, and choose a King of the Roman Religion, aiming
(as it is thought) at Cardinal Bourbon (the Head of the third party) but what
his other designs were, his 30 Dec.
death after a two months Popedom, would not let be known. And after him
succeeded Clement VIII.

The Parliament at Rouen now puts forth a severe 7 Jan. 1592
Edict against any that shall adhere to Henry of Bourbon, as they called him;
yet the prosecution of the League was somewhat hindered by the Jealousies
arising betwixt Parma and Mayenne, the latter fearing to be out-vapoured by the
Spaniard, was not so averse as formerly from an Agreement with the King, to
carry on which the great Statesman Villeroy (who as yet kept himself with the
Leaguers) and du Plessis Morney (the Kings faithful friend) had diverse
meetings, but the Covenanters Propositions were so high and lofty (getting all
into their own hands, leaving his Majesty a mere shadow) that it brake off
without any determination, though the King was willing to grant much to be at
rest and quiet.

This Treaty was presently made known, thinking to do Mayenne a displeasure,
and so it did, both the Spaniards and Leaguers being offended at him, in
offering to treat without their consent or knowledge, and so made jealous as if
intended to leave them in the lurch. But on the other side, the King gained not
much by the bargain, the Romanists who followed him (next that it should be
carried on by an Huguenot, viz. Morney) began to have the same suspicions of
His Majesty. And in this zeal and humor having consulted themselves, they
forthwith gave Mayenne to understand that it was fitting for the common safety,
that all the Romanists should be united, and so to require of the King to
change his Religion within a prefixed time, and then they would acknowledge him,
otherwise they would jointly proceed to the Election of a King of the Roman
persuasion, for such an one (and none other) they would have.

Add to this Pope Clements favor of the League, allowing it 15000 Ducats a
month, exhorting them to choose a new King of the Roman belief, alleging none
to be capable of a Crown but one of that Religion, commanding the Nuncio
Cardinal Piacenza to forward the Election. Upon all these and other such like
considerations the King is perplexed beyond measure, now clearly perceiving that
all of them were gone to that height of Conditional Subjection, as never to
receive him for King unless he would be of their Religion, nor was his force
sufficient to oppose. The case is hard, but a Kingdom is not to be lost, yet
the war goes on vigorously on both sides.

In the mean time the Pope having sent to his Nuncio in France to hasten the
calling of the States General, that a Catholic King, an enemy to Heretics,
and a Defender of the Church, might be chosen; the Duke of Mayenne took heart,
fancying that the Pope might aim at him, States General; the Spaniard would
have it at Soissons, that Parma might the sooner assist or awe them from
Flanders; the Duke of Lorrain desires Rheams, where his greatest Interest lay;
but Mayenn^ thought Paris best, his own Authority being greatest there by his
former weakening the Sixteen.

In the mean time all care is taken by them to exclude Henry, and nothing could
thwart them more then his turning Romanist, of which they had some fears,
several earnestly soliciting him to it. To prevent this October.
it is spread abroad, how unlawful it is for any to desire his Conversion; how
it is against Divine, Civil, and Canon Law, the Decrees of the Popes, Mem. de
M. de Nevers vol. 2. page 634.
the Fundamental Law of the Kingdom, the Holy Union, etc. and therefore
conclude, that those who propose or endeavor such a thing are wicked Citizens,
unstable perjured Politics, seditious Disturbers of the Commonweal; favorers
of Heretics, suspected of Heresy, Excommunicated, ought to be driven out of
the City, lest they should corrupt the rest.

And those of Chaalons having put forth a 18 November.
Decree against Cardinal de Piacenza the Popes Nuncio, as also the Popes Bulls,
as they did formerly against Pope Gregory XIV. Those of the Parliament of Paris
publish an Act, whereby they

Declare the said Decree of Chaalons null; of none effect or force, being
published by those of no Right or Authority to be a Parliament, being
Schismatics, Heretics, Enemies to God and his Church, disturbers of the State
and public peace of the Kingdom.

Order the said Decree as full of Scandal, Schism, Heresy, and Sedition, to be
torn and burnt by the Hangman.

Forbid any to receive or obey the said Decree.

Enjoin all to honor and obey Pope Clement VIII. and acknowledge his Legate.

Affirm that their intended General States design nothing but the Preservation
of the Roman Religion, and to choose a true Christian Catholic French King.

Forbid any to hinder or molest the members* coming to the said meeting of
States.

DU-TILLET.
Paris 2 December. 1592.
Accordingly to summon the said States General, the Duke of Mayenne 1593. 5 Jan.
Published a large Declaration, in which he undertakes

To Vindicate himself.

Desires the Romanists to unite.

That though the Leaguers had too much cause to desire the late Kings death,
yet they had no hand in it, it being a blow from Heaven.

That Navarre could not be King, because an Heretic, Obedience being only
founded upon the of the Roman Religion.

So they cannot be blamed for their Actions, nor can be Rebels, seeing they
fight only against Heretics, and their Associates, who have despised the Popes
Bulls, and Admonitions, etc. And so throwing an odd blot upon the King
concludes.

To this the Popes Legate Piacenza, thinking that of Mayenne'^ not plain and
severe enough, added another Declaration,

Desiring all to be obedient to the Pope, who will never assent to an Heretical
King, or the ruin of the Church or that Crown. * 15 Jan.


Affirming that to think that the Privileges of the Gallican Church extends
so far as to admit of an Heretical King, is the dream of a Madman, and an
Heretical Contagion.

That those who had acknowledged Navarre, had forgot the Piety of their
Ancestors, the Reputation of their Country, and the safety of their souls,
their salvation being desperate.

That Navarre had violated all Laws both divine and humane.

And that the Parliament of Paris is a true and lawful one, and so persuades
them to proceed to an Election.

To these the King returning Answers, endeavoring to clear himself from their
Accusations, not forgetting also to show what a favor he had for the Roman
Religion.

And though the death of the Duke of Parma had been no small Hindrance to the
Spanish designs, yet now Lorenzo Suarez de Figuer^ Duke of Feria comes
Ambassador to manage the Interest of that Crown at the meeting of the States,
several at this time aiming at the Throne, and every one not despairing of
their Cause or Interest: The Spanish daughter Izabella Clara Eugenia, the Dukes
of Guise, Lorain, Nemours and Mayenne having all hopes.

In short, the States General meet at Paris in the Great Hall of the 26 Jan.
Louvre, amongst the rest of the Drolleries of these times, nothing took more
then a Book called Satyr Menippee or le Catholicon d'Espagne, Composed in
abuse of this Convention. Debit. Pret. Belg. Tom. 3. p. 339.
Justus Lipsius will have a fling at this Book, but the greatest honor it
received was from Rome, where their Wisdoms there, (as if they had nothing
else to do) did many years after very gravely call it to remembrance, and at
last thought it fit to pass under their 16 Mar. 1621. vid. Ind. Expurgat.
Alexandri VIII. p. 218.
Censure of Reprobation. The prose of it was made by the Almoner to Cardinal de
Bourbon; the Verses were composed by Nicholas Rapin, commended by Poet* Gall.
vol. 3. p. 165.
Johannes Passeratius, Ib. p. 420, 421.
Scav^la Sammorthanus with others, and Rapin himself has some Ib. p. 204* etc.
28 Jan.
Poems out in Latin.

The States being met as aforesaid, Mayenne (King-like) sits under the Cloth
of State, desiring them to choose a Catholic King, an Enemy to Heresy, which
was seconded by others. The next day at a private meeting the Legate moved, that
at the next Sessions of the States all should take a solemn Oath never to
acknowledge Navarre for their King, though he should turn Romanist, but this
was quashr at the Proposal, as to swear against the Popes Authority, suppose he
should turn, and his Holiness command him to be received.

The next day the Romanists with the King (with his consent) send Propositions,
to the States for a Treaty with them, at which the Legate stormeth, affirming
the Proposal to be Heretical, and so not fit to be Answered, Cardinal Pelleve
and Diego d'Ivarra one of the Spanish Agents agre^ing with him, but this was
opposed; and because the Paper was directed to all the States, 'twas judged fit
to be communicated to them, which so netled the Legate, that he got the College
of Sorbonne to declare it Heretical, as intimating a declared Heretic might be
King, and ought to be obeyed. Yet the Proposal is shown to the States, a
Conference with the Royal Romanists is consented to, but in their Answer they
had this odd Conclusion, -- That to oppose an Heretical King is not Treason.
The place agreed on is Surenne, between Paris and St. Denis, and Persons are
nominated on both sides.

In the States the Spaniards carried high for the Infanta, many seeming willing
to it for interest-sake; but when they named Ernest Archduke of Austria, the
Emperors Brother, for her husband, it was rejected, as not fitting to give the
Kingdom to a stranger. The Spaniards smelling the design, offered to admit of a
French Prince to be married to Philips daughter, which took pretty well, Guise,
Nemours, Lorain, and Mayenne his sons, each of them hoping to be the Man and
King. Nay, some who seemed to be the Kings Friends and Allies, as Cardinal
Bourbon, Count de Soissons, the Prince of Conti, with some others, began to
hearken to this Proposal, every one fancying to make the Crown his, upon which
conceits they were not so earnest in the Kings Cause and Interest as they
seemed to be.

The King perceiving that the Authority of the Pope was one of his greatest
Enemies or Pretenses, had a great mind to have him pacified, to which purpose
he formerly had the Republic of Venice, and Ferdinando de Medici Grand Duke of
Tuscany to use their interests in his behalf at Rome; and to further it had
also been sent Cardinal Pietros de Gondy, Bishop of Paris, and the Marquess de
Pisani, in the name of the Romanist with the King upon the same Errand. But the
Pope commanded them not to enter into the Ecclesiastical Territories, as being
Favorers of Heretics, well-Wishers to Navarre, with whom they had presumed to
speak and treat, to which some Reasons and Excuses being returned, the Pope at
last permits them to enter Rome. And at last the King himself gave fair Signs
and Proffers to the Conference at Surenne, not only of his being willing to be
instructed in the Roman Religion, but as it were ready to be of it.

This amazeth the Covenanters to the purpose, the Legate protests against the
Conference as dangerous, that they could neither treat with, nor admit of a
peace with Navarre, being a declared Heretic, and that if they did either, he
for his part would quit the Kingdom; and this he published in Print that every
one might take notice of it. Nor were the Spaniard less concerned, who (fearing
the Kings Conversion, would make haste and be excepted of, thinking to spoil
it) Nominates the Duke of Guise for Husband to the Infanta, showing it was so
in his Instructions.

At this Mayenne is stung to the heart, nor could he so much dissemble but his
thoughts were perceived; however he thanks them for their kindness to his
Nephew, and desires time till things were better prepared; But this Nomination
being known, the Ambassadors, Nobles, Citizens, and every one flock to pay
their service to Guise, and give him joy, his Palace is filled, himself cried
up, and now they vapor of a new Kingling, Charles de Guis^.
Charles XI. At all this the Duchess of Mayenne is mad, she frets, storms and
weeps three days, and not able any longer to endure, she falls upon her
troubled husband with Sighs, Exclamations, Threatenings and Railings, jearing
him as one that has lost all his labor and pains, if he who had hitherto
borne the brunt, must at last only thus truckle to his young Nephew.

The Duke also (thus perplexed to see himself as it were laid aside) puts many
into young Guise his head, demands strange and exorbitant Conditions of the
Spaniard for performance; yet thinking these not sure enough, designeth a
Treaty with Cardinal Bourbon; and lest this also should fail, cunningly deals
with the Parliament of Paris, to make a Decree, that the Crown should not be
transferred to strangers, and the nulling of all Treaties held to that purpose,
as contrary to the Sulique Law (which some think a Cheat) and other Fundamental
Laws of the Kingdom. And this trick was soon obtained by the hands of Jehan le
Maistre chief President, who (as if the Duke knew nothing of the business) 28
June.
waited upon Mayenne with a good Company of Counselors, to inform him of their
Order; which Action and Decree, the Duke seemed to take in ill part, as if they
had been too bold in meddling, and this had some effect, not a little dashing
the Confidence and Plots of the Spaniard.

The King understood all this Cabal, and also he perceived, that though they
agreed not amongst themselves, yet were they all resolved against him, and to
add to his trouble, the Romanists whom he most trusted, were falling from him
as a Prince not to be converted. These and other Camde^ an. 1593.
Inconveniences, forcing him to be more apprehensive, he thinks himself now
necessitated so far to comply with them in securing the Kingdom to himself, as
to hint the Roman Religion to be the best; and so at Mante, having talked
between Sp^nd. 1593: sect. 17. 23 July.
five and six hours with some Prelates, he seemed well enough satisfied, and
thus thrust from his failings, he declares he will publicly go to receive
Absolution, and hear Mass at St. Denis within two days.

Now is Mayenne at his Wits end, he had been at some pains and trouble to lay
aside his Nephew, his Duchess persuading him rather to make peace with
Navarre, then to be a subject to young Guise. But here he perceives himself
outwitted, all his Pretensions against the King being because he was an
Heretic, but now by this declared Conversion he is left without excuse. Well,
finding no other remedy, he consults to get a Truce with the King for some
time, to which his Majesty shows himself willing, hoping by the sweetness of a
little peace to gain upon the people, though Mayenne had other designs against
him. As for the Duke of Guise, considering well how things went, he excused his
Election to the Spanish Ambassadors, as a thing that would prove ridiculous to
others, and ruinous to himself.

In the mean time, the Legate informed of the Kings design, to convert and be
absolved at St. Denis, pulls out his Paper-Tools, and falls to the old Work,
declaring Navarre to be an Excommunicated Heretic, being so pronounced by
Sixtus V. and therefore not to be absolved or admitted into the Church, but by
the Pope himself: That all shall be null and void, that they shall do that
waywards; and that those who shall appear there, shall be excommunicated and
deprived: to these Mayenne adds his good will, by forbidding any man to go to
St. Denis 25 July.
un^er great penalties.

But all to no purpose, for the day being come, all sorts of people crowd
thither, the King clothed in white, with a black Hat and Cloak, nobly attended,
goes to the Great Church, the Gates being shut, the Lord Chancellor knocks,
they are opened, and within appears Renaud e Beaune Archbishop (or if you
will A Little losa attributed to the Archbishop of Bourg^s, Pope Nicolas I.
calling S. Rodolphus the 47. Prelat of this City a Patriarch. Cause. 9. Quest.
3. c. Con^^^stus and Gloss.
Patriarch) of Bourges; sitting in his Chair in his Pontificalibus, environed
with a great number of Prelates. He asked who he was, and what he would have?
The King replied, that he was Henry King of France and Navarre, desiring to be
received into the bosom of the Church, the Archbishop asked him if he
heartily desired it, and was truly sorry for his former Errors? which the King
affirming on his knees, repeating the Confession of Faith, with some Prayers,
and being sworn, after secret Confession he received Absolution; then sat under
the Cloth of State to hear Mass; so all being done, he returned an excellent
Romanist to his Palace, but with what bad words and maledictions the Priests of
Paris could throw upon him.

In the mean time at the Conference of Surein, a Truce being concluded between
the King and Mayenne, the Legate showed himself very zealous and furious against
it, threatening to be gone, but he was somewhat appeased by Mayenne's getting a
Decree from their illegal States for the receiving the Council of Trent, though
a little before, the Council being treated on, in the same States the
Parliament opposed its Reception, producing XXVI. Articles in it, contrary to
the Gallick Spond. on 1593. sect 9.
Church.

Mayenne seeing the Covenanting Cause thus at a stand, if not quite lost,
thanks the Spaniards for the honor they had done his family, by honoring
their Infanta to his Nephew Guise, and for their assistance to the League, but
tells them withal, that it is fitting to defer the Election to a more
convenient time, then Assembling the States, he made them all take an Oath to
persevere in the Holy Union, and so adjourned 8 August.
them for some months, and then to meet again at the same place, hoping yet
with himself rather to raise then diminish his greatness.

The King having as aforesaid taken away all Objections at home about his
Religion, endeavors the same at Rome, to which purposes he sends Lodovico
Gonzago Duke of Nevers Ambassador thither, with several Vid. Gomberv^lle
Memoi^es de M. de Nev^rs vol. 2. P, 405. etc. p. 638. Davila. page 1220.
Divines, amongst whom was Jaques Davy, Sieur du Perron the Elect Bishop of
Eureux, who had already thrown off the interest of his former Master Cardinal
Bourbon (the Head of the third Party) for whilst he Negotiated the Cardinals
designs with some great ones at Court, he grew acquainted with the King,
pleasing him with his Learning, Eloquence, Mirth, Wit and Poetry: thus
commanding the Kings Ear and Humor; and perceiving his own greatness might
more easier be attained to by the King (especially his Conversion) then the
Cardinals Exaltation, quitted his old former service, and became very active
for his Majesty.

Nevers and his Company go toward Rome, whilst Arnand d'Ossat (though but of
mean Parentage, yet of great Wit and Judgment, as his Negotiations and Letters
testify) now living at Rome (and afterward a Cardinal) secretly and wisely on
his own head, agitated for the Kings advantage. The Pope sends Possivino (the
known Jesuit) to Nevers, not to approach, the Duke returns many Reasons, and
goes on; at last the Pope allowed him, but he must enter the City privately,
and not stay in it above ten days. He waits upon the Pope, but Clement will
grant him nothing, nor absolute, nor confirm the former Absolution of Henry,
nor permit the Bishops who came along with him to kiss his Toe, because they
had presumed to absolve Navarre, though they alleged it was but ad futuram
Cautelam, reserving his Obedience and Acknowledgment to the Pope, which he now
rendered him. The Duke and Prelates seeing nothing to be done, depart the City
and go to Venice.

In the mean time Mayenne carries on his designs, sends into Spain, desiring
that their Infanta might be married to his eldest son; but the Legate is mad at
him for spoiling the cause, by crossing the Promotion of Guise: nor had the
Spaniards any great kindness for him, perceiving that he favored and made use
of them only for his own advantage. Besides these, the League was now also
somewhat weakened by the Ambitious thoughts of the Duke of Nemours, who thinking
to canton out or make himself absolute Lord or Prince of Lion (where he was
Governor) and the Territories adjoining was by Mayenne's Directions turned out
of the City and Government, by which affront (as his Brother in law Nemours
thought it was) one grand prop of the Covenant was thus discontented and laid
aside. Upon which Mayenne and Guise (thus conceiving their own Relations and
Confederates to plo^ against them) thought it behoved them to be more cunning
and wary, and so they join more strictly together, for the more sure
preservation of themselves, Family and Faction.

CHAP. IX. The Several Plots of Pierre Barriere against the King. Paris yielded
Charles
to the King. Chastel stabs the King in the Mouth. Ridicove a Friar sent to
kill the King.
WHILST the Leaguers (as aforesaid) were grievously perplexed Covenant) is
zealously contrived. There was one Pierre Barriere or la Bar, first a Boatman
in Orleance, and after a trusty Soldier for the Solemn League and Covenant; he
some way or ^her instigated, took up a Resolution to kill the King, thinking
thereby to do God good service, and meritoriously to make his way more easy
for Heaven, their Preachers from the Pulpit having continually thundted into
the peoples ears the lawfulness and gallantry of such an Action.

His design he communicates to some Friars, who encourage him in it; then he
must needs reveal it to Seraphino Banchi, a Florentine Dominican then living in
Lion; Banchi honestly abhorring the Fa^^, discovers it to le Sieur de
Brancabeon, a servant of the Queen Dowagers, and shows him the fellow to the
end he might use his direction in informing the King.

Barriere resolved on his business, goes to Paris, conferreth about the
business with Christopher Aubre, Curat of S. Andre des Arcs (or en Laas) who
seemed well pleased with the noble Resolution, made the fellow drink, telling
him, That he should gain by that Act both great Glory and Paradise; and so
sends him for further Instructions to Ambrose Varade, about three weeks
before chosen Rector of the Jesuits College. Varade entertaineth him friendly,
telling him, that the Enterprise was most holy, and that with good Constancy
and Courage he should Confess himself, and receive the blessed Sacrament. Then
led him to his Chamber, gave him his blessing, received the Sacrament in the
College of the Jesuits, and was confessed also by another Jesuit by Varade's
Order.

The Villain thus encouraged buyeth a Knife for Eighteen pence, a lusty knife
with a blade, some seven inches long, edged both ways with a long Poyniards
Point. Thus prepared he went to St. Denys^ (where the King then was) watching
opportunity to give the blow, but prevented there, he followed him to Fort
Gournay, then to Bricontrez Robert, where he confessed again, and communicated
with Thomas Boucher, (whether akin to Jean I know not) the Curate of that
place; here the Melun, whither Brancal^on being come, and seeing the fellow, he
is discovered, and taken, and carried to prison, where he desired of Anne
Rousse the Gaolers wife some poison. Being examined, confessed all, is
condemned, led to the 31 August.
Scaffold in the Marketplace, where he further confesses, that two Black
F^iars went from Lion also upon the same design: so his right Hand is burned in
a flaming Fire, his Arms, Legs, and Thighs broken, so put upon the wheel and
strangled, the next day his body was consumed to ashes, and they thrown into
the River.

The King now goes on prosperously, taking several places, and others yielding
freely to him, which success troubled not a little the Covenanters. Nuncio put
forth a 27 Jan.
Declaration, exhorting all the Catholics to unite and oppose Navarre, telling
them that the Pope will not absolve him, nor admit of his Absolution; that the
Duke of Nevers is disreguarded at Rome, his Embassy is despised by the Pope;
that they owe no obedience to the King, his Conversion being but a Cheat, and
himself not received into the bosom of the Church.

In the mean time Aix in Provence yields to the King, to the great trouble of
Gilbert Genebrard the Hebrician and Chronologer, who the year before had this
Archbishopric given him for his great zeal to the League by Pope Gregory XIV.
and so vexed was this old Covenanter at the re^^ition of this place, that he
forthwith departed the City, scorning to breathe amongst such Royallists.
Mayenne having sought help from Pope, Spaniard, and every where else, and now
growing jealous of Count de Belin his Governor of Paris, he removed him,
putting in his room Count de Brissac, and so marches out to try his fortune in
other places.

Brissac having thus Paris under his command, thought it best to consult his
own advantage by making peace with the King, whom he saw to carry all. Whilst
this Capitulation went secretly on, the King had himself crowned at Chartres,
by Nicholas de Thou Bishop of that City, 27 Feb.
and for his Sacreeing or Anointing, because Rheims was possessed by the
Covenanters, and so they could not procure the Sancte Ampoule or holy Vial of
Oil (of which their Legends talk much) they had recourse to that kept in the
Abbey Monast^ri^m majoris Monaste ii.
de Marmonstier near Tours, which they say was brought from Heaven by an Angel
( P^g. 57.
Gononus says the Virgin Mary) to cure the broken bones of St. Martin the
Archbishop of that City. For the Ceremonies of this Coronation I shall refer
you to Hist. de N^v^^. c.
Andre Pavyn, Le Cerimonial de ^ranc.
Theodore Godefroy, and the story of it was the same year printed in French as
also in English.

Well, the Tr^aty is concluded about the delivering up of Paris. Brissac upon
feigned excuses sends out of the City the Soldiers he could not confide in,
then having prepared all things for the best, the King and his Forces are
secretly let into Paris, the Soldiers and Citizens upon notice 22 March.
crying V. ve le Roy, all things are carried peaceably, all pardoned and kept
in their Places and Offices; but Cardinal Pelleve Archbishop of Rheims a
furious Covenanter, now lying sick in Paris, and informed what was a doing
angrily said, that -- He hoped yet the Arms of the Spaniards and good
Catholics would drive that Huguenot out of Paris -- which said he died. All
the Kings enemies had liberty to depart. The Legate (though the King desired him
to stay) returned for Rome, the Spanish Ambassadors and Forces marched away,
and several Their names in Mem. de M. Nevers, v l. 2. l. 718.
Frenchmen jealous of their own Villainies quitted the City, and others the
Kingdom. And now both Parliament of Paris and the Sorbonne Doctors wheel about,
and declare themselves dapper fellows for King Henry IV. and the Parliament of
Paris puts forth a Decree, the sum of which was:

Nulleth and makes void all Decrees and Oaths made or taken against King Henry
IV. since Dec. 20. 1588.

Nulleth all that has also been done against King Henry III. commands all to
speak reverently of him, and that those shall be proceeded against who were any
way guilty of his murder.

Revoketh all power formerly given to the Duke of Mayenne, forbids any to yield
him any obedience under pain of Treason, and under the same penalty commands
the House of Lorrain to acknowledge Henry IV. for their King.

Commands all people to forsake the League or Union.

Revoketh all that has been done by the late pretended States General at
Paris, and that for the future they assemble not.

And that the 22th. of March shall for the future be kept as an Holyday, etc.

De Villoutreys.
Paris, 30 March 1594.
The King thus prosperous, many places (seeing small hopes left) submitted
themselves. The Duke de Elboenf of the House of Lorrain makes peace; the Duke
of Lorrain himself is inclinable, but Mayenne, d'Aumale, and some others stand
out obstinately. As for the Spaniards, they seeing the League ruined, fight for
their own Master Philip, under that notion beginning a war with France, to them
the Duke of Aumale submitting himself and Interest, rather then to his own
Sovereign; and Mayenne followed almost the same steps, joining with them,
though he did not absolutely submit himself to them. Thus the League daily
losing ground; Lorrain makes a Truce or Peace with the King, and Guise seeing
little else to trust to, renounceth the Covenant and compounds with His Majesty.

But that all hopes might not fail, another attempt must be made upon the Kings
Person. The Memoirs du Duc du Sully, tom. 1. p. 169.
Jesuits, Capuchines, and other Religious Zelots had formerly contrived his
murder; and Mem. de la Ligue, tom. 6. p. 263. L^ur^nce Bouchil Hist. de la
justice criminelle de France, tit. 11. chapter 15.
Francois Jacob, a Scholar of the Jesuits at Bourge^ had boasted and threatened
his death; but here we meet with a fellow that will endeavor to be as good as
his word.

His name was Jean Chastel, son to a Draper in Paris, a young man of a wicked
life, and bred up in the Jesuits School. Having considered with himself what an
abominable life he had led, resolved to do some noble and meritorious action
for the benefit of Religion, thereby to wash and wipe out the stains of his own
crimes and offenses. And having often heard it preached from the Pulpit,
discoursed of and disputed in the Schools (where he conversed) that it was not
only lawful but glorious to kill Heretical Kings, and particularly Henry of
Bourbon. Thus nursed up, he concluded nothing could be more meritorious to
himself, and acceptable to God and Man, then the taking out of the world
Navarre, whom he was taught to believe to be truly no King, but a damnable
Heretic and Persecutor of the Church. Thus resolved, he Andre in Paris.

And now being fully confirmed in the gloriousness of the action, and being
well prepared for the attempt, he will take the next opportunity. The King with
several Nobles being at the Louvre in the Chamber of the fair Cabrielle
d'Estrees, (by him for love-sake made Duchess of Beausort) Jean Chastel
amongst the rest had boldly thrust himself in. At last getting near the Kings
person, he out with his knife offering a stab at his Throat or Heart, but the
King by chance then stooping to one in 27 Dec^m^.
complement, received the blow or wound upon his upper lip, which also struck
out a tooth. The Villain upon the blow let the knife fall, and having mixed
himself with the Company designing to slip away, it could not presently be
known who was the Criminal, till the Count de Soissons by chance casting his
eyes upon Chastel, and perceiving him in an amazed and affrighted condition,
seized on him by the arm, upon which the fellow presently confessed, and which
was more boldly vindicated the action. Upon this wound Perron made a long Copy
of Vide ^^sp^n^se le P^rn^sse, com. 1. fol. 13, 14, etc.
verses, and so did Poet. B^l^. to^. 1. p. 500, 501.
Baudius, Poet. (...). tom. 3. p. 718, 719.
Seba, and others upon the Parricide and Pyramide.

The bystanders would have cut the Villain to pieces, but the King wiser then
their passions commanded he should not be hurt; so he is had to prison, tried,
and condemned to have his flesh pulled off with hot Pincers, his right hand
holding the knife to be cut off, and himself drawn in pi^ces by four horses;
which accordingly was done, the Parricide showing no sign of grief or pain.

The Father of Chastel was banished, his house before the Palace pulled down,
and a stately Pyramide erected in its place, with many Inscriptions in Golden
Letters upon it, casting no small reproach upon the Jesuits. The Inscriptions
at large you may see in other Lud. Luc^s Hist. J^suit, l. 4. c 3. J^. W^ius
Lecti^^ Memor b^o (...) t^m 3^ ^^ c 4. Mem. de la Ligue, t^m. 6. p. 266, etc.
Writers. Of Chastel and the Jesuits thus says part of it:

Huc me redegit tandem herilis filius,
Malis magistris usus, and schola impia
Sotoricorum, eheu, nomen usurpantibus, etc.
On another side of the Pyramide amongst other words were these: -- Pulso
praeterea tota Gallia hominum genere novae ac malificae superstitionis, qui
rempub. turbabant, quorum instinctu piacularis adolesc^ns dirum facinus
instituerit.

On the fourth side of the Pyramlde was the Arrest or Decree of Parliament
against the said Chastel and the Jesuits, part of which relating to the latter,
take as follows:

-- The said Court does likewise ordain, that the Priests and Students of the
College of This Jesuits C^llege ^ Par^s was (...) house ^f Guiilaume de Prat,
Bish^p ^f Clermont. He ^e^mitte^ t^^ J^su^ts t^^li^* and (...) th^r^ 1564. and
when he died he left it (...) F^^t. ^^ them. H bu^lt them C^ll^g^s ^lso at
other (...).
Clermont, and all others calling themselves of that Society, shall (as
corrupters of youth, disturbers of the common peace, and enemies to the King
and State) within the space of three days after the publication of this present
Decree, depart out of Paris and other Towns and places where their Colleges
are, and fifteen days after out of the Kingdom, upon pain (wheresoever they
shall be found, the said term being expired) to be punished as guilty of the
foresaid crime of High Treason. Also the goods as well moveable as unmovable
to them belonging, shall be employed to charitable uses, and the distribution
and disposing of them to lie as shall be ordained by the Court.

Furthermore, hereby are forbidden all the Kings Subjects to send any Scholars
to the Colleges of the said Society which are out of the Kingdom, there to be
instructed upon the like pain and crime of High Treason, etc.

Du TILLET.
29 December. 1594.
This Decree against Chastel and the Jesuits was so ill resented at Rome, that
it was some years after there 9 Nov. 1609. Index Expurg. edit. Alex. vii. page
205
condemned amongst other books which they looked upon as Heretical, in number
of which was also the famous Thuanus. And we are Jan. de serres. an. 1609.
told that Bellarmine was so nettled at the learned Bishop Andrews his Tortura
Torti, that he was the great stickler in procuring the former Ceusure. Thus
were the Jesuits (who, as Davila confesses, were the first Authors and
continual Fomenters of the League) banished the Kingdom; though since they have
been restored, the Pyramide pulled down, and a Fountain erected 1604, in its
stead. As for the Pyramide, Chastel, the Decree against the Jesuits, and the
Kings Tooth, one did thus endeavor to reconcile all:

Sire, si vous voulez du tout a l'advenir
De l'Assassin Chastel oster le souvenir.
Ostant la Pyramide, and l' Arrest qui la touch,
Qu' on vous remitte done une dent dans la bouche.
Sir, if for the future you will have forgot
The murderous Chastel and the traitorous Plot;
The Pillar, and the Decrees that the Jesuits stain
Destroy; then let them tooth your mouth again.
And the King himself (when told that Chastel was a Student amongst the
Jesuits) did give them this biting blow, -- Memoir^ du Sully Tom. 1. p. 270.
It seems then it is not enough that the mouths of so many good men have
testified that the Jesuits were none of my friends, if they be not also
convinced of it by mine own mouth and blood now shed.

The truth is, upon Chastels Mem. d^ la Ligue vol. 6. Jes Cat. fol. 205 Davila,
p. 1332.
confession more then once, that he learned this King-killing Doctrine from the
Jesuits; their College of Clermont was searched by Order, amongst which in the
Study of Father Jean Guignard (born at Chartres) were several Writings found,
praising the murder of the late King, persuading the killing of this, etc. of
which take his own words: -- That cruel i. e. H^nry III.
Nero was slain by one Clement, and that Counterfeit Monk was dispatched by the
hands of a true Monk. This Heroical act performed by James Clement is a gift of
the Holy Spirit, (so termed by our Divines) is worthily commended by the Prior
of the Jacobins, Burgoin, a Confessor and Martyr. The Crown of France may and
ought to be transferred from the House of Bourbon unto some other. And the
Henry IV.
Bearnois, although converted to the Catholic Faith, shall be more mildly
dealt withal then he deserves, if rewarded with a shaven Crown he be shut up
in some strict Covent, there to do penance for the mischiefs which he has
brought upon the Realm of France; and to thank God that he has given him grace
to acknowledge him before his death. And if without Arms he cannot be deposed,
let men take Arms against him; and if by war it cannot be accomplished, let him
be Murdered.



This Guignard being tried confessed the book to be of his composing, is
condemned, and suffered; yet have they pictured him amongst the Martyrs,
attributed Miracles to him, though Response al' Ant^eotou. c. 1. p. 32, 33.
Adrian Behotte (a little more modest) is unwilling to hear any more of him, as
if he were guilty. By Order also was Jean Gueret, another Jesuit, Teacher of
Philosophy, and Confessor to Chastelet, banished, and his goods confiscated,
Chastel having learned Philosophy under him for two years and an half, in which
time he had heard such Principles of King-killing asserted.

And it cannot be denied but that the Jesuits College was bad enough in these
Leaguing times. At the first breaking out of Troubles they instituted at Paris
a Brotherhood, esteeming it a Congregation in honor of our Blessed Lady, and
it was commonly called The Congregation of the Chapelet, because the Brethren
of that Company were to carry a pair of Jes. Cat. sol. 198, 199.
Beads, to say them over once a day. Of this Fraternity the Zelots of the
League had themselves enrolled, as Mendoza the Spanish Ambassador, the
Sixteen, and several others. This Congregation was kept every Sunday in an
upper Chapel: on Saturdays they were confessed, on Sundays they received the
Sacrament; when Mass was done, a Jesuit stepped into the Pulpit, exhorting them
to be constant in the Cause. This done, the Common sort departed, the Grandees
staying behind to consult about the affairs of the League, of which Council
Father Odon Pigenat was a long time President, being one very zealous and fiery.

In the School of this College one Alexander Hay a Scotchman was Regent of the
first Form for three or four years of the Troubles, being a furious Covenanter,
and a great Corrupter of the Youth. He read to his Auditors Demosthenes his
Invectives against Philip of Maeedon, where by his Glosses he made good stuff
against the King, affirming it a commendable act to kill him, by which blessed
Deed the Actor could not fail of Paradise, and be exempted from the pains of
Purgatory. Nay so zealous was he against the King, that he openly protested,
that if the Bearnois should enter the City, and pass by their College, he would
leap from the highest window thereof upon him, thereby to break the said
Henry's neck, being firmly persuaded, that this fall would also carry himself
into Heaven. That day that the King went first to St. Denis to hear (...) Hay
understanding that certain of his Auditors had been (...) the Ceremony, the
next day he forbad them his Lectures as ^^^communicated persons, forbidding
them to enter his School till they had been absolved by some of the Jesuits
from that horrid crime.

When the people began to talk of Peace with the King, he commanded one of his
Scholars to declame against it; but the Orator seeming rather to be for Peace,
Hay storms at him, makes him come down, calling him Heretic and such like
Covenanting names. When the King took possession of Paris one of the Scholars
went into the School before the rest, and wrote all about his Class GOD SAVE
THE KING;
which when Hay saw, he fell into a rage, crying out against those who had
spoiled the walls, (for he durst not now speak positively against the King,
threatening if he knew the offender to have him punished, and so caused it to be
wiped out. He being now forced to leave the Kingdom, went to Rome where he
lived.

And Jaques Cammolet a furious Jesuit, and a great Stickler in the Leaguing
Council, was as arrogant of the King as any, using to make it his business to
prattle mischief into the people. One time preaching in the Church of St.
Berthelemy, he took for his text how Judges 3. 15, 16, 21, 22.
Ehud slew Eglon the King of Moab, he discoursed a long time in Commendation of
Henry III. placing Clement the Murderer amongst the Angels. And at last thus
instigated the people to do the like to Henry IV. -- We have need of an Ehud,
we have need of an Ehud, were he a Friar, were qe a Soldier, were he a Laquay,
were he a Shepherd, it made no matter; needs we must have an Ehud, one blow
would settle us fully in the estate of our affairs, as we most desire --
Another time he (and so did Barnard) call the King Holofernes, Moab, Nero, etc.
and maintained that the Kingdom of France was Elective, and so it belonged to
the people to choose the Kings: For proof of which he culled out this Text, --
Thou shall choose thy brother for King: which thus he and Barnard expounded, --
Thy brother, -- that is, not of the same lineage, or of the self-same Nation,
but of the same Religion, as this great Catholic King, this great King of
Spain is. Another time Cammolet affirmed, that by these words, -- Deliver me, O
Lord, out of the mire, that I may not stick in it -- King David understood
Prophetically the rooting out of the House of Bourbon.

When Barriere was examined concerning his Design to murder the King, he also
confessed that two Friars went from Lions to act the same; and that Cammolet knew
of their or some other man's wicked purpose, was in those times fully believed,
of which he himself gave this hint. When news came to Paris that Barriere was
discovered and executed, many of the Zelots began to despair of a Remedy,
Cammolet the next 5 Sept.
Sunday thus encouraged his Auditors, -- Have patience, have patience, for you
shall see within few days a wonderful miracle of God, which is at hand; yea
esteem it as already come.

Such like Discourses as these, and their thus siding with the Spaniard against
their own King and Country, with other actions, were the reason that the
Jesuits were judged to be expelled the Nation, and occasioned a pleasant French
Gentleman in a little Poem thus to conclude of them:

-- A Gesis sunt indita nomina vobis,
Quae quia Sacrilegi, Reges torquetis in omnes,
Inde sacrum nomen, sacrum sumpsistis and omen.
From A warlike we upon used by the ancient Spaniards and Freuch, and from them
taken up by the Ro^ans and others.
Gesan, which against all Kings they shake,
The Jesuits their Name and Fortune take.
A little after Jehan Chastel had wounded the King, there was one Francois de
Verone set forth a Book in Vindication of the Villain and Action, affirming it
to be Apol. p^ur Jean Chastel. p^rt 1. c. 7. p. 21.
A generous, virtuous, and an Heroic Act, and comparable to the most Renowned
Deeds of the Ancients, either in Sacred or Profane History. That it was Part
2. p. 25.
purely just, virtuous and Heroic; That it was Part 4. c. 1 p. 147.
most holy, most humane, most worthy, most to be praised and commended; That it
was Ib. p. 155, 156.
agreeable to God, to all Laws, to all Decrees, and the Church. That those who
had condemned him, had Part 4. c. 2. p. 152.
judged against God, against the Holy Scriptures, against the Church and her
Decrees, and against the States and Fundamental Laws of the Kingdom. And as for
Chastel himself, he was a Part 3. c. 10
Happy soul, and a Page 23.
true Martyr. And the same Verone also write an Apology for Father Guignard,
whom he Part 5. c. 9, 10.
commends for his Constancy, in defending to the last gasp his treasonable
papers against the King, for which he reckons him a Martyr and Saint in Heaven.

But to return to the King, who had earnestly solicited the Pope to Romanist,
and receive him into the Church. At last the P^p^ perceiving the King
victorious, the League ruined being no^ able t^ make head against him, after
many solicitations and Treaties, (though the Duke of Sessa the Spanish
Ambassador opposed and Mem d. Nev ^^, vol. 2. ^ 716.
threatened much) consents, and so Jaques Davy He was cons^^rated B^sh of this
See by Card. Joyeuse at Rome. 29 December. this year. He was after Archbishop of
Sens, and Cardinal a^ ^erron.
Bishop-Elect of Eureux, and Arnaud d'Ossat, the Kings Proxies or Representers
appeared before the Pope in the Porch of S. Peter's, 17 Sept.
prostrating themselves before him, and kissing his feet, desiring in the Kings
name Absolution. First, the Pope nulls and makes void the Absolution formerly
given the King at S. Denis, then they lying prostrate at his feet, whilst the
Psalm Miserere was sung. At the end of every verse the Pope with a Wand W^ipped
at Rome -- S K. James (...) in his Ap l. ^or the O^th of All^^^me^, p. 75.
Virga Sacerdo^al* leviter perc^ssum, Mat. Tort. ^, 89.
gently striking their sh^ulders; then he pronounced the Absolution, upon which
the Gates of the Church fly open, and in they are led, Te Deum is sung,
Bonefires and Guns make the Boys mad for joy, and so the King is a good
Romanist.

In the mean time the Duke of Mayenne seeing no hopes of carrying on his own
designs of greatness, the King being now successful, and most of the Kingdom
obeying him, is willing also to be at peace with him, which the King
perceiving, very graciously offers him Conditions. A Treaty is begun, and all
his shifts and pretenses being spoiled by the Popes admission and absolution of
the King, after many Demands, Consultations and Concessions, an All the
Articles and Edicts c^nc^rning ^^ t^^se Ag^^emen^s (...) the King ar. in
^^^oired^s ^erniers ^^^u^l^s de ^^^nce. E^^. 1601. 1596
Agreement is struck up, very favorable and beneficial to the Duke and his
party, all things being pardoned and liberty given to them to come in and live
peaceably.

Many advised the King to prosecute Mayenne to the utmost, and not accept him
into his favor, having shuffled him off for six years together, troubling him
with fifty Treaties without concluding any thing, and one not willing to agree
as long as he had any means and opportunity to oppose. But the King being good
natured, waved all his jealousies, made a firm peace with him, kept him his
Favorite; and he himself ever after lived a good subject. And to this
Agreement, it is supposed the fair Gabrielle did not a little persuade the King,
she losing nothing by making such reconcilements.

Now the Duke of Nemours (the elder Brother died a little before a fierce
Covenanter) reconciles himself also, so does the Duke of Joyeuse, the City of
Marseilles as seized on too, and delivered to the King; so that now nothing
seemed to remain of their Solemn League and Covenant, but the Duke of Aumale,
and the Duke of Mercoeur; The first would not acknowledge the King, having
submitted himself to Spaniard, for which he was declared a Traitor, and in
Effigy was executed, by the drawing of it in pieces by four horses. The
second, being Brother to the Queen Dowager, still maintained part of the Duchy
of Bretaigne, foolishly hoping to separate that Province from the Crown, and
retain it to himself. The King had often offered him good Conditions, but still
he delayed time, which at last so troubled his Majesty, that he resolved to
march into Brittany himself to reduce Mercoenr perceiving, and by consequence
his ruin not far off, claps up a Peace, by giving his only daughter to Caesar,
eldest son of the fair Gabriele (by the King) which son by this great Match was
made Duke of Vendosme. And now also was struck up a complete Vervins between
the French and Spaniard. And thus ended the French League and Rebellion.

But before we leave this League we will give you a chip of the old block,
whereby you may perceive other designs on foof, to take away the Kings life.

The Duke of Parma Governor of the Netherlands dying (1592.) Thuan. lib. 123.
^ledaye de Mons. ce la Martel^ere, p. 97, 98.
Ernest Archduke of Austria, and Brother to the Emperor Rodolph II. succeeded
in that Command, and with him at Bruxels resided N. Malavicinus, Ambassador
from Pope Clement VIII. which Agent had formerly acted at Parts very earnestly
for the Covenanters.

Nor did his zeal lessen by a farther distance, for here he consulted all means
to get some body to assassinate the French King Henry IV. At last informed that
one Charles Ridicove a Dominican Friar at Ghent, had showed himself a mortal
enemy to Navarre, and would be apt enough to undertake such a wickedness.
Malavicino sends to the Provincial, commanding him to send Ridicove to him;
which is obeyed. The Dominican being come to Bruxels, and acquainted with the
noble Exploit, desires that the Deed might be approved of by the Pope and
Cardinals, that himself and friends might be rewarded, and himself Conveniences
allowed. Malavicino consenting and undertaking for all, the Conditions are
agreed on.

It may be the true name was D'avesnes, the same with that me t^ored i^
Histoire de la paix enter les Roys de France and d'Espagne, fol. 144.
Avenaria Mother to Ridicove (who also knew of the Plot) in Confession tells
it to Hodume the Jesuit, who likes the Fact well enough, but desires to see
the hardy fellow; it is granted, and having viewed him well, approves of all,
but fears the man is not strong enough: In short, Ridicove is blessed and crossed
by Malavicino, and liberty granted him (for the better carrying on the
business) to appear Gentleman-like, to ride, fence, dance, and such like
Accomplishments. Thus qualified, he departs the Netherlands, goes to Vernand,
thence to St. Denis, where finding the thing difficult, or not fully resolved
or hardy enough to venture, he returns to Brussels. Malavicino seeing him,
and nothing done, wonders at his negligence, Ridicove excusing himself because
he now perceived the King was turned Romanist. To take off this, Malavicino
tells him he is mistaken, the Bearnois being damned by the Pope, all his
Partakers excommunicated, and so asked him if he would once undertake it again;
the Villain consents, but desires the Popes Authority: At last he is persuaded
to try the other bout in France; so disguised, he departed with an excuse in
his mouth, as if he had been sent by Nicholas Basta, a Commander at Antwerp,
(who was also privy to the Plot) to treat underhand about the delivering up of
Bapaulme, (a strong little place on the Frontiers of Artois) to the King.

At this time one Pet. Arger a Dominican also of the same Monast^ry of Gant,
had been trucking at Bruxels with Malavicino about the Kings death, which he
undertook to perform, some Italians loving to be sure in Murder.

Ridicove in the mean time changes his name, and from his Mother calls himself
d'Avesnes
Avenarius, thus he goes to Amiens, waits upon the Governor, with whom
thinking to get the greater repute, and not to be discovered himself, he the
false Avenarius tells him of one Ridicove instigated by Malavicino to kill
the King, and to this he adds also the design of Peter Arger. The Governor
informed the King of all, who sends for this supposed Avenarius, who boldly
affirmed the same stories to his Majesty; and that Ridicove being his intimate
friend, had disclosed the same to him. In short. the King, till a further
discovery, has Avenarius imprisoned; though at last, doubting least this might
only be a trick to cast an Odium* and Jealousy upon Albert the Cardinal
Archduke, and Archbishop of Toledo (who upon the death of his Brother Ernest
was then Governor of the Netherlands) and so to hinder the peace between the
two Crowns then consulting on; the King ordered the fellow to be set at
liberty, but to depart the Kingdom, and to return no more upon pain of death.

Ridicove getting to Gant, consulteth again how to kill the King, and havi^g
joined himself with another Dominican called Clement Odin, and disguising
themselves in the habits of Heremites, trudge into France, discover their
design to Pierre Morell a Curate, who relates it to Desidere Parisote, who
abhorring the Fact, tells the King, whereby the Friars are secured, examined,
and being asked what could excite them to such a deed, Ridicove Answered, --
That he was first instigated to entertain such thoughts, by the daily Sermons
and Disputations which he had heard, fitted for such Actions; it being the
custom not only in their Churches, but the street and all other meetings, to
extol Jacques Clement, as a most glorious Martyr, for sacrificing his life for
the liberty of his Country, whereby he also thought the deed to be glorious
and acceptable to God, especially when Malavicino did warrant it to him by the
Authority both of God and the Pope, and thus fully persuaded he had undertaken
the Murder. -- for which he was condemned and executed.

At the same time there was one Nicolas l'Anglois a Capuchin Friar, belonging
to that Monastery in St. Miel, or St. Michel in the Dukedom of Bar, and in the
Diocese of Toul in Lorrain, who throwing off his Cowle or Hood, and under the
disguise of a Beggarly habit, being found in the Court, upon examination,
giving no good account, and Convict by Testimony was also condemned and
suffered upon the Wheel.

Such like murtherous designs of the Friars, occasioned many Poems against
them, amongst the rest upon the stabbing of Henry III. (who is said to have
loved them most affectionately) thus one of them concludes.

Jamais il n'y eut Roy par qui la Moinerie
Respectee fut plus, and par qui plus cheria:
Si les Moins ainsi tu^nt leurs grands amiss,
Bon Dieu! que ferent ils a leur grand Ennemis?
Never did King carry more kind defires,
Than Henry, unto all sorts of Friars;
If Monks to friends will give such deadly blows,
Good God! what will they do unto their Foes?
Thus much for the French, Popish, Solemn League and Covenant, by Retorting of
which is enough to stop their mouths concerning our late Rebellions, seeing,

The Romanists there safely pretended the danger of Religion as well as our
Presbyterians did.

They entered into a Solemu League and Covenant, as our Non-conformists did.

They forced their King to take it, and it is not unknown what our villainous
Long-Parliament would have done, and what the impudent Schismatics in Scotland
did do.

They spread abroad that their King was an enemy to their Religion, and in this
were worse then our Puritans, who though they slandred our King, yet had it
rather been a scandal for him to have been of their schismatical persuasion.

They had their Priests and Jesuits sacrilegiously to abuse the Pulpit and
People, with their seditious, lying and treasonable Discourses, as our Rebels
had their blasphemous Lecturers, ignorant and impudent Tub-Thumpers; and it is
hard to tell which of these Covenanters were the greater Villains, though I Will
grant ours to be the greater Dunces.

They falsely gave out that many thousand Huguenots lurked in Paris to kill
them, thereby to incense and inrage the people, as our Puritans did of God
knows what Cavaliers and Papists mustred under ground, and such like tales.

They had their several Juncto's and Cabal's, as ours had their Committees, etc.

They nulled and made void all their Oaths of Allegiance, as ours did.

They declared that Allegiance was but Conditional, viz. to a Romanist, as ours
did to a Covenanter.

They made many Oaths in behalf of Conditional Subjection and Rebellion, as out
late Zealots did.

They had their Doctors or Divines of Sorbonne, to countenance and vindicate
their wicked Actions, and to declare for good whatever they would have them; As
ours had their Club of Assembly of Divines, to prove new Governments, and
King-opposing to be by Divine Right and Predestination.

They made Banishment and other Penalties for those who would not take and
subscribe their Oaths, as our Rebels did for their Covenants and Engagements.

They had their particular Processions, and such like Set-pieces of Devotion,
to crave Divine Aid and Assistance, as ours had their monthly Fasts to desire
God to bless their sins and Rebellions, as also their Thanksgiving, like the
old Irish, who used to thank God, if by Theft or Robbery they had got a good
booty.

They had their Oaths of Abjuration as well as ours had.

They would pardon and authorize all those who acted for their cause, as ours
could indempnifie one another, some may think with as much right or true
Authority, as the Mer. Casub^^'s Necessity of Reform. p. 75.
French Priest consecrated the Sacrament in the name of the Devil.

They called their League against their King Loyalty, and ours thought as well
of the Covenant.

They would have the Council of Trent revived, as ours would the Covenant,
Directory, and Presbytery, and such like schismatical and treasonable
Principles.

Some of them would have their Chieftain Mayenne to be King, as others in
England would have had Oliver.

As their Mayenne would not take upon him (when offered to him) the Title of
King, because his Interest was not then sufficient to vindicate it, and so
would only be Lieutenant of the Crown of France; thus Oliver upon the same
account refused the Kingship, but would be Protector of England.

They commended Guise and Mayenne as the only Prop of their Church, as ours by
their Addresses did sacrilegiously magnify Oliver, and his son Richard.

They had their Rump and secluded Members as well as we, but in this the French
were worst of the two, they turning out honest men, whilst ours excluded only
Conditional subjects, i. e. Traitors, so one Knave turned out another.

They sent to the Popish Princes large Complaints against their King, as ours
with their Schismatical Assembly against King Charles I. to Holland and Geneva.

They would alter, limit, put out and in as they pleased their Kings Council,
as our Puritans desired to do in England.

They would take away the Kings Negative Vote, and make the States superior to
him, so would our Roundheads here.

They sent a Letter to desire Protection and Assistance from Spain, (an enemy
to their King and Country) as the Scotch Covenanters did from the French King
Lewis XIII. against their King Charles I. as appears by their Letter,
subscribed by their Chieftains.

They in Triumph conducted Guise, and his friends into Paris, as our
Presbyterians did the five Members, etc. to the affront of King and Government.

They by their Tumults forced their King to flee from his chief City and Court
Paris, as our Puritans did King Charles I. from London for his own safety.

When their King offered them and their General Mayenne Pardon, Favor, and
desired a Peaee, they reject both it and him, as ours did with King Charles,
when he offered the same to them and their General Essex.

They censure all who sided with the King, and sat at Tours or Chaalons, as
ours did those who sat at Oxford as a Parliament.

They broke the Kings Great Seals, making new ones, as ours also did.

They declared it Treason to aid or favor their King, as the English did.

They murdered any who sided with their King, as well as our Rebels here.

They defaced all the Kings Pictures, and Statues, as the Phanaticks did here.

They had their Women of all Qualities to promote their Cause by their
Love-tricks and Contributions, as the Puritans in England had their Wives, holy
Sisters, and zealous Ladies, hurried along with as much Chastity and Religion,
as Honesty, Moderation, or Loyalty.

They renounced all obedience to Henry III. and his Queen, ordered he should
not be prayed for; as our wicked Presbyterian Long-Parliament declared the
Queen a Traitor, renounced the King by their abominable Votes, and Declaration
of Non-Address, and it was afterward death to pray for him.

They often attempted the death of Henry IV. contrived and procured the Murder
of Henry III. as ours designed King Charles's death in the Isle of Wight, and
at last murdered him on the Scaffold.

When Henry III. was killed, some of them would not acknowledge his Successor
Henry IV. but would have a Government or Ruler of their own making; others
would admit him if he would turn Romanist. As when King Charles I. was
martyred, some would not at all have his heir K. Charles II. to reign, whilst
others would not reject him, provided he would turn Presbyterian, otherwise not.

They often endeavored to seize on their King, then to kill him or depose him
by clapping him up in a Monastery, but failed in their designs; whilst ours
had the luck of it to conquer, and so to act with our King as they pleased.
Though it is plain the French had as bad intents, though not the like success
and opportunities, it may be their Kings were not so much betrayed as ours.

Yet herein lay the difference, whereby the Romanists were most culpable; their
Troubles and Seditions being countenanced, acted and headed by the most learned
and knowing of their Clergy, as Popes, Cardinals, and their Prelates; whilst our
Rebellion and Schism was hurried on, and noised up by an ignorant pack of
Lecturers, fellows of no Religion, having not Learning to apprehend any.

In short, our Covenanters and Rebels followed and trod in the Footsteps of the
French Leagne (a War which first occasioned the multiplicity of Pamplets) and
from which all latter Rebellions have taken the Items, Rules, Principles, and
Methods.

Yet how abominable and wicked soever, this French-Roman Solemn League and
Covenant was, it had its Admirers of those no way engaged in it; Amongst whom
our English Father Parsons was none of the hindmost, vaporing to the world,
Andr. Philopater, Resp. ad Edict. Reginae Angl. p. 210, 211. 172, 173
How just, how famous, and how holy the Cause was: That it was not only lawful,
praiseworthy, or holy; but necessary and of Duty; by Divine Command, and
Christian Obligation; Nay, that they could not do otherwise without danger of
their souls; It may be grounding all this upon his Papal Rule, That Nulli
populo sub damnationis poena licet Regem haeredicum admittere. Ib. margin.
no People whatever are to admit of an Heretical King under pain of Damnation.
But it is known well enough, that his Pen is no slander, nor are his
Commendations of any Credit.

The End of the Eighth BOOK.
A CONTINUATION OF THE HISTORY OF THE Romish Treasons AND USURPATIONS.
BOOK IX.
CHAP. I. The Quarrels betwixt Pope Paul the Fifth, and the Venetians.
Near the beginning of this Century, by the Death of Leo XI. 1605:
(who sat as Pope but a few days) Paul V. succeeded as Bishop of Rome. Scarce
was he warm in his Chair, when he began, to consider, how to advance the
Privileges and Honor of his See, which by Degrees had been neglected and worn
out; For this purpose he was earnest with the French King to receive the
Council of Trent. He procured that in Spain the Jesuits might be ex^mpted from
paying Tithes: At Naples he wrought in such sort, that the Marquis of Morcone
was sent to Rome as punishable in the Inquisition, for having condemned to the
Galleys, a Bookseller; The Inquisition pretending the Crime to belong to his
Cognizance; He offered to trouble the Duke of Parma, for laying Imposts on his
own Subjects in the absence of the Bishop, He fell out with the Duke of Savoy,
for presenting an Abbey to Cardinal Pio, so that his Highness for Peacesake,
was forced to give it to the Popes Nephew.

Thus his design went on to ruin the Temporal Authority. In the mean time, the
Commonwealth of Luca, considering that many of their Citizens changed their
Religion, and retired into the Protestants Countries, published an Edict
prohibiting any of their Subjects to have any Commerce with such people. The
Pope liked the Law, but would not have it made by Laymen, so commanded them to
^ase the Edict out of their Records, and he would publish another, but the same
in Substance, by his Papal Authority.

At the same time, the Commonwealth of Genoa being informed, that the
Governors of certain Lay-Fraternities (their Subjects) instituted by Devotion,
^ad not ^^ithfully dispensed the Revenues entrusted them, resolved to examine
their Accounts, and Commanded their Books should be brought to the Duke. At the
same time, diverse Citizens, used to meet, as for Christian Exercises, in the
Jesuits College: which Club, resolved to favor none in p^omo^ion to Offices
but their Associates. The State taking notice of it, and considering, what
mischief, in time, this would bring upon the Commonwealth, prohibited all such
Assemblies and Conventicles.

The Pope takes Pet at these honest Orders, affirming they were against the
Ecclesiastical Liberty, so Commands the Commonwealth to revoke these Edicts, or
else he would thunder against them his Censures of Excommunication. By which
Terror, both the States of Luca and Genoa, were forced to obey his Holiness.

Thus the Popes design went fairly on, nor did he doubt any place in Italy,
unless the Republic of Venice, which used to act upon Principles most
honorable and beneficial to themselves, without any respect to the Interest or
Bribery of other Potentates. The Pope had now resident at Venice, as his
Nuncio, Horatio Matthei Bishop of Gierace, a great Stickler and Boaster of the
Ecclesiastical Liberty, as they called it; and in his way so zealous, that he
thought all Christian Actions and Graces were of no validity, unless this also
were promoted beyond all proportion.

The Senate of Venice, considering the mistake of Charity and Devotion [the
Zealots thinking nothing so holy as the multiplying of Churches, where no *
need is,] made a Decree, (1603.) that, None -- la Republique -- se tronea
contrainle d'y mettre la main -- Autrement il fast arrive bientost que toutes
leurs villes n' eussent plus este qne Convens and Fglises, et que tours leurs
Revenus, qui doivent porter le^ charges de l'estat. and qui servent a la
Nourriture de^ Gens Mary's, les quel^ 'ournissent des Soldats, des Marchande,
and des Laboureurs, n' eussent plus servi q^ a l'en tree tien des Religieux e^
des Religieuses. Hard. de Perefixe Ev. de R^^ez Hist. du Hen. le Grand. part.
3. an. 1606.
within the Precincts of the City should build any new Church or Monastery,
without the Senats Consent. -- Truly thinking that they were stored well
enough, having already within the City (where ground is so scarce) 150
Churches, Monasteries and such like places of Devotion.

The Senate also (agreeable to the old Statutes of their Republic anno 1333 and
1536.) made a Decree like our English Mort-maine, That None should sell, give
or alienate any more lands to the Clergy without the Senats Commission.

A little after the making of these Laws, the Troubles between them and the
Pope began. The Occasion taken thus.

One Scipio Sarraceno, a Canon of a Church of Vicenza, had with great Contempt
desaced the seal of the Magistrate, which was put to, for the custody of the
Bishops Court of Chancery, at the request of the Chancellor, the Sea being
vacant. And farther, had earnestly endeavored to seduce a young Gentlewoman
his Cousin, using many solicitations to her, both in public and in the Church;
but not gaining his desires, according to a common kind of Revenge and Affront
in Italy, he filthily bewrayed her door, portal, and the ring thereof, and did
her some other wrongs. The young Gentlewoman upon advice, puts in her Complaint
to the Senate at Venice, whereupon the Canon is Cited and Imprisoned.

Of this the Pope is informed, who cries out that the Liberties of the Church
are violated, that he will not permit Ecclesiastics in any Case to be judged
by Laymen, that Satisfaction is to be given and the Canon released. The
Venetians return, That their Republic is free, that they have the same
authority with other Princes, so can take cognizance of the Crimes of their own
Subjects within their own Dominions and punish them according to the falt.

Whilst this is convasing, happens another accident, The Count Brandelino
Valdemarino Abbot of Nervese, being guilty of many Exorbitant Crimes, as

Cruel Tyranny over his Neighbors, by taking up their goods, at what small
price he pleased.

Committing many Rapes and Impurities upon all sorts of Women.

Accused of Sorcery and dealing in Magic.

Practicing many abominable murders by poison, whereby he destroyed his
Brother and his Servant, and endangered his own Father.

That he had for a long time lain with his Sister, and poisoned her Maid, lest
she should discover it.

That he had caused his Enemy to be killed, and then poisoned the murderer,
lest he might accuse him, and other such like Villainies.

For these and such other crimes, the Abbot is by Order of the Senate
Imprisoned. At this the Pope also takes offense, denying the Temporal Authority
over Priests, that the Church can only take cognizance of them, be their falts
never so great or notorious. And in this* humor lays a Quarrel against the
Venetians, unless they will satisfy him in these three things.

I. That they null the Decree, concerning the building of any more Churches.

II. That they also null and void the other Decree, touching the giving of
lands to Ecclesiastics.

III. That the Abbot and the Canon be released, and delivered up to his Nuntio.

A great deal of do, there was on both sides, but the Pope peremptorily
informed the Senate, that at first, he would send an Exhortory Breve to them,
and if he were not obeyed by such a time, he would proceed farther, having
power over all, could deprive Kings, and to this end had Legions of Angels for
his aid and assistance.

And accordingly he sent two Breves: The Nuntio delivers them to the Senate,
but they were not opened, because Marini Grimani, the Duke was then on his
Deathbed, and dyed the next morning. The Pope upon notice of this, orders his
Nuntio to protest unto the State against any new Election, as in it self to be
void, by being made by men excommunicated: Thinking by this Trick to bring a
Confusion amongst them. The Nuntio, to execute this Command, with great
importunity desired Audience of the State, but it was not granted him, it being
not their Custom to admit any, during the Vacancy, unless their business be
only of Condoling.

Duke Grimani being buried [for till the former Duke be under Ballotation or
Lots, and the Election fell upon Leonardo Donato. Having thus got another Doge
or Duke, they open the Breves, which they found to be one and the same in
Tenor, which the Pope said was through the Nuncio's mistake, in delivering two
of the same, instead of two different ones.

The Pope ranted fairly against their Decrees about Churches and
Ecclesiastics, affirming that -- These Ordinances tended to the Damnation of
Souls, to public scandal, were of themselves void and of no value, and no man
obliged to observe them. That they who had made these Statutes or any like, or
who did further them, had incurred Ecclesiastical Censures; had deprived
themselves of such lands as they held of the Church; and their Estates and
demains were subject to other penalties: that they could not be absolved unless
they revoked the Decrees. So he admonished the Republic to consider the
Danger, whereinto they had cast their souls, to seek a Remedy, and commanded
them under pain of Excommunication to null the said Orders. That otherwise he
would proceed farther, considering the account he was to give to God at the Day
of judgment; and that he could not dissemble, when he saw the Ecclesiastical
Authority so abused.

The Venetians answered all, warily and wisely; but yielded not a jot of their
Authority. At which the Pope was incensed, saying they were Tyrants and
different from their Ancestors; being resolved, though he should lose his skin
yet he would maintain the cause of God of his own Reputation. And so orders his
Nuntio to give the other Breve, which through mistake (as he said) he had not
formerly presented. The Nuntio obeys, and the Senate opening it, found it to
concern the Imprisonment of the Abbot and Canon, which the Breve said was
Contrary to the Holy Canons, and to Ecclesiastical Liberty, which were grounded
on divine Ordinance; so commanded under pain of Excommunication, that the Canon
and Abbot should speedily be delivered to his Nuntio and that if in the mean
time the secular power had proceeded to any acts, or sentence of Condemnation
or Execution, he did null them, and declare them void: Threatening if he were
not speedily obeyed, he would proceed farther.

The Senate vindicated themselves by an Answer, but nothing satisfactory to the
Pope, who told their Ambassador that the Exemption of Ecclesiastics, was de
jure divino, and that his cause was the cause of God; that he would not depart
any thing from his Resolution, and he would be obeyed. And thus resolved, calls
a Consistory where were present XLI. Cardinals, who agree with the Pope; so a
Breve of Excommunication or Interdict is drawn up, printed and published
against the Duke, Senate, and the Republic.

It contained,

That the Venetians had lately made some Decrees, contrary to the Authority of
the Apostolical See, the Ecclesiastical Liberty, General Councels, Sacred
Canons, and the Constitutions of the Pope.

For proof of which, he instanced their Decrees, concerning Churches, and the
Clergy; with the Imprisonment of the Abbot and Canon.

That these Actions tended to the danger of the Souls both of Duke and Senate,
and the scandal of others.

That the Lawmakers incurred the Censures of the Church, the forfeiture of
what they had, could not be absolved but by the Pope, and the nulling of the
Decrees.

That though the Decrees, were void of themselves, yet the Pope did hereby,
null them; according to the Example of his Predecessors.

That he does hereby Excommunicate the Duke, Senate, and their Partakers, if
within XXIV. days, they do not null the Decrees, raze them out of their
Registers, promise to make none such for the future: And to release the Abbot
and Canon to his Nuntio.

That from this Excommunication none could absolve them but the Pope himself.

That if after the XXIV. days, the Venetians should continue three days longer
obstinate without submitting, that then he Interdicted all their State and
Dominions, so that no Masses or Divine Service should be celebrated in them,
except in some cases and places.

That he deprived the Duke and Senate of all privileges they had or pretended
to have from the Church:

Commanded these his Bulls to be published through the said Dominions, to be
observed and obeyed by all.

The Bull it self being now not very Common, take as follows.

PAVLVS PAPA, QVINTVS
Venerabilibus Fratribus Patriarchis Archiepiscopis et Episcopis, per Universum
Dominium Republicae Venetorum constitutis, et dilectis filiis eorum Vicariis in
Spiritualibus generalibus, nec non Universis Abbatibus, Prioribus, Primiceriis,
Praepositis, Archidiaconis, Archi-Presbyteris, Decanis et Plebanis et
Parochialium Ecclesiarum Rectoribus, aliisque personis in dignitate
Ecclesiastica constitutis, in eodem Dominio existentibus, tam secularibus, quam
quorumvis Ordinum et Institutorum Regularibus; Salutem et Apostolicam
Benedictionem.
SUperioribus mensibus ad nostram, and Apostolicae sedis Audientiam pervenit,
Ducem and Senatum Reip. Venetorum, annis elapsis in eorum Consiliis, plura and
diversa Decreta, tum sedis Apostolicae autoritati, and Ecclesiasticae libertati
ac immunitati contraria, tum Generalibus Conciliis, and sacris Canonibus, nec
non Romanorum Pontificum Constitutionibus repugnantia, statuisse.

Et inter caetera, sub die XXIII. Mensis Maii, anni M. DC. II. sumpta
occasion, ex quadam lite, seu Controversia inter Doctorem Franciscum
Zabarellam ex una, and Monachos Monasterii de Praglia nuncupatos Ordini Sancti
Benedicti Congregationis Cassinen, alias Sanctae Justinae de Padua in Diaecesi
Paduan. ex altera partibus vertente; in eorum Consilio statuisse, non solum ut
Dicti Monachi tunc, aut deinceps ullo unquam tempore, actionem, per quam sub
quovis titulo, aut color in bonis Ecclesiasticis Emphiteoticis a laicis
possessis praeferrentur, praetendere, an etiam jure Praelationis, seu
Cosolidationis directi cum utili Dominio, aut extinctionis lineae in primis
Investiturae Comprehensa, aut alia quavis causa bonorum praedictorum
proprietatem sibi vendicare minime possent, sed tantummodo jus directi Dominii
illis praeservatum; verum etiam, ut id ipsum quoad caeteras omnes personas
Ecclesiasticas, Seculares, and Regulares, Monasteria Monialum, Hospitalia, et
alia loca in eorum temporali Dominio existentia, declaratum and firmiter
deliberatum censeretur.

Et sub die decimo Januarii M. DC. III. ad superiora quaedam Consilia ab eorum
Majoribus, ut etiam asserebant, habita respicientes, quibus cavebatur, ne
quisquam, sive secularis, sive Ecclesiasticus in Urbe Venetiarum, Ecclesias,
Monasteria, Hospitalia, atque alias Religiosas Domos, and pia loca, sine eorum
speciali licentia fundaret and erigeret, in Concilio Rogatorum congregatos
iterum decrevisse, ut id eandem in Omnibus jurisdictionis eorum locis vim
obtineret, and praeterea Exilii ac perpetui Carceris, and publicationi fundi,
venditionisque aedificii contra secus facientes poenam edixisse.

Vlterius, eosdem Ducem and Senatum die XXVI. Mensis Martii anni M. DC. V.
inhaerentes alteri Decreto, anno M. D. XXXVI. ab eodem Senatu facto, in quo (ut
asserebant) erat express prohibitum, ne quis sub certis in illo contentis
poenis in Urbe Venetiarum, ejusque Ducatu bona immobilia ad pias causas
Testamento seu Donatione inter vivos, relinqueret, aut alio quovis Titulo
alienaret, sive ad earum favorem, ultra certum tunc expres^um tempus obligaret
(quod in illum usque diem, ut ibi etiam dicebatur, usu receptum and observatum
non fuerit) non modo iterum id vetuisse, sed express etiam prohibuisse, ne
bonorum ejusmodi Immobilium alienationes in favorem personarum
Ecclesiasticarum, sine Senatus praedicti licentia, fierent, ac insuper Decretum
ipsum and poenas in eo contentas per universum eorum Dominium extendisse, and
per Rectores and Potestates Civitatum and locorum sui Dominii, promulgari
fecisse, atque bona Immobilia omnia, quae contra praemissorum formam vendi, aut
quovis modo alienari contingeret, ultra nullitatis poenam publicari, and vendi,
eorumque praticum inter Rempub. ipsam, Magistratum exequentem, and ejus
ministros, ipsumque denuntiatorem dividi mandasse, and alias, prout in Decretis
and Mandatis Ducis, and Senatus praedictorum latius dicitur, contineri.

Ac praeterea eosdem Ducem and Senatum, Scipionem Sacracenum Canonicum
Vicentinum, and Brandolinum Valdemarinum Forojuliensem Abbatem Monasterii, seu
Abbatia de Nervesa Tarvisinae Dioecesis, personam in dignitate Ecclesiastica
constitutam, ob quaedam praetensa Crimina in Civitate Vicentina and alibi per
illos (ut dicebatur) commissa, Carceri mancipasse, and mancipatos detinuisse,
sub praetextu, quod eis haec facere liceret, inter alia ob quaedam ipsis Duci
and Reipublicae a quibusdam Romany Pontificibus praedecessoribus nostris
concessa (ut asserebant) Privilegia. Cumque praemissa in aliquibus Ecclesiarum
jura etiam ex Contractibus init is ipsis Ecclesiis competentia auferant, ac
praeterea in illis, and aliis sedis Apostolicae ac Nostrae autoritati and
Ecclesiarum juribus, and personarum Ecclesiasticarum privilegiis praejudicium
inferant, ipsamque libertatem ac immunitatem Ecclesiasticam tollant. Ac ea
omnia in ipsorum Ducis and Senatus animorum perniciem and scandalum plurimorum
tendant.

Et cum ij. qui supradicta ac similia edere and promulgare, illisque uti ausi
sunt, in Censuras Ecclesiasticas a sacris Canonibus, Generalium Conciliorum
Decretis, and Romanorum Pontificum Constitutionibus inflictas, necnon etiam
privationis feudorum, and bonorum si quae ab Ecclesiis obtinet, poenam eo ipso
incurrerint, a quibus Censuris and poenis, non nisi a Nobis and Romano Pont.
pro tempore existente, absolvi and liberari possint ac praeterea Inhabiles and
Incapaces sint, qui absolutionis and liberationis beneficium consequantur,
donec editas leges novis Edictis atque Decretis subtulerint, omniaque inde
sequuta reipsa in pristinum statum reintegraverint.

Cumque etiam Dux and Senatus, praedicti, post plures paternas nostras
monitiones a multis mensibus citra eis factas, adhuc decreta and edicta
praefata non revocaverint, ac eosdem Canonicum Saracenum and Abbatem
Brandolinum carceratos detineant, and illos Venerabili Fratri Horatio Episcopo
Hieracensi, nostro and Apostolicae Sedis apud eos Nuncio, ut debebant, non
consignaverint: Nos qui nullo pacto far debemus, ut Ecclesiastica libertas
and Immunitas nostraque and Sedis Apostolicae Auctoritas violetur and
contemnatur; Inhaerentes plurimum Generalium Conciliorum Decretis ac Vestigiis
Re. Me. Innocentis III. Honorii III. Gregorii IX. Alexandri IV. Clementis IV.
and Martini etiam IV. Bonifacii VII. Bonifacii IX. Martini V. Nicolai V. and
aliorum Romanorum Pont. Praedecessorum* Nostrorum, quorum aliqui similia
Statuta alias contra libertatem Ecclesiasticam edita, tanquam ipso jure nulla,
invalida and irrita revocarunt, ac nulla, invalida, and irritaesse decreverunt,
and declararunt and aliqui contra similium edictorum Statutarios, and alios ad
Excommunicationis promulgationem, necnon ad alia infra-scripta seu eorum aliqua
devenerunt, habita cum venerabilibus fratribus Nostris S. R. E. Cardinalibus
matura Consultatione, de ipsorum consilio and assensu, licet supra dicta
Decreta, Edicta and Mandata ipso jure nulla, invalida and irrita sint, ea
nihilominus ipso jure adhuc de novo nulla, invalida, and irrita, nulliusque
roboris and momenti fuisse and esse, and neminem ad illorum observantiam
teneri, per praesentes decernimus and declaramus.

Et insuper auctoritate Omnipotentis Dei, ac Beatorum Petri and Pauli
Apostolorum ejus, ac Nostra, nisi Dux and Senatus praedicti intra viginti
quatuor Dies a Die Publicationis Praesentium in hac alma Urbe faciendae
computandos, quorum primos octo pro primo, octo pro secundo, and reliquos octo
pro tertio and ultimo ac peremptorio termino, and pro monitione cano illis
assignamus, praedicta Decreta omnia, and in illis contenta et inde sequuta
quaecunque omni prorsus exceptione et excusatione cessante public
revocaverint, et ex eorum Archivis seu Capitularibus locis aut libris, in
quibus Decreta ejusmodi annotata reperiuntur, deleri et cassari, et in locis
ejusdem Dominii, ubi promulgata fuerunt, revocata, deleta et cassa esse,
neminemque ad illorum observantiam teneri public nunciari, ac omnia inde
sequuta in pristinum statum restitui fecerint, et ulterius nisi a similibus
Decretis contra libertatem, Immunitatem et jurisdictionem Ecclesiasticam ac
nostram et Sedis Apostolicae auctoritatem, ut praefertur, facientibus edendis,
et respective faciendis in posterum cavere, et penitus abstinere promiserint,
ac Nos de revocatione, deletione, cassatione, nunciatione, restitutione, ac
promissione praedictis certiores reddiderint; et nisi etiam praedictos
Scipionem Canonicum et Brandolinum Abbatem praedicto Horatio Episcopo et Nuncio
cum effectu consignaverint, seu consignari fecerint, ipsos tunc et pro tempore
existentem Ducem et Senatum, Reipub. Venetorum, statutarios et eorum fautores,
Consultores, et adhaerentes, et eorum quemlibet, etiamsi non sint specialiter
nominati, quorum tamen singulorum nomina et cognomina praesentibus pro
expressis haberi volumus, ex nunc prout ex tunc, et e contra Excommunicamus et
Excommunicatos nunciamus et declaramus.

A qua Excommunicationis sententia, praeterquam in mortis articulo constituti,
ab alio quam a nobis, et Romano Pont. pro tempore existente etiam praetextu
cujuscunque facultatis, eis et cuilibet illorum tam in genere, quam in specie
pro tempore desuper concessae, seu concedendae, nequeunt absolutionis
beneficium obtinere. Et si quempian eorum, tanquam in tali periculo constitutum
ab ejusmodi Excommunicationis sententia absolvi contigerit, qui postmodum
convaluerit, is in eandem sententiam reincidat ^o ipso, nisi mandati^ nostris,
quantum in se erit, paruerit: et nihilominus, si obierit, post obtentam
hujusmodi absolutionem, Ecclesiastica car^ar s^pultura, donec Mandatis nostris
paritum suerit.

Et si dicti Dux ^t Senatus per tres dies, post lapsum dictorum vigintiquatuor
dier^m, Excommunicationis sententiam animo (quod absit) sustinuerint indurato,
sententiam ipsam aggravantes, ex nunc pariter prout ex tunc* Civitatem
Venetiarum et alias Civitates, Terras, Oppida, Castra, ^t loca quaecunque, ac
universum temporale Dominium dictae Reipublicae Ecclesiastico Interdicto
supponimus, illamque et illud supposita ^^s^ nunciamus. et declaramus: quo
durante, in dicta Civitate Venetiarum et aliis quibuscunque dicti Dominii
Civitatibus, Terris, Oppidis, Castris ^t locis, il^orumque Ecclesiis ac locis,
piis et Oratoriis etiam private is and Domesticis Capellis, nec public nec
privatim, Missae tam solemnes quam non solennes, aliaque Divina Officia
celebrari possint, prae^^rquam in Casibus a jure permissis, et tunc in
Ecclesiis tantum and non alibi, et in illis etiam januis clausis, non pulsatis
Campanis, ac Excommunicatis et Interdictis prorsus exclusis; neque aliter
quaecunque indulta et Privilegia Apostolica, quoad hoc quibuscumque tam
Secularibus quam Regularibus Ecclesiis, etiam quamtumcunque exemptis, et
Apostolic^ Sedi immediate subjectis, etiamsi de ipsorum Ducis et Senat^s jure
patronatus, etiam ex fundatione, et donatione, aut etiam expri^i^egio
Apostolico existant, ac etiam si tales sint, quae sub generali disposi^ione non
comprehendantur, sed de illis specialis et individua mentio habenda sit,
Monasteriis, Ordinibus etiam Mendicantium, aut ins^itutis. Regularibus eorumque
primiceriis, Praelatis, Superioribus, et a^^^, cuib^s^^nque etiam
particularibus personis, aut piis locis et Oratoriis (...) ^icis, ac Capellis
privatis, ut praefertur, in genere vel in specie s^b quibuseunque tenoribus, et
formis hactenus concessa et in posterum conc^d^nda ullatenus suffragentur.

Ae ult^rius eosd^m Ducem et Senatum, et quemlibet eorum, non solum Reip^b. sed
etiam privato nomine, si aliqua bona Ecclesiastica in feudum, s^u alias quovis
modo a Romana, aut vestris, seu aliis Ecclesiis concessa obtineant, illis
feudis et bonis nec non etiam omnibus quibuscunque Privilegiis et indultis, in
genere vel in specie, in quibusdam vidilicet casibus et delictis contra
Clericos procedendi, illorumque causas, certa forma prascripta, cognoscendi a
Romany Pontificibus Praedecessoribus nostris ^o^san quomodolibet, ex nunc
similiter, prout ex tunc, et e contra privamus, ac privatos fore et esse,
nunciamus and decernimus.

Et nihilominus, si ipsi Dux and Senatus in eorum contumacia diutius
perstiterint indurati, Censuras et poenas Ecclesiasticas contra illos, eisque
a^haerentes, et in praemissis quovis modo faventes, aut auxilium, consilium et
favo^em praestantes, etiam iterat is vicibus aggravandi, et reaggravandi,
ali^sque etiam paenas contra ipsos Ducem and Senatum declarandi, et ad alia
opportuna remedia, juxa sacrorum Canonum disposition^m, contra eos procedendi,
facultatem nobis et Romany Pont. successoribus nostris nominatim et in specie
reservamus. Non obstantibus quibusvis Constitutionibus et Ordinationibus
Apostolicis, nec non Privilegiis, Indul^i^ ^t literis Apostolicis eidem Duci et
Senatui, aut quibusvis aliis p^rsonis in genere vel in specie, praesertim quod
interdici, suspendi vel excommunicati non possint per literas Apostolicas, non
facientes plenam ^^ expressam ac de verbo ad verbum de Indulto hujusmodi
mentionem, ac alias sub quibuseunque tenoribus et formis, et cum quibusvis
etiam dero^atoriarum ^^rogatoriis, aliisque efficacioribus et insolitis
clausulis, ac irritantibus, et aliis decretis, ac in specie cum facultatibus
absolvendi in casibus nobis et Apostolicae sedi reservatis illis quovis modo
per quoscunque Romanos Pont. ac Nos et Sedem Apostolicam in contrarium
praemissorum concessis, confirmatis and approbatis. Quibus omnibus et singulis
et aliis supra expressis, eorum tenores praesentibus pro expressis habentes,
hac vice duntaxat specialiter, et express derogamus, caeterisque contrariis
quibuscunque.

Ut autem praesentes nostrae litterae ad omnium majorem notitiam deducantur,
vobis et cuilibet vestrum per easdem praesentes committimus, et in virtute
Sanctae Obedientiae, et sub divini interminatione judicii, nec non sub
Inderdicti ingressus Ecclesiae ac suspensionis a Pontificalium exercitio, ac
fructuum Mensarum Patriarchalium Archiepiscopalium, et Episcopalium
perceptione; quoad vos Fratres Patriarchae, Archiepiscopi et Episcopi, an etiam
privationis dignitatum beneficiorum ac Officiorum Ecclesiasticorum quorumcumque
quae obtinueritis, ac etiam vocis activae et passivae, ac inhabilitatis ad
illa, et alia in posterum obtinendi quoad vos, filii vicarii, et alii
supradicti, eo ipso incurrendis, aliisque arbitrio nostro infligendis poenis
districte praecipiendo mandamus, ut per vos, vel alium seu alios praesentes
litteras postquam eas receperitis, seu earum notitiam habueritis, in vestris
quisque Ecclesiis, dum major in eis populi multitudo ad divina convenerint, ad
majorem cautelam, solemniter publicetis, et ad Christi sidelium notitiam
deducatis, nec non ad earundem Ecclesiarum vestrarum valvas affigi et affixas
dimitti faciatis.

Et ulterius volumus, ut praesentium transumptis etiam impressis, manu alicujus
Notarii Publici subscriptis, et sigillo personae in dignitate Ecclesiastica
constitutae munitis, eadem prorsus fides ubique habeatur, quae ipsis
praesentibus haberetur, si forent exhibitae vel ostensae; quodque eadem
praesentes, sive illarum Exempla, etiam praefertur impressa ad Ecclesiae
Leteranensis et Basilicae Principis Apostolorum, et Cancellariae nostrae
Apostolicae valvas et in acie Campi flore ut moris est affixae, et publicatae
eosdem Ducem et Senatum, ac alios quoscunque praedictos, vosque etiam universos
et singulos, respective perinde afficiant, ac si eorum ac vestrum cuilibet
personaliter directae, intimatae et praesentatae fuissent.

Datum Romae apud St. Petrum, sub Annulo Piscatoris, die XVIII. Aprilis M. DC.
VI. Pontificatus nostri anno Primo. M. VESTRIVS BARBIANVS.
Anno a Nativitate D. N. Jesu Christi M. DC. VI. Indictione quarta, die vero
XVII. Mensis Aprilis, Pontificatus Sanctiss. in Christo Patris, et D. N. D.
Pauli divina providentia Papae Quinti, anno ejus primo, supradictae litterae
earumque exempla impressa, affixa, et publicata fuerunt ad valvas Ecclesiae
Lateranens. ac Basilicae Principis Apostolorum, et Cancellariae Apostolicae,
nec non acie Campi flore ut moris est, per nos Christophorum Fundatum, et Joan.
Domenicum de Pace, Apostolicos Cursores. Petrus Aloysius Peregrinus Cursorum
Magister.
The Venetians perceiving the Popes malice and indiscretion by this Paper
Interdiction, first ordered that every one should have recourse to his prayers,
then to testify their sensibleness of the wrong done them, recalled home Duodo
their extraordinary Ambassador at Rome; but, to prevent an absolute Rupture,
they let Nani their Ordinary Ambassador stay. Then was command given to all
Ecclesiastical Parsonis not to publish or permit to be published or affixed in
any place, any Bulls or Breves: And by Proclamation it was commanded, that
whoever had any Copy of the former Breve or Interdiction against the Serene
Republic should bring them unto the Magistrates: all which were obeyed, and
such a multitude of Copies brought in, that it was a wonder that so many had
been printed and carefully or seditiously spread abroad.

The Pope informed of the Venetian Proclamation against his Breve, called home
his Nuncio, and sent a dismission to Nani their Ambaffador at Rome, who
accordingly returned to Venice. In the mean time the Pope expected that his
Breve or Indiction would do wonders for his cause, especially he doubted not of
three things.

I. That the Priests and such like Ecclesiastics would forth depart from the
Venetian Territories.

II. That the Cities and the people seeing themselves thus deprived of Church
Offices and such like Duties and benefits, would run into Sedition, and so
force the Senate to give the Pope satisfaction.

III. That the Nobility and Senators themselves, upon this occasion might be
disordered, and divided, by which he doubted not of a Conquest.

But in all these, he found himself deceived, and the Duke to prevent the worst
published his Manifestoes or Letters (which you may read in * Goldastus) which
he caused to be affixed in public places. In them, Monarch. Romans Imper. Tom. 3.
he

Vindicated himself and the Senate in what they had done, and in their carriage
toward his Holiness.

Declared that the Breve was against all law and equity, against Scriptures,
Fathers, and Canons, praejudicial to Secular Authority, the liberty of the
State, the peace of the people, and to the scandal of all the world: Therefore

Pronounced the said Breve unjust, void, null, and of none effect, nor to be
obeyed or observed by any.

Commands all Ecclesiastics within these Dominions, to continue the
celebration of Divine Service.

Now multitude of Penmen are employed of both sides, every one writing
according to his Fancy or Interest; but those of Rome were the most violent,
throwing all manner of Lies and Slanders upon the Republic that their malice
could Invent, and in this they thought themselves not culpable, because they
thought the Venetians now to be the most wretched of all people, insomuch that
Cardinal * Baronius looks upon them as Pagans P^r^ena^^ ad R^^^ b. Venet. page
41^. Id. page 64.
and Heathens without the fold of Christianity, tumbling into manifest
perdition, and so far gone hat he cannot upon any account * wish them well.

And so great Authority had the Papal Interdict with some of the Religious,
That the Jesuits and Capuchins, intended to obey it, though contrary to the
Command of their Prince and Senate.

As for the Jesuits, the Senate demanding their Answer, they returned that they
might continue the Divine Offices, their Sermons and Confessions according to
their Custom. For upon notice of the Interdict, they had sent Achilles
Gaillardi (a Paduan noted Jesuit and the Author of some meditations) to
represent unto the Pope, what good Services they might do his cause, if he
would permit them to stay in the Venetian Dominions. For the Nuncio before his
departure from Venice, had been very busy with the Jesuits, the chief of whom
then in the City being Possevino and Bernardin Castorio noted Authors. But the
Pope understanding the badness of Example, if such a famous Order submitted not
to his Breve, sent them an Express to depart. Now the Term of the XXIV. days
appointed in the Monitorie approaching, the Jesuits were required to give their
final Resolution, who returned an Express refusal to say Mass: which being
retorted upon them as a base Equivocation, they replied, it was not contrary to
their former promise, because the Mass, for the Excellency of it, is not
comprehended under the words of Divine Offices. The Senate seeing themselves
thus abused by these people, commanded the Jesuits speedily to depart their
Dominions; Upon this, the Jesuits suddenly collected a great sum of money from
their Devoted ones, so packing up as fast as they could; in the Evening they
departed the City, each one carrying the Host at his neck, intimating that
Jesus Christ departed with them; as they took Bark, the people cried out
against them, Go with a vengeance, and come no more hither. Before their
departure, they had hid their richest Ornaments, burned great quantity of
writings, and there was found in their Colleges a good number of Cruses to
melt metals, which left some blot upon them, though Possevino endeavored to
vindicate them from any design of gold or silver. At their College in Padua,
were found many Copies, of a writing, containing XVIII. Rules under this Title
(being drawn up and commanded to be believed, by their Founder vid. Exer^icitia
Spiritualia.
Ignatius Loyola) Regulae aliquot servandae, ut cum Orthodoxa Ecclesia vere
sentiamus.



In the Seventh whereof, there is a Prescription to take heed how men press or
inculcate too much the Grace of God.

And in the Third, it is ordained -- That men must believe the Hierarchical
Church, although it tell us, that that is black, which our eye judges to be
white.

The Senate having thus wisely given an hint of their Resolutions, by their
dealing with the Jesuits, Put forth an Order, that all Ecclesiastics who would
not continue Divine Services, should retire out of their Dominions. Upon this,
the Capuchins with whom the Nuncio and Jesuits, had tampered very much,
resolved also to depart, and intended to go (according to the Jesuits
Instructions to them) out in Procession with the Sacrament, thereby to stir up
the people to Sedition; who have most affection to this Order, pretending to
great poverty and Innocence: But this solemnity was hindered by Authority: So in
the morning celebrating one Masie, eating up all the Eucharist, they concluded
the Office, without giving Benediction to the people, and then departed, and so
did the Theatins and the reformed Franciscans. But it was observed that the
Capuchins in the Territories of Brescia and Bergamo (where were no Jesuits to
seduce them) did not depart, but remained Obedient to their Governors
celebrating Divine Service, for which honesty and loyalty, they were bitterly
persecuted by their superiors at Rome, with Excommunications and other Censures.

Now began a fierce dispute amongst them, Whether all the Sacraments
administered by the Priests that staid contrary to the Interdict, were nullities
or no? Whether it was lawful to adore the Eucharist shown by such Priests? And
Whether it was a Mortal or Venial Sin, to hear Mass celebrated by such
Priests? Of these every one judged according to his Interest, as is usual in
such cases.

In the mean time, the Jesuits by their Instruments, did what they could to
stir up Sedition in the State, and so did other Ecclesiastics engaged on the
Papal faction: but the Senate, by their prudence prevented all, and being
perfectly united amongst themselves, kept the people in a true Obedience to
them.

The Quarrel growing daily greater and greater, each party addressed themselves
to the respective Princes in Christendom, to render their cause cheer and
legal; the Princes desiring and persuading a Reconciliation, every one of the
Romanists offering to be Mediators.

The Pope troubled that the Venetians would not stoop to his humor, invented
another Plot, whereby he thought to make some Divisions amongst them. And this
it was. He published a Jubilee, whither he invited all Christians, granting
Indulgences, Absolutions, and Pardons to all, but those of Interdicted places.
By this Strategem, he fancyed, that the Venetian people. seeing themselves thus
deprived, of such blessing and graces, would disobey the Senate and run into
Sedition. And the better to carry this on, the Jesuits gave notice, that though
the people were excluded in the general, yet they had power from his Holiness,
to grant it to such of them as would observe the Conditions by them propounded,
amongst which were these, Not to go to Mass, Nor to approve the reasons and
actions of the Senate. But all these plots did the Pope little good. Nor did
their orher lies against the Republic, as if it had renounced the Roman
Religion, and become Lutherans or Protestants, avail them any thing.

The Pope seeing the bad event of all these designs, sends to Philip III. King
of Spain, to desire his Assistance: The King returns an Answer, that he had
desired an Accommodation, but seeing the Honor of his Holiness concerned, he
would assist him with his forces, which he had also signified to his Ministers
in Italy. This Letter was received at Rome with the greatest joy and Triumph
Imaginable; the Spaniards vapouring of their meritorious actions to the Pope.
But others gave different Censures of the Letter; some thinking it procured by
the Authority of the Duke of Lerma, the then great Favorite of Spain who ruled
King and all things else: But others believed, that the design of it was not,
as it appeared, really for war; but thereby to render the Venetians more
submiss and tractable for a peace.

However the Count de Fuentes the Catholic Kings Governor at Milan seem^d
very forward in Preparations; upon which the Venetians thought it not s^tting
to be behind: so that now both parties seemed running into a War: both Pope and
Duke drumming up men, and making all things ready for Offense and Defense.

Whilst these preparations went on, the better to disorder and weaken the
Venetians, the Marquis de Santa Croce, having received the Papal Benediction by
his Nuncio, departed from Naples with XXVI. Spanish Galleys, and at Messina
received the addition of XIV. more, thence secretly sailing along, entered the
Golf of Venice, fell upon Durazzo a City in Albania belonging to the Turks,
which he sacked and returned with Plunder and Prisoners. Hoping by this means,
to incense the Turk, so to make him fall out with the Venetians, and invade
their Territories in Dalmatia. But the Turk, in this more Religious than the
Spaniard, understanding the base design, scorned to break with the Venetian in
this juncture, but offered the Republic his Assistance.

This wicked design thus failing, the Partisans of the Pope went another way to
trouble the Republic, maintaining in Print, that The Marriages made within the
Interdicted Territories were invalid, the Matrimonial Conjunction Adultery, and
the Children all Bastards. This was a cunning plot to amuse the zealous and
simple; but the wisdom of the Senate, and the reasons of their writers, dashed
this to pieces also: Though the Roman Inquisition was very furious in their
judgments, forbidding under pain of Excommunication any of the Venetian Papers
or Reasons, to be intertain'd or read, as Schismatical and Heretical; and
Cardinal Bellarmine was very active with his Pen against the Senators.

In the mean time the Ambassadors of France and Spain, labored what they could
for a Reconciliation, and the Emperor and Grand Duke of Tuscany were not slack
in affording their assistance to a peace. But the means seemed difficult; for
the Pope stood upon his old plea, of having the Prisoners delivered him, and
the Decrees Canceled. And on the Contrary, the Duke and Senate, resolved not to
betray their Temporal Authority, and renounce their Decrees, though as for the
Abbot and Canon, at the earnest entreaty of the French, they were willing in a
Complement to bestow them upon King Henry IV. and let him do with them as
pleased him best; and when the Pope would recall his Censures, they were
willing to do the same with their Letters or Protestation against them; but not
before, lest they might intimate that they had been in the falt and done amiss.

Whilst the Treaty is thus earnestly carried on by several Princes and Rome
called La Congregation de Guerra, or the Congregation of War, consisting of XV.
Cardinals; out of whom he culled IV. to be employed with the Treasurer and the
Commissaries of the Chamber, about the means to provide money, and most of
these were of the Spanish Faction; the better to engage that King to him, if
the Trial of the cause should once be put to the Sword.

And it was the opinion of many, that it could not end without blows, for the
Pope begins the year with new Levies: and the Count de Fuentes, who longed for
mischief, caused the Drums to beat up at Milan for Soldiers; sent to
Switserland, to Naples, to Flanders, to Germany, and other places, to raise
what Soldiers he could, getting Money and Arms from Spain, so that he doubted
not, presently to be at the Head of XXX. Thousand men. The hopes of these great
Preparations animated the Pope so much, that, in a full Consistory, he
declared, He would have war with the Republic of Venice.

In the Interim, the Venetians were not idle, hastening their Preparations as
much as in them lay, so that in a little while they had got together about LXXX
Galleys, raised many Thousand foot in their own Territories, sent to the
Cantons to hire more, doubted not of Assistance from France, was promised aid
from Great Britain by Sr. Henry Wotten King James his Ambassador, by which
means they had hopes from Denmark and Holland; and was promised supplies from
the Lorreiner, whose Son viz. the Count de Vaudemont, they hoped would be their
General. But the Duke of Lorraine being aged, so superstitiously fearful of
Papal Censures, beside having a Son a Cardinal, who with the Pope did diswade
him, would not permit his Son to go, or any Levies to be made in his Dominions,
though young Count de Vandemont, was willingenough for the Venetian.

Whilst Christendom is thus troubled with rumors of wars, and every place
busy with great Preparations, to fill Europe full of mischief and bloodshed,
and all about an idle Humor of the Popes; The Treaty goes on apace. And
though many Embassies and Audiences had been been employed to little purpose;
yet the French King, will try the other pull, and so resolves to employ
Cardinal de Joyeuse, in this business; who being a Churchman might be more
acceptable to the Pope, yet under the Command of the Instructions, might no way
lessen the rights of the Republic.

Thus qualified, Joyeuse arrives at Venice, where he falls to work vigorously,
and willing he was to save the Popes Reputation and Credit: but after many
Hearings and Debates, he could get only this Answer from the Senate, That the
Censures being taken away, they would recall what they had done in Opposition
to them, and send an Ambassador to Rome; That for the Decrees, they would
proceed in the use of them, with such Moderation and Piety as they and their
Ancestors used to do. And that upon a Peace, the Ecclesiastics might return,
only the Jesuits excepted. And with these Answers, the Cardinal departs from
Rome to see what good he could do there.

At Rome, Cardinal de Joyeuse found the Opinions divided some for a Peace upon
any account, considering what a great mischief a Rupture might bring upon
Christendom; others thought it not honorable for the Pope to recede from any
thing he had done, till he had obtained what he desired and made the Republic
submit. As for the Pope, though his greatest hopes lay in the Spaniard, yet he
could not with reason rely too much on him, knowing his Coffers at that time to
be empty, and if he did him any good he would expect a requital of some
Privileges, which would not be convenient for Rome to yield to, besides he
doubted to be overpowered by the Venetians and their numerous Assistance;
amongst whom would be many of the Reformed Religion, which having once got a
footing in Italy, might, in that juncture of time, give a blow at the very
Papacy.

These Considerations persuaded or forced the Pope to a Compliance, but yet was
troubled that he could not come off with Honor, seeing the Venetians Answers
were resolute and cunningly worded, and they would not admit of the Jesuits,
upon any account whatever: and thus to forsake them who had suffered for his
cause, would betray his Baffle to the whole world.

At last, after several Consultations it was agreed on, that at Rome, Monsieur
a' Alincourt the French Ambassador, should demand of the Pope in the Name of
the Christian King and of the Republique, that the Censures might be taken
away. And also that Cardinal Joyeuse and d'Alincourt should give him their
words in the Name of their King, that the Decrees should remain without
Execution, until the Accord might be effected. To this last clause the Pope
would have had added, that It was with the consent of the Republic: But this
was not yielded to, knowing the Venetians would never agree to such an
Addition. So, as much being done at Rome as could be, de Joyeuse returns with
the Papal Instructions and Authority to Venice.

At Venice, the Cardinal hoping in some thing to uphold the Popes Honor, told
the Senate, that now all the Difficulties were shrunk to two, viz. To send an
Ambassador to Rome, before the Censures were removed, and to re-establish the
Jesuits. But finding these would not be granted, he proceeds more moderately,
and

Proposes. They Answer. That the Ecclesiastics should be restored, and their
goods redelivered. That they consent, provided the Pope will receive into
Favor, those who had writ in defense of the State. And what ever the Pope did
with the writings in behalf of his cause, they would do the same with those
Papers in vindication of theirs. That the Prisoners should be delivered without
any Protestations. The Prisoners should be delivered to the French Ambassador,
but the Senate would make a Protestation. That their Protestation against the
Interdict should be revoked, as also their Letter writ unto their Cities. They
will take away their Protestation or Manifesto, when the Monitory or Interdict,
(upon which it is grounded) is taken away, but the Letter need not taking
notice of.

He is also very earnest for the Restitution of the Jesuits, but the Senate
absolutely But upon the earnest desire of Pope Alexander VII. and the great
offers of the King of Polands Brother (a Jesuits himself) they were restored
were restored. 1657. 20. January 30.
deny's it upon any account what ever, Recounting several of their Seditions
and Ungrateful actions, it having been one of the first places that fostered
them. At last, after several Reasonings, was concluded and agreed on. That the
Cardinal should declare in the College without any other Ceremony that the
Censures were taken away. And that at the same time the Duke should put into
his hands a Revocation of the Protestation.

That the Prisoners might be delivered to Fre^ne the French Ambassador at
Venice, as to the French King, with the Republic Protestation; the Pope being
not supposed to be concerned in it.

That the Religious who had retired themselves, upon the Interdict should be
restored, the Jesuits excepted, and XIV. others, who had fled for certain
Crimes, and not in Obedience to the Pope.

That no mention should be made of any Letter, written unto Governors, or
Cities, but only a Manifesto published for the revocation of the Protestation,
which was printed.

That after the Censures were taken away, the Republic should name and send an
Ambassador to reside with his Holiness, according to the common Custom of
Princes.



And if there were any other particulars, that they should not now be spoken of
but should be remitted to be fairly treated of with the Pope.

Before these were fully agreed on; there had been some dispute about the
manner of the Ceremony, in taking off the Interdiction: for the Senate had
absolutely denied to receive Absolution, affirming they were Innocent, and had
(in what they had done) committed no falt: Then the Cardinal proposed to go to
St. Mark's Church with the Duke and Senate, and there to celebrate Mass, and
give a Benediction which was enough (he said) to intimate that the Censures
were taken away.

But the Duke and Senate, jealous of their Reputation, would not allow of this;
For though they confessed, That the Apostolic Benediction ought not to be
refused, when offered, yet at this time it might give occasion to some to
believe a falsity, as if they had needed it by some falt in this Quarrel,
alleging farther the Custom of the Popes, who, if Princes do some acts to them
through Devotion or Humility, presently esteem it as done of Duty, or in
acknowledgment of their falts. At last, to end this Obstacle, it was agreed on,
as abovesaid, That the Cardinal should declare without any other Ceremony that
the Censures were taken away.

Now nothing remained undecided but the form of the Manifesto, to null the
Senate's Protestation against the Monitory or Interdict: but of this all was
accepted, only this sentence. The Censures being taken away the Protestation in
like manner was taken away. The Cardinal urged, that they ought not to use the
words Taken away in the Protestation, but Revoked. The Senate, though they
affirmed they could not comprehend, what subtilty or difference, laid in the
alteration; yea for some time refused to admit of a change. But perceiving the
Cardinal would have it so, or else break all, at length yielded to the
Cardinals request, and so it was concluded thus.

The Censures being taken away, the Protestation in like manner is revoked

All Obstacles thus removed, the Agreement was completed with these Ceremonies.

The XXI. of April in the morning, de Fresne the French Ambassador The XI.
according to the English Account.
being at the Cardinal de Joyeuse's Lodgings, Marc Ottobon the Venetian
Secretary had the two Prisoners Marc Antony Brandolino Valdemarino Abbot of
Nervese, and Scipio Sarazin Canon of Vicenza, carried thither. He telling the
Ambassador, that these were the Prisoners, which the Illustrious Prince the
Duke of Venice, had sent to be delivered to his Excellence, in gratification of
the most Christian King. But with Protestation, not to Prejudice hereby, the
Authority the Republic has to judge Ecclesiastics. The Ambassador answered
That so he received them. Of which a public Instrument being drawn, de Fresne
went into a Gallery where the Cardinal was, sent for the Prisoners, saying to
the Cardinal These are the Prisoners that are to be delivered to the Pope; The
Cardinal pointing to one near him, said, Give them to him, meaning Claudio
Montano (a Commissary sent by the Pope to this effect) who touched them in
token of Dominion and Possession; and prayed the Ministers of Justice who
conducted them that they would be pleased to keep them for him.

This done, the Cardinal and Ambassador, went to the College, where they met
the Duke and Senate, and all being set as usually, The Cardinal pronounced these
words.

I rejoice very much that this day, (so much desired by me) is come, wherein I
declare unto your Serenitie that all the Censures are taken away, as indeed
they are; and I take therein much pleasure, for the benefit, which shall
redound hereby to all Christendom and particularly to Italy.

This said, the Duke put into his hand, the Decree of the Revocation of their
Protestation, and after some words of Complement, they all rose and departed;
an end of this Quarrel being thus made.

That afternoon, a Rumor was spread about, that that mouring, at the meeting in
the College, the Cardinal had given an Absolution. At this the Venetians (so
jealous were they of their reputation) were somewhat troubled, and made it
their business to find out the Original of such a Report, which at last they
found to be scattered by some Frenchmen, who giving for their assertion, only
this Reason, viz. That the Cardinal being entered into the College, before any
thing was done, made the sign of the Cross under his Hood. The idle story and
discontent vanished, the Venetians smiling to see, on what little things some
fond people would build a Submission or Conquest.

And it may be, upon this Rumor, or some such idle Report, some Historians do
say, that they did receive Absolution. But in this History I find most reason
to rely upon the Credit of Father Paul. One of the most famous Pen-Champions
that the Venetians employed in this Quarrel, was the said learned and judicious
Friar, of the Order of the Servi commonly known by the name of Father Paul, of
whom a word or two by the by.

He was born at Venice M. D. LII. He naturally addicted himself to his book,
whereby when young, he gained great Reputation, so that William the famous Duke
of Mantoua intertain'd him as his Chaplain, in the year M. D. LXXIX. he was
created Provincial of his Order, which he executed without partiality: he went
and lived some time at Rome, where he got acquainted with the best, his parts
making him known, to Pope and Cardinals as well as others. Being returned to
Venice he followed his studies close, and in all manner of learning was so
excellent, that all Strangers that went ^o Venice desired his acquaintance,
upon which he was foolishly accused by the Court of Rome as a Companykeeper
with Heretics.

At this time, the Order of the Servi was in some trouble, by reason of their
Protector, Cardinal Santa Severina, who against all right or reason, was
resolved to make one Gabriel Collison General of the Order, being thereto
persuaded by his Briberies: the whole Order opposed this, and herein Father
Paul was a little engaged, but carried himself with great discretion and
moderation. But at last Gabriel was made General, and a seeming peace was made.

When the late Quarrel began between the Pope and the Venetians, they chose
Father Paul, to be one of their chief Assistants, who by his solid reasons
staggerd the Papal Pretensions: which so concerned the Pope, that he would have
had the Father bribed from his Duty to the Commonwealth; but this failing,
other designs were set on foot. Gaspar Schoppius, a man well known for his
railing and pernicious principles of Government, freely told Father Paul, that
the Pope had long Hands, and might reach him, but wished rather to have him
alive at Rome, and the Father was by several great Personages informed, that
Plots were laid against his Life: but he trusting to his Innocence neglected
his Security.

But this confidence might have cost him his Life, for one Evening in the
Street at Venice, he was assaulted, received two wounds in his Neck and one in
his Face, entering at his right ear and passing through the Jaw bone, and out
again betwixt his Nose and his Cheek, and the Stelletto was left sticking in,
the Villain not having strength enough to pull it out.

The number of these Assassins were five, who having a Gondola ready, got
presently to the House of the Pope's Nuncio, then resident in Venice; thence in
a flat Boat, with Ten Oars and well armed, prepared for the purpose, they
departed that night, toward Ravenna. Being now in the Papal Territories, they
were secure, and vapour'd of the Fact, and were nobly received at every place;
at last they got to Rome, where they were well also entertained, with
assignation of Entertainment. And here they staid some time, till the world
cried shame, that such abominable Villains should be sheltred and entertained
from Justice, by his Holiness: upon which the Pope, was forced for Honor sake,
to order their departure out of the City; yet had they some Allowance granted
them, but so small, in respect of those Glories they expected, that they became
mal-content, so that at last every one of them came to an evil end.

But to return to Father Paul, he was had home to his Monastery, the most
famous Physicians and Chyrurgions in those parts employed about him, so that
after some time he perfectly recovered, to the joy of the whole Senate, who by
public Proclamations took order for his future Security, assigning him a
Guard, increase of Stipend, with a House at St. Mark's at the public Charge.
But the Father desired to be excused from all such state, cost, and trouble,
resolved to continue in his Monastery amongst his Brethren of the Order. The
Senate perceiving this to be his earnest desire, gratified him, but caused some
building to be added to his Chamber, from whence by a little Gallery, he might
have the Commodity to take Boat the better to avoid Treachery, in his returns
sometimes by night, from the public Service.

Seeing the Senate had thus carefully provided for his security, so that there
was danger to use any more force, some other designs were set on foot, 1609.
Fra. Antonio da viterbo who served as an Amanuensis to the Father, was
solicited, to make him away with a Razor, which he might conveniently do,
considering his intimacy, and the great trust the Father put in him, or if not
this, to poison him. Antonio refused to act this wickedness himself, especially
to such a good Friend and Patron, but would afford his Assistance if others
would be the Actors. So at last it was concluded, that he should take the Print
in Wax of his Keys, which he should deliver to another Friar Giovar Francisco,
whom Friar Bernardo (the Favorite of Cardinal Borghese, Nephew to the Pope)
had employed about this thing; by which means having Counterfeit Keys, they
might send in some Ruffians or Bravo's to murder the Father.

But some Letters of this Plot, by chance being taken, there was enough
discovered, to have Francisco and Antonio seized on. Francisco was condemned to
be hanged, but had his pardon by a full discovery of the whole design, and
delivering unto them all the Letters concerning this black Plot; what great
Personages were in this action, is not known; the Council of Venice thinking it
best to conceal them, for the Honor of Religion.

To tell all the Attempts against him would be tedious, these are enough; and
against him it was that the Court of Rome bent all their spite, he being an
Enemy to the prop of all their Greatness, viz. their Usurpations, and Authority
over Temporal Princes; and his Reasons obtained him the greater ill will from
that Bishop, because they seemed to be favored by other Potentates: The Pope
fearing that in time other Territories might follow the Example of the
Venetians. And when his Coercive Authority is once despised, he will remain but
a weak Governor within the narrow Limits of his Churches Patrimony; which may
render him incapable of preferring his Favorites abroad; and the Interest thus
gone, the Splendour of his Seat will fail; and the Glory of his idle and wasting
Courtiers, will be eaten up, by the more thrifty Citizens. Thus their Charity
to themselves, made them the more violent against the Friar Paul though he
acted nothing, but what became the duty of a good Subject to his Prince and
Country.

The Father hoped, that the malice of his Enemies would vanish by degrees: and
when Pope Paul V. dyed, he expected all heart-burning to cease, but here he
found himself mistaken, and the Quarrel and Enmity entailed as it were upon the
Pontifick Chair. For Gregory XV. succeeding, 1621, bare the same ill will,
looking upon the Father as the chief-Counsellor, nay and Incendiary too of the
Venetians, insomuch that he told their Ambassador, that, there would never be a
peace between the Republic and the Sea Apostolic, but such an one as Father
Paul should approve of.

The Father informed of this, was grieved beyond measure, that he should be
held a Beautefeu, and so rather than any difference should arise about him,
resolved peaceably to retire himself from his own Country. To live amongst the
Protestants, might expose himself to Calumnies; to dwell where the
Ecclesiastics might overpower him, or where the Temporality would not trouble
it self in his Protection, was to expose his Life to Poison and Stellettoes
again. Upon this difficulty he determined to reside at Constantinople, or some
of the Eastern Countries. And for this Peregrination he began to make
Preparations, take advice, get safe-conducts, etc. But being informed that the
Pope released much of his displeasure toward him, he was the less careful in
hastening.

And now he began to be ancient and feeble, and dyed in his Monastery at
Venice, with great Tranquillity and Settlement of mind, 1623. in the LXXI. year
of his Age.

The Father was little, humble, grave, but withal cheerful; of his diet very
sparing, insomuch, that every day with him, was almost a Fast: he was merciful
and good to his greatest Enemies, begging Pardon for those, who designed his
death.

His Learning got him renown every where, being good for the Oriental
Languages, besides Greek, Latin, and other Europaean; was famous for his skill
in Mathematics, Physic, Anatomy, Chemistry, Astronomy: in all which he was a
daily Practitioner and Discoverer of many Excellent Rarities: Insomuch that the
chiefest Artests, thought themselves happy in his advice and acquaintance. And
make honorable mention of him.

He had also carefully perused all the ancient Philosophers, out of whom he had
collected their different Opinions.

For Politics, he was held not only the greatest, but the most honest
Statesman in his time, admirable versed in the Laws, knowing in all Histories,
and his skill in Geography made the world his own. Divinity was his calling,
and what an excellent man he was at his Pen, may appear by his diverse writings,
many of which are not yet published, but some remain as Rarities locked up in
the Cabinets of Princes, whilst others lurk as Secrets in the Archives of the
wise Venetian Council. But a Specimen of his great Abilities, may be gathered
from his History of the Council of Trent. where he was pleased to vail himself
under the Title of Pietro Soave Polana. Which by an Anagrammatism, makes the
Fathers Name, Surname, and Country, thus Paolo Sarpio, Veneto. his Fathers name
being Francisco di Pietro Sarpio.

There is also abroad of his A History of the Inquisition; a History of the
Quarrels between Pope Paul V. and the Venetians, and several other things in
justification of his Country in those Troubl^s, which with his other writings
(and Commendations of him) have fallen under the lash of their vid. Ind. lib.
Prohibit. edit. Alexand. VII. page 98. 222. 226. 227. 272
Index Expurgatorius.

The Court of Rome, whilst he lived carried the greatest bitterness against
him, daily writing Lybels and Invectives against him, stufft up with Lies and
Forgeries, insomuch that Bellarmine, (though his Pen was engaged against the
Father in the Venetian Quarrel) told the Pope that such notorious Falsities and
Calumnies would bring more Scandal than Credit to his Cause.

Amongst the rest of his Enemies was Maffeo Barbarini Nuncio in France at the
time of the Quarrel, and afterward Pope Urban VIII. who in his Aerie and
Romantic humor raised and invented many unworthy Stories of the Father, far
unbefitting a Person of his Place and Dignity.

Nay so implacable were the Roman Favorites, that their Slanders and Malice
followed him to his Grave, publishing impudent and fabulous Stories concerning
his death, of his dying Howling, of strange Apparitions of Black Dogs, of
Terrible Noises heard in his Cell and Chambers, and several such like lying
Forgeries, as those idle people used to invent upon Luther, Calvin, and others
who will not truckle to the Usurpations of the Roman Court. But the people of
Venice, who knew him better, accounted him a Saint, hanging up their Votive
Tablets at his Spond. an 1623. 13. Rob Johnston Rerum Brit. Hist. lib. 20. an.
1623. p. 638.
Sepulcher, till the Senate, to satisfy Pope Urban VIII. forbad such
Ceremonies to be used to his Monument. And so much by the bie, of the Learned
and Judicious Father Paolo Sarpi.

Here might I treat of some further troubles endeavored to be stirred up by
Urban VIII. who in affront to the Republic, caused an Ancient Inscription,
[which had been set up in the Sala Regia in the Vatican, as a Monument of the
Venetian honor for restoring Alexander III. when chased by the Emperor
Frederick I.] to be defaced and razed out. He also excommunicated the Luqueses,
the Grand Duke of Tuscany, the Duke of Parma, and of Modena, and to maintain
his Censures fell to 1642 1644
the Temporal Sword. But Parma flew about like Lightning with 3000. Horse, that
his Holiness and Cardinals thought it safest to retire to the Castle S. Angelo.
At last by the Intercession of the French, a Peace is concluded, the Censures
are taken off, the engaged Princes have their Temporal Authority confirmed by
the Peace. And the Ancient Inscription, in Honor and Gratitude to the
Venetian, is to be renewed and inscribed in a larger Table, and set up in the
Vatican as formerly.

Here the Pope gained nothing by fomenting Troubles: And in truth, the Papal
Authority, by the late Venetian Quarrel, received a deadly blow; Princes
thereby, beginning to see their own power and Jurisdiction, have the less
esteem for that pretended or usurped by the Pope; and may in time acknowledge
themselves Supreme, within their own Dominions.

CHAP. II. Henry the Fourth murdered by Ravaillac.
I Have formerly related diverse attempts of the Romanists to take away the
Authority and Life of Henry IV. of France, which Catalogue Hist de la Paix fol.
142. 143. etc. Laur. Bouchel Hist. de la justice Crim Tit. 4 chapter 22.
I might augment, with the wickedness of four Piedmonters, of a Lorrain
Lacquey, of one Pedefer, of one Nicolle Mignon a woman poor and wicked, who
designed his murder. And to these I might add the attempt of one Jean de
L'Isle, who (as the King was returning from hunting) upon Pont-neusi in Paris,
by taking hold of his Cloak would have pulled him off his Horse, and
endeavored to assassinate him with St. Lazare Hist. Tragiques p. 68. Hard. de
Perefixe Hist. Hen. le Grand.
his Dagger: But the King was graciously pleased to pardon him, the fellow
being found to be a mere Enthusiastic Fool, declaring himself to be King of
the whole world, to have descended from Pharamond the first King of the
Francks, and affirming Henry to have Usurped the Kingdom of France from him.
Probably somewhat related to the Whimsies or Phanaticism of the American Doctor
who believed he should be King and Dr. Mer. Casa^bon of Enthusiasm chapter 3. p.
104. 105. 108. Edit. 2.
Pope too, or the Italian Footboy, who fanci^d himself a Monarch, the
Serving-man who thought himself a Pope, or the Italian Groom who held himself
for Emperor, and accordingly, to his poor Capacity, would take such state upon
him. Upon this foolish or madman's attempt on the Kings person, the Monsieurs
M^tin and Malherbe, then noted Poets in France, have composed some vid.
d'espinella le Parnasse des Poets Francoses. Tom. 1. fol. 33. etc. Tom. 2.
fol. 218. etc.
Verses.

But passing by these, with a latter one mentioned by the careful Duke
Memoires. Tom. 3. page 478.
du Sully, and other Contrivances to involve that Kingdom in Rebellion, I shall
hasten to the Murder of that great Monarch which in short was thus:

The King in his Coach with others going to visit his great Confident the Duke
of Sully, then indisposed in the Arsenal; being come to the La Ferronnerie (or
Ironmongers) which was then very narrow by reason of the Shops built against
the wall of St. Innocent's Churchyard, and a Stop being made to his Coach by
two Carts, one laden with Wine, the other with Hay: At this Stop, one Francois
Ravaillac took Laur. Bouchel Hist. de la jusstice crim. tit. 11. chapter 14.
the opportunity to thrust himself near the Coach, and setting one foot upon
the wheel and the other against a Shop-stall, so advanced himself, that with a
knif prepared for the purpose, he murdered him with two or three stabs, before
the mischief was perceived. Of this Murder thus discants les Trophies de Hen.
le Grand. 103.
Pierre Matthieu the Kings Historiogapher and Councellor.

Il ne plus faut nommer Henrys les Roys de France
La Mort par deux Cousteaux and un Esclat de Lance
A tue trois Henrys: L'un joustant a Cheval,
L' autre enson Cabinet, le tiers en son Carosse;
Cinq Roys du nom de Jacques ont fait croire a l'Escosse
Qu'il y a dans les noms quelque secret fatal.
Let Us no more name Henrys, for Kings of France,
Since Death with two Knives and one shivered Lance
Three Henrys killed; one Tilted through the Eye:
In's Chamber one, the last in's Coach did dye:
The death of * Five Scotch James may advise, Four more truly.

That in some Names, some Fatal Secret lies.
Who were the Contrivers of this horrid Fact, is not as yet (that I know of)
fully divulged, though wisemen suspect that there was more in it, than the
malicious thoughts of such a Varlot, whose obscurity was such, that the King
could not have any way offended him, any way disingaged, or have provoked him
to such a mischief, but that the Devil and a false zeal of Religion will
instigate a man to any mischief.

It Is true, the King at this time, had an Army of above Forty Thousand men,
ready for some grand design, and he himself within a few days was to go and
head them in his Intended Exploit; but whether this great expense of men and
money, was only to regain the Beautiful Princess of Conde, who with her
Husband had privately fled into Flanders to avoid the Kings immoderate Love, as
Cardinal Hist. Relat. Fland. p. 13^. etc.
Bentivoglio is pleased to assert: Or to obtain the Division of Christendom
into XV. Dominions, according to the strange Model laid down by the Duke of
Mem. Tom. 4.
Sully and some others from him, I shall not undertake to Determine, seeing
others will not by any means allow that the Kings Intentions, Plots, and
Designs are yet any way Quo Consilio Rex bellum susceperit, quem potissimum
sinem intenderit, quam metam, quosve limits armis proposuerit, ut incertum est
et incompertum hactenus, sic inane perscribere et lucem ex fumo et umbra
captare. Joan. de Bussieres Hist. Franc. vol. 4. page 482.
known or discovered.

But it is certain the Spaniard was amazed at these great Preparations of the
King, and thought it fitting to strengthen himself in Flanders, and the Pope
and Spaniards did not use to separate Interests; besides Gregory XV. had been
very earnest to persuade the King from any more Arming, but to little purpose.
And it may be here, not unworth the Observation, that whilst the King was
raising this great Army, there was a large Mem. du Sully Tom. 3. page 360. and
Hist. de la vie de Monay du Plessis page 337.
Book secretly kept in France by some Considering Priests, in which many did
subscribe their fidelity and Obedience to the Pope; and what else I cannot
tell, but this we are assured, that the Book was half written through, and a
great part of those Oaths, and Signatures, signed and subscribed in blood.

As for Ravaillac he had formerly been a Monk, then throwing off his Frock, had
for some time taught a Petty-school; but it seems, Profit, not coming in fast
enough by that Trade, he threw himself upon the Law, turning Solicitor or Petty
fogger: He had formerly been a stickler in their Solemn League and Covenant,
and as appears kept some of its Leven yet in his heart, and so a zealous
Disciple to the Pope; and this it seems was no small furtherance of him: for
what ever the Kings designs were, Ravaillac was fully persuaded, that the aim
of it was to ruin his Holiness and the Roman Religion, boldly alleging in his
Examination, this for the cause of the Attempt. -- Parceque faisant la guerre
contre le Pape, c'estoit la fair contre Dieu, d'autant que le Pape estoit Dieu
and Dieu estoit le Pape -- Procez. Examen, Confessions etc. du Francois
Ravaillac, page 39. Is. Casaubon. Epist. ad Eront. Ducaum, page 14. Andre Favyn
Hist. de Navat. page 1292.
Because (said he) making war against the Pope, is the same as to make war
against God, seeing the Pope was God, and God was the Pope.

That there were more than one Contriver of this Murder needs no doubt,
seeing the general Bruit which fore-ran it, and the great confidence or rather
certainty his Enemies had of it, of both which the Words and Testimony of the
present Archbishop of Paris are observable.

His Enemies were then in a profound silence; which possibly was not caused,
Hist. Hen. le Grand, p. 3.
only by their Consternation and fear of the Success of his Arms: but out of
the Expectation they had to see succeed some great Blow in which lay all their
hopes.

It must needs be, that there were many Conspiracies against the life of this
good King; since from Twenty places, advice was given of it; since by a Printed
Paper both in Spain and at Milan a report of his death was published before;
since there passed a Currier eight days before he was Assassinated, through the
City of Liege, who said that he carried news to the Princes of Germany that he
was killed; since at Montargis, there was found a Paper upon the Altar,
containing the Prediction of his approaching death, by a determinate blow;
since in fine, the Report ran through all France, that he should not outlive
that year, and that he should dye a Tragic death in the LVII. year of his Age,
and some also said, in a Coach, which made him to dread and tremble when he was
in one.

The Jesuits were accused of having some knowledge of it, and to this purpose
was called to mind the Sermon of Father Hardy; preached at St. Severins in
Paris not two Months before the Blow; in which, amongst other things he told
his Auditors -- That Kings heaped up Treasures to make themselves feared, but
yet there needed but a Blow a or Mattock to kill a King: and it is known, that
none was more gathering and hoarding up of Moneys in his latter days, to carry
on his Armed design, than this King, insomuch that they talk of Mountains of
Gold that he had amassed together.

It Is also objected, that Ravaillac declared, he had informed Father d'Aubigny
of this intended Murder, and showed him the Knife, but that this was told him
in Confession, and so not to be revealed: the cunning Jesuit, upon Examination,
protesting, that God had given him that Grace or Quality, that as soon as any
thing was revealed to him in Confession, he presently forgot it.

But however it be, the reverend Hardovin de Perefixe the present Arch bishop
of Paris, does assure us, that the Constancy, hardiness and unconcernedness of
the Malefactor at his exquisite Torments in suffering -- strongly confirmed the
suspicion had that certain Emissaries under the Mask of Religion had instructed
and charmed him, with false assurances that he should dye a Martyr, if he killed
him; whom they made believe was the sworn Enemy of the Church -- The truth is,
after the Villain had given the murdring blows, he neither took care to flee,
to conceal his Knife, or shift for himself: but stood still by the Coach, as if
he desired to be taken notice of, and glorified, and prided himself in such a
noble Exploit.

And that there was some Secret more than ordinary discovered in his
Examination and Confession; and that those who instigated him to that bloody
action were such, that it was not thought fitting (whether for the Honor of
Religion, or some other respect) that they should be publicly known, is more
than hinted at, by the foresaid Prelate: For of these things, says he -- les
juges mes^ue qui l'interrogerent, n' oserent en ouurir la Bouche qui n'en per
lerent jamais que des Espaules. Hist. Hen. le grand. part 3.
The Judges themselves who Examined him, durst not open their mouths, but with
a Shrug or Covertly with excusing put offs. -- And that some grand thing was
here hushed up, may in part be supposed, by the Prince of Conde and others, five
years after, putting forth a Public Complaint, amongst other things, that the
discovery of Henry the Great's murder was stopped and not fully prosecuted.

However the Common Censure was apt to think worst of the Jesuits, reckning
them as the chiefest Assertors and Champions of this King killing Doctrine;
insomuch that Pierre Coton himself fell to work, to write an Apology for his
Order, which he did by way of a Declaratory Letter dedicated and directed to
the Queen-Regent, where (though not long) the Reader will find more words than
materials, either not down right, plain and pat to the purpose, or else drawing
false and fair shadows, over some black and seditions Authors: and yet those
whom he mentions are but a very few.

Amongst the many others, who thought this King-killing Doctrine, most
agreeable to the Jesuits, and at this time began to show himself, both in the
Pulpit and at the Press, was Jean du Boys Olivier, Abbot of Beaulieu, born at
Paris, Preacher to the King, one held a Lover of his Prince and Country, and of
an honest, free, downright disposition: The stirring of this du Bois, did a
little vex the Fathers, his Credit and Repute having the heavier hand upon
them, and therefore nothing could satisfy them but removal, upon some
honorable pretense, and no place so fitting as to pack him for Italy. Of which
take a piece of a Letter to Archbishop Abbot, as I transcribed it from the
Original.

May it please your Grace,
Since the writing of my last to your Grace, etc. we have freshly received the
news from Rome, that the Abbot du Bois, a man very popular here in Paris, a
Town-born Child, and famous also for his freedom both of speech and writing
against the Exorbitancy of the Popes Authority, and the practices of the
Jesuits, and in particular against Pere Coton, to whose Lettre Declaratoire
published presently after the Kings death, (to acquit his Order of the
Imputation of the Kings death) he set forth an Answer in print dedicated Aux
Bons Francois being also cited by the Anti-coton as a witness But here (it may
be) Anti-Coton was wrong informed concerning Father Coton.
Que sentence a este donnee contre lay a Avignon pour avoir engrosse une
Nonnain: That this Abbot Isay, going lately to Rome, is there clapped up in the
Inquisition, which has occasioned the French here to speak according to their
manner very frankly in Commiseration of him, who was always held a good
Patriot. And it is thought dishonorable to the state, in regard that he is the
Queens Chaplain, and was employed by her, as some say, but to Florence, as
others to Rome, to thank the Pope for the Cardinals Hat which he lately
bestowed upon the Queens Almoner the Bishop of Beziers: but however, it is
agreed by all, that he carried Letters from hence, wherewith it is said, he was
purposely gratified to bring him within the compass of the snare, wherein he is
caught, etc.

From Paris the 5th. of December, 1611. Your Graces most humbly to be Commanded
J. WOODFORD.


Having thus followed him to Prison, it is easy to conclude that he must end
his days there, it being not agreeable to their custom and Policy, to set such
at Liberty that can tell Tales, and that they might be no more feared or
troubled with him, they forthwith sed cum sub idem tempus, Abbas Silvius ob
paricidialem illam doctrinam esset in Jesuitas invectus voce et scripto, paulo
post Romae necatus est in carere Peter Molin. de Monarchi^. Temporali Pont.
Romans cap. 2. page 22.
murder him in Prison at Rome, his main falt being (for any that I know)
Loyalty, which thus occasioned his misfortune and death, to the shame of his
Persecutors.

But that Book which then made the greatest noise was called Anti-Coton, which
was smart, and in the main spoke to the purpose, though some mistakes might
happen in it through too much haste; however it put the whole Order of Jesuits
into a flame and hurry, every one endeavoring to quell this unknown enemy: But
certain it is, it had been better for their Reputation, if Father Cotton had
not given occasion to such a Reply by his Letter, which did them more hurt than
good.

For those Romanists who vapor with the Council of Constance, and brag that
they maintain nothing contrary to it, may (like the shearing of hogs) make a
great noise, but get little Wool or Reputation; for as on one hand, they may
declare a Council to be above a Pope, for which his Holiness will give them
little thanks, so on the other, they cannot expect any Credit or Approbation
from Temporal Princes, seeing one may be as great a Traitor as Clement or
Chastel and yet not contradict the cried up Canon of this Council, The sum of
all this goodly Rule being only thus much. -- No Tyrant (that is a Greg. de
Valiant. Tom. 3. disp. 5. 9. 8. p. 3.
lawful King ruling Tyrannically) ought legally to be slain by any one of his
Subjects or Vassals by any clancular means, being sworn to him, Non expectata
sententia vel mandato judicis cujuscunque.
without sentence or Command of some some judge or his Superiors.

And this is all the great business, that so many of them have pleaded their
Loyalty with. The main of all being that they stick close to the Council of
Constance, and with it will declare, That it is lawful for a private man to
kill a wicked King, without command from his betters, which has so little Pith
or Sense as to the main business True Allegiance, that possibly most
King-judgers or killers might think they never broke such a Canon, and so not
condemned by such a Council.

As for Father Cotton a French, man he was of a subtle Headpiece, cried up by
his Order, both for his Sanctity and Learning, but the command of his Tongue,
Courtship, and Carriage were his best Friends, by which he got to be the Kings
Confessor, and thus settled in his Favor, he knew well enough how to keep
himself there; yet others think his writings more to consist of words than
matter, and that his real Sanctity (though some will appropriate as it were
Miracles to him) was no better than his Neighbors. Anti-Coton accuses him of
betraying the Kings secrets, and the Duke of Memoires Tom. 3. chapter 29 page 290
etc.
Sully proved to the King that in that he was guilty.

Pope S^nn^rt. l. 6. part 9. c. 8.
Nicolas V. gave leave to a Friend of his so far to consult the Devil, that one
witch might kill another, that thereby his acquaintance might obtain his former
health: and it may be upon this Example, Cotton made use of the Devil or
Demoniack, to enquire concerning the life of the King and several other
affairs; which may be seen at large in lib. 132.
Thuanus and Tom. 3. p. 56, 57.
Sulley. And it was a close and biting Anagram which was made upon this Father;
and it may be reflecting upon the Order.

PIERRE COTON Anagr. PERCE TON ROI. * i. e. Stab your King.


In short, none was more intimate with the King than he, none had more power
over him than he, none could make him do or undo sooner than he, whether
through real love or policy I know not; insomuch that some Deputies of Rochel
once presenting a Petition to the King, his Majesty was pleased to return them
this Answer -- That he could not hear them then, for his ears were stopped with
Cotton -- Hence it grew into a Common jest in France upon any repulse from the
King or denial of access -- les Oreilles du Roy sont bousches de Cotton.
The Kings ears are stopped with Cotton. Upon which, and the Kings familiarity
with him, using much his Company, and to take him into his Coach, as also
alluding to the suspicion of some that this Father kept Correspondency with
Spain, revealing thither the Kings Secrets; this following Pasquin flew about
Paris.

Le Roy ne scauroit fair un pas,
Que Le Pere Cotton l'accompagne;
Mais le bon Prince ne scait pas,
Que le signifies cunning, crafty, as well as fine.
fin Cotton vient d'Espagne.
The King cannot go any where
But Father Cotton sticks to his ear;
Yet the good King does not attain,
That the pure Cotton, comes from Spain.
As concerning the Kings murder, some of the Leaguers, or his Enemies thus
long before it happened wished or foretold it.

Dum sequeris solium Regis fraudesque Navarre,
Tesequitur Regis sors violenta tui.
Since thou will grasp Valois his Crimes and Lands,

Thou shall be slain, like him, by bloody Hands.

The Jesuits (as formerly hinited) upon the attempt of Chastel had been
banished the Kingdom of France, nor might they probably have any real hopes of
a Return, seeing the Lawyers, the Universities, especially the Sorbonne, the
Common People, most of the Nobility, the Religious of other Orders and their
Parliament had declared positively against them: Nor will some think, that the
King himself had really any good will or affection for them, though he was
willing of a Reconciliation with them, the better to secure himself, as was
supposed from his Answer to his great Favorite de Sully, who persuading him
from their readmission (being as a foresaid banished) was thus answered by the
King -- Give me then security for my life.

In short, be the reason what it will, the King would by his power, maugre all
Opposition, have them restored, and had; and not only made the Arrest or Decree
of Parliament against them, be recalled, but to ingratiate himself the more,
had the Marble Pillar or Pyramide (formerly mentioned upon his wound by
Chastel) pulled down, permitted them (to the regret of the University of Paris)
to teach again, gave them places of honor about him; and that nothing might be
wanting on his part to oblige them, he built them a stately College at la
Flesche in Anjou, in which Town some supposed he was first conceived, and
lastly to the said College he bequeathed his heart; which upon his Murder the
Jesuits receive and carried in great Pomp and State to the said College (his
body was buried at St. Denis). At the carrying away of his Heart, it is said
that one (some think the chief President de Harlay) cunningly asked some of the
Fathers -- Whether the Kings Tooth which Chastel struck out were not likewise
enclosed in the Box with the Heart and carried too? However upon the Jesuits
having the Kings Heart, this following biting Pasquin was made, and with others
flew about the world.

En fin tell quel vous le tenez
Le Caeur du Roy, don't vous avez
Tant de fois la mort procuree;
Lors que less Chiens ont attrappe,
Le Cerf qu' ils ont tant galoppe,
Du Caeur on leur fait la Curee.
which another made more short, thus:

Ce n'est, qu'a vous (Trouppe Sacree)
Qu' on doit bailler le Caeur des Roys
Quand les grands Cerfs sont aux abboys
On en doit aux Chiens la Curee.
It Is You alone (you sacred Crew)
To whom the Hearts of Kings are due;
For when Great Hearts are hunted hard,
Their Entrails are the Hounds reward.
Upon this murder, the Parliament Orders, a de Rege et Regis institutione.
Book written by Mariana the Spanish Jesuit to be burnt by the Hangman, as
maintaining the Lawfulness of King-killing, and Father Cotton was desired to
Answer that Book; but he slipped his Neck out of the Collar, as not willing to
write plain and positively against Mariana. After this the Parliament also 1614.
condemned Desensio fidei Catholicae.
Francisco Suarez's Book as containing many Seditious and Treasonable
Principles; and after this, another Jesuit, Antonius Sanctarellus publishing
the same Tenants, his Book was also 1626.
burned at Paris. These things so nettled the Fathers of that Society, that
they had no way to clear themselves but to have some of their Chieftains 16.
March.
subscribe against those Errors; here Father Coton was again commanded to put
pen to Paper, and to confute Santarel, this put him to such a push, for he must
either offend the Pope and the General of their Society, or the Parliament of
Paris. If he answered them, he opposed the first two, if he did not; he
offended the latter, and would be thought to espouse those Tenants; which might
the more expose his Order in France, and make himself guilty of Treason; These
Considerations did so perplex him, that (though in perfect health before) he
dyed within 19. March. 1626.
Three days.

To other Jesuits were also commanded to write against such Tenants, but we
hear nothing of their attempt in this case. And how unwilling they were
positively to give their Judgments, may somewhat appear by this following Story.

Whilst the Parliament of Paris was Censuring Sanctarellus his de Haeresi,
Schismate, etc.
Book, being printed at Rome by the Approbation of Mutius Vitellescus, General
of their Order, as also the Master of the Sacred Palace, and others: The
Parliament 13. March.
sent for Father Cotton the Provincial of the Jesuits, the Rector of Clermont,
and others the Chieftains of their Order; to whom they proposed these following
Questions, which was thus answered (in the name of all the rest of their
Society) by Father Cotton.

Parl. Is this pernicious Book of Sanctarellus called Tractatus de Haeresi,
Schismate, etc. approved of by you?


Coton. No, and we shall shortly publicly oppose it.


Parl. Why do you contradict that Doctrine, which the General of your Order at
Rome approves of?


Coton. We consess that our Society believes so at Rome, but why should the
falt of the Italians be imputed to us, seeing we in France are of an other
persuasion.


Parl. Has not the King of France absolute power over all his Subjects?


Coton. He has so, as to Temporals.


Parl. Do you believe that the Pope, has so much authority over Kings, that by
his Excommunication, he can Interdict them, absolve their Subjects from their
Oaths of Allegiance, depose them, and dispose of Kingdoms?


Coton. Fie, Fie, what to Excommuniate the most Christian King? who can think
that the firstborn of the Church can be an enemy to his Mother, which he
always protected and defended? or that he is to be Excommunicated, who has all
along endeavored the Extirpapation of Heresy?


Parl. It seems then you do not believe the same with your General at Rome.


Coton. Our General living at Rome, it is not to be supposed that he is to
contradict that which is believed at Rome.


Parl. Well, let him believe so, but what do you believe?


Coton. Truly, the quite contrary.


Parl. But if you were at Rome, what would you believe then?


Coton. We would change our minds with the Country, and would believe as they
did at Rome.


Parl. Pray Gentlemen, to the purpose, without any Equivocations, idle or
frivolous put offs, what does the body of your Society think of the Popes power
over Kings?


Upon this Cotton is at stand, desires Liberty to consult with the Society.

CHAP. III. Tir-Oen raises a Rebellion in Ireland, encouraged by a Phaenix
plume sent him by the Pope. The Irish send a slanderous Letter to the Pope
against Quen Elizabeth, Pope Clement the VIIIth. thanks the Irish for their
Rebellion. Mount joy Lord Deputy proclaims Tyrone Traitor. Clement the VIIIth.
sends another Letter to Tyrone. The Irish write to the King of Spain. Don Juan
de Aquila with several Spanish forces land in Ireland; but to their own ruin.
Tyrone submits and delivers himself up to the Lord Deputy. The Divines of
Salamanca and Valla-dolid declare in behalf of the Irish.
IN the former Century, having seen part of the Rebellions of the Irish and
Tir-Oen, we shall in haste run over the rest, not insisting too much upon their
Wars and Fights, but leave them to other Historians.

Upon the departure of the Earl of Essex, Tir-Oen renews his Rebellion being
encouraged to it, both from Spain and Pope; the first sending * Baron. an.
1186. 16. Sir Jo. Davies dis^overy of Ir^land p. 19.
as his Agent Don Martin de la Certa, with XXII. Thousand Crowns, to carry on
the Treasonable cause; the latter, viz. the Bishop of Rome sending him his
blessing by Matheo de Oviedo [by some called Archbishop of Dublin] and the
better to encourage the Arch-Traytor, his Holiness also sent him (as Pope Urban
III. sent Henry II. a Crown made of Peacocks Feathers) a Fools-bable, viz. a
Osull^v^m Compend. Hist. (...) Tom. 3 l 5. cap. ^^. f^l. 167. Cambden A^^^l.
1599.
Phaenix Plume or Feather. But I would gladly know of the Pope how he came by
such a Toy. For if there be no such Bird in the world as a Phaenix (as the
learned Dr. Vulg. ^rr^rs lib. ^ cap. 1^.
Brown and others rationally assert) his Infallible Holiness must get this
Romantic Rarity, from the same Storehouse, that one got a Phil. Loni ^r.
Theatr. Histr. page 81.
Feather out of the Archangels Wing, another, some of the Flame of Moses his
Bush, and a third the Triumphant Banner wherewith Christ descended down into
Hell.

Tyrone with these encouragements and hopes of farther relief from Spain, grows
bold and numerous, and having got many of the great ones to join with him,
sends also to the Lord Barry to persuade him to the same Treasonable actions.
His Letter runs thus.

My Lord Barry,
YOur impiety to God, Cruelty to your Soul and Body, Tyranny and Ingratitude
both to your Followers and Country are inexcusable and intolerable. You
separated your self from the Unity of Christ's mystical body, the Catholic
Church. You know the sword of Extirpation hangs over your head, as well as
ours; if things fall out otherwise then well: You are the Cause why all the
Nobility of the South (from the East part to the West, you being linked into
each one of them, either in Affinity or Consanguinity) are not linked together
to shake off the Cruel Yoke of Heresy and Tyranny, with which our Souls and
Bodies are oppressed.

All those aforesaid depending of your resolution, and relying to your judgment
in this Common Cause of our Religion and Country, you might forsooth with their
help (and the rest that are combined in this holy Action) not (...) defend your
self from the Incursion and Invasion of the English, but also (by Gods
Assistance) who miraculously and above all expectation gave good success to the
cause principally undertaken for his Glory, exaltation of Religion, next for
the restoration of the ruins and preservation of the Commonwealth) expel them
and deliver them and us from most miserable and cruel Exaction and Subjection,
enjoy your Religion, safety of Wife and Children, Life, Lands and Goods, which
all are in hazard through your folly, and want of due Consideration.

Enter I beseech you into the Closet of your Conscience, and like a wiseman
weigh seriously the end of your actions, and take advice of those, that can
instruct you and inform you better, than your own private judgment can lead you
unto. Consider and read with attention and settled mind, this Discourse Isend
you, that it may please God to set open your eyes and grant you a better mind.

From the Camp this instant Tuesday the sixth of March according to the New
Computation.

I pray you send me the Papers Isend you, as soon as your Honor shall read the
same.

O Neale.


The Lord Barry answered him Nobly and Loyally, upon which they fell upon his
Lands and Vassals, doing what mischief they were capable of acting. And the
better to credit their wicked cause, the chief of them wrote a Letter to Pope
Clement VIII. slandering the Queen and her Government, and so desired the Pope
to send out a Bull or Excommunication and deprivation against her, as Pius V.
and Gregory XIII. had done before. The Paper it self runs thus.

Sanctissime Pater,
CUm superioribus annis Dei summi nutu et voluntate excitati ad recuperandum
hoc Regnum ab Anglorum gravissimo jugo, qui et Religionem et Regionem vi et
Tyrannide multis seculis occupavere, id nunc tandem post multa pericula extant
lata, pro majore part excussimus, sanctitati Vestrae exponimus, quod prima
nobis et praecipua fuit cura perpetuoque erit, statum Ecclesiae, hic fere
extinctum, in integrum restituere et collapsum redintegrare; ita apud nos
judicantes nostrarum partium esse, vitam ipsam omnemque substantiam nostram in
eo augendo impendere, id quod libentiori animo praestare conamur (ut non
dicamus cogimur) quia nisi tempestive communi malo in utroque statu
occurserimus, nobiscum deterius long actum fuisset quam Turcae solent agere,
cum sibi subditis Christianis adeo ut vel fuga esset consolend. vel hic mors
obeunda.

Rebus itaque in angustias has redactis, ad quem majore spe jureque accedere
cujusque opem implorare possumus ac debemus, quam ad Te Pater Spirituum in
Terris, ut filiis spiritualibus misere adhuc afflictis, jugoque long graviore
and crudeliore quam Pharaonico attritis adsis. Quod nos speramus a pietate tua
consecuturos exemplo omnium afflictorum, qui ad Sedem tuam in talibus aerumnis
accedentes opem atque desideratiorem exitum fuerunt consecuti.

Ad Te igitur communem omnium afflictorum, praesertim fidei causa laborantium
pium and benevolum Patrem, tanquam ad unicum nostrum Refugium and tutissimum
Asylum consugimus, fusisque lachrimis humiliter petimus, ut nostros gemitus
audiat, vota suscipi^t, ac postulatus concedat, ut eorum ora obstruantur
franganturque vires qui oderunt Sion, ac impediunt diruta Jerusalem denuo
reaedificari moenia, ubi fi nobis credere dignetur tua Sanctitas, nunquam
Antecessores nostri ex tempore quo Regnum hoc in manus Anglorum devenerat,
adjutores fuerant quam nos sumus ad fidem a nostro Apostolo Sancto Patricio,
traditam suscipiendam ad eamque (proh dolor) in his partibus fere extinctam
hactenus and pene sepultam excusso jam pro part Anglorum jugo exsuscitandam,
promovendam, augendam and amplificandam; quia nihil aliud in his votis habemus,
quam videre Dei gloriam et fidei Orthodoxae propugnationem. Annuere itaque
dignetur vestra Sanctitas nostris Petitionibus, qui pretis honoribus and
commodis quibuscunque diem ulteriorem vivere non desideramus, quam videre Dei
Ecclesiam toto Orb florentem.

Petimus autem imprimis, ut ad majora fide incrementa illis sedibus vacantibus
in hoc Regno, ii qui vita, moribus and literatura praeficiantur, quosque
nobiscum Reverendissimus Corcagensis ac Cloanensis Episcopius nominavit ac
commendavit tanquam Idonei Pastores ad Dei gregem verbo and exemplo
instruendum, ne indignis qui sine Ordine and fortasse summa cum Authoritate and
Ambitione sese animarum curae, nisi ingererent, nisi occurreretur, aditus
pateat. Quod ut petamus movemur propter summam animarum jacturam, quam ob
Pastorum paucitatem in utraque Monioniae Provincia qui undecem Episcopatus sub
Metropoli Cassilensi complectitur: excipimus enim Reverend. Corcagen. and
Claoneum qui senio and labor jam pene est confectus, nostri potiuntur: and hoc
eo confidentius petimus, qui quod electi, consecrati and ad nos dimissi fuerunt
a vestra Sacro sancta sede ad vacuas hiis in partibus seeds occupandas a nobis
pro viribus iisdem Dei gratia defendantur, ut gregibus sibi commissis tuto
invigilare queant.

Insuper desideramus ut quemadmodum felicis Recordationis Pius Quintus Pont.
Max. contra Reginam Angliae ejusque fautores Bullam Excommunicationis ediderat;
Nec non Gregorius XIII. eandem continuaverat, ac vim habere in bello
Giraldinarum indicavit: similem quoque sententiam ad hoc bellum promovendum and
ad felicem exitum deducendum, Sanctitas vestra emittere dignetur, ac generatim
Sanctitati vestrae affectu quo possumus maximo Regnum hoc vestrum a te solo
post Deum dependens nosque humiles tuos subditos una cum Procuratoribus
praesentium latoribus quos pro nobis and nostro nomine deputamus, quique fuse
and veraciter omnia quae in hoc bello gessimus adjuti eorum opera and doctrina
viva voce aperient before, Deprecantes ut sancta vestra indubiam illis fidem
dignetur adhibere eidem committimus and commendamus.

Datum in Castris nostris Catholicis XXXo Martis M. DC. Sanctitatis vestrae
Obedientissimi filii and fidelissimi subditi, Tir-Oen
O Neale Ja. Fite-Thomas
James Desmond. Florence Mac Cartie.
Mac Cartie More. Dermond Mac Owen Cartie.
Dermond Mac Cartie, alias Mac Donogh


Tyrone daily growing more powerful in Ireland; Queen Elizabeth, to stop his
career, sends over Sir Charles Blunt, Lord Montjoy, as Lord Deputy of that
Kingdom: and the Presidency of Munster being void by the unfortunate death of
Sir Thomas Morris, who was slain by the Rebels; She also at the same time sent
over Sir George Carew, well acquainted with the Country, to be Lord President
of the Province of Munster.

Of this Sir George Carew by the way: He was Son to George Carew, Doctor in
Divinity, Archdeacon of Totness in Devonshire, afterward Dean of Windsor, etc.
Sir George was by Queen Elizabeth made Lord President of Munster; by King
James, Baron of Clopton; and by King Charles I. Earl of Totness, was Master of
the Ordinance, and Privy-Councellor to both the said Kings. He was a faithful
Subject, a valiant and prudent Commander, an honest Councellor, a Gentile
Scholar, a lover of Antiquities, and a Patron to Learning. Besides his
Translations out of French, he wrote a large History of his Three years
Transactions in Munster; in which other accidents of Ireland are interwoven;
it is Printed under the Title of Pacata Hibernia: In which, either Mr. Stafford
the Publisher, or the Printer, has committed several gross oversights both in
the Latin and English Parts. Besides thief, he has in four large Volumes
collected several Chronologies, Charters, Letters, Deeds, Monuments, and other
Materials belonging to Ireland. To which Manuscript Collections having been
much beholden in my Irish Narratives, I thought it fit in these few lines
gratefully to give the World notice of it; wishing that others of the Nobility
would (as they ought to do) follow his generous and industrious Example,
thereby to advance the honor of their Country and Families; and not live like
idle Heirs of their Ancestors Titles; That the credit of Nobility may once
again advance, and the Honors and Titles might not be ashamed of the Persons
that vainly bear them. And thus much by the By, of the gallant and honorable
Earl of Totness, who dyed in the City of W^stminster, without Issue, in the
year MDC XXIX, the XXVII. of March.

In the mean time the Rebellion goes on in Ireland; and the better to
encourage their Sin and Treason, the Pope sends a Letter to the Irish,
commending them for their taking up Arms, or acting such villainous Exploits:
And to all that do any way assist the said Tir-Oen, he gives a full pardon and
remission of all their sins, meriting, forsooth, as much as if they had fought
against the Turk, or endeavored the recovery of the Holy Land. The Letter it
self, being but short, take as follows:

Clemens PP. VIII.
UNiversis and singulis Venerabilibus fratribus, Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, and
Praelatis; nec non Dilectis filiis, Principibus, Comitibus, Baronibus ac
populis Regni Hiberuiae, Salutem and Apostolicam Benedictionem.

Cum jam diu, sicut accepimus, vos Romanorum Pont. Praedecessorum nostrorum, ac
nostris and Apostolicae sedis cohortationibus adducti, ad vestram libertatem
recuperandam, eamque adversus Haereticos tuendam and conservandam, bonae
memoriae Jacobo Giraldino (primum qui durum servitutis jugu^ vobis ab Anglis
Sanctae Romanae Ecclesiae desertoribus impositum, summo animi ardore depellere
dum vixit pro viribus procuravit); Deinde Johanni Giraldino ejusdem Jacobi
Consobrino; E novissime dilecto filio nobili viro Hugoni Principi Onel dicto
Comiti Tironensi, Baroni Dungenaniae and Capitaneo Generali Exercitus Catholici
in Hibernia conjunctis animis and viribu^ praesto fueritis, ac opem and
auxilium praestiteritis, ipsique Duces and eorum milites, manu Domini
Exercituum illis assistente, progressu temporis plurima egregia facinora contra
hosts viriliter pugnando praestiterint, and in posterum praestare parati sunt.

Nos, ut Vos, ac Dux, and Milites praedicti alacrius in expeditionem hanc
contra dictos Haereticos opem imposterum etiam praestare studeatis,
spiritualibus gratiis and favoribus vos prosequi volentes, eorundem
Praedecessorum nostrorum exemplo adducti, ac de Omnipotentis Dei misericordia
ac beatorum Petri and Pauli Apostolorum ejus authoritate confisi, vobis omnibus
and singulis qui praedictum Hugonem Ducem ejusque Exercitum Catholicae fidei
assertores and propugnatores sequimini, ac illis vos adjunxeritis, aut
Consilio, Favore, Commeatibus, Armis, aliisque bellicis rebus seu quacunque
ratione eis in hac Expeditione operam dederitis, ipsisque Hugoni Duci ejusque
exercitus militibus universis and singulis, si vere poenitentes and Confessi,
ac etiam si fieri poterit, sacra Communione refecti fueritis plenariam omnium
Peccatorum suorum veniam and remissionem, ac eandem quae proficiscentibus ad
bellum contra Turcas and ad recuperationem Terrae Sanctae, per Romanos Pont.
concedi solita est, misericorditer in Domino concedimus; non obstantibus, si
opus sit, nostris Decretis de non concedendis Indulgentiis ad instar ac in
susceptionis Indulgentiarum occasion anni Jubilaei aliisque Constitutionibus
and Ordinationibus Apostolicis ceterisque contrariis quibuscunque.

Verum quia difficile foret praesentes nostras ad omnium quorum interest
notititiam pervenire; volumus, ut earum exemplis etiam Impressis manu alicujus
Notarii Publici subscriptis ac sigillo personae in dignitate Ecclesiastica
Constitutae munitis, eadem fides ubique habeatur quae eiisdem praesentibus
haberetur.

Datum Romae apud Sanctum Petrum, sub Annulo Piscatoris die XVIIIo Aprilis MDC.
Pontificatus nostri, Anno IX. M. Vestrius Barbianus.


The Rebels thus fortified with the Pope's Blessing, never doubted but with the
fame of this Benediction so to increase their numbers, as to be able to carry
all before them, and utterly free themselves from their obedience. But herein
they found themselves deceived. For Montjoy the Lord Deputy, what with the
Soldiers he found in Ireland, and the new Recruits from England, so followed
the Rebels in Vlster, and other places, that some of them were forced to
submit, and Tyrone was forced to secure himself in Bogs, and such like
Fastnesses. And in the Southern parts of the Kingdom in Munster, Sir George
Carew the Lord President, what by his policy cherishing (by counterfeited
Letters) distrust amongst the Rebels, so making divisions amongst themselves;
and what by his Industry and Valor, taking most of their strong Holds from
them, several of them were forced to lurk in corners for their security, and
others content to submit themselves to the Queen's Mercy and Protection.

But most of these submissions were but counterfeit and feigned, yiedling to
time and necessity, for which they presently sent to Rome, craving pardon for
this their outward submission. Amongst the chief of these Rebellious
Dissemblers, was Tyrone took upon him the Impudency and Authority to create him
with the Ceremonies of the Ancient Irish. Mac Cartie More.
Florence Mac Cartie, one of the greatest note amongst them, who underhand
fomented and encouraged all Treasonable practices, but openly seemed a fair
complier to the Queen and her Government; all which appears plainly by his
Letters and Correspondencies held with both parties.

The Lord Deputy seeing the wickedness of Tyrone, his resolution not to submit
to the Queen, but rather to throw himself into the protection of her mortal
Enemy the Spaniard, from whom he expected great aid; as an Earnest of which,
one Spanish Ship had newly come with Arms, Munition, and Moneys, to carry on
the Rebellion: The Lord Deputy, I say, upon these considerations, with advice
of the Council, thought fit thus to proclaim the said Tyrone Traitor.

By the Lord Deputy and Council.
Mountjoy.
WHereas Hugh Neale, of the simple and ignorant called O Neale, was from her
Majesty's free and gracious Disposition, not only innobled to the Title and
Dignity of Earl of Tyrone, but also by like Grace bountifully enriched with
diverse large and great Authorities and Possessions, without any color or title
thereunto which by him could be made; and at no time so much as once touched
for his apparent and known disloyal and undutiful misdemeanors, in hope that
his amendment might have satisfied his punishment, until above five years past:
He the said Hugh forgetting not only his duty toward God, her Majesty, and
Country, but also so many favors and great graces, did not only in person
enter into most detestable and unnatural Rebellions against her Crown and
Dignity, and endeavored and in part performed the drawing into this Realm
foreign Forces of her Majesty's professed and known Enemies; with alluring,
provoking, and violently urging her Majesty's ancient and dutiful Subjects to
partake with him in his Confederacies and Rebellions: but also most falsely now
of late suggesting (to cover his cankered and long festered Treasonable
disposition) that he intended a defense for them against the severity of her
Majesty's Laws, made against their long enjoyed Religion, Restitution of
ancient Liberties by right due unto him and them, and a purpose to prevent an
utter extirpation and rooting out of them and their posterities from their
Countries, Liberties, and ancient possessions, matters by himself merely
counterfeited and invented, himself well known to be irreligious, of barbarous
life, a cruel oppressor of his Country people, and of worse affection than may
be recited.

Whereas by long experience of her Majesty's mild and merciful Government, it
has appeared that such Courses never so much as by probable conjecture did or
could enter into her Majesty's Princely Heart, much less to have been by her
performed. But his only true and known purpose being to draw their dependency,
so as by him they might be oppressed with bearing Bonughes, yielding of
intolerable payments, executions and oppressions (under which they have long
groaned and grieved) and not return to her Majesty's merciful Government, but
to continue and contain them under his Tyranny for ever.

All which his intentions and actions well and long known unto her Majesty, and
yet by her tolerated; it pleased her Princely Heart out of her accustomed
mercies, to the end the wiser might not be excused by want of remembrance, nor
the simpler to be led away by lack of knowledge, openly to proclaim the said
Hugh Tr^ytor unto her Majesty, her Country and Government. And yet
nevertheless to make her exceeding Mercies more manifest, was pleased in diverse
and sundry places, to the end to reclaim him and his Adherents (so by his
before-recited means deceived) to their ancient subjection, to offer unto him
and them her Majesty's free pardon for their lives, lands, liberties, and
possessions: which by him was as oftentimes obstinately refused, as graciously
offered.

And now at last the said Hugh foreseeing he may no longer withstand her
Majesty's forces, and failing of his long hoped foreign assistance, now
intends to leave this poor deceived people to her Majesty's condign Justice
by them deserved, or to her accustomed Mercy* which she never forgets, and
so to retire himself as a Bush Kearne to Wolv^sh Dens and Desert Fastness, some
small time to escape his deserved Judgment.

Which to prevent, and to free her subjects of their former bondage and
burdens; I the now L. Deputy, with consent of her Majesty's Council here
present, for and in her Name and behalf, do promise to any person or persons
that shall deliver the Body of the said Hugh in life, unto the said L. Deputy,
4000 Marks; and to such person or persons as shall bring in his Head for
sufficient proof that he or they have procured and performed his death, the sum
of 2000 Marks, together also with her Majesty's most gracious and free pardon
for his and their Lives, Lands, Liberties, Goods, and Possessions; the promise
to be fully satisfied and performed in manner and form as abovesaid.

In witness whereof, I the L. Deputy, and Council aforesaid, have subscribed
our Names.

Given at Her Majesty's Castle of Dublin, the xxth of November, 1600. Adam
Dublin, C. This was the Treasurer, and not Sir Geo. Car^w.
George Carry. Thomas Midensis. Robert Gardener. Richard Wingfield. Nich. Walsh.
George Bourchier. Jeffr. Tenton.

GOD SAVE THE QUEEN. Will. Usher.

This Proclamation was but fitting, considering the rebellious heart of Tyrone,
who took all manner of courses to withdraw Subjects from their obedience; and
in this he was not wanting in a counterfeit Religion, pretending great zeal for
the Roman Catholic Cause, under the color of which he solemnly took a
Pilgrimage, to visit a piece of the Cross, which they say was kept in the
Monastry of St. Cross, or Holy Cross, in the County of Tipperary. But his chief
design was to inveigle the simple people to his party, by this his religious
action; nor did he quite lose his expectation.

And now the Pope Clement VIII. for a farther encouragement to their Villainies,
sends a particular Letter to Tyrone, full of many fair words and commendations,
but void of all honesty and religion, persuading him still to continue in his
Rebellion. The Letter it self was this:

Dilecto filio, Nobili viro, Ugoni Principi Naelio, Exercitus Catholici in
Hibernia Duci and Capitaneo Generali.
DIlecte fili Nobilis vir, Salutem and Apostolicam Benedictionem. Cognovimus ex
literis Nobilitatis tuae and ex iis quae dilectus filius Petrus Lombardus Civis
vester, Praepositus Cameracensis, nobis coram exposuit Sacrum foedus quod tu
and quam plures Principes et Proceres, et Nobiles Primarii Regni istius, pro
Dei gloria, Patriae salute et Catholica Religionis Defensione in istis, Dei
benignitate, charitatis glutino colligatum conservari et augeri, quodque
ejusdem Domini Exercituum open et virtute prospere a vobis pluries pugnatum est
adversus Anglos, Ecclesiae et fidei Desertores magnam ex his voluptatem in
Domino cepimus, ipsique Patri miserecordiarum Deo gratias egimus, qui adhuc in
Regno isto reliquit sibi multa millia Virorum qui non curvaverint genua sua
ante Baal, hoc est Impias Haereses, et prophanas novitates non sunt sequnti,
imo eas detestati fortiter pugnant, pro haereditate Majorum suorum, pro fidei
salute integritate et unnitate cum Ecclesia retinenda quae una est Catholica et
Apostolica extra quam non est salus.

Laudamus egregiam pietatem et fortitudinem tuam Fili et Principum et
Coeterorum omnium qui tecum juncti ac foederati nulla pro Dei gloria pericula
recusant, seque Majoribus suis qui bellicae virtutis et Catholicae Religionis
studio ac laud imprimis floruerunt dignos Nepotes et justos successores
ostendunt et palam profitentur. Conservate filii hanc mentem, conservate
Unionem et Consensionem vestram, et Deus Omnipotens, Deus Pacis et Concordiae
erit vobiscum et pugnabit pro vobis, et quem admodum fecit prosternet inimicos
suos ante faciem nostram.

Nos autem qui Nobilitatem tuam et vos omnes avitae fidei et gloriae Imitatores
paternae, amamus et gerimus in Visceribus Jesu Christi, non cessamus Deum
nostrum Orare pro vestra felicitate et salute, vestrique soliciti sumus et
erimus semper quantum cum Deo poterimus, atque ubi opus fuerit scribemus
efficaciter ad Regis et Principes Catholicos filios nostros ut vobis et causae
vestrae omni open suffragentur. Cogitamus etiam propediem mittere ad vos
peculiarem Nuntium nostrum, et hujus sanctae Sedi^ (^n qua Deo Authore meritis
licet imparibus praesidemus) virum pium, prudentem zelo Dei praeditum et nobis
probatum, qui nostri erga vos amoris testis sit vobisque omnibus in rebus ubi
usus venerit adjumento sit ad Salutarem et Necessariam Unionem vestram
conservandam, ac Catholicam fidem propagandam, ac omnia denique pro sui muneris
Officio, officienda, quibus Dei honor et cultus in Regno isto augeatur.

Interea placuit has nostras Literas ad vos praemittere testes amoris nostri,
in vos and Regnum istud, et ut vos omnes tanquam filios nostros in Christo
dilectos paterno affectu consolaremur, ipsum vero Petrum Lombardum quem
Nobilitas sua Oratorem et Negotiorum gestorem constituit apud nos, et jam
libenter audivimus, and deinceps audiemus. Tibi vero et caeteris qui tibi
unanimes pro fidei Catholicae propugnatione adhaerent, nostram et Apostolicam
benedictionem benign impartimur, Deumque precamur ut Angelos emittat in
circuitu vestro, et pios conatus vestros sua coelesti gratia dirigat, vosque
dextra suae potentiae perpetuo tueatur.

Datum Romae apud Sanctum Petrum, sub annulo Piscatoris die xx. Januarij, Anno
Pontificatus nostri ix. 1601. Silvius Antonianus Cardinalis.


Besides this, Mateo de Oviedo, who had the confidence upon the Popes account,
to call himself Archbishop of Dublin; being now in Ireland to carry on the
Rebellion, writ to James Fitz Thomas, who called himself Earl of Desmond, this
following encouraging Letter.

My most honorable good Lord:
HAving long desired a fit opportunity to write unto you, the same is now
offered by Mr. Viz. John Fitz Thomas, Brother to James the titular Earl of
Desmond.
John, whereof I am very glad, that by such a most sure and faithful Messenger
I might open my mind to your Lordship, as also to show, that most certain and
undoubted hope of aid is shortly to come.

I would most willingly have come unto your Lordships presence, which lately I
have essayed, and doubtless would have done, unless I had been hindered by those
Lords, which told me, that present and imminent dangers were to be feared in my
journey, unless I had an Army of Soldiers to conduct me; and now (but that
there is a necessity of my returning into Spain) I would have come to you in
company of Master John: But I hope that most speedily and most fortunately I
shall return unto you again.

In the mean time I have pretermitted nothing which might tend to your profit,
as well to Our Catholic Master, as any other whatsoever, which now also in
Spain I will perform: I would therefore entreat your Excellency, That you would
be of good courage, together with all other of your Faction; and that you would
fight constantly and valiantly for the faith and liberty of your Country;
knowing, and firmly hoping, that the help of my Lord the Catholic King, is
now coming; which when it comes, all things shall be prosperous, and will
place you in your former liberty and security, that ye may possess your
designed peace and tranquillity. The Almighty conserve your Lordship in safety
long to continue.

From Donegall the xiiith of January, 1601.

These Benedictions, and the assured hopes that the Rebels had of the hastening
of the Spanish Succors, made them grow more bold and daring; insomuch that
many hundreds of the Conaght and Vlster-Traytors hurried themselves into a
Body, thinking to invade Munster; but Carew by his vigilance and policy quite
frustrated their design by the loss of some hundreds of such desperate
Vagabonds.

Yet their plottings go on; and at the desire of Florence, Mac Cartie, Donoghe
Mac Cormock (who called himself also Cartie) sent this Letter to the King o^
Spain.

HAving received direction from the Earl of Clan-care, I would not omit this
opportunity, at the departure of the Mate^ de Oviedo.
Archbishop of Dublin, and Don Martin de la Cerda, to make known to your
Majesty how the said Earl has written to your Majesty by two or three ways;
but understanding that these Letters came not to your Royal hands, he has now
again written by me to your Majesty, making offer as well of his person and
lands, as of his Vassals and Subjects, to your Royal Service, humbly beseeching
your Majesty to receive, favor, and aid him with your Power and liberal Hand,
seeing there is no other that can and will assist us better against the
Heretics in this Holy Enterprise.

From Donegall the vth of January, 1601. Your Majesty's Loyal Vassal, to kiss
your Royal Hand, Donoghe Cartie.


At Dongall was the chief Rendezvous of Tyrone, and the great ones of his Party
in the North; where they made a Solemn League or Covenant; for the better
strengthening of which, they all received the Sacrament: and afterward Tir-Oen
wrote this Letter to Florence Mac Cartie.

OUR Commendations to you Mac Cartie More: I send shortly to you, according to
our Trust of you, that you will do a stout and hopeful thing against the Pagan
Beast; and thereupon our Viz. That mentioned before, which was ruined and lost.
Army is to go into Munster, and with the will of God we consent unto you, and
will that you believe not any word from us for ever, before we write again unto
you: For you shall see I believe he relates to the Earl of Essex his business,
in which he was also concerned.
trouble enough in England by Englishmen it self; so as there shall be
easiness of suffering their wars by May next, in respect of that it is now.
And since this Cause of Munster was left to you (next under God), let no
weakness or imbecility be found in you, and the time of help is near you, and
all the rest.

From Dungannon the vith of February, 1601. O NEALE.


Rumors being spread abroad of diverse Informations brought in, of Insurrections
and Spanish Invasions, Her Majesty's Governors thought it was their duty to
look about them: So Sir George Carew gets James Fitz-Thomas, the Titular Earl
of Desmond, to be surprised as he lurked in a filthy Cave; and also secured
Florence Mac Cartie, who for all his underhand Treasons and Conspiracies,
outwardly yet carried a show of Loyalty. Both which were sent into England, and
clapped up in the Tower of London; and some others also were seized on, and kept
in hold.

Whilst they were thus busy in consulting the safety of the Kingdom, the
Spaniards [of which Invasion the Bishops of Clonford and Killaloe, Archer the
Jesuit, and others, were great Instigators] landed with a great Fleet at
Kingsale in the County of Cork in Munster; which Town they began to fortify,
and sent notice of their abode to Tyrone and O Donnel, desi^ing them to haste
to them with all their Powers.

The Lord Deputy, informed of the Spanish arrival, sets out a Proclamation at
Cork, forbidding any to assist them; declaring also upon what unjust grounds
the Pope and King of Spain had undertook that Invasion, and commanding all
people to live in obedience to their true Sovereign Queen Elizabeth. In answer
to which, Don Juan de Aquila, General of the Spanish Forces, sets out this
following Declaration; which is pat to our business, and worth the perusal, the
better to discover the true Roman-Catholique Doctrine.

DON Juan de Aquila, General of the War, and the Catholic King This is in
Latin, MS. F. 97 Cant. in Bib. Bodl. Oxon. and thus in English, in Pacata
Hibernia, p. 200, 201, 202.
of Spain' s Chief Commander in Gods War which is made in Ireland for the
defense of the Faith. To all the Irish Catholics living in Kingsale, the City
of Cork, and in all other Villages, Cities, and Castles, wishes health in Him
who is the true Happiness.

There is come unto our ears a Proclamation, or certain Libel, made in the City
of Cork, in the Name of the Deputy; which because it contains many untruths,
and such things as offend the ears of honest men, lest they may lead and seduce
the minds of simple men into errors, and turn them from the truth; I am
compelled to show their falsehood, to lay open the truth, and in few words to
signify the pretense and intention of our most Excellent King Philip in this
War, which is with the Apostolic Authority to be administered by us: And (to
speak the truth) I could very easily retort upon them those reproaches which
they object to us, and make them lose the pleasure which they have taken in
ill-speaking, by hearing the like. Notwithstanding we will not (like unto weak
and unarmed women) go to reproachings; but setting these things aside, answer
to those that are objected, with sound truth, and Christian modesty.

First of all, Ye fain that we would lead away the pretended Subjects of the
Queen of England from their obedience, to bring them under Our yoke, which is a
very untruth: for we endeavor not to persuade any body that he should deny due
obedience (according to the Word of God) to his Prince. But ye know well, that
for many years since, Elizabeth was deprived of her Kingdom, and all her
Subjects absolved from their fidelity, by the Pope; unto whom he that reigns
in the Heavens, the King of Kings, has committed all power, that he should
Root up, Destroy, Plant, and Build in such sort, that he may punish temporal
Kings (if it should be good for the spiritual Building) even to their deposing;
which thing has been done in the Kingdoms of England and Ireland, by many
Popes, viz. by Pope Pius Quin^us, Gregory the Thirteenth, and now by Clement
the eighth, as it is well known, whose Bulls are extant amongst us: I speak to
Catholics, not to froward Heretics, who have fallen from the faith of the
Roman Church, seeing they are blind leaders of the blind, and such as know not
the grounds of the truth, it is no marvel that they do also disagree from us in
this thing. But our Brethren the Catholics, walking in the pureness of the
faith, and yielding to the Catholic Church (which is the very Pillar of the
Truth) will easily understand all those things. Therefore it remains that the
Irish (which adhere to us) do work with us nothing that is against Gods Laws,
or their due obedience; nay that which they do, is according to Gods word, and
the obedience which they owe the Pope.

Secondly, Ye affirm, That we Spaniards go about to win the Irish with
allurements and feigned flatteries (which is a thing far from our natures) and
that we do it but for a while; that after we have drawn the minds of simple men
unto us, we might afterward (exercising our Cruelty toward them) show our
bloody nature.

O the Immortal God! Who does not wonder at your bitter and unexpressible
cruelty, and your boldness showed in these words? For, Who is he that does not
know the great Cruelty which you English have exercised, and cease not to
exercise toward the miserable Irish? You, I say, go about to take from their
souls the Catholic Faith which their Fathers held, in which consists eternal
life: Truly you are far more cruel than Bears and Lions, which take away the
temporal life; for you would deprive them of the eternal and spiritual life.
Who is it that has demolished all the Temporalities of this most flourishing
Kingdom, except the English? Look upon this, and be ashamed.

Whereas on the other side, We, commiserating the condition of the Catholics
here, have left our most sweet and happy Country, Spain, that is replenished
with all good things, and being stirred with their Cries which pierce the
Heavens, having reached the ears of the Pope, and our King Philip; They have
(being moved with pity) at last resolved to send unto you, Soldiers, Silver,
Gold, and Arms, with a most liberal hand; not to the end they might (according
as they feign) exercise Cruelty toward you, O Irish Catholics; but that you
may be happily reduced (being snatched out of the Jaws of the Devil, and free
from their Tyranny) unto your own pristine Ingenuity, and that you may freely
profess the Catholic Faith.

Therefore my most beloved, seeing that which you have so many years before
desired and begged for, with prayers and tears; and that now, even now, the
Pope, Christ's Vicar on Earth, does command you to take Arms for the defense of
your Faith; I admonish, exhort, and beseech you all, all I say, unto whom these
Letters shall come, That as soon as possibly you can, you come to us, with your
Friends and Weapons. Whosoever shall do this, shall find us prepared, and we
will communicate unto them those things which we possess; and whosoever shall
(despising our wholesome Counsel) do otherwise, and remain in the obedience of
the English, we will prosecute him as an Heretic, and a hateful Enemy of the
Church, even unto Death.

Don Juan de Aguila.

The Lord Deputy laid siege to Kingsale, which continued long; in which time,
both he received supplies from England, and Don Juan from Spain; both parties
standing sufficiently in need of such. As for the Irish, many of them who had
formerly promised obedience to the Queen, now revolted, delivering themselves
and Castles up to the protection of the Dons. Amongst the rest, Donnel Osulevan
Bear freely gave up to the Spaniard his strong Castle of Dunboy, which cost
the English much cost and time in re-taking. Of which he writ this Letter to
the King of Spain.

IT has been ever, most Mighty and Renowned Prince, and most Gracious and
Catholic King, from time to time manifestly proved by daily experience among
us Irish, That there is nothing works more forcibly in our hearts, to win and
to draw our love and affection, than natural inclination to our Progeny and
Offspring, and the memorial of the Friendship which sticks still in our
minds; chiefly the same renewed, cherished, and kept in use by mutual
affection, and by showing like friendship to us also.

We the mere Irish, long sithence deriving our Root and Original from the
famous and most noble Race of the Spaniards, viz. from Milecius son to Bile*
son to Breogwin; and from Lwighe, son to Lythy, son to Breogwin, by the
Testimony of our old ancient Books of Antiquities, our Pedigrees, our
Histories, and our Chronicles. Though there were no other matter, we came not
as natural branches of the famous Tree, whereof we grew, but bear an hearty
love, and a natural affection, and entire inclination of our hearts and minds,
to our ancient most loving Kinsfolks, and the most noble Race, whereof we
descended.

Besides this (my Sovereign) such is the abundance of your goodness, and the
bounty or greatness of your liberality, now every way undeserved of our parts,
as tokens of love and affection by your Majesty showed unto us, that it is not
fit nor seemly for us, but to bestow cur persons, our men, and our goods, in
the service of a Prince, that deals so graciously with us, that sends
Forces of men, great Treasure, Victuals, and Munition for our aid, against our
Enemies, that seek to overwhelm and extinguish the Catholic Faith
diabolically, put to death our Chieftains tyrannously, coveting our Lands and
Livings unlawfully.

For the aforesaid Considerations, and for many other commendable causes me
moving, I bequeath and offer in humbleness of mind, and with all my heart, my
own person, with all my forces, perpetually to serve your Majesty, not only in
Ireland, but in any other place where it shall please your Highness: I commit
also my Wife, my Children, my Manors, Towns, Country, and Lands, and my Haven
of Dunboy, called Biara Haven, (next under God) to the protection, keeping, and
defense, or Commerick of your Majesty, to be and remain in your hands, and at
your disposition. Also at your pleasure be it (my Liege Lord) to send defense
and strong keeping of the Haven of Dunboy, first for your self (my Sovereign)
to receive your Ships, and for me also as your loving Servant, so that the
Queen of England's Ships may not possess the same before you, while I follow
the Wars in your Highness behalf.

I pray Almighty God to give your Majesty a long life, and health of Body and
Soul, with increase of Grace and Prosperity. So I betake you to the keeping of
God.

From the Camp near Kingsale the xxixth of December, 1601. Stylo Novo. Your
most dutiful loving Servant, Donnel Osulevan Bear.


With an intent to raise the Siege, Tyrone, O Donnel, Mac Guire, Mac Maghon,
Burk, Tirrell (the best Soldier amongst the Rebels), and other Irish, hasted
toward Kingsale, and in their March joined with Alonso de O Campo, and his
Spanish recruits newly landed; all which joined together, made up toward VII
Thousand.

The Lord Deputy for all this continues the siege; Tir-Oen and the rest of his
Relief approach, come within two miles of the Town; but is fought and beat, his
followers quite dispersed: Tyrone runs into his hiding-holes in Vlster.
O-Donnell and others escape into Spain, and the rest where they thought most
convenient. And this Battle may be said to confirm the Queen in Ireland, and to
secure the Protestants there, who had been Dr. Nic. Bernards life (...)
A^ch-bishop Usher page 30.
slaughtered by the Irish, had the Spaniards here prevailed.

Don Juan de Aguila seeing the Irish thus routed, and his own Forces much
impaired both in health and number, fell to a Capitulation, upon which he
yielded the Town: He and his Spaniards were to be sent home; and what other
places they had in the Kingdom under their protection, were likewise to be
delivered up to the English, and amongst the rest was Dunboy.

Which place being naturally strong, and pretty well fortified, Osulevan Bear,
a man given over to Mischief and Rebellion, was resolved Spaniards return to
their own Country; only the Cannoniers he detained, the better to serve him in
the defense of the place against the English and his Queen; concerning which he
writes this Letter to the King of Spain.

My Lord and my King,
OVT of his love to your Kingly Greatness, your humble steadfast Servant, Donnel
O Sulevan Bear, enforced through peril and constraint, does make bold to
inform unto your Greatness, That upon the landing in Castle-Haven, in the West
of Ireland, your General Pedro Zubiar, and Pedro Lopez de Soto, with a Fleet
and Men from your Greatness, according to the inward conceit of mind I always
held, which I manifested in my young years, and would have still followed,
unless disability had constrained me to the contrary; finding a happy and good
Opportunity (as I imagined) I came to their presence, tendering my Obeisance to
them in the Name of your Highness, and being with 400 men at my own cost
toward your service, I yielded out of my mere love and good will, without
compulsion or composition, into their hands in the Name of your Majesty, not
only my Castle and Haven called Beer Haven, but also my Wife, my Children, my
Country, Lordships, and all my Possessions, for ever to be disposed of at your
pleasure. They received me in that manner, and promised (as from your Highness)
to keep and save the said Castle and Haven, during the service of your Grace.

Notwithstanding, my Gracious Lord, Conclusions of Peace were assuredly agreed
upon betwixt Don Juan de Aguila, and the English; a fact pitiful, and
(according to my judgment) against all Right, and Humane Conscience. Among
other places, whereof your Greatness was dispossessed in that manner (which were
neither yielded nor taken, to the end they should be delivered to the English)
Don Juan tied himself to deliver my Castle and Haven (the only Key of mine
Inheritance, whereupon the living of many thousand persons does rest, that live
some twenty Leagues upon the Seacoasts) into the hands of my Cruel, Cursed,
Mis-believing Enemies; a thing I fear, in respect of the execrableness,
inhumanity, and ingratefulness of the Fact, if it take effect as it was
plotted, that will give cause to other men not to trust any Spaniard hereafter
with their Bodies or Goods, upon these Causes.

My Lord, in that I judge this dishonorable act to be against your Honor and
Pleasure (as I understand by your last Letters that came into Ireland)
considering the harm that might ensue to the service of your Majesty, and the
everlasting Overthrow that might happen to me and poor people, such as might
escape the Sword of our Enemy (if any should) I have taken upon me (with the
help of God) to offer to keep my Castle and Haven from the hands of mine
Enemies, until further News and Order come from your Highness.

I have sent my Son and Heir (being of the age of five years) as a pledge for
accomplishing your will in this behalf, and for the performing of my promise
past unto your Greatness. I would not omit my self in person to come and visit
your Highness, but that I fear our Wars here would grow weak in respect of my
absence; for which cause my self, and the rest of our men of worth, have sent
in haste with Intelligence unto your Greatness our loving Friend Dermond
Odrischall (in respect of our confidence in him, our knowledge of him, and the
continual endeavor we see in him toward this Catholic War) as from us all.

And for as much as we could not conveniently write all that we wish unto you,
we humbly beseech, That he may be heard as from us all, as if our selves were
present, and to hasten helping-News, that shall rejoice us and our people; and
afterward to speed your gracious help unto us: for the sooner the better,
whilst our Enemies are not in readiness. And until the coming of News from your
Grace unto us, I will have in a readiness, where the Service shall require, the
number of One thousand men; and I will upon my knees pray the merciful God, to
give unto your Grace long life, with health of Body and Soul, and all
happiness; and so do commit you to the safeguard of the Omnipotent:

Dunboy, viz. Beer-Haven, the xxth of February, 1602. Donnell Osulevan Bear.


Other two Letters he wrote also to the same purpose, one to the Earl of
Carazena, Governor of Gallicia; and the other to Don Pedro Zubiar; in which he
gave this notable boast, viz. That his Ancestors maintained the Credit and
Calling of good Gentlemen these Two thousand and six hundred years sithence
their first coming out of Spain.

And to keep Dunboy he resolves; nor did he want encouragements, the Spaniard
sending to the Irish relief Twelve thousand pounds, and Ammunition and other
Necessaries; and O-Donnel writes this Letter to O Connor Kerry.

WHat News are here, the Doctor, and Dermond Odrischal, may largely report unto
you: but of this one thing you may be fully assured, That the King will not
omit the winning of Ireland, if it cost him the most part of Spain. His Majesty
does send you Money and Munition. I pray let our information of you be found
true, and your service encourage Our King to further merit you.

I pray you send me the relation of the News of our Country, in such sort, as
if there be any bad, it be concealed from the Spaniards, and known to me; Where
the Deputy with the Queen's Forces are occupied, or where they are in Garrison.

At the Groyne xxiv. of May, 1602. Your loving Friend, Hugh O-Donnel.


And Owen Mac Eggan, the Popes Apostolical Vicar in Ireland, thus writes to
Richard Mac Goghagan, in Dunboy. This Mac Eggan was newly returned out of
Spain, and came along with the Spanish Supplies. He was by the Pope made now
Bishop of Rosse.

Master Richard,
I Commend me unto you, being very glad of the good report I hear of you,
whereby I cannot but expect much (with God his assistance) in that lawful and
godly Cause, of you. I am sorry, but it was not my luck to conferr with you,
and with the rest of your Company, and inform you of all the state of the
matters of Spain. But upon my Credit and Conscience, there is no greater piece
of Service now in hand in all Christendom for the King of Spain, than the same
that ye have. How great it is to God, and necessary for our Countrey-affairs,
ye know.

Moreover, within few days you shall have relief of men come to help you
thither out of Spain. The great Army of Fourteen thousand men, are
forthcoming; you shall all be as well recompensed both by God, and by the
King's Majesty, as any Ward that is in all the World again. Have me, I pray,
commended to all, and especially to Father Dominick, and bid him be of good
Courage. There comes with the Army a Father of the Company, an Italian, for the
Pope his Nuncius, in whose company I came from Rome to the Court of Spain, and
there he expects the Army's coming hither. He shall give all a Benediction,
yea, I hope within your Castle there, spite of all the Devils in Hell.

From the Catholic Camp this present Wednesday, 1602. Your assured Friend,
Owen Hegaine.


In my Sacrifice and poor Prayers, I will not fail, but commend you and your
good Cause to God Our Ship did arrive three days agon, and our Letters are come
to the King by this time. Nisi Dominus custodierit Civitatem, etc.

In the mean time, Sir George Carew lays siege to Dunboy, which was held out
very desperately; yet at last it was stormed, and all killed or executed,
except Sixteen, Twelve of which were chief followers of Tirrell, and for whom
he bare a great respect, upon which account they were saved some days.

For Tirrell offered to do any service that lay in his power to purchase their
Lives and Liberties. It Is accepted; a stratagem is propounded, in effecting of
which, he also should be pardoned. But this he refused, offering to redeem them
with Money: But to be false to his Master the King of Spain, or to betray the
Catholic Cause, he never would, as he said. Upon which, seeing no good to be
done on him, his Twelve men were also executed.

Yet for all these great and noble Successes of the Loyallists, the Rebels
would not absolutely give over their wickedness, though their main security
were some beggarly lurking-places in Boggs and Woods. But that which rendered
them so stubborn, was the great confidence they had in the Spanish Army, which
indeed had come to their relief, if the loss of Dunboy had not so much
discouraged the Catholic King, who upon notice of its taking, sent into
Gallicia to Carrazena Governor of Corunna, to stop the Army and other
Necessaries for Ireland, considering the place where he expected to land them,
was taken.

One of the chief Incendiaries among them at this time, was their Bishop of
Ross, Owen Mac Eggan, or as some call him, Eugenius O-Hegan, who by his
pretended Dignity, as Vicarius Apostolicus, his favor and credit with the King
of Spain, his Interest with their Clergy, being empowered by the Pope to
dispose of all the Ecclesiastical Livings in Munster, and other Favors he
enjoyed, carried a great stroke amongst the people, commanding and ruling all
as he pleased: and such was his malice against obedient Subjects (were they
Irish or Romanists) that all that he could any ways seize on, he would in piety
(as he pretended) first have them confessed and absolved, and then presently in
his own sight murdered; and this he esteemed a notable sign of Catholic
Sanctity.

At last it was the fortune of the Loyallists to meet with a Party of the
Rebels, in which Conflict this furious Mac Hegan commanded an hundred Horse,
himself leading them on with his Sword drawn in one January 1602/^
hand, and his Breviary and Beads in the other, where he was slain, and the
Rebels routed.

In short, such was the prosperity of the Loyallists, that the Traitors seeing
no safety for them either in Rebellion, or Spaniard, began by degrees to crave
pardon, and submit; and Tir-Oen himself sent several Letters to the Queen,
acknowledging his offense, and begging her mercy; and at last thus submitted
himself to Montjoy.

The said Lord Deputy being at Mellifont, not far from Drogheda, thither March
30. 1603.
comes Tyrone only with one or two in company. Being admitted to the Presence
Chamber (the L. Deputy sitting in the Chair of State) he fell on his knees at
the very Threshold. Having laid prostrate a while, the Lord Deputy beckoned
unto him to come nearer. Then approaching Speed.
some steps, he prostrated himself again on his knees, saying,

In the Royal Clemency of my dread Sovereign, and most gracious Queen, I do
only lay the hope and rest of my remaining Estate, unto whose pleasure I
absolutely remit my Life, and whole Revenues; and do most submissively deplore
mine own misery; Beseeching again her Mercy, whose bountiful Favors I have
heretofore, and mighty Powers now of late both felt and found; and well hope,
that the Fountain of her everlasting Graces are not drawn dry. Let me, I pray,
be the Subject whereon her Mercy may work; and an ensample for ever of her mild
Clemency, both to divulge her Princely Lenity, and to redeem in some part the
Honor I have lost.

For Age I am not so unserviceable, nor of Body so unable, neither in Courage
so dejected, but that my faithful Service in her behalf may expiate and make
some measure of satisfaction for these my many and disloyal Rebellions.

And yet I may justly complain, That through the malicious Envy of some, I have
been hardly and unfriendly dealt with, which may somewhat extenuate my Crime
and Offense: For --

He was proceeding to offer some Excuses for his faults; but the Lord Deputy
interrupted him, saying, That so great a Crime was not to be colored March 31.
The. Bown's Appendix to his Translation of Cambden's Elizab.
with any excnse. Then after some few words pronounced Majesteriously
Conqueror-like, he commanded him to depart aside. And the next day Tir-Oen
signed this following submission with his own hand, and delivered it up to the
Lord Deputy.

I Hugh O-Neale, by the Queen of England, France, and Ireland, her most
gracious favor created Earl of Tir-Oen, do with all true and humble Penitency
prostrate my self at her Royal Feet, and absolutely submit my self unto her
Mercy, most sorrowfully imploring her gracious Commiseration, and appealing
only to her Princely Clemency, without presuming to justify my unloyal
proceedings against her Sacred Majesty; only most sorrowfully and earnestly
desiring, that it may please her Majesty rather in some measure to mitigate her
just Indignation against me, in that I do religiously vow, That the first
Motives of my most unnatural Rebellion, were neither Practice, Malice, or
Ambition; but that I was induced first by fear of my Life (which I conceived
was sought by mine Enemies practice) to stand upon my guard, and afterward
most unhappily led to make good that Fault with more heinous offenses, which in
themselves I do acknowledge deserve no forgiveness; and that it is impossible
for me, in respect of their greatness, in any proportion, even with my Life to
make satisfaction. I do most humbly desire her Majesty to pardon them; that as
I have already been a sufficient Argument of her Royal Power, having little
left but my Life to preserve it self; so that it may now please her Majesty to
make me an Example of her Princely Clemency, the chiefest Ornament of her High
Dignity.

And that I may be the better able hereafter, with the uttermost service of my
Life, to redeem the foulness of my Faults; I do most humbly sue unto her
Majesty, That she will vouchsafe to restore me to my former Dignity and Living;
in which estate of a Subject, I do most religiously vow to continue for ever
hereafter Loyal in all true obedience to her Royal Person, Crown, Prerogative,
and Laws; and to be in all things as far and as dutiful conformable thereunto,
as I or any other Nobleman of this Realm is bound by the duty of a Subject to
his Sovereign, or by the Laws of this Realm. Utterly renouncing and abjuring
the Name and Title of O Neale, or any other Authority or Claim which has not
been granted or confirmed unto me by her Majesty, and that otherwise by the
Laws of this Realm I may not pretend just interest unto. And I do religiously
swear to perform so much as is abovementioned, and the rest of these Articles
subscribed by mine own hand, as far as shall any way be in my power; and to
deliver such Pledges for the performance thereof, as shall be nominated unto me
by the Lord Deputy.

I do renounce and abjure all Foreign Power whatsoever, and all kind of
dependency upon any other Potentate but her Majesty the Queen of England,
France, and Ireland; and do vow to serve her faithfully against any Foreign
Power invading her Kingdoms; and to discover truly any Practices that I do or
shall know against her Royal Person or Crowns. And namely and especially, I do
abjure and renounce all manner of dependency upon the King or State of Spain,
or treaty with him, or any of his Forces or Confederates; and shall be ready
with the uttermost of my ability to serve her Majesty against him, or any of
his Forces or Confederates.

I do absolutely renounce all Challenge or Intermedling with the Vriaghts, or
Fostering with them, or other Neighbour-Lords or Gentlemen out of my Country,
or exacting any Black-rents of any Vriaghts, or bordering-Lords.

I do resign all Claim and Title to any Lands, but such as shall now be granted
unto me by her Majesty's Letter Patents.

Lastly, As the only being a Subject does include all the Duties of a Subject;
so will I be content to be informed here, and advised by her Magistrates, and
will be conformable and assisting unto them in any thing that may tend to the
advancement of her Service, and the peaceable Government of this Kingdom; as
namely, for the abolishing of all barbarous Customs, contrary to the Laws,
being the Seeds of all Incivility; and for the clearing of all difficult
Passages and Places which are the Nurseries of Rebellion; wherein I will employ
the labors of the people of my Country in such sort, and in such places as I
shall be directed by her Majesty, or the Lord Deputy, or Council in her Name:
and will endeavor for my self, and the people of my Country, to erect civil
Habitations, and such as shall be of great effect to preserve us against
Thieves and any Force but the Power of the State, by which we must rest assured
to be preserved as long as we continue in our Duty.

And now, to see whether these Rebellions agree or no with the Roman-Catholique
Doctrine, I shall afford you the Opinions and Commendations of some of their
Universities, of these very Treasonable Actions.

In Dei Nomine Amen.
ILlustrissimus Princeps Hugo Onellus, bellum gerit cum Angliae Regina and
Anglis, ob Catholicam Religionem tuendam, ut scilicet liceat illi and Ibernis
libere Catholicam Religionem profiteri; quam libertatem vi and armis Angliae
Regina conatur eripere.

Duo nunc circa hoc bellum in dubium revocantur.

I. Alterum est, An liceat Catholicis Ibernis praedicto Principi Hugoni in eo
bello favere armis and quibuscunque aliis modis?

II. Alterum, An iisdem Catholicis liceat pugnare contra praefatum Principem
citra mortale peccatum, and Anglis in eo bello favere armis aut alia quavis
ratione?

Praesertinm, cum si Anglis hoc auxilii genus negant, manifesto vitae periculo
aut amittendi bona temporalia sese exponunt. Et praeterea, cum ipsis Catholicis
Iberniae a summo Pont. sit permissum, ut possint praedictae Reginae Angliae
obedire, ac ut legitimam Reginam, Tributa illi solvendo, recognoscere, videtur
enim id praestare posse, quod Subditorum est, pugnare scilicet adversus Reginae
Rebels, qui debitam ei Obedientiam negant, and terram illius ditioni
subjectam usurpare videntur.

Ut utrique Questioni satisfiat, Tanquam certum est accipiendum Posse Romanum
Pont. Fidei desertores, and eos qui Catholicam Religionem oppugnant, Armis
compellere ac coercere, cum alia Ratio non suppetat tanto malo occurrendi.

Est praeterea ut firmum constituendum Angliae Reginam Catholicam Religionem
oppugnare, nec permittere Ibernos Catholicam fidem, public colere, eademque de
Causa praedictum Principem, and ante eum alios (quos Apostolicae literae
Clementis VIII. commemorant) bellum adversus illam suscepisle. His ita
constitutis facile prima Quaestio expeditur.

Citra quaestionem namque est, Posse quoscunque Catholicos dicto Principi
Hugoni O-Neil in praedicto bello favere, idque magno cum merito and spe maxima
Retributionis aeternae: Cum enim praedictus Princeps bellum gerit authoritate
Summi Pont. ob tuendam Religionem Catholicam, ad idque eum and omnes Christi
fideles, Pontifex per suas literas adhortetur (ut ex ejus literis constat).
Atque Principi in eo bello faventes multis gratiis prosequatur, ac si bellum
contra Turcas gererent; nemo jure dubitaverit, and susceptum bellum justum esse
and magni esse meriti pro Catholica Religione (quae omnium maximum bonum est)
tuenda pugnare.

Est etiam de secunda Quaestione omnino certum, Eos omnes Catholicos peccare
mortaliter, qui Anglorum Castra contra praedictum Principem O-Neil sequuntur:
nec posse illos aeternam salutem consequi, nec ab ullo Sacerdote a suis
peccatis absolvi, nisi prius resipiscant, ac Castra Anglorum deserant. Idemque
de illis censendum est, qui Armis and Commeatibus in eo bello Anglis favent,
vel quod simile tribuunt praeter ea Tributa Consueta, quae (ex summi Pont.
Indulgentia and permissione) eis licet So some Copies have it; but Osullevan
reads it thus: -- ^is licet Reginae Angliae aut ejus Exactoribus solvere
Angli^ Regibus* florente in ea Religionae Catholica, aut eorum Exactoribus
solvere.

Haec Assertio hac apertissima Ratione confirmatur.

Quoniam per liter as summi Pont. satis est compertum Angliae Reginam and ejus
Duces Bellum gerere injustum contra praedictum Principem O-Neil and eos qui
illi favent.

Cum enim Pontifex declarat Anglos adversus Catholicam Religionem pugnare,
eosque non minus ac Turcas oppugnari debere, eisdemque Gratiis eos oppugnantes
prosequatur, quibus contra Turcas pugnantes prosequitur: Quis dubitet, bellum
ab Anglis adversus Exercitum Catholicum omnino iniquum geri? At nemini licet
iniquo bello favere, aut i'li adesse, sub poena aeternae Damnationis.

Peccant ergo gravissime Catholici, qui in Castris Haereticorum contra
praedictum Principem pugnant in bello aperte iniquo and injusto, and omnes qui
eidem bello favent Armis aut Commeatibus, aut quacunque alia ratione, quae per
se belli progressum juvent, nec possint rationem inire indifferentis obsequii.

Nec eos quicquam juvat Apostolicas Literas Surreptionis notare: Surreptio enim
intervenire non potest, ubi nulla narratur Petitio eorum, in quorum favorem
expeditur. At summus Pont. aperte in illis Literis docet, Se and Antecessores
suos sponte exhortatos fuisse ad illud bellum gerendum Hibernos Principes ac
Fideles omnes: and ad eos magis provocandos, magnis eos Gratiis ac Indulgentiis
donat. Qui ergo fieri potest ut Surreptitiae sint literae, quae solam
Exhortationem gratiis erga assistentes cumulatam continent?

Nec possunt ergo Catholici Anglis faventes, rationibus in secunda Quaestione
adductis se tueri: Nullum enim peccatum mortale committendum est, etiam si vita
aut res familiaris amittenda sit: ea vero quae bellum injustum per se promovent
ac juvant exercere, aperte peccatum est mortale.

Permissum est etiam Catholicis Haereticae Reginae id genus obsequii praestare,
quod Catholicam Religionem non oppugnat. Non fuit unquam nec potuit esse
Pontificis men's, ea Obsequia circa Reginam eis permittere, quae aperte cum fine
and scopo ipsius Pont. de promovenda in Hibernia Catholica fide ac Religione
pugnant. Hanc autem ejus esse mentem and scopum, Literae ipsae apertissime
declarant.

Ex quibus omnibus satis manifestum relinquitur, illustrissimum Principem
Hugonem O-Nellum, and alios Catholicos Hiberniae bellum gerentes adversus
Reginam Haereticam, Orthodoxam Fidem oppugnantem, nullo modo Rebels esse,
neque debitam Obedientiam negare aut Terras Reginae injuste usurpare, quin
potius illos justissimo bello se terramque suam ab iniqua and impia Tyrannide
vindicare, sacramque Orthodoxam fidem (ut Christianos and Catholicos decet) pro
viribus tueri atque defendere.

Quae omnia and singula, nos infra-scripti, ut certissima ac verissima
judicamus and approbamus.

Datum Salamantic VII. die Martii, An. D. 1602. Sic ego Johannez de Seguensa,
Professor Theologiae in Collegio Societatis Jesu, hujus Almae Salmanticensis
censeo. Idem Censeo ego, Emanuel de Royas, Professor Theologiae in eodem
Collegio Societatis Jesu. Horum Patrum Sententiae tanquam omnino certae
assentior et ego Gaspar de Mena, Theologiae and S. Scripturae in eodem Coll.
Professor. In eadem sum prorsum cum Praedidictis Pp. Sententia Petrus Osorio in
eodem Coll. Societatis Jesu pro Sacris Canonibus.


In the Name of God Amen.
THE most Renowned Prince Hugh O Neil, does make war for the defense of the
Catholic Faith with the Queen of England, and the English people, viz. That
it may be lawful for him and the Irish freely to profess the Catholic
Religion; which liberty the Queen of England does endeavor to take from them
by force and arms.

There are two matters now in question a^^ut this War.

I. The one is, Whether it be lawful for the Irish Catholics to favor the
foresaid Prince Hugh with Arms and all other means in this War?

II. The other is, Whether it be lawful for the same Catholics to fight
against the foresaid Prince, without deadly sin, and to favor the English in
this War, by Arms, or by any other means whatsoever?

Especially, when the case so stands, that if they deny this kind of help unto
the English, they expose themselves to a manifest danger of their lives, or the
losing of their Temporal goods. And furthermore, since it is permitted by the
Pope, that they may obey the foresaid Queen of England, and acknowledge her as
their lawful Queen, by paying Tribute unto her: for it seems that, that may
be performed what belongs unto Subjects to do, viz. To fight against the
Queen's Rebels, who deny their due obedience to her, and seem to usurp the Land
which is subject to her dominion.

That both these Questions may be decided, we must hold as for certain, That
the Pope has power to bridle and suppress those who forsake the Faith, and
those who fight against the Catholic Faith; when by no other means so great a
mischief can be hindered.

And furthermore, it must be positively concluded, That the Queen of England
does oppugn the Catholic Religion, and does hinder the Irish from the public
enjoyment of the Catholic Faith; And that for this cause, the foresaid Prince
O-Neal, and others before him (mentioned in the Apostolical Letters of Clement
VIII.) undertook the War against her. These things thus laid down, the first
Question is easily resolved.

For without doubt, any Catholic whatsoever may favor the said Prince Hugh
O-Neil in the foresaid war, and this with great merit, and certain hopes of an
Eternal Reward: For seeing that the said Prince does make War by the Pope's
Authority for the defense of Catholic Religion, and that the Pope does exhort
all the faithful by his Letters thereunto (as is manifest by his Letters), and
that he will extend his graces upon the favorers of the Prince in that War,
in as ample manner as if they make war against the Turks. No man in justice
can doubt, but that the present War is lawful, and also that to fight for the
Catholic Religion (which is the greatest good of all others) is a matter of
great merit.

And concerning the second question, it is most certain, that all those
Catholics do sin mortally, that take part with the English against the
foresaid Prince O-Neil, Neither can they obtain Eternal Salvation, nor be
absolved from their sins by any Priest, unless they first repent and forsake
the English Army. And the same is to be censured of those, who in this War
favor the English either by Arms, or any other means; or shall give them any
thing of like Condition, besides those accustomed Tributes, which is lawful for
them (by virtue of the Pope's Indulgence and Permission) to pay unto the Kings
of England, or their Officers, the Catholic Religion flourishing and being
amongst them.

This Assertion is confirmed by this most manifest Reason.

Because it is sufficiently proved by the Pope's Letters, That the Queen of
England and her Forces, make unjust War against the said Prince O-Neal, and
those who favor him.

For seeing that the Pope does declare, That the English do fight against the
Catholic Religion, and that therefore the said English should be resisted as
much as if they were Turks; and that he does bestow the same Graces and
Blessings upon those who resist the said English, as he does upon those who
fight against the Turks: Who doubts but that the War waged by the English
against the Catholic Army, is altogether unjust? But it is not lawful for any
to favor an unjust War, or to be present thereat, under the pain of Eternal
Damnation.

Those Catholics do therefore most grievously offend, who bear Arms with the
Heretics against the foresaid Prince, in a War so apparently impious and
unjust. And so do all those who assist them in the said War with Arms,
Victuals, or by any other means, which of themselves do further the proceedings
of the War, and cannot give account of their indifferent obedience.

Neither does it any thing avail them to scandal the Apostolical Letters of
Surreption, or of some underhand procuring. For Surreption cannot happen, where
no Petition of them is declared, in whose favor they were dispatched. But the
Pope does plainly declare in those Letters, that he and his Predecessors had
voluntarily exhorted the Irish Princes, and all others of the Faithful, to
undertake this War. And, the better to incite them to it, does enrich them
with great Favors, Blessings, and Indulgences. How can it then be supposed,
that these Letters were surreptitious, which only contain an Exhortation
strengthened with many Favors for such as did fulfill them.

Neither therefore can the Catholics who assist the English, defend
themselves by the Reasons alleged in the second Question: For no mortal sin is
to be committed, although thereby Life or Goods might be saved: but these
things which further and help to execute an unjust War, are manifestly deadly
sins.

It is permitted likewise to the Catholics, to perform such kind of Obedience
to this Haeretical Queen, as does not oppugn the Catholic Religion. Neither
ever was it, or could it be the meaning of the Pope, to allow them to use that
Obedience toward the Queen, which does manifestly contradict and oppose the
end and scope which he had to promote the Catholic Faith and Religion in
Ireland. But that this was his meaning and scope, his own Letters or Breves do
manifestly declare.

From all which it remains sufficiently apparent, that the most famous Prince
Hugh O-Neil, and other Catholics in Ireland, making war against an Heretical
Queen (who opposes her self against the True Faith) are by no means Rebels,
neither do they deny due obedience, or unjustly usurp any of the Queens
Dominions. But on the contrary, they do rather vindicate themselves and their
Country from an impious and wicked Tyranny, by a most just War; and do defend
and maintain the holy and Orthodox Faith with all their power, as becomes all
Christians and Catholics so to do.

All and every of which, we whose Names are underwritten, do judge and approve
as most certain and true.

Salananca VII. of March, 1602. I Juan de Ziguenza Professor of Divinity of the
College of the Society of Jesus of this famous City of Salamanca, do so judge. I
Manuel de Rojas, Professor of Divinity of the said College, do agree in the
same. I Gaspar de Mena, Professor of Divinity and Holy Scripture in the said
College, do assent to the said Opinions of these Fathers as altogether true. I
Piedro Osorio, Expounder of the Sacred Canons in the same College of the
Society of Jesus, am altogether of the same Opinions with the foresaid Fathers.


The same Censure or Declaration I find the very next year after, thus dated
and subscribed:

-- Datum Salmanticae, secundo Februarii, Anno Domini Millesimo Sexcentesimo
Tertio.

Doctores Salmanticenses.
Fra. Franciscus Zumel Decanus Salmant. Mag. Alphonsus de Curiel Sacrae
Theologiae Primatius Professor. Fr. Petrus de Herrera. Mag. Doctor Franciscus
Sancius. Fr. Dionysius Juberus. Mag. Andreas de Leon. Fr. Petrus de Ledesma.
Fr. Martinus de Paraza.
Doctores Theologi Vallisoselani.
D. Franciscus Sobrino Decanus. D. Alfonsus Vacc^ de Santiago. D. Johannes
Garcia de Coronel. Mag. Fr. Johannes Nigron. D. Torre. Fr. Josephus de Luxan.
Vallisoleti, Octavo Martii, Anno Millesimo sexcentesimo tertio.

Philip Osullevan thinks this Declaration enough to convert all good Hist.
Cathol. Ibern. Compend. Tom. 3. lib. 8. cap. 7. fol. 204.
Romanists to Rebellion, and is not a little proud of its Authority; and thus
cockered up in his usual vanity, he accuses all of folly and ignorance, who
sided with the Queen and her Loyallists; and to think otherwise, he says is a
mad and poisonous Doctrine.

Tir-Oen (as aforesaid) having submitted himself, the Lord Deputy carried him
the next day to Dublin, intending to convey him into England; and thither he
carried him, King James being proclaimed and received as the undoubted King,
who also pardoned Tir-Oen, received him honorably at Court, and by
Proclamation forbidding any to show him the least disrespect.

But the Romanists in Ireland show themselves of another temper: for hearing of
Queen Elizabeth's death (a great comfort to Three Convers. of Eng. part 1. an
Addition to the Epist. Dedicat
Parsons) and that James was King of England, they rejoice at the one, and
despise the other. The Citizens of Lymrick, with their Priests, seized upon all
the Churches in the City, erecting their Altars, resolving to re-settle their
Religion again. At Wexford they gave out, that King James was Fynes. Morysont
Itinerary, p. 285, 286, etc.
a Romanist, the better to embolden their Associates. Those of Waterford
secured the Cathedral Church to themselves, defaced the Session-House at
Blackfriars, by breaking the Doors, pulling down the Benches and Seats of
Justice, ordering Masses to be celebrated publicly.

But those of Cork went farther, refusing to proclaim the King, ran to their
Arms, forbad the Commissioners to proclaim him; upon which the Loyallists and
the said Commissioners were forced to proclaim him upon an Hill near the Town.
They entertained one amongst them, who called himself a Legate from the Pope,
went with them in Solemn Procession, new hallowed their Churches, kept strong
Guards, took the Sacrament to spend their Lives and Goods in the defense of the
Roman Religion; fell upon the Kings Forces, encouraged a Priest to hearten the
people on, by preaching to them, That James could not be a lawful King, because
he was not appointed by the Pope, and sworn to maintain the Roman Religion.
They write also to all Towns and Cities, to assist them in defense of the
Catholic Faith; and the better to carry on their Designs, seized upon the
King's Munition.

And as for Tir-Oen, having staid a little time in England, with leave and
Reward he returned for Ireland; where after so many Promises and Obligations,
it was expected he would have lived civilly and obedient. But here, according
to his old wont, he falls a plotting and contriving mischief again, but with
a great deal of secrecy. In the mean time Montgomery Lord Bishop of Derry (and
afterward of Mead) enters Bp. Carlton's Thankful Remembrance, cap. 14. p. 168.
into suit against Tir Oen, for wrongfully keeping some of his Episcopal Lands
(a great sin, but too much in fashion to cheat the Church); upon this Tir Oen
is summoned to appear at an appointed time, to expect the issue of the Trial.
The Earl, conscious of his late designs against the State. and fearing that his
Plots had been discovered, prompted by his guilty Conscience, he and his Family
slipped privately into 1607.
Normandy, thence to Flanders (where he was entertained by Father Jo. Gee's
Foot out of the Snare, p. 103.
Musket with a Panegyric Oration): upon which King James puts forth a
Proclamation against him, not a little to the disgust of zealous An. 1608.
de Sponde. From Flanders he goes to Rome, where he lived upon the Pope's
Allowance, became blind for some years, and so 1616.
dyed. And his Son ended his days miserably in Bruxels, being found strangled
in his own Chamber; but whether by himself or others, as it is not certainly
known, so is it nothing to my purpose.

And thus much concerning these Troubles in Ireland, whose effects were so
lamentable, that besides the Miseries and Depopulations by War, the extremity
of Famine grew so great, that the very Archbishop Vshers Speech at Dublin,
April 30. 1627. Vid. his life by Dr. Bernard, p. 67.
Women in some places, by the way-side, would surprise the men riding by, to
feed themselves with the flesh of their Horses. And sooner might these Troubles
have had an end, if it had not been by the instigation of their zealous Priests
and Jesuits, though born Subjects; such as were Father Archer, White, Ractor,
Mulrony, Leinagh, etc. Mahonne O Dullany a Priest, Edward Raghter a Dominican.

A Continuation OF THE HISTORY OF THE Romish Treasons AND USURPATIONS.
BOOK X.
CHAP. I. Diverse Plots against Queen Elizabeth and King James. Rawleigh's
Designs against King James. The Life of Father Parsons.
THIS Century might afford us several dismal Contrivances against the Crown
and Prosperity of Great Britain; but of some I shall but slightly touch, as
being commonly known; and in others I must not be too critical and open, lest I
should offend against Sir Walter Rawleigh's Prudential Rule, Not to follow
Truth too near the heels, lest she should kick back, and strike out my Teeth.

And here I might speak at large of the several Designs as well of Puritan as
Papist, to hinder King James from his true succession to the Crown of England;
as sometimes endeavoring to make him odious to Queen Elizabeth, to prevent her
declaring for him; as by telling her of the King's intimacy with Clement VIII.
which they endeavored to Puritan, or an Irrational Enthusiastic: But they
hoped, that her Jealousy of Religion, augmented by her Age, and some
Expressions in the Letter, might persuade her to make Mountains of Mole-hills,
and in such a pet to declare some other to the Crown; which, as some hoped,
might have brought such troubles upon the Kingdom, that in the hurry a Romanist
might have slipped himself into the Throne, to which so many pretended.

But she was too wise to be cheated by such Toys; presently she perceiving the
drift, she suspected the cheat. And a mere forgery it was in respect of King
James; though his knavish Secretary, Balmerinoch, Propenderet animo ad
Religionem Romanam Rob. Johnston Hist. Rerum Brit. p. 448.
one warping toward Popery, had given some ground for such a story: For he, by
the Instigation of his Kinsman, Sir Edward Drummond, a Romanist, had penned a
Letter to the said Clement VIII. in favor of the Bishop of Vaison, a
Scotch-man, for his preferment to a Cardinalship, which by shuffling in among
other Letters to be signed, the King had hastily (a dangerous oversight, where
are knavish Secretaries) set his hand to; the other sealing it with the Royal
Signet, entrusted to him by his Office.

Queen Elizabeth by the by challenged King James with this. But he protested
his Innocence, by denying any such thing; so did James Elphingston Lord
Balmerinoch, who also got Drummond to forswear it. Raleigh, and other Enemies
to the Scotch Title, could then proceed no farther, though they had used such
Interest at Rome, as to get a Copy of it, which they showed to the Queen as the
Original, and she to Mr. David Foulis the King's Agent; who satisfied her
Majesty, by proving to her, by the Testimony of her Stationers, that the Date
of the Letter was older than the stamp or mark of the Paper; whereby it could
not be the Original, and so might be a Cheat as well as a Copy. But afterward
Mat. Tort. page 47. 1608, 1609.
Bellarmine retorting this Letter to the King, Balmerinoch was farther examined
and tried, who confessed all, was condemned of Treason, and as a Traitor to be
beheaded; but by Queen Ann's Intercession was pardoned. A man he was of good
Parts; but especially knew how to filch, pilfer, and embezel Church Lands; and
if it should be possible for a covetous man (as he was) to be honest, yet it is
certain, that he who robs God and the Church, can never be a Friend to the
King, but for his own Interest.

Queen Elizabeth is now old and weak, cannot live long; so it is needless to
attempt any more against her Person, whose death they daily expected, and it
might anticipate their quickest Designs. No man's right and succession to the
Crown is so much feared as that of King James; and therefore to prevent Him,
must be the main Care and Contrivance.

There was one Francis Mawbray, Son to the Lord of Barnebowgall, who had lived
some while in the Infanta's Court at Bruxels; he, they to which purpose he
intends for Scotland, but takes England in his way. At London one Daniel an
Italian Fencing-Master, discovers the Plot to the Queen; she for a further
trial has them both seized on and sent into Scotland: Mawbry, supposed guilty,
is cast into Edinburgh Castle, whence thinking one night to escape out of a
Window, by his Bed-sheets, which proving too short, he fell upon the Rocks, and
so dyed; his Body was hanged for some time, then quartered, and fixed upon the
Gates, and several places of the City.

This failing, another Design is in hand: In Italy, Ferdinando I. the Grand
Duke of Tuscany, by the intercepting of some Letters, discovers a Plot to
take away King James his Life by Poison. The Duke, who had formerly been a
Cardinal, moved with the Fame of the King's Learning and Virtue, and it may be
had some hopes of his Conversion, upon the former false Letters, resolved to
discover and prevent it. At this time Mr. Henry Wotton sojourned in Florence,
and was well acquainted Vietta, the Duke's Secretary; upon whose Commendations
Wotton is pitched on to be the Messenger. The Letters and excellent Antidotes
against Poison (such as were not then known in Scotland) were delivered to him,
who disguised under an Italian Garb and Name of Octavio Baldi, hastes to
Scotland, comes to the King, discovers himself and the Conspiracy, and after
some stay returns to Florence. He was afterward Knighted by King James, and
famous for his Learning, Languages, and Embassies.

In these Designs against the King's right to the Throne, Pope Clement VIII.
was not wanting, who intended the Crown for some of his Friends. Card. D'Ossat
Let. 191. 268. 272.
And perceiving that some in England were tampering to promote the Interest of
the Lady Arabella, in this case he thought it best to deal warily: He had a
mind that the Duke of Parma should enjoy the Crown; but this upon better
thoughts he supposed would not be feasible, by reason that Arabella's Interest
might be too strong. And therefore Parma being married, he casts another way
about, and thinks upon Cardinal Farnese, younger Brother to Parma; who being
unmarried, might be wedded to Arabella, and so did not question by their joint
Forces and Interests to carry the Crown. To carry on this business, nothing was
thought more convenient, than to unite all the Romanists in England, that their
Cause might not suffer by any dissentions amongst themselves about this
Succession. And seeing Experience had told them, That their Clergy had a great
awe and authority over the Laity, so it was best then to have all their Clergy
to be of the same mind, and to prosecute the same Ends, and they hoped that
their Laity would not then be divided. To which purpose they conclude of an
Archpriest, who should have a Jurisdiction over the rest, who were to act
according to his Rules and Instructions. And in these Designs, Father Parsons
was a main Stickler and Contriver; the Pope also had drawn up some Bulls, and
sent to his Nuncio in the Netherlands to divulge and spread them abroad at
convenient time; wherein he declared, That not any, though never so near in --
Quantum cunque propinquitate sanguinis niterentur, nisi ejusmodi essent qui
fidem Catholicam non modo tolerarent, sed omni open ac studio promoverent, and
more Majorum jurejurando se id praestituros susciperent, etc. Bull. Clement
VIII.
blood, should after Q. Elizabeth's death be admitted to the Crown, but such an
one as would not only tolerate the Roman Religion, but would swear to promote
and resettle it; and, that in the mean time Cardinal Farnese might in this
Island have the greater Vogue, the Pope made him Protector of England, as he
was of other Countries: Nay, rather than fail, the same Pope had 1597. D'Ossat
Let. 87.
formerly exhorted the French and Spaniard to unite, invade England, and divide
it between them: Nor did they neglect to instigate the Family of the Pools to
have a right.

Yet for all these Attempts, and other Endeavors of the Jesuits, Winter,
Desmond, and such like, who plotted His Exclusion; upon the death of the Virgin
Queen Elizabeth, he was proclaimed and received as the undoubted King James I.
of England, but of Scotland VI. However, no sooner is he set in the Throne, but
an odd medley-Plot is agitated against him, composed of such variety of
Religions and Interests, that it seemed to puzzel the World that such a wise
man as Raleigh should be in it; but that they knew, Discontent would thrust a
daring Spirit upon any thing to satisfy it self.

The main Ingredients of this Conspiracy were,

Henry Brook Lord Cobham seemed to be Protestants.
George Brook his Brother Thomas Lord Gray of Wilton, a Rank Puritan. William
Watson, the Author of the Quodlibets, where he rants dapperly against the
Jesuits for their Treasons and Plots. Romish Priests.
William Clark, who had writ against Father Parsons for the same Crimes. Sir
Griffin Markham, a Zealous Romanist. Sir Walter Raleigh, a Statesman and
Soldier, and troubled with no more Religion than would serve his Interest and
turn. Count Arembergh, Ambassador from the Archduke of Austria. Zealous
Romanists.
Matthew de Lawrencie, a Merchant, but an Instrument employed by Arembergh.
And some other such like. Their Designs were,

To set the Crown on the Lady Arabella, or to seize on the King, and make him
grant their desires, and a Pardon. To have a Toleration of Religion. To procure
Aid and Assistance from Foreign Princes. To turn out of the Court such as they
disliked, and place themselves in Offices. Watson to be Lord Chancellor. George
Brook, Lord Treasurer. Sir Griffin Markham, Secretary of State. Lord Gray,
Master of the Horse, and Earl-Marshal of England.
For more security, Watson draws up an Oath of Secrecy. But all is
discovered; they are seized on, examined and tried. The two Priests plead James
is not King, because not then Crowned. But that excuse is declared idle: most
of them are found guilty, and condemned. Watson? Clark, and George Brook, were
executed; the rest reprieved. Gray dyed in the Tower the last of his Line.
Raleigh was beheaded 1618. the rest discharged of Imprisonment, but dyed
miserably poor. Markham and some others abroad; but Cobham (as we are Oshorn's
Traditional Memoires of K. James, p. 12
told) in a Room ascended by a Ladder at a poor Woman's House in the Minories
(formerly his Landress) dyed rather of Hunger, than a natural Disease.

I need not here speak how their Respons. ad Edictum Reg. ^6. Card. Allen's
Answer to the Execut. of Justice, p. 185.
Priests endeavored to amuse the people with what Troubles there would be at
the death of Elizabeth; nor how, to alienate the Crown, they published (to stir
up many Titles and Pretenders) diverse Pamphlets, as Lesley, Heghington,
Creswell, Crag (a Scotch Jesuit, but his Book was burnt, and never printed).
And we are told, That the Jesuits were entreated to Is. Casaubon Epist. ad
Front Ducaum.
assist in this Plot; but they desired to be excused, as having another Design
in their thoughts, which some think was meant of the Gun-powder-Treason. And to
all these Contrivances Father Parsons was no bad wisher.

OF this Parsons, seeing he then made such a noise in the world (and 11.
is by those of his Order commended as one of the most holy men of his time,
whilst others, though Romanists, will look upon him no otherwise than the
greatest Villain then living in the world) I shall say something here, the
better to inform Posterity.

It Is true, the Industrious Dr. Thomas James, almost LX. years ago, undertook
to write his Life, and therein to set down nothing but what the Priests and
Romanists themselves writ of him; which accordingly he did: but it containing
more of Satyr than History, I shall make little or no use of that Collection,
now so rarely to be met with, for they were all bought up by the Jesuits
themselves; it is called, THE JESVITS DOWNF ALL.

Some Romanists have boldly asserted Parsons to have been a Bastard, begotten
by the Parson of the Town Stockgursee in Somersetshire, and therefore called
Parsons, though they say his right name was Or Cubhuck A. P. A Reply to a Libel
called A brief Apol. p. 324.
Cowback; and this has been in a manner generally believed. But to do him what
right I can, I shall not be unwilling to allow here some mistakes as to the
place; and though, upon enquiry, I am informed, that those Parish-Records are
now lost, whereby I cannot satisfy my self as well as Manifestation of folly,
f. 89
I would; yet I shall in part be guided herein by himself, and other Enquiries.

He was born at Nether-Stowey in Somersetshire, a Vicarage, in the year 1546.
His Father (a Blacksmith) was once an Enemy to Rome; but was (as they say)
reconciled to that Church by Alexander Briant, who was executed; and his Mother
dyed at London in the same persuasion. They had XI. Children, this Father
Parsons being the middlemost. He was Dr. Sutclyf's Blessing on Mount Gerizzin,
p. 220, 288.
instructed in the Latin Tongue by John Hayward, or Haywood, once a Monk or
Canon-Regular of the Abbey of Torr, who came out of Devonshire to be Vicar of
Stowey; he was held a notable Twinger, and suspected as kind enough with
Parsons Mother, lying at her House.

Thus fitted for the University, thither was he sent, and entered into Baliol
College in Oxford; but in what year, I cannot tell. In 1564, I meet Lihb.
Matri^ Antiq. Oxon.
with three Parsons in that College, two of them Batchelors of Arts, and one an
Vndergraduat, who (comparing the time with the Customs of that College) must be
this same Parsons. In the year 1568, he was admitted Socius Sacerdos, commonly
called Chaplain-Fellow; and so went into Holy Orders, though but Bachelor of
Arts. In the year 1573, he took his Degree of Master of Arts; and in the next
year, viz. the 13 of February, 1573/4 he resigned or quitted the College.

But the manner how he left that place, has not hitherto been agreed to on all
hands; A brief Apology, fol. 193, 194, etc.
himself, to keep up his credit, will tell a fair Tale, and endeavor to lay
some blots upon Dr. Bagshaw: on the other side the Answer to the brief Apol. p.
32, 33, etc.
Doctor, though a great Romanist, undertakes to clear himself, to confute
Parsons his story, and to render him faulty enough. Seeing these were both then
Fellows of that College, and both afterward turned zealous Romanists, yet
Enemies, and could understand this story best; yet finding them in different
Tales, and so not willing more to believe than to dis-believe either; I shall
take the story from a third hand, who was also Fellow of this College, and
afterward Archbishop of Canterbury; but when he wrote this following Letter
(which I transcribed from the Original) was Master or Head of University
College.

To my worshipful loving Friend, Mr. Dr. Hussye, at Mr. Haiden's House, who
dwells at the Sign of the Tunn in Watling-Street; Give these.
YOU write unto me to know what is in record any way against Mr. Parsons; and I
return you here enclosed word for word so much as is in the Register of Baliol
College. In the Resignation, as you may see, he had written Sponte and coactus;
but now it is Sponte non coactus, [and] being blotted out, and [non] being set
Thus non et
over. Which I am deceived if it be be not altered by some body else of late,
in as much as I am verily persuaded, that since my coming to the College I have
seen it Sponte and coactus; which although it carry a contradiction, yet
intimates that he resigned against his will. The particular reasons whereof,
no man can tell better than Dr. Turner, now dwelling in Fetter-lane; or Dr. In
the Proctor's Book I find one Tho. Hyde proceeded Master of Arts the same year
with Rob. Parsons, viz. 1573.
Hide of Sarum; for as I take it, they were both present at his Removing.

The causes and manner of his giving over, as far as I could ever comprehend,
were these: Christopher Bagshaw admitted Fellow 1572, let the College 1582, was
made Priest in France, lived a while in the English College at Rome; proceeded
Doctor, some say, at Padoa [A. P. Reply, p. 1^6.]; others at Paris; and was one
of the Faculty at Sorboune. He was active against the Arch. Priest in the
stirrs at Wishich: He lived to be very old.
Bagshaw, being a smart young man, and one who thought his penny good Silver,
after that he had his Grace to be Bachelor of Arts; was with some despite
swindged by Parsons, being Dean of the College; Hoc manet alt^ mente repostum:
And Bagshaw afterward coming to be Fellow, was most hot in prosecution against
Parsons. It was the more forwarded by Dr. Squire's displeasure, who was then
Master of Baliol College, and thought himself to have been much bitten by vile
Libels, the Author whereof he conceived Parsons to be; who in truth was a man
at that time wonderfully given to scoffing, and that with bitterness, which
also was the cause that none of the Company loved him.

Now Dr. Squire and Bagshaw being desirous of some occasion to trim him, this
fell out: In the year 1572. Parsons had been Bourser; and being joined in
Office with one Stanclit, a very simple Fellow, he took the advantage of the
weakness of his Colleague, and falsified the Reckonings much to the damage of
the College; as also deeply polling the Commoners Names, whereof there was
store in the College; and withal, not sparing his own Scholars: By all which
means it was thought, that he had purloin'd One hundred Marks.

His Office expiring at St. Luke' s Tide, there were some that between that and
February 1573. scanned over the Books, being moved thereto by the secret
Complaints of some of the Commoners their Scholars; and finding it apparent, as
also being now certified, that he was a Bastard; whereas it is the first
quality there required by Statute, That every Fellow should be Legitimo Thoro
natus; they proceeded to have his Expulsion solemnly. Where by the way you may
add, that Parsons was not of the best fame concerning Dr. Sutclyf's Blessings
on Mount Gerizzim, page 288.
Incontinency, as I have heard some say who lived in Oxon at that time: but
whether that were then objected against him, I have not heard.

Parsons being put to this push in the College Chapel, and ways sufficient
concurring to expel him, and in truth no man standing for him, makes humble
request, That he might be suffered to resign; which with some a-do was yielded
to him; and then he wrote as you have here enclosed.

Afterward, before the Assembly broke up, he entreated that his giving over
might he concealed, by reason that it would be disgraceful unto him with all
men, but especially with his Scholars and their Friends; and for these causes
humbly prayed, That he might keep his Scholars, Chamber, etc. and be reputed as
a Fellow in the House, the matter being concealed from all the Boys and the
younger sort in the House; which then in words was yielded unto, and that other
Decree which now you see razed, was enacted for the time, but afterward was
soon crossed, as you may behold.

And soon after their coming out of the Chapel, by Bagshaw's means a Peal of
Bells was rung at Magdalen Parish Church, being the Parish wherein Balliol
College stands; the reason of which ringing, as it was imparted to some few,
to be to ring out Mr. Parsons, so generally it was not known to the world, or
in the College, which gave occasion to this farther jest:

When Parsons was expelled, he was one of the Deans of the College, and so by
his Place was to keep Corrections in the Hall on the Saturdays. The next time
therefore of Corrections, which was the day of Parsons his Expulsion, or soon
after, Dr. Squire causes Parsons to go into the Hall as Dean, and to call the
Book and Roll, etc. and then comes Dr. Squire himself in, and as if it had
been in kindness to countenance him (but in truth more profoundly to deride
him) he calls him at every word Mr. Dean, and desires him often to have a
strict care to the good government of the Youth; and not only for a fit, but
all the time of his year that he was to continue in Office.

Some of the Commoners knew all this Pageant, and laughed the more sweetly; and
Parsons in the end spying how he was scorned, and nothing concealed; nay,
understanding all his Knell which was rung out for him, for very shame got him
away to London; and there not knowing what course at first to take, at length
resolved to try his fortune beyond Sea, purposing, as it should seem at his
departure, to study Physic; but afterward when he came into Italy, resolving
rather to study the Civil Law; which he did for a time at Bononia, as himself
in that place told Mr. Davers, Brother to the late Sir John Davers, as the said
Mr. Davers has himself told me; but afterward be-like wanting means of
Continuance, he turned to be a Jesuit.

Presently upon his departure out of England, he sent a Letter, or rather a
notable Libel to Dr. Squire; and he had so ordered the matter, that many Copies
of the Letter were taken and abroad in the hands of others, before the Letter
came to the Doctor; which was the true cause that many very lewd things were
falsely reported of Dr. Squire, although in truth he was such a man as wanted no
faults, etc.

February 1. 1601, At Vniversity-Colledg. Your very loving Friend, GEORGE ABBOT.
The enclosed Resignation mentioned in the Letter, runs thus:
Ego Robertus Parsons Socius Collegii de Balliolo, Resigno omne meum jus and
clameum, quem habeo vel habere potero Societatis meae in dicto Collegio, quod
quidem facio sponte Here and is dashed out, and non written over it.
no^ coactus, die decimo tertio mensis Februarii Anno Dom. 1573.

Per me Rob. Parsons.

The enclosed Decree mentioned in the Letter, take thus:
Eodem tempore Decretum est unanimi consensu Mri and Reliquorum Soci^rum, ut
Magister Robertus Parsons nuperrime Socius retineat sibi sua Cubicula and
Scholares quosque voluerit, and Communia sua de Collegio habeat usque ad Festum
Paschatis immediate sequentis.




But this last Decree was presently after cancelled or crossed, and so remains
in their Register-Book.

Being in Italy, he went to Rome, and there turned Jesuit; thence came again
into England with Campian, but made what haste he could out again: sometimes
living in Spain, instigating that King to invade England; other times living at
Rome, where he was Rector of the English College; was, as they say, in some
probability of a Cardinal's Cap.

We have formerly told you of his pernicious Principles, taken out of his own
Writings; maintaining, That the Sea backward, l. 2. c. 1. p. 76, 77.
Pope has power and authority to depose Kings: That L. 2. c. 3. p. 93
Subjects of themselves may depose their Kings: Nor will he deny, but that
Kings may lawfully be, L. 2. c. 4. p. 101.
killed by their people, and such like. And now the better to understand the
man, take a few Instances of his behavior toward his Queen and Country; as
they are delivered to us by the Romanists themselves: and here I shall only set
down that which carries the greatest probability. William Clark the Priest
says thus of him:

As touching the Colleges and Pensions that are maintained and given by the
Spaniard (which he so often inculcateth) we no whit thank him for them, as
things are handled, and occasions thereby ministered, of our greater persecution
at home, by reason of Fa. Parsons treacherous practices, thereby to promote the
Spanish Title to our Country, and his hateful Stratagems with such Scholars as
are there brought up, enforcing them to subscribe to Blanks, and by public
Orations to fortify the said wrested Title of the Infanta, meaning Isabella
Clara Eugenia, Daughter to Philip II. of Spain, whose Right to the English
Crown was maintained in a Book by this Parsons made, but published by him under
the false Name of Dolman: 'Twas called, A Conference about the next Succession
of the Crown of England. Of this Book thus says the former Priest.

-- Concerning his proposing the Book of Titles to be read in Id: fol. 69.
the Refectory in Rome, instead of a Spiritual Lecture used to be read at such
times: There be divets yet that will depose the same against him; and Mr.
Lawbery, now a Reverend Priest, was the man should have read the same; but he
rejected it.

Another tells us thus of Father Parsons:

-- It is well known, that Fa. Parsons in Spain caused many, as well A. P.
Reply to a Libel. page 81, 82.
others as Priests, to subscribe (as Priests) to the Title of the Infanta, now
Duchess of Burgundy. Fa. Fancard also has made many to set their hands to
three Blanks, although some refused to do it, as they have themselves reported
at their coming into England.

I have moreover understood, that Fa. Parsons was a chief dealer in sending of
those Armado's which the Spaniards have set out for the Invasion of our
Country; and them of England with whom he dealt most earnestly to go into the
Navy which was set out in the year 1596, who refusing to be employed in any
action against their Country, were for that cause sent away from the College,
and told that it was not convenient that they should stay in the College, where
they had given example of such repugnance.

There is moreover sufficient proof, that after the evil success of the Spanish
attempts, Fa. Parsons carried a Youth to the King of Spain, who pronounced a
certain Speech for the purpose; which being ended, Fa. Parsons began to urge
the King to give one attempt more; affirming, that he would write his Letters
into England; and nothing doubted to effect what should be the great
furtherance of such a journey, etc.

Certain other Letters also have been seen of Fa. Parsons to his fellow-Jesuits
in England, wherein he has wished that the Catholics would unite themselves
together, and set up a King of England. And in his Letters of the xxiv. of
January 1600, to the Earl of Angusse, he confesses that he dealt in such
matters for eight or ten years.

Watson the Priest tells us thus: -- Did he not earnestly move our W. W. a
Dialogue, p. 92.
young Students in Spain to set their hands to a Schedule, That they would
accept the Lady Infanta for Queen of England, after the decease of her Q. Eli^.
Majesty that now is; yea, and finding them altogether unwilling to intermeddle
with these State Affairs, belonging nothing unto them, and most hurtful to both
their Cause and Persons: used he not this cunning shift to draw on the innocent
and simple youths, to pretend (forsooth) to them of Valladolid, that the
Students in Sevil had done it already; no remedy then but they must follow. And
having thus craftily gotten their Names, he showed them to the Students in
Sevil for an example of their fact and forwardness, which he required them to
imitate; that it would be well taken that they all did thus show themselves
desirous of the Lady Infanta for their Queen.

It Is known well enough, that there has been an old Saying or Prophecy (the
English People doting most on such whimsies) running thus:

There shall be seen upon a day
Between the Baugh, and the May,
The black Fleet of Norway.
When that is come and gone,
England build Houses of Lime and Stone;
For after, Wars shall you have none.
And this, as the Lord Essays, Ess. 35. of Prophecies.
Bacon says, was commonly understood of the Spanish Invasion in 1588, the King
of Spain's Surname being (as they say) Norway. But Dr. Challenge, chap. 6. page
177, 178.
Sutclyff, the Dean of Exeter, tells us, That Parsons made another
Interpretation of it, to wit, some after-Invasion, yet by the Spaniards; though
the words of the Prophesies do somewhat differ, yet of these Toys are we told
that Parsons made use of, to instigate the King of Spain to another Invasion,
in which his Majesty need not doubt of Success, and a Conquest, as he said,
seeing his Majesty's Name was Philip Norway, of whom the English had an old
Prophecy:

Between Bostons Bay
And the Pile of Foudray,
Shall be seen the black Navy of Norway.
And that nothing might be left undone to advantage the Spanish Cause and
Title, the chiefest about the Queen were solicited to assist that Interest;
Watson the Priest telling us -- Quodlibets page 150. 189. 51. 126. 132.
That Father Parsons sent a Jesuit-Priest to the Earl of Essex, to have had him
to take a Pension of the King of Spain privately, for the advancement of his
designments. and with others also they were not wanting.

And of this the Learned Eliz. An. 8598.
Cambden will give us some farther light, telling us, That the Earl of Essex
affirmed, that Anthony Rolston an English Fugitive, was by the Spanish
Agitators sent into England, Creswell the Jesuit assisting in it, as if the
business were only to get a peace betwixt the two Crowns, but in truth (as
Rolston himself confessed) to discover what preparations the English had for
war; to animate and confirm the Romanists, and by bribes and large promises to
corrupt some great Lords about the Queen; in particular, the Earl of Essex.

Neither was Parsons less active and zealous (when he saw that ill success had
rendered the Spaniard more cold in the business) for the Pope's Designs upon
England, whether it were for the Duke of Parma, or his younger Brother Cardinal
Fernese, as the wise Cardinal D' Ossat does in several places discover, and for
which Pasquin at Rome gave him a rub; for proof of this, we need go no further
than his own Countryman John Colleton, born in Somersetshire, of Lincoln
College in Oxford, and (as Pits thinks) once Fellow of it; a great Romanist,
for which for some years he under-went imprisonment, was one of the greatest
esteem amongst them, having been not only an Assistant to two of their
Arch-Priests, but in the vacancy supplied the place it self, and by them called
Archdeacon of London: This man, of such credit and repute, tells us thus of
Father Parsons.

-- Just Defense, page 240, 241.
The Magistrates have in their hands, and de facto have showed to some
Prisoners at the time of their Examinations (for proof, and to exaggerate the
Disloyalties and Treasons objected), one or more Letters, which they affirm to
be Father Parsons, wherein his concurrence and furtherance to an Invasion were
expressed. Then the man's restless tampering in State-matters, being reported
to have proffered and re-proffered the Crown of our Country to several
Princes, now to one, now to another, as the meeting of matters and
opportunities could most recommend and credit his words, and entertain the
Personage with hopes thereof, etc.

Neither is Father Parsons holden only of our Magistrates for a Statist or
Merchandizer of the Crown and Diadem (though this were enough to estrange and
divorce us from having any connection or partaking in ought with him): but his
Travels and Negotiations this way, are become so notoriously known, that even
Pasquine in Rome (as Intelligence is sent us) speaks in this manner of him:
If there be any man that will buy the Kingdom of England, let him repair to a
Merchant in a black square Cap in the City, and he shall have a very good
Penniworth thereof.



That this is the true Copy word for word, I cannot say; but rather the
substance of it, or else only a Translation, the Original of it being either in
Italian or Latin, because hung upon Pasquin's Buttock in the night time, by a
Roman Gentleman, as A. C. a Letter to his dis-Jesuited Kinsman, page 43.
one tells us, who gives us another rendering of it, thus: If there be any
Citizen here in Rome, that is minded to purchase the Realm of England, let him
repair to the Rector of the English College here within the City, and he in
Jesus Name will afford him a good Penniworth.



Which of these two is the truest Translation, I cannot tell; it is certain the
sense is the same: and it cannot be denied but that he was the most active man
in carrying on the designs against England, for which he was in great repute
and authority both with Pope and Spaniard; whereupon there were some thoughts
of a Cardinal's Cap for him: To which purpose they tell us, that his Friends,
Holt the Jesuit, and Quodlibets, p. 120, 121. The Discovery, page 61. A Copy of
certain Discourses, p. 127
Dr. Thomas Worthington (who also became a Jesuit), drew up a formal Letter
supplicative in the Name of the people of England, to the King of Spain, humbly
beseeching his Majesty, that for the good of England he would earnestly deal
with the Pope that Father Parsons might be a Cardinal; affirming that to be the
only means to unite the English hearts to his Majesty's Service and Interest. A
little after, 1597, Parsons gets from Spain to Rome; where he is no sooner
arrived, but Cardinal Baronius, and another Spanish Cardinal, visit him; and it
is talked about, that Parsons is to be a Cardinal too. Of which they tell one
story: how he being advised by his Physicians to keep his stomach warm, sent
his Brother George for some Scarlet, intending to make it a Stomacher; his
Brother's head being possessed with Robert's advancement, went to the Merchants,
and had carried into the College a great deal of diverse pieces of Scarlet, for
the making of his Brothers Cardinals Robes; for so he gave out to all his
acquaintants he met. Father Parsons wondering at the reason of so much Scarlet,
but understanding the mistake, was not a little vexed and troubled, knowing what
sport would be made with it; so the better to conceal it, he dismissed the
Merchants secretly out at a Backdoor.

Many more Stories might be told of Father Parsons, some accusing Dr. James his
Jesuits downfall.
him of Forgery, Cheating, Cozenage, Corrupting of Registers and Records,
Robbing of Libraries, and many other such like Crimes, which may be found in
the Writings of the Romish Priests themselves.

Besides those Books mentioned by Pits, Ribadeneira, or Alegambae, he has writ
several others; as,

Leicester's Commonwealth, which was then by some jeeringly called Green-Coat,
because it was then commonly spread abroad in Green Covers. It was a Book full
of railing: yet the Earl was bad enough.

A Memorial for Reformation; or a Memorial or Remembrance for them that shall
live when Catholic Religion shall be restored into England. And this is its
true Title, though some do commonly call it The High Council of Reformation for
England, etc. It is a Book that Parsons Manifestation of folly, cap. 5.
says he was almost twenty years in compiling. It was never printed, Parsons
being very cautious of having of it seen; the design of it was, to find fault
with former Laws and Governments, all which he undertook to alter and mend.
Some Romanists have found fault with him, as if in it he designed to run down
all other Orders, and to advance the Jesuits. But Parsons undertakes to
vindicate himself. In short, somewhat to understand the Design, take the
Division of the Book thus:

This Book had Three Parts: 1. The whole Body of the Realm jointly, which
consists of Ten Chapters. 2. The Clergy: containing The Clergy in general.
Then Bishops, Priests, Religious men, Churches, Schools, and Universities
particularly: having Seven Chapters.
3. The Temporality, or Laity, containing Prince, with his Council. Nobility
and Gentry. Commons, all of inferior rank, as Husbandmen, Servants, etc. Inns
of Court, Law: containing Five Chapters.


He wrote it in the Lor, di Banco Bizzarrie Politiche, page 27. 28.
English Tongue, as one says; and if any where to be seen, probably in the
English College at Rome. And I suppose it is the same which Parson's Three
Conversions of Eugl. Part ^ Vol. 2. page 396.
himself once quoteth with his Latin Title -- De Reformatione Ecclesiae
Anglicanae per aliquot Capita. He Id. Part. 3. Vol. 1. page 321, 351, 369
several times mentions his Writings in Certamen Ecclesiae Anglicanae; by which
Book is meant Concertatio Ecclesiae Catholicae in Anglia: in which he concludes
the First Part: The Second Part was for the most part writ by Gibbons and Fenn,
which was gathered together and published by John Bridgman a Jesuit.

There is in Baliol Colledg-Library a thick Quarto Manuscript, called,
Controversiae nostri Temporis in Epitomen reductae.


It was given to that College by John Bailey, Doctor in Divinity, formerly
Fellow of Exeter College. There was also one John Bailey who succeeded
Christopher Bagshaw, in his Fellowship of Baliol College, 1582: but whether
related to the former Bailey, I know not.

This Dr. Bailey was eldest Son to Lewis Bailey, Lord Bishop of Bangor; the Book,
as much as I can gather by comparing, is all writ with Parons his own hand; and
the Learned Censura lib. Apocryp. Praelect. 2, Coll. 22.
Dr. John Reynolds says Parsons was the Author of it.

I have heard it also said, that he wrote a little Book De Sacra Scriptura; and
that it was in the foresaid Library; but upon search I find no such thing
there, and may suppose it a mistake, the former Manuscript at the beginning
treating of that Subject.

He scarce put his Name to any of his Books, but for the most part
insignificant and impertinent Letters; sometimes false Names, as

John Howlet, W. C. Reply fol. 73. a.
Perneus, Doleman, and such like. And thus much for Parsons, whom (as good Rob.
Abb^t Antilog. fol. 14. ^.
Authority tells us) Pope Clement VIII. called Knave; the Jesuit Fitzherbert,
looked upon as an Exact Hypocrite; the Secular Priests as the worst of
Villains; and whose Doctrine and Actions against his own Sovereign and
Country, were notoriously bad. In short,

He was born 1546 or 1547 Admitted Fellow of Baliol College 1568 Was Master of
Arts 1573 Left the College 1571/4 Studied Law and Physic in Italy 1574
Admitted Jesuit at Rome 1575 Returned into England with Campion but made haste
out again 1580 Made Rector of the English College at Rome 1587 Returned from
Spain to Rome, some say in hopes of a Cardinal's Cap 1597 Dyed at Rome, and is
honored in the Cell with a long and noble Epitaph 1610

CHAP. II.
I. The Gunpowder-Treason.

II. The Life of Father Garnet; with the story of his Straw.

THE Narrative of this Conspiracy, commonly called the Gunpowder-Treason, being
generally known, and related at large, as well by Foreigners, as Natives; I
shall be the shorter in it.

A Club of Romanists, vexed that a Toleration was not granted, resolved to
resettle their Religion by the ruin of the King and Kingdom. To this end many
Plots had been contrived against Queen Elizabeth and King James. But they
failing, a more desperate is pitched on, and this was, With one Blow to destroy
King, Queen, Princes, Bishops, Nobles, and Commons, who were not of their
Persuasion.

This is concluded feasible, by blowing up the Parliament House, where they or
their Representees meet. To this purpose Piercy hireth an House adjoining,
intending by that means to undermine it; which Mine being stuffed with Gunpowder
and other Materials, would not fail of Execution. But first, they take an Oath
of Secrecy in an House behind St. Clements Church without Temple-Barr.

The OATH.
You shall swear by the Blessed Trinity, and by the Sacrament you now purpose
to receive, Never to disclose directly or indirectly, by word or circumstance,
the matter that shall be proposed to you to keep secret, nor desist from the
Execution thereof, until the rest shall give you leave.

This done, they went into a more private Chamber, heard Mass, and received the
Sacrament from one William Gerard.

In short, To work they fall, and in some time had wrought under a little Entry
to the Wall of the Parliament House, under-propping it with Wood as they
proceeded. But at last, occasion offering it self, they hired a Convenient
Cellar just under the House, into which they conveyed Thirty six Barrels of
Powder, over which they laid a Thousand Billets, and Five hundred Fagots, with
some Stones and Iron Bars.

Things thus fitted, they expect the day of the Parliaments sitting, which from
time to time had been put off till the Fifth of November: In the mean time they
consult how to seize on the Prince (Henry) if he should not be at the House. As
for Charles Duke of York (after King Charles the Martyr) Piercy undertook to
surprise him, whom with his Brother Henry they resolve to dispatch out of the
World; yet the better to bring their Ends about, they thought good to center
their hopes in one of the Royal Blood; and this must be the Lady Elizabeth
(afterward married to the Palsgrave), whom they would bring up, and marry
according to their Interests; thinking thereby also to oblige many of the
Nobility to their Cause, upon hopes of having her to Wife, and with her the
Crown. She was now at Comb, the Lord Harrington's House in Warwich-shire; where
to secure her, they contrived a great Hunting-Match to be the Sixth of November
on Dunsmore-Heath; under which pretense many Romanists would meet well
Appointed, and surprise her by force.

As for a present supply of Moneys, Sir Everard Digby promised Fifteen hundred
pounds, Mr. Francis Tresham Two thousand pounds, and Piercy all that he could
get of the Earl of Northumberland (his Kinsman) his Rents, which was about Four
thousand pounds. They also contrived how to keep the Slander of such a Villainy
from themselves and Religion; so determined to throw the Crime upon the
Puritans (a sort of people bad enough of themselves, that we need not load them
with other men's Faults) by declaring them to be the Traitors who blew up the
Parliament.

To carry on which false report, they had framed a Proclamation, which they had
got printed, and ready for publishing upon the Sign given, which they suppressed,
and burnt upon the discovery, though some of them by chance came to view, and
were seen and read by Dr. Parker Dean of Lincoln, Sir W. Ellis Recorder of the
said City, and other persons. And the better also to get the same Credit with
the people, Keys (Brother-in-law to Mr. Pickering) had a few days before either
borrowed or bought the swift Horse (well known in London, and thereabouts) of
Mr. Pickering of Tichmarch-grove in Northamptonshire (a noted Puritan, whom
they also designed to kill), upon which Faux (having fired the Match and
Touchwood leading to the Train) was to escape, as they bore him in hand; but
their design was to kill him at his taking Horse, for Pickering's Man; which
the people would easily believe, seeing the Horse, so well known to them; and
the multitude once persuaded of this, would be more facil to join with them,
under notion of doing Justice upon such supposed Traitors and Wretches.

They also consult how to keep the Romish Lords from going that day to
Parliament, the better to strengthen their Cause by their preservation. But in
the height of all their hopes and expectations, a discovery is made thus:

Some of them (supposed by Monteagle to be Piercy, but Bishop Ans. to Sir Ant.
Weldons Court of K. James, page 73 M. S.
Goodman says it was Tresham who wrote the Letter) having a great affection to
the said Lord Monteagle (Son and Heir to the Lord Morley) had a mind to
preserve him also from the intended slaughter. So one Evening a Letter sealed
is delivered in the Street (the Strand) by an unknown Fellow, to one of the
Lord's Footmen, charging him to deliver it with care to his Lord. Monteagle
opens it, finds it without Date or Subscription, writ with a very bad hand, and
in a style he knew not what to make of, thus:

My Lord,
OVT of the love I bear to some of your Friends, I have a care of your
Preservation; therefore I would advise you, as you tender your life, to devise
some excuse to shift off your attendance this Parliament. For God and man have
concurred to punish the wickedness of this time.

And think not slightly of this Advertisement, but retire your self into your
Country, where you may expect the Event in safety: For though there be no
appearance of any stir, yet, I say, they shall receive a Terrible blow this
Parliament, and yet they shall not see who hurts them.

This Counsel is not to be contemned, because it may do you good, and can do
you no harm; for the Danger is past, as soon as you have burned this Letter;
and I hope God will give you the Grace to make good use of it: To whose holy
Protection I commend you.


Monteagle wondered at the Letter and its delivery; and thinking it might relate
to some mischief, thought it his duty to make it known: so away he goes to
White Hall, shows it to the Earl of Salisbury, then Secretary of State, who
tells some other of the Privy Council of it; and the King being returned from
his Hunting at Royston, they deliver it to Him.

His Majesty, having seriously considered it, and all other circumstances;
concluded, that it might relate to some Design to blow up the Parliament; and
in this jealousy ordered the Rooms and Vaults about the House to be searched;
which was done the night before the Sessions; when in the foresaid Cellar under
the Lords-House, were found the Barrels of Powder, and at the door standing
Guido Faux booted and spurred, with a large Dark-Lanthorn (now to be seen in
Oxford Library) with Matches, Tinder-Box, and other Materials for his Design.

Faux was presently carried to Court and examined, where he appeared sturdy and
scornful, maintaining the Design to be lawful, That James was not his King,
because an Heretic; was sorry that the Plot failed, and that he had not blown
up the House, with himself, and those who were sent to search; affirming, That
God would have had the Plot concealed, but it was the Devil who revealed it. At
last, Faux himself confessed all that he knew of the Treason. Thus far
discovered, the King suspecting some Commotions or Risings, sent with all speed
to prevent them by timely notice by Lepton and others. This was that Mr. John
Lepton of Yorkshire, who rid so often betwixt London and York in one Week,
viz. in May 1606; who though he won his Wager, yet was a Loser, never getting
his winnings.

Piercy, Wright. etc. who now lurked about London to expect the fatal Blow,
informed of the discovery, take Horse, making what haste they can to their
Companions, appointed to be at the Rendezvous on Dunsmore. In brief, according
to their abilities they run into open Rebellion, but to their own Destruction.
The High-Sheriffs, with other Magistrates and Loyal Subjects, so hunting them,
that they were either all dispersed, slain, or taken, and the chief of them
afterward condemned and executed.

Mr. Osborn (whose Observations and Principles are not always approvable)
Memoires of K. James, page 38.
tells us, that his Catholic Majesty sent an Agent on purpose to congratulate
King James his great preservation: A flattery so palpable, as the Pope could
not refrain laughing in the face of Cardinal D'Ossat, when he first told it
him. Thus he.

This Agent was Don Juan de Mendoza, who brought very rich Presents with him.
Whether it was Flattery, or Hypocrisy, or no, is no great matter; it being the
custom of Princes, though Enemies, to use such Ceremonies. And I can tell him
farther, That a little after the Plot, a sudden report being spread that King
James was killed; and Sir Lewis Lewkenor, then Master of the Ceremonies, being
sent by the Council to certify the Foreign Minister, of the King's safety and
health, Don Pedro de Cunigo, the Spanish Ambassador at London, seemed almost
mad for joy; and for the good News, presented Sir Lewis with a great Gold Chain.

The Legendiaries will tell us of several men speaking after their heads were
cut off; and Turrianus the Jesuit will make Clemens, several years after he
knew that St James was dead, yet to write an Epistle of Instructions to the
said St. James: And Osborn here does much follow the same wonders, by telling
us that this story is testified by Cardinal D' Ossat, whereas that Cardinal was
dead above a year before the Powder Plot happened. Another mistake he has,
saying, That the Pope laughed at the Flattery; whereas Cardinal Les Ambassades
and Negotiations, par Caesar Ligny, l. 3. p. 450
Perron (who was the man that told the Pope of the Spanish Ambassy for England)
says, his Holiness was displeased at the Hypocrisy.

But to return: What was the extent of this Treason, and how many were
assistants to it, is difficult to discover. Certain it is, that some of the
Nobility were suspected, imprisoned, or fined, or called in question for not
coming up at that time to Parliament.

About this time they sent over Sir Edmond Baynham to Pope Pius V. And Father
Parsons Rector of the English College there, orders the Students to pray -- For
the Intention of their Father Rector; which made some of them wonder what could
be the meaning of such an unusual Prayer, not knowing what his Intention was.
But being afterward informed of the discovery of the Plot, Sixteen of them
(abhorring such juggling and bloody Designs) forsook the College, slipped into
France, some of them turning to the Church of England, whither they came.

Guido Faux himself had been also with the Pope, and consulted with the
aforesaid Parsons; and it is affirmed by the voluntary Confession of Vid. Bp.
Audrows Respons. ad Apol. Bellarmini, c. 5. page 113.
a Jesuit, That at this time there were three Bulls procured from the Pope, and
ready upon this occasion; and should have been published, had the Powder done
the intended Execution; but that failing, they were suppressed.

In the Netherlands, Hugh Owen (an English Traitor) was made acquainted with
it, highly commending the Contrivance; and so did William Baldwin, the Legier
Jesuit in Flanders, who some years afterward was apprehended at Basil, in
Switzerland, as he was in disguise stealing into Italy. He was sent into
England, where he laid some years in the Tower, and at last was delivered at
the desire of Gondemar the Spanish Ambassador, whose Cunning did sometimes
out-master the Court-Policy. As for Baldwin, he dyed at Omers in September,
1632.

About this time in Spain, lived as Legier for their Cause, Arthur Creswell;
who after his turning Jesuit, called himself Joseph Creswell, the only man, as
Sir Edward Coke said, he ever heard of to change his Christian Name: he was
informed of the Powder Plot, and liked it so well, that he came into Tho.
Sponcer's Hist. of the Gunpowder Treason, p. 72, 73.
England at this time to act (as it is said) his part in this glorious Action;
but he was so wise as to haste back again for his own safety; and dyed
afterward in grief and discontent, at Gant, 1623; having for many years
endeavored the disturbance of the Kingdom.

As for Portugal, Thomas Robinson (who belonged to the English Covent at
Lisbon) affords us this Observation. -- Henry Flood, a Jesuit, Anatomy of the
Eng. Nun. at Lisb. p. 3. Margin.
who afterward lurked in England as chief Agent for the transporting of Nunns
to Bruxels, Graveling, Lisbon, or any other place -- This Flood caused the
Jesuits at Lisbon to spend a great deal of Money on Powder on a Festival-day, a
little before the Powder Treason in England should have been effected, thereby
to make experience of the force thereof; and also persuaded one John Haw (a
Merchant, whom he had perverted) and diverse other Catholics, to go over into
England, and to expect their Redemption there (as he calls it) a while.

How long this Conspiracy had been on the Anvil, is hard to say. Mr. Cambden
lays the foundation of it on the Popes Breves (1600) that were sent over to
exclude King James, or any other that should not maintain the Roman Religion.
And Catesby himself laid the greatest force and confirmation upon them. For
when in conference Father Garnet seemed to desire that the Pope's consent might
be obtained; Catesby answered, That he took that as granted by the Pope in his
Bulls or Breves before: for (said he) if it were not lawful to receive or
repel him, the said Bulls or Breves do import; then is it lawful also to expel
or cast him out.

And it appears by the Confessions of Faux and Thomas Winter, that in the first
year of King James, 1603, the Plot was more fully agreed on, and the blowing up
of the Parliament House by Powder, concluded; from which time, till its
discovery, they continually had their Agitators and Councils to promote the
Cause, and carry on the Work, with all vigor and secrecy.

What number of them were engaged in it in England, I know not; nor did there
appear above an hundred in a Body: but that others had some hints or notice of
it, is more than probable. And it was observed, that that very morning (viz.
November V.) the Romanists at Rowington went to Warwick and rang the Bells. And
the same Night Grant, with some others, went to the Stable of Warwick-Castle,
took away the Horses thence, rid two miles off to Norbrook (Grant's House)
where Rockwood's Wife, Morgan's Wife, with some others of the same stamp met,
to rejoice with them for the downfall of Heresy; encouraging their Husbands to
go on, increase their Forces, and fight it out to the last.

Nor need we suppose, that their Priests and Jesuits in England were idle in
this grand Affair, which had been so long in hammering amongst them. We meet
with Hammond the Jesuit very active, not only encouraging them to Cruelty, but
also after it was discovered to confess and absolve at one time about Twenty of
the Rebels at Robert Winter's Honse.

Greenwell (alias Tesmond) another Jesuit, was so zealous in this holy Cause,
that when he knew the Plot was known, he called Father Hall a Phlegmatic
Fellow, because he thought him not active enough to advance the Rebellion; and
in this fury hurried himself down into Lancashire, to see what troubles he
would raise there, by falsely declaing as he went along, That there was a design
to cut all the throats of the Romanists.

Yet was the said Father Hall (alias Oldcorne) a Jesuit eager enough for the
Plot, encouraging Mr. Littleton with the justness of the Design, however the
Event was: Instancing, how the Turks sometimes beat the Christians; and that
the Eleven Tribes of Israel were twice overcome, though God himself had
commanded them to go and fight against Benjamin. Rich. Carpenter's Sermon,
November. 5. 1662, page 11
What need we trouble our selves with Father Thomson the Jesuit, who used to
vapor to his Scholars at Rome, how often his shirt had been wet with digging
under the Parliament House; and other such like stories, which might be endless?

However, there are some Romanists would gladly have the world believe all this
to be but a mere cheat, only to be a Trick of Salisbury the then Secretary; and
for proof, I have had the patience and pleasure to hear a story very gravely
told, How one lurking under the Council Table, (and upon what jealousy came he
there?) concealed by the long Carpet, heard much of the Contrivance. A Tale so
ridiculous, that to endeavor its confutation, would argue one more impertinent
than the Tale-teller.

But, though this story might be false, yet will they have Cecyl to be the
Plotter, and to draw these Romanists into it; as if (supposing this were true)
they were not guilty, and Traitors. Can you deny but that they themselves
thought the Plot lawful and just? That accordingly they really intended it? And
would have done it, if not prevented? If Cecyl occasioned it, he must use some
Means and Instruments; and who and what they were, is a wonder that they were
not discovered and known before now: Those who were Executed, accused no body;
and as the Poet says well,

-- He that hangs, or beats out's Brains, Hudibras, part 2. Cant. 1.

The Devil's in him if he feigns.
If this were a Cheat, and known so to be, would not Father Parsons and others
have vapoured with it all the World over? Would they have been silent in the
matter? Or would they have concealed any thing that would have vindicated
themselves, and exposed and shamed the Church of England? Were they such
Friends to us, and such Enemies to their own Credit, Cause, and Reputation?

But on the contrary, Why does Judgment of a Cath. concerning the Oath of
Alleg. Parag. 1.: 10.
Parsons, as if ashamed at it, seem troubled at the very naming of it, as it
were, desiring to hear no more of it? Why does Will. Warmington, an honest
Priest, confess, That A Moderate Defense, p. 7.
none therein were culpable, but only Jesuits and Catholics.

If the Plot was laid and known before, Why does Spondanus say, That the King's
Preservation was An. 1605,. 8. Divinitus evasit.
miraculous? And why does a great Jesuit now confess, That the discovery of the
Plot was very Patefactis mirabeliter eorum Consiliis. Bried. An. 1605.
wonderful.

But lastly, Why do several of them justify the Powder Plot? b Co quaeus is so
favorable to the Plotters, that he allows them a good place in Heaven; and
yet we must not question but that King James is tormented in Hell? Has there
not been publicly printed Apologies for the Fact, and those who suffered in
it, declared Examen. Praefat. p. 43.
Martyrs? Did d Is. Casaubon Epist. 619.
not Id. Epist. 624. Front. Ducao.
John Grant, one of the Traitors, declare at his Execution, That he thought the
Fact was so far from being sinful, that he rather judged it to be meritorious,
and enough to blot out or satisfy for all his former offenses?

But enough of this; only by the by we are told, That the Heads of Catesby and
Piercy were set over the House of Lords, but were afterward Osborn's Mem. of K.
James, p. 31.
(as it is said) removed, and others set in their places. And a Learned and
Honest Pen tells us thus -- Peter du Moulin, Vindication of the sincerity of
the Protestant Relig. page 64.
I cannot leave unobserved, That in the height of the late Tyranny, two Heads
of the Gunpowder-Traytors that were set up upon the House of Lords, were taken
down, not by the high Winds, but by the same Zeal which plotted that Treason,
and with the leave of Traitors of another Feather. We may hear in time, that
those holy Relics are shrined up in Gold, and are working Miracles. To this
may be added, That the Their Protestants Plea and Petition for Priests and
Papists, p. 58.
Romanists confess themselves, that Catesby, Tresham, T. Winter, the two
Wrights, and Grant, were in Essex his Rebellion. That Piercy gave the Pistol to
his Master the old Earl of Northumberland in the Tower; as also, that when they
drew up a Petition to the Parliament for Favor, or a Toleration, Who should be
the Id. page 70.
Presenters of it, but Sir Francis Hastings, and Sir Richard Knightly, two
noted Puritans? Whereby it seems, that these two Enemies can join together
against the Church of England. But now it is not amiss to say something
concerning Father Garnet, who made the greatest noise in this Plot.

SECT. II. The Life of Father Garnet; with the story of his Straw.
HENRY GARNET was born in Nottinghamshire, 1555, of Gentile Parents; was sent
to Winchester School, where he was under the Tuition of the Learned Thomas
Bilson, then Schoolmaster there, and afterward Bishop of Winchester.

In his Youth he was as bad as his Neighbors, yet not behind in Learning; was
one of the chief Praepositors of the School; in which place he began to be a
young Conspirator, having framed a cruel Plot to fall upon the Schoolmaster,
and cut off his right hand. To which might be added his filthy Sodomy, with
which he basely abused five or Vid. Rob. Abbot (Bishop of Salisbury) Antilog.
in Epist. ad Lectorem.
six of the handsomest Scholars. And perceiving that these his Crimes would
hinder his promotion to New-Colledg in Oxford (from which School that Noble
Foundation is supplied) he went to London, and obtained to be Corrector of the
Common Law Press, under Mr. Tottle the Printer.

Here he staid not long, going to Rome, where he turned Jesuit 1575. In this
having employed himself some years, he returned to England 1586, where he was
very active against his Queen and Country, as in the Spanish Invasion, and
other such like Conspiracies; and the better to secure himself, altered his
Name as opportunity served, sometimes lurking under these several Names:
Wall^y. Darcy. Roberts. Farmer. Philips.


Very zealous he was in hindering the coming of King James to the Ehglish Crown;
and his Example was a great encouragement to the Romanists, he being the
Provincial or Head of the Jesuits in England. The better to prevent King James
his Succession, he had two Bulls or Breves lying by him from the Pope, to
publish as occasion served. And for a farther assistance, he sent Thomas Winter
into Spain, 1601; with whom went also Greenwell, alias Tesmond the Jesuit.
These, according to their Instructions, resort to Father Creswell, the Legier
Jesuit there, who conducted them to Don Pedro Francese, Secretary of State; and
also to the Duke of Lerma, the chief Favorite; where they desire, that a
Spanish Army might presently be sent into England, and they should not want aid
from the Romanists in that Island. The Request is consented to, the King
promising to employ in it 100000 Crowns; wishing them in the mean time to give
him notice of the Queen's death whenit should happen.

Whilst these Designs are carrying on, Queen Elizabeth dyed, and King James
succeeded in the Throne, who granted a general and full pardon for all former
Treasons, to all who would take them out under the Great Seal; and amongst the
rest Garnet also took out one under the Name of

Henry Garnet of London, Gentleman. He, Catesby, and Tresham, had a little
before employed Christopher Wright into Spain, to give advertisement of the
Queen's death, and to continue their former Negotiation with Winter. But now
perceiving the Spanish King cold in the business [he well considering the
peaceable entrance of King James, how firmly he was settled in the Throne, how
often he had undertaken against England, but without success; and now how his
Treasures were much exhausted] Catesby therefore thinks nothing like some lusty
Plot at home; and at last this Gunpowder-Treason is concluded on, which if it
took effect, might raise such Troubles and Garboils in England, that amongst
the several Interests, the Romanists, (who would stick together) might play
their own Games well, and by assistance from beyond Seas, secure their Cause,
if not command the Crown.

In this, one scruple seemed to stick by Catesby; for considering that at this
general blowing up, some Romanists could not be kept from that slaughter; it
being impossible to keep all they wished well to, from going to the
Parliament House, without probability of a discovery. Upon this doubt, Catesby
repaireth to Garnet, propounds unto him the case, asking, Whether for the good
and promotion of the Catholic Cause against Heretics (the necessity of time,
and occasion so requiring it) it be lawful or no amongst many Nocents to
destroy and take away some Innocents also?

To this Garnet answers affirmatively; declaring, That if the advantage were
greater to the Catholic part, by taking away some Innocents together with many
Nocents, then doubtless it should be lawful to kill and destroy them all; as we
must not forbear the storming of a Town, though some Friends be in it, who with
the Enemy might be slain.

Now they are os opinion, That the Design is so secret, that there is no
probability of its discovery; yet Garnet seemed to wish, that the Pope's
Consent were had; but Catesby is of opinion, that the will of the Pope is
sufficiently manifest by his former Bulls positively against King James his
Government or Rule.

In May 1605, fell out certain Broils in Wales by the Romanists.

In June does Greenwell the Jesuit consult at large with Garnet about the
Treason; but this, as he pleaded, was under the disguise of Confession. Now
also was held a great Consultation or Conference between Garnet, Catesby, and
Tresham, concerning the strength of the Romanists in England, that they might
inform the Pope of it.

In August, Garnet sent Sir Edmund Baynam to the Pope (whom he Abbot Antilog.
fol. 176. b
acquainted with the Powder Plot) under the vizard of desiring his Holiness to
command all English Romanists (as they say) to cease from any farther
Commotions (as they Cambden Eliz. An. 1586.
gave out in Babington's Treason), knowing that such little troubles or
endeavors would but hinder their Design, now wholly trusting to the
Powder-Blow, which would be past before Baynham could end his business at Rome,
and return the Pope's Answer; and if discovered, this might bespeak Garnet of a
a peaceable humor.

In September, Pilgrimages and Devotions are appointed to be at Saint
Winifrides Well in Flintshire in Wales; under which pretense their Prayers,
Meetings, and Consultations, might advance the Cause.

In October does Garnet meet the rest of the Plotters in Warwickshire at
Coughton, bordering upon Worcestershire; to which place they resorted from all
Counties.

In November the first, Garnet prayed openly for good success; and, amongst
other Expressions, used this part of an Hymn:

Gentem auferte perfidam
Credentium de finibus;
Vt Christo lauds debitas
Persolvamus alacriter.
From us, this Faithless people, Lord, destroy;
That we due praise may give to Thee with joy.
Speed L. 10.. 55.
, and from him Page 13.
Spencer, tell us, That these Verses were made by Garnet; but by a great
mistake; for they are part of an old Hymn formerly used sometimes in the Church
on All Saints day; but then especially aiming at the Jud. Clichton,
Elucidatorium, Eccles. l. 1. fol. 72, 73.
Turks and Saracens; but here we need not question, strongly designed against
the Church of England; which it may be was the occasion that Garnet did
afterward upon more serious thoughts fear, that this Hymn would be objected
against him. But of this I make no great matter, seeing he prayed but according
to his Church, and may carry a good, as well as a bad sense; yet besides this,
he exhorted them to, and prayed for a good success.

Others of them were taught thus to pray for the downfall of Heresy, and the
prosperity of their Designs, alluding to the working in the Mine, and the
blowing up of the House: Prosper, Lord, their pains that labor in thy Cause
day and night; Let Heresy vanish like smoke: Let the memory of it perish with
a Crack, like the ruin and fall of a broken House.



On the sixth of November, early in the morning, Catesby and his Confederates
being met together, and perceiving all discovered, resolved to make the best of
a bad Market, sent a Letter to Garnet, (then ready at Coulton near unto them)
earnestly entreating his help and assistance for the rising of Wales, and the
persuading as many as he could into Arms. Greenwell the Jesuit was with him;
and so valiant for the Cause, that he posted down into Lancashire, to stir up
as many as he could. But Garnet seeing all discovered, his heart now failed
him, and so consults his own security.

But a little after, Garnet, and Oldcorn the Jesuit, were apprehended in Mr.
Abington's House at Henlip in Worcestershire, being immured and closed up in a
stack of Chimneys: the way or passage into the Cave or Vault where they lay,
was an upper Room, by taking up the half-pace before the Hearth, whose wooden
border was made like a Trap-door, to pluck up and down, and then the Bricks
were laid in their Courses and Order again.

Garnet was 28. Mar^ch, 1606.
Tried, Condemned at Guild Hall in London, and executed 3. of May^
at the west end of St. Paul's Churchyard; where he appeared in a Troubled and
an Amazed Condition, still prying and peeping about for a Pardon; though Henry
Mountague, Recorder of the City, pitying his perplexedness, assured him there
would be none granted. And thus dyed Henry Garnet, Provincial of the Jesuits;
for whose Life Gualt. Chro nicorum. Vol. 4. page 1190.
one tells us, that the Spanish Ambassador offered Thirty thousand Florences.

The Jesuits have taken a great deal of pains and confidence in behalf of this
their Brother Garnet, whom they will have to dye a Saint and Martyr, what ever
come of it; for they will not allow of one bad man to have been of their Order:
I think Alegambe commends all his Bead-Roll (but Interest has made it a duty
for such Catalogue-Makers to flatter and applaud the most wicked); but be as
bad as they will, they tell us, that it is impossible for a -- Jungantur in
unum, dies cum nocte, tenebrae cum Luce, calidum cum frigido, sanitas cum
morbo, vita cum morte and erit tum spes aliqua, posse in caput Jesuitae
Haeresin cadere. Vid. Epist. Is. Casaubon, viz. Epist. 624. ad Front. Duc.
Jesuit to be an Heretic.

Amongst the rest of the Learned Penmen who undertook to testify to the world
the Treasons of Garnet and his Accomplices, was the famed Frenchman, Isaac
Casaubon, more especially in an Epist. 624.
Epistle, or rather Book, to Fronton Le Duc, a Jesuit, and his old Friend; for
the better accomplishing his Design, he had delivered to him all the Epist. 620.
Original Writing, Trials, and Letters of Garnet. This action of Casaubon so
netled that Order, that they drew their whole force of Invention and Malice
against him; endeavoring by their lies and slanders not only to render him
odious to the whole world, but his Father and whole Family (we may except his
Son John, because he turned a Capuchin): nay, so zealously indiscreet were some
against him, that they Epist. 64^, 679.
declared him to be no Scholar, a Fellow of no Judgment; that he could not
write Latin, or scarce understand it; which was enough to testify the truth of
all the rest: yet with such Indignities Isaac would sometimes be forced to a
passion.

Those who have undertaken the justification of this Garnet, have thought to
arm themselves, and secure him with the power and virtue of these following
Arguments:

1. His Denials. 2. The Honesty of Aequivocation. 3. The Bond of Auricular
Confession. 4. His Sanctity, or Saintship, which is confirmed by 5. His Miracle
of the Straw.
As for his Denials, they are so far from quitting him from the crime, that
they rather render him the greater Malefactor, if professed Lies and Perjury can
advance a man's guilt. It Is true, he was bold to a wonder, in protesting and
calling Heaven and Earth to witness his Innocence; but at last when he saw such
exact Proof and Testimony against him, he confessed his Dissimulation; pleading,
That he thought they could not have produced such clear proofs against him.

The Jesuits being not a little offended that he should any way confess himself
guilty, which with some might be a blot both to himself, and their Order;
Garnet, to vindicate himself to them, and to show the folly of denying any
longer, thus writes to them -- -- What should I do? First, all the rest of the
Confederates have accused me. Secondly, Catesby always made use of my Authority
amongst them, whereby most of them were persuaded to have a good opinion of the
Interprise; so that all knew I was in it. Thirdly, Two (set on purpose) heard
me discourse the whole business with Oldcorn and to tell him how I thought to
answer to all Objections. Fourthly, My Letters writ with the Juice of Oranges
to Anne Vaux.
Mrs. Ann, are (I know not how) fallen into their hands, whereby I plainly enough
discovered my knowledge of it.

For all his strong denials at first, this is enough to prove him guilty: Tort.
Torti, page 286.
And besides, if he were not so, Why did he himself confess -- That he had
often vowed, both by words and writing, to the Lay-Conspirators, That he would
never discover or betray any of them? To this might be added, how he did
acknowledge his offense, wishing it were in his power to undo that which was
done; and that if the whole world were his, he would willingly give it to quit
himself from the guilt of Treason, which now troubled his Conscience. He also
writ to his Favorite, Mrs. Vaux, his sorrow that he could not dye for
Religion, but for Treason. And many more Instances might be collected out of
his Trial; but this is enough to satisfy an honest man.

Yet he was very willing and earnest to vindicate and clear himself from this
Treason; in which he made a great deal of work with the Trick of Equivocation,
of which he was a cunning and exquisite Master, and as confident as ever man
was: for this, one instance or two may serve.

Being asked, Whether he had any discourse with the Jesuit Oldcorn since his
Imprisonment? Garnet swearing upon his Salvation, with Epist. Is. Casaub. ad
Front Duc.
many other horrid Imprecations, denied again and again that he had any
discourse. Which being presently proved against him, he confessed it, begged
pardon, affirming that his former Denial was by virtue of Equivocation.

Another time being asked, Whether he did well to swear upon the Holy
Evangelist, That he had neither writ or sent to the Jesuit Tesmond, which he
knew to be false? He replied, That he swear so lawfully enough, because then he
did not think that his Letters were intercepted, and so they could not have
disproved him.

A little before the Queen's death, when they were busy in their Plots to keep
out King James; in vindication of this Juggling Faculty, there was composed a
little Book entitled,

A TREATISE of EQVIVOCATION.

But this Title it seems not pleasing Father Garnet, he with his own MS. in
Bibl. Bodl. Oxon.
hand had dashed it out, and bestowed upon it this Name, writ also with his own
hand:

A Treatise against Lying, and Fraudulent Dissimulation.

Yet for all this goodly and specious show of honesty, it allows all manner
of Dissimulation, and to swear positive untruths, by their Law of Directing the
Intention. As for example; In time of Plague a man comes to Coventry; at the
Gates, by the Officers is examined upon his Cap. 8. page 43, 44. ^.
Oath, Whether he came from London, or no? The Traveller, though he did
directly come from London, yet may swear positively, That he did not come from
London. His reason is, Because he knows himself not infected to endanger
Coventry by his entrance, which he supposed answered to the final intent of the
Demand; although their immediate Intention were to know from him upon his Oath,
only whether he came from London or no. And this man (says the Book) the very
Light of Nature would clear from Perjury. And he tells us of one Page 39.
Mr. Southwell who taught a young Gentlewoman, that if she were examined, If
the said Southwell were at her Father's House? She might swear, No; with this
intention to her self, That he was not there, so that she was bound to tell
them. At the end of this Book I find Blackwell their Archpriest of England,
thus commend and allow it under his own hand:

Tractatus iste valde Doctus and vere Pius and Catholicus est. Certe Sa
Scripturarum, Patrum, Doctorum, Scholasticorum, Canonistarum, and Optimarum
Rationum praesidiis plenissime firmat aequitatem Equivocationis. Ideoque
dignissimus est qui typis propagetur ad Consolationem afflictorum Catholicorum,
and omnium piorum Instructionem.

Ita Censeo GEORGIUS BLACKWELLVS Archipresbyter Angliae, and Protonotarius
Apostolicus.

By this it seems it was intended for the Press; but, it may be, prevented by
its seizure; which was thus, as appears by the Testimony of Sir Edward Coke,
under his own hand.

This Book, containing Sixty one Pages, I found in a Chamber in the
Inner Temple, wherein Sir Thomas Tresham used to lie, and which he obtained for
his two younger Sons.

This 5th of December 1605. EDW. COKE.

I have been the more punctual in transcribing these Testimonies from the
Original Manuscript, because it has been said that there was never any such
Book. The Author of it is supposed to be Mr. Francis Tresham of
Northamptonshire, one very active in this Powder Treason; but he November. 20.
died of the Stranguary in the Tower of London, before his Trial; yet his Head
cut off, was set with the rest on London-Bridg. This Tresham also composed
another Book (not yet printed) which was also seized on; it was called, De
Officio Principis Christiani.


In which he maintains the lawfulness of Si Princeps Haereticus sit, and
obstinate ac pertinaciter intolerabilis, summi Pastoris divina potestate
deponatur and aliud caput constituatur, cui subditi se jungant, and legitimo
Ordine and Authoritate Tyrannidem amoveant. Princeps indulgendo Haereticis non
solum Deum offendit, sed perdit and Regnum and gentem. De Officio Principis,
Cap. 5.
deposing Kings, an obstinate Heretic having no right to Dominion.

As for this knack of Equivocation, and how boldly they will allow themselves
to swear positive Untruths and Falsehoods, I shall refer you to Dr. Antilog.
fol. 12.
Abbot, afterward Bishop of Salisbury.

But the Jesuits, in Garnet's Vindication, go a little farther, and will grant
that he knew of the Treason; yet it being only told him in Confession, he could
not with a safe Conscience discover it.

As for the Antiquity and Convenience of Confession, I am no way concerned in
at this time. And though I have a reverend esteem both for it and its secrecy;
yet I may think it had been more prudence for some rather to have spared than
divulged some of their lofty and towering Expressions, which might occasion as
much ill as good; as those who are so positive to affirm, That it is not to be
Vid. Rob. Abbot, Antilog, cap. 3. Is. Casaub. Epist. ad Front. Ducaum, Barth.
Fum. summa aurea, v. Confessor. 9. 5. Tho. Lans, Consult. Germ. p. 375.
discovered or revealed, though it were for the preservation of the whole
Kingdom or Country; though it were concerning the killing of the King. Nay,
that it were better to have all the Kings murdered, than the Confession
revealed; which should not be done, though it were to preserve Jesus Christ
himself.

Delrio the Jesuit has a passage so pat to the business, that I could almost
be persuaded that he was acquainted with the Treason, and so make the Plot a
year or two older than some will grant; for he has put the Case and Story so
exactly, as if he published it before to give them the greater encouragement
under the virtue and protection of Confession. For, says he, Suppose one in
Confession to a Priest, should declare, Disquisit. Magic. Tom. 3. l. 6. c. 1..
3. p. 131.
That he or some other had so laid Gunpowder under such a place, that (if not
prevented) the House would be blown up, the King destroyed, and the rest in
like danger; yet, says Delrio, the Priest is not obliged to discover this.

Garnet himself declared, That if one confessed to him, That the next His Trial.
day he intended to stab the King, yet he should conceal it: And upon this
ground it is, that Mat. Tort. page 65.
Bellarmine complains that Garnet was executed because he would not reveal
that, which with a safe Conscience he could not do; which he says a little Id.
page 94.
after, is never to be revealed upon what account soever.

And Emanuel Sa has a Trick to clear the Priest, if the Magistrates or any
other should press him hard to reveal what he knew, and that is this: The
Potest Confessor jurare se nihil scire, imo nihil se audisle tale in
Confessione, subintelligendo sie, Ut dicere teneatur: eodem modo potest
Poenitens jurare, se nihil aut nihil tale dixisse in Confessione Em. Sa.
Aphorism. V. Confessor. 23.
Confessor (says he) may swear that he knew nothing of it, nor heard any such
thing in the Confession -- Understanding, That he did not so hear it, as to
tell it -- And upon the same mental Reservation may the Penitent also swear,
That he mentioned no such thing in his Confession.

As for Garnet, what has formerly been said, does sufficiently testify, That
he knew of it, not by Auricular Confession, but that he was also a stirring and
active Agent in it; and Garnet did afterward declare, That he was sorry that
he did not Abbot. An^^log. fol. 110, 106.
reveal it.

But if we should grant (though an untruth), that Garnet knew nothing of it,
but what was discovered to him by way of Confession; yet will he not preserve
his Credit, nor save himself from being a Traitor. Their Decret. Greg ^e
Poenit. and Remis. ^. Om^^, ut^^^^^
Canon Law says, that if any reveal a Confession, he shall be degraded from
his Priesthood, and to live all his life after close up in a Monastery. Now
whether is better, for one man to undergo this punishment, or a Kingdom to be
ruined, and the King, Princes, Bishops, Nobles, and Commons, to be destroyed?

But again, the Romanists themselves declare, That sometimes a Confession may
be Vid. Rob. Abbot, Antilog. fol. 186, 187.
revealed. And their great Cardinal Republique 6
Perron, though he will not have the Confessor to name the Party or Penitent,
yet upon such eminent dangers he would have him, by some means or other, to
give notice of the intended Villainy, thereby to prevent the mischief; and if
Garnet had done this, he might have showed himself a good Subject, which is a
great part of a good Christian.

And lastly, That Confessions have been revealed upon such great dangers,
History will afford us some Examples: Lib. 43.
Thuanus tells us, That Charles, Son to Philip II. King of Spain, confessing to
a Priest, that he had a mind to kill a certain man; the Priest revealed it to
the King; and Philip supposing himself to be the man, secured his Son. The
Sieur de Haulte Ville, in his Hist. de la paix enter les Roys de France and D'
Espagne, page 307.
Confession told a Priest, That he once intended to kill King Henry II. of
France. Which the Priest discovering, Hault-Ville was beheaded. Pierre Barriere
confessed to Seraphino Banchi, his intent to kill Henry IV. of France, which the
Dominican discovered, whereby the Fellow was taken and executed. A Gentleman of
Normandy in Jean Bodin de la Republique, l. 2. c. 5. p. 387.
Confession told a Franciscan, That he formerly had a design to kill Francois
I. of France, for which he was now sorry; yet did the Confessor divulge this,
and the Norman was executed. And one Radulphus having designed to murder Pope
Innocent IV. he in Mat. Paris, An. 1247. p. 724.
Confession told it to a Priest, who informed the Pope of it; and we need not
doubt but that the Pope liked it well enough. Nor do we hear that any of these
Priests were punished or checked for their Revealings; and -- Papae
fiducialiter intimavit.
Matthew Paris does rather commend the latter, intimating as if he were bound
to do it, or did the part of an honest man in discovering it.

But we need trouble our selves no more about this matter, seeing it is
impossible that all the cunning or wit of the whole Order of the Jesuits, can
quit Father Garnet from having been a Traitor against his Sovereign or Country.

Having of old been a great stickler to procure Troubles in this Kingdom.

Having been very active in the Invasion of Eighty-Eight.

Receiving Bulls from Rome (to dispose of the Crown) against the Laws of the
Land.

Very earnest to hinder King James (right Heir to the Crown) to obtain it.

One of the Grand Agitators in this Powder Treason, to destroy the King and
Kingdom, he himself at last confessing it.

That Catesby had told him of the Plot, not by way of Confession.

That Greenwell had told him of this, not as a Fault (for how could they do so,
that approved of it as Meritorious?) but as a thing which he had Intelligence
of, and told it him by way of Consultation.

That Catesby and Greenwell came together to him to be resolved.

That Tesmond and he had Conference of the particulars of the Powder Treason in
Essex.

That Greenwell asked him, Who should be Protector? Garnet said, That was to be
referred till the Blow was past.

That he confessed, That he ought to have revealed it to the King.

That nothing deterred him from the discovery, so much, as his unwillingness to
betray Catesby.

That he had greatly sinned against God, the King, and the Kingdom, in not
revealing it; of whom he heartily begged pardon and forgiveness.

And that the Sentence of Judgment and Death was justly past on him.

Yet will they tell great things of his Holiness and Saintship, which may
sufficiently be confuted without any great trouble, if we do but consider the
Bloodiness and Sodomy of his youth, the Seditions and Treasons of his
after-years, with his proneness to Perjury and Lying, all which are no signs of
Holiness. To which might be added, his noted familiarity (even in his later
days) with Mrs. Ann Vaux, who seldom Vid Bishop Abbot's Antilog. cap. 9. fol.
135.
parted from his side, which occasioned some (who knew not that he was in
Orders) to think that he was married to her. Certain it is, that sometimes she
went under the Name of Anne Garnet; and in her Letters writ to him, even when
in Prison for this last Treason, she still subscribed her self, -- Yours, and
not mine own, A. G.


And we have it from good Authority, that Robert Winter of Hoodington in
Warwickshire (one of the Traitors) did freely and openly testify, That the
said Garnet did lie with her in Mr. Abington's House at Henlip in
Worcestershire.

And yet, rather than fail in his Sanctity, they can invent a pretty Miracle to
witness it: As, how one John Wilkinson earnestly desiring to be a Spectator of
Garnet's Martyrdom, not doubting but that God would show some Miracle or other
to demonstrate he Father's Innocence: Accordingly he went to the place of
Execution (Saint Paul's Churchyard) settled himself as conveniently as he
could, staid till all was done, got nothing but an ear of Corn (tainted with a
little of Garnet's blood) belonging to the Straw of the Hurdle or Scaffold:
This he carries with him as an holy Relic; and after some time Garnet's Face
miraculously appears as painted on it, a Crown on his Head, and a Starr and a
Cross on the Forehead, with a Cherubim hanging over his Chin, and Beams about
all.

In short, the truth of the story was thus: Wilkinson a zealous Romanist, and
affected to the Jesuits, might get a piece of a Straw tainted with Garnet's
Blood; a Straw, or Ear of Corn, with some Blood on it, he carries to the Wife
of Hugh Griffith, a Traitor, and Romanist by Profession. This she puts into a
Crystal Case, and we need not doubt but that it was looked upon with a great
deal of Devotion, but as yet nothing of a Face could be seen by any eye.

At last, about the Eighteenth day of September, 1606, (viz. above six Months
after Garnet was executed) some of the zealous Romanists looking upon it, saw
that which they called the Face of a man. Thus is a Miracle found out, and
Wilkinson hastes beyond Seas to the Jesuits at St. Omers, telling them what a
pretty wonder he had discovered for the honor of their Society, into which he
was presently entered.

But here we may observe, that they confess, that Wilkinson came from the said
St. Omers into England, a little before Garnet's Execution; and it may be sent
upon the cheat. Again, how comes the Wonder to be above Four Months, or about
Nineteen Weeks in doing? Or, Might it not be done by Art, since Francis Bowen
(to whom it was shown by Garnet's Friend, Mrs. Ann Vaux) who had some skill in
Painting, confessed, an Artist might make one neater; and presently upon the
place, for a trial, one of the Archbishop of Canterbury's Gentlemen (whose
Profession was not Painting) drew one, which Bowen confessed was like that of the
Straw, but a little better proportioned; and Practice daily teaches us, that
Faces may be done in a less Compass.

As for the thing it self, 'twas only a few Lines drawn like a Face upon the
outward Husk of a Grain of Wheat; but without any such Beams or Glories about
it, as the Jesuits would make simple people believe; nor any more like Garnet
(as Hugh Griffith the Tailor himself confessed) than any other man that had a
Beard.

They tell us, that St. Luke was an excellent Painter, and drew Pet. de
Natalibus, l. 9. c. 79
several Pictures of the B. Virgin Mary; one of which, it is said, Pope Gregory
the Great Nonius c. 61 Jo. Eus. Nieremb. de Mirac l. 1. c. 39.
carried in his hand in the Procession he made about Rome, to stop the Plague
then raging there; which very Picture he sent to St. Leander Bishop of Sevil in
Spain; which is yet kept to work wonders in the Monastery of Santa Mariae, or
Nuestra Sennora at Guadalupa in Estremadura: Yet every Boy at Rome will tell
us, that this Picture is in a little Chapel built on purpose for it on late
days by Pope Paul V. within the great Church St. Maria Maggiore; and the
Guadalupians will assure us, That there is a great wooden Statue, with a Mart.
Z^ilerus, Itiner. Hispan. p. 198
black Face, Hands, etc. with white Raiment.

Thus here is Miracle upon Miracle, the very same thing at the same time, both
at Rome, and Guadalupa, and a curious painted Picture turned to a Wooden
Statue, daubed over with black and white, which requires no great skill. And
something like this, is the Straw-Miracle of Father Garnet, which at first was
but a common Ear of Wheat, with a few Lines drawn upon one of the Grains; but
is since wonderfully increased by the Industry of the Jesuits, for the honor
of their Society, and Traiterous Martyr.

And to this might be added another Miracle: for though at first there was but
one Straw and Face, yet it seems that they had afterward an ambition to
multiply them; and, for ought that I know, would make every Straw at his
Execution, bear his Picture* for Osborn's Mem. of K. James, page 35
one tells us, that he has had several of them in his hands, but could observe
no great matter in them, unless ruled by his Fancy; and these they sold about
for holy Relics Thus they increase and multiply, as Falstaff did at Gads-hill
in Shakespeer; and Miracles which are made a Trade and Gain, may well be
suspected, if not held palpable Cheats.

Thus this Straw amongst that Society, got such a Fame, that Homer's Frogs,
Passeratus his Ass, Virgil's Fly, Ovid's Flea, Hiensius his Lowse, were not
able to stand in competition with it; that methinks it was a great oversight in
an Ingenious Romish Knight, not to remember it in his late Song in the
Commendation of Straw.

Of this Straw-Miracle, Gualterus Paulus, a German Jesuit, would persuade the
world to allow of this Anagram: PATER HENRICUS GARNETVS.
Anagram:
Pingere cruentus arista.


Which for all his pains will not hold, unless he will make an I stand for an
H; a liberty that must not be allowed of: yet, as if it were Authentic, thus
does he gloss upon it.

Quid petit hic vultus sicca redivivus Arista?
Quid frons? Quid sacris ora locuta notis?
Nominis augurio PINGERE CRVENTVS ARISTA,
Garnete; agnosco vultum, Opus, Artificem.
Spica, Tabella; Deus, Pictor; Color, unda Cruoris;
Spica Crucem; vultum dat Deus; astra cru^r.
But enough of this Straw, which * Cornelius a Lapide thinks worthy Com. in
Apocalypse. cap. 7. ver. 3.
to illustrate and explain the Revelations. But possibly he thought Garnet
happy, because he dyed on the Gallows; such a great esteem did a Lapide seem to
have for violent Deaths; still pueling and lamenting that he could not dye a
Martyr, still sighing and wishing that he might burn at the Stake; still
grieved and troubled that he should dye in his Bed; now begging of the
Prophets, then beseeching the Virgin Mary, and anon desiring Christ, that he
might dye a Martyr, and not in his Bed, after the common way of Mankind: But
for all these fond and idle thoughts, the little Jesuit would secure himself,
leaving it to the Heretics or Pagans to fetch, take, and kill him; as for his
part, he would neither go to them nor their Countries; whereby (for all his
seeming desire of Martyrdom) he would make sure of one.

As for Father Garnet, I should scorn to have been so unworthy or uncivil, to
have objected some of the former Crimes to him, or upbraided him with them; but
that I perceive they will yet tax the King and Kingdom with Cruelty and
Murder, by enrolling Garnet in their Catalogue of Martyrs, and proclaiming him
the most Virtuous, Holy, and Innocent of men. A Lapide (as aforesaid) must
magnify his miraculous Straw; Casaub. Epist. ad Front. Duc.
Martinus Delrio must compare him with Dionysius the Areopagit; his Pictures
must be hung up in Churches; and at Lovain it was once publicly prayed --
Sancte Henrice, intercede pro nobis -- O Holy Henry intercede for us. And Opus
Chronolog. Tom. 2. An. 1606.
Gordon the Jesuit having placed Garnet in Heaven, desires him to intercede
there for the Conversion of England. But if such people may obtain a Beatitude,
we may have some cause to suspect many of their Old Saints.

A Catalogue of Good Works.
Dr. Andrew Willet tells us thus -- To Baliol College William Hammond gave
Fifteen thousand pounds, though the greatest part thereof, the College was
defrauded, by one Anthony Garnet a Popish Priest, sometime Steward to the old
Lord Montague; which Garnet notwithstanding had been sometime Master of the
College, and so stood by Oath perpetually bound unto it.

What this Anthony Garnet was related to our Henry, I know not; but by the by
this Anthony was Fellow of Baliol College, 1550. was Master of it, 1560.
October 27, and 1563, Richard Hooper succeeded him in the Headship. There was
also of the same College one Richard Garnet, Fellow 1567; who was turned out by
their Visitor, 1570, October 8. But this only by the way.

CHAP. III. The Romanists threaten the Earl of Salisbury. King James, seeing
them thus high, thought it best to bind them strictly to him by the Oath of
Allegiance. The Pope sends forth two Breves. Constitutes Mr. Birket to be
Archpriest, and orders the Oath shall not be taken. Birket accordingly sending
forth his Letters. Newton's Miracle to prove the Oath of Allegiance not to be
taken. Pope Urban the Eighth, his Breve against the Oath of Allegiance.
THE abominable Treachery and Villainy of this Gunpowder Plot, undertaken under
the pretense of maintaining and restoring the Roman Religion; engaged the
Governors to consult the preservation of themselves and the Kingdom. And
considering the furious Zeal and wicked Principles of some men, in affirming
the lawfulness of deposing and killing Heretical Kings; That the Pope had power
to deprive Temporal Princes, absolve Subjects from their obedience, and such
like Villainous Positions, with the many wicked Practices yet fresh in memory,
against the Crown and Life of Queen Elizabeth and King James.

Upon these and such like Considerations, after several serious Consultations
to prevent the like mischiefs; They thought fit to draw up a solemn Oath,
whereby every one should abjure such Treasonable Doctrines, and swear for the
future to behave themselves as became good Subjects.

The Romanists fancied Robert Cecyl (Earl of Salisbury, and Secretary of State)
to be their greatest Enemy, and the chief promoter of this Oath against them:
Whereupon some of them thought, if they could any way deterr him from
prosecuting them (as they called it) the King and others would trouble their
thoughts the less with them; and so these Parliamentary Proposals would fall of
themselves. Upon this fancy, this Threatening Letter was sent to the said Earl
of Salisbury.

My Lord,
WHereas the late unapprovable and most wicked Design, for destroying of his
Majesty, the Prince, and Nobility, with many other of Worth and Quality
(attempted through the Undertaking spirits of some more fiery and turbulent,
than zealous and dis-passionate Catholics) has made the general state of our
Catholic Cause so scandalous in the eye of such, whose corrupted Judgments
are not able to fan away and sever the fault of the Professor, from the
Profession it self; as that who now is found to be of that Religion, is
persuaded, at least in mind, to allow (though God knows, as much abhorring as
any Puritan whatsoever) the said former most inhuman and barbarous Project.

And whereas some of his Majesty's Council (but especially your Lordship, as
being known to be, as the Philosopher terms it, a Primus Motor in such
uncharitable proceedings) are determined (as it is feared) by taking advantage
of so foul a scandal, to root out all the Memory of Catholic Religion, either
by sudden Banishment, Massacre, Imprisonment, or some such unsupportable
Vexations and Pressures; and perhaps by decreeing, in this next Parliament,
some more cruel and horrible Laws against Catholics, than already are made.

In regard of these Premises, there are some good men, who through Good men and
Roman Catholics,
their earnest desire for the continuing the Catholic Religion, and for
saving many souls both of this present, and of all future posterity, are
resolved to prevent so great a mischief, though with a full assurance aforehand
of the loss of their dearest lives.

You are therefore hereby to be admonished, that at this present may^ murder
Privy-Councellors,
there are Five which have severally undertaken your Death, and have vowed the
performance thereof, by taking already the Blessed Sacrament, if you continue
your daily plotting of so Tragical Stratagems aginst Recusants.

It is so ordered, that none of these Five knows who the other Four be, for
the better preventing the discovery of the rest, if so any one by attempting
and not performing, should be apprehended.

It is also already agreed who shall first attempt it by shot, and so who in
order shall follow.

In accomplishing of it, there is expected no other than assurance of death;
yet it will willingly be embraced, for the preventing of those general
Calamities which by this your transcendant Authority and grace with his
Majesty, are threatened unto us.

And indeed the Difficulties herein are more easily to be digested, since two
of the intended Attempters are in that weak state of body, that they cannot
live above three or four Months.

The other Three are so distressed in themselves and their Friends, as that
their present Griefs (for being only Recusants) do much dull all apprehension
of Death.

None is to be blamed (in the true censuring of Matters) for the Nor are they
to be blamed for it.
undertaking hereof: For we protest before God, We know no other means left us
in the World, since it is manifest, that you serve but as a Match to give fire
unto his Majesty (to whom the worst that we wish, is, That he may be as great a
Saint in Heaven, as he is King on Earth) for intending all Mischiefs against
the poor distressed Catholics.

Thus giving your Lordship this Charitable Admonition, the which may perhaps be
necessary hereafter for some others your Inferiors (at least in Grace and
Favor) if so they run on in their former Inhuman and Unchristian Rage against
us; I cease: putting you in mind, That where once True and Spiritual Resolution
is, there (notwithstanding For it is a True and Spiritual Resolution.
all dangers whatsoever) the Weak may take sufficient Revenge of the Great.

Your Lordship's well-admonishing Friends, etc. A. B. C^ etc.
It may be your Lordship will take this but as some forged Letter of some
Puritans, thereby to incense you more against Recusants.

But we protest upon our Salvation, It is not so: Neither can any thing in
human likelihood prevent the effecting thereof, but the change of your course
toward Recusants.




This Letter at the beginning offers fair, seeming to detest the
Gunpowder-Plot: but little of truth and sincerity may be expected from it, when
we consider, that the design of it is to Apologize for Murder; to which it
appears there is a Club or number of them consenting and attempting: and they
are not ashamed to assert, That though they murder Privy-Councellors, yet the
Murderers may be good men; nor are they to be blamed for it, for it is a True
and Spiritual Resolution. But enough of this Letter, to which the Earl himself
was pleased to give an Answer.

The Oath of Allegiance was prudently drawn up, and confirmed by Act of
Parliament; which Oath being the Foundation and Sum of this Treatise, take as
follows word for word; and, for distinction sake, divided into several
Branches or Articles.

The Oath of Allegiance. Anno Tertio Jacobi.

I A. B. do truly and sincerely Acknowledge, Profess, Testify, and Declare in
my Conscience before God and the World, That our Sovereign Lord King -- is
Lawful and Rightful King of this Realm, and of all other his Majesty's
Dominions and Countries.

And that the Pope, neither of himself, nor by any Authority of the Church or
See of Rome, or by any other means, with any other, has any Power or Authority
to Depose the King:

Or to dispose any of his Majesty's Kingdoms or Dominions:

Or to Authorize any Foreign Prince to Invade or Annoy him or his Countries.

Or to Discharge any of his Subjects of their Allegiance and Obedience to his
Majesty.

Or to give License or Leave to any of them to bear Arms, raise Tumults, etc.

Or to offer any violence or hurt to his Majesty's Royal Person, State, or
Government; or to any of his Majesty's Subjects within his Majesty's Dominions.

Also I do swear from my heart, That notwithstanding any Declaration, or
Sentence of Excommunication or Deprivation made or granted, or to be made or
granted by the Pope, or his Successors; or by any Authority derived, or
pretended to be derived from him or his See, against the said King, his Heirs
or Successors; or any Absolution of the said Subjects from their Obedience: I
will bear Faith and true Allegiance to his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors.

And him and them will defend to the uttermost of my Power, against all
Conspiracies and Attempts whatsoever, which shall be made against his or their
Persons, their Crown and Dignity, by reason or color of any such Sentence or
Declaration, or otherwise:

And will do my best endeavor to disclose and make known unto his Majesty, his
Heirs and Successors, all Treasons and Traiterous Conspiracies which I shall
know or hear of to be against him, or any of them.

And I do further swear, That I do from my heart Abhor, Detest, and Abjure, as
Impious and Heretical, this Damnable Doctrine and Position, That Princes which
be Excommunicated or Deprived by the Pope, may be Deposed or Murdered by their
Subjects, or any other whatsoever.

And I do believe, and in Conscience am resolved, That neither the Pope, nor
any Person whatsoever, has power to absolve me of this Oath, or any part
thereof,

Which I acknowledge by good and full Authority to be lawfully ministered unto me.

And do renounce all Pardons and Dispensations to the contrary.

And all these things I do plainly and sincerely acknowledge and swear according
by these express words by me spoken, and according to the plain and common
sense and understanding of the same words, without any equivocation, or mental
evasion, or secret reservation whatsoever.

And I do make this Recognition and Acknowledgment heartily, willingly, and
truly, upon the true Faith of a Christian. So help me God.

A. B.

Unto which Oath so taken, the said person shall subscribe his or her Name or
Mark.

King James doubted not but that all honest and good Subjects would Apol. for
the Oath of Allegiance, page 49, 50, 51.
submit to this Oath, Because, as he said, that he that shall refuse to take
this Oath, must of necessity ^old all, or some of these Propositions following:

I. That I, King James, am not the lawful King of this Kingdom, and of all
other my Dominions.

II. That the Pope by his own Authority may depose me; if not by his own
Authority, yet by some other Authority of the Church, or of the Sea of Rome. If
not by some other Authority of the Church and See of Rome, yet by other means,
with others help, he may Depose me.

III. That the Pope may dispose of my Kingdoms and Dominions.

IV. That the Pope may give Authority to some Foreign Prince to invade my
Dominions.

V. That the Pope may discharge my Subjects of their Allegiance and Obedience
to me.

VI. That the Pope may give license to one or more of my Subjects, to bear Arms
against me.

VII. That the Pope may give leave to my Subjects to offer violence to my
Person, or to my Government, or to some of my Subjects.

VIII. That if the Pope shall by Sentence excommunicate or depose me, my
Subjects are not to bear Faith and Allegiance to me.

IX. If the Pope shall by Sentence Excommunicate or Depose me, my Subjects are
not bound to defend with all their power my Person and Crown.

X. If the Pope shall give out any Sentence of Excommunication or Deprivation
against me, my Subjects by reason of that Sentence are not bound to reveal all
Conspiracies and Treasons against me, which shall come to their hearing and
knowledge.

XI. That it is not Heretical and Diabolical, to hold, That Prinees being
Excommunicated by the Pope, may be either Deposed or Killed by their Subjects,
or any other.

XII. That the Pope has Power to absolve my Subjects from this Oath, or from
some part thereof.

XIII. That this Oath is not administered to my Subjects by a full and lawful
Authority.

XIV. That this Oath is to be taken with Equivocation, Mental Evasion, or
secret Reservation; and not with the Heart and good will, sincerely, in the
true Faith of a Christian man.

Now whether there was just cause for drawing up and imposing of such an Oath,
King James can tell you best himself. And first, that the Romanists had no
reason to contrive his ruin, he declares at large in these words:

But now having sacrificed (if I may so say) to the Manes of my late Apol. for
the Oath of Allegiance, page 18, 19, 20.
Predecessor [Q. Elizabeth, whose Government and Moderation he vindicates], I
may next with St. Paul justly vindicate my own Fame from those innumerable
Calumnies spread against me, in testifying the truth of my Behavior toward the
Papists: Wherein I may truly affirm, That whatsoever was her just and merciful
Government over the Papists in her time, my Government over them since, has so
far exceeded hers, in Mercy and Clemency, as not only the Papists themselves
grew to that height of pride, in confidence of my mildness, as they did
directly expect, and assuredly promise to themselves Liberty of Conscience, and
equality with others of my Subjects, in all things; but even a number of the
best and faithfullest of my said Subjects, were cast in great fear and
amazement of my Course and Proceedings, ever prognosticating, and justly
suspecting, that sour fruit to come of it, which showed it self clearly in the
Powder Treason.

How many did I honor with Knighthood, of known and open Recusants? How
indifferently did I give Audience and Access to both sides, bestowing equally
all Favors and Honors on both Professions? How free and continual Access had
all Ranks and Degrees of Papists in my Court and Company? And above all, How
frankly and freely did I free Recusants of their ordinary Payments?

Besides, it is evident what strait Order was given out of my own mouth to the
Judge, to spare the execution of all Priests (notwithstanding their conviction)
joining thereunto a gracious Proclamation, whereby all Priests that were at
liberty, and not taken, might go out of the Country by such a day my General
Pardon having been extended to all Convicted Priests in Prison, whereupon they
were set at liberty as good Subjects; and all Priests that were taken after,
sent over, and set at liberty there.

But time and paper will fail me to make enumeration of all the benefits and
favors that I bestowed in general and particular upon Papists; in recounting
whereof, every scrape of my Pen would serve but for a blot of the Pope's
Ingratitude and Injustice, in meteing me with so hard a measure for the same.

Yet for all these Favors, His Majesty in another place tells us, That,

The never-enough wondered at, and abhorred POWDER TREASON Monitory Preface to
all Christian Monarchs, p. 6, 7, 8, 9.
(though the Repetition thereef grieveth, I know, the gentle-hearted Jesuit His
Majesty alludes to Parsons Letter (against his Book) called, The judgment of a
Catholic English man, p. 6.. 10.
Parsons), This Treason, I say, being not only intended against me and my
Posterity, but even against the whole House of Parliament, plotted only by
Papists, and they only led thereto by a preposterous zeal for the advancement
of their Religion; some of them continuing so obstinate, that even at their
death they would not acknowledge their Fault; but in their last words,
immediately before the expiring of their breath, refused to condemn themselves,
and crave Pardon for their Deed, except the Romish Church should first condemn
it.

And soon after, it being discovered that a great number of my Popish Subjects
of all Ranks and Sexes, both Men and Women, as well within as without the
Country, had a confused Notion, and an obscure Knowledge, that some great thing
was to be done in that Parliament for the Weal of the Church; although, for
Secrecy's cause, they were not acquainted with the Particulars: certain Forms
of Prayer having likewise been set down and used for the good success of that
Great Errand.

Adding hereunto, That diverse times, and from diverse Priests, the Arch-Traytors
themselves received the Sacrament for confirmation of their Heart, and
observation of Secrecy.

Some of the principal Jesuits likewise being found guilty of the foreknowledg
of the Treason it self, of which number, some fled from their Trial, others
were apprehended (as Holy Garnet himself, and Oldcorn were) and justly executed
upon their own plain Confession of Guilt.

If this Treason now clad with these Circumstances, did not minister a just
occasion to that Parliament House, whom they thought to have destroyed,
courageously and zealously at their next sitting down, to use all means of
Trial, Whether any more of that Mind were yet left in the Country; I leave it
to you [i. e. the Emperors, Kings, and Princes] to judge, whom God has
appointed his highest Deputy-Judges upon Earth. And amongst other things for
this purpose, this Oath of Allegiance, so unjustly impugned, was then devised
and enacted.

And in case any sharper Laws were then made against the Papists, that were not
obedient to the former Laws of the Country; if ye will consider the Time,
Place, and Persons, it will be thought no wonder, seeing that Occasion did so
justly exasperate them to make severer Laws than otherwise they would have done.

The Time, I say, being the very next sitting of the Parliament after the
Discovery of that Abominable Treason.

The Place, being the same where they should all have been blown up, and so
bringing it freshly to their memory again.

The Persons, being those very Parliament Men whom they thought to have
destroyed.

And yet so far has both my Heart and Government been from any bitterness, as
almost never one of those sharp Additions to the former Laws have ever yet been
put in execution.

And that ye may yet know further, for the more convincing these Libellers of
wilful Malice, who impudently affirm, That this Oath of Allegiance was devised
for deciving and intrapping of Papists in points of Conscience.

The truth is, That the Lower House of Parliament at the first framing of this
Oath, made it contain, That the Pope had no power to excommunicate Me; which I
caused them to reform, only making it to conclude, That no Excommunication of
the Pope's, can warrant my Subjects to practice against My Person or State;
Denying the Deposition of Kings to be in the Pope's Lawful Power. As indeed I
take any such Temporal Violence to be far without the limits of such a
Spiritual Censure as Excommunication is.

So careful was I that nothing should be contained in this Oath except the
Profession of Natural Allegiance, and Civil and Temporal Obedience, with a
Promise to resist all contrary Uncivil Violence.

This Oath now grounded upon so great and just occasion, set forth in so
reasonable Terms, and ordained only for making of a true distinction between
Papists of Quiet disposition, and in all other things good Subjects; and such
other Papists as in their hearts maintained the like violent bloody Maxims
that the Powder-Traytors did.

And in another place His Majesty tells us to the same purpose, viz. That this
Oath

Was framed to be taken by my Subjects, whereby they should make Apol. for the
Oath of Allegiance, page 3, 4.
clear Profession of their Resolution faithfully to persist in Obedience unto
me, according to their Natural Allegiance.

To this end, that I might hereby make a separation, not only between all my
good Subjects in general, and unfaithful Traitors, that intended to withdraw
themselves from my obedience; but especially, to make a separation between so
many of my Subjects, who although they were otherwise Popishly affected, yet
retained in their hearts the print of their natural Duty to their Sovereign:
And those who being carried away with the like Fanatic Zeal that the
Powder-Traytors were, could not contain themselves within the bounds of their
Natural Allegiance, but thought diversity of Religion a safe pretext for all
kind of Treasons and Rebellions against their Sovereign.

Which godly and wise intent, God did bless with success accordingly: For many
of my Subjects that were Popishly affected, as well Priests as Layicks, did
freely take the same Oath; whereby they gave me occasion to think the better of
their fidelity; and likewise freed themselves of that heavy slander, that
although they were fellow-Professors of one Religion with the Powder-Traytors,
yet were not joined with them in Treasonable Courses against their Sovereign.

Whereby all quietly-minded Papists were put out of despair; and I gave a good
proof that I intended no Persecution against them for Conscience Cause, but
only desired to be secured of them for Civil Obedience, which for Conscience
Cause they were bound to perform.

But the Devil could not have devised a more malicious trick for intetrupting
this so Calm and Clement a course, than fell out by the sending hither, and
publishing a Breve of the Popes, countermanding all them of his Profession to
take this Oath; thereby sowing new seeds of Jealousy between me and my Popish
Subjects, by stirring them up to disobey that Lawful Commandment of their
Sovereign, which was ordained to be taken of them as a pledge of their fidelity.

His Majesty here alludes to Pope Paul V. who upon the coming out of this Oath,
sends out a Bull or Breve against it, forbidding any of the Romanists to take
the said Oath. The manner of their procuring, and how the English-Romanists in
this juncture behaved themselves, take as follows:

No sooner was the Oath and Act of Parliament published, but there Vid. Rog.
Widdrington's Theological Disputation, Epist. Dedicat. to Pope Paul V.. 6.
was a great and long Consultation held at London by the Priests, assisted by
Mr. Whose Title ran thus -- George Blackwell, by the grace of God, and the
Ordinance of the Sea Apostolic, Arch. Priest of England.
George Blackwell their Archpriest, what they and their Friends ought to do in
this case. At last Blackwell did conclude, that this Oath (according to the
plain and common understanding of the words) might with a safe Conscience be
taken by the Romanists; and with him agreed a greater part of the Priests, who
went then to London to assist at this Consultation.

But this Compliance was opposed by certain Jesuits, and some other Priests,
from whence arose all the stir and controversy which afterward made Divisions
amongst them, concerning the taking of this Oath: Nor is the Dispute yet ended.

The Jesuits and their Faction resolving not to be bafled, would carry the
business with a high hand; to which purpose they threatened to procure a Breve
from the Pope to hinder the taking of the said Oath.

Blackwell and his party fearing the worst, with all haste dispatched a Letter
to Mr. Nicholas Fitzherbert, an English Priest then flourishing in Rome; fully
relating to him how the case stood amongst them, earnestly desiring him to deal
effectually with some Cardinals, that the Pope might be persuaded not to send
over any Breves against the taking of the said Oath, which would but increase
their Trouble, and render the Divisions wider.

But it seems the Jesuits were too quick and powerful for the other Priests;
for their Letter came too late, and to no purpose; it being determined at Rome,
that a Breve should be drawn up and sent; the main Procurers of which, were
supposed to be Cardinal Bellarmine and Father Parsons; the later of whom (as a
forerunner of the Breves) sent a Letter into England; part of which, take as
follows:

About some four or five Months ago it was consulted by seven or eight Id. cap.
10. Sect. 2.. 53. 54, 55, 56.
of the Learned Divines that could be chosen to give their judgment of it
(i. e. the Oath): Their Reasons are many; but all reduced to this, That the
Pope's Authority in chastising Princes upon a just Cause, is de fide, and
consequently cannot be denied when it is called into controversy, without
denying of our Faith; nor that the Pope or any other Authority can dispense in
this.

For if the Question were de facto, and not de jure, to wit, Whether the Pope
might justly in this or that occasion Excommunicate or Depose this or that
Prince upon these or these causes; or whether precedent Popes have done well
therein, or no? Then might some of these Reasons, which you say your Friends do
alledg, be admitted into Consideration; to wit, Whether it could be in
aedificationem, or destructionem, do hurt or good, be profitable or
improfitable? or, Whether the Causes be sufficient or no? for without cause
none holds that the Pope may depose: Or, Whether the due form of Admonition,
touched in your Letters, were observed? But forasmuch as the Question is de
Potestate of the See-Apostolick Power, What it may do upon any Cause, or
against any Catholic Prince whatsoever; these Considerations of temporal hurt
cannot enter.

Besides these, I have conferred the matter with Cardinal Bellarmine, and
sundry others of great Learning and Conscience; and all are of one opinion in
this case, That the form of the Oath, as it lies, is Heretical, and no way may
be admitted by him that will not deny the Catholic Faith.

I had occasion twice to speak with his Holiness; the first, in company of Mr.
Kinsmanto the former Nic. Fitzherbert.
Thomas Fitzherbert, where we proposed certain manners of Mitigation suggested
by Friends, etc.

Whereto his Holiness answered, That as for any Actual using Censures against
his Majesty, he meant not, but rather all Courtesy. But as for the Authority
of the See-Apostolick (to wit, using of Censures) he was resolved, and would
rather lose his Head, than yield one jot.

The second; He being informed that some Priests did seem to incline to the
taking of the Oath. He answered, He could not hold them for Catholics, etc.

Thus we see how the Plot was carried, and how zealous the Pope and his
Assistants were against the taking of this Oath, as if it were enough to
overthrow their whole Religion: Though King James did assure them and the
World, That no decision of any one point of Religion, was intended in this Oath.

For (says he) as for the Catholic Faith, Can there be one word found Apol.
for the Oath, page 63
in all that Oath, tending or sounding to matter of Religion? Does he that
takoth it, promise there to believe or not to believe any Article of Religion?
Or does he so much as name a true or a false Church there? And as for St.
Peter's Primacy, I know no Apostle's Name that is therein named, except the
Name of JAMES, it being my Christian Name -- Neither is there any mention at
all made therein, either disertis verbis, or by any other indirect means,
either of the Hierarchy of the Church, of St. Peter' s Succession, of the Sea
Apostolic, or of any such matter.

But however, as if this Oath quite overthrew the Roman Religion, and rendered
the Pope no more powerful than his Predecessors were in the first Three hundred
years, out comes a Breve from his Holiness, right or wrong, expressly commanding
the English not to take the said Oath upon any means whatever. Part of which,
take as follows.

Dilecti filii, Salutem and Apostolicam Benedictionem.
MAgno animi moerore Nos semper affecerunt Tribulationes and Calamitates, quas
pro retinenda Catholica fide jugiter sustinuistis. Sed cum intelligamus omnia
hoc tempore magis exacerbari, Afflictio nostra mirum in modum aucta est, etc.

-- Non potestis, absque evidentissima gravissimaque Divini honoris injuria,
obligare vos Juramento, quod similiter maximo cum Cordis nostri dolor
audivimus propositum vobis fuisse praestandum, infra scripti tenoris, viz.

Ego A. B. etc. Here was inserted the Oath it self.
Quae cum ita sint, vobis, ex verbis ipsis perspicuum esse debet, quod
hujusmodi Juramentum, salva fide Catholica, and salute animarum vestiarum
prastari non potest, cum mul^a contineat, quae fidei and saluti aperte
adversantur.

Propterea admonemus vos, ut ab hoc atque similibus Juramentis praestandis
omnino Caveatis. Quod quidem eo acrius exigimus a vobis, quia experti vestrae
fidei Constantiam, quae tanquam aurum in furnace, perpetuae Tribulationis igne
probata est. Pro comperto habemus, vos alacri animo subituros esse quaecunque
atrociora Tormenta, ac mortem denique ipsam constanter oppetituros, potius quam
Dei Majestatem ulla in re laedatis, etc.

-- Praecipimus vobis ut illarum Literarum verba ad amussim servetis, and
simpliciter prout sonant and jacent, accipiatis and intelligatis, sublata omni
facultate aliter illa interpretandi, etc.

Datum Romae apud S. Marcum sub Annulo Piscatoris x. Kal. October. 1606,
Pontificatus nostri Anno secundo.
Dearly beloved Sons, Greeting, and Aposiolical Benediction.
THE Tribulations and Calamities which you have continually sustained for the
keeping of the Catholic Faith, has always afflicted us with great grief of
mind. But for as much as we understand, that at this time all things are more
grievous; our Affliction hereby is wonderfully increased, etc.

-- You cannot without most evident and grievous wronging of God's Honor, bind
your selves by the Oath, which in like manner we have heard with very great
grief of Heart, is administered unto you, of the tenor following, viz.

I A. B. etc. Which things since they are thus, it must evidently appear to
you, that such an Oath cannot be taken without wrong to the Catholic Faith,
and the salvation of your souls, seeing it contains many things plainly
contrary to Faith and Salvation.

Wherefore we admonish you, That you do utterly abstain from taking this, and
the like Oaths. Which thing we do the more earnestly require of you, because we
have experience of the constancy of your Faith, which is tried like Gold in the
fire of perpetual Tribulation. We do well know, that you will cheerfully
undergo all kind of cruel Torments whatsoever, yea and constantly endure Death
it self, rather than you will in any thing offend the Majesty of God, etc.

We command you, That you do exactly observe the words of those Letters, and
that you take and understand them simply as they sound, and as they lie; all
power to interpret them otherwise, being taken away, etc.

Dated at Rome at S. Marks under the Signet of the Fisher, the 22d of September.
1606, the 2d year of our Popedom.
This Breve being presently sent into England, was not instantly submitted to
by all the Romanists, some of them having taken the Oath of Allegiance, and
thought they ought as good Subjects to stand to it; others of them who wished
well to their own security, betwixt the two opposite Commands of the King and
the Pope, were willing to think the former Breve to be but a Cheat, and
surreptitiously procured without the Pope's knowledge [such things happening often
at Rome, the Pope (as well as other Princes) being several times abused both by
their Secretaries and the Datarii]: And to this opinion were some of the wisest
and best of the English Romanists drawn, upon consideration that the Pope [who
ought to be Holy, Charitable, Merciful, a lover of Peace, a promoter of
Obedience, not a busie-body, nor a medler in other Princes Affairs] would not
undertake to disquiet the Romanists, raise divisions in the Church, and thrust
his Friends into the danger of violating the Laws of their King and Country,
to whom they owed all Obedience, and not upon any account whatsoever
Traitorously to oppose and violate.

But the Pope, who thought his Kingdom, his Authority, his Supremacy, his
Vicarship, his Infallibility, and all his other pretty pretended Trophies
struck at, was resolved to have his Humor, let what mischief so ever come of
it; and so, as if to satisfy those who doubted of the Reality of the former
Breve, he forthwith sent this other into England.

Dilecti Filii, Salutem and Apostolicam Benedictionem.
REnuntiatum est nobis, reperiri nonnullos apud vos, qui, cum satis
declaraverimus per literas nostras Anno superiore x Kalend, October. in forma
Brevis datas, vos tuta Conscientia praestare non posse Juramentum, quod a vobis
tunc exigebatur; and praeterea stricte praeceperimus, ne ullo modo illud
praestaretis:

Nunc dicere audent, hujusmodi Literas de prohibitione Juramenti, non ex animi
nostri sententia, nostraque propria voluntate scriptas fuisse; sed potius
aliorum intuitu atque industria: eaque de causa iidem persuadere nituntur,
mandata nostra dictis literis non esse attendenda.

Perturbavit sane nos hic Nuncius, eoque magis, quia experti Obedientiam
vestram (filii nostri unice dilecti) qui, ut huic sancta^ Sedi obediretis,
opes, facultates, dignitatem, libertatem, vitam denique ipsam, pie and generose
nihili fecistis; nunquam suspicati essemus, potuisse vocari apud vos in dubium
fidem literarum nostrarum Apostolicarum, ut hoc praetextu, vos ex mandatis
nostris eximeretis.

Verum agnoscimus versutiem atque fraudem Adversarii humanae salutis, eisque
potius, quam vestrae voluntati tribuimus hanc renitentiam.

Ea proter iterum ad vos scribere decrevimus, ac denuo vobis significare,
Literas nostras Apostolicas Anno praeterito x Kalend. October. datas de
prohibitione juramenti, non solum motu proprio, and ex certa nostra scientia;
verum etiam post longam and gravem deliberationem de omnibus quae in illis
continentur adhibitam, fuisse scriptas, and ob id teneri vos, illas omnino
observare, omni interpretatione secus suadente rejecta.

Haec autem est mera, pura, integraque voluntas nostra, qui de vestra salute
soliciti, semper cogitamus ea, quae magis vobis expediunt.

Et ut cogitationes and consilia nostra illuminet is, a quo Christiano gregi
custodiendo nostra fuit praeposita Humilitas, indesinenter Oramus: Quem etiam
jugiter precamur ut in vobis filiis nostris summopere dilectis, fidem,
constantiam, mutuamque inter vos Charitatem and Pacem augeat. Quibus omnibus
cum omni Charitatis affectu, peramanter benedicimus.

Datum Romae apud Sanct. Marcum, sub Annulo Piscatoris x. Kalend. September.
1607. Pontificatus nostri Anno tertio. Petrus Stroza.

Dearly beloved Sons, Greeting and Apostolical Benediction.
It is reported unto us, That there are found certain amongst you, (who) when
as we have sufficiently declared by our Letters, dated the last year, on the
xxij of September, in the form of a Breve, that ye cannot with safe Conscience
take the Oath which was then required of you; and when as we have further
straightly commanded you, that by no means you should take it.

Yet there are some (I say) among you, who dare now affirm, that such Letters
concerning the forbidding of the Oath, were not written of our own accord, or
of our own proper will, but rather for the respect, and at the instigation of
other men: and for that cause the same men go about to persuade you, that our
Commands in the said Letters are not to be regarded.

Truly this News did trouble us; and that so much the more, because having had
experience of your obedience (most dearly beloved Sons), who to the end you
might obey this Holy See, have godlily and valiantly contemned your Riches,
Wealth, Honor, Liberty, yea and Life it self: We should never have suspected
that the truth of our Apostolical Letters could once be called into question
amongst you, that by this pretense you might exempt your selves from our
Commandments.

But we do perceive herein the subtilty and craft of the Enemy of man's
salvation; and we do attribute this your backwardness rather to him, than to
your own will.

And for this cause we have thought good to write the second time unto you, and
to signify unto you again, that our Apostolical Letters, dated the last year,
on the xxij of Sept. concerning the prohibition of the Oath, were written not
only upon our proper motion, and of our certain knowledge; but also after long
and weighty deliberation used concerning all those things which are contained
in them: and that for that cause you are bound fully to observe them, rejecting
all Interpretation persuading to the contrary.

And this is our mere, pure and perfect will, who being always careful of your
salvation, do always mind those things which are most profitable unto you.

And we do pray without ceasing, That he who has appointed to our Lowliness
the keeping of the Flock of Christ, would enlighten our Thoughts and Counsels:
whom we do also continually beseech, that he would increase in you (our most
beloved Sons) Faith, Constancy, with mutual Charity and Peace one to another.
All whom we most lovingly Bless with all Charitable affection.

Dated at Rome at Saint Marks, under the Signet of the Fisher, the xxiii of
August, 1607, the third year of our Popedom. Peter Stroza.

Some Months after the publishing of the first Breve, Mr. George Blackwell
[constituted the Archpriest 1598, by Henry Cardinal Cajetane, called Protector
of the English Nation by the Appointment of Pope Clement VIII.] was seized on,
examined and imprisoned, and the Oath offered him, which he freely took.

Cardinal Bellarmine upon notice of this, writes a long Letter to Blackwell,
telling him how joyous the news (of the Imprisonment) seemed to him, because
(forsooth) now you draw near unto the glory of Martyrdom; than the which, there
cannot be a gift of God more happy; and therefore bids him for the comfort of
the Church, be valiant and stout. It Is easy giving advice afar off; but the
Cardinal did not care to put himself into the danger of Heretics, ever since
he assisted the Rebellious League against the French King.

But there is one thing that clouds all this Rejoicing, viz. that Blackwell
should take the Oath: This troubles the Cardinal, who tells the Archpriest,
That the Oath is so craftily composed, that no man can detest Treason against
the King, and make profession of his Civil subjection, but he must be
constrained perfidiously to deny the Primacy of the Apostolic See. But the
Servants of Christ, and especially the Chief Priests of the Lord, ought to be
so far from taking an unlawful Oath, where they may endamage the Faith, that
they ought to beware that they give not the least suspicion of Dissimulation
that they have taken it -- For if you will diligently weigh the whole matter
with your self, truly you shall see it is no small matter that is called in
question by this Oath, but one of the principal Heads of our Faith, and
Foundations of Catholic Religion. And for proof of this, he produces little
scraps out of Gregory the Great, Pope Leo, and such like Instances, nothing at
all God wot to the Business in hand, as Blackwell himself in his Answer to
Bellarmines Letter, may testify.

The Pope considering Father Blackwell's Humor, and it may be his Confinement,
appointed (1608) Mr. George Birket to be Archpriest, and sent him a Breve to
forbid the taking of the Oath, and to deprive all Priests of their Faculties
that should take it. Part of which, take as follows.

-- Tibique injungimus and Mandamus, ac specialem facultatem ad hoc tribuimus,
ut Authoritate nostra omnes and singulos Sacerdotes Anglos, qui quoddam
Juramentum (in quo multa continentur, quae fidei atque saluti animarum aperte
adversantur) praestiterunt: vel ad loca ad quae Haeretici ad eorum
superstitiosa Ministeria peragenda convenire solent, consulto accesserunt, aut
qui talia licite fieri posse docuerunt, and docent, admonere cures, ut ab
hujusmodi erroribus resipiscant and abstineant.

Quod si intra tempus (extrajudicialiter tamen) arbitrio tuo illis praefigendum
hoc facere distulerint, seu aliquis illorum distulerit, illos seu illum
facultatibus and Privilegiis omnibus ab Apostolica sede seu illius Authoritate
a quocunque alio, illis vel cuivis illorum concessis, eadem Authoritate prives
ac privatos, esse declares etc.

Datum Roma apud S. Petrum sub Annulo Piscator. die 1 Feb. 1608 Pontificatus
Nostri Anno 3.
-- And we enjoin and command you, and for this we give you special Faculty,
that by our Authority you take care to admonish all and every English Priest,
who have taken a certain Oath (wherein many things are contained which are
manifestly against Faith and the salvation of souls) or do willingly repair to
such places where the Heretics use to meet to celebrate their superstitious
Services or Worship; or have taught and do teach that such things may lawfully
be done; that they may repent and abstain from such Errors.

And if within the time [ extrajudicialiter notwithstanding] by you as you
think fit to be appointed unto them, they or any one of them shall defer to
obey this; That then you by the same Authority do deprive and declare them or
him to be deprived of all Faculties and Privileges granted them or any of them
from the See-Apostolick, or by her Authority from any other whatsoever, etc.

Dated at Rome at St. Peter's, etc. 1 Feb. 1608.
Birket upon the receipt of this Breve, draws up and sends abroad this
Admonishing-Letter.

To all the Reverend Secular Priests of England.
Most dearly beloved Brethren,
WHereas I have always desired to live without Molesting or Offending others,
it cannot be but a wonderful Corsive, Sorrow and Grief unto me, that against
mine own inclination I am forced (as you have seen by the Breve it self) to
prescribe a certain time for such as do find themselves to have been contrary
to the points which are touched in the said Breve, concerning the Oath, and
going to Church, that they may thereby return and conform themselves to the
Doctrine declared by his Holiness, both in this and the other former Breves.

And therefore now by this Present do give notice unto you all, That the time
which I prefix and prescribe for that purpose, is the space of two Months next
ensuing after the knowledge of this my Admonition. Within which time, such as
shall forbear to take or allow any more the Oath, or going to Church, I shall
most willingly accept their doing therein.

Yet signifying unto you withal, That such as do not within the time
prescribed, give this satisfaction, I must (though much against my will) for
fulfilling his Holiness commandment, Deprive them, and Denounce them to be
Deprived of all their Faculties and Privileges granted by the See-Apostolique,
or by any other by Authority thereof unto them, or to any of them; and so by
this present do Denounce, hoping that there is no man will be so wilful or
disobedient to his Holiness Order, but will conform himself as becomes an
Obedient Child of the Catholic Church.

And so most heartily wishing this Conformity in us all, and that we may live
and labor together Unanimes in Domo Domini, I pray God give us the Grace to
effect that in our Actions, whereunto we are by our Order and Profession
obliged.

This 2d of May, 1608. Your Servant in Christ, GEORGE BIRKET, Archpriest of
England, and Protonotary Apostolical.


Now were Pens employed on both sides, the Romanists cuffing one another
bravely about the Oath; Voluminous Coquaeus comes railing from France against
it; Getser opposes it in Germany; Andraeus Eudaemonioannes of Greece, declares
it Abominable; In Italy, Cardinal Bellarmine is very busy against it;
sometimes under his own, other times masked under false Names, as Tortus, and
some think Schulckenius was one and the same person with the Cardinal.

In Spain now flourished Franciscus Suarez; he also, by order from the Pope and
Conclave, is commanded to undertake it; which he does: But the good old man
thought he was hardly dealt withal by the Inquisitors, to whom having sent his
Book for Approbation, they altered Vid Bishop of Chichester (Dr. King) his
Letter to Is. Walton, before Hook^r's Eccles. Poliy, Edit. 1666.
and added according to their own humors, as was * confessed by Mr. John
Salikill, then Suarez his Amanuensis, but afterward reconciled to the Church
of England.

But above all the opposers of this Oath, none like Father Parsons; who to have
the better pretense of Reviling, will father King James his Apology upon Thomas
Montague, and (through that supposed Name) bespatter his Majesty. He tells us,
that all the The Judgment o^ a Catholic Englishman,. 14. page 9.
Learned men beyond Seas cry it down as unlawful, as opposing matters of Faith;
and he himself assures us, That none can take it Id. page 14. 22.
without peril of everlasting Damnation.

At last, Parsons coming to argue against it, is driven to the Fanatical
Argument, Liberty of Conscience; and thus boldly asserts it. For (says he)
Page 38.. 20.
neither Breathing, nor the use of common Air, is more due unto them [i. e.
good Subjects] or common to all, than ought to be Liberty of Conscience to
Christian men whereby each one lives to God and to himself, and without which
he strugleth with the torment of a continual lingering death. And then a little
after, thus boasts -- Id page 51.. 37.
Let them show but one only Authority Sentence. Example, or Testimony out of
any of these three kind of Witnesses, Scriptures, Fathers, or Councils, that we
must obey Princes against our Conscience or Religion, and I will grant he says
somewhat to the purpose.

Thus will they have all their Religion or Faith to hang upon the taking or not
taking of this Oath. But in this zeal for liberty he meets with a Rub, and that
is this: Why then do the Romanists force Protestants by their Inquisitions to
abjure their Opinions; and if they refuse, Id. page 23.. 36.
punish them with Death, or as the Crime requires?

To this Objection, Parsons thinks he says enough, by telling you, that the
case is not the same; because (forsooth) the Roman Church has jus acquisitum,
ancient right over Heretics; but the Protestant Church of England has no such
thing upon Catholics. As Treasonable an Assertion as could be imagined, seeing
according to his Consequence, and the thing in hand, A Protestant King can have
no right over Romanists; and so Protestanism must ipso facto deprive Kings, and
render them incapable of Dominion, where the people are of the Roman Religion;
so that Henry IV. was not, nor could be King of France till he was reconciled
to Rome.

The truth is, all of them who write against the Oath, ground all their
Exceptions upon this, That they think it takes away the Pope's power of
depriving Kings, and absolving Subjects from their Allegiance; so that we may
see what it is that pincheth them, and how much they look upon Loyalty and true
Obedience to be an Enemy to their Interest and Church.

But to render this Oath more odious and terrible, they amaze the simple people
with strange stories of God's Judgments against the takers of it; and this,
with the Vulgar, they make one of their best Arguments.

They alledg, That the Captain of them, viz. Father Blackwell, dyed Vid. Rog.
Widdrington's Theolog. Disput. cap. 10. Sect. 4.
suddenly: To which the other Party reply, That it is granted, that Blackwell on
Saturday in the afternoon [ viz. 25 of January, 1612] fell into a swoun (being
well before), upon which he was had to bed, whither some Priests came to him;
to whom he affirmed, he had done nothing contrary to his Conscience in taking
the said Oath, and that it was a lawful Oath; and so dyed a little after; but
his death was five years after he had taken the Oath.

That if sudden-deaths be Arguments, they could retort, and tell them of some
Priests, Enemies of the Oath, who dyed by the same Judgments; as of one in the
North, who (otherwise very healthy) was so suddenly stricken with a deadly
Disease, that he dyed within sixteen hours. Of another that fell down a pair of
Stairs, whereby he was so bruised, that he lived not long after. Of a third,
who leaping hastily over an Hedge, fell into a pit on the other side of the
Hedge, and so was cast away. To all these might be added, that one of the
greatest Champions the Oath had, was Mr. Thomas (or Rowland) Preston, a learned
Benedictan Monk, who lived many a fair year after his taking and defending the
said Oath; though the Pope and his Party might have wished that he had dyed
sooner, or writ less. Yet he disguised his Writings under the Name of Roger
Widdrington [who indeed was another Romanist, living in the North]; under which
Name he opposed Suarez, baffled Bellarmine, confuted Gretzer, Becanus, and the
rest of their Party; whereupon some began to call it Widdrington's Doctrine, i.
e. to defend the lawfulness of the Oath of Allegiance. The Jesuits had several
designs against him; once they plotted to seize upon him in a Boat upon the
River Thames, and so to hurry him beyond Seas, where they would have clawed him
for his defending Loyalty and Allegiance: but he suspected that the beyond sea
Air would hasten his death; therefore for some years he secured himself in the
Clink, where he lived with freedom, followed his Studies, and had an excellent
Library of his own.

Again the other Party object, That Mr. Jackson who took the Oath, dyed of the
Plague. But this is nothing to the unwarrantableness of the Oath, unless we
will argue, that it was unlawful to regain the Holy Land from the Saracens,
because S. Lewis ix, King of France, and one that is Canonized, is said to dye
of the Plague in that Expedition; or that we must not read Sanders his Book de
Schismate, because Edward Rishton, a rebellious ungrateful Priest, published
it, and made Continuations to it, and dyed of the Plague in Lorrain.

Nay, the Anti-Loyalists fly so low, that rather than have nothing to say,
they would object as a fault the living or breathing at a Bishops House; and
all this a-do, because Mr. William Warmington lived in the Bishop of
Winchester's House; whereas the Objection was occasioned by their own
uncharitableness: For Warmington having taken and engaged himself as a Champion
of the Oath, his own Roman Friends and Kindred became his Enemies, withdrawing
from him all the Benevolence they used to allow him.

Warmington put to this stress of Livelihood only for his Loyalty and
Obedience, petitions the King for some Allowance. The King graciously accepts
it, commends him to Dr. Bilson the Bishop of Winchester, with order to take him
to himself to his own House, there to provide for him. The Bishop obeys,
Warmington lives with him, wants nothing, has liberty at pleasure, and freedom
of his Religion. And is not this a notable Argument to prove the Oath of
Allegiance unlawful.

But if these should fail, they can fly to their old trick of Miracles, and
bring Heaven it self to confute the Oath; and this they doubt not but will work
much with the honest Romanist. One of their Stories take as follows.

Mr. Thomas Newton of Pickworth in Lincolnshire; a Roman Catholic, meeting at
Standford with one Mr. Edward Sutton of Kellam in Notinghamshire, a disorderly
pretended Protestant, were there apprehended, and committed to the Town Hall;
at last were carried to Thomas Cecyl Earl of Exeter, who proffered them the
Oath of Allegiance; Sutton after some excuses took it, but Newton desired time
to consider of it. Upon which, for want of Bail, and at the Constables desire,
they were returned to the Town Hall.

Here these two discoursed about the Oath; Newton assuring to his Companion its
unlawfulness. To bed they go together. About midnight September 4. 1612.
Sutton cries out, That he was damned only for taking the Oath, and declares
Newton happy for refusing it. Newton bids him make the sign of the Cross;
Sutton does so; then creeps down into the bed, saying, he durst not look up to
behold the Vision.

Newton looks up, sees the Room full of light and brightness, the Mystery of
the Trinity represented to him; then there appears the Virgin Mary in a shining
white Robe, with an infinite company of Angels about her, holding a Crown over
her head, singing in honor of the Trinity, Alleluia, Gloria in Excelsis Deo.
etc. Then Newton thought that the Virgin thus spoke to him -- Behold, see and
believe my Assumption in Body. Take not the Oath, but rather endure all
Torments; for I will be with thee, and assist thee in all, and will strengthen
and preserve thee from all pains and torments, with such Consolations as thou
now feel.

This Vision continued about half an hour; and a little before they vanished,
there appeared also a multitude of Saints and Martyrs, offering up (as it were)
Incense unto Almighty God, and saying to him -- Double thy Devotion unto
Saints; for nothing is more acceptable unto Almighty God. Thus was Newton
confirmed in two points, which before (as he said) he somewhat doubted of, viz.
the Virgins Assumption, and Prayers to Saints.

The Vision ended, Newton and Sutton roar out as loud as they could, Alleluia,
Gloria, etc. and thus they continued balling for three or four hours, Sutton
saying, that now he had learned how to pray.

In short, Sutton turns stark mad, and becomes distracted. The Bishop of
Peterborough administers the Oath of Allegiance to Newton, who for all the
contrary Commands in the Vision, took it, and so was set at liberty. And this
is the sum of the pretty Tale which Father Preston, an honest Romanist, thinks
ought to be ascribed either Theolog. Disput. cap. 10. Sect. 5. 23.
to the vehement Imaginations of a troubled Brain, or else to be accounted a
mere Illusion of the Devil. And so I leave it to the discretion of the Reader,
with liberty to approve or disprove these doughty Arguments against the Oath of
Allegiance.

But lest these Illusions, Inventions, and idle Stories, should not do the good
or mischief intended, the Pope must ever now and anon hurry over his Bulls into
England, to rowse up the Romanists, and put them in a posture of Defense
against the said Oath.

In King James his time, there were several such Papers; nor were they
discontinued in King Charles 1. his days. In the beginning of whose Reign Pope
Urban viii, one said to have some affection to the English Nation, sent over a
Bull of Comfort to the Romanists; part of which, relating to the Oath, take as
follows.

VRBANVS Pp VIII. Dilectis Filiis Catholicis Angliae.
Dilecti Filii, Salutem and Apostolilicam Benedictionem.
NON semper terraena faelicitas est beneficium Coeli and Patrimonium Pietatis;
pacem enim peccatorum videns Ecclesia non raro experta est potentiam mortalium
esse stipendium sceleris. Quare, Catenas Martyrum anteferimus exuviis
Triumphantium, and Rex sempiternus. Principatus Coelestes pollicetur, non iis
qui superbo pede jura proterunt, sed qui persecutionem patiuntur propter
justitiam, etc.

Quod si eousque vis progrediatur, ut vos ad noxium illud, and illicitum
Anglicanae fidelitatis jura mentum adigat, mementote Orationem vestram ab
universo Angelorum spectantium consessu audiri. Et adhaereat lingua vestra
faucibus ^estris, priusquam Authoritatem B. Petri ea jurisjurandi formula
imminutam detis. Non enim ibi id solum agitur, ut fides Regi servetur, sed at
sacrum Universae Ecclesiae sceptrum eripiatur Vicariis Dei Omnipotentis.

Quod soeliciis Recordationis Paulus V. Praedecessor noster in tam gravi
deliberatione decrevit, id omnino tanquam Decretum Veritatis servare debeatis.
Dilecti Filii, Tributum hoc Principi Apostolorum debitum nulla^ hominum minae
aut blanditiae a vobis unquam extorqueant; qui secus suadent, ij visionem
mendacem and divinationem fraudulentam prophetant vobis: Citius enim viro
Christiano debet potentium gladius vitam eripere quam fidem. Quod si Angelus
etiam e Coelo descendens vos aliter, quam veritas Apostolica, doceat, Anathema
sit, etc.

Datum Romae, S. Petri, sub. Annulo Piscatoris, die xxx May, 1626. Pontificatus
nostri Anno terti^.
Pope URBAN VIII. To his beloved Sons the Catholics of England.
Beloved Sons, Greeting and Apostolical Benediction.
TErrene foelicity is not always the benefit of Heaven, and the Patrimony of
Piety: For the Church, seeing the prosperity of sinners, has often found by
experience, that the greatness of Mortals is the stipend of Impiety. Wherefore
we prefer the Chains of Martyrs before the spoils of the Triumphant; and the
Eternal King promises Heavenly Principalities, not to them who proudly trample
the Laws under their feet, but to those who suffer Persecution for
Righteousness sake, etc.

And if Violence proceed so far, as to compel you to that pernicious and
unlawful Oath of Allegiance of England; Remember, that your Prayers are heard
in the whole Assembly of the Angels beholding you: And let your Tongue cleave
to the roof of your mouth, rather than you permit the Authority of St. Peter to
be diminished with that form of Oath: For that is not all, that Fidelity be
kept unto the King; but that the Sacred Scepter of the Catholic Church be
wrung from the Vicar of God Almighty.

That which our Predecessor Paul V. of blessed memory, with so great
deliberation decreed, that ought ye altogether to observe as a Decree of Truth.
Beloved Sons, this Tribute due to the Prince of the Apostles, no threats or
flatteries of men ought at any time to extort from you; and they who persuade
you otherwise, prophecy unto you a lying Vision, and a fraudulent divination:
for sooner ought the Sword of the Mighty take from a Christian his life, than
his Faith; yea if an Angel from Heaven teach you otherwise than the Apostolic
Truth, let him be Accursed, etc.

Dated at Rome, at St. Peter's, under the Signet of the Fisher, xxx of May,
1626, the third year of our Popedom.
FINIS.
THE TABLE.
A
A Drian II commands the murder of Michael the Emperor 182 Albert. Emperor
murdered 301 The Oath of Allegiance, vid. Oath. Cardinal Allens bad Principles
70, 71 His actions against Queen Elizabeth 454, 455, 456 Francis Duke of Anjou,
his death 502 Suspected by poison Ibid. Causes the Guisard to rejoice Ibid. Don
Juan d'Aquila lands in Ireland with Spanish forces 658, etc. L'Auspespine the
French Ambassador in England, plots the murder of Queen Elizabeth 450
B
BAbington's treasons against Queen Elizabeth 445, 446 Baldwin II Emperor of
Constantinople deposed 279 Fran. Baroncello his pranks at Rome 306 Cardinal
Baronius bad Principles 78 The Barricadoes 523 Pierre Barriere his plots
against the King 589 Becket, vid. Thomas Cardinal Bellarmines bad Principles
68, 69 Berengarius murdered 192 John of Bilboa, his imposture 360, 361 Birket
constituted Archpriest of England 720 Blois, the Assembly of the States General
meet there 527 The D. of Guise rules all there ibid. Boniface VIII Pope, his
life and actions 282, etc. Cardinal Bourbon declared King 562 Bow at the name
of the Pope and Virgin Mary 40 Richard Bristow's bad Principles 62, 66
C
CAelestine V Pope 282, 283 Alphonso Carillo Archbishop of Toledo, chief of the
Rebels against Henry IV King of Castile and Leon 337, 338, etc. Catherine Queen
of Navar deprived 343, 344 Robert Cecil threatened in a Letter from the
Romanists 707, 708 Charles III le Gross, Emperor deposed 185 First dated his
Letters from the year of Christ 186 Charles III le simple King of France
deposed 203, 204 Carlos I King of Spain chose Emperor, and called Charles V 353
His going from Spain into Germany opposed by the Spaniards 353, 354 Chastel
stabs the King 596 Childerick II King of France and his Queen murdered 160
Childerick III, King of France, deposed 165, 166 His Subjects absolved from
their Oaths of Allegiance by Pope Zachary Ibid. Clement VIII thanks the Irish
for their Rebellion 651 Sends a Letter to Tyrone the Rebel 655 Friar Clement
kills Henry III of France 547 The Prince of Conde poisoned 521 Conradino King
of Naples beheaded 281 Constantines Donation a mere cheat 117, 118, etc.
Constantine V Emperor of Constantinople murdered 169, 170 The Covenant, vid.
League Council of Sixteen, vid. Paris Culene King of Scotland murdered 211
D
DAndalo in a Chain under the Popes Table 307 Deodato Duke of Venice his eyes
put out 183 Desmond' s Plots against Ireland, and Articles with Francis I. King
of France 385, 386 Proclaimed Traitor 390 His death 392 Devils abused 27, 28
The Devil confessed his sins, and loved the Mass 28 Prayed for that his sins
might be forgiven 136 S. Dominick his lying stories 5 Donald V King of Scotland
imprisoned 183 Duffe King of Scotland murdered 208, 209, 210 Duncan King of
Scotland murdered 215
E
EDict, vid. Union Edmund King of England murdered 205 Edmund Ironside King of
England murdered 214 Edward King of England, surnamed the Martyr 206, 207
Edward II King of England, his deposing and murder 309, 310 Edward VI,
insurrections in the North and West against him 408, 409 Queen Elizabeth leaves
out the word HEAD, and is styled only Supreme Governor 400 Her Vindication
410, 411, etc. to 423 Her commendations by Forraigners 411 Defended from
cruelty in putting some Romish Priests to death 413, 414, 416 Declared in a
Bull of Pope Pius V, Excommunicated, Deprived and Deposed 419 Her mildeness and
mercy toward Romish Priests 419, 420, 421, 422, 423 Who were put to death for
Treasons, not for Religion Ibid. Deposed by Pope Paul IV Her murder designed by
Pius V 426 Her Subjects absolved from their Oath of Allegiance by his Bull 427
to 431 Insurrections in the North against her Government 432 Attempts to kill
her 445, 446 Several plots against her 675, 676, etc. Empire, its troubles by
the Papal arrogancy 303 England not subject to the Papal Power 233, 234
Equivocation 190 Exorcisms used by the Romanists to inveigle the ignorant
people 446, 447, 448, 449 St. Ericus IX King of Swedland killed 252 Erick VI
King of Denmark beheaded 279 Erick VII murdered ibid. Ethus King of Scotland
imprisoned 183 Exorcisms cheating 27
F
FAbritio, Duke of Venice his eyes put out 183 Felton condemned for Treason,
not for Religion 419 Esteemed as a Martyr by the Romanists 433 Florence, wicked
designs against it by the Pope 331, 332, etc. Folly of Heathens 1, 2 Formosus
Pope his troubles 196, 197 His body dragged out of the grave, and his fingers
cut off 197, 198 France, the holy League and Covenant there 483 More stirs
there upon the deaths of the Guises 529 The people's Declaration 530 S. Francis
his childish stories 2, 3, 4 Frederick I Barbarossa his troubles 254, etc.
Frederick II Emperor troubled and deposed 266
G
GAlla, Duke of Venice, his eyes put out 183 Father Garnet his life 696 to 707
The story of his straw 704, 705 Gerberg a Nun drowned in a Wine-vessel 178
Gibbelines their Story 270 Giovanni, Duke of Venice, banished 183 Men held for
Gods 1, 2 God abused and blasphemed 29, 30 Gradenico, Duke of Venice, murdered
183 Gregory I against a Universal Bishop 154 Commends the murder of
Mauricius 155, 156 Calls himself servant of servants 156 Delivers Trajans soul
out of Hell 157 Gregory VII his power 218, 219, etc. Deposed by a Synod at
Worms 220 By another at Brixen 226 Dies, and is Sainted 227 Gregory XIII his
explication of Pius V his Bull against Queen Elizabeth 435, 436 Jac. Gretser
his bad Principles 69 Guelfs their story 270 Guisards several designs against
the House of Navar, as the chief of that of Bourbon 488, 489, 490 Their
under-plottings against Henry III of France 494, 495, 496 to 502 Their designs
against the House of Bourbon 502 And to make themselves next Heirs of the
Kingdom 502, 503, etc. Look upon Cardinal Bourbon as first Prince of the Blood,
rather then the King of Navar 507 Duke of Guise holds a Treaty or Conventicle
with some Spanish Commissioners and others, and the agreement at that Cabal 505
Has a meeting of the Chieftains of the House of Lorrain at Nancy 520 Presents
several propositions to the King ibid. Comes to Paris, has the acclamations of
the people 522 The Queen Mother sent to treat with him 524 His insolent demands
524 Refuses to swear Allegiance to the King, and plots to take away his life
528 Is killed at Blois ibid. Cardinal of Guise killed by the Kings order ibid.
Gunpowder-Treason, vid. Treason
H
LOng Hair of great value 167 Hare, occasioned the taking of Rome 187
Harenscaran punishment, what 256, 257 Heaven abused with lies 29, 30 Henry II
King of England, his troubles by Thomas a Becket 235, 236, etc. His grief and
penance for Beckets murder 247, 248 Henry IV King of Castile and Leon, his
miseries by his proud and rebellious Nobility 337, etc. They make a League
against him ibid. Design to kill him 340 Henry IV Emperor his troubles and
deposition 218, 219, etc. Deprived 220, 224, 225 His strange Humility and
Submission 222 Crowned at Rome 226 Deposed by his son 228, 229 His poverty and
death 229 His body denied burial 229, 230 Henrician Heresy, what 230 Henry V
Emperor kisseth the Popes Toe ibid. Henry VI Emperor how Crowned 262 Henry
VII Emperor his death 301, 302 Henry, Son to John d'Albret King of Navar,
Excommunicated and declared Deprived by Pope Leo X 346 Henry King of Navar
protests against the Declaration and Excommunication of Pope Sixtus V 512, 513
Hen. VIII King of England, Supreme Head of the Church, declared deprived of his
Dominions 399, 400, 401, 402, etc. Paul III' s Bull against him 404, 405
Rebellions in the North against him 406 His Apology undertook by William Thomas
407 Hen. III K. of France, his troubles from the Leaguers, Book the 8th He
steals privately out of Paris 524 Submits to the D. of Guise 525 Closes in with
the King of Navar 540 His Name dashed out of all Prayer books ibid. A Monitory
Bull sent out against him by Sixtus V 540, 541, 542, 543 Is murdered by Friar
Clem. 547 The Action rejoiced at and vindicated by the Covenanters 548 and the
Chieftains of Rome 549, 550, 551, etc. Henry IV King of France his troubles
lib. 8. cap. 7. Declared Heretic, and deprived of his Dominions, by Gregory
XIV 577 Murdered by Ravaillac 640 to 648 Hildebrand, vid. Gregory VII Hugonots,
the Grandees of them massacred in one day 416 The action commended and
applauded publicly 416, 417 Hungary, bloody actions there 308 Ors. Hypato,
Duke of Venice slain 183
I
JAmes VI K of Scotland, plots against him by the Romanists 366, 367, 368, 369,
370, etc. Designs against his taking the Crown of England 676, 677, 678
Imposes the Oath of Allegiance, and defends it 709, 710, 711, etc. Jesuits
foolish stories of their Founder and Order 5, 6 They have two Consciences 45
Jesus Christ, childish stories of him 16, etc. 29 Married to several 16, 22 Not
so much worshipped as were others 17 Ignatius Loyola, his lying stories 5, 6
Images, troubles about them 163, 164 Ingratitude 229 The Spanish Invasion 451
to 459 The Spanish Royal Standard blessed 453, 454 Joane Pope 180 John King of
England his troubles 274 Joh. K. of Navar deprived 343, 344 Ireland, troubles
there against Q. Elizabeth 384, 385, 386, 387 to 397 Articles between Francis I
K. of France, and the Earl of Desmond for the conquering it 385, 386 A
Rebellion raised there by Tir-Oen 648, 649 The Irish send a slanderous Letter
to the Pope against Queen Elizabeth 649 They are thanked for their Rebellion by
the Pope 651 Defended by the Divines of Salamanca and Valladolid 667, 668, etc.
Irene murders her son Constantine 169 Donna Isabella, Sister to Hen. IV K. of
Castile invited to accept the Government, refuses, declared Princess of the
Asturias, and lawful Heir to the Kingdom of Castile and Leon 341 Succeeds in
the Kingdom 342 Julio II Pope, deprives John d'Albret, K. of Navar, and gives
his Kingdom and Dominions to Ferdinand II K. of Arragon 344 Of a Warlike
disposition 347, 348 Interdicts Lewis XII, absolves his Subjects; gives his
Kingdom to any that will take it: takes away the Title of MOST CHRISTIAN from
the French, and confers it on the King of England: ibid. the first Pope that
wore a long beard 350 Holy Junta of Spain against Charles V 357, 358, 361, etc.
Justinian II Emperor of Constantinople, his troubles 161, 162 His Nose 162
K
Kennith III King of Scotland murdered 211 Kings are but Asses 38 Must kiss the
Popes Feet ibid. Lead the Popes Horse ibid. Hold his Stirrup ibid. Carry up
water for the Popes hands ibid. Carry up his meat ibid. Carry the Pope on their
shoulders ibid. May be deposed by the Pope 41, 42, etc. May be deposed by
Bishops, though poor 53 Compared to Asses 38 to Dogs 43 May be deposed by their
Subjects 86, 87, etc. May be killed by their Subjects 95, 96, etc. For how many
Causes Kings may be deposed 107, 108, etc. Their murder defended by a B. D. of
the Sorbonne 503
L
Lambert Emperor slain 190 Holy League and Covenant in France, the
introduction to it 483, 484, 485, 486 to 494 The Articles of the Holy League
494, 495, 496, 497 The Leaguers solicit their cause at Rome with Pope Gregory
XIII 506 Their Declaration drawn up in the name of Cardinal Bourbon, whom they
call first Prince of the Blood 507, 508 Their Council of Sixteen at Paris, vid.
Paris Some Preachers set on work by them to bespatter the King and his actions
518, 519 Their insolences against King Henry III after the death of the Guises
529, 534 Their Holy Union 535 They send Messengers to the Pope with private
instructions to act 536 Card. Bourbon declared King by the Leaguers 562, 563,
etc. Leo III Emperor troubled about images 163, 264 L. Lessius bad Principles
74, 75 Lewis le Debonnaire Emperor deposed 170, 171, etc. 177 Lewis IV his
eyespull'd out 189 Lewis VII of France Interdicted 254 Lewis IV Emperor, his
troubles 303, 304 Lewis XII of France Interdicted 347 Calls a Council at Pisa
to depose Pope Julio 349 Roderigo Lopez his treasons against Queen Elizabeth
461, 462, 463 Designs to poison her ibid. Loretto's Chapel and flying story
23 Luidolph his humble submission 194 Those of Lions join with the Leaguers 537
Their Declaration ibid. The form of their Oath 533
M
THe Office of Majordom [Maire du Palais] first set up by Clotaire the I 165
One Landregesile first chosen to that Office ibid. Ebroin the first that
advanced that Office ibid. Malcolme King of Scotland murdered 208 Malcolme II
King of Scotland murdered 214 Gregory Martin's Pamphlet against Queen Elizabeth
437 Virgin Mary abused with lying stories 4, 5, 7, 8, etc. 21, 29 Her kissing
and marrying 8, 9 Her kindness to whores 9 Equal to Christ himself 11, 12 Her
blood better then Christ's blood 13 How hurried into Heaven 14 We must bow at
the Name of the Virgin Mary 40 Queen Mary of England in her 5 years Reign put
above 260 to death for Religion 418 Mauritius Emp. murdered 153, etc. The D.
of Mayenne goes to Paris, is made Head of the Leaguers 538, 539 Refuses peace,
is proclaimed Traitor and all his adherents 539 Medici, the wicked designs of
the Pope upon that Family 331 Giuliano murdered by Bandini and de Pazzi 332
Lorenzo wounded, but escapes ibid. Michael Emperor of Constantinople murdered
182 Miracles lying and forged 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, etc. 21, 22, 23, 24, 25,
etc. 134, 135, 184, 199, 207, 247, 266 Monegario, Duke of Venice, his eyes put
out 183 Cardinal Montalto his Letter to the General Council of the holy Union
about the murder of Hen. III 549, 550, 551, etc.
N
NAples its troubles 330 John Nichols, an account of him 434
O
OAths of Allegiance 60 Endeavored to be in France 57, 58, 59 Opposed in
England 73, 74, 75, 76, 77 First framed 709, 710 The Pope sends out two Breves
against the taking this Oath 716, 717, 718 Pope Urban VIII' s Breve against it
725 Obelerio Duke of Venice cut in pieces 183 Orders in Religion, and the
stories of their Founders 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 Oxford, a Priest pretends to cure
diseases there in 1663. p. 447 Otho IV Emperor deposed 265
P
Paris, a Council of Sixteen appointed there to act for the League 515 Their
design of surprizal of Bologne discovered to the King by Poulain 516 Their
designs to seize on the K. and kill him, discovered by Poulain 516, 517, 518,
521, 522 They break the Kings Great Seal and make another 539 A new Oath
enjoined ibid. Is besieged by Henry IV 565 Its Famine relieved by the Duke of
Parma 575 Yielded to the King 590 William Parry Dr. of Laws, his several
attempts and treasons against Q. Elizabeth 437, etc. Encouraged to kill the the
Queen 439, 440 Executed in the Palace-yard 442 Father Parsons, vid. Persons
Partitiato Duke of Venice thrust into a Monastery 183 Pope Paul V, his quarrels
with the Venetians 619 to 639 Pepin made King 165, 166 The first Christian King
that was Anointed 168 Cardinal Perron his bad Principles 57, 59, 84, 85 Fa.
Parsons bad Principles 75, 76, 77, 90, 91, 93, 94, 101 His life 679 to 688
Philip the Emperor murdered 263 Philip I King of France Excommunicated 232
Philip IV le Bell King of France his troubles by Pope Boniface VIII 282, etc.
Pius V, his Bull against Q. Elizabeth 427 to 436 Its interpretation granted by
Pope Gregory XIII 435, 436 Pope, his Power and Authority 31, 32, etc.
Extravagant Titles given him 33 The Pope is God 34 Can create something out of
nothing ibid. Above all power in Heaven or Earth 35 We must bow at the name of
the Pope 40 Pope to be obeyed rather then Christ or God ibid. Pope can depose
Emperors and Kings, and dispose of their Dominions 41, 42, etc. Can absolve
Subjects from their Allegiance to their Kings 82, 83, etc. Great strivings to
be Pope 131, 132, etc. The manner of their Elections ibid. 141 Formerly chose
by Emperors 139, 179, 180, 198, 201, 202, 216, 217 Whether there be really a
true Pope? 142, 143, etc. Their Toes kissed 38, 162, 167, 230, 260 Used to adore
the Emperors 170 Their horses led by Kings and Emperors 38, 181, 252, 253, 259
Their succession not agreed on 195, 196, 197, etc. 116, 117 Of 18 years old 200
Of 10 or 12 years old 216 The changing of their names 201 Popes stirrup held
227, 252, 253, 255, 259, 260, 299 Despise the Imperial Power 253 Schism amongst
them, and reflections upon some of their actions 323, 324, etc. Declares it
lawful for Subjects to fight against their King, if an Heretic 507 Nicholas
Poulain taken into the Council of Sixteen 516 Discovers all their designs to
the King 516, 517, 518, etc. Flees from Paris to the King 525
R
THe Reformation (of the Church of England) defended 412, 413 Relics false
and spurious 14, 15, 24, 25 Nicol. de Renzo his pranks at Rome 305, 306 William
Reynolds, an account of him 560 Richard II King of England, his deposing and
death 312, 113, 314 Charles Ridicove, a Friar sent to kill the King 597 Rodolph
declared Emperor against Henry IV 223 slain 226 Robert Rodolpho sent into
England by Pope Pius V, to stir up rebellions against Q. Elizabeth 426, 427
Roger King of Naples shot to death 252 Rome taken by the occasion of an Hare
187 Swears Allegiance to the Emperor 188 Odd Tumults there 305, 306
S
SAints, sottish, beastly and unchristian 18, 19, 20 Counterfeit, that never
were 20, 21 Sanders bad Principles 62, 66, 67, 83 Scotland, plots there by the
Romanists against King James VI 366, 367, 368, 369, 370, 371, 372, 373, 374,
375, etc. Scripture basely abused 3, 5, 6, 32, 33, 35, 39 Segovia, tumults
there begun upon the Emperor Charles V' s leaving Spain 355 Simony 143, 144,
151 The Council of Sixteen, vid. Paris Sixtus V Pope, his Bull against K. of
Navar, and Prince of Conde Very furious against Queen Elizabeth 454 Deprives
the Queen of her Dominions, and absolves her Subjects from Allegiance ibid.
So^^^z, vid. Sua^ez. S^rbonne- College their bad Pr^nciples 73 When built 99
They make a secret Decree that Princes may be deposed, etc. 519 They decree
that the people of France are freed from the Oath of Allegiance and Obedience
to Hen. III, and may fight against him 530, 531 They send to Sixtus V for a
ratification of this Decree 532, 533, 534 They conclude that Prayers are not to
be made for the King, and the word Henry to be dashed out of their Prayer-books
537 Spain' s rebellious League against Charles V 351 Or the holy Junta or
Assembly 357 Or Co^^^unalty 355 Tumults there upon Charles V' s departure for
Germany 355, 356, 357 The Spanish Invasion, vid. Invasion Squire' s design to
kill Q. Elizabeth Stapletons bad Principles 44 Stephanus P^pe strangled 197
Thomas Stukely his ambition for a Kingdom 387 His designs against Ireland 388
Fran. Suarez bad Principles 61 Subjects of themselves may depose Kings 86, 87,
etc. May kill their King 95, 96, etc. Suercherus II King of Swedland murdered
252 Suercherus III killed Ibid. Suintila K. of Spain deposed 158, 159
Supremacy, an interpretation of the Oath 400, 401
T
THomas a Becket his troubling Henry II 235, etc. Declared perjured and a
Traitor 238 Further accused 244 The Bishops complain against him 240, 241 His
Horse-bridle held by the King 246 He is murdered Ibid. William Thomas defends
King Henry VIII 407 Tir-Oen rebel to Q. Elizabeth in Ireland 393 Pardoned, and
rebels again 394 Raises a Rebellion in Ireland, lib. 9. c. 3. Proclaimed
Traitor by Mount-joy Lord Deputy 653 Submits, and delivers himself up 665
Tradenico D. of Venice murdered 183 Trajans soul delivered out of Hell 157
Traitors, how punished 256, 261, 262 Gunpowder-Treason 689 to 695 The Council
of Trent not free 425
V
VAlentia, troubles in that Kingdom 359, 360 Venetians, their insolences to
their Dukes 183 Dog-trick to get off their Interdict 307 Quarrels between them
and Pope Paul V 619 to 639 Verstegan his life 415 Vitalis Michele II D. of
Venice killed 253 Virgin Mary, vid. Mary Edict of Union (or July) a peace made
by it 525 The Heads of it 525 Pope Urban VIII sends a Breve against taking the
Oath of Allegiance 725
W
WIlliam I K. of Naples imprisoned 252 Willan' s design to kill Q. Eliz. 463,
464 Witches 208, 209, 215
X
XImenes Cardinal, his life, actions 251, 252
Y
YOrk designs to kill Q. Elizabeth 463, 464
Z
ZAchary Pope absolves subjects from their Oaths of Allegiance 166
FINIS.

