A Battle-Door FOR TEACHERS and PROFESSORS TO LEARN Singular and Plural; You to
Many, and Thou to One: Singular One, Thou; Plural Many, You. Wherein is showed
forth by Grammar, or Scripture Examples, how several Nations and People have
made a distinction between Singular and Plural. And first, In the former part
of this Book, Called The English Battle-Door, may be seen how several People
have spoken Singular and Plural; As the Apharsathkites, the Tarpelites, the
Apharsites, the Archevites, the Babylonians, the Susanchites, the Dehavites,
the Elamites, the Temanites, the Naomites, the Shuites, the Buzites, the
Moabites, the Hivites, the Edomites, the Philistines, the Amalekites, the
Sodomites, the Hittites, the Midianites, etc. Also, In this Book is set forth
Examples of the Singular and Plural, about Thou, and You, in several Languages,
divided into distinct Battle-Doors, or Forms, or Examples; English, Latin,
Italian, Greek, Hebrew, Caldee, Syriack, Arabic, Persiack, Ethiopick,
Samaritan, Coptick, or Egyptick. Armenia^^ Saxon, Welsh, Mence, Cornish,
French, Spanish, Portugal, High Dutch, Low Dutch, Danish, Bohemian, Slavonian:
And how Emperors and others have used the Singular word to One; and how the
word You came first from the Pope. Likewise some Examples, in the Polonian,
Lithvanian, Irish and East-Indian, together with the Singular and Plural words,
thou and you, in Sweedish, Turkish, Muscovian, and Curlandian, tongues. In the
latter part of this Book are contained several bad unsavory Words, gathered
forth of certain School-Books, which have been taught Boys in England, which
is a Rod and a Whip to the Schoolmasters in England and elsewhere who teach
such Books

George. Fox. John Stubs. Benjamin Furley.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Wilson, and are to be sold at his Shop at the Sign
of the Black-Spread-Eagle and Wind-mil in Martins le Grand, 1660.

AN INTRODUCTION: Which is, a leading into the BATTLE-DOOR which is, The
Entrance into Learning.
FOr all you Doctors, Teachers, Scholars, and Schoolmasters, that teach
people in your Hebrew, Greek, Latin, and English Grammars, Plural and
Singular; that is, Thou to one, and You to many, and when they learn it, they
must not practice it: what good does your teaching do them? for he is a Novice,
and an Idiot, and a fool called by You, that practices it; Plural, You to many;
and Singular, Thou to one.

NOw People, What good does all your giving money to these Schoolmasters,
Teachers, and Doctors, to teach your children Singular and Plural, in their
Accidence, and Grammars? what good does your learning do them, when you do not
intend, that they should practice it, when they have learned it; that is, Thou
to one, and You to many, he is called clownish, and unmannerly, if your child
practice that which he has learned at School, which you have paid for, he is
called a Clown, and unmannerly, and ill bred. (Mark) Then I say, All the
Scholars, all the Doctors, and Teachers, and Schoolmasters then are them that
teach people ill-breeding, and unmannerliness; which teaches Singular to one,
and Plural to many; For that is it they teach them, as you may read in the
Accidence, and Grammar; as, amas, thou love; amatis ye or you love: and so
all your Learning is come'd to naught, and all your money is spent in vain, and
all the Doctors, Teachers, and Scholars profits them not; for they come to be
unmannerly, and called ill-bred, and Clownes, when they speak the Language
Singular and Plural, thou to one, and you to many: And so, if people must not
practice that which they learned of them, this will make people believe, its a
work of darkness; But come people, do as they say, though they say, and do not.
Though they do not speak Singular to every one, but plural to one, though they
teach it, but thou to one, and you to many.

But, why do the Translators translate the Bible, Thou to one, and You to many,
Italian, Greek, Hebrew, and Latin; (Dutch Bibles, high and low) French
Bibles, and Welsh and English Bibles, and others, Plural and Singular, thou to
one, and you to many, if the people should not practice it, thou to one, and
you to many? Why do the Translators translate it so? thou to one, and you to
many, if the people should not practice it, and say thou to one, and you to
many, seeing he is an Idiot, and a Novice, and a fool, and an ill-bred Clown,
and unlearned, and unmannerly, by all the Doctors, Schoolmasters, Teachers,
Lawyers, Magistrates, and Scholars, that say thou to one, and you to many: Why
did all the Translators translate the Accidence and Grammar singular and
plural, thou to one, and you to many, which is to make Clowns of them, and
Idiots, and Fools and Novices? and why could you not have let you have stood in
all the Bibles, and Accidences, and Grammars, and never have translated the
word thou to one, if they be Idiots and Fools, that says thou to one, and you
to many? Do you not in this say that the Prophets, Apostles, and Saints were
Idiots and Fools, for saying thou to one, and you to many; and say, you are
wiser than them all; and you may say, you to all, though we have set it
otherwise in our Accidence, and Grammers, and Bibles, and teach so, and whip
all that do not learn so: May not the Nations question, and all People, the
Teachers, that they are not as ignorant in other things, in other Doctrines,
Principles, and points, as they have been, and are of the plural and singular
Language, in their tongues, that is you to many, and thou to one? who said, it
has been in other Languages, you to one, have not they deceived the Nations,
think you, in other things as well as this, as you may read in this Battle-door.

The Teachers of the world, and Scholars have been either very Ignorant of
Tongues, or else wilful, that they would have you spoken to one, which is
thou; and this may give all people to see, in saying that it was you in other
Tongues to one, that they are them which corrupts the Languges, and are
exalted, taking glory to themselves, and have the Plural put upon them, for the
singular, which is vulgar.

All Languages are to me no more than dust, who was before Languages were, and
am come'd before Languages were, and am redeemed out of Languages into the
power where men shall agree: but this is a whip, and a rod to all such who have
degenerated through the pride, and ambition, from their natural tongue, and
Languages, and all Languages upon the earth is but Natural, and makes none
divine, but that which makes divine is the Word, which was before Languages,
and Tongues were.

Men, crying up Tongues to be the Original, and they have degenerated from the
Tongues which they call the Original, which is not the Original, which be the
Naturals, I look upon the natural Languages no more than men to learn to dress
a horse, or women to sweep a house, as to divine things; For in the beginning
was the word, which was before Natural Languages were.

For speaking the word Singular and Plural we have been stoned, and persecuted
by the Priests, and Professors Generation, and our lives in jeopardy daily;
What says Thou? Thou to me.

Here is a touch of your Pricks, and your stuff of your one way, but not that
it is ours, for all these are in the confused State; for we could do it without
pricks, but only there is a great Company in the blindeness and ignorance,
which cannot read without them, nor cannot tell what to make of our words
without them, therefore we come to let you see your own way, and your own
teaching, that you may read your own, and how contrary you have been in your
own way, in your teaching, as in Accidence, and Grammar, and Bible.

A BATTLE-DOOR FOR TEACHERS and PROFESSORS TO LEARN Plural and Singular:
YOU to Many, and THOU to One; Singular one, Thou; Plural many, You.
THat now why the Teachers of the World, Scholars and Schoolmasters, teach
People and Children which will not have People, nor Children, speak Thou to
one, and You to many, is not sense, nor good Latin, nor good English, nor good
Greek, nor Hebrew: Therefore, to you that stumble at the word Thou to a
particular, because we do not say You to a particular, is this

The Light which Christ has enlightened you withal, believe in that, the
anointing within you, you may know to teach you.

Geo. Fox. BATTLE-DOOR is for you to learn, that you may speak Thou to one,
Singular, You to many, Plural.

Singular is to one, Thou, is to a single man or woman, or to God, or Christ.
Plural is to many, or more than one, You, is to many, men or women.

In Latin, Tu is thou singular, and Vos is you plural.

In Hebrew (...) attah, Thou man singular, (...) attem, Ye, or You men plural.

(...) at, or (...) or atti, thou woman singular, (...) atten, ye, or you women
plural.

In Greek, (...), Su is thou singular: and (...), hun^eis is you, or ye plural.

The Arabic is the same, Thou to one, You to many. The Syriack, Aethopick,
Caldee, the Egyptian, the Samaritan, etc.

God spoke singular to one, God spoke plural to many.

Christ spoke singular to one, He spoke plural to many.

Ths Saints spoke singular to one, The Saints spoke plural to many.

Come Priests and Professors, Scholars and Schoolmasters, you have the
Original, as you call it; to you is this BATTLE-DOOR.

Is not your own Original, Thou to one singular, and You to many plural; and
proper speech, not nonsense? Do not they speak false English, false Latin,
false Greek, false Hebrew, false O^ldee, false Syriack, and Arabic, false
Dutch, false French; and false to the other Tongues, that follows here in this
Book, that does not speak thou to one, what ever he be, Father, Mother, King,
or Judge, is he not a Novice, and Unmannerly, and an Idiot, and a Fool, that
speaks You to one, which is not to be spoken to a singular, but to many?

O Vulgar Professors, and Teachers, that speaks Plural when they should
Singular, lapis a stone, lapides stones, that is, more than one.

Come you Priests and Professors, have you not learnt your Accidence.
Singulariter,
Ama amato, love thou Amet amato, love he, or let him love


Say on,

Amemus, love we, or let us love. Amate amatote, love ye Ament amanto, love
they, or let them love.


And Singular.
Amo, I love Amas, thou love Amat, he loves
Plural.
Amamus, we love Amatis, ye love Amant, they love


Will not Boys, and Children, shame Professors and Teachers, through Pride and
Ambition, to be degenerated from their own Mother Tongue; to be Fools, and
Novices, and Idiots, from that which they learned when they were Children.

But you Teachers, Professors, Scholars and Magistrates, who rages at them
that speaks Singular to Sing. and Plural to Plural, who pretend that you know
Accidence and Grammar, Logic, Rhetoric, and Divinity; yet in practice you
must have your BATTLE-DOOR again, but is this Schollar-ship true English,
Latin, or sense to say of us, instead of, of me, to us for to me; toward us
for toward me, and to put off you, for off thee? and is not this nonsense,
and false English, and false Latin, to put Nos, vos, illi; we, ye, you, and
they instead of Ego, tu ille, I, thou, and he. Read on: Singular
I of me to me toward me from me
Plural
we of us to us toward us from us
Singular
Thou of thee to thee toward thee O thou from thee
Plural
Ye of you to you toward you O you from you
Singular He of him to him by him with him she of her to her by her with her it
of it to it by it with it Plural
They of them to them by them with them
Singular
My thy
Plural
our your
Singular
his, her
Plural
their, theirs
Singular
My self I my self my own self
Plural
Our selves we our selves our own selves
Singular
Thy self thou thy self thine one self
Plural
Your selves you your selves your own selves
Singular
him self her self it self
Plural
themselves
Singular
he himself she herself
Plural
they themselves
Singular
his own self her own self its own self
Plural
their own selves


To put us for me, and they for he, and you for thou, and we for I; and to put
every one of these words aforesaid out of its proper place, would it not be
confusion, and like unto the confused Priests and Teachers speech in the world?

Come Professors, Teachers and Magistrates, would you not be offended to say
Author for Authors, and to say in Authors for in an Author; or to the Authors,
for to the Author? is not this nonsense, and such as knows not Singular and
Plural? or at least does not practice it: and to say learned Authors, for a
learned Author, will this please you? Plural for Singular? or to say Books for
a Book, or the Books for a Book, or in Books for in a Book, is it not contrary
to Plural, and Singular, and sense, and your own Schoole-directions, and
contrary to English and Latin?

Is not Singular, a Book, an Author, and old Author; and is not Plural, Books,
Authors, and old Authors? do not rage at them that do not speak Plural to
Singular.

But read the BATTLE-DOOR, that you may come to the Accidence, Grammar, and
Bible; you who pretend you have the Histories.

Who was the first that brought up this evil custom, to put you for thou, or
to say we when you should say I; and they, when you should say he; our, when
you should say mine, us, when you should say me; your, when you should say thy?

Answer ye learned men; who has brought this evil custom to put Plural for
Singular? Come ye Doctors and Schoolmasters, and Teachers, and Professors, and
Magistrates: Come ye peevish Professors, and Teachers, answer me, and so read
again you three Persons (so called) Singular, and Plural, in this BATTLE-DOOR.

Singular
I thou he
Plural
We ye or you they


Ego tu ille
that is I thou he
Singular

nos vos illi
that is We ye or you they
Plural

Now it is not nos I, nor ego we, but ego I, and nos we; it is not tu you,
nor vos thou, but tu thou, and vos ye or you; it is not ille they, and illi he,
but ille he, and illi they.

Some Examples in English alone, about the three Persons in both Numbers, (so
called) Singular and Plural.
Singular
I have been thou have been he has been
Plural
We have been ye, or you have been they have been


Now to say, you have been, they has been, thou have been, he have been, is
not this nonsense, ye Teachers and Professors? is not this to put the Plural
for the Singular, and not to put the Singular in his place? and is not that the
nonsense to one, and false English, and false Latin, and ragg'd when the
Plural is put to the Singular.

If you be not like a company of mad men, Schoolmasters, Professors, Teachers,
Magistrates, Ministers, surely you will see and own, and come to read, Singular
I am thou art he is
Plural
We are ye are they are


Singular
I shall, or will be thou shall, or wilt be he shall, or will be
Plural
We shall, or will be ye shall, or will be they shall, or will be


Cannot you understand this we, ye they, from I, thou, he? surely you should
not be so Mad and Crabbed, and Peevish, and Snuff at the Innocent, proper and
Singular Language, and not say thou's, thou me; I will be you would, I will have
Plural, I love nonsense, I love false English, I love false Latin, I will be
as a Beast, I will have neither Manners, nor Learning, yet I will be esteemed
of, as though I had all; I will have you, instead of thou; but is it manners or
learning, to speak we, when they should speak I, or to speak you, when they
should thou, and to speak they, when they should he?

Answer me you Schoolmasters, Schoolars, Professors, and Teachers, and
Magistrates, who cannot abide the Innocent.

Whether it be proper to speak Plural, when we should Singular? whether or no
such are not to be accounted to be without Learning, and Ill-bred, and Savages,
and the Barbarous people?

Several Instances, to show, how several Nations used the Singular and Plural
Language.
Persian Language.
THe Langua ge in Persia was Plural and Singular, As King Artexerxes; the King
spoke you to many, in the seventh of Ezra, and thee to one.

Hebrew Language.
ANd the Jews Language was Plural and Singular to the King, as Neh. ^. they,
and thou.

Syriack Language, and others.
ANd the Language of Rheum, the Chancellor, and Shimshat the Scribe, and the
rest of their companions; the Dinaites, the Apharsathihites, the Tarpelites,
the Apharsites, the Archevites, the Babylonians, the Susanchites, the
Dehavites, and the Elamites, etc.

And this Letter was Plural and Singular, as you may see in the fourth chapter
of Ezra, 11, 13, 15, 16, verses, and the Kings Answer was Singular and Plural
to them; thou to one, and you to many.

And Haman spoke Plural and Singular, thy, and their, to King Ahasuerus, who
reigned from Iudia, even unto Ethyopia, over an hundred and twenty seven
Provinces; see Ester the 1 chap 1, 3, and 8, verses, etc. And the Language of
Hamans wife was Plural and Singular, chap. 5. And the King thou would Haman, Ester
the 8. and the 2, 3. verses, and Ester thou would the King, and the King thou would
her, whose Language was Plural and Singular; thou to one, and you to many.

Job.
Job, the greatest man in all the East, in the land of Vz, (a Judge) Job 2. he
thou would his wife, and his wife thou would him.

Temanits Language, Job 1.
ANd Eliphaz the Temanite, thou would Job, and told him he had taught many, and
spoke Plural and Singular.

Naomitich Language, Job 11.
ZOphar the Naomite, his Language, was Plural and Singular; he thou would Job, and
ye'd many in the 19. verse.

Shuits Language, Job 18.
BIldad the Shuite, he thee'd Job, and these their Language, was Plural and
Singular.

Greek
THe Gentiles speech was Plural and Singular, Cornelius was thee'd and thou would
by Peter, and we are all here: So the Gentiles speech was Singular and Plural,
Acts the 10.

The Athenians, learned wise Philosophers, Epicureans, and Staicks, they spoke
the Language, Plural and Singular to the Apostles, and said thou brings strange
things to our ears, that we may know what these things means: And they all
spoke Plural and Singular, and we never read that any was offended at Plural
and Singular, (but the Christians) and the Bible justtifies the same; and such
as worshipped stocks and stones, had Plural and Singular Language amongst them,
Acts 17. 25, 26, ver.

Festus thou would Agrippa, and said he should hear Paul; and he spoke Plural, and
said I have brought before you, and especially before thee Agrippa; this was
their Language, Plural and Singular.

Greek Language,
AGrippa thou would Paul, and said, tho^ art permitted to speak for thy self; and
Paul thou would him again, and it was not offensive; and he spoke Singular and
Plural to them, Acts 26. Here you may see the Heathens may judge the Christians.

Ethiopick Language,
THe Black-moores Language, was Plural and Singular, to King Zedechia, King of
Judah, Jer. 38. The Black-moore, spoke Plural and Singular, and the King thou would
the Black-moore again, and there was no Jangling about the word; and Jeremiah
thou would and thee'd the King, and the King thee'd him again, and spoke Singular
and Plural.

The Stumblers objection is, Job 18. Bildad the Shuite, When will you make an
end of your words? Eliphaz the Temanite had been speaking, and Job, therefore
he said, When will you make an end of your words? now says the stumblers, he
you would and ye'd Job; but when he speaks to Job, he thou would him, and said, thou
art he that teers the Soul.

Elihu, the Son of Barachel the Buzite, spoke the Language Plural and Singular,
to Job, Job 32, 33. chap. Elihu waited, and saw there was no answer in the
mouths of the three men; but when he speaks to Job, he speaks Singularly.

Egyptian Language,
ANd Pharaoh, King of Egypt, was thee'd and thou would, and you was used; so Plural
and Singular, the Egyptians Language, which the Spiritual Egyptians, which is
grown into a Monster, cannot a bide it; Pharaoh thou would Jacob, and said how old
art thou? Pharaoh, the'd Joseph, Gen 48. and Pharaoh thou would and thee'd Joseph,
and you would the people; go to Joseph, and he will show you, what he says to you,
Genesis 42.

Hebrew Language,
JOseph spoke Plural and Singular, you to his Brethren, and thee to his Father,
Genesis 42.

Moahitish Language.
BAlack, the Son of Siphro, King of Moab, spoke Singular and Plural; he thou would
and thee'd Balaam, and Balaam, thou would and thee'd him, Number. 23. and 24. chap.

Hivites Language.
ANd the Hivites said thee to Joshua, Joshua 9. 8.

Edomites Language.
ANd the Language of Edom was Singular and Plural, the Jews to him was we; for
Edom t^ou'd Moses Messenger, Numbers 20. 18.

Philistines Language.
THe Philistines Language was Plural and Singular, they thou would Sampson, and
thee'd his wife, Judge. 15. 16. and said we.

Amalekites, and Moabites Language.
BOoz, of the family of the Amalekites, and Ruth a Moabite, their Language was
Singular and Plural, as you may read in Ruth. And Joseph thou would and thee'd his
mistress, and she was not offended, Genesis 39.

Sodoms Language.
THe Language of Sodom was Plural and Singular, as they spoke to Lot, Genesis 19.
5.

Genesis 20. Abimeleck the King thou would Abraham, and his Language was Plural and
Singular.

Hittites Language.
THe Language of Heth, and Ephron the Hittite, was to Abraham Singular and
Plural, Genesis 23.

Egyptians Language.
ANd pharoahs Language to Abraham was thou, Genesis 12. And Melchisedecks Language
was Singular to Abraham, Genesis 14.

Midian Language.
JEthro the priest of Midian, Moses Father-in-law, his Language was plural and
singular; and he thee'd and thou would Moses, and said you when he spoke of more
than one, Exodus 17.

Philistines Language.
ANd Goliath the philistin, spoke plural and singular; that was their speech,
and thee'd and thou would David, and David thee'd and thou would the philistin, 1 Samuel
17.

Hebrew Language.
ANd Jonathan thee'd Saul his Father the King, 1. Sam. 19. Abigail thee'd David
the King, and Abigails servant thee'd her, 1 Samuel 25.

And the man of God, that came out of Judah, thou would and thee'd Jeroboam the
King, and Jeroboam thou would and thee'd him, 1 Kings 13.

Nathan thou would David, 1 Kings 1.

Egyptian Language.
ANd Pharaoh thou would Haddad, 1 Kings 11.

Hebrew Language.
JEhu thou would Baash, 1 Kings 16.

The woman that Elisha healed her child, said thee and thou to him, 1 Kings
17. which the worlds Ministers stumbles at now; and Elisha thou would Ahab, 1 Kings
18.

John, who was to prophecy to Nations, we do not read, but he spoke you to
many, and thou to one.

Jesabel could speak the Language plural and singular, 1 Kings 21.

And Ahaziah, his captains over fifty men, thou would Elijah the Prophet, 2 Kings
1.

Sirian Language.
ANd Elisha thou would the King of Israel, and he thou would Naaman, 2 Kings 5. when he
bid him go wash in Jordan: so here you may see the Sirian Tongue was thee and
thou singular and plural, 2 Kings 5.

And the Assirian King thee'd and thou would the King of Israel in his letter, 2
Kings 5.

Sirian Language.
ANd the King of Assiria, his messengers spoke the Language Singular and
plural, to the King of Isreal's Messengers, 2 K. 5.

Syriack Language.
ANd the Caldeeans spoke to the King in the Syrian tongue, and thee'd him; and
he you would them, Daniel 2 chap. we will bring the Sun upon the Beasts of the
field, that the hea^e shall make them to gad, the firstborn of death has long
spoken, that Condemns about the plural and singular, Language.

Syriack Language.
LAban and Bethuel, and Rebeccah, and her mother, their Language was singular
and plural in the Syrian Tongue unto Abraham's servant, and his was the same to
them, Genesis 24. 25.

Hebrew Language.
ANd Jacob thou would Laban his Father in-law, and his Language was Plural and
Singular to Iocob, whom Rachael stole his Gods from, Genesis 31.

Sodoms Language.
ANd the King of Sodom thee'd Abraham, and Abraham theed and thou would him again,
Genesis 24.

Ethiopian Language.
ANd the Queen of the South which came from the uttermost parts of the earth,
to Solomon, her language was thee to him, and was Plural and Singular to him, 1
Kings 10.

Syriack Language.
THe King of Assyriahs servant thou would him, the King; and his servant spoke
Singular and Plural 2 Kings 6.

Caldee Language.
THe Caldeeans Language was Plural and Singular to Nebuccadnezzar the King, and
thee'd and thou would him; and the fourth of Daniel, Nebuccadnezzar, King unto all
people, Nations and Languages that dwelt in all the ^arth. And the Jews
Language to him was Singular and Plural, thee and thou, and we, and us, and
was not offended at it, and did not persecute about it, as Christians do now.

Babylonian Language.
THe Kings of Babylon, Nebuccadnezzar and Beltashazzers Language was Plural and
Singular, Genesis 4. 5, chapters, and Beltashazzar thee'd and thou would Daniel.

Medians Language.
THe Language of the Princes of Babylon to Darius the Median, was Plural and
Singular, for they thee'd and thou would the King; and King Darius the Son of
Ahasuerus of the seed of the Meeds, Daniel 9. his Language was thee and thou to
Daniel; and Plural and Singular, Daniel 6. 5.

Such as was in the ship with Jonah, they thou would Jonah, and spoke the Plural
language, and the Singular: the Heathen, Jonah 1.

Edomitish and Isreal's Language.
ESau, his Language was thou to his Father Isaac, Genesis 27. and Esau thou would
Jacob, and Jacob thou would him again, Genesis 33. and their language was Singular and
Plural.

The Samaritan Language.
THe woman of Samaria, her Language was plural and singular to Christ, and she
thou would and thee'd him, and Jesus thee'd her again, and spoke singular and
plural; and he was not offended at the woman's language, John 4.

Roman Language.
ANd Paul said he was a Roman, in his Examination, and spoke singular and
plural, thee and thou to one, and you to many, whose language does continue
plural and singular, Acts 22.

Gentiles Language.
ANd Pilate the Gentile, the Heathen, he spoke the language plural and singular
to the Jews, and to Christ, and Christ spoke plural and singular to him, Luke
23.

The Professors and Teachers Objection, is, That Christ spoke plural to Peter:
which if they read that chapter throughout, they may see how that when he spoke
you, he spoke to his disciples, and says, I have appointed you a kingdom, that
you may drink at my Table: he says unto Simon, Satan has desired to have you,
and sift you, but I have prayed for thee; and when thou art converted
strengthen thy Brethren: so here is singular, and here is plural spoken of by
Christ: and mark what Trials Peter had afterward, (that Christ said he prayed
for) at the sufferings of Christ, who did the like as Peter did: and after,
when Christ had spoken singular to Peter, he spoke plural again to the
disciples, saying, I sent you without a purse, and you wanted nothing. So if
Professors and Teachers be not wilfully blind, and make others as blind as
themselves, by reading over this chapter, they may see Christ speaks singular
to one, and plural to many, and not plural to Peter, Luke 22. 32, 33.

God spoke singular; he thou would Adam; and Adam thou would God, and God spoke plural,
and God said, I have given to you every herb, Genesis 1. and 2. chapter.

And God thou would Moses, but when he spoke to Moses and the Congregation, he said
you, Leviticus 1. and in the 18. of Leviticus, and the Lord spoke unto Moses,
Speak unto the children of Israel, and say unto them, I am the Lord your God,
Lev. 18. Mark, your God, and thou Moses: and Exodus 24. and he said unto Moses
thou: so here was the Lords speech, thou to one, and you to many.

Christ's speech, the Son of God, was plural and singular, he thou would Pilate,
Luke 23. and he thee'd Peter, Matthew. 16. 23. and he said you to the Pharisees,
Matthew. 23. and he said you to the disciples, John 15. 16. I have chosen you:
here was Christ's speech plural and singular.

And the Prophets, the Apostles, and Saints, was thou to one, and you to many,
plural and singular; For Jacob thou would Esau, Genesis 33. 10. and thou would God. And
Jacob you would his Sons, Genesis 42. and Joseph you would his Brethren, and they thou would
him, as you may see in that chapter.

Abraham's and Isaacks Language.
ANd this was the Language of Abraham and Isaac; you to more than one, and
thou to one, Genesis 22.

Isaac thou would Jacob; and you would Jacob, and Esau, Genesis 28.

Moses thou would God in the 32 of Exodus, and spoke plural to him, and bid him
remember how he said he would multiply your seed; speaking of Abraham and
Isaac.

Jeremy thou would Zedechia, Jeremiah 39. and you would the children of Israel, in the
40. chap. and 3. verse.

And Isaiah spoke singular and plural; singular, where he several times in the
25. of Isaiah says thee and thou to the Lord; saying, O Lord thou art my God, I
will exalt the^. etc. and he speaks plural in the 9. verse, whom they have
waited upon, who will save us.

The Prophet Ezekiel speech was plural and singular, You shepherds, You eat
the fatt, and cloth with the wool, Ezekiel. 33, 36. chapters, Thou Devourest up
men. And the rest of the Prophets you may look throughout, and see the Language
plural and singular.

The Apostles they spoke singular and plural, they thee'd Christ, and thou would
God, as Peter in the 16. of Matthew. said thee to Christ, when he told him he was
to suffer, and said, Thou art the Son of God, Matthew 16.

And Paul said, Who art thou Lord, when he was struck down? Acts the 9.

And Peter he you would the Children of Israel, as in Acts the 3.

And the Apostle Paul you would the Saints, Ephesians. 1. and you would the Gentiles, Ephesians. 3.
and thou would God, and so used the Language singular and plural.

And the Apostles, and the Brethren thou would Peter, Acts 11.

Isaacks servant thou would his Master, Jacobs Sons thou would their Father, and
Jephtha's Daughter thou would her Father.

Ruth thou would her Mother-in-law; and you may see Subjects, and Kings above
mentioned, how they spoke the word plural and singular, thou and you, and was
not offended.

The end of the ENGLISH BATTLE-DOOR.
THE LATIN Battle-Door.
In lucem qua christus vos illuminavit in eam credit, ut unctionem intra vos,
ad vos docendum cognoscatis.

Geo. Fox.
PRofessors, Teachers, and Magistrates, would it not be nonsense, and not right
English, to say doces you teach; legis you read? And would it not be
false English, and false Latin, and nonsense, to say, audis you hear? yet
you Professors and Teachers, and Magistrates, are in such a rage against a
simple and Innocent People, for speaking the word thou to one, and you to more
than one; and call them Fools, and say they cannot speak true English.

But come ye before Mentioned, and read; is it not docetis ye teach, legitis ye
read, auditis ye hear? and is it not doces thou teach, legis thou read,
and audis thou hear? have you forgott Amo, amas, amat, amamus, amatis,
amant? In English, I love, thou love, he loves, we love, ye love, they love.

And when one of your Priests goes to a Town to Teach, for him to say docemus
we teach; were this truer English, or truer Latin, than to say doceo I teach?
is it proper English and Latin for our Professors, and Teachers, and
Magistrates, for them to say Amo we love, amas you love, amat they love? is
this good Latin, or good English, you Scholars and Old Professors, and
Magistrates, which rage so at such as speak not Plural, but Singular to one?

Come to the BATTLE-DOOR again; but is not this the proper English, and proper
speech, you Professors, Teachers, and Magistrates for to say, Amo, I love,
amas, thou love, amat, he loves, singular? Amamus, we love, amatis, ye love,
amant, they love; plural?

But this is that which pleases the Teachers, Magistrates and Professors of
Christ's words out of the life, (to whom this BATTLE-DOOR is sent to read) for
to say Amamus, I love, amatis, thou love, amant, he loves; is this good
Latin, and good English, and good sense, you that cannot bear the Singular
Language to a single person your selves. Pluraliter, docetis, thou teach;
docent, he teach? and is it good Latin, and good English, and good sense, to
say Legitis, thou read, legunt, he reads, Audimus, I hear, audio, we hear?

Now if you teach that which you call the Singular Number, instead of the
Plural, and the Plural, instead of the Singular; and will not have them to
practice it, nor speak it, but are angry with them because they do speak Plural
and Singular; and yet you teach them in your Accidence, the Plural and the
Singular, are not you the Novices, Fools, and Idiots, and keep People and
Children in Ignorance, that they shall neither speak true sense, nor true
English, nor true Latin, but speak false?

Doce, doceto, teach ye; lege, legito, read ye; audi, audito, hear ye; you
Schoolmasters, you Ministers, and Doctors, and Magistrates, is this good
English? is this good Latin? is this good sense? who rages at the people of
God called Quakers, because they speak the word thou to one? would not your
Schoolmasters have whipped you, if you had read so? and will you persecute
others because they say, doce, doceto, teach thou; lege, legito, read thou?
will you persecute us because this we practice, and say thou to a particular:
But to say the Plural in the Singulars place, you, for thou, this pleases our
Priests, and Schoolmasters, and Peevish Magistrates: Thou's thou me, Cry they:
and thus they have forgotten their Accidence.

The proper Speech, true Latin, true Sense, true understanding, true English,
which Teaches Plural and Singular, it has not been the book that taught
friends Spiritual understanding, but the Lord.

Come Professors, Teachers, and Schoolmasters, and Scholars, and Magistrates,
learn the pure Language, learn Friends Language; learn Plural and Singular; To
say hi lapides, a stone; is not this nonsense? or is it good English or
Latin, you that love Plural to the Singular, and cannot endure the Singular to
the Singular, but the Plural to the Singular? Therefore we gave you here the
Plural to the Singular?; See if this would not be nonsense to you, false
English, and false Latin, and stink in your own Nostrills; but this is the
true English, and true Latin, we must tell you all Schoolmasters, and
Professors, and Magistrates, that rages so against us that Lapides, is stones
Plural, that is many stones, or more than one; and lapis, is a stone Singular.

Come Teachers, Scholars, Professors, and Magistrates, is this true English,
good Latin, proper sense for to say, hi Magistri, a Master; and hic Magister,
Masters? so when he calls master, he calls masters; is this sense you that
cannot endure thou to a Singular, but would have Plural to him? is not hic
Magister, a Master; and hi Magistri, Masters? is not a master Singular, and
masters, Plural? is not this proper sense, proper English, and proper Latin.
Who are the Idiots, Novices and Fools, but such as have learned most of their
life time, and cannot bear singular to one, as the word thou; but he rages, and
frets, and knaws himself?

Come Priests, and Scholars, and Magistrates, hoc Regnum, Kingdoms: is this
sense? and haec Regna, a Kingdom; is this good Latin? is not this like unto
the English sense, and their Teachers, Scholars, Magistrates and Professors
Language, who will take plural to the singular, and offended, if the plural be
not spoken to the singular. Are not these the men that have abused the English
Tongue, and darkened the people from good sense? but the plural and singular is
this, in your Accidence; Hoc Regnum, a Kingdom, singular: and the plural is
Haec Regna, Kingdoms; not Haec Regna, Kingdom, nor Hoc Regnum, Kingdoms.

You Scholars, and Teachers, and Magistrates; is not Musa, a Song; and Musae,
Songs? Now, to put Musae, for Musa, Songs, for Song, would be Improper, and
very Boys would laugh at the Teachers, Professors, and Magistrates faces,
because they do speak plural, when they are to speak singular; Musae, Songs,
instead of Musa, a Song.

And Filia, a Daughter, and Filiae, Daughters; not Filiae, for Filia; not
Daughters; for Daughter.

And Mensa, a Board, or a Table in the singular, and Mensae, Tables, or Boards
in the plural number: not Mensae, for a Table, but Mensa.

And Dominus, Lord, and Domini, Lords; now, to say Dominus, Lords; is this
sense?

And Deus, God, and Dii, Gods; and to say Dii, for Deus, Gods, for God; would
not this be nonsense? and is not Deus, singular; and Dii, plural?

And Is It Pater, a Father, in the singular; and Patres, Fathers, in the plural:
now to put Patres, for Pater, this were to put Fathers, for Father; plural for
singular; for Pater, a Father, is singular; and Patres Fathers, is Plural.

Caput, a Head, singular; and Capita, Heads, plural; but to put Capita, for
Caput, is to put plural, for singular; many Heads, for one Head: and is not
this the doings of the Professors, Teachers, and Magistrates?

Animal, a living Creature; Animalia, living Creatures; to put Animalia, for
Animal; is to put the plural, for the singular; and to say many Creatures are
one, and one is many.

Matter, a Mother; and Matres, Mothers: Now, to say Matres, for Matter; is to put
plural for singular again.

Homo, a man; Homines, men; and to say Homines, to a man, instead of Homo, a
man; and that is the Language, that must please our Teachers, Professors, and
Magistrates, to put the plural to the singular: But Homo, is a man; and
Homines, is men.

And in the fourth Declention, so called, it is read Haec Manus, a hand, and Hae
Manus, hands; not Hae Manus, a hand, nor Haec Manus, hands; and to say many
hands, where there is but one hand, is that sense?

And it is Haec Facies, a Face, in the singular; and Hae Facies, Faces, in the
plural.

And is not Bonum, a good thing; and Bona, good things: but to put Bona, for
Bonum; things, for thing; a plural for a singular; This is the Professors, and
Teachers, and Lawyers Road; it will not please them, unless the plural be put
for the singular: and all are Novices, and Fools, and Idiots, and unmannerly,
and ill-breed, and wants learning, and do not speak plural to them when he
should speak singular; when plural is many or more than one; and singular is
one; as Bonum, a good thing, and Bona, good things; and Homo, a man; and
Homines, men; and to put Homo, men, and Homines, a man; is not this it that
pleases you, is not this non-scence? and is not this it that pleases the
Idiots, and the Fools, and the Novices, and ill-breed; when a manor a woman
will grin like dogs, if they have thou spoken to one, and not you.

Read over some Scripture Examples, taken forth of the Latin Bible about thee,
and thou, and you, and ye; Singular and Plural.
ADam thou would God, Genesis 3. 12. The woman that thou gave me; in Latin by
Tremelius, it is Mulier ista quam posuisti mecum; and in the Vulgar Translation,
it is Mulier quam dedist^ mihi Sociam: mark, it is dedisti, thou have given, not
dedistis, you have given, nor posuistis, you have placed, put, or set; but
posuisti, thou have put, placed or set.

God thou would Adam, Genesis 2. 16. Of every Tree of the Garden thou may freely
eat; in Latin, by Iunius and Tremelius, it is de fructu quidem omnis arboris
hujus horti libere comedes; here it is comedes, thou shall eat, not comedetis,
you or ye shall eat; in the vulgar, so called, ex omni ligno paradisi comede:
mark, it is comede, eat thou, not comedite, eat you or ye.

But when God spoke of Man and Woman both, he spoke Plurally, as in Genesis 1. 29.
Behold, I have given you every herb, etc. in the Latin, it is ecce dedi vobis
omnes herbas, etc. mark again, it is vobis, to you, not tibi, to thee; Here when
he speaks to more than one, he says vobis, to you, but when he speaks to one,
he says, tibi, not vobis, as in the 3. chapter of Genesis and 11. ver. who told
thee that thou wast naked? Quis indicavit tibi nuduni esse te? See Priests and
Professors, here is neither vos, nor vobis, you, nor to you, when Adam alone is
intended, but te, and tibi; thee, and to thee.

And when God spoke to the woman, and said, what is this thou have done? I will
greatly multiply thy Sorrow, and thy Conception; in Sorrow thou shall bring
forth Children, and thy desire (shall be) to thy husband, and he shall rule
over thee: Junius gives it in Latin thus, Genesis 3. 13. and 16. ver. quid hoc
(est quod) fecisti? admodum multiplico dolorem tuum, etiam conceptus tui; in
dolor paries liberos: quin erga virum tuum appetitus tuus esto, et ipse
praeesto tibi; take notice again, it is quid hoc fecisti? what have thou done?
not fecistis, what have you done? and it is dolorem tuum, et conceptus tui, thy
Sorrow and thy Conception; not Dolorem vestrum, nor conceptus vestri, your
sorrow, nor your conception; again it is not parietis, you shall bring forth;
but paries, thou shall bring forth; neither is it virum vestrum, nor appetitus
vester, nor praeesto vobis; your husband; your desire; rule over you; but it is
virum tuum, thy husband; appetitus tuus, thy desire; praeesto tibi, rule over
thee.

And when Saul's servants spoke to him, their master, 1 Samuel 16. 16. Behold, now
an evil spirit from God troubles thee; in the Latin by Tremelius, and
Iunius, it is in the 16. ver. Ecce jam Spiritus Dei malus perturbat te; here
it is not perturbat vos, troubles you; but perturbat te, troubles thee; here
Saul, though a King, was not offended at his servants, for saying, perturbat
te, troubles thee.

Neither was Iephtha angry with his Daughter, for using the words thou, thee,
thy, and thine to him, Judge. 11. 36. and she said unto him, my Father, if thou
have opened thy mouth, etc. taking vengeance for thee of thine Enemies, and so
fourth. In the Latin, by Tremelius, and Junius, 38. verse. Quae dixit ei;
pater mi, pandisti os tuum Jehovae? postquam praestitit tibi, etc. de hostibus
tuis, etc. and again, it is not hostibus vestris, your Enemies, but hostibus
tuis, thine Enemies; neither is it os vestrum, your mouth, but os tuum, thy
mouth; nor is it praestitit vobis, but tibi; not taken vengeance for you, but
for thee; again, it is not pandistis, you have opened, but pandisti, thou have
opened.

Nor do we read that ever any King, with his Subjects; Parents, with their
children; Masters with their servants; or any relation whatsoever, have been
offended for speaking the Singular Language to a single person, though never so
great or small, throughout the whole Scriptures of Truth; and so you that have
stumbled, and do stumble, at the Elect People of God scornfully called Quakers,
read all the English, Latin, Greek, Hebrew; or Translations into any other
Language which the Bible is in, and you may find all along, that the propriety
of every Language is kept in the Bible, Singular and Plural, though you have
lost it, and the life both that gave it forth, which the Quakers Witness,
therefore you are angry at them.

The end of the LATIN BATTLE-DOOR.
THE ITALIAN Battle-Door.
CALLED BY THEM La Santa Croce.
Nella luce con laquale Christo v'ha illuminati in essa credete, accioche
l'unttione in voi consciate per insegnarvi.

Geo. Fox.
PEr insegnarli di parlare secondo le lor direttioni Grammaticali, nelle quali,
come anco nella lor traduttione de la bibbia, si servono del plurale e
singolare, [tu] ad uno, e, [voi] a molti, ancor che nella prattica lor si son
degenerati, cosi ben che l' inghilterra, la francia e gli altri dominii del
Papa, perch, come ho dimostrato, che nel latino Ego e per Io, tu per tu, ille
per colui, nos per noi, vos per voi, and illi per coloro, cosi osserva qui,
quali paroli che hanno posto ne i libri loro, come direttioni, per li fanciulli
e genti, per imparare la lingua lor.

That is:

TO teach them to speak according to their Grammatical directions, in which, as
also in their Translation of the Bible, they use the plural and singular, [tu]
thou to one, and [voi] ye or you to many; although in their practice they are
degenerated, as well as England, France; and the rest of the Popes Dominions;
for, as I have showed, that in the Latin Ego is for I, tu for thou, Ille for
he; n^s for we, vos for ye or you, and illi for they, so mind here, what words
they have put in their Book^; as Directions for Children and People to learn
their Language by. Il Singolare is the Singular. Il Plurale is the Plural l'
huomo is the man gli, or li huomini is the men dell' huomo of the man de gli,
or delli huomini of the men all' huomo to the man a gli, or alli huomini to the
men O huomo O man O huomini O men dall' huomo from the man dagli O dalli
huomini from the men Singolare e Singular Plurale Plural, il padre e the father
i padri is the fathers del padre of the father de', or de i padri of the
fathers al padre to the father a' o a i padri to the fathers O padre O father O
padri O father dal padre from the father da' o da i padri from the fathers
Singolare Singular Plurale Plural la donna the woman le done the women de la,
or della donna of the woman de le o delle done of the women a la o alla donna
to the woman a le, or all done to the women O donna O woman O done O women
de la, or dalla donna from the woman da le o dalle done from the women

Hor per dire gli huomini, i padri, le done, quando si debba dire l' huomo, il
padre, la donna; e questo buon Italiano, O buon senso O proprieta di parlare? e
non e questo di dire che sono molti huomini molti padri, O molte done, quando
non e piu d'un huomo, d'un padre, O d'una donna.

That is:

Now to say the men, the fathers, the women; when you should say the man, the
father, the woman; is this good Italian, good sense or proper speech? and is
not this to say that there are many men, many fathers, or many women; when
there is but one man, but one father, or but one woman? Singolare Singular Io
is I Tu thou colni, egli, ei, e', and quello he Plurale Plural noi is we voi
ye, or you Coloro, loro, Eglini, and quelli they

Hor per dire [noi] in luoco di [Io] O [Coloro] in vece di [Colui]; saria
questo buon ^enso, O a proposito? and ancora non e tanto a proposito quanto di
dire [voi] in luoco di [tu?]

That is:

Now to say [ we] instead of [ I] or [ they] in lieu of [ he,] would this be
good sense, or proper? and yet would it not be as proper, as to say [ ye or
you] in place of [ thou?]

singolare il mio plurale i miei singular and plural mine male la mia le mei
female il tuo i tuoi thine male la tua le tue female il suo i suoi his male la
sua le sue female singolare il nostro plurale i nostri singular and plural is
our male la nostra le nostre female il vostro i vostri your male la vostra le
vostri female il loro i loro or lor' their male la loro le loro or lor' female

Hor per dire il nostro, il vostro, il loro, quando se debba dire il mio, il
tuo, il suo, non e questo di parlare come d'un pluralita di person quando una
sola persona s'intende? questo non e huon Italiano, ne parlar propriamente, ma
falso, e non savio.

That is:

Now, to say our, your, their, when you should say mine, thine, his: is not
this to speak as of a plurality of persons, when one single person is intended?
this is not good Italian, nor to speak properly; but false, and not wise.
Singolare Singular Plurale Plural Io amo is I love noi amiamo is we love tu ama
thou love voi amate ye, or you love colui ama he loves Coloro amano they love

Hor per dire noi amiamo, voi amate, Coloro amano quando si debba dire, Io amo,
tu ami, colui ama; non e questo di parlare nel plurale pello singolare?

That is:

Now to say we love, ye love, they love, when you should say, I love, thou
love, he loves: is not this to speak in the plural for the singular?
Singolare Singular Plurale Plural Io sono is I am noi siamo is we are tu sei
thou art voi sete ye, or you are Colui e he is coloro sono they are

Hor per dire noi ^iamo, voi sete, Coloro sono, quando si debba dire Io sono,
tu sei, colui e sariae questo buon Italiano, e parlar al propo^ito, come dotto?
O parlare come un stol^o and un pazzo?

That is:

Now to say, we are, ye are, they are, when you should say, I am, thou art he,
is, would this be good Italian, and to speak proper as learned? or to speak as
a Fool and a Madman?

E adesso, voi che dite [tu] a i vostri servi di bassa condition, e [voi] a i
vostri servi da megliore stima (come si chiama) e [vosignoria] l'un a l'altro;
Non sete voi degenerati dallo vosiro proprio Linguaggio Volgare, e per la
vostra superbia and ambitione, parlate contrario all vostre grammatiche
proprie e Bibbia? E cosi sete cascati nel rispetto di person, dicendo [tu] a i
vostri servi di bassa condition (come si dice) e non [Voi] a quelli, ma [Voi]
a i vostri servi da megliore stima, and a gli artefici, e [V. S.] l' un a l'
altro. Non e questo quell' antichristo ch' e inalzato sopra tutto quello che si
dice Iddio? Perch, dite voi [ Voi o V. S.] a Dio, o a Christo? and anchora
l'arrogate a voi stessi; dite voi a Dio o a Christo, Io^vi pregho O signore? O,
Io pregho V S O signore? come Voi dite a l'huomo Vano and ambitioso: Anco non
destrugge questo tutta la vostra instruttione nelle vostre Gramatiche laqual' e
[tu] ad uno, e [voi] a molti? e piu, non sta la vostra bibbia testimoni^ al'
incontro dello vostro parlare cosi, and a l' incontro della vostra accettation
di person?

That is?

And now you that say [ tu] thou, to your servants of low degree, and [voi]
you, to your servants of better account (as you call it) and [ vo signoria]
that is your Lord-ship to one another; are not you degenerated from your own
Mother Tougue, and through your Pride and Ambition, do speak contrary to your
own Grammers, and Bible? And so are fallen into the respect of persons, saying,
[ tu] that is thou, to your servants of mean account, (as you call it) and not,
[ voi] that is, you to them, but [ voi] you, to your servants of better esteem,
and to Artificers, and [ V. S.] your Lord-ship to one another. Is not this the
Antichrist, who is exalted above all that is called God? for, do ye say, [
voi], you, or [ V S] your Lord-ship to God* or to Christ? and yet do take it to
your selves; do you say to God or to Christ, I beseech you O Lord, or I beseech
your Lord-ship, O Lord? as ye say to Vain and Ambitious Man: and does not this
destroy all your Teaching in your Grammers, which is [ tu] thou to one, and [
voi] ye to many? again, does not your Bible stand a witness against your so
speaking, and against your respect of persons?

Qui seguitano alcuni essempi^ fuor della scrittura, del [tu] e del [voi.] Il
Centurione parlando a Christo medesi^o, gli diede del [tu] Matthew. 8. dicendo.

Signore io non son degno che [tu] entri sotto'l mio totto, etc. Nota, qui non
si dice, signore io non son degno che [V S] enter, etc. O, che [voi] entrate,
etc. ma che [tu] entri, etc. E Gie su rispondendo disse a lui, nel ver. 13. va
e secondo che [tu] hai creduto, cosi ti sia fatto. Anco qui Christo disse, [va]
nella seconda persona Singolare, e non [andate] nel plurale, ne [vada] nella
^erza persona singolare come voi; E secondo che [tu] hai creduto cosi ti sia
fatto, non secondo che voi havete creduto, cosi vi sia fatto, O secondo che V S
ha creduto cosi gli sia fatto.

That is:

Here follow some scriptures Examples concerning Thou, and You.

The Centurion speaking to Christ himself, [as the Italians Phrase it] gave
him the thou, or thou would him, Matthew. B. saying, Lord I am not worthy that thou
should enter under my roof, etc. Note, here it' not said, Lord I am not
worthy that your Lord-ship should enter, etc. or that you should enter, etc.
but that thou should enter, etc. And Jesus answering, said unto him, in the
13. ver. Go thou, and according as thou have believed, so be it done unto thee:
again, here Christ said, Go thou, ^n the second person Singular, and not go ye,
in the Plural, nor let him go, in the 3. person Singular, as you do: And
according as thou half believed, so be it done unto thee; not according as you
have believed, so be it done unto you; or according as your Lord-ship has
believed, so be it done unto him.

Mu Chris^o parlando a quei che lo seguitavane, disse Io [vi] di^^ in Veritu.
E. parlando a Simono chiamato Pietro, and Andreo suo fratello, 4. Matthew. 18.
disse lord, Venite dietro a me, and io vi faro pescatori d' huomini, Qui
Christo non disse, io ti dic^, ma io vi dico in verita, ne, veni dietro a me,
and io ti faro, etc. ma venite dietro a me, and io vi faro pescatori di huomini.

That is:

But Christ speaking to those that followed him, said, Verily I say unto [you].
And speaking to Simon called Peter, and Andrew his Brother, Matthew. 4. 19. said
unto them, Come [ ye] after me, and I will make [ you] Fishers of men. Here
Christ did not say, I say unto [ thee,] but verily I say unto [ you;] nor come
[ thou] after me, and I will make thee, etc. but come ye after me, and I will
make you Fishers of Men.

Il giouene il eugino di Paolo Parlasse nel Singolare al Capitano, gli Fatti di
Apostoli, 23. cap. 20. and egli disse. I Giudei si son composti, di pregarti
che domani tu meni fuor Paolo, etc. osserva, non e di pregar Vi, o di pregar V.
S. ma di pregarti, etc. E che [tu] meni, etc. non che Voi menete etc. o che V.
S. mean fuor Paolo, etc. Altra Volta, V. 21. ma [ tu] non compiacer lore, qui e
[ tu] non voi, ne V. S.

That is:

The young man, paul's kins-man, spoke in the singular to the Captain, the Acts
of the Apostles the 23. chapter and the 20. verse, and he said, The Jews are
agreed to desire thee, that thou would bring forth Paul to morrow, etc.
mark, it is not to desire you, or to desire your Lord-ship, but to desire thee,
etc. and that thou would bring, etc. not that you would bring, etc. or that
your Lord-ship would bring forth Paul, etc. again, ver. 21. But do not thou
yield unto them: here it is [ thou,] not you, nor your Lord-ship.

E Paolo parlando al Re Agrippa, I Fatti di Ap. 26. cap. v. 19. disse, Io
desiderarei da dio che and in poco and in molto non sol [tu] ma ancor tutti,
etc. osserva altravolta, e [tu] non voi, ne V. S. e pin, ver. 29. Credi [tu] Re
Agrippa, a i Profeti? Io so che [tu] credi, qui e, credi tu? and Io so che tu
credi. Non credete voi? and Io so che voi credete. Ne creed V. S.? and io so
che V. S. creed.

That is:

And Paul speaking to King Agrippa, the Acts of the Apostles the 26. chap. ver.
29. said, I would to God, that not only [ thou] but also all, etc. observe
again, it is [ thou] not you, nor your Lord-ship: and again, Ver. 29. King
Agrippa, Believe thou the Prophets? I know that thou believe. Here it is,
do thou believe? and I know that thou do believe. Not, do you believe? and
I know that you do believe. Nor, does your Lordship believe? and I know that
your Lord-ship does believe.

E Agrippa parlando a Paolo disse, in poca cosa, mi persuadi, a far mi
christiano. Non e, in poca cosa mi persuadete, etc. Ne V. S. mi persuade, a far
mi Christiano.

That is:

And Agrippa speaking to Paul, said, Almost thou perswadest me to be a
Christian. It is not, Almost you persuade me, etc. Nor your Lord-ship
persuades me to be a Christian.

E Paolo diede del in a Pietro, 2 Gal. 14. Dissi in presentia di tutti, se tu
(non voi, ne V S.) che sei Giudeo, etc.

That is:

And Paul thou would Peter, 2 Gal. 14. I said before them all, if thou, (not you,
nor your Lordship) who art a Jew, etc.

Ma Paolo scriuendo a i Santi, parlaua in plurale, [voi] 1 Gal. 3. Gratia e
Pace a voi, etc. non a te, etc.

That is:

But Paul writing to the Saints, spoke plural, you, 1 Gal. 3. Grace and peace
unto you; not unto thee.

E Christo disse [ tu] a Pietro, quando disse, Ami tu me? non amate voi me? O
mi ama V. S? Saria questo buon Italiano voi Giesuiti, e Frati, e Cardinali, e
Papae, di porre [Voi] in luoco di [ tu?] O per usar la medesima parola [Voi]
quando parlate ad uno, com^ quando parlate a piu? perch non vi servite del [
tu] quando parlate a molti, cosi ben che del [Voi] quando parlate ad uno?
perch, [voi] e la parola ch' e posta nelle vostre grammattiche per molti, cosi
ben che [ tu] per uno? e quello s'intende esser usato sempre, quando si parla
ad uno, e [voi] quando si parla a piu d'uno. E cosi christo disse [voi] quando
parlasse a gli scribi e pharisei, Matthew. 23. 16. G^ai a [voi] guide cieche. non
Guai a [te] guide cieche. Non saria questo cecita, di mettre a te, per a voi, o
a voi per a te.

That is:

And Christ said [ thou] to Peter, when he said, Love thou me? not do you
love me? or does your Lord-ship love me? would this be good Italian, you
Jesuits, and Friars, and Cardinals, and Pope, to put [ you] instead of [
thou] or to use the same word [ you] when you speak to one, as when you speak
to more? wherefore, do you not use [ tu] thou, when you speak to many, as well
as [voi] ye, or you, when you speak to one? for [ voi] ye is the word which is
put in your Grammars for many, as well as [tu] thou, for one* and that is
intended to be used always, when one is spoken to, and [ voi] you, when more
than one is spoken to: And so Christ said, [ voi] y^u, when he spoke to the
Scribes and Pharisees, Matthew. 23. 16. Woe unto you blind guides; not woe unto [
thee] blind guides: would not this be blindness to put unto thee, for unto
you; or unto you, for unto thee.

Directions to Read Italian.
SOund their a very broad, as a in the word all, or aul. G before e or i, as
ch, in the English word child. Cc before e or i sound as tch, as in the English
word watch. Ch always as k; ^eh as double k. G before e or i as j consonant in
Jesus; if a vowel go before the g, and e or i follow, sound the g as dg; in the
English word bridge: example, Vigilante sound Vidgilante. gh before e or i
sound as gu, in the English word guest. gl sound ll, as in the English word
collier: example; siglio a son, sound it fillio; except these following
words, Inglese an Englishman; Globo the Globe; negligenz^, negligence;
negletto, neglect; conglutinare, to fasten together; sound all these words as
in English. gn sound as nni, as Regno a Kingdom, sound rennio, or as we do the
English word Onyon. gua sound as gwa. i sound as ee in the word thee, or as i
in the word King; not as the English i in the word life. q sound always as k.
cq as ekw, as acqua water, ^ound ackwa. s between two vowels sound as z, or as
s in the English word Rose. sce, sci, sound as she* shi; as seintilla, a
sparkle, read shin^illa. s before d, g, l, m, n, r or u, sound as z; as sdegno,
disdain; sound zden^io. t as in English; only before ia, ie, ii, or io, in the
middle, or end of a word, sound it is, etc. as gratia, grace, sound gratsia;
except amba^tia, an ecstasy; sa^ttia, a pinnace; malatia, a sickness,
questione, a question; quistione, a quarrel; and molestia, trouble. u sound as
oo, in the English word root, etc. u before o sound very short, s^arce heard,
as buon^, good, sound bwono. z single, between two vowels, sound as dz, as
mezo, an half, sound medzo. z double, between two vowels, sound as tf, as
bellezza, beauty; say belletfa; also before l, n, r, as ts: some words
beginning with z, are sounded some dz, others ts, which is gotten by
observation; as ^ero, the cipher [o] say dsero; so zio, an uncle, say tsio: in
all other sounds they agree with the English, except in their o, which is
variously sounded; sometimes open, sometimes close, which must be gotten by the
Ear.

The end of the ITALIAN BATTLE-DOOR.
THe GREEK Battle-Door.
(...)

Geo. Fox.
THE GREEK Language has it is proper distinctions betwixt the Singular, Duall,
and Plural numbers, so called, and when they speak of (or to) one single
person, they speak in the SINGVLAR, when of two in the DVALL, and of more than
two in the PLVRALL number; and do not confound the Duall, or Plural with the
Singular; or speak Plural when they should speak Singular; as you do, that say
You, when you should say Thou; as you may see in the GREEK GRAMMAR, or in these
following Examples taken from thence, and out of the Scriptures of Truth:

Singular (...), ho logos is a, or the word (...), tou logou of the word (...),
to logo to the word (...), ton logon the word (...), O l^ge O word Duall (...),
to logo is the two words (...), toin logoin of the, and to the two words
(...), O logo O the two words Plural (...), hoi logoi is words, more than two
(...), ton logon of the words, more than two (...), tois logois to the words,
more than two (...), tous logous the words, more than two (...), O logoi O
words, more than two

Now to say To logo, or Hoi logoi, when you should say Ho logos; this were to
say two words, or more than two words, when you should say a, or the word: This
is false Greek, and false English; for Ho logo^ is a word, or the word; and To
logo is two words; and Hoi logoi is words more than two.

So (...), he mousa is a Song; (...), ta mousa is Songs two; and (...), hai
mousai is Songs more than two. Now to say Ta mousa, or Hai Mousai for Hc mousa,
that were to put Duall or Plural for Singular: (...), He time is Honor; (...),
Ta tima is Honors, Duall; and (...), Hai timai is Honors Plural. Now is it
good Greek, to say Ta tima, or Hai timai, when you should say He time? to put
the Duall, or Plural for the Singular.

(...), To Xulon is A tree; (...), To Xulo is Trees Duall; (...), Ta Xula is
Trees Plural. Now to say, To xulo, Two Trees; or Ta xula, More than two trees,
when you should say, To xulon, A tree, would this be good Greek, or good
English?

So (...), Ho krites is a Judge; and (...), Ho basileus is a King; and (...),
to krita is two Judges; and (...), or (...), To Basilee, or Basile, is Two
Kings; and (...), Hoi kritai, is Judges more than two; and (...), or (...), Hoi
Basilees, or Basileis, is Kings more than two.

Now to say To Krita, or To Basilee, le, when you should say Ho Krites, or Ho
Basileus; This were to say Two Judges, or Kings, when there is but One Judge,
or One King. And to say Hoi Kritai, or Hoi Basilees, leis, for Ho Krites; or Ho
Basileus, is to say more than two Judges, or Kings, when there is but one
Judge, or one King. Is this good Greek, or good English; or proper, or truth?
Well, say on, and see the Pronounes (so called.) Singular (...), Ego is I
(...), Su Tu thou (...), Ekeinos he Duall (...), Noi, no is we two (...),
Sphoi, spho ye two (...), Ekeino they two Plural (...), Hemeis is we, more than
two (...), Humeis ye, more than two (...), Ekeinoi they, more than two

Now, to say Noi, or Hemeis, instead of Ego, were to say, We two, or We more
than two, instead of I: and is this good Greek, or good English, or proper
sense? Answer you that say You for Thou.

And to say Spho, or Humeis, when you should say Su; this were to put the
Duall, or Plural, with the Singular, and so to speak confusedly, without any
distinction, as you do, that say You to many, and You to one.

And to say Ekeino, or Ekeinoi, when you should say Ekeinos; would this be good
Greek, or good English, to say, They two, or They, More than two, when you
should say He? Singular (...), Emos is mine (...), or (...), Sos, or Teos,
thine Duall (...), Noiteros is our of two (...), Sphoiteros your Plural (...),
Hemeteros is our (...), Humeteros your

Now to say Noiteros, Sphoiteros, or Hemeteros, or Humeteros, when you should
say Emos, or Sos Teos; this were to say Our, or Your, speaking of two, or of
more than two, when you should say mine, or thine, speaking of one: Would this
be good Greek, or good English, to say Noiteros, our, of two, when you should
say mine, and so fourth? Go on, and see Examples in the Verbs. Singular (...),
Tupto is I beat (...), Tupteis thou beatest (...), Tuptei he beats Duall
(...), Tupteton is ye two do beat (...), Tupteton they two do beat Plural
(...), Tuptomen is We more than two do beat (...), Tuptete ye, more than two
do beat (...), Tuptousi they more than two do beat

Now to say Tupteton, or Tuptete, when you should say Tupteis; this were to
say, Ye, two do beat, or Ye, more than two do beat, when you should say, Thou
do beat. Is this good Greek, or good English, to say You for Thou? Singular
(...), Eimi is I am (...), Eis, ei thou art (...), Esti he is Duall (...),
Eston is ye two are (...), Eston they two are Plural (...), Esmen is We are
more than two (...), Este ye are more than two (...), Eisi they are more than
two

Now to say Eston, or Este, when you should say Eis, or Ei; this were to say,
Ye two are, or ye, more than two, are, when you should say Thou art; and this
is to say You, when you should say Thou; would this be proper Greek, to put the
Duall, or Plural for the Singular? Answer you Doctors, Scholars, Teachers,
Priests, and Professors? or is it proper English?

And to say Esmen, when you should say Eimi; is this good Greek? Answer you
Scholars, etc. that say you for thou: Are not you Novices, that are
degenerated from your Original?

And to say Eisi, when you should say Esti; this is to say they, when you
should say he: Is this sense, you that say you to one, when you should say
thou, and say its the Custom of the Nation, whose custom is degenerated from
your native Tongue? Come read on, and see some Examples out of the Scripture,
about thou and thee, and ye and you.

Jesus thee'd his Mother, and said, What have I to do with thee? In Greek its,
(...)? Ti emoi kai soi? Mark, it is Soi, Thee, Singular, not (...), Humin, You,
Plural, John 2. 4. Jesus Christ you would the Scribes and Pharisees, and said, Woe
to them that professed that which they did not practice, Matthew. 23. 13, 14, 15.
Verses, he says, Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees Hypocrites; There is three
Woes, and three Yous in these three Verses; in the Greek it is, (...). Ovai
humin Grammateis kai Pharisaioi hupocratai. Here it is Ovai humin, Woe unto you;
this is plural: you may see Humin, You, when he speaks to many; but when he
spoke to one, to his Mother, he said soi, thee. So here you Doctors and
Teachers, who in your practice deny a distinction when one is spoken to, but
will have you to one, and you to many; you are contrary to Christ's practice in
speaking here, who said soi, thee, to his Mother; and humin, you, to the
Scribes, Pharisees, and Hypocrites.

The Apostle thou would Philemon, a particular, saying to the Church in thy house,
(...). Kat' oikon sou Ecclesia. Here it is thy house, oikon sou; not your
house, oikon humoon. And so Verse the 18. If he has wronged thee, or owes
thee ought. In the Greek it is, Ei (...). Ei de ti edikese se e opheilei. It Is
se, thee, not humas, you. And in the same Epistle, ver. 3. when he writes to
many, he says, (...), charis humin; that is, Grace unto you, not soi, unto
thee.

And Paul you would the Saints again, when he wrote to the Ephesians, 2. chap. And
you who were dead: In the Greek it is, (...): Kai humas ont as nekrous. And
here see its humas, that is, you, not thou, plural not singular, when he speaks
to more than two. Jesus thee'd Pilate, John 19. 11. (...). Apekrithe ho Iesous,
ouk eiches exousian oudemian kat' emou, ei me en [soi] dedomenon anoothen, dia
touta ho paradidous me [soi] meidzona hamartian echei. That is in English,
Jesus answered, thou could have no power at all against me, if it were not
given thee from above: therefore, he that has delivered me to thee has the
greater sin.

The end of the GREEK BATTLE-DOOR.
THE HEBREW Battle-Door.
(...)

Geo. Fox.
THe HEBREW TONGVE (which the Jews call the HOLY LANGUAGE) has as full, and
plain distinctions, when one is spoken to, and more than one are spoken to, as
any Language that is, which may confound the Doctors, Scholars, Priests,
Teachers, and Professors of England, and elsewhere, who have forgotten what
they have learned at School, or at least, do not practice what they learned:
Therefore this BATTLE-DOOR is sent to such, who do not practice what they have
learned at School, but are degenerated from Grammar-Directions, and
Scripture-Examples, who in every Language, in which there are Grammars, and
Bible, has a perfect distinction for Singular and Plural; contray to the
practice of the Teachers, Priests, and Professors, who will say you, or ye, to
one; and you, or ye, to more than one; and so have forgotten to practice what
they have learned in Grammars, and read in the Bible, who in every Language, in
which they are written, has its proper term, when more than one are spoken
to, distinct from, when one is spoken to as the Battle-door following plainly
shows. Singular (...) any or (...) anochi is I (man) or (woman) Plural (...)
anahhnu or (...) nahhnu is we (men) or (women)

Now to put Anahhnu, or Nahhnu for Any, or Anochi, were to put We for I; and
this would be false Hebrew, and English both: for Any, or Anochi is I (man) or
(woman;) and Nahhnu, or Anahhnu, is We (men,) or (women.) Singular (...) atta
is thou (man) Plural (...) attem is you, or ye men

Now to say Attem, when you should say Atta, were to say you, ye men, when you
should say thou man; and this were false: for Atta is Thou (man;) and Attem is
You, or Ye men. Singular (...) hu or (...) hahu is he, this, or that (man)
Plural (...) hem or (...) hemma is they, or those men, or these things

Now to say Hem, or Hemma, when you should say Hu, or Hahu, this were to say,
they, or those men, or these things, when you should say He, this, or that man;
and this would be false Hebrew: for Hu, or hahu, is this, or that (man;) and
Hem, or hemma, is they, or those men, or these things.

Would this aforementioned manner of speaking be good Hebrew ye Priests and
Scholars, who rages at the Singular language? would not the I^wes laugh at you
here in their native Tongue to hear you speak it in such a Non-sensicall way?
Come Scholars, is not this to speak Plural, when you should speak Singular?
this is for a man to say he is speaking to many men, when he is speaking but to
one man; where is the Giddy-heads now? you use to call Friends Giddy-heads, the
Elect people of God, which you in Scorn call Quakers.

Come now to the Feminine Gender, (so called,) Singular Plural (...) at or
(...) atti is thou (woman) (...) atten is you, or ye (women)

Now to say Atten, when you should say At, or Atti, is nonsense, to speak
Plural for Singular, and make people believe you are speaking to many women,
when you are speaking but to one woman; Is this good Hebrew? And have you not
made people believe you have been the wisest upon the Earth? and now must you
come to be whipped, and taught the BATTLE-DOOR. Read one: Singular (...) hi or
(...) hahi is she, this, or that (woman) or female Plural (...) hen or (...)
henna is they, or those (women) or these things (female)

Now to say Hen, or henna, when you should say hi, or hahi; this were to say
they, or those women, or these things female, when you should say she, this, or
that woman, or female; and this would be false Hebrew and English both: for hi,
or hahi, is she, this, or that (woman) or female; and hen, or henna, is they,
or those women, or these things female, or feminine, (so called.)

Come now, and read those that are called the Affixes, which are placed at the
end of words, and signi^ies as follows: Singular (...) i is I, Me, My, Mine
(...) any (...) eni (...) enni (...) ai (...) ti Plural (...) enu is Us, Our
Ours, at the end of words (...) anu (...) ennu (...) enu or (...) enu

Now to put Enu, anu, ennu, or enu, instead of i, any, eni, enni, ai, ti; this
were to put us, our, ours, in place of I, me, my, mine; and this is false
English, and false Hebrew; and they that speak thus, are more like madmen,
than men in their wits. Singular (...) cha or (...) cha and (...) echa is Thee,
Thy, Thine, at the end of words Plural (...) chem is You, Your, or Yours, at
the end of words (...) echem

Now to say chem, Echem, when you should say (...) cha, (...) and Echa; this is
to say, You, Your, yours, when you should say, Thee, Thy, Thine; and this is
false Hebrew, and deserves the Rod. Read again: Singular (...) v is him, his,
at the end of words (...) u (...) O (...) hu (...) ennu Plural (...) m is them,
their, or theirs, at the end of words (...) mo (...) hem (...) em (...) am
(...) ehem and (...) emo

Now to put m, mo, hem, em, am, ehem, and emo, in place of v, u, o, ^u, and
ennu, were to put, and say, them, their, or theirs in place of him, and his:
Those that follows are used at the end of words, when you speak, to, or of a
woman, or women; or to or of that which is called the F^eminine gender.
Singular (...) each or (...) chi and (...) ajich is thee, thy, thine, female
Plural (...) chen is you, your, or yours (...) echen

Now to say chen, echen, when you should say each, chi, ajich, is to say, you,
your, and yours, when you should say thee, thy, and thine: and they that say
so, are ill-bred, unlearned, and unmannerly. But say on: Singular (...) ha is
her, hers (...) ah (...) enna Plural (...) hen is them, their, or theirs,
female (...) ehen (...) an

Now to say an, hen, ehen, when you should say ha, ah, and enna, this is to say
them, their, theirs, when you should say her, and hers; and this is now the
practice of most in Christendom, to say them, when they should say her; and
their, or theirs, when they should say hers; and to stand in the Babylonish
Confusion, crying up Tongues, and yet practiceing nothing of them, out of the
Obedience. Read on: Singular (...) any or (...) anochi is I ( man) or women
(...) shelli of me (...) li to me (...) othi me (...) menni or (...) mimmenni
from me Plural (...) na^^n^, or (...) ana^^nu is we (woe.) (...) shellan^ of us
(...) lanu to us (...) othanu us (...) mennu or (...) mimmenu from us

Now to say nahhnu, or anahhnu, shallanu, lanu, othanu, and mennu, or mimmennu,
when you should say any, or anochi, shelli, li, othi, and menni, or mimenni;
this were to say, we, of us, to us, us, and from us, when you should say, I, of
me, to me, and from me: and this manner of writing, and speaking, would be a
gross perverting of every word abovementioned, from its own proper
signification. Singular (...) atta is thou (man) (...) shellecha of thee (...)
lecha to thee (...) othecha thee (...) mimmecha from thee

Plural (...) attem is you, or ye men (...) shellachem of you (...) lache^^ to
you (...) ethchem you, or ye (...) mimmechem from you

Now to say attem, shellachem, lachem, ethchem, and mimmechem, when you should
say atta, shellecha, lecha, othecha, and mimmecha: This were to say, you, or
ye, of you, to you, you, from you, when you should say, thou, of thee, to thee,
thee, and from thee: and this would be false Hebrew, and English both; and like
unto their manner of speaking, that says you, of you, etc. when they should
say thou, of thee, etc. But read on.

Singular (...) hu is he (...) shello of him (...) lo to him (...) otho him
(...) mimmennu from him

Plural (...) hem or (...) hemma is they ( men) (...) shellahem of them (...)
lamo or (...) lahem to them (...) ethem or (...) otham them ( men) (...) mehem
from them

Now to wrest all these words abovesaid out of their proper place, and speak
the plural when you should speak singular, would not this be the same in
Nature, with speaking you to one man, which is to be used when more than one is
spoken too.

Those that follows, are when a woman, or women, are spoken to, and of:

Singular (...) at is thou ( woman) (...) shellach of thee (...) lach to thee
(...) othach thee (...) mimmach from thee

Plural (...) atten or (...) attena is you, or ye ( women) (...) shellachen of
you ( women) (...) lachen to you (...) aethchen you, or ye (...) mimmechen from
you Singular (...) hi is she (...) shellah of her (...) lah to her (...) othah
her (...) mimmennah from her

Plural (...) hen or (...) henna is they ( women) (...) shellahen of them
(...) lahen to them (...) othan or (...) eth-hen them (...) mehen from them (
women)

Now to write, or speak all these words contrary to their own place, and to put
the Plural in the Singulars place, Would it not be like their sayings, that
says you woman, of you woman, etc.) when they should say thou woman, of thee
(women, etc^^) What say you Scholars? will you snuff hereafter, if one say
thou to a particular? you will not, will you?

Come Priests, read some of your Hebrew Nounes, (so called) which you have in
your common Grammars.

Singular (...) jad Dual (...) jadaji^ is is a hand both the hands

This the Grammarians calls the Duall Number, which shows forth only two by
Nature.

Now to put jadajim for jad, were to put both the hands for one hand; Is this
good Hebrew? you will come to the Singular language by the Rod, who would have
the Plural for the Singular.

Singular (...) reghei Dual (...) raglajim is is a foot both the feet

Now to put raghlajim for reghel, is to put feet, for a foot.

Singular (...) dabhar Plural (...) debharim is is a word words

Now to say debharim for dabhar, is to put words for a word; and this is like
unto the Priests Doctrine, that puts the Scriptures, which is the Words, for
the WORD. Professors, and Scholars, and Teachers, read on:

Singular (...) shophet Plural (...) shophtim is is a judge judges

Now to say Shophtim, Judges, when you should say Shophet, a Judge, Is this
good Hebrew? is not this false? and to speak Plural, when you should speak
Singular?

Therefore thou must read Shophtim, Judges, and Shophet, a Judge: But to say
there are many Judges, when there is but one Judge, Would not these be looked
upon as mad men? they could not persuade them, but they were many men, when
there is but one, Thou, and is not You; and they cannot distinguish betwixt
Judges, and a Judge: So not betwixt You, and Thou; Shophtim, and Shophet. Say
on:

Singular Plural (...) shephot (...) shephatim, or (...) sh^phutim is is a
judgment, or a plague judgments, or plagues

And to put Shephutim Shephatim, in place of Sphephot, is to put Iudgemens, and
Plagues, for a Judgment, and a Plague; Is this good Hebrew? Is this good
sense? Are not these SotHeads, and Giddy-Heads, that speaks thus, to put the
Plural for the Singular. But read on.

Singular Plural (...) shekketz, or (...) shikkutz (...) shikkutzim is is
Abo^ination Abominations

Now to put shikkutzim for shekketz, or shikkutz, were to put abominations for
abomination, were this good Hebrew? like as you Pr^^ests have put many men for
one man: Plural for Singular.

Singular Plural (...) Saraph (...) Seraphim is is a burning, or a fiery
Serpent fiery Serpents

Now to say Seraphim, when you should say Saraph, this is to say, here are many
Serpents, when there is but one Serpent; Is this good Hebrew, you that put
Plural for Singular? Is not this like unto you, that have corrupted your own
Mother Tongue? and the Corruption in you is offended, if it be not given. Read
on:

Singular (...) ben Plural (...) bani^ is is a Son Sons

Now to Say Banim, when they should say Ben, is not this to say You, when they
should say Thou? and to say Sons, when its but a son.

Singular (...) rosh Plural (...) rashim is is a head heads

Now to say Rashim, when you should say Rosb; this is to say Heads, when you
should say a Head.

Singular (...) ir Plural (...) arim, or (...) ajarim is is a City. Cities

Now to say Arim, or Ajarim, when you should say Ir, here the man speaks
nonsense, when he says Cities, when there is but one City; as they that say
You, when they should say Thou; and speaks of many where there is but one; and
so the world is bred, and trained np in Nonsense, which speaks Plural, when
they should Singular.

Come Doctors, Lawyers, Scholars, Scool-masters, come to that which is called
the Verb.

Singular (...) pakad Plural (...) Paked^ is is he visited they have visited

Now to say pakedu, when you should say pakad, were to put plural for singular,
and were not true Hebrew; and none says so but the Novices, and Ignorant and
Vulgar, though they tell the people they are Scholars. Say on:

Singular Plural (...) pakadta (...) pekadtem is is thou ( man) have visited
ye, or you ( men) have visited

And to say pekadtem, when you should say pakadta, that when you are speaking
to one man, you are speaking to many; would this be good sense, or true Hebrew?
and is not this nonsense in the eyes of people, and like madmen? But read on:
Singular Plural (...) pakadti (...) pakadnu is is I have visited; that is, one
we have visited; that is, more than one

Now to say pakadnu, when you should say pakadti, Is not this foolishness? Is
not this to speak we, when you should speak I? and is not this false Hebrew?
and to say we have visited, when you should say I have visited, Is this to
speak like men in their senses? is not this nonsense?

Now read the Feminine, (so called) that is, when a woman, or women are spoken
to, or of.

Singular (...) pakeda Plural (...) pakedu is is she visited they have visited

Now to say pakedu, when you should say pakeda; this were to put many women for
one woman: and to say you, or ye women have visited, for thou woman have
visited, Who would speak in this language that were in their wits, or senses
either?

Come Priests and Scholars, who cries up your Learning so much; Is it not
false Hebrew, to speak pakedu, when you should speak pakeda? were not this to
speak you, when you should speak thou? and you women, when you should speak
thou woman?

Singular Plural (...) pakadt (...) pekadten is is thou ( woman) have visited
you, or ye ( women) have visited

Now to say pekadten, when you should say pakadt, is to say you, or ye women
have visited, when you should say, thou woman have visited; and this is
nonsense, and false Hebrew; and they that teach this, you, for thou, and
cannot bear it, but they must have you for thou, Are these men of
undeastanding? or the Vulgar, and Ignorant, Barbarous, and Brutish? Yes, they
be so.

Read on, and see some more Examples about that you call your perfect Verb.

Singular Plural (...) niphkadta (...) niphkadtem is is thou ( man) wast
visited you, or ye ( men) were visited

Now to say Niphkadtem, when you should say Niphkadta, this were to put plural
for Singular. Read again:

Singular Plural (...) pikkadta (...) pikkadtem is is thou ^ast visited
diligently you, or ye have visited diligently

This is not true Hebrew, to say, You have visited diligently, when you should
say, Thou bast visited diligently

Singular Plural (...) hiphkadta (...) kiphkadtem is is thou ( man) have caused
to visit you, or ye have caused to visit

Now to say hiphkadtem for hiphkadta, were to put you for thou.

Singular (...) hophkadta is thou ( man) wast made to visit, or thou wast
visited by another

Plural (...) hophkadtem is you, or ye men were made to visit, or you, or ye
were visited by another

Now to say hophkadtem, when you should say hophkadta, were to say, you, or ye,
were made to visit, or were visited by another, when you should say, thou wast
made to visit, or wast visited by another. Read on again,

Singular Plural (...) hithpakkadta (...) hithpakkadtem is is thou man have
visited thy self you ( men) have visited your selves

Now for to say Hithpakkadtem, when you should say Hithpakkadta, were to say,
you have visited your selves, when you should say, thou (man) have visited by
self; and this were false, for Hithpakkadta, is thou (man) have visited thy
self and Hithpakkadtem, is you, or ye (men) have visited your selves. Say on:

Singular Plural (...) lamad (...) lamedu is is he has learned they ( men)
have learned

Now to say Lamedu, when they should say Lamad; is not this to say many
learned, when but one learned, and to put plural for Singular. Singular Plural
(...) lamadta (...) lemadtem is is thou ( man) have learned you, or ye ( men)
have learned

Now to say Lemadtem, when you should say Lamadta, is to say you have learned,
when you should say thou have learned; and to put plural for singular. Say on
again:

Singular Plural (...) lamadti (...) lamadnu is is I (man) or (woman) have
learned we (men) or we ( woe.) have learned

Now to say Lamadnu, when you should say Lamadti, this were say we (men) or we
(women) have learned, when you should say, I man, or I woman have learned; for
lamadti is I man or woman have learned, and Lamadn^; is we men, or women have
learned.

Singular Plural (...) lamadt (...) lemadten is is thou ( woman) have learned
ye, or you ( women) have learned

And to say Lemadten, when you should say Lamada, this is to say, ( women) have
learned, when but a woman has learned.

Singular (...) lanreda Plural (...) lamedn is is she has learned they have
learned

Now to say Lamedu, when you should say Lameda, were to say, they women have
learned, when you should say, she women has learned; for Lameda, is she bath
learned, and Lamedu, is they (men) or they women have learned.

Read some more Examples:
Singular (...) lemod Plural (...) limdu is is learn thou ( man) learn you, or
ye men

Now to say Limdu, learn thou man, does not this deserve the Rod? which Limdu,
is learn you, or ye men, and Lemod is learn thou man Singular, and to say you,
when he should say thou, is this good sense? is this good Hebrew?

Singular (...) limdi Plural (...) lemodena is is learn thou ( woman learn you,
or ye woe.

Now to say Lemodena, when you should say Limdi, were to say, let many women
learn, when they should say, let one woman learn. Read on:

Singular Plural (...) tishlach (...) tishlachu is is thou ( man) shall send
you, or ye ( men) shall send

Now to say Tishlachu, when you should say Tishlach, is to say many shall send,
when you should say, one shall send.

Singular Plural (...) tishlechi (...) tishl^chna is is thou ( woman) shall
send you, or ye ( woman) shall send

Now to say Tishlachna, many women shall send, when they should say Tishlechi,
which is, one woman shall send, that is not good Hebrew, for Tishlechi, is thou
(woman) shall send.

Say on: Singular (...) jiphkod Plural (...) jiphkedu is is he shall visit they
( men) shall visit

Now to say jiphkedu, when you should say, jiphkod, you put they, for he in so
doing, and this is nonsense, out of sense. Singular (...) tiphkod Plural (...)
tiphkedu is is thou ( man) shall visit you, or ye shall visit

Now to say Tiphkedu, when you should say Tiphkod, is to say you, or ye men,
when you should speak thou.

Look unto the English, and many others who have corrupted their own tongue.
Read on: Singular (...) ephkod is I shall visit, when a (man) or (woman) are
spoken of Plural (...) niphkod is we shall visit, when (men) or (women) is
spoken of

Now to say Niphkod, when you should say Ephkod, this is to say we, when you
should say I, and this would be false Hebrew; for Ephkod, is I man; or I woman
shall visit, and Niphkod, is we men, or we women shall visit. Singular (...)
tiphkod Plural (...) tiphkodena is is she shall visit they ( women) shall visit

Now to say Tiphkodena, they (woman) shall visit, when you should say Tiphkod,
she (woman) shall visit, this is to say, many shall visit, when but one shall
visit. Singular Plural (...) tiphkedi (...) tiphkodena is is thou ( woman)
shall visit you, or ye shall visit

Now to say Tiphkodena, when you should say Tiphkedi, were to say you, or ye,
women shall visit, when you should say, thou woman shall visit and such
speaking is false Hebrew, and English both, for Tiphkedi, is thou (woman) shall
visit, and Tiphkodena, is you, or ye, (women) shall visit.

Now see some Scripture Examples in Hebrew, about Thou, and You.
JEphtha's Daughter, said thou, and thy, to her Father, and did not say you, to
him, Judges 11. 36.

(...)
Va tomer elaiv abi phatsita et picha:
Mark, its picha, not pichem; thy mouth, not your mouth: And its (...)
meojebecha, thy enemies. Mark, its cha, not chem; thy enemies, not your enemies.

And Nathan thou would David, 2 Samuel, 1. 27. (...) atta haish, thou the man: Here he
says, not you the man, but atta haish, thou the man.

And Isaac, his servant, thou would his Master, Genesis 24. ver. 5. (...) ashib et
bincha. Mark, its bincha, thy Son, not binchem, your Son.

And again, he says, (...) asher jatsata, from which thou came: Here its
jatsata, not jetsatem; thou came from, not you came from.

And Pharoab Thou Would Jacob, and said, How old art thou? Genesis 4^8. In the Hebrew,
it is (...) Camma^^jeme sh^ne ^ajiecha: Mark again, its ^aji^cha, of thy life
not hajiechem, your life.

And in the third verse, Pharaoh said unto Joseph's Brethren, What is your
Occupation? Its (...) ma^ashechem, your occupation, not thy occupation; its
chem, not cha; your, not thy, when he speaks to more then one, but when he
spoke to Jacob abovementioned, then he says, cha, not chem; thou, not you; and
here when he speaks to Jacobs sonns, being more than one; he speaks plurally,
and not singularly, chem, and not cha, you, and not thou. So let pharaoh,
witness against you Priests, and Scholars in England, that makes no
distinction when you speak to one, and when you speak to many, as hereafter in
this BATTLE-DOOR, may plainly appear.

And Adam, thou would God, Genesis 3. 9. (...) kolcha shama^ti: Here it is kolcha, not
kolchem; thy voice, not your voice.

And God thee'd, and thou would Adam, Genesis 3. 11. and said, who told thee, that
thou waft naked: its lecha, to thee, not lachem, to you.

And God when he spoke to the Children of Israel, by the Prophet Jeremy, he
you would them, saying, Hearken not to the word of the Prophets, that Prophecy unto
you, they make you vain, Jeremy 23. 16. its (...) lachem attechem: here is not
lecha mentioned, when more than one is spoken to, but lachem to you, not lecha;
to thee.

And so the Priests, and Scholars, and Doctors may see, that the Hebrew, they
call the holy tongue, makes as plain a distinction when one is spoken to, and
when more than one are spoken to, as any language that is.

The end of the HEBREW BATTLE-DOOR
THE CALDEE Battle-Door.
(...)

Geo. Fox.
THe CALDEE Language, which teaches Thou and Thee to Singular, and You and Ye
to Plural, though the Nations will hardly own it; either the French, Spanish,
Italians, Greeks, or Latins, or English. But see some few Examples taken out
of the Grammars, and Bible, as follows:

But first read the Letters which are the same with the Hebrews Letters.

a b g d h v u z ch or hh t j i y (...) k or ch I m n s oo p ph or f (...) ts
tz or z q or k r sh th or t (...)

Singular (...) ano or (...) ano is I (man) or (woman) Plural (...) anan or
(...) anahhno or (...) nahhno is we (men) or (women) Singular (...) at or (...)
ant is thou (man) or masculine, so called) Plural (...) antun or (...) atun is
you, or ye (men) or (males) Singular Plural (...) hu or (...) hau or (...) jhu
is ^e (male) (...) himmon or (...) hinnun or (...) innun is they (males) Now to
say himmon, hinnun, jnnun; atun, antun; anan, nahhno, or ana^^no; this were to
say they, you, or ye, and ^ree, when you should say he, thou, and I, and this
were false Caldee, and English both. Now read those that are used, when a
woman, or women, or f^eminines so called are spoken to or of. Singular (...)
anti or (...) ant or (...) at is thou (female) Plural (...) anten or (...) aten
is you, or ye (females) Singular Plural (...) ihi or (...) hi is she (...)
innen or (...) hinne^ is they (females) Now to say jnnen, hinnen, aten, anten,
when you should say at, ant, anti, and hi, jhi, this were to say, they (women)
or ( f^emales) and ye, or you, (women) or ( f^emales) when you should say, thou
(woman) or female, and she (woman) or female: and this is to speak to many (
women) or ( females) when there is but one to speak to: but now read on to
those which are called in the Caldee Grammars, the Inseparable Pronounes, and
Affixes, or Suffixes, placed at the ends of words, and signifies as follows.
Singular (...) i (...) ai (...) ni or (...) nnani or (...) ano is me, my, at
the end of words Plural (...) an (...) ain or (...) no or (...) nan is us, our,
at the end of words

Now to put an, ain, no, nan, when you should put i, ai, ni, nnani, or ano,
this were to put us, our, when you should put me, my; and this would be false,
and deserves the Rod. Singular (...) och or (...) noch or (...) aik is thee,
thy, at the end of words, when a man, or a male is spoken to Plural (...) cho^^
or (...) cho^^ is you, your, at the end of words, when men, or males are spoken
to

Now to say chom, chon, when you should say, och, noch, aik, this were to say,
you, your, when you should say, thee, thy; and this were to put many Men, or
Males, for one Man, or one Male. But Say on: Singular (...) o^i is him, his, at
the end of words; or this, or that Male, or Masculine (so called) (...) eh
(...) eh (...) hi (...) neh Plural (...) hon is them, their, or these, or those
Males, or Masculines (so called) (...) hom (...) nun

Now to say hon, hom, nun, when you should ohi, e^, hi, ne^, this were to say,
them, their; or these, or those (males) or (masculines) when you should say,
him, his; or this, or that (male) or ( masculine;) and this would be false
again, as all the rest before mentioned; and a gross perverting of every word
from its own proper signification, and contrary to Grammar directions; and
Scripture Examples; Now come to those that are put at the end of words, when a
woman, or women, or f^emales are spoken of or to. Singular (...) ek is Thee,
Thy, at the end of words (...) ki (...) aik (...) nek Plural (...) chen or chen
is You, Your

Now to put chen, when you should put ek, ki, aik, nek, is to put you, your;
when you should put thee, thy; and this were false again. But Say on. Singular
(...) oh is her, at the end of words; or this, or that Feminine (so called)
(...) ho (...) noh Plural (...) hen is them, their; or these, or those Females,
or Feminines (so called) (...) nan (...) nin (...) nen

Now to put, or place hen, nan, nin, nen, at the end of words, when you should
put, or place; oh, ho, no^, this were to put them, their, or these or those
females, or feminines, in place of her, or this, or that female, or feminine;
and they that write or speak thus, must come and be taught this BATTLE-DOOR.

Read some Examples in that which is called the perfect Verb.
Singular (...) pkadh is He ^ath Commanded Plural (...) pkadu is They ( men)
have Commanded Singular (...) pkadt is Thou ( man) ^ast Commanded Plural (...)
pkadt^n is You, or Ye ( men) have Commanded

Now to say pkadu, and pkadtun, when you should say pkad^, and pkadt; this is
to say, they, and you, have commanded, when they should say, he, and thou, have
commanded, and this is like the practice of the Nations, whose hand writing
declares the contrary; So are come under the smart Rod.

Feminine, (so called) when a woman, or women, are spoken to or of. Singular
(...) pikdath is She ( woman) has Commanded (...) pekadt Thou ( woman) have
Commanded Plural (...) pekada is They ( women) have Commanded (...) pekadten
You, or Ye, ( women) have Commanded

Now to say pekada, and pekadten; when you should say, pekadt, and pikdath,
this were to say, you, or ye women, and they (women) have commanded, when you
should say, Thou (woman) have Commanded, and She (woman) ^ath Commanded: and
this has been the practice of the unlearned, (yet pretended learned) who
speaks false Calde^, and English both, when a man, or woman, or men, or women
speaks of themselves. Singular (...) pikdeth is I (man) or (woman) have
Commanded Plural (...) pekadna is we (men) or (women) have Commanded

Now to say pekadna, when you should say pikdeth, is to say we men, or we women
have commanded, when you should say, I (man) or I (women) have commanded; is
not this false Caldee, and English both?

Now Read some Examples about those that are called the Nounes in the Caldee
Grammars.
Singular (...) tur or (...) turo is a Mountain (...) detur or (...) deturo of
a Mountain (...) letur or (...) leturo to a Mountain (...) jattur or (...)
jatturo the Mountain (...) mittur or (...) mitturo from a mountain Plural (...)
turin or (...) ture or (...) turaijo is Mountains (...) deturin or (...)
deturaijo or deture of Mountains (...) leturin or (...) leture or (...)
leturaijo to Mountains (...) jatturrin or (...) jatture or (...) jattuarijo the
Mountains (...) mitturin or mitture or mitturaijo from Mountains

Now to say turin, ture, turaijo, etc. when you should say tur, turo, etc. as
above mentioned, this were to say mountains, when you should say a mountain,
and this were false, for tur, or turo, is a mountain, and turin, or ture, or
taraijo, is mountains. But Read on. Singular (...) tzidqo or (...) tzidqetho
is Righteo^snesse Plural (...) tzidqon or (...) tsidqotho is (...)
Righteo^snesses

Now to say tzidqotho, or tzidqon, when you should say tzid qo, or tzidqetho,
this were to say, righteossness, for righteo^snesses. Singular (...) reglo or
(...) regel is a Foot Dual that is, two (...) raglajin or (...) raglin is both
the Feet

Now to say raglin, or raglajin, when you should say regel, or reglo, this were
to say both the feet when there is but one foot. Singular Plural (...) jad or
(...) ido is a Hand (...) idajin or (...) idin is two Hands

Now to say jdajin, or jdin, when you should say jdo, or jad, this were to say,
there were two hands, when there is but one hand; and this were false Caldee,
and English both, for jad, or jdo, is one hand, and jdin, or jdajin, is two
hands.

Now Read a few Scripture Examples in Caldee, about the Singular, and Plural
Language.
NEbuccadnezar the King, he said ye, to many, Daniel 2. 8. ye would gain the
time in the Caldee, its (...) jdd^no antun tsabnin: Mark, its antun you, or ye,
not ant, not at, which is thou, as is before expressed.

And in the nin^h verse, and ye have prepared lying, and corrupt words, it
(...) hisdamnetun, etc. Mark, its ^^is^^^^etun, ye, or you, have prepared, not
hisdamnet, thou have prepared; here its Plural not Singular, when he speaks to
the Caldeans, being more than one, but when he speaks to a particular, he
says, art thou able to make known the dream, 26. verse, its (...) bajthaik
chahel, here you may see again, the ending is with the Singular, not with the
Plural, aik, not chon, thou, not you, when one is spoken to.

And Daniels Answer, was thou to the King again, in the 31. verse, thou o King
saw, (...) ant malko, hhaze havaita, here its ant, not antun, nor atun,
which is you, or ye, as is before expressed.

And in the 37. verse, (...) ant malko melek ^alk^^jo, here you see again, its
ant, not ant^n, thou o King, not you, o King, and the King was not offended at
the word ant, which in English is thou. So by these few Examples you may
plainly see a clear distinction, made in the Caldee Language, when one is
spoken to, and when more then one is spoken to, and so throughout that
Language, as in all other the Oriental Languages, there is a plain distinction,
betwixt Singular and Plural, as in any Languages that are.

And so you Scholars, Doctors, that have boasted of the tongues, you may be a
shamed for what you have spoken, and done this seven years and more, against
that harmless People called Quakers, for saying thou, to one, and you, to many
Might not the King have said before mentioned, to them that spoke to him in the
Singular Language, ant which is thou, what ant's thou me, as well as the proud
Professors in this age have said, what thou's thou me, I will have atun, or
antun, said to me, the King might say, which in English is you, or ye, as well
as an English man may say, I will have you said to me, but we do not read that
the King was offended, for any using the word at, or ant to him, which in
English is thou.

Directions for pronouncing Hebrew and Caldee.
BEsides the 22 Letters in the BATTLE-DOOR, there are others Marks placed with
them to sound them, which serve as Vowels, so called; whereof some are sounded
long, and some short.

The long ^ a ^ e as ea, ^ i as ie, and ^ o as oa, ^ u as (...) in Root. the
short are ^ and ^ a, (...) e, (...) i. as i i in His, ^ o, ^ u, as u in Truth.

These are sounded after the Letters, to which they belong. As (...) ^ha, (...)
bea, (...) (...) ^dho, ^ u, as ^; ^o (...) pha, (...) pe. Except - under (...)
which - is read before those letters, as (...) Eloah, God, not Eloha, (...)
ruach, the spirit, not roocha (...) Ies^^a, a Savior, or Jesus; (...)
Mashiach, anointed, M^ssiah, or Christ, not Mashich^: (...) is by some sounded
as g, by others as gn in the beginning and middle of words, and ng in the end:
but the Jews sound it not at all, as (...) they read it im, with, etc. Nalso
has no sound, as (...) abh, a Father; (...) a man, (...) not, ^ has no sound
in the end, but (...) as gala, he revealed, (...) (...) with before it makes
av, as (...) (...) meek: or with between them, (...) de^harav, his words, not
debaraiv* or with - as (...) kav, a measuring-line. (...) ev, as (...)
peaceable. ^ iv, as (...) piv, his mouth. If ^ or ^ have under them another
vowel, so called, then the (.) upon ^ is ^, and ^ is v, as (...) ho-va,
calamity; and the (.) in ^ makes double v, as (...) kiv-va, he waited in hope.

is not sounded without a vowel, as (...) each, how; ^ dv, (...) re, Except in
the end after ^ or ^ as (...) adho-n^i, Lord; (...) p^-nai, my face: (...) goi,
a nation; (...) ga-lui, revealed: with a vowel it is sounded as y, as ^ yadh, a
^and.

marked on the left side is ^, and if there be no vowel under i^, the (.) is o,
as (...) So-ne, ^ating; ^ marked on the right side is sh; and if the letter
before it has no vowel, then the (.) is o, as (...) Mo-s^e, Moses: sometimes
it has two (^) as (...) Sho-chadh, a gift, reward, or bribe* and (...) No- se,
he who lifts up, or pardons.

o short, is often writ without (:) and then differs not in form from ^ a long,
when yet it is short o, and is thus known:

1. Before (:) or (.) if no accent come between, as (...) zochra, she
remembered: (...) ron-n^, sing ye.

2. before a letter having - after it, as (...) ko^all, except (...) or (...)
go before - as (...) la, no; (...) m^ what.

3. In the end of a word, beginning with! (...) ^a, or ve, and- as (...)
vai-yakom, and be rose; (...) veja-kom; and he shall arise.

4. before under (...) or N as (...) o-holo, his taber^^ole, (...) ho-omadh, he
is appointed, etc.

5. Before if follow it as, (...) o-h^l-cha, thy tabernacle, etc.

(:) is sounded very short, oft-times not at all, but is silent, quiescent, or
mute. Its Read.

1. In the beginning, as (...) be-yom, in the day.

2. After a long vowel, as (...) pa^-kedhu, they have visited.

3. After another (.) mute, as (...) yiph-kedhou, they shall visit.

4. Under strong (.) as (...) dzammero^, sing ye; and under a letter
immediately doubled, as (...) halel^, praise ye.

Otherwise its not read, as I in the end, although two come together 1 2, after
a short vowel: 3. before another (:) 4. after a long vowel, with a tonic
accent, (so called) as (...) pekodh-na, visit ye women.

(.) In a letter is sometimes mild, only takes away the ( h) or aspiration
from these ^ix letters; (...) bh, gh, dh, ch, ph, th: so that with this (.) in
them, they are written b, g, d, c, p, ^; sometimes (.) is of more force, and
doubleth the letter, in which it is to avoid much writing, as (...) pinna, a
(...); not phina: it is mild (only in these fix letters, and that) only in
the beginning, as (...) pe; a mo^th; not phe, nor ppe.

2. After (:) mute, as (...) tiz-ke, thou shall be clean, or pure; not
thizk-ke. It is strong, and doubles the letter after a short vowel in the midst
of a word, and refers to two syllables at once; and the letter which lies hid
in (.) has always belonging to it (:) mute, as of (...) lam-ma, is made, and
for shortnesle written (...) lam-ma, why.

It sometimes also doubles the first letter of a word, when the word before
ends with (...) a (...) a, or (...) e, as (...) ma-t to^h, how good! Or if the
foregoing word ends with any of these terminations servile, without, as (...)
a, (...) ha, (...) ta, (...) ka, or as (...) ku-mu tz tzeu, arise depart; (...)
en yeshu-a-tha 1 lo, there is no salvation for him.

It never is ^ound in these 4 letters, (...)

In (...) (.) is ^ound but only at the end of a word, and notes that (...) is
to be sounded, without which it is never sounded in the ends; as (...)
ragh-lah, her foot; (...) to ra, the law, not tho-rah: Nota, This* (...)
kol-ish, every man. The Caldee has the same pronunciation, save that (:) is
not sounded, though after a long vowel, (so called) as (...) she-elta, a
petition: and that (...) and (...) makes eu both in the end, and in the middle
of a word: as (...) heu-tha, a beast; and ' makes ai in the middle, as (...)
kadh-majtha, prima, first fem. and that they observe not (...) ni, as in Hebrew.

Is by some rendered o in Caldee, as (...) urcho, a way; (...) huc-metho,
Wisdom: so she-eltho, and heu-tho.

Benjamin Furly.
The End of the Caldee Battle-door.
THE SYRIACK BATTLE-DOOR.
(...)

Geo. Fox.
First see the Letters.
In the end. In the middle. In the beginning of a word. (...) (...) (...) A
(...) (...) (...) B, or Bh, or u (...) (...) (...) G, or Gh (...) (...) (...)
D, or Dh (...) (...) (...) H (...) (...) (...) V, u (...) (...) (...) Z (...)
(...) (...) Hh, Ch (...) (...) (...) T, tt (...) (...) (...) Jiy (...) (...)
(...) K, c, or Ch (...) (...) (...) L (...) (...) (...) M (...) (...) (...) N
(...) (...) (...) S (...) (...) (...) Aa, or Oo This letter (...) is not
expressed in sound in the Battle-Door, because the pronunciation of it is
unknown to the Grammarians themselves. (...) (...) (...) P, Ph, or F (...)
(...) (...) Ts, tz, z, ss (...) (...) (...) Q, or K (...) (...) (...) R (...)
(...) (...) Sh, Sch (...) (...) (...) Th, or t

The Syrian Language is thou to one, and you to many, Singular and Plural, in
the Testament and Grammar; as may plainly appear here in this Battle door.
Singular (...) eno or (...) no is I (man) or (woman) Plural (...) hhnan or
(...) nahhno is we (men) or (women)

Now to say hhnan, or nahhno, when you should say eno, or no, this were to say
we, when you should say I, and this were to put Plural for Singular, for eno,
or no is I; and hhnan, or nahhno is we. Singular (...) at is thou (man) Plural
(...) anthun or (...) atun is you or ye ( men)

Now to say anthun, or atun, when you should say at, this were to say you, or
ye (men) when you should say, thou (man) and this were false Syriack, and
English both, for this deserves the rod; for at, is thou (man) and at^n, or
anthun, is you, or ye (men.) Singular (...) hu or (...) hau is he Plural (...)
honun, (...) hen^l or (...) enun is they (men)

Now to say honun, or henun, or enun, when you should say, hu, or hau, this
were to put they (men) for he (man) and this would be false Syriack, and
English both; for honun, or henun, or enun, is they (men) and hau, or hu, is he
(man;) but read on: Singular (...) ati or (...) at is thou ( woman) Plural
(...) aten is you, or ye ( women) Singular (...) hi, or (...) hoi is she, or it
( female) (...) hai, or (...) he Plural (...) honen (...) henen or (...) enen
is they ( women) these, or those ( females)

Now to say aten, honen, henen, or enen, when ye should ati, or at, this were
to say, you, or ye (women) and they (women) or these, or those (females) when
you should say thou (woman) and she, or it (female.) And this were to say,
there were many (women) or (females) when there is but one (woman) or one
(female) and this would be false Syriack, and English both; for ati, or at, is
thou (woman) and hi, or hoi, or hai, or he, is she, or it (female) and aten is
you, or ye (women,) and honen, or henen, or enen, is they (women) or these, or
those (females.) But come, read on, Singular Plural (...) eno or (...) no is I
(man) or I (woman) or Male or Female (...) hhnan, or (...) nahhno is we (men)
or (women) or (Males) or Females (...) dil or (...) dili or (...) dilai of me
(man) or (woman) (...) dilan, or (...) dilon of us (...) li or (...) lai to me
(...) lan or (...) lon to us (...) lai or (...) li me (...) lan or (...) lon us
(...) meni or (...) men is from me (man) or woman (...) menan from us

Now to say hhnan, or nahhno dilan, dil^n, lan, lon, lan, lon, and menan, when
you should say eno, or no, dil, dili, dilai, li, lai, li^lai, and men, or meni,
this were to say we; of us; to us; and from us; when you should say I; of me,
to me, me, and from me, and this would be false Syriack, and English both; for
eno, or no, is I; and ^^nan, or nahhno is we, dil, or dilai; or dili, is of me,
and dilan, or dilon is of us, li, or lai, is to me, and lan, or lon, is to us,
lai, or li is me, and lan or lon is us, men, or meni, is from me, and menan is
from us Singular Plural (...) at is thou (man) or (male) (...) atun or (...)
anthun is you or ye men (...) diloch of thee (...) dilchun of you (...) loch,
to thee (...) lechun to you (...) loch thee (...) lechun you or ye (men) or
males (...) menoch from thee (...) menchun from you

Now to say atun, or anthun, dilchun, lechun, and menchun, when you should say
at, diloch, loch, loch, and menoch, this were to say you, or ye (Men) or Males,
of you, to you, you, or ye (men) or males, and from you, when you should say
thou (man) or (male) of thee, to thee, thee, and from thee, and this would be
false Syriack and English both; and Contrary to the Examples above mentioned
Singular Plural (...) hau or (...) hu, is he (...) honun is they men (...)
dileh of him (...) henun or (...) enun (...) leh, to him (...) dilhun, of them
(...) leh, him (...) lehun, to them (...) meneh, from him (...) lehun or (...)
enun them (Men) or (ma^es) (...) menhun from them

Now to write or speak any of these words above mentioned out of its proper
place were the same in Nature and ground, with saying you when you should say
thou. Now read on to those which are called the faeminine, when a woman, or
(women) are spoken to or of, Singular (...) ati or (...) at is thou (woman) or
(Female) (...) dilech or (...) dilechi of thee (...) lech or (...) lechi, to
thee, (...) lech or (...) lechi thee, (...) menech or (...) mennechi from me^,
Plural (...) aten is you, or ye women (...) dilchen, of you (...) lechen, to
you (...) lechen you, or ye (...) menchen from you Singular Plural (...) hi, is
(...) honen is they (Females) (...) hoi, she, or it (female) (...) henen or
(...) enen (...) hai or (...) he (...) dilhen of them (...) diloh of her, or of
it (...) lehen to them (...) loh to her, or to it her, or it (female) (...)
lehen them, or those (Females) (...) loh (...) menhen or (...) menhen from them
(...) menoh from her, or from it

Now to say honen, henen, or enen, dilhen, leben, lehen, and menhen, when you
should say hi, hoi, hai, or he, diloh, loh, loh, and menoh, this were to say
they (women) of them, to them, them, and from them, when you should say she or
it, of her or of it, or to it, her, or it; and from her or from it female. And
this manner of speaking would be a gross perverting of words from their proper
Signification, like unto the Priests and Doctors, and Scholars and Professors
that says you to one, when they should say thou.

Now come read those that are called the Inseparable pronouns (...), or
affixes, or suffixes placed at the end of words, and signifies as follows;
Singular Plural (...) i, (...) ai, (...) ni, (...) ini, being placed at the end
of words, when a man or (male) speaks of himself; or a (woman) or female
speaks of her self, is me, my, mine; (...) an (...) ain, and (...) nan at the
end of words is us, our ours when men or women, Males or Females speaks of
themselves.

Now to put an, ain, and nan, when you should put i, ai, ni, and ini, this were
to put us, our, and ours; in place of me, my, mine, and this would be false
Syriack and nonsense, and the least child that has but read the first
Rudiments in Syriack would laugh at you, if you should thus pervert words
Contrary to Grammar rules, and Scripture Examples in the Bible; Singular Plural
(...) och or (...) ok, (...) aik, and (...) nok these at the end of words is
thee, thy, thine, when a man, or a male is spoken to, (...) chun (...) aikun,
is, you, your, yours, when (men) or, males are spoken to,

Now to say chun, aikun, when you should say ocb, ok, aik, or nok, this were to
say you, your, and yours, when you should say, thee, thy, and thine, and this
would be false again; but read on, Singular Plural (...) eh (...) au, (...) oi,
(...) neh (...) hun, (...) aihun, (...) nun is is him, his, at the end of words
them, their

Now to put or place hun, aihun, nun, when you should put eh, au, oi, neh, this
were to put them, their, in place of him, his; Now read those that are used at
the end of words, when a woman, or women, or the feminine so called are spoken
to, and of Singular Plural (...) each or (...) ek and (...) aik is thee, thy,
etc. (...) chen or (...) ken and (...) aiken is you, your, etc.

Now to put chen or ken and aiken when you should put each, or ek, and aik, were
to put you, your, in place of thee, thy, and this were to speak to many women
or females where there is but one woman or female to speak to Singular Plural
(...) oh, is her, or hers, or it, or this or that female, or feminine so called
(...) hen, is at the end of words is them, their, or these or those (females)
(...) eh and (...) noh (...) enen (...) aihen,

Now, to put hen, enen, and aihen in place of oh, eh, and noh, this were to put
them, their, or these or those females, in place of her, hers, or it, or this
or that female, and such Syriack and English both deserves the rod and must be
brought to read this Battle-Door; Now come and see some of those words that are
called Nouns in the Common Grammars, Singular (...) melek or (...) malko is a
king (...) dmelek, or (...) dmalko, of a king (...) lmelek, or (...) lmalko to
a king (...) lmelek, or (...) lmalko the king (...) menmelek or (...) menmalko
from a king Plural (...) malkin or (...) malke, or (...) malko or (...) malkai
is of kings, and so adding the letter (...) l, and (...) men, as is above
mentioned in the Singular, to every word of the Plural, it will be lmalkin,
lmalke, lmalko, lmalkai, is to kings, or the kings, and menmalkin, menmalke,
menmalko, and menmalkai is from kings; any of these words is for kings (...)
dmalkin (...) dmalke, etc.

Now to say malkin, malke, malko, malkai, dmalkin, dmalke, dma^ko, dmalkai,
lmalkin, lmalke, lmalko, l^malkai, and menmalkin, menmalke, menmalko and
menmalkai, when you should say malek, malko; dmelek, d^malko; lmelek, lmalko,
and menmelek, or menmalko; this were to say kings, of kings, to kings, the
kings, and from kings, when you should say a king, of a king, to a king, the
king, and from a king; and this would be false and contrary to Grammar
directions, Singular Plural (...) zedqo or (...) zedqtho is Righteousness
(...) zedqon, or (...) zedqotho is Righteousnesses;

Now to put zedqon, or zedqotho instead of zedqo, or zedqtho were to put
Righteousnesses for Righteousness, and this were to put Plural for Singular
like them, that puts you for thou* But read on, Singular Plural (...) gabhro or
(...) gebhar is a man (...) gabhrin or (...) gabhre or (...) gabhrai is men

Now to say gabhrai, gabhre, or gabhrin, when you should say gebhar or gabhro,
this were to say men, when there is but a man; And this were nonsense, and
they that speak thus are more like mad men, than men in their senses. Singular
(...) abo, is a father Plural (...) abohe or (...) abohotho is fathers

Now to say abohe, or abohotho, when you should say abo, this were to put
fathers for a father, and this would be false; for abo is a father, and obohe
or abohotho is fathers. Come you that will not have one say thou to a
particular, but you, and will make no diftinction in your practice, betwixt you
and thou, Plural and Singular, read on in some few Examples, in that which is
called the perfect verb. Singular Plural (...) pkadt (...) pkadtun, is is thou
(man) have Commanded you or ye have Commanded, Singular Plural (...) pkudh
(...) pkudu is or without the laft letter u, sounded pkud is Command you or ye
(man) Command thou (man) or (male) Singular Plural (...) tephkudh is thou (
man) shall or wilt Commaud, (...) tephkdun is you or ye men shall or will
Command.

Now to say pkadtun, pkudu, or pkud, and tephkdun, when you should say pkadt,
pkudh, and taphkudh, this is to say you, and ye (men) have Commanded, Command
you or ye (men) and you or ye shall or will Command; when you should say thou
(man) have Commanded, Command thou (man) or (male) and thou man shall or wilt
Command, and this manner of writing and speaking both would be hist at in every
Scool that learns the Syrian Language, and would be Contrary to all Writers of
Grammar in that Tongue, and Contrary to Scripture Examples; but before you come
to Scripture Examples, read a little more about thou and you, in that word
above mentioned, when a (woman) or female or women, or females are spoken to
and of. Singular Plural (...) pkadt is thou (woman) or female have Commanded;
(...) pkadten is you or ye women have Commanded; Singular Plural (...) tephkdin
is thou (woman) or (female) shall or wilt Command, (...) tephkdon is you or ye
women, or females shall or will Command:

Now to say pkadten, and tephkdon, when you should say pkadt, and tephkdin,
this were to say you or ye (women) or females have Commanded, and you and ye
(women) or females shall or will Command, when you should say thou (woman) or
(female) have Commanded, and thou (woman) or female shall or wilt Command, and
this manner of writing or speaking is like them that says you to one woman,
when they should say thou.

Now see a few Scriptures Examples in the Syrian Language, about thou and thee,
and you or ye, Plural and Singular.

David Thou Would God, and said thee and thou, and thy to him, as you may read in
the Psalms all along, but see an Example or two in the Syrian Language, (...)
umen karso them aloh^ at lo tharhhek men.
In Latin it is, and a ventre matris meae Deus meus tu ne absis a me: In
English, and thou my God from my Mothers Belly, be not thou absent from me,
psalm. 22. Mark its (...) at, thou, not atun, you;

And in the ninth Psalm, (...) wansabhrun boch cul jodeai shemoch, in the
Latin its, and sperabunt in te omnes Scientes nomen tuum: in English it is,
and all that know thy name will hope in thee.

Mind again, shemoch thy name, not shemchun your name, and boch, not bechun in
thee, not in you.

Christ when he spoke to the Scribes and Pharisees, being more than one, he
speaks Plurally, when he said woe to you, in the Syriack it is (...) woi
lechun, woe to you, not woi loch, not woe to thee, they being more than one,
Matthew. 23. But when Christ spoke to the high Priest, being but one Priest, not
many, he thou would him, Matthew. 26. in the Syriack, (...) at emart, thou have said
it, here its at thou, not atun you.

And John writing to the Saints you's them, saying in Syriack, 1 Ep. John 1. v.
20. (...) Watun meshichuto it lechun men kadisho uforshin atun and lechul nosh.
That is, And ye have an unction from the holy one, and ye discern every man.
Here its atun ye, not at thou, when he writes to more than one.

Felix theed Paul, Acts 24, 25. I will send to thee Mittam ad te, in the
Syriack, (...) eshadar bothroch, mark its och, not chun, thee, not you: And
Paul thou would Faelix in the same Chapter; forasmuch as I do know that thou have
been of many years a Judge of this Nation, etc. and because thou may
understand, etc. In the Syriack, (...) men shnaio saghiotho joda no dithaik
dajono damo hono, mark its dithaik, here is aik which at the end of a word is
thee, or thy, not aikun, you nor your, in the Latin version as you call it,
its, a multis annis scio te esse judicem hujus gentis; in English its from or
of many years: I know thee to be a judge of this Nation.

And because thou may understand, etc. (...) chad meshbach at lmeda, mark
again, its at, not atun, thou, not you: in the Latin, Quum tu possis nosse,
etc. that thou may know, etc.

And in the same 24 Chapter, Tertullus a certain Orator, thou would and theed and
thy'd Faelix the Governor, seven or eight times in the beginning of that
Chapter, and we do not read that the Governor was offended for using the
Singular Language, you will not say that Tertullus was ill-bred, he was a
Rhetorician, he knew fine speaking; he knew how to affect the Governor with his
adorned speech, and yet he uses the Singular Language to him; as you may read
in his Speech to him, in the beginning of that Chapter, and any that knows the
Syriack Tongue, may see that there is no mention of you, ye, nor your, but
thou, thee, and thy, (...) mettulthoch for thy sake, mark its och, not chun,
thy, not your: And so seven or eight times, or more, there is och, each, and
aik, and at, used by the Orator to the Governor, which in English as before
mentioned is thou, thee, thy, and not chun, aikun, nor chen, nor aiken, which
at the end of words is thee, thy, thine, nor atun, which is you, or ye, and so
all along throughout the Testament in the Syrian Language, the Singular terms
are used to the Singular, and Plural to the Plural, not like the Scholars and
Teachers of England and elsewhere in most parts in Christendom, who are
degenerated from the propriety of their own Language, and will not practice
what they teach in their Grammars, nor what is written in the Scriptures of
truth, and many more places I might instance, that the Syriack Language, which
the Scholars says was Christ's Language, is as punctual and as clear in making
a distinction, in this patticular, betwixt Singular and Plural, as any
Language, though the Teachers in England makes none in their practice, who will
say you to one man, and you to more than one, but sure this that already has
been said about it, may be sufficient to convince them about it, or at least to
stop their fretting against any for saying thou to one man, which is the
propriety of the English Tongue, and not you to one.

Some Directions for the Reading or Sounding Syriack.
Besides the two and twenty Letters mentioned in the Battle-Door there are
other Letters joined, as (...) a l (...) la (...) that is (...). And ll at the
end thus (...) or (...); and where l (...) ends a word, and (...) begins the
next, they are often joined thus (...) as (...) al-estho, upon the wall.

These six Letters are written with a point upon them, and are read, (...) b,
(...) g, (...) d, (...) k, (...) p, (...) t, but with the point under them are
read, (...) bh or v, (...) gh, (...) dh, (...) ch, (...) ph, or f, and (...) th.

Diverse Letters are founded otherwise than they are written, viz.
(...) after another (...) is read j or y, as (...), ojar the air. Also in the
participle of the Present-tence of Verbs having (...), u, silent in the middle
as (...) kojem standing. (...) z before (...) th, or (...) ch or (...) k, is
sounded as (...) s. as (...) gestho, Wool, (...) s before (...) g or (...) d,
is sounded as (...) z, as (...) hhezdo, reproach: (...) g before (...) th is
sounded as (...) k, as (...) rektho, desire.

The Vowels (so called) are as follows (...) or (...) is a, as (...) ba,
(...) or (...) or (...) or (...) is e, as (...) or (...) be, (...) or (...) is
i, as (...) by, (...) or (...) is o, as (...) or (...), bo. (...) or (...) or
(...) is u, as (...) bu. Note the marks are placed above or beneath according
to convenience, but the points are always placed as abovesaid. (...) or (...)
is au, (...) is au, (...) is eu, (...) is iu, (...) is ou, (...) is oi, and
(...) makes ai.

Diverse Letters are written and not sounded, as
1. All Letters having a stroke under them, and so are often times left quite
out, as (...) or (...) barnosho, the son of man, (...) ezath, he went, etc,
except in the Imperative Mood passive, where the (...) only notes the Letter
under which it is to want a Vowel, as (...) ethpaqd, be thou commanded.

2. Neither (...) nor (...) have properly any sound but as they are pointed, or
marked, as (...) aloho, God, (...) ^had, be remembered.

3. (...) i having (...) under it, as (...) ileph, not jileph, he has learned
not. 2. before (...) as (...) golen, not golein, they revealed. 3. In the
affixes as (...) aloh my God, not alohi, and (...) not meni but men, from me.
4. nor in the feminine termination of Verbs (so called) as (...) pkad, they
women commanded, 5. nor in these words, (...) mnothmol, the day before
yesterday, (...) ethmol, yesterday, etc. in brief (...) is never sounded at the
end of a word if it has no Vowel belonging to it.

4. (...) is not sounded in (...) joined after another word, as (...) tob-u, he
is good, although it has no stroke under it, as it ost has, as (...) hu-^,
he is, (...) is not at all sounded, neither the (...) nor the (...) joined
after Nowns or Verbs (so called) as (...) not malkau-i nor malkau-hi, his
kings, but malkau and (...) anoi respondit ^i, be answered him, (...) kroi,
vocavit eum, he called him.

5. (...) v, is not sounded in the middle nor end after (...) as (...) or (...)
malkutho or malku, a kingdom, nor after (...) in foreign words, as (...)
paulos, Paul, nor in the termination of any Verb, as (...) e^hal, they have
eaten, not echalu.

6. (...) d in these kind of words is not sounded, as (...) ito, an assembly.
(...) hhatho new masc. Except (...) hhdhat (...), new fem.

7. (...) n in these kind of words is not sounded, (...) shato, a year, (...)
mdhito, a City: (...) sphito, an ark or sbip, and some give this rule, viz.
that (...) before (...) t, having (...) or (...) belonging to the foregoing
Letter is not sounded; but (...) before (...) th is sounded as (...) kantho, a
Companion or Fellow Servants: also in these words, (...) is not read, (...)
gaboro a Giant, (...) ghev, the side of a thing, (...) alghev tturo, upon the
side of the Mountain.

This point (.) is used above and beneath Letters, first to distinguish betwixt
ambiguous words, and upon a Letter its put for (...) or (...), and beneath a
Letter for (...) and (...), as (...) idho, a hand, from (...) aidho, quae which
feminine, so (...) hu, himself, from (...) hau, he, (...) hi, her self, from
(...), hoi, she, (...) honun, they men, from (...) henun, themselves men, (...)
honen, they women, from (...) henen, themselves women: (...) man, who, from
(...) men, of or from, and (...) bisho, evil, fom (...) boisho, wretched,
(...) avdo, a servant, from (...) abodho, a work, (...) oulo, an infant, from
(...) aulo (without a point) iniquity, and from (...) avolo (with the point
above) wicked.

2. This Point serves to signify the Moods and Tenses in Verbs so called.

1. Under a Letter it is a note of the Preter tense in all the Persons of it,
except the first and third feminine, singular. 2. Its a note of the Imperative
and Infinitive Mood. 3. It denotes all the persons in the future tense, except
the first, singular and Plural: as (...) ebne, I shall build, and (...) nebne,
we shall build, which is so distinguished from the third Person singular, (...)
nebne, he shall build.

This point (.) (...) a Letter denotes 1. the first Person singular of the
Preter tense, 2. the Participle of the Present tense, and there it serves for
(...), (...), in the first second and fifth conjugations, and in the third, and
the first kind of the fourth conjugation it is (...) a 3. Its a note of the
first Person in both numbers of the Future tense as abovesaid: And the third
Person singular feminine, has amongst some, one point at the end behind the
(...), and one under the word, as (...) emrath, she has said; among others, it
has two points underneath, thus, (...) shroth, she has loosed.

Two points upon a Letter is a note of the plural number in Nowns or Verbs (so
called) as (...) malke, kings, (...) pkadh, or (...) pkaden, they women have
Commanded.

This stroke (-) is often times upon Letters, 1. when the Letters serve as
numbers, as (...) 1, (...) 2, (...) 3, (...) 10, (...) 12, etc. 2. To show that
the word is writ short, as (...) for (...) kadisho, holy. 3. Upon the Vocative
Participle (...), O, to distinguish it from (...) au, or.

The pauses are, ((...) for;) ((...) for:) two points so (...) for () a
parenthesis, three points thus ((...) for?) ((...) or (...) for.)

B. F.
THE ARABIC BATTLE-DOOR.
(...)


The Arabians have in their Language proper distinctions betwixt the Singular,
Duall, and Plural Numbers, so called, and when they speak of one, they use the
Singular Number, and the Duall speaks of two, and the Plural speaks of more
than two; as may be seen by these following Examples taken out of the Arabic
Grammars, and Scriptures.

But first see their Letters, which in number are twenty eight, as follows.

End. Middle, Beginning. (...) (...) (...) -- as the Hebrew (...) Their Vowels
are placed some above, and some beneath the other Letters thus, (...) above a
Letter is a, or e, as (...) is ba, be, (...) under a Letter is ^ as (...) is bl
(...) upon a Letter is ^, or ^, as, (...) is bo, or bu. (...) (...) (...) B.
(...) (...) (...) T. (...) and (...) in the end is t. (...) (...) (...) Th.
(...) (...) (...) G or J, for so it is sounded. End, Middle, Beginning. (...)
(...) (...) Hh. This (...) upon a Letter before (...) having no Vowel is a.
(...) b a, This (...) under, before (...) without a Vowel is ^ long, as (...)
is ^^* This (...) above, before (...) without a Vowel is ou, or oo, as (...)
too, This (...) above a Letter is also a long, as (...) ba. These (...) or
above is an, as (...) or (...) is ban. These (...) or ^ under is in, as (...)
or (...) is bin. These (...) above is on, as (...) is bon. Note, This (...)
above is a, and this (...) o, always upon the last Letters of words, and upon
these Letters, (...) hh, (...) th, (...) s, (...) d, t. (...) ^, (...) ^, (...)
g, and (...) k. (...) (...) (...) Chapter (...) (...) (...) D. (...) (...) (...)
Dh. (...) (...) (...) R. (...) (...) (...) Z. (...) (...) (...) S. (...) (...)
(...) Sh. (...) (...) (...) S. (...) (...) (...) D. But upon the beginning of
words, and upon the rest of the Letters, they are e, and u, for the most part
as (...) men, and (...) kum. (...) (...) (...) T. (...) (...) (...) D.

(...) (...) (...) -- as the Hebrew (...). (...) d before (...) it is not
founded. This (...) upon a Letter doubles it; except the same letter goes
before it with this (...) upon it. (...) (...) (...) G. (...) (...) (...) F.
(...) (...) (...) K.

(...) (...) (...) C, also (...) and (...) before a, o, u. (...) (...) (...) L.
(...) before a Letter with (...) upon it, is not founded, as (...) errabbo, not
elrabbo, the Lord. (...) (...) (...) M. (...) before (...) b, is founded as
(...) m, before (...) ll, (...) v, (...) mm (...) jj, (...) rr, it is not
founded at all. Before (...) t (...) th, (...) ch, (...) d, (...) dh, (...)*
(...) ^, (...) (...), and (...) ^, (...) ^* as ng. Before (...) k, and (...) c*
as nc* (...) (...) (...) N. (...) (...) (...) W (...) (...) (...) H, also (...)
and (...) in the end* (...) (...) (...) J or y* Also (...) in the end.

Several Letters are joined together, as (...) and (...) is (...) and (...), l
and a joined together, (...) is ^b and (...) j, (...) is (...), n, j, (...) is
(...) t and j, (...) is (...) and (...) th and j. or b and hh, n and ^h, t and
hh, th and hh, without a point under the (...) as (...) is b and hh, and with a
point upon the (...) thus (...) it is b and ch, etc. as (...) is (...) and
(...) n and ch, and so there are diverse other Letters joined together which are
difficult, and too long to insert here.

Singular. (...) Regolon Sound the g, not as in English, but as z, y, as
Rez-yolon, and Rez-yolin, as the french g* etc.
is A man (...) Regolin Of a man, and to a man. (...) Regolan The man. Duall.
(...) Regolani is Two men. (...) Regoleini Of the two men. To the two men.
Plural. (...) Rigalon is Men, more than two. (...) Rigalin Of the men more
than two To the men* (...) Rigalan The men, more than two.

Now to say Regolani, or Rigalon, when you should say Regolon, this were to say
two men, or more than two men, when you should say a man, for Regolon is a man,
and Regolani is two men, and Rigalon is men, more than two. Now is not this to
put the Plural or Duall for the Singular? is this good Arabic?

Singular. (...) Ana is I man or woman. (...) Angta (...) n before (...) t,
etc. is founded as ng, so its angta, not an^a, etc.
Thou man. (...) Angti Thou Woman. This ^ upon a Letter has no sound (only
shows that that Letter is to be joined in spelling, with the foregoing mark,
as nahh-no, not nahhno, etc. (...) Howa He. (...) Hia She.

Duall. (...) Angtuma is Ye two men or women. (...) Huma They two men or women.

(...) upon (...) t, (...) m, etc. is (...) most commonly.

Plural. (...) Nahhno is We men or women. This (...) upon (...) adds nothing
to the sound; and is o^t placed for (...) in the beginning, end, and middle.
And upon (...) or (...) it it notes them to be put instead of (...) (...)
Angtum Ye men. (...) Angtunna Ye women. (...) Hum They men. (...) Hunna (...)
upon a Letter doubles it.
They women.

Now to put Angtuma, Huma, Angtum, Angtunna, Hum, or Hunna, when you should say
Angta, Angti, Howa or H^a. This were to say ye two, they two men or women, ye
men, ye women, they men, or they women, when you should say thou man, thou
woman, he or she. Is this good Arabic thus, to confound the Duall and Plural
with the Singular?

Again to put Nahh^no for Ana, is not this to say We for I? Is this good
Arabic or English, to put the Plural for the Singular?

Here follows some Examples of the Affixes (so called) that is words affixed
or joined at the end of other words, which are and do signify as follows.

Singular. Note these Affixes signify mine, thine, his, hers, your, their, when
they are joined to Nowns so called; as of (...) meliko, a king is made* (...)
melki, my king, (...) melkuka, thy King, speaking to a man, (...) melkuki, thy
King* speaking to a woman* (...) melkuho, his King. (...) melkuha, her King.
(...) melkuna, our King. (...), melkukum, your ( of men) king. (...)
melkukunna, your ( of women) King. (...) melkuhum, their ( of men) King. (...)
melkuhunna, their King, speaking of women, but when they are joined to Verbs so
called, they signify thee, him, her, us, you, they, as (...) Angsurka, I shall
help thee, and (...) Ansurkum, I shall help you, etc. Now is this good Arabic
or good English, to say melkukum, your King, when you should say melkuka, thy
King, or ansurkum, I will help you, when you should say ansurka, I will help
thee?
(...) i (...) a is My, mine. (...) ni, (...) ni Me. (...) ka Thine, or thee
man. (...) ki Thine, or thee woman. (...) ho, (...) hi His, or him. (...) ha
Hers, or her.

Plural. (...) na is Ours, or us. (...) kum Yours, or you men. (...) kunna
Your, or you women. (...) hum Their, or them men. (...) hunna Their, or them
women.

Now to say hum, or hunna, when you should say ho or ha, and kum and kunna when
you should say ka or ki, and na when you should say i or ni, this were to say
theirs, or them, when you should say his, or hers, or him, or her, and yours or
you; when you should say thine, or thee; and ours, or us, when you should say
mine or me: Is this good Arabic, or good English, answer you Doctors,
Scholars, Priests, and Professors, that say you to one, when you should say
thou.

Singular. (...) Nasarto is I man or woman have helped. (...) Nasarta Thou man
have helped. (...) Nasarti Thou woman have helped. (...) Nasara. He has
helped. (...) Nasarat She has helped.

Duall. (...) Nasartuma is Ye two men or women have heped. (...) Nasara They
two men have helped. (...) Nasarata They two men have helped.

Plural. (...) Nasarni is We have helped; more than two. (...) Nasartum Ye
men, more than two, have heped. (...) Nasartunna Ye women, more than two, have
helped. (...) Nasarou They men, more than two, have helped. (...) Nasarna They
women, more than two, have helped.

Now to say Nasartuma, Nasara, Nasarata, instead of Nasarta Nasarti, Nasara,
Nasarat, this is to say ye two have helped* they two men have helped, they two
women have helped, when you should say* thou have helped, he has helped, or
she has helped, is this good Arabic (answer ye Dostors, Scholars, Priests
and Professors) to speak in the Duall number, so called, when you should speak
in the Singular? And wherefore serves the distinction of numbers, if they may
be thus confounded?

Again to say Nasarna, Nasartum, Nasartunna, Nasarou, Nasarna, when you should
say Nasarto, Nasarta, Nasarti, Nasara, Nasarat; is this good Arabic? is not
this to say we, ye, they, more than two, men or women, have helped, when you
should say I have, ^hou have, He or she has helped; is this good English?
answer ye that say you to one? or is it true to say that diverse have helped?
when but one has helped? and do ye not speak thus, when you say you have to
one, instead of thou have? Consider.

Here follow some Scripture Examples concerning Thee and Thou, showing that it
is the Language which is only used throughout the Scriptures, the Singular to
One, and Plural always to many.
Peter Thee'd Jesus, 17 Matthew. 4. verse, and said unto him, (...) ^ (...) ^
(...) Ia Rabbo geijidon lana en nekouna hahuma * eteshao an nesnahha hahuna
thelatha medalin wahhidatan laka wawahhidatan limousei wawahhidatan liilija *
That is

Oh Lord it is good for us to be here: Will thou that we make here three
Tabernacles: one for Thee, and one for Moses, and one for Elias?

Here when Peter speaks of them all, he speaks in the Plural number; Ia
Rabbo geijidon lana, etc. oh Lord it is good for us, etc. lana is us, the
Plural Number. But when he speaks to Christ alone, he speaks in the Singular
number; eteshao an nesnahha hahuna thelatha meda^in wahhidatan laka, etc. That
is, Will thou that we make here three Tabernacles, one for thee, etc. it is
laka for thee, not(...) (for you) in the Plural number, when he speaks to
one only, although to Jesus his Lord, and our.

So Jesus when he spak to one woman thou would her 15 Mat. 28. (...) Ia merato
adimon imanuki jekouno laki kaa aradti. That is, Oh woman great is thy faith,
be it unto thee, as thou will, here it is imanuki* thy faith, and jekouno laki,
be it unto thee* with the female affixe Singular, so called, (...) ki, thee or
thy for a woman, not (...) imanukunna, nor (...) lakunna, your faith, nor to
you in the feminine affixe Plural, (...) kunna, your or you for women, as you
may see above in the Affixes. Nor is it (...) kaa aradtunna, as you will, in
the ending of the second person plural, but kaa aradti, as thou will in the
second person Singular feminine.

Paul thou would King Agrippa, 26. Acts 27. (...) ^ (...) eijuha-lmeliko, agribba
ama tuseddiko-lenbijao * ana aalemo enneka tuseddikuhum. That is,

Oh King Agrippa, do thou not believe the Prophets? I know that thou
believe them.

Here i^ is tuseddiko, do thou believe? in the second person singular, not
tuseddikouna, do you believe? in the second person plural.

And Christ thou would Paul, 22. Asts 7. verse, and said ^ (...) Shaolo Shaolo lima
tedtahiduni. That is, S^ul, Saul, why persecutest thou me?

And Paul thou would Christ again, Acts 22. v. 8. ^ (...) ^ (...) fa ^jabto, ana *
ja abbo men angta * That is,

I answered, Lord who art Thou? Here it is, men angta, who thou? not (...)*
men, angtum who you?

And Jesus answered him, in the same verse again. (...) ^ (...) ^ (...) fakala
li* Ana h^wa jesouhho-lnna sirijo-lladi angta tadtahidoho* That is; He said
unto me; I am Jesus of Nazareth whom thou persecutest. Here it is all in the
Singular number; again, it is fakala l^, he said unto me, not (...) lana, unto
us, and ana, etc. I am Jesus, etc. not we are Jesus of Nazareth, and lladi
angta, etc. whom thou, etc. not lladi angtum, etc. whom you persecute. Thus
speaking to one they spoke in the Singular number, but speaking to more than
one they always spoke in the Plural number.

Thus Peter, Acts 2, verse 14. said you to many. (...) * (...) * (...) * (...)
* (...) * (...) fanahada bitruso m^a^ lahhadi ashera * warafaa sautoho
wachatabahum kaalen * eijuha-rrigalo-ljehoudo walkatibouna uresha^ima agjmaouna
faljecun hadha indekum maroufan ^ waangtitou ilei ekwailei * ilenna haolao
leisou sekarei kama danangtum angtum * ilannaha-lssaato-lthaltheto
mina-lnnehari * That is,

But Peter stood up with the eleven, and lifting up his voice, spoke unto them,
saying; O ye men Jews, and all ye that dwell in Jerusalem, be this known unto
you, and he arken unto my words, Ver. 15* For these are not drunken as ye
suppose, seeing it is but the third hour of the day.

Here he says hadha indekum maroufan * be this known unto you* indekum, not in
the singular number, indeka, unto thee, and kama danangtum angtum, as ye
suppose, not kama danangta angta; in the Singular, as thou supposest, but as ye
suppose, etc.

So ^tephen speaking to the Jews you would them* Acts 7. 51. (...) * (...) feangtum
tukawimouna rouhha^lkudusiaaman dfeangtum nediro abaakum. That is,

Ye resist the holy Spirit always; for ye are like your Fathers. Here is again
angtum, not angta; ye, not thou; and aba^kum, your fathers; not abaaka, thy
fathers. etc.

Thus Christ also you would the Scribes and Pharisees. (...) * elweil^lakum
eijub^-lketabato walfarrisijouna-lmeraouna ilannakum* etc. That is,

Woe unto ye Scribes and Pharisees Hypocrites. because ye, etc. Here again it
is not laka, nor illannaka, (in the Singular) to thee* and because thou.

Christ you would his Disciples Matthew. 23. 8. (...) * (...) faemma angtum fla tedou
lakum muallima alei-lars fainna muallimakum wahh^don howa-lmelihho waangtum
gjamia ichw^ton* That is,

But be ye not called Master upon Earth, for one is your Master even Christ,
and all ye are Brethren.

And when Paul writes to the Saints he you would them, 1 Cor. ^.^. * (...) nim^ton
lekum w^sel^meton m^na^ lilahi ab^na w^rrabbi jes^uhhalmesihhi *

Grace be unto you, and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
Here again it is all in the Plural number, and not in Singular, but when they
speak to one alone; so are not you Doctors, Scholars, Priests, and Professors,
degenerated both from your own Mother Tongue, and from all the Learned Tongues
so called, who say you to one?

Note the Arabians have no Accent, but it is observed that the first Syllable
in words of two Syllables is sounded most, and the last Syllable, save two in
words of many Syllables, unless the last Syllable save one has one of these
long marks, (...) a, (...) i (...), ou, and then that is to be sounded most.

Here follows some more of the double or joined Letters, which are most
difficult and necessary to be known, for the true reading of Arabic:

As (...) is double (...) hh. (...) is hh and gj. (...) is k, l, and a. (...)
is s m, or (...) sh and m. (...) is b m. (...) is t m. (...) is l m. (...) is
(...) n a* (...) is (...) ba. (...) is j a* (...) is m and (...) gj* (...) l, m
and gj. (...) or (...) is (...) and (...) is (...) and (...) is l and j. (...)
f and j. (...) is n and j. (...) is double l. (...) double l and a. (...)
double l and h. (...) is l and k (...) is r and h. (...) is d and h. (...) is b
and h. (...) is (...) and (...) ^ (...) is r and t. is (...) double l and gj.
(...) is s and gj. (...) is sad and gj. (...) is s and hh. (...) ^ and chapter
(...) is k and l. (...) or (...) is k and a. Many others there are which use
will teach.

The End of the Arabic Battle-Door.
THE PERSIAN BATTLE-DOOR.
(...)


In the Persian Language there is also a distinction betwixt the Singular and
the Plural Number, as may be seen in the Persian Grammar, where (...) Tou is
put for Thou, and (...) shuma, for ye.

The Persian Alphabet or Letters are 32 in Number viz.
End, Middle, Beginning. (...) (...) (...) -- as in the Arabic. The Vowels (so
called) This (...) upon a Letter is a, or e, as, (...) ba* or be. This (...)
under a Letter is i, as (...) by* and sometimes short e. This upon a Letter is
o or u, as (...) bo or bu. (...) (...) (...) B. (...) (...) (...) P. (...)
(...) (...) T. (...) (...) (...) S. (...) (...) (...) G. as the French g.

End, Middle, Beginning. (...) (...) (...) Chapter as in Engl. this (...) before
(...) is a, as (...) yar, a Companion, but if (...) ^m, or (...) n, follows
(...)* then this (...) is sounded as o, as (...) adamion, men, and sometimes
this (...) being placed in stead of (...) upon (...) as (...) osmo^^heavek,
This (...) before (...) is i or ie, as (...) tiz, sharp, (...) suarie, a
riding. This (...) before (...) is ou, or u long, sounded as oo, in English, as
(...) ghoush (or ghoosh) an ear, (...) zur, ^iolence. This (...) upon these
three Letters (...) notes that that Letter has no vowell, but is to be joined
in sound with the foregoing, as (...) danis-ten, to know. This (...) upon a
Letter doubles it, as in the Arabic. In speaking, the Persians do o^t found
more Letters then they write; as, for (...) Mader Man, My Mother, they say,
Madere Man. And for (...) Hal chub darem, I am in (...), they (...) Hali chubi
darem. (...) (...) (...) Hh. (...) (...) (...) Chapter as x or k. (...) (...) (...)
D. (...) (...) (...) Z. (...) (...) (...) R. (...) (...) (...) Z. (...) (...)
(...) Zh. (...) (...) (...) S. (...) (...) (...) Sh. (...) (...) (...) SS.
(...) (...) (...) Z. (...) (...) (...) T. (...) (...) (...) Z. (...) (...)
(...) ^. (...) (...) (...) G as in English. (...) (...) (...) F. (...) (...)
(...) K. (...) (...) (...) C or k. (...) (...) (...) Kh, or Gh. (...) (...)
(...) L. (...) (...) (...) M. (...) (...) (...) N. (...) (...) (...) V. (...)
(...) (...) H. (...) (...) (...) Y in English.

First see an Example in their first Declension (so called) which ends in (...)
on in the Plural number.

Singular. (...) Pader. is A, or the Father, and of a Father. (...) Paderra. To
a Father, and the Father. (...) ie Pader. O Father. (...) az Pader. From a
Father.

Plural. (...) Paderon. is The Fathers, and of the Fathers. (...) Paderonra.
To the Fathers, and the Fathers. (...) ie Paderon. O Fathers. (...) az Paderon.
From the Fathers.

Read on an Example in their second Declension (so called) which ends in (...)
h a, in the Plural number.

Singular (...) Osmon. is The Heaven, and of the Heaven. (...) Osmonra. To the
Heaven, and the Heaven. (...) ie osmon O Heaven. (...) az osonon. From Heaven.

Plural (...) osmonha. is The Heavens, of the Heavens. (...) osmonhar. To the
Heavens, the Heavens. (...) ie osmonha O Heavens. (...) az osmonha. From the
Heavens.

Singular (...) Man. is I, and of me, or my. (...) Mera. To me, and me. (...)
az Man. From me.

Plural (...) Ma. is We, and of us, or our. (...) mara. To us, and us. (...) az
ma. From us.

Singular (...) Tou. is Thou, and of thee, and thy. (...) Tura. To thee, and
thee. (...) ie Tu. o thou. (...) az Tu. From thee.

Plural (...) shuma. is Ye, and of you, or your. (...) shum^ra. To you, and
you. (...) ie shuma^ o ye. (...) az shuma. From you.

Singular (...) Ou. is He, and of him, or his. (...) Oura. To him, and him.
(...) ie ou. O he. (...) az u. From him.

Plural (...) ishon. is They, and of them or theirs. (...) ieshonra. To them,
and them. (...) ie ieshon. O they. (...) az^shon From them.

Now to say shuma, or shumara in Persian, when you should say, Tou or Toura:
This is as the Professors and Scholars in England who say you, and your, when
they should say thee and thine, or thy; and this is both false Pe^sick and
false English, contrary to the Grammar Rules.

The Persians have no particular words to signify my, thy, his, our, your,
their by, and so they put the foregoing words, I, thou, he, we, ye, they, after
words, as, (...) Pade^man, is my Father, (...) Pader^tou, is thy Father, (...)
Pader^ou, is his Father, and so Pader-ma is our Father, Pader-shuma is your
Father, and Pader-ishon is their Father, and so padera mera, padera-mara, etc.

See here again an Example of the Verb (so called.)

Singular (...) Man mie churem. is I eat. (...) Tou mie churie. Thou eatest.
(...) Ou mie chued. He eats.

Plural. (...) Ma mie churim. is We eat. (...) shuma mie churid. Ye eat. (...)
Ieshon mie churand. They eat.

Singular. (...) Am. is I am. (...) Ie Thou art. (...) Est. He is.

Plural. (...) im. is We are. (...) id. Ye are. (...) And. They are.

Here follows also some few Scripture-Examples which show that the Singular
Language is Spoken to one, and the Plural to many, and not confounded by
speaking Plural to one, and Plural to many.

Peter thou would Jesus, Matthew. 16. 16. (...)

That is, Simon Cephas gave answer and said; Thou art Christ the Son of the
living God. Here all that understand the Persian Language may see that it is
Tou-ie, Thou art, and not shuma, ye are, etc.

And Jesus Thou Would Peter again, verse 17. (...)

That is, Jesus answered, and said; Blessed art thou, O Simon Barjona. Here ye
may again see that its Tou, Thou, and not shuma, ye, etc.

Christ you would his Apostles, Matthew. 16. 15. (...)

That is, Jesus said unto them; Now ye, who say ye that I am?

Again Christ you would the Pharisees, Luke 17. 21. (...)

Neque dicent, Hic est, aut illic est. Ecce Regnum Dei in Vobis in est.

That is, Neither shall they say, here it is, or there it is. Behold the
Kingdom of God is within in you.

Here again ye may see its shuma, ye, when he speaks to many, and not Tou,
Thou: And thus it is throughout the four Books of Matthew, Mark, Luke and John,
which are translated into the Persian Language, as may there be seen by those
that understand it.

The End of the Persian Battle-Door.
THE AETHIOPICK BATTLE-DOOR.
(...)


The Aethiopians Language has also clear distinctions betwixt the Singular and
Plural, betwixt their speaking to one, and their speaking to many, as may be
seen in what follows.

They have twenty six Letters, which do admit of 182 sounds, and forms, as
appears by this following Table of Syllables (so called.)

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 short. short. Observe in reading, that the five first orders of
Vowels (so called) are long, and the sixth and seventh orders are e and a
short. ha he hi ho hu he ha (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) H. la le
li lo lu le la The short e answers the: in the Hebrew, and is often times not
sounded; as that, whose rules are observed for the most part in reading of it,
it is never sounded 1. in the end as (...) ab, a father, not abe, and (...)
amen, not ame-ne 2. before a short Syllable of the sixth or seventh orders, as
(...) ach-zab, Nations; not achez^-be. (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
(...) L. ha he hi ho hu he ha (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) H. ma
me mi mo mu me ma (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) M. sa se si so su
se sa (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) S. brev. brev. So (...)
mechratu, mercy, not meche-ratu, etc. ra re ri to ru re ra They have no marks
for accents but ordinarily the first order of Syllables (that stand under the
figure 1) are sounded most, whether in the beginning, middle, or end of a word:
But all the rest are only sounded so, in the first or last syllable save one.
(...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) R. sa se si so su se sa (...) (...)
(...) (...) (...) (...) (...) S. ka ke ki ko ku ke ka (...) (...) (...) (...)
(...) (...) (...) K. ba be by bo bu be ba Every word great or small has after
it two points thus: but for greater distinctions they have four thus:: and the
end of a Verse, or so, is thus noted,::=:- (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
(...) B. ta te ti to tu te ta (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) T. ha
he hi ho hu he ha (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) H. They have these
other Syllables besides their Alphabet. na ne ni no nu ne na (...) (...) (...)
(...) (...) (...) (...) N. chua chue chui chuo chuu (...) kua kue kui kuo kuu
(...) gua gue gui guo guu (...) hua hue hui huo huu (...) a e i o u e a (...)
(...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) A. cha che chi cho chu che cha (...) (...)
(...) (...) (...) (...) (...) C or chapter va ve vi vo vu ve va (...) (...) (...)
(...) (...) (...) (...) V or W. a e i o u e a (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
(...) (...) A. za ze zi zo zu ze za (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
Z. ja je ji jo ju je ja (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) J. da de di
do du de da (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) D. ga ge gi go gu ge ga
(...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) G. ta te ti to tu te ta (...) (...)
(...) (...) (...) (...)(...) T. pa pe pi po pu pe pa (...) (...) (...) (...)
(...) (...) (...) P. za ze zi zo zu ze za (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
(...) Z. zza zze zzi zzo zzu zze zza (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
ZZ. fa fe fi fo fu fe fa (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) F. pa pe pi
po pu pe pa (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) P. psa.

Singular. (...) besa. is A man. (...) besit. A Woman.

Plural (...) seb. is Men. (...) anest Women.

Here follows an Example of their pronouns so called.

Singular. (...) en. is I. (...) anta. Thou. (...) vetu. He.

Plural. (...) nehna. is We. (...) antemu. Ye. (...) emuntu. They.

Here follows an Example of the Affixes, so called, which are placed behind
their Nouns, and do signify.

Singular. (...) ja, is my. (...) cha, thy. (...) hu, his

Plural. (...) na. is O (...) chemu. Your. (...) homu. Their.

As for Example of (...) ab, a father, is made (...) abuja, my father, by
adding (...). after it; and (...) abuna is our father; and (...) abucha is thy
father, and (...) abuchmu is your father, (...) abuhu is his father, and (...)
abuhomu, is their father.

So these are put behind their Verbs so called, and do signify.

Singular. (...) ni. is M^. (...) cha. Thee. (...) to. Him.

Plural. (...) na. is Us. (...) chmu. You. (...) mu or Them. (...) vomu.

As (...) jafakrani, is he loves me; (...) afakarchucha, is, I have loved
thee; and (...) afakraro, is, I will love him; (...) asakarna, he has loved
us: (...) afakarachuchmu, is, I have loved you.

Here follow some Scripture Examples taken out of the Aethiopick Testament.
Christ thou would and thee'd his Father, John 17. v. 25. (...) Aba: zadk:
vaalamsa: ajaemaracha:: vaansa: amarchucha: valahi: amarucha: chama: anta:
fanavechani:=:- That is,

Father of truth, and the world knows not thee, and I have known thee, and
these have known thee, that thou have sent me.

Here you may see its Anta, not Antemu; Thou, not you.

But speaking to many, to his Disciples he you would them, John 15. 26 and 27.
verses.

V. 26. (...):=:-

V. 27. (...):=:-

Vemazia: paraklitos: zaena: efenu: emhaba: ab: lachemu: manfas: zedk: zajvazz:
emhaba: ab: vetu: samaetja:=:-

Veantemuhi: samaetja: chama: emtechata: halo: mesaloja:=:-

V. 26. And when the comforter shall come, whom I shall send unto you from the
Father, even the Spirit of truth which proceeds of the Father, he shall
testify of me.

V. 27. And ye (are) my witnesses, that he has been with me from the beginning.

Jesus thou would Pilate, and you would the Jews, Matthew. 26. v. 64. (...):

Vajbelo: egzie: ijasus: anta: teb: vebahetu: eblachmu: That is, And the Lord
Jesus said unto him; thou say: nevertheless I say unto you, etc.

And thus you may see that here the Plural is not confounded with the
Singular, but that they spoke Singular, Anta, Thou, to one, and Plural,
Antemu, ye, to many.

The End of the Aethiopick Battle-Door.
THE SAMARITAN ALPHABET.
1 Aleph (...) (...) 80 Pe (...) (...) 2 Beth (...) (...) 90 Tsade (...) (...)
3 Gimel (...) 100 Koph (...) (...) 4 Daleth (...) (...) 200 Resh (...) (...) 5
He (...) (...) 300 Shin (...) (...) 6 Vau (...) (...) 400 Tau (...) (...) 7
Zain (...) (...) 8 Hheth (...) (...) 9 Teth (...) (...) 10 Jod (...) (...) 20
Caph (...) (...) 500 (...) 30 Lamed (...) (...) 600 (...) 40 Mem (...) (...)
700 (...) 50 Nun (...) (...) 800 (...) 60 Samech (...) (...) 900 (...) 30 Ain
(...) (...) 1000 (...)

Read a few Examples about the Singular and Plural in the Samaritane Language.
Singular. (...) anah, is I. (...) at, is Thou. or (...) ant, or (...) attah,
(...) hu, or is He or She. (...) hi, or (...) hi,

Plural. (...) anahhnan, is We. (...) attun, is You or Ye. (...) attin, or
(...) anun, is They. or (...) anin,

Now to say anahhnan, attun, attin, anun, anin, when yo^ should say anah, at,
ant, attah, hu, and hi, this were to say we, you, or ye, and they when you
should say I, thou, and he, and this would be false Samaritane and English both.

These are placed at the end of words, and signifies as follows.

Singular. (...) i, is My, me, mine. (...) ni, Thy, thee, thine. (...) nch or
nk, Him, his, her. (...) ich or ik, (...) k or ch, (...) h,

Plural. (...) i, is Us, our. (...) n, (...) nan, (...) chem You, Your. (...)
uchum (...) chum, (...) un, Them, their. (...) hin, (...) hun,

Singular. (...) dili, is My, mine. (...) dilech, Thy, thine.

Plural. (...) dilan is Our. (...) dilchun, or (...) didchun, is Your.

Now to put or place all these words above mentioned out of their place, and to
put the Plural word in the Singulars place, this would be like them that puts
you for thou.

The EGYPTIAN Language, which is called the Coptick Language,
they have also a distinction betwixt Singular and plural, which may condemn
the spiritnal Egyptians, who have lo^ distinction through pride, and Ambition,
who will neither practice plain and simple Language themselves, nor will suffer
others, but will persecute them: Therefore let the spiritual Egyptians, who
will persecute people for using thou to one, and you to more than one; read a
few Examples in the Egyptian Tongue, but first see the Letters, as follows.

The Name, Letter, and Sound Alpha (...) A a. Vida (...) V v, sound it as B b.
Gamma (...) G g. Dalda (...) D d. Ei (...) E e. So (...) S s. Zida (...) Z z.
Hida (...) I i, sound as i in high, But with Thita (...) Th. (an Accent thus
(...) as ie. Iauda (...) I i. Kabba (...) K k. Lauda (...) L l. Mi (...) M m.
Ni (...) N N n, in the end (...) Exi (...) X x. O (...) O o. By (...) P p,
sound as b. To (...) R r. Sima (...) S s. Dau (...) T t. sound it t. He (...) E
e. sound it as i, or y, and after Alpha as u. Phi (...) F f. sometimes as p.
declining to b. Chi (...) Ch chapter as K. O (...) O o. Scei (...) Sc as sh Eng. or
German sch. Fei (...) F f. Chei (...) Chapter as in Character. Hori (...) as Hebrew
(...). Giangia (...) Gi. as the Spanish ^. Scima (...) Sc sc. as sh. Dei (...)
as Hebrew (...). ^^si (...) Ps.

Singular (...) Piromi is a Man Dual (...) Hanromib two Men Plural (...)
Niromi. Men more than two.

Singular (...) Oyshimi is a Woman Dual (...) Hanshimib two Women Plural (...)
Nihiomi Women more than two

Here follows an Example of the Pronouns so called.

Sngular. (...) Anok is I thou Man So und Itok, Itof, Itos, etc. (...) * Idok
(...) Ithok (...) Itho thou Woman (...) Idof He (...) Idos She

Plural. (...) Anon is We (...) Ithoden Ye, men or women (...) Ithooy They

Now to pervert all these words, and use the Plural words in speaking, instead
of the Singular; and say Ithoden to one man when you should say Idok; this is
as our English Scholars and others do pervert their Language, in saying You to
one, when they should say Thou; and this would be false Coptick, as well as
false English; for Idok and Ithok is Thou man; Itho is Thou woman, and Idoden
is Ye, or you men, or women.

Singular. (...) Paos is My Lord (...) Pekos Thy Lord (...) Pefos His Lord

Plural (...) Penos is Our Lord (...) Pedenos Your Lord (...) Poyos Their Lord

Sing. (...) E^sodem is I hear (...) Eksodem thou hear (...) Efsodem he
hears

Plural (...) Ensodem is we hear (...) Ededensodem ye hear (...) Eysodem they
hear

The end of the Egyptian Language.
Here follows some Examples in the Armenian Language,
by which it may be seen, that the Armenians also have proper distinctions
between the Singular and Plural, to wit, T uu, for Thou, and Tuuch, for Ye or
You.

The Name, Letter, Value and Number. Aip (...) Aa 1 Pien (...) Pp 2 Chiem (...)
Ch 3 Ta (...) Tt 4 Jeg (...) Ie 5 Ssa (...) Ss 6 E (...) Ee 7 Jet (...) Je 8
Tho (...) Th 9 Sgie (...) Sg 10 Iin (...) I^i 20 Liun (...) L^ 30 The Name,
Letter, Value, and Number. Hhe (...) Hh 40 Za (...) Z z 50 Ghien (...) Gh 60 Ho
or Huin (...) H h 70 Zza (...) Zz 80 Kat (...) K k 90 Ge (...) G g 100 Mien
(...) M m 200 I (...) I i 300 Nu (...) N n 400 Scia (...) Sc 500 Vua (...) V u
600 Scia (...) Ce 700 Be (...) B b 800 Gge (...) Gg 900 Rra (...) Rr 1000 Se
(...) S s 2000 Vieu (...) V u 3000 The Name, Letter, Value and Number. Diun
(...) D d 4000 Ere (...) R r 5000 Zzo (...) Zz 6000 Hiun (...) V u 7000 Ppiur
(...) P p 8000 Che (...) Ch 9000 Ieu (...) Eu Fe (...) F f 10000

These are their Vowels so called which are four, to wit: (...) a e i u

These Five are called half Vowells. (...) ie ie i ^ u

These Seven are called Diphthtongs. (...) ai a^ ieu ui ui ^u iu

They have no O, but do use their Au for it;

Singular (...) Air is A Man

Plural (...) Arch is Men

Singular (...) ^es is I (...) Tuu Thou (...) (...) He

Plural (...) Mench is we (...) Tuuch ye (...) (...) they

Singular (...) Im is mine (...) Chin thine

Plural (...) Mer is our (...) Zzer your

Now to say Tuuch, when you should say Tuu, or Zzer, when you should say Chui,
would not this be false Armenian, as it is false English to say, you, or your,
wh^^ you should say thou, or thin^?

The End of the Armenian
Here follows some Examples in the Ancient SAXON Tongue,
by which it appears that they had a distinction between the Singular and
Plural, Thu, Thou to one; and Ge, Ye to many; a^ you may see by the following
Examples, or, in the SAXON Grammar out of which this was taken, more at large.
But first see their Letters and Marks wherein they differ from the English.

(...) d. e. th. th. f. g. h. i. r. s. t. w. y. and. that (...) AE. AE. Th. E.
M. S. W. W.

Singular (...) is a man (...) a beast

Plural (...) is men (...) beasts

Singular Plural (...) (...) is is I, thou, he, we ye they of one more than one
(...) (...) is is mine, thine, our, your,

Singular (...) is I teach (...) thou teach (...) he teaches

Plural (...) is we teach (...) we teach (...) they teach

The End of the SAXON.
Some Examples in CORNISH
Singular Chee deane is Thou Man

Plural Why Teesse is You Men

Singular Chee Bennen is Thou Woman

Plural Why Benenas is You Women

Singular Chee Rowler is Thou Ruler

Plural Why Rowledgee is You Rulers

Singular Chee Metearn is Thou King

Plural Why Metearneau is You Kings

Singular Chee Meternas is Thou Queen

Singular Chee taze is Thou Father

Plural Why Tazowe is You Fathers

Singular Chee Dama is Thou Mother

Plural Why Dameeowe is You Mothers

Singular Chee Pedn an Bobel is Thou head of the people

Plural Why Pednawe an Boble is You heads of the people

Singular Me Chee Eve is I Thou He

Plural Nigh Why Gye is We You They

Singular Why Poan Gye is You or They

This is the Cornish Proper Tongue both Singular and Plural, Answerable to the
English above Mentioned.

In MENCE;
Singular Us is Thee

Plural Shysh is You or Ye

The End of the CORNISH.
Some Examples in PORTVGAL.
Singular O Homen A Man A Molher A Woman O Rey A King A Raynha A Quen

Plural Os Homens Men As Molheres Women Os Reys Kings As Raynhas Queens

Singular Eu I Me Me Tu Thou Te Thee Elle He Lhe Him

Plural Nos Us, We, Vos Ye, You, Else They Lhes Them

Singular Meu, Meus, is Mine Minha, Minhas Teu, Teus, Thine Tua, Tuas, Seu,
Seus, His Sua, Suas,

Plural Nosso, Nossos, Our Nossa, Nossas, Vosso, Vossos, Your Vosa, Vossas,
Seu, Seus, Their Sua, Suas,

Singular Eu Falo I speak Tu Falas Thou speak Elle or Fala He speaks
Aquelle

Plural Nos Falamos We spe^k Vos Falays Ye speak Else or Falaon They speak
Aquelles

The End of the PORTVGAL.
THE WELSH Battle-Door.
In y goloni yr hwn y goluodd Christ chwi credwch yntho, mal y galloch adnabod
yr eniniad ich dyscu.


Rhau Samplau in y Iaith Cymraig yngcilch y girie Ti a Dydi:
In dangos in gyntaf, IN gyfatebol ir Scrythyran in dangos pafodd I Darfu, I
Duw Christ, ar Saintie arfar^ ddywedid Ti a Didi wrth un din you unig pwu bynag;
ac Chwi neu Hwchwi wrth llawer, neu mwu nag un.

In aile, Y may yma rhau Samplau, in gyfatebol I rheol y Grammar Cymraig, ym
pa un yr Y scolhigion, Firiadau, Profeswur, ar boble, sin ddywedid Chwi, a
Hwchwi wrth un din in unig, nwu a allan weled pafodd y maint gwedi gwur droi ac
in cysiliorni oddi wrth I rheol Profesedig I hinain, y Scrythyran, ar Grammar.

That is, Some Examples in the Welsh Tongue, concerning the words Thou and Thee.
showing plainly;

FIrst, according to the Scriptures, how that God, Christ, and the Saints used
to speak Thee, and Thou, to any particular person whatsoever, and Ye, and You,
to many, or more than one.

Secondly, here are some Examples according to the Rules of the Welsh Grammar;
in both which Scholars, Priests, Professors and People, which say Ye, and Tou,
to a particular person, may feel how they derogate and err from their own
professed Rules, both Scripture and Grammar.

Y Sampl Cynta.
In dangos pafodd y Ilyfarodd Duw Ti a Tydi wrth un din ag nid Chwi a Hwchwi.

Yr Arglwidd Dduw a allwodd ar Adda, Ag a ddyweddd, wrtho ym pha lle yr wit Ti,
(nid pa I Will yr ydech chwi, Addaf;) pwu a ddywedodd it Ti die fod in noith, a
swteist ti, etc. Ar Arglwidd a ddywedodd Ti wrth y wraig, a Ti wrth y sarphe,
ac nid chwi a hwchwi, Genesis 3. penod, 11 adnod.

Genesis 26. 3. Ar Arglwidd a y^ ddangosodd I Isaac ac a ddywedodd wrtho, ym
deithi^ in y wlad hon, mi a ^ydda gida, thy ac ath benedithiaf. Canis it Ti, y
rhoddaf yr holl wl ad hin, etc.

Exodus 4. 21. Ar Arglwidd a ddywedodd with Moisen, pan elech I ddychwelidd ir
Aipht gwel itnwithur ger bron Pharoh yr holl rhyfeddodau a rhoddwud in die llaw.

Ar Arglwidd a ddywedodd Ti wrth I Proffwud Ezekel, penod 12. adnod. 1, 2, 3,
4, 5, 6. ac with i Proffwud Amos, pen. 8. adn. 2. ac wrth I Profiwid Jeremiah,
ponod 26. adn. 2, 4.

First Example.
How God spoke Thee and Thou to one, and not Ye and You.

And the Lord God appeared unto Adam, and said, Where art Thou, (not Where are
you Adam (? Who told thee that Thou wast naked? have Thou eaten, etc. And the
Lord said Thou to the woman, and Thou to the serpent, and not ye and you: as
you may read, Genesis 3d Chapter, Verse 11.

Genesis 26. 3. And the Lord appeared unto Isaac, and said unto him, Sojourne in
this land, and I will be with thee, and will bless thee: for unto thee, and to
thy seed, etc.

Exodus 4. 24. And the Lord said unto Moses, when thou go to return into
Egypt see thou do all these wonders which I have put into thy hand.

And the Lord said Thou to his Prophet Ezekiel, chap. 12. ver, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
and to his Prophet Amos, chap. 8. ver. 2. and to his Prophet Jeremiah, chapt.
26. verse. 4.

Yr ail Sampl.
In dangos pafodd y llafarodd Duw Chwi ac Hwchwi wrth llawer, neu mwu nag un.

Exodus 6. Am hynu dywed wrth mibion Israel myfi jw yr Arglwidd, ac mysi ach
dygaf chwi allan odditan lwithau yr Aiphtaed: myfi ach dygaf allan oi caithiwed
hwunt, ac ach gwaredaf a llaw cref, hefyd mi ach Cymeraf in bobl, I mi ac mi a
fyddaf in Dduw I chwi, a chwch wybod may myfy iwr Arglwydd ych Duw yr yr hwn
sydd in ych dwyn chwi allan, etc.

Second Example.
Showing how God spoke Ye and You to many, or more than one.

Exodus 6. Wherefore say unto the children of Israel, I am the Lord, and I will
bring you out from under the burdens of the Egyptians, and I will bring you
out of their bondage, and I will redeem you with a stretched out arm, and I
will take you to me for a people, and I will be to you a God, and ye shall know
that I am the Lord your God.

Y trydidd Samplau.
A Christ a ddywedodd Ti a Tydi with un din pwi bynag, a chwi ac hwchwi with
llawer, neu mwi nag un, mal y gellir darllain in eglir, Mark 4. 13. ag Pen. 9.
13, 19, 23, 25, adnodu. ag Penod. 10. 15, 18, 19, 21, adnodu. ag in Luke,
penod. 21. or 8. hyd 22. ag in penod. 22. or 10. adnodu hyd 35.

Third Example.
And Christ said Thee and Thou to any particular person, and Ye and You to
many, or more than one; as may be read at large, Mark 4. 13. and Chap. 9. 13,
19, 23, 25, verses. and and Chap. 10. 15, 18, 19, 21, verses. and in Luke
chapt. 21. from 8. to 22. and in chapt. 22. from the 10th. verse to the 35th.

Y pedweridd Sampl.
Y Saintie a ddywedasant Ti neu Dydi with un din pwu bynag, ac a ddywedasant
chwi neu hwchwi wrth llawer, neu mwu nag un,

Actau. 13. adn. 10. Paul a ddywedodd wrth Elymas y Swinwr, tydi mab diafol,
(nid chwi mab diafol) oni Fidie di a gwuro jawn fordd yr arglwidd.

Adnod. 11. Ac in awr well man llaw yr Arglwidd arnat ti, athi a fydd ddall,
etc.

A pan llafarodd of wrth llawer, neu mwu nag un, in y 16 adnod, Paul a
ddywedodd, O wir Israel yr rhai ydech: in ofni Duw grandewch, etc.

Ac yr ydem in efangylu I chwi yr addewid a nwaid ir tadau:

A Paul a ddywedodd Ti wrth Claudus Lyssias y pen Capten: Ac wrth Agrippa y
Brenning, Actau, pen. 21. 37, 39. Penod. 26. 27, 29 adnodu.

Ar Saintie a ddywedasant Ti wrth Paul, mal y gelir darllain in egliur Actau.
pen. 21. 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, adnodau, ac nid chwi a hwchwi: Fellu Duw, Christ,
ar Saintie a ddyweda sant ti neu dydi wrth un, ac nid chwi a hwchwi:

A Ieptha barnwr Israel, Barnwur yr 11. pen. 26. a ddywedodd wrth I ferch began
darostwng, y darostyngaist fi, ac nid chwi.

Pen. 27. A hi a ddywioddod agorast die enau wrth yr Arglwidd, gwna I mi ar ol
yr hin aith allan oath enau, began ir Arglwidd nwithir it Ti ddialedd ar die
elynion;

Yma y ddywedodd hi die ti wrth I thad y barnwr; ac nid chwi a hwchwi: Oidd hin
anmoisol? atebwch chwi Professwir, Firiadau, a dyscawdwir, yr rhau sin dyweddid
may yr Y sorythyr iw ych Roeol.

The Fourth Example.
And the Saints said Thou or Thee to any particular person, and ye or you to
many, or more then one; as, in

Acts 13. ver. 10. Paul said to Elymas the Sorcerer, Thou child of the Devil,
(not you child of the Devil) will thou not cease to pervert the right way of
the Lord?

Ver. 11. Behold the hand of the Lord shall be upon thee, and thou shall be
blind, etc.

And when he spoke to many, or more than one, as in the 16th verse, Paul said,
Ye men of Israel, and ye that fear the Lord give audience, etc.

And we declare unto you glad tidings;

And Paul said thou to Claudius Lysias the chief Captain: And to King Agrippa,
as in Acts, chapt. 21. 37, 39. Chap. 26. 27, 29 verses.

And the Saints said Thou to Paul, as may be read Acts, chap. 21. 21, 22, 23,
24, 25 verses, and not ye or you: So God, Christ, and the Saints said thee or
thou to one, and not ye and you, and ye and you to many, or more than one.

And Jeptha the judge of Israel, Judges the 11. ver. 26. Thou have brought me
low, and not you have, etc.

Ver. 27. And she laid if thou have openest thy mouth unto the Lord, do as thou
have promised seeing that the Lord has avenged thee of by enemies.

Here she said thee and thou and thy to her Father the (...) of Israel, and
not ye and you^^ Was thi^ unmanerly Answer ye Priests Professors, and Teachers,
who say, the Scriptures are your Rule.

Pan ddywedoch Chwi wrth un, yr ydech you my^ed (...) gwrthwineb ir Yserythir,
ac I jaith ych maime^ canis chw^^ said I llawer; and ti with un.

When you say You to one, you go contrary to the Scriptures, and to your Mother
Tongue: For you is to many, and thou is to one.

Yma y may in canllin rhau Samplau in gyfatebol I Rheolau y Grammar yr hwn y
mae I dyscawdwir of, in I galw yr unig ffordd I wibod pafodd I ddywedid in
cywir.
That is, Here follows some Examples according to the Rules of Grammar (which
the teachers thereof, call The Art of Right Speaking.
Sing. Fi that is I Ti Thou Efe He,

Plu. Ni that is We, or Us Chwi Ye, or You: Hwunt They.

NOw to say Ni, Chwi, which is, V^ and You, when you should say, Fi, Ti, which
is I, Thou, this is false British, and English, and contrary to the Scripture,
and Grammar teaching, and deserves the rod, who through pride and Ambition are
degenerated from your own Mother Tongue.

Sing. Grwaig a Woman. Plur. Grwagedd Women. Gwr a Man. Gwir Men.

Now to say grwagedd, which is Women, when you should say grwaig, which is a
Woman; this is false British, and English.

And to say gwir, which is Men, when you should say gwr, which is, Man; is this
proper British and English?

And to say chwi gwr, which is, you man, when you should say ti gwr, which is,
thou man; that is false British, and false English: And to say chwi grwaig,
which is you woman, when you should say ti grwaig, which is thou woman; that is
false British, and English: And to say, chwi mister, which is you Master, when
you should say, ti Mister, which is thou Master, this is false British and
English: And for to say, chwi tad, which is, you father, when you should say ti
tad, which is, thou father; this is to speak plural when you should speak
sin^ular, which is false British, and English.

And to say chwi mam, which is, you mother, when you should say, ti mam, which
is, thou mother; this is to put the Plural when you should put the Singular.

And for to say chwi Rheolwr, which is, you Ruler, when ye should say, ti
Rheolwr, which is, thou Ruler; this is to put Plural for Singular, which is
false British.

Sing. Plu. Cerais: I have loved. Carasom, We have loved. Ceraist: Thou have
Carasoch, Ye have Carodd: He has Carasant, They have

Now to say Carasom, carasoch, carasant, when you should say, Cerais, ceraist,
carodd; this is to say, We, ye, they have loved, when you should say, I, thou,
he has loved; this is Improper, and false speaking?

And to say, Chwi gwr gwna hin, which is, You man do this; when you should say,
Ti gwr gwna hin; which is, Thou man do this, would not this be false Welsh, and
English?

And to say; chwi Christ, which is, you Christ; and chwi Duw, which is, you
God; as you say, chwi gwr, which is, you man; and chwi gwraig, which is you
woman; and so will you not here give to the man, and to the woman, that which
you will not give to God, and Christ? And here through your exalting you are
degenerated from your own proper Language, and your own Mother Tongue; and err
from your own teaching Grammar, and Bible: And is not this the Antichrist that
is exalted above all that is called God?

In awr i ddywedid chwi gwr gwna hin, pan ddylech ddywedid ti gwr gwna hin, and
iw hwn Cymraig angywir, ac mae y^ hiddu yr wialen pwi trwi balchder ac uchder
medwl a giliasoch oddywurth iaith ych mame oblegid I ddywedid chwi Crist, a
chwi D^w, fell yr ydech in ddywedid chwi gwr, neu chwi grwaig; ac yma chwi a
rhowch ir gwr ag ir rwaig yr hin ni Rhowch i Dduw a Christ, ac yma trwu
balchder a meddwl uchel yr yd^ch wedi cilio oddiwrth ych iaith ych hin ac
oddiwrth iaith ych mane ac ydech in Cyfiliorni oddiwrth dyscidieth ych Grammar
ar Bible: Ac (...) iw hwn yr Angcrist, sin ymdercha^i goriwch pob peth a Elwir
in Dduw.

Directions for sounding WELSH.
A, As in these words, Made, lade, male, sale, etc. not as in Mad, lad; or in
all, call; as Tad, a Father, sound Tade.

B, always as in English.

C, always as k, never as s, or as we do ce or ci, in City, etc. Ch as kh, or
gh. as the Hebrew (...) chw as the Spanish ju, or qu, in the North of England,
as Chwaer, a Sister, sonnd qhuare.

D, as in English: dd as th, in this, the, other, blithe, etc. softly, not so
hard as in thing, think, thrust, with, etc. dh as the Hebrew (...) without (.)

E, as in English: or as the Greek ^.

F, as V consonant, so called; as, Carafe, I will love; sound carave; ff as f,
as ffordd the way; sound fforth.

G, as in Gave, get, give, God, gust, great, etc. never as J in Jesus, or g in
Generation, ng as in King, thing, etc.

H, as in English, or rather as in Spanish, with a more than ordinary
Aspiration.

I, as e in Me, the, or as ie in Priest, piece, as in Ital. Span. etc. J
Consonant as y in year, yield, etc. as jaith a Language, sound yaith.

L, as in English: ll almost as in Spanish, or rather as lh, as llaw, a hand,
sound lhaw.

M, as in English: only mh they have, which we have not as in ^hen, my head,
which they sound umhen.

N, as in English: but nh as in nhad, etc. sound unhade, my father.

O, and oe as in English, oi as oy in boy: ow as in know, below; and sometimes
in two syllables, as ffowch escape, sound ffowch, or ffo-wch, that is ffo-ooqh.

P, and Ph as in English.

R, as in English, rh as (...) in Greek.

T, as in English, th as in thing, think, thirst, as the Greek (...), and the
Hebrew (...), without (.).

U, as ie, or i, in King, bliss, this, etc. as clust an ear, sound cliest;
llafaru to declare, sound lhavarie.

(...), or W* (which is all one) sound as oo in good, root, etc. or ou in
could, should, would; as the Hebrew (...) or Greek (...), as (...) a man, sound
goor or gour.

(...), in this form, as er in her, i in stir, or u in hurt, hun^, us, etc.
as the French e in le, que, ce, etc. But this Y as i in thin, tin, brim; but
some Books have not this different form, and then its obse^^ed to be (...) in
the beginning of words, and in words of the Plural Number, and y in the last
syllable of a word, as hynny, that, ystyr consider, llythyr a letter, tywyll
dark, in which sound the first as u, the last as ^e, as hunnie, usteer,
lhutheer, tuwilh; so ^wch a buck, Bychod bucks; which sound, Booqh, Buqhod.

They have neither k, q, x, nor z. in their tougue.

Ae have almost one sound, as ai in acquaint, as mae sound may; aur Gold, sound
air. Ai Au

Aw, as eaw in English? as llaw a hand, sound lheaw.

Eu as eu or ew in High Dutch, or as y, or i in the English word high, etc. as
goleuni, light, sound golynie. Ei

Iw almost one sound, as ue in Due, true, etc. as lliw a Color, rhyw some;
Ddnw God; which sound, lhue, rhue, Thue. Yw Uw

Wy, as ouy yea, in French; as pwy, Who, sound Pouie, or pooie.

B. F.
The End of the Welsh Battle-door.
THE SPANISH Battle-Door.
En la luz con que Christo os ha alumbrado en ella creed, para que conozcays la
uncion en vosotros para ensennarhos.


LOS Castellanos en sus Grammaticas (por las quales se ensennan su languaje a
los otros) ensennan que ay dos numeros, es a saber, el singular (que habla de
uno solo) y el plural (que habla des m^s que uno) y que en ambos dichos numeros
ay tres person as distinctas las unas de las otras, la primera (hablando de su
mismo, O sus mismos) la segunda (hablando a otro, O otros) y la tercera
(hablando de otro, O otros) y aun contodo, esso se son tan degenerados (por su
ambicion) en su hablar, que las mez clan los unos con los otros, usando muchos
vezes el Plural para el Singular, y la tercera persona parae la segunda
Singular, para que nolo quiere^ suffrir, que alguno los de del tu la segunda
persona Singular, y se enojon mucho en ella, -pero toda via los trasladores de
la Biblia Espannola, usan siempre tu la segunda persona Singular, come se llama.

That is,

THE Spanjards in their Grammars (by which they teach their language to others)
do teach that there are two numbers (to wit) the Singular (which speaks but
of one) and the Plural (which speaks of more than one) and that in both said
numbers there are three persons distinct from one another; the first (speaking
of ones self, or themselves) the second (speaking to another, or others) and
the third (speaking of another, or others) and yet for all this are so
degenerated (by their ambition) in their speaking, that they confound them one
with another, using oft-times the Plura^ for the singular, and the third person
for the second Singula^, because they will not endure that any one should give
them the thou, the second person Singular, as its called.

Singular El Maestro is The Master D'el Maestro Of the Master A el or al
Maestro To the Master Del Maestro From the Master

Plural Los Maestros is The Masters De los Maestros Of the Masters A los
Maestros To the Masters De los Maestros From the Masters

Singular La Casa is The House De la Casa Of the House A la Casa To the House
De la Casa From the House

Plural Las Casas is The Houses De las Casas Of the Houses A las Casas To the
Houses De las Casas From the Houses

Agora para dezir los Maestros, y las Casas, quando se ha de dezir el Maestro,
y la Casa, es esto bu^n Castellano, para mesclar el Plural con el Singular,
como vosotros hazeys quando dezir, vos O vosotros para tu?

That is,

Now to say the Masters, and the Houses, when you should say the Master, and
the House; Is this good Spanish, to confound the Plural with the Singular, as
you do when ye say ye or you, for thou?

El Rey is A King Los Reyes is Kings La Reyna A Queen Las Reynas Queens

Agora para dezir, los Reyes, o las Reynas d'Espanna, quando se ha dezir el
Rey, o ln Reyna d'Espanna, esto seria dezir que Reyes, y Reynas d'Espanna,
quando no ay sino el Rey, y la Reyna, un solo? Es esto bu^n Castellano, O la
verdad?

That is,

Now to say the Kings, or the Queens of Spain, when you should say the King, or
the Queen of Spain; this were to say, that there were Kings, and Queens in
Spain, when there is but the King, and the Queen, but one; Is this good
Spanish, or truth?

Singular Plural Yo is I Nos or nosotros is We De mi Of me De nos or de
nosotros Of us a mi To me a nos O a nosotros To us Me, mi Me Nos Us De mi From
me De nos or de nosotros From us

Tu is Thou Vos or vosotros is Ye or you De ti Of thee De vos or de vosotros Of
you a ti To thee a vos or a vosotros To you Te, ti Thee Os You De ti From thee
De vos or vosotros From you

El is He Ellos is Them Del Of him De ellos Of them a el To him a ellos To them
Lo, le Him and it Los, les Them D'el From him De ellos From them

Ella la, le ellas las is is is is she her they them Women.

Agora para dezir nosotros, vosotros, ellos, quando se ha de dezir yo, tu el,
esto seria vsar el plural para el singular, porque nosotros, vosotros, ellos
son del numero plural, y no se han de usar, quando se habla a un solo, sino
quando se habla a muchos, etc. Y yo, tu, el, son del numero singular, y se usan
a un solo: pues es esto buen Castellano para mezclar los? No esto contrario a
vuestras proprias Grammaticas que ensennan hablar en el singular a uno, y en el
plural a mas que uno?

That is,

Now to say, we, ye or you, and they, when one should say, I, thou, he; this
would be to use the plural for the singular, for we, ye, they, are of the
plural number, and are not to be used when one alone is spoken to, but when
many are spoken to, etc. And I, thou, he, are of the singular number, and are
used to one alone; Then is this good Spanish to confound them? Is it not
contrary to your own Grammars, which teach to speak in the singular to one, and
in the plural to more than one?

Singular Plural Mi, mio is My, mine Nuestro is Ours Mi, mia Nuestra Tu, tuyo
Thy, thine Vuestro Your Tu, tuya Vuestra Su, suyo His, hers Su Theirs Su, suya

Agora por un hombre, (hablande de su mismo solo) de dezir nuestro libro, O
nuestra Cabeca quando se ha de dezir mi libro, O mi cabeca es esto buen
Espanol? porque Mi quiere dezir que es mio solo; y nuestro que ay otros
conmigo. Y para dezir vuestro (a un solo) quando se ha de dezir tu o tuyo, no
es buen Espannol, porque vuestro dize propriamente a muchos, y no a uno, sino
Tu o Tuyo a uno; pues no es esto contrario a vuestras proprias Grammaticas, y
Biblia? Y no estays vosotros degenerados de vuestra propria ensennanca, o
instrucion? hablando como alunados y no doctos, si vuestras Grammaticas
ensennan vuestra lenguaje derechamente, y si la biblia Espannol esta
verdaderamente trasladada?

That is,

Now For one man (speaking of himself alone,) to say [nuestro libro] our Book,
or [nuestra ca^eca] our head, when he should say [mi libro] i. e. my Book, or
[mi cabeca] that is, my head; Is this good Spanish? For mine, means, that it is
mine alone, and ours, that there are others with me.

And to say your (to one alone) when you should say, thy or thine, is not good
Spanish, for you is said properly to many, and not to one, but thy or thine to
one: Then is not this contrary to your own Grammars and Bible? and are you
degenerated from your own Teaching, and Instruction? speaking as madmen and not
learned, if your Grammars do teach your language aright? and if the Spanish
Bible be truly translated? But Read on: Singular Yo revelo is I reveal Tu
revelas Thou revealest Aquel reveld He reveals

Plural Nosotros revelamos is We reveal Vosotros revelays Ye reveal Aquellos
revelan They reveal

Singular Plural Yo digo is I say Nosotros dezimos is We say Tu dizes Thou
say Vosotros dezis Ye say Aquel Dize He says Aquellos dizen They say

Agora para dezir nosotros revelamos, O nosotros dezimos, quando se ha de dezir
yo revelo, O yo digo, es esto buen Espannol? No es esto hablar como Idiota, y
novicio, y como loco que no sabe quando hablar en el singular y quando en el
plural, sino pone el plural para el singular?

Y para dezir vosotros revelays, O vosotros dezis, quand^ hablays a un solo, es
esto buen Castellano, no es esto contrari^ a vuestra instrucion Grammatical?
Que ensenna dezir tu a uno, y vos, o vosotros a muchos, no a uno?

Y para dezir vuestra ^erced revela O V^d dize quand^ hablays a un otro, es
esto segun vuestra Grammatica? Porque no se ensenna alla que tu se habla a un
otro, en la segundae e rsona singular? Y para dezir a quellos revelan O
aquellos dizen, quando se ha^^dezir, aquel revela, O aquel dize no es esto
poner el plural para el singular es esto buen Espannol part hablar ansi?

That is,

Now to say we reveal or we say, when one should say I reveal or I say; Is this
good Spanish? Is not this to speak as an Idiot and Novice, and as a fool that
knows not when to speak in the singular, and when in the plural, but puts the
plural for the singular?

And to say ye reveal or ye say, when you speak to one alone; Is this good
Spanish? Is not this contrary to your own Grammar instruction? Which teaches to
say thou to one, and ye or you to many, not to one.

And to say your worship reveals, or your worship says, when you speak to
another; Is this according to your Grammar? For do you not teach there that
thou is to be spoken to another, in the second person singular? And to say they
reveal or they say, when you should say he reveals or he says; Is not this
to speak the plural for the singular? Is that good Spanish to speak so?

Y aora vosotros que dezis tu a vuestros s^ervos de cuenta vil (como se llama)
y vos a vnestros Criados de mejor suerte, y vuestra merced a todos otros, no
soys degenerados de vuestra propria lengua vulgar (si vuestras Grammaticas
ensennan vuestra lengua derechamente) vosotros que por vuestra ambicion hablays
contrario a vuestras proprias Grammaticas disciplina y Biblia?

Y ansi estays caydos en el respecto de personas, diziendo, a vuestros Negros y
Esclavos tu, pero a vuestros sievos mejores vos O vosotros, y los unos a los
otros vmd. No es esto l'Antechristo, que esta ensalcado sopre todo loque se
llama dios? Porque dezis, [vos O Vmd] a Dios O a Christo? Y a^n lo tomays a vos
mismos. Dezis yo os supplico, O yo supplico vmdo and sennor? Como dezis, a
l'Hombre soberbio y Ambicioso? Y no deshaze esto toda la instrucion en vuestras
Grammatic^s que e^ tu a uno y vos a muchos?

No testigaron tambien los ninnos contra vosotros? Porque no les ensennastes
[ensu Grammatica] que hauian de dezir tu a uno? Porque pues se enojeys vosotros
tan en ellos que hablan segu^ vuestra propria instrucion? Tambien no sera la
Biblia Espanno^a testigo contra vosotros en vuestra hablar ansi, en que no ay
otra palabra a uno solo sino tu, etc, Como se puede ver en las Escripi^ras
seguentes y leer en la Biblia mismo mas a largo.

That is,

And now you that say thou to your servants of mean account (as you call it)
and you to your servants of the better rank, and your worship to all others;
Are not you degenerated from your own Mother Tongue? (If your Grammars teach
yonr language aright) Ye who through your ambition speak contrary to your own
Grammars, Teaching and Bible; and so are fallen into respect of persons, saying
to your Negers and Slaves thou, but to your better servants ye or you, and to
one another your worship; Is not this the Antichrist, who is exalted above all
that is called God? For do you say [ you or your worship] to God or to Christ?
And yet take it to your selves; Do you say I beseech you, or I beseech your
Worship O Lord? as you say to proud and ambitious man? And does not this
destroy all your teaching in your Grammars, which is thou to one, and you to
many? Will not the Children also testify against you? For did you not teach
them [in their Grammar] that they should say thou to one? Wherefore then are
you so offended at those that speak according to your own teaching? And will
not the Bible be a witness against you in your so speaking, in which there is
no other word to on^ alone but thou, etc? As you may see in the following
Scriptures, and read in the Bible it self more at large.

Aqui se sigue algunos Exemplos sacados fuera dell' Escriptura. Here follows
some Examples taken out of Scripture. Adam Dio del tu ^ Dios, Genesis 3. 10, 12.
Adam thou would God, Genesis 3. 10, 12. Y el respondio, oy tu boz en el huerto y we
miedo, etc. Y la muger que diste conmigo, ella me Dio del arbol y comi, etc.
And he answered, I heard thy voice in the Garden, and was afraid, etc. And the
woman which thou gave me, she gave me of the Tree, and I did eat. Mirad est^
oy tu boz, y la muger que [tu] diste conmigo, etc. No esta, oy vuestra boz; Y
l^ muger que [vosotros] distes conmigo, etc. Ni oy su boz de vuestra merced, y
la muger que vmd, Dio conmigo, etc. (Mark) its, I heard thy voice, and the
woman which thou gave me, etc. It is not I heard your voice, and the woman
which you gave me, etc. Nor I heard your worships voice, and the woman which
your worship gave me, etc. El siervo de Abraham Dio del tu a Abraham su Sennor,
Genesis 24. 5. Abraham's servant thou would Abrabam his Lord, Genesis 24. 5 Y el siervo le
respondi^ por ventura la muger no querra venir en pos de mi a esta tierra;
bolvere pues tu hijo a la tierr^ de donde saliste* And the servant answered
him, Peradventure the woman will not follow me unto this Land; Shall I then
return thy son unto the Land from whence thou came forth? Otra vez mirad; no
es, bolvere pues vuestro hijo, a la tierra de donde salistes? Ni bolvere pues
su hijo de vmd. a la tierra de donde vmd salio? Sino, tu hijo, y de donde [tu]
saliste. Mark again it is not, shall I th^^ bring back your son unto the land
from whence yo^ come? nor shall I then bring back your worships son unto the
Land from whence your worship came? but, thy son, and from whence thou came.
^a hija de Jephte. dio del tu, a su padre, Juezes 11. 36. Ella entonces le
respondio: Padre mio, si has abierto tu boca a jehovah, haz de mi como Salio de
tu boca pues que Jehovah t^ ha hecho venganca de tus enemigos, etc. Iephtha's
daughter thou would her father, Juges 11. 37. If thou have opened thy mouth unto
the Lord, do thou unto me as it proceeded out of thy mouth: Forasmuch as the
Lord has taken vengeance for thee of Thine enemies, etc. He aqui otra vez, no
es hazed de mi como Salio de vuestra boca, pues que Jehovah os h^ hecho
venganca de vuestros enemigos, etc. Ni haga vmd de mi como Salio de su boca,
pues que Iehova ha hecho vmd venganca de sus enemigos. Como vosotros dezis.
Behold again, It is not, do you unto me according as it has proceeded out of
your mouth, Seeing the Lord has taken vengeance for you, of your Enemies, etc.
Nor let Your worship do unto me as it has proceeded out of his mouth, seeing
the Lord has taken vengeance for your worship, of his enemies. as you do say.
Y Nathan dixo del tu al Rey David. And Nathan thou would King David. 2 Samuel 12.
Entonces Nathan dixo a David, Tu eres a quel varon. 2 Samuel 12. Then Nathan said
to David, Thou art the man.

Y aqui, como veys, el Sujetto dixo del Tu a su Rey, la Hija a su Padre, el
Siervo a su Sennor, y Adam a su dios, quando Hablaron a un solo; y no veys que
Dios se enojo en Adam, ni el padre en su hija, ni el Rey en su Sujetto, por
haver dicho Tu y te a ellos, co^o vosotros, se enojeys en ellos que dizen Tu a
vosotros.

That is,

And here as you see the Subject Thou Would his King, the Daughter her Father, the
Servant his Master, and Adam his God, when they spoke to one only; But you do
not see that God was offended at Adam, Nor the Father at his Daughter, nor the
Lord at his servant, nor the King at his Subject, for saying Thou and T^ee to
them, as You are at them that say Thou to You. Pedro dixo Tu a Christo. Peter
tho^ 'd Christ. Matt. 16. 16. Y respondiendo Simon Pedro dixo, Tu eres el
Christo, etc. Matthew. 16. 16. And Simon Peter answered and said* Thou art the
Christ, etc. Y Christo dixo a Pedro Tu. y ti. And Christ Thou Would and Thee'd
Peter. Ver. 18. Bien aventurado eres, etc. porque no te ^o revelo carne ni
sangre, etc. Ver. 18. Blessed art Tho^, etc. for flesb and blood has not
revealed it unto thee etc. Y Ver. 23. Quitate de delante de mi adversario, (o
Satan) estorvo me eres porque no entiendes loques es de Dios, Si no loque es de
los hombres. And Ver. 23. Get thee from before me (enemy, or Satan) Thou art an
offense to me: For thou understandest not the thing which is of God, but that
which is of men. El Mancebo dixo Tu y Ti al Tribuno. The Young man thou would and
thee'd the Chief Captain. Actos de los Apostoles 23. 20, Y el dixo los judios,
han concertado de rogar te que mannana Saques a Paulo al concilio, etc. mas tu
no los creas, etc. Acts 23. 20, 21. And he said, The Jews have agreed to desire
thee, that thou would bring down Paul to morrow into the Council, etc. but
do not thou yield unto them. Paulo a Agrippa. Paul to Agrippa. Actos 26. 2. O
Rey Agrippa, tengome por dichoso, de que delante de ti me aya oy de defender.
Acts 26. 2. O King Agrippa, I think my self happy, because I shall answer for
my self this day before thoe. Pero hablando a mas de uno dixeron Vosotros, etc.
But speaking to more than one they said You, etc: Christo a sus Discipulos.
Christ to his Disciples. Joan 14. 18, 20. No os dexare huerfanos, vendre a
vosotros: y a quel dia vosotros conocereys, que yo soy en mi padre, y vosotros
en mi, y yo en vosotros. John. 14. 18, 20. I will not leave You Orphans, I will
come to You, and at that day ye shall know that I am in my Father; and you in
me, and I in you. Y a los Escribas y Phariseas. And to the Scribes and
Pharisees. Mat. 23. Ay de vosotros Escribas y Phariseas Hypocritas, etc. Matthew.
23. Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees Hypocrites, etc. Luke 17. 21 Porque
heaqui el Reyno de Dios dentro vosotros esta. Luke 17. 21. For behold the
Kingdom of God is within you. Paulo a los Romanos. Paul to the Romans. Romans 8.
9, 10. Mas vosotros no s^ys en la carne, sino en el espiritu, por quanto el
espiritu de Dios mora en vosotros: y si alguno no tieune el espiritu del
Christo, el tal no es deel. Romans 8. 9, 10. But ye are not in the flesh, but in
the spirit forasmuch as the spirit of God dwells in you: and if any man has
not the spirit of Christ, he is none of his. 2 Cor. 14. 5. No hos conozceys a
vosotros mismos, que Jesus el Christo esta en vosotros, si ya no soys
reprovados? 2 Cor. 14. 5. Know you not your own selves, that Jesus Christ is in
you, if ye be not already reprobates. Paulo a los Galatas. Paul to the
Galatians. Gal. 1. 3. Gracia ayays y paz, de Dios el Padre, y del Sennor
nuestro Jesus el Christo. Gal. 1. 3. Grace and peace be unto you, from God the
Father, and from our Lord Jesus Christ. 1 Joan. 2. 20. Mas vosotros teneys la
uncion del Sancto, y conoceys todas las cosas. 1 Joan. 2. 20. But ye have an
unction from the Holy One, and ye know all things. Verse. 26. Esto os he
escripto de losque os engannan. Ver. 26. This I have written unto you,
concerning them that seduce you. Ver.. 27. Y la uncion que vosotros aveys
recebido del, mora en vosotros: y no teneys necessidad que ningun^ os ensenne:
Mas como la uncion misma os ensenna de todas cosas, y es verdadera, y no es
mentira, ansi como os ha ensenado, perseverad en el, o en ella. Verse. 17. And
the unction which ye have received of him abides in you, and you need not that
any man teach you, but as the same anointing teaches you of all things, and it
is true, and is no lie, so as it has taught you, ye shall abide in him, [or in
it.]

Ansi por loque es dicho, y por las Escripturas ya citadas, podeys ver que la
Lengua Castellana ha proprias distinctiones para toda Cosa, y no tienen
necessidad, de mezclar el Plural con el Singular, ni la tercera persona
singular con ^l^segunda, como se hazen communamente: Porque pues aueys ansi
corru^pid^ vuestra Leng^aje? No es^a por Soberbia, y ambicion, que soys hechos
tan sobervios en vuestras coracones que no puedeys suffrir el mismo hablar a
vosotros mismos, que vosotros mismos bablays a Dios, quando semblays orar a el?
Y como esta sobervia, esta levadura, vienne ser otra vez purgada fuera, no os
sera menester que vosotros otra vez bolvereys a la simplicidad y rectitud de
hablar? Seays vosotros juezes vosotros mismos.

That is,

So by what is said, and by the Scriptures before mentioned, ye may see that
the Spanish Tongue has distinctions in their Speech for every thing, and need
not confound the Plural with the singular, nor the third person Plural with the
second, as they do ordinarily. Wherefore then have you so corrupted your
Language? Is it not through pride and ambition, that you are become so proud in
your hearts, that you cannot bear the same Language to your selves, which your
selves do give to God, when you seem to pray to him? And as this pride, this
leaven comes to be purged out again, must you not return again to simplicity
and plainness of Speech? Be ye Judges your selves.

Directions for the sounding of Spanish and Portugal.
THey have but Twenty two Letters, as the Italian and French: they have no K,
nor W.

A, as in French, broader than in these English words, care, sale, male, etc.

B, oftentimes as V consonant, in the beginning and middle of words; and the
same word is often writ with b or v. The like in Portugal.

C, as in English, before e, i, as s,: c with this tail under it, as ss, or
ths, almost* lispingly, ch as in English, as mucho much, muchacho a boy: c
before t is not sounded, as acto an act, sound ato, etc.

D, in the middle and end as dh.

E, as in English, it is sounded in the end of words always, ey as i, or y in
English; as, la Ley the Law, sound l^ Ly.

F, as in English.

G, as gh in Ghost, but more in the throat; but never as the English j
consonant, or as g before e: gua as gwa. gue, or gui; as in these English
words, guest, guide.

H, in the beginning is sounded strong, in the end scarce at all, it never
comes before t, as it does in English: hue sounds as wue or gwe, as huerto an
Orchard, sound wuerto or gwerto; so huesso a bone, sound wuesso or gwesso. H in
Portugal is not sounded.

I, as in almost all Tongues and Languages, never as the English, who sound
their i different from all, as ei: j as kh, or gh, as the Arabic (...) in the
throat; ju as qhu, or as in the North of England they sound qhuarter; as, Iuan
John, Iuez a Judge, sound Qhuan, Qhuez.

L, as in English; but ll as if i followed, as llamar to call, callar to be
silent; sound lliamar, and calliar, as ll in Welsh, or ill in French, in fille,
or gl in Italian, figlio, etc. or as lh in Portugal, molher a woman, which
sound mollier, etc.

M, as in English, M, in Portugal sound it in the end of a word as n.

N, as in English, but double nn, or n with this-stroak upon it, as if i
followed it; as, danno loss, sound dannio, or as gn in French, or Italian. And
so nh in Portugal, as Rainha a Queen, sound Rainia.

O, as in English; as tomar to take.

P, as in English.

Qu, as in English, before a, as quando when, but before e or i, as k; as, que
what, qui who, sound ke, ki. The like in Portugal.

R, as in English.

S, as in English.

T, as in English; save that its never sounded as c or s, as in the English,
French, Dutch, Italian, and Latin, in these kind of words, Nation, patience,
etc. which are always writ in Spanish with c, as Nation, paciencia, etc.

U, as oo in English, or as ou in these words, could, would, should; as ou in
French, or oe in Dutch; If two uu come together, and a Vowel follow, the latter
is a Consonant; as, yo uve, I had, except vuestro, vuestra, etc. Your.

X, as their g, or j consonant; so that the same word is sometimes writ with j,
sometimes with g; and otherwhiles with x, and so may be sought in the
Dictionary, if not in the one then in the other.

X in Portugal as sh: and so some do sound the Spanishg, j, and x.

Y, as in French, or as ee, or ie in English, as piece, Priest, etc. and is a
word of it self, signifying and.

Z, as in English.

The end of the Spanish Battle-doore.
THE FRENCH Battle-Door.
En la lumiere de la quelle* Christ vo^s a illumine, en icelle croyez, a fin
que vous cognoissiez l'unction en vous pour vous enseigner.


LEs Francois a^ssy bien que tous a^tres ont^la propre distinction enter le
singulier and plurier, come appert par leurs Grammaires, es quelles ils
enseignent parler Tu, au singulier and Vous, au plurier, and ainsy ont ils
traduit le Bible, encore qu'en leur parler ordinairement ils la semblent
manquer disant Vous quand ils parlent a un seul, and le mesme [Vous] quand ils
parlent a plusieurs, and ainsy par l'ambition sont degenere de leur propre
language, comme il se trouve en leurs Grammaires and Bible.

That is,

THe French as well as all others have the proper distinction betwixt the
singular and plural, as appears by their Grammars, in which they teach to say
[Tu] thou in the singular, and [Vous] you in the plural, a^^ so have they
translated the Bible; although in their speaking ordinarily they seem to want
it, saying, [Vous] you, when they speak to one alone, and the same [Vo^s] you,
when they speak to many, and so through ambition are degenerated from their own
Language, as it is ^ound in their Grammars, and Bible.

Singular Plural L'Homme is A Man Les Hommes is Men La Femme A Woman Les Femmes
Women Le Roy A King Les Roys Kings L^ Roine A Queen Les Roines Queens.

Or po^r dire les Hommes, les Femmes, les Roys, les Roines: pour l'Homme* la
Femme, le Roy and la Reyne: c'est a dire qu'il y a plusieurs Hommes, plusieurs
Femmes, plusieurs Roys, and plusieurs Roynes, quand il n'y a qu'un Homme,
qu'une Femme, qu'un Roy, and qu'une Royne: car l'Homme, la Femme, le Roy, la
Royne est d'un, and les Hommes, les Femmes, les Roys and les Roynes est de
plusieurs.

That is,

Now to say men, women, Kings, Queens; for a man, a woman, a King and a Queen:
this is to say, that there are diverse Men, diverse Women, div^rs Kings, and
diverse Queens, when there is but one Man, but one Woman, but one King, and but
one Queen: for A Man, A Woman, a King, a Queen is of one, and Men, Women, Kings
and Queens is of many.

Singular Plural Ie ou may is I Nous is We De moy Of me De nous Of us A moy, or
me To me A nous To us Moy or me Me Nous Us De moy From me. De nous From us.

T^ is Thou Vous is Ye or you De toy Of thee De Vous Of you A toy To thee A
Vous To you Toy Thee Vous You D^ ^^y From thee. De Vous From you.

Il ou luy is He (...) Ilz eux, or leur is Them De luy Of him (...) D' eux, de
leur of them A luy and luy To him, or to her A eux, leur, leurs to them Le and
luy Him (...) I^^z, eux, les them De luy From him, (...) Deux, leurs from them.

Or est ce bon Francois, pour dire Nous, Vous, Ils, au lieu de Ie, Tu, Il?
n'est ce pas mettre le plurier pour le singulier? comme si vous n'eussiez pas
tell distinction en vostre Language.

That is,

Now is it good French to say We, Ye, They, instead of I, Thou, He? Is not this
to put the Plural for the Singular? as if you had no such distinction in your
Language.

Mon or le mien is Mine Le nostre is Our Ma la mienne La nostre Ton le tien
Thine Le vostre Your Ta la tienne La vostre Son le sien His. Their. Sa la
sienne Leur

Or pour dire, Nostre, Vostre, Leur, quand on doibt dire, Mo^, Ton, Son, c'est
comme si on parlast de plusieurs quand on p^rle d'un seul; and est-ce bon
Francois cela? ^omme, pour dire ^'est Nostre livre, quand on entend ou veut
dire c'est Mon livre; n'est ce pas improprentent dit? and neantmoins n'est ce
^as si propre que de dire Vostre test pour La test?

That is,

Now to say, Our, Your, Their, when one should say, Mine, Thine, His, this is
as if one spoke of many when he speaks but of one; and is this good French? as,
to say It is Our ^ook, when he means, or would say, it is My hook; is not this
improperly said? and yet is it not as proper as to say Your head for Thy head?

Singular Plur^l Ie vay is I go Nous allons is We go Tu vas Thou go Vous
allez Ye go Il va He goes. Ils vont They go.

Or pour dire, Nous allons, vous allez, ilz vont, quond on doib^ dire Ie vay,
tu vas, il va, est dire, Nous pour Ie, Vous pour Tu, Ilz pour Il, est cela bon
Francois pour mettre le Plurier pour le Singulier?

Now to say, Nous allons We go, Vous allez Ye go, Ilz vont They go; when one
should say Ie v^y I go, Tu vas Thou go, Il va He goes, is to say Nous We,
for Ie I; Vous Ye or You, for Tu Thou; Ilz They, for Il He; is this good French
to put the Singular for the Plural?

Singular Plural Ie crains is I fear Nous craignons is We fear Tu crains Thou
fear Vous craignez Ye fear Il craint He fears. Ils craignent They fear.

Or pour dire Nous craignons, Vous craignez, Ils craignent, quand il vous
faudra dire Ie crains, Tu crains, Il craint; c'est mettre le plurier Pour le
Singulier; and dire que plusieurs craignent quand il n'y a qu'un qui craint car
Nous craignons, Vous craignez, Ils craignent sont Plurier, et parlent de
plusieurs; and Ie crains, Tu crains, Il craint sont singulier, and parlent d'un
seul.

That is,

Now to say, Nous craignons We fear, Vous craignez Ye fear, Ilz craignent They
fear, when you should say Ie crains, I fear, Tu crains Thou fear, Il craint
He fears; this is to put the Plural for the Singular: and to say, that Many
fear, when but One fears, for Nous craignons, Vous craignez, Ilz craignent,
We fear, Ye fear, They fear, are Plural, and speak of many; and Ie crains, Tu
crains, Il craint, I fear, Thou fear, He fears, are Singular, and speak of
one alone.

Or pour mettre le Plurier pour le Singulier, ou le singulier pour le plurier
est parler comme mal scavant; car Claudius Mauger en son livre enseigne parler
au singulier et plurier, qu'on doibt parler ainsy, and puis le confonde autre
fois, and dit a une femme, Mademoiselle Vous parlez mieux que moy, en lieu de
Tu parles, qui est Vous pour Tu: and Page 116. il dit, Monsieur, Je suis vostre
serviteur, icy est Vostre pour Ton: Est ce selon son Instruction, pour dire
Vous pour Tu, and Vostre pour Ton? and ^^^sy a oublie sa premiere Instruction
la quelle est, Tu and Ton, a un seul? Est cecy propre [ou pertinent]? Ou tu (
Claude Mauger) n'es tu pas icy impropre d'estre enseigneur d'autres, qui ne
parles pas Vrayement ta propre Language, ny vray Francois, ny vray Anglois; Ou
penses tu que les Anglois n'ont point l'oeil pour voir dessus toutes ces chooses
la, qui ne sont pas degenerez, de leur propre Language Maternelle, mais
cognoissent le singulier du plurier, and ne confondent pas l'un avec l'autre?

That is,

Now to put the Plural for the Singular, or the singular for the plural is to
speak as unlearned: For Claudius Mauger teaches in his book to speak singular
and plural; that men should speak so; and afterward confounds it again, and
says to one Woman, Mistress You speak better than I, instead of Thou speak,
which is, You for Thou: And Page 116. he says, Sir, I am your Servant, here is
Your for Thy: Is this according to his teaching, to say You for Thou, and Your
for Thy; and so has forgotten his former teaching, which is Thou and Thy to
one alone,: Is this proper (or pertinent)? Or Thou ( Claude Mauger) art not
thou here unfit to be a Teacher of others, who do not speak true thy own
Tongue, neither true French, nor true English? Or do thou think that the
English have not an eye to see over all these things, that are not degenerated
from their own mother tongue, but do know the singular from the plural, and do
not consound the one with the other.

Icy s'ensuit aucunes Exemples de l'Escriture touchant Toy and Tu, and Vous en
Francois and Anglois. Here follows some Scripture Examples concerning Thee and
Thou, and You in French and English. DIeu tutoya l'homme, and l'homme tutoya
Dieu. God thou would man, and man thou would God. Gene. 3. 9. Mais l'Eternel Dieu
appela Adam, and lui dit, Ou es Tu? Gene. 3. 9. And the Lord God called unto
Adam, and said unto him, Where art thou? Verse. 10. Lequel respondit, I'ai oui
ta voix au jardin, and ai craint, pour ce que j' estoy nud: and me suis cache.
Verse. 10. And he said, I heard thy voice in the garden, and I was afraid,
because I was naked, and I hid my self. Verse. 11. Et Dieu dit, qui ta monstre
que tu estois nud? n'as tu pas mange de l'arbre d^quel je'avoy defendu de
manger? Verse. 11. And he said, who to (...) thee thou wast naked? have thou
eaten of the forbidden fruit, whereof I commanded thee that thou should not
eat? Verse. 12. Et Adam respondit, la femme que tu m'as donnee pour estre avec
moi, m'a baille de l'arbre, and Ie'n ai mange. Verse. 12. And the man said, the
woman whom thou gave to be with me she gave me of the tree, and I did eat.
Moyse a Dieu: Dieu a Moyse. Moses to God: God to Moses. Exodus 33. 12. Moyse
donc dit a l'Eternel, regard, Tu m'as dit, fai monter ce peuple ci, and sine
ma's point fait cognoistre celui que Tu dois envoyer avec moi: Tu as dit, je te
cognoi par nom, and aussi, Tu as trouve grace devant mes yeuz. Exodus 33. 12.
Moses said unto the Lord see, Thou say unto me, Lead this people forth, and
thou have not showed me whom thou will send with me: Thou have said moreover, I
know Thee by name, and thou have also found grace in my sight. Verse. 17. Et
l'Eternel dit a Moyse, aussi ferai-je ceste. chose que Tu dis: car Tu as trouve
grace d^vaut mes ^eux and to ai cognu par no^^. Verse. 17. And the Lord said
unto Moses, I will do this also that thou have said: and I know thee by name.
L'Eternel tutoia Iosue. The Lord thou would Jo^ua. Josue 1. 1. L'Eternel parla a
Iosue fills de Nun. Iosue 1. 1. The Lord spoke unto Josua the son of Nun. Verse.
8. Ce livre de la Loy, ne departira point de la bouche, ains Tu mediter as en
icelui jour and nuict, asin que Tu prenes guard a fair selon tout ce qui est
escrit en icelui; car lors tu rendras heureuses tes entreprises, and lors
adresseras-Tu. Verse. 8. Let not this Book of the Law depart out of thy mouth,
but thou shall meditate therein day and night, that thou may observe and do
according to all that is written therein; for then shall thou make thy way
prosperous, and then shall thou have good success. L'Eternel tutoia Samuel. The
Lord thou would Samuel. 1 Samuel 16. 1. Et l'Eternel dit a Samuel, Iusques a quand
mener as-tu dueil sur Saul? 1 Samuel 16. 1. The Lord said to Samuel, How long
will thou mourn for Saul? Verse. 3. Et tu inviteras Isa^ au Sacrifice^ la je te
ferai sav^ir ce que tu aur as a fair, and tu m'oindras celui qui je te dirai.
Verse. 3. Call Jesse to the Sacrifice, and I will show thee what thou shall do,
and thou shall anoint unto me him whom I shall name unto thee. Dieu a Solomon:
Solomon a Dieu. God to Solomon: Solomon to God. 1 ^^oys 3. 5. Et l'Eternel ^
appar^t a Solomon en Gabaon par song de nuict: and Dieu lui dit, demand ce
que tu vondr^^ que Ie te done. 1 Kings 3. 5. And in Gibeon the Lord appeared
unto Solomon in a dream by night: and God said, ask what I shall give thee.
Verse 6. Et Solomon respondit, Tu as use de grande gratuite envers ton serviteur
David mon per^. Verse. 6. And Solomon said, Thou have showed unto thy servant
David my father great mercy. Verse. 9. Done done ^a to^ ^serviteur u^. coeur
qui s'entende, etc. Verse. 9. Give therefore unto thy servant an understanding
heart, etc. Ver. 11. Don't Dieu lui (...) pour ce que tu (...) dema^de c^ci,
etc. Ver. 11. And God said unto him, because thou have asked this thing, etc.
Ver. 12. Voici, I'ai fait selon ta par^le, etc. Ver. 12. Behold I have done
according to thy words, etc. ^e Souverain Sacri^icateur a Christ. The Chief
Priest to Christ. Matthew. 26. 63. Ie t'adjure par le Dieu vivant, que tu nous
dies si tu es le Christ le fills de Dieu. Matthew. 26. 63. I ch^rge thee by the
living God, that thou tell us if thou be the Christ the son of God. Ver. 64.
Jesus lui dit, Tu l'as dit. Ver. 64. Jesus said to him, Thou have said it.
Matthew. 27. 2. a Ponoe Pilate. Matthew. 27. 2. to Pontius Pilate. Ver. 11. Et le
governor l'interragua, disant, Es- Tu le Roy des Iuifs? Jesus lui dit, Tu le
dis. Ver. 11. The governor asked him saying, Art thou the King of the Jews?
Jesus said unto him, Thou say it. Jehan. 18. 19. Le souverain Sacrificateur
donc interogua Jesus touchant ses disciples, and touchant sa doctrine. John 18.
19. The High Priest then asked Jesus of his Disciples, and of his Doctrine.
Ver. 21. Pourquoi ^^interrogues-Tu? Interrogue ceux qui ont oui que c'est que
Ie leur ai dit. Ver. 21. Why ask thon me ^ Ask them that heard me what I
said unto them. Ver. 22. Quand il eut dit ces chooses, un des sergeans qui
estoit present, bailla (...) co^p de sa verge a Jesus, est-ce ainst que tu
respons au souverain Sacrificateur? Ver. 22. One of the Officers which stood by
smote. Jesus with the palm of his hand [ or his rod] saying, Answerest thou the
High Priest so? Ver. 23. Jesus lui respondit, Si I'ai mal parle ren tes
moignage du mal, and si I'ai bien dit, pourquoi me frapes-Tu? Ver. 23. Jesus
answered him, is I have spoken evil, bare witness of the evil, but If well, why
smitest thou me. Les Deux Anges, and Jesus a Marie: Et Marie a Jesus. The Two
Angels, and Jesus to Mary: and Mary to Jesus. Jehan. 20. 11. Mais Marie se
tenoit pres le sepulcre dehors en pleurant, John 20. 11. But Mary stood without
the sepulehre, weeping* Ver. 12. Et vid deux Anges vestus de blanc. Ver. 12 And
saw two Angels in white: Ver. 13. Et ils lui dirent, femme, pourquoi
pleures-Tu? Ver. 13. And they said unto her woman, why weepest Thou? Verse. 15.
Jesus lui dit, femm^, pourquoi pleures Tu? qui cerches tu? Elle pensant que ce
fust le jardinier, lui dit, Seigneur, si tu l' as emport^, di-moi ou Tu l' as
mis and je l'osterai. Ver. 15. Jesus says unto her, woman, why weepest thou?
whom seek thou? she supposing him to be the gardener, said unto him, Sir, If
thou have born him hence, tell me where thou have laid him, and I will take him
away. Le Lepreux a Christ, and Christ au Lepreux. The Leper to Christ: and
Christ to the Leper. Mat. 8. 2. Et voici un lepreux vint and se prosterna
devant, lui, disant, seigneur, si Tu veux, tu me peux nettoyer. Matthew. 8. 2.
And behold there came a leper and worshipped him, saying, Lord, if thou will
thou can make me clean. Ver. 3. Et Jesus disoit, Ie le vueil, sois nettoye.
Ver. 3. And Jesus said, I will, be thou clean. Pierre au Seigneur: le Seigneur
a Pierre. Peter to the Lord: the Lord to Peter. Mat. 14. 28. Si ^est toi, etc.
Mat. 14. 18. If it be thou, etc. Verse. 13. Pourquoi as tu doubt? Ver. 13.
Wherefore did thou doubt? L'Ange au Seigneur. The Angel to the Lord. Apocal.
16. 5. Et I'oui l'Ange des eaux, disant, seigneur, Tu es just, qui es, and qui
estois, and qui seras, pour ce que tu as fait untel Judgment. Revel. 16. 5. And
I heard the Angel of the waters say, Thou art righteous O Lord, which art, and
wast, and shall be, because thou have Judged thus. Verse. 6. Pourtant qu'ils ont
respandu le sang des Saints, and des Prophets, Tu leur as aussi baille du
sang a boire: car ils en sout dignes. Verse. 6. For they have shed the blood of
Saints, and Prophets, and thou have given them blood to drink, for they are
worthy. Les Anges a Lot. The Angels to Lot. Gene. 19. 15. Puis les Anges
presserent Lot, disans, leve toi, etc. de peur que Tu ne perisses en la
punition de la Ville. Gene. 19. 15. Then the Angels hastened Lot, saying,
Arise, etc. lest thou be consumed in the iniquity of this City. L'Ange a
Abraham. The Angel to Abraham. Gene. 22. 11. Mais L'ange de l'eternel lui cria
des cieux. Gene. 22. 11. And the Angel of the Lord called out of Heaven. Ver.
12. Et il lui dit, Ne mets point ta main sur l'enfant, and ne lui fai rien: Car
maintenant ai-je cognu que Tu crains dieu, veu que Tu n'as point espargne ton
fills, ton Unique pour moy. Ver. 12. And he said unto him, Lay not thine hand
upon the Lad, neither do thou any thing unto him: For now I know that thou
fear God, seeing thou have not withheld thy son, thy only son from me. L'Ange
a Gedeon: and Gedeon a L'Ange. The Angel to Gideon, and Gideon to the Angel.
Jud. 6. 12. Tres-fort and vaillant homme, l'Eternel est avec Toi. Iud. 6. 12.
The Lord is with thee thou mighty man of Valor. Ver. 17. Ie te pry, que Tu me
donnes vnsigne, que c'est Toi, qui parles avec moi. Verse. 17. I pray thee show
me a sign, that Thou talkest with me. L'Ange a Manoah, and a sa femme: and
Mauoah a l'Ange. The Angel to Manoah, and his Wife: and Manoah to the Angel.
Judge. 13. 3, 5, 11, 15, 17, 18. Iud. 13. 3, 5. 11, 15, 17, 18. Roys aux Hommes:
Hommes aux Roys. Kings to Men: Men to Kings. Exodus 10. 7. Et les serviteurs de
Pharaoh lui dirent, Iusques a quand cestui-ci nous tiendrail enlaces? Laisse
aller ces gens, and qu'ils servent a l'Eternel leur Dieu: Sauras tu au paravant
qu'Egypte est perie? Exodus 10. 7. And Pharaohs servants said unto him, How long
shall this man be an offense unto us? Let the men go, that they may serve the
Lord their God: know thou not, that Egypt is destroyed? Ver. 25. Mais Moyse
respondit, Tu nous laisseras aussy emmener les sacrifices. Ver. 25. And Moses
said, Thou must give us also Sacrifices. Ver. 28. Et Pharaoh lui dit, Va T'en
arriere de moy, Donne-Toi guard de Voir plus ma face: Car au jour que Tu verras
ma face, Tu mour ras. Ver. 28. And Pharaoh said unto him, Get Thee from me,
look thou see my face no more: For whenever thou seeest my face thou shall
die. Ver. 29. Lors Moyse respondit, Tu as bien dit: Ie ne verrai plus
aucu^ement ta face. Ver. 29. Then Moses said, Thou have well said, I will see
thy face no more. Certains Caldeens au Roy, -- parlerent and dirent, Certain
Caldeans to the King, -- spoke, and said, Dan. 3. 10. Toi Roi, as fait un edit,
que tout homme se jettast bas, and se prosternast devant la Statue d'or. Dan.
3. 10. Thou, O King, have made a Decree, That every man shall fall down, and
worship the golden Image. Ver. 11. Et que quiconque ne se jetteroit bas, and ne
se prosterneroit, seroit jette au milieu de la fourmaise de Feu ardent. Ver.
11. And whosoever falls not down, and worshippeth, that he should be cast
into the fiery Furnace. Ver. 12. Or y a-il certains Iuifs que Tu as ordonnes
sur les affairs de la Province de Babylon, assavoir Scadrach, Mescac, et
Habednego: Ces gens-la, o Roy, n'ont tenu conte de Toi: ils ne servent point a
tes Dieux, and ne se prosternent point devant la Statue d'or qne tu as dressee.
Ver. 12. There are certain Jews whom thou have set over the affairs of the
Province of Babylon, Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego: These men O King, have
not regarded thee, they serve not thy Gods, nor worship the golden Image that
Thou have set up. Ver. 13. Adonc le Roy Nebuchadnetsar estant esmeu de colere,
and fureur, commanda qu'on amenast Scadrach, Mescac, and Habednego. Ver. 13.
Then Nebuchadnezzar in his anger, and wrath, commanded that they should bring
Shadrach, Meshac, and Abednego. Ver. 14. Et Nebuchadnetsar dit, Est'il vrai,
quevous ne servez point a mez dieux? Ver. 14. And Nebuchadnezzar said, Is it
true, that ye do not serve my Gods? Ver. 15. Maintenant n'estes Vous pas
prests, au temps, que vous orrez le son du Cor, etc. Que si vous ne vous
prosternez? vous serez jettes a ^este mesme heure-la au milieu de la Fournaise
de feu ardent. Ver. 15. Now therefore are ye ready when ye hear the sound of
the Cornet, etc. For, if ye worship it not, ye shall be cast immediately into
the midst of the hot fiery Furnace. Ver. 16. Scadrac, Mescac, and Habednego
respondirent and dirent au Roy Nebuchadnetsar, Il n'est pas besoin que nous te
respondions sur ce propos-la. Ver. 16. Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego
answered, and said to the King: O Nebuchadnezzar, we are not careful to answer
thee in this matter. Ver. 17. Voici, nostre Dieu que nous servons, nous peut
delivrer, etc. Ver. 17. Behold, our God whom we serve is able to deliver us,
etc. Dan. 5. 9. Don't le Roy Belscatsar fut sort trouble, etc. Dan. 5. 9. Then
was King Belshazzar greatly troubled, etc. Ver. 13. Daniel adonc fut amene
devant le Roy, and le Roy prenant la parole dit a Daniel, Es-tu ce Daniel? etc.
Ver. 13. Then was Daniel brought before the King, and the King spoke and said
unto Daniel, Art thou Daniel, etc. Ver. 16. Mais I'ai oui de Toy, que Tu peux
declarer les interpretations, and resoudre les chooses difficiles: Maintenant,
si tu peux lirc ^^ste Escriture, and m'en declarer l'interpretation, Tu seras,
etc. Ver. 16. And I heard of Thee, that Thou can make Interpretations, and
dissolve difficult things. Now, if thou can read the writing, and make known
to me the Interpretation, Thou shall be, etc. Ver. 17. Lors Daniel respondit,
and dit, etc. Ver. 17. Then Daniel answered and said, etc Ver. 18. O Roy, Le
Dieu Souveraign, avoit done a Nebuchadnetsar ton Pere, ce Royaume, etc. Ver.
18. O Thou King, the most high God gave thy father Nebuchadnezzar a Kingdom,
etc. Verse. 22. Toi aussi Belscatsar, son fills, n' as point humilie ton coeur,
combien que Tu seusses toutes ces choses-la. Ver. 22. And Thou, his son, O
Belshazzar, have not humbled thine heart, though thou know all this. Dan. 6.
16. Lors le Roy commanda qu'on amen ast Daniel, and qu' on le jettaft en la
fosse des Lions: Et le Roy prenant la parole, dit a Daniel, Ton Dieu auquel Tu
sers incessamment, c'est celui qui te delivrera. Dan. 6. 16. Then the King
commanded, That they should bring Daniel and cast him into the den of Lions*
Now the King spoke, and said unto Daniel, Thy God whom thou servest
continually, he will deliver thee. Ver. 22. Mon Dieu a envoye son Ange, and a
ferme la gueule des Lions, etc. and mes mes devant Toi, o Roy, je n'ai commis
aucune laschete. Ver. 22. My God has sent his Angel, and has shut the Lions
mouths, etc. and to Thee, O King, have I done no hurt. Voyez Daniel 4 chap. 16,
17, 19, 22 verses, and chap. 2. 29, 31, 34, 37, 41, 43. and 45 verses. See Dan.
4. chap. 16, 17, 19, 22 verses, and chap. 2. 29, 31, 34, 37, 41, 43, and 45
verses. 1 Roys, 21. 20. Achab a Elie le Prophet: and le Prophet Elie a Achab.
1 Kings 21. 20. ^ Ahab to the Prophet Elijah: and Elijah to Ahab. Acts 26, 27,
28, 29. Paul au Roy Agrippa, et le Roy Agrippa, a Paul. Acts 26. 27, 28, 29.
Paul to King Agrippa, and King Agrippa to Paul. Le Mari a sa Femme, la Femme a
son Mari. The Husband to his Wife, the Wife to her Husband. 1 Samuel 1. 8.
Pourtant lui dit Elkana son Mari, Anne, Pourquoy pleures tu? Et pourquoi ne
manges tu? etc. 1 Samuel 1. 8. Then said Elkanah her Husband to her, Why weepest
thou? And why eatest thou not? etc. Verse. 23. Et Elkana son Mari luit dit, fai
ce qui te semble bon; demeure jusqu'a ce que tu l'ayes seure. Verse. 23. And
Elkanah said unto her, Do what seems thee good; tarry until thou have weaned
him. Juges 14. 16. La Femme de Samson donc pleura apres lui, disant, Tu me hais
seulement, and ne m'aimes point: n' as tu pas propose vne sentence a de^iner
aux enfans de mon peuple and ne me l' as point declaree? Et il lui respondit,
voici, Ie ne l'ai point declaree a mon Pere in a Mere, etc. Judge. 14. 16. And
Samsons Wife wept before him, and said, Thou do but hate me, and love me
not; Thou have put forth a Riddleunto the Children of my people, and thou have
not told it me: And he said unto her, behold, I have not told it my Father nor
my Mother, etc. Dieu aux Hommes. God to Men. Genesis 9. 9. Et quant a moi, voici
iestabli mon alliance avec vous, and avec vostre race apres vous, etc. Genesis 9.
9. And I, Behold I establish my Covenant with you, and with your Seed after
you, etc. Christ aux hommes. Chtist to men. Math. 5. 11. Vous serez bienheureux
quand on vous aura injuries and persecutes, and on aura dit toute mauvaise
parole contre vous, a cause de moi en mentant, etc. Matthew. 5. 11. Blessed are
ye when men shall revile you, and persecute you, and shall say all manner of
evil against you fasly for my sake. l'Ange aux Hommes. The Angel to men. Judges
2. 1. Or l'Ange de l'Eternel monta de Guilgal en Bokim, and dit je Vous ai fait
monter horse d'Egypte, and vous ai fait entrer au pays duquel i'avoy' jure a vos
peers, et ai dit, ie n'enfraindrai jamais mon alliance [traittie] avec vous.
Iug. 2. 1. And the Angel of the Lord came up from Gilgal to Bochim. and said, I
made you to go up out of Egypt, and have brought you unto the land which I
swear unto your fathers: and I said, I will never break my Covenant with you.
Roy aux Hommes. A King to men. 2 Roys 1. 5. Et les Messagers s'en retournerent
verse Achazia: don't il leur dit, Pourquoi estez- vous retournes? 2 Kings 1. 5.
And when the Messengers turned back unto Ahaziah, he said unto them; Why are ye
turned back? Pere aux Fills. Father to Son. Genesis 43. 6. Et Israel dit pourquoi
m'avez vous fait ce tort, de declarer a ce personnage-la, que vous aviez encore
un friar. Genesis 43. 6. And Israel said; Wherefore dealt ye so ill with me, as to
tell the man, whether ye had yet a Brother? Pere aux Filles. Father to
Daughters. Exodus 2. 20. Lors ils dit a ses filles, Et ou est-il? Pourquoi avez
vous ainsi laisse ce personage? appellez le, and qu' il mange du pain. Exodus 2.
20. And he said unto his Daughters, and where is he? Why is it that ye have
left the man? call him in, that he may eat bread. Joseph a fes Freres. Joseph
to his Brethren Genesis 45. 4. Derechef Joseph dit a ses freres, Ie vous pri^
approchez Vous de moi: Et ils s' approcherent: puis ildit, Ie [suis] Joseph,
vostre friar, que vous avez vendu en Egypt. Genesis 45. 4. And Joseph said, unto
his Brethren, Come near to me I pray You: and they came near, and he said, I am
Joseph your brother, whom you sold into Egypt. Judah a son pere Jacob. Judah to
his Father David. Genesis 43. 3. Judah disant, Genesis 43. 3. Judah said, Ver. 4. Si
[donc] Tu envoyes nostre friar avec nous, etc. Ver. 4. If thou will send our
brother with us, etc. Ver. 5. Mais si tu ne l'envoiez, nous n'y descendro^s
point. Ver. 5. But if thou will not send him, we will not go down. Jonathan au
Roy saul. son Pere. Jonathan to King Saul his Father. 1 Samuel 19. 4. Jonathan
donc parla en bien de David, a Saul son pere, et lui dit, Que le Roy ne peche
point contre son serviteur David, car il n'a point peche contre Toi: et mesmes
ce qu'il t'a fait t'est grandement profit^ble, etc. 1 Samuel 19. 4. And Jonathan
spoke good of David unto Saul his father, and said unto him: Let not the King
sin against his servant, against David, because he has not sinned against
Thee, and because his works have been to thee ward very good, etc. Ver. 5. Car
il a mis sa vie en ^azard, and a frape le Philistin, and l' Eternel a done une
grande delivrance a tout Israel: Tu l' as veu, et t'en es esjoui: Pourquoi donc
pecherois- Tu contre le sang innocent: faisant mourir David, sans cause? Ver.
5. For he did put his life in his hand, and slwe the Philistine; And the Lord
wrought a great salvation for all Israel: Thou saw it, and did rejoice:
wherefore then will thou sin against innocent blood to slay David, without a
cause? Le Pere a sa Fille: la Fille a son Pere The Father to the Daughter: the
Daughter to her Father. Judes 1. 14. Et Caleb lui dit, Qu' as-tu? Judges 1. 14.
And Caleb said unto her, What will thou? Ver. 15. Et elle lui [respondit,]
Donne-moi un present: puis que Tu m' as done une terre Seche: donne-moi aussi
des fontenils d'eaux. Ver. 15. And she said unto him, Give me a blessing, for
Thou have give me a South land; Give me also springs of water. Iepthe a sa
Fille: and Elle a lui. Jeptha to his Daughter: and She to him. Juges 11. 35. Et
dit, Ha ma fille, Tu m' as du tont abaisse, and es du nombre de ceux qui me
troublent: ear I'ai ouvert ma bouche a l'Eternel, and ne [m' en] pourrai
retracter. Iuges 10. 35. And said, Alas my Daughter, Thou have brought me very
low, and art one of them that trouble me, for I have opened my mouth unto the
Lord, and I cannot go back. Ver. 36. Et elle lui [respondit] mon pere, as Tu
ouvert ta bouche a l' Eternel; fai-moi selon ce qui est sorti de Ta bouche.
Ver. 36. And she said unto him, my father, if Thou have opened thy mouth unto
the Lord, do to me according to that which has proceeded out of thy mouth. Le
Fills a sa Mere. The son to ^is Mother. 1 Rois 2. 22. Mais le Roy Solomon
respondit a sa mere, et dit, Et pourquoi demandes Tu Abisag? 1. Kings 2. 2^.
And King Solomon answered unto his Mother, and said, and why do thou ask,
Abishag* Le Serviteur au Maistre The servant to the Master. Cen. 24. 5. Et ee
serviteur lui [respondit] peut estre que la femme n' aura point a gre de me
suivre en ce pais ici me faudra-il necessairement remener ton fills au pays don't
Tu es sorti? Genesis 24. 5. And the servant said unto him, peradventure the woman
will not be willing to follow me unto this land, must I needs bring thy son
again into the land from whence thou came? Le Serviteur a sa Maistresse. The
Servant to his Mistress. Genesis 39. 9. Et si ne ma rien defendu si non Toi,
entant que Tu [es] sa femme: and comment feroi-je ce mal si grand pecheroi-je
contre Dieu? Genesis 39. 9. Neither has he kept back any thing from me but thee,
because thou art his wife: How then can I do this great wickedness, and sin
against God? Homme a Homme. Man to Man. Juges 19. 17. Adonc cet homme ancien
[lui] dit, Ou vas- Tu? and d'ou viens- Tu? Iuges 19. 17. And the Old man said,
Whither go Thou? and whence come Thou? Paul a Timothy. Paul to Timothy. 1 Timothy 6. 11, 14. Mais Toi o homme de Dieu, fui ces chooses, etc. 1 Timothy 6. 11,
14. But thou, O man of God, flee these things, etc. 2 Timothy 2. 1. Toi donc, mon
fills, etc. 2 Timothy 2. 1. Thou therefore, my son, etc. Ver. 2. Et ces chooses que
Tu as entendues de moi, etc. Ver. 2. And the things which Thou have heard of
me, etc. Ver. 3. Toi donc, endure travaux comme bo^ soldat de Jesus Christ.
Ver. 3. Thou therefore, endure hardness as a good soldier of Jesus Christ.
Paul a Tite. Paul to Titus. Tit. 2. 1. Mais Toi, propose les chooses qui
conviennent ^ saine doctrine, etc. et ver. 15. et Chap. 3. 8. Tit. 2. 1. But
speak thou the things which become sound Doctrine, etc. and ver. 15. and Chap.
3. 8. Paul a Philemon. Paul to Philemon. Philem. 19. Asin que je ne te die
point que mesme Tu, Te dois Toi-mesme a moi. Philem. 19. Albeit I do not say
unto Thee how Thou owe unto me. Ver. 21. Sachant que tu feras mesme plus que
je ne di. Ver. 21. Knowing that thou will also do more than I say. Iehan a
Gaius. John to Gaius. 3 Epist. de Jehan. Ver. 5. Bienaime, tu fais fidelement
en tout ce que Tu fais en verse les freres, et envers les estrangers. voyez ver.
6. 3 Epist. of John, Ver. 5. Beloved, Thou do faithfully whatsoever Thou do
to the Brethren, and to strangers. See ver. 6.

RULES for the true sounding of FRENCH.
THey have 22 Letters, the same with the English, only they have no K. or W.

A, is sounded broader than in English, as in All, or Aul; as l' Ame, the Soul;
au as o, as Autheur an Author, read Otheur: ay as a in English, as fair, to
do, sound fare: But if a Vowel (so called) follow ay, its sounded as in
Englis^, as Rayon (a Sunbeam. In Pais, a Country; and hai hated; its ^onded in
two Syllables, as Pa-is and ha-^.

B, as in English, not sounded in the end, as Plomb, lead, sound plom.

C, as in English, before e, i, y, as s, before a, o, u, as k; ^ always as ss;
ch, as sh; as chain a chain, sound shai-ne: Except cholere (choler,) chorde(a
cord) Eschole,(a School); cicchoree, (succory); which are sounded as English. C
before t, is not sounded, as dict, (said); faict (done), sound dit, fet; c in
second as g.

D, before a consonant is seldom read, except in these words admettre (to
admit) etc. If d ends a word, and h or a Vowel begins the next, its sounded as
t.

E, before m, or n, as a; as sens (sense) read sans; except in words that end
in ien, where the e is always sounded as in English, as sien (his), bien
(well), Except in these words, Experience, Expedient, patience, science,
patient; Escient (earnest) fient (dung), which are sounded, Experian-ce,
scian-se, etc. And it is always sounded in the end, as pe-re (a father), not
pere in one syllable, as in English. e with this stroke on it is sounded as ee,
or ie in English; Also in most words ending in er or ier.

F, as in English.

G, before e, i, y, has a softer sound than in English, as z mixed with y, as
negligence sound neg-liz-yance, as the Arabic ^ g before a, o, u, as in
English: gu before a Vowel, as in English guest, guard, etc. gn as we do ni, as
oignon, an onion, sound oinion.

H, as in English, in natural French words, as hair, to hate, but not in words
derived from the Latin, as heure (an hour) sound Eure.

^, as ee, in me, thee, etc. or ie in Priest, field, etc. before double ll
sound it as if it were behind it, as faillir (to fail) sound failliir, fille,
a daughter, sound fillie, etc. Except Ville, a Town; Village, a Village;
Pupille, a Pupil; Estoille, a Star; Caviller, to Cavil; mill, a thousand.

L, in fills (a son) nor in ils (they) is not sounded: nor before two
Consonants, as tiltre, a title; nor in il (he) if a consonant follows, as il
dit, (he says) sound i-dit: In the end of these words its sounded as u, as fol
(a fool), mol (soft) col (a neck) sound them, for, mou, cou, as we do ou in
could, etc.

M, in these words, sound as n, as nom (a name) renom, (renown) faim (hunger)
temps (time), sound them non, renon, fain, ^ans, etc.

N, is never sounded in the 3d person plural, of Verbs, as ils parlent (they
speak) read parlet; ils aiment, read aimet, they love.

O, before m,'or n, as in these English words, One, home, etc. ou, as oo in
English, or as ou, in could, should. oi or oy is sounded as oe at length, as Le
Roy, the King, sound le Roe, etc.

P, as in English.

Q, as k, as Qui Who, que what, quand when, sound ki, ke, kand.

R, as in English.

S, as in English, in words derived from the Latin, except in prester to lend,
vestir to cloth, Apostre an Apostle, est he is, which sound preter, vetir,
Apostre, et; but in natural French words its not sounded, as hastif hasty,
tesmoing a witness; read them ha-tif, te-moing, nor in the end of a word if the
following begins with a consonant, as Vous ne nous ferez pas croire tells
chooses, i. e. Ye shall not make us believe such things; Where observe, that
none of those Letters of s or the letter z are to be read; read it thus, Voo ne
no fere pa croire tell chooses; s single between two vowels (so called,)
sounds as z, as rose, a Rose, chose (a thing): s is sounded in words that
signify the manners, or fashion of any people, as a la Moresque, according to
the manner of the Moors, a la Turquesque, after the manner of the Turks, etc.
also in words denoting sects, as, Mahometiste, a Mohammedan; Alchoraniste,
Atheiste, Sophiste, etc.

T, as in English, before ion, as Nation sound Na-ti^n, t in the word et (and),
is never sounded, but et is always read as e.

U, as u in the English words True, truth, etc. or as ew, in Few, new, blew,
etc. as Tu Thou, usage sound it u-za-zy^* v before a Vowel in the beginning of
a word, and before r, and after another u in the middle, is a consonant; as
Vous Ye, poor poor, vray true, trouver to find.

X, as in English; except in all numeral words, as Deux two, Deuxiesme, the
second; Six, six; Sixiesme, the sixth; Dix, Ten; Dixiesme, the tenth; where the
x is sounded as s, as Deus, Deusiesme; Sis, Sisieme: Soisante, sixty; dis,
disieme; etc. and in the end of words as z, as paix, peace; prix, price; sound
them paiz, priz.

Y, is sounded as the French i, or the English ee, or ie, and is a word of it
self, signifying There, as Il y est, He is there.

Z, as in English, only if it end a word, and a Consonant begins the next
word, its not sounded.

The French do oftentimes cut of many Consonants (so called), in their
speaking; as, instead of il faict beau temps, It is fair Weather; they say, I
fe bo tan.

Also, they add sometimes a Consonant in speaking which they write not, as if a
Verb (so called) ends in a or e, and the following word begins with a Vowel, so
called, then they put t betwixt, as a il faict cela? Has he done that? read
it, a t'i fe s'la? and Par le elle bien? Does she speak well? read it, Par le
t'elle bien? So Que dira on de toi, What will be said of thee? speak it, Que
dira t'on de toi? And sometimes l is put for t, before the word on, as Que fera
l'on a moy? What will they do to me?

e is oftentimes cut of by this mark (') called an Apostrophe; as, Qu'est ce?
What is it? for, Que est ce? etc.

B. F.
The End of the French Battle-door.
A Narration how the TURKS and PERSIANS use the words Thee and Thou in their
Communications.
TAmerlane, the Emperor of Persia speaks Thou and Thee to Bajazet the Emperor
of the Turks: and Bajazet speaks thou and thee to Tamerlane, as may be seen in
the Turkish Hystory, Page 220. Amurah also the Emperor speaks Thou and thee to
Scanderbeg Prince of Epirus: and Scanderbeg the Prince writes thou and thee to
Amurah again; and calls his Speech modest and temperate, Page 301. the
aforesaid Amurah the Emperor speaks thou and thee to his Son, Page 330. The
Emperor Bajazet his son speaks thee and thou in his Speech to his Brother, as
in Page 442. The Emperor uses thou in his Speech again to his Son, Page 493. A
Soldier to the Emperor speaks thou and thee, Page 494. Gazelles an Egyptian
Commander speaks thou to the Emperor Selymus, Page 546. Solomon the Emperor,
entitled the Magnificent, writes thou and thee to the Great Master of the
Rhodes, P. 571. The Governor of Rhodes writes thou again to the Emperors
Commander in chief, Page 574. A Soldier speaks thou to the Emperor solomon,
Page 638. A Jew speaks thou to the Turkish Admiral, Page 661. One of the
Kings of Africa uses thee and thou in his Speech to Charles the Emperor, Page
661. Solomon the Emperor uses thou and thee in his Letter to Pope Paulus. P.
766. But Pope Clement in his Letter to Sigismund the Emperor writes we when
it was sent from him only: and you, when it was sent to Sigismund the Emperor
only, as in the 1081 page may be seen: so the first that gave you to one was
the Pope; whom the Emperors, Kings, Princes, Dukes, Earls, Lords, Judges,
justices, priests, and people have followed him into a ly, flattery, and
deceit, who say you to one, and so have lost their understanding.

To say You to many, and thou to one is the proper understanding of God, which
God has given to man, to distinguish when he speaks to one, or more then one;
as to men you, to man thou: and a beast, or beasts; horse, or horses; woman or
women: which Thou distinguishes, when we speak to One; and You dishinguishes,
when we speak to many: So men have lost their understanding, which God has
given them to distinguish with, that speaks you to One, For who say you to one
have lost their distinction in the Plural Number from the Singular, with which
they should number: So, that Understanding is of God, which does distinguish
the singular from the plural, and to the Plural there is a Plural word, to the
Singular a Singular word: And he that has lost this is become a fool and
Novice.

LONDRES

Imprime pour Robert Wilson, and se vendent a sa boutique a ^Enseigne de
l'Aigle noir, au rue appellee St. Martins Le Grand.

THE GERMAN Battle-Door.
An das liecht damit Christus euch erleuchtet hat, glaubet an das, auff das ihr
erkennet die salbung in euch umb euch zu lehren.


DIE Teutschen haben in ihre sprache unterscheid zwischen singularem unde
pluralem, welche sie lehr^en in ihre Grammatica, auch in ihre Biblische
ubersetzung behalten haben, wie wol in ihre read sie sind da von abgefallen,
durch hoff^rt unde heucheley in ansehung der personen, (wie auch die Englischen
unde die andere) sagende ihr, zu einen mensche gegen ihre eigen Grammaticam,
unde Biblische ubersetzung.

That is,

THE Germans have distinction in their language betwixt the singular and
plural, which they do teach in their Grammar, and have retained in the
translation of their Bible, although in their speaking they are degenerated
from it, through pride and hypocrisy in respect of persons, as the English and
others, saying, ihr, ye or you to one man, contrary to their own Grammar and
Bible translation.

Singular Plural Der man is A man Die menner is Men Die hand A hand Die hende
Hands Das ^uch A Book Die Lucher Books Der K^nig A King Die K^nige Kings Die
K^nigin A Queen Die K^niginnen Queens

Aber nu zu sagen, die Menner, die Hende, die Bucher, die K^nige, die
K^niginnen, wenn ihr soltet sagen, der Man, die Hand, das Buch, der K^nig, die
K^nigin, das were den pluralem f^r den singularem, zu gebrauchen, unde zu
sagen, das da weren viel Menner, viel Hende, viel ^^cher, viel Konige, oder
viel K^niginnen, wenn da ni^ht m^hr den ein Man, ein Hand, ein Buch, ein K^nig,
oder ein K^niginne is it; Is It das gute Teutsch? oder warheyt reden?

That is,

But now to say Men, Hands, Books, Kings, Queens, when you should say, a Man,
a Hand, a Book, a King, a Queen, that were to use the plural for the singular,
and to say that there were many Men, many Hands, many Books, many Kings, many
Queens, when there is but one Man, one Hand, one Book, one King, one Queen; Is
this good Dutch? or to speak truth?

Ich is I Wir is We Mein and meiner Of me Vnser Of us Mir To me Vns To us Mich
Me Vns Us Von mich From me Von uns From us

Du is Thou ^hr is Ye or you Dein and deiner Of thee Ewer and Ewr Of you Dir To
thee Euch To you Dich Thee Euch You O du O thou O ihr O you Von dir From thee
Von euch From you

Er is He Sie is They Sein and seiner Of him Ihrer and ihr Of them Ihm To him
Ihnen and ihn To them Ihn, sich Him Sie and sich Them Von ihm, von sich From
him Von ihnen and von sich From them

Nuzu sagen, Wir, Ihr, Sie, etc. zu einem man, wenn ihr soltet sagen ich, Du,
Er, das is it falsche Teutsch nach ewer eigen Grammaticam denn das lehret, das
man soll sagen, Ich, Du, oder Er Zu einem man: unde Wir, Ihr, Sie zu mehr den
ein.

That is,

Now to say, we, ye, they, etc. to one man, when you should say, I, thou, he,
that is false Dutch according to your own Grammar, for that teaches that we
should say, I, thou, he, (that is, ich, du, er) to one man, and we, ye, they
(that is, wir, jhr, sie) to more than one.

Singular Plural Mein is Mine Vnser is Our Dein Thine Ewer Your Sein His Ihre
Their

Nu is it es gute Teutsch zu sagen, Vnser haupt, f^r Mein haupt; oder Ewre haupt,
f^r Deine haupt;oder Ihre haupt, f^r sein haupt; is it das gute read, is it es
nicht zu reden wie ein nar and ungelehrte?

That is,

Now is it good Dutch to say, unser haupt, our head, for mein haupt, my head;
or ewr haupt, your head for dein haupt, thy head; or ihre haupt, their head,
for sein haupt; his head; Is this good speech? Is it not to speak as a fool and
unlearned?

Singular Plural Ich schreibe is I write Wir schreiben is We write Du
schreihest Thou writest Ihr schreibet Ye write Er schreibet He writes Sie
schreiben They write

Ich lose is I read Wir lesen is We read Du lesest Thou read Ihr leset Ye
read Er leset He reads Sie lesen They read

Nu umb ein man zu sagen von sich selbs, wir lesen, oder wir schreihen; Is It das
gute Teutsch, is it es nicht gegen ewer eigen Grammaticam? Vnd zu einem zu sagen,
ihr schreibet, oder ihr leset? Is It

das recht geredet, oder is it es gute sitten? Was f^r sittten denn haben die
Apostellen, und anderen gehat, die die Schrifften geschrieben haben, die all
zeit haben DV gesagt zu einem men sche?

Wie ihr lesen moget im schrifft; Is It das b^se sitten gewesen? Antwortet ihr,
die ihr zu einem mensche saget. Vnd zu sagen sie schreiben oder lesen zu einem
man; Is It das recht oder wahr?

das is it die b^se sitten, l^gen zu reden.

That is,

Now for one man to say of himself, we read or we write; Is this good Dutch? Is
it not contrary to your own Grammar? And to say to one man ( ihr schreibet or
ihr leset) you write or you read; Is this right spoken? Or is it good manners?
What manners then had the Apostles and other, that wrote the Scriptures, who
always said to one man ( du) thou, as you may read in the Scriptures? Was that
evil manners? Answer you, that say you to one man. And to say, they write or
read, to one man; Is this right or true? This is the bad manners, to speak lies.

Nu ihr die saget, [ihr] zu einem man oder fraw (wie gesagt is it) wenn ihr
soltet sagen du; Is It das nicht gegen ewer eigen Grammaticam, und Biblia und
Lehrnung, und ewer eigen Mutter sprach? Vnd warumb said ihr b^se, wenn man du
sagt zu einem man oder fraw, and nicht ihr? Said ihr nicht hoffartig worden?
Vnd nicht wie denen die die schrifften auss gegeben haben, und said ihr nicht
von ewer eigen Mutter sprach abgewichen? Vnd said ihr nicht (wie Kindren) der
r^ht wehrt, von zu sagen ihr zu einem mensche f^r du, gegen das ewre eigen
Grammaticam lehret? Den soltet ihr nicht ewer Kindern zuchtigen so sie solten
ihr sagen, wenn ihr lehret sie du sagen?

That is.

Now you that say [ ihr] ye or you to one man or woman (as is said) when you
should say [ du] thou; Is not that conrary to your own Grammar and Bible, and
Teaching, and your own Mother Tongue? And wherefore are you offended, when one
says [ du] thou, to one man or woman, and not ihr, you, are you not grown
proud, and not as those that gave forth the Scriptures? And are you not
degenerated from your own Mother tongue? And do you not deserve the Rod as
Children, for saying, ihr, you, to one man, for du, thou, contrary to that
which your own Grammar teaches? For would you not correct your Children, if
they should say [ ihr] you, when you teach them to say [ du] thou?

Hie folgen etlicke Exempelen ausz them Schrifft gezogen, zu beweisen dass du,
is it den rechte sprach zu einem mensche, und ihr zu viel menschen bey die
heyligen mennern gottes gebraucht.

That is,

Here follow some Examples taken out of Scripture, to show that thou is the
right language to one man, and [ ihr] you to many men, used by the Holy men of
God.

DER Herr sprach du zu Adam, Genesis 3. 9. Vnd Got der Herr rieff Adam und sprach
zu ihm; Woe bistu?

That is,

THE Lord said thou to Adam, Genesis 3. 9. And the Lord God called unto Adam, and
saidunto him; Where art thou?

Vnd Adam sprach dein und du zum Hern, Genesis 3. 10, 12. Vnd er sprach ich h^rete
deine stimm im Garten, und furchte much, etc.

Das weib das du mir zu gesellet have, gab mir, etc.

Hie is it nicht ich h^rete ewre stimm, auch nicht das weib das ihr mir zu
gesellet hasset; wie die h^ff^rtige jetzo einem them anderem sagen, und willen
sich selber nicht lassen gen^gen mit du und deine, wie woll sie nicht besser
zum Allerh^chsten Got reden; Is It dass nicht den wider Christ der sich
^berhebet ^ber alles das Got heisset?

That is,

And Adam said, thy and thou to God, Genesis 3. 10. 12. And he said, I heard thy
voice in the Garden, and was afraid, etc. The woman which thou have put to me,
gave unto me, etc. Here it is not, I heard your voice, and the woman which you
did put to me, as the proud now do speak to one another, and will not be
content with thou and thine, although they speak no better to the Most High
God; Is not thi^ the Antichrist that exalts himself above all that is called
God?

Hie hat den Tochter Jephta zu ihrem Vatter du gesaght, Richter 11. 36.

Sie aber sprach, mein Vatter hastu deinem mund auffgethan gegen them Hern?

Hie hat Samuel zu Eli du gesagt, 1 Samuel 3. 8. Under stund auff und gieng zu,
und sprach, hie bin ich, du have mir geruffen, etc.

Hie hat Soloman zum Herrn du gesaght, 1 K^nig 8. 39. So wollestu h^ren im
himmel, in them sitz da du wohnest, etc.

Hie hat den Knecht Abraham's zu seinem Herrn du gesaght, 1 Buch Mose 24, 5.

Sol ich denn deinen sohn wieder bringen in jenes land, darauss du gezogen bist?

Hie hat Mose zum Herrn du gesagt, 2 ^uch Mose 5. 22.

Herr, warumb thustu so ubel an diesem volk? Warumb hastu mich her gesand?

Hie hat Abigail zu David du gesagt, 1 Samuel 25. 25.

Ich aber deine magd, habe die Iunglinge meines Herrn nicht gese^en, die du
gesand have?

Paulus hat du zu them K^nig Agrippa gesagt, Act. 26. 3.

Allermeist weil du weissest, all sitten und fragen der Iuden, etc.

Petrus hat du zu Christus gesagt, M^th. 16. 16.

Du bist Christus des lebendigen Gottes sohn.

Daniel hat du zu them K^nig gesagt, Daniel 2. 29.

Du K^nig dachtest auff deinem hette, etc.

Den Iunglinge hat zum uberhauptman du gesagt, Act. 23. 20.

Dass du morgen Paulum fur den Rath bringen lassest, etc.

Mose hat gegen Pharaoh du gesagt, 2 Bu. Mose 9. 30.

Ich weiss aber dass du und deine Knechte, euch nicht furchte fur Got them
Herrn.

Aber zu mehr alss einer ruffet die weisheit, O ihr menner ich schrey zu euch,
und ruff den leuten, Prove. 8. 4.

Vnd. wenn der Herr zu seinem volck geredt hat, so hat er ihr gesagt, Jesa. 50.
1.

Aber wenn er nur zu einer spricht, so sagt er du, und nicht ihr oder euch.

Petrus sagt, so thut nun bufse, und bekehret euch das ewre sunde vertilget
worden, Act. 3. 19. Da hat er gegen viel geredt.

Vnd wenn Paulus zu mehr alss einer schreibet sagter; So ermahne nu euch, ich
gefangener in them Herrn, dass ihr wandeltwie sich, gebuhret ewrem beruff,
darinnen ihr beruffen said, Epheser 4. 1.

Wieder sagt Paulus, Derhalben ich Paulus der gefangener Christi Jesus, fur euch
heiden, Epheser 3. 1. Da hat er gegen viel geredt.

Vnd wenn Christus hat gegen viel geredt so hat er gesagt; Weh euch
Schrifftgelehrten, und Phariseer, ihr Heuchler die ihr den wittwen h^user
fresset, und wendet lang gebet fur darumb werdet ihr desto mehr verdamniss
empfahen, Math. 23. 14.

The End of the German Battle-Door.
THE Nether Dutch Battle-Door
In het litcht waermede Christus u-lieden Verlicht heeft, geloft, op dat
ghy-lieden de salvinge van binnen u-lieden moogt kennen om u-lieden te leeren.


HIerin is getoont aen de nederduitschen, het onderscheidt dat sij hebben in
haer onderwijzing-boecken en bijbels tusschen Eenvoudt en Meervoudt namelijck,
tusschen (ghij) welke tot even man gesprooken is en ghijlieden often u-lieden,
het welcke alleenlijck soude gesprooken worden tot mere dan even, van welk
onderscheidt sij verbastert zijn, als andere natien, door hoogmoedt en aensien
der persoonen, seggende u-lieden aen even rijck en hoogh moedigh mensche, daer
door de mensche ver heffende bouen sijn schepper, en dit is de Tegen-Christ,
die verhoogt hem zelven boven al dat Godt genoemt is, want aen Godt often Christ
en seggen sij niet ulieden (als sij schijnen hem aen-te-roepen) gelijck sij
done als sij aen hoogmoedigh mensche spr^^cken, en dit is den Here even gruwel.

THAT IS

HErein is showed unto the Nether-Dutch, the distinction which they have In
their teaching Books and Bibles betwixt the Singular, and the Plural, to wit,
betwixt thou [ghy] which is spoken to one, and betwixt ye or you, [ ghy-l: or
u-lieden] which should be spoken only to more than one, from which distinction
they are degenerated as other Nations, through pride and respect of persons,
saying, you, [ u-lieden] to one rich proud man, thereby exalting man above his
maker, and this is the Antichrist which exalts himself above all that is
called God, for to God, or Christ they say not [ u-lieden] that is, you, when
rhey seem to call upon him, as they do when they speak to a proud man and this
is an abomination to the Lord.

Male kind
Singular De Man is The Man Des Man's, or van den Man Of the Man Den Man, or aen
den Man To the Man o Man O Man Van den Man From the Man

Plural De Mannen is The Men Der Mannen, or van de Mannen Of the Men Den
Mannen, or aen de Mannen To the Men O Mannen O Men Van de Mannen From the Men

Female kind
Singular De Vrouwe is The Woman Der Vrouwe, or van de Vrouwe Of the Woman De
Vrouwe, or aen de Vrouwe To the Woman O Vrouwe O Woman Van de Vrouwe From the
Woman

Plural De Vrouwen is The Women Der Vrouwen, or van de Vrouwen Of the Women Den
Vrouwen, or aen de Vrouwen To the Women O Vrouwen O Women Van de Vrouwen From
the Women

Neither kind
Singular Het Huys is The House Des Huyses, or van't Huys Of the House Den
Huyse, or aen't Huys To the House Van het Huys From the House

Plural De Huysen is The Houses Der Huysen, or van de Huysen Of the Houses Den
Huysen, or aen de Huysen To the Houses Van de Huysen From the Houses

Now to say de Mannen, de Vrouwen, de Huysen, when you should say de Man, de
Vrouwe, het Huys; were to say Men, Women, Houses, When there is but one Man,
Woman or House meant; Is this proper Language, or good Dutch, or good English?
For de Man, is the Man; de Vrouwe, is the Woman; het Huys, is the House, one:
and de Mannen, is Men, de Vrouwen, is Women; de Huysen, is Houses; more than
one.

Read on and see some Examples of the Pronouns so called.
Singular Plural Ick is I Wy or Wy-lieden is We (...) G^y Thou Ghy-luy or
Ghy-lieden Ye Hy He Sy or Sy-lieden They

Now to say Wy, Ghy-luy or Ghy-lieden, and Sy or Sy-lieden, when you should say
Ick, Ghy and Hy; this were to say We, Ye, or You and They when you should say
I, Thou and He: And this would be false Dutch and English both, as in all the
Examples beforementioned in the other Languages.

Hier volgen sommighe Exempelen genomen uyt de Schriftuer. Here follow some
Examples taken out of Scripture. GHY THOU Genes. 3. 9. End Godt de Here ri^p
Adam end sprack tot hem, Waer sijt ghy? AND the Lord God called unto Adam, and
said unto him, Where art thou? Adam sprack tot Godt. Adam did speak to God.
Genes. 3. 12. do sprack Adam dat wijf die ghy my gegeven hebt, gaf my van den
Boom, end ick at. Genesis 3. 12. Then the man said, the woman whom thou gave to
be with me, she gave me of the Tree, and I did eat. 2 Samuel 12. 7. Do sprack
Nathan tot David, ghy sijt die man, 2 Samuel 12. 7. And Nathan said to David,
thou art the man. Paulus sprack tot Felix. Paul spoke to Felix. Act. 24. 10.
Done antwoorde hem Paulus als hem de Stathouder had toegelaten te spreecken,
Ick verantwoorde my selven te vrijmoediger, dewijle ick weet dat ghy veele
Iaeren dese v^lck Richter geweest hebt. Act. 24. 10. Then Paul after that the
Governor had beckoned unto him to speak, answered, for as much as I know that
thou have been of many Years a Judge unto this Nation; I do the more cheerfully
answer for my self. U THEE Christus spreeckt tot Simon Christ speaks to
Simon. Luce 7. 47. Daerom segge ick U, haer sijn veele sonden vergeven. Luke 7.
47. Wherefore I say unto thee, many sins are forgiven her. Het is gesegt tot
Christus. It is said to Christ. Luce 8. 20. End hem were geboodtschapt end
gesegt, uwe Moeder end uwe Broeders staen buyten end willen U sien. Luke 8.
20. And it was told him by certain, which said thy Mother and thy Brethren
stand without, desiring to see thee. Paulus spreeckt tot Koning Agrippa. Paul
speaks to King Agrippa. Act. 26. 2. Ick achte my selven geluckich, O Koninck
A grippa, dat ick my heden voor U sal verantwoorden. Acts 26. 2. I think my
self happy O King Agrippa, because I shall answer for my self this day before
thee. U LIEDEN YOU Matthew. 23. 1, 2, 3. Do sprack Jesus tot de scharen, end
tot sijne Difcipulen, seggende, Op Moses Stoel sijn geseeten de
Shcift-geleerden, end Phariseen, daerom al dat ^y U lieden g^bieden te houden,
houdt dat. Matthew. 23. 1, 2, 3. Then spoke Jesus to the multitude, and to his
Disciples, saying, The Scribes and the Pharisee^ sit in Moses Seat: all
therefore whatsoever they bid you, observe that, observe and do. Luce 7. 9.
Jesus dit hoorende verwonderde hem sijner, end hem omkeerende, seyde tot der
schare die hem naevolgde, Ick segge U lieden, Ick en hebbe so grooten Geloove
in Israel niet gevonden. Luke 7. 9. When Jesus heard these things, he marvelled
at him, and turned him about and said unto the people that followed him, I say
unto you, I have not found so great Faith, no not in Israel. 2 Cor. 1. 1, 2.
Paulus even Apostel Jesus Christi door den Will Godts, end de Broeder Timotheus
der Gemeynte Godts die te Corinthen is* m^t all den Heyligen die in geheel
Achaia sijn, genade sy U lieden. 2 Cor. 1. 1, 2. Paul an Apostle of Jesus
Christ by the Will of God, and Timothy our Brother unto the Church of God which
is at Corinth, with all the Saints which (...) in all Achaia, grace be to you.

Here are some EXAMPLES taken out of the DANISH Tongue, to show the Professors
and Teachers of England and elsewhere, that the Danes in their Bibles and
Grammars have a distinction betwixt Singular and Plural, though in their
Practice they as well as the English, and French, and Spanish, and others in
Europe, are degenerated from what they Teach, and have been taught in their
Grammars, and what the Translators of the Bible have set down in it.

Singular Plural Ieg is I Wi is We Mig Me Oss Us Du Thou I Ye Dig Thee Eder You
Hand He De They, Men or Women Sig or hannem Him Them Them, Men or Women Hende
Her

Of One Of Many Min is Mine Vor is Our Din Thine Edders Your Hans His Deris
Their, Men or Women Hendis Hers

Singular Plural Ieg siger is I say Wi sige is We say Du siger Thou say I
sige Ye say Hans siger He says De sige They say

Singular Plural Ieg Taler is I Speak Wi Tale is We Speak Du Taler Thou
Speak I Tale Ye Speak Hans Taler He Speak De Tale They Speak Now

Now to wrest all these Danish words abovementioned out of their proper place,
and to put the Plural word in the Singulars place? Would not this be called
false Danish? But like the English, that puts you for thou.

Mand is A Man Mander is Men Quind A Woman Quinder Women Konge A King Konger
Kings Dronnigen A Queen Dronninger Queens

Now is to say Mander, Quinder, Konger, and Dronninger, when you should say
Mand, Quind, Konge, and Dronningen; this were to say, Men, Women, Kings, and
Queens, when you should say, a Man, a Woman, a King, and a Queen, and this
should be false Danish, but like them that says, you when they should say thou.

See some Scripture EXAMPLES in the DANISH Bible, how the Singular word is used
to one, and Plural to more than one; contrary to them that say you, when they
should say thou.
GEnes. 3. 9. God thou would Adam; And the Lord God called unto Adam and said,
Where art thou? In Danish it is, Oc Good Herren kallede ad Adam, oc sagde til
hannem, Huor (est) du? Mark its du, thou, not I nor eder, ye nor you.

And Adam said thou to God, in the 10th verse, The woman which thou gave,
etc. In Danish, Den Quinde some du gafest, etc. Here again you may see its du,
not I, thou, not ye nor you.

But when God speaks to them both, to Adam and to Evah, to male and to female
he used the Plural language, as in Genesis 1. 29. And God said, I have given to
you, etc. In Danish, Oc Good sagde, Jeg haffuer giffuit eder. (Mark) its eder,
you, not dig, thee, when he speaks to male and female both. Male and female
created he them, and blessed them, etc. So here you may see the Danish Bible
has a distinction between the Singular and Plural, as well as the English
Bibles have; But who says I or eder, or edders, ye, you or your, when they
should say du, dig, dine, thou, thee, thine? This is a gross perverting of
Scripture example, and Grammar direction; and so throughout the whole Bible in
the Danish language, there is a constant keeping to the Singular words to a
single person or thing, and Plural words to more than one.

And the Caldeans, who accused the Jews to Nebuchadnezzar the King, they
thou would the King in the third of Daniel, the 11th verse, Du Konge, thou King;
here is not I nor eder. ye nor you mentioned, when one is spoken to, though a
King.

Christ, when he spoke to more than one, said you, as Math. 23. 16. Woe be unto
you blind guides; In Danish its, Ve eder forblinded^ ledere. Mark, its eder,
you, not du nor dig, thou, nor thee, when more than one is spoken to.

And when he spoke to his Disciples, he said you to them Math. 24. 4. Take heed
that no man deceive yon; In Danish Seel til at der bedrager ingen eder. (Mark)
its eder, you, not dig, thee, when he speaks to his Disciples.

But when Christ spoke to one, to Peter, he thou would him, Math. 14. 31. O thou of
little Faith? Wherefore did thou doubt? In the Danish its, O du lidet
Troendis, hui tuilde du? (Mark) again here it is du, thou, not I nor eder, ye
nor you. And Peter thou would and thee'd Christ in that Chapter, and 28th verse,
Master if it be thou, bid me come unto thee on the water; In Danish its, Herre,
est det du, da buid mig komme till, dig paa vandet. Mind here is both du and
dig, thou and thee used to Christ by Peter, and not ye nor you.

So Christ you would the Scribes and Ph^risees, Luke 12. 21. De skulle icke heller
sige, see her, eller see der. The see, Guds Rig^ er induortis i eder.

That is,

Neither shall they say, Lo here, or lo there; for behold, the Kingdom of God
is inwardly within you. Here it is induortis i eder, inwardly within you; not
induortis i dig, inwardly withinthee, when he speaks to more than one.

So these few Examples may inform, that the Danish tongue as well as others
aforementioned have a distinction betwixt Singular and Plural, though the
Professors, and Teachers, and Doctors, have lost it in their Practice, who will
say you, when they should say thou.

The End of the Danish.
Here follows some few EXAMPLES of the SLAVONIAN Language, whereby the Reader
may see that that Language makes a distinction betwixt Singular and Plural,
contrary to the Practice of the Professors and Teachers in England, and most
part of Christendom, who are degenerated from the Practice of the Primitive
times, and the times of the Apostles and Saints.
Singular Plural Ya is I My is We Ty Thou Wy Ye or you On He Oni They

Ya Pissy is I Write My Pisseme is We Write Ty Pissess Thou Writest Wy Pissete
Ye Write On Piss He Writes Oni Pissy They Write

Kral is A King Kralowe is Kings Kralowna A Queen Kralowny Queens Czysarz An
Empereur Czysarzowe Emperors Czysarzowna An Empress Czysarzowny Empress Otecz
A Father Otczowe Fathers

Now to pervert all the abovementioned words out of their proper place, were
to put Plural for Singular, and would be the same with those that says you
when they should say thou; and so would be as false Slavonian as it is false
English to say you to one when it should be thou.

The End of the Slavonian.
Here follows a few Examples about the singular and the plural in the BOHEMIAN
Language.

Singular Plural Ya is I My is We Ty Thou Wy You or Ye On He. Oni They.

NOw to say My, wy, oni, when you should say, Ya, ty, ont, this were to say,
We, you, or ye, and they when you should say, I, thou, and he: And this would
be false Bohemian, and English both.

Singular Plural A Kniez a Priest Kniezi Priests. Oteez Father, Otezowe
Fathers.

Singular Ya sem poslussen is I obey Ty sy poslussen Thou obeyest On gest
poslussen He obeys.

Plural My sme poslusni is We obey Wy gste poslusni Ye obey Oni gsau poslusni.
They obey. or, Oni gsau posluschni.

Now to say, My sme poslusni, Wy ste poslusni, and Oni gsau pos^usni, or
posl^schni; when you should say, Ya sem poslussen, Ty* sy poslussen, and On
gest poslussen, and this would be false Bohemian and English; and like the
Nations who puts Plural for the Singular, You for Thou: and if any read the
Bible in the Bohemian Language, they may see the said Distinctions betwixt
singular and Plural, contrary to the practice of the Nations who are
degenerated from it.

The End of the Bohemian.
Here follows in this sheet some few Examples in the Polish Tongue, about the
Singular and Plural, and also the Lithvanian Tongue, together what Thou, and
You is in the Sweedish, Hungarian, Moscovian, Curlandian, and Turkish, and a
few Examples in the East-Indian and Irish.
(1) Polish.
Singular Plural Ia is I My is We Ty Thou Wy You or Ye On He Oni They

Now to say My, Wy, Oni, when you should say Ja, Ty, On, this were to say We,
You, or Ye, and they, when you shonld say I Thou, and he, and this were false
Polish and English both.

Singular Plural wick is a man. Ludzie is men, Niewiasta a Woman Niewiasty
Women Krol a King. Krolowie Kings Cesarz an Emperor. Cesarze Emperors

Singular Joy Mi^uj^ asz milu is I love Ti Mi^ujesz tu mili Thou love On
Mi^uieans mili He loves

Plural My Mi^ujuemij mes milime is We love Wy Mi^uje^ie jus milite Ye or you
love Oni Mi^ujo^ anis mili They love

Now to put every one of these aforementioned words out of their proper place,
the Plural in the Singulars place, would be false Polish and English both, and
like them that puts To^ for Thou.

Some Examples in the Lithvanian language.
Singular Plural Asz is I Mes is We T^jen Thou Ius You or y^ Ans He An^^jen
They

Now to say Mes, Ius, An^sjen, when you should say Asz, T^jen, Ans, this were
to say We, You, or Ye, and They when you should say I, Thou, and He; and this
were false Lithvanian, and English both.

Singular Plural ^mogus is a Man ^mones is Men Moteriszkie a Woman Moteryszkies
Women Karalus a King Karaley Kings Giesorus an Emperor Ciesorey Emperors

Now to say ^mones, Moteryszkies, Karaley, and Ci^sorey, when you should say.
^mogus, Moteriszkie, Karalus, Ciesorus, and this were to say Men, Women, Kings,
and Emperors, when you should say a Man, a Woman, a King, and an Emperor, and
this would be false Lithvanian and English both. Now read the distinction
betwixt Singular and Plural in the aforementioned languages in Thou and Yo^.

(1) Swe^dish (2) Hungarian (3) M^scovian (4) Curlandian. (5) Turkish. Singular
Tu, Thou T^ Thou Tic Thou Tu is Thou Sen is Thou Plural (...) You Iwe You Wy
Yo^ Iu^jen is You Si^ is You

Now to say, iv^, iwe, wy, ju^jen, and Si^ when you should say Tu, Te, Tie,
Tu,, and Sen, this were to say We, You, or Ye, and They, when you should say,
I, Thou, and He, And this were false Swe^dish, Hungarian, Moscovian,
Curlandian, and Turkish and also English.

Now read on to some Examples in the East-Indie language.

Singular Plural Betta is I Puckanera: dingan betta is We ^uckan^ra Thou Seera
deveck You or y^ Dea He Eetoo: Oran: Banya: They

Now to say Puckanera:, di^gan betta:, Seera deveck:, Eotoo: (...) when you
should say Betta, Puckanera, Dea. This were to say We, You, or Ye, or They when
you should say I, Thou, and He, and this would be false Indian, and English
both.

Singular Plural Oran is a Man Oran^ lackey is Men Prompoan a Woman Waddoon
Women

Raja is a King or Prince, Peng-geran is Kings or Princes.

Now to say Oran lackey. Waddoon, Peng-geran, when you should say Oran,
Prompoan, Raja, this were to say Men, Women, Kings or Princes, when you should
say a Man, a Woman, a King or Prince, and this would be false Indian and
English both.

Read a few IRISH Examples.
Singular (...) (or) (...) me (or) mise is I (...) (or) (...) tu (or) tusa Thou
(...) (or) (...) e (or) eison He

Plural (...) Sin is We (...) (or) (...) sib (or) sibse Ye or You (...) (to)
(...) iad (or) iadsion They

Now to say Sin, Sib (or) Sibse jad (or) jadsion, when you should say, me
(or) mise, tu (or) tusa, e (or) eision, this were to say, we you or ye, and
they, when you should say, I, Thou, and He, and this would be false English
and IRISH both.

These words are Pronounced thus.
Singular Plural Me (or) Mishe, Shinne, Tu (or) Tussa, Shif (or) Shifshe; E
(or) Eishion, Yad (or) Yadshion,

Read on Scripture Examples.
(...) biogh afios agad ariog.

Be it known unto thee O King, Dan. 3. verse 18. These words are pronounced
thus, beegh ais agat aree.

SOmething spoken to a Book, given forth by one, who writes himself W. W.
Master of the Free School of King Edward the Sixth, in Louth in Lincolneshire;
which Book he calls, A Treatise of English Particles, which he Directs to Peter
Bradly, Warden of the School of King Edward the Sixth in Louth; and to John
North, Justice of the Peace, etc. Which he says, the chief design of his Book
is to prevent, and cure the diseases of Barbarismes, and to stop the ignorance
of many gross, and ridiculous Barbarismes, committed daily by young Learners:
And in which Book, which is the work of W. W. I find that in it, which is both
Ridiculous and Barbarous, and Ignorant, worse than a young Shollar, who speaks
not proper English: for that is the properest English the Bible is translated
into, which is Thou to One, and You to Many. Instance in thy Preface to the
Reader, where thou speaks of bald latin, where thou says you; but for you I
had died; and in latin its te, and in the same Page thou says I am glad that
you are well, and in the latin its tu: now whether is not this bald English as
thou calls bald latin? art thou fit to be a Teacher, when thou translates you,
when thou should thee, and thou; do thou not deserve the Rod here? and art
thou not ashamed to publish such a thing abroad? a fool goes on in this Road,
will thou call this Elegancy? is not this thy Elegancy and Teaching, contrary
to Scripture, and the Accidence? come to it again; amas, thou love, amatis,
ye or you love: come read W. W. and say on.

In the 51. chap. and 161. page of thy book, thou puts you, for tu, and say
you, understood of one, is made of tu, and so puts you, for tu; when the
Accidence, and the Grammar condemns it, and the Bible, English and Latin;
where is the Barbarismes now? who makes no distintion in the English, when thou
speaks to one, and when thou speaks to more than one; as when thou say, If
you forsake us we are undone: art not thou speaking to many people? here is not
you, many, yet thou say in the latin, si deseris tu perimus, which thou
say in English If you forsake us we are undone; which is thou, both in
English and Latin; art thou fit to be a Teacher, or Translator either here,
who makes no distinction at all in the English betwixt you and thou? thou have
the same word for tu, as thou have for vos, in English, and thou usest you to
tu, and cannot find thou, and have forgotten the Accidence; and as I said
before, thou have the same word for tu, as thou have for vos, for in that page
thou say, You shall bear me witness; and thy Latin is, Vos ^ritis mihi
testes. So here thou may see vos is you, and tu is you, by thy directions; is
not this bald Latin, and bald English, and Ridiculous, and Barbarous, and
Ignorant: and thou say in the 162. page, Your spoken but of one, is made of
tuns, of more than one by vester; then why do thou use the word vester, when
thou speaks to a King, or Nobleman, and thou bids Note to a King, Prince, or
Nobleman, vester is to be used, as Majestas vestra, your Majesty; Celsitudo
vestra, your Highness; Dominatio vestra, your Lord-ship; and thou say,
Accepi Epistolam tuam, I received your Letter. Is not this bald Latin, to put
tuam for your? is not vestram your, and tuam thy, in that case, and that
gender, as its called in the Accidence? and in the 163. page thou say in
Latin, quam a te, etc. From you, in English; and so makes people believe, that
a te in Latin, were from you, in English, Is this thy Elegancy, and thy
Interpreting, and thy Teaching?

And thou in another place says, Certiorem te faciam, I will let you know. Now
is this proper to speak te for you? and can thou find no other word for te
but you? can thou not find thee in English, as te which is for thee? and
thou brings Cicero for it, which will Judge thee whether he spoke you, when he
should have spoke thee: and thou says in thy practice, I was looking of you;
and thou Latins it with te ipsum; is this good translating? is not te ipsum,
thee or thy self, and not you, nor your self?

And in thy Second Dialogue, thou says, When was he with you at your house?
and then thou Latins it, Quando apud te Domi fuit: and here again thou puts te
for you, and here is thy nonsensical Elegancy, English and Latin, which are
Barbarismes, which thou says is to avoid it, who puts tu and te, and te ipsum,
for you, and your.

In thy Third Dialogue thou says, Ni tu dixisses, If you had not said it: and
absque tuo sermon, which thou Englishes, But for your saying: here thou puts
tu for you, and tuo for your, and this is thy Teaching, Elegancy, to avoid
Barbarismes which draws into it; for cannot any Barbarous, and Ignorant man,
speak tuo, when he should speak your, and speak tu and te, and teipsum, when he
should speak you, and your self: that is to say, you, when he should say thou,
and your, when he should say thine, or thy, as thou teach, tu and te, and
teipsum, for you, which should be for thou and thee; And is thy Elegancy, and
Teaching, to avoid Barbarism, or to bring into it, or like a man that is out
of his senses? And thou says in another place in thy Book, Quando te id video
desiderare. Now W. W. Englishes it thus, to prevent Barbarism and Ignorance,
which is thus Englished, Being I see you desire it.

So instead of saying, that thou desire, he says, you desire: and thus thou
Englishes it to us.

And in the 181 Page of thy Book, Expectandum est tibi dum: W. W. Englishes it
thus to us, You are like to stay. Is this right Translating, school Boys, to
put tibi for vobis? For tibi is for thee, and vobis is for you in that case: so
the man has spoken Nonsense throughout his whole Book, and is not fit to
teach, who has spoken you instead of thee; Now if all the Authors he mentions
in his Book, as Dane, and Pool, and Brinsly, and Clark, and Doctor Hawkins, and
diverse others which thou mentions; If their English Teaching and Latineing be
like thine, who speaks you, when thou should speak thou; your, when thou should
say thy; vos, when thou should say tu, and vobis, when thou should say tibi; is
this good English, or good Latin, or good Teaching either?

And as for the Stumblers, that says, a King says we and us of himself: and
vester, which in English is yours, or your, must be said to a King, a Prince,
or a Nobleman, which is contrary to the Scriptures, or Accidence, and Grammar
Rules; for the Scriptures says, Tu Rex, Thou King; not vos Rex. And in the
first Book of Kings, 1. 28, 29, 30. King David said I, and not we and us, when
he spoke of himself, when he says in the 30 verse, Even so will I certainly do
this thing; the Latin is, faciam, I will do; not faciemus, we will do.

And in Ezra the 6. 8. Darius the King said, I make a Decree, etc. in Latin, A
me positum ^st edictum; its not a nobis, we, etc.

But when a King speaks of himself and the Council, then he may say we or us; A
nobis positum est edictum, We make a Decree.

And we never read in the Scriptures, that any said vester to a great man: In
the I Kings aforesaid, Nathan the Prophet did not bid Bathsheba use such a word
as vester to King David, when he bid her say, Tu Domine mi Rex; Thou Lord my
King: when she spoke to him, her language was just in opposition to W. W.
vester, when a King is spoken to, for she when she speaks to the King, says,
Domine mi tu Iurasti in Domine deo tuo ancillae tuae, My Lord, thou swearest by
the Lord thy God unto thine handmaid. Mark, is not this just contrary to W. W.
directions in his 162. page, that will not have tu^s used to a King, but
vester; and is not Bathshebaes words to the King, tuo and tuae, not vestro? nor
vestrae? a child of seven years old cannot but blame thy folly; are not the
Scriptures full of such Examples to show forth, that tuus is used, and not
vester, when a King is spoken to of himself? neither did she say vester, when
in the same 17 verse she says, Quia Schelomoh filius tu^s regnabit post me:
Here W. W. see again what thy elegancy is turned to, and how little worth thy
Directions is in thy Book. Does she say Filius vester, Your son? thou sees its
Filius tu^s. And what says Nathan to the King, in the 26. verse, he uses not
vester, when he says, Et me ego servus ^uu; But me, even me thy servant. Read
again, is vester here mentioned? surely thou will be ashamed to speak of vester
any more to be used to a King, when one speaks to himself, as of himself.

And Tertullus the Orator, uses not vester but tu^s, when he spoke to Felix,
which he gives a high Title to, as Praestantissime Felix, Most Noble Felix,
Acts 24. 2, 3. he says, not Per vestram Providentiam, but Per tuam
Providentiam, By thy Providence: was not Tortullus an Orator? why does W. W.
stand thus in contradictions to the Accidence, to the Grammar, and to the
Bible? I wonder where he has gotten this order to speak thus, unless he
imitate the Jesuits and Friars; for they say, Dominatio vestra, who are
degenerated from the true Latin, Accidence, Grammar, and Bible both.

Something written concerning Charles Hools translating of some School-Books,
he writes himself Master of Arts, wherein he says the propriety of both
languages is kept; that children by the help of their Mothers tongue, may the
more easily learn to discourse in good Latin among themselves; and first to
that book called, Confabulatiunculae Puerilis.

In the first page of his book he says, Ad multos loquimur Pluraliter; and he
Englishes it thus, We speak to many in the Plural Number, and yet in his next
sentence he uses the word you, when he speaks to one, as Habeo tibi gratiam,
which he Englishes, I thank you, when the Accidence, and Grammars, and
Dictionaries, and Latin Bibles, does not put tibi, for you, but tibi, for
thee; and vobis, for you: and in this his book, wherein he says the propriety
of both Languages are kept, but he has lost it; for he himself uses you, to
one, in a manner throughout his whole book; as you for thou, as Salve in, God
save you, Et tu, And you too, and Quid tu ais, What do you say Sir, Dixisti te
velle aufugere; in English as he says, You said you would runn away; as when he
speaks to more than one, he uses the word you to them also. Instance in his 33.
page of that book, when he says, Illico dimittam omnes vos; in Englishes, as
he says, I will presently dismiss you all; here is vos you see, and then in the
next words when he speaks but to one, Tu mihi responde, Do you answer me: here
he keeps you still, he puts you to tu, which is thou, and you to vos, which is
you also, like a madman; and so in his translation he makes no distinction,
when he speaks to one, and when he speaks to more than one; but you to one, and
you to many; and yet he says in his Title page, the propriety of both Languages
is kept; and this Book he Dedicates to one Joseph, and Humphry Primate,
Citizens of London.

And the same order he keeps in his Translation of that Book called Corderius,
which he directs to one Henry Hampson Citizen of London, and he says the
propriety of both languages is kept, and yet he keeps to you, when one is
spoken to.

Page the 172. Tu vero? What did you? and 173. page, Fuisti ne memor promissi
tui? which he Englishes, Have you been mindful of your promise? he says not
thou, and thy, which is the propriety of the English Tongue, when one is spoken
to.

Page 250. Tu jure id poterds, he Englishes it thus, You might have done that
at your one pleasure, and so here again, he puts you for tu thou.

Page 264. Sunt ne tibi testes? Have you any witnesses? here is you again for
tibi, and Abi sede loco tuo, Get you gone and sit in your place, and so he
proceeds in that book, and speaks you when he should thou; and uses you when he
speaks to one, as well as when he speaks to more then one.

And in that Book he has Translated which is called, Sententiae Pueriles,
sentences for children, and he Latins it and Englishes it to them, and he
Englishes and Latins it to us thus, Ne sis lingua futili, Be not a blab of
your tongue, so he Englishes to us your, when it should be thy; its not Ne
sitis, Be not you, but its Ne sis, Be not thou, Children by this means of
teaching, will neither know true English, nor true Latin.

Again he Englishes it to us in that book thus, Commit your selves to Christ
that you fall not into sin, the Latin out of which he Englishes these words,
is Commendabis te Christ one impingas in peccatum, so he has put yourself for
thyself, and you for thou, so is this a good translator that translates you for
tu? which is thou, and your for te, which is thee or thy in that place? Read on
School-boyes, and you may see up and down in his book he does English and
translate in this manner, as though the man were not in his senses, more like
to distract children, then teach them true English or Latin either.

And in his book called an easy entrance into the Latin tongue, therein he
teaches Singular and Plural, thou to one, and you to more than one; yet in his
translating of Latin into English, he writes contradictory, setting you, for
thou, the second person Plural for the second Singular, and does not this
deserve the whip boys? and would not he have whipped you for such doings? for
the proof of it, take two or three examples out of the aforementioned book of
his, in page 440, he translates as follows, for Cede de meo loco, he
Englishes thus, Get you out of my place, putting there the word you, for thou,
for cedite, or ceditote, is depart you, or ye, and cede, is depart thou, or
thee, so also, for Quid est tibi nomen? he Englishes thus, What is your name?
which being rightly translated, is, What is thy name? so there also putting the
word your, for thee; and Quid tu ais: he Englishes, What say you? which is
properly, What say thou? so putting the Singular in the Plurals place, which
is nonsense: so again, for Cur non scribis, he Englishes, Why do you not
write? for Why do thou not write? and also, for Quot annos natus es? he
Englishes, How old are you? putting the word you for thou, and in this style,
and after such like manner he goes through his book, he puts you, in the place
of thee, and thou, as tu you, for vos you; as in his English translations it
does appear, teaching one way, and translating contrary to it, which is not a
proper way of translating; nor C. H. is not a fit man to translate, nor to
teach.

Richard Bernard in his English Terrence, so called, also makes use of the same
Irregular way of translating, and so renders himself deserving a whip, for
translating the word you, for thou; You; to one, when its properly spoken to
more than one, as for example, in his Terrence, page 12. in his Formulae
loquendae, he writes thus, Paucis te volo, I would speak a word or two with
you; putting the word you, for thou or thee; for te there does not signify with
you, but in the Singular thee: so also in the same page thus, for Rem omnem a
principio audies, he Englishes, You shall hear, etc. now audies, is not you
shall hear, but thou shall hear: so again, for Quid est quod me velis? he
Englisheth, What would you with me? putting you for thou, and for Mihi
exorandus es, I must entreat you; putting you, for thou; for the word es is not
to be understood you are, but thou art so. R. W. thou art not a fit man to
translate to us.

John Clarke, in his Book called Dux Grammaticus, he also proceeds after the
same manner; as in putting thee and thou out of their proper place; and in
their stead places the word you, which is contrary to all Grammatical order;
and in so doing he brings himself under the whip; as for Example, in page 163.
for Quid est quod to angat animi mi Petre? in page 218. he Englishes it thus,
Friend Peter, what is that troubles your mind? putting your for thy. So also in
page 173. for, Vbi locorum cede versatus es hoc omne triennium? in page 231. he
Englishes thus, Where ith world I pray have you been these whole three years?
putting the word in the plural, when it should be in the singular, you for
thou; and after the same manner he translates in several other places in the
same Book: so unfit to translate.

In the Book called Ianua Linguarum, The portall to the gate of Tongues. The
same irregular way is used, putting you for thou, and thee: as in examples, it
may be manifested, as in chap. 3. for, Scis numerare utique? it is Englished
thus: Know you how to number very well? Now it is scis, know thou, not scitis,
know you, in the plural. But this Non-sencical way is commonly used by all our
National Priests and Teachers; so also in the same Book, Si tibi placet; If it
has listed you: There also putting the word you for thee. So again, for, Si
rogas quid est erditum esse? it is Englished thus: If you demand what it is to
be a Scholar, etc. there also putting you for thou. So contrary to the Grammar
and Bible.

John Clarke, in his Book called, Phraseologia Fuerilis, page 340. for, Sed vis
tibi verum fatear? he Englishes, Shall I tell you truly, Here he puts you for
tibi, which is thee: and for Rem tenes, he puts, You hit the nail on the head:
putting you for thou. And for Quanam Iturus es, he translates, Which way walk
you. When Quanam Ituri estis is, Which way walk you, and Quanam iturus es, is,
Which way walk thou. So here he puts you for thou.

J. S. his Manuduction, or, A leading of children by the hand to the Latin
Tongue, by a short Vocabulary, and familiar form of speaking in English and
Latin.

In his first page he says, Licet tibi, You may, when he should say Thou
may, and thus he Teaches and English to us, though in his Grammar he says,
tibi is to thee, and vobis is to you; but here in his Manuduction he teaches
again, and says, tibi is to you; and he says, Aequum dicis, You say right,
which is, being truly Englished, Thou say right, for Aequum dicitis, is, You
say right, and in another place, for Fac quod te monebam, Do as I bid you: here
he puts you for te, again, when vos is you, and te is thee, and thus he Latins
and Englishes to us, and again, Ignoscas quaeso mihi, I beseech you pardon me,
here he puts, Ignoscas, for Ignoscatis; for Ignoscatis quaeso mihi, is, I pray
you pardon me, not Ignoscas: but if he Englished it right, it should be Thou
pardon, not You pardon; Boys do you not see him here how he Englishes to you,
who says you, when he should say thou, vos, when he should say tu, and vobis,
when he should say tibi? look all a long in his book, and you may see he
Englishes thus to you, and puts the plural you, for te, tu, and tibi; which in
English is thou, and thee; and would not I. S. have whipped you, if you should
have said so in his Grammar, tu, te, and tibi, for you? and does he not deserve
to be whipped, that puts tu, te, and tibi, for vobis and vos?

I. Webb, Doctor of Physic, in his English Translation of Cicero's Familiar
Epistles:

Book 10. Epistle 2. he says, I will request you: But Cicero to Plancus the
Emperor, says, not vos, but te; for the Latin from which I. W. has these
words, is, Peto a te, I will request of thee: and not Peto a vobis. And Boys,
Do you not see I. W. in his English, who says, Peto a te? who says you, when
he should say thou? And is not this to say a vobis, when he should say a te?

6. Book, 9. Epistle, You cannot do me a greater favor; when Ciceroes words
are, Hoc mihi gratius facere nihil potes. Here Boys, you may see again, that
he gives you for thou; for you know, in possum, potestis, ^, You can; and
Potes, is, Thou can: and thus he translates to us, and gives us you instead
of thou. And in the same Epistle thou says, Especially to you, when Ciceros
words are, Praesertim ad te. Here is not vos, but te; not you, but thee: and
thus he Englishes, and puts you instead of thee, like a madman.

And thou says, I expect with desire, your Letters, when Tully says, Literas
tuas vehementer expecto. Tuas literas, is, Thy letters; and Vestras litteras,
is, Your letters: Cicero to Decimus Brutus Imperator, Book II. Epistle 15.

C. S. Englishes a certain Book, written in Greek and Latin, for Children to
learn, by John Posselius.

In the beginning of this Book by Posselius, about the third page, he says,
Gratia mihi est precatio tua: and this he Englishes thus: Tua, Your; Precatio,
Prayer; (or wishing) Est, is; Grata, Acceptable; Mihi, To me. Here Boys, see
if this be right Englishing, to put your for tua: Is not vestra preeatio, your
Prayer; and tua precatio, thy prayer?

And he says, in his 47 page, of his Translation, Cupio Audire ex te, I desire
to hear of you. Is not this false Translating, and false Teaching; contrary to
the Accidence, Grammar, and Bible, to put you, for thee; and your, for thy: Is
not ex vobis, of you? and he says, ex te, which should be of thee, if right
Englished. And School-Boyes may look over the Book, and see how he puts you for
thou and thee, and your for thy, etc. all along, as if he were out of his
senses, and knew not a letter, which cannot find thou, and thee, for tu, and
te; and thy, for tuus, and tua, and tuum; but has put your, and you, for it.

T. W. his Certain Draught, taken out of Ciceroes Epistles, printed in the Year
1575. who throughout that Draught (as he calls it) which he says, is a very
necessary, and profitable entrance to the speaking, and writing of the Latin
Tongue: Or, as he calls it, A certain Draught taken out of Ciceroes Epistles,
for the Exercise of Children in the Latin Speech: Together, with an easy, and
Familiar Construction thereof into English. But all, who knows what the Latin
Speech is, may see, that his Constructon is neither easy, nor familiar, for
the exercise of Children, in that Speech, but rather to confound them, who puts
Plural to the Singular; you for tu, te, and tibi; and your for tuus, and tua,
and tuum: And this is his common practice throughout his Book; only a few
Examples I have drawn forth of his Book, that others may see his Confusion, and
avoid it.

In page 1. Tuam virtutem, etc. He Englisheth it to us thus* That your virtue,
in stead of thy virtue; for vestram virtutem is your virtue, and tuam virtutem
is thy virtue; and in the same page he says, Teque nec animi, nec corporis
laboribus, defatigari, and he Englishes and says, And that neither with travel
of mind or body ye are wearied; Here Mark, he puts ye which is plural for te,
which is thou or thee singular.

In page 3. Vt tu Scribis, as ye write; when ut vos scribitis is as ye write,
and ut tu Scribis is as thou writest. So this is not an easy nor a familiar
Construction, that makes no distinction betwixt singular and plural, that says
ye to one, and you to more than one, as you may see in the 8th page, where
Cicero writes to his Family and says, Et vos, and meipsum, that is, Both you,
and me, says T. W. and in the ninth page, Nihil ego te accusavi, I blamed ye
no whit: (Mark) and see what a Construction is here, if this be either easy or
familiar when he puts ye for te, which is thee, and you for vos; and so he goes
on in his Book, putting ye or you for tu, and te, and tibi, and ye or you for
vos and vobis, and so makes no distinction betwixt singular and plural; as when
he says in the same ninth page, speaking of more than one, Ye should be in
firm friendship, and the Latin is, Vos esse jam junctissimos. And again in
that page he says, Specially since there be so few of you, and the Latin is,
Praesertim cum [vos] sitis tam pauci: and then when one is spoken to, he says
you also; That I was certified from you, and the Latin is, Me a te certiorem
factum esse; and so here the Reader may see, this is not an easy nor a
familiar Construction, that makes no distinction betwixt the singular and
plural, but puts you or ye for vos and vobis, and you or ye for tu te and tibi,
and so his easy and familiar Construction is become confusion, and not
necessary nor profitable for childrens exercise, that is so filled with
nonsense.

H. F. in his Book called sylva synonymorum, he says in the 58 page of his
Book, Tuo s^asu, or tua persuasu; and he Englishes it and says, By your
Council, Advise or Persuasion: so here Boys you may see this is false, for
vestro suasu, or vestro persuasu, is your Council, Advise or Persuasion; and
tuo suasu, or tuo persuasu, is thy Counsel, Advise or Persuasion.

In page 131, Optamus tibi salutem and omnia prospera; he Englishes it and
says, God save you: here he puts you for the Latin word tibi, which is to
thee, and vobis is for you, as is aforementioned.

In 162 page, Nosce teipsum; he Englishes and says, Know your self, instead of
thy self: and this is false again.

In the 219 page, Ad te nihil, ad me valde pertinet; and he translates it and
says, It is not your part but, mine: and so here he puts your for te, which is
thee. Now would it not be nonsense for one to say, ad te pertinet, it belongs
to thee, or its thy part, to three or four persons, to put te, which is thee,
in the place of vos, which is you or ye; and in this manner of translating in
many more places of this Book does this H. F. proceed in, and so he may well
call his Book sylva, which is a Wood; for he is in a Wood himself, and would
bring all others that follows his Translation into a Wood with him that puts
plural for singular, you and your for thee and thy.

Ier. Wharton Master of Arts, his English Grammar which is Printed for
Scholars, which in it he teaches the word singular to one, and plural to many;
and when he has done, he writes an Epistle to John Co^lston Esquire, and says
you to him, and your, and so has confounded himself and all his teaching, who
teaches singular to one in his Book, and then speaks plural to one, and says
you and your to him; he writes his Book to a single person, and before he in
his Book teaches thee and thou to one, and you and your to many; so you may see
how he has confounded himself in his teaching, that does not practice himself
what he has taught in his Book; this manner of teaching Children and Boys is
enough to distract them, when they teach one thing and practice another.

He says in his Book ho Boy, you take no care, in page 89 of his English
Grammar: here he speaks you to one, who has taught contrary by his Directions,
and so confounds his own teaching; who teaches in his Grammar thou to singular,
and you to plural; and yet in his Epistle he speaks you to a singular, and so
he deserves the Rod for teachi^g another what he practices not himself.

A Catechism by Thomas Ingmethorpe, translated into H^brew, to be learned of
every Child; and his first question is, What is your name? And he Hebrews it
and says, (...) Ma Shemecha (which is) What thy name? For cha at the end of a
word is thy, and chem is your, as before mentio^ed in the Hebrew Battledoor;
and so this is an ill Translator, that cannot speak proper words, that puts
your for thy.

And the second Question he asks is, Who gave you this name? and he says in
the Hebrew, (...) Mi kara shem hazze la^h, (that is) who gave thou this name?
for lach is for thee, and lachem is for you, as in the Hebrew Battle-door; and
thus he translates and puts cha and lach for you and your, when they are for
thy and thee; and so this Catechism is not a fit Book for Children to read, who
puts the singular in Hebrew, cha and lach, thy and thee, to the English words
your and you, which are plural, though the English Catechism be false also set
out by the Bishop.

And he asks again and says, What did your Godfathers and Godmothers then for
you? (as if God had a father, and God had a mother) and he Hebrews it and
says, (...): Ma asu haorbim haele tachtecha baet hahi; Mark, its cha, thy, not
chem, your for cha, as before mentioned at the end of a word is thy singular,
and chem is your plural; and so this man translates like a man that is
distracted, or out of his senses, and shows himself to be ignorant of the
Hebrew Grammar, and Hebrew Bible, who puts the Hebrew singular cha and lach,
thy and thee to the English plural your and you; and thus he proceeds in some
other places of his Book; but such must be stopped from translating, that cannot
distinguish betwixt singular and plural, that would own such a Catechism of the
Bishops, who put you and your for thee and thy, for they in that Catechism
intends but one Child, when they say your and you, and so they are both judged,
he for putting cha and lach, thy and thee singular, to their words you and your
plural, though their intent was but to one Child, like the Professors and
Teachers in this age, who says you and your to one, and you and your to more
than one, and so have lost distinction, and must come to be taught the
Battle-door, both such Translators as this, and such as follow the steps of the
Bishops, who said your name, when they should have said thy name, etc.

THE Hebrew Tongue, the Jews calls the Holy Tongue; which is plural and
singular; atta, thou (man) attem, you or ye (men) at or atti, thou (woman)
atten is you or ye women.

The Caldee Tongue is plural and singular, ant or at, thou (man) or (woman)
attun or antun, you or ye men, and atten or anten, is you or ye women.

The Syrian Tongue which the learned ones says was Christ's natural speech, is
plural and singular, at, thou (man) atun, you or ye (men;) and at, thou (woman)
and aten, you or ye women.

And the Latin Tongue which the Christians calls the holy Tongue, is plural
and singular, tu and vos, thou and you.

The Italian Tongue is plural and singular, tu and voi, thou and you or ye;
Christ said you to the Pharisees, and he thee'd Peter, and the Apostles you would
the Saints, and thou would a single; Thou Agrippa, and thou Philemon.

Presbyter John's letters to the King of Portugal, and to the Pope was plural
and singular, as you may see in a small Book written in Latin of the Customs
of all Nations, by John Boem a German, his Letter to the King of Portugal, 1521.

In the 4th Book in the 19th page, its written, pax tibi, peace to thee, not
paxvobis, peace to you, but tibi, to thee; and in the same page he says, tua
Class, tuo exercitu, and tuis ducibus; by thy Fleet, by thy Army, and by thy
Captains; its not vestra Class, nor vestro exercitu, nor vestris ducibus, your
Fleet, your Army, your Captains, but thy Fleet, thy Army, thy Captains; so you
may see its tua, tuo and tuis, not vestra, vestro nor vestris, thy not your,
when one is written to, though a King.

And in the same Book you may see when he writes to the Pope, and makes a
Confession of his Faith by his Orator, there he keeps to plural and singular.

And Hellen Presbyter John's Grandmother, in her Letter to Emanuel King of
Portugal, 1509. in that same fourth Book says, Dominus Deus te been fortunet,
the Lord prosper thee, its not vos, you nor ye; and tibi victoriam de inimicis
tuis donet, and grant thee victory over thy enemies, not vobis nor vestris, you
nor your, but tibi and tuis, thee and thy.

And in the same Book you may see Damian of Goe's Esquire a Portugal, in his
Letter to Paul the third Pope of Rome, he says, Qu^mobrem tuum est officium,
wherefore it is thy duty; he says not vestrum officium, your duty; and ut
obediat tibi, to be obedient to thee, its not obediat vobis, obedient to you;
and studio tuo efficere, and to bring to pass by thy care: here its studio tuo,
thy care, not studio vestro, your care.

The man of AEthiopia, the Eunuch under Candace, the Queen of AEthiopia, his
language was plural and singular, he thee'd Philip, and spoke singular and
plural, Acts 8.

Scholars and Doctors have you forgot Erasmus his Epistles, and Tully his
Books of Orations, and his Epistles, did not they use the singular words to the
singular, tu, tibi, te; tuus, tua, tuum, etc? when they wrote or spoke to one
man or woman, though never so great, and vos, vestrum, vobis, when men or women
were written or spoken to; if you have forgot what they write, ask the boys
that learns in the Grammar Schools, and they can tell you that they kept to
plural and singular in their Epistles, and was not Erasmus angry in his time
with those that would not endure to be thou would? And what say you of Salust, have
you forgot that History, do you not remember the Oration of M. AEmilius
Lepidus, the Cons^l against Lu. Silla, where it is said in the first four lines
of that Oration, Clementia and probitas vestra Quirites, quibus per coeteras
gentes maximi and Clari estis; In English, Your clemency and integrity (O ye
Romans) by which you are most great and famous amongst other Nations: Mark,
here he speaks plural when he speaks to more than one to Romans, vestra and
estis, your and you are, not tua, and es, thy and thou, art, and so he proceeds
in that Oration in the plural language, being that he speaks to more than one,
in saying several times in that speech (O ye Romans) and other Orations there
are that follows this in that History of Salust, which keeps to the plural
language when more than one is written to, I shall not instance more examples
as to that, for any lad that reads that book can tell you that it is so; and
they can tell you, that when King Mithridate King of Pontus wrote to Arsaces
King of Parthia, that he did not you him nor ye him, but thou would, thee'd and
thy'd him several times in his Letter; and if you scorn to read your selves,
the Boys can tell you, that Salust thee'd and thou would C. Caesar the Emperor in
his Orations.

In Purchase his Pirgrims the third Part in folio 59. In a Letter from Cham the
Emperor of Tartaria, unto Bajothnoy one of his Captains, he writes unto him in
the singular number ( thou O Bajothnoy) and in Bajothnoys Letter unto the Pope
in the same Book, he writes unto him in the singular number ( thou Pope but in
both the said Letters when they mention many, they use the plural number you.

A Word to all such as teaches their Children to Learn other Tongues, as
Latin, or the like by Heathen Books.
THE Children of Israel were to teach the Law of God, and the Commands of God,
and the Statutes of the Lord; this was the Command of the Lord God to Moses the
chief Magistrate among them, and they were to destroy the Heathens inventions,
and they were not to teach their Children them, but to break that down which
they had invented, and to be taught the Law of God; so you do not read that
they were to be taught the Heathens Books, and the things that they had
invented, but the Law of God was to be kept, and to break down what the Heathen
had invented, and to be rooted out of their memories: And now you that are
called Christians, you must be fain to have Heathen Books to teach your
Children in your Schools, whereby the Children must learn the Heathens words;
what Christians, what Gospel Professors are not you, to teach your Children
the Gospel as the Jews were to teach their Children the Law, and train them up
in that, and break down all the Heathens Books: must the Heathen help you? must
you be borrowers of the Heathen? the Jews were not to be borrowers, and are you
borrowers of the Heathens Books? did not the Christians burn abundance of Books
when they came to be converted? and are you gathering up Heathens Books since
the days of the Apostles in the Apostasy, as Virgil and Ovid, and Horace and
Terrence, and Plantus, and Cicero, with others which you extol in your Schools?
and is not all the Children taught nonsense, that is taught to speak tu you,
when they should speak tu thou, and vos you, to speak nos when they should ego,
is not this thy practice, and is not this the Teachers fruits, Parents and
Masters, and Professors and all sorts of People their fruits; and therefore if
you will teach your Children in other Tongues, and have it translated into
English, for to teach and translate the things of God, the Scriptures for
Children to learn, and not to translate Heathens works to corrupt the earth
with them, but let all be burned and made an end of; therefore let all
translators that knows the Tongues (which is charged to you from the Lord God
to translate the Scriptures into other tongues to teach their children, and
make an end of all heathenish Books which corrupts the Earth, and so by that
means by translating the Scriptures into the heathenish Language which would
have your children to commerce with them, you may be serviceable to the
heathen, and be light to them, and for to learn your ways, and your words and
things of God the Scriptures, least you teach your children the way of the
heathen, and by teaching their Books, could not the Jews be taught the
Languages of other Nations but they might get their Books? but if any one have
learned the tongues; cannot he translate good things into that tongue that they
would learn, and not bring their old Books open among Christians, that the
Christians may see they have learned the way of the heathen, let them be raced
out? And is not Latin called the holy tongue by the Papists, and were not the
heathens (whose Language it was) natural, was there ever such a people upon the
earth to call the Latin tongue the holy tongue above other tongues? that which
was the heathens Language yo^ call holy.

IS the Bible translated true? were they Novices, Idiots, and fools that
translated it? Them that translated the Bible into English, Plural, and
singular, thou to one, and you to many? Thou to one, if he were a King, or a
Lord or a Judge, or a Father, or to God, or Christ, and you to many, and was
this Language of the Bible, translated into English, translated into Dutch,
translated into French, translated into Latin, and Hebrew? Now if you say they
were Idiots, and fools, and Novices that translated the Bible so, thou to one,
and you to many, and you are the wise men, and not fools and Idiots, and
Novices; ye Doctors, Teachers, Schoolmasters, and Magistrates, that rages when
thou is spoken to a particular, and not thou to you; and scorn, and deride. So
if ye be the wise men and not fools and Idiots, and the Bible was translated
wrong by fools, and Idiots. How is it then that you wise men have not altered
the translation, and put in the Bible, you Father, you God, you Christ, you
King, you Master, you Lady, etc? Now if ye say they were wise men that
translated the Bible, and not fools, and Idiots, and Novices, and that the
Bible is translated true, and that it is the words of God: then ye must
acknowledge your selves to be fools, and Idiots, and Novices, and through your
pride and ambition, have degenerated from your own Mother tongue English, and
cannot speak proper Language plural, and singular, thou to one, and you to
many, but you would have you to one. So England has degenerated from their
Mother tongue English, and speaks not proper English, if that be proper
English which be in the Bible; which is thou to one, and you to many. Then must
the Scholars, and Doctors, and the raging Professors acknowledge themselves to
be Novices, fools and Idiots which they put upon them that have spoken, and do
speak thou to one, and you to many, the Elect People of God, which ye in scorn
call Quakers. And so likewise, if thou, and you, which you to many, and thou to
one, be the true Dutch, both high and low, the Dutch, (then they were true men
that translated the Bible) but through their pride, and ambition, have
degenerated from their own Language, and so their own Bibles testify against
them, and degenerated from it, and the Latin, Greek, and Hebrew. And so
likewise, if the French Bible be translated true, if that be the true French,
which is thou to one, and you to many: They are degenerated from their own
Mother tongue, and Latin, Greek, and Hebrew, through their pride
high-mindedness, and ambition have degenerated, and so like the English, Dutch,
and others Nations, when they should speak singular, they speak Plural: and are
offended at such as will not speak plural to one, instead of singular: and grin
their teeth at them like Dogs, and say thou'st thou me; so ye may see how
England, and other Nations, in their own Bibles have degenerated from their
Mother tongue; and from the Latin, Greek and Hebrew, which is taught in their
Schools, which is plural, and singular; and now it is a great crime to speak
thou to a single man, and you to many, that they will persecute; So this is a
Battle-dore to the Nations, that they may learn the Languages, the pure
Language, singular that is,, thou to one man, King, or Lord, or Judge, or
Father or Mother. or servant, or God, or Christ: Plural, that is you to many
Not thou to many as the degenerates speaks, Scholars, Doctors and Lawyers,
and Teachers, and Schoolmasters which it is an offense to them, to say thou
and not you to give them the pure plain Language which is false English, which
is false Latin, false Greek, false Hebrew to say so; And the Schoolmasters
will whip their Lads, and say they speak nonsense, if they speak plural, when
they should speak singular. But if they practice it in their speech, they grin
at them like Dogs, and fret and rage like mad men, and say, What? thou's thou
me ill-bred clown? I will be you would, though it be contrary to what I have
taught, or what I have been taught at School; or though it be contrary to
Scripture Example, yet I will have it, because it is my will; I will follow the
Roman Empires Example, the Popes, who first brought it up, you to one; I will
not heed Scripture nor Grammar: rather than I will offend my own will, and my
own proud mind, and other men's pride, who cannot bear it, I will rather deny
Grammar and Scripture, and Sense and Reason: I will follow the customs of the
Nations, who says, you to one, and you to many; and so have lost distinction,
though it be otherwise in the Bible and Grammars, and though it have been
otherwise in former years before the Apostasy, yet let me join with the Pope,
and his power, that first brought it in.

How the word You to one came first from the Roman Empire.
Part of James Howells Epistle dedicated to the Nobilityand Gentry of Great
Britain, annexed to a French English Dictionary, compiled by Randle Cotgraue,
which was printed in the Year 1650.
FUrthermore, I find in the French language, that the same fate has attended
some words, as usually attend men, among whom we find some use to rise to
preferment, others to fall to decay, and an under-value. I will instance in a
few, this word Maistre, Master, was a word of high esteem in former times among
the French, and appliable to Noble men, and other in some high Office only,
but now it is fallen from the Baron to the Boor, from the Count to the Cobbler,
or any other mean Artisan, as Maistre Jean le sauuetier, Mr. John the Cobbler;
Maistre Jaques le Cabaretier, Mr. Iammy the Tap-house man; Sire was also
appropriate only to the King, but now adding a name after it is a title
applyable to any mean man upon the endorsement of a letter, or otherwise; but
this word Souuerain clean contrary has raised it self to that cumble of
greatness, that it is now applied only to the King, whereas in times past the
President of any petty Court, any Bailiff or Seneshall was called Souuerain;
Mareshal likewise at first was the name of a Smith, Farrier or one that dressed
horses, but it climbed by degrees, to that height that the Chiefest Commanders
of the Gendarmery of France, are com'd to be called Marshalls, which a bout a
hundred years since were but two in all, and now they are twelve. This Title
Majesty has no great Antiquity in France, for it began in Henry the Seconds
time. And indeed it was the Style of France at first, as well as any other
Countries Tutoyer to thou any person one spoke unto; But when the Commonwealth
of Rome turned to an Empire, and so much Power came unto one man's hand, then in
regard he was able to Conferr Honor and Offices, the Countries began to
magnify him, and to speak to him in the Plural Number by (...), and to deify
him with Transcending Titles, as we read in Symmachus his Epistles to the
Emperor Theodosius, and to Valentinian, wherein his Style unto them is vestra
aeternitas, vestrum numen, vestra perennitas, vestra Clementia, so that you in
the Plural Number, with other Titles and Complements, seems to have its first
rise with Monarchy, which descended afterward by degrees upon particular men.

HEre you may see in the Battle-doors aforesaid, which is the first entrance
into learning, which is to beat down all into it, that they may see the Pope
was the first that used the word you, or us, which is Plural to One, and so
from him, to the Kings, and Lords, and all their Officers, till it came to the
common people, whose Example the Protestants have followed, and are not yet
recovered, nor out of it Redeemed, but they are called Fools and Idiots,
Novices and Clowns; that do not follow that Popish way; nor the Pope their
Example or Teacher, but are come to the understanding of God, to destinguish
Plural from singular, to the word for the Singular, and for the Plural, that
does distinguish, and these are they that are hated of all people upon the
earth, both Protestants and Papists, that have lost their understanding that
God has given to them, and degenerated from the distinguishing words, to the
Plural, and to the Singular, and not only so, but are degenerated from their
own Teaching Books, Accidences and Grammars, which Teach Plural and Singular,
and not only so, but are degenerated from their own Translations of the Bible,
which is Plural and Singular, Thou, to One, and You, to Many, in their own
Mother Tongue, which through pride, ^^d ambition, they are degenerated from,
and call them Novices and Clowns, and Idiots, that practice it, as you may read
in the Bibles, which they have Translated into the English Tongue, and their
Grammars and Accidences: So that if men that are accounted wise in the earth,
be thus degenerated from their own mother Tongue, their own Teaching books,
Grammars and Accidences, and their own Language in the Bible, which they have
Translated (as in every Tongue that they have Translated in, they have
Translated Singular and Plural, from which they have erred) here if they have
degenerated from their own words, and doings as they have from their own
Tongues, from the Tongues which are natural, and so are gone and degenerated
from these things before mentioned, which be natural things, sure all cannot
but judge that they are far degenerated from the Divine things, and Spiritual
things, that thus be gone from their own Teaching Books, and their Tongues,
into which they have Translated the Bible, and the understanding or distinction
which God has given to them, to distinguish between Plural and Singular, and
the word to the Singular, and the word to the Plural: If men cannot endure to
here these things, they are not like to hear ^alke of Divine things and
Spiritual. But now their is a redemption from the Degeneration, from the
naturalls, and nature is come and coming into its right course again, and so
now Truth has to drive all this degeneration back again to the Pope from
whence it came, and to travel through the Protestants through all their
degenerations till it come to the head the Pope, the well which it sprung out
off, that all may come into the true understanding of God again, through which
we comprehend the Popes understanding, who was the first Author of it, who
through his Pride and Ambition, destroyed the Commonwealth of Rome, and there
is your example of all you proud ones, that cannot endure Thou, Singular to
One, but You the Plural, like the Pope your Example, the understanding of God
is arising beyond the Popes, and all his adherants, who have followed him, to
whom Plural has been spoken, when they should have spoken Singular; And so
Gods people are come to speak Singular and Plural, and the word to the
Singular, and the word to the Plural, which does offend none, but whom the
Pope, has been their Example, and Schoolmaster, and Teacher, and Pattern, but
now over all this is seen, with the pure of God, and comprehended by the
understanding of God.

George Fox,
THe Papists and the Protestants have their Colleges where they make their
Divines by their Tongues, and these are they that are called the Witty Men, and
Wise, and Divines, which the many Tongues which makes them Divines stops at
Babel, with all their wit, that Lads and Lasses may comprehend them, for all
the earth was of one Languags* Speech, and Tongue before Babel, and what a
great stur they make about their Tongues, and Languages, and Speeches, which
lies on this side Babel in Babylon, which Tongues I say Languages, and
Speeches, that ends at Babel, for who are come out of Babylon are redeemed out
of Tongues, and they must cease that are natural things, which makes not
Divines, nor Ministers of Christ, for Tongues is no more to learn then to do a
natural thing, and is attained and gotten in that knowledge and wisdom, that
must be confounded, but that which does make a Divine is that which was before
Babel was, at the beginning of which was many Languages, and stands when
Babylon is ended and confounded, and that is the Word of God, which lives, and
abides, and endures for ever, which was in the beginning, which was before
Babel the Tongues, and Babylon was and stands, and is Imortal, and that make^ a
Divine if he have not the Tongues.

This is that all may see how they are degenerated from their Tongues, which
came up to the Confounding of Babel, and has been set up for Original; since
the days of the Apostles, by the Apostate Christians in Babylon, on the top of
Christ the first and the last, which was before Tongues was, and stands when
they are ended, and he is the Light, Life, Power, Wisdom, and Teacher, and
Reigns over Babel, and Babylon.

And as for all their Terms of Art we are fain to use some, though I am quite
over them, but do let them see by them their weaknes^e, though they may judge.

George Fox,
Reader,
THrough the unusual difficulty that the Printers met with, about so many
particular things, and being not finished at one Pre^e, we could not with
convenience keep a con^ant order about the Number in the pages, and several
oversights there are committed besides, in Numbering the pages. Therefore here
are gathered some directions, by which thou may know by little searching how
the several languages are placed one after another, and with what Number every
one begins, and ends, and in what line to find the Singular word Thou, Plural
word you, or ye, and the Dual word in every language that speaks of Dual And in
what part of the Book, thou may find how Titles came first in, and the word you
to one came first by the Roman Empire, or Pope.

(1) The English Battle-door begins at Number 1. and ends at 14. And in the 2.
page of that discourse 2. line, Thou, is one, Singular You is many, or more
than one, Plural.

(2) The Latin Begins at 15 page. Ends at 20. And the Latin for thou is tu,
Singular, and You is Vos, Plural, as may be seen in the 2. page of the English
Battle-door, line 7.

(3) The Italian begins at 21. and ends at 28. Tu is Thou Singular Voi is You,
Plural p. 23. line 2. and 5.

(4) The Greek begins at number 29. and ends at 34. Su is Thou sing Sphoi, or
Spho is Ye or You two Dual, humeis is ye or you more than two Plural. Page. 31.
l. 14. 17. 20.

(5) The Hebrew Battle-door begins at 35, and ends at 50. Atta is Thou(man)
Attem is You (men) p. 36. l. 14. and at or Atti is Thou (woman) and Atten is
You, or Ye (women) p. 37. l. 5. and 7.

(6) The Caldee begins at 51. and ends at 60. Ant or At is Thou (man) Antu^ or
Atun, is You, or Ye,(men) p. 52. l. 9. and 11. 12. 14. Anti or Ant, or At, is
Thou (Female) Anten, or Anten, or Aten is You, or Ye,(Females) lines 26. 28.
30. 31. 33.

(7) The Syriack begins at 61 and ends at 76. At, is Thou,(man) Anthun, or
A^un, is You, or Ye,(men) p. 62. l. 13. 14. 16. Ati or At is Thou (woman) Aten,
is You, or Ye,(women) p* 63. l. 5. 7. 1.

(8) The Arabic begins at 77. and ends at 88. Angta is Thou (man) p. 80. l. 2.
Angtum is Ye (men) l. 10. Angti is Thou (woman) l. 3. Angtunna, is Ye, or You,
(women) l. 11. and Angtuna, is Ye, or You, two (men) or (women) l. 7.

(9) Persian begins at 89. and ends at 94. Tou is Thou, p. 92. l. 7. Shum^, is
Ye, or You, l* 11.

(10) The Ethiopian begins at 95. and ends at 98. Anta is, Thou, Antemu is
You, or Ye, p. 97. l. 7.

(11) The Samaritan begins with 99. and ends with 100. At or Ant or Attah is
Thou, Attun, or Attin, is You or Ye, p. 100. l. 5. 7. 9.

(12) The Egyptian language is placed ne^t after the Samaritan, and begins with
Number 1. and ends with Number 4. Idok, or Ithok is Thou (man,) Itho is Thou
(woman) p. 3. l. 9. 10. 11. Ithoden is Ye (men) or (women) l. 15.

(13) The Armenian follows next after the Egyptian, and begins with Number ber 5.
and ends with Number 8. Tuu is Thou, p. 8. l. 5. Tuuch, is Ye or You l. 8.

(14) The Saxon next after the Egyptian, begins with number 9 and ends (...)
number 10 Thu is thou Ge is ye p. 9. l. 4.

(15) The Cornish Examples about Thou and You, in the 10. p. and ends in the 11
being in the same sheet with the Saxon, in Cornis^ Chee deane is Thou (man) Why
Teesse is You (men) Chee Be^^en is Thou (woman) Why Benenas is You (women) p.
10. l. 9. 11. 12. 14.

(16) Mence only the two words about Singular and Plural put in the last end
of the Cornish Examples in the 11. p. which is Us, Thee, and Sys^, is You, or
Ye.

(17) Portugal Examples are placed in the 12. p. in the Saxon sheet, and Tu,
(...) Thou, and Vos, is Ye, or You, l. 10.

(18) The Welsh foll^es next after, and begins with Number (...) and ends with
8. T^ is Thou, Chwi is Ye, or You, p. 5. l. 30.

(19) The Spanish follows next after the Welsh, and begin, (...) p. and ends at
Number 12. Tu is Thou, and Vo^, or Vofoaros is Ye, or You p. 3. l. 16.

(20) The French is placed next after the Spanish, and begins with Number 1.
and ends in 19. Tu is Thou, and Vous is Ye, or You p. 2. l. 25.

(21) Next after the French in the 20. p. is a Narration how the Turks and
Persians use the words, Thee and Thou, in their Communications.

(22) The German follows the French, and begins with Number 1. and ends with
Number 6. Du is Thou, ^hr is Ye, or You, p. 2. l. 26.

(23) The Nether-Dutch next after the High Dutch, and begins with Number 7. and
ends in 11. Ghy is Thou, and Ghy-luy (or) Ghy-lieden is Ye or You, p. 8l. 4. 5.

(24) The Danish begins at Number 12 and ends at 14 Du is Thou, ^ is Ye, Dig is
Thee, Eder is You, l. 15. 16.

(25) The Slavonian begins at 15. and ends with the same Ty is Thou Wy is Ye,
or You, p. 15. l. 12.

(26) The Bohemian begins at 16. and ends in the same, Ty is Thou, Wy is You,
or Ye.

(27) The Polish begins at 17. and ends in the same page, Ty is Thou, Wy is
You. In the same sheet besides Polish are contained about the Singular and
Plural word Thou, and You,

(28) The Lithvanian Tujen is Thou, Jus is You, or Ye.

(29) The Sweedish, Tu is Thou, (...) is You.

(30) The Hungarian, Te is Thou, Iwe is You.

(31) The Moscovian, Tie is Thou, Wy is You.

(32) The Curlandian, Tu is Thou, ju jen is You*

(33) The Turkish, Sen is Thou, Si is You.

(34) The East-Indian, Puckanera is Thou, Seera deveck is You, or Ye.

(35) The Irish in the same sheet, Tu, (or) Tusa is Thou, Sib (or) Sibse is Ye,
or You.

NExt follows some things spoken to some School Books who have translated them,
and have put the Plural word You, for the Singular word Thou which Authors that
have thus translated, are from Scripture Examples in the Latin Bible
contradicted, and their folly made manifest for their mistranslations, and
contrary to the practice of several who in their writings have used the
Singular word to one, though to Emperors, or Pope, etc. And so continues upon
this matter and such like, from the 1. page next after the East-Indian, and
Irish Examples, unto the 13. page.

In the 13. page. A word to such as Teaches their Children to learn other
Tongues as Latin, or the like by Heathen Books.

In the 14. and 15* and 16. pages of this matter, there is something Queried of
the Doctors, Teachers, Schoolmasters, and Magi^^rates, whether the Bible be
truly translated, and whether they were Novices, Idiots, and Fools that
translated it, etc.

In the latter part of that 16. page and beginning of the 17. thou may see how
Titles ^ame first in, and the word You to one came from the Pope, of the Roman
Empire, and next follows a few words to the whole matter by G. F. who is before
confusion and many languages were.

Then Id^ly follows seven sheets of bad unsavory, un^^holesome, unchristian
words, and Phrases gathered by the Author out of some School-Books which are
taught Boys in England and some other Nations, that the Schoolmasters may
learn to avoid such corrupt Books and Words, which corrupts the goods mannars,
which seven sheet^ I have placed after this Table, and after the Erratas

More Errors espied since; which Correct as follows.

IN the Title page, for Ama'e^ites, read Elimelekites read the same word Eli
^elekites for Amalekites twice in the 9. page of the English Battle-door.

In the Introduction, page 2. line 41. read one way. In the Hebrew, p. 36. l,
25. r. (...)

In the Syriack, p. 71. 1. p^nult r. (...) for (...) Page 50. line 14. in the
Persian, r. this ^ upon these three letters (...) d, y, u, notes, that they are
not to be sounded no more than if they were not written, but upon any other
letter; it only notes, that that letter has no vowell, but is to be joined in
sound with the foregoing, as (...) Donisten, to know

In the Sax^n, p. 10. l. 5. for we teach, r. ye teach.

In the Welsh Battle-door, in the handle r. goleuni for goloni.

In the Portugal, p. 12. l. 1. r. homen and homems, for homen and homens.

Reader,
Notwithstanding the endeavors of the Corrector, there have many faults
escaped the Press, some of which have been mended with the Pen as thou may
perceive, and others left for thee to Correct at thy leisure: I have gathered
as many as I could conveniently and have set them down as follows.

IN the English p. 7. l. 4. r. Apharsathkites for Apharfathihites. l. 11. r.
India. Latin p. 10. l. 8. r. Singular, p. 18. l. 17. r. it is.

Hebrew p. 38. l. 20. r. (...) p. 39. l. 35. r. mimmennu. p. 41. l. 18. r.
(...) l. 20. r. (...) p. 42. l. 34, r. Judgments. p. 45. l. 27. r. (...) p. 46.
l. 13. r. (...) p. 47. l. 26. r. (...) l. 34. r. Thou (woman) shall send, and
You, or Ye women shall send, and in the last line of the page r. shall send, p.
48. l. 7. r. (...) and l. 14. for (...). r. (...) l. 16. r. (...), l, 29. r.
(...).

Caldee p. 52. l. 25. after anahhno, r. when you should say hu, hau, or jhu ant
or at, no or ano. p. 96. l. 37. r. jathturaijo, and l. 4. 3. r. (...). p. 59.
l. 25. r. (...) l. 34. r. veiyakom

Syriack p. 63. at the end of the 18. line marked with the pen with, etc. read
ati or at hi or hoi, hai or he.

Persian p. 50. l. 14. after these three letters (...) r. notes, that they are
not to be sounded no more than if they were not written, but upon any other
letter it only.

Welsh p. 1. l. 9. r. Dydi, the same line. r. In. p. 2. 33. r. bendithja^ p. 5.
l. 1. r ad for pen in the same line r. ddyweodd.

In that which is spoken to several Translators of School, Books, See the
Errata's

P. 4. l. 33. r. and (for) as. p. 6. l. 25. r. now it is scis. p. 7. l. 3. r.
eruditum. p. 10. l. 25. r. teaching p- 14. l. 2. r. your practice.

In the seven last sheets about their unsavory words.

p. 2. l. 27. r. paululum supra poplites, and. l. 31. r. justissimum, p. 7. vlt
l. r. vein, p. 12. l. 9. r. word, and l. 33. r. think, and l. 35. r. warming.
p. 18. l. 18. r. from, and l. 35. r. pauper p. 22. l. 5. r. give me a man etc.
l. 13. r. vos calletis with a full point. p. 23. l. 3. r. incedit p. 24. l. 38.
r. truth. p. ult. l. 15. gathered

In the Arabic, p. 85. l. 22. r. faajabto for sa ajabto. l. 28. r. InnaSirijo
for Inna Sirijo

In the French Battle-door, p. 6. l. 1. r. and thou have found grace in my
sight.

In the Greek, p. 32. l. 12. r. forth, for fourth.

FINIS.
ENGLAND, and other Nations in Christendom (so called) as they have degenerated
from the proper, plain and simple language, Singular and Plural (as already
mentioned in these former discourses, placed in each Battle-Door, to several
Languages;) so also England and some other Nations in Christendom, teach their
Children Heathenish Books in the Latin Tongue, and Greek, which is contrary to
the Practice of the Saints, and Jews of old, who was not to learn the manners
and fashions of the Heathen; but England, who is a part of Christendom, learns
their Children in Books which is not fit to be mentioned amongst Christians
indeed, but fitter to be burnt; as the true Christians of old burnt their
Books, which was at a great value: And now we will try what these Christians in
England and elsewhere will do with their Books, which they teach their Children
in their Schools, and have been taught in England for many years past; we have
drawn out some few Examples forth of some of the School-Books, to show to the
Reader what words they use in their Schools in their Books, and whether such
words, and such Books be fit to be used and taught, yea or nay? Or the words of
Scripture for them to be taught in Schools to Children? According to what
already in this forementioned Book is charged upon People from the Lord, not to
teach these Heathenish Books, but let them be burnt as useless; and if any will
learn other Languages to their Children, that they may learn them the
Scriptures of Truth, and other found and wholesome words, and savoury; and not
such unsavory words, as is and have been practiced in their Schools for many
years, let not the earth be stained and corrupted with such silthiness; For
evil words corrupts the good manners.

And first we have taken forth some few words out of that Book which is
commonly taught Children when they first enter into Latin, which is called,
Pueriles Confabulatiunculae, (that is) Childrens Talks.
IN the 9th page of that Book, Col. 3. Translated by Charles Hool Master of
Arts; Its said, Heus tu; Ho you Sirrah: So (Mark) if Heus, which he Translates
for Sirrah, be a fit word for Children to learn at their first entrance into
the Latin Tongue: And also mind his false Translating, which says, you
Sirrah, when he should say thou.

In the 10th page, Col. 4. ubi sedent canes, sedeto; Sit, where the dogs sit:
Vbi vero sedent canes? And where do the dogs sit? In Clunibus; Upon their
Buttocks.

In the 11th page, Salve pugil invicte; which Hool Translates and says, God
save you jolly pi^der: Iamdudum, pugnus in mala haereret; My fist should have
gone about your ears a good while ago: Evoco; I dare you forth.

In the 12th page, Col. 5. Ego illi etiam dentes istos omnes evella^; And I Will
knock out all those teeth of his.

In the 23th page, Col. 10. Dii perdant phrontisterium una cum Magistro; Hang
the School and the Master too.

In the 69th page, Col. 28. Dii perdant omnes cervisiarios! A pox take all the
Brewers!

In the 71th page, Col. 29. Bibite strenue; Drink lustily.

In the 89th page, Vbi pedunt Vulpes? Where do Foxes fart? A little above their
hams.

In the 90th page, Canis micturus, cur pedem levat alterum? Why does a dog
being to piss, hold up one leg? Ne permingat caligas; lest he should bepiss his
stockings.

Quod hominum genus est juststissimum; What sort of men is the justest?
Potatores; Good fellows says Hool; but its Drunkards rightly Translated.

In the 68 page, Col. 28. Etiam h^c stas, ganeo? What do you stand here still,
you Ruffian-Rogue? (Mark) here is Ruffian-Rogue, which is not fit for Children
to be bred up with such words, its no marvel why this word Rogue is so common
in peoples ^ouths, when Children are taught it in the Schools, at their first
entrance into the Latin Tongue. And again Charles Hool Translates falsely, for
saying, What do you stand herestil, etc? for stas is thou stand'st, and statis
is you or ye stand; and to say you Ru^sian-Rogue, What Charles Hool Master of
Arts? Have thou forgot the three Concords in the Accidence, is not you the
Plural, and is not Ru^^ian-Rogue the Singular? How now Charles Hool Master of
Arts? This is not Artificial, this is not true agreement, not right Concord, to
put the Plural word you, to the Singular word Ruffian-Rogue.

In the 69. page, Col. 28. Dii perdant omnes cervisiarios ^ A Pox take all the
Brewers: How now Charles, could thou not choose a fitter Book, to Translate for
Children, to learn them to discourse in good Latin amongst themselves, as thou
says in thy Title page, What man? Do thou not see that this dii perdant, is
a Heathenish phrase, which in plain English is as much as to say, God Confound;
And so thou might as well have said God Confound, or the Gods Confound the
Brewers, as Pox take all the Brewers; for dii is Plural, the Heathens had many
Gods: Friend, is this a ^it Book to be taught in Schools, and to be Translated
for the use of Children, that is stuffed up with such cursed and unsavory
speeches, is such a Book as this worthy the recommendation to Joseph and
Humphey primate Citizens of London? Friend, consider of this, and let thy Book
be burnt as fit for nothing but destruction, and that Spirit that invented it.

Now read some few Examples taken out of a Book commonly learned in Schools
among Children in England, Holland, France, and some other parts; which is
called Colloquia Scholastica; that is, School-Colloquies, or Talkings together:
and this Book is Englished by the said Charles Hool.
IN the 38th page, Col. 31. 1. Book, Quasi nulli sint fallaces ejusmodi; As
though there were no couzening knaves of that stamp.

In the 43. page, Col. 32. Re^ acu tetigisti; You have hit the nail on the
head; What false Translating again? you for thou.

In the 69. page, 1. Book, Col. 56. Ad ludem igitur nos attingamus; Let us
Buckle (or fall) to our sport then.

In page 72. Col. 61. Eho inepte; O thou noddy.

In page 98. Col. 5. the 2. Book, Long falleris; You are deceived your nose
breadth ( says Hool.)

In page 109. Eho inepte; Ho you coxcomb.

In page 128. Col. 26. Eamus igitur lusum pila palmaria, nameo lusu scio te
delectari; Let us go play at hand-Ball then, for I know you love that sport.

Delector sane, sed nunc pilam non habeo; I love it indeed, but now I have not
a Ball.

In page 210. Col. 71. the 2d. Book, Quid opus est inter nos honorem praefari?
Non enim verba faetent; What need we to make words of reverence amongst our
selves? For words do not stink: Ad tergendas nates in lairina To wipe one's
Breech in the House-of-office.

In page 217. Col. 2. the 3d. Book, Hem, verbero! Ho, you, Rogue.

And many other such like Sentences are in this Book, which are commonly taught
Children, and Translated by Charles Hool; which Book he commends much in his
Epistle Dedicatory, (faith he) I have been told in commendation of that, yet
famous Dr. Reynolds (once President of C. C. C. and then the Universities
Orator in Oxford) that when young Students came to him, and desired him to
inform them what Books they were best to peruse, for the speedier and surer
attainment of a clean Latin style of speech; he ever bad them get Corderius's
Colloquies, and be sure in reading them, to make those expressions their own,
both for writing and speaking, because in them they should find Terence and
Tullie's Elegancies, applied to their Common talk; th^s faith Hool in his
Epistle Dedicatory, in Commendation of this Book, out of which these few
Examples are gathered; And so here the Reader may see what kind of men Oxford
have bred, who this Charles Hool calls yet famous Dr. Reynolds, President of C.
C. C. and the Universities Orator in Oxford, who advices young Students to read
this Book, and to make those Expressions their own, both for writing and
speaking, because in them they should find Terence and Tullie's Elegancies,
applied to their common talk: Now what Terence's Elegancies are, I have taken
forth some of them, that the Reader may see the folly and madness of the yet
famous Doctor Reynolds Oxfords Orator, who Commended this Book so much called
Colloquia Scholastica, School-Conferences and advising young Students to make
those expressions their own; and what Expressions are contained in that Book, I
have given the Reader a hint of some few already, though many more might be
gathered, not sit to be mentioned amongst any that fears God; and a shame for a
Doctor Oxford Orator to Commend to young Students, to make such Expressions
their own, which already I have mentioned; and in these following Examples do
mention out of that Book Terence, which this Doctor Reynolds calls Elegancie.

Some Examples drawn out of that Book called Terence, a School-book which has
been much applauded in England and other parts for pure and elegant Latin, as
thou may perceive by Doctor Reynalds speech aforesaid, to the young Students;
as also what Rich. Bernard says of this Author Terence in his Epistle
Dedicatory, wherein says he, I offer you here, that which fortune has
vouchafed to favor me withal, a Latin Author to speak English, a Comical
Poet, pithie, pleasant and very profitable; as merry as Eutrapeles, as grave as
Cato, as ethical as Plato: he can play craftily the Couzener, and cunningly the
Clown: he will tell you the nature of the fraudulent flatterer, the grimme and
greedy old Sire, the roysling Ruffian, the minsing Mynion, and beastly Bawd,
etc. These words are placed in the Epistle Dedicatory, to the Worshipful (as he
says) young Gentleman, and of virtuous Education; Mr. Christopher Wray, Son
and Heir to the Right Worshipful Sir William Wray Knight, and to the rest of
the Toward young Gentlemen his Brethren, Nephews to the Virtuous and True
Religious Ladies, the Lady Bows, and the Lady Sainctpol, his very bountiful
Patronesses, etc. And these flattering Titles he gives them from Epworth in
Lincolnshire, the 30th. of May, as he calls it. And subscribes himself yours
in the Lord,

RICHARD BERNARD. I have set down these words, that sober People may see how
blind this Learned man is, to give such Titles to Men and Women as are
abovementioned, and yet can find no better subject to present to their View,
then this Play-Book; this shows plainly what spirit they are of, both he that
Translates it, and they unto whom its Dedicated; for if they were such as he
styles them, Worshipful, Gentle, Virtuous, Right, Toward, True, Religious, he
would not have presumed to have sent such a piece as Terence, a Maker of
Plays; I have gathered out some few Examples, that the sober Reader may see
how little cause Oxfords Orator had, to call them Terences and Tullies
Elegancies; and how Charles Hool might have been more Considerate in speaking
so much to the Commendation of that Book called Colloquia Scholastica; and
commending it the more, because it was Terence and Tullies Ellegancies; of
which Elegancies of Terence, see a few Examples as follows, Translated by the
said Richard Bernard, Cantabrigiae ex Officina Iohannis Legate, 1607.

And first in his Book of Andriae, Act. 1. Scen. page 14. Carnifex quae
loquitur? What prates this Hangman? Page 15. Astute; A subtle Fox I warrant
him. Meum gnatum rumor est amare; Sir, the report is that my son is in love;
this word Sir is often used in this Book.

In the same page 14. in the Latin, Its said, Sane quidem; Tes, a Gods Name,
16. page. And many such expressions are used in this Play-Book, which were long
to relate.

In page 17. Nos opinantes ducimur falso gaudio; He makes us believe the Moon
is made of a Green Cheese.

Quid malum hic vult? What a rope ailes he? What a Devil would he have?

Andriae, Act. 1. Scen. 4. page 21. Importunitatem spectate aviculae; See how
earnest the old Trot is to have her here.

Act. ij. Scen. I. Nae iste haud mecum sentit, page 29. Now in good faith he is
not of my mind, page 31. This word in good faith, is often used in this Book by
Bernard.

In the same 29th page, Quam vellem? Marry Sir would there had. 31.

Andriae, page 32. Abi hinc in malam crucem; Away with a vengeance, get thee
hence with a mischief, go hence with sorrow eenough.

Andriae, Act. 2. Scen. 2. Ridiculum caput, page 33. O wise Wood-cock. page 35.

Act. II. Scen. vi. Quidnam hic vult veterator sibi? What means this ungratious
Varlet, old crafty Fox, or subtle Knave? page 46.

Andriae, Act. iv. Scen. ij. page 73. Illic scelus est qui me perdit; That
miscievous Knave, that Varlet is he, who has undone me utterly; that is the
Villain and graceless Raskal that has undone me. Ei credit furcifer; The
Hangmanly Thief, or naughty Knave believes him.

In page 74. De te sumam supplicium; I will take my pennyworths of thee; I will
punish thee. Te ulcis^ar; I will be revenged on thee; I will fit on thy skirts;
I will be upon your Jack for it: thus Bernard Translates it.

Andriae, Act. iv. Scen. iij. Jusjurandum mihi ad Magistratum opus est; I must
needs swear to the Magistrate. Liquido passum jurare; I may take an Oath with a
safe Conscience, I may swear without impeachment, or crack of Conscience. But
you Schoolmasters and Scholars, will you call this a very profitable pithie
and pleasant Poet, that uses such words as these already mentioned? will you
suffer this Play-book to be taught in your Schools? Who do not only use these
corrupt words, contrary to the Doctrine of the Apostle, who says, Let no
corrupt Communication proceed out of your mouth: But also here is in these two
last Examples mention made, to swear before a Magistrate, and to swear with a
safe Conscience, etc. What does not Christ say, Swear not at all, Matthew. 5. and
will you teach such a Book as this in your Schools, who puts a necessity upon
swearing, who say^s, I must needs swear to the Magistrate, etc. Let this be
burnt, and all others that is contrary to the Doctrine of Christ, who says,
Swear not at all.

Andriae, Act. iv. Scen. ij. page 73. Per omnes tibi adjuro Deos; I swear to
thee by all the Gods.

Page 73. Age, si hic non insanit satis sua sponte inliiga; Go to, if he be not
mad enough of himself, do you prick him forward: Here is a Heathenish Sentence,
and false Translating both, Richard Bernard thou says, do you prick him
forward; which thou takes from infliga, infliga is the second person singular,
thou; and infligate is the second Plural, you; What Richard, cannot thou
distinguish betwixt ama, love thou; and amate, love ye or you.

Andriae, Act. iv. Scen. v. Dii te ^radicent, page 88. I pray God a very
vengeance light upon thee, page 81. And as he Translates it in page 83. God
send thee ill thriving; What curse, Richard?

Page 80, Ne me attingas sceloste; si pol Glycerio non omnia hec: Touch me not
thou Varlet; in faith if I tell not Glycerie of all this, never credit me, page
83. What swear man?

Per tempus advenis; You come in Pudding time. Here is a light frothy Sentence,
and false Translating both, you for thou; for advenis is thou come; and
advenitis is ye or you come.

In page 90. Tibi ergo; Yea, you Sirrah. Here is a bad word and false; tibi is
thee; and Richard Bernard says you. Eho, non tu dixti esse inter eos
inimicitias carnifex? Why thou Hangman thou, did thou not tell me that they are
fallen at debate? Ego te commotum reddam; I will anger ever vain in your heart.
What teach to provoke to anger, and Translate false too, is te, your?

Andriae, page 98. Ita me dii ament, credo; Yea, so God help me, do I believe
it. What it seems this taking the Name of God in vain, which is common amongst
the Christians in England, have been learned out of Terence, which Doctor
Reynalds Oxfords Orator calls Elegancy; for this Book is full of such like
matter as this, as Faith, and in good Faith, and Knave and Rogue, and which is
not fit for Christians to use, much less for their Children to learn, and more
less for the Students to make their own, as aforementioned.

Eunuchi, Act. ij. Scen. iij. page 129. Nescio hercle; In good Faith I cannot
tell thee, Page 133. What teach Children to say in good Faith? This Book is
full of such Sentences; surely, this Book should be burnt, or laid aside as
useless, and not to be called profitable, as Richard Bernard does.

Eunuchi, Act. ij. Scen. iij. page 129. Vt illum dii deaeque senium perdant,
qui me hodie remoratus est, meque adeo qui restiterim; tum autem qui illum non
flocci fecerim: I would the old Churles neck were broken, which has staid me
in my way to day, and a mischief the Gods bring upon my self also truly, that
was so mad as to stay still; and also for that I weighed not light of him. How
now Richard Bernard, is this a pity, pleasant and profitable Poet, who teaches
to say old Churl, and wish peoples necks to be broken, and to wish the Gods to
bring a mischief upon ones self; What says Oxfords Orator to this, is this
Elegancie? What says thou now Charles Hool? Could thou not choose a better Book
to Translate into English for Children to learn in than Colloquia Scholastica?
Which thou so much commends, and brings that yet famous (as thou calls him)
Doctor Reynolds to second thee toward the Commendation of it; for says thou,
he ever bad the young Students get Corderius's Colloquies, and be sure in
reading them, to make those Expressions their own, both for writing and
speaking, because in them they should find Terence and Tullie's Elegancies,
applied to their common talk; Is this a fit Orator, or famous? Who can say
Terence and Tullie's Elegancies, wherein are found nothing but the words of
Heathens, not fit to be mentioned amongst Christians; What thinks thou Charles
Hool, are these Expressions which I already have gathered out of Terence, are
they Elegant, is that man (though once Oxfords Orator) fit to be called famous,
that will call this Elegancy? If I should gather out all such words as were of
this nature in that Book of Terence, I might make a pretty large Volume; and if
there were no such words as these in it, yet it ought not to be taught in
Schools, what a Player, a maker of Comedies, let this not be mentioned amongst
Christians, much less to be commended, and called pithy, pleasant and
profitable, as beforementioned.

Ennuchi, Act. ij. Scen. iij. page 131. Garris; You prate like a Fool. What a
bad word is this, not fit to learn any Child, to call any Fool. And again Rich.
Bernard has mis-translated it, by saying you, which is Plural; for the word
garris is tho^. pratest, and garritis is you or ye prate.

Eunuchi, Act. iij. Scen. ij. Ita me Dii ament, honestus est, page 141. As God
love me a comely fellow, page 143.

In page 142. Tace tu, quem ego esse puto infra omnes infimos homines; Sirrah,
hold thou thy peace, whom I repute as the basest Raskal in the world, page 144.

Eunuchi, Act. iij. Scen. iij. Malam rom, abis hinc? Get thee hence in a
mischief. Non hercle veniam tertio, heus, heus; For in good Faith I will not
come the third time, ho, ho, page 146.

Act. iv. Scen. iij. Vt ego unguibus facile illi in oculos involem venefico,
page 155. Oh how I could fly on the Raskal with my nails, and scratch out the
eyes of the juggling Villain.

Page 163. Act. iv. Scen. vi. Oculi ilico effodientur; I will scratch out
incontinently his eyes, page 164.

Eunuchi, page 166. Qui (malum) alii? What other in a vengeance? Diminuam ego
caput tuum hodie nist abis; I will crack thy crown even now, except thou be
packing. Ain vero canis? siccine agis? Say thou so indeed? thou currish
Knave, thou dogged fellow. Quaere, qui respondeat; Go look, thou shall not be
told of me.

Eunuchi, Act. v. Scen. j. page 169. Quid ais venifica? What say thou
poysonful Queen? page 170. Quid ais sacrilega? What say thou cursed Queen?
page 171.

Act. v. Scen. ij. Eho paululum impudens, page 171. Ah shameless Knave, page
173.

Act. v. Scen. iv. page 177. Ego pol te, pro istis dictis and factis, scelus
ulciscar; I will be revenged on thee in Faith, for these thy sayings and deeds
villainous Raskal.

Act. v. Scen. v. page 178. Rogitas audacissime Do thou ask Cock-brain'd
Fool, page 179.

Act. v. Scen. v. Nunc minatur porro sese, id quod maechis solet; And now
besides all this, he threatens to do with him, as customably is done to
Whore-masters: that is, he will geld him, page 179.

Act. v. Scen. vij. Quid est inepta? What is the matter foolish gigglot? page
183.

Eunuchi, Act. v. Scen. vij. Hem quid dixti pessuma? an mentita es? etiam
ri^es? ^ itane lepidum tibi visum est scelus, not irridere? nimium, page 183.
What say thou stinking drab? did thou tell me a lie? yea, do thou laugh?
what think thou it to be so pretty a sport to deride us? the best sport in
the world, page 184.

Heavtontim, Act. ij. Scen. iij. page 210. Hujusmodi, obsecro; I marry for
Gods sake, page 214. This word Marry, as I have said, and in Faith, and in
good Faith, and Troth, is often used in this Book; And is such a spirit fit to
mention the Name of God? Who will say, I marry for Gods sake; away with such
Books, let them not be mentioned amongst you who profess Christianity.

Heavtontim, Act. iij. Scen. j. page 219. Menedeme salve; Neighbor Menedemus,
good morrow to you. Here the Reader may see where that customary word (good
morrow) in England and other Nations comes from; even from the Heatheni^h
writers, not from the Saints writings.

Act. iij. Scen. ij. page 225. Tanto her^le melior; Marry so much the better.

Act. iij. Scen. iij. Recte sane, page 227. Yes, marry that I will, page 229.

Heavtontim, Act. iiij. Scen. iij. Quid (malum) me tandem censes velle id
assimularier? page 237. What (a vengeance) think you, desire I to have that
dissembled long? page 238.

Adelphi, Quid (malum) bone vir mihi narras? Act. iiij. Scen. ij. page 302.
What (a vengence) tell you me of an hone^^ man? page 303.

Hecyra, Act. j. Scen. ij. page 337. At te Dii deaeque perdunt cum isto odio
Laches; I pray God confound thee Laches for this thy hatred, page 340. Dii
vortant been quod agas; God send you good luck whatsoever you go about. (Mark)
Reader thi^ Player (which Dr. Reynolds commends his Elegancies as
aforementioned) both curses and blesses in one Act; Can he that will say God
confound thee, be fit to desire blessings or good luck upon any?

Hecyra, Act. j. Scen. j. Ita me Dii ament, page 345. As God help me, page 346.

Hecyra, Act. iij. Scen. iij. Non novi hominis faciem, at faciam ut noveris?
magnus, rubicundus, crispus, crasus, caesius, cadaverosae facies, dii illum
perduint, page 357. But I never saw the man, I cannot tell what a man he is;
but I will teach thee how to know him, he is a big man, bottle-nosed, wrinkled,
fat, fleshy, and eyed lik a Cat. O carraine-like face, O cruel look, ill might
he thrive, page 358.

Hecyra, Act. iij. Scen. v. page 359. At istos invidos Dii perdant, qui haec
libenter nunciant; But a Break-neck light on those envious persons, who are
willing to tell these News, page 361. Bernard might as well have said, the Gods
confound or destroy these envious Persons; And so here let the sober Judge,
whether this be a fit Book to be taught in Christian Schools.

Phormio, Act. iiij. Scen. 4. page 430. Eho verbero, aliud mihi respondes, ac
Rogo? Thou Knave, do thou answer me another thing then I do ask? Quid Rogo
narras? What then do you ask? This is false Richard Bernard, narras is the
second person singular thou, and Narratis is the second person plural you. Quid
ego narrem, opera tua ad restim mihi quidem rediit planissime; What then should
I tell thee? by thy means I am come to this state, that I may go hang my self,
Vt te quidem omnes dii deaeque superi, inferi malis Exemplis perdant; And
verily, I pray and wish all the Gods, God desses above and below, that an evil
end may light upon thee for Examples to others.

Act. iiij. Scen. v. page 433. Quid tua malum id refert? What a vengeance, have
thou to do with it?

Phormio, Act. v. Scen. vj. page 442. Ad Lenonem hinc ire pergam; I go
presently to the Bawd-house, page 443.

In page 447, Malum, quod isti dii deaeque omnes duint; What a mischief has
God sent us here.

Page 448. Nist sequitur, pugnos in ventrem ingerere; Pinch him in the guts,
unless he will follow. Vel oculum exculpi: est, sic ubi vos ulciscar, locus.
Pull out mine eyes and you will, I Will find a place to be revenged of you.

Phormio, Act. v. Scen. ix. page 451. Scelus tibi narret? Thou filth should he
tell thee? p. 453. And abundance more of such like Expressions might be
gathered out of this Play-book, which is counted in the Schools a pure Latin
style, and by some times Oxfords Orator called Elegancies; and by Rich.
Bernard, pithy, pleasant and profitable; But the sober-minded, and who fears
God, have cause to avoid such words and such books both, and not to account
them Elegancies, nor to make such Expressions their own; but to Judge such, and
to esteem them unpleasant and unprofitable, not fit to be mentioned amongst
Christians.

A few Examples taken out of a Book Printed in the Year 1655, called a Treatise
of English Particles by W. W. Master of the Free Grammar School of King Edward
the sixth in Louth in Lincolnshire; which, as he says, his chief Design is to
prevent and cure gross ridiculous Barbarisms committed daily by young Learners;
we have spoken something of him already in the former Book, about the Singular
and Plural Language, his putting you, which is the Plural wordr in English to
tu, which is the Singular word in Latin: Now we have drawn out some of his
Phrases, which to the sober will appear rather to be Barbarismes, then
Elegancies.
IN page 13. Chap. 13. Absque juramento, tibi non credidissem; But for your
Oath I would not have believed you. (Mark) this Phrase shows forth a
tolleration of an Oath, which is Barbarous, and not a Saints practice, nor
Christ's Doctrine, which says, Swear not at all, Matthew. 5. And besides in this
Phrase is two lies, for here is your and you mentioned in the English Phrase,
and no such word in the Latin, for the Latin is tibi, which is thee, and not
vobis, which is you and your.

In page 36. Chap. 15. Stultus es, qui huic credas; Ton are a Fool for
believing him. What W. W. is this a fit Phrase to teach in a Christian School,
to say Fool, is not Boys too apt to use such words without teaching? And
besides thy false Translation ( you Fool) for the Latin which thou puts for
you are, is es, which is thou art, and estis is you or ye are; but such
Mistranslation is in a manner generally throughout thy Book, and this is a lie,
and Barbarismes, to put the Plural word you in English to the Singular tu and
tibi in Latin.

In page 55. Hercle, me hercle; In Faith [Troth.]

Page 72. Ne vivam, si scio; Would I might never live, if I know.

Page 74. Chap. 28. Ne sim salvus, si aliter scribo ac sentio; May I perish, if
I write not as [or otherwise than] I thing.

In page 106. Faciam te usque ferventem flagris; I will give your hide a
warning. A bad Phrase, and a Mis-translation, both your for thee or thy.

In page 154. Ego te -- si vivo; I Will be even with you. (Mark) a threatening
Phrase, and a lie both, to say you for thee; for te is thee, and not you.
Liquido jurare; To swear with a safe Conscience. Christ forbids it, its not
safe to break his Commands.

Page 155. Chap. 48. Sed Mehercle extra jocum homo Bellus es; But without
(jesting it should have been) thou art in Troth a pretty fellow. What, both
jeer and swear in one Phrase.

Page 188. Chap. 58. Non habet, quo restim emat ad su spendium; He has not
wherewithal to buy a Halter to Hang himself.

Page 201. Exi for as sceleste; Out you Villain.

In the 12th page of W. W. Praxis or Practice upon the foregoing Treatise of
English Particles, he says, Minime vero Nay marry. What W. W. will thou be as
bad as Terence a Stage Player? will thou teach Boys to say Minime vero Nay
Marry.

In the 6th Dialogue, page 15. Hercle; In Troth. What swear again, learned thou
this from Terence? whom Oxfords Orator so much commends his Elegancies.

In W. W. latter part of his Book which he calls Idiomatologiae An glo-Latinae
specimen; or, A Taste of an English-Latine Phraseologie.

Page 8. Imo vero pulchre discedo and probe Marry, I come fairly of.

page 9. Misce folia and rursum impertire, distribue; Shuffle the Cards, and
deal them again. What W. W. do thou speak of playing at Cards, is this thy
work (as thou say) new and useful, both for our own and other Countrymen,
to set down such Phrases as this to speak of Cards, etc?

Page 18. Diminuam ego caput tuum; I will break your head. In amore totus est;
Over head and ears in love.

Page 40. Est ubi vos ulciscar; I shall find a time to be revenged on you. So
these few Examples are gathered out of this Book, which Book, he says, is to
prevent Barbarismes; and if these and such like Expressions, besides his
Mis-translations, putting you for thou, be not more like Barbarismes than
Christianism, let the sober Reader Judge.

Some Examples taken out of a Book called Bibliotheca Scholastica
Instructissima; Or, A Treasury of Ancient Adagies, and sententious Proverbs,
selected out of the English, Greek, Latin, French, Italian and Spanish;
Published by Thomas Draxe, Batchelour in Divinity.
IN page 4. Been agit Deus, utcunque male agant instrumenta. Impii Divina
beneficia corrumpunt. Nullum bonum est, quo quis male non utatur. God asks
Corn, and the Devil marreth the Sack. God sends meat, and the Devil sends
Cooks. Audendum aliquid, si vis esse aliquid Faint heart never wan fair Lady.

Page 27. Vbi turpis est medicina, fateri pudet, Ovid. Quis furor est quae
nocte latent peccata fateri? Ovid. Confess, and be Hanged.

Page 32. Lingua quo vadis? Loquitur hyperbolice. His mouth runs over. Back
an ace quoth Bourne. Bate me an ace quoth Boulton.

Page 33. Omnia pretio metitur, etc. He would have the Devil and all.

Page 35. Male sibi metuit, men's est in tergoribus, Plaut, His Tail does make
Buttons.

Page 44. Quod fatis d^cretum est, nemini evitare licet, etc. He that is born
to be Hanged, shall never be Drowned.

Page 45. Qualis lupis sortito obtigit, discordia inter eos orta est Horat. Vbi
dissensio ibi non est chorus, etc. The Devil has cast a Bone betwixt them.

Page 73. Cretensis cretensem fallere conatur. Asintam vapido gestat sub
pectore vulpem, non est facile decipere vulpem, etc. He must have a long Spoon
that will eat with the Devil.

Page 78. Dives aut iniquus est, aut iniqui haeres, Plaut* Nunquam vir aequus,
dives evasit cito. Salvete equorum filiae, Arist. Happy are these Children,
whose Fathers go to the Devil.

P. 80. Semper saturitati juncta est lascivia. Saturatis contubernalis venus,
etc. Licorish mouthed, Licorish tailed.

P. 84. Qualis Dux, talis Comes, etc. No marvel it is if the Impes follow,
when the Devil goes before.

P. 118. Amor animae vacantis passio. In vacuo pectore regnat amor, Ovid.
Lovers live by Love as Larks by Leeks.

P. 134. Aures delinit Musica, etc. A man cannot hate Music except he be deaf.

P. 134. Arabicus Tibicen; Men. Caena optima est, in quam choraules non venit.
Non est ignotae gratia magna lyrae, Ovid. Music is a sweet folly. Musicians
are the Parrots of Paradise.

P. 159. Copiae cornu. Faelicitas a Deo, etc. Hom. God save plenty. God in the
Ambry, etc.

P. 155. Medicus sostrum requirit. Omnes Medici pecuniis placantur. Plurima
divitibus Medicus: sed scribit egeno. God have mercy, fills not the
Physicians Purse.

P. 166. Exordium est aegestatis nihil parcere, Rutil. Ruf. Vna cum Minerva est
admovenda manus. Magnis opibus exitiosa res luxus. Spend, and God will send.

P. 173. Quae rara, chara, etc. Far fet, and dear bought, are dainties for
Ladies.

P. 199. Est omnium long deterrimus. Novissimum malum intolerabile maxim.
Singulari nequitia. There cannot lightly come a worse, except the Devil come
himself.

P. 201. Fabula nullius veneris. Asinorum mortes narras. Suumnarrat somnium,
Cic. Nihil ad rem. A Tale of a Tub. A Tale of Robbin-Hood.

P. 207. Fas est mentiri pictoribus, atque Poetis. Peregrinantes difficile est
mendacii convincere. Poetae sunt liberi and pictores. Travelers may lie by
Authority, etc.

P. 211. Tyrannorum brevis est potestas, etc. God sends a cursed Cow short
Horns. Douis placare avarum. Offam cani objicere. Ei adulari licet, occidere
quem licet, Salust. To set a Candle before the Devil.

P. 215. Mala radices altius arbor agit. Mores mali quasi herba irrigua. A
groaning Wife, and a grunting Horse, never fails the Master.

P. 217. Dulce Bellum inexpertis. Onus nunquam solitus portare molestum, etc.
The black Ox never trod on his foot.

P. 218. Tranquillo quisque gubernator est. Nihil inexpertum affirms. De rebus
ignotis verba facit. Docet experientia cuncta, in alieno foro litigat,
Mart.(...). In alio mundo, Macrob. etc. Many speak of Robbin-Hood, who never
shot in his Bow.

P. 231. Nota mala res, optima. Nulla est tam bona uxor, in qua non invenias,
quod conqueraris. Mulier est malum necessarium. Ignis, mare, mulier, tria mala,
Eurip. (...), Menan. Mulieres raro culp^ vacant. Matrona frugi non est passim
obvia. A profitable shrew, He that will shrive, must ask leave of his Wife.

P. 238. Dux malorum faemina and scelerum artifex, Sen. Censen' to reperire
posse exortem culpae f^eminam, Ter. (...). i. e. Mulier est malum
efferatissimum. (...)

Oriunda e furiis. Qualis leaenae est, talis irae faeminae. Mala mulier cunctis
feris est ferocior. Artificiosa est nocere, mulier quum vult, Val. A fixen, a
limb of the Devil. She can do no more evil than a She-Ape. And many such like
frothy, light unfavoury expressions are in the said Authors Book, which writes
himself Batchelour of Divinity; but let the sober and honest Reader Judge,
whether such Expressions be Divine, the words of the Saints, wholesome words, or
the words of Heathens, from whom he has gathered most of them, as thou may
understand by the Authors names, set at the end of some of the Sentences: I
could gather many more out of that Book, which are not fit to be mentioned
among any that fears God, or knows what Divine is; for if the Author had been
Divine, he would not have sent a Book abroad into the world stuffed with profane
and old Wives Fables, which the man of God was to refuse, 1 Timothy 4.

Here follows some few words gathered out of a SchoolBook called P. Ovidii
Nasonis Sulmonensis de Art amandi, Liber 1. Of the Art of Love. And Ovid. in
that Book begins thus;
SI quis in hoc artem populo non novit amandi,
Me legate, and lecto carmine, doctus amet,
The same by one is Englished thus in Verse.
If there be any in this Multitude,
That in the Art of Love is dull and rude,
Me let him read, and these my lines rehearse,
He shall be made a Doctor by my Verse.
And so he goes on and says in page 397. Inque meo nullum carmine crimen erit.
And there shall be no fault in this my Verse, p. 2. in the English.

And now we will try whether he speaks true or not, when he says there shall
be no fault in his Verse.

In page 397. Principio, quod amare velis, reperire labora,
Qui nova nunc primum Miles ad Arma venis.
Proximus huic labor est, placidam exorare puellam
Tertius ut longo tempore duret amor.
First thou that art a fresh man and art bent,
To bear Loves Arms and follow Cupids Tent,
Find whom to Love, the next thing thou must do,
Learn how to speak her fair, to plead and woo,
Lest having won thy Mistress to thy lure,
I Will teach thee how to make that Love endure.
And so he goes on with a great deal of light and unclean Expressions, in that
397th page.

In page 398. Tu quoque materiam longo qui quaeris amori,
Ante frequens quo sit disce puella loco.
And thou that studiest to become a Lover,
Learn in what place most Virgins to discover, etc.
Tot tibi nanque dabit formos as Roma puellos:
Haec habet, ut dicas quicquid in orb fuit.
Behold the populous City in her pride,
Yields thee more choice than all the world beside.
Gargara quot segetes, quot habet Methymna racemos,
Aequore quot pisces fronde teguntur aves.
Quot coelum stellas, tot habet tua Roma puellas, etc.
More Ears of ripe Corn grows not in the Fields,
Nor half so many Boughs the Forest yields:
So many green Leaves grows not in the Woods,
Nor swim so many Fish in the salt Floods,
So many Stars in Heaven you cannot see,
As here be pretty Wenches, Rome, in thee.
(Mark) If these be not lies, and he tells us before,
Inque meo nullum carmine crimen erit. And there
shall be no fault in this my Verse.
And does he not speak here many lies, as already I have mentioned? For these
words stirs up lust beside the lies; and so not fit to be taught in Christian
Schools, but to be burnt.

In page 400. Si qua repugnabat nimium, comitemque negabat,
Sublatam Cupido vir tulit ipse sinu.
Atque ita, quid teneros lachrymis corrumpis ocellos,
Quod Matri Pater est, hoc tibi, dixit, ero.
If any strived against it, strait her man,
Would take her on his knee, whom fear made wan,
And say, Why weepest thou? Sweet, What ailest,
my dear?
Dry up those drops, these Clouds of sorrow clear.
I Will be to thee, if thou thy grief wilt smother,
Such as thy Father, was unto thy Mother. p. 6.
In p. 401. Poximus a Domina nullo prohibente sedeto,
Iunge tuum lateri, quam potes, usque latus, etc.
But where thy Mistress sits do thou abide,
Who shall forbid thee to attain her side, etc.
With such like lascivious Expressions he goes on in that page and says he in
the same page; Protinus officii precium, patiente puella,
Contingent oculis ^rura videnda tuis.


Happily thy dutious Guardian such may be,
That thou her foot or well-shap't leg may see, etc.
Here the Reader may see for what already has been taken out of this Book,
that such words are not fit to be mentioned in Christian Schools; But read on
and see what Council he gives men to increase lust, though he call it Love, as
to dissemble, to taste sweet viands, and to drink wine, etc.

In p. 404. Ille, vel ille duces, and erunt, quae nomina dicas:
Si poteris, vere, si minus, apta tamen.
Dant etiam positis aditum convivia mensi^,
Est aliquid praeter vina, quod inde pet as.
That man's a Conqueror, captives they that tremble,
Speak truly, if thou can, if not dissemble.
Thence if you go to Banquet and sit down,
To taste sweet viands, and to drink around,
There may thy thoughts unto my Art incline,
Observing Love, more than the Crimson Wine.
Vina parant animos, faciuntque caloribus aptos,
Cura fugit multo dilniturque mero.
Tunc veniunt risus, tum paupet cornua sumit,
Tunc dolor, and curae, rugaque frontis abit.
Tunc aperit mentes, aevo rarissima nostro,
Simplicitas, arts excutiente Deo.
Illic saepe animos juvenum rapuere puellae,
Et venus in vinis, ignis in igne fuit.
Wine does prepare the Spirits, heats the Brain hot,
Expels deep cares, makes sorrows quite forgot.
Love's mirth, breeds laughter, makes the poor man proud,
And not remembering need to laugh aloud,
Sets open the thoughts, does rudeness Banish,
Refineth Arts, and at Wines sight woes vanish.
In Wine has many a young Man's heart been took
And born away in a fair Wenches look,
In Wine is lust and rankness of desire,
Join Wine and Love, and you add fire to fire.
In p. 406. Vtque viro furtiva venus, sic grata puellae est:
Vir male dissimulat, tectius illa cupit.
Stolen pleasure, which to men is never hateful,
To women, is now and at all times ever grateful,
The difference is, a Maid her Love will cover,
Men are more impudent, and public Lovers.
In p. 408. Omnia faeminea sunt ista libidine mota,
A^rior est nostra, plusque furoris habet.
Ergo age ne dubita cunctas super are puellas,
Vix erit e multis quae neget una tibi.
Quae dant, quaeque negant, gaudet tamen esse rogatae
Vt jam fallaris, tuta repulsa tua est.
Sed cur fallaris, cum sit nova grata voluptas?
Et capiant animos plus aliena suis?
Fertilior seges est alienis semper in agris,
Vicinumque pecus grandius uber habet.
Sed prius ancillam captatae nosse puellae
Cura sit, accessus molliet ista tuos.
Proxima Consiliis dominae sit ut illa videto,
Neve parum tacitis conscia fida jocis.
Hanc tu pollicitis, hanc tu corrumpe rogando,
Quod petis, ex facili si volet illa, feres.
Illa leget tempus (Medici quoque tempora servant)
Quo facilis Dominae men's sit, and apta capi.
Men's erat apta capi tunc, cum laetissima rerum,
Vt seges in pingui luxuriabit bumo
Pectora dum gaudent, nec sunt astricta dolor,
Ipsa patent, blanda tum subit art venus.
Chief mischief all by Women's lust engender,
Some of their hearts be tough, though most be ten
der,
Women's desires are burning, some contagious,
Men's are more temperate far, and less outrageous*
Then in my heart proceed nor doubt to enjoy,
And win all Women be they nere so coy.
Use them by my directions, being learned by thee,
Not one amongst a thousand will deny thee.
Yet love they to be urged by some constraint,
As well in thine, which they deny as grant;
But take thou no repulse, is it not a Treasure,
To enjoy new delights, and taste fresh pleasure.
Variety of sweets are welcome still,
And acceptablest to a Woman's will:
They think that Corn best in another Field,
Their Neighbors Goat the sweetest Milk does
yield.
But first ere siege be to thy Mistress laid,
Practice to come acquainted with her Maid.
She can prepare the way, seek thy Redress,
And by her means thou may have sweet Access,
To her familiar ear your Counsels show,
And all your private pleasures let her know:
Bribe her with ^ifts, corrupt her with Reward,
With her that is easy, which to thee seems hard,
She can chose times, so times Physicians keep,
When in thy Mistress Arms thou safe may sleep,
And that must be when she is apt to yield,
What time the ripe Corn swells within the Field,
When Banished sorrows from her heart remove,
And gives mirth place, she lies broad wake to Love.
In p. 409. Sed propera, ne vela cadant iraeque residant:
Vt fragilis glacies, interit ira more.
Quaeris, an hanc ipsam prosit violare ministram?
Yet ere her furious anger has struck fail,
Rage in the Sea delay consumes and dies
Like Ice against the Sun; no grace despise
That from the Handmaid comes, with all thy power
Seek by convenient means her to deflower.
In p. 413. Forsitan and primo veniet tibi littera tristis,
Que roget, ne se sollicitare velis.
Quod rogat illa, timet: quod non rogat, optat ut instes,
Insequere, and voti postmodo compos eris.
Interea sive illa thoro resupina feratur,
Lecticam Domina dissimulanter adi.
At first perhaps her Letter will be sour,
And on thy hopes her Paper seems to lowr:
In which she will Conjure thee to be mute,
And charge thee to forbear thy hated suite,
Tush what she most forwarns she most desires,
In frosty Woods are the hottest fires.
Only pursue to reap what thou have sown,
A Million to a Mite she is thy own.
If thou by chance have found her in some place,
Down with her back, and upwards with her face.
Occasion smiles upon thee, thank thy fate,
Steal to her, besides with a Thievish gate.
If I should take out all these light, vain lascivious verses contained in this
Book, I might make my self and the Reader sick; and so I forbear to set down
any more Examples out of this filthy Book, which has been learned in the
English Schools for many years by past: So this that I have set down here; is
but a touch of what may be set down afterward, if this Christian Nation (so
called) do not burn all these Heathenish Books; if the Lord will (if I live)
they may hear more from me hereafter about this matter; but now I proceed to
enquire forth some Examples out of other Books, approved and commended by many
in England, but denied and judged by all who fears God in it. And so much at
this time about Ovid. De Art Amandi; Of the Art of Love.

Here are some words gathered out of a Book called Phraseologia Puerilis Anglo
Latina, in usum Tirocinii Scholastici: Or, Selected Latin and English Phrases,
wherein the Purity and Propriety of both Languages are Expressed; very useful
for young Latinists, to prevent Barbarisms, and Bald Latine-making, and to
initiate them in Speaking and Writing Elegantly in both Languages; Recognized
by W. Du-gard late Master of Merchant-Taylor School.
Reader, Mind that the Author of this Book is one John Clark Batchelour in
Divinity, sometimes Master of the Free School in Lincoln.

Says the Postscript; The whole Phraseologia is for the most part gathered
out of that Golden work of Erasmi Colloquia, worthy the often reading by all
Scolars.

IN page 6. Nihil nobis cum front Stoica. Valiant curae. Hang sorrow.
Veterator nequissimus. A notable Knave.

P. 7. Sapientior Diogine Aristippus. Give a man that will eat his meat. Ego
Sphingem praestiti, tu oedipus esto. Riddle me.

P. 8. Verecunde mentiri. To lie a little.

P. 9. Ministrarem illi Nymphae si proprius assiderem. I would serve that fair
Maid were I nearer. Tu calls quo gestu sit ministrandum istis veneribus. You
can fit the Tooth of such Ladies. (Mark) vain words, and false Translation you
can fit, etc. when its tu calls, not vos calletis vola furcifer; make haste,
Sirrah.

P. 10. Mentirie venifica. You lie you Queen. This is false Translation;
Mentimini is you lie, and Mentiris is thou lie. Abi in malum rem Ganeo. Walk
Knave, walk. Tuas minas flocci facio. Non te pili facio. A Fig for you. Bad
words and Mis-translation, you for thee, and thy, tuas and te, not vos nor
vestras, you nor your.

P. 11. Abstine sus, non tibi spirat. Hands off beast, it is not for you. What
you again, and an unsavory Phrase both, who that is worthy would read this
often but Judge it?

P. 14. Errones hoc and illuc circum^ursitanter? Vagabond Rogues.

P. 15. Si Calceum induisses, tum demum sentires qua part urgerer. Every man
can rule a shrew but he that has her*

P. 17. Velis nolis. In spite of your teeth. A froward (...) and false
Translation, its not velitis nor nolitis, your, (...) word; and a Child that
reads his Accidence, can tell (...) that velis and nolis are Singular words.

P. 20. Citius miscerem illis toxicum. I will see them hanged first.
Sesqui-Haereticus. An arrant Heretic. Galatea, Euterpe, Calliope, Callirrhoe,
Melissa, Venus, Minerva. Sweetheart, Honey, Duck. Tisiphone, Megaera, Alecto,
Medusa, Baucis. Dirty Slut, Drab.

P. 22. Extime lineus, intime laneu^. A very Hypocrite, a white Devil.

P. 24. Dignus qui non simplici suspendio pereat tantus artifex. He is worthy
to be hanged a thousand times. Belli homunculi. Boon Companions. Ad Calendas
Graecas. At later Lammas.

P. 29. Honos sit auribus. Sir Reverence. Minimum ab fuit quin risu
dissiluerim. I was almost burst with laughing.

P. 30. Bachus in exuvio Leonis. Polyphe^us ^umo Codice. A Cow with a Cart
Saddle. Totam faciem ruber raddidi. I pummelled him soundly. Non Chius sed
Cous. A lucky cast. Convolvere talos and Mittere. To cast the Dice.

P. 31. Quota venus finiet ludum? how many Fises shall we make up?

P. 40. Lude ingenue, lude legitime. Play fair. Noster hic ludus est. The Game
is ours. Adsit fortuna, been vertat. God send us good luck. Sceleratus ille
laterculus obstitit. That scurvy rub hindered. Ingens jactus. A brave cast.
Saltus Ranarum. Leap-Frog. And such like Expressions are in this Book, which
all that fears God, and are taught of him, will not mention but Judge; and that
spirit in John Clark Batchelour in Divinity both, who publishes such words to
be taught in Schools to prevent Barbarismes, and bald Latin making; but such
Expressions as these leads into Barbarismes, and do not prevent them; but read
on, you shall hear more of John Charles phrases in another Book, but a little
more of this.

P. 42. Relicto faetore ad quem Collatum oletum videri possit Sampsuchinum aut
foliatum. Stink like a Polecat.

P. 43. Simiam verius diceres quam homine^. A very Jackanapes. Venture
prominulus. A Swag-belly. Suaviter invite. Be merry Sirs. Totus echinus asper.
Not to be handled with a pair of Tongues.

P. 45. Tibi dico male, non vale. A shame on you. Tou for thee again, beside
the unchristian Expression. Timidi nunquam statuere tropaeum. Faint heart never
won fair Lady.

P. 47. Mentiris splendide. You lie with a latchet. Here is you again for thou,
as I said before montimini is you lie, ^^d mentiris is thou lie. Malis agi
furiis. The Devil is in them. Vt incredit testudo! How like a Snail he goe's^
Vt responsat nebulo? How you talk Sirrah?

P. 48. Vapulabis largiter. I will Cudgel your Coat. Your for thou. Heus
furcifer. You Sirrah! So hoe!

P. 49. Quis Deus aut quis ventus te illu^ ^degit? What wind brought you
hither. You again for te, and a light unsavory Expression, an old Wives Fable,
to be shunned of all who are Divine.

P. 50. I^gens obambulat patera. The Cup walke's round.

P. 55. Spes sua decollat. Hope hang's him.

P. 56. Laeta satis principia -- sed quid longa dies? It is honey Moon yet.

P. 58. per rimulas lupum video. Peep; I see, or I smell a Knave.

P. 61. Abi hinc in malam crucem. Get thee hence with a mischief.

P. 64. Latest anguis in herba. The still sow eat's up all the draff.

P. 68. Excutiam tibi dentes. I Will dash out thy teeth. Terrae filius. A base
fellow.

P. 69. Ovem in front, lupum in cord gerit. He looke's like a Saint, but is a
Devil. John Clark, are not they so, who call themselves Divine, and yet set
forth and allow words, Books and writings that are profane?

P. 78. Mari aquam addere. To greas a fat Sow in the Tail.

P. 79. Triticum advexi and hordeum vendo. I have brought my Hogs to a fair
Market.

P. 80. Vt argivum Clypeum abstulerat ita gloriatur. He brag's as if he had
harrowed Hell. In pistrinum te dedam. I Will send you to Bridewell. (you again
for te.) Diis inferis devotus. Cursed to Hell. Tuam non moror morositatem. A
fart for your anger. How now John Clark, is this spoken like a Divine, does
such an Expression as this become a Divine, besides thy bad Translation, to put
your for thy? But this is thy common road throughout thy Translations.

P. 81. Ego faciam ingratiis tibi. I Will do it in spite of you. False again.

P. 82. Ego te commotum reddam. I will vex every vein in your heart. What your
again for thee?

P. 83. Sane quidem. Yea marry. What swear John Clark? So I end this
Phrase-Book, and proceeds to thy other, for if I should set down all these
unsavory, unwholesome, unchristian, undivine Expressions, contained in this
thy Phrase-Book, I might have taken it all; for the words in it are light, vain
and frothy, not becoming a Divine; and not worth Recognizing by W. Dugard, late
Master of Merchant-Taylors School, nor not fit to be taught in Christian
Schools, though they be gathered out of that golden work of Erasmi Colloquia,
worthy the often reading (as the Postscript mentions) by all Scholars; but
all who are taught by God and his Scholars, will avoid such Books, and Judge
them and the Author too, though he be called a Divine; and though they be
taken out of that Golden Work of Erasmus's Colloquies, and be Recognized by W.
Du-gard; yet they who are taught of God sees such Books and Phrases both, to be
out of the Tr^th, and far from pure language, which its said in the Title Page
already mentioned, that the purity and propriety of both the Languages are
Expressed; this is not so, for in a manner throughout thy Book thou puts the
Plural for the Singular; and this is neither proper nor pure, but bald and
Barbarous both, which thou says is to prevent it; but any who reads these bad
words and Phrases, may soon see that such vain and profane Expressions and old
Wives Fables (which the man of God was to shune) will rather increase
Barbarisms than prevent them.

Now I come to gather out some bad undivine, unchristian Expressions, out of a
Book of the said John Clark, who writes himself Batchelour in Divinity,
sometimes Master of the Free School in Lincoln: But first I set down the Title
of his Book, which he calls Phraseologia Puerilis, five Elegantiae Sermonis,
Latini pariter atque Anglicani, capitatim concinnatae, atque in Methodum
Alphabetariam distributae, in usum Scholastici Tyrocinii:

Polit^^ utpote puerilem, ad utriusque Linguae politiem, in peculiari suo
vicissatim idiomate, dirigentes. Or, Selected Latin and English Phrases, very
useful for young Latinists, to prevent Barbarismes and bad Latin making, and
to initiate them in speaking, and writing elegantly in both Language, etc.
Printed at London in the year 1655.

This John Clark says in his Preface Directory, I may say hereof (says he) as
Erasmus of himself of his Colloquia Familiaria, in his Epistle to young
Frobenius, vicit libellus tibi dicatus Expectationem nostram; ille, sic
adamatur, sic rapitur, sic teritur manibus studiosae juventutis, ut and patri
tuo fuerit subinde Typis excudendus, and mihi novis accessionibus identidem
locupletandus. -- I could never have dreamt (says he) that so poor a piece as
this of mine is, could have found so good acceptance of Scholars, or such
entertainment in the world, who has despised the day of small things. There is
hope (says he) Learning will not quite go down yet, though some call it, the
Language of the Beast. Scientia non habet inimicum nisi Ignorantem --
Instrumentum est ad omnem vitam literatura. Quomodo repudiamus secularia
studia, fine quibus divina esse non possunt? Tert.

Reader, In this Book are contained most of the unsavory Expressions, which I
have already mentioned; and therefore I forbear so much as I can to rehearse
the same Phrases over again; for if I should mention them, and all other
Expressions contained in this Book, that are not worth the reading, but to be
Judged, I might leave out little; and so I give a touch of some
unchristian-like Phrases taken out of the same Book.

PAge 1. Porcis, aut bubus Cypriis projiciendum, A Sir-reverence for Swine to
muzzle in.

P. 2. Mitto ructus alliatos, ventris statum, and habitus putres. I Will not say
what belching, fizling and filthy smells there were.

P. 5. Nonne vides camelum saltantem? See my Dog dance a Jig.

P. 7. Quid, malum I hic vult sibi? What a Rope means the man?

P. 9. Prorsus examinatus extitit. His Breech made Buttons.

P. 13. Eadem opera adducite huc mendicos omnes, e pontibus, ac triviis. Tag,
Rag and long Tail.

P. 18. Substruxissem illi fasciculum urticarum. I Would have netled him to some
purpose. Perfunderem illum lotio. I Would pour a Piss-pot on's Head.

P. 19. Effunde in urticetum. Nettle him soundly.

P. 29. Eorum ego vitam mortemque juxta aestimo. Neither good to Hang, nor Hold.

P. 30. Is pugnos sentiet meos. He shall feel my fists. Laevam injeci capillis,
dextra pugilem egi. I caught him by the Hair and cufft him, while I could
stand. Sugillavi eum Magnifice, totamque faciem tuber reddidi. I Lugg'd him
lustily, I Pummel'd him soundly, I Boxt him to some purpose. And several such
like Phrases in that page to this purpose; whereby it appears that this Divine
John Clark tollerates such things in Children, that speaks so much of it.

P. 37. Corvino admodum Color. As black as the Devil, God bless us.

P. 74. Tibi quidem faenum esse oportuit, si pabulum daretur te dignum. Hay and
a Halter is fitter for you. A bad Phrase and false Translating, you for thee.

P. 80. Quidam amosus, pannosus, pediculosus est, luridus, ex succus, facie
cadaverosa, cranium habebat vix tres pilos, quoties loquebatur claudebat oculos.

P. 151. Cur non emisti restim suspendio? Why do not you not buy an Halter and
Hang your self? Crucem meruisti. You deserve Hanging. Bad words and false
Translation, you for thou, it is not emistis nor meruistis, you have bought nor
you have deserved, but emisti and meruisti, thou have bought and thou have
deserved.

P. 218. Agamus festum diem. Let Us frolic it now. Genialitur coenabimus. We Will
fare like Emherors, be as merry as Cup and Can.

P. 219. Amaranthaeis redimite tempora sertis sollicitate chelyn. And many such
like Expressions which were long to rehearse.

P. 236. Me (...). accipe. I am wholly yours. Adomnia tua imperata paratus. At
your service, Sir; ready at your Beck. Observantissimus, and studiosissimus
vestri. Your observant servant. Are not these foolish Complements, and
Mistranslations both? For tua is thy, and not your; here this Divine encourages
Children to give flattering Titles unto men, which the Children of God cannot
do, least their Maker cut them away.

P. 41. Ipsa invidia spectante ac ringente frustra. In spite of the Devil.

P. 245. Opus Apelle Dignum. A curious Picture indeed. Pictura non invenusta. A
very gallant draught. En graphice effigiatam, and ad vivum depictum imaginem!
See what a gallant Picture it is. Depictum est ad Nativam effigiem. Limn'd to
the life. Friend is this Divine-like, to commend Pictures? Is not this Popery.

P. 264. Cani das paleas, asino ossa. You give a shoulder of Mutton to a sick
Horse. This is a bad Phrase, and a Mistranslation both, das is thou give, and
datis is you give.

P. 266. Numen testor sanctissimum. I take God of Heaven to Witness. Is it fit
to teach Boys to make protestations, and to take the Name of the pure God in
vain? Christ says, Swear not at all: And so this Book is not fit to go abroad
in Schools amongst Children, that is so filled with unsavory, unwholsom,
unchristian, undivine Expressions; I have given but a touch of some few of
those many bad unwholesome Expressions, which are contained in several
Schoolbooks taught Children in England; but all who make Conscience of speaking
evil words, which corrupt the good manners, will avoid such words and Books
both: Surely, John Clark Batchelour in Divinity, Charles Hool Master of Arts,
William Walker, Richard Bernard and others, who have Translated such Books, and
have so much commended them to the world, will cease to proceed any further in
such a work as this, which corrupts the earth with noysomness; but if they will
Translate, and set forth Grammars in any Language for any Children to Learn,
let them give Scripture Examples forth of the Bible, in any Language they
profess to Teach, whether Latin or Greek, or others, and not borrow from the
Heathens to Learn Languages; this is but a little of what I could say in this
matter, or may say hereafter, if the Lord will. Your books may get
entertainment in the world, which lies in wickedness, for the world loves its
own; but they who are Redeemed and Redeeming out of the world, and its words
and manners and customs, cannot but testify against such books that they be
evil: and woe worth that day, that ever I spent so many years, as I have done in
reading these and such like books, for the end of such things is sorrow and
vain; and he who gathers out these unwholesome words already mentioned, intends
never to read them again hereafter, unless it be to witness against publishers
and promoters thereof, and that spirit for ever.

JOHN STUBS.
The Pope set up you to one in his pride, and it is the pride which cannot bear
thou and thee to one but must have, and would have you from the Author their
Father in their pride, which must not but have the word thou, which was before
their Father the Pope was, which was Gods language, and will stand when the
Pope is ended.

G. F.

FINIS.

