A COLLECTION OF Many Select and Christian EPISTLES, Letters and Testimonies.

Written on sundry Occasions, by that Ancient, Eminent, Faithful Friend and
Minister OF CHRIST JESUS, George Fox.

The Second Volume.

What thou see, write in a Book, and send it unto the Seven Churches,

Rev. 1.11. For we write none other things unto you, than what you have read
and acknowledged, and I trust you shall acknowledge even unto the End,

2 Cor. 1.11. LONDON, Printed and Sold by T. Soul, in White-Hart-Court in
Gracious-street, and at the Bible in Leaden-Hall-street, School.

AN EPISTLE By way of PREFACE,
To all Truth's Friends and Friendly Readers, Greeting: In the dear and tender
Love of my Heavenly Father, which by his dear Son and blessed Spirit, he has
plentifully shed abroad in many Hearts in this glorious Gospel-Day; Glory to
his worthy Name and excellent Power for ever.
Dear Friends,
I Am concerned to recommend the serious reading and perusal of the ensuing
Collection, unto all who sincerely desire the Promotion of Christ's Kingdom,
and Prosperity of his Church and Sion, in true Love, Union and Order, in and by
Christ Jesus himself, the Head and Foundation thereof.

And that none of you would think the perusal of these Epistles wearisom or
tedious, because the same Words and Things in many of them may seem frequently
repeated, there being numerous Evangelical Truths, and variety of good and
wholesome Matter, as well as diversities of Episties, containing much Christian
Counsel to many various States and Conditions of enlightened and enlivened Souls
traveling and breathing to God; so that the frequent intermixed Repetitions of
the same necessary Truths may be the better allowed and born with in the
Reading. However, the moderate and ingenious Reader will not be offended
thereat: It being a thing frequent in the Holy Scriptures, to have the same
Gospel Truths often repeated, which many dull and forgetful Persons have need
to be often told of such Matters, of so great Importance. The Author's Epistles
and Matters of most general Concern are here collected, to avoid Prolixity and
unnecessary Repetitions, as much as could be.

The Simplicity and Plainness of the Author's Style is not to be despised, he
being more in Life and Substance than in the Wisdom of Words, or Eloquence of
Speech. And the Lord being pleased in his Day to make great Use of him, and to
do great Things by him, for his Name and Seed's sake; of which there yet
remains Clouds of Witnesses, even to that Divine Power and hidden Wisdom of God
(in the Mystery of Christ) which was with him, and supported him, and lifted up
his Head through many great Fights, of Afflictions and Trials.

I confess, I have not read or heard all the Epistles in the ensuing
Collection; but many of them, which I know to be very seasonable, weighty and
necessary; and therefore have cause to believe so of the rest, which I have not
read. But, by our long and frequent Conversation, Knowledge and Intimacy
(together with his living and revived Testimonies, his godly Care and Zeal for
Truth's Honor and Prosperity) I have deeply read, and known the Author, his
unfeigned Love, Innocence and Integrity, in the blessed Living Truth, whose
Christian Care (among many other things relating to the Churches of Christ, the
Union, Good Order and Discipline thereof greatly was, That no Offense in any
thing might be given; that the Ministry might not be blamed; well-knowing what
Trials and Proofs attended Christ's Ministers and Ministry in these latter Days
(in some degree) as in the Primitive Christians Times; namely, that he (with
many others in his Day) approved himself, and themselves, as the Ministers of
Christ, in much Patience, in deep Afflictions, in Necessities, in Distresses
(and some in Stripes and cruel Beatings) in Prisons, in Tumults, in Labors by
Watchings, and by Fastings, by Purity, by Knowledge, by Long-suffering, by
Kindness, by the Holy Ghost, by Love unfeigned, by the Word of Truth, by the
Power of God, by the Armor of Righteousness, on the Right Hand, and on the
Left, by Honor and Dishonor, by evil Report and good Report; as deceivers,
and yet true, etc. 2 Cor. 6. In which Proofs of God's Ministers, this his
Ancient Servant had a deep share, and the true Root of the Matter was in him,
far beyond his Expressions.

And though many false Predictions, Prophesies, and cruel Threats were early
breathed out by Persecators and envious Spirits against Him, and Us his Friends
and Brethren (whom he unfeignedly loved) and against His and Our Holy
Profession, Way and Testimony, as if in a very short time all would come to
naught, and be laid waste; yet they have all been disappointed, and proved
false, and his Christian Living Testimony and Work further manifest to be of
God, and not of Men, nor of the Will of Man: For Truth, that is strongest of
all, has still prevailed, and must prevail. And though the Memory of this our
deceased Brother and faithful Servant of Jesus Christ, be still greatly Envied,
and be most grossly Defamed, by some implacable Adversaries, and hardened
Apostates, who could not obtain their evil Ends, and destractive Designs,
against him in his Lifetime; yet his Memory is truly Precious to many
Thousands, who truly Fear God and Love his Truth, who have a true Inward Sense,
That such a Divine Power and Providence attended him in his Innocent Christian
Testimony, Ministry, Labors, and Sufferings, that the Devil and all
persecuting Agents, could never stop nor frustrate his Testimony or Service, in
turning many to Righteousness, even from Darkness unto Light, and from the
Power of Satan unto God,

In many of the ensuing Epistles, he often mentions the Seed, the Life, the
Power of God, and the like; whereby he intends no other than what the Holy
Scriptures testify of Christ; which, we know, he truly loved and esteemed, and
was often conversant in reading of them, and had an excellent Memory and
spiritual Sense thereof given him of the Lord. By the pure holy Seed, he meant
and declared Christ, the promised Seed; wherein all the Promises of God are Yea
and Amen. And as Christ is the Word of God, the Word of Life, the Word of
Faith, he is that immortal and incorruptible Seed, of which all true and
spiritual Believers and Children of the Light are begotten to God, and born
again; and which Seed, or Word of Eternal Life abides in him that is born of
God, and sins not because thereof, 1 John 3. And as the Generation of God,
and Children of his Kingdom, and of the Promise, are called the good Seed, and
counted for the Seed, being born of that Incorruptible Seed, or Word of Life,
which endures for ever, 1 Peter 1.23, 15. And being that blessed Seed and Holy
Generation, which was foretold Christ should see, and for which the travel of
his Soul was, Isa. 53.

This our deceased Friend and Servant of Jesus Christ truly testified of him in
all Respects, both as come in the Flesh and in the Spirit, both as Christ was
and is our only Mediator and Advocate, and as he was and is God over all,
blessed for ever; whom he so dearly loved and honored, that he often offered
up his Life, and deeply suffered for him; and that in dear and constant Love to
his Seed, that a holy Generation might be raised, strengthened, and increased in
the Earth among the Children of Men. And his knowledge and Ministry of our Lord
Jesus Christ, being after the Spirit in Life and Power, did no ways imply, any
lessening of the Dignity or Glory of Christ, nor any defect of Faith or Love to
Christ, as he came and suffered in the Flesh for Mankind, as some Adversaries
have injuriously misrepresented and aspersed him; for he highly esteemed
Christ's Sufferings, Death, Resurrection, and Glory; and powerfully testified
of the Virtue, Power, blessed and spirtual Design, Fruit and Effects thereof,
as revealed and witnessed by his Holy Spirit. And as we have no cause to
question, but as with this innocent and good Man, to live was Christ; so, to
die was Gain; in both which he glorified God.

Christ Jesus being our Spiritual Rock, Foundation and Head, he is truly
precious to us and all true Believers, in all States and Conditions, both of
his Humiliation, Glory and Dominion; his great Grace and Goodness appearing in
those precious Ministerial Gifts given by him (when he ascended up on high) for
his Ministry and Church.

And it is very observable, that though to express Christ's Lowly Condition and
Appearance in the World, He is sometimes in Holy Scripture termed the Seed; His
Name is also called Wonderful Counselor, the Mighty God, the Everlasting
Father, the Prince of Peace: Upon whose Shoulders the Government is laid: And
of the increase of his Government and Peace there shall be no end, Isaiah 9.
And it is most suitable to Christ's low, humble and suffering Condition, to make
use of such Instruments as are most like himself in Humility and Lowliness of
Mind; although they be but low and mean in the World's Eye and Esteem: God is
pleased to make choice of low, mean and weak things (and of Instruments
contemptible in the Eyes of the high and lofty ones of this World) to confound
the Wisdom of the World, according to 1 Cor 1. He chose poor Shepherds to
divulge that great Evangelical Truth of Christ's Birth; and certain Women to
preach that Gospel Truth of his Resurrection, Luke 2. and 24. And both from
Angelical Testimony, as well as from their sight of Christ himself: Truth must
not be rejected because of such Instruments which God in his Wisdom is pleased
to employ in his Work; nor the Day of small things despised: From small
Beginnings of good Matters, great Things, glorious Seize and Perfections
do spring. Glory, Honor and Dominion, to our most Gracious God, and to the
Lamb on his Throne, for ever and ever.

Now, dear and well-beloved Friends, all live in Love and Peace, following the
true Faith, peaceable and good Example of the Faithful in Christ, and the God
of Love and Peace will be with you.

Your true Friend and Brother, In CHRIST JESUS, George Whitehead.
London, School.
A COLLECTION Of many Select Epistles to Friends, OF THAT Ancient, Eminent and
Faithful Minister of Jesus Christ GEORGE FOX.
A Testimony, how the Lord sent G.F. forth at first, in the Year 1643.
WHEN the Lord first sent me forth in the Year 1643. The Year when the Lord
first sent G.F. forth to declare his Truth.
I was sent as an Innocent Lamb (and Young in Years) amongst (Men in the Nature
of) Wolves, Dogs, Bears, Lions and Tigres into the World, which the Devil had
made like a Wilderness, no right Way then found out of it. And I was sent To
Turn People from Darkness to the Light, which Christ, the Second Adam, did
Enlighten them withal; that so they might see Christ, their Way to God, with
the Spirit of God, which he does pour upon all Flesh, that with it they might
have an Understanding to know the Things of God, and to know him, and his Son
Jesus Christ, which is Eternal Life; and so might worship and serve the Living
God, their Maker and Creator, who takes Care for all, who is Lord of all; and
with the Light and Spirit of God they might know the Scriptures, which were
given forth from the Spirit of God in the Saints, and Holy Men and Women of God.

And when many began to be turned to the Light (which is the Life in Christ)
and the Spirit of God, which gave them an Understanding, and had found the Path
of the Just, the Shining Light, then did the Wolves, Dogs, Dragons, Bears,
Lions, Tigres, Wild Beasts and Birds of Prey make a Roaring and a Screeching
Noise against the Lambs, Sheep, Doves and Children of Christ, and were ready to
devour them and me, Dungeons and Prisons, and haled before Magistrates. But all
things did work together for good: And the more I was cast into outward
Prisons, the more People came out of their Spiritual and Inward Prison (through
the Preaching of the Gospel) But the Priests and Professors were in such a
great Rage, and made the Rude and Profane People in such a Fury, that I could
hardly walk in the Streets, or go in the Highways, but they were ready
oft-times to do me a Mischief. But Christ, who has all Power in Heaven and in
the Earth, did so restrain and limit them with his Power, that my Life was
preserved; though many times I was near killed.

Oh! the Burdens and Travels, that I went under! Often my Life pressed down under
the Spirits of Professors and Teachers without Life, and the Profane! And
besides, the Troubles afterward with Backsliders, Apostates and false
Brethren, which were like so many Judas's in betraying the Truth, and God's
Faithful and Chosen Seed, and causing the Way of Truth to be evil spoken of!
But the Lord blasted, wasted and confounded them, so that none did stand long;
for the Lord did either destroy them, or bring them to naught, and his Truth
did flourish, and his People in it, to the Praise of God, who is the Revenger
of his Chosen.

G. F.

Concerning the first Spreading of the Truth, and how that many were
Imprisoned, etc.
AND the Truth sprang up first ( to us, as to be a People to the Lord) in
Leicestershire in 1644. and in Warwickshire in 1645. and in Nottinghamshire in
1646. and in Darbyshire in 1647. and in the adjacent Countries in 1648. 1649.
and 1650. and in Yorkshire in 1651. and in Lancashire and Westmorland in 1652.
and in Cumberland, and Bishopric, and Northumberland in 1653. and in London,
and most parts of the Nation of England, and Scotland and Ireland in 1654. etc.

And in 1655. many went beyond Seas, where Truth also sprang up.

And in 1656. Truth brake forth in America, and many other places.

And the Truth stood all the Cruelties and Sufferings, that were Inflicted upon
Friends by the Long-Parliament (to the Spoiling of Goods, Imprisonment and
Death, and over all the Reproaches, Lies and Slanders) and then by O. Protector,
O. C. etc.
and all the Acts that O. Protector made and his Parliaments, and his Son
Richard after him; and the Committee of Safety. And after, it withstood and
lasted out all the Acts and Proclamations since 1660. that the King came in.
And still the Lord's Truth is over all, and his Seed reigns, and his Truth
exceedingly spreads unto this Year, 1676.

And Friends never feared their Acts, nor Prisons, nor Goals, nor Houses of
Correction, nor Banishments, nor Spoilings of Goods; nay, nor Life it self. And
there was never any Persecution, that came, but we saw, it was for Good; and we
looked upon it to be Good, as from God: And there was never any Prisons, that I
was in, or Sufferings, but still it was for the bringing Multitudes more out of
Prison: For they that Imprisoned the Truth, and Quenched the Spirit in
themselves, would prison it, and quench it without them. So that there was a
Time, when there were so many in Prison, that it became as a Byword, Truth was
scarcely any where to be found, but in Goals.

And after that the King came in, diverse Friends suffered much, because they
would not Drink the King's Health, and say, Sufferings for not Drinking the
King's Health.
God bless the King; so that many times Friends were in Danger of their Lives
by rude Persons, who were ready to run them through with their Swords for
refusing it; until the King gave forth a Proclamation against Drinking Healths.
For we were and are against all Drinking Healths and Excess, both before his
Coming in, and after; and we desire the King's good, and that the Blessings of
God might come upon him, and all his Subjects, and all People upon the Face of
the Earth. And we did desire People not to Drink the King's Health, but let him
have his Health, and all People else; and so to Drink for their own Health and
Necessity only: For that way of Drinking Healths, and to Excess, was not for
the King's Health, nor their own, nor any others. Which Excess often brought
forth Quarrelling and Destroying one another; for they destroyed the Creation,
and one another: And this was not for the King's Wealth, nor Health nor Honor;
but might grieve him to have the Creatures destroyed, and his Subjects. And so,
the Lord's Power gave us Dominion over that also, and all our other Sufferings.

But Oh! the Number of Sufferers in the Common Wealth's days, and in O.
Protector's days, and since! But especially they, that were haled before their
Courts, for not paying Tithes, Sufferings for Tithes, etc. in O. C's days, etc.
and not Swearing in their Juries, and for not putting off their Hats, and for
going to Meetings on the First-Days (under pretense of breaking the Sabbath)
and other Meetings in the Weekdays; who were abused both in the Meetings, and
on the Highways! Oh, Sufferings for Meetings.
how great were the Sufferings we then sustained upon these Accounts! For
sometimes they would drive Friends by Droves into the Prison-houses (like
Penfolds) and there keep them on the First-Days; and then take their Horses
from them, and keep them for pretended Breach of their Sabbath: Though they
would Ride in their Coaches, and upon their Fat Horses to the Steeple Houses
themselves, and yet punish others. And many Friends were turned out of their
Copyholds and Customary Tenements, because they could not Swear; And as they
went to Meetings, they have been Stoned through the Streets, and cruelly abused
otherwise. Sufferings for the Hat.
And many were Fined with great Fines, and lay long in Prison for not putting
off their Hats; but Friends could never pay them, though they kept them in
Prison, till they had satisfied their own Wills upon them; and at last turned
them out, after they had kept them a Year, or more, in Prisons.

And many Friends were exceedingly spoiled in their Estates and Goods in the
petty-Courts for Tithes, till we got a Prohibition and Demur out of the
King's Bench, that then threw the Trial of such things out of their
petty-Courts, that they might sue for them in the Courts at London: And my
Desire is, that the Lord may open their Understandings also (if it be his Will)
to throw them out of those Courts also.

And many Books I gave forth against Tithes, and how the Priesthood was
changed, that took them: And that Christ sent forth his 12 (and after, 70)
Disciples, and said unto them; Freely they had received, and freely they were
to give. And so all that are Transgressors, and do not obey the Doctrine and
Command of Christ therein, we cannot receive them.

And many suffered for not Swearing, Concerning not Swearing.
both before and since the King came in; because they could not Swear in
Obedience to the Command of Christ and the Apostle's, who forbad all Swearing.
And Tenths were offered up in the time of the Law; but all must be offered up
in the time of the Gospel for Christ's sake. For there were no Tithes nor
Swearing before the Fall; and so there are none again to be in the Restoration
by Christ. And though Swearing was in the time of the Law; yet our Yea is to be
Yea, and our Nay to be Nay in the time of the Gospel.

And several Books I was moved to give forth against Swearing, and that our Yea
and Nay might be taken instead of an Oath; and if we broke that, let us suffer
the same Punishment, that they did, that broke their Oaths. And in Jamaica the
Governor granted the thing, and the Assembly; Friends Sufferings about
Swearing, and something opened by G. F. concerning Oaths.
and it is also granted in some other Places: And several of the Parliament Men
in England have acknowledged the Reasonableness of the thing. For the true Oath
of God was but to tie People to swear by the Lord, and to say, and to do Truth,
since Man and Woman fell, in the time of the Law, and not before the Fall: And
this was the Oath, that Christ came to fulfill and end; and he says, Swear not
at all. And I say, Christ fulfils and ends this Oath, which Men were to perform
to the Lord, who performs God's Oath, which he swear by himself, and fulfils
that; and he sets up Yea, Yea, and Nay, Nay instead thereof: Concerning which I
and my Friends have written at large in our Books touching this Subject. And
the Magistrates, after some time, when they saw our Faithfulness in Yea and
Nay, they that were Moderate (both before and since the King came in) would put
Friends into Offices without an Oath: But they that were Cruel and Envious,
would fine Friends to get Money of them; though Friends could not pay them any.

And thus the Lord's Power has carried us through all, and over all, to his
Everlasting Glory and Praise! For God's Power, which was before the Devil's
was, has been our Hedge, our Wall, and our Keeper, and the Preserver of his
Plants and Vineyard, who have not had the Magistrates Sword and Staff to help
them, nor never trusted in the Arm of Flesh: And have gone without Judas his
Bag, or the Magistrates Sword and Staff to preach the Word of Life, which was
in the Beginning, before they were; which Word reconciles to God. And Thousands
have received the Word of Reconciliation, and are born again of the Immortal
Seed by the Word of God, and are feeding upon the Milk of the Word, which
lives, and abides, and endures for ever. And many have suffered to Death for
their Testimony, both in England and beyond the Seas, both before and since the
King came in; which ye may see, as follows:

This was given to the King and both Houses of Parliament, being A brief, and
plain, and true Relation of the late and sad Sufferings of the People of God in
scorn called Quakers, for worshipping and exercising a good Conscience toward
God and Man.

By reason whereof Eighty nine have suffered till Death ( Thirty two of which
died before the King came into England, and Fifty seven since, by hard
Imprisonment and cruel Usage) Forty three have died in the City of London and
Southwark, since the Act was made against Meetings, etc. (about 1661.) They
have thus suffered; of which a more particular Account was given (with their
Names, that did suffer) to the King and Parliament (about 1663.)

And though diverse Laws were designed against us, How Friends suffered, and of
their Faithfulness; and concerning the Acts, that have been made, since the
King came in.
yet never could any of them justly touch us, neither did they truly concern
us, though they did execute them unjustly upon us; and they knew, we were not the
People justly chargeable; and some have been made to confess it. And all those
Laws, that were already made, and the Oath, which they imprisoned us for
(because we could not Swear at all, in Obedience to the Command of Christ
Jesus) were never originally intended against us. And yet we suffered by the
several Powers and their Laws (though they did not concern us) both spoiling of
Goods and Imprisonments, even to Death it self. And the Governor of Dover
Castle, when the King asked him, If he had dispersed all the Sectaries
Meetings? He said, That he had; but the Quakers, the Devil himself could not:
For if that he did Imprison them, and break them up, they would Meet again; and
if he should beat them, and knock them down, or kill some of them, all was one;
they would meet, and not resist again. -- And thus the Lord's Power did support
them, and keep them over their Persecutors; and made them to Justify our
Patience and Lamb-like Nature. This was about 1671.

And since the King came in, Three Acts have been made against us by the King
and Parliament, (besides the Proclamations) by which many have suffered
Imprisonment, and Banishment, and many to Death. And yet for all these Acts and
Proclamations, and Banishment, and Persecutions, and Sufferings, Faithful
Friends are as fresh as ever, in the Lord's Power, and Valiant for his Name and
Truth. And some Weak Ones there were, when the King came in, that did Swear,
and take the Oaths; but after, when they had so done, they were sore troubled
for disobeying the Command of Christ, and the Apostle, that they went to the
Magistrates, and condemned themselves, and offered themselves to go to Prison.
And thus the Lord, in his Everlasting Power, has been the Support and Stay of
his People.

And when the Glorious Gospel and Truth was spread over the Nation, and they
had received the Word of Life, Quarterly and Monthly Meetings set up.
then first the Quarterly, and some Monthly Meetings, were settled throughout
the Nation; and then after, as Truth more and more spread, the Monthly
Mens-Meetings, in 1667 and 1668.

And then also some Womens-Meetings were set up; and after the Womens-Meetings
throughout the Nation, and other Nations were exhorted unto, and set up and
established throughout the Nations. For I was sent for to many sick People:
Women's Meetings set up, and the occasion of it.
And at one time I was sent for to White-Chappel, about the third Hour in the
Morning, to a Woman, that was dying, and her Child; and the People was weeping
about her. And after a while I was moved (in the Name and Power of Christ
Jesus) to speak to the Woman; and she and her Child was raised up: And she got
up, to the Astonishment of the People, when they came in, in the Morning; and
her Child also was healed. And when I came to G. Roberts's House, about Eight
in the Morning, there came in Sarah Blackberry to complain to me of the Poor,
and how many poor Friends were in Want; and the Lord had showed me, what I
should do, in his Eternal Power and Wisdom. How G.F. ordered Friends to Visit
the Sick, etc.
So, I spoke to her, to bid about Sixty Women to meet me about the first Hour
in the Afternoon, at the Sign of the Helmet, at a Friends House: And they did
so accordingly, such as were sensible Women of the Lord's Truth, and fearing
God. And what the Lord had opened unto me, I declared unto them, concerning
their having a Meeting once a Week, every Second Day, that they might see and
inquire into the Necessity of all poor Friends, The Service of Womens-Meetings.
who were Sick and Weak, and were in Wants, or Widows and Fatherless in the
City and Suburbs.) And so, they blessed the Lord for the Wisdom of God, that had
settled such a Meeting in his Power amongst them: For they saw, that all that
were Heirs of the Power of God, were to take their possession of the Power of
God, the Gospel and its Order, which was, before the Devil was. And this
brought them into the Practice of the pure Religion, and to Visit the Sick, and
for the Relief of the Fatherless and the Widow, and to see, that nothing was
lacking amongst them; and that they, in visiting the Sick in the Lord's Power
and Word, through it they would have the Wisdom of the Lord, and of his
Creation, and how to administer his Creatures, and by the same Power to heal
and strengthen with the outward things, and without them. Which they have felt
prosperous to this day; and great things have been done in their Meetings by
the Lord's Power, and very honorable it has been in the Eyes of all the
Faithful, yea, and commendable in the World also.

And afterward the same Womens-Meetings were settled up and down the Nation,
and beyond the Seas in the Power of the Lord, which was, before the Devil was;
into which Power of the Lord no Sect nor Apostasy can come, but Peace and
Unity. And the Power of the Lord, the Gospel, is the Authority of all the Men's
and Women's Meetings, and all the Heirs of the Power, the Gospel, both Men and
Women are to take their possessions of the Inheritance of the Power of God,
which is over the Devil: So, in it nothing can get betwixt them and the Lord
God.

And at the Settling of the Mens-Meetings in the Gospel, the Power of God, A
Mens-Meeting of the Primitive Christians.
I let them see, how they had a Mens-Meeting in the first Conversion amongst
the Primitive Christians, of such as were faithful Men, and full of the Holy
Ghost; and these were to see in the Lords Power and Wisdom, that nothing was
lacking.

For since the Christians denied the Jews Temple, 1650
Storehouse and Priests, where the Widows, Strangers and Fatherless were
relieved; they set up a Mens-Meeting in the Power of God, and in the Holy
Ghost, (and they had Deaconnesses also) to see, that Widows, Fatherless and
Strangers were relieved, and that nothing was wanting among them. Now, though
this Practice has been lost since the Apostles Days, since Men have gone from
the Power of God, and the Holy Ghost, that the Apostles were in, (and therefore
are the Streets and Country so full of Widows, Strangers and Beggars, From
whence Wants come.
and so full of Wants, who want the Sense of the good Spirit, and Power to open
their Hearts, as the Apostles and Primitive Christians were in.) But the
Everlasting Gospel being preached again by the same Holy Ghost, as the Apostles
were in; and received from Heaven, as they received it; and many Thousands
having received this Gospel now again, Mens-Meetings are set up (as were in the
Days of the Apostles) in the Power of God, and in the Holy Ghost: And
Womens-Meetings as Mothers, and that they may be Teachers of good Things, and
so to see, that nothing be lacking amongst them; and so to do Good unto all,
but especially to the Household of Faith.

And now, the Power of God is the Authority of both our Men's and
Womens-Meetings, and all our other Meetings; which Power of God was, before the
Apostasy was from the Apostles, and before the Fall and the Devil was, and is
over all; and all are to take their Possessions of it, and in it to do God's
Service and Business. So these Meetings are for the Converted and Elect, before
the World began, and such as are Heirs of the Power, and do possess it; and
what they do and act in the Spirit and Power of God, they do it in that, which
shall never have an End, to the Glory of God for ever, Amen!

G. F.

UPon the Fourth Day of the First Month, 1650, I felt the Power of the Lord to
spread over all the World in Praise.
Praise, Honor and Glory be to the Lord of Heaven and Earth, Lord of Peace,
Lord of Joy! Thy Countenance makes my Heart glad, Lord of Glory, Lord of
Mercy, Lord of Strength, Lord of Life and Power over Death, and Lord of Lords,
and King of Kings! In the World there are Lords many, but to us there is but
one God the Father, of whom are all things; and one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom
are all things: To whom be all Glory, who is Worthy! The Earth makes Lords.
In the World are many Lords, and many Gods, and the Earth makes Lords,
coveting after Riches, and oppressing the Creatures; and so, the Covetous Mind
getting to it self, Lords it above others. This Nature of Lordly Pride is Head,
until subdued by the Power of God: For every one (in that State) does strive to
be above another; few will strive to be the lowest. O that every one would
strive to put down (in themselves) Mastery and Honor, that the Lord of Heaven
and Earth might be exalted!

G. F.

Friends,
FOrsake the Company of wild People, and choose the Company of sober Men, Epist.
1.
and that will be Creditable in the End. And choosing the Company of wild and
light People, To shun ill Company.
which delight in vain Fashions and ill Courses, is dangerous, and of a bad
Report among sober People; for the Eyes of such will be upon you: And if they
see, ye are wild, ye will come under their Censure. Therefore love Gravity, and
Soberness and Wisdom, that does preserve.

G. F.

Friends,
THE Children of the Devil, Epist. 2.
how expert are they in Evil, in all Deceit in his Kingdom; and yet they may
speak of the things of God: but no Vulturous Eye nor Venomous Beast ever trod
in the Steps of the Just, though they may talk of the Way. For who have their
Conversation in this World, and only mind the Things of this World, in vain do
they profess Godliness.

But the Children of God, who are conceived and begotten of him, are not of
this World, neither do they mind only the Things of this World, but the Things
which are Eternal: But the Children of this World do mostly mind the External
Things, The World's Love.
and their Love is in them, and the other live by Faith; the one is sanctified
by the Word, the other painted with the Words. The Children of God are pure in
Heart, not looking only at the Outside: The Favor of the World and Friendship
thereof is Enmity to God, Man may soon be stained with it. O love the Stranger,
and be as Strangers in the World, and to the World! For they that followed
Christ in his Cross, they were Strangers in the World, and Wonders to the
World, and condemned by the World; and the World knew him not, neither does it
them that follow him now. So, marvel not, if the World hate you; for the World
lies in hatred and wickedness. Who love this World, are Enemies to Christ; and
who love the Lord Jesus Christ, and have him for their Lord over them, they are
Redeemed out of the World. The World would have a Christ, but not to rule over
them; the Nature of the World is above Christ in Man, until Christ has subdued
that Nature in Man. While the Nature of the World does rule in Man, Oh the deaf
Ears and blind Eyes, and the Understandings, that are all shut up amongst them,
with which they Judge! But who love the Lord Jesus Christ, do not mind the
World's Judgment, nor are troubled at it; but consider all our Brethren, who
have gone before us.

When ye think ye are past all Crosses, when the Trial does come, ye will find
a Cross to that Will, which does meddle with the things of God presumptuously;
that Man may live in Joy, but the Spirit is in Bondage. Fleshly Boastings.
Rejoice not in the Flesh, but in the Spirit, which crucifieth all fleshly
Boastings; if that Will be fed, then Carelessness comes up, and they fall into
Flatness (from the Spirit) and are mindless of the Lord God; such are soon up
and down. The Serpent tempted Eve to eat of the forbidden Fruit, and she took
and gave to her Husband, and so they fell under the Serpent's Power, and the
Creatures, out of the Power of God, which would have kept them in Dominion: And
so, Adam and Eve, and the Serpent, all went out of Truth. And Eve eating of the
Tree of Knowledge, Knowledge and Wisdom after the Fall, but not in the
Dominion, in the Power of God: But the Seed Christ, which was in the Beginning,
bruiseth this Serpent's Head, and he is the Wisdom of God.

G. F.

Friends,
THere is an Eye, that has looked to see the good Seed, Epist. 3.
that was sown, and queried, from whence came these Tares? A little Note of G.
F. to Friends at first
The Answer was and is; The wicked One has sown them. Now read the Tares, and
what is the Effect of them, and their Work? And what they do, and have done?
How they hang amongst the Wheat? But now is the time of Harvest, that both
Wheat and Tares are seen, and each distinguished, the one from the other.

G. F.

All Friends,
MInd that which is pure in you to guide you to God, out of Babylon, Epist. 4.
out of Confusion, there all the World is; About 1651.
there is the Seat of the Beast, there are the false Prophets and Deceivers, as
well within as without. One Voice of Deceit knows not another, nor none of them
the Voice of the Living God. But, Dear Friends, mind the Light of God in your
Consciences, which will show you all Deceit; dwelling in it, guides out of the
many things into one Spirit, which cannot lie, nor deceive: They that are
guided by it, are one, who have been made to drink into one Spirit; and the
Spirits of the Prophets are subject to the Prophets. God is not the Author of
Confusion, but of Peace: All Jarrings, all Schisms, all Rents are out of the
Spirit, for God has tempered the Body together, that there should be no Schism
in the Body, but all worship him with one Consent. And as the Power and Life of
Truth is made manifest, watch in the Discerning one over another.

And beware of discouraging any in the Work of God: The Laborers are few.
The Laborers are few, that are faithful for God. Take heed of hurting the
Gift, which God has given to profit withal, whereby ye have received Life
through Death, and a Measure of Peace by the Destruction of Evil. Pray, that
Peace may be multiplied, and the Ministration of Life, to the raising of the
Dead, that the Seed of the Woman may bruise the Serpent's Head, discover all
Deceit, and rend all Vails and Coverings, that the Pure may come to Life, which
Deceit has trampled upon.

And all take heed to your Spirits; that which is hasty, discerns not the Good
Seed. Take heed of being corrupted by Flatteries; they that know their God,
shall be strong. But take heed of laboring to turn the Just aside for a thing
of naught, but know the Precious from the Vile, the Clean from the Unclean;
These shall be as my Mouth, says the Lord, for his Work is great, and his
Gifts diverse. And therefore all mind your Gift, mind your Measure; mind your
Calling and your Work. Some speak to the Conscience; some plough and break the
Clods; some weed out, and some sow; some wait, that Fowls devour not the Seed.
But wait all for the Gathering of the Simple-hearted ones; for They that turn
many to Righteousness, shall shine for ever.

Mind the Light, Friends in Power, in Love, that there be no Surmisings, but
pure Refreshings in the unlimited Love of God, which makes one another known in
the Conscience, to read one another's Hearts: Being comprehended into this
Love, Oneness.
it is Inseparable, and all are here one. And keep in the Oneness, and note
them that cause Dissension, contrary to the Gospel ye have received; that one
pure Faith may be held in all, to guide and preserve all in the Unity of the
Spirit and Bond of Peace; all one Family of Love, Children of one Father, and
of the Household of God.

G. F.

DEar Father and Mother in the Flesh,
Epist. 5.
but not of that Birth, which speaks to you: For like to that which does beget,
is that which is begotten; Praises, Praises be given to my Heavenly Father, who
has begotten me again by the Immortal Word.

To that of God in you both I speak, and do beseech you both for the Lord's
sake, to Return within, and wait to hear the Voice of the Lord there; and
waiting there, and keeping close to the Lord, a Discerning will grow, that ye
may distinguish the Voice of the Stranger, when ye hear it. Oh! be faithful, be
faithful to the Lord in that ye know; for in the Buckstider the Lord has no
pleasure, neither shall their Damnation slumber. Oh! be Faithful! Look not
back, nor be too forward, further than ye have attained; for ye have no Time,
but this present Time: Therefore prize your Time for your Soul's sake. And so,
grow up in that which is Pure, and keep to the Oneness; then shall my Joy be
full. So Fare ye well! And the Lord God of Power keep you in his Power! To him
be Praises for evermore!

G. F.

Friends,
NO one is Justified, Epist. 6.
breaking the Commands of Christ; no one is Justified, Who they are that are
not Justified.
living in Iniquity; and no one is Justified in professing only Christ's Words,
and the Prophets, and the Apostles Words, and living out of their Lives: And no
one is Justified living in the first Birth and Nature, and false Faith and
Hope, which does not purify, as God is pure. No Man is Justified not believing
in the Light, as Christ commands, but with the Light is condemned; for the
Light is the Condemnation of all them, that walk contrary to it: Therefore the
Power of God mind. No Man is Justified, acting contrary to that Spirit, which
does convince them.

G. F.

To Friends at Swarthmoore.
Friends,
LOve that which Judges the Carnal Mind, Epist. 7.
and Crosses it, which makes an Entrance to God, and keeps you open; and
then Refreshment will come into your Souls from the Lord. Dwell in the Power,
and know the Power of Words in one another; and take heed of Deceit: Farewell.
And the God of Love and Power keep you to himself!

G. F.

Dear Friends,
that will live Godly in Christ Jesus, must suffer Persecution. Epist. 8.
God is Righteous, God is Pure, Holy and Just; God is Clean. He that is Godly
and Holy, suffers by the Ungodly and Unrighteous, The Just suffers by the
Unjust.
and Unclean, and Unjust, and Filthy: And so, the Just suffers by the Unjust;
and he that is born of the Flesh, persecutes him that is born of the Spirit.

G. F.

Friends,
THat which is set up by the Sword, is held up by the Sword; Epist. 9.
and that which is set up by Spiritual Weapons, About 1652.
is held up by Spiritual Weapons, and not by Carnal Weapons. The Lamb shall
have the Victory.
The Peacemaker has the Kingdom, and is in it; and has the Dominion over the
Peace-Breaker, to calm him in the Power of God.

And Friends, Let the Waves break over your Heads: There is rising a new and
living Way out of the North, which makes the Nations like Waters. Hurt not the
Vines, nor the Oil, nor such as know, that the Earth is the Lord's, and the
fullness thereof. The Days of Virtue, Love and Peace are come and coming, and
the Lamb had and has the Kings of the Earth to war withal, and to fight
withal, who will overcome with the Sword of the Spirit, the Word of his Mouth;
for the Lamb shall have the Victory.

And are not some like Ephraim, with a miscarrying Womb? Which have not brought
forth the Substance, the Birth from above; Hos. 9.13, 14.
but have brought forth Children to Murder?

G. F.

To Friends, to stand still in Trouble, and see the Strength of the Lord.
Friends,
WHatever ye are addicted to, Epist. 10.
the Tempter will come in that thing; and when he can trouble you, then he gets
Advantage over you, and then ye are gone. Stand still in that which is pure,
after ye see your selves; and then Mercy comes in. After thou see thy
Thoughts, and the Temptations, do not think, but submit; and then Power comes.
Stand still in that which shows and discovers; and there does Strength
immediately come: And stand still in the Light, and submit to it, and the other
will be hushed and gone; and then Content comes. And when Temptations and
Troubles appear, sink down in that which is pure, and all will be hushed, and
fly away. Your Strength is to stand still, after ye see your selves; whatsoever
ye see your selves addicted to, Temptations, Corruption, Uncleanness, etc. then
ye think, ye shall never Overcome. And Earthly Reason will tell you, what ye
shall lose; hearken not to that, but stand still in the Light, that shows them
to you, and then Strength comes from the Lord, and Help, contrary to your
Expectation: Then ye grow up in Peace, and no Trouble shall you move. David
fretted himself, when he looked out; but when he was still, no Trouble could
him move: When your Thoughts are out, abroad, then Troubles move you: But come
to stay your Minds upon that Spirit, which was before the Letter; tempt God;
but stand still in that Power, which brings Peace.

G. F.

DEar Hearts,
Epist. 11.
Brethren and Babes of Christ, wait to feed on the Immortal Food, and walk in
the Truth, and God Almighty be among you! And in it ye will see him; stand all
naked, bare and uncovered before the Lord. And take heed of your Wills, for
that (as Herod) slays the Just, and shipwracks the Faith, and runs you into
the Flesh. Return back, and stay your selves upon the Lord every particular, to
have your Minds guided by his Spirit; growing up in that which is Precious and
Immortal, there is no feigned Love. So, the Eternal God keep you in his Eternal
Love pure unto himself, and naked, and knit your Hearts together! God Almighty
bless you, and water you with the Showers of his Mercy, and with the Dew of
Heaven!

G. F.

Friends,
IF ye love the Light, Epist. 12.
and walk in it, ye love Christ, and will all walk in Unity together: And if ye
hate the Light, ye hate Christ: Here is your Teacher, The Light is the Teacher.
who love it; here is your Condemnation, who hate the Light. And the Conscience
being feared, there is a Returning to Teachers without: For the Carnal will
have its vain invented Form; but the Spirit's Form stands in the Power: Prove
your selves, where ye are.)

G. F.

To the Flock of God about Sedburgh.
EVery one in your Measure wait upon God, Epist. 13.
who is the true Shepherd, and leads his Flock into the green Pastures, and
fresh Springs he opens daily; this ye will see and experience. And mind that
which is pure in one another, which joins you together; for nothing will join,
To wait in the Measure of God.
or make fit, but what is pure; nor unite, nor build, but what is pure.
Therefore every particular, fear God; for whatsover ye build (of your selves)
will not stand, but will tumble down again; although it be as Gold, or Silver, or
Brass, or Iron, the strength of all these things, which is above the Pure (in
you) will come to nothing, and this will not unite with the pure. Therefore
wait every one in the Measure, which God has given you; and none of you be
Sayers (only) but Doers of the Word: And so, walk in the Truth, and be ye all
Servants to it, and it will lead you out of the World. The World would have the
Truth to serve them to talk of, to trade withal, and to contend withal; these
are the Wells without Water, these are the Trees without Fruit: But who dwell
in the Spirit of the Lord (which is pure, which joins together, and unites and
builds up all in one Spirit) see all these things, and are separated from them.
So if ye live in the Spirit, and walk in it, ye will not fulfill the Lusts of
the Flesh, which will lead into Uncleanness, and into Adultery, and into that
which despises Dignity, which defiles the Flesh, and goes from the pure.
Therefore the pure Faith is to be contended for; and those who were sanctified
by God the Father, did contend for it, and were preserved by it in Christ
Jesus. (Therefore wait upon God for the living Bread, that never fades away;
which he that eats of, lives for ever. So God Almighty bless you, and keep you
in the Measure of his Gift, faithful to himself!)

Dear Hearts, to that which is pure in you, I speak (which the presumptuous
Mind would veil) that God alone may be exalted, and all Flesh shattered down.
And all to take warning, and not one to exalt himself above another; but that
God alone may be exalted among you all, and in you all, who alone is blessed
for ever. And ye may see, from whence your heavenly Food comes alone, and grow
up by it; for God has done great Things in these Northern Parts, and the Lord
is doing great Things to the Exaltation of his Great Name, and astonishing the
Heathen; notwithstanding the raging of the Beast, and the opening of his Mouth,
to the Blaspheming of God and his Temple. Therefore all be Valiant in the Lord
God; and so Fare ye well! And the Lord God of Power keep you!

G. F.

A Word from the Lord to Friends.
ALL Friends, Epist. 14.
that are grown up in the Life and Power of the Truth, see that when ye appoint
your Meetings in any open Place, in the Fields, on the Moors, or on the
Mountains, Concerning appointing Meetings.
that none appoint Meetings in your own Wills; for that lets in the Wills of
the World upon the Life of Friends, and so ye come to suffer by the World. But
at such Meetings let the Wisdom of God guide you, that some may be there to
preserve the Truth from suffering by the World; that all Burdens may be kept
off, and taken away: So will ye grow pure and strong. And when there are any
Meetings in unbroken Places, ye that go to Minister to the World, take not the
whole Meeting of Friends with you thither, to suffer with and by the World's
Spirit; but let Friends keep together, and wait in their own Meeting Place: So
will the Life (in the Truth) be preserved, and grow. And let Three, or Four, or
Six, that are grown up, and are strong (in the Truth) go to such unbroken
Places, and thresh the Heathenish Nature; and there is true Service for the
Lord: And to you all this is the Counsel of the Lord! The Grace of God, the
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, be with your Spirits! Amen.

G. F.

To the Church of God in Lancashire.
Friends,
EVery one in particular, who are of God, and not of the World, Epist. 15.
walk out of the World's vain Customs, Ordinances and Commands; and stand a
Witness against them all, in the Testimony of Jesus, and witness him the
Substance of all, waiting in the Light of God, and walking in it, then will ye
have Unity one with another, and the Blood of Jesus Christ will cleanse you
from all Sin; for through it and by it we do overcome; which Blood of the new
Covenant is but one: There shall ye witness the Lamb of God, that takes away
the Sins of the World. Oh, wait all in that which is pure, to be fed alone of
God with the Eternal, Living Food! Go not out among the Swine, who feed upon
the Outside, the Husk, among the Merchants of Babylon, and so forsake the
living Bread; but as ye have received Christ Jesus, in him walk, that ye may
all honor the Lord Jesus Christ, and adorn his Gospel. And be famous in his
Light, and bold in his Strength, which will carry you above the World, and
above all the Deceits of it. Oh, in Love watch over one another for good, and
for the better, and not for the worse! And dwell in that which is pure of God
in you, lest your Thoughts get forth; and then evil Thoughts get up, and
Surmising one against another, which arises out of the veiled Mind, which
darkens the pure Discerning. But as ye dwell in that, which is of God, it
guides you up out of the Elementary Life, and out of the Mortal into the
Immortal (which is hid from all the fleshly ones) where is Peace and Joy
Eternal to all, that can witness the new Birth. Babes in Christ, born again of
the Immortal Seed, in it wait, my Life is with you in perfect Unity; bow down
to nothing, but the Lord God. Bow down to nothing but the Lord.
Satan would have had Christ to have bowed down, but he would not; the same
Seed now, the same Birth born in you now, which is the same to day, yesterday,
and for ever. The Tempter will come to you; and if ye look forth, and hearken
to his Words, and let them in, then ye bow down under him, and worship him. But
I say unto you, and charge you in the Presence of the Lord, Mind the pure Seed
of God in you, and the mighty Power of God will cherish you up to the Lord God
above all Temptations, not to bow down to any thing; but feeding upon the
Immortal Food, ye will feel your selves supported, and carried over him by your
Father and your God, whi is over all, blessed for ever! Who is the Virtue of
all Creatures, the Wisdom of all Things; all Holy Praises be unto the Holy,
Glorious Lord God for ever!

G. F.

TO all you,
Epist. 16.
My dear Friends, who have tasted of the immediate, working Power of the Lord,
and do find an Alteration in your Minds, and do see, from whence Virtue does
come, and Strength, that does renew the Inward Man, and does refresh you; which
draws you in Love to forsake the World, and that which has Form and Beauty in
it to the Eye of the World; and has turned your Minds within, which see your
Houses foul, and Corruptions strong, and the Way narrow and straight, which
leads to Life Eternal: To you all I say, Wait upon God in that which is pure.
Though you see little, and know little, and have little, and see your Emptiness,
and see your Nakedness, and Barrenness, and Unfruitfulness, and see the
Hardness of your Hearts, and your own Unworthiness; it is the Light, that
discovers all this, and the Love of God to you, and it is that which is
Immediate, but the dark Understanding cannot comprehend it. So, wait upon God
in that which is pure, in your Measure, and stand still in it every one, to see
your Savior, to make you free from that, which the Light does discover to you
(to be Evil.) For the Voice of the Bridegroom is heard in our Land; and Christ
is come amongst the Prisoners, The Prisoner of Hope.
to visit them in the Prison-Houses; they have all Hopes of Releasment and free
Pardon, and to come out freely, for the Debt is paid; wait for the
Manifestation of it, and he that comes out of Prison, shall reign.

So, Meet together all ye, that fear the Lord God, and think upon his Name, his
Mercies endure for ever; his Mercies are in Temptatations and Troubles, his
Mercies are in Afflictions, in Reproaches and in Scorns. Therefore rejoice, ye
Simple ones, which love Simplicity, and meet and wait together to receive
Strength and Wisdom from the Lord God; and in departing from Sin and Evil, ye
will be able to speak to the Praise of the Lord: And meeting and waiting in his
Power, which ye have received, in it all to Improve your Measure, that God has
given you; for ye never Improve your Measure, so long as ye rely upon any
visible thing without you; Labor in Love.
but when ye come alone to wait upon God, ye shall every one have a Reward
according to your Deserts, and every one your Penny, who are called into the
Vineyard to labor. (Therefore be faithful to God, and mind that which is
committed to you, as faithful Servants laboring in Love; some Threshing, and
some Ploughing, and some to keep the Sheep): He that can receive this, let him:
And all to watch over one another in the Spirit of God. So God Almighty bless,
guide and prosper you unto his Kingdom, where there is no Tribulation. When
your Minds run into any thing outwardly, without the Power, it covers and vails
the pure in you.

G. F.

Dear Friends,
PRize your Time, Epist. 17.
and the Love of the Lord to your Souls above all things; The Light show Sin
and Evil.
and mind that Light in you, that shows you Sin and Evil. Which checks you,
when ye speak an evil Word, and tells you, that ye should not be proud, nor
wanton, nor fashion your selves like unto the World; for the fashion of this
World passes away. And if ye hearken to that, it will keep you in Humbleness
of Mind, and Lowliness of Heart, and turn your Minds within, to wait upon the
Lord, to be guided by it; and bring you to lay aside all Sin and Evil, and keep
you faithful to the Lord; and bring you to wait on him for Teaching, till an
Entrance thereof be made to your Souls, There is your Teacher, the Light,
obeying it; there is your Condemnation, disobeying it. If ye hearken to the
Light in you, it will not suffer you to conform to the evil Ways, Customs,
Fashions, Delights and Vanities of the World; and so lead you to Purity, to
Holiness, to Vprightness, even up to the Lord. Dear Hearts, hearken to it, to
be guided by it. For if ye love the Light, ye love Christ; if ye hate that, ye
hate Christ. Therefore in the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ consider of it; and
the Lord open your Understandings to know him!)

G. F.

ALL Dear Friends every where, Epist. 18.
who have tasted of the Everlasting Power, and are made Partakers of his Divine
Nature, Be faithful, An Exhortation to Faithfulness.
and dwell in that which is Pure. And take heed of the World's evil Ways,
Words, Worships, Customs and Fashions; neither let fair Speeches draw you out,
nor hard Speeches trouble you and make you afraid: But fear the Lord God of
Heaven and Earth, who by his mighty Power upholds all things. And be bold in
the Power of Truth, and valiant for it upon the Earth; treading, triumphing
over, and trampling all Deceit under Foot, inward and outward; having done it
in your selves in particular, ye have Power over the World in general. And Meet
together everywhere, and keep the Unity of the Spirit, which is the Bond of
Peace; which Circumciseth Inwardly, and puts off the Body of Sin, and Baptiseth
all into one Body with one Spirit. And being written all in one another's
Heart, have all one Voice, and the pure Language of Truth, where, in all
plainness of Speech, things may be spoken in Nakedness of Heart one unto
another, in the Eternal Unity in one Spirit, which draws off and weans you from
all things, that are Created and External (which fade and pass away) up to God,
the Fountain of Life, and Head of all things; to whom be Glory, Wisdom, Riches
and Honor, God blessed for ever! Who has blessed us, and given to us Eternal
Life, and this Life is in his Son; and he that has the Son, has the Father
also. And that which the World does profess and make a Trade withal, the Saints
do enjoy and possess; which the World does not know, but in the Letter.

And all Friends and Brethren, in what ye know, be faithful, rejoicing and
praising the Lord with all Thankfulness, that the wise God should Call you, and
Elect you. Oh! dwell in Love in your Hearts to God, and one to another! And the
God of Love and Life keep you all in his Power, and Love, and Spirit to
himself, that ye may all be kept pure, and stand pure and clean before him. The
Work and Harvest of the Lord is great: My Prayers to God are for you, that ye
may be faithful, and be kept faithful in the Work.

G. F.

Dear and tender Friends,
MY Love is to you all in the Truth of God; Epist. 19.
and my Prayers and Soul's Desire is to God, To Friends in Truth.
that ye may be kept in the Simplicity of the Truth in Christ Jesus, growing up
in the Power of his Resurrection, and to be made Conformable to his Death, and
to have Fellowship with him in his Sufferings; and that all your Hearts may be
knit together in Love, and in one Spirit to God, and be kept out of all the
World's evil Customs, Fashions, Words, Works, Manners, Ordinances and
Commandments, which will all perish, which the World holds up in the Carnal
Mind, The Carnal Eye and Mind.
and the Carnal Man does act them. For whatsoever is seen with a Carnal Eye, is
Carnal: See, if ye do find something in your Understandings made manifest,
which is Eternal, to guide your Minds out of all External things, which wither
away, and fade. For the Cross is to the Carnal Mind; your (Carnal) Minds going
into the Carnal and Earthly things, or your Eyes and Lusts into the Earth,
where Lightness, Rashness, Crosness, Bitterness and Presumption is, then the
Tongae will run at random, and is at liberty; and he that has not Power over
his own Tongue, his Religion is vain, and the light Mind rules. But the Light
within, which does convince thee, it will show thee, when the Mind goes forth;
and show thee the daily Cross, which is to Crucify that Carnal Mind: For the
Carnal Mind minds Carnal Things; and the Cross is to the Will of Man, for it
shall never enter.

Therefore give not way to your Wills, nor busy your selves nor Minds with
needless and careless Words, or such things, for they will vail you, and draw
your Minds from God: But keep within. And when they shall say, Christ is within.
Lo here, or Lo there is Christ, go not forth; for Christ is within you: And
they are Seducers and Antichrists, which draw your Minds out from the
Teaching, within you. For the Measure is within, and the Light of God is
within, and the Pearl is within you, which is hid; and the Word of God is
within you, and ye are the Temples of God; and God has said, he will dwell in
you, and walk in you: And then what need ye go to the Idols-Temples without
you? The true Church (the Saints) is in God; but the Imitation of the Church is
in the World, without God. The Seducers are in the World; Antichrists and
Deceivers are in the World, and false Prophets are in the World; and
Covetousness is in the World, and all Hypocrisy, and all Heresy, and
Dissimulation, and all Pride, and looking for Honor is in the World; and he
that seeks for it, is of the Devil. And all idle, foolish Jesting, and all
light, vain Talking, which is not seemly nor convenient, is in the World.

Therefore lay aside all Filthiness and Superfluity of naughtiness, and fear
God, and give Glory to him, and worship not the Beast; for the Beast and the
false Prophet must be cast into the Lake of Fire. The true Figures and Types
were outward, and visible to the outward Eye and Mind; but the Carnal Mind is
to be taken away, and destroyed. For the Figures did Type forth the Substance;
when the Substance was come, the Figures were taken away, and Types were ended.
And the (false) Imitations of Christ and of God are in the World; and the vain
Worships of the World are the Worships of the Beast, and are not of God. For
God is a Spirit; and he that worships him, must worship him in Spirit and
Truth. The Beastly Nature in Man and Woman holds up the Beast, and his
Customs and Worships; and the Plagues of God are to be poured upon the Beast,
and all them that worship the Beast and false Prophet. And they that abide in
the Truth, worship not the Beast Inwardly, nor Outwardly, The Worship of the
Beast denied.
but deny all the Beast's Worships and false Prophets, and worship God in
Spirit and Truth. And they which do not abide in the Truth, hold up the Beast's
Worship, and the false Prophets; and they that do so, shall have their Portion
together: Plagues will be poured upon such.

And ye that know God, dwell in the Truth, and tread upon the Deceit; for God
will be Glorified alone: To whom be Glory and Honor for ever! Amen.

G. F.

TO all my Dear Brethren, Epist. 20.
whom the God of Power has enlightened with his Eternal Light, and discovered
unto you his Way of Truth, and brought you out of the dark ways, wherein ye
have walked; which dark ways all the World walks in: But where the pure Light
of God is witnessed, it guides to himself. The Light is but one, which leads
out of Darkness and the dark World, into the World which is without End.
Therefore all Friends and Brethren in the Eternal Truth of GOd, walk in it up
to God, and be not Sayers (only) nor Backsliders; for the Backslider is a
Sayer, and not a Doer, and there arises Ambition, Pride and Presumption out of
that Nature. But dwell in the pure Light, which God has made manifest to you
in your Understanding, and turn your Minds to him, and walk as Children of the
Light, The Backslider, a Sayer.
and of the Day, and be not Drunken in any thing, nor run not to Extremes in
any thing; but be Moderate and Patient. Wait for the Presence of the Great God,
and our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; and be not so Childish, as to be tossed
with Men's Words without Life. And run not out after others Liberties, which
they have got into their Notions; for thou that do so, wilt not abide in the
Truth; and so thou may come to be shaken, and shake others, who look at
Words. But wait every one in particular (in the Measure, that God has given
you) upon God, in the Fear of God, then your Hearts will be kept clean; and
this is the sure Way. (And wait all to have the Son made manifest in you, and
the Son alone to set you free in your selves in particular; The Son makes free.
and all that are made free by the Son, are one. But the first Nature, that
would have Liberty, must go into Captivity; which they, that live in their
Carnal Reasoning, seek Freedom for: But here is Man deceived in his first
Birth.)

But ye all, in whom the Immortal Seed is brought to Light, who are raised up
to sit in heavenly Places with Christ Jesus, and are become Children of the
Day, walk as Children of the Day, and as Children of the Light, and Let your
Light so shine before Men, that they may glorify your Father, which is in
Heaven. All loving the Light, ye love the one thing, which gathers your Hearts
together to the Fountain of Light and Life; and walking in it, ye have Unity
one with another, and the Blood of Jesus Christ cleanses you from all Sin. The
Knowledge of the Letter, The Knowledge of the Letter.
which you formerly got into your Notions and Comprehensions, the dark Mind
gave dark Meanings to it, and so kept you in the Broad Way; but now wait all,
to have the same Spirit manifested in your Understandings, which was in them,
which gave forth the Scriptures, who were come out of the Broad Way, Holy Men
of God, who had escaped the Pollutions of the World. And if every particular of
you know not a Principle within, which is of God, to guide you to wait upon
God, ye are still in your own Knowledge, which is brutish and sensual: But
waiting all upon God in that which is of God, ye are kept open to receive the
Teachings of God. And the pure Wisdom and knowledge is that, True Wisdom and
Knowledge.
which comes from above, which is to know God, and Jesus Christ, the Way, which
is hidden from the World; and to walk out of your own Ways, and out of your own
Thoughts. And dwelling in that which is pure, up to God, it commands your own
Reason to keep silent, and to cast your own Thoughts out; and dwelling in that
which is pure, it discovers all this. So dwelling in the Spirit, it keeps
all your Hearts to God: To whom be all Praise, Honor and Glory for ever!

From Judge Fell 's in Lancastire' the 31st of the 11th Month, 1652. G. F.

To Friends at Kendal.
TO that of God in you I do speak, Epist. 21.
that ye may watch over the Weak, and see, how the Plants of the Lord do grow.
And walk in the Joy and Love of the Truth, Watch over the Weak.
serving God with Joyfulness of Heart; and to you this is the Word of the Lord.
And keep all that is bad, down and out with the Light, which condemns all
Ungodliness; so keep all that out, which is for Condemnation; that ye may all
be preserved clean and pure, that out of Condemnation ye may be kept, and walk
in the living Light. So God Almighty be with you all! And I charge you to read
this among the Brethren, and these Words mind with the Light, that no Looseness
be amongst you; but own and be obedient to the Commands of the Lord, that ye
may stand out of, and above all the contrary Commands of Man. And so Farewell.

G. F.

OH Friends, Epist. 22.
keep close to the Light in you, and do not look forth at Words, that proceed
from a vain and light Mind; but at the Power of Words. The Power of Words.
For the Words of God, that proceed from him, are Powerful and Mighty in
Operation, to the throwing down of all the strong Holds of the man of Sin. The
Lord is coming in Power, to gather his Chosen ones to himself, and to Judge and
Condemn the wicked One for evermore. He will plague the Beast, and burn the
Whore, and plague and torment the Disobedient, and Rebellious and Backsliders
very sore: Therefore ye that know the Voice of the Lord, hearken to it, and
see, how ye stand in his Fear, and how ye are brought into the Obedience of the
Truth. And take heed of looking forth at Man; but keep close to the Light in
you, and see, that your Minds be kept close to that, and guided by that; and
being guided by that, it will keep you clear and pure to receive the Teaching
of the Lord. Have Salt in your selves, and let your Words be few and seasoned,
Words few and savoury:
that they may be savoury. And watch over one another in Love, and walk in
Wisdom and Sobriety, and Gravity, and Sincerity, in Purity and Cleanness. And
keep free from Deceit, and have no Fellowship with the unfruitful works of
Darkness, but rather reprove them. And be Faithful to the Lord; walk so, as the
World may be confounded and ashamed, when they speak evil of you, as
Evildoers; walking in Humbleness, Lowliness and Uprightness before them, it
will take away all just Occasion of speaking Evil against the Truth. And be
bold and valiant for the Truth, and press forward, toward the Mark of the
Price of the high Calling of God in Christ Jesus, and let no Man take your
Crown.

Dear Friends, watch over one another in Love, and stir up that which is pure
in one another, and exhort one another daily. And the Lord keep you all in his
Fear, and in his Obedience now and evermore!

G. F.

FRiends,
Powers of Darkness, but keep your Meetings, and meet in that, Epist. 23.
which keeps you over them; and in the Power of God ye will have Unity.

And Dwell in Love and Unity one with another, and know one another in the
Power of an Endless life, which does not change. And know the Second Adam, The
first and second Adam.
the Lord from Heaven, which is above the First Adam, the Earthly, where all
Strife and Transgression is. And all Friends every where, be Faithful in the
Life and Power of God, and keep your Meetings (above all the World) in that
which changes not, that nothing but Christ may reign among you, the Power of
God, and the Wisdom of God, the Sanctification and Redemption; that the Just
over all may reign, and the Seed of God may have the Dominion in you all; that
with that ye may all be ordered to the Glory of God, Love thinks no Evil.
and kept in the Bond of Peace, and reign in the love of God, (which is out of
the Iniquity, and rejoiceth not in it) which thinks no Evil. And have this Love
shed abroad in all your Hearts, and feel it abiding in you; which Love of God
edifies the Body. And know the Word of God abiding in you, The Word of God, its
Effects.
which was in the beginning, and brings to the Beginning; which Word being
ingrafted, it saves the Soul, and hammers down, and throws down and burns up
that which wars against it.

G. F.

TO all Friends every where,
Epist. 24.
Dwell in the Truth, and walk in the Love of the Truth, in Patience, and every
one in your Measure keep your Habitations, and learn that good Lesson of Jesus
Christ, To be Low and Meek in heart, giving no Occasion to the Adversary by
Evil-doing. Walk Uprightly.
But walk all honestly and uprightly; for the Upright and Meek in Heart know
God, and God delights in the Upright and Righteous. And walking in Vprightness,
ye will be bold, as Lions, resisting the Wicked with your Spiritual Weapons,
not by bloody Hands, as the Wicked are tearing and rending the Just, that dwell
in the Truth. For the Lions want and hunger, and rage; but ye that fear the
Lord, shall want no good thing; and they that wait upon the Lord, he will give
them their hearts Desire. I witness the Words of the Lord to be true, praised
be his Name! O Friends, dwell in the Fear of the Lord, and take heed of
Presumption, Presumption.
that your Minds run not out into Vanity and Lightness, that the World may not
take Occasion, and the Truth suffer. But every one keep your Habitation, where
God has called you; and take heed of Deceit, and form nothing in your own
Wills or Minds, but grow up in the Inner Man (putting off the Old Man with his
Deeds) as Trees of Righteousness, which the Lord has planted, growing in
Wisdom and Understanding to do the Will of God, and not your own Wills. He that
does the Will of God, abides in that, which endures for ever, and sees all
Flesh to be as Grass, and the Glory of the World to pass away. Woe to the Proud.
Woe unto you proud Men, who Compass the Earth, to set your Nests on high; all
your Gods of Gold and Silver must perish, and that Mind that holds them up,
must perish. But all Friends, mind that which is Eternal, which gathers your
Hearts together up to the Lord, and lets you see, that ye are written in one
another's Heart; Meet together every where, growing up in the Spirit to the
Lord, the Fountain of Life, the head of all things, God blessed for ever! Let
not hard Words trouble you, nor fair Speeches win you; but dwell in the Power
of Truth, in the mighty God, and have Salt in your selves to savor all Words,
and to stand against all the Wiles of the Devil, in the mighty Power of God.

For God that raised up his own Seed in his Saints, which Seed Christ is but
one in all, and spreads over all, and throughout all; and we now are through him
come to have Dominion and Power over the Evil-One, and to tread upon that,
which has been too strong for us, the Enemy of our Peace, and the Enemy of our
Unity with God and one with another. Our Unity with God, and one with another.
So in that, which is raised up in us, which trampleth upon the Earthly, dark
Power, have we Unity with God, and Fellowship with his Son, and Unity one with
another; so known to one another in that, which none, who are of the World,
knows. So our Life is hid, and our Happiness, Joy and Delight hid from all,
who are ruled and governed by the Prince of the Air, from under whose Dominion
and Government we are Redeemed by the only Redeemer Christ Jesus, not with
Corruptible things, neither is our Redemption of Man, nor by man, nor according
to the Will of Man, but Contrary to Man's Will.) And so, our Unity and
Fellowship with vain Man is loft, and all his evil Ways are now turned into
Enmity; and all his Profession is now found to be Deceit, and in all his
fairest Pretenses lodges Cruelty; and the Bottom and Ground of all his
Knowledge of God and Christ is found Sandy, A Sandy Knowledge.
and cannot endure the Tempest. For being brought off from that Foundation, and
having suffered the Loss of all, which seemed beautiful upon the Sand (which
was there builded according to that Wisdom, which was not Eternal, but was
Earthly, upon which the Curse of God was, and yet does remain, where it is
standing) we do declare against that Bottom and Foundation, by the Power of
God, in that Light of Christ, which discovers all false Foundations, and makes
manifest all Sandy Bottoms, which Man has builded upon. For where the only
true Seed takes Root, Earthly Plants and Dwellings.
there all Man's Plants and Plantations are plucked up; for there the Earth, in
which the Earthly Plants do grow, is broken up, plowed up, and ripped up, and
all things made manifest, which have lain hid in it. For in the Earth dwell all
the noisome Creatures, and the Evil Beasts, which are hurtful to the Creation:
For in the Earth the Devil dwells, and walks; but the Earth being plowed up, he
is made manifest, and the Seat of his Dwelling is broken up. That Mind, which
does speak of God, but lives not, dwells not, nor abides in the Fear of God,
that Mind must suffer, and pass under the Judgment of God, for the Curse of God
is upon that Mind: For that Mind is Earthly, and of the Earth, upon which the
Curse of God is. And that Mind may talk of God, and speak of God, but not in
Union with God, nor from Enjoyment of God in the Spirit, nor from having
purchased the Knowledge of him through Death and Sufferings; A Hearsay
Knowledge.
but from Hearsay of him, and from Custom and Tradition, which the true Fear
of God does destroy that Mind, which speaks of him, but does not live in his
Fear: And that Mind is raised up, which does abide in his Fear; and this is
Acceptable Sacrifice, which is pure, clean, holy and without Spot. Then that
which knows God, speaks of him, which has purchased the true Knowledge of him
through Suffering; and to such there is no Condemnation, but Joy and Peace. And
this Mind sings true Praises to God, the other in Hypocrisy; and therefore the
Woe is unto it. And this Mind is stayed upon God, the other is gadding after the
Creatures, committing Fornication with other Lovers; and speaks of God, but is
not subject to God, and must pass through Condemnation.

G. F.

To Friends in the Truth.
FRiends, Epist. 25.
the Love of God is to you, the Springs are opening, and the Plants are
refreshing with the living Waters. Now Friends, walk in the Truth, as ye have
received it; and wait in that which keeps you in the Yea and Nay, Yea and Nay
the pure Commusication.
in the pure Communication, in the Good Manners. In the pure Conversation over
all the World ye will reign, whose Conversation is in Heaven; and here the
World ye will Judge, walking in the Life. And ye which turn from the Light,
which Jesus Christ has enlightened you withal, here are the Corrupt Manners,
the evil Communication, the filthy Conversation, which with the Light is all to
be condemned. Ye which turn from the Light, are in Esau's Nature, and choosing
the Earth, there is Profaness: Therefore take heed to the Light, and wait to
receive Power from God, to stand against that, which the Light discovers to be
Evil. And ye, which are turned from the Light, which Jesus Christ has
enlightened you withal, and do turn to the Hireling-Priests, which are
Changable, from the Priest which never changes, Judas his Way.
ye walk in Judas his Steps, Woe will be your End; ye had better never to have
been born, ye are Betrayers of the Just. Ye that turn from the Light, ye turn
from Christ, as Judas did; and ye that walk in the Light, ye walk after Christ,
and he is your Way; but ye that turn from it to the Hireling-Priests, Judas is
your Way, which is Destruction. And ye that turn from the Light, turn from the
Command of God; Cain is your Way: And ye that turn from the Spirit, Cain.
Balaam. Core.
Balaam is your Way; and ye that get up into Presumption, Core is your Way,
which leads into Self-Separation; and this Fruit will wither, which is natural
Knowledge, which is seen with the Light, and is to be condemned with the Light,
which never withers, which is the Condemnation of the World; which all the
Children of the Light walk in. Which Light walking in, it will bring you to
receive Christ, Christ the Way to Salvation.
from whence it comes, here is the Way to Salvation; and as many as receive
him, to them he gives Power to become the Sons of God. And the Son of God is
but one in all, Male and Female; and the Light of God is but one: So all walk
in it, to receive the Son; in which Light is the Unity, which brings to
Fellowship with the Father and the Son. And the Oneness is in the Light, as the
Father and the Son is one, and brings you to, where he is, out of the World,
from the World, and not to be of the World. Therefore walk in the Light, which
is all the World's Condemnation, even them of the highest Religion, who act
contrary to the Light: And to you this is given forth from the Word of the
Living God. And thou that love thy Soul, love the Light to wait for Christ,
the Savior of thy Soul: And ye that hear the Word, The Word, which was in the
Beginning.
wait in the Light, which comes from the Word, which leads up to the Word,
which was in the beginning, which breaks the World to pieces, that lies in
Wickedness, and burns it as with a Fire; and divides asunder the Precious from
the Vile. This is the Word, which makes all clean, which is received into the
Heart; and this is the Word of Faith, which we Preach: And the World Preaches
the Words without, being out of the Life, and in the brutish Knowledge, which
is condemned of God, and by all, who are of God, that have (and are in) the
Life of the Holy Scriptures. Therefore I charge you all in the Presence of the
Living God, to wait in the Light, which comes from Christ, that with it ye may
receive the Life; that with the Light and Life, which is one, ye may come to
have the Scriptures opened to you, which were given forth from the Light.) And
so all the World, who have not the Light guiding their Understandings, nor the
Life, but are Strangers to it, there are the Sects, The Rise of Sects and
Opinions.
there are the many Opinions, there is the Heresy, which makes a Profession of
the Letter declared from the Light, but are out of the Life, with the Light all
this is condemned; and the Children of Light are in Unity, in that which gave
forth the Holy Scriptures. And so to you all this Testimony is from the Word of
God.

This is to be Read among all Friends every where; for this was I moved to send
among you.

G. F.

Concerning Marriages.
FRiends, All they, who do act contrary to the Light, which comes from Christ
Jesus, Epist. 26.
and it hate, whose Deeds are evil, and live in strife about Words, and their
Minds are in Earthly things, defrauding and wronging one another, they know,
when they do so, with the Light, which comes from Christ Jesus. So this Light,
which lets them see and know, when they act contrary to it, with this Light are
they Condemned. The Light condemns the Evil.
And all, that do act contrary to the Light, and do join together in Marriage
contrary to the Light, and are joined with that which is contrary to the Light,
this is their Condemnation, the Light, which leads to God. But who are joined
together with the Light, are Joined together in God; and let no Man put them
asunder. True Marriages.
Here is the true Joining; and there will be a Clear Testimony unto them, that
God did Move and Command, and Join them with his Light, among all the Children
of Light; And this Marriage is honorable, and the Bed not defiled. And whom
God does move, and command, and join together, it was and is by his Power.

G. F.

TO all my Dear Friends and Brethren every where.
Epist. 27. To Friends, to be faithful, and valiant in the Lord.
(He that has the Son of God, has Life; all that have not the Son of God,
have not Life. The Son of God is he, which makes free from all Sin, and is come
to destroy the Works of the Devil, and to make us Conformable to his Image, and
the Image of the Devil to deface and destroy, Freedom from Sin.
and the Image of God to renew us up in; and so to bring us to walk in
Righteousness. Praises be unto the Glorious God for ever, who has sent his Son
into the World, to take away the Sins of the World. The Lamb of God, the Son of
God, is but one in all his Males and Females; Sons and Daughters, and they all
are one in Christ and Christ one in them all.) And all Friends, walk worthy of
your Calling in all Holiness, for Holiness becomes the Saints; without Holiness
no Man shall see the Lord. And every one Improve your Talents, laboring in the
Vineyard, dressing the Lord's Vineyard, that ye may be found the faithful
Servants, who are as good Servants, and walking all in Love to God, and one to
another. And know one another in the Spirit, which is Immortal; for all other
Knowledge in the Flesh vails the pure, and hinders your Discerning: There will
arise Tares out of that Ground, whence that Love springs. Therefore dwell all
in the pure Spirit of God, and walking therein, it will teach you every one in
particular, to know God the Father of Spirits. And all to stand naked and bare,
and uncovered before the Living Lord God: For Woe is to every one, that is
Covered, Be Covered with the Spirit.
but not with the Spirit of the Lord; and who are Covered, and not with his
Spirit, will not stand in his Counsel. But all ye, who are Uncovered, walking
in the Spirit of the Lord God, it will keep you all in his Counsel to stand
Uncovered before the Lord, bare and naked, to receive Instruction and Counsel
from him. So, God Almighty be with you all! The Dew of Heaven is falling upon
you to Water the tender Plants; and the Blessing of God be amongst you, which
showers down amongst you! The Heavenly Joy fill your Hearts, and Comfort you in
the Inward Man in all Tribulations. The Glorious Light is shining, the Immortal
is bringing forth out of Death, the Prisoners have Hope of their Pardon (the
Debt being paid) and they freely purchased by Christ's Blood, Prisoners of Hope.
and he into the Prison-Houses is come, that the Prisoners begin to sing in
Hope of their Eternal Freedom, for Joy of Heart leaping, and the dumb Tongue
shall sing Praises. And the Arrows of the Almighty are shooting against the
Wicked: Therefore be bold and valiant for the Truth, triumph over all the
Deceivers, and trample upon their Deceits.

G. F.

TO all you, Epist. 28.
that are Enlightened with the Light, that comes from Jesus, The right Course of
Nature.
to it take heed, which leads into the right Course of Nature, which who act
contrary to it, go out of the right Course of Nature into Drunkenness,
Rashness, Lying, Blaspheming, Deceit and Uncleanness: All this is out of the
right Course of Nature, and leads out of the right Course of Nature, and
destroys it, and is to be Condemned with that which leads to the Glory of the
first Body, and leads Nature into its right Course and right Being, which Man
was in, before he fell.

G. F.

Concerning Tithes.
FRiends,
Epist. 29.
The Counsel of the Living God to you all is, that ye may come to discern the
Ministers of God and Christ from the Ministers of the World, that have gotten
the Scriptures for their Cloak, and with it make a Color to deceive, and tell
you, That they are the Ministers of Jesus Christ, and Christ has sent them;
who sue you at the Law, and hale you before Magistrates for Tithes and
Maintenance, when they do you no Work, nor have ye hired them. Yet they come
and tell you, Priest's Objection.
The Workman is worthy of his Meat, and the Labourer is worthy of his Hire:
Here the Custom of Sin has taken away the Sense; they are so accustomed to it.
But praised be the Lord God, who has given us his Light, and with it all such
are seen, comprehended and judged; and to such we cannot give Tithes, nor Hire,
which do us no Work, whom we have not hired; for it is Contrary to Scripture
and Christ's Doctrine, and to that of God in our Consciences. It is not for the
saving of the Earth (for it is the Lord's, and the Fullness of it) that we do
not pay the Pirests Tithes; for if we should, we should uphold the First
Priesthood, and its Office, who had their Storehouses, The first Priesthoods
Storehouses.
to put the Tithes into, that were given them; and then all the Widows,
Fatherless and Strangers did come, and were to be filled in the Priest's Gate,
and the Priests were to minister it out of the Storehouse; as ye may read in
Malachy, and the Book of Moses, who received a Law from God, and gave it forth
to the Priests to receive Tithes. So with the Light, which Christ Jesus has
given us, with it we come to Witness him, the Unchangable Priest, and see the
Change of the first Priesthood, and the Change of the Law also, by which the
Priest received the Tithes; as ye may read Heb. 7. So we do witness the New
Testament, and the New Covenant, and the Everlasting Priest (praised be God!)
and do Confess Christ Jesus come in the Flesh. And all ye, that would have us
to give Priests Tithes, and would Compel us so to do, ye are they, that do
Oppose Christ's Doctrine and Commands to his Disciples, Freely ye have
received, freely give; and do not own the Unchangable Priest's, being come to
teach his People: ye are against the Unchangable Priest's Office; ye are
against the New Covenant, and New Testament. And so we cannot uphold Tithes,
and such as take Tithes, who act against Christ Jesus, Tithe-takens act against
Christ.
his Commands, and deny him to be come in the Flesh, in Life, Doctrine and
Power. So, we that suffer our Goods to be spoiled Joyfully, it is for Christ's
sake, the unchangable Priest, and for the New Covenant's sake, and the New
Testament's sake. As the Hebrews did, who suffered their Goods to be spoiled
Joyfully, and were a Gazingstock; and so we suffer now by the Changable
Priesthood, which takes Tithes, as the People of God did then. But if we hire
any Man, and set him at Work, we will give him his Wages and his Meat; but such
Dissemblers, as say, The Scripture is their Rule for it, and we neither hired,
nor set them at Work, all such Deceivers are denied, who take the
Scripture-Words, and make a Cloak of them for their Covetous Practices.
Nevertheless, if any Minister of Jesus Christ, or Son, or Daughter, or Servant,
which Jesus Christ sends forth, (who said, Freely ye have received, freely
give) comes to our Houses, and Minister unto us Spiritual Things, we will set
before him our Carnal things; and he that sows unto us Spiritual things, it
is the least, that we minister unto him of our Carnal things. But he, that
sueth us at the Law for Means, Tithe-Suers.
and calls me before Courts and Sessions, and tells me, He is a Minister of
Christ, and Christ sent him, all such Evil ( Beasts as the Apostle speaks of)
we deny, who mind Earthly things, whose God is their Belly, who serve not the
Lord Jesus Christ, but their own Bellies. But if any one come into our Houses
(as before said) to preach the Gospel to us, we shall set before them, and they
shall eat freely, as Christ says, Whatsoever they set before you, that eat.
But to give Tithes to such, as do not preach to us Spiritual things, but deny
Christ come in the Flesh, and hold up things in the Figure, all such we deny;
and for the Truth's sake do we suffer by such. Tithe-buyers.
And ye that have bought Tithes to get Gain thereby, to you we cannot pay
Tithes; ye are as bad as the Priests to hold up such things, as were acted in
the Figure, and deny Christ come in the Flesh. And though ye may say, Give
Caesar his Due, for a Cloak, that Cloak we deny: Nevertheless, if we be owing
any thing to Caesar, or to any Ruler, or Magistrate, or Minister, he shall have
his Due. So, Caesar shall have his Due in his place; and the Figure we own in
its place, and Christ in his place.

G. F.

DEar John,
Epist. 30.
the Everlasting Arm of the Lord hold thee up, and break all thy Bonds asunder,
and set thee upon the Rock on thy Feet, To a suffering Friend.
in which thou may know his Presence, and his Everlasting, Supreme Power.
And so the God of Life be with thee! And pray for thy Enemies, for the Lord to
open them and their Hearts, and see themselves and thee.

G. F.

DEar Friends,
Epist. 31.
Mind the steadfast Guide to the Lord, where we do all meet in the Eternal
Spirit, in Oneness, all being Baptized by it into one Body, Baptism in one
Spirit.
having one Food, the Eternal Bread of Life, which the Immortal feed upon, and
all made to drink into one Spirit, Perfection.
which is the Cup of the Communion of the Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, which
makes Perfect, and Redeems from all that is Vain, Fleshly and Earthly, up to
God, who is Holy, Pure, Spiritual and Eternal. And let not any of you in your
Desires wander from that which is Pure in you; then your Conditions will be
kept clear and pure to see all things, as they are, and a clear Separation will
be made from that, which is of Man, and of your own, and that which is of God;
and there will be a Growing up in that which is Pure. And so, be Low in your
Minds, waiting for the Coming of our Lord Jesus Christ in you all, who is Lord
over all, to be Lord over all in you. And so the Lord God of Power keep you
all! Farewell.

G. F.

To Friends, that their Minds go not out from the Spirit of God.
FRiends, Epist. 32.
when your Minds go forth from the pure Spirit of God, and are drawn out from
it, there the Image of God comes to be lost, G.F.'s Epistle to Friends, to live
in the Cross. About 1653.
in those whose Minds goes out from the Pure, to lust after that which is in
the Fall, which may appear like Truth in the Notion; in that Nature, out of the
Truth, lodges the Inchanter and Sorcerer. To speak of Truth, when ye are
moved, it is a Cross to the Will; if ye live in the Truth, The Inchanter, and
Sorcerer, etc.
which ye speak, ye live in the Cross to your own Wills. For that which joins
with the Earthly Will, goes out from God, and that which is pure; and so makes
a place for the Inchanter and Sorcerer, and the Airy Spirit to lodge in;
whereby a Grave is made for the Just, and the Partition Wall between God and
Man standing; Death comes to reign, and the Grave has the Victory over such;
and in the Airy Spirit lodges the Inchanter, which the Lord will rebuke. Dwell
in the Pure and Immortal, and wait upon the Living God, to have your Hope
renewed, and to be renewed again into the Image of God, and the Image of the
Devil defaced, and the Prince of the Air cast out; for he lodges in the Mind,
that does despair, and in that Mind, that does presume.

So, dwell in the Light, and wait upon God to have the Image of God renewed;
and all come to witness your selves to be restored by Christ Jesus into the
Image of God, The Image of God.
and to be made by him like to God, pure, holy, perfect and righteous: This was
witnessed, this is witnessed, and this will be witnessed measurably with
Thousands, who are growing up out of the Fall, and coming up out of the Grave.
Let not the Lust go out to any thing, which is mortal, to be Servant thereto;
but mind the Joining to the Life: Here ye are kept in the Image of God. Not but
that ye may use the Creatures lawfully, but being kept in the Image of God, The
lawful Use of the Creatures.
ye are kept as Kings over all the Creatures, and over the Creation; here ye
will see all things, and by whom they stand. To the Pure all things are pure,
being in the Image of God above all the Creatures below, not worshipping the
Host of Heaven, nor being in Bondage to the Creatures, nor minding any thing in
Comparison of that which is Immortal, which joins you unto the Lord; and all
that speak here, in that which is Immortal, are joining unto the Lord. But that
Nature keep out, and that judge, which is mortal, which will join to the
Harlot, the fleshly; from all that there is to be a Separation. And here (as ye
are brought by the Power of God) the Gate is seen, that stands open; which Gate
is shut from all Mortal Eyes. And all the Wonderers are here seen, who inquire
after new things and Novelties; but the Wise Man satisfies not the Fool:
Novelties.
For that part is above the pure, if it be not kept in the Cross; which, not
being wrought out, will join to the Flesh, and so become one with the Harlot:
And such Join together to put Christ to Death afresh.

So therefore, dwell in that which is Pure and Eternal, which guides the Mind
to God; here is perfect Peace to those, whose Minds are stayed upon the Lord:
Which if the Mind goes from, there the Peace is lost; and there gets in the
light, airy Spirit in that Nature. The light airy Spirit.
And if the Mind go back, to fetch up things again, and speak them forth, there
will lodge the Airy Spirit too, the there may be true Experiences; and if the
Life speak them forth, by which they were opened, it keeps down the Airy Spirit.

Therefore Mind the Substance, that keeps you in your present Conditions, and
that which does disobey or rebel against the Word of the Lord, in that Nature
lodges the Airy Spirit; and that which hearkens to things, that are spoken out
of the Life, without, that lets in the Devil: And so, ye come to be possessed
with evil Thoughts, and Doubts, and Carnal Reasonings, and Bondage; and
Troubles; these things in you will rest, until the Life be risen again within,
to cast all that forth, which the Earthly Ear and Mind has let in. Now, if ye
hearken diligently, ye will learn your Safeguard, and Judge forth that which
is not Pure, which defiles; that the Just may have the Dominion. And here ye
will see, what stains, and what defiles, and the pure Eye and Ear will be
opened to hear God; and the Wizzard, and the Inchanter, and the Sorcerer, and
the Soothsayer, all that will be kept out and Judged. For none of that must
live in Israel, where there is to be no Transgression: For where they live,
Truth does not; and where Truth does live, that does not, but is all judged out.

G. F.

To Friends, for all to wait and walk in the Truth.
ALL Friends and Brethren every where, Epist. 33.
in the Life and Power of the Lord wait, and from it none walk; but that to the
Light of Christ in every one ye may be made manifest, that the Fear and Dread
of the Lord may be in all your hearts, that nothing may reign, Keep your
Meetings.
but Life it self. And so, all your Meetings in every place keep, waiting in
the Light, which from Christ does come, the Savior of your Souls; that his
Presence in the midst ye may all feel, who are gathered together in his Name
and Power in his Light (which is his Name) and from the World's Gatherings are
turned. (And if any be moved (who are turned to the Light) with the Power,
which comes from him, To be moved with the Power, to the Service for the Lord.
to any Service for the Lord, to it be Obedient; and ye will see Christ with
you to the End of the World. But if any go, before they are moved, and so from
the Light walk, he is a Stumbling Block, and is to be Judged and Condemned by
the Light; and is out of the Wisdom, and out of the Fear, and sows to the
Flesh, and reaps Corruption, and by the Light is Condemned. For that answers
not the Light in every Man's Conscience, neither does it reach to the Life, the
Spirit in Prison; but it manifests Weakness, and Foolishness and Nakedness,
which is from the Light, and contrary to it: And such are Stumbling Blocks, and
do not answer the Witness of God in the Conscience.

Therefore wait all in the Light, for to receive the Power from him, who is not
of the World, that ye may be preserved from Nakedness and Weakness. For that
which goes from the Light, and is not guided with it, The Slothful.
runs into the Lust; and there is the Slothful, which is to be Judged, and
that, that will offend, to which the Woe is; for it answers not that of God in
the Conscience: Neither is it Honorable, nor of good Report; for that which is
Honorable, and of good Report, answers that which is of God, and answers
the Light of Christ in every Man in the World with Wisdom, which from the Light
does come, even from him, by whom the World was made.

Therefore all Friends, this is a Charge to you all, and a Command to you all
in the Presence of the Living God, In the Light, Life and Power and Wisdom of
God walk, that to that of God in every one ye may be manifested in the sight of
God, and it may be your Witness, that ye are of God, in every Man's Conscience,
which witnesses against the World, and for him, who is not of the World. And
wait all in the Light for the Wisdom, by which all things were made, with it to
use all the Lord's Creatures to his Glory (and none to stumble one another
about the Creatures, for that is not from the Light) for which End they were
Created, and with the Wisdom, Wait for the Wisdom by which all things were
Created.
by which they were made, ye may be kept out of the Mis-use of them in the
Image of God, that ye may come to see, that the Earth is the Lord's, and the
fullness thereof, and the Earth may come to yield her Increase, and to enjoy her
Sabbaths; and all such that walk Contrary to the Light, may be turned to the
Light, that with the Light they may see and condemn that, which is contrary to
it. So that in the Wisdom of God ye may all be kept, and in the Fear of the
Lord and his Righteousness established, which is far from Oppression, where all
Bonds of Iniquity are broken, and the Prince of Darkness Judged out, and the
Prince of Peace reigns, under whose Dominion keep and walk. And all that cause
Strife, are to be Condemned and shut out, which have their Eye without, and are
Condemned by the Light, the God of the World having blinded the Eye of the
Unbeliever.

Therefore ye Believers in the Light, wait in the Wisdom, that with it and in
it ye may be ordered to the Glory of God, that among you nothing may reign, but
Light, and Life, and Wisdom, and Power, the Dread and Fear of the Lord be among
you, and Truth and Righteousness reign; which will answer the Light of Christ
in every Man. And all that is Contrary, let it be Condemned with the Light,
which comes from him, by which the World was made, who was, before the World
was, who lights every Man, that comes into the World: Though they believe
not in it, yet ye may answer the Light in every Man, though it be their
Condemnation.

So being kept in the Light, which comes from him, by whom the World was made,
who was, before it was made, ye come to receive the Wisdom, by which all things
were made, and with it to order and use them to the Glory of God. For that
which is not from the Light, nor from the Wisdom, is the Offender, which is to
be Condemned with the Light, which comes from the Life; and to it in you all
take heed, that your Hearts may be joined together to God, and all that is
Contrary, Condemned. And so, the Lord God Almighty preserve and keep you all in
Wisdom!

Friends, A Warning from the Lord to you all, in Wisdom to walk, P. S.
that ye may Adorn every one, what ye profess, A Warning to Friends, to walk in
the Testimony of God.
that the measure of God's Spirit in every one ye may answer. And know the Lord
to guide your Understandings, and let his Wisdom be Justified by you all, and
ye in the measure of the Spirit of God in Unity kept; Wisdom Justified.
that ye may see Righteousness spring and flourish among you, and no Deceit
stand, nor nothing that is deceitful; but with the Eternal Judge it down, and
keep it down, that nothing may live, that is for the Sword, which would defile
the Land. Therefore in that which is Eternal, dwell, as a Royal Priesthood, in
that which comes from him, by whom the World was made; who to all your Souls is
a Friend, from whence the Refreshing is received. So the Lord God Almighty
preserve and keep you all, that in his Life, Dread and Power ye may be
preserved.

G. F.

FRiends,
Epist. 34.
I do Warn you in the Presence of the Living God, not to speak the things of
God out of the Fear of God, at Random, in a presumptuous Mind; Proud Boasters.
for proud Boasters are excluded out of the Kingdom of God, and with the Light
of Christ condemned, and with the Life, that gave forth the Scriptures, are
they Judged. Therefore to you this is the Word of the Lord, In the Light, which
Christ has enlightened every one of you withal, in it wait, and it love, and ye
shall have the Light of Life; and it will bring you to stand in the Counsel of
God, and keep you from all wicked Ways: And with it ye will see all the
Inchanters, Inchanters and false Prophets seen with the Light.
false Prophets, who speak a Divination of their own Brain, whose Minds are
turned from the Light of Christ; with this Light are they condemned: All whose
Minds are turned from it, and hate it, whose Deeds are evil, with this Light
are they Condemned; though they may make a Profession of the Words, which did
proceed from the Light, from them who lived in it, and walked in it. So they
that turn from it, and hate this Light, making a Profession of their Words,
that dwelt in it, and hate them, that walk in the Light now, (Oh, high Deceit!)
all such are to be Condemned with the Light. And such that hate the Light, and
deny it, though they may profess the Words, that did proceed from the Life, and
be full of them, they turn no People from their wicked Ways; for in the Counsel
of God they stand not: For they were in the Counsel of God, who gave forth the
Scriptures, who were in the Life of them, from which the Letter did proceed.

Therefore in the Life (every one in your Measures) wait and walk, The Life
opens the Scriptures.
which gave forth the Scriptures, which will open them to you again;) else you
all I do deny, and ye are to be turned away from, as having the Form, but not
the Power. And know the Life of God in one another, and the Power of God in one
another; but that Knowledge in the Form without the Life, we deny, though it be
never so finely painted, and the Harlot be never so beautiful, who is turned
from the Light, which Christ has enlightened withal. This is the Harlot, The
Harlots Dress.
who dresseth her self with the Words, that proceeded from the Light, who
persecuteth them, who dwell in the Light, who drinks the Blood of the Saints,
who dwell in the Life, which gave forth the Scriptures. And with the Words,
that proceeded from the Light, does she cloth her self, and is harlotted from
the Life; and all that she brings forth, is contrary to the Light: So she is
called the Mother of Harlots. But if ye love this Light, and your Minds be
guided by it to see the Face of Jesus, and him the Head, then with this Light
ye will see all the Harlots, and the Mother of Harlots, and where she is, and
what she is joined to. The Light is that, by which ye come to see; he that
walks in it, stumbleth not: But thou stumblest, who art turned from the Light
among the Harlots. I charge you every one in the Presence of the Living God, to
take heed to the Light: It is your Teacher, loving it; it is your Condemnation,
hating it.

G. F.

To Friends in the Ministry.
STand up, ye Prophets of the Lord, for the Truth upon the Earth; Epist. 35.
quench not your Prophecy, neither heed them that despise it; but in that
stand, Quench not Prophecy.
which brings you through to the End. Heed not the Eyes of the World, ye
Prophets of the Lord, but answer that in them all, which they have closed their
Eye to; that ye may to them tell of things to come, answering that of God in
them, that shall remain. Keep ye in your Habitations, ye Sons of God, that over
all the Contrary ye may reign. And ye Daughters, to whom it is given to
Prophecy, keep within your own Measure, seeing over that which is without,
answering that of God in all. And despise not the Prophecy, keep down that
Nature that would, which is the same as that is, which acts contrary to that of
God in them. Not lifted up.
Neither be lifted up in your Openings and Prophecies, lest ye depart from that
which opened, and so come by the Son of God to be Judged, and bidden to depart,
as Workers of Iniquity; for a Worker of Iniquity is gone from that, which leads
to the Son of God, who is the End of the Prophets.

Quench not the Spirit, by which ye may prove all things, The Spirit proves all
things.
and that which is good, hold fast; for if the Spirit be quenched, then Light
is put for Darkness, and Darkness for Light, and Evil is put for Good, and Good
for Evil: This is, when the Spirit is quenched, then cannot ye try all things,
then cannot ye hold fast that which is good.) For then they cannot see good,
when the Spirit is quenched; but when the Spirit is not quenched, then with the
Spirit ye may see the Good, to take the Good, and the Evil to shun. And this
brings to put a Difference between the Precious and the Vile, the Profane and
the Holy, the Clean and the Unclean; the Spirit is it, that proves all things.

G. F.

FRiends,
Epist. 36.
Take your heavenly Censers, and offer up your Spiritual Prayers to the
Almighty God, and having heavenly Fire in your Censers, it will consume all
false Offerings and Sacrifices, The Sacrifice of Prayer.
which are offered in the evil Nature.

G. F.

DEar Friends,
Prize your heavenly Calling, Epist. 37.
by which ye are called into Holiness and Righteousness, without which no one
shall see the Lord. And let your Conversation be, as becomes the Gospel, To
Friends in Cumberland.
the Holy Power of God, which is the Gospel of Christ, the Holy One, who
suffered by the Unholy Ones. And keep in the Lowly Mind, and the Humility of
Christ, that the Fruits of your good Conversation, and Translation, and
Regeneration in your Lives may appear, The Fruits of a good Conversation.
as a People redeemed from the Pleasures of the Flesh, and the Spirit of the
World, and the beggarly Lusts; and that ye may obtain the Promise of the
Eternal God, and the Power of the Truth, through the Word in the Heart, the
hidden Man, that ye may obtain Victory over that, which wars against your
Souls; through which ye may be arrayed and adorned, and by that ye may be
preserved and kept from that which, is not of the Father (the Lust of the
Flesh, the Lust of the Eye, and the Pride of Life) in the Simplicity and
Innocence of Christ Jesus (over all the Subtilty and feigned Deceit) through
which ye may esteem nothing in Comparison of that which is of God, and him
above all, through Christ the Light, the Truth, the Power of God manifested in
you. False Liberty.
And keep out of all false Liberties, and that which would lead you out of the
Fear of God; and in that ye will be preserved in the Sense of the Power and the
Truth of God in your own Hearts: In that every one watch, through which
Knowledge and Virtue is ministered unto you, and Peace from the God of Virtue
and Peace. And keep out of all that, which tends to Strife, and Whisperings,
and Backbitings, and Tattlings, which draws from the Witness, Watch and Fear of
God within, which leavens into the Fleshly Lusts and Nature; and then that
Judges, and yet is in the same thing, for which he Judges others: which Nature
and Judgment, all is for Judgment and Condemnation. So be Wise, and keep your
First Love, break not Wedlock with the Lord Jesus Christ; keep your first
Habitation, keep your Garments clean, for such as so do, they are blessed; that
ye may shine as Lights to the World, Be Examples in Virtue.
and be Examples in Virtue, Righteousness and Holiness, walking in the Truth in
all Patience and Quietness, looking at the Lord, your Strength, and Christ
Jesus, the Conqueror, and beyond all the Hills and Mountains; that ye may be a
good Savor to the Lord, having Salt in your selves. Let your Lamps be burning,
and your Lights shining, and then ye will see over all the Unsavouriness, that
is in Adam's Family in the Fall, who live in Christ, the Power of God, that
never fell, and keep Marriage with him the Holy One, the Just One, the Light,
the Truth and Power of God, who makes an End of all Unholiness. And so, walk in
the Righteousness, that your Feet may be kept in the Way of Peace: And keep
both your Tongues, and Hands, and Bodies, and Lips, and Minds, and Words out of
all that, which would defile and corrupt you, and bring you under the
Indignation and Wrath of God, and his Hand to be turned against you. So, keep
in the Fear of God, and keep in his Truth, which ye at first received, for
Truth never changes. And walk in the Spirit, and then the Lusts of the Flesh
will not be fulfilled, and then Strife is kept out, that which would be high,
and get up, through which comes Strife and Wars. So, keep your Fellowship in
the Spirit, in which is the Unity, and Bond of Peace, Fruits of the Spirit.
and the Fruits of the Spirit will appear, Righteousness, Holiness, Goodness,
Peace, Soberness and Gentleness, Chastity and Virtue, through which ye may have
Fruit to feed the Hungry, and to relieve the Sick and Poor.) For the Unfruitful
walks not in the Spirit, and so, bears not Fruit; and so the Curse comes, and
Briars, and Misery. So, eye the Lord God in all things in the Spirit, who is a
Spirit; in that ye may distinguish his things, and the things that are of your
selves, and what is of Men, and what is of God, and what to keep alive, and
what must dye. So, be Obedient to the Spirit, and to the good Power of God,
that has quickened you; and live in it, that ye may dye no more, for that
gives you Life. For they that are made alive, and come to dye again, and to be
Twice Dead, Twice Dead plucked up, etc.
and then come to be plucked up by the Roots; such lie dead upon the Earth, and
corrupt it. So, let not the World, let not things visible draw your Minds away
from the Lord. Do not mind the Body more than the Lord; do not forsake the
Lord; but be of good Faith in the Truth of God, and live in it, then ye live in
Christ Jesus, who is your Way, who is your Teacher, who is your Prophet, who is
your Priest, who is the Bishop of your Immortal Souls, Christ that never fell,
nor never changed, nor never will change. And here ye come into the Seed, the
Top-stone, The Seed, the Top-stone.
that is atop of the World set, and before the World was, who will remain, when
the World is gone; who was full of Grace and Truth, and Virtue and Life, by
whom Grace comes, that brings Salvation, who is every one of your Teacher in
your selves. So, know Christ the Head and Salvation, in which there is Peace,
and no Condemnation; for the Condemnation is upon them, that are out of the
Light. And so, live in Unity in the Light, before Darkness and Enmity was, in
which ye have Peace, and Love to God, to Christ, and to one another.

G. F.

An Epistle to the Travelers in the Lord's Way, with a Testimony against the
False Prophets, and them that hold them up.
FRriends,
Epist. 38.
All are to receive your Spiritual Bread and Water from the Father of Life, by
which ye may be strengthened and watered from the Father of Life, in your
passing and traveling on in your Spiritual Journey heartily and comfortably;
that ye may come to your heavenly Rest, The Spiritual Travel.
being come and coming out of the great City of Sodom, toward the City of
heavenly Jerusalem, where ye shall abide Eternally for ever.

Reason not with Flesh and Blood, that shall never enter; take not Counsel of
that, which draws thee nearer to Carnal things, and draws thee to Consult with
Carnal Reason, Carnal Reasoning.
and so draws thy Eye and Mind to Visible things, and so brings thee to wander
from going on thy Journey; and if thou followest that, thou go to Death,
Hell and Destruction, and to the Pit and the Snare, and that gets Dominion over
thee, and comes to rule over thee, which ought not. But every one wait in the
pure Spirit to guide you to God, then ye shall see the Promise of God fulfilled
in you, and the Springs of Life opened to you, and Refreshment daily coming in
from the Lord; and then ye will come to Walk with the Lord, forsaking all,
Father, Mother, A forsaking all.
Wife and Children, Lands, Livings and all: Here is Joining to the Lord, as one
Spirit; and he that does not forsake all, is not worthy of him. All who are in
the first Birth, and all who reason with Flesh and Blood, stand here, and are
for Persecuting them, who are born of the Spirit, that are passing out of this
City, toward the City, whose Foundation and Builder is God: For in that City
the Righteous Ones are slain, by them who are of Cain's Generation. All ye, who
are got up into his steps, professing Christ and to be Ministers of Christ, who
stand in the Envy, and have the Chiefest place in the Assemblies, and are
called of Men Master, which Christ forbids; Lie down all for shame, who are in
Pride and Oppression, Professors Pride and Oppression.
and in the steps and places of the Pharisees, and have got a Form of the
Words, which the Apostles said, and which Christ said, and have got it in Three
or Four Languages; the Lord has discovered you now; the Lord God Almighty has
discovered you by his Prophets and Servants: All Honor, and Glory, and Thanks
be to him for ever, who now is come to rule alone in his Saints. Rejoice, O all
ye Prophets and Righteous ones! The Beast, which made War with the Lamb and the
Saints, the Lamb has got the Victory over the Beast, and the Ten Horns, which
pushed at him. Powerful Father and Eternal God, to thee alone be all Glory,
Honor and Thanks for ever!

Now all ye Teachers, The World's Teachers and Hearers described.
and Hearers (that hold you up) I witness against you, that ye may be Witnesses
against your selves, and that ye may witness your selves to be in Cain's
Generation, and in the Generation of the false Prophets, and Antichrists, and
Seducers (who have the Form of Godliness, but deny the Power) and in the
Generation of them that ever slew the righteous Seed, as it will appear.

Now All People, take notice, who are they, that bear Rule by their Means? Who
are the Hirelings now, that the Scriptures speak of? Who seek for their Gain
from their Quarters now? Who feed themselves with the Fat now? Who seek for the
Fleece, and cloth themselves with the Wool now, and so make a Prey of the
People? Where are the Hirelings now? The Priests preach for Hire, and the
Prophets prophecy for Money. Who sues Men at the Law now, which Christ spoke
against; which the Apostle speaks against, who was a Minister of the living
Truth, which testifies against all such Practices? Who goes in the Way of
Balaam now for Gifts and Rewards? Where are the Covetous Teachers now? Who are
called of Men Master now? Who love the Chiefest Places of the Assemblies now?
Who goes in Long Robes now? Who stand praying in the Synagogues now, and speak
a Divination of their own Brain, which the Woe was pronounced against by Christ
Jesus (the Substance of all the Prophecies) who cried Woe against all such
Pharisees and false Prophets? Who hale out of the Synagogues now? Who stone and
stock, prison and beat now, and hale before Magistrates? This was the Jews
Practice and Religion, ye may say; the Jews did so. The Prophets of God they
testified against these things; and the Apostles they testified against all
these Practices: And Jesus Christ testified against all the evil Works of the
World; and all these Practices were held up in Cain's Generation. So, be ye
Witnesses, that ye are here in the Generation of the false Prophets, False
Prophets Generation.
and in the Chair of them, that spoke a Divination of their own Brain, that are
called of Men Masters; love the Chiefest places in the Assemblies; lay heavy
burdens upon the people; of them that seek their Gain from their Quarters, and
of them that go in the Way of Balaam, Cain's Sacrifice.
and in the Generation of Cain. Where any Prophet comes to Cry against any of
you, ye seek to Imprison him, or to destroy him, which Abel did not (as ye may
read) but Cain, who was the first Birth, whose Sacrifice God had no respect to;
no more has God to your Customary Will-worships, Praying and Prayers, than to
Cain's. Cain's Generation.
For Cain's Generation was and is the same, that ever it was, and is not of the
Generation of the Righteous: And except ye all be born again, ye cannot Inherit
the Kingdom of God. So, here be ye Witnesses against your selves, that ye are
in the Generation of Cain, which ever slew the Righteous Seed; and in the
Generation of all the false Prophets. Put it not far from you, as they did,
which put Christ to Death. If thou had lived at that day (thou may say)
thou would not have put Christ to Death: But thou shall see the same Nature
in thee now, as was then. For now is the Son of God come; and ye are of the
same Generation, that they were, seeking to put him to Death, where he is
manifest.

But the Eternal, Glorious God of Heaven and Earth, the same, as ever he was,
is manifesting himself in his Sons and Daughters, who are called out of that
Generation and Worship. For he said, Come out from among them, be ye separate,
touch no Unclean thing, Be ye Separate.
and I will be a Father unto you, and ye shall be my Sons and Daughters; and
this we witness, and this is fulfilled. The Generation of the Wicked we know,
and the Generation of the Faithful we know, here is a Separation between the
Precious and the Vile, between the Holy and the Profane. So all People, weigh
and see, in what Generation ye are? The Generation of the Righteous shall
shine; The Generation of the Righteous and Wicked distinguished.
the Generation of the Wicked are for the Fire prepared, and to be turned into
Hell. Ye are the Stubble; ye that are Proud, are for the Fire; ye that are
Wicked, ye are Chaff, that the Wind drives to and fro; ye that are Scorners,
are turned from God; ye that are Heathenish, know not God; and all that are
Heathen, know not God; the Lord will render Vengeance in Flames of Fire upon
you. The mighty Day of the Lord is coming, that shall burn as an Oven: The Fire
is kindling in the Earth, which shall burn up all, Root and Branch, Head and
Tail; the Lord of Hosts has spoken it. The Lord God of Power will reign: O
happy Day! Praises! Praises! Praise ye the Lord, ye Righteous Ones; sing
Praises to the Lord God Almighty for ever!

All ye Liars and Dissemblers must never inherit the Holy City ( in that State)
And all ye, Liars and Dissemblers state.
which commit Sin, and live in Sin, know not God; and who are disobedient, and
hold the Truth in Unrighteousness, the Wrath of God abides upon you. All ye,
that work Iniquiquity ( and live and die in that) are to depart from God, as
Cursed, to Everlasting Punishment; where then will ye find him, that ye talk of
with your Mouths, and call your Savior? Ye that live in your vain, wicked,
profane Ways, and take him to be your Cloak, and say, Ye are Redeemed by him,
and live in your Wickedness, Go, ye Cursed, (he will say) I know you not:
Plagues, Woe and Misery will be poured upon you all. Let every one, that names
the Name of the Lord, depart from Iniquity: None can call him Lord, but by the
Holy Ghost; and where the Holy Ghost is come, there he is Lord and King: This
is witnessed in all his Saints, where he is so; but in Cain's Generation it is
not, but he persecutes it. But he is risen and come in his Saints, who is Lord
and King, who will reign over all the World, and bear the Government upon his
Shoulders. The Lord is King in his Saints.
For the Lord is King in his Saints, he guards them, and guides them with his
mighty Power, and does preserve his Seed and Children from the Seed of
Evildoers, into his Kingdom of Glory and Eternal Rest, where they find Joy,
and Peace and Rest Eternal. All Glory and Praise be to the Lord God Almighty
for ever!

G. F.

ALL Friends in Westmorland, Cumberland, Bishopric, New-Castleside,
Northumberland and Lancashire,
Epist. 39.
Wait in the Measure of the Spirit of the Living God, that with it all your
Minds may be guided up to the Living God, To Friends in the North.
and to it take heed, that ye may have Dominion over these Spirits, that are in
the Earth; that in the Spirit of the Living God ye may all know one another,
and with it come to reign over the World, in the Power of the mighty God, which
upholds all things; and wait to receive Wisdom from God, who created the
Creatures to his Glory. And the Lord God Almighty keep you all in the Spirit,
and be with you all!

And all of you, Live in the Life.
live in the Life, that with it ye may come to know the Father of Life; and all
being led with the Spirit of the Living God, the Lord's Presence ye will enjoy;
and all that is contrary, with it will be Judged. So the Lord God Almighty
preserve you in that which is Pure, up to himself, who is Pure, to receive his
Wisdom, and that with it and in it, ye all may come to be ordered to his Glory,
who is God over all; to whom be all Honor and Glory, God blessed for ever;
that with it ye may come to see the Lamb of God, the Savior of your Souls, who
was, before the Letter was.

G. F.

FRiends,
Epist. 40.
I do you all Warn and Charge, to be faithful in the Measure of the Life of
God, Be Faithful.
which he has given you. And watch over one another, that with that which is
Pure, ye may discern, and Unity have with that which is Pure. And take heed of
any Lightness and Frowardness, which is Contrary to that which is Pure, but in
that wait and dwell, Lightness and Frowardness to shun.
which does that Judge in particular and general; that the Garden of the Lord
may be dressed, and ye in his Wisdom preserved and kept. The Mighty Power of
the Lord keep you all in his Spirit, and with it up to himself your Hearts
joined together! And see that ye Meet together, and be led together in the
Spirit and in the Power of the Lord; and that out of all Men's evil Wills ye
keep, which contrary to the Power and Light are. This is the Counsel of the
Lord to you.

G. F.

FRiends,
Epist. 41.
to you all this Exhortation is from the Word of the Lord: Dwell in the Life,
Friends to live in what they profess.
that with it ye may see the Father of Life. And dwell in the Light, with which
Light the World is Condemned; which Light comprehends the World's Wisdom; which
Light comprehends the World and their Knowledge, and all the Deceivers, which
are entered into the World (who are turned from the Light) with which Light they
are condemned, that is, the World, which hates the Light, because their Deeds
are Evil; and they will not bring their Deeds to the Light, because the Light
will reprove them, they hating it, Deceivers and Antichrists.
and you, that live in it: And all the Deceivers, and all the Antichrists they
are such, as are turned from the Light, which oppose Christ. To you all, my
Brethren, who dwell in the Light, which is the Condemnation of the World, and
of all the Deceivers, who are turned from the Light; it is not possible, that
those Deceivers should deceive you, who are the Elect, which dwell in the
Light, which comprehends the World. I do Charge you all in the Presence of the
Living God, to dwell in what ye speak and profess; and none to profess, what he
does not dwell in; and none to profess, what he is not; a Sayer, and not a
Doer; such beget vain Talkers: So, with the Light all such are to be condemned
from the Life. So, I charge you all in the Presence of the Living God, to Dwell
in the Light, which is the World's Condemnation, The Light is the World's
Condemnation.
who hates it: Though they may profess all the Words declared from them, that
were in the Light of Christ; they hating the Light in the particular, with the
Light, which never changes, are they and all their Profession to be condemned,
and Woe is the End of it and them, from Christ, who is the Light. Wherefore to
you I speak, Friends, that dwell in the Light, and love it, that to the Light
in all Consciences of them that hate it (which Christ Jesus does enlighten them
withal) ye may be made manifest, which is the World's Condemnation. In the
Light all Friends dwell, which comprehends the World, which is its
Condemnation: The highest Religion to it must bend and bow; and all that is to
be Condemned, which is Contrary to it. And all Friends, dwell in the Light,
which is Eternal, which comprehends the World, that with it ye may comprehend
the World; and rise up, and go on in the mighty Power of God, as mighty Men of
War in the Power and Strength of the mighty God of Life, the Lord of Hosts, who
is with you, your Shield, The Lord of Hosts is your Armor.
Buckler and Defense, and Armor, who arms you over all the Wicked to reign,
triumph and trample. God Almighty bless you, and prosper his Work, that to the
Light in all Consciences ye may be made manifest, to the Measure of God, which
is Pure, which is given to every one; that with it all may see, what is
contrary to God. And to you this is from the Word of God.

G. F.

To Friends, concerning the Light, in which they may see their Savior, and the
Deceivers.
TO all Friends every where, scattered abroad: In the Light dwell, Epist. 42.
which comes from Christ, that with it ye may see Christ, your Savior; that ye
may grow up in him. For they, who are in him, are new Creatures; and Old things
are passed away, and all things are become New. And who are in him, are led by
the Spirit, to them there is no Condemnation; but they dwell in that, which
does Condemn the World, and do with the Light see the Deceivers, and the
Antichrists, which are entered into the World. And such Teachers, as bear Rule
by their means; and such as seek for the Fleece, Hireling-Teachers.
and make a Prey upon the People, and are Hirelings, and such as go in the Way
of Cain, and run greedily after the Error of Balaam; and such as are called of
Men Master, and stand praying in the Synagogues, and have the Chief Seats in
the Assemblies, All which are in the World, which by those that dwelt in the
Light, were cried against; for it did them Condemn, and all such, as speak a
Divination of their own Brain, and are filthy Dreamers, who use their Tongues,
and steal the Words from their Neighbors; with the Light, the World and all
these aforesaid are comprehended, and all that is in it; and all they that
hate it, and all the Antichrists, that oppose it, and all the false Prophets
and Deceivers, that are turned from it, with the Light are comprehended, and
with the Light are Condemned, and all that are turned from it, and hate it.

I am the Light of the World, says Christ, and he does enlighten every one,
that comes into the World; and he that loves the Light, and walks in the
Light, receives the Light of Life: And the other, he hates the Light, because
his Deeds are evil, and the Light does reprove him. And this is the
Condemnation, that Light is come into the World, in which Light, they that love
it, walk; which is the Condemnation of him that hates it. Antichrists, false
Prophets and Deceivers are seen.
And all the Antichrists, and all the false Prophets, and all the Deceivers,
the Beast and the well-favoured Harlot, all these are seen with the Light, to
be in that Nature, acting contrary to the Light; and with the Light are they
comprehended, and by the Light condemned.

For he is not an Antichrist, that walks in the Light, that comes from Christ;
he is no Deceiver, that walks in the Light, that comes from Christ: Many
Deceivers are entered into the World. The World hates the Light, and Deceivers
are turned from the Light, and the Antichrists they are turned from the Light,
therefore they oppose it, and some of them call it a Natural Conscience, a
Natural Light; and such put the Letter for the Light. But with the Light, which
never changes (which was, before the World was) are these Deceivers seen, where
they enter into the World. For many Deceivers are entered into the World, and
the false Prophets are entered into the World; the World hates the Light, and if
it were possible, they would deceive the Elect. But in the Light the Elect do
dwell, which the Antichrists, Deceivers, and false Prophets are turned from,
into the World, that hate the Light: That Light which they do hate, the
Children of Light dwell in, the Elect. So it is not possible, that the
Antichrists and Deceivers, that are entered into the World, that hate the
Light, should deceive the Elect, who dwell in the Light which they hate; which
Light does them all comprehend, and the World; which Light was, before the
World was, and is the World's Condemnation; in which Light the Elect walk: And
here it is not possible, that they that dwell in the Light, should be deceived,
which comprehends the World, and is the World's Condemnation. Which Light shall
bring every Tongue to Confess, and every Knee to bow; when the Judgments of God
come upon them, it shall make them confess, that the Judgments of God are Just.

G. F.

TO all my Dear Brethren, the Flock of God every where;
Epist. 43.
Keep together in the Power up to God, 8. Month, 53.
and none be discouraged or disheartened at the Enemies without, which are
without God in the World; but be bold all in the Power of Truth, triumphing
over the World. Stand fast in the Freedom of Christ.
Hold your Freedom, and keep and stand fast in it, that ye may be armed with
Wisdom, and furnished against your Enemies, who are Wiser in their Generation,
than the Children of Light. But the Wisdom of the Most High is spreading, and
making it self manifest in your Hearts, by which ye may comprehend the World's
Wisdom, the World's Worship and Knowledge. The World's Worship and Knowledge.
And waiting in that which is Pure, it will lead you into that which was,
before the World was, before the false Worship was, before the Seducers were,
before the Antichrist was, and before the outward Temple was, and false Prophet
and Hirelings: And here ye will comprehend the World, and what is done in the
World. Therefore every one keep your Habitation, abide the Trial, and abide the
Day, and stand fast in your Freedom, so far as Christ has made you free; free
from Man's Will and Commandments, Freedom from the Lusts of the World.
which imbondageth; free from the Fashions and Lusts of the World, the fleshly
Will, which bondageth and burdens the Pure. And to you, that cannot witness
this, Wait, and mind the Pure, and then the Burden will be easy; and wait for
Redemption and Salvation, to make it so. And your Strength is, to stand still,
that ye may receive Refreshings; that ye may know, how to Wait, and how to Walk
before God, by the Spirit of God within you. So God Almighty be with you, and
keep you up to himself under his own Dominion, from under the Dominion of
Satan, that ye may trample him under your Feet.

And Friends every where, Meet together, treading and trampling all the Deceit
under your Feet; Watch in the Eternal.
and watch over one another in that which is Eternal, and see every one, that
your Words be from the Eternal Life: Examine and Search with that which is
Eternal, which speaks to that, which is in Prison in others. And ye that are
led forth to Exhort, or to Reprove, do it with all Diligence, taking all
Opportunities, reproving that which devours the Creation, and thereby destroys
the very humane Reason: For the Truth does preserve every thing in its place.
And all Meet together every where, and in your Meetings wait upon the Lord; and
take heed of forming Words, but mind the Power, and know that which is Eternal,
which will keep you all in Unity, walking in the Spirit, See the Lord near.
and will let you see the Lord near you, and amongst you. So, God Almighty be
with you, and multiply you, and give you the Dew of Heaven, the heavenly Dew,
the living Mercies (which nourishes the tender Plants, which causes them to
grow, bud and bring forth) and water you with his Blessings. So, the Lord God
of Power be with you all, my dear Hearts! I am with you in the Spirit, and in
the Love of your God, your Father and mine. The Lord God prosper, guide and
protect you, and bring you all into his Kingdom of Glory, you who are Elected,
Called, Chosen and Faithful, who are the Lambs. God Almighty bless you, and
keep you all, my dear Hearts! The Love of God passes Knowledge.
The Love of God is Love past Knowledge, which bears all things, endures all
things, hopes all things, envieth not, thinks no Evil. And the Love of God is
the Ground of all true Love in your Hearts, which casts out the Love of the
World, and the Enmity, which was gotten betwixt you and God. He that believes,
is born of God; and he that is born of God, overcomes the World. So, Fare ye
all well, and God Almighty bless and prosper you.

G. F.

And all ye Friends, that wait in that which is pure in it self, which cannot
lie, which does not change, Wait upon God, for God does not change, and let all
Flesh be silent before the Lord, that the Life may speak in all; then the Mouth
of the Lord is known, Let Life speak.
and God is Exalted and Glorified with his own Work, which he brings forth. And
Meet together therein every where, and mind that which gathers you, and wait on
that which is pure, which gathers you out of the Worlds Nature, Disposition,
Conversation, Churches, Forms and Customs, which will knit your Hearts together
up to God. That which gathers you out of all these, is the Spirit of the Lord,
which will gather you up to him, who is the Father of Spirits; that ye may be
able to Judge and Discern, and Confound all the Deceit in the World, and grow
up to be as Kings, and suffer nothing to reign in you, but what is in the Life
Eternal. And beware of speaking in the Presence of the Lord, except your Words
be from the Eternal Life, Words spoken from the Word.
the Eternal Word of God, else it does not profit, nor build up, nor edify.
So, God Almighty be with you all in your Meetings, that ye may see him to be
your Head, King and Lord over all. To you all, who are enlightened with the
Light of the Spirit, that is the Light, which shows you Sin and Evil, and your
evil Deeds and Actings, and the Deceit and False-heartedness; The Light teaches
Holiness.
which will Teach you Holiness, walking in it, and bring you into Unity; and it
will draw your Minds up to God, and in it ye will see more Light: But hating
the Light, there is your Condemnation.

G. F.

ALL Friends, Epist. 44.
wait upon the Unlimited Power and Spirit of the Lord, which baptises into one
Body; where ye will have all Unity in that which crucifies the Flesh, and
mortifies all evil Desires, and puts off the Body of Sin, the Old Man with his
Deeds, and Circumcises without hands, and joins together your Hearts up to God,
from whence the living Mercies come, from the Living God alone, who is God over
all, blessed for ever. To that in every one of your Consciences do I appeal and
speak, to the Measure that God has given, the Light; The Light, is the Eye.
loving it, and taking heed to it, and waiting in it for Power from God, it
will guide you to the Father of Light, in which ye will have all Unity; and
hating the Light it will be your Condemnation. Oh Wait, wait upon the Living
God to nourish the tender Plant in you, that ye may bring forth Fruits of
Righteousness unto God, for he accepts such, and none else. Therefore wait upon
God, he has a pure Seed among you: Let your waiting be in the Light; and mind
that he is a Wise Man, whose Eye is in his Head, which is Christ, the End of
all Priests, the End of the outward Temple; and the Fool's Eye is abroad, after
many Priests, and they are led away with Conceivings, Temptations.
and diverse Temptations. Therefore in the Light wait, where ye will see all
Deceits within and without: For it is a Sin to enter into Temptations; but it
is no Sin to be tempted: Christ was tempted, but he entered not into the
Temptation: Therefore in the Fear of the Lord wait and watch. The Light is
that, which lets thee see Sin and Evil and Temptations; which if thou enter
into, the Light will be thy Condemnation; then thy Heart will not be right
toward God. But in the Light of God all wait, Wisdom's Gate.
which will bring you to see, where Wisdom's Gate is; the Fear of the Lord is
the beginning of it. Pure Wisdom is let out of the Treasury into the pure
Heart, which sees God; and fearing the Living God, it keeps the Heart pure and
clean, to receive the Wisdom from the Treasury freely, who does not upbraid.
And as ye depart from Evil and Iniquity, he breaks the Bonds by showing Mercy;
and then the Understanding grows pure and clear. So in the Power of the Lord
God Fare ye well.

And the Lord God of Power keep you all in his Measure up to himself, from and
above all the World's evil Ways, Baits, Customs and Teachings, to trample upon
them in his Power; that Wisdom may be Justified of you all, and ye may be
preserved, and God glorified: To whom be all Glory, Honor and Thanks over all,
God blessed for ever!

Read these among all my Brethren and Friends, and send it abroad to Friends,
that ye may all know the Power of the Living God in one another, not in Words,
but in Power. So Farewell.

G. F.

Concerning the Heirs of the Kingdom of God, and how Christ was, and his Saints
are Tempted.
THey are the Heirs of the Kingdom of God, Epist. 45.
and of the Generation of God, that live out of the Kingdom of the Wicked World
(up to God, in the Seed, which all the Promises of God are to) following after
Christ, who was in Egypt, and passed out of Egypt, the House of Darkness. And
he was in the Wilderness, Christ was Tempted.
and there he was tempted to Lust after the Creature; he was tempted to make
himself away; he was tempted to Worship the Devil (to bow down and worship him)
He is the Captain of our Salvation; he is gone before, he endured the Cross, he
despised the Shame, he suffered the Contradiction of Sinners, for the Glory
that was set before him, he has won the Crown: He has overcome Egypt, and he
has fulfilled the Law, he has overcome the World, he has overcome the
Temptations; he is able to succor all who are tempted. It is no Sin to be
tempted, but to enter into the Temptation, that is Sin: He is the Head of the
Body, he is the Head of the Church, Christ the Head of the Church.
who has blotted out the Ordinances and Traditions of Men; who is the End of
the daily Sacrifice; who is the End of the Levitical Priesthood; he is the End
of all outward Temples, who is the Substance of the Prophets, for they all
witnessed of him: He is Ascended above all Principalities and Powers.

Now, to all Dear Ones, the same Seed, which is Christ, the same Spirit is now
manifest, as ever was; the same World is now, as ever was; the same
Temptations, and the same Devil, and the same vain Worship of the World,
twining into another Form and Color. And Jesus Christ is the Way, the Truth
and the Life, the Door, that all must pass through, and he it is, that opens
it; the same Door that ever was, the same Christ yesterday, to day, and for
ever. And all who follow Christ, the Seed, and are of his Generation, and are
brought out of Egypt, the House of Darkness, and from under the Law, the
Righteousness of the Law is fulfilled in them; who walk not after the Flesh,
but after the Spirit (as the Apostle says) which we do witness. And the Seed's
Generation has passed through the Wilderness, Temptations in the Wilderness.
where they have been tempted to Lust after the Creature: Ye that have been in
the Wilderness, can witness this with me, and the same Temptations, even to
Despair, and to make themselves away. The Devil, before he would go out of his
Kingdom, he would destroy all: But look at the Captain Jesus Christ, who has
passed before, who was tempted (the Captain of our Salvation) with the same
Temptations to worship the Devil; and that if thou would worship the Devil,
thou should have the Glory of the World; if not, be called a Devil, as
Christ was, The Glory of the World.
and be called a Madman, as he was; and that none followed him, but a Cursed
People (as they said) And they that worship the Devil, gave those Titles to
him) And thou shall lose thy good Name, and be a Laughing Stock to them that
worship the Devil, and as a Derision among them, and a Mark for every one of
them to shoot at, and the Drunkards to make Songs of. This is the Portion of
them, who deny the Worship of the World, and the Glory, and the Favor, and the
evil Fashions thereof, and cannot Fashion themselves to it; who are tempted to
all these things: But it is no Sin to be tempted; but standing in the Power of
the Almighty God, ye will be enabled to stand against, and above all the Wiles
of Satan. So dwell in the Power of Almighty God, which carries through the
Wilderness, and through Temptations to the End, and gets the Victory over all
the Carnal Ordinances, and Commands, and Traditions of Men; and he that
overcomes, ascends above them all: And he that overcomes, shall sit down with
Christ in his Throne. So, every one must witness Christ born in them, passing
through Death to him, through the World, through the Law, through Temptations,
through the Wilderness, and out of the World; and the Son of God ye will
witness to arise, who does overcome, who was born of God. And the same Spirit,
that raised up Jesus Christ, the same Spirit raises you up, and quickens
your Mortal Bodies; and he that has not the same, is none of his.

So, Fellowship with Christ in his Sufferings.
Examine your selves, and see, if ye have Fellowship with Christ in his
Sufferings, and be brought to be Conformable to him in his Death, and to have
Fellowship with him in his Temptations and Reproaches, and Buffetings, and
Scornings, and the Contradiction of Sinners, and to be spit upon, as he was;
and he that has Fellowship with him in his Sufferings, shall have Fellowship
with him in his Glory: And he that does Confess him in this dark World, him
will he Confess before his Father, and his Angels; and he that does deny him in
this World, him he will deny before his Father and his Angels in the World to
come.

Now to all you, who are Convinced, and have your Understandings Enlightened,
and the Worship of the World does appear to you to be Contrary to the Worship
of God and Christ in Spirit, and all the Prophets and Apostles, who Worshipped
the Living God in Newness of Life, Lust not after the Creature.
in the Second Birth, Beware, ye enter not into the Temptation, to lust after
the Creature, and give not way to the Lazy, Dreaming Mind, for it enters into
the Temptations. So there thou will be polluted with the Pollutions of the
World; then thou will be tempted to Despair, and the Devil there gets Power
upon thee, if thou enter into Temptations, and follow thy Imaginations in going
from the Light of Christ within thee. And then thou judge with evil Thoughts;
and he will come with his Instruments, his evil Angels, to tempt thee from
God's Worship to the false Worship, Temptations to the false Worship.
or else thou will lose thy Credit or good Name, or thy Place, or thy
Authority, where thou art, except thou will bow to him: And every one will
stare at thee, and thou will be gazed at, and wondered at. So if thy Mind go
from the Light, and out of the Fear of the Lord, then thou will Consult with
Flesh and Blood, which must never enter into the Kingdom of God, and that
Carnal Reason must never enter. And then thou will take Counsel of the Harlot,
and so the Eye of thy Mind will be turned out from God, and so thou go under
the Power of the Prince of the Air, which rules and reigns in the Children of
Disobedience, and so under the Dominion of Satan. And then, though thou have
the Praise of the World, and the Glory of the World; yet disobeying that, which
should have led thee into the Kingdom of God, and from under the Dominion of
Satan, thy latter End will be worse than thy Beginning. The World's Honor.
And in the World there thou may have thy Honor, and the fleshly Man is
nourished, and thy Glory and Renown may grow again among the Fleshly ones, who
are gone out from God, and have disobeyed the Light in them, which should have
led them from under the Dominion of Satan (under whose Dominion they are now)
up to God, where there is Joy Eternal, where there are Riches and Glory
Eternal, and where there is Comfort Eternal; whose Kingdom is for ever, whose
Dominion is an Everlasting Dominion: But thou, who forsakest the right Way,
go into Eternal Destruction. Woe, Woe is to thee! For the love of the World is
an Enemy to God; and he that loves the World, the love of the Father is not in
him: And thou, who set thy Hand to the Plough, and look back, art not
fit for the Kingdom of God.

And all who can Witness the Second Birth, and are born again, The Second Birth.
know, the Promises of God in and to the Seed are Yea and Amen; and ye coming
out of that which was in Time, ye come up to God, who was before Time was: This
is a Mystery, he that can receive it, let him; and he that has an Ear to hear
it, let him hear, In Time and before Time.
what the Spirit says. Abel was the Second Birth, he was no Murderer, nor no
Sinner; for God called him: And God saw no Iniquity in Jacob, but Esau the
first, is hated, and not perfect. And except ye be born again, ye cannot enter
into the Kingdom of God: Flesh and Blood shall not inherit the Kingdom of God.
And he that is born of God, sins not, because the Seed of God remains in him,
neither can he sin, 1 John 3.9.
because he is born of God. And he that is born of God, overcomes the World; he
that is born of God, is not of this World. And he that is born of God,
testifies against all the Works of the World, and the Wickedness of it; and he
that is born of God, does not commit Sin. He that commits Sin, is of the Devil,
and has not seen God at any time: Hereby are the Children of God made manifest
from the Children of the Devil; for he that sins, is of the Devil, and knows
not God. For this Purpose was the Son of God made manifest, to destroy the
Works of the Devil; and he that does Righteousness, is Righteous, even as he is
Righteous. And they that were of the Second Birth, were taught of God, Born of
God.
and needed no Man to teach them; and were come into the Everlasting Covenant:
And those are the Second Birth, who are born again of the Immortal Seed by the
Will of God, and not by the Will of Man. And as many as received Christ, he
gave Power to them to become the Sons of God, which are not born by the Will of
Man, but by the Will of God; John 3.5.
not by Water only, but by Water and the Spirit.

G. F.

TO all Friends who are in the Unity, which is in the Light; Walk in the Light.
Epist. 46.
It is one Light, that does Convince you all; and one Christ, that does call
all to Repentance, up to himself, the one Head, Concerning the Unity, which is
in the Light.
which is Christ. The wise Man's Eye is his Head, who changes the Mind, and
calls from above, to that which lies below; it is he alone, that gives Faith,
and all who are in this Faith, are one. It is one Power, that raises up the
Seed; and your Faith being out of Words, in the Power, ye are all one, and that
Seed is one; and ye are all one, if ye he Ten Thousand; which Seed is one,
which is Christ, and he is the Master, which is one: and all the Brethren, who
are in the Spirit, are one. Ye have all one Eye, ehich is the Light; one Fire,
which Consumes all, which the Light discovers to be evil; and one Spirit, which
baptises all into the one Body, where there is no Confusion, but Pureness and
Oneness. Therefore all Friendds, mind the Oneness, and that which keeps you in
the Oneness and Unity, it is that which keeps you out of the World; and this
one Light leads you out of Darkness into the Everlasting Day, where ye see the
Church of God.) But living in the Darkness, and following that Mind, it leads
into the World's Assemblies, who have the Letter of the Saints Words, but live
out of the Life, smiting at one another, fighting for the Husks: But minding
the Light within, it leads you into the Assemblies of the Righteous, who are in
the Life. The Kernel is (to be found) within, The Kernel, and the Husk
distinguished.
the Husk is without, which the Swine feed upon, but the Pearl is hid from
them; and the Swine, and the Dogs would devore them, in whom the Pearl is
found: They are Outsides, who feed upon Outsides. God that made the World, and
all things therein, seeing he is the Lord of Heaven and Earth, dwells not in
Temples made with Hands, Acts 17.24.
and has made all Nations of Men, that dwell upon the Face of the Earth, of
one Blood, and has appointed the Times and Seasons, and has given to every
one a Measure according to their Ability. God has given Ability to every one
according to their Measure (that are Faithful to it) and here is the
Righteousness of God received, and the Wrath of God revealed upon the Children
of Disobedience. The Grace of God has appeared unto all, which taught the
Saints to deny Ungodliness, and teaches us; which the World turns into
Wantonness, and walks despitefully against the Spirit of Grace; and yet tempts
God, and calls for Grace: These are they, that set up Teachers without. And
Christ says, He is the Light of the World, and has enlightened every one, that
comes into the World; and he that loves the Light, brings his Deeds to the
Light, to him there is no occasion of stumbling: and this Teaching guides to
God, the Father of Light. And the other, he hates the Light, because the Light
will reprove him, here he knows, his Deeds are evil, by the Light: And this is
the Condemnation, that Light is come into the World, and Men love Darkness
rather than Light. And here thou must become silent, The Sight of Sin.
Oh Flesh, that temptest God to give thee a Sight of thy Sins; for Christ has
enlightened thee, and given thee a Sight of thy Sins, which shall be thy
Condemnation, hating it: For thou that hate it, have it. And it is Thou, that
put the Letter for the Light, which was given from the Light, from them
that walked in the Light; but thou hating the Light given thee, thou know
not the Conditions of them that had the Light, but put Darkness for Light,
and Light for Darkness: and so Woe rests upon thee! It is Thou, that put
Evil for Good, and the Woe rests upon thee! And it is Thou, that art covered,
and not with the Spirit of the Lord: And it is Thou that stand'st not in the
Counsel of the Lord, but followest thy own Imaginations, that art turned out
from God; and so the Woe rests upon thee! And thy Kingdom and Crown is Pride;
and Woe is to the King of Pride! And Thou art the Wicked, that forgettest God,
which must be turned into Hell; and live in Perverseness, and art a Child of
Disobedience, who disobeyest the Light; and so the Wrath of God rests upon
thee. But who love the Light, and walk in the Light, Jesus Christ is their
King, whose Gospel is preached to every Creature. For Death having passed over
all Men, all in the first Nature are Children of Wrath, and all in the Second
are Children of God. The Seed is sown upon all sorts of Ground; The Seed and
its fourfold Ground.
upon the High-Way-Ground, Thorny and Stony Ground, and Good Ground. And Christ
has given to every one a Measure, and Ability according to his Measure; he
that improves not his Measure, he has the Eye, and sees not, and Ear, and
hears not; and Heart, and does not understand. And he is the Thief, that
steals the Apostles Words, and Christ's Words: And is the Drunkard, who abides
not in the Light; gone from his Measure, and so abides not in the Doctrine of
Christ. And this Light shall be thy Condemnation, when the Book of Conscience
is opened, which shoud exercise your Conscience, which will condemn you: And
the Wrath of God abides upon the Children of Disobedience.

G. F.

ALL Friends every where, who with the Light, Epist. 47.
that never changes, are Convinced, and turned from Darkness, To Friends in
Cumberland, Bishopric, and Northumberland.
In the Light dwell, that ye may come to learn of Christ in the Life, and with
it know the Movings of the Spirit of Life in you, that moves against all the
Works of Death, and so works Freedom. A Measure of this living Spirit and Power
being known in every one, and ye kept to it, with it ye are kept diligent,
quick and lively, to walk in the Life; The Life Redeems.
for it is the Life, that Redeems which only Overcomes, and gives an Entrance
into Rest. Therefore every one of you know a Measure of that Spirit, which
exercises Meekness, Truth and Faithfulness in you in Power, which as it is
known, breaks the Bonds of Iniquity, and scatters the Armies of the Aliens;
that ye may all know, what it is to follow the Lamb, with Joy and Peace in your
Minds, your Hearts upright to your Guide. Take heed, Imitation of others.
that none of you walk by Imitation of others only: For though the Way they
walk in, be good to them, who are in the Light, yet thou art in Darkness, and
know not, whether thou go, nor can ever receive any Strength from God
to Carry thee on in that Way, nor Reward for it; and thy Fellowship is not with
God in that Way, but with Men, and in this Way thou can not be Cleansed, but
in the End thy Labor will be lost. And of this sort are they, that turn back,
and speak evil of the Way of God, when Way of God they never came into, nor his
Life, Peace and Power; that is a Way they never knew. By these the Offense
comes, and the Stumbling Block, whereby many are offended; but Woe to such, by
whom the Offense comes!

And take heed of Judging the Measures of others, but every one mind your own;
Judge not the Measures of others.
and there ye famish the busy Minds and high Conceits, and so Peace springs up
among you, and Division is Judged. And this know, That there are Diversities of
Gifts, but one Spirit and Unity therein to all, who with it are guided. And
though the Way seems to thee diverse; yet Judge not the Way, lest thou Judge the
Lord, and know not, that several Ways (seeming to Reason) has God to bring
his People out by, yet are all but one in the End: This is, that he many be
looked to from all the Ends of the Earth, to be a Guide and Lawgiver; and that
none should Judge before him. Deep is the Mystery of Godliness! Therefore
Silence all Flesh, and see your own Ways be Clean; and as ye grow therein, the
Way of Peace will be more prized by you, and the perfect Bond ye will come to
know: And all who are here established, shall stand in Strength, when others
fall on the righthand, and on the left.

Dear Friends, ye have long been Convinced, and owned the Lord in Word and
Form; and look for it, ye must be proved and tried, not only your Faith and
Patience in Persecution by the Enemy without (for that many of you have
escaped) but proved ye must all be with that which is nearer, The Trial by a
Falling away.
even a Falling-away amongst your selves: And it is good, that the Stedfastness
of all should be known herein. For many are crept in unawares, who are
self-ended, slowbellies, who love this World more, than the Cross of Christ,
who are got high in th Form, and have great swelling Words, which they can
utter for their Advantage in Earthly things, deceiving the Simple therewith,
who are not yet got above the Pollution of the World: And this was ordained of
Old, for the manifesting of him, that is approved. And with that Eye, that
leads out of the Fall, is he seen to be fallen, who has got the Saints Words,
to plead for that which is in the Fall, it to uphold. And here the Oppressor
would set his Seat faster, than before, the Devil being now transformed into
the Likeness of an Angel of Light. And thus is the Scripture fulfilled; My
little Children, this have I written to you, that when ye see this come to
pass, ye might not be amazed, as though some strange thing had befallen the
Church of God; but even the same, that was of Old, to prove you, and to perfect
yo against the Devil: Herein is he made manifest, that ye may know his Wiles.
And great Stedfastness shall it produce to all, who mind their standing upon
Christ the Rock, and have Salt in themselves to savor withal. But that which
will not come to the Everlasting Foundation, Airy Spirits.
is apt to be tossed to an fro with Airy Spirits, who are now gone out into the
World, to deceive such, whose Hearts look back after Worldly things. Therefore
stand with your Minds girded up to God above the World, lest ye run in vain,
and lose your Crown; which none receives, but he that continues to the End.

G. F.
Let this go to all the Churches of the Saints.



To Friends, concerning Judging.
FRiends to you all this is the Word of the Lord: Epist. 48.
Take heed of Judging one another; Judge not one another (I charge you in the
Presence of the Lord) with that which must be Judged; neither lay open one
another Weaknesses behind one another's Backs; for thou that do so, art one
of ham's Family, which is under the Curse. But every one of you in particular
with the Light of Christ (which he has enlightened you withal) see your
selves, that Self may be Judged out with the Light in every one. Now, Self
Judged.
all loving the Light, here no Self can stand, but it is Judged with the Light;
and here all are in Unity, and here no Self-will can arise, nor no Mastery; but
all that is Judged out. And let there be no Backbiting amongst you; but in
Love, ye that dwell in the Light, and see clear, speak to the others, whose
Minds are gone from the Light: Else (as I said before) if ye do speak behind
their backs, there will be the Evil Eye and Filthy Mind, which dare not speak
to their Faces. And so the same (Mind) which does condemn behind the back, is
for Condemnation; and so Self should be Judged first. Here ye will be kept
watchful ub the pure Fear and Love of God, and all Self will be Judged out from
amongst you, which would be Judging in secret; which is a Work of Darkness.

And take heed (I charge you all in the Presence of the Living God) of a
feigned Humility, and a feigned Love, Feigned Love and Humility.
which is out of the Light, and then that to use as a Customary Salutation, or
a Formal Gesture; which is all for Condemnation, and to be kept out, being out
of the Covenant. So see, that all your Actings be in and from the Light; here
ye will be kept clean and pure, and will come to be sealed in the Everlasting
Covenant of God with the Light, which comes from Christ.

And again, I charge you all in the Prefence of the Living God, not to suffer
your Minds to go out to Contend with them, Contentions out of Truth.
who be not of the Truth, in that which is out of the Truth, both which are to
be condemned with the Truth. For the same Mind will boast and get up, which is
out of the Truth, and reaches at things in the Comprehension, though it lives
not in it, but is excluded out of the Truth, and shall not enter; but is for
Condemnation. And so to you all this is the Counsel of the Lord God of Power
and of Peace, that in Peace ye may be preserved, to wait for the Spirit of
Grace, and of Wisdom, and of Understanding.

And Friends all every where, Meet together, waiting upon the Lord, that your
Minds may be guided by the Spirit of God up to God. And know the Life of God in
one another, which all, whose Minds are abroad, are Strangers to, and to the
Covenant of Promise; for the Covenant and Promise of Life is with and to the
Seed: The Covenant and Promise of Life.
And there is no Sin, Iniquity or Transgression in the Covenant; for that is
all Judged, being out of the Covenant of God. And therefore all wait, that ye
all may come to witness the Covenant of Life made with your Souls, and to find
the Witness, the Seal of the Spirit, that ye are Sealed to God with, Sin and
Transgression finished.
and that ye may all witness Sin and Transgression finished, and blotted out by
Christ Jesus, the New Covenant of God; and ye may all come to know the Lord,
and to love the Light, which Christ has given you, to teach you; then ye will
witness the Covenant, yea Ten Thousands will witness the Covenant, Christ
Jesus. For as the Lord said, I will give him for a Covenant of Light to the
Gentiles, to open the blind eyes; And so, this Light does open the Eyes of the
blind. All ye, that were blind, as the Gentiles, or the Jews, ye know, that
with the Light your Eyes are opened, and ye do see the New Covenant, the
Unchangable Priest, the Unchangable Covenant. So in that, which changes not,
dwell, that that which is changable and wavering, may be Judged and Condemned
with that which changes not. And though the Ministration of Condemnation was
and is glorious in its time, The Ministration of the Spirit.
yet the Ministration of the Spirit exceeds in Glory, which changes not; and
there is no Condemnation to them, who are in Christ Jesus, the New Covenant,
who walk in the Spirit. But who are in that which changes, running into the
Changable Ways and Works without, and are in that Nature which hates the Light,
all such are for Condemnation by the Light, which is Eternal, and never
changes. And all the beggarly Lusts, Traditions and Rudiments of Men, which
are acted in that Nature, contrary to the Light, are for Condemnation by the
Light.

So, dwelling all in the Light, which is Unchangeable, ye come to Judge all the
Changable Ways and Worships, Changable Worships.
that are Variable and Changable, by that which comes from God, which changes
not; and with his Light, which he has given, all those things are Judged. So
dwelling in the Judgment, ye will be filled full of Mercy; for first Judgment,
and then Mercy is to spread over all, that the Just may rule over all.

And Friends, I charge you all in the Presence of the Living God, let no Evil
Communication, Evil Communication.
nor evil Words proceed out of your Mouths. And if ye find the Root in you not
taken away, that would act such things, dwell in the Light, which lets you see
the Evil Communications, and with the Light give Judgment upon it in the
particular, and first Judge it there; for that is it, which corrupts the Good
Manners. And there areno good Manners, but all is corrupted, whilst there is
Evil Communication, and all that Profession is Abomination to the Lord, whilst
that stands. So, put away all filthy Communication out of your Mouths, and all
Wrath, Unrighteousness and Ungodliness, with the Light ye will see it all; and
walking in the Light, and loving it, ye may Judge all that with the Light, and
with it come to know the good Manners and pure Communication. And walking in
this Light, it will keep out all Evil Communication from amongst you, for the
corrupt Manners are there, and procced form that; and all the Profession, which
is performed in that Nature, whilst the Evil Communication is standing, is
Abomination, and for Condemnation: For all the Evil Manners corrupt, and all
their Profession is corrupt and for the Fire.

So, all walk in the Light, with which ye are enlightened, for it will teach you
all the good Manners and pure Communication, Good Manners.
and condemn all corrupt Manners and corrupt Communication; and so to have the
Heart and Mind cleansed from all such things. And all walking in the Light, ye
have the Besom; labor to sweep the Land from all such corrupt Manners and vain
Communication, and with the Light all that comes to be Judged down. So the
Light is the Judge, and the Condemnation; and in the Light walk, and ye will
shine.

And My Dear Brethren in the Covenant of Life, Yea and Nay, and (call the days)
First day, Second day, Third day, Fourth day, Yea and Nay.
Fifth day, Sixth day and Seventh day, as they were given forth, First day,
Second day, etc.
and called by God in the Beginning. The Endless Riches ye are made partakers
of, and the Endless Inheritance ye are come to have a share of, Heirs with
Christ of the Kingdom, that never fades away; and ye that suffer with Christ,
shall reign with Christ. And to you all Friends, who are not come up to the
Covenant, and cannot witness, that ye are come into it, and sealed (by the
Spirit) follow no Imagemakers, but the Life guiding you, which is Eternal; that
will hew down all Imaginations, and Likenesses, and Images, and Image-makers,
Image-makers.
that the Glorious God, the Father of Life may be exalted, the Ground of all
Truth. And Friends, none to speak abroad, but as ye are moved of God with the
Spirit of the Lord, and to that be obedient, as faithful Servants; that ye may
enter into the Joy of your Lord. And Friends, I warn and charge you all, that
there be no keeping of Old things in store in the Mind or Memory, or
Heartrising one against another, or Backbiting among you, Evil-speaking.
or speaking evil one of another; but Judge that out by the Light of Christ.
And dwell in the Life of God, then ye all in this Life of God will have Unity:
And beware of, and not suffer that in you to Contend, which goes out of the
Truth; but by the Truth Judge it out. And Meet together every where, knowing
one another in the Spirit, and not in the Flesh; and with the Spirit of God
wait upon God, the Father of Spirits. And Friends, Live not on that, which is
out of the Truth, but all be kept low; that that, which is pure of God, and
comes from God, ye may live and feed upon. And that there be no feeding on
feigned Love, Feigned Love
but on that which is Pure and Eternal, without Mixture or Stain; that all the
other may be hewn down, and trampled upon, and trodden down. Earth to the
Earth, Dust to the Dust; that ye may allbe kept pure, and in Joy, waiting for
the Eternal Riches from the Eternal God. So all to know the Ministry and
Prayer, which is from and in the Spriti, and in it all are one; and by it all
the contrary is Judged. And take heed of Pride, but by the Eternal Spirit,
Pride.
keep all that down, and judge it. The Sacrifices of the Wicked are Abominaiton
to the Lord, and he hears not Hypocrites; but the Prayers of the Righteous are
heard.

G. F.

FRiends, in the Life and Power of God dwell, Epist. 49.
which does teach you to deny your selves, which keeps you from all Strife, and
from all Deceit, that nothing may appear, Self-denial.
but by the pure Spirit it may be Judged; and that by the Spirit of God ye may
all be kept up to him, who is a God of Order, and not of Confusion: For all who
are in Confusion, are in that Nature that is contrary to the Light, who are with
it to be Condemned. And so the God of Life be with you all, that the Fear of
the Lord in all your hearts may be set, that the Dread, Terror and Fear of the
Lord amongst you may remain, and Faith from him ye may all come to receive, and
Love. And let Love proceed one toward another, from the Faith, which purifies,
that all Actions to the Light may be brought, that all Deeds contrary to the
Light, may with it be Condemned; that in Peace and Righteousness ye may all
grow up in that which is Eternal, guided to him who is Eternal, taking all heed
to the Measure of God's Grace, that with it your Minds may be guided up to God,
the Father of Life, and all your Minds with the Eteranl kept to him, who is
Eternal: That the Kingdom of God ye may all come to see, The Kingdom of God.
waiting in the Light, taking heed to it, which calls to Repentance, which
informs your Minds toward the Kingdom of God, where there is no End, but Love,
Joy and Peace for Evermore. And wait in the Light for Power to remove the
Earthly part, that ye may all witness the Kingdom, and Joy in the Holy Ghost;
that with the Light your Minds may be kept up to God, who is Pure, and in it ye
may all have Unity, who in the Light of Life do walk: For who contrary to the
Light do act, this is their Condemnation. Unsavory Speeches, etc.
And let no unsavory Speeches, nor Profaneness, nor Looseness, nor Idleness, nor
Filthiness be amongst you, but be diligent, serving the Lord in the Light; for
all that which is contrary to the Light, with the Light is to be Condemned. And
to you this is the Word of the Lord, that with the Spirit of the Lord, that
comes from the Father of Spirits, ye may all come to witness the Spirit of
Promise, and set to your Seals, that God the Father of Spirits is true. So in
the Name and Power of the Lord Jesus Christ be ye all kept and preserved; and
Keep together, and Meet together, that ye may grow in the Measure of God's
Grace.

G. F.

And all Dear Friends, Eternal dwell, that as the Plants of the Lord ye may
grow; The Plants of the Lord.
and ye, who are the Vineyard-dressers, keep out the subtle and cunning Foxes,
who make their Holes in the Earth. If in the Light ye all dwell, which was,
before the Earth was, with it ye will the tender Plants preserve.

And all Friends, in that which is pure, patiently wait to inherit the
Substance; and in that dwell, which sees beyond the Shadow, Types, Traditions
and evil Lust. And dwell in the Life, that ye may be nourished with living
Food, and be kept above the World in the Light, that the Son of God be not
crucified afresh, with that which turns from the Light into the Lust. So all
ye, that have a Sight of this, and are come hither, Wait in the Light, that ye
may grow up in the living Word, to comprehend the World; that every one of your
Souls may come to find its Rest, where no Burden is, and the Travel in the Will
of Man is ceased. For all those Travels and Burdens are among them, that
contrary to the Light do act, Self-Burdens and Travels.
and the Burden is their own, and the Travel is their own; which is to be
condemned with the Light, which leads up into Life. And so the Power of the
mighty God of Life be with you, which is raising up his living Seed, and the
Seed is one, which is turning up the Earth, and cleaving it asunder, and
removing it out of its place, and bringing into the Faith of Abraham, and to
the God of Abraham. The Lord God be with you, that in the Light dwell, whose
Minds are turned toward Christ the Way, from all that which Christ the Light
discovers to be evil. Ye Children of the Light, seek to turn many to the Light,
and to Wisdom's Gate bring them, that ye may all come to be Door-Keepers in the
House of the Lord, and see what must be kept out of hi House, Wisdom's Gate.
Door-Keepers.
and what to receive into the House; and own no Sacrifice, but that which is
from the Living, which is accepted of the Lord.

G. F.

ALL Friends, Dwell in that which is Pure, Epist. 50.
and wait for the Power of God to preserve you in that which is. Pure, up to
God. Concerning the Power of God.
And know the Seed of God in one another, that the Knowledge, which is after
the Flesh, may die; and know the Power of God in one another. Let your Faith
stand in that which throws out the Earthly Nature, and the Loftiness of Man;
which overturns the Worldly Wisdom and the Carnal Knowledge, which is brutish
and Devilish. In that which is Pure, dwell, that ye may be able to discern, and
savor and comprehend that, which is not Pure; Dwell in that which is Pure.
and in that wait which is Pure, to have your Minds guided thereby, which will
let you see God, and show you your evil Thoughts, and Judge them; and is a
Cross to your evil Desires, Wills, and Lusts. I say, Dwell in that which is
Pure, which will guide you to God; but if ye lust (as aforesaid) then the Pure
is veiled, and the light Mind speaks at random, with a drunken Spirit, and not
from the Mouth of the Lord. And there lodges the Dreamer, and the lying
Spirit, and the false Prophet, The Dreamer and false Prophet.
and that which is like the Truth, but is not the Truth; but dwelling in the
Truth, this will be discovered. And wait upon God in that which is Pure, for
the receiveing of that which comes from God, which is living; which nourishes
up to Everlasting Life. So God Almighty be with you!

G. F.

To Friends, Concerning the Cross of Christ, the Power of God, that leads out
of the World, to the World that is without End.
THE Cross is to the Carnal Part, which is the Ground of Images, Epist. 51.
the Ground of the Seducers, and the Ground of the false Prophet and
Antichrist; the Cross is to that Ground, Concerning the Gross.
to the Root and Life (of it.) This being minded, which is Pure and Eternal, it
makes a Separation from all other Lovers (and brings to God) and the Ground of
evil Thoughts comes to be opened, and the Cross is to that Ground; The Ground
of Evil Thoughts.
which Cross overturns the World in the Heart. Which Cross must be taken up by
all, who follow Jesus Christ, out of the World, which has an End, into the
World which is without End; and all the evil things of the World must be
denied: For who loves the World, the love of the Father is not in him; but
where the World is standing, the Cross is not lived in. But dwelling in the
Cross to the World, here the Love of God is shed abroad in the Heart, and the
Way is opened into the Inheritance, which fades not away; where nothing shall
enter, which is defiled. For God is not seen, but in the Eternal Light, God is
seen in the Light.
from whence all pure Wisdom comes: This Treasure is not seen, but with the
Spiritual Eye; nor received, but with the Pure in Heart, and by those, who
dwell and abide in the Eternal Light. But the Carnal Heart may get the Words
from them, who had received the Wisdom, who dwelt in the Fear of the Lord; but
they, who live without the Fear, may get their Words, and yet know not Wisdom's
Gate, from whence those Words proceeded, having the old Bottle. Watch all
therefore, and see, what ye do possess: For all who gave forth the Holy
Scripture, who dwelt in the Fear of God, they possessed th Life, which those
Words proceeded form; and the Secrets of the Lord were with them. Therefore all
in your Measure, which is of God, wait, that it may guide your Minds up to God,
and followit, and not your evil Desires, nor the Lust of the World; for the
Fear of the Lord will keep your Hearts Clean, A Clean Heart.
and the true Wisdom will be with you in the pure Heart. And every one, that
has this Light, which Christ has enlightened them withal, the Deeds that are
Evil, ye know them so to be by the Light; and this Light will be their
Condemnation, ye know it. And all who witness this Light, and love it, their
Eye is in their Head, which is Christ, if they be Ten Thousands.

G. F.

ALL Friends in Westmorland, Epist. 52.
Lancashire, Cumberland, Northumberland, Bishopric, and about New Castle,
whose Minds are turned to the Light, To Friends in the North.
Meet together, and wait upon the Lord, and keep your several Meetings in the
Light of Christ; that all your Hearts may be joined together, and ye all kept
in Unity up to God, the Father of Lights. The Lord God Almighty keep you and
preserve you, that ye may all see the Blessings of God; for he Blessings of the
Lord are among you: And that ye all with the Light may know your Minds kept up
to God, The Wisdom of God.
to receive the Wisdom of God, by which all things were made; that with it ye
may come to order the Creatures, and in the Wisdom of God ye may be preserved
to walk wisely. And that no Deceit nor Slothful Spirits be amongst you,
Slothful Spirits.
nor Hangers-on, getting the Form, etc. who speak, what they are not; all such
I do deny, and with the Light all such are to be condemned: Such cumber the
Ground, and stain the Earth, that it cannot enjoy her Sabbaths, nor yield her
Increase. They that are so, and act contrary to the Light, are by it to be
condemned, and with it I do them deny which Light is one in all your
Consciences; that with the Light your Minds may be kept up to God, and all that
which is contrary, may be condemned to the Fire, which is for the Fire. And I
warn you all, in the Presence of the Living God, to take heed to the Measure of
the Grace of God; The Grace of God.
that with it your Minds may be kept up to God, and that ye may all come to
profit in the Spirit. And from you all God does look for the Fruits of that
Spirit, of which a Manifestation is given you to profit withal: And to you this
is the Word of the Lord.

O Friends, mind the Seed of God, and the Life of Christ! And take heed of
being hurried with many Thoughts, but live in that which goes over them all,
and that in it ye may reign, and live in the Seed of God.

G. F.

Concerning the Duty of all Friends in Truth.
ALL Friends every where, that have Wives, or that have Husbands, Epist. 53.
or that have Children, or that have Servants; or Servants that have Masters,
or Children that have Parents, that are not Friends, This is to you all, that
are in the Light, which lights every Man, that comes into the World, that
they, that act Contrary to the Light, and believe not in it, which know not the
Word, Chaste Conversatior.
and will not be won with the Word (speaking to them) that your Chaste
Conversation ( ye walking in the Light, which comes from the Word) may answer
to the Light in them, which they hate, and walk Contrary to; that your Chaste
Conversation may Judge them, and ye may win them by your Chaste Conversation,
walking in the Light, which answers the Light in them, wherewith they be
enlightened; which Light comes from the Word, which casts down all that is
Contrary to it. That they, that act Contrary to the Light, beholding your Chaste
Conversation, and your Good Works, the Light, which they act Contrary to, may
make them Confess to your good Conversation, and glorify your Father, which is
in Heaven; who are born of the Light, Children of Light. That ye may receive
the Wisdom from above (which is neither Earthly, nor Sensual, nor Devilish)
with which ye may be ordered to the Glory of God, and with that order all, that
ye have to order: And to you this is the Word of the Lord.

G. F.

Honoring all Men, P. S.
is reaching that of God in every Man for that brings to seek the Honor of
God; the other fades, and reaches not to that of God in Man: For the Saints,
Honor all Men.
which were to honor all Men, they were in that of God, which did reach to
that of God in all Men And they that are not in the Spirit of God, do dishonor
the Son, and mis-call Men, honoring and fetting up that which is out of the
Truth; which is to be trodden under Foot.

G. F.

This is to be sent among Friends, who be in the Light.
ALL my Dear Brethren, Babes of God, Born of the Immortal Seed, Epist. 54.
whose Dwelling is in the Power, that upholds all things, Concerning the Light.
which Power is made manifest, which has brought you to him, that was in the
Beginning, before the World was, and with the Life to Comprehend the World, and
that which is in it, and what it is, Life comprebends the World.
and what it lies in. All my Dear Babes of God, who are in the Arms of the
Almighty, dwell in the Light, that ye may be manifested to the Light of God in
all Conseiences, that to the Light, which is of God, Peoples Minds may be
directed, and they come to receive the Life, and to witness it, that gave forth
the Scriptures; that with the Light ye may see them, who act contrary to the
Light, who are for the Sword, who are for the Hammer, and who are for the Fire.
Here not a Deceiver shall stand, nor a false Prophet, nor an Antichrist, False
Prophet and AntiChrists.
who do oppose the Light; but with the Light all such are seen and
comprehended. Which Light is Eternal, and was, before the World was, which
comprehends the World; which Light is one in every Man's Conscience: Which
Light is the Condemnation of all that hate it, and of all that Profession, that
is acted in that Nature contrary to the Light. My Babes, dwell in the Light, in
the Immortal Seed of God, and grow up in it, and be clothed with Christ's
Zeal, having his Mind; that with the Light ye may see them, which be from the
Light turned, and act contrary to the Light, who with the Light are to be
condemned. And so all they, that make a Profession of the Scriptures declared
from the Light, and act contrary to the Light, that comes from Christ Jesus,
and yet profess his Command; their Zeal is without Knowledge, and they will
persecute. For they, Self-Righteousness.
that be in the Self-Righteousness, are in that Nature, that acts contrary to
the Light, who with the Light are to be condemned; which Light leads to Christ,
and brings to witness him, the Lord of Righteousness. Therefore dwell in the
Light, that to the Light in all Consciences ye may be made manifest, to turn
them from the Darkness to the Light, and so to Christ, from whence it comes;
that with the Light every one may see their Salvation, Christ Jesus, and so, ye
may bring every one to sit under the Vine Christ Jesus, and bring every one
into the Light, which comprehends the World, which is the World's Condemnation,
False Prophets, Antichrists and Deceivers.
and all them that hate it. And bring every one to the Light, which condemns
all evil Deeds and Works of Darkness, and Works of the Flesh; that with the
Light they may all see, what shall enter into the Kingdom of God, and what not.
And bring all into the Light, that they may see the false Prophets, and the
Antichrists and Deceivers, A Brutish Knowledge.
which are all in that Nature, which acts contrary to the Light; in which Light
is Unity, with which Light are they all condemned: And to you this is the Word
of the Lord. And who turns from the Light and gets the Words of them, that knew
what they declared from the Light, and makes a Profession of them, this
Knowledge is brutish: But who dwells in the Light, and with the Light sees
Christ, his Knowledge is from that which is Eternal; with which Light the other
is Condemned, which acts contrary to it, though he may have the Words declared
from it. And all who are turned from the Light, and make a Profession of the
Words declared from the Light, and gather there a great deal of Wisdom, yet
their Minds are turned into the Earth, which is a Seat for the Devil, there is
the Sensualness, there is the Devilishness and Earthliness, there is the Wisdom
that is from below, which is acted in that Nature contrary to the Light; with
the Light that is comprehended, and with the Light that is condemned: That
Wisdom is from below. But the Light leads the Mind up to Christ, from whence it
comes, to receive the Wisdom which is from above, and condemns that which leads
from the Light, for that is pure and gentle, which is from above; but the other
is Sensual, Earthly and Devilish, Perverse and Envious, and is with the Light
comprehended and condemned: Which Light is against the false Prophet, whose
Words, Knowledge and Wisdom is not from it.

G. F.

THE Word of the Lord God to all my Brethren, Epist. 55.
Babes and Soldiers, that are in the Spiritual Warfare of our Lord Jesus
Christ; The Spiritual Warfare.
Arm your selves, like Men of War, that ye may know, what to stand against.
Spare not, pity not that which is for the Sword (of the Spirit) Plague and
Famine, and set up Truth, and confound the Deceit, which stains the Earth, and
cumbers the Ground: The Dead stinks upon the Earth, and with it the Earth is
stained, therefore bury it. And wait in the Light, which comes from Jesus, to
be clothed with his Zeal, to stand against all them, who act contrary to the
Light, which comes from Jesus, and yet profess the Words declared from the
Light; which are only Sayers, but not Doers: Sayers and not Doers.
All such are to be trodden without the City under Foot; and Woe proceeds from
the Lord against all such, and the Stone is falling upon such, and fallen, to
grind them to Powder. Arm your selves like Men of War, the mighty Power of God
goes along with you, to enable you to stand over all the World, and
(Spiritually) to chain, to fetter, to bind, and to imprison, and to lead out of
Prison; to famish, to feed and to make fat, and to bring into green Pastures.
So the Name and Power of the Lord Jesus Christ be with you! And go on in the
Work of the Lord, that ye may trample upon all Deceit within and without. And
all they, who are gathered together with the Light, and their Minds turned
toward Christ Jesus, who does them enlighten, that they may all see the Lord
Jesus among them, their Head, and they his Branches; in the Light waiting, and
growing up in Christ Jesus, from whence it comes, they may bring forth Fruit to
the Glory of his Name. And all waiting and walking in the Light, with it ye
will see the Lord Jesus amongst you: And ye will see with the Light, all that
hate it, who profess Christ Jesus Words declared from his Light, and walk not
in it; by his Light are they, and all their Profession condemned. And to you
this is the Word of the Lord.

G. F.

To call the Minds out of the Creatures.
ALL Friends of the Lord every where, Epist. 56.
whose Minds are turned within toward the Lord, Take heed and hearken to the
Light within you, which is the Light of Christ and of God, which will call your
Minds to within (as ye heed it) which were abroad in the Creatures; that by it
your Minds may be renewed, and by it turned to God, with that which is pure to
worship the Living God, the Lord of Hosts, over all the Creatures. That which
calls your Minds out of the Lusts of the World, The Lusts of the World and Evil
Affections;
it will call them out of the evil Affections and Desires, and turn you from
them, and set your Affections above: And the same, which calls your Minds out
from the World's Teachers, and the Creatures, and to have your Minds renewed,
there your Obedience is to be known and found; and there the Image of God is
renewed, and ye come to grow up into it. That which calls your Minds out of the
Earth, turns it toward God, where the pure Babe is born in the Virgin-Mind;
and the Babe's Food is known, and the Childrens Bread witnessed, which comes
from the living God, which nourishes up to Eternal Life: Which Babes and
Children receive their Heavenly Wisdom from above, from the Pure, Living God,
and not from the Earthly One; for that is trodden under Foot with such. And all
who hate this Light, whose Minds are abroad in the Creatures, and in the Image
of the Devil, they may get the Saints Words (who received their Wisdom from
above) in their old Nature and corruptible Mind; Murderers of the Just, Enemies
to the Cross of Christ, in whom the Prince of the Air lodges, Sons of
Perdition, Murderers of the Just.
Betrayers of Christ. Therefore take heed to the Light, which is oppressed with
that Nature; which Light shall Condemn (as it arises) all that evil Nature,
and shut it out, and turn it out of the House. And so ye will come to see the
Candle lighted, the House sweeping and swept, and then after the pure Treasure
will be found; The Treasure. found.
and then the Name of the Eternal God will be exalted. And the same Light, that
calls your Minds, which were abroad, out of the World, the same turns them to
God, the Father of Light: Here the pure Mind is known, and the pure God is
waited upon for Wisdom from above; and the pure God is served night and day,
and the Peace, which has no End, is enjoyed. For ye may have Openings; but
your Minds going into the Lusts of the Flesh, here the Affections are not
mortified. Therefore hearken to that, and take heed to that, which calls your
Minds out of the vile Affections, and the World's Lusts, to have them renewed;
the same will turn your Minds to God, the same Light will set your Affections
above, and bring you to wait for the pure Wisdom from God from on high, that it
may be Justified. Wait all in that which calls your Minds inward, and turns
them to God; and here is the Cross witnessed, The Cross.
that the Mind shall feed upon nothing, but the pure Light of God, and on the
living Food, which comes from the living God.

So, the Lord God Almighty be with you all, and keep you all in his Strength
and Power to his Glory, over all the World, whose Minds are called out of it,
and turned to God to Worship the Creator, and serve him, and not the Creature.
And the Light of God, that calls your Minds out of the Creatures, turns them to
God, to an Endless Being, To see God always present.
Joy and Peace; here is a seeing God always present, who is not known to the
World, whose Minds are in the Creatures, whose Knowledge is in the Flesh, and
whose Minds are not renewed. Therefore to you, whose Minds are called out of
the Creatures, and out of the World, and fading things by the Eternal Light of
God, the same Eternal Light, which has turned it, and presented it to God,
will bring you to see all these things, and those whose Minds are abroad in the
Creatures; and so, Judgment will be given upon that, and them who hate the
Light.

And Friends, the Seed of God mind, and dwell in it, which will bring you to
reign over the World; and the Power of the Lord dwell in, which will keep you
Clear in your Understanding; that the Seed of God may reign in you all, which
is but one in all, which is Christ in the Male and in the Female, which Seed
the Promise is to. Wait upon the Lord, to feel the Just to reign over the
Unjust, and the Seed of God to reign over the Seed of the Serpent, and to be
the Head, that all which is Mortal, Presumption.
may dye; for out that will rise Presumption. So Fare ye well! And God Almighty
bless, guide and keep you all in his Wisdom.

G. F.

To a Friend in Distress, when the Accuser had got in.
IN the Time of thy Weakness the Accuser of the Brethren is got in; Epist. 57.
therefore mind the Seed of God to cast him out, and what may hinder thee from
eating the things of the Creation. So do not hear that, but mind the Seed of
the Lord, and thou will feel Life and Dominion.

G. F.

OH Friends, Look not out; for he that does, is darkened. Epist. 58.
And take heed of Lightness; take heed of the World, and of busying your Minds
with things not serviceable. The Wise Man's Eye.
A Wise Man's Eye is in his Head, but a Fool's Eye is gazing up and down. Oh!
Be Valiant for the Truth upon the Earth, and tread upon the Deceit! And keep to
Yea and Nay; for he that has not Power over his own Tongue, his Religion is
vain. And take heed of Knowledge, for it puffs up, Knowledge puffs up.
but dwell in the Truth, and be what ye speak; he that abides not in the
Truth, is led by the Evil one. Wait on the Lord, he will perfect his Work
amongst you; he that hearkens diligently to the Teacher within, denies all
outward Hireling-Teachers: He that is made the Temple of the Holy Ghost,
places no Holiness in the World's Temples. The Teachers without exalt the
Carnal Mind, but the Teacher within destroys it. There is not a Word in all
the Scripture to hold up the Practice of Sprinkling Infants, nor the Word
Sacrament, Sprinkling Infants, etc.
nor to hold up an Hourglass to preach by for an Hour's time in a place; but
the vain Mind does hold up many things, which Christ does not command. Earth
makes Masters (amongst Earthly Men) but let him that rules, The Earth makes
Masters.
rule in Love; for the Earth is the Lord's, and the fullness thereof: And he
that labors, let him labor as to the Lord, in love. So let Love be the Head
in all things, and then the Lord is exalted, then there is no Eye-service, but
Singleness of Heart; then all that is done, is done as as to the Lord. So, be
faithful in all things, and keep from the World's vain Customs. Do not wear
Apparel, Apparel.
to gratify the proud Mind, neither Eat nor Drink, to make your selves wanton;
for it was created for the Health, and not for the Lust, to be as Servants to
us, and we Servants to God, to use all those things to his Glory: To whom be
Praises, Honor and Glory for ever-more, who has created all things to his
Glory, and so to be used and spent. Do not make Profession to be seen
outwardly, for Christ was Condemned by the World (and the formal Professors)
and all his Followers are as Wonders to the World: Therefore marvel not, if the
World hate you, but rejoice. Look not back, but keep forward, knowing, that the
World is Enmity with God. Ye that know the Light, love one another, and dwell
in it, and know one another in it.

G. F.

FRIENDS,
Make not Flesh your Arm by Carnal Reasonings, Epist. 59.
Consultations and Disputings in that part, An Exhortation to Friends, not to
make Flesh their Arm.
which is above the Innocent Life, for that needs none to plead its Cause, but
God its Father, who will give you sufficient Strength and Wisdom at the same
Hour; the other shall and will fall before the Enemies of the Lord.

G. F.

To Friends, to keep in the Fear of the Lord.
FRiends,
Epist. 60.
Every particular mind that, which is pure of God in you, to guide you up to
God, and to keep you in the Fear of the Lord, that ye may receive Refreshment
from God alone in your selves, and grow up in the Inward Man, nourished and
strengthened by that, which is Immortal. And delight in that, which shows you
the Deceit of your Hearts, and Judges that which is contrary to God, and be
Obedient to that which is pure; The Lord God a daily Help.
so ye will see the Lord God present with you, a daily Help, his Hand always
ordering of you, and as a Shepherd always keeping the Dogs from his Lambs, whom
he feeds in Green Pastures, and waters with his Heavenly Dew of Mercy, who
makes them all fruitful. The Cry of Want and Poverty shall be no more heard in
the Land of the Living, but Joy, Gladness and Plenty. The wearied Soul, that
has lain in the Pit and in the Mire, and lived in the Clouds of Temptation,
God is our King.
and cried out for want of the Lord, shall cry plentious Redemption, and say;
God is our King, who fills Heaven and Earth, and the Voice of our King is heard
in our Land. So Fare-ye-well in the Lord! And the Lord God Almighty keep you
and preserve you in his mighty Power.

G. F.

FRiends, Epist. 61.
dwell all in the Immortal Seed of God, which is Heir of the Promise of God,
and does inherit the same; so every one of you know the Promise of God your
Portion, and the Power of God your Portion, and the Kingdom of God, that is
everlasting, without End, and the Power of an endless Life, being Heirs of
that, come to inherit it, knowing it your Portion; that ye may possess it, and
increase in the same Kingdom and Power, and endless Life: Here ye lay up
Treasure in Heaven, Lay up Treasure in Heaven.
where the Thief, Moth, nor Rust comes not. And know the Seed of God, in which
is the Election, that never alters nor changes; which Seed never changes,
neither does it submit to that which does change, but stands steadfast and
distinct from all the Changables: Which Seed ends all Types, Figures and
Shadows, and variable things, and Typical things, that do change; which Seed
does not change, which is Christ, which keeps above all the Inventions,
Rudiments, Traditions, vain Talkers and Bablers, that be in the World, and
stands, when they will be all gone, and have an End. In which Seed is Power,
Wisdom and Life Eternal, that remains for ever and ever, which has the
Dominion in the Life and Power, The Unchangeable Wisdom of God.
and unchangable Wisdom of God, which is pure and gentle from above, and
preserving above all the Destroying; which keeps up the heads of the living to
Life; in that live. Which Seed of God breaks the Head of them, that go out of
the Truth, to wit, the Serpent's: And here Life goes over all in Renown and
Dominion, and the Top-stone comes to be over all laid. So live in Life, and the
Love, and the Power of God, which was, before Man and Woman fell; in that Power
ye are kept over all outward things, that have been set up, and are set up in
the Fall, which causes Pride and Contention, and Strife; which, if lived in,
keeps out of the Power, in which is the Saints Everlasting Fellowship, that
stands and remains, and is Everlasting, for ever and ever. In which Power the
living Seed lives, and the living Babes are preserved; in which Power they have
their Food from the God of Life, which is living, which nourishes the Immortal
Babes up to the Immortal God, with the Immortal Food; through which they come
to be the living Stones, that build up the spiritual Household, The Church is in
God.
who are the Church in God; who are brought out of the State, where Adam and
Eve with his Sons and Daughters is drove from God, up to God again by Christ,
the Power of God, who is the Way to God, where the Church is in God, that is
the Pillar and Ground of Truth. So all in that live, which brings you up to
God, out of the State of Adam and Eve, and his Sons and Daughters in the Fall.
In that Power (as I said before) ye will have an everlasting Fellowship with
God, and one with another; which Power of God was, before the Fall was: In that
Power ye will know one another, and see one another, in which ye shall ever be
together; in which ye shall see and know your Election, before the World began.
So Farewell.

G. F.

ALL Friends, be Low, and in the Life of God dwell, Epist. 62.
to keep you Low. Ye are the Salt of the Earth, to make it savoury unto God: Ye
are the Light of the World. The Light Justifies, walking therein.
Therefore walk in the Light of Christ, whose Light does Justify you, who then
shall condemn you? Therefore in that dwell, which does Condemn all the Evil in
the World.

G. F.

AND all Friends every where, pray to the Lord to give you Dominion over all,
and that in his Power, and Life, and Seed, ye may live and reign. And all
Friends, submit your selves one to another, in the Fear of God, and be one with
the Witness of God in all, One with the Witness of God.
and look at that, and that will keep you down from looking at the Bad; but
looking at the Good, keeps your Minds over the Bad, with the Lord.

G. F.

To Friends, Concerning the Covenant of Light and Life.
FRiends every where, Epist. 63.
to the Measure of the Life of God in you all take heed, that with it your
Minds may be guided up to the Living God, from whence Light and Life does come,
and Virtue, A Note concerning the Life.
and Strength, and Nourishment; so that with the Life ye may be kept from that
which vails, and clouds and darkens, where the Mist of Darkness comes over
you. Wherefore to the Measure of Light take heed, that with it all your Minds
may be guided up to the Father of Life, from whence Life comes; that the
Knowledge of the Glory of God in the Face of Christ Jesus, ye may all come to
enjoy. So that in Peace, Patience, Righteousness, and Temperance, and Godliness
ye may be kept, and all grow up in brotherly Kindness, Brotherly Kindness.
and be kept from that which causes Strife, and Sects, and Divisions; so that
nothing may rule, but the Light of God among you. To that which is pure and
lowly, take heed, that Mastery and Strife may be thrown down, and the Evil Eye,
and the Eye, that is out from the Life of God, may be known and plucked out; so
that the Light of the glorious Gospel may shine, and that ye may all know it.
And so, all awake to the Righteousness of Christ, the Righteousness of God,
whom Man was departed from, Christ the Righteousness of God, who enlighteneth
every one, The Righteousness of Christ.
that comes into the World, that all Men through him might believe. So, all
having a Light from Christ Jesus, the Righteousness of God, he is the Way to
the Father, whom God gave for a Covenant of Light, Life and Peace. Therefore
every one in your Measures Wait, that ye may see him, and come to witness the
Covenant of Life and Peace with God, receiving his Gift, Christ Jesus, the Son
and Mediator. So this I warn you all in the Presence of the Living God, to wait
every one in the Measure of Light and of Life, that ye may all come to witness
the Seal of the Covenant, The Seal the Covenant.
and be led and kept with that which will keep you Spotless, and Clean, and
Holy, and Righteous, where Power is received from him, who has given you a
Light; so that in the Light ye may all have Unity, and in it be kept, and all
that which is contrary to it, with it may be Condemned. And in this Covenant of
Light and Life (the Gift of God) know one another, and him by whom the World
was made, who was, before the World was; who is now again manifested (Glory and
Honor for ever be unto the Lord!) That the Crown, that is Immortal, ye may all
come to see and receive, and your own Crowns lay down at the Feet of Jesus. And
so, his Light being come to, all your own Works are ceased from, and your own
Thoughts; which if ye follow them, they will lead you into Error. Therefore
wait in the Light, which comes from him, by whom the World was made, to receive
Wisdom from him, that in it and with it ye may be preserved from the World, and
out of the World, to him by whom the World was made; and that Wisdom may be
Justified of her Children, Wisdom Justified of her Children.
and ye kept all Low in the Fear of God, from all Strife and Deceit, and
Dissension, and Pollution, and Hypocrisy, and Dissimulation, single with the
Measure of Light, which comes from the Father of Life. Every one to feel with
the Life of God, the Arm of the Lord God not to be shortened; but to reach to
every one of you all, and to carry you all in his Arm, and gently to lead them,
that are with young. So feeling the Presence of the Lord God with you, ye
receive Virtue into your Souls from the Living God, who nourishes his own
living Plant and Plants. So the Lord God Almighty preserve you in the Light,
which shows to every one their evil Deeds, and reproves for them; this is the
true Light, which if ye come to it, and love it, ye come to Christ, and love
him, by whom the World was made; and it will let you see the Chief Shepherd and
Bishop of your Souls, and how ye have gone astray, like Sheep without a
Shepherd: For it is that, which restores you to Christ, the Bishop of your
Souls, who is the Prophet, that must be heard. And all who will not come to the
Light, which comes from Jesus Christ, but hate it, because their Deeds are
evil; they do know, that the Light will reprove them. Therefore this is their
Condemnation, The Light of Truth.
the Light, which is your Teacher; who come to it, and receive it, ye receive
Christ, and he gives the Power to become the Sons of God; which many do
witness, blessed be the Name of the Lord. Therefore wait every one in your
Measure, to know the Scripture fulfilled in you, which came not by the Will of
Man, but was learned of God; which is for the perfecting of the Man of God
through Faith in Christ Jesus, and is to be read, and to be fulfilled, and to
be practiced, which was given forth from the Spirit. Therefore every one wait
in the Measure of the Spirit, to learn of him, as they did, which gave it forth.

G. F.

To Friends in the Ministry.
ALL Friends, Epist. 64.
who are moved of the Lord to speak the Word of the Lord, whom the Lord has
made to be his Mouth, speak not your own Words to feed the sensual part of Man,
in your own Wills; for there God is not honored, and Wisdom is not justified.
But ye that are moved to speak in Steeple Houses, or to the Priests (who have
not the Word of the Lord, Speak the Word of the Lord faithfully.
but the Letter) speak the Word of the Lord faithfully, neither add to it with
your Reason, nor diminish from it with a disobedient Mind; but speaking the
Word of the Lord (faithfully) it is sharper than a Two-edged Sword, to cut down
all Deceit, and as a Fire to burn up the Chaff; and it purifies you, that speak
it: And so as an Hammer, it will break down all the Contrary. And the Word is
but One, which sanctifies all, and cleanses the Heart, and sanctifies and
reconciles to God. And the Light is but One; and all being guided by it, all
are subject to One, and are One in the Unity of the Spirit. And if your Minds
turn from the Light, and that Mind speak of the Light, there gets up Pride and
Presumption, and the Will; and then ye begin to strike your Fellow Servants.

Therefore all Dear Friends and Brethren, Be Servants to the Truth, and do not
strive for Mastery, but serve one another in Love. Wash one another's Feet,
take Christ for your Example, Serve one another in Love.
that I may hear of no Strife among you: But all walk in the Truth, and in the
Love of it, up to God, for there ye are my Joy and Crown in the Lord. Children
would be striving; but that which would have the Mastery, must dye, and shall
not enter into the Kingdom of God. Therefore mind not high things, but fear,
and condescend to Men of Low Degree; for the Fear of the Lord keeps the Heart
clean, and the pure in Heart sees God.

AND Friends, Lord and his Truth, and get over the Head of the Wicked, and
trample all that which is Contrary to God, under your Feet; that ye may Answer
that of God in every one. And him, who was promised to be the Covenant of God
to the Gentiles, The Covenant of God.
and the New Covenant to the Jews, hold forth to them both; that all may know
him their Leader to God, and the Prisoner to come forth unto him.

G. F.

THis is the Word of the Lord to all Friends and Fellow Laborers in the Truth,
who are subduing the Earth, and its earthly Knowledge, Epist. 65.
and its Carnal Wisdom, and beating down and threshing down that, in Hope to
get forth the Wheat, and to be made Partakers of your Hope; I charge you all,
dwell in the Light, which does comprehend the World, their evil Ways, their
Will Worships, what they worship, Will Worship.
and what is their End in all their Actions: So that ye may yoke the Oxen, and
bridle the Horses, and tame the wild Heifers, and bring them to Christ's Yoke,
that is, to the Light; bring every one unto it, to see their Way to Salvation,
and with it every one may know their Condemnation, who act contrary to it. Wait
all on the Lord, that ye may be settled and stayed in the Lord, and to grow up
in the Light, that gave forth the Scriptures; that there may be no stumbling
about the Words, which came from the Light.

For no Creature can read the Scriptures to profit thereby, Light and Spirit,
that gave them forth.

LOVE the Truth more than all, Power of God, Good Soldiers of Christ.
as good Soldiers of Christ, well fixed in his glorious Gospel, and in his Word
and Power; that ye may know him, the Life and Salvation, and bring up others
into it.

G. F.

ALL Friends,
Epist. 66.
Meet together in the Light, that with it ye may see the Father of Life amongst
you in your Meetings. And so, the Lord God of Power be with you, and keep you.

And the Lord God Almighty give you Dominion over the Beasts of the Field, The
Beasts of the Field.
and the Fowls of the Air, the Fishes in the Sea, and all creeping things. And
the Lord God Almighty be with you all! Farewell.

AND all live in Peace, Love, in Life, and in the Power of the Lord God, and
keep your Meetings, every one of you waiting in the Power of God upon him;
Unity with God.
that in it ye may have Unity with God, the Father, and the Son, and one with
another.)

AND, Dear Friends, Let Wisdom guide you in Patience, and do not strive with
any in Meetings; Strive not in Meetings.
but dwell in the Power of the Lord God, that can bear and suffer all things.
And make no Strife among Friends, but live in that which makes for Peace, and
Love and Life, in which Edification is known.

G. F.

To Friends, concerning Marriages.
WHom God joyneth together, Epist. 67.
are with the Light (which is Eternal) in the Unity, in the Covenant of Life,
and of Peace, and this Marriage is honorable, What Marriage is honorable, and
what is not.
and this Bed is not defiled. For the Light leads from all Whoredom and
Adultery, which God will Judge. For there is no Marriage honorable, but what
is in the Lord, and that is in the Light; with which Light the Covenant of Life
is known and seen, and the Faith in Jesus (the Gift of God) is received: And
they that forbid Marriage, are out of the Light, and in the Doctrine of Devils.
And they which are in the Light, whom God does Join together, let no Man put
them asunder; for they that seek to do so, are in that Nature, which acts
contrary to the Light. And this Marriage, which is honorable with the Children
of the Light, is seen and known, who are in the Covenant of Light, and with the
Light are turned to the Lord Jesus Christ, who leads from all the Works of
Darkness. And none, who are in the Light, are afraid of their Deeds being
tried, but they bring them to the Light, to be tried, whether their Works be
wrought in God. Motions of the Flesh Condemned.
Now who follow the Motions of the Flesh, fulfilling the Desires of their Will,
and go into the Lust of the Flesh, such are adulterated from the Light, and
their Marriage is not honorable, and the Children of the Light cannot approve
of them. But whom God does Join together, they are led from the evil Motions of
the Flesh; and the Children of the Light do Approve of and Justify them. And
who follow the Motions of the Flesh, are in the Eagerness, Lust, Extremes,
Excess, and the Hastiness; and that Mind is afraid to declare its Work, though
afterward is forced by Constraint: And that the Children of Light cannot
Justify, which is done in that Nature contrary to the Light. Therefore the
Joining together in the Light, the Children of the Light do Honor and
Justify, and the Light does not hide from its own; but the Darkness hides from
the Light, and is afraid to be reproved. Therefore all ye Children of the
Light, let your Light so shine before Men, that the Marriage, which is
Honorable, may be witnessed, and all that is Contrary to the Light, condemned.
Therefore let all Proceedings in such things, Proceedings in Marriage.
where they are Intended, be declared to the Children of Light, that therewith
they may have Unity, and all the Motions and Works of the Flesh, may be
condemned, and that the Pretense of the Spirits Moving may not be a Cloak or
Cover for the beastly Lust; but that all such Proceedings may be searched into
by the Light, and tried, whether they stand in or out of the Covenant.

Let this be read amongst all Friends. The God of Peace and Love be with you,
that to the Lord of Life ye may all be a sweet Savor, and in the Wisdom of the
Lord ye may all be kept; watching one over another in that which is Pure, and
waiting for the Appearing of that which is Good.

G. F.

FRiends, know the Life and Power of God in your selves, Epist. 68.
and one in another, and to that Power be Obedient, Know the Life and Power.
to Thresh down all Deceit within and without you in Wisdom, and in that dwell,
which Comprehends the World; and know the Rest, which is for the People of God,
which he that believes, has entered into. So know the Life, that stands in
God; and all know the Power of God, for that Power shall never be shaken nor
change, but will shake down all, that must be shaken and will change. So in
that the Lord God Almighty preserve you, which gives you to see, where there
is no Changing nor Shadow.

G. F.

To Friends at Malton
ALL my Dear Friends at Malton, mind that which is Pure in you, Epist. 69.
that ye may grow up in the Power, out of the Form. And take heed of Deceit,
and of Jarring one with another; take heed of Strife and Confusion in your
Minds: But mind the pure Life of God in you, according to your Measures, to
guide you up to God out of the Flesh, and all the Ways and Works of it, within
and without, which that which is Pure and Holy, calls all unto. So all walk in
the Wisdom of God, which is given into the pure Heart, that none of your
Nakedness may appear, and Men see your shame; but all wait in the Spirit upon
God, the Father of Spirits, to be Clothed with his Righteousness. Be Clothed
with Righteousness.
So God Almighty keep you and bless you; the Blessing of the Lord be with you
and among you! I am with you, Present in Spirit (joying and beholding your
Faith toward God, which ye have in Jesus Christ) though Absent in Body.

AND all Friends, Quench not the Spirit of God in you, in the Authority of the
Son of God, and his Power, whereby ye may be kept on Top of the World.

G. F.

FRiends,
Epist. 70.
I do Judge all that in all, which is contrary to the Life and Power of God,
even the Ground and Root of all Jars and Strife, which is not of God, Jars and
Strife Judged.
but is out of the Life of God: I Judge its Beginning and its Ending, Judged it
is by the Light. And I do Judge with the Spirit of Truth all Foolishness,
Hastiness and Strife, which is not of God. And all Friends, Wait in the Measure
of the Spirit of God, to guide you up to God, and keep you all in Peace and
Unity.

Heed nothing, P. S.
but the Life and Power of the Lord God; for all that is out of it, is and will
be Confounded.

G. F.

To Friends, to live in the Power of God, in Christ that never fell.
DEar Friends, Epist. 71.
all be Faithful in the Everlasting Seed, in which ye have both Life and Power,
Dominion and Wisdom, and Clothing with that which is Immortal, and the
Blessing of the Lord, and Peace in the Seed, Christ, that never fell nor
changed, nor will change; in whom ye have Peace, in whom ye have Blessings, who
takes away the Curse. The Peace is in Christ.
For the Peace is in the Second Adam, that never fell, Christ Jesus, and the
Blessings, and the Righteousness is in him; but the Troubles, and the Curse,
and the Unrighteousness and Misery is in Adam in the Fall, and all deceitful
Teachings, Ways and Worships. And so, sit not down in Adam in the Fall, but in
Christ Jesus, that never fell (then in him ye will all have Life) that was with
the Father, before the World began: He ends all the Types, Figures and Shadows,
first Covenant and Priefthood, and Ways in the Fall, in old Adam, Christ that
never fell, who is the Way, who is the Substance; in him (I say) sit down, and
then ye will be all found in the endless Life. For Adam lost his Habitation and
Eve, and the Apostate-Christians from the Righteousness, from the Law, and from
the Power of God. Therefore ye, that are come to Christ Jesus the Substance,
the End of the Prophets, in whom ye have Life (as I said before) which was with
the Father, before the World began, in him live, Serve one another in Love.
and love one another, and serve one another in Love, and in the Fear and
Wisdom of God, that is above Adam and Eve's Sons and Daughters Sensual,
Devilish Wisdom in the Fall. And so, keep your Meetings in the Name of Christ
Jesus, that never fell, then ye will see over all the Meetings of Adam and
Eve's Sons and Daughters in the Fall, their Confused Meetings and Gatherings,
who are out of the Habitation of Righteousness and Holiness, and so out of
Peace. So, in the Life (Christ) live, in whom ye have Peace, keeping your
Habitation in him; that none be as the untimely Figs, nor as the Corn upon the
House top, that is soon withered and gone. But that ye may live in the Seed,
the Substance, Christ the Life, in whom ye have Riches, that never fade away;
feeding upon the Tree of Life, whose Leaves heal the Nations. So, live in Unity
one with another in the Life, Christ Jesus, that the Seed may be all your
Crowns. And so Farewell. My Love to all Friends in the Seed of God, Christ
Jesus, who was with the Father, before the World began.

G. F.

AND Friends, In the Measure of Life, which the Father of Life has given you,
Wait, with it to be guided; Life and Spirit, that the Fruits of it may appear,
To profit in the Life.
to the Glory of the Father of Life.

G. F.

To Friends in the North.
FRriends, see that all Friends professing Truth there-aways, Epist. 72.
in Order be kept, that no Confasion, no Pride, Pride and Lust Judged.
Filthiness nor Uncleanness be amongst you; but with the Light let all that be
Judged down and Condemned, and cast out, that all in that which is pure, may
patiently wait to inherit the Substance. And in that dwell, which does bring
out of the Shadows, Types, Traditions, Ungodliness, Unrighteousness, Pride,
Filthiness, Lust and Uncleanness. So, the mighty Power of the Lord God be with
you all, and keep you.

And all Friends, dwell in the Life, which from God comes, the Father of Life,
that with it ye may see God, and all may be nourished and fed with the living
Food, which comes from the Living God. Ye Babes of God, dewell in the Wisdom of
God, in Grace, that ye may grow up in the Wisdom and the Grace of God. So, the
mighty Power of the Lord be with you all, and keep you in Obedience to the
Light, out of the Evil of the World; which Light does it condemn.

Let this go to all them that dwell in the Light, whose Minds are turned
toward Jesus, the Way to the Father; Let that be burnt up, which the Light
does discover to be evil, and condemns it. And to you, this is the Word of the
Lord.

G. F.

Concerning Tithes.
ALL Friends, who are in the Eternal Light, ye see the Figures, Epist. 73.
the Shadows and the Types (the Beginning and Ending of them) and with the
Light ye come to see the Substance of the things shadowed and figured forth. So
all in the Light dwell, Christ the Substance of the Types.
that with it ye may come to know the Ministry of Life, and the Ministry of
Condemnation; that with the Light ye may come to witness the Substance, Christ
Jesus: And with the Light ye will see, what the Apostle meant, when he spoke of
Tithes and Offerings, and of the Changable Priesthood, and when he spoke of the
Substance of those things he had before spoken of; who with the Light denied
the First Priesthood, the Tithes and Offerings, that were Changable. And now,
with the Light, the Changable Priests are denied, and the Unchangeable Ministry
of Life witnessed; and the Law, that gave Tithes, and the Commands about them
(with the Light, ye see) are ended: And with the Light God is seen, who was,
before those things, were; and the End of those things ye come to see, Christ
Jesus, the Sum and the Substance of them. So all ye, Summons by Writs to Answer.
that are Summoned with Writs (which come from the Courts ahove) to Answer,
because ye connot pay Tithes, Keep to the Light in you, which comes from Jesus
Christ; that with the Light ye may all come to see Jesus, the Sum and
Substance, and the End of all the before mentioned Tithes and Offerings. And
so, according to the Light of Christ in them all, speak, that to it their Minds
may be guided; and declare the Truth to them, which is agreeable to that of God
in every one's Conscience: And bear Witness to the Sum and Substance, The Sum
and Substance, Christ Jesus.
Christ Jesus, and show forth that to them all. And declare it to the Highest
Judicature in the Nation, when that ye suffer for the Testimony of Jesus, that
ye witness to the Substance, Christ Jesus, who is ascended far above all the
Principalities and Powers; and that ye witness to the Ministry of Life: And
show forth the Substance to them (if ye have an Opportunity) showing to them,
that ye suffer for Conscience sake. And so over the World stand, and over all
their evil Works, and bring all Men's Works to the Light: And being guided by
the Light, it will let you join to none of their vain Inventions, that are
acted and made in that Nature, that is contrary to the Light; it will bring you
to witness the Sum and Substance, Christ Jesus, over all the World: And so, if
the Spoilers take your Goods, let them go, and let them take the Coat also. And
keeping to the Light, which comes from Jesus, to that of God in every one's
Conscience ye will be manifest; and keeping clear your Consciences, with it all
that, which is contrary, will be condemned. And so, every one to the Light
keeping, it will let you pay no Tithes to the Hirelings, nor Join with them
therein; but it will bring you to witness the Sum and Substance, Tithes and
Offerings in the first Priesthood.
Christ Jesus. For the Tithes and Offerings were ministered in the First
Priesthood's time, and it was glorious in its place; but with the Light it was
and is seen, the Beginning, their Time and the End of them, and with the Light,
the Sum and Substance, Christ Jesus is witnessed. And all in the Light dwell to
guide you, that to that of God in all Consciences ye may be made manifest; that
they that Imprison you for Tithes, and resist the Light of Christ in their own
particulars, that over them all ye may stand; being guided by that which is
pure, that it may lead you to act, that no Condemnation upon your Actions may
come: For who Contrary to the Light does act, upon his Actions Condemnation
does come. That so over all the World ye may stand in the Light, which does it
comprehend, and condemn; and with it ye may witness the End of the Shadows: And
unto you this is the Word of the Lord God. And none to act any thing in your
own Wills: But who act Contrary to the Light, and pay Tithes, go to the
Changable; and with the Unchangable are cast out from the Children of Light.
And so, the Children of Light are one in the Light, and with the Light see the
Body, and Christ Jesus the Head, and are all one in him. Where did any Sue one
another for Tithes under the first Priesthood? Suing for Tithes.
But with the Light the Primitive Christians witnessed Christ Jesus, the
Substance of the things typified in the first Priesthood's time. To the Light
of Christ Jesus in all your Consciences, which comes from Christ, I speak, that
ye may see, what ye act; and that such, as are Sued for Tithes, may look to the
Sum and Substance, the Unchangable Priest Christ Jesus.

G. F.

MY Dear Friends,
Epist. 74.
Live in the Immortal Seed and Power of the LORD GOD, that ye may Meet in that,
and in that feel one another. The Spiritual Weapons.
And live in the Spirit, in which, ye will have Unity and Peace, and the
Spiritual Weapons, to cut down the Spiritual Enemies of your Peace. And dwell
in the Life and Power of God, that ye may have Dominion, and come to witness,
that ye are the Heirs of the Power of an Endless Life, and of a World, whereof
there is no End; and so, in this keep your Meetings. And dwell in the Peaceable
Seed, which destroys that which causes Troubles, Wars and Fightings; in that
dwell, which was, before that was, in that will ye have Life and Peace
Everlasting.

AND living in the Seed, ye will see the Everlasting Commander, that says,
Swear not at all; Swear not as all.
and the Witnesses of the true Seed say the same: And this is the Command of
the Royal Seed, which is the Everlasting Commander among the Believers, and to
all others; and they that believe not in the Light, it condemns them, being in
the Evil. The Oath did bind to God in the time of the Law and the Prophets; but
Christ, the Oath of God, the Everlasting Covenant, ends the Law and Prophets,
who brings up to God, and destroys the Devil, and ends Strife and Oaths,
and fulfils the Law and the Prophets.

And the Everlasting Command of the Royal Seed is, Love Enemies.
To love Enemies (which the Jews were allowed to destroy) for ye are all
Brethren, not ruling in Lordship, like Jews and Gentiles, but the Greatest
shall be as the Least amongst you; for the Seed is one in all, and that is the
Master, who destroys the Devil. And to respect Men's Persons, is a
Transgression of the Royal Law; let there be no such thing among you: But let
every one believe in the Light, and then in it see their Salvation; and ye will
receive Power to become the Sons of God. Let no one have but one Wife, for
Christ has but one, his Church, which is his People.

So, in the Power, and in the Bed of Purity, The Bed of Purity.
in the Singleness of Virginity, and in the Beauty of Holiness live, where
Righteousness, and Holiness and Truth dwells together, and Peace in the
Kingdom of Power, where is the Everlasting Joy, Peace and Dominion, and
Victory, where the Bed is not defiled, but the Marriage that is honorable, is
known; in that live.

About am I compassed with the Virgins pure, The undefiled Beauty of the
Virigns.
and the Undefiled ones are my Beauty: The Virgins trimmed with Oil in their
Lamps, enter in with the Bridegroom. And all ye Virgins pure, lose not the
Ornaments of he Lord, but wait, that ye may be Married to the Lamb in the
Everlasting Marriage, and to remain with him in the World, that is without End.

G. F.

DEarly beloved Friends and Brethren,
In the Power, Epist. 75.
and Life and Seed of God all dwell, serving one another in Love and in the
Wisdom of God, Serve one dnother in Love.
that with it ye may be ordered to the Glory of the Lord God; that nothing may
reign, but Life it self, and in it be faithful. Keep all your Meetings, and
know the Power of the Lord God among you all.

YE must do nothing for the Lord by Earthly Policy, Power of the Lord God,
Earthly Policy.
and be ordered by that to his Glory: Ye will never be right, till then, and
that must keep Peace among you.

AND take heed of High-mindedness, for that will puff up that part,
High-mindedness puffs up:
which is for Judgment, then it will do hurt. but when he comes to reign, whose
Right it is, then Peace and Good Will is unto all Men; and no hurt in all the
holy Mountain of the Lord is seen.

G. F.

OH, Epist. 76.
all Friends, in the unchangable Life and Power, and Seed of God live, and be
out of the Low, Earthly, Changable Spirit of the World, The Chargable Spirit of
the World.
which is given to Changing and Tossing, and Tempest and Waves, by which Dirt
is cast up. Oh! Therefore the Life and Power of God and his Seed live in, which
never changes, by which every one may stand in the Power of God, and in his
Life and Wisdom, through which ye may all live. And stand steadfast in the
Unchangeable Life and Seed of God, The Unchangeable Life.
which was, before Changins and Alterings were; and which will remain, when all
that is gone.

So, God Almighty in that peserve you, in which ye may have the Blessing among
you, and God's Wisdom to order you (both Men and Women) to his Glory; that so
in his Fear ye may be preserved to the Glory of God, in his Wisdom and Life, in
that which does not change, in which ye may feel the Unchangeable Fellowship.

AND Friends, Be Wise and Low, and take heed of Abusing the Power of God; Be
Low, and Answer the Good in all.
but live in it, in the still Life, patient, to the Answering the Good in all,
to the Refreshing one of another, and not to the Stumbling: But mind that which
keeps in Unity, in the Life, though never so little.

G. F.

FRiends, Epist. 77.
in the Meafure of the Life of God wait, to guide your Minds up to the Fathers
of Life, there is no Shadow nor Changing. That which does not change.
As ye do hither come, ye must know a Removing and Changing of that which will
Change, with that which does not Change; to that take heed to guide all your
Minds, that none be found Naked: For who are found Naked, they are in that
which has an End, and does Change, and that causes Blindness. And therefore
to you all this is the Word of the Lord: In the Measure of the Life wait, that
it may join your Hearts unto the Father of Life, that Clothing and
Righteousness ye all may come to receive, and come to feel your Strength
renewed from the God of all Strength, to every one of you according to your
Measrue, and see him, that Mercy shows. And so, in Peace live, which come from
the God of all Peace, who bruises Satan under your Feet, who has ruled. So
here the Love of God will in your Hearts come to be shed abroad, which Love is
one, and does not change; The Love of God does not change.
in it dwell, and grow and abound, that over all that, which is contrary to the
Lord of Life, who destroys Death, ye may reign every one over your own Hearts,
and Lusts and vile Affections, and your former vile Conversation, Disposition,
and Nature and Wills. So that ye may come to know the Saints State, unto whom
all things were become New, and the Old things were passed away; and that which
does not change, which is New, that mind, to guide all your Minds up to the
Living God, from whence Light, Life and Power does come. So in it the Lord God
of Life preferve you, that to him ye may be a sweet smelling Savor; for that
which will corrupt, and does corrupt, and will grow ragged, and come to be
torn, and will dye of it self, and will wither, fade, and stink in the Nostrils
of God, is that, which is contrary to the Measure of the Life of God, and is
with the Light condemned. Therefore wait (I do warn you all in the Presence of
the Living God) in the Measure of the Life of God, Grow up it Love.
in it to grow up in Love, in Virtue and in Immortality, in that which does not
fade, which joins and unites your Hearts together; and that all that may with
the Light be Condemned, which is contrary to it. For that which does defile, is
out of God's Kingdom, and is with the Light seen and condemned; in which Light
the Children of the Light walk, and have Unity one with another, and with the
Son of God, from whence it comes.

AND, My Dear Friends, Keep your Meetings, Seed of God among you all, though
never a Word be spoken among you: But be faithful, that ye may Answer that of
God in every one. And do not neglect your Talents, Talents.
but be faithful in the Power and Life of God, which ye have received: And
dwell in the Life and Power, and Love of God one with anothre.

G. F.

FRiends, in the Power and Life of God dwell, Epist. 78.
in Unity one with another, that with the Life of God ye may Answer that of God
in every one. And keep down and Low, that nothing may reign, Keep Low.
but Life among you; and unto the Power of God be Obedient. And Friends, the
going from the Life and Power into the Changable things, there is the Strife,
which the Life is over; by which Power of God all things were made, wherein
Wisdom is received to order all things to his Glory. So, the Seed, Christ in
you all know, which does go over the Earth, and inherits the Promise of God;
that ye may be all Heirs of the Promise of God. And Cease from your own Words,
The Promise of God.
but in the Power live; for it breaks down Rocks, Mountains, old and Sandy
Foundations, and the Bond of Iniquity, and makes up the Breach between God and
Man, and breaks down that, which made the Breach. So the Seed know one in
another, which Seed is Christ; who according to the Flesh was of Abraham, and
according to the Spirit, the Son of God. And this is the Word of the Lord God
to all Friends, and a Charge to you from the Lord God, To live in Peace one
with another, and that the Peace, Life and Wisdom of God may rule you all.

G. F.

To all Friends, to abide in their Callings.
TO all Dear Friends, who are called, who are enlightened, Epist. 79.
whose Midns are turned from the World's Worships and Teachers, having your Eye
to the Light and Guide within, which is leading you out of this dark World, and
your old, vain Conversations toward God, and the World, which is without End;
Mercy and Peace from God the Father be multiplied among you! Every one of you
abide in your Calling, waiting upon God, where he has called you: And take
heed of Reasoning with Flesh and Blood, for there Disobedience, Pride and
Presumption will arise; and there ye will grow up to be Trees, Fruitless Trees.
that bear no Fruit, and as a Fig Tree, which bears Leaves, and no Fruit, and
as Wells without Water Oh! Therefore mind the Pure, which would lead you out of
this Corruptible, Heathenish, dark World and its vain Ways, and from
Destruction and Death to Life. And so the Lord God of Power bless you, guide
you and preserve you on in your Way toward the holy City, being called out of
the unholy City; for he that has called you, is Holy. Now many are called, but
few are chosen: Oh! Therefore abide in that, which has called you (which is
Holy and Pure) up to him, who is Holy and Pure, and let the Time past of your
eil Ways be sufficient, wherein ye have lived in Wickedness, and in the Ways of
this untoward Generation; lest your Minds do turn back into Egypt and the
World, and so cause the Worthy Name of the Lord to be blasphemed (which has
called you) by turning aside, and growing into Hardness of Heart, and turning
from a pure Conscience, and making Shipwreck of it, and of Faith. For ye may
see, how far many may go, and did go, and were led out of many things; yet did
turn again into the World. So mind your present Guide, and your present
Condition, and your Call, what ye are called from, and what ye are called to;
for whom the Lord has called and chosen, The Lord's Freemen.
are the Lord's Freemen. And so, abide every one in your Calling with God,
where God has called you, and there walk in Newness of Life, and not in the
Oldness of the Letter; for he that turns from him, that calls, walks not in
the Life of God. Therefore all Friends, walk in the Truth and in the Love of it
up to God; and every one in particular mind your Guide, that ye may grow up in
Wisdom, Improve your Talents.
and improve your own Talents, and the Gift, which God has given you. And take
heed of Words without Life, for they tend to draw you out of the Power to live
above the Truth, and out of your Conditions; which Nature will not have Peace,
except it have Words: But every particular submit to that, which is of God in
you, to guide you to God. And be ye all Servants to the Truth, and diligent in
your Callings, and serve one another in Love, in which ye can wash one
another's Feet. Serve one another in Love.
So, serve one another in Love, and do not lavish out your selves without the
Fear of God; such are Clouds without Water, which have the Words, but not the
Power, flowen up into the Air; which have a Light, and yet are as Wandering
Stars, which lead up into the Presumption; and thou that art there, thy
Garments are defiled, for thou go from the Spirit, which should sanctify
thee; for ye are sanctified through Obedience to the Spirit. Therefore every
particular, Walk in the Spirit and obey it, then ye will have all Unity one
with another in the Spirit, and ye will see, Knowledge, Tongues and Prophecies
shall cease; Prophecies scall ceafe.
but he that comes to the End, to him who opens all Truth, is blessed.

Therefore all Friends, Obey that which is pure within you, and know one
another in that, which brings you to wait upon the Lord; that ye may all
witness a living Soul, and your selves to be come out of Death. For these
things ye must all find within, there is your Peace, and there Refreshing comes
into your Souls from the Lord: And standing still in the Light within, and
therein waiting, ye will see your Savior Christ Jesus, raising you up out of
Death; by which Work he is glorified: For the Works of the Lord praise him,
which are Wondrous to the World. Now every one in particular, mind the Pure in
you, The Chaste Virgins.
for the Chaste Virgins follow Jesus Christ, the Lamb of God, who takes away the
Sins of the World; and who are not Chaste, will not follow him. For that in
every particular of you, which is not Chaste, will not submit to the Pure, which
would guide you to God, but rather submit to their own Thoughts, and follow
them, and run after them and their own Wills, and seek to accomplish them; and
so run out into that Generation, whose Thoughts were not as God's Thoughts, nor
Ways, as God's Warys. Therefore watch all, and abide all in your Callings; the
Light is that, which will let you see your Transgression and your Running
aside, and the Bypath and Crooked ways, and the Generation of Serpents and
Vipers: And this Light is Christ, which shows these things. Now, before these
things be known and judged of aright, Judgment must be brought sorth into
Victory, and set up in the Earth, where this State is witnessed.

Now the Woman (which is the Church) must be subject to her Husband in all
things: Jesus Christ is the Husband; The Woman subject to her Husband.
in every thing she must be subject to him. Who are in the Flesh, know nothing
of this in the first Nature, for it the Mystery, which the Apostle speaks of;
and so, it is a Mystery still, but where it is opened and made manifest, such
are subject to the Hasband Christ Jesus. Now take heed, of getting these Words
into the Comprehension, and the light Mind speaking them, there is Danger; but
that ye may all wait to be comprehended of, and to walk in the Truth. My little
Children in the Lord God Almighty, this is my Joy, that ye be all ordered and
guided by the mighty Power of God, and dwell in it, and know it in one another,
and know the Voice that speaks, and the Sound of the Words, and Power of
them. For Words without Power destroy the Simplicity, and bring up unto a Form,
and out of the Obedience of the Truth. And therefore, walk in the Power of the
Truth, Words without Power.
that the Name of the Lord God may be glorified among you, and his Renown may
be seen in you and among you, and all the World may be astonished, and the Lord
admited in ordering of his People, who are guided by his Wisdom, and in it
found. And take heed of running out, to make Conceited Ones Wise; for then thou will consume that, which the Lord has given thee, upon their Lusts, and so,
give holy Savor, and Salt, and Discerning. Therefore have Salt in your selves,
and be Low in Heart; the Light is Low in you, Be Low, the Light is Low.
and it will teach you to be Low, and to learn that Lesson of Jesus Christ, to
the plucking down all the high Thoughts and Imaginations. And take heed of
Strife in your Minds; and if there be, then glory not, for it is the vain Mind,
and it is not good. Let no Srife be amongst you, and let none seek for the
highest Place, for there is the Separated Pharisee; but be Lowly-minded,
Condescending one to another in a low Degree, and bare one with another in
Patience; and be not High-minded, but fear. And all who are Servants, Servants,
labor in Love.
labor in Love, as unto God, for the Earth is the Lord's, and the Fullness
thereof; and labor in Singleness, as unto the Lord. And all who have Families,
rule in the Power and Love of God, that that Love may be Head among you: For
the time is coming, that it shall be, as with the Servant, so with the Master;
and as with the Maid, so with her Mistress. For it is one hSeed, that has
raised them up with one Power, out of one Grave, one Death, which Seed all the
Promises of God are to; and as thou passest out of Death, thou shall witness
the Promises of God fulfilled, which are to the Seed, destroying the one, and
raising up the other in thee. So all Friends, this is to you, who know the
Voice of the living God, and know your Calling, stand fast, and waver not, lest
ye loose your Recompense of Reward; but stand fast, that ye may receive the
Recompense of Reward. For God is Just in all his ways, and abides faithful:
Turn not aside, lest he whet his Sword, and cut you asunder; for ye that do,
the Woe follows you.

Therefore all Friends, mind that which is of God in you, which is pure, which
is but One, to guide you to the Father of Life, who gives you Food and Raiment,
Food and Raiment.
and Strength; that ye may gather strength, and flourish, and your Souls
delight themselves in Fatness, and feed and eat of the Abundance of Riches with
him and from him, which fills all things; and of the daily Bread, which
comes from above, which none can feed upon, but who are above the World; for
who are below, The daily Bread, the Bread of Life.
never could nor would, but are ready to stone them that confess, they eat of
the Bread of Life, and would give of it to them. Dear Friends, wait upon the
Lord, that all of you may grow up in the Inward Man, and be comforted and
cherished there, in the things that be Eternal. So with Bowels of Love to you
all, I rest.

Read this among Friends, who have an Understanding, and are called of the
Lord; and so Farewell!

And stand in the Will of the Lord, and be Obedient to him: And the Grace of
our Lord Jesus Christ, which teaches you to deny all Ungodliness and Worldly
Lusts, that Grace fill and establish your Hearts, that your Hearts may grow up
in that Grace to God, from whence all Gifts and Graces come. Amen.

And all Friends, Vain Palkers.
take heed of Vnruliness, and vain Talking and Talkers, for such are not
Obedient to the Truth; therefore avoid and shun it and them.

G. F.

To seek the Kingdom of God first.
FRiends,
Epist. 80.
Seek the Kingdom of God first, and the Righteousness thereof, An Epistle to
Friends, conceraing seeking the Kingdom of God, and the Rightousness thereof.
and those things, what ye shall Eat, and what ye shall Drink, and wherewith ye
shall be Clothed, will be added, and will follow. Therefore take no Thought,
what ye shall Eat, nor what ye shall Drink, nor wherewithal ye shall be
Clothed; for the Gentiles seek after these things, who seek not after the
Kingdom of God, and the Righteousness of it: But seek ye first the Kingdom of
God, and the clothes the Earth with Grass, and who feeds the Young Ravens, when
they cry: And the Kingdom of Heaven being sought after, and the Righteousness
of it, he that is here, lives out of the Creatures, up to the Greator, which
differs him from the People of the World, who take Thought (which Thoughts they
live in) what they shall Eat, what they shall Drink, and what they shall put
on. And they that be there, be out of the Wisdom of God, which the Saints are
in, that have sought and found the Kingdom of God and his Righteousness; which
(Wisdom) brings them to use the Creatures to his Glory; Eat, or whether they
Drink, all is done to the Praise and Glory of God. Such as abide there, can do
nothing against the Truth, Use the Creatures to God', Glory.
which Truth has made them free indeed; who into the Kingdom of the Dear Son
of God are come, which is without End, who over the Kingdoms of the World
reigns.

G. F.

ALL Friends every where, Epist. 81.
to you this is the Word of the Lord God: Dwell in the Life and Power of God,
and the Seed of God, (1655)
which inheriteth the Promise of God; that all light, hasty, airy drunken
Spirits may be limited and stopped, and judged, Airy, drunker Spirits Judged.
and all Foolishness and Vnsavouriness, and Confusion (which causes
Distraction) the Cause of it may be taken away, and all ye kept in the
Authority and Power of the Truth, that know the Power of God manifested among
you. And ye knowing it, and the Life, dwell all in it, and abuse it in no wife;
but wait for the Wisdom of God, that it may be Justified of her Children, and
God glorified, and honored and exalted, and the Pretiousness of his Truth
considered well of, which ye have bought; Buy the Truth, and sell it nol.
and do not sell it for changable things, for things that pass away, and
subsist but for a time. But as the glorious Truth is springing and manifest
among you, live and walk all worthy of what ye are called unto, the high
Calling in God and Christ Jesus above all the World, out of all that which does
change, where the Life, that is Immortal, is felt, and a Crown, that fades not
away, a Crown of Life, that endures for ever! Live in the Dominion of the
Life, that is hid in God, and every particular it know in one another. And live
in the Power of God, and of Life, that ye may see over the Day of Tempest, over
the Day of Darkness and Blackness, and Mists: And feel, and know, and come into
that, which comprehends the World; that ye all may be guided with Wisdom, and
ordered to God's Glory. And be all obedient to the Truth, which all the Enmity
is out of; Be obedient to the Truth.
and know the Life of God in you all, that with it ye may all be guided, and
your Hearts joined together up to God, the Father of Life; that ye may all be
Inheritors of the Power of an Endless Life, and of the World, Fell the Seed of
God.
where there is no End, and Possessors of Substance. And feel the Seed of God
in you all, which inherits the Promise from God; which Seed is a-top of the
Serpent's Head. And keep that under, that feeds upon Dust, which the Glory and
Life is over; which Seed breaks the Strength of all Men, and inherits the
Strength of the Almighty, the Possessor of Heaven and Earth; which Seed is
Christ, that gives the Dominion over the first Adam, over the Earthly, and
brings down all that which stains. So feel the Seed, which is Christ in you
all, and ye all will feel the Lamb of God, which takes away the Sins of the
World, who gives to see, where there is no Shadow, nor Change, nor Altering,
nor Variableness; wherein ye all may come to inherit the Blessings from God,
and come into the living Way. For whose Way dies, they err from the living
Principle of God in them; The Principle of God.
for who walk in the Way that lives, they answer the Principle of God in every
Man; though they act contrary to it, that are in the Way, that days, and do
not live, but change and alter: The Lamb must get the Victory.
And to you this is the Word of the Lord. So the Lamb must get the Victory in
every one of you, which is Christ in the Male and in the Female; who brings
into the Father's House (from all the Congregations of the Dead, and their
Houses of Darkness) wherein every one comes to have his Mansion, and his Food
of Life from God, the Father of Life, who is Blessed for ever-more! Whose
Kingdom and Glory is revealed and revealing, and setting up in the Life, and
Power and Wisdom of God. The Lord God Almighty preserve and keep you all in
Love, in Peace and Unity one with another, in the Light and Covenant with God,
and one with another; which Light is the Condemnation of all that hate it.

AND my Dear Lambs, Babes, and Plants the Lord God, dwell every one of you in
Your own, Dwell in your own.
that ye may feel the precious Springs of God.

AND Friends, Authority of the Truth, the Power of the Son of God, and feel the
Power and Dread of the Lamb, which is to subdue all other Powers. The Lamb
subdues all other Powers.
All Power in Heaven and in Earth is given to the Son; and his Authority stands
over the World, and will subdue it, and make the Kingdoms of the World to
become the Kingdom of the Son of God. So, live in Love, Meekness, Patience, and
in the Power and Wisdom of God, which is over all the World.

SOVND, Sound the Trumpet of the Lord of Hosts, whose Terrible Day is come and
coming, and pleading with all Flesh by Fire and Sword.

The mighty Day of the Lord is coming upon all Flesh, that all Hearts shall be
ripped up and made manifest: Therefore whilst ye have time, Repent.

This is the Message of the Lord to all Nations, Let all your Laws be according
to that of God in all Consciences.

G. F.

THE Word of the Lord to all Friends, Epist. 82.
who are brought into the Eternal Truth of God, whose Minds are guided out of
the Earth up to the Lord (whose it is) and have received Wisdom from God;
Wisdom Justified in the Diligent, and the Slothful condemned.
that with it ye may come to know, how to order the Creation with the Wisdom,
by which all things were made. This I charge you and warn you all in the Fear
of the Living God, that no Creatures be destroyed through Slothfulness,
Laziness and Filthiness, nor upon the Lust; for if ye let that rule and be set
up, that is for Condemnation, and that which sets it up, if for Condemnation
with the Light, that leads to the Wisdom, by which the Creation must be
ordered. And Friends, to the Light in you all I speak: See, that there be no
Slothfulness amongst you, Slothfulness Judged.
but all keep in Diligence and Liveliness; for he that is Slothful, and gets
the Form, may have an easeful Mind, but is an evil Example: And all such must
be Judged with the Light, that they may come to know the Servant's place, and
be Diligent. And such who have gone up and down a-Begging, Beggars to inbour.
if ye have received any such amongst you, with the Light, which has Convinced
them, see, that they be kept in Diligence, and not suffered to wander, but be
kept in Obedinence to the Light, to receive the Wisdom from God, how to labor
in the Creation; and see, that they have things decent and necessary, and their
Nakedness covered, that no Reproach nor Shame may come upon the Truth amongst
such, as are without; but that with the Light all such may be Condemned, who
act contrary to it: That in the Light, which condemns the World, ye may walk,
and receive the Light of the Son of God, which the World stumbles at, which is
their Condemnation, and in which the Saints have Unity. And all being kept
diligent, and walking in the Light, there will be no Slothfulness; and then
none shall have Self Ends in recceiving any, but those Ends shall be Judged
with the Light, which is Eternal. Nor no one can come in amongst you, which
has such Ends, to make a Prey upon you; but ye dwelling in the Light, which is
Eternal, he is Judged, and Self Ends, Self Ends Judged.
with the Light which is Eternal; which is one with the Light in his
Conscience, which condemns him. Then if he own his Condemnation, he is to be
received amongst you in the Light, in which ye all have Unity with Christ and
with God. And to you this is the Counsel of God. (To go amongst Friends evey
where.)

G. F.

Dear Friends in the Eternal Truth of God, Epist. 83.
whose Minds by the Light of Jesus Christ are turned toward God, Meet often
together in the Fear of the Lord, and to the Light take heed, that with it all
your Minds may be kept up to God, from whence it comes. And in all your
Meetings wait Low in his Fear, Wait Low Meetings.
that ye may come to know the Life and Power of Truth one in another. And all
ye, whom the Lord has made Overseers over his Church in your several Places,
Overseers of the Church.
be faithful to the Lord, and watch over the Flock of Christ with all Dilignce;
ye which are Strong, watch over the Weak, and stir up that which is Pure one in
another; see, that in order all your Meetings be kept: Be faithful unto the
Lord, where he has set you, and ye shall not lose your Reward. Servants, be
faithful unto your Masters, Masters and Servants.
not with Eye-service, serving them as Men-pleasers, but in Singleness of
Heart, as unto the Lord; that ye may come to undo the heavy Burdens; Being
faithful in your Places, where the Lord has set you, there is your right
Service. And take heed of forward Minds, and of running out before your Guide,
for that leads out into Looseness; and such plead for Liberty, and run out in
their Wills, and bring Dishonor to the Lord; and the Unbridled Will gets at
Liberty, and an Exalted Spirit gets up, and Pride and Haughtiness, and high
Words. Pride.
And such are they, which add to the Burden, and do not take it off. Therefore
all wait Low in the Fear of the Lord, and be not hasty nor rash, but see the
Way be made Clear; and as the Lord does move you, so do, and return with speed
(when ye have done) to the Place, where ye were abiding, and be faithful there;
that the Truth of God be not evil spoken through you, as they speak of
Vagabonds and Wanderers, that it may not be so amongst you: Vagabonds and
Wanderers.
For such are Vagabonds and Wanderers, which run before their Guide. And
Masters rule over your Servants in Love, with all Diligence and Meekess,
knowing, that ye have one Master in Heaven. And Friends, in all Places, where
any do go abroad, as they do pass by, Examine them, Whether they are going, and
what about? And if they cannot give a good Account, to exhort them to return
back, and abide faithful in their Places, until they see their Way mad Clear.
So Farewell in the Lord. The Eternal God of Power and Wisdom direct and guide
you to his Eternal Praise, that his Name may be honored and glorified in you
and through you all! Be Diligent.
Be diligent every one in your Places, where the Lord has set you, for the
Work of the Lord is great; and God Almighty keep you to be faithful Laborers
in his Work.

From one, who is a Lover of your Souls, and whose Care is over the Church of
God, that it may be kept in Order, and that all, that are guided by his Spirit,
may be lead into all good Order.

London, the 15th of the 3d Month, 1655. G. F.

To Friends, to sit under their own Vine.
MY Dear Friends,
Epist. 84.
Sit every one of you under your own Vine, and there none shall make you
afraid; and in that ye will bring forth Fruit to God abundantly, to his Praise.
And in the Vine as ye abide, Heirs of Christ.
ye will all become Heirs of Christ, and come all to know the Seed, which is
Heir of the Power of the World, where there is no End; and Heirs of the
Kingdom, and so possess that. And live in the Seed, The Seed, the the Top-Stone.
the Top-Stone, which was before Enmity was, in which ye will feel Vnty and
Virtue, and Love and Peace; in that keep your Meetings.

G. F.

An Epistle to Friends, that with the Light they may see their Salvation.
FRiends,
Epist. 85.
All to the Light, which Jesus Christ has enlightened you withal, that heed,
that with the Light of Christ, the Savior of your Souls ye may all come to
see, and enjoy Rest; and the New Covenant ye may all witness, where ye need no
man to teach you, saying, Know the Lord. The Light shows Sin and Evil.
And this Light shows you Sin, and the Evil of the World, and the Lust of it,
and the vain Fashions of it, that pass away, and the Unrighteousnss, and the
Ungodliness of it; for they are not in Covenant with God, but are contrary to
the Light, and to be condemned with the Light. Therefore to the Light I direct
you, that with it ye may see your selves; then in it stand, that with it ye may
see Jesus, from whence it comes: And not to join with your vain Thoughts, nor
that which does consult, and set and frame Ways; there is the Idol-maker, The
Founder of Images.
and the Image-maker, and the Founder of the Images, whom ye will see with the
Light, if ye to it take heed: And so, the Founder of the Image will be
destroyed, and with that ye will come to hear the Voice of the Son of God; and
who hears his Voice, shall live. Stephen. Moses.
And Stephen, who was stoned to Death, witnessed the Substance, and Moses Words
fulfilled, who said, Like unto me will God raise up a Prophet, him shall ye
hear: He heard this Prophet, and denied the First Temple and Priests; The First
Temple denied.
and so, to deny that, which God had commanded, was more, than to deny these,
which God never commanded. Therefore consider in your Lifetime, how much time
ye have spent in Hearing of othem, and what Assurance ye have of the Eternal
Inheritance, which never fades away!

G.F.

To Friends in London.
THere is something drawing toward you, see to it. Epist 86.
Take heed of the Earth, and keep a-top of that, which will cumber the Mind;
and Dwell in Love and Peace one with another. Keep a top of the Earth.


G. F.

FRiends,
In the Power of the Lord go forth, Epist. 87.
and gather with it into the Fold, and spread the Name and Truth of the Lord
abroad; and in his Service be Diligent, Concerning Preaching the Truth to the
Heathen, and all that are out of the Truth.
and for his Truth be Valiant on the Earth, and for his Name's sake. And dwell
in that which will pierce the Hearts of the Heathen, and will overturn their
Heathenish Customs, and take away their false Covers; and in that Power of the
Lord be diligent, answering the Witness of God in all Consciences. And dwell in
Peace and Love amongst yourselves; Pierce the Hearts of the Heathen.
Confound the Deceit, and bring the Truth over the Heads of the Heathen, to the
answering the Witness of God in them all: And that is the Word of the Lord to
you. And live in the Seed, The Ministry of the Life and Spirit.
and there ye will feel the Ministry of the Life and Spirit in your own
particulars; in which ye may be serviceable to others, that are without, and
amongst your selves. And let the Heathen know, that the Plagues, and Curses,
and Wrath, and Woe is unto them, that live out of the Truth; for Wrath, Woe to
the Heathen.
Envy and Strife is out of the Truth, and the Vengeance of God is due to them,
that do not Obey it, where is the burning, flaming Fire: And let them know,
that the Glory of the Lord is risen.

AND walk in the Power of the Lord, and in his Wisdom, good Savor in the
Hearts of all, and to the Lord a Blessing in your Generation.

G. F.

FRiends,
Meet together, waiting upon the Lord, Epist. 88.
that nothing but the Life may among you reign; and that in Life, Life to reign.
Love and Wisdom ye may grow up: And in the Measure of the Grace of God all
wait, to guide your Minds up to God. And all Friends, Meetings in Order kept.
I do lay it upon you for to see, that in Order all your Meetings be kept. So,
the Lord God Almighty keep you all to his Glory, in his Wisdom to himself. Amen.

To be read among all Friends at their Meetings.

G. F.

For Plymouth.
FRiends, keep your Meetings, that in the Truth ye may reign, Epist. 89.
and in the Power spread it abroad. And keep in the Truth, that Be Valiant for
the Truth on Earth.
ye may see and feel the Lord's Presence? amongst you; and for it be Valiant
upon the Earth, and know one another in the Power of it. So, the Lord God
Almighty preserve you in his Power to his Glory! Amen.

G. F.

FRiends,
All ye, Epist. 90.
whose Minds are turned with the Light toward Jesus Christ, from whence it
comes, in it wait, Something of the Work of the Light manifest.
that with it ye may all see Jesus, and all that Condemned, which is Contrary
to it; that so by that ye may be kept from all Extremes, Passions, Passions and
Hastiness.
Agonies and Hastiness, Presumption and Desperation. For dwelling in the Light,
which does never change, this keeps your Minds out of all those things
beforementioned, which lead Nature out of its true Course; The true Course of
Nature.
and with the Light all that is seen and condemned, which is contrary to it.
And that which does Condemn, keeps you in Peace and Order, and leads to the
Door of Mercy, and Nature into its right Course, and into the Virtue of that
Word, by which the Creatures were made, and with it to use them all to his
Gloy. Which Light is the Condemnation of the Carnal Wisdom and Knowledge of the
wicked World, and the Condemnation of the Disobedient, and the Condemnation of
them, whose Deeds are Evil, who hate the Light: Which brings to witness the
Word to be as a Fire, to burn up that which is to be condemned, and to the
purging of the Floor, and burning the Chaff with unquenchable Fire, and to the
Gathering of the Wheat into the Garner. Therefore in this Light dwell and wait,
True Words.
from which the true Words did proceed, that with it all those Words may be
opened again, and all they condemned with the Light which have the Words, and
act contrary to it; such must go empty away. And to you this is the Word of the
Lord, Have Salt in your selves.
That ye may come to have Savor and Salt in your selves. For dwelling in the
Light, ye will be manifest to the Light in their Consciences (though they hate
it) who have the Words declared from the Light; such go empty away from God,
who is Light. And all they, who abide in the Light of the Lord, see all such to
be out of the true Course of Nature, who act contrary to the Light, which
defiles the Flesh; and they are such, who were of old ordained to Condemnation
with the Light.

G. F.

A General Epistle for Friends, Concerning the Priests.
ALL Friends, Epist. 91.
in the Spirit of the Living God wait upon God, to learn of, The Blasphemy
known, and who they are; and with the Light they are seen and discovered.
and to be taught by him. For now does the Beast open his Mouth in Blasphemy,
speaking great, swelling Words: And now is the Cage of Unclean Birds and the
Unclean Spirits, which are gone forth into the Earth, seen. And now are the
Locusts see, and the Caterpillars known: And now are the Seven Thunders
uttering their Voices: And now are the Hailstones falling, and the Vials of
the Wrath of God pouring out upon the Beast and the false Prophet. And now are
the whited Walls seen, Whited Walls.
and the painted Sepulchers, who garnish the Sepulcres of the Righteous, and
build the Tombs of the Prophets, full of dead Men's Bones. Ravening Wolves.
Now are the Inwardly-ravening Wolves seen, which have gotten the
Sheeps-Cloathing: And now are the false Prophets seen, which through
Covetousness make Merchandise of the People. Briars and Thorns.
And now are the Thistles, and Briars and Thorns, where the Figs do not grow,
seen: And now are they seen, which make Merchandise of the Words of the
Prophets, Christ and the Apostles, and through Pretense make long Prayers; who
devour Widows Houses. And now are such known, who lead silly Women Captive, who
are always learning, and never able to come to the Knowledge of the Truth, some
Thirty, Forty, some Sixty Years. And now are such known and seen, Beating in
the Synagogues.
and mainfest with the Light, that Christ spoke of, that should beat his
Followers in the Synagogues, and hale them before Magistrates for his Names
sake; yea, if they killed them, should think they did God good Service. And now
are such Teachers seen and known, that sport themselves in the Daytime, and
walk after their own Ungodly Lusts. And now such are seen, that go in Cain's
Way, Cain's Way.
who would murder, and do murder in their Hearts, who are in Envy, who are the
Vagabonds, and the Fugitives, who have not an Habitation in God, who is Love.
And now are such seen and known, that go in Balaam's Way, that love the Wages
of Unrighteousness, Balaam's Way.
Gifts and Rewards. And now are such seen and known, that bear Rule by their
Means, and the pople love to have it so; holding up the horrible and filthy
thing committed in the Land, as in Jeremy. Jerem. 5.
And now are such Shepherds seen and known, Isaiah 56.
as seek for their Gain from their Quarters. Now are such seen and known,
Hirelings.
as seek for the Fleece and the Wool, and make a Prey upon the people; and
such as re Hirelings, which the Lord sent Ezekiel and Micah to cry against.
Ezekiel. 34.35. Mich. 3.
And now are such seen and known, which our Lord Jesus Christ cried Woe against;
who stand praying in the Synagogues, Mart. 23.
having the chiefest Seats in the Assemblies, called of Men Masters, which
devour Widows Houses. And now are such Deceives seen and known, Deceivers.
that by their Lies and Lightness have caused the people to err; which speak a
Divination of their own Brain, and use their Tongues, and say, The Lord sent
them, when he never sent them. And now are th Mockers and Scorners come, which
the Scriptures speak of, which mock, Scoffers.
stone and persecute the Children of the Light, as they pass up and down the
Streets; and many have been almost murdered in the Highways and Steeple Houses
by them. And now is the Scripture fulfilled, which says, The Beast and Dragon.
That the Beast and the Dragon shall make War against the Lamb and the Saints;
for such are manifest now, who are as natural, brute Beasts, what they know,
they know naturally, having not the Life, that gave forth the Scriptures; but
are found in the Self-Separation (from the Spirit of God) having gotten the
Words, which were declard from the Spirit of God, murdering and destroying (as
much as in them lies) those, that are in the Light and Life of those holy Men
of God, that gave forth the Scriptures. Now the Shame of all their Profession
is seen, which is Abomination unto the Lord, which profess the Words declared
from the Light of God, but are strangers to the Light and Life. And now the
Unsavory things are smelt, tased of, and seen to be among many of the
Professors of Religion, who are more like Swine rending, Dogs and Swine.
and like Dogs biting and devouring one another, than like the Children of the
Light: Which does them mainfest to be contrary to the Light; which all that are
contrary unto, with the Light are condemned.

G. F.

To all the Seed of Abraham, which suffer for denying the World's Customs, and
because they cannot hold up the Corrupt Priesthood, that is therein; or for
Testifying against the World, that the Works threof are evil.
ALL Friends and Brethren every where, Epist. 92.
that are Imprisoned for the Truth, give your selves up in it, and it will make
you free, To the Prisoners.
and the Power of the Lord will carry you over all the Persecutors, which was,
before they were. For since the Beginning has this Persecution got up;
therefore live and reign in that Power, which remains, when the other is gone,
and in that ye will have Peace and Unity with God, and one with another, who
suffer for not putting into the false Prophets Mouths, and for Crying against
them, and for not swearing, Sufferings for not Swearing.
and not giving the World's Complements and their Honor, which the Lord is
staining; and who are suffering for reproving Sin in the Gate. Be faithful in
the Life and Power of the Lord God, and for the Truth be Valiant on the Earth,
and look not at your Sufferings, but at the Power of God, and that will bring
some good out in all your Sufferings; and your Imprisonments will reach to the
Prisoned, that the Persecutor prisons in himself. So be faithful in your
Sufferings in the Power of the Lord, Tithes, Oaths, Temples.
who suffer now by a false Priesthood for his Tithes, Oaths, Temples, which
have got up since the Apostles days. For as the Apostles and true Christians
suffered for denying the Jewish Temple, Priesthood, Tithes and Oaths, so ye do
by the false, and amongst the Apostatized Christians, who are got up since the
Apostles days. So the Power, and Life, and Wisdom of the Lord God Almighty keep
you, and preserve you, to finish your Testimony to the End, that ye may witness
every one of you a Crown of Life Eternal, in which ye may sing Praises to the
Lord, and in that triumph! And so, be faithful in that which overcomes, and
gives Victory.

G. F.

That Friends should have a Sense of one another Sufferings.
FRiends, Epist. 93.
in the Power of the Lord God live, which goes over the Heads of all the World,
that so in the Power ye may witness forth the Truth in their Courts; and then
if ye suffer, ye by suffering will get Dominion over their Heads. And lay down
and offer up your Lives for one another: Offer up your Lives for one anoher.
And here is the Love of, and unto the Brethren manifest, to lay down their
Lives one for another. But the Love of Christ is further, he laid down his Life
for his Enemies. So dwell Low in the Life, that ye may answer that of God in
every one.

G. F.

FRiends,
Epist. 94.
I do Warn and Exhort you all in the Presence of the Lord God, Dwell in the
Measure, which God has given you of himself, in which is no Strife, Dwell in
Unity.
but Unity: Therefore every one of you dwell in it. Boast not your selves.
And this I do Warn you of, Boast not your selves above your Measures, but
dwell in the Truth it self; that with the Measure of the Living Spirit of the
Living God ye may be guided up to God, in which Spirit ye will all have Unity
in the least Measure of it. And so every one of you Judge Self, for it would
have the Mastery; which is to be Condemned with the Light, Self Judged and
Mastery.
in which is Unity. So, the Eternal God of Light, and Life and Power be with
you all, and in you all! And keep from all Strife, and above it in Love and
Unity in every Place.

AND Friends, Life into the Changable, is the Cause of Strife and Confusion.

G. F.

GRow in the Increase of God, My Dear Children, and know all your Assurance in
the Lord, and the Seed in every one of you, Epist. 95.
which the Promise of God is to. And be Obedient to the Just, and in the Truth
of God wald, and the Love of it. And my Dear Hearts, in the Seed dwell, which
gives the Victory over the World, Victory over the World.
and that in the Wisdom ye may be preserved, which bruises the contrary under
foot; whereby ye may reign in the Life of God, to be as Nursers and Waterers of
the Plants, Nursers and Waterers.
and that all the Contrary may be kept under; that in the Eternal Power of God
ye may be kept, which gives Dominion over all, and condemns the contrary. In
which Power the Lord God Almighty preserve you to his Glory, Amen.

Live in the Life of God, and feel it.

AND Friends, take heed of being hurried with many Thoughts; Many Thoughts.
but live in that, which goes over them all.

G. F.

A Warning to Friends to keep to the Light, out of Deceit and Strife in Unity.
FRiends,
Epist. 96.
I do warn and exhort you all in the Presence of the Lord God, to Meet together
in the Measure of Life, that with it ye may be guided up to God, and in Unity
kept together up to him, the Father of Light and Life; and God Almighty be with
you! And that the Dread and Terror of the Lord may among you be, and Deceit
confounded; and that with the Measure if Life all your Mind may be guided up to
God, that so ye all in Peace and Love may be kept. And let this be sent among
Friends, to be read in all their Meetings

G. F.

To a Friend.
IN the Will of God stand, with thy own Will offered up, Epist. 97.
as his was, who said, Not my Will, but thine be done. And beware of Striving
in thy own Will against the Eternal Providence and Power, The Eternal
Providence and Power.
which is now working Invisibly, cross and contrary to all the Powers of
Darkness. And in the Fear of the Lord wait, that thy Duty to the Lord thou
may know, whose Everlasting Love is to thee; whose Blessing reaches unto
thee, if thou be faithful with faithful Abraham, who received the Blessing, and
to his Seed after him. So beware, left through thy Forwardness and Rashness
thou bring the Curse upon thee, and so break thy Peace and Covenant with the
Lord God. Rashness.
The Everlasting God give thee Faith in Christ Jesus, in whom the Promise is
Yea and Amen.

G. F.

DEar Friends, stand in the Faith, Epist. 98.
which gives the Victory over all the World, in which ye all will have Victory,
and so come to be of Abrabam's Faith, and know the Word, that quickens you,
Faith gives Victory.
and reconciles to God, and hammers down the Contrary. So, in the Power and
Life of Christ Jesus live, and in that ye all will be preserved to his Glory.

G. F.

To all that make Mention of the Name of the Lord, and that profess his living
Truth.
FRiends,
Epist. 99.
A Warning and Charge to you all from the Presence of of the Living God, To let
all Lighness and Airiness, Foolishness, Wilfulness and Frothiness be Judged in
Patience, Lightness and Airiness Judged.
let it come to the Fire and be burned; and Hay, Wood and Stubble, and all that
which is above the Seed, he that builds there, is above the Foundation, his
Works are to be burned, he will suffer Loss. Therefore keep all down to the
Seed of God, and feel that a-top of all, which Seed inherits the Promise of
God; that nothing may reign, but the Seed it self, which inherits from God. So
all come into the Authority of God, which is not usurped, which gives the
Dominion over all the usurped Authority; The one Power of the Son of God.
that ye may live all in the one Power of the Son of God, which brings all into
the Unity, and subdues all things, that cause the Enmity. So, the one Power,
the one Soul, the one Heart, the one Mind is witnessed; here the Glory is
revealed among you, and the one Head (Christ) the Seed, and ye are all of one
Family. Here is the Power of the Son of God known, all Power being given to
him; which Power and Seed bruiseth the Serpent's head, and breaks it, in which
stands the Enmity: So all Power is given to the Son to rule, to subdue and to
judge. So, live in the Power, and ye live in the Unity, ye live in the Peace,
ye live all in the Subjection one to another in the Fear of the Lord; The Seed
is one.
ye live all in the Seed, which is one, which keeps a-top of the Head of the
Serpent, and keeps his Head down, and brings it under. So, feel the Seed of
God in every particular to be the Head in the Male and in the Female, and then
ye come to be Bone of his Bone, and Flesh of his Flesh, and to inherit every
one the Promise of God in the particular; whereby ye may come to be Inheritors
in the Lord's Strength, feeling it and possessing it in your own particulars.
So the Seed of the Serpent being kept down with the Seed, which is Christ in
the Particular, he brings to see over all, that is Contrary.

G. F.

Concerning all fuch, as set up outward Crosses.
FRiends, Epist. 100.
in the Power of the Lord God dwell and live, that over all the World ye may
stand, in that which fathoms it, that ye may handle the Word of God aright, The
Word a Hammer.
which is as a Hammer, and as a Sword to divide the precious from the vile; and
is as a Fire, to burn up that which is hammered down, and divided from the
precious. And in the Wisdom of God wait, that ye may answer that of God in
every one; which Light will bring them off those things, which they have set up
in that Nature, which is gone from the Light. Which things the Light goes over,
and brings to see the Beginning and Ending of all those, whom Christ said,
should come, which John saw, were come, who went out from them, whom all the
World went after; amongst whom have come up all these heads and Horns, and
Babylon, Beast and false Prophet, and Mother of Harlots, who have sat upon the
Waters, which have been Peoples, Nations and Languages. And these have been
from the Light, and so from the Rock, and from the true Foundation; and the
Kings of the Earth have drunk of the Cup of her Fornication: And all Nations,
that have been from the Life and the Foundation of God, have been in this
Fornication, from Christ the Husband. So now People are to be turned by the
Light to Christ, their Husband, the Rock, the Cornerstone, and are to be
brought from their outward Crosses to the Cross of Christ, the Power of God
within them, and from the dead Image to the Image of God, which they have lost
through their going forth from the Light, and thereby have lost the Power of
God. And all these Crosses of Wood and Stone, Crosses of Wood and Stone.
and the Founder of them must all be thrown down by the Power of God, which is
the Cross of Christ; and to the Light must they be turned, which answers to
that of God in every one, before they come to feel Christ to rule and reign in
them. Then the outward, dead Crosses of Stone, Wood, Silver or Gold they shall
not need (to have to put them in Remembrance of Christ, or to bring him into
their Minds; for such as are come to the Light, which Christ has enlightened
them withal, and believe in it, they feel the Power of God, they feel Christ
and his Cross, which is the Power of God.

G. F.

DEar Friends and Brethren in the Everlasting Seed of God, Epist 101.
which has the Wisdom, and Life Eternal, and Dominion over all that is in the
Fall, in which the Blessing of the Everlasting God is known, An Exhortation to
Patience in the time of Suffering.
and his Life, that never fades; in which Seed (that has the Dominion nion
over all that is in the Fall) is the Wisdom that is pure and gentle, which was,
before the Wisdom below was. And so, all Friends, be ready to Offer up your
selves in the Power of God, joining to the Suffering Seed, in which ye offer up
your selves to God in the Patience, Offer up your selve, to suffer.
in your Sufferings, feeling the Seed, which was before that was, which makes
to suffer. For the Lamb must have the Victory, mark, the Lamb, and not the
rough Nature, which has gotten up, since Man fell from God's Image; the Lamb
must have the Victory over that. (So, The Lamb must have the Victcry.
give up all in the Lamb's Nature, that in that ye may all Meet in Life, in
Power, in Victory and Dominion over all that, which is in the Fall, knowing the
Birth, that will persecute, and the Birth that is persecuted; and knowing the
Birth, that is born of the Flesh, and the Birth, that is born of the Spirit:
There is but these two Briths, and the Elder must serve the Younger; Two Births.
and the Elder is the first Birth. Therefore feel all Jacob, and the Seed of
God, then ye come to feel that, which shall remain for ever and ever. So in
that all stand and dwell, that to the mighty God ye may be a Blessing, and a
good Savor in the Hearts of all People, being Valiant for the Truth upon the
Earth. And take heed of grieving the Spirit, but be faithful; and take heed of
provoking, and keep down all that with the Spirit of God, that is Contrary to
God, by which ye may answer that of God in every one.

G. F.

FRiends,
Encourage not your Wives nor Children, Epist. 102.
in setting them up in the World's Honor; for that which would do so in you,
is Carnal; and the Carnal Mind is not subject to the Law of God. If ye do mind
that which is of God in you, it will draw you up to God, out of the World's
Honor, and Friendship, and Words, and Ways, and Fellowships, and Preferments,
Customs and Fashions, up to God's Everlasting Kingdom, The World's Honor and
Preferments.
where is Everlasting Joy for evermore.

G. F.

To keep to the Witness of God.
FRiends, Epist. 103.
take heed of Darkness, or going beyond your Bounds or Limits, but keep in
God's Fear, that ye may receive his Wisdom from above, To keep in Sincerity,
etc.
that with it ye may order all things to his Glory, answering the Witness of
God in every one, keeping in Godly Sincerity and Simplicity, Meekness, Patience
and Humbleness, Justice, Truth and Mercy; What graceth the Government.
and this graceth a Government, and is a Praise to them that do well, and is a
Terror to them that do Evil: For they that do Evil, go from the Witness of God
in their own Conscience, and then the Higher Power comes over them. Therefore
keep to the Witness of God in your selves, and that is the Word of the Lord to
you; and then ye will have the Just Weight, Just Weight.
and Measure and Balance, and true Understanding, to answer the just Principle
of God in every one.

Bow and submit your selves to the Power of the Mighty God of Heaven and Earth,
and to no Deceit, and take heed of bringing any into it. Respecting Persons.
And take heed of respecting Persons in Judgment; and that is the Way to obtain
Favor from the Lord, and his Blessing. From him, who loves your Soul's Eternal
Peace and Good.

G. F.

ALL Friends every where, Epist. 104.
in the Power of God dwell, and know that over all to keep you. And lose not
the Power of God, which keeps down, Concerning the Power.
tames and breaks all wild, unruly, rash and hasty Spirits, which will run
without the Power; which Spirits reach not to the Seed and the Witness of God
in Men, and strike not through the Earthly, neither receive Wisdom to be
ordered to the Glory of the Lord God. And there is Safety in the Power; and
there is the Wisdom of the Most-High felt, Wisdom.
and the Power of the Endless Life. And this is the Word of the Lord God to you
all every where: Dwell in the Power of the Lord God, and live in it; for that
brings all your Souls into Peace, into Oneness, into God, from whence they
come, who has them all in his Hand. And in the Power ye will all come to feel
the End of Words, the Life, The End of Words, the Life.
from which all Words of Truth were given forth; and all hasty, rash, loose,
lustful Spirits the Power will strike down, for they beget nothing to God, but
go out of his Dread. Therefore this is the Word of the Lord God, and a Charge
unto all Friends upon the Earth, to dwell all in his Power; then his Dread,
Fear, Terror and Majesty will be with you, and amongst you all, to Cleanse,
Wash, Vessels for the Lord's Use.
Water, Regenerate and Sanctify every one's Vessel, who will be thereby fitted
for the Lord's Use. So that the Power being lived in, it keeps you over all the
World in the Dread and Majesty of Truth, in Cleanness and Newness of Life; and
to know the Wrath of the Lamb against all his Enemies. And the Power of the
Lord God will strike down the Lust, that causes Pride, Strife and Contention;
it will bring you to live in Love and Unity one with another, and to know the
Kingdom of the Most-High, that stands in Power, ruling in you all. And all your
Crowns it will lay down, that are Mortal, and will raise up the Seed, and bring
Life and Immortality to Light; where the Crown, that is Immortal, is known, and
the Glory, that fades not away, is possessed. And all Spirits, that are
unruly, and out of the Power, must be Judged with it, and kept subject; A Crown
Immortal.
for that which lives in the Power, is begotten by the Seed Christ, the New
Man, that is made after God in Righteousness and Holiness: This Birth is of the
Immortal Seed by the Word and Will of God, not begotten or brought forth by the
Will of Man. And none quench the Spirit's Movings in the least Degree, nor none
go beyond. And feed not upon that, which Dies of it self, but on that which
comes from above: Know the Son of Man's Flesh, which is your Bread, and his
Blood, which is your Drink; which who eats and drinks of, hungers no more, nor
thirsts no more, but has the Endless Life. Nor none Write, Writing, Printing,
Speaking.
Print nor Speak (for God) but as ye are moved of the Lord God; for that
reaches to that of God in others, and is Effectual. Nor none stop Writing or
Speaking, when ye are moved with the Spirit of the Lord God, for the Power of
the Lord God is to order, and to keep down that which would be hasty, or that
which would not be Obedient, for that leads into the Wilderness (each way)
which the Power, and Life and Seed of God must be set a-top of, which keeps you
over the World, and brings you to the Beginning.

And all Friends every where, Mectings.
In all your Meetings know and feel the Power, and the Seed (that is the Heir
of the Promise) of the Lord God amongst you, over you and in you; then in that
ye will feel the Presence of the Lord God dwelling in the midst of you. And to
the Lord your Hearts will be brought, and it will bring you nigh one to
another, and to come into sweet Love and Unity, Love and Unity.
and into Easiness and Openness of Heart; and keep you over all that which
would stain you, or hurt you, or defile you. Whereby Wisdom shall be given to
you, with which ye shall be ordered to God's Glory; whereby ye shall feel his
Blessing, and order the Creatures to his Praise. And the Gospel ye shall be
shod with all: Shield of Faith.
And standing and dwelling in the Power of God, there the Shield of Faith ye
will receive, that gives the Victory over the World, with which ye have all
Access to God; which Mystery of Faith is held in a pure Conscience. So, in the
Power of God ye all living, ye live in the Lamb's Authority, in the Lamb's
Dominion; and Victory through him over all the World ye come to obtain, to Answer
that of God in all Consciences, in Cleanness of Heart and Mind.

And all Friends, In the Life and Power, that stands in God, dwell, that ye may
have Unity with God, and one with another, and feel his Presence among you: And
the Seed, and Life, Feel God's Presence.
and Power and Wisdom of Christ know in you all, and one in another. And the
Lord God Almighty preserve you, and keep you in his Power, Life and Dominion,
which lets you see him, who was in the Beginning, before the World was made;
that nothing may rule, but Life it self; that ye may feel God's Presence in you
and with you, that Truth and Life over all the World may spread. So the Lord
God Almighty preserve you in the Life, and Power and Wisdom of God, that ye may
all be ordered to his Glory.

This is to be read in all your Meetings.

G. F.

Concerning the Light. (To be read amongst Friends.)
ALL Friends every where,
Epist. 105.
Keep your Meetings, waiting in the Light, To wait to know the Word of God.
which from the Lord Jesus Christ does come; so will ye receive Power from him,
and have the refreshing Springs of Life opened to your Souls, and be kept
sensible of the tender Mercies of the Lord. And know one another in the Life
(ye that be turned to the Light) and in the Power, which comes from the Lord
Jesus Christ, who is your Light, who is your Life; that ye may all in the Life
see Christ to reign in you, who is the Truth, from whence ye have Light. Here
the Old Serpent is chained, and put into the bottomless Pit, and Christ is
known to reign, Christ to reign.
and ye to reign with him; Heirs with him, Joint-Heirs, and Heirs of God. Here
is the Dominion received and witnessed of the World, that is without End, and
the Promise of Life from the Father of Life to you, who are turned to the Son,
who to the Father is the Way, who is the Mediator between the Father and you.
The Everlasting Priest.
All wait to receive the Everlasting Priest, the Everlasting Covenant of God,
of Light, Life and Peace, into which Covenant no Sin, no Darkness nor Death
comes; but the Blessing of the only Wise God, the Father of Life, here is
known, where no Earthly Man can approach. But he that is of God, knows God's
Truth; and he that is of the Devil; The Devil, a Murderer.
does his Lusts, who was a Murderer from the Beginning, in whom is no Truth,
who in it abode not. So he it is, that speaks a Lie, and speaks of himself, and
not God's Word; for he is out of the Truth. But ye, that be turned to the
Light, walk in the Light, walk in the Truth, where no Darkness is; with which
Light, that never changes, ye may come to see that, which was in the
Beginning, before the World was, where there is no Shadow, nor Darkness. In
which Light as ye wait, ye will come to receive into your Hearts the Word of
Faith, The Word of Faith.
which reconciles to God, and is as a Hammer, to beat down all that is
contrary; and as a Sword, to divide the Precious from the vile; and as a Fire,
to burn up that which is contrary to the Precious: Which Word is Pure, and
endures for ever; which was in the Beginning, and is now again witnessed and
made manifest. Therefore wait in the Light, that ye may all receive it, the
same Word that ever was, which the Scriptures were given forth from.

So Friends, keep your Meetings; and as ye are moved of the Lord, be Obedient
to him, and keep your Habitations. And be not troubled; but look at that, which
gives you to see over the World. So the Lord God Almighty preserve you all to
his Glory! Amen.

G. F.

To Friends, to keep in the Life, out of Janglings.
FRiends,
Epist. 106.
Stand faithful to your Measures of the Gift of God, which comes from him, who
was, before the World was made; that ye may stand over the World, and all the
betraying Spirits in it, that nothing may reign, but Life in you all. And keep
out of Janglings and Parties, Janglings and Parties.
in that, which is able to keep you above them all to God; and in that all
wait. And the Bustlings of the World keep out of, in the Covenant of Peace with
God.

G. F.

MY Dear Friends in the Power of the Everlasting God, which comprehends the
Power of Darkness, Epist. 107.
and all the Temptations in it, In that Power of God dwell, which will keep and
bring you to the Word, which was in the Beginning, The Word, which was in the
Beginning.
which will keep you up to the Life, and to feed upon the same, over the Power
of Darkness: In that ye will find Strength, and feel Dominion and Life, and
that will let you see, before the Tempter was, and over him; and into that the
Tempter cannot come, for the Power and Truth he is out of: And in that Life
dwell, in which ye will know Dominion. And therefore, let your Faith be in the
Power, and over the Weakness and Temptations, Weakness and Temptations.
and look not out at them; but look in the Light and Power of God at the Lord's
Strength, which will be made perfect in your weakest State. And look at the
Grace of God in all Temptations, to bring your Salvation, which is your Teacher
to teach you; for when ye do look or hearken to the Temptations, ye go from
your Teacher, the Grace of God, and so are darkened: The Grace of God is
sufficient in all Temptations to lead out of them, and to keep over them.

G. F.

FRiends,
Wait in the Light, Epist. 108.
that with the Light every one of you may come to see Christ to be your Wisdom,
and your Righteousness, and so come to see the Body, his Church, About 1656.
of which he is the Head; and in the Measure of Life waiting on the Father of
Life, ye may come to reign in the Life: All that are here kept, are in pure Joy
and Love. And in the Light wait, Harlots and Idolaters seen.
that ye may see the Harlots and Idolaters, etc. which are to be fed with
Judgment. Spare not that which is for the Sword, and for the Fire; let all
Fleshly-mindedness be trodden under your Feet. And standing in the Power, ye
will see the Seed slaying the Fat, and chaining and binding the Unruly, The Fat
and Unruly.
and succouring all the Lambs and Babes: This is the Word of the Lord to you.

G. F.

FRiends,
Keep to Patience, this is the Counsel of the Lord to you. Epist. 109.
Do not Judge one another behind one another backs, Concerning Judging.
nor speak Evil one of another, for that is that, which sows the Enmity among
Brethren. Nor do not Judge one another before the World, for that is that,
which is in the Extremes, Passion and Hastiness; and there ye do let in the
World's Spirit to rejoice over you, and that is out of the Patience, and Love,
and Wisdom and Fear of God and his Truth. And every one dwell in the Seed and
Life of God, and in that know one another, and Meeting together in that, ye may
see the Lord Jesus in the midst of you. And Friends, The Aggravating Part.
go not into the Aggravating Part to strive with it, lest ye do hurt to your
Souls, and run into the same Nature; for Patience must get the Victory, and
answers to that of God in every one, which will bring every one from the
contrary. So let your Moderation, and Temperance and Patience be known to all,
for that which joins to the Aggravating Part, sets up the Aggravating Part, and
breeds Confusion, and reaches not to the Witness of God in every one. And
Friends, keep out of the Worldly-Wise Part, The Wise Part.
for that will never let People join and unite together (in Truth) which enters
into the Earth, Apprehensions of Words; but let Innocence be the Garment, and
Truth and Simplicity the Covering: Then in the Innocence ye will have Unity,
where there is no evil Thought, but Love, that thinks no Evil. Therefore Cover
one another Nakedness; let all things be done in Love, and that will Edify:
And let the Weight and Preciousness of Truth be in your Eye, and esteemed above
all things by you. For here is my Grief, when I hear any thing amongst Friends,
that hinders their Unity, and makes a Breach, (whereby the Wrong gets Ground)
who should live in the Seed, which breaks the Bond of Iniquity, Breaches.
and makes up all Breaches; in which Seed shine, answering the Witness of God
in every one, which bruises the Earthly Part under, that brings forth Briars
and Thorns, and spreads over the World, and all the contrary. Therefore all ye,
which have known the Power of the Lord God, and have tasted of the Seed of God,
Live in that, in which ye come to have Unity; that that Part may be kept down:
And the Wrong Eye, that looks out at one another Weaknesses, that must be kept
under, even that, where the Heat, and the Burnings, and the Enmity is; the Seed
of God a-top of all that must be set, Cover Nakedness.
in which is the Unity. Therefore, if there be any Nakedness in any, or among
any, cover that, and come all to the Seed of God in your own selves; for in
that is the Virtue to heal, yea, all Nations. Slaughterings, Wounds and
Cuttings are the other Weapons in the other Part, which is out of the Seed of
God, whose End is Peace; in which is the Unity, which is the Top-stone over all
the Enmity, and a-top of it is laid, and bruiseth it all down.

I am a Lover of your Souls Eternal Good, Peace and Unity, in the Kingdom, that
stands in the Power, which has no End.

G. F.

To the Prisoners at Exon.
FRiends,
Epist. 110.
Mind that, which keeps you all Meek and Low, to be guided with it. Keep Meek
and Low.
And all consider that, which keeps you in the Way of Peace; that none of you
may be pudling in your own carnal Wisdom, which is to be confounded, which is
shut out of the Kingdom of God: All wait to have Dominion over that, that ye
may know Peace and Unity, and the Love of God, that does not change. And do not
strive one with another, lest ye do hurt one another; for it is not the hasty
Spirit, that does get the Victory, but the Lamb, who must reign over the World,
and was, before it was. And the Mind, which is forward, The forward Mind Judge.
Judge, and dwell in the peaceable Way; and that ye may be Patterns in your
Imprisonments to them, which be out of the Image of the Son of God.

To the Prisoners in Exon; Written, whilst J. N. was there, with many more in
Prison.

G. F.

A Warning from the Lord for Plainness of Speech to be used. (To go among
Friends)
FRiends of God and Brethren,
Epist. 111.
This is a Warning to you all from the Lord God and Jesus Christ, that all that
ye speak, it may be in Plainness of Speech, Plainness of Speech.
according to that of God in all Consciences, and that it may proceed from that
of God in you, the Light of Christ, that all your Words be Words of Life to the
Life, and Death to the Death, where it reigns above the Light. And that all
Words, which are spoken, be in Plainness of Speech; that the Light of Christ in
all Consciences, which he has enlightened every one withal, may witness your
Words to be the Words of Life: So that dwelling in the Light, to that of God ye
may be made manifest in all Consciences; which shall be their Condemnation,
that hate it. Ye that dwell in the Light, and walk in the Light, use Plainness
of Speech and plain Words, single Words in the single Life, pure Words from the
pure Life, seasoned Words, seasoned with Grace, which teaches to deny all
Ungodliness and Worldly Lusts. They who live in Ungodliness and Worldly Lusts,
turn from the Grace of God into Wantonness, who are light and vain, whose Words
are unsavory, not seasoned with Grace, whose Words edify not; upon whom God
will render Vengeance in Flames of Fire, who shall be separated from his
Presence and his Angels. Therefore Friends, in Plainness of Speech all dwell;
for dwelling in the Light, it will bring you to Plainness and few Words, to
live in the Life, The Life of the Scriptures.
which gave forth the Scriptures, which was, before the Scriptures were given
forth; and with it ye will see their Conditions, that dwelt in the Life, and
gave forth the Scriptures. And with this Light ye will see their Conditions,
who were testified against (who were out of the Life) by them who dwelt in the
Light; and with it all that comes to be seen, read and understood, which was
given forth with the Life, and from the Life; and all comes to be known in
Plainness, and is with Plainness spoken forth again. Which comes not by the
Will of Man: For no Prophecy of the Scripture came by the Will of Man; all the
Prophecies in it were out of the Will of Man: The Will of Man.
And they Witnessed and Prophesied of Christ, who was born not by the Will of
Man; who was supposed to be the Son of Joseph, but was the Son of God. And all
the Apostles were made Ministers by the Will of God, and not by Man, nor of
Man, but by the Will of God; and so, they witnessed Christ, who was not born by
the Will of Man, who were made Ministers not by the Will of Man: And they
witnessed, that no Prophecy of the Scripture in old time came by the Will of
Man, neither was it of any private Interpretation; but holy Men of God spoke
it, as they were moved by the holy Ghost, the holy Mover, which is but one. And
all who are in their own Wills, and have the Scripture, and make a feigned
Profession of that (which came not by the Will of Man) are in the Presumption;
and with the Light of Christ, which he has enlightened every one, that comes
into the World, withal, with that Light shall they be condemned, even all that
hate it, and live in their own Wills. And so, the Unity of the Saints is in
that, which condemns the World. And all who live in their own Wills, and yet
make a Profession of the Scriptures, there are the Sects and Opinions, Sects
and Opinions.
and there is no Unity, and they have not Unity amongst themselves; but only an
Oneness in Nature, though not in Unity in their Meanings of the Letter. That
which comes not by the Will of Man, but is contrary to his Will, and contrary
to all the World's evil Ways, and overturns them, which is according to that of
God in all Consciences, with that have Unity; which testifies against every
Man, when he acts contrary to it, and with it he shall be judged, and condemned
in his own Knowledge and Understanding. And ye all walking in this Light, it
will bring you to all Plainness and Singleness of Speech; Mystery of Iniquity.
which will make the Deceit to tremble, and the Mystery of Iniquity to shake,
which lodges in the Temple and sits there, where it ought not to sit, and is
exalted above all that is called God: Now, with the Brightness of his Coming is
he discovered, and with the Breath of his Mouth he is to be consumed. So, dwell
all in the Eternal Power of God, and in his pure Light, that ye may be a Terror
to all Evildoers, and to all Ungodliness, and to all who act Unrighteously,
and live in Uncleanness. And so, ye will come to use plain Words and plainness
of Speech to them all, The Witch and Iachanter.
and no Flattery shall dwell in you, no Inchanter nor Witch shall live, no
Hypocrisy shall stand before the Judgment Seat of God; but shall be as the
Chaff, driven to and fro; that the Scripture may be fulfilled upon them. And
all who are out of Plainness, with the Eternal Light, which Christ has
enlightened them withal, shall they be condemned and confounded in Time: The
Light was before Time.
(For this Light was before Time, and is in Time, which lets every Man and
Woman see all their Actions done in Time; and hating this Light, this is their
Condemnation.) But all loving this Light, and walking in this Light, ye will
come to walk in that, which is the World's Condemnation; and it will bring you
to see the World to be gone from God, from Christ, and all who are of God. And
this is the Counsel of God to you, that in that, which is contrary to your
Fleshly Wills, ye may all wait and walk, for that will lead you from all vain
Thoughts, and all evil Desires; there wait, and ye will witness the Birth born,
not by the Will of Man: And this Birth is Heir of another World, and Heir of
the certain Riches, which is manifest to that of God in all Consciences. So to
you all this is a Warning from the Lord, who are in the Light, and love the
Light, which Christ Jesus has enlightened you withal, which is contrary to your
Wills, and all Men's Wills; that with it ye may use plainness of Speech to all,
and so to be made manifest to that, which they hate, which is their
Condemnation, the Light. And abiding in Christ, Christ the Vine.
who is the Vine, every one will come to witness your selves to be as Branches
abiding in the Vine, and sitting under the Vine.

This was I moved of the Lord to send out abroad among you, as a Message to all
the Plants of the Lord.

If ye speak any thing contrary to the Light, which Christ has enlightened you
withal, with the Light ye are to be condemned. And if any among you do speak of
Former Experiences, and not dwell in the Light, but in Hypocrisy and
Prefumption, and Envy without the Fear of God, ye are to be thrown down, and
with the Light condemned; and Woe upon thy Head from God and Christ proceeds,
and art to be turned out, and Judged with the Light and with the Life!
Therefore in the Life dwell and walk every one in particular; then ye will have
Unity one with another, and grow up to be Trees of Righteousness, the Planting
of the Lord.

G. F.

ALL Friends,
Mind the Light, and dwell in it, and it will keep you a top of all the World;
and the Seed of God mind, Epist. 112.
and know it, and in it be Content.

Dwell in the Seed, which is Heir of the Promise of Life Eternal, The Seed, the
Heir.
and dwell in the Possession of that. And in all your Doings (and Words) be
faithful to the Lord, and to Men; let this be your daily Exercise.

G. F.

To a Friend in the Ministry.
DEar Brother,
Supposed to E. B.
Mind the Lord, and stand in his Will and Counsel. Look not forth at Time nor
Place, Epist. 113.
but at thy Father's House, wheresoever thou art. And dwell in the pure Measure
of God in thee, and there thou will see the Lord God present with thee. For the
bringing forth many out of Prison, art thou there set; behold, See the Lord God
present.
the Word of the Lord cannot be bound: The Lord God of Power give thee Wisdom,
Courage, Manhood and Boldness to thresh down all Deceit. Dear Heart, be
Valiant, and mind the pure Spirit of God in thee, to guide thee up unto God, to
thunder down all Deceit within and without. So Farewell! God Almighty keep you
all!

G. F.

DEar Brethren,
In the mighty Power of God go on, Epist. 114.
to which Power of the God of Heaven and Earth, To E. B. and F. H.
all the Powers of the Earth must bow; that to that of God in all Consciences
ye may be made manifest, that that in them, which is of God, may witness, The
mighty Power of God.
that ye are sent of God. Dwell in the Life of God, that to the Spirits in
Prison ye may minister, and to it be made manifest, that ye are no Deceivers,
but Saviors, and such as are sent to lead from all Deceivers, The Spirits in
Prison.
and them to testify against. So, in the mighty Power of God go on Preaching
the Gospel to every Creature, and Discipling them in the Name of the Father,
Son and Holy Spirit. In the Name of Christ Preach the mighty Day of the Lord to
all the Consciences of them, who have lain long in Darkness (and under its
Chain) where the Light shined, but the Darkness could not comprehend it. So, in
the Power of the Lord God go on, and thresh that, which has been fed with the
Harlot's Spirit, and the Harlot famish, The Harlot's Spirit.
which has and does Prison the Just. I Charge you in the Presence of the
Living God dwell in his Power, that with his Power ye may be carried along to
minister to all the Spirits Imprisoned by the Deceit. As the Life of God does
arise, it will lead you up to God, the Father of Life; in this your Fruits
shall never wither. But go on to plant a Vineyard, The Vineyard.
and to Plow, that ye may eat the Fruit thereof; and to plant in Hope, and to
thresh in Hope, that ye may be made Partakers of your Hope: And to thresh out
the Corn, that the Wind may scatter the Chaff, that the Corn may be gathered
into the Barn. So, in the Power of the Lord Jesus Christ preach the Everlasting
Gospel, that by his Power the Sick may be healed, the Leprous cleansed, the
Dead raised, the Blind Eyes opened, and the Devils cast out. In the Name of the
Lord Jesus Christ go on, that that of God in all Consciences may witness, that
ye are sent of God, and are of God; and so according to that speak, to bring up
all unto the Head Christ, and into the Life, which gave forth the Scriptures;
for there is the Unity, and out of it is the Confusion.

G. F.

To Friends, Concerning the Word of Life.
FRiends and Brethren, Epist. 115.
the Eternal Word, from which ye have both spoken and ministered to others, is
the Word of Life, the Word of Peace, The Word of Reconciliation.
the Word of Reconciliation, which makes of Twain one New Man; and if ye do
abide there, there is no Division, but Unity in the Life, which was before
Death was, and before Division was: Therefore that which is divided, is of the
Kingdom that cannot stand, and is for Condemnation by the Life, and Word of
Reconciliation. That which speaks the Evil Language, I do deny; for that which
speaks so, does not see thoroughly. Therefore in the Light wait, where the Unity
is, where the Peace is, where the Oneness with the Father and the Son is, where
there is no Rent nor Division; but all one in Christ Jesus, the Everlasting
Fountain of Life, and Covenant of Peace. The Son of Man comes not to be
ministered unto, but to minister. Where the Life and Fullness dwells, it hides
and covers from that, to which the Curse is; that so it may minister forth to
the Seed's Seed.

SOVND, sound the Trumpet abroad, ye Valiant Soldiers of Christ in his Kingdom,
Antichrists in Arms.
of which is no End! All the Antichrists in the Kingdoms (of fallen Men) are
up in Arms against Christ.

G. F.

Concerning Judging in Meetings.
FRiends,
Epist. 116.
Do not Judge one another in Meetings, ye that do minister in the Meetings; for
your so doing has hurt the People, both within and without, Meetings quiet.
and your selves under their Judgment ye have brought. And your Judging one
another in the Meetings, has emboldned others to Quarrel, and Judge you also
in the Meetings: And this has been all out of Order, and the Church Order
also. Now, if ye have any thing to say to any, stay, till the Meeting be done,
and then speak to them in private between your selves, and do not lay open one
another Weakness; Not to lay open Weakness.
for that is Weakness, and not Wisdom to do so. For your Judging one another in
Meetings, has almost destroyed some Friends, and distracted them: And this is
for want of Love, that bears all things; and therefore let it be amended. No
more, but my Love.

FRIENDS, Movings to do any Service for the Lord, Do Service for the Lord.
when they have done it, let them return again with speed to their Habitation,
and there serve the Lord in their Generation; that no Slothfulness may be
amongst you. But all keep in Diligence, that no Occasion may be given to any to
speak evil of the Truth; but that ye may answer that of God in all. So, give no
Offense; Give no Offense.
for Woe is to those, by whom Offenses do come: Yet Quench not the Spirit.

G. F.

MY Dear Friends,
Keep your Meetings, and ye will feel the Seed to arise, though never a Word be
spoken amongst you: Epist. 117.
And be Faithful, that ye may Answer that of God in every one. Neglect not your
Talent.
And do not neglect your Talent, but in the Life and Power of God live, which
ye have received. And, my Dear Friends, dwell in the Life and Power and Love of
God, and one toward another.

FRIENDS, Dwell in the Measure of the Spirit of God, The Love that is Eternal.
for the true and lasting Love proceeds from God, who is Eternal. And abiding
in the Measure of Life, ye will have Peace and Love, that never changes; if
from the Measure you turn, Iniquity gets up, and so the Love waxes Cold, and
in that lodge the evil Thoughts, Jealousies, evil Will and Murmurings. Wait in
the Light, which is of God, that ye may all witness the Son of God, and witness
that, which shall never wither; so ye will see and feel God near.

G. F.

LEt no Friends go begond their own Measure given them of God, Epist. 118.
nor rejoice in another Man's Line made ready to their Hands; Another Man's
Line.
lest that get up, and would be Justified, which is to be Condemned: And that
which will Boast, and be Justified in the Sight of Men, is out of the Kingdom
excluded. Therefore in the Measure of Life wait, and with it be led to have
Power over your own Wills (which are Mortal and Changable) that the Way of
Righteousness may be found, Man's Will.
where your Wills are shut out, which causes the Hastiness and the Strife, to
run into Words without the Life, Words without Life.
where Judgment and Condemnation does overtake you. Wherefore delight in
Judgment, which leads to the Door of Mercy.

G. F.

FRiends,
Wait in the Life, which will keep you above Words, Epist. 119.
and keep your Minds up to God, the Father of Life, and Condemn and Judge all
them, which would have Words more than the Life. Grow in the Life.
God Almighty be with you in the Measure of Life, that in it ye may grow; and
with it your Minds may be kept up to him, the Father of Life.

And that all Strife may be kept down with the Life, and all Light Spirits
judged down, with that which comprehends the World, Light Spirits.
and judges it. So, God Almighty be with you all, and keep you in his mighty
Power up to himself, and condemn all that which is contrary to him and his
Light.

To be read at Meetings.

G. F.

MY Dear Friends,
Dwell in the Everlasting Seed of God, Epist. 120.
in which ye all will feel Life Eternal, that never has an End; and in that
Meet, and keep your Meetings. And dwell together in the Love and Life of God,
with which ye may all be filled, through which Love ye may cover the Multitude
of Sins, Love covers.
and Answer the Life of God in all; in which ye may feel the Blessings of the
Almighty God, covering you as with a Garment. And so, Possession of Life.
live in the Possession of the Life; in which ye all will have Unity and
Fellowship with God, and one with another.

DEAR Friends, Exhort all your Families at Times and Seasons, whether they be
Servants or Children, that they may be Informed in the Truth. Professors, many
of you did Exhort and Instruct them in the Form, Exhort your Families.
when that ye had not the Power: And therefore now being brought into the
Truth, ye should be more diligent to Exhort, Admonish and Instruct them.

G. F.

To Friends, To take Care of such, who suffer for owning the Truth.
FRiends,
Epist. 121.
In the Wisdom and Power of God dwell, by which all things must be ordered to
his Glory, in which ye may do all things to his Glory; and that with the Wisdom
of God ye may order and preserve the Creation, and every thing that is Good.
And if any Servants be convinced, Servants Convinced.
and turned from their Places for Truth's sake, Friends to be tender to them,
that they be not lost; but that they may be preserved. Soldiers. Children.
Wives.
And if any Soldiers be put out of the Army for Truth's sake, that they may be
nourished and cherished; or any Children be turned from their Parents, or
believing Wives from their unbelieving Husbands, that they may be admonished to
walk wisely toward them. Prisoners.
And that all Prisoners, that have but little of their own, there may be Care
taken for them, and for the Lame and Sick. And that, if any Friends be
Oppressed any manner of way, others may take Care to help them: And that all
may be as one Family, building up one another, and helping one another. And if
any desire Meetings any way for Truth's Service, Friends not to look out; but
to dwell in the Life and Power of God, and therein to answer it.

AND all Friends every where, Power, and Life and Seed of God keep your
Meetings, that over all the Top-Stone may be laid, and ye all in the Wisdom and
Patience may be preserved, Wisdom and Patience.
and as a sweeet Savor may be kept to God, and in the Hearts of all People.
And every one be Obedient to the Life and Power of the Lord God, Obedient.
and that will keep you from being as a Wilderness; but be Faithful and still,
till the Winds cease, and the Storm be over.

G. F.

FRiends,
Epist. 122.
To that which is Pure, I speak, in which is Unity, where no defiled thing
shall enter. Silence all Flesh, who strive about Words, in which is no Profit;
who would draw you out of your Conditions, and others out of their Conditions.
Therefore be Low, and mind that which is Low, Mastery and Pride.
to draw you out of Contention. And strive not for Mastery, and do not exercise
Lordship over one another; but mind that which is Pure, which keeps you in the
Fear of the Lord God. For if your Minds go from that which is Pure, which leads
to God, your Nakedness will appear to the World; and then ye go in your own
Wills and Strength, and there is the Seat for Mastery and Pride, out of the
Will of God, and that is out of the Unity, out of the Oneness, out of the Way;
and instead of building, ye destroy; and instead of edifying, ye draw back into
the World. Therefore all be Low, and wait upon the Lord, and be swift to Hear,
slow to Speak, and slow to Wrath; be Low, and wait upon God, to receive the
living Food from God, to nourish you in Time, with that which was before Time;
that God in all things may be glorified. So, the Lord God Almighty direct you,
and bring down all fleshly Wills; that the Pure may be raised up. So, meet
together and wait upon God, if there be not a Word, I charge you. Beware of
Contention, for there ye get above that of God in the Conscience; and so go out
of the Fear of the Lord.

G. F.

Men in the Fall are in the Wars and Strife, but Truth restores, and brings
into Peace.
DEar Friends,
My Love is to you all in the Everlasting Seed of God, Epist. 123.
that never changes nor falls, Concerning Christ, that never fell, and Adam in
the Fall.
nor gives it self to that which does change, which is not of this World, but
is over it, and was, before the World was; in which is the Stedfastness and
Staiedness, and Life Eternal: Which reigns over all the Airy Spirit (and that
which does change) and remains, and is as the Winter-fruit, and stands, The
Seed, the Winter-fruit.
when all the untimely Figs are gone. (Mark) And Seed is not as the Corn, that
grows upon the Housetop, that withers; for the Leaves, that this Seed brings
forth, never fade nor fall; The Leaves heal the Nations.
for the Leaves thereof heal the Nations, which are wounded. The Second Adam
goes over Adam in the Fall, and his quarrelling Sons and Daughters, who War one
with another with their carnal Weapons, who remain in their carnal Worships,
carnal Fellowships, carnal Teachings: But who are in the Noble and Royal Seed,
are all in Peace, and in Love, and in Life, and in Unity, and are in the
Spiritual Worship, and Spiritual Fellowship, and Spiritual Teaching, being in
the Seed, Christ, that never fell, nor never will fall, nor never changed, nor
never will change. In this Seed, Christ, is Peace and Rest, out of all
Troubles, out of all Whimsies, Christ the Rest.
foolish Dreams, Imaginations, Fancies, false Visions, false Revelations. For
the Seed, in which the Blessing is, is felt, and the Life, and the Light, and
the Righteousness, and the Truth, that answers the Witness of God in all Men
and Women, whether they will hear or forbear. And so, all that are in Adam in
the Fall, both Men and Women, and there remaining in the Fall, they never are
in Rest nor Peace, Adam in the Fall his Travels.
but are in Travels, Wars, Strife, Fightings; the Lusts being the Ground of all
this. And Whimsies and Imaginations, Fancies, false Visions, false Dreams,
Arrogance, Pride, Ambition, Swellings, Puffed-up-ness, that beings Shame, and
covers them with Shame; which they possess, that are in the Fall, out of
Christ, the Second Adam, that never fell, For in Adam in the Fall is all the
(inward) foul Weather, Storms, Tempests, Winds, Strifes, the whole Family of it
in Confusion, being all gone from the Spirit and the Witness of God in
themselves, and the Power, and the Light; in which Power, Light and Spirit is
the Fellowship with God and one with another, through which they come out of
Adam in the Fall, into the Second Adam that never fell, The Second Adam, the
Quickner.
the Quickener, who awakens Old Adam's Children in the Fall out of their Sleep
of Sin, and brings them out of his Ways up unto himself, the Way, Christ that
never fell nor changed, and out of and from his Teachers, and Priests and
Shepherds, etc. that change and fall, to the Priest, Shepherd and Prophet, that
never fell nor never changed, nor never will fall nor change, nor leave the
Flock in the cold Wealther, nor in the Winter, nor Storms nor Tempests; nor the
Voice of the Wolf does not frighten him from his Flock. For the Light, the
Power, the Truth, the Righteousness, did it ever leave you in any Weather, or
in any Storms or Tempests? And so, his Sheep know his Voice, and follow him,
who gives them Life Eternal abundantly; who says to all, that are Dead in
Adam, I am come (mark) I am come, that ye ( Dead in Adam) might have Life.
Christ, the Second Adam is come, that the Dead in the first Adam might have
Life, and might be quickened, and might be awakened to Righteousness, who are
asleep in the Unrighteousness. And so, he does invite all Adam's Posterity to
come to him, that all through him might believe, and come to Light, and come to
Life, and come up into Peace and Rest; for in the Second Adam ye have Peace, ye
have Rest. So, they have no Peace nor Rest in the Old Adam in the Fall; but in
the Second Adam, Christ, that never fell, is both the Rest, Christ, the Rest
and Peace.
and the Peace, and the Life. But in Adam in the Fall is neither Rest, nor
Peace, nor Life; but Darkness and Trouble, and Sorrow, and Burdenings, and
Changins: And this Adam's Sons and Daughters in the Fall do inherit and possess
in the World. Therefore all come out of Adam in the Fall, and haste to him that
never fell, nor never changed; in whom ye have all both Rest, and Peace and
Life, that was with the Father, before the World began.

And so, Meeting in the Name.
In in the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ, that never fell, keep your Meetings,
ye who are gathered in his Name; and then ye will see over all the Gatherings
of Old Adam's Sons and Daughters, that be in the Fall, and out of his Name. But
ye being gathered into his Name, that never fell, Christ Jesus, fell the Seed
of God over all that set, that makes to suffer; which was, before that was, and
will stand and remain, when that is all gone. So Farewell.

G. F.

MY Friends,
Epist. 124.
Be faithful, and keep your Meetings; and in that Light wait, which comes from
the Head, Christ, in whom are all your Lives; from whence ye have your Light,
which is the Life in the Son. The High Calling in Christ.
And ye, which do witness the High Calling in Christ Jesus, and are redeemed by
him out of the World, and are become New Greatures, walk above the World, and
be not Hasty; but in the Light and Life wait, that with it your Minds may be
directed and guided, and joined together with that which is Immortal and
Undefild, in one Spirit, up to the Immortal God. And that with the Spirit, One
Baptism, One Faith.
which he has given you, ye may witness the One Baptism into One Body, and ye
all with the Light may see the One Faith, which Christ is the Author and the
Finisher of; and that ye may all see the End of you Faith, the Salvation of
your Souls, with that which gives you the Victory over the World. And fear the
Lord, and take heed of Strife, and live in Peace and Love one with another,
believing all in the Light, which makes manifest; that all ye may be the
Children of the Light: And this Belief gives the Victory over the World. He
that is of this Faith, is born of God; and he that believes in the Light,
shall not abide in Darkness, nor shall ever be confounded. For he believes in
that, which manifests that, which is to be confounded and trampled upon; and
he shall not be condemned, but shall have the Light of Life. And he that
believes not in the Light, is with the Light condemned already. And he that
hears not the Voice of the Son of God, does not live, but is in Death:
Therefore he that hears not the Light, which comes from Christ the Life, The
Voice of the Son of God.
hears nor the Vioce of the Son of God, and he comes not to Life. And the
Hour is come, that they, which have been in the Graves, have heard the Voice of
the Son of God, and do live; and they that do not hear the Voice of the Son of
God, do not live, but are in the Death and the Grave. And they that come to
believe in the Light, hear the Voice of the Son of God, and live, and out of
the Condemnation are come; and live over Death, and the Grave and Hell, and so
come to Life.

G. F.

FRiends, to you all this is the World of the Lord: Epist. 125.
Know the Seed of God in one another, which Seed is Christ. Look not out, then
ye will not Wonder, but will be a-top of the Wonderer. The Seed, The Wonderer.
which is Christ, being known in one another, which the Promise of God is to,
every one of you know the Promises fulfilled in you; whereby ye all may witness
the Blessing of God fulfilled to you, and in you. And so in this the Lord God
Almighty preserve you all to his Glory, and that ye all may know the Flesh of
Christ your Food, and know his Reign.

And quench not the Spirit, and stop not the Power; Quench not the Spirit.
but dwell in that, which does stop and quench the Deceit: And to you this is
the Word of the Lord God.

And all Friends mind and heed the Life and Power of the Lord God; for all that
are out of it, are and will be confounded. Therefore dwell in that which
condemns it, in which will be your Peace.

G. F.

For Friends, to dwell in Love and Unity.
THE Word of the Lord God to all Friends: Epist. 126.
Dwell in Peace and Unity with God, and one with another, that to the Lord ye
may be a sweet Savor, and to one another, A sweet Savor.
and also in them that hate the Light; that ye may all come to witness the
Sonship, and to be Heirs of God, and in the Spirit have Unity, The Bond of
Peace.
which is the Bond of Peace. And the Seed of God, and the Life mind.

G. F.

ALL Friends every where, do not delight in Apparel, Epist. 127.
do not delight in the Creature, more than the Creator. Apparel and Riches.
Trust not in uncertain Riches, which fade and pass away; but in the living God
trust, and love the Riches that endure, and fade not away. Delight not in the
World that ends, but in the World that has no End; that there ye may all come
to have an Assurance of the Endless Life.

G. F.

To all Friends, to keep in the Power of God, out of the Cares of the World.
ALL Friends, to that which is pure, take heed, Epist. 128.
that with that all your Minds may be kept up to God, who is pure; Grow as the
Lilly.
that as the Lilly ye all may grow, and receive Wisdom from God, how to use the
Creatures in their places, to the Glory of him that created them. For Woe is
unto you, that Lay up for the latter Day with Covetousness; ye act in that
Nature contrary to the Light, taking Thought for to morrow, what ye shall eat,
and what ye shall drink, and what ye shall put on. Look at the Life, which is
more than Food, and the Body, which is more than Raiment; and consider the
Lillies and Ravens, The Lillies Ravens and the Earth.
and who feeds them, and cloatheth the Earth? That in the Faith ye may stand,
and with it ye may come to see him, who is Invisible. He who lays up for the
Latter Day with Covetousness, he goes from that, which should keep him out of
Days, The Ancient of Days.
up to God, the Beginning of Days; here the Ancient of Days comes to be seen,
and the Life out of Death springs, and a diligent Serving God is known, and
every one for his Family provides: For he is worse than an Infidel, that does
not. That which was, before Days were, Mind, which brings to be Diligent,
serving the Lord; and that keeps down the Destroyer. And that keeps down the
Covetous and the fleshly Principle, and that which would run out into the
Observation of Days: And that keeps the Life up, out of the Earth, and keeps
from trusting in the Riches, Trasting in Riches.
that be uncertain, and brings to trust in God, who is living, who is the
Condemner of all the Gods, who have Eyes, and see not; who keep People under
their Dominion from the Light. But all, who to the Light take heed, see God,
who is Living, who all things sees.

G. F.

MY Dear Friends and Brethren,
Epist. 129.
Keep in the Seed of Peace, which was, before the Enmity and Adversary was, in
which ye will all have Life and Peace, and Unity and Dominion; and in that ye
will know Christ Jesus to reign, The Reign of Christ.
who was, before the World began; in whom ye may know your Election, and a
Sitting in the Heavenly Places in Christ Jesus, above all the Earthly Places
below, and Men's evil Traditions and vain Customs; sitting in Christ Jesus
keeps out of them, for he was, before they were.

And let all Friends every where pray to the Lord, to exalt his Truth to his
Glory, and his Kingdom which has no End, but is from Everlasting to
Everlasting.

G. F.

ALL Friends,
Epist. 130.
Dwell in the Truth, in my Father's House there are many Mansions, said Christ.
And ye all, that do know the Life, To all Friends, to dwell in the Truth, the
Life of God, the (...), etc.
go not from it: Heed not Words without Life; but heed that, which lets you see
and know the Father. For Mountains will arise, and may arise: But this is the
Word of the Lord God, and a Charge to you all in the Presence of the Lord God,
Heed the Power and Life, the Power, which ye have formerly known and tasted of;
and that will keep you, until the Day of Salvation, and that brings you to know
the Kingdom of God to stand in Righteousness, etc. and that will bring you to
comprehend Deceit, The Deceit of the World.
and to fathom it, and bring you to be over the Deceit of the World. So ye,
that know the Power of the Lord God, heed it, and it will remove Questionings
out of your Minds; it will remove that, which causes Trouble to come into your
Minds: The Power is the Gospel.
But if ye go from the Power, the formal Part gets up in you, and the Wonders
you will run into. But the Power of God it is the Gospel, and ye that have
received the Power of God, ye have received the Gospel; and he is cursed, that
preaches any other, yea, if an Angel from Heaven: For Christ is the Power of
God, to whom the Angels must bow. And Christ Jesus, who was born (of a Virgin)
crucified, and is ascended (and there is no other) all of you, that are turned
to the Light, wait to have him born in you, every one in particular. I am the
Light of the World, says Christ, by whom the World was made, who does
enlighten Every Man, that comes into the World: Christ the Light, the Bread of
Life.
Who is the Bread of Life, that came down from above; and who eats of this
Bread, lives for ever. Now, Every one of you having a Light from Christ, the
Bread of Life, wait, and with and from it you will see, know and have your Food
in due Season. Now, every one that comes into the World, having a Light from
Christ Jesus, who is not of the World, and being turned to this Light, which he
is lighted withal, he is turned to Jesus Christ, from whence it comes. And here
none shall say, Lo, here is Christ, or Lo there is Christ; but every one with
the Light, which comes from him, Christ is seen with the Light.
shall see Christ (and shall see the Father through the Spirit, that proceeds
from the Father and the Son) and the Glory, that he had with the Father, before
the World began; and shall have Dominion over all the contrary in the Male and
in the Female, having a Light from him, that gives the Light of the Knowledge
of the Glory of God, in the face of Christ Jesus. Which Light shines in your
Hearts; and there shall every one feel their Treasure in the Earthen Vessel,
and the Power which is of God. Now, whosoever goes from the Light, which they
are enlightened withal, they go into the Darkness, and they go into the Wonders;
and run out gazing, Lo here, Lo there is Christ.
and saying, Lo he is here, Lo he is there. I am come a Light into the World
(says Christ) which every one, that comes into the World, is lightened withal,
which Light is the Covenant; and every one, who are in the Light, are in the
Covenant with God.

And so Friends every where, keep your Meetings (this is the Word of the Lord
God to you) and do not heed the Lo-here's or Lo-there's, neither be troubled;
but heed every one the Life of God, and do not gad abroad from the Truth
within; that ye may be kept out of all highswelling Storms, Bustlings and
Tempests, and with it ye may be kept over the World, to him and in him, that is
not of the World. And take heed of denying the Truth; whosoever do, they go
from the Light within them, and so go into the Darkness, and into the Wonders.
The Wonderer.
And who go from the Light within, go from the Emanuel, from the Savior
within, Christ Jesus, and from the Truth in the inward parts, and from the
Wediator between you and God, and from the Vine; and so, ye bear not Fruit to
the Glory of God. And going from the Light within, ye go from your Peace, and
from the Covenant of God; and going from the Light within, ye go from the Life,
where every one receives the Light of Life. And who go from the Light within,
go from the Increase of God; who go from the Light within, go from the
Anointing within them, and so continue not in the Son, nor in the Father: All
who go from the Light within, go out of the Covenant of Eternal Life. But every
one walking in the Light within, which he has received, he shall there receive
the Bread of Life, Christ, whom the Light comes from. And so, having your Food
within, ye shall not go forth to gather it; but he that is in the Light, and
believes in it, comes to know the Garner, where-into the Wheat is gathered, The
Bread of Life.
and the Chaff, that is to be burned with unquenchable Fire, and the Floor
thoroughly purged; and the Immortal Crown is known.

Therefore all Friends, keep in the Power, and know the Power of God in one
another, and the Life, that stands in God; that out of all Dryness and
Barrenness ye may be brought, and kept in the Living and Eternal Spirit and
Power. And so, the God of Glory keep you from the Evil, that is in the World,
in Glory and in Unity, every one in your Measures! Now, the Power of God will
never be shaken; that which is to be shaken (or tossed) is out of the Power,
and the Power remains; Therefore dwell in the Power, which throws down all
that, which may be shaken (or tossed) and raises up that, which can never be
thrown down nor shaken: And to you this is the Word of the Lord God. And dwell
in that, and keep in that, which keeps you out of and above the Knowledge of
that, which enters into the Sensual Part; for both these will fail. Therefore
in the Power and in the Life of God dwell, which comprehends the World, and
reaches and fathometh over it all, in that dwell and live, there will be your
Peace; it will keep you out of the Strife, and Combustions and Heaps. For this
all comes to be fathomed, Strife and Combustions.
chained and kept down by the Eternal Power, and bound and bundled up for the
Fire, and judged down, and all that which brancheth forth from it, that nothing
may reign, but Life it self; and all the Contrary, the Filth amd Dross, with
the unquenchable Fire is to be consumed and burned. Wait all this to know, here
is the Path of Righteousness and Purity; and nothing shall stand, but the
Mountain of the Lord: Glory to the Lord in the Beauty of Holiness, which is
felt and seen! And all being kept in the Light, and walking in that, which ye
are enlightened withal, ye cannot be in the Strife; for the Enmity is out of the
Light, and the vain Boaster, which comes to nothing, but is judged and
condemned. And when that ye are Met together in the Light, hearken to it, that
ye may feel the Power of God in every one of you: So here comes your Ear to be
opened to hear the Counsel of the Lord God; and here the Eye comes to be opened
to see the Lord Jesus Christ in the midst of you, ye all sitting under you
Vines. So, every particular wait on him, who received not Honor of Man,
neither glorified himself; but the Light, which enlightneth every one, Man's
Honor.
that comes into the World, is a Witness against all them, that seek their
own Glory, or glorify themselves, or bear witness of themselves. Now they, who
receive Honor from Man, are from the Light, both he that gives, and he that
takes it; and it is to be stained, and the Light stains it, and condemns it. So
every particular of you, to you this is the Word of the Lord God, Know the Son
of God to be revealed in you. And know the Seed, which is Christ, to which the
Promise of God is; that ye may all witness the Seed of the Woman to bruise the
Serpent's Head in every one of you. The Serpent's Head.
That ye may all witness ye are come to him, that was in the Beginning; and to
the Seed of the Woman, which bruiseth the Serpent's Head in every one of you in
your own particulars. Then ye all will come to feed on the Bread of Life, that
comes from above: And such are Redeemed out of the Transgression, who are here,
that witness this. But where the Seed of the Woman has not bruised the
Serpent's Head, and that which abides not in the Truth, reigns; there is the
Transgressour. So, that which is out of the Truth reigning, the Serpent being
Head, The Seed of the Serpent, and his Food.
he sows his Seed, his Seed goes forth from him, and his Food, his Meat is
Dust; for he could not feed upon Life, that abode not in the Truth, which is
the Life. He that abides not in the Truth, which is the Life, his Food is Dust;
and he it is, that is tormented. And who are out of the Truth, are out of the
Worship of God; for who are the Worshippers of the Father, they must be in the
Truth and in the Spirit. And being in the Spirit and in the Truth, they are in
that the Devil abode not in, but is out of; and all false Ways, and Seducers,
and Deceivers and false Worshippers are out of. And Jerusalem's Worshippers,
Jerusalem's Worshippers, etc.
and Samaria's Worshippers, and the Worship that is at the Mountain, and the
Idolatrous Worfhippers, and the Worship of Devils; all these are out of the
Truth, and out of the Spirit, that changes not. But who are in the Truth and
in the Spirit, they are a-top of the World, and a-top of him, that abode not in
the Truth; their Feet are shod with it. Therefore every one of you, that are
come into the World, coming all to the Light, ye come to your Armor, ye come
to that, which lets you see Sin, it is the Armor against it; it is the Eye,
The Arment against Sia.
with which ye see that, which must be cut down and judged to Death: In which
Truth, which is the Light, we have Fellowship one with another. And this is the
Counsel of the Lord God to you, dwell all in the Power of God, which is the
Gospel of Peace. And the Power of God is the Cross of Christ; and ye that feel
the Power of God, ye feel Christ; for Christ is the Power of God. The Power of
God is but one, and the Light is but one, and the Cross (of Christ) is but one,
which is the Power of God; and the Gospel of Truth is but one, which is the
Power of God, and there is no other: Ye that come to know these, look for no
other. And Christ is that One in the Male and in the Female, which is the Seed,
which the Promise of God is to; and there all wait to find him, and receive
him. Know ye not, that Christ Jesus is in you, except ye are Reprobates, said
the Apostle; so now, Reprobates,
if ye are Reprobates, ye are Wonderers and Gazers in Adam, in Transgression,
out of the Light, out of the Life, out of the Power, out of the Truth, out of
the Way, which is Christ: But being in the Life, ye are in the Way, in the
Truth, in the Power of God, in Christ, out of Transgression, in the Second
Adam, the Lord from Heaven, out of the Transgression of the First Adam. And if
Christ Jesus be in you, the Body of Sin is dead, and ye are brought to God;
Emanuel.
and the Emanuel being known, God with us is witnessed by every one of you,
that are redeemed by him out of the Transgression, who are in the Second Adam.
So, if Christ Jesus be in you, and ye in him, the Body is dead; and ye are
alive to Righteousness, and Death is brought into Death.

Friends, dwell all in the Light, and then ye will dwell in Covenant with God,
and with God ye will have Peace. And Friends, all dwell in the Light, that ye
may receive the Wisdom of God, of God, The Wisdom of God.
by which all things were created; with which Wisdom ye may come to order all
the Creatures. And be Low, as Babes and Little Children, for the Little
Children receive the Kingdom. And so, all know the Promise, which is to the
Seed; and know the Seed of God in one another, that there be no Master, but
Christ, who bruiseth the Serpent's Head, where Debate and Enmity is, No Master
but Christ.
which is the cause of Strife. So, let the Seed be Master in the Male and in
the Female, that the Ground of Strife, which would be Master, may be kept
under, and the Seed, which the Grave could not hold under, be the Ruler; so
that ye may witness the Rock, that the Gates of Hell cannot prevail against,
nor the Temptations of the Devil.

G. F.

FRiends every where,
Epist. 131.
Dwell in the Power of the Lord God, which is without End, Striving about
Earthly things.
in which ye may all have Unity. And take heed of striving about Earthly
things, which is the unredeemed Part, that is out of the Paradise and the
Garden of God; but that with the Wisdom of God ye may come to be ordered, and
order the Creatures by that, by which they were made and created, that by it ye
may know your selves to be grverned. And after that Riches do increase, take
heed of setting your Hearts upon them, lest they become a Curse and a Plague to
you. For when ye were Faithful at the first, the World would refrain from you,
and not have Commerce with you; but after, when they saw, Trading and Dealing.
ye were Faithful and Just in things, and Righteous and Honest in your Tradings
and Dealings, then they came to have Commerce and Trade with you the more,
because they know, ye will not Cozen them, nor Cheat them: Then ye came to have
greater Trading, double than ever ye had, and more than the World. But there is
the Danger and Temptation to you, of drawing your Minds into your Business, and
clogging them with it; so that ye can hardly do any thing to the Service of
God, but there will be crying, My Business, my Business; and your Minds will go
into the things, and not over the things; and so therein ye do not come into
the Image of God, in which is Dominion. And so, Riches.
when your Minds are got into the Riches, and cumbred therewith, ye go back
into that ye were in before: And then, if the Lord God cross you, and stop you
by Sea and Land, and take your Goods and Customers from you, that your Minds
should not be cumbred; then that Mind, that is cumbred. it will fret, being out
of the Power of God.

And all Friends, take heed of Jars and Strife, for that is it, which will Eat
out the Seed in you; Jars and Strife.
therefore let not that harbor in your Bosoms, lest it eat out the Good in
you, and ye come to suffer in your own Particulars. Therefore dwell in Love and
Life, and in the Power and Seed of God, which is the Honorable, Royal State.
And all that Speak or Preach abroad, see, that ye be in the Life, and Power and
Seed of God, which will Edify the Body, and not in a brittle, peevisb, hasty,
fretful Mind; but dwell in that, which keeps down the contrary, that that may
speak, which edifies the Body in Love. And all take heed of vain Words, Vain
Words.
and Tatling idle Words, but every where shop such; that Love may continue in
the Body, and that the Seed may spread over all, that Unity may be kept. And
all Friends every where, if Friends be Poor, Poor Friends and Prisoners.
and in Want, or in Prison, that ye may in Wisdom relieve and cherish shch. And
all Friends every where, Stop the Deceit, that would devour and destroy, which
is out of the Truth, and true Wisdom; which must be limited, that transgresses
the Spirit of God. For since the Days of the Apostles, the true Church has
been in the Wilderness, and the Beast, false Prophet, Antichrist and false
Church have ruled and reigned; The false Church.
amongst whom have been the many Names and Horns amongst the
Apostate-Christians, who have professed themselves to be Elders. Amongst this
Eldership have they had outward and earthly Rulers, which have got up since the
Days of the Apostles: But who come to Christ, who was and is the true
Christians Hea, he is their Ruler; by whom all things were made. And when the
Apostate-Christians went from the APostles Doctrines into the World, Many
Ruiers and Heads.
they set up many Rulers amongst them, and many Heads; when they went from the
Seed of God in themselves, in the Male and in the Female, then they forsook
their Head, Christ Jesus. And so, whosoever go from the Seed of God in
themselves, and set up other Heads, they lose the One Head, which is Christ
Jesus; and then come to be covered with Darkness, and the Seed comes to be
laden, as a Cart with Sheaves: And then they forsook their Head, Christ Jesus.
And so, whosoever go from the they go from the Seed in the Male and in the
Female, which is the One Head. And then come up the Fightings about earthly
things, Fightings and Warrings for Self. Interest.
and Warrings with Carnal Weapons about Earthly things and Self-Interest, and
Man's Honor and Titles, and about their Churches and Religions, and Worships
and Ministry, which have been set up since the outward Sword the Heathen, and
one another; but Christ Jesus, the Prince of Life, fulfils the Law, and ends
the outward Jews Types, Figures and Shadows, Ordinances and Carnal Weapons, who
is the King of the whole Earth, who comes to save Men's Lives, yet slays and
kills with the Sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of his Mouth. And the
Apostles, who followed Christ, they wrestled not with Flesh and Blood; so all,
who come to witness Christ to reign and to rule (who is the Prince of Life,
that Saves Men's Lives) and follow him, do not wrestle with Flesh and Blood, nor
seek to destroy Men's Lives. And here comes the Wisdom to be known, that is from
above, that is pure and gentle, and easy to be entreated, that is not sensual,
carnal and devilish. So in the time of the Law among the Jews there was
Fighting outwardly; but in the time of the Gospel of Christ Jesus, who came to
end the Law, they were to Love Enemies, Love enemies.
and not to kill them; and love them that hate them, and not kill them. But in
the times since the Days of the Apostles, in the Apostate-Christians time, they
are crying up the outward Sword again; and this is the Dragon's and the Beast's
Power, the Prince of Death, which has reigned since the Apostles Days. But who
come to follow Christ, they come to reign (in Spirit) over all these Fighters
with carnal Weapons, that are got up, since the Days of the Apostles. Therefore
who are come now into the Power of the Lord God, and to the Seed that is Royal,
who was the Elected, before the World began, keep your Meetings, and dwell in
the Power of God, in which ye may know his Image, and come into it; with which
ye may (Spiritually) reign, and have Dominion over all the World, and rule in
it over them and their Vanities, and work them down without a Carnal Weapon, in
the Power of God. So, keep your Meetings, both particular and in the general,
in the Power of the Lord God, and dwell in the Life, and Power and Wisdom of
the Lord, that all Uncleanness whatsoever may by the Power of the Lord be
brought down and rooted out; and that such have no Rule nor Authority amongst
you, Uncleanness.
though they be never so fair or excellent of Speech: But let all such be
brought under by the Power of the Lord God, who is to reign over it; that in
the Sweetness and Unity ye all may be brought to be a sweet Savor to the Lord
God, and in the Hearts of one another, and let no Uncleanness be amongst you. '
And all Friends every where, Printing.
Take heed of Printing any thing more, than ye are required of the Lord God.
And all Friends every where, Take heed of wandering up and down about needless
Occasions, Wandering.
for there is Danger of getting into the Careless Words, out of Seriousness,
Weightiness and Savouriness. And all Friends every where, Take heed of Wronging
the World or any one in Bargains, Overreaching.
or Overreaching them; but dwell in the Cool, Sweet and Holy Power of the Lord
God, and in Righteousness, that it may run down amongst you; and that will keep
you Low. And all Friends every where, Take heed of Slothfulness and Sleeping in
your Meetings; Sleeping in Meetings.
for in so doing ye will be bad Examples to others, and hurt your selves and
them. And all take heed of going up and down (to Minister) but as ye are moved
of the Lord God, Ministry.
or to speak in Meetings, or any other Places; for Traveling to such is
dangerous to lift them up, going amongst sttled Meetings, that are settled. For
there is Difference betwixt Friends going into the World, and of coming among
them, that are come to Silent Meetings, and to feed there; for that which may
be seasonable to the World, may not be to them. Therefore let all live in the
Seed, and Wisdom and Fear, and consider, before they utter, that the Life be
up; whereby all may be settled, and they themselves be washed.' And dwell in
the Seed, that ye all may know Christ come to reign in you; so that all may be
done and spoken by and in the Power of the Lord God, that is done and spoken,
and not out of it: And in that ye will all have Unity in the Record of Life,
whereby the Power of God and the Seed of God may come up, which is Heir of the
Blessing and of the Promise; that ye may come to know the Place, where there is
no Curse, and the Lamb's Power, Throne, Life and Dominion. And in the Wisdom of
God all dwell, that to him ye may be a sweet Savor, and a Blessing in the
Hearts of all People; that nothing may rule nor reign amongst you, but the Seed
it self, and the Life of God.

Let this be read in your Meetings.

G. F.

An Epistle to Friends, for all to keep in the Light, and to watch over one
another.
ALL Friends and Brethren every where,
Apist. 132.
Walk in the Truth, and know one another in the Measure of Life, that in it
your Minds may be guided up to the Father of Life; A Note concerning Life.
and stand in his Counsel, that he alone may be loved with all your Strength,
with all your Minds, and with all your Souls; so that ye may all know one
another in the Life and Light, that ye may all be kept from Idols. For if ye
know one another in the Flesh only, that Love, which will rise out of that
Knowledge, The Knowledge in the Flesh.
is feigned, and that will wither, and under the Condemnation of the Light must
come: Therefore all wait in the Measure of Life, that with it your Hearts may
be knit together. And none to be hasty, nor to will any thing; there is not any
thing received from God by him, who wills with his own Will: For no Prophecy
of the Scripture came by the Will of Man; Peter, The Will of Man.
that was not learned of Man, but of Christ, saw this. And the Scripture is for
the perfecting of the Man of God, which is learned of God, and came not by
Man's Will: So now, mind your Growth, and your Perfecting, and your
Stedfastness in the Light, in which is the Unity. So every one wait in the
Light, which comes from Christ the Head, from whence Nourishment comes, which
nourishes the Body, and all the Members; from whence comes the Bread of Life,
which is from above, and the Water of Life. Therefore all wait in your Measure,
and walk after your Line, which is the Light, which comes from Christ, The Line
of Light.
which is your Life; that every one of you may have Praise and Comfort in the
same, and every one of you may be kept in the Way of Righteousness and Peace up
to the Lord, who is Righteousness and Peace, where the blessed Hope is seen
with the Light, that comes from him, by whom the World was made. That so, the
Covenant of Light, Life and Peace ye may all come to witness, and every one
come to have Dominion and Rule over your own Spirits; for the Spirit of Man
lusts to Envy, if it be not subdued by the Spirit of the Living God.
Therefore wait, and take heed, lest any Nakedness appear, and that which is not
justified in the Sight of God. Presumption.
And Presumption take heed of, lest ye go from the Living God; but in the
Spirit dwell, that over all that ye may reign, and come to be recorded in the
Book of Life, which Life was, before the World was. And this brings you to see
and read one another, as Epistles written in one another's Hearts, where in
Unity, Love and Peace ye will come to dwell, in the Life of the Spirit of the
Living God, The Saints, taught of God.
in which the Saints had Unity, which brought them to be taught of the Living
God; and so, they gave forth the Scrptures, as they were moved by the Holy
Ghost. So, no Prophecy in the Old Time came by the Will of Man, but was learned
of God: So now, ye waiting in the Spirit every one, to be taught of God, the
Father of Spirits, your Teacher is with you present, and one in you all,
according to your Measures. Which Spirit is given to every one of you to profit
withal; by which Holy Spirit the Scripture was given forth: Which Scripture the
World has got, who are sensual, not having the Spirit, and there they are
fighting about the Outside and the Languages. And there is the Sea, Languages,
Sea and Beast.
which the Beast arises out of, which the World wonders after; and there is
the Mother of Harlots, with all her false Colors, whose Eyes are out from the
Light, which comes from him, by whom the World was made; there ye may go, and
have a Name to live, but are dead. Now all be willing to wait in the Measure of
that, which is Eternal, that no Fornication be found amongst you, nor Deceit;
Fornication and Deceit.
that all may come to receive Wisdom from Christ, who is the Wisdom of God.
That this Wisdom may be Justified in you all, and ye all in the Light
preserved, and that which is contrary condemned: So that ye may all be kept
from Deadness and Slothfulness, in the Fear of the Lord God, and therein your
Hearts kept clean. And so, the Lord God Almighty preserve you!

Friends, Keep your Meetings every where, waiting upon the Lord, that to him ye
may be a sweet Savor. And watch over one another with the Measure of the
Spirit of the Lord. Meetings.
The Lord God Almighty preserve you, and keep you in his Will, Wisdom, Light,
Life and Power.

Let this be read among Friends.

G. F.

FRiends,
Epist. 133.
Toward all Men walk in Wisdom, and be gentle to all Men; To keep in Love, for
that edifies.
for the Meek inherit the Earth, and receive the Blessing: And they that thirst
after Righteousness, shall inherit Righteousness, and the Blessing: And the
Merciful do obtain Mercy and the Blessing: And the pure in Heart shall see God,
Blessed are the pure in Heart.
and receive the Blessing. And Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be
comforted: And Blessed are the Peacemakers, for they are the Children of God:
And Blessed are they, that are persecuted for Righteousness sake, for theirs is
the Kingdom of God: And Blessed are ye, when Men shall revile and persecute
you, and shall say all manner of Evil against you falsely for Christ's sake. And
it is Love, that edifieth, Faith.
and the Edifying is in the most Holy Faith, which Faith is the Gift of God,
which gives Victory over the World; and in this is the Blessing, which
purifieth the Heart, and this is it, which brings to please God. And that
which edifieth, is the living Faith, and not the dead Faith; and Love rejoiceth
in the Truth, and not in the Iniquity, for that is not in Love. So ye, that are
the Lord's Lot (Mark) and are his Inheritance, and are in Covenant with God,
with him ye have Peace; The Covenant with God.
which Covenant is given to all the World. But they that hate the Light, are
out of Covenant with God, and by the Light they are condemned; and those which
the Light does condemn, are out of the Covenant.

G. F.

LIve in Peace, Epist. 134.
all my Dear Babes of God, one with another, for Patience that obtains the
Crown, and has the Victory. And in Pureness live over the Deceit, Patience
obtains the Crown.
and answer the Witness of the Lord God in every one. And keep in the Seed and
Life of the Lord God, that ye may feel the Blessing of the Lord God amongst you
and upon you.

AND That which does let you see your Sins, Savior, The Savior seen.
who was, before the World was, him by whom the World was made, glorified with
the Father, before the World began; he will be your Stay and Rest.

DEAR Friends, Seed of God, and know it in you all, that ye may know it to
reign, which is the Heir of Power; and in that live and dwell, and in it keep
your Meetings.

And we must have the Patience to bear all manner of Evil done or spoken
against us for Christ's sake,

G. F.

For Francis Howgil and Edward Borough. About 1657.

DEar Friends and Lambs,
Epist. 135.
Put on the Armor of Light, and the Shield of Truth, and the Breast Plate of
Righteousness, that ye may stand in Battle against all the Philistians, The
Armor of Light.
and the Enemies of God, being led and guided with the Spirit up to God, the
Father of Spirits; that what ye do beget, may be to him, and into his Image,
and that which ye do present, it may be perfect: And so, Mind this. Sow not
sparingly, for the Lord has a Seed that-aways: So the Lord God Almighty
preserve you! And stir abroad, whilst the Door is open, and the Light shines;
and so, go on in that, which lets you see the World, to comprehend it, and
to see, what is imprisoned by it, and suffers by it. So, the Lord give you an
Understanding in all things, and his Arm go along with you, that ye may be to
his Glory. And the Blessing of the Lord be with you!

DEAR Francis and Edward, In the Life of God wait, Wisdom from God, To Fra.
Howgill and Edw. Borough.
that ye may order all things there with it, and to be manifest to the Witness
of God in all, that ye may beget to God; that as good Plow-men, and good
Thresher-men ye may be, to bring out the Wheat. Good Plowmen.
So the Lord God Almighty keep and preserve you!

G. F.

DEar Friends,
Dwell in that which keeps your Peace, Epist. 136.
and comprehends the Deceit, and answers that of God in every one. To Friends,
to dwell in that which keeps Peace.
And let Friends keep their Meetings, and never hearken to Tales, nor things
without; but keep their Peace, and know the Life and Power, Union and
Fellowship, which stands in God, in and with which ye may stand over the World
in the one Power, Life and Wisdom, Meetings.
and therein be kept to the Glory of the Lord God. So, in that which is pure,
the Lord God Almighty preserve you!

G. F.

FRiends,
Let God's Wisdom have the stay of your Minds, Epist. 137.
and let it be the End of all your Words; beware of that Spirit, God's Wisdom.
that leads out of it into any thing. There is a Day coming, wherein some may
wish, that they had walked in Wisdom, Weaknesses and Failings.
as touching the Weaknesses one of another, or the Failings one of another; for
what know ye, who may stand or who may fall in the Day of God's Trial? Then
many, that have been unstable, may wish, that they had kept their Secrets in
their Bosoms, and in God's Wisdom sought to restore all, Secrets.
and not to scatter; as that Spirit does, which cannot bear and cover the
Weaknesses one of another, who are yet in the Wilderness, where the Trials are
many: I have seen a great Danger in this thing. Wherefore beware of that
Spirit, that cannot bear one with another, Forgime and Cover.
or forgive one another; for that which cannot, will discover rather than
cover, and bring a Cloud over many, wheresoever it is received, and raise the
contrary in many, and vail the Just (it may be in whole Meetings) for want of
Wisdom to be stayed in the Meek Spirit, The Meek Spirit.
which trys all Spirits, and gives clear sight of things: For want of this many
may be cast by, and scarce ever restored again.

Therefore I say, Tread over the Dead, and that which works in that Nature, and
reach to the Witness in all; so will ye stand for God, and God will bless you
in the Day of Trial.

G. F.

FRiends,
Epist. 138.
Ye that are the Prisoners of the Lord Jesus Christ in outward Bonds, who
witness him, by whom the World was made, who is the King of Saints, and who are
his, Prisoners Note.
and come under his Dominion and Government, Ye are not your own; but purchased
with his Blood, which washes and makes you clean, and justifies, whose Bodies
are his Temple. Though he suffers you to be Imprisoned, yet in his Power your
Bodies are kept, and your Spirits also; ye standing Witnesses for your Master,
Standing Witnesses.
for your King, for your Prophet, for your Covenant of Light, for your Wisdom
of God (him by whom all things were made) for the Word and Power, by which all
things were made and upheld, against the Powers of Darkness, who are out of the
Light, out of the Truth, who cannot bind, stop nor limit the unlimited Power,
which is over it, and comprehends it. They who are born of the Word, and in the
Power which upholds all things, over that (and the Power of the Evil One) have
Victory, and sing over the false Prophet. The false Prophet.
For the Devil was the Deceiver, who in the Truth abode not; and there is the
false Prophet, who speaks of his own, and not from the Lord; and there is the
Beast, that makes the War against the Lamb and his Saints, who witness the
Testimony of Jesus, and the Word of God. Therefore mind the Word of God, ye
Children of the Light, who are in the Light, that comes from the Word; mind the
Word of the Lord, which is as a Hammer, and as a Fire, and sharper than a
Two-edged Sword. And ye, who are the Lord's, are not your own; but they who are
in their own Time, The Time in the Father's hand.
see not the Time, which is in the Father's Hand; their Time is always, and
they do their own Works, and not the Works of God, which the Son of God did.

G. F.

FRiends,
Epist. 139.
Know the Praying in the Spirit, and with the Understanding; then ye will come
to know the Sighs and Groans, that cannot be uttered. Praying in the Spirit.
For such as have not the Spirit, that gave forth the Scriptures to guide them,
are as the Pharisees were, in the Long Prayers, and in the Wrath, and in the
Doubting, and do not lift up holy Hands. This makes a Difference between
Praying in the Spirit, and the Pharisees long Prayers, that devoured Widows
houses.

AND None owns the Light; Light, that Christ lights them withal. And none
owns the Truth, Light and Truth.
but who owns the Light, that comes from Christ, the Truth. And none comes to
the Father, but such who owns the Light, that comes from Christ, which leads
to him. Nor none owns the Son, except he owns the Light, that comes from him.

FOR all dwelling in the Light, Wars, leads out of Strife, leads out of the
Occasion of Wars, and leads out of the Earth up to God, Wars and Strife.
out of Earthly-mandedness to Heavenly-mindedness, and brings your Minds to
be in Heaven.

G. F.

ALL Friends every where, Epist. 140.
that do suffer for Tithe, and are served with Writs to answer at London,
Copies of your Suppoena's and Writs, To Friends, Concerning Collecting their
Sufferings.
that ye may have them, when ye Appear, to show them to the Court; whereby ye
may be kept a top of the Persecutors and Evildoers. And keep a Copy of all
your Sufferings for Tithes in every County, that it may be laid on their Heads,
that cause you to suffer. And all Friends, Imprisonment, or are Fined for not
Swearing, Titles. Not Swearing.
keep a Copy of your Sufferings in every County, and the Men's Names, that cause
you to suffer, for Tithes, or for not Swearing. And all Friends, that suffer
for not giving Money for Repairing of Steeple Houses; keep Copies of your
Sufferings in every County, by whom: And as any are brought to suffer for these
things, Repairs.
or for not bowing to any Deceit whatsoever, Let a true and a plain Copy of
such Suffering be sent up to London. Steeple Houses, and are beat, knocked down
or Imprisoned; Steeple Houses.
Let a Copy of all such Sufferings be sent up as abovesaid, that the things may
be laid on the Heads of them, that caused the Sufferings. beaten or wounded in
going to Meetings, Meetingss
or be struck or bruised in Meetings, or taken out of Meetings and Imprisoned;
let Copies of such things be taken, and sent as abovesaid, under the hands of
Two or Three Witnesses; that the Truth may be exalted, and the Power and Life
of God lived in. Friends be Summoned up by Writs, or Suppoena'd to appear
personally to Answer for Tithes, let them do it, that the Truth may stand over
the Head of the Liar; To Appear personally.
which may answer the Truth in every one. And as ye are moved, be obedient to
the Truth, that nothing may reign, but the Truth. They that say, Ye must appaer
personally, and when ye appear, say, They do not mean so, but that ye must
appear by an Attorney; This is not Truth, this is made up of a Lie, and is to
be judged by them, that dwell in the Truth.

If any Friends be moved to write to them, who cause their Sufferings, Copies
be sent of their Sufferings, To Write.
as aforesaid. And also, not putting off their Hats for Conscience sake, let
Copies be sent up of these things likewise. Hats.


Let this be sent among all Friends in all Counties in this Nation.

G. F.

To Friends, to gather up their Sufferings, and lay them before the Judges.
ALL Friends every where, Epist. 141.
that are in any Sufferings, let your Sufferings be gathered up together in
every County, Sufferings to be laid before Justices and Judges.
ye that have suffered by Justices, or Constables, or Bailiffs; let your Names
be set to your Sufferings, and a Name or Two to witness them, and the Names of
them that caused you to suffer. And after that ye have gathered up your
Sufferings in every County, In the County where the Judges come, let your
Sufferings be laid before them, who are sent forth from the Head and Heads of
the Nation (which Nation or Nations is to be governed as a Family in Justice
and Truth, and Judgment and Righteousness:) For he that is the Head in the
Nation, gives forth his Charge to the Judges; for they are all as his Servants.
The Judges they come forth into the several Counties, and the Counties are as
their Families; and they give forth their Charge to the Justices, Sheriffs,
Juries, Bailiffs, The Judges Charge.
Constables. The Justices and Sheriffs of the Counties, they are to look to
their places, as to their Families; Chief Constables and other Constables in
their places, as to their Families; and the Constable to look to his Town, as
to his Family: The Judges give Charge to all in their places. Now, these not
judging and doing justly, Sheriffs, Juries, Constables not doing justly,
righteously or equally; the Sufferings being gathered together short and true,
and their Actions, that have not been just and righteous, who caused the
Righteous to suffer, and Truth to fall in the Gates, and in the Streets, that
Equity cannot enter (for Equity cannot enter, where Truth is fallen; for that
which lets in Equity, is Truth) Gather up such your Sufferings in every County,
Sufferings delivered to the Judges.
that suffer by the Unjust and Unrighteous, and deliver them to the Judges,
that they may see it; that they may Judge justly, and see, what is done in the
Family, to whom they give their Charge, and what their Master's Servants have
done, Justices, Sheriffs, Constables. And if the Judge, that sits in the Gate,
will not Judge righteously, nor plead the Cause of the Innocent, nor help the
Helpless, nor break the Jaws of the Wicked, that tear and rend the Innocent
(but is light and vain) God, who is Just, is ready to plead their Cause, and to
judge and cast out the Unjust Judges: He Judges among the Judges.
For he that Judges among the Judges (and relieves the Oppressed, and helps
the Helpless, and strengthens the weak Hands and feeble Knees, and gives
Righteousness to every one that loves it, to every one, whose Intents are
Upright and Single) gives true Judgment, agreeable to that of himself in every
one, and crosses the Ends and Intents of every one, that is from that, and
gives Judgment upon the Unjust. And that a Copy of all your Sufferings, which
are delivered to the Judges in every County, be kept, and sent up to him, that
is the Head in the Nation (who sends forth the Judges, The Head in the Nation.
as his Servants) that he may see, measure and weigh, how unrighteously they
have Judged, and what his Servants have done, which cause the dividing of his
Family; and through the want of Judgment running down the Streets, Equity
cannot enter, because Truth is fallen. So, these things being laid upon the
Heads of the Nation, that they may feel and see, God's Judgments are Just.
that God's Judgments are Just; and will come upon them, if they justly do not
Judge, and righteously do not measure, and truly do not weigh. So that in every
Circuit and Assizes the Sufferings of all Friends being gathered, and sent to
every Judge in his Circuit, a Copy of the said Sufferings (which were so laid
before such a Judge) may be afterward brought and sent to the Head of the
Nation; that Truth, Righteousness and Justice may reign, and Friends be clear
of the Blood of all Men: That the Seed of God may reign; which does reign above
all the Wicked.

G. F.

ALL my Dear Friends,
Epist 142.
Keep up your Heads above the Waters and the Sea, in which there is a Tempest.
Fear not the Devil, nor all his Darts nor Weapons, nor all his Soldiers and
Instruments, that he keeps in League with; but mind the Power of God, and the
Light of Jesus, The Armor of Light.
and be clothed with, and put on the Armor of Light, and the Helmet of
Salvation, and the Breast Plate of Righteousness, the Shield of Faith, in which
ye have Victory and Unity, and Access to God. And dwell in Patience and Love to
God, and one toward another; for the Lamb must have the Victory over them all,
the Wild Beasts in the Field or Wilderness, who are in the Fall from God. And
though these Beasts Horns be never so long, The Beast's Horns.
yet the Lamb shall conquer them; who gets the Victory, and overcomes, and
takes away the Sin. And the Lamb has Wisdom, the Lamb has Power; follow him,
then ye shall have his Mind, Wisdom and Patience; and in that ye follow the
Spirit of Truth, and are led by that (against which there is no Law) in which
there is Life and Peace, and Fellowship with the Son and the Father, and all
the Saints and their Words. Therefore live in the Truth, and then ye live in
Christ the Way, that lives, who was, before the Untruth was, in which the many
Ways in the Wilderness are. The Way of Truth.
And living in the Truth, ye live in the Love and Unity, yea in that, which was
before the Enmity was and Imperfection; in which Truth is all Perfection of
Love and Life, and Light, which Light, Life and Truth is the Way to God, in
whom the Church is, which Christ is the Head of. And who come to this Church,
they come into God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ; and who come to God,
they must come into the Light, Life and Truth. And that is the Way, in which
People are renewed into God's Image of Holiness and Righteousness again, in
which God is seen: Which Way is out of the Ways of Man, that is fallen from the
Image of God's Righteousness and true Holiness; in which Way are all the
Gadders abroad from God, out of the Life.

G. F.

ALL Friends and Brethren,
In the Noble Seed of God live, Epist. 143.
which has the Promise of Life, which is the Top-and Cornerstone, The Top-and
Cornerstone.
Christ over all set, in whom is Life Eternal and Fullness for you all, and
Life, Peace and Wisdom. And the Seed Christ destroys the Devil and his Works,
which Seed Christ lives for ever: Feel and know that in your selves, which will
never have an End; and then ye will know that which does remain and abide, when
the Devil and his Works are destroyed and gone. (The Seed remains, Christ,
the Power of God, which goes over the Power of the Devil, in which is the
Saints Unity, that is Everlasting; which brings to the Church; The Saints
Unity.
that is in God. And so, all in the Power of the Lord God and the Seed live,
which is over all that, which is not in his pure Life; in which ye all have
Unity, that never has an End. My Love is to you in the Seed, in which there is
Life.)

G. F.

FRiends,
Epist. 144.
Get not Knowledge in the unsanctified and unregenerated Part; for that which
is not sanctified in your own particulars, Knowledge.
will not be to them, that it is declared to. Neither can ye feel your Words go
from you with Joy and Life, The unsanctified Part.
that come from the unsanctified and unregenerated Part; for that Part will
glory and boast, and vaunt it self, and say, This have I done, and that have I
spoken, and not glory in the Lord. So, this satisfies not, and the Spirit in
Prison is not refreshed by those things.

G. F.

FRiends,
Where there is Strife among any of you, Epist. 145.
mind the Light to Judge it down, and Condemn it; by which Light your Minds may
be guided up to Christ, where there is no Scrife, to learn of him, Strife
Judged down.
and to Condemn all that with the Light, which would give the World a Ground to
reproach Truth, and to see your Nakedness: For that which is out of the Light,
will fall, and confound it self. So, mind that which keeps your Peace, and
condemns that which leads into Weakness; and that which will let in Prejudice,
from the Light goes: All which is to be condemned with the Light, which leads
to Christ, the Covenant of Peace. And where there is Strife, which leads out
into many Words, such will wither, and bring themselves under Condemnation at
last: Many Words.
Such must be Silent, and mind that which does condemn them; that the Life in
them may arise, wherein is no Strife. For where Men's Spirits are high,
something is stirring, that should be kept under; take heed, that get not up
into Rule. So, first learn the Ministry of Condemnation in your selves, that
Life may arise, before Ministry in the Spirit be known, which preaches Peace
by Jesus Christ, where there is no Strife: Therefore wait to know the Time of
Silence. A time of Silence.
And all Friends, Let your Patience and Moderation be known to all Men; for
nothing is attained to, that is good, by Strife, for that is out of Christ, in
the forward Will, which is to be condemned with the Light (where is the Unity)
which comes from Christ, and leads up to Christ, the Covenant of Life. And
take heed, All Friends, of causing his Name to be blasphemed through you among
the Heathen, but mind and wait to receive the Love of God, which bears all
things, and suffers all things; and so comes to receive the Armor of
Righteousness, Love bears all things.
which quenches all the fiery Darts of Satan, that the Patience, that bears and
suffers all things, may be witnessed.

G. F.

To Friends in Ireland.
FRiends,
Epist. 146.
Feel all of you the Power of the Lord God in your selves, to guide your Minds
up to God, and to give you Dominion over all Weakness, Dominion over Weakness.
and to strengthen and to heal you. And look not out, but every one feel the
Power of God in your own particulars, and let all your Faith stand in that;
then will ye have Unity, and in that ye will have Dominion and Victory, and it
will keep you in Order: In which ye will have Virtue, and in which ye will feel
the Spirit, in which ye will have Fellowship and Comfort. And be Low and Still
in the Life and Power, and not hasty nor rash; that ye may in the Life and
Power answer that of God in every one, Not Hasty nor Rash.
that cries for Peace and Rest. So, dwell in the Love of God, this I warn you,
and charge every one of you; your Faith standing in this, and in the Power of
God, then ye will feel the Presence of the Lord God among you.

G. F.

To Friends in Wales.
FRiends,
Epist. 147.
Live in the Wisdom of the Lord, for that is it, which does preserve you pure,
lively and gentle, above that which is below. And in the Increase of God live,
The hicrease of God.
and in his Virtue, Power and Love, that through it your Hearts may be
established and filled with the same; that Justice and Truth may in all things
be amongst you, and Christ Jesus known in the midst of you as a Prophet, Christ
a Prophet, Priest and King.
Priest and King (who has gathered you in his Name) to Open and Reveal to you,
and Rule you, who is the quickening Spirit, in whom the Spiritual Sacrifices are
offered. Therefore I say, Know Christ, who is the Substance of all the Types,
Figures and Shadows, by whom the World was made, who destroys the Enmity among
People, and the Devil, the Author of it; The Heave Offering.
and in him is both Life and Peace. The Heave Offering was a Figure of Christ,
the One Offering; the Priests, and the Law and the First Covenant were Figures
of the Everlasting Covenant, Christ Jesus. Oaths, Oaths.
which ended Strife in the Time of the Law and before, were Figures of Christ,
the Oath of God, who swear by himself; which Oath Christ Jesus ends, and
destroys the Devil, the Author of Strife, and brings People to Yea and Nay, who
judges the false Oath, and ends the true. For there was no Oaths commanded
before the Fall: so there is none to be in the Restoration and Redemption by
Christ. They see this Doctrine, that are renewed again (in Measure) into God's
Image, and are come into Obedience to Christ's Doctrine and the Apostle's, as
in the Primitive Times; and see the Ground of Swearing among the Jews, The
Ground of Swearing.
and see the Ground of Swearing got up since the Apostles Days, among the
Apostates from the Primitive Practice in the Church in the Apostles Days. And
they see, that Oaths were not given to Man before the Fall, and see, they are
not to be in the Restoration; nor were not in the Primitive Times, nor in the
Beginning, according to the Doctrine of Christ, who is the First and the Last,
who is to be minded, and his Doctrine, who is the Top-and Cornerstone. And now
is the Bride, his Wife, The Bride, his Wife.
coming up out of the Wilderness, where she has been driven, and been fed of
God in this time of the Beast's, Dragon's, false Church's and Whore's Worship,
which has gotten up since the Apostles Days. Therefore all walk in the Light
of the Lamb, that by his Blood ye may be washed; that through it, and the
Testimony of the Lord Jesus ye may overcome. And Meet in the Power of God, and
in that keep your Meetings; Meet in the Power.
that ye and every one of ye may inherit the Power of God, and so come into
your own Inheritances. So, live in Love, Peace and Unity one with another; for
the Body does edify it self in Love: And the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be
with you (Amen!) to teach you, and to season and to establish your Hearts, and
to bring you Salvation; and in that live, which was, before Enmity was.

G. F.

An Exhortation to fervent Prayer and steadfast Faith, in time of the greatest
Troubles and Exercises.
OH My Dear Friends and Brethren every where,
Epist. 148.
Let all your Cries and Prayers be to the Lord in Singleness of Heart, Cries
and Prayers.
in his Spirit and Power, and in Belief in God through Christ, to receive what ye
pray for! For the Lord's Ears are open to the Cries of his Poor and Afflicted
Ones: So, Day and Night let your Cries be to him, who will keep you in all
Distresses. For in your Afflictions Christ is afflicted, Christ is Afflicted.
and in all your Oppressions he is oppressed, and in all your Imprisonments he
is imprisoned, and in all your Sufferings he suffers, and in all your
Persecutions he is persecuted: Saul, Saul, Why persecutest thou me? said
Christ. And all Friends, keep out of the vain Fashions of the World in your
Apparel, Vain Fashions.
and run not after every New Fashion the World inventeth and sets up; keep
in your plain Fashion, that ye may Judge the World's Vanity and its Spirit in
its vain Fashions, and show a Constant Spirit in the Truth and Plainness.

And be Moderate and Chaste in all your Families, The Fast to the Lord.
and in all your Imprisonments keep in the Fast to the Lord, which breaks down
the Bond of Iniquity, by which every one's Health grows. And ye may also see,
how Christ Jesus encourages to Pray, Mark 13. Take ye heed, watch and pray;
Watch and Pray.
and what I say unto one, I say unto all, Watch. And in Luke 11.5-13. wherein
he further encourages to Pray, where Christ says; The Importunate Friend.
Which of you shall have a Friend, and shall go unto him at midnight, and say
unto him, Friend, lend me three Loaves, for a Friend of mine is in his Journey
is come to me, and I have nothing to set before him. And he from within shall
answer and say; Trouble me not, the Door is now shut, and my Children are with
me in Bed, I cannot rise and give thee. I say unto you, though he will not
rise, and give him, because he is his Friend, yet because of his importunity he
will rise, and give him as many as he needs. Ask, and it shall, given.
And I say unto you, Ask, and it shall be given you; seek, and ye shall find;
knock, and it shall be opened unto you: For every one, that asks, receives;
and he that seeks, finds; and to him that knocks, it shall be opened. And
upon this Christ encourages to Knock, Pray and Seek. For if a Son shall ask
Bread of any of you, that is a Father, will he give him a Stone? Or if he ask a
Fish, will he for a Fish give him a Serpent? Or if he, shall ask an Egg, will
he give him a Scorpion? If ye then being Evil, know how to give good Gifts unto
your Children, how much more shall your Heavenly Father give the Holy Spirit to
them that ask him. And further he encourages to Pray, Luke 18. He spoke a
Parable unto them, that Men ought always to pray, and not faint, saying: There
was in a City a Judge, The Unjust. Judge.
that feared not God, neither regarded Man. And there was a Widow in that City,
and she came to him, and said, Avenge me of mine Adversary; and he would not
for a while. But afterward he said within himself, Though I fear not God, nor
regard Man; yet because this Widow troubles me, I will avenge her, lest by her
continual coming she weary me. And the Lord said, Hear what the unjust Judge
says; And shall not God avenge his own Elect, which cry day and night unto
him, though he bear long with them? I tell you, that he will avenge them
speedily. Here mind the Promise of Christ, that does not change, but will be
fulfilled.

And Christ distinguishes in a Parable of a Pharisee (who was a public praying
Man) and of a Publican, The Pharisee and Publican.
that stood a far off, and cried for Mercy; which being in the Fear, was more
Justified, than the Pharisee, who was in the public Praying: So, Pray in the
Spirit and in the Faith, nothing wavering nor doubting. And seek and watch in
the Spirit, every one in your Measures, that ye have received, and therein to
be preserved; and Christ the Life will open to you, and the Spirit will give
you an Understanding, and a Distinction of the State of Asking, The wavering
State.
and not receiving, and of seeking, and not finding, and the Praying in the
wavering and in the doubting, which is not in the Spirit of God. But such ask
in that Nature which doubts, and would consume it on their Lusts. Ask in Faith.
So, ask in Faith, that gives the Victory over the wavering, doubting Nature:
And whatsoever ye ask believing, it will be given unto you; it is Christ's
Promise, John 14.13, 14. For Christ says, Whatsoever ye ask in my Name, that
will I do, that the Father may be glorified in the Son. If ye shall ask any
thidg in my Name, I will do it. If ye love me, keep my Commandments. So, every
one's Prayers are assured unto them, and their Requests effectual in their
Obedience, and loving Christ, and keeping his Commandments.

G. F.

To Friends, to know one another in the Light.
ALL Friends every where,
Meet together, Epist. 149.
and in the Measure of God's Spirit wait, that with it all your Minds may be
guided up to God, to receive Wisdom from God; To Friends, in the North. The
first and second Adam.
that ye may all come to know, how ye may walk up to him in his Wisdom, that it
may be justified of you, and ye in it preserved up to God, and he glorified.
And Friends, Meet together, and know one another in that which is Eternal,
which was, before the World was: For knowing one another only in the Letter and
Flesh, A Natural Knowledge.
differs you little from the Beasts of the Field; for what they know, they know
naturally. But all knowing one another in the Light, which was, before the
World was, this differs you from the Beasts of the Field, and from the World's
Knowledge, and brings you to know one another in the Elect Seed, which was
before the World was. And if ye turn from this Light, ye grow strange; and so
neglecting Meetings, ye grow cold, and your Minds run into the Earth, and grow
weary and slothful, and careless, and heavy, Neglect of Meetings.
and sottish, and dull and dead. Ye may speak then of things, which were opened
once from the Light, though now ye be turned from it; but with the Light, in
which is the Unity, is all that condemned: In which (Light) is the Fellowship
with the Son, from whence the Light comes, which keeps in the Liveliness, which
keeps from Slothfulness, and all those things before mentioned, which are
contrary to the Light; which who turns from, turns into. Therefore in the Light
wait and walk, that ye may have Fellowship one with another. I charge you all
in the Presence of the Living God, None boast.
that none boast your selves above your Measure of Light; if ye do, ye will be
buffeted: For such run into Presumption, and so into Reproof. Which Reproof
that Spirit will not take patiently, but gets up into Presumption; which is to
be condemned with the Light, in which is the Unity, which keeps from
Desperation and Presumption. They which go from the Light, the Enemy comes into
them, and the Envy, and the Manslayer gets up within, The Manslayer.
and slays the Man; and no such one has Eternal Life abiding in him, for he is
turned from the Light, which comes from Christ Jesus, the Life. All who do in
the Light dwell, which comes from Christ, come to receive the Eternal Life: The
Love of God.
And here the Love of God is shed abroad in the heart; and dwelling in Love, ye
dwell in God, and from the Life the Eternal Love does flow, which Life comes
from the Father of Life, whose Love does not change. And so with the Light (ye
dwelling in it, which leads to the Life) ye will come to witness the Faith
unfeigned, and the Humility unfeigned, and the Faith, Faith.
which works by Love, which purifies the Heart; waiting in the Light, which
comes from Christ Jesus, this is received from him. For with the Light, Man
sees himself, which (Light) comes from Christ, who is the Author and Finisher
of his Faith; which Faith gives him the Victory over that, which he sees to be
contrary to the Light and to the Word. And this is the One Faith; and here the
first Adam and the second Adam are known and seen.

Let this be read amongst Friends every where.

G. F.

FRiends all every where,
In the Life and Power of God live and dwell, and spread the Truth abroad.
Epist. 150.
Quench not the Spirit, but live in Love and Unity one with another; To
Friends, to live in Love and Unity together in the Power of God.
that with the Wisdom of God ye may all be ordered to God's Glory. And live all
in Patience one with another, and in the Truth, that ye may feel and see to the
Beginning, before the World and its Foundation was, in the Faith, which gives
the Victory; that nothing may reign, but the Life and Power amongst you. And
live all as the Family of God in Love, in Life, in Truth, in Power, having your
House established a-top of all the Mountains and Hills; that ye may answer that
of God in every Man, and the Word of the Lord ye may witness to go forth among
you, and be among you. So in this the Lord God Almighty preserve you and keep
you. The Son of God's Power.
And in the Son of God's Power live, for all Power in Heaven and Earth is given
to him; who is to subdue all the Powers of Darkness, and to make the Kingdoms
of the World his Kingdom. And none go beyond the Measure of the Spirit of God,
nor quench it; for where it is quenched, it cannot try things. So if any have
any thing upon them to speak, in the Life of God stand up, Speak in the Life.
and speak it, if it be but Two or Three Words, and sit down again; and keep in
the Life, that ye may answer that of God in every Man upon the Earth. To you
this is the Word of the Lord God.

G. F.

FRiends,
Epist. 151.
There was a Time, when the Apostles preached Christ, that died at Jerusalem;
Concerning several Ministrations of Paul's preaching Christ.
and they witnessed him forth, and brought (for Proof) the Prophets
Testimonies, which prophesied of him. And they that preached Christ's
Sufferings at Jerusalem, showed the Fulfilling of the Prophet's and the Law,
and all that was written of him. And after, the Apostles preached Christ the
Substance (the End of the Types and Figures) amongst them that had the Prophets
Words, Christ died at Jerusalem.
and the Law, and the outward Temple; and they showed them out of the Prophets
Words, and out of the Law, that that was the Christ, that died at Jerusalem,
and suffered without the Gate.

And then there was a Time, that the Apostles preached Christ in them, to them
that did believe, and had received him; Know ye not, that Christ is in you,
except ye be Reprobates? And, Christ in you, the Hope of Glory: Christ in you,
the Hope of Glory.
And, If Christ be in you, the Body is dead: And, They that are Christ's, have
crucified the Affections and Lusts, and all things are become new. But this was
spoken to them that believed, who were the Saints, to them Christ in them was
preached, the Substance, of what the Prophets prophesied of; and to believe in
him, who was risen, the Resurrection: Repentance and Faith.
But to the World the Apostles preached Repentance, and to believe in Jesus
Christ; and taught Faith toward God. But to them, who were Redeemed out of the
World, in and to whom the Son of God was made manifest (who were brought to
God, the Judge of all, and to the Church in God, and to the innumerable Company
of Angels, and to the Spirits of Just Men, who were made perfect in him through
Faith toward God) preaching Repentance, and the Doctrine of Baptism was
needless, Baptism.
in whom it was fulfilled, to and in such as were brought to God: He that can
receive this, may, for to it there is no private Meaning.

There is a Time of preaching Faith toward God; and there is a Time, to be
brought to God: But such as are here, deny the first Priesthood, and witness
the second with the Eternal Spirit of God; who witness him without Father or
Mother, a Priest for ever, after the Order of Melchisedech.

G. F.

THis is the Word of the Lord God to you all: Epist. 152.
In all Openings and Speakings, let not the Man be lifted up, for that will not
be the Servant, but the Master; which is to be thrown down with that, To
Friends in their Openings.
from whence the Openings come. Therefore that keep down, which would be lifted
up in the sight of the World, Not to be lifted up.
for that does (often) fall in the sight of the World; but that being lifted
up, which answers that of God in every Man, this is of the Son of God, who is
exalted above the World, and was, before it was made and created.

And Every one dwell in the Seed and Life of God, Meet together, and keep your
Meetings, that ye may see the Lord Jesus Christ in the midst of you.

G. F.

To Friends beyond Sea, that have Blacks and Indian Slaves.
DEar Friends,
Epist. 153.
I was moved to write these things to you in all those Plantations. God that
made the World, and all things therein, and gives Life and Breath to all, and
they all have their Life and Moving, and their Being in him, he is the God of
the Spirits of all Flesh, and is no Respecter of Persons; but Whosoever fears
him, God is no Respector of Persons.
and works Righteousness, is accepted of him. And he has made all Nations of
one Blood to dwell upon the Face of the Earth, and his Eyes are over all the
Works of his Hands, and sees every thing, that is done under the whole
Heavens; and the Earth is the Lord's and the Fullness thereof. And he causes
the Rain to fall upon the Just and upon the Unjust, and also he causes the Sun
to shine upon the Just and the Unjust; and he commands to love all Men, for
Christ loved all, so that he died for Sinners. And this is God's Love to the
World, Christ died for Sinners.
in giving his Son into the World; that whosoever believes in him, should not
perish: And he does Enlighten every Man, that comes into the World, that they
might believe in the Son. And the Gospel is preached to every creature under
Heaven; which is the Power, that gives Liberty and Freedom, and is Glad
Tidings to every Captivated Creature under the whole Heavens. And the Word of
God is in the Heart and Mouth to obey and do it, and not for them to ascend or
descend for it; and this is the Word of Faith, which was and is preached. For
Christ is given for a Covenant to the People, and a Light to the Gentiles, A
Light to the Gentiles.
and to enlighten them; who is the Glory of Israel, and God's Salvation to the
Ends of the Earth. And so, ye are to have the Mind of Christ, and to be
Merciful, as your Heavenly Father is Merciful.

G. F.

OH Friends! keep out of that State, Epist. 154.
which is out of and below the Chaste Nature; for all Vnchastness by the Power
of the Lord, The Chaste Nature.
and his Truth and Light is to be judged. Therefore live in the Truth and in
the Light of God, that keeps you all Chaste, for in that is the Unity, and out
of that is the War. For from the Lusts are the Wars and Strife; Oh keep over
that Nature, that Purity may flow, and Righteousness spread, and Truth
flourish, and Love and Peace abound in and amongst all the Family of God! Keep
down the Unchaste, keep down the Adulterous Eye, The Adulterous Eye.
and keep down the Lust of the Flesh, which is not of the Father, but of the
World; and Lust is against the Spiritual Fellowship, and Spiritual Union, and
Spiritual Dominion, for that would be as a Lord, to Lord above the Spirit,
which the Spirit of God is Lord over, and Judges it. Keep down the Lustful
Heart and Eye, for that leads from God, and joins with the Adulterate in any
thing, or with any thing, that is Evil; keep Truth and a pure Conscience, and
there ye have an unspotted Life, in which ye may see over the spotted Life,
where no Chastity nor Purity is. Therefore live in that which keeps you Chaste,
Follow the Lamb.
then ye follow Christ the Lamb; for there is the holy Joy, and Peace, and
Comfort and Unity known, in the Life and Fellowship with the God of Life. For
what is the Cause of all the Lusting Spirits to Envy, and of the Wisdom, that
is Sensual, Earthly and Devilish, but a Living and a Going out from the Truth
and the Life? Which ( Truth and Life) is the Mark of the high Calling of God in
Christ, where the Peace is. And so, the Spirit of this World lusts to Envy, it
lusts to Strife, it lusts to Contention, it lusts against the Spirit of God;
the Lusts of the Eye, and the Pride of Life, and the Lusts of the Flesh,
clothed with Flesh, covered with Flesh, not with the Spirit, such are unchaste,
and follow the Lust, not the Lamb, and so live in that, which the War proceeds
from, and in Strife and Contention. And therefore, Mark that Spirit with the
Eternal Power of God, Evil Thoughts.
for it Judges with evil Thoughts, being in the Earth, and thinks all to be
like it self, being in the Bad, and in the Lust, and in the Adultery; it judges
all to be like it self.

Oh therefore mind the Holy Life, the Chaste Life! That is the Bride's
Clothing, by which she adorns her self for her Husband, Christ Jesus.
Therefore in that, which keeps your Peace, live, there is your Life and
Dominion, that Weeds may not grow, nor Brambles, but that it all may be cut
down and weeded out. For those grow through the Liberty of the Flesh, and by
that ye come to be darkened, and lose your Discerning and Feeling; The Beam in
the Eye.
and there gets the Beam into the Eye, by which ye come to Judge with that
Judgment, which is for Judgment, which should be judged down by the Spirit of
Truth and Peace. And so, Live in the same Peace with God, and one with another,
and have Fellowship in the Chaste Life, and in the Spirit and Power of God. And
keep down that which lusts to Envy, and Strife and Contention, for that will
not, nor cannot bear true Judgment, but will flatter and fawn, and sow
Dissension; and so in the End will bring Dishonor both to God and his People:
That can never abide true Judgment or sound Doctrine, for that Adulterates from
God, and joins in Marriage with that, which is Adulterated from God. And so,
the Unchaste follows the Whore and the Adulterer, The Whore and Adulterer.
and goes to the Marriage-Supper of the Adulterer and the Whore; but the Chaste
Virgin follows the Lamb, and goes to the Marriage-Supper of the Lamb: Therefore
all live in the Chaste Life, by which ye may follow the Lamb of God to his
Supper and Marriage. And keep ye all out of that, from whence Contentions and
Strife and Wars arise, which are the Fruits of them that live in the Lust,
which is seen with the Everlasting Power, the Ground, from whence Strife and
Contention, and Wars come, The Ground of Strife.
the Unchaste, which live in the Lust; which Lust will defile all, that receive
it. Therefore all Friends every where, your Fellowship is to be in the Gospel,
the Power of God, and in the Spirit, the Fruits of which is Peace; in which ye
all will be kept in Dominion, Pure and Chaste to God, and one toward another.
For all that come to the Sabbath of Rest, must put off their Old Clothes, which
they have worn in their Old Works, Labors and Travels: For Six Days the Jews
were to labor, but the Seventh Day was their Rest, which is Perfection.

G. F.

Concerning the Light.
FRiends,
Ye that be turned to the Light, in it Wait, Epist. 155.
in it Meet together, that with it your Hearts may be joined together up to
Christ, the Head, from whence the Light does come; The World's Gatherings.
with which ye may see all the World, and all the Gatherings, that are out of
the Light, which are in the Vanities of their Minds, and in the Rebelliousness
of their Hearts, and Stubbornness of it, from the Light. But ye believing in
the Light, and receiving it, ye receive and come into the Covenant with God,
and Peace with God; and into that, which gives the Knowledge of his Glory, and
of his Image. And this Belief gives the Victory over the World, and brings
unto God, and into his Likeness, and separates you from the World, The World
and its Likeness.
and its Likeness and Image, and its Fashion, which is out of the Light; and
its Knowledge, and its Wisdom, and its Honor, and its Fear, and its Love, and
its Rejoicing, which are out of the Light, in the Flesh, and in the Iniquity,
where the Soul is in Death. But in the Light rejoicing and walking, ye receive
the Love of God shed abroad into your Hearts, which Love rejoices in the Truth
(mark) in that which the Devil abode not in; with that ye know and will know
the Increase of God, and know God and his Law put in your Minds, and in your
Hearts written, where the Fear is placed, where the Secrets of the Lord are
revealed, and the Light, which is the Truth, comes to be walked in: Here is a
Joy in the Lord, where no Flesh glories. In this waiting (in the Light) the
World, where there is no End, it gives you to see; World without End.
and the Power of the World, which is to come, ye will come to see, and be
Partakers of. Which Power ye receiving (who are in the Light) it brings you to
become the Sons of God, and to be Heirs of the World, where there is no End,
and of the Everlasting Inheritance, which fades not away, and the Riches,
which are durable, where no Thief can come, nor nothing to rust or canker; for
that is out of the Light, that does thieve, rust or canker, and in the
Transgression. Therefore, ye Saints in the Light of the Most-High God, whose
Name is dreadful amongst you, and his Power made manifest in Measure and his
Glory appearing, Walk worthy of the High Calling! The High Calling.
Keep your Dominion, keep your Place of Rest in the Power and Strength of the
Almighty, and Meet together in the Love, Unity, and Peace, Meet in the Love.
and know one another in this Love, that changes not; which being received, ye
walk in that, which condemns that which is changable. This Love rejoiceth in
the Truth, and has Dominion over him, that abode not in the Truth, but
rejoices in that, which the Devil abode not in. And here the Spirit is
received, in which God is Worshipped, the Father of Spirits: He that believes
here, believes in the Lord, and shall never be confounded; for he believes in
that, which does Confound and Condemn those, who are out of the Light, and gone
from the Word of God in the Heart, and from the Power of God, and from the
Light of the Glorious Gospel, which is the Power of God. The God of the World
has blinded their Eyes, that abide not in the Truth, they are gone from the
Light, which is the Truth; and all that are blinded by the God of the World,
The God of the World.
these are out of the Light, and out of the Truth. Therefore ye being in the
Light, and to it turned (the Light of the glorious Gospel) the Image of God is
seen, and the glorious Gospel received. Therefore walk in the Light, as the
Children of the Light, and know the Wisdom, that is of her Children justified;
that ye may answer the Light in every one (that comes into the World) that
hates it. And keep your Habitations, that ye may every one feel your Spring in
the Light, which comes from the Lord, and feel your Nourishment and
Refreshment; which waters the Plants, and causes them to grow up in the Lord,
from whom the pure, living Springs come. The Water the Witness.
And here is the Water, which is the Witness in the Earth, which does wash; and
here comes the Spirit to be known, the Witness, which does baptize, and the
Witness the Blood, which does cleanse, which agrees with the Witness in Heaven.
So, he that believes, has the Witness in himself (Mark and take Notice.) And
so, ye being in the Light, every one in particular feed upon the Bread of Life,
The Bread of Life.
which comes from above, which nourishes up to Eternal Life; wherein as every
one grows up, here every one gives Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and
knows the Light, which is the Way, the Truth, and the Life. Every one of you,
that are to it turned, ye are in the One Way, Truth, Light and Life, feeding
upon the One Bread, which comes from above; which whosoever does eat of, lives
for ever, and shall never dye.

Let this be read among all Friends every where in this Nation and elsewhere,
that to the Light are turned, and in it are kept, that in the Unity they may
all be kept. And in it God Almighty preserve and keep you, that ye may feel his
Promises, which is to the Seed; and know the Seed, to which the Blessing is,
and know the Flesh of Christ, that ye may be Flesh of his Flesh. And Friends,
Live at Peace among your selves, waiting upon the Lord; and the Lord God of
Life and Peace be with you!

Let no Friends be discouraged; but walk in the Truth and the Love of it, and
to it bend.

G. F.

ALL Friends,
About 1658
I do Warn and Charge you in the Presence of the Living God, in his Wisdom and
Life keep, that no Ill Savor be nor get up amongst you. Epist. 156.
For ye are the Salt of the Earth, to season and to make savoury to God; To
Friends, to keep in that which is Savoury.
but if the Salt have lost its Savor, it is henceforth good for nothing.
Therefore I do Warn you all, Mind that which does keep your Peace; whereby ye
all may grow in Love, and know Christ in you all, in whom is Peace. Light of
the World to answer the Light in every one, that with the Light they may see
your good Works, and by seeing them, Good Works.
they may glorify your Father, which is in Heaven; for all Deceit is Judged
and Condemned by it. And every one keep in the Measure of the Life of God, and
see, that there be no Strife nor Presumption among you; but all serve one
another in Love, and let that of God guide every one of you, Serve in Love.
in which ye may have Unity one with another, and with God: And in his Life
wait, to receive Power to bind and chain all down, which is contrary to Truth.
And so, in the Life and Power of God, the Lord God Almighty preserve you to his
Glory! Amen.

THE Light is precious to him, that believes in it, Light, walk in the Light,
and live in the Light, Christ the Truth; The Light, the Truth.
that ye may through Obedience to it be the Children of the Light and of the
Day: For the Light and the Truth is and was, before Darkness and Deceit were.

G. F.

FRiends,
By the Wisdom of God were all things made, Epist. 157.
and by the Wisdom of God must all things be ordered again to God's Glory. The
Wisdom of God to order.
Transgression and Sin brings Death and Destruction; but the Wisdom hid from
the Eyes that be therein (by which Wisdom all things were made and created)
was, before Sin, Death and Destruction were. And so, that is it, which the
Creatures and Creation of God must be ordered by that Wisdom, which made them,
and does not change; which is hid from Death and Destruction, and from that
which is in the Transgression of Life, and must not rule. So Friends every
where, be Tender to those, that have forsaken any thing for Truth: Parents,
Masters.
And if that their Parents have put them out from them, or their Masters put
them away for Truth's sake, and them that are put out of their places for
Truth's sake, such in the Truth receive and cherish; that they may be kept in
the Service of the Creation to God's Glory, answering that of God in all. For
every one is to abide in their places, and there to be faithful, except they be
put out, or put away, and be buffeted for no Fault, and take it patiently;
that is Thanks-worthy. And do good unto all, especially to them, that are of the
Household of Faith, The Household of Faith.
and be as the Church of God, guided in the Wisdom of the Most-High, who
causes his Rain to fall upon the Just and upon the Unjust: And so, be ye
Merciful, as your Heavenly Father is Merciful. And know the Seed of God, that
is Heir of the Promise in every one of you, and the Wisdom, by which all things
must be ordered to his Glory, who upholds all things by his Word of Power: By
which Word of Wisdom all things were created, and must be ordered again to the
Glory of the Creator; in which Man will be kept Clean unto God, and honor God
with his Substance, and glorify God in his Spirit. Whereby every one's
Conversation will come to be ordered aright, and ye come to sit down in the
heavenly Places in Christ Jesus; The High Calling
and to know the High Calling of God in Christ Jesus, who calls out of Darkness
into the Light, out of Death into Life: For he that calls, is Holy, and calls
into Holiness, without which none shall see the Lord.

AND all Friends, be faithful in the Seed and Life of the Lord God; that is it,
which abides in the Love of God for ever, where every one has his Bread,
Birth, which abides in the House of the Lord God for ever, The Birth which
abides.
and shall go no more forth; which is greater than he that is in the World. And
in the Seed and Life keep your Meetings with God and one with another. So in
that the Lord God Almighty preserve you all to his Glory.

G. F.

FRiends and Brethren every where,
Epist. 158.
Dwell in that which makes for Peace and Love; for Blessed are the
Peacemakers, for theirs is the Kingdom, To Friends, to dwell in Peace and Love.
that stands in Righteousness, Joy and Peace in the Holy Ghost and in Power.
Therefore seek the Peace, in which is the Welfare and Good of every one. And
take heed of Strife and Contention, for that eats out the Good, and dos not
Edify, nor make for Peace, for it is Love, that Edifies the Body. Therefore
keep in the Seed, and know that which was, before Enmity was, in which there is
both Peace and Life. And all be careful to Watch over one another, for one
another Good; and be Patient, and keep low and down in the Power of the Lord
God, that there ye may come to enjoy the Kingdom of Peace, and sit down with
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob in the same. For Blessed are all ye, that lie down in
the Power of the Lord, and rise up in it, and in Faith remain; through which
Power ye come to be preserved and united to the God of Life and Truth. Words
and Carriage.
And take heed of any Words or Carriage, that do not tend to Edification and
Building up in the Love and Life. Therefore ye, that have tasted of the Power
of God, and of his good Word, and of his Light, wait for Wisdom, and in it
walk, that ye may be preserved in Unity in the Light and Life, and in
Fellowship with God, and one with another; that to the Lord God ye may be a
Good Savor. and to him a Blessing in your Generation, strengthening one
another in the Faith, in the Grace, in the Word, by which all things were made
and created. The Word of Patience.
And keeping the Word of Patience, herein ye will see the Lord keeping you from
all the Temptations, which come to try them, that dwell upon the Earth; by
which Word of God ye may all be preserved in the sweet and holy Life, in which
there is Unity in the Word, which was before Enmity; which Word does fulfill the
Words. Therefore in that live, that ye may all feel Life abundantly through the
Light and Power, that comes from the Word, which was in the Beginning; through
which Immortal Word your Immortal Souls may be brought up to the Immortal God,
where is Joy, Peace and Comfort. So, Strife and Contentions.
above all things live in that which stops Strife, Contentions and Janglings,
and live in that, by which ye come to Serve one another in Love, even in the
Love of God, which thinks no evil, nor envies not, neither is it easily
provoked. Therefore live in that, which is not easily provoked, and thinks no
evil; which fulfils the Law, which is Love out of a pure heart. Prejudice.
And let not Prejudice boil in any of your hearts, but let it be cast out by
the Power of God, in which is the Unity, and the Everlasting Kingdom; that ye
may all witness your being made Heirs of the same Kingdom of Peace, and to be
Inheritors of it, sitting down in the same, knowing your own Portion, and
increasing in the heavenly Riches: And this is above all Strife, that is below,
and the Man of it, which is born of the Egyptian Woman, which genders to
Bondage. Therefore know the Seed, the Second Man, The Egyptian Woman.
the Heir of the Promise over all set, and the Blessing and Presence of the
Lord, which was, before Strife was. Therefore know the Seed of Life and Peace
to reign in you all, which possesses the Kingdom, where there is no End.

The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all, to teach, season and
establish you, which brings your Salvation.

G. F.

DEar Friends,
All dwell in the Everlasting Seed of God, Epist. 159.
Christ Jesus, in whom ye have Health and Strength, Life and Dominion, and
Power over all Weaknesses. Weaknesses and Infirmities.
And keep your Minds in the Strength of the Almighty, and not in Weakness, nor
in the Infirmities, but in the Lord's Power, which was, before Weakness and
Infirmities were; and then in that Power ye will find. Life and Refreshment
from the God of Strength. And so in the Power of God, that is over all, keep
your Minds in the Life and Peace of God, and in the Assurance of him and his
Love; and so, in that dwell and live in the Dominion of God, in his Love, and
Life and Strength. And be of good Faith, Be of good Faith.
and of a valiant Mind for God's Truth upon the Earth, in the Power, Life,
Truth and Seed, in which ye have Dominion, Peace, Wisdom, and the Blessing of
God upon you, and in you; and in that dwell, and know that blessed Seed your
Crown and Life. No more, but my Love.

For the Comfort of the People of God, and their Encouragement to be Faithful,
and to put their Trust in him, who performs all his Promises.
THE People, that know their God, they prosper and prevail, they that do
understand, shall Instruct many: And though they may fall, and go into
Captivity, and be spoiled now; yet when they shall so fall, Captivity.
they shall be helped; and when they are helped, many shall cleave unto them.
And some of Understanding may fall, for to try and purge them, and to make them
white, till the Time be out: For there is a Time appointed to Liberty, for the
faithful Sufferers, A Time of Liberty.
that come from and through the great Tribulations; and Michael shall stand up
for the Children of thy People, and every one shall be delivered, that shall be
found written in the Lambs Book of Life.

G. F.

ALL my Dear Friends,
Folly and Wickedness will have an End, Epist. 160.
but the Word of the Lord will have no End, but endures for ever. So, feed
upon the Milk of the Word, ye Babes, To Friends, in Bristol.
that ye may live by that, which comes from it, which does endure.

G. F.

OH Friends!
Epist. 161.
Do not Dye from the Good through the Wantonness of flesbly Lusts, neither be
choked with the Cares of this Life, nor fear the Shearers, neither let the Heat
scorch your green Blade; but dwell under the Shadow of the Almighty, who will
shade you from the Heat and Cold. Neither be cumbred nor surfeited with the
Riches of this World, nor bound, nor straightened with them, Riches.
nor married to them; but be free and loose from them, and be married to the
Lord. The Sufferings in all Ages of the Righteous and Just were, because they
could not join to the Nations vain Worships, evil Customs, Rudiments,
Traditions and carnal Inventions, but joined to the Lord, and not to them; The
Sufferings of the Righteous.
and therefore they suffered, and kept single to the Lord God in following him
and his Truth, and living in it, the Amen, the Crown, Life, Virtue and
Righteousness, that flows over all, in which the Righteous have Peace.

G. F.

FRiends,
Epist. 162.
Keep your Meetings in the Power of God, and in his Wisdom (by which all things
were made) and in the Love of God, Meetings for Business.
that by that by may order all to his Glory. And when Friends have finished
their Bufiness, sit down and continue a while quietly, and Wait upon the Lord
to feel him: And go not beyond the Power, The Power.
but keep in the Power, by which God Almighty may be felt among you. For the
Power will bruise the Head of the Serpent, and all false and contrary Heads;
this blessed Seed, as he is the Head of the Church, so he is also the Head of
every Member of his Body. And so, by the Power of the Lord ye come to love
Truth, and love Jesus Christ, and love Holiness; and by the Power ye come to
love God, and praise him, and bless him and magnify him, who lives for
evermore. For the Power of the Lord will work through all, if that ye follow it.

WHEN ye do Judge of Matters, Words, or when ye do Judge of Persons, Concerning
Judging.
all these are distinct things. A wise Man will not give both his Ears to one
Party, but reserve one for the other Party, and will hear both, and then Judge.

G. F.

MY Dear Friends,
Epist. 163.
In the Life live, in which is the Unity and Peace one with another, and
Lowliness and Humbleness of Heart and Mind, Wisdom received.
serving one another in the Fear of the Lord God; by and in which Fear the
Wisdom of God is received from above, and by which all things were made and
created, and by which ye may all be ordered to his Glory. And so, this is the
Word of the Lord God to you all, Live in the Power of the Lord God, in which is
Peace, Love, Unity and Dominion in the Life and Power of God, which was, before
Enmity was; The Light and Life.
and in the Light, which was before Darkness was; and in the Life, which was
before Death was: And so, in that feel Unity and Life in the Power of God. And
so, the Seed of God feel over all that set, which makes to suffer; which was,
before it was, and will remain, when that is all gone. And so, feel the
Top-Stone over all laid, that his Life ye may feel over all, and in that live.

G. F.

MY Dear Friends,
Epist. 164.
Keep your Meetings in the Power of the Lord God, To Friends, To keep their
Meetings.
in which ye may all feel Life Eternal among you. And do not forsake the
Assembling of your selves together, but provoke one another to Love, in which
is Edification, Life, Peace, Truth and Dominion; in which ye may feel the
Blessing of God covering you, ye dwelling in the same. And so, Meet together in
the Name of the Sons and Daughters of Adam in the Fall, and will stand, when
they are all gone; in which there is Life, Peace and Wisdom, Order and
Edification, in the Love and Life of Christ, over all the brittle and foolish
Priests and Professors in the World; and in which Life and Power there is the
perfect Fellowship, that will stand for ever, Perfect Fellowship.
when all other Fellowships are ended and gone. And so, ye that know the Life
and Power, and Light of Christ, which was before Death and Darkness, and the
Power of the same was, Be Faithful, who are gathered together in this Life and
Power, and are Met in it, in it keep your Meetings, in the Life and Power of
the Lord, over all other Meetings; in which ye may all feel one another in the
Fellowship and Unity, that is Everlasting, and never has End. And so, in that
the Lord God Almighty preserve you all to his Glory; that to the Lord God ye
may be a Blessing in your Generation, and a good Savor to God, and in the
Hearts of all People. That none may say, ye are an unstay'd, unestablihsed, or
a fickle People, and have your Religion, Truth and Worship to seek; but that ye
have it already, and are established in the Life and Power of God, Christ the
Heal.
and in his Worship, Church and Religion, which Christ is the Head and the Life
of (which destroys the Devil and his Works) who is the Pasture of Life, who
was, before Death was. And so, him feel over all that set, which makes to
suffer, who was, before it was, and will remain, when it is gone: And so, feel
the Top-Stone over all laid, and Christ to reign.

G. F.

ALL Friends,
Be faithful in the Power of God and his Seed, Epist. 165.
and mind the Power of God, which was before the Power of Darkness, and the
Fall of Adam were. In which Power of God is your Fellowship, and in which
Fellowship ye may see over the Jews Fellowship and the Gentiles, and ye may see
the Apostles Fellowship, Fellowship in the Power.
and the Apostatised Christians. Now, the Gospel is preached, and the true
Fellowship come into again, which the Apostles were in, which was, before the
Apostatised Christians Fellowship was, out of the Life and Power of God, which
the Apostles were in, and the Church in the Primitive Times: And the
Gospel-Fellowship, the Power of God is prefect, in which is our Fellowship,
which was, before any Imperfection was.

And they have no more Command to set up Temples, Tithes, Temples, Tithes,
Oaths. Swearing.
Oaths or Swearing among the Christians since the Apostles Days, than the
Gentiles had to set up Diana's Temple; for the Temple-Worship, Tithes and Oaths
Christ came to end, and to bring People out of them, and to make them his
Temples, and to bring to Yea, Yea, and Nay, Nay in their Communications. And
so, before the Fall there were no Oaths, in the Fall there were; but in the
Restoration there are to be no Oaths, Tithes, nor outward Temples.

G. F.

To the Church of God in Scotland.
DEar Friends,
In the Power and Light is my Love to you all, Epist. 166.
in which the Virtue, Life, Holiness and Righteousness is known, To Friends in
Scotland, to live in the Truth, which they first received.
and the Riches, that never fade away. Live in the Truth, which ye first
received; that it may be your Crown, and your Clothing. And dwell in Love, and
Peace and Unity one with another in the Trath of God, which the Devil is out
of; and keep your Meetings in the Name of Christ Jesus, that never fell; and
then ye will see over all the Gatherings in the Fall, in whom the Peace, Life
and the Blessing is. And all know one another in him, who is the Substance, and
him to be your Way and Teacher, Priest and Prophet, that never fell; and then
ye will see over all the false Ways, Christ your Way, Teacher, Priest and
Prophet.
Prophets, Priests and Teachers in the Fall, ye being in him, that never fell,
your Priest and Prophet. Be Faithful to God every one in your Measure of Light,
Life and Truth; which Truth is over the whole World, and all that is in it. And
so, living in the Light and Truth, ye may answer the Light and Truth in every
Man and Woman; and be a good Savor to God in the Hearts of all People. And
keeping your Habitations in the Truth, and in the Light and Life, then ye will
see over Adam and Eve, their Sons and Daughters Habitations in the Fall, who
cannot abide the Truth, Light and Life in the inward Parts; therefore they are
not in Peace one with another, Habitations in the Fall.
being not in the Habitation, that Adam was in, before he fell, nor in Christ,
that neve fell, in whom the Saints sit down, in the Life, Christ, who was with
the Father, before the World began. Adam lost his Habitation, and the Jews lost
their Habitations, the one went into the Earth, and the other into Captivty,
where the Apostates are; and so are become like untimely Figs, or like unto the
Corn upon the Housetop. Now this is the Word of the Lord God unto you all,
Keep your Habitations in the Light, Life and Power, which ye first received and
felt in your selves; that ye may be clothed with the Blessing of the Lord,
which was, before the Curse was. And live in the Unity in the Light, which was
before Darkness was, or the Power of it; and in the Life, which was, before
Death was; and in the Truth, which was, before the Devil was; and in the Power
of God, which was, before the Power of Satan was: All live in this, that ye may
be clothed with that which is Immortal, and attain to the Crown of Life, and
to know the Election, before the World began. He that is the First and the
Last, that is the Beginning and the Ending, sit down in him, not in Adam in the
Fall, but sit down in Christ, that never fell; and there that Life ye will come
to know, Sit down in Christ.
which was with the Father, before the World began. And so, live in the
Substance, which is the Seed, Christ, who ends the Prophets, first Conveant,
first Priesthood, and all the Types, and Figures, and Shadows given after the
Fall.

G. F.

MY Dear Friends,
Epist. 167.
Be not carried away by good Words and fair Speeches, Good Words and fair
Speeches.
nor the Affectinate Part, which is taken with them; but every one have hold of
the Truth in your selves, and the Life, and Light and Power of the Most-High,
by which ye may be stayed upon Christ, Bread, the Staff of Life.
your Bread of Life, he is the Staff of your Heavenly and Eternal Life; Bread
is the Staff of Life. Now Friends, who have denied the World Songs and Singing;
Songs and Singing.
sing ye in the Spirit, and with Grace, making Melody in your Hearts to the
Lord. And ye having denied the World's formal Praying, Praying.
pray ye always in the Spirit, and watchy in it. And ye, that have denied the
World's giving of Thanks, and their saying of Grace, and living out of it; do
ye in every thing give Thanks to the Lord through Jesus Christ. And ye, Giving
Thanks,
that have denied the World's Praising God with their Lips, whilst their Hearts
are afar off; do ye always praise the Lord night and day, Saying Grace.
and from the Rising of the Sun to the Going down of the same praise ye the
Lord. And ye, that have denied the World's Fastings, Praising. Fastings.
and of their hanging down their Heads like a Bulrush for a day, who smite with
the Fist of Wickedness, Keep ye the Fast of the Lord, that breaks the Bond of
Iniquity, and lets the Oppressed go free; that your Health may grow, and your
Light may shine, as the Morning.

G. F.

FRiends all every where, who have tasted of the Love,
Epist. 168.
Mercy and Kindness of God, and his Power, ye are called to Holiness and
Chastity. Therefore keep out of inordinate Affections, Inordinate Affections.
and inordinate fleshly Love, and feigned Flattery and Desires, which is below
the Truth; which will bring you to Infirmness. And keep out of fond Affections
and fond Love, that draws out the fleshly Part, the fleshly Eye, and brings
into Pride, and Looseness and false Liberty, and to abuse the Power of God. Oh,
keep out of all Uncleanness, whatever may be pretended, and fleshly Desires;
for the Lust of the Eye, the Lust of the Flesh, and the Pride of Life are not
of the Father, but of the World: And therefore keep down that, which is not of
the Father, but of the World. And take heed of dishonouring your Bodies, and
defiling your Minds, but keep your Bodies clean from all Fornication,
Fornication and Adultery.
Adultery and Uncleanness; for that which pretends otherwise, and does so,
defiles it, and is out of the Truth, and is contrary to the Law of God, and
contrary to Christ's Doctrine. And therefore defile not your selves, but live
pure, chaste and holy, as becomes the Saints; for no Adulterer nor Fornicator
has any part in the Kingdom of God. Such go from that of God in themselves,
and quench the Spirit of God, and abuse his Power, and go into fleshly Love,
and fained Desires and flattering Pretenses, covering it with a false Liberty,
and so are in the Bondage to the beggarly, fleshly Lusts; and whom they
overcome, they bring into the same Bondage, and through their fained Flattery
and dissembling Carriage rob, and beguile and spoil, Flattery.
to fulfill their insatiable, ungodly Desires, Wills and Lusts. Therefore live
in the Truth, for all such things are out of the Truth, and such as do the
same, whatsoever they be; therefore all that go into Uncleanness, under what
fair Pretense soever, are to be Judged.

G. F.

TO all the Elect, Chosen and Faithful, Epist. 165.
who are of the Royal Seed of God, living Stones, Elect and Precious, knit and
built up together, and united, the Family and Household of God, London, the
11th of the 3d Month.
and come to his Mountain, that is established upon the top of all Mountains,
that walk in the Light of the Lord, in Unity and Covenant with God, in the
Covenant of Life and Peace with him: Who in this the Lamb's Day are the Gold
tried in the Fire. Who have been tried by Goods spoiling, As Gold tried in the
Fire.
by Bonds, by Whippings, by Mockings and Reproaches in the Day of the Lamb's
Power, and some have been tried unto Death; and ye have proved to be the pure
Gold, that has come out brighter and brighter. Who have not feared the Waves
of the Sea, nor the Winds; who fears not the storms nor the Weather; whose
Anchor holds, which is the Hope, the Mystery, which Anchors the Soul, which is
Immortal, to the Immortal God. Among whom the Star or Jacob is seen, and the
Morning Star is risen, and the Sun of Righteousness shines, and the Lamb's
Voice is known, the Charch in the Glory and Beauty is appeared and appearing;
The Mirriage of the Lamb.
the Marriage of the Lamb, and the Bride, and the Wedding Day is known, in
which there is Unity; and the Vigins sing Praises, and follow the Lamb, because
of his sweet Ointment; and the Virgins are upon Mount Zion. And the Gospel is
going forth unto all Nations, Kindreds and Tongues; and Life and Immortality is
coming to Light thuough the Gospel, which is the Power of God; and the Mystery
of the Fellowship is known, The Mrstery of the Fellowship.
which is in the Power: And for want ofthe Power, the Gospel, in which is the
Fellowship, has Christendom been on Heaps, and the Heathen Ignorant. And now
ye, who know the Power of God, ye know the Gospel; and ye, who are in the Power
of God, ye are in the Mystery of the Fellowship: So Mark, the Fellowship is a
Mystery, and the Mystery of the Fellowship is Everlasting. So, if any wants the
Power of God, he wants the Mystery, in which is the Fellowship, althought he
may have all the Scriptures.

2. And now Friends, if any be moved of the Lord God by his Power, be Obedient
to it, Obedience to the Power.
and waithin the Life and in the Power, and it will direct you to the Glory of
God, in his Wisdom, not to abuse it; that whatsoever ye do, ye may do it to his
Glory, ye answering the Just Principle of God in every one.

3. If any be moved to go to the Steeple Houses or Markets, or to Rereove Sin
in the Gate, or to Exhort High or Low, or to Reprove them; Reason not with
Flesh and Blood, nor quench the Spirit: And when ye have done, in the same
Spirit live; and then ye will have Peace, and Rest and Fellowship with God, and
one with another: For the unity is in the Spirit, and it is the Bond of Peace.

4. And all Friends, in your Meetings do not quench the Spirit. And take heed,
Judging in Meetings.
and do not judge one another in the Meetings; but have patience, until the
Meetings be done: So, if any have any thing upon him to speak to another, he
may speak to him after the Meeting is done; that will cover one another's
Weakness, and not hurt othres.

5. And all Friends every where, wait to feel the Power of God in your selves
in your Meetings: Sleeping in Meetings.
And take heed of Sleeping, and feel the Power of God in one another; that ye
all may be in the Mystery of the Fellowship. For Woe unto them, that are at Ease
in Zion! I Warn and Charge you all in the Presence of the Living God, that none
make their Habitation in the Earth, or build Tabernacles there, lest ye become
Vagabonds from the Lord: But let every one rest in his Habitation in God, and
here is no Vagabond; but there shall every one know an Heir-ship, an Habit
ation and an Inher it ance. And I warn and charge you from the Lord, not to
make any of the World's Jewels your God; but live all in the Power of the Lord
God, in which ye will be carried over the Spirit of the World.

6. And Friends all every where, dwell in the Love and Fear of the Lord God,
and in Peace one with another, and in the Power and Life of the Lord God keep
your Meetings; and live in the Mystery of the Fellowship of the Gospel, which
is Everlasting. This is to go to all the Meetings in the North among them to be
reda.

G. F.

FRiends,
Every one of you having a Light from the Son of God, Epish. 170.
wait in it, that ye may come to receive the Son of God, from whence it comes;
and receive Power from him tobecome the Sons of God, To Friends at Worcester.
and have Faith in him. For who are of Faith, are of abraham's Seed, which
faith gives the Victory over the World: It is by Faith, Concerining the Light.
our Hearts are purified. (So. dwell in the Light, Faith.
which casts out all Jangling Spirits; in which ye may have unity one with
another, Unity.
and with Christ, from whence the Light comes, and with the Father, whom he is
the Way to: And that with the Light ye may answer the Light in every Man (which
comes from Christ) though they hate it.) So, the Lord God Almighty keep and
preserve you.

AND all keep your Meetings in the Power of God,

G. F.

An Epistle General to them who are of the Royal Priesthood, About 1659.
and Chosen Generation; Given forth from the Movings of the Power and Spirit of
Truth, and now made public: To be sent abroad among the Saints scattered in
Old and New England, Germany, Holland, Ireland, Scotland, Barbados and
Virginia, for them to read in the Fear of the Lord.
FRiends,
Let all that ye do, Epist. 171.
be done in the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ, by whom all things were made and
created, that ye may do that which ye do, in the true Dominion; and then what
ye do, ye do in the Power of God. And all Friends, dwell in Love, for that is
the Mark of Disciple, and Fruits of Faith and the Spirit; Love the Mark of a
Disciple.
which Love out of a pure Heart is the End of the Commandment, and fulfils the
Law, and in that is Edification and Building: And the Fruits of being past from
Death to Life, there is Love to (God) Brethren and Enemies, being in the Seed
that destroys Death, and the Power of it, the Devil.

We need no Mass for to teach us; for the Spirit that gave forth the Scripture,
teaches us, how to pray, sing, praise, rejoice, 1. The Mass.
honor and worship God, and in what; and how to walk, and to behave our felves
to God and Man, and leads us into all Truth, in which is our Unity; and (it
is our) Comforter, and Guide and Leader, and not Men without, which say, They
have not the Spirit and Power, as the Apostles had, that gave forth the
Scriptures.

And we need not your Common Prayer to teach us, for the Spirit, 2.
CommonPrayer.
that gave forth Scriptures, teaches us, how to pray, praise, sng, fast and to
give thanks, and to praise and worship, andin what; and how to honor and
glorify God, and how to walk before Him and Men; and (how to use) all
Creatures upon the Earth; and leads and guides into all Truth, which was
given forth from it, which reproves the World of Sin, That is our Comforter,
Leader and Guider; by which we know Sonship, and in which we have Unity, and
this does ever change: But that which Man does invent, and their Prayers and
Forma (which do say, Men's invented Forms.
That they have not the same Spirit, which gave forth the Scriptures) do
change. But the Spirit, that gave forth Scriptures, teaches us, how to pray,
speak, sing, fast, give thanks, and how to read (them with Understanding) and
how to walk before God and Man, and how to worship God, and in what; for it
leads us into all Truth, which is our Comforter, in which we have Unity and
Fellowship, and to know the (true) Religion, which does never change.

And so, the Spirit of Truth, which gave forth the Scriptures, is our Director,
Sin. Directories, the End of them.
And this leads to see the End of all Directories, which Man invents, which
have not the Spirit the Apostles had; and when they cannot hold it up, they cry
to the Powers of the Earth, to help them. And these we see, are from the Spirit
erred, and without the Spirit; with whom we cannot trust our Bodies, Spirits
nor Souls into their hands, but have committed them to the Lord, whose they are.

And we are a People, Church-made-Faith, The Church-made-Faith.
which ye have framed and made in Eleven Days time, and your other Three Days
set apart. For Christ is the Author of our Faith, which is the Gift of God,
which is a Mystery held in a pure Conscience: And we say, that all the Priests
in Scotland, London and New England cannot make the Gift of God, the Mystery,
which is the Faith, which remains (and by which Men are justified and saved)
neither have they Power over it; which brings us to have Access to God, and
gives us Victory over that, which separated us from God. And so, we need none
of their Faith to lead us; for the Faith Christ is the Author of, we live in,
Magistrates.
which they cannot make nor frame. And though they may cry to the Magistrates
to help them to uphold their Made-Faith (which Idol they cannot hold up
themselves) which they have Invented, and say, They are not in the Life and
Power, as they were in, that gave forth the Scriptures; and say, Revelation is
ceased from People, and There is no Victory, while they be upon the Earth;
These are the Fruits of their Framed-Faith, which we need not. For the Spirit,
that gave forth the Scriptures, teaches us to know, who is the Author of our
Faith, and the Fruits of it; which gives Victory. And the Spirit teaches us,
how to pray, sing, give thanks, praise, rejoice, fast, worship God, and in
what; and how to walk to God and Man, and leads us into all Truth, the
Reprover of the World for Sin, which is our Comforter, Guide and Leader, and
Director; in which we have Unity and Fellowship, that is without End, and a
pure Religion, that does never change. And a great deal of stuff there is in
their Books, which is not worth mentioning, which it and that Nature will Rot,
that gave it forth; Church-Faith changes.
but the Seed, and Life and Power will stand.

Church-Faith changes, Directory changes, Common Prayer changes, and Mass
changes: And here are the four Religions, which are got up since the Apostles
Days; which they have fought for, and killed one another about. But the Pure
Religion does not change, which we are of and own; in which is the Spiritual
Weapons, which were amongst the Apostles. The True Faith changes not, for it
abides and remains, which is the Gift of God, Romans 13.
and a Mystery held in a pure Conscience; of which we are, and which is our
Faith.

Mass for the Papists, Common Prayer for the Episcopal-Men; and the Directory
for the Presbyterians; Church-made and framed Faith for the Independents, and
mixed Baptists and others: And those have had their Fellowships in these, for
which they fought, and about which Carnal Weapons got up, since the Days of the
Apostles. Carnal Weapons.
But the Fellowship in the Spirit remains, and does not change, which has
Spiritual Weapons, and these are known and used to fight withal about Religion,
in which the Seed of God is known, which bruiseth the Serpent's Head, which led
Man from God, and made a Separation betwixt Man and God. And the Election is
known (in him who was) before the World began; who is the Head of our Church,
and not they that be Head of the Mass, The various Heads of them.
Head of your Directory, Head of the Common Prayer, and Head of the
Church-made-Faith, which we see all change and come to naught, and God
confounds: And Men stand in Doubts and Questions, and have not Assurance in
their Religion; but that of God stands in them all bound.

They that followed the Pope, were called Papists; Papists and Protestants.
and they that protested against the Pope, were called Protestants.

And thus they gave Names one to another. And so Common-Prayer-Men, and
Directory-Men, and Independents, and Baptists. And thus in the Envy, out of the
Love, out of the Spirit, which gave forth the Scriptures, gave they Names once
to another; all which we judge.

Our Faith, our Church, our Unity is in the Spirit, The Quakers Faith.
and our Word at which we Tremble, was in the Beginning, before the Papists
Mass, and your Episcopals Common Prayer, and the Presbyterians Directory, and
Independents, Baptists, and other Church-made framed Faiths were; and our
Unity, Church and Fellowship will stand, when they are all ended: By which
Spirit we judge them all, and deny their works; in which is our Unity with God,
with the Scriptures, and one with another. For they have been to People, like
so many Changable Coverings, but now the Spirit is taking them off; by which we
are Covered, and is our Weapons in this Day of great Battle with them. The
Scriptures, which ye do speak, The Scriptures owned.
and show forth in your Books, are owned, but your Imaginations of them we
deny; but they are all owned in themselves, and places: So, they are all Ours,
which end in Christ, who is Ours, and in him we are, that remains.

The Mass is the Papists Sacrifice, that they kill about. The various
Sacrifices of them.
The Common Prayer is the Episcopals Sacrifice, that they persecute and kill
about: And -- The Directory is the Presbyterians Sacrifice, they persecute and
kill about. The Made and framed Church-Faith is the Independents and and
Baptists Sacrifice, which they kill and persecute about.
Which Sacrifices the Lord does not accept, neither has he Respect to; which
are of them, who have erred from the Spirit, which the Apostles were in, with
which they offered Spiritual Sacrifice to God, the Father of Spirits, which we
are in.

And all my Dear Hearts, Fellowship in Suffering.
and know the Fellowship of the Seed in its sufferings, and to be made
Conformable to his Death; that ye in the suffering through it may know the
Power of the Resurrection of the Just Seed: And this is it, which kills all bad
Spirits, that will talk, but not do; such may crucify Christ in themselves
afresh. Therefore mind the daily suffering, which the Seed had, and have Unity
with that; so ye may rise with that, which destroys that, which causes it to
suffer.

The Papists cry, Higher Powers Help!
Higher Powers, Help, help, or else my Mass will go down, and all my Ceremonies.

The Episcopal-Men cry, Help, help, Higher Powers, or else my Common Prayer
goes down.

The Presbyterians cry, Help, help, Higher Powers, or else my Directory will
down.

The Independents (and Anabaptists and others) cry, Help, help, Higher Powers,
or else my Framed Faith (which is my Eleven Days Work) will down, and we shall
not stand.

Are not ye ashamed all? And show, ye are Naked, out of the Power and Life, the
Apostles were in; and from their Weapons Naked? The Outward Power neither
uphelp nor separated them from the Love of God, which they had in Christ, the
End of the Law. I am not one of them, that call themselves Papists,
Common-Prayer-Men, nor Presbyterians, Independents, nor Anabaptists, Puritans
nor Heathens, which are out of the Life of God; but that which God has clled
me to, that I am, and in the Elect, before the World began.

This is to go every where abroad amongst Friends, who are of the Royal
Priesthood, which destroys that which made a separation from God. From the
Royal Seed goes the Royal Commandment, The Royal Priesthood.
which Seed remains for ever, from the Royal Seed to the Royal Seed, which are
the Royal Priesthood, which have the Royal Law, and Love to Friends and
Enemies; which is beyond the Love of the World, and before it was: That is the
Royal Love, where no Enmity can come.

FORGIVE us, as we forgive them, cry Papists, cry Episcopal, cry Presbyterians,
and Baptists and Independents, these cry and say the Lord's Prayer, Forgive us
our Debts and Trespasses, as we forgive them, that trespass against us; and
then like a Company of senseless Men, without Understanding fall a fighting one
with another about their Trespasses and Debts, and never mind, what they
prayed, as though they never looked for Forgiveness, and to receive the things
they praycd for. Forgive us, as we forgive.
That pray, Forgive us Lord, as we forgive them, and fall a persecuting and
imprisoning one another, and taking their Brethren and Fellow Servants by the
Throat about Religion, which in their Prayers they said, Forgive us, as we
forgive them, and will not forgive, but say their Prayers, as the Pharisees did
the Scriptures, and did not; this is he, that must be cast into Prison, until
he pay the utmost Farthing, and must not come out. And this has been their
Work, since the Apostles Days, and is not here Law? The Apostles and Christ did
not bid, that any should kill about their Words, but that they should love
Enemies; but ye will kill about their Words, who were killed for speaking them
forth. And so all Friends, dwell in the Seed of God, which is Heir of the Power
of the World which is without End; in that dwell and keep your Meetings, that
ye may all be Possessors.

ALL Religions will fight about Religions and Worship, and kill like the
Heathen about their Gods; Jews, Gentiles, Papists, Protestants of all Sects,
which are out of the Power of the Lord, Spirit that the Apostles were in: And
so, they are all out of the Royal Spirit, Fighting Religions.
that has the Royal, Spiritual Weapons, and out of the Royal Seed, which
says, Love Enemies, which is the Royal Command to the Royal Priesthood. And
they confess, they have not the same Power and Spirit of the Apostles; so then
its true for them to say, We are not the spiritual Men, we have not spiritual
Weapons to fight withal; if ye do not help us, Higher Powers, we fall. For we
hold our Traditions, and that which we have, is by Tradition, is by the Earthly
Powers. For we are not made Ministers, as the Apostles were, by the immediate
Spirit and Power, and Gifts as the Apostles were; therefore the Higher Power
must help us, and to them go we with our Packet of Letters, as Saul did; for we
are not spiritual-weaponed Men, as Paul was. For in all these things are the
Priests guilty.

THE Papists, Common Prayer Men, Presbyterian, Independents, Baptists persecute
one another about their Inventions (which they have invented) their Mass, their
Common Prayer, their Directory, Persecuting Religions.
Church-Faith (which they have made and framed) their Inventions and
Handy-works, and not for the Truth: For they know not, what Spirit they are of,
that persecute, and would have Men's Lives destroyed about their Church, Worship
and Religion; for Christ said, He came not to destroy Men's lives, but to save
them, Now they, that know not what Spirit they are of, that will persecute and
destroy Men's Lives, and not save them, we cannot trust our Bodies, Souls nor
Spirts into their Hands, that know not, what Spirit they are of themselves;
they are not like to be trusted with others, that would destroy by a Law, which
the Disciples would have done by Prayer, to command Fire to come down from
Heaven to destroy them, that would not receive Christ: Which Sort Christ
rebuked, and told them, that they did not know, what Spirit they were of. And
now, if they did not know, what Spirit they were of; do these, which have
persecuted about Church and Religion, since the Apostles Days, who would compel
Men's Bodies, Goods, Lives, Souls and Estates into their Hands by a Law, or else
make them suffer? These are not the Ministers of Christ (the Savior) that
destroy Men's Lives, and they know not, what Spirit they are of; and the Lives,
Bodies and Souls are not to be trusted in their Hand. And ye, that do
persecute, shall have no Resurrection to Life, except ye Repent: But they that
do know, what Spirit they are of themselves, they are in the unrebukable Zeal,
and by the Spirit of God they offer up their Spirits, their Souls and Bodies to
the Lord, which are his; whose they are, to keep them.

G. F.

WE are of the Royal Seed, Elect and Precious, Epist. 172.
before the World began, that which (ever) the Sodomites crucified, grieved and
vexed by their unrighteous, ungodly Conversation, who lived in Fullness and
Pleasures, and abundance of Idleness. And we are of that Seed, that cannot
serve the Wills and Lusts of Men, and bow and stoop to them; who are a People
redeemed out of Kindreds, Kingdoms, Peoples and Nations, who are of the
Household of God, built up together a spiritual House, whose Builder and Maker
is God, and do reign upon the Earth, as Kings and Priests unto God; whom we
serve Day and Night. The Household of God.
And are of the Seed, that has been slain from the Foundation of the World,
which the Princes of the World and Councels, and the Great and Wise of the
Earth crucified; who lived in the Form of Godliness of the Saints Words, but
quenched the Spirit in themselves, and being that Birth born of the Flesh,
persecuted that which is born of the Spirit.

We are of the Seed, the Anointed, which the Powers of the Earth combine, and
take Counsel together against, whom God (we see) sitting in Heaven, The Royal
Priesthood.
laughs them to Scorn. We are the Royal Priesthood, who offers daily to the
Lord the Spiritual Sacrifice; the Holy Generation, and the peculiar People,
zealous of good Works, clothed with the Zeal of Christ against the bad Works,
and the Workers thereof. Therefore of all Nations, Peoples, Sects, Ways,
Professions and Talkers of Religion are we hated, by them that are out of the
Way and Power of God, though they profess Scriptures, Church-Worship and
Ministry; yet such have crucified Christ, and the Lord of Glory. We are they,
that witness the Promise of God fulfilled, and that do witness, that the Age is
come, wherein God would show forth his exceeding Riches and Kindness, which was
wrought amongst the Apostles: The Anointed of God.
We are the Anointed of God, and his Prophets, that he says, Touch not; who
are, as the Apple of his Eye; who for our sakes has reproved Powers, and
Thrones and Dominions, and rebuked them. We are the Preachers of Righteousness
in the great City Sodom, wherein Christ was crucified, where the Life of the
Prophets, and the Apostles and Holy Men of God lies slain, and Cursers,
Cursers, Swearers, Drunkards.
Swearers, Drunkards, Eaters and Drinkers, that rise up to play, in all
Fullness, Wantonness and Profaneness profess their Words, and make merry over
their Lives: And the Witnesses since the Apostles Days have been slain; the
Woman in the Wilderness, the Lamb and his Wife shall be known, which is come up
out of the Wilderness. So in this great City Sodom and Gomorrah, Sodom and
Gomorrah.
the False Church and the Whore are, where all the Abominations are, that made
all the Nations drunk of the Wine of the Wrath of her Fornication; whereby the
World is all on Heaps about Religion and Church-Worship, and the several Ways
in Sodom's Nature, professing the Saints Words, imitating Forms, killing and
slaying one another about professing the Saints Words, but out of their Life.
Which shows, that they are not of the Royal Seed, The Royal Seed.
which says, Love Enemies, that is the Royal Seed; and they that follow him,
are of the Royal Priesthood, and holy People and Generation, amongst whom is
the Royal Law of Love; whereby we cannot respect Men's Persons, for he who does,
is convinced of the Royal Law, to be a Transgressor. So every one of us, that
is come to the Seed of God, that bruiseth the Serpent's Head, that led Man from
God, who is the Prince of the World, the Prince of Darkness, and the Prince of
the Air, the Father of Lies, a Murderer from the Beginning, the Corrupter of
Mankind, the Author of the Separation from God, and the Original of Sin, the
Beginning of it, which led Man from his Dominion over the Handy-Works of God;
The Handy-Works of God.
which the Royal Seed Christ, destroys, and renews Man again in the Image of
God, and brings him again to his Dominion over the Handy-Works of God. And this
Hundreds of Thousands are now witnessing; by which they come to be Kings, and
redeemed from the Earth, and come to be made Kings upon the Earth in the Image
of God, over the Handy-Works of God, in the Wisdom, by which they were created.
So, all Powers whatever, that are a Terror to Evildoers, that bear not the
Sword in vain, to us are a Praise, that do well. And all Kings upon the Earth,
that were Anointed by God, a Figure of our Christ, the King, the Anointed, he
ends them all, Revel. 1.6.
and makes Kings to reign upon the Earth; amongst these Christ is King, which
Thousands witness, amongst these he is King, and all other Kings made by Man,
and putting Man on Earthly Crowns, Earthly Man will put them off again, and
un-King them, if they cross them: This is the State amongst them, in whom
Christ reigns not, nor the true Magistrate obeyed, which is to the Evildoers a
Terror. But since the Apostles Days all has been in Confusion about Religion,
Church and Worship, amongst them that have killed the Witnesses, and since the
true Church went into the Wilderness, and the Witnesses have been slain, and
the Man-Child caught up to God. So they, that have slain the Witnesses, and
killed the Saints, have been in all this Confusion; The Witnesses rising.
and the Witnesses are rising, and the Everlasting Gospel shall be preached
again (amongst them, that have had the Words, but have slain the Life of the
Prophets and the Apostles) unto all Nations, Kindreds and Tongues of them that
dwell upon the Earth. So the great Professors of the World (which were the
Jews) could not abide Jesus, the King, that he should reign; and where he is
now in the Male and in the Female, he is King, and that makes Kings, among whom
he is King. All in the Name of the mighty King of Kings is to be done, and then
it is in the Power.

G. F.

ALL Friends,
Take heed of running on in a Form, Epist. 173.
lest ye do lose the Power; but keep in the Power and Seed of God, in which ye
will live in the Substance. And at any Disputes take heed; Disputes.
many may be lifted up in the Victory and Conquest, and after have a Joy in the
Prophecies and Openings, and after fall. And if Bablers come, and Janglers say,
They have a Bad Metting; and so, the murmuring Nature gets up, out of
Patience, and the Seed, which bears all things, and suffers all things,
which keeps down that, which causes Lifting up, Murmuring and Disputing,
which the Seed ends, and Prophecy, and keeps down all the other, that is
contrary, and would live in the contrary; that which keeps down that, which
does change, is the Peace and the Cornerstone, and the staiedness in the Seed
and Life.

G. F.

DEar Friends all every where,
Feel the Seed of God over all that, Epist. 174.
which is in the Fall, that is gotten up, The Fall of Adam.
since Adam and Eve fell from Righteousness and the Image of God; and in which
Fall the Lamb has been slain. And so, feel the Seed of God over all that,
which makes to suffer; and will stand and remain, when he, that makes to
suffer, is gone. And so, feel Christ to reign and rule over all that, which is
in the Fall, Feel Life over all.
and there ye may all feel the Life to flow over all, which Life was with the
Father, before the World began; and which Life will remain, when Death and the
Power of it is gone. And in that Life all live and dwell, and in it keep your
Meetings.

AND feel the Word of Patience and the Word of Wisdom, Patience and Wisdom in
this Day of Life: Patience and Wisdom.
And feel my Love to all Friends in the Everlasting Seed of God.

G. F.

To Friends, to serve one another in Love, in outward things.
MY Dear Friends, Epist. 175.
in the Order and Wisdom of Life order all things to God's Glory, and dwell in
the Love of God together, all serving one another in Love, and in the Life of
the Truth; and ye that give to the Poor, Give to the Poor.
lend to the Lord, and he will give you again with Advantage. And so, be
Fruitful in every good Work, and be Subject to one another in the Fear of the
Lord, and do that which ye do, in Love and Peace; and in that keep in the
Authority and Power of God, in Kindness. Passion and basty Spirits.
And keep down, and be Master over all Passion, and the hasty and cross
Spirits, and silence that, which is sudden; and let Love have the Pre-eminence
in all and over all. And provoke one another to Love and to good Works, and be
diligent in all your places; that ye may be a good Savor in the Hearts of all,
and that the Truth may flow over all: And let nothing be wanting amongst you,
and then all is and will be well. And encourage one another to seek out the
Poor, and Sick, and Fatherless, and Widow, and Imprisoned, and make up their
Necessities and Wants; Necessities and Wants.
then there will be nothing lacking. And keep in Discerning, that ye may not be
ensnared, nor made a Prey upon; but that in the Power and Wisdom of God ye may
be kept over all such, and to feel through all States and Conditions: That the
Lord God may be honored in and by you all, and ye all may be preserved in his
Power and Life to his Glory. For your bestowing of outward things to such as
stand in need, is the least Love, and things of little Value, in Comparison to
the things that are above and Immortal. And so, keep over all in that, in which
ye have the Blessing poured upon you from the Lord God to cloth and cover you.

This is for the Men's Meetings.

G. F.

FRiends,
Epist. 176.
That Minister up and down among Friends, be Examples in Wisdom, Life,
Patience, Righteousness, Holiness, and in Godliness and Soberness, An
Exhortation to Friends that Minister, to be good Examples.
that your Lives and Conversations may preach. And keep out and over all vain
youthful Ways and Childishness, and over all those fallen Spirits, that
quarrel, jangle and contend about outward things, and have a Life in them;
through which they are eaten out from the Life and Truth of God: and such
become as the Dross, and they come to be as the untimely Figs, and as the Corn
and Grass on the Housetop. And so ye all, that minister abroad to others,
first see, that ye be in the Truth, that will never change, and in the Word and
Life, that will abide; and in the Gospel, the Power of God, Meats, Drinks,
Apparel.
which was before Meats and Drinks, and outward Apparel were; that ye may abide
in that, which never changes, that ye may not be confounded. For when they,
that are Ministers, change and alter from that, which they went forth first in,
and brought the People into, it does show, that they are either gone out of the
Truth, or else they were never in the Truth; and this confounds People: They
had better never have gone out at all. Therefore ye, that Minister abroad, see,
that ye be in that, which will never change, and is over all them, that do
jangle about changable things; for that being Ministered to People, that never
changes, and they that Minister, being in that, An established State.
which never changes, this begets People into an Established State. For they
are all fallen Spirits, and not Ministers of the Word, nor the Gospel, nor of
Christ that never fell (which destroys the Devil and his Works in the Fall)
that are quarrelling and siding, and disputing, and contending and striving
about outward things. For that Mind, that goes into them, is in the Heats and
Tempests, up and down, and is in the wrong Judgment, and cries against others,
as being Lords, and being esteemed and looked upon, and looking at Men; when
the Wrong Lords in themselves, and that is it which should not be esteemed. The
outward Part being gotten up in themselves, who have gotten a Life in outward
things, in the outward Knowledge, and the outward Reason, and outward Wisdom,
that outward Part and Reason, Wisdom and Knowledge must all perish, and the
Life they have in them also, The Life of God.
before the Life of God can come to rule in them, in which is the Everlasting
Unity and Fellowship. And so Friends, all that minister abroad in the
Everlasting Word, which never changes, and the Gospel, in it abide, he First
and Last: For the Word keeps down the Pride of Life, the Lust of the Flesh, and
the Lust of the Eye; which is of the World, and not of the Father. And so, let
your Liberty be in the Word and Spirit, and the Power of God, which keeps you
out of the Liberty of the World, and its vain Fashions; and be not fashioned
after them. And so, take heed of light Words, unseasoned Talk; Unseasoned Talk.
and of taking Liberty to the Flesh; but walk in that which is pure, and keep
in that, in which ye may have the Wisdom (which is the Beauty the of gray
Hairs) that to the Lord God ye may be a good Savor, and in the hearts of all;
walking in all Comeliness and Decency. The Word of Truth makes you to be
seasoned and savoury; and this is Comely, keeping in the Beauty of Holiness, in
which Holiness the Lord is seen, over the Beauty of the World, that is vain.

G. F.

ALL Friends every where, who are dead to all carnal Weapons, Epist. 177.
and have beaten them to pieces, stand in that, Carnal Weapons.
which takes away the Occasion of Wars, in the Power, which saves Men's Lives,
and destroys none, nor would have others. And as for the Rulers, that are to
keep Peace, for Peace's sake and the Advantage of Truth, Give Tribute.
give them their Tribute. But to bear and carry carnal Weapons to Fight with,
the Men of Peace (which live in that, which takes away the Occasion of Wars)
they cannot act in such things, under the several Powers; but have paid their
Tribute: Which they may do still for Peace sake, and not hold back the Earth,
but go over it; and in so doing, Friends may better claim their Liberty.

G. F.

For Friends in Barbados, Virginia, New England, and all the Islands about.
FRiends and Brethren, Epist. 178.
who are made Partakers of the Power of the World, that is without End, and are
Partakers of the heavenly Gift, and feel the Power, in which is the Unity,
Peace and Kingdom, that has no end, in that feel one another, and know one
another, and in the Life, in which ye will have Peace and Unity one with
another; that the Top-Stone may be laid over all, and ye all in the Wisdom,
Life and Seed in your measures may be preserved, spreading the Truth abroad,
confounding the Deceit, answering the Witness of God in all: To which they must
be brought, before their Minds can be turned to God, and be acquainted with his
Couemnt of Promise, and his Life, and to know God, Christendom on heaps.
the Father of Spirits. For all Christendom, which has gotten the Words of the
Prophets, Christ and the Apostles, that are not in the Spirit and Power, as
they were in, that gave them forth, are all on heaps about them, and not in
Unity, being out of the Spirit, in which is the Unity and true Fellowship. For
there are the Heaps amongst them, that are out of the Spirit and Power of God,
having the Words in the Transgression, in the Fall, in the Earth, and in the
many Bodies, Names and Heads, Churches, Religions and Worships, which are in
the first Birth, born of the Flesh, which will persecute him, that is born of
the Spirit; Baptism.
which Spirit plungeth down by Baptism, and puts under, and brings into
the One Body, and puts that under, which causes many Heads, and answers
to that which is Transgressed against: For all must come to the One Baptism
with the Spirit into the One Body. And all my Dear Friends, be faithful, and
quench not the Spirit, but be Obedient to the Truth, and spread it abroad, The
Witness of God in all.
which must go over all the World, to Profossors, Jews, Christians and Heathen,
to the answering the Witness of God in them all; that they may come to the
Truth, which answers the Witness in them, to be made free by it. And Friends,
In the Wisdom of God dwell, which preserves in Unity in the Spirit and Power.
If any thing be spoken in a Meeting, which ye cannot bear, speak to them
concerned betwixt them and you, Meetings quiet.
after the Meeting is ended; for if any of the World be there, it may give
Occasion to them to reproach Truth. For Wisdom preserves in the Peace, and
makes Peace, and preserves out of the Contrary, and overcomes with the Wisdom
and Love, and answers the Witness with the Life, and so has Unity, and that
has the Kingdom.

G. F: ALL Friends, Ye must come into a Tomperance above all the World. And all
Friends, Ye must come into a Patience above all the World. And all Friends, Ye
must come into a Moderation above all the World. And all Friends, Ye must come
into a Wisdom above all the World. And all Friends, Ye must come into a
Knowledge above all the World. And all Friends, Ye must come into an
Understanding above all the World. And all Friends, Ye must come into a
Sobriety, and Gravity, and a seasoned State above all the World.


G. F.

MY Dear Friends,
In the Love, Epist. 180.
and Life and Power of the Lord God dwell, in the Power, Life and Seed, which
has no End; To Friends, to take beed of getting into the Form without the
Power.
in which ye all may have Unity. And be Faithful and Diligent in the things
that are good, and keep your Meetings, and Meet together in the Power of the
Lord, which cannot be broken; in which is an Everlasting Unity. And live in
Peace and Unity one with another, and all keep in the Power of the Lord God,
and take heed of getting into a Form without the Power (any of you) for that
will bring Deadness and Coldness, and Weariness and Faintings; and what will it
not bring in that Nature? therefore keep in the Power of the Lord, which will
keep all the Contrary down and out, and preserve you in Peace and Life, Love
and Unity, fresh and fruitful, and diligent in the Wisdom of the Lord God, with
which and in which ye may be kept and preserved to his Glory, and be a good
Savor to him, and in the Hearts of all People. (That to the Lord ye may be a
Blessing in your Generation, and a peculiar People in Tenderness, and full of
that Faith, which overcomes the World, and all things in it; through which ye
may come all up into the Unity of the Spirit, which is the Bond of Peace.

AND all Friends, Live in the Power of the Lord God, Wise Part, which will
judge Truth to be Simple, The Wise Part.
and come to despise it; and cry up their own Words of Wisdom in its place.

G. F.

FRiends,
Epist. 181.
Live in the unchangable Power of God, which will keep you in Righteousness and
Truth, and Love and Unity, and Dominion over all the unclean Spirits, The
Supreme Power.
and rough Ways and Mountains within and without; that the Power of the Lord
God may be Supreme amongst you, and that ye may in the Wisdom of the Lord be
preserved. And none abuse it, but all patiently in the Power of the Lord wait,
that in it ye may be all kept Low, in Love and Unity with God, and one with
another; that in the Seed ye may be kept, which is Heir of the Power. Earthly
things.
And all be diligent in your Places serving the Lord, and that your Spirits may
not be plucked down with Earthly things, nor limited by them; but that in the
Power of the Lord God ye may act over them (the Handy-Works of God) out of the
Intanglements and Thraldom of them, and out of the vain Inventions of Men, but
keep in the Power of the Lord God over them; in which Power is the Mystery of
the Fellowship and the Dominion, and let every one's Eye behold it, and mind
it. For that is it, which will keep you out of the Changable things, and
present your Minds, Souls and Spirits to the Lord; and there the Seed comes up,
which is Heir of the Power, and of the Wisdom, which is pure from above, where
the City if known, that lets no Uncleanness in, and the Salt is known, that
savours all things: Therefore feel it in the Heart, which is more than in the
Head or Tongue; which many may strive for, but do not obtain the Power, nor the
Kingdom. Therefore all be Wise the Wisdom of God, The beginning of Wisdom.
and let every one's Eye be unto that Wisdom, which the departing from Sin and
Evil is the Beginning of; that with it ye may be ordered, and do, whatsoever ye
have to do, with it and by it: In that ye will feel his Presence and Blessing,
that ye may know the Seed Immortal to have the Dominion in you; that there ye
may come to know Christ to reign. And your Growth in the Seed is in the
Silence, The Growth in Silence.
where ye may all find a Feeding of the Bread of Life. And all Friends, keep in
the Wisdom of the Lord, that is pure and holy from above, by which Wisdom ye
may be preserved and kept, holy and pure, above that which is below, and out of
that which is below, the wise part, wherein is the Strife; that being kept down
by the Power of the Lord, the Seed comes up, which is Heir of the Power: And
there Innocence and Simplicity, and Nakedness of Heart and Spirit is lived in,
and Life is fed upon.

G. F.
And so, if any Friends have Friends (or Relations) beyond Sea, send them Books
or Papers, Books.
and be diligent to spread the Truth; and send Latin Books, or French Books, or
other Books to Leghorn, France, Poland, Italy, Norway, Low Countries, etc.



MY Dear Hearts,
Epist. 182.
Do your Business faithfully, and fear not the Amazement of Men, To Friends
beyond the Sear.
ye Sons and Daughters of Abraham. Trample upon all Deceit, and keep over all
that, in the Dominion of God's Power, Fear not Man.
above the World, answering that of God in all; and spare not any Deceit. Be ye
faithful, and ye will find and feel the Word, Cut down Deceit.
which is sharper, than any two-edged Sword, to cut down Deceit; and ye will
feel the Blessing of the Lord God with you. And if the World's Works lie like a
Wilderness, care not for it, and matter it not, but do the Work of the Lord
faithfully; and ye will feel it prosper, answering that of God in every one.
And so, God Almighty preserve you in his Power.

G. F.

FRiends,
Epist. 183.
Dwell in Patience, and in the Power, Life and Wisdom of God, and in Peace, and
Love and Unity one with another: And be subject in the Power, and Life and
Wisdom of God, to God and to one another; that in it ye may be as a pleasant
Field to the Lord God, As Libies and Flowers.
and as the Lillies, and the Flowers and the Buds feeling the pleasant Showers
and the Streams of Life from the Living God flowing upon you, and coming into
you, whereby the Presence and Blessing of the Lord God Almighty amongst you all
may be felt. And in that the Lord God Almighty preserve and keep you, that to
him ye may be a good Savor. And live in Peace: And the God of all Peace keep
you, that nothing may reign and rule amongst you, but the Life, and Power, and
Seed and Wisdom of God; that in him ye may be preserved, by which all things
were made and created. That ye may be all ordered to his Glory, and be a good
Savor in the Hearts of all People; in which ye do refresh others, and are
refreshed. So, dwell in the Fear of the Lord, which brings a Dread and Terror
upon all his Enemies, Esau's Mount.
that are in Esau's Mount; but your Peace comes from the Mountain of God: And
let your Joy and Peace be in the Lord.

G. F.

OH my Dear Friends and Brethren every where,
The Power of the Lord God, that is over all, live in, Epist. 184.
that in that ye may feel Unity and Fellowship, that in the Power of the Lord
God ye may all come to be Heirs of the Power of an Endless Life, through which
ye may inherit Eternity, and so to feel Life Eternal abiding in you. Now, The
Manslayer and Persecutor.
the Manslayer has not Eternal Life abiding in him, that is he that envies
his Brother; so all the Persecutors, that envy their Brethren, have not Eternal
Life abiding in them: Under this all the Persecutors about their Church and
vain Religion, false Worship, Faith and Ministry are. Therefore all of you,
feel this Eternal Life abiding in you, for he that has the Son of God, has
Life Eternal; and so, in this Eternal Life ye have Fellowship with God and his
Son, and with one another; and in this, the Law of Life, that is in Jesus
Christ, The Law of Life.
passes Sentence on the Law of Sin and Death in every Man and Woman, and
brings it to the Execution. Through which Law of Life Righteousness flows and
runs down, and also Justice and Truth; and by this Law of the Spirit of Life in
Christ Jesus ( Mark, in Christ Jesus) ye come to know the Lamb's Throne, and
the Throne of Iniquity thrown down, and all blasphemous Mouths stopped, and the
Chambers of Imagery thrown down, and the Household of God raised up, and the
Fruit less Trees thrown down, and the Plant of God raised up, The Plant of God.
which is of his own Planting, the Tree of Righteousness, whose Fruit is unto
Holiness, whose End is Everlasting Life. So mark, here is the Fruit of this
Tree, and the End of this Tree, and by this Spirit ye do distinguish Names and
Plantings, and Pluckings up; and God's Building ye will distinguish from Man's
Building; and Man's Plucking down, and man's Gathering together: Ye that are
gathered together in the Name of Jesus, can distinguish Men's Gathering, and
their Scattering. Oh! The Knowledge of Truth:
Therefore be Valiant for the Truth, which ye are come to the Knowledge of, and
worship God in that Truth, which the Devils is our of, and abode not in; this
makes you free from the Devil and his Works, that are out of the Truth: Here in
this Worship (in the Truth and in the Spirit) the living God, who is a Spirit,
the God of all Truth, he has his Glory and his Honor from his Spirit in every
Heart. And so, keep in the Spirit and Truth, and the Power of the Everlasting
God, who is from Everlasting to Everlasting, that ye may know him Lord of the
Earth and of the Heaven, and of the Heaven of Heavens, ruling and reigning,
whose Eye is over all his Works; that ye may glorify him in his Power and
Spirit, and serve him in the New Life, which will keep you over all Men's Fables
and Devices, Fables and Devices.
Whimsies and Imaginations, out of all Janglings and vain Dispates of Men of
corrupt Minds. And so, all to live in that, which is the same to day, as was
yesterday, Christ Jesus, the Power of God and the Seed of Life, and Word that
was in the Beginning; so, no new thing, but that which was and is to all
Eternity: Let your Fellowship be in that, and your Unity and Communion be in
that; for by the Spiritual Eye the Eternal Unity with the Eternal God is seen.
So, The Voice of God soakes the Earth and the Heavens.
Hear his Voice every where, that speaks from Heaven, whose Voice shakes the
Earth, and not the Earth only, but Heaven also. The Heaven signifies Joy; so,
all the false Joys, the lifted-up Joys, or exalted Joy, and Joy in vain Glory,
and Joy in the world, or any outward thing or Creature, or Men or Women, his
Voice, that speaks from Heaven, shakes the Earth and the Heavens, and this must
be shaken and removed, both the Heaven and the Earth, before that does appear,
that can never be shaken, the Noble, Royal Seed, Elect and Precious, which was
before the World began; being Heirs of him, come to inherit him, in him ye
shall know that which cannot be shaken. and there is the true JOy, the standing
Joy, in that which is from Everlasting to Everlasting, who is the Beginning and
Ending; here is not any lifted up, nor cast down. So I say, Hear his Voice, and
hearden not your Hearts; for through not hearing his Voice, ye harden your
Hearts, then ye provoke God to Wrath and sore Displeasure. Let him have your
Ear, that speaks from Heaven; that ye may come to observe his Counsel,
Teachings, Instructions and Directions. For all the Prophets, the holy Men of
God and the Apostles were Attentive and Obedient to this heavenly Voice, who
witnessed to the Truth, who had a Witness in Heaven also; and such declared
forth the glorious Truth, which they had from the Instruction of the Almighty.
As ye may read throughout the Scriptures, what glorious Expressions and weighty
Truths they declared, whose Ears were Attentive to him, that spoke from Heaven;
and how they declared against them, that stopped their Ears, and closed their
Eyes, and hardened their Hearts. For such, whose Ears are not Attentive to the
heavenly Voice, are Earthly; so, if the Earthly, and Sin and Evil have the Ear,
it will fill it with that which is bad, and harden the Heart, and choke the
good: Therefore the Lord must have the Ear, who is the Ruler of Heaven and
Earth. And as your Ears are attentive to the Lords's Voice, that is from
Heaven; Iniquity's Mouth is stopped in you, Iniquity's Mouth stopped.
the Throne of Iniquity is thrown down in you (that is, the wicked Spirit and
Power) wherein Iniquity sits, and the Chamber of Imagery is thrown down in you,
where Man's Thoughts and Imaginations are. But as the Ear is Attentive to the
Voice of him that speaks from Heaven, ye will come to the Throne of the Lamb,
who has the Victory and the Dominion; that all may live in the Everlasting
Power of God, that goes over all Deceit, which was before Deceit and Darkness
was. A Growth in the Power.
And always feel a Growing in the Power of the Lord God, that is Universal and
Everlasting, that ye may be all Heirs of the Power of the Endless Life, and
come to inherit it, and possess it, and sit down in the Possession of the same;
that every one's Lot may fall in the Land of the Living, where the Lord has
his Glory and his Honor for ever and ever! Oh the Glory of the Lord spreads it
self over all! and here as ye abide, ye have the Savor, and can taste your
Meat in the Power of the Lord God, feeding upon every Word, that proceeds out
of the Mouth of God, having your Ear open, and attentive to his Voice; in this
ye grow up in the Life, that is Eternal.

G. F.

ALL Friends, Epist. 185.
be Obedient to the Power of God, which is the higher Power, To Friends, to
know the Authority of the Seed.
and is above that which abode not in the Truth. So ye, that know the Power of
God, be obedient to it; for ye have Authority from the Power of God, which
comprehends all the Powers of Darkness, to answer the Witness of God in every
one; and to trample upon all the Power of Darkness; and its Authority. For ye,
that feel the Power, that comprehends the World, and all the Powers of
Darkness, keep in the Authority, in the Power of God. Mind not Words without
the Power, Mind not Words without the Power.
nor the pleasing of the Reason and Carnal Knowledge, Wisdom and Understanding
of Fancies and Thoughts of Men; but dwell in the Authority (the Power of God)
ye that know it; That over all ye may reign in the Seed, who fulfilled the Law
and the Prophets; who spoke with Authority, and speaks with Authority now, more
than the Scribes and Pharisees, the Writers of the Law and of the Prophets, and
the Speakers of them, who were Transgressors against the Life, that gave forth
the Words, which were written. And so, the Authority of the Scriber and
Pharisees, who wrote Moses and the Prophets, is as the Authority of the
professing Christians, who profess Christ and the Apostles Writings, but are
without the Life and from the Seed of God; these are one with them, who put
Christ to Death, and knew not the Authority of the Seed.

G. F.

FRiends, Epist. 186.
which have known and tasted: of the Power of the Mighty God of Heaven and
Earth, and of his Light and Life, be faithful in the Power, Light, Life and
Truth, To Friends in Barbados, to wait to witness the Immanuel.
to the spreading of the Truth abroad; with which ye may answer the Truth in
the inward parts in every one. And dwell in that which hind and chains, and
gives to see over the World; that Life, Wisdom and Power may reign among you,
that he turned to the Life, and believe in it, which come to receive the Light
of Life, Christ, the Power of God. Be saithful, and spread the Truth abroad,
and walk in the Wisdom of God, answering that of God in every one, and write,
speak and send Books abroad into the Countries, and Islands and Nations, or
main Land, as ye are moved; that the Sound of the Trumpet of the Lord's Host
may be heard in the Nations and Islands. Be valiant for the Truth.
And be faithful and valiant for the Truth of God upon the Earth, that is the
Truth, that the Devil is out of, and abode not in; in that dwell and live, in
Unity and Peace one with another. So, the God of Love, Life and Power, and
Wisdom be with you! And ye that are turned to the Light, and gathered into it,
Meet together, and keep your Meetings, Keep your Meeting.
that ye may feel and see the Life of God among you, and know that in one
another; for that keeps down and lays low all that which is out of the Kingdom.
So, know the Power of God, and keep your Peace therein; that ye may all grow up
in the Increase of God ( mark, in the Increase of God) and feel his Presence
among you. For where two or three are gathered together in my Name, says
Christ (that is, in the Power) I am there in the midst of them: In this
Meeting, in this Gathering Christ is felt in the midst. Who feels the Power of
Christ, feels Christ, for he is the Power of God, and the Immanuel with them;
but who go from God, in the Transgression, are in the first Adam, where Death
reigns and Darkness; and this is the State, that is Reprobated. But who are
turned to the Light, Christ Jesus, to the Immanuel, they know the
Interpretation thereof, God with us; who redeems out of Transgression and out
of Death, Immanuel, God with us:
Darkness and Sin, who being witnessed, the State of fallen Man, that was drove
from God, and the State of being brought to God again, is witnessed by Jesus
Christ, the Covenant of Light. In which Covenant, which is Eight, the Lord God
Almighty preserve you all!

Ye may Write, how things are with you in the Island.

G. F.

This is to go among Friends.
MY Dear Friends,
Epist. 187.
Dwell in the Love of God together, for that edifies you all, Love edifies.
and by that ye are built up; and who go from that, puck down with Enmity and
Discord, and Wrangling, and Quarreling and Disputing; and are puffed up with
high-lweling Words, and are large in their Worldly Wisdom and Earthly Knowledge
in a Show, to tread upon the simple; and are of the great Comprehension.
Therefore keep over the Spirit, for that will not stand to the End, although it
would be Lord; it is scorched, when the Heat of Persecution comes. Disputes and
Janglings.
And therefore stand Faithful: For that which runs into Janglings, and
Disputes, and Contentions and Questionings, is the Disobedient: That was the
Devil's work in the Beginning, which brought Eve out of her Habitation; and
that is the Work of his Servants in the Fall, to bring the Innocent out of
their Habitation, to question, reason and jangle with them, to bring them out
of their Habitation. They will say, They must not Meet together, such as are
gathered in the Name of Christ Jesus, that never fell, who is above Adam, that
sell: And thus the Devil would lay all wast, and make the World like a
Wilderness, and break down the Bounds of the righteous Gardens and Plantations,
and would break them down into his Wilderness, and lay them barren and wast.
And so, when they are gone fromt he Truth themselves, the Devil is got into
them, and would keep them from Meetings, Meetings.
to draw others into the same, who are gathered into the Name of Jesnes, and
are come to sit down in the heavenly Plate in Christ Jesus, and are found with
the Flock, that lie down at Noonday. And so, that fallen Spirit would bring
the Saints to for sake their Assemblies, and wouldmake them like a Wilderness;
if he cannot, he will throw Dirt upon them, and back-bite them, and prejudice
them, and slander them, and speak Evil of them, and strive to sow discord
amongst them, and preach up some outward things amongst them, to bring them
into an outward Fellowship, from the Immotal Power and Gospel-Fellowship, and
fill them with Earthly Wisdom and Knowledge, Carnal Policy.
and Understanding, and carnal Policy, with Quirks, Tricks, Turnings and
Windings to over-word and ensnare the simple, and to bring them into
Questioning. And so, this Spirit is to destroy, ruin and lay wast, and to rob
and beguile, and would destroy (if it were in its Power) the Saints Fellowship
and Worship, and if it were possible, to deceive the Elect. For sometimes it
will come in the show of Worship and fained Humility, and other times with
Esau's Tears; but all the strength of it is set, to lead the Innocent out of
his Habitation, and to destroy and devour him. And so, being adulterated from
the true Spirit, the true Light, and the Fellowship in it, Secret Evils.
it runs into all the secret Evils, inward Adultery, and outward Adultery,
Uncleanness and Fornication; and being in the Evil, Darkness and Uncleanness,
judges all like unto it self with its evil Thoughts, and casts out its Flood of
Evil-Speaking and Wickedness upon the righteous and just, the Saints of the
Most-High, whose Garments are clean and pure. And so, this Spirit will cry down
the Saints Fellowship in Spirit, and Worship in Spirit and Truth, and their
Fellowship in the Power, which was, before their Forms were, or the Devil
either; and when it cannot get them down, and break their Fellowship, to
forsake their Assembling together (which is contrary to the Apostles Doctrine,
and the Churches in the Primitive Times, before the Apostasy) and when they
see, they can neither break their Fellowship nor Worship, Forms of Worship.
then they say, Away with your Forms; and cry down Forms to such, as be in the
Power of Godliness. and that Spirit's Work, that does so, is to bring into such
Forms in Time, which are out of the Spirit, and Truth and Power of God, in
which the Saints have Fellowship and Refreshment; in which God is worshipped in
that which is above, and was before Time. And that contrary Spirit its Work is,
to bring into the many Invented Forms in the Fall, and sometimes runs out of
all right Form into Confusion, and out of all Orde of Life, in which the Saints
of the Most-high, that walk in the Spirit, are, in the Fellowship and Power of
Life, having the Order of Life amongst them. Keep your Habitation.
And therefore all Friends, Keep your Habitation every where in the Truth of
God, and let your Lights be shining, and your Lamps burning, and have Oil in
your Lamps, and Salt in your selves to savor withal, that ye may grow up into
Christ Jesus, by whom all things were made, that were made; that through him ye
may know all things. And so, Live in him, that destroys the Enmity; and in him
sit in Christ Jesus, in whom ye have Unity, Life, Peace and Salvation.

The Honor was given to him, that never changed, nor never fell, True Honor.
who is Christ Jesus, and ye in him are partakers of this Honor; and they that
change and fall, do not know this Honor, but are a Dishonor to him.

G. F.

FRiends, live in the Seed of God, that destroys the Devil, Epist. 188.
who is the Author and Cause of Wars and Strife, and brining of Men and People
into the Earth, where the War, Strife and Pride is; The Author of Wars.
here the outward Swordmen have not learned yet to beat their Swords and
Spears into Plough-shares and Pruning Hooks. Yet ye that are in that Seed, see
that ye Accuse no Man falsely, that has the Sword of Justice, The Sword of
Justice.
which is to keep the Peace, and is a Terror to the Evildoers, and to keep
down the Transgressors, and for the praise of them that do well; this is owned
in its place: But he that kills with the Sword, must perish with the Sword.
So, there was a Time the Jews were to fight with outward Weapons, with Sword
and Spear; Outward Weapons.
but there is a Time, when Nations shall not learn War any more, but shall come
to that, which shall take away the Occasion of Wars, which was in the
beginning, before Wars were. And Friends, take heed of blending your selves
with the outward Powers of the Earth.

ALL Friends, dwell in the Life, and Power and Seed of God, 2. To Friends, to
dwell in the seed, in which is their Safery.
in which ye may be kept in the Son of God's Kingdom, and preserved in his
Dominion out of all changable things; in that God's Blessing will be with you.

In the Seed of God is the stayed State, and in that is the Life and Peace with
God, and the Offering, that satisfies God; and that perfecteth for ever them
that are sanctified. The stayed State.
And the Seed bruises and destroys the Serpent's head, who is the Prince of the
Air, the Prince of Darkness, the Tempter and the Troubler; in which Seed is
Peace and Life enjoyed, and by the Wisdom of it to be ordered to God's Glory:
And there the Reign of Christ is known, who is come to reign and to rule.

G. F.

To Friends in New England and Virginia.
MY Dear Friends, Robert Hodson, William Robinson, Marmaduke Stevenson, Peter
Pearson, William Brend, William Leara, and the rest of Friends in New England
and Virginia,
Epist. 189.
Concerning Judging.
Be faithful to the Lord in the Truth of the Lord God, 8. Month 15.
nd in his Power and Wisdom be valiant for it upon the Earth, and spread it
abroad, and confound Deceit: And dwell in the Power of God, and stand in it,
which comprehends the whole World; that through it ye may answer the Witness of
God in every one, and be a Dread to Nations. And go on in Peace, and Love and
Unity one with another, and keep in the Wisdom of the Lord God; that ye may be
answerable to the Witness one another in the Sight of weak Friends, but dwell
in the Power of the Lord God, and that will keep that down in every particular,
which is to be judged; through which ye may judge the whole World, that lies in
Wickedness. Therefore dwell all (I warn you from the Lord God of Power, of
Life, of Heaven and Earth) dwell in his Power, and Wisdom and Life, that in
that ye may have Dominion over the World, and the Andersaries in it, and live
in it; through which ye will feel the Preciousness and Weight of Truth, The
Weight of Truth.
which now is going over all the World: and To all Nations of Mankind the
Everlasting Gospel, the Power of God, is to be preached, through which life and
Immortality shall come to Light; in which Power is the Fellowship. Therefore
this is the Word of the Lord God to you all, those that are convinced by the
Power of the Lord God, and the Light, let them dwell in it, in which they may
have Unity. For the the Lord has a Seed that ways, if ye in Patience all of
you wait, and not matter the Weather, the Storms, the Winds, the Hail, the
Rain, when ye are to sow the Seed, nor the rough Ground, The Husbandman.
that is to be tilled. For the Husbandman waits patiently, after the Seed is
sown; there is a Winter, before the Summer comes: And there must be a great
Work, before the Misty Heathen be cleared in their Understandings (that are so
naturally) and the dark Air be driven back, and the Prince of Life and Light be
witnessed. Dwell in the Life and in the Light; for the great Professors of
Spiritual Babylon, the Mother of Harlots, that are full of Craft, will be
brought down; and that must be witnessed, before ye know the bride made ready
for her Husband. So, live in Patience and in Peace, and in the weighty Wisdom
of God, and then ye will see the End of all frothy Spirits, that will not abide
the Trial. Therefore Friends, keep ye in the Power of the Lord God, and dwell
in Live one with another, and in the pure Power and Life of Truth, and the Seed
of God, which ye first kept in; that ye may be kept over all light and airy
Spirits, that will be up and down like a Tempest, Comers and Goers to the Seed;
that ye may stand in the Seed, which is Everlasting. Airy Spirits.
In that the Lord preserve you.

Ye may write over, how things are there; for Truth is well here, and spreads
abroad in the World in other Nations, and is of a good Report.

G. F.
Reading, the 15th of the 8th Month, 1659.
THE Lord is King over all the Earth, Power in Heaven and in the Earth; and he
is King of Kings and Lord of Lords, let him rule and reign in all your Hearts
by Faith, and exalt him in the Land, and in your Assemblies.

G. F.

OH Friends, have an Esteem of Truth and God's Glory!
Epist. 192.
Keep down all Inordinate Affections, Concerning Marrying with the world, and
bad Marriages.
and have an Esteem of Truth above your Lusts and Earthly things, worldly
Riches and Goods, and mind the Example of the Old World, When the Sons of God
saw, the Daughters of Men were fair, they took unto them Wives of all that they
liked; and so made no Distinction between the Righteous and the Wicked. Which
grieved the Lord God, that he said, His Spirit should not always strive with
Man; And therefore he shortened his Days to an Hundred and twenty Years, which
before were many Hundred Years. Enoch-Methuselah and Lamech.
Though Enoch, Methuselah and Lamech, and the holy Men of God their Marriages
God did not Judge; but when the Sons of those holy Men, which were called the
Sons of God, went to the World for Wives, they slew the Spiritual Birth in
them, and quenched the Holy Spirit of God in them, and corrupted the Earth, and
filled it with Cruelty, and followed the Imaginations of their own Hearts Lasts
continually; insomuch that they grieved the Lord, and he repented, that he made
Man. For he saw, All Flesh had corrupted his Way upon the Earth, saving Noah, a
Just Man, with his Family, who walked with God, Noah, a Just Man.
and did not join with the Wickedness of the World: Therefore God destroyed the
Old World; The Old World.
and the Beginning thereof was these bad Marriages, as Jude and Peter says,
They followed strange Flesh, by which they came to be corrupted; and therefore
God sent a Flood, and destroyed the Old World with its ungodly Deeds. And there
is your Example, that Marry with the World. Genesis 6.

And does not the Lord say to the Chidren of Israel, Forbidden Marriages.
Thou shall not give thy Sons nor thy Daughters in Marriage with the Heathen?
And were not such as did so, reproved by the Lord and his Prophets? As ye may
see through the Scriptures. And does not the Apostle say, Be ye not unequally
yoked together with Unbelievers; for what Fellowship has Light with Darkness,
or Christ with Belial, or a Believer with an Infidel? For how many Thousands of
the Jews did the Lord destroy, which went and married with other Nations, and
pleaded Liberty? And did not Phineas run one through, and his Heathenish Woman?
Phineas.
And so, must not all such be run through with the Sword of the Spirit of God?
And the Lord said, Numb. 25.7, 8.
Phineas has turned mine Anger away from the Children of Israel, when the Lord
had destroyed Twenty four Thousand of them. And does not the World call such
Bastard and Hypocrite Quakers, and not faithful, that go to the World for a
Wife, and to the Priests to be Married? Priest's Marriages.
Oh! That ye should profess Truth, and go from its Power and Life, and so
corrupt your selves, and to have no more Esteem of your Bodies, which God has
so honored, and made them Vessels of his Mercy, to put his Mercy into! And
have no more Esteem of God, his Truth nor his People, but to Esteem your
Affections and Lusts above them all, and to make your selves a Talk and a
Laughing Stock, by going into that, for which ye are judged of God, and of all
his People, and of that of God in your own Consciences also! Burying-places.
And do not Friends buy Burying-places, because they cannot give their dead
Bodies to the World, no more than Abraham could? And ye that profess your
selves to be quickened by Christ, and made alive by him, to give your Bodies to
them, that are dead in Sins and Trespasses? Oh, ye makde your selves ridiculous
both to God's People and the World, and come under the Judgment of both, and of
God and the Scriptures, to be such, as follow strange Flesh, and corrupt the
Earth, like the Old World! Ye bring Burdens upon the Just: But God will
shorten your Days, as he did the Old World's, except ye repent; as ye may read,
Genesis 6. And therefore mind God's Ordinance, and then ye will know God's Joining
by his Spirit and by his Power. And be not corrupted with them, that follow
strange Flesh, and corrupt themselves, that creep among you, and would be
called by you Name, Bastard-Quakers.
which the Priests and the World call Bastard-Quakers. And therefore keep the
Gospel Order, which is the Power of God (before the Devil was) and the
Government of Christ Jesus, which destroys the Devil and all his Works.

G. F.

ALL Friends every where, that are Convinced with Truth, and profess it, and
own it,
About 1660. Epist. 191.
Keep to the Single Language, the good Spirit, the Light of Christ Jesus leads
to it; and that which goes from that, The Single Language.
which does not live in it, is to be judged: And then, if Man or Woman seek to
get Gain, by speaking the improper, untrue Language, and flattering Language of
the World, which is in Confusion, the Lord may take that Gain away from them.
For Plural and Singular was the Language of God, and Christ and all good Men,
and of the Prophets and Apostles; Singular and Plural.
but the Confused World, that lies in Confusion, cannot endure it, who live not
in the Fear of God, neither follow the Example of good Men, but are in the
double Tongue, quenching the Spirit, and hating the Light of Christ Jesus,
which is Single. And so al Friends, train up your Children in the same Singular
and Plural Language; all Masters, Mistresses and Dames, or whatsoever ye are
called, Friends Children.
that do take Friends Children, that are in the Singular and Plural Language,
it is not fit for you to bring them out of it, neither to Force nor Command
them otherwise, to please your Customers, nor to please Men; for if they should
pay Two or Three for One, that would displease you, who would have them to
speak Two or Three, when they should speak Singular, Thee and Thou to One. And
so, do not lose that Testimony, which slays the World's Honor, and do not go
into the Custom of the World's Fashions or Commands, nor force others from
that, which is the Language of God, and Christ, and all good Men and Women,
into that which is Contrary to God and Christ, and all good Men and Women; for
there must be, 1660
and always was a Distinction betwixt One and Many. For if in your Practice ye
should not do it, but let one have many things, when he should have but one
thing, ye would think to suffer Wrong, and your Servants to do that which were
not Righteous; and so, do not they speak that which is not Righteous, when they
say Many for One, and Nonsense and Confusion? And therefore keep to the
proper, sound, Single Language. For indeed, I did hear some, Apprentices and
Servants.
that were troubled at their Apprentces and Servants, for saying Thee and Thou
to one, and because they would not say the word You; and such, who have known
the Language from their Childhood. And therefore that Selfish, Man-pleasing and
Daubing Spirit ust be put down with the Spirit, and condemned with the Light,
else ye will presently be ridiculous to the World, and to all Men, and they
will say, Ye are not so, as ye were in he Beginning; and so follows the Customs
of the World, and not the Practice of Christ, and all good Men. And so, this is
(written) that all may Fear the Lord; and they who have done so, may do so no
more, and that others may be warned, and not to go into such things: But mind
the Truth and Spirit of God, the Light of Christ Jesus, that none of the
Freeborn may lose the true Language, and speak half the World's Language, and
half of the People of God. For to say to Friends, Thee and Thou, and to the
World You, that is Hypocrisy: Hypocyifie.
and therefore for all Hypocrites, and Hypocrifie and Dissembling to be kept
under Judgment, for that is a Dissembling with the Witness of God. For ye see,
the Outward Jews, when they went from the Law of God, in process of time spoke
half Hebrew, and half Ashdod. Half Hebrew half Ashdod.
And therefore to prevent all Dissembling and Hypocrifie, keep to the Spirit of
God and Light of Christ Jesus, that the Jews inward may not have a Mixed
Lanugage, no more than the Jews outward, to speak half the confused Language of
the World, and half the true Language. Nor to the World speak confusedly, to
speak the Plural for the Singular, and when ye are among the World, speak as
the World does; and when ye are amongst Friends, speak as they do: This Spirit
is not from the Spirit of God, but is Hypocrifie and for Judgment. And so, let
the Truth have its Passage in all things, and speak True Words, and not False,
with the Light ye will see; who act contrary to it, will be condemned by it. So
let Friends be distinct from all the World in their Language, in their Ways, in
Love, and in their Conversations; for in that ye are over the World, and Judge
them by Scripture, Scriptures, Grammar and Accidence.
by Grammar and Accidence, and all other Teaching-Books, for ye have them all
on your side to hammer them down withal, who follow neither Scriptures, Grammar
nor Accidence, nor their own Teaching-Books, and are Judged by them all, and
the Spirit of God also, which leads to one, and to divide and distinguish
Singular from Plural, many things from one thing, and One from Two and Three;
and many Men and Women from One, many Ways from One, many Churches from One,
many Fellowships from One, and the many Words from One, and the many Gods from
One, and the True Christ from the many Antichrists and false. All this is
distinguished and known by the One Spirit, the Light and Power of Christ Jesus,
which gives an Understanding.

Let this be sent abroad, that all may read it over.

G. F.

FRiends,
Fear of the Lord God live, departing from Sin and Evil, Epist. 192.
as it appears in your own particulars, and therein ye will receive the Wisdom
of God, by which all things were made and created; A General Etistle to
Friends, concerning diverse Particulars.
with which Wisdom they may be ordered to the Glory of God, that created all
things: and with that Wisdom use all things, and order all, that are under your
Hands and Dominion, to the Glory of him that created them. And in this ye will
feel the Lord God going in and out amongst you (and to be with you) and his
Blessing and Presence with you (in your Actings) and he over all giving you
Dominion in his Wisdom, Power and Life; that with that ye may come to answer
that of God in every one, with which your Minds should be guided up to God: And
in that ye will be a good Savor to God, and in the Hearts of all People, that
live up to the Witness, and are led by the Witness of God up to God. And such
as go from it, upon them the Law of God is to be added, and they by it to be
stopped and limited; The Law of God.
which Law is a Praise to them that do well, who come from under the Occasion
of the Law. And in this that Eye is opened, which beholds God and his Law,
which answers that of God in every one; which when Men go from that of God in
themselves, the Law takes hold upon them. Which when Adam went from, he
transgressed the Law of God, when he went from the Life and Image of God within
him; and then the Law came upon him, which was not made for the Righteous, but
for Sinners and Transgressors. And in this stands the Covenant of Works, the
Law of Works, that brings under and yokes the Man down; which Christ the
Covenant of God, and of Life, and of Peace, redeems Men from under this Law;
and the Law of the Spirit of Life makes free from the Law of Sin and Death. The
Law of Life.
So Christ, the Covenant of God being felt, the Law of Life is come and
witneffed within Man again; and to such, they that are in the Wisdom of God,
will be a Praise, and your Moderation will increase, your Temperance will
increase, your Knowledge of God and his Son Jesus Christ will increase, whom to
know, is Eternal Life; and this will not be lacking. And so, as ye are kept in
the Wisdom of God, and in his Life and Power, ye will see the Law, that goes
over all Transgressors, which was added, because of Transgression: Which Life
lets you see to the Higher Power, The Higher Power.
which was, before any Transgression was; because of which the Law was added
upon Man, when he went from that of God in himself. Which (as I said before)
every true Christian (which is a Christian indeed) witnesses the Law of Life
in Christ, which sets free from the Law of Sin and Death; and such come to see
and feel him, who was, before any Transgression was. And so, as to the Lord God
ye are kept faithful in your Generation, and in his Fear are preserved in
Humility and Mercy, doing good and justly, the Jaws of the Wicked will be
broken, and ye will feel the Lord's Blessing upon you, and come to know the
Seed in your selves, which inherits, which is the Heir of the Promise of the
World without End. And the Power of an endless Life you will feel in Christ, the
Seed, in whom the Words of the Prophets and Apostles are fulfilled; and therein
is Unity and Love, Righteousness and Peace, even in him, who bruifeth the
Serpent's Head, that feeds upon Dust. Here there is nothing fed upon, but Life,
yea, the Life, which was with the Father, before the World began, which is
Christ Jesus: And who are in this, are in the thing the Scripture testifies of.
Christendom on heaps.
And this has been wanting in Christendom: They have had the Words of the
Prophets, Christ and the Apostles, and been on Heaps about them, not being in
the Seed, Christ, who is the End and Substance of them; who is the Light and
Life, Righteousness, Wisdom and Truth, which makes free from the Adversary, who
is the Cause of Strife.

From a Lover of your Souls Eternal Good, and of your Establishment in
Righteousness and Peace, in this Day of the Lamb's Power; Glory to the Highest
for ever!

G. F.

DEar William,
Thou have a fine Compassin Holland and Germany, Epist. 193.
and under the Prince of Palatin's Government: To William Ames.
And there is a Seed in Poland, that desires Friends. So in the Seed be
faithful, which is Immortal, and is the Heir of the World, where there is no
End. And so, in that be faithful, and spread the Truth over that part of the
World: For the Lord has a Vine and a Mountain to be set up that a-ways, and a
Standard and Ensign held out to other Nations. So, in the Power of the Lord
God, and his Wisdom and Seed, the Lord God Almighty preserve thee!

G. F.

DEar Friends, who have found the better part, Epist. 194.
and chosen the better thing, the one thing, which lasts for ever, which is
the Ground of all true Rejoicing and Joy, in whom ye have all Riches and Life,
and the Blessings, and the Immortal Power to be your Crown and Covering. A time
of Shearing.
And it may be, there will be a Time of Shearing and Clipping; but the Earth is
the Lord's, and the Fullness thereof. So, mind him to be your Portion, and the
Seed Christ your All, and your Life; and fear not loosing the Fleece, for it
will grow again. And keep your Meetings in the Name of him that never fell,
which is above all the Meetings of Adam's Sons and Daughters in the Fall. The
Fellowship in the Gospet.
And keep in the Fellowship in the Gospel, which is the Power of God, which
was, before the Devil was; and this Fellowship is above all the National
Fellowships in the Fall of Adam. And keep in the Worship of the Father in the
Spirit and in the Truth, which the Devil is out of, and in that ye will live in
the Truth and Spirit in your selves, and walk in Unity in the same; and then ye
are over all the Will-worships in the Fall of Adam, where they are in the
Strife about them. And who are come to the Church in God, do see above all the
Churches of Adam in the Fall, drove from God. Egyptians and Babylonians.
And as the outward Jew suffered by the outward Egyptians and Babylonians, and
they persecuted them, and killed their Children; so the spiritual Egyptians and
Mystery Babylon persecute and would kill the Jews in Spirit, that worship God
in the Spirit, whose Praise is of God, and not of Man, and such have none from
fallen Men, but by them are persecuted. But all such go, as dumb before their
Shearers; for he that gave his Back and his Cheek to the Smiters, overcame and
reigns, and has the Victory and the Honor, who is Christ, the Amen, the first
and last, the Top-and Cornerstone; in him sit down in Life, and Peace and
Rest. So no more, but my Love in the Everlasting Seed, the second Adam, that
never fell nor changed, whose Love is above all the Love in Adam's House in the
Fall.

G. F.

FRiends, Epist. 195.
all that are moved of the Lord by his Power, Light and Life, to go into other
Nations, as Messengers of his Covenant of Light, to preach the Gospel,
according to that, which shows the Secrets of every Man's heart, wherein
Nations are brought into Covenant with God, and redeemed out of Tongues, and
People and Kindreds: Keep your Feet upon the Top of the Mountains, and sound
deep to the Witness of God in every Man; then will your Feet be Beautiful, that
publish Peace, Liberty to Captives.
and to the Captives proclaim Liberty, with your Feet upon the Mountains
publishing Peace, binding up the Brokenhearted; having Oil of Gladness for them
that mourn. And this is the Word of the Lord God to you, keep ye a-top of the
Heads of all the Mountains of Sin and Opposition, in Innocence, Meekness and
true Humility in the Fear of God; that in his Dread and Wisdom ye may all be
kept, Dwell in the Light.
and in the Fear of the Lord stayed. And dwell in the Light of Christ, that
does Enlighten every Man, that comes into the World, that all through him might
believe; and bring all to believe in the Light, to give them the Knowledge of
the Glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ, from whom the Light comes, that
they are all enlightened with; and that they may come into the Covenant of Light
with God, and his People. And so, dwell in the Power of the Lord God, that ye
may comprehend the World, and see over it: all And keep ye over all the unclean
Spirits, and Execute true Judgment, answering to that of God in every Man; and
here is the Saints Honor. And this is the Word of the Lord God to you,
Consultings.
Enter not into consultings with the wrong Nature, lest ye Consult with the
Adversary, whose Head must be bruised; and lest in the mean time, that blind
your Eye, and raise up a light Spirit in you, and take you Captive. But dwell
in the Power, Dread and Fear of the Lord God, that ye may answer that of God in
every Man, and stop the Mouth of that which Opposes; that ye may blind the Eye,
that will not see the Light, and the Ear stop, that will not hear it, for that
must be judged. For that is it, that keeps all from Conversion, and that is the
Seed of the Serpent, which must be bruised with the Seed of the Woman, yea, the
Head of it: And keep a-top of the Head of it, that ye may answer that of God in
every Man; and be kept a-top of the contrary, and tread it under feet. And so,
the Lord God Almighty keep you in his Power and Wisdom, Bind the Unruly.
and by it bind the unruly; and when ye have bound them, then ye may speak to
them, and by it to fetter them; then ye may catch them, when ye will, when they
are fettered. And get the Yoke upon the wild Heifer; then will ye save your
selves from a Push, The wild Heifer.
and bring them down, and order them with the Power, and reach to the Witness.
And see, that ye keep the Bit in the wild Horses Mouth, The wild Horse.
whereby his Head may be held down: And howsoever, see that he be bridled, then
with the Power he will be ordered; though he Snuffs and Snorts, the Bridle
being kept in his Mouth, he is held down by it: Though he cries, Aha, aha; that
is above the Witness. And when this is done, being kept in the Power, ye will
know him, that Rides meekly upon the Foal of the Ass (the Colt, the Foal of the
Ass) to Jerusalem, the highest place of Worship; who brings the Prisoner out of
the Pit, where there is no Water. Christ, The Foal of the Ass.
the same to day, as yesterday, and for ever. And the Lamb gets the Victory, he
that sits Meekly upon the Colt, the Foal of the Ass, He it is, that gets the
Victory, he by whom the World was made, who is not of the World, that treads
upon the Highest Worship in the World. Lay Hands upon no Man suddenly, I warn
and charge you all in the Presence of the Living God, but touch the Witness of
God in every one.

G. F.

DEar Friends in Jamaica, and else where, Epist. 195.
who know the Truth of God, and have been Sufferers for the same, All live in
it, Live in the Truth.
which the Devil is out of; that ye may all be preserved in Peace and Freedom.
For Truth brings to the Noble Mind, Spirit and Nature, and Seed, which never
will bend to Sin and Unrighteousness, nor Ungodliness whatsoever, nor to the
Author of it. And therefore all walk in the Truth, that ye may all come to
honor the Lord God in your Lives and Conversations, in your Words and
Dealings, Just Dealings.
doing Truly, Justly and Righteously unto all People; that God may be glorified
amongst you. And that ye may come to be as Lights to the World, and the
Countries about you, so that by your Light they may come to walk out of their
dark, unrighteous, ungodly and corrupt Ways, which the Corrupt People walk in;
which the holy and the sanctified Ones are of a more Noble Nature and Seed,
than to tread in those Paths. And therefore all mind that, in which ye may
honor God, and his holy Name, into which ye are called; that ye may answer the
Lord God for all his tender Mercies and great Riches, that he has plentifully
manifested and enriched you withal. The Love of God.
That the Love of God may fill your Hearts, which has abundantly been shed in
you; that so it may abound one toward another, and to all the Creatures of
God, for their Good; that they may come to the Way of Life and Peace, and that
they seeing your Good Works, may Glorify your Father, which is in Heaven. And
so, let Truth, Righteousness, Holiness, Pureness and Justness be your Jewels,
and in your Eyes esteemed above all; for Unrighteousness, Unholiness and
Ungodliness is but Dross, and is not of God nor Christ. And therefore Live in
the Truth, which the Devil is out of, and in the Life, which was, before Death
and the Devil, the Power of it was; and in the Light, which was, before
Darkness was, and the Devil, the Prince of it; and in this ye will have
Fellowship with God, with Christ, and one with anothr. And so no more, but my
Love. Things here are well, and Meetings are quiet and large in this Nation,
and this part of the World. Farewell.

Ye may Write unto us, and let us know how things are with you.

G. F.

DEar Friends, in the Power of the Lord dwell, Epist. 197.
which will keep you all in Unity, dwelling in it; and all be bold in that,
threshing down all Deceit, and wait to have all your Minds guided with that
which is Eternal, up to God, who is Eternal. And walk wisely in the Wisdom of
God (I Charge you in the presence of the living God) and take heed of acting in
your own Wills, Self-Will judged.
contrary to that which is pure of God in you. And know the Power and Life of
God in one another, which gave forth the Scriptures, which was, before the
Scripture was; which Life the Saints had Unity in, one with another. So, in the
Life God Almighty preserve you! And Meet together every where (I Charge you in
the Presence of the Lord) and wait together upon God, to have your Minds guided
by that which is of God, up to him, Unrighteousness.
with thta which is pure, which will judge all Unrighteousness (which must
never enter into the Kingdom of God) and with the Eternal Spirit of God, and in
his Power ye may be kept from all Fancies in your own Wills. So God Almighty be
among you, to do his Will in his Love.

G. F.

DEar Friends;
Epist. 198.
Keep over all that, which tends to Strife, in the Seed Christ, in which is
Peace and Life; for that which tends to Strife, Feigned Flattery.
and yet is in a fained Flattery, will corrupt you. And therefore live in that,
which is Pure and Steadfast, and is not Changable; and in that know one another.
And lay hands on no Man suddenly; for that which is fickle and changable, will
bring People into an unsettled State, and bring them out of their own
Conditions, and bring into a Questioning State. And therefore keep in the Seed,
and Light and Power of Christ, in which ye may walk safely, and not give away
your Power; but dwell in it, in Love, Unity and Peace one with another. And in
it keep your Meetings, and be quiet; and live, and dwell in the Power of Truth
over all the Unruly Spirits.

And be faithful, that the Seed, Christ Jesus may reign in you, and among you.
For the Truth is over all, and reigns: And so, be Valiant for it upon the Earth.

Lancaster Prison, the 2d of the 5th Month, 1660. G. F.

1. About 1661.
FRiends, The matter concerning not putting off the Hat in Prayer, and when
they give Thanks to God, Epist. 199.
which has been said by some, it is Heathenish and Romish, and set up in the
time of Darkness and Ignorance, Concerning the Hat.
and in the Curse, and in the Fall, and Cursed. Then they, and ye, who have put
off your Hats, when ye have Prayed, and given Thanks to God, must be wrong,
according to their Judgment (which is false) For who have known the Power of
God, and the Motions of it, which Power was, before Hats and Coverings were,
are out of this Judgment. For there was a Sect of People amongst the
Corinthians, that were jangling about Meats, Drinks, Days, Marriages; and
whether they should pray covered, and whether the Woman should pray and
prophecy uncovered? There was such a Strife, before the Papists got up. And
therefore the Apostle set up a Comeliness amongst the Churches, and says, It was
a Dishonor for a Woman to Pray or Prophecy with her Head uncovered: And also,
a Dishonor for a Man to Pray or Prophecy with his Head covered.

Now say they, who keep the Hat on, when they Pray; This Covering of the Woman
is the Spirit and Power (which is her Covering, and not the Hat) then the
Spirit and Power must be Covered, when she Prays and Prophesies. And how can
she Pray and Prophecy, when the Spirit and Power is Covered? For that is her
Covering, and her Head (say they) And this must be uncovered in the Man, when
he Prays and Prophesies. So, showing hereby a Contradiction in the Male and
Female; Spirit and Power must be covered in the one, and uncovered in the other.

2. They say, Christ is the Head of the Woman (spoken of in the Corinthians)
and her Head must be covered, when she prays and prophesies; and is it not
meant of an outward Hat? Then Christ (which is the Head) he must be covered in
the Woman, when she prays and prophesies; and when a Man prays and prophesies,
his Head must be uncovered: This also shows a Contradiction. For Prophecy is in
the Spirit, and Praying is in the Spirit, and by Prophecy they see Christ. And
if Christ be covered, then they must consider it, by what the Woman covers him,
and whether or nay she can prophecy when he is covered? And so it is that
Mind, which runs into outward things, that stumbles; and ever was, and ever
will be so.

And this Mind and Spirit, which has given this Judgment so upon Friends, and
amongst Friends, not only in a Paper to be spread up and down, but also in
Disputes and Jangligns about it; in which is such a Judgment contrary to Truth,
and the Apostles comely Order and Practice, which was set up amongs them. This
Judgment, has not only judged us, but also the Apostle: They may as well say,
He set up a Form in the Curse, Ignorance, Heathenish and Romish; who calls it,
a comely thing for a Man to pray uncovered, if not, Praying and Prophesying.
he dishonours his Head; and a Comely thing for a Woman to pray or prophecy
with her Head covered: So there was a Comeliness and an Honor in it. We never
use to preach up such things, who are come to the Power of God, before
Coverings or Hats were. And many would not have believed, that ever such things
would have come forth amongst us; but now they see our Comely Order and
Practice is likened to a Heathenish and Romish Order, and cursed. Some such the
Apostle had to do withal, when he set up his comely Order, before the Romish
Way was.

Therefore are we necessitated to speak a little to such things, that Friends
may keep in the Power of God, which was, before Hats and Coverings were. For
when we see People run into such things, and make a Sect of it, and cry, They
have Attained to a greater Glory than before; they run into such outward
things, which the Hat is; and if they have Attained to that, they have but
Attained to that, which is since Adam fell. For they that have attained to that
State, which Adam was in before the Fall, it is without Hats or Coverings. And
they that are come to Christ (and abide in him) are in a State beyond Adam,
before he fell, The State beyond Adam.
far before outward Coverings were; for Christ was with the Father, before the
World began, before Adam was made. And when the Apostle spoke to the
Corinthians, how that he would have them to know, that God was the Head of
Christ, and Christ was the Head of the Man, and the Man was the Head of the
Woman; and the Woman was made for the Man, and not the Man for the Woman; and
he is the Image and Glory of God, and she is the Glory of the Man. This the
Apostle spoke to the Corinthians, who were not come to the State of Adam and
Eve, before they fell; amongst whom there was a Sect about the Man being
covered, and the Woman uncovered. Amongst whom he sets up a Comely Order and
Practice, and lets them see, how they should pray, prophecy and practice. So
he meant there of outward things, when he speaks of a Man uncovered, and a
Woman covered; or else he should be shaven and shorn. Now these (as I said
before) were not come to the state of Adam and Eve before the Fall; for who are
come there, are come to that which was before Coverings were: This was a comely
and decent thing, and of good report amongst the Primitive Christians.

Therefore all Friends, live in the Power of God, which ye first received, the
Power, which was before the Fall was, in that is the Fellowship, and leads to
both Order, Comeliness and Decency. For all the Sects about Meats, Drinks and
Days, are gotten up among the Sons and Daughters of Adam, that are gone from
the Power of God, and his Image, Righteousness, and True Holiness, which were
before Coverings were: And others, who are fallen from that into such outward
things, there they are jangling about them. And therefore keep over all such
things in the Power of God, which was before outward things were; in that have
ye perfect Fellowship and Unity, for there is your Profit. For they that have a
Fellowship in keeping on their Hats, and observing of Meats, those outward
things lead them from the Power, and so to no Profit, but into Strife and
Jangling, and vain Disputes. Therefore the Power of God all keep in: The Power
of God was before Strife was; and in that is the perfect and standing
Fellowship, when all other Fellowships shall have an end, which were set up
since Adam's Fall. And so Farewell! My Love is to you all in the Everlasting
Seed of God.

The Church of the Romans fell away by running into outward things, The Church
of the Romans.
from the Power and Life; also the Corinthians, Galatians, and others of them;
and also the Seven Churches of Asia, by running into outward things; and what
the outward things were, they ran into ye may read: And how the Apostle
reproved them, and what all are gone into, since they lost the Power of God,
and the Unity in the Spirit. And therefore all Dear Friends, keep in the Power
of God over all outward things, which was before they were; and in that Power
is the standing Unity.

G. F.

The Line of Righteousness and Justice stretched forth over all Merchants, etc.
And an Exhortation unto all Friends and People whatsoever, who are Merchants,
Tradesmen, Husbandmen, or Seamen, who deal in Merchandise, trade in Buying
and Selling by Sea or Land, or deal in Husbandry,
That ye all do that which is Just, Equal and Righteous in the sight of God and
Man, one to another, and to all Men: And that ye use Just Weights and Just
Measures, and speak and do that which is True, Just and Right in all things:
That so your Conversations, Lives, Practices and Tongues may preach to all
People, and answer the Good Just and Righteous Principles of God in them all.
In which ye may be serviceable unto God, and to the Creation in your
Generation, and a blessing both to God and Man.
ALL Friends every where,
Epist. 210.
Live in the Seed of God, which is the Righteousness at self, and inherits the
Wisdom, and is the Wisdom it self; The Wisdom of God.
with which Wisdom ye may order, rule and govern all things, which are under
your Hands (which God has given you) to his Glory: Govern and order with his
Wisdom all the Creatures, that ye have under you, and all Exchangings,
Merchandising, Husbandry. Do what ye do, in the Wisdom of God, and with it,
which is pure from above, and gentle, and easy to be entreated: With this
Wisdom (which is not earthly, sensual, nor devilish) you do good unto all, and
hurt no one, nor your selves; for it is pure, and preserves pure.

So, this is the Word of the Lord God to you all; Power of God over all the
unrighteous World; which Power of God was before it was: In which Power of God
ye will be preserved in Justice, in Truth, in equal Balance, and Weights and
Measures, in the Truth, The Equal Balance.
Uprightness and Honesty to all People. So all here in this are serviceable to
God in their Generation, and to the Creation, and to God are a Blessing. Do
rightly, that is the Word of the Lord God to you all, whether ye be Tradesmen,
of what Calling, or Profession, or Sort soever, or Husbandmen: Do rightly,
justly, truly, holily, equally to all People in all things; and that is
according to that of God in every Man, and the Witness of God, and the Wisdom
of God, and the Life of God in your selves; and there ye are serviceable in
your Generation, laboring in the thing that is good, which does not spoil, nor
destroy, nor waste the Creation upon the Lusts.

And all Merchants whatsoever, Sea men, Sea or Land; This is the Word of the
Lord God to you all: Do justly, speak truly to all People whatsoever: A Terror
to the Vnjusts
Then are ye a Dread and a Terror to the Unjust: Wrong no Man, overreach no
Man (if it may be never so (...) your Advantage) but be plain, righteous and
holy; in this are ye serviceable to your own Nation and others, by your Change
and Excharging of things and Merchandise, and to the Lord God ye come to be a
blessing in the Creation and Generation. Live in the Life of Truth, and let the
Truth speak in all things, and Righteousness; and let Justice be acted and
Holiness in all things, without any Guile, Fraud or Deceit; so, that is
well-pleasing to God and Men, and according to that of God in every one. And
this shows forth the Fruits of Believers, that are passed from Death to Life;
from Death, which came by Sin, the Original of which is the Devil. So being
come from Death to Life, which goes over him; over him, I say, who is the
Author of all Unrighteousness. Now, in the Truth and Righteousness ye will all
have Peace, Favor and the Blessing of the Lord in all things: And that keeps
out the covetous Mind, and covetous Desires; The Covetous Mind.
the Power and Life of God, that goes over the Power of Death, which brought
the Sin: That which keeps over this, has the Blessing and Increase of the
heavenly Riches; and that shall not want the Creatures, nor any good thing from
them the Lord will not withhold. So, be careful to do good in all things to all
People whatsoever: In the Fear of God serve him, and be diligent, and not
stubborn in any thing, but pliable in the Power of God, that keeps you over all
the Powers of Unrighteousness; acting so in that, that ye may be a good Savor
in all Nations Islands and Places where ye come, in the Hearts of all People,
doing truly and plainly, uprightly, faithfully, justly and honestly, according
to the Light of Christ Jesus in every Man; that ye may witness to all: Then
will your Words, Lives and Conversations preach and manifest, that ye serve God
in the New Life; and that ye have put off the old Man and his Deeds, which are
unrighteous; and that ye have put on the New Man, which is renewed after God in
Righteousness and Holiness, according to his Image.

Loath Deceit and all Unrighteousness, Hard-heartedness, Wronging, Cozening,
Cheating or Unjust Dealing; Righteous Life and Power of God, Unjust Dealing.
and Wisdom (that presses all the other down) and to answer the good and just
Principle in all People; and that will win People to deal with you, Doing Truth
to all, without respect to Persons; to High or Low whatsoever, Young or Old,
Rich or Poor: And so here you Lives and Words will preach wherever ye come.

All Husbandmen and Dealers about Husbandry whatsoever, Do rightly.
to you all this is the Word of the Lord God; Do rightly, holily, justly,
honestly, plainly and truly to all Men and People, whomsoever ye have to deal
withal; wrong not any in any case, though it be never so much to your
advantage: Deny your selves, and live in the Cross of Christ, the Power of God,
for that destroys Injustice; and without Holiness none can ever see the Lord;
and out of Righteousness there is no true Peace. Therefore all, of what Sort
soever, or what Calling soever, Do justly (whether ye be Masters or Servants,
Fathers or Mothers, Sons or Daughters) to one another, and to all, Do that
which is Just and Righteous, uprightly and holily; in that you will hve Peace,
and see God.

So in all Husbandry, Speak Truth, act Truth, doing justly and uprightly in all
your Actions, Speak Truth.
in all your Practices, in all your Words, in all your Dealings, Buyings,
Sellings, Changings and Commerce with People, Let Truth be the Head, and
practice it: And in all your Words let Truth be spoken: This brings
Righteousness forth, and Deceit to the Judgment-bar. Wrong no Man, nor covet,
nor cheat, nor oppress, nor defraud any Man in any case; but keep your Dominion
in the Truth, in Righteousness, Holiness and Equity, in the Power, and Light
and Wisdom of Christ. In this ye answer the Light of Christ in every one, and
are a blessing to the Lord God, and to your Generation ye are serviceable; and
come to walk in the New Life, in which the Righteous, Holy God is served: In
which Righteousness ye have Peace; and in which Holiness ye see God: For the
Kingdom of God stands in Righteousness, Peace and Joy in the Holy Ghost.

So, Truth, whether Merchants or Tradesmen, and all sorts of People whatsoever,
in all your Occasions, and in all your Tradings Dealings and Doings, The swift
Witness.
speak the Truth, act in the Truth, and walk in the Truth; and this brings
Righteousness forth: For it answers the Witness of God in every one; which
lets every one see all the Deeds and Actions they have done amiss, and Words,
which they have spoken amiss: So the Witness of God Within them arises a swift
Witness against them, for their Words which they have spoken amiss, and for
their Actions which they have done amiss, and brings them to the Judgment-Bar,
and to Condemnation. Here Righteousness goes forth, and here the sweet Savor
to the Lord God begins to ascend; and Truth and Equity arises both to be acted
and spoken.

So all Friends of what Calling soever, The Just Principle in all.
and feel the Power of God, and the Light of Christ Jesus: Dwell in that, act
in that; that ye may answer that of God in every one upon on the Earth, with
your Actions, and by your Conversations, and by your Words, being right, just
and true: This goes over the unjust, untrue, unholy and unrighteous in the
whole World; and reaches to the good and true Principle of God in all People,
which tells them when they do not do equally, justly, righteously and holily.
So that is the Word of God to you all Friends, of what Calling soever ye be:
Live in the Power of Truth, and Wisdom of God, to answer that just Principle of
God in all People upon the Earth; and so ye answering of it, thereby ye come to
be, as a City set upon a Hill, which is above that Mountain, that is in the
whole World, that lies above the Just Principle of God in every one there,
which the Power of God goes over. So, let your Lives preach, let your Light
shine, that your Works may be seen, that your Father may be glorified; that
your Fruits may be unto Holiness, and that your End may be Everlasting Life.
Dwell in the Power of the Lord God, and Light and Life, with which ye may feel
and see, before the Unrighteousness was; in this ye will know the Everlasting
Righteousness brought forth, which answered the Righteous Principle of God in
every one, to which they must come down, to lead them and guide them, to teach
them to speak and act Truth justly, righteously and holily. And that has the
Dominion, which does justly, holily and righteously speak, act and think; and
this has the praise of God; and they who do so, come to answer that, which God
requires, To love Mercy, do justly, and to walk humbly with God. And this is
more than all the Talkers of Justice, Righteousness and Holiness, Talkers of
Justice.
whose Life denies, what their Tongues profess and talk of: By that God and
Christ is dishonored. So these are no good Example, neither serviceable in
their Generation nor Creation, nor any but they, who live in the Power of God,
and in his Wisdom; in which they have the Righteousness, Peace, Truth,
Holiness, Justice and Equity; These are comely and savoury both God and Man.

And all, of what Trade or Calling soever, Keep out of Debts; Owe to no Man any
thing but Love. Go not beyond your Estates, Keep out of Debts.
lest ye bring your selves to Trouble, and Cumber, and a Snare; keep low and
down in all things ye act. For a Man that would be great, and goes beyond his
Estate, lifts himself up, runs into Debt, and lives highly of other Men's Means;
he is a waster of other Men's, and a destroyer: He is not serviceable to the
Creation, but a destroyer of the Creation and Creatures, and cumbereth himself
and troubles others, and is lifted up, who would appear to be some Body; but
being from the Honest, the Just and Good, falls into the Shame. Therefore dwell
every one of you under your own Vine (that know Redemption from the Earth) and
seek not to be Great, but in that, and dwell in the Truth, Justice,
Righteousness and Holiness; and there is the Blessing enlarged.

And no one (of what Calling soever) run into Debt, Usury and Exaction; for
many People have been wronged thereby; they that have taken of them, who by it
have appeared great, and lived above what they were, and so would seem to be:
Therefore be true and honest, holy and righteous every one, in that which ye
have: Owe nothing, but Love.
Owe to none any thing, but Love; and in that ye will feel the Blessing, and
come to be serviceable in the Creation, serving one another in Love, and not in
Oppression and Taxation. And that keeps all down, in the Power, Wisdom and Life
of God; and bends all minds to strive for one another good, and to help one
another in that which is good, just and righteous, and serve one another in
that; in that ye live in the Life, and in the Seed, the Power and
Righteousness, that is everlasting, which is of God, and his Wisdom, through
which ye come to answer the good, just and holy Principle of God in every one
upon the Earth: In which Power ye have Dominion; in which ye come to live the
Life, which is well-pleasing to God, a Life which shall stand, when the World
is ended. And in this Life, Power and Wisdom of God, that is endless, ye are a
Terror to all, A Terror to Defrauders.
that are in the Wisdom below; ye are a Terror to all, that are in the
unrighteous Actions and Words: And ye are a Terror to all, that are in the
unjust and unequal doings, and all the Defrauders, Cozeners, Cheaters,
Over-reachers, Liars and Wrong-dealers. In the Power of God, and his Life, in
which ye have Justice, ye have Truth, ye have Equity, ye have Righteousness;
and it comes to be to you, as natural; you Words, your Lives, your
Conversations, your Presence and your Practices both judge and preach; and ye
will be a Terror to all them in the just Life, and everlasting Righteousness,
Christ Jesus; living in him and in his Wisdom, and walking in him, and speaking
the Truth, as it is in him in all things; your Life and your Words are a Terror
to all, that speak not Truth in their Dealings, and to all that act not truly
and righteously in their Doings, your Lives do judge them, and are a Judge to
them; and through your Constancy, Faithfulness and Life, which is Everlasting,
ye bring many to Amendment: For both Life, Actions, Words and Conversation
preach (all these preach to the unrighteous World) being in the Everlasting
Righteousness, which over the World has Dominion; through which Life, Power,
Seed of God and Wisdom ye reach, and answer the good and just Principle of God
in every one; and it will make them at last confess to you, though they may go
on in the contrary for a time.

So in that Power, Wisdom and Strength, that gives you Dominion over all, and
to answer that of God in all, the Love and Power of the Lord Jesus Christ
preserve and keep you all in his Wisdom, Life, Seed and Dominion, that to him
ye may be a Blessing, and a good Savor in the Hearts of all People: And let
all your Actions and Words be one with the Witness of God in all People, Amen.

The Wicked and Unrighteous owe Envy and Hatred, Debt; but the Righteous, Just
and Harmless, who owe nothing to any Man, but Love, with that they pay their
Debt. But Drunkards, Adulterers, Swearers, Rioters, who eat and drink, and rise
up to play, and live in Pleasures wantonly upon the Earth, Fighters,
Quarrellers, Envious, Malicious, Unjust, Unrighteous; all such Actions and
Practices are judged out of the Power of God, and out of his Kingdom.

AND all Friends every where, Shopkeepers or Merchants, or Factors, or any
other Trades, keep low in the Power of God, and do not go beyond your Capacity,
nor reach after things more, than ye can justly perform, and answer all Men;
but all in your places be just and true, that ye may answer all Men within and
without, and Truth and Justice in your Returns, that ye may keep your Words, So
say, and so do; which is the Royal Law of Liberty in all your Tradings, else ye
are a Dishonor to Christianity. So say, and so do.
therefore see your Business, that what ye do, and what ye say, ye may perform,
that ye may not break your Words and Promises; for if ye do, ye go to Loss.
Neither are ye Masters, of what ye take in hand; for a Master should be a top
of things, and be in that, which can command things.

And none to be Negligent in their Business, but give an Account by Words or
Writings, how things are with them, when others write to them; so that none may
Wrong one another in these outward things, nor oppress one another, but be
serviceable one to another, Things beyond Ability.
keeping their Words (their going into things beyond their Ability, makes them
break their Words) keeping within their Compass with that which they may answer
others, lest any should be lifted up. For it is bad thing to be lifted up, and
to make a Noise and a Show for a time with other Peoples Goods, and cannot keep
their Word, their Promise, their Day; such may be lifted up for a time, and
Break and Fall, and go out as a Stink, and bring a great Dishonor to Christ
and true Christians. And therefore, keeping your Word, your Day, and keeping
your just Measure, your just Weight, that keeps down the Oppression: And by
keeping to that just Measure and Weight, and to your Word and Day, Just
Measure, just Weight.
by the Power of God and his Spirit in your own Hearts, there the Blessing is
doubled, there ye come to be Rich, and ye are a good Savor to God, and in the
Hearts of all People.

So every one strive to be Rich in the Life, and in the Kingdom and Things of
the World, that has no End; for he that covets to be Rich in the things of
this World, falls into many Snares, and hurtful Lusts. And therefore let him
that buys, or sells, or possesses, or uses this World, be, as if he did not:
Let them be Masters over the World in the Power and Spirit of God, and let them
know, that they owe no Man any thing, but Love; yet serve God in Truth, and one
another in their Generation.

For Friends, if ye be not faithful in the Outward Treasure, and Outward
Mammon, who will trust you with the True Treasure? Or who can believe, that ye
have the True Treasure, The True Treasure.
but that ye speak by hearsay of it? So, I say to you all, See, that ye are
faithful in this Outward Mammon, this Outward Treasure of the things of this
Life, of this World, faithful to your Word, faithful to your Days, faithful to
your Promises, in all your Tradings, Traffickings, Bargainings true and just,
and righteous and honest in these outward Treasures or Mammon, concerning the
things of this World, of this Life, of these outward Riches; just and faithful,
true and honest Men and Women in these outward things: I say, as Christ says,
Who will trust you with the true and heavenly Treasure, if not as before?
Therefore I say, to be faithful in these Outward, that shows an honest Man and
honest Women; faithful in all your Dealings and Practices between Man and Man,
and Woman and Woman, that shows an honest Heart, and a faithful Man and Woman
in outward things, that answers the faithful Principle in all People. So all
Men and Women to be faithful in these outward things one to another, that shows
the good Heart to receive the true Treasure, that ye may be faithful in it to
God, who have been faithful in their outward Treasure or Mammon one to another.
So, let every one's Conversation be without Covetousness; let not that be once
named among Saints. Covetousness.
And Do to all Men, as ye would have them do to you, that is the Law and the
Prophets; if not, ye are judged by them both: For the Kingdom stands in
Righteousness [mark, stands in it] and in Peace and Joy in the Holy Ghost
[mark, in it.]

FOR Holiness becomes the House of God: Postscript.
Whosoever acts Unholily, it is that does dishonor his House, and does not
become it: Whosoever acts Unfaithfully in this Outward Treasure or Mammon, The
House of God.
or in the true Treasure to God, is not justified in the Sight of God nor Man;
for they are justified by Faith, through Faithfulness both to God and Man. For
whosoever does Righteousness, is of God; and he that does not Righteousness, is
not of God: For God loves the Righteous, and delights in them; but not in
them that do Unrighteousness: For in the Righteousness they have Peace; but out
of Righteousness People have Trouble. So all God's People, his Children, his
Saints must be Holy, as he is Holy; and therefore do that which is holy and
just in all your Lives and Conversations: And whatsoever ye do, let it be done
to the Praise and Glory of God [mark that] Have God's Praise and Glory in your
Eye in all your Speakings and Doings, then ye will be preserved to his Glory,
and then ye will honor him; and them that honor him, he will honor and
beautify, The fine Linen.
and cloth with the fine Linen, the Righteousness of Christ, that Men may not
see your Nakedness. For God will have a holy People, to serve him in Holiness;
a true People, to serve him in Truth, and in his Spirit, and in his new and
living Way, above all the dead Ways, that are come by Sin and Unrighteousness,
and Transgression of his Spirit, and Power and Command. So all ye, that know
his Power and Spirit, live in it, that ye may glorify God in all your Lives,
and Conversations and Words, that ye may answer that of God in all; that ye may
glorify God in your Bodies, Souls and Spirits, which are his, who has made
them, and gives them to you for that End: To whom be Glory and Honor for ever,
who created all for his Glory and for his Honor. So the Lord God Almighty keep
and preserve you faithful in all things to his Glory and Honor for ever!

He that walks in his Integrity, is Just; and blessed shall be his Children
after him,

Prove. 20.7. Unjust Weights, and Unjust Measures, both these are an Abomination
to the Lord,

Verse 10. G. F.

DEar Friends,
Epist. 201.
In the Stilness and Silence of the Power of the Almighty dwell, which never
varies, alters nor changes, but preserves over and out of, 3. Month 3.
and above all the Changable Worships, Religions, Ministers, Churches,
Teachings, Principalities and Powers, with the Power of God, Stilness and
Silence.
which keeps over all this, to the Kingdom of Christ, that is Everlasting, in
which there is no Changing, who is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords; all Power
in Heaven and Earth is given unto him, of whose Light, Life, Power and Wisdom,
Grace and Riches have ye received, which comes from him, that does not Change.
So, in that live, that does not Change, the Unchangeable Life, the Unchangeable
Mind, the Unchangeable Spirit and Wisdom, and the Unchangeable Worship and
Church, of which Christ is the Unchangeable Head, who remains the same
yesterday, to day, and for ever; in that ye will feel the Blessing and Presence
of the Lord God of Life amongst you, The unchangable Church and Worship.
as ye all abide in the unchangable Kingdom, Dominion, Power and Life, who are
Heirs of it according to your Measures, who have received the Light, and
received the Life and Grace, and the Power of a Kingdom and a World, that has
no end. So, wait all in it, that ye may be Possessors and Inheritors of the
Kingdom, and of the Life and Power, which has no end, and of the Promises,
that are Yea and Amen; and let nothing, that is of the World, alter you, but
keep ye in that, which keeps you in the Everlasting Kingdom of God.

The 3d of the 3d Month, 1661. G. F.

An Answer to a Letter sent to G. F. concerning the Voluntary Contribution to
the King.
FRiend,
To the Thing thou Queriest of me, concerning this Matter, Epist. 202.
my Answer is: Seeing, that the King and his Friends desire it not as a Tax or
an Assesment, but a Free Gift of the People, A Free Gift.
which cannot be said is an Oppression; therefore it is left to all Friends, to
do as they are Free. And what the World does, Friends are not to look at, who
will set up a thing, and dislike it; but Friends are to mind the Universal
Power of the Lord God, that they may do that freely in their own Power, which
they do, better than by Compulsion, Tax or Assess; for if all things were done
so, it were the best, in the Free State, Bounty and Love, which would more
break the Hearts of People, than by Force of Assesment and Tax. So, things are
left to the Wisdom and Universal Spirit of the Lord God, The Universal Spirit.
which goes over the Heads of all in the Fall; that with the Living Power and
Wisdom of God ye may overcome them, and so do, as ye are Free.

G. F.

WHat Friends! Do ye reign as Kings? Epist. 203.
Can they pluck never a one (of you) out of the Father's Hand? Are ye put
forth? The Father's Hand.
Do ye witness that Scripture fulfilled; put forth to follow the King of Kings
(the Shepherd) who gives Life abundantly? In that let your Joy be still, and
your Comfort remain; in which ye will feel the Endless Kingdom and Dominion: In
that the Lord be with you, who is your Strength, Comfort and Fullness for
Evermore, World without End! And Friends, Mind the Light, and dwell in it, and
it will keep you a top of all the World; and the Seed of God mind, and know it,
and in it be Content.

Dwell in the Power of Truth, and be not Negligent in that, Diligent, serving
the Lord, every one in your Measures; that to the Lord God every one of you may
be a Blessing, Be Diligent.
and a sweet Savor unto him in your Creation and Generation, feeling and
knowing the Lord's Power every one in your selves, yea, the Power of an Endless
Life, and of a Kingdom, that has no End, and of a Dominion, that is over all
Dominions. And in the Power of the Lord God Everlasting, ye may feel the Seed
of God in every particular of you raised up, which does inherit the same; that
ye may sit down in your own Possession of Everlasting Life. And in that Meet
together, waiting upon the Lord, and in it keep your Meetings, where ye may
feel the Chief Shepherd leading you into Pastures of Life: And so, Meetings.
the Blessing of the Lord be with you!

G. F.

To all Friends, Prisoners.
DEar Friends and Brethren,
Epist. 204.
The Seed of God feel all in your selves, which is the Heir of the Power of
God, that ye may sit down in the Possession of the same; 3d Month 22.
inheriting the Power, and the Promise, and the Gospel. The seed of God.
In which Power of God is the Fellowship, being Heirs of the same, and Members
of that Fellowship, which never has an End, which brings Life and Immortality
to Light; which Power of God was, before that was, which darkneth Life and
Immortality from People. Walk in the Truth.
So, walk in the Truth, then ye walk with the God of all Truth; and walk in the
Righteousness, and then ye walk with the Righteous God in all Peace: Walk in
Holiness, and then ye walk in that, in which ye see God; which they that do
not, see him not. Therefore walk in the Power of God, which goes over the Power
of Darkness, which was before it was; which Power of God is the Gospel, in
which is the Mystery of the Fellowship, a Mystery (I say) to all the
Fellowships, that are out of the Power of God. Therefore the Seed of God know,
The Top-Stone laid.
which is the Top-Stone, that it may be over all laid in you, which bruiseth
the Serpent's Head, which is the fulfilling of the Prophets and Prphecies;
which Seed brings to the Beginning, where are the Pastures of Life. So, in that
Meet, in the Seed, in that wait, in the Power of God, in which ye have Life, in
that keep your Meetings; which brings to feel that, which was before the Power
of Darkness was. The Wisdom of God.
And wait to inherit the Wisdom of God, that with that ye may be all ordered to
God's Glory in his Life, in which ye may feel Unity with himself, and one with
another, and his Presence and Blessings among you, in the Power and Seed of
God, which was, before Enmity was; in which is the Unity, and the Holy Will and
Dominion: Which Power of God brings from all the barren Mountains, where is
Death, to the Begtinning, where is Life. My Love is to all Friends in the
Everlasting Seed of God, that has the Promise of Life, and does inherit the
same; in which is the Fellowship with God, and one with another.

London, the 22d of the 3d Month, 1661. G. F.

ALL Friends,
Epist. 205.
Live in God's Dominion, and Power and Life, which was, Storms and Tempests.
before Storms and Tempests were, in which ye may feel Life and Dominion, Power
and Victory, the Lord's Power being lived in, which was before Tempests were,
in which ye will have the Victory. A Summer Religion.
There is a Summer-Religion, which appears when the Sun shines upon them; and
in the Summertime all the venomous Creatures creep out of their Holes, Corners
and Dens, and the Flies, Wasps and Snakes; but when the Winter is come, and the
Storms and Tempests come, then the Summer-Religion is gone, then the Venomous,
Viperous Creatures Religion and Works are gone. The standing Religion.
But the Religion, that is in the Power of God, stands, which was before the
Devil was, and all his Works and Children. And so, that is the standing
Religion, that is in the Power of God, which was before the Power of Darkness
was. And Friends, ye that know the Light of Jesus Christ, and have tasted of
his Power, by which ye come to be gathered into the Name of Jesus, do not
forsake the Assembling of your selves together; but provoke one another, and
exhort one another to Love, The Love of God.
and to Good Works, and let not Powers, nor Principalities, nor Prisons,
Thrones, nor Dominions, spoiling your Goods, Mockings, Scoffings nor
Reproachings, and Pluckers off your Hair and Smiters, separate you from the
Love of God, that ye have in Christ Jesus, who conquered Death and the Devil,
the Power of it, the Adversary, the Wicked One, the Enmity. Christ is the Life,
the Light, the Love of God to Mankind; now ye coming to be gathered into him,
who destroys the Devil and his Works, the Life that destroys Death, and the
Light, Truth destroy Error.
which destroys Darkness, and the Truth that destroys Error and all Falsehood,
and the Power of God, that destroys the Power of the Devil, and being gathered
into Christ and into his Name, Meetings.
keep your Meetings in the Power of God and in his Light and Life, whose
Gathering is above all other Gatherings in the Earth; and Christ's Name is
above all other Names on the Earth. And feel the Seed of God over all that set,
which makes to suffer; which was before it was, and will remain, when it is
gone.

From a Lover of your Souls, and your Everlasting Good. G. F.

IN the Power of God that is Everlasting, Epist. 206.
and does remain in this your Day of Trial, in it stand, of which ye are
Partakers, and are come to be Heirs of the same; and in it is your Peace and
Kingdom. A Day of Trial.
And though ye have not a Foot of Ground to stand upon, yet ye have the Power
of God to skip and to leap in; standing in that, which is your Life, that is
Everlasting. Who by the Power of God are gathered up to the Beginning, to the
Endless Life, who have your Meetings in it, that neither Death, nor the Power
of it can separate you from, nor out of the Power of God, for it was, before
Death or the Power of it was; in that are your Living Meetings, Meetings.
and Joynings and Building up the Spiritual Household of living Stones, gathered
by and through the Power of God. In which Power of God is the Household of
Faith, which Faith gives them the Victory, in which Power of God ye being, are
gathered over Jews, Gentiles and the Apostate-Christians Meetings and
Gatherings, who are in Enmity and Confusion, and out of the Power of God; that
put the Wheat for the Tares, and so persecute the Elect, which Election was,
before the World began, of which ye are made Partakers. Stand fast therefore in
your Confidence, in that which is without End, in that in which the Endless
Life is seen, in the Power of God, and Light; which rules over Powers, Thrones,
Principalities and Dominions. The Power of God goes over them, and ye living in
it, nothing can separate you from the Love of God, which ye have in Christ the
Seed, which was, before the World began, glorified with the Father, who has
all Kings and Kingdoms in his hand, which is his Power; in that let your Faith
stand: With which Immortal Power ye may all be clothed, which covers you and
preserves you over the Mortal. And Prisons, Fetters, Dungeons and Sufferings,
Prisons, Fetters, etc.
the Royal Seed, and Heirs of the Promise, what are they to you, who are
Married to the Lamb, who was Slain from the Foundation of the World; against
whom they warred and banded themselves, and took Counsel together against the
Lord, and his Anointed, who breaks their Bonds asunder; whom neither Death,
Grave, nor all the Powers of the World were able to hold nor contain, but over
all he rose (the Seed) and reigns, till he has made all his Enemies his
Footstool: Honor and Praise be to the Lord, the living God, that lives for
ever! So all ye, which are gathered in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, whose
Name is called, that Power of God, the Word, which was in the beginning, over
the Powers of Darkness, before it was, and compelling Worships, Ministry,
Maintenance and Churches were; this Gathering, Meeting in the Name.
this Meeting in the Name, the Power, the unrighteous World cannot separate you
from it; for it is over it, and was, before it was. In that Power have ye the
Kingdom and Dominion, in the Power, reigning over all that, which has been out
of the Power. And ye that partake of the Power, have Power with God, in that we
need not bid you, keep your Meetings; for ye are met and gathered into the Fold
of Christ Jesus, and are put forth by him, and are brought from under that,
that leads from God, by the Power of God. In this Gathering by the Power into
the Name of Christ (which is the Power) with the Power he is felt in the midst,
who is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, and Prince of Life and Peace, and
Prophet to open by his Power and Light in you all, and a Priest for ever, that
lives to offer up the Spiritual Sacrifice and Praise to God; and he being among
you felt, and in you all, ye will have every one of you, in your own
particular, Joy, Peace, Comfort, Consolation, Assurance, Confidence and
Satisfaction, when all Gatherings, Meetings, Heaven and Earth, Types and
Figures, and Shadows and Prophets, and the Prophecies are ended. And Swearing
before the Law and in the Law, and all invented Oaths since the Law, and
amongst the Heathen, when these are gone, past away and fulfilled, the
Election, and the Seed, and the Gathering in the Name of Jesus Christ, the Lord
of Life remains and stands, and his Throne and Dominion; in which there is no
Curse, but a Blessing. So, happy are ye, who are partakers of this, heirs of
this Blessing, and heirs of the Promise, and of the Life, and of the World that
has no End; who have your Confidence and Assurance in him! So all ye, that
have felt the Light, and have been turned to it, The Light.
in that Light ye feel the Covenant with God, who is Light; which brings to be
acquainted with the Life of God, and gives the Knowledge of Christ your Savior
and Redeemer, which is the Salvation to the Ends of the Earth. By which Light
and Covenant ye are turned from Darkness, and the Power of Satan, that
separated you from God, who was the Enemy, through whom ye had not Peace with
God. But now being turned from him, into the Light and Power, in this Covenant
of Light and Power ye have Peace with God (that destroys the Enmity) and are
come to receive it; and so Heirs of the Kingdom, that is Everlasting. Be at
Peace one with another, and in Love and Tenderness, and in the Wisdom of God
order and preserve, and nourish and cherish all things to his glory; in which
ye will feel his blessing, and treasure, and riches and Julness in you, with
you and amongst you. So, put on the Armor of Light, that with it ye may be
able to defend, and see, and walk, and stand against all the Arrows and Darts,
that are in the unrighteous World, The Armor of Light.
and before they were, as Children of the Light, and Children of the Day, where
the Darkness is past. Put on your Breast Plate of Righteousness, to save and
preserve your Hearts and Minds, and to keep you from all that, which would
defile and surfeit it, or cause you to be weary, or think the War or Time long:
For the Power is Everlasting, and the Righteousness is Everlasting, that
destroys the Works of the Devil, and him both, whereby the Seed of God comes to
be set on the head of it all; The Shield of Faith.
Glory and Praise be to him for ever! Put on therefore the Shield of Faith, by
which Faith (your Shield) ye have the Victory. For Faith is a Mystery held in a
pure Conscience, by which ye have Access to God; in which Faith ye please God,
in which Faith ye have Unity, which gives you the Victory over that, which
separates from God (the Enmity) In that Faith be Joyful, which is the Faith of
God's Elect, that brings them over the World, and to that which was before the
Foundation of it. And this is the Faith the Just lives by, by which he is saved
and justified, by which he lives and conquers, anmd has the Victory over the
Unjust; Glory to the Highest!

PVT on the Helmet of Salvation, Sword of the Spirit (the Word of God) your
Helmet being on, The Helmet of Salvation.
nothing can destroy nor hurt your Salvation, Christ Jesus being your Helmet
and your Head, who destroys the Devil and his Works, the Sword of the Spirit,
that mortifies, that crucifies, baptizes, cuts off, plunges under all
Corruptions, that have gotten up since the Transgression; then in the Spirit ye
will worship God, and have Fellowship and Spiritual Weapons, and come to be
Spiritual Men, and not as the Carnal World, that rules and wrestles with Carnal
Weapons, and with Flesh and Blood. The Stone cut out of the Mountain without
hands, will dash and break into pieces all the Cutters with Hands, and
Carnal-weaponed Men about Religion, Church and Worship; and his Kingdom is an
Everlasting Kingdom, and his Dominion has no End. This Stone is that, which
laid Nebuchadnezzar's head low, and brought him to eat Grass, like a Beast; who
knew not the Kingdom of the Most-high ruling in Men. So ye, that know this
Stone cut out of the Mountain without hands, ye all know the Kingdom of the
Most-high God ruling in you, and his Dominion, which s Everlasting, and come to
be his Temple. For there was but One Temple in the whole World commanded of
God, One Temple.
as a Figure of Christ, who would dwell in Man, in Male and Female, who should
be the Temples of God, in whom should be his Name and Power: Blessings, Honor,
and Glory and Praises be given to the Lord God for evermore, by all them who
witness this.

So all Dear Lambs, and Babes and Brethren, Happy and blessed are ye, who the
Seed do know, which is Heir of the Blessings, and the Power and Life, and the
Kingdom, and the World, that is Everlasting and without End. Be shod all with
the Gospel, The Gospel.
which is the Power of God, which has brought Life and Immortality to Light,
and has and does abolish Death; I say, be Shod in the Power, and then your
Feet will not slip nor slide, and ye will not fall, and ye will stand steadfast,
being shod with the Everlasting Gospel, in the Preparation of it. And standing
in the Power, ye stand over the Workers of Iniquity, and all Unrighteousness in
the World, and slippery Ways, standing in the Power, which was before Death,
Darkness, and the Power of Darkness and Death was, which has darkened Life and
Immortality from People, so that they could not walk, and get forward on their
Way to the Lord. But in the Power of God (the Gospel) being in it, and with it
shod, your Feet standing in the Power, ye over Death, Darkness, and the Power
of it may stand, walk, go and leap (which was, before it was) there is
Faithfulness and Stedfastness, and there ye may walk without Doubt. And keep
the Word of Patience, and take unto you the Word of God; and who are born of it
(of the Immortal Seed) nourished by the Milk of the same, up to Eternal Life,
know things, as they were in the beginning, they feed upon that which Lives,
and not upon that which is in the World, and in the Fall, which is below the
Word, and below the Power, and below the Truth, and out of it; who know the
Shepherd and his Crook, The Shepherd.
which plucks you out, he shows you the Pastures of Life, in which ye must
feed: Every one, that knows the Power and Light, and by it is guided and turned
to him, feels and knows this. And so, ye that have the Word of Patience, ye
have the Hammer, ye have that which was in the beginning; ye have that, which
lives, and abides and endures for ever. Ye know, what the Hammer is to; and ye
know the Word is a Fire, and what the Fire is to: So ye, that have the Word,
have the Fire, which burns up all that which does not abide, and does not
endure, and does not live for ever, as the Word does; which is the Word of
Wisdom. So ye, that have the Word, have the Wisdom, which was in the beginning,
before that which is below, was. So ye, that have the Word, have the Sword,
yea, sharper than a Sword with two Edges; which will cut down all that, which
has gotten up since the beginning, which has transgressed the Just Spirit,
and burn up that which has gotten up since the beginning, in the
Transgression. And this is the Word, that makes clean, and reconciles to God;
and is the Word of Reconciliation: The Word of Patience.
And this is the Word of Patience to keep you; and ye will be kept in the Hour
of Temptation, that comes upon them, that dwell upon the Earth. For the Word of
God was, before the Tempter was, and goes over him, and destroys him; in that
live, in his Life, that is Fternal, which does abide. So in that the Lord Jesus
Christ preserve you! For in that Patience is exercised, in that Word, which
comprehends all that, which has gotten up since the beginning; for with that
ye may be tried. But the Word is over alol, in that live, which hammers, burns,
cuts down and reconciles, against whom the Tempter and Temptation cannot come
nigh to prevail; it breaks his Head. Neither meddle not, nor mix your selves
with the Powers of the World, nor things below; but live in the Power of God,
which is peaceable.

And forasmuch as we are scandalized, Plots and Plotters.
as Plotters, we in the Power of God do comprehend the Power of Darkness; which
Power was, before the Powers of Darkness were, which destroys Darkness, and the
Power of it. And we cannot Plot, it is impossible we should; standing in that
which destroys Darkness, and the Devil, the Power of it, who is the Author of
Plots, and the Enmity in Peoples Minds, bondaging and bringing the Creature
into thraldom; which we in the Power of God would have all Persons from under
it, and would have no Man's Person in the whole World hurt; but in the Power of
God would have all Men saved, and seek all Men's Peace. And so in that, which
manifests all Plots, and the Author of them (the Devil) and that which judges
him, and destroys him and them, are we in, and are made Partakers of him, who
redeems and saves, and heals and sets free, who is the Power of God. (So, all
you who are Partakers of the Power of God, that have been turned to the Light,
and received the Power of God, Christ Jesus, that has given you Power to
become the Sons of God; in which Light and Power of God, The Saints Liberty.
by which ye were turned to him, ye come up into the Liberty, the Liberty of
the Sonship, into the Power of God, that does redeem and save, and destroy that
which leads from God, which does defile, and destroys it, and gives Dominion.
That is the Power of God, in which the Saints have Liberty, where the Sons of
God sing together, and praise, glorify, and honor their Father; to whom be
Glory, Praise and Honor for Evermore! Who in him triumphs in Glory, and can
say, Emanuel is born, and a Son is given. So, all in the Life and Power of
God's Seed and Wisdom, which is Everlasting, dwell, and know the Seed of God in
every one of you, in your own particulars, Male and Female, which Seed is the
Heir of the Promise, the Heir of the Wisdom, and Heir of the World, that has
no End, of an Endless Life, and the Heir of the Kingdom that is Everlasting,
and the Heir of the Blessing, where there is no Curse. And every one an Heir of
the Power, of the Blessings of the Kingdom, come to inherit, The Election.
come to possess your own Inheritance, and then sit down in your own
Possession; in which ye may know every one your Election (in the Seed) which
was, before the World began, and so be Possessors and Inheritors of Life and
Substance. The Substance is the Seed, the Top-Stone, on top of the Law, on top
of the Prophets, on top of the Types, Figures, Shadows, Parables, and ends them
all, and on top of all Heathens Inventions, though it has been a Mystery hid
from Ages. See now, the Seed, the Seed of the Lamb and his Marriage is known,
and the Lamb reigns, where there is no Curse, but the Blessing. The Curse is
out of his Dominion, who destroys the Author of the Curse, Wrath, Plagues and
Woe, that has the Blessing, the Seed, Christ Jesus.

AND all Friends, Improve your Talents, Well done, good and faithful Servants;
for they who do not, The Talents.
their Talents are taken a way from them, who have been Slothful, Complainers
and Idle. Let your Lamps be burning, have Oil in your own Lamps, and Salt in
your selves; then ye are the Wise Virgins, that enters in with the Bridegroom.
The Word of God cannot be bound, which makes Rich, which lives for Ever; in
which is the Life. So, do not quench the Spirit, nor add to the Prophecy, nor
diminish, that keeps you from the Plagues, and to see your Names written in the
Lamb's Book of Life: There stands your Joy Everlasting, through which ye see
the White-Stone, through which Light, Power and Seed ye do overcome that which
is gone forth from God. So, ye dwelling in the Son of God, ye shall go no more
forth, but shall inherit all things. So, Farewell!

KEEP in the Power of the Lord God, that goes over all the World, Flight in the
Winter.
that none of your Flight may be in the Winter. And beware, lest any of your
Flight be on the Sabbath Day (which the signification of it is Rest) but all in
the Power of the Living God abide, in which ye may feel Life, Peace and Rest,
and an abiding Place; a secret Chamber to turn into, till the Indignation and
Wrath of the Lord be past, which is to come over all Transgressors. And if the
Judgment begin at the House of God first, and the Righteous passes the
straight way to Salvation, where will the Hypocrites and the Sinners appear?
Over whom the overflowing Scourge must come and pass. Therefore in the Life,
Power and Love of God all dwell. And the Apostle says, Forsake not the
assembling of your selves (as the manner of some is) but edify one another in
the Light and the Life, as the Day does appear: And to say, That People must
not Meet together to worship God, they may as well say, Ye must not be
Christians. For Persecutors were always blind, Persecutors.
and they stopped their Ears to the Spirit of God in themselves formerly; so
were in the blind Zeal, and turned against them, who were in the true Zeal, in
the Spirit of God.

Let this be carefully Copied over, and sent amongst Friends.

G. F.

MY Dear Friends,
Epist. 207.
Look above all Sufferings that are outward, at the Seed of God, which was,
before that was, which makes to suffer; Suffernings for Tithes.
and the Seed of God, Christ Jesus, will stand, when that which makes to
suffer, is gone: And so, in the Seed of God live, and lie down in the same,
which is Christ, the Life, the Way to God, the Father of Life. The Tithes of
the Jews, and the Tithes of the Apostate-Christians must all be born Testimony
aginst, by them that be redeemed from the Earth, and reigns above it, in his
Life, and Power and Wisdom. And so, be of good Faith, and never heed, but make
War in Righteousness with the Beast, Dragon, Whore and her Folowers; for by the
Lord many Walls and Troops have ye gone through and leaped over, and the Lord
has given you Dominion over that, which warred against you; and by the Power
of the Lord ye have Overcome, and in the Power of the lord ye will Overcome
all, and in it will stand, when all the contrary is gone. And know your
Portion, and sit down in the Possession of it: So, every one of you to be in
your Possessions and Inheritances, and with the Shield of Faith and helmet of
Salvation, The Shrill of Faith.
and the Breast Plate of Righteousness, and the Sword of the Spirit, the Word of
God, which was, before Deceit was, which will hammer, and break and cut down
all that which is contrary. And being shod with the Preparation of the Gospel,
which is the Power of God, which was, before the Fall was. In that Stand, in
the Power of God, which was, before the Devil weas, and will remain, when he is
gone.

G. F.

ALL ye Prisoners of the Lord for his Truth sake, Epist. 208.
and for keeping the Testimony of Jesus Christ, against all the Inventions,
Traditions, Rudiments, Will-Worships, fained Humilities and
Self-Righteousnesses, that are in the Fall (and are out of God's Power and
Righteousness) who have no Weapons but Carnal, like themselves; your Patience
must overcome all the rough Spirits in the World, and your Love must bear all
things. For Patience obtains the Crown, which is Immortal, which runs the Race:
So, it is the Lamb must have the Victory over all the unclean, airy Spirits,
and over him that is out of the Truth. So, be Meek and Low, then ye follow the
Example of Christ, Patience obtains the Crown.
and come to bear the Image of the Just, who suffered by the Vjust; and put on
his Righteousness, who suffered by the Unrighteous, whose Back was struck, Hair
was plucked off, and Face was spit upon, and yet cried, Father, forgive them:
Here he kept his Dominion, though a Sufferer, who had the Victory, which the
Followers of the Lamb do (in Measure) attain to. So, put on Courage, put on
Patience: Let your Loyalty be known for your King, that has conquered the
Devil, Death and Hell; in walking in Righteousness, Peace and Truth, feeling
the Power of God preaching and reaching the Witness of God in every one, when
Words are not uttered. And let your Faith be in the Power, that goes through
all things, and over all things, and every one hearken to it. So, the Power of
the mighty God then ye will know, and his Arm, how it works, and the Hand, how
it carries you, The Power and Arm of God.
which will bring you out of Tribulation and Thraldom, and Spiritual Egypt,
into Peace. And this is the Power of God, in which live and dwell, in which ye
will feel him, which was, before Enmity was. And be at Peace one with another,
then ye will live in the Prince of Princes Peace, and in his Kingdom, Dominion,
and Life, in which is Unity, which was, before Enmity was, and which destroys
it. And so, in the Power of the Lord God ye are made strong, which goes over
the Power of Arkness, and was, before all that was, which is out of the Power
of God. And all People that are gone from the Witness of God in their own
particulars, they are all weak and feeble, and staggering: All Men's and Women's
Strength is in the Power of God, which goes over the Power of Darkness. So,
feel all this in you, to carry you through all, and over all, and in it preach
and Work for God, and let your Ear be lent to it, and hearken to it in one
another, and by it feel the Seed raised up in one another, which is Heir of the
Power; that ye may know each your Portion. For all People, that are gone from
the Witness of God in their own particulars, that are erred from it, and hate
the Light, they are full of Darkness, Sin and Iniquity, and are far from
Inspiration and Revelation, Inspiration and Revelation.
while their Minds are erred from the Spirit of God in themselves, that is hid
from them. So, when their Minds are turned with the Light and Spirit of God
toward God, then with it they shall know something of Revelation and
Inspiration, as they are turned by that of God from the Evil, and emptied of
that, then there will be some Room in them for fomething of God to be revealed
and inspired into them. And there in that, they will have Prophecy, seeing
things to come, being turned from the Evil that has darkened them, and
separated them from God; in which they will see the Covenant. through which
they will come to have Peace with God.

And all Friends, your Sufferings ye may gently send to them, Sufferings.
which make you to suffer, whether it be Sheriffs, Deputy Lieutenants or
Justices, and let them see, Christ's Mind nor the Aposthes, were not to
Imprison any, nor did they Imprison any; whereby ye may clear your Innocence to
the Consciences and the Witnesses of God in all Men.

G. F.

MY Dear Friends,
Epist. 209
In the Power of God and his Immortal Seed dwell, in which ye all will have
Life Eternal, and inherit the Substance and Dominion, To Friends, in and about
Nortolk and Lyn, etc.
and a Kingdom of Life, which never fades, nor shall have an end. And so,
dwell all in the Power of the Lord God, in which ye may all feel and know your
Strength renewed, in that which is Immortal; and be of one Mind in the Power of
God, and live in Love and Peace, knowing the Kingdom of the same, which stands
in the Power of God, which was, before the Power of Satan. And your Fellowship
being in the same Power of God, The Fellowship in the Power.
your Fellowship is in that, which is Everlasting, and that never has an End.
And the Church Fellowship is in God, and the Worship is in the Spirit, and in
the Truth; which Truth was, before the Untruth was, and stands when all the
Untruth is gone in the World: In this live and dwell, in which ye will all have
Unity and Fellowship; in which ye will feel Life Eternal amongst you. In that
Meet and keep your Meetings, and wait together upon the Lord, Meet in the Name.
who are gathered together in the Name of Jesus; whose Name is above every
Name. So is his Gathering above all other Gatherings; which Gathering stands,
when all other Gatherings are ended. And not in any other Name under Heaven is
Salvation brought, but in the Name of Jesus; in which Name are yur Gatherings;
in which Name ye all know your Salvation, and shall all know it, as ye abide
all in the Power of God, that keeps unto the Day of Salvation. And so, be
Faithful unto the Lord God, minding the Seed, and feeling it, and knowing of it
in your selves; which destroys the Devil, the Destroyer and the Oppressor,
Murderer and Liar, the Father of all Unrighteousness and Ungodliness, and all
that is bad, which the Seed destroys, which Seed is Christ. Therefore know that
reign, and the Top-stone over all laid; in which ye will all feel Life, Heirs
of the Power.
and have Life Eternal, coming to be heirs of the Power of God, knowing every
one that to be your Portion, and Heirs of the Gospel, and Inheriting it: Then
ye possess Fellowshp, the Gospel Felloship, which is Everlasting, which is the
power of God. And so, Farewell! And the Lord God Almighty preserve you, and
keep you. So, my Love in the the Everlasting Seed of God is to you all.

From Mendlesham, this 11th Day of the 1st Month. G. F.

FRiends,
Epist. 210.
Trust not in Man, nor in the Arm of Flesh, neither put Confidence in them, but
in the Lord. Judge your selves, and keep down the Boaster, Keep down the
Beaster.
and that which would be high; under Judgment keep that down, by the Power of
God in your selves, lest the Lord God bring upon you, something without you, to
bring you down, who do not keep that down in your selves. And therefore keep
all that down with the Power of the Lord God in your selves; and then ye will
have Dominion over it all, in the Power of the Lord God. And live all in the
Power of God, which was before the Fall, in which ye will have Fellowship over
all the Fellowships in the Fall, The Fellowship in the Power.
and above all outward things, that have an End; which Fellowship soeth over
all that which is in the Strife. For in the Power of God your Fellowship there
has no End, which was before the Fall and Strife was in which is peace; which
Fellowship will remain, when all that, which is in the Fall, is gone, and in
which is the perfect Unity, which keeps over all such Spirits, which run into
outward things; from which arise Quarrels, and Strife and Imperfections. And
therefore keep in the Power of the Lord God, that is Everlasting, in which is
the Fellowship, that has no End; in that live and dwell. And feel the Seed of
God over all that, whlch makes to suffer, and it will remain, when all that is
gone, in that ye will feel Life over Death, and Light over Darkness. And so in
that the Lord God Almighty preserve you and keekp you in the Dominon! This Day
I came into the Isle of Ely, where I hear nothing, Isle of Ely.
but things are peaceable, and Friends Minds kept over all the Bustlings in the
World, and take little notice thereof; but minds the Power of God, which was
before the Fall was; in which Fall are Bustlings. And so, to the Lord God be
faithful-

G. F.

FRiends,
All ye that have known the Way of Truth, and tafted of the Power of the same,
and now turn back into the World's Fashions and Customs, ye stop them, that are
coming out of the World, The World's Fashions and Customs.
ye make them to stumble at the Truth, ye make them to question the say of the
lord, which is out of the Way of the World, and its Ways; and ye grieve the
Righteous, and sadden the Hearts of the Upright and Simple. ye had better, ye
had never known the Way of Light, Life and Power; ye are the Cause of many
keeping in Darkness; you are the Cause of the Boasting of the Wicked, and make
the sicked to take you for an Example, and their Object against Truth, and them
that live in it, to plead against its Ways. Ye had better never have been born;
your Days will be Sad, Trouble and Vengeance will be your Garment and Clothing
in that State; and a hard thing it will be for any of you to Repent, for you
will find a more subtle thing in you, Repentance.
than was before you knew the Way fo Truth; who have neglected hearing the
Voice of God, through which your Hearts are hardened. Ye are the Cause of many
Husbands and many Wives to boast themselves against the Truth, and Servants,
and Children thereof; for in some Families, there are Servants Convinced, and
Children Convinced, and in others there are Husband Convinced and not Wife, and
Wife and not Husband, and Servants and not Master, and Children and not
Parents. So ye, that turn from Truth, ye are the Object for them that are not
Convinced, to turn against them, that are Convinced; Woe and Misery is for you!
Woe and Misery.
Ye had better never have been born, nor known the Way of Truth; whose latter
End is worse than the Beginning, when the Way of Peace is hid from your Eyes,
and a place of Repent ance ye cannot find; though ye wash your Alter with Tears,
being in the stained Life, where all the Tattlers, Tale-carriers, Unclean
Persons, Envious, Tale-carriers.
Murmurers and Complainers be in, and are out of the Life, and Power and Wisdom
of God, which has the Royal Dominion and Possession of the Royal Seed.
Theresore Turn, turn all, that are not hardened, and past feeling, and hear the
Voice, that the Way of Peace and Repentance, and the Way of Life and Salvation
ve may know, and live in; and upon all your disorderly Carriages, Walkings,
Words and Actions ye may come to receive Judgment, and through that ye may
receive Power to live a New Life, in which God is served in the Truth, and not
the Devil, who is out of the Truth; for in the Truth is the holy Unity and hte
pure Dominion, and the everlasting Life promised and received, and the Royal
Seed, which the Elect has, wherein they have the Bread of Life.

G. F.

To a Friend under an Exercise of Spirit.
KEEP Low in the Power, Epist. 212.
and thy Eye in the Seed, that destroys the Devil and his Works, and bruiseth
his Head; and live up in the Seed, which was before the Devil was, that in that
thou may have Life and Peace, in that which was before Death was: And in the
Seed Christ, thou will have Dominion over all thy Enemies, and see, before they
were. And that which lets thee to see thy Hardness, Darkness, Thoughts and
Temptations, and the Tempter, and thy Confusion, Deadness and thy Wants, is the
Light, and Power and Spirit of God in thee, which the Bad Spirit persuades
thee to look out at. The Temper.
And then thou murmurest and complainest, and art discontent, and not quiet,
and then the Enemy and Death covers thee, and through that, the Mind comes to
be unestablished. And therefore keep to the Good Spirit in thee, which does
manifest Sin and the Devil; and thy Mind being staid by that, it will inform
thee. And keep thy Mind in the Seed, in that is thy Lfie; and look at the Good,
and not at the Bad, but over it. For it is not a Sin to be tempted; and that
which the Accuser lays to thee, and thy Mind being against it, and not
yielding to it, it will never be laid to thy Charge: And that thou will see, as
thou-with the Power of the Lord do overcome. And God give thee Dominion in
the Life and Power and Truth, in which is the Blessing and Peace; and the Lord
God Almighty bless thee in that. Doubt not, faint not, question not; for Eve
was deceived by the Serpent, the Questioner; therefore keep over him in the
Power of God, and in that is the Reigning: And take not Belief from the
Serpent, nor take Meat from him, but keep thy Fast from that, which is in the
Fall; for that brings from the Lord, to feed upon the Accuser and the
Tempter's Food, Keep thy Fast.
that feeds unbelief. And therefore keep thy Fast to the Lord, and feed upon
that, which comes down from above, in which there is Life; and that
strengthens that Faith, which has the Victory. And therefore keep good
Faith, in him that was before the Devil was, Christ, the First and Last; and in
him sit down, who is the Amen. And when thou have been troubled, and resisted
the Tempter, has not the Angel of the Lord after ministered to thee, to the
strengthening of thee?

G. F.

Dear Friends,
Epist. 213.
In the Life and Power of God dwell, by which ye were raised, and by which ye
are nourished and refreshed, it is the sure Foundation, The sure Foundation.
which shall never be raced out; for it is laid of God, and no Man can lay
another. And ye, that feel the Life and Power of God in your selves, ye feel
Christ the Salvation, Righteousness and Wisdom of God, and so ye, by the Power
and Wisdom of God are kept and preserved in Sincerity and Integrity to God; and
thereby come to be established upon the Rock, which the Gates of Hell cannot
prevail against, nor all the Fiery Darts of the Wicked touch. And in the Power
of God, ye being gathered and established, ye stand and live in that, which
scatters the Clouds, and keeps your Eye clear to the Lord God; by which Power
ye see him (in measure) with a good Understanding, A good Understanding.
through all the evil Powers and Spiritis, which work in the Darkness against
him, and by the Power of God are preserved out of them, and set above them,
where ye reign as Kings in the Immortal Seed of God, by which the Serpent's
Head is broken, and his Seed destroyed. For the true Freedom is in the Son, The
true Freedom.
who suffered and died, and is risen again in Life, and has brought Life and
Immortality to Light again; in which Life and Light ye are the Children of the
Most-high God, and Heirs of the Everlasting Kingdom of God, where ye have a
sure Portion in the Joy, and Peace and Blessing of God, in which sit ye down
and keep your Habitation. And the God of Life and Peace, and endless Love be
with you all, and cloth you with the Garment of Everlasting Praise; that in
all things ye may give him the Glory, who lives for ever more.

G. F.

FRiends, the Power of the Lord God is over all them, Epist. 214.
that keep on their Hats in Prayer, and they do not keep on their Hats in
Prayer neither by the Motion, nor the Power of God, nor by the Spirit of God,
Against such Apostates, as kept on their Hats in Prayer.
but (by an earthly, dark Spirit) against it, and them that are in the Power of
God: This was the first Ground of it, both in Jo. Perrot and his Company, when
he run out, and J. N. when he run out; Opposition, the first Ground.
and this first was done in Opposition to them, that were in the Truth, and in
the Power of God; but the Power of God will crush to pieces that fained, dark,
earthly Spirit, and to the Earth and Pit itmust go, with all its fained and
false Pretenses; and the Power of the Lord God, and his Truth reigns over it
all.

The first, that got up into this Posture of keeping on their Hats in Prayer
against Friends, were the Ranters. Ranters.
The next was J. N. but he quickly, by the Power of the Lrod, saw it, and
judged it; John Perrot.
and the next was Jo. Perrot, whose End was according to his Work, and so will
those, that continue in it: For the Power of God is over them, Dark, earthly
Spirits.
and their dark, earthly Spirit; and the Power of God was, before they were,
and will remain when that they are gone, and it reigns over them all: And that
is the Word of the Lord God to you all. And for my part I had as leive see a
Priest to stand up in a Meeting, as one of these dark, earthly Spirits with
their Hats on their Heads, when that Friends pray; for they cannot deceive
Friends. For I have been more burdened with their dark, subtle and Sophistical
Spirit, than with the Priests, which had no more show of Reverence to God (in
that) than to a Horse, whose outward seeming Righteousness has deceived many;
but the Power of God (which destroys the Deceiver) undeceiveth and bringteth
People to that, which did first Convince them. And they that kept on their
Hats, when Friends prayed, after a while some of them ran to the Priests to be
married, and some to hear them in the Steeple Houses; then this dark, earthly
Spirit could bow, and put off its Hat to its own; the dark Spirit, which kept
on the Hat in the Assemblies of the Righteous, in Opposition against the Spirit
and Power of God: A Fainedness of Love.
And so, this Spirit has led People into a Fainedness of Love and Liberty,
which the Power and Spirit of God cannot own, but judge and stand over, and
reign over, if they keep their Habitations in the Power, and Life and Truth of
God; which reigns.

If they, that are and have been in this dark, earthly Spirit, had but had a
regard to the Power of God and his Truth, they would have been Tender, Offense
given.
and afraid of giving any Occasion of Offense, both to them that are within,
and to them that are without, to draw out their Minds to look at that, which
their earthly Spirit has promoted; and so to lay Stumbling Blocks, and set up
an Idol, and an Image to look at, which draws Peoples Eyes from the Witness of
God in themselves: But the Power of God is gone over it, and will break it
down. And so, this Belial's Spirit, which would be without Yoke, cries (to
such, as in Love exhort them, and judge it) Ye Lord over us. And so this
earthly, dark Spirit (which is gotten above the Witness of God in themselves,
which is not sensible of the moving Spirit and Power of God) it sets up its own
earthly Form, which the Power of God never set up, An earthly Spirit.
but judges. And this earthly Spirit judges all, that are gathered together in
the Power, and that are constrained by the Power and Love of God, in a familiar
way, to take one another by the Hand, through the dearness and nearness of the
Love of God, and the pure, clean and holy Life; and also are moved by the Power
of the Lord God to put off their Hats in Prayer. This dark Sophistical, earthly
Spirit, thus has judged these Practices of the People of God aforementioned,
to be but a Form, which are done in the Power of God, it being out of the Power
it self, and the Fellowship and Unity of it. And because they, that are in it,
are gone (from that which first convinced them) into outward things, and into
their Form in the earthly Spirit, it judges those that will not follow them,
that have lost the Power of God. And thus many of them are darkened with a
cankered, rusty Spirit, which will corrupt them, and has destroyed many: And
this is that, Hardness of Heart.
that has brought the Plague of Hardness of Heart, through which there has been
Strangeness, and not Unity, nor Familiarness, nor Nighness in the Truth; for
how should it, when they are gone from that, which firt Convinced them? To that
all must come, before they have Fellowship and true Unity in the Power and
Truth of God; which, if that had been minded, it would have led to follow,
Whatsoever things are Comely, whatsoever things are Decent, whatsoever things
are of good Report, and such things as make for Peace: But this Spirit has
followed the contrary, and therefore the Power of the Lord God, and the Life
and Truth, is against it, and over it is gone, and reigns.

And ye with your earthly Spirit and earthly Form, have given Occasion to the
World to say, That the People of God called Quakers, are divided, some with
their Hats on, and some with them off, and so they are opposite one to the
other. And these are the Fruits of the earthly Spirit, which would bring
Darkness and Earth over all; but the Power of God is over this dark and earthly
Spirit, and the World, and them that are in it; and looks upon them, and the
World as one against the Truth, and the Power of God. And the People of God
called Quakers, The Unity of the People of God.
are One (and not divided) in the Power of God and his Truth; and in God's
Power and Spirit they are in Unity in the Truth and Power of an endless Life.
This I was moved of the Lord God to write.

G. F.

To Friends that Labor in the Ministry, that their Lives may Preach.
DEar Friends and Brethren, amongst whom the Vine is manifest, Epist. 215.
and who are (by Faith) grafting into it, The Vine made manifest.
through and in which ye may bear Fruit to glorify God; be Wise in all things
and Harmless, that your Lives, Conversations and Innocence may preach, and
reach to the Hearts of all your Opposers and Persecutors. And be Faithful and
Valiant for the Truth upon the Earth, and Tender to one another in all
Convenient outward things, for that is the least Love. And dwell in that which
redeems you from the Earth, the Power of God, in which ye may know the Kingdom,
which is Everlasting, and come to be Hairs of that; that ye may sit down in
your own Possession, knowing the Seed of God, which was, before the Seed of the
Serpent was, knowing the Birth born of the Spirit, The Birth of the Spirit.
which was, before the Birth born of the Flesh was. And so, live in the Truth,
by which ye may see over that, which stains, corrupts, cankers, loads and
burdens the Creation; by which Power of God and Truth ye may answer the Spirit
of God in all, which the Wicked grieve, vex and quench by their ungodly Lusts,
and filthy Conversation and unsavory Words. Fear not Sufferings which bring to
wear the Crown: Fear not him, that can kill the Body only, Through Sufferings,
the Crown.
but cannot hurt the Soul; for that that is Immortal goes over him. Fear God,
and fear not him, hat can spoil the Goods; for the Earth is the Lord's, and the
Fullness of it: But mind God's Power, and let your Patience be Perfect, and all
your Words seasoned with Grace, that they may edify; by which ye may season
the Earth, your Hearts being established in the same, over all the unsavory
Words and Talkers, and live in the Truth above them. And let your Backs and
Cheeks be ready to the Smiters; that ye may overcome the Evil with the Good,
and may heap Coals of Fire upon their Heads. For it is the Good, that overcomes
the Evil, and the Lamb that has the Victory; the rough Goat must not. So, let
your Moderation be known unto all Men, honoring all Men, Honor all Men.
that is, having them all in Esteem; that ye may set them in the Way of
Salvation and Life: That the Power of God may come over them, that your
Meekness and Gentleness may prevail over the rough, and in Boldness in the
unalterable, holy Way you may be preserved; which is the New and Living Way,
which is the Light and Life, which brings into Covenant with God, in which
there is Peace. In which the Lord God Almighty give you Dominion, and preserve
you by his Power, into the endless Life, where ye all may know Happiness and
Peace in the Pasture of Life, where all the Sheep and Lambs feed; in that the
Lord God Almighty preserve you!

Let Copies be sent to Virginia and Maryland.

G. F.

To Friends in New England, and the Islands beyond Sea.
TO all my Dear Friends and Brethren, Epist. 216.
among whom the Precious Truth and Power of God has been declared, and
joyfully received, whose Belief, Confidence and Innocence is spread abroad, who
are come to the Vine, Christ Jesus, that is your Shade; whom Bonds and Death
have not dismayed, for the Worth of Truth sake: And Fetters, Irons, Whippings,
Stripes and Spoilings of Goods, and the like Cruelties and Persecutions have
not daunted ye, whose Courage, Valiantness and Boldness for the Truth,
Valiantness for Truth.
has much appeared among a crooked and perverse Generation, that professed
Christ, and among whom he has not had so much place of Entertainment as in
their Manger in the outward; Dens of Dragons.
whose Hearts are Dens of Dragons and Places of Darkness, and whose Religion
and Profession they have shamed, being unfruitful in the Ways of God and
Christ, Workers of Darkness, whose Iniquity has flourished and Sins, sprung as
the Grass; that their Folly and Shame might cover them, and that they might be
confounded in their Iniquity.

So ye, Power of the Lord God, in his Might, and Strength and Hand, The Power
of the Lord and Might.
that brings your Salvation, stand; in which Power and Arm ye see over that,
which brought Destruction; in which Power (that is, the Gospel) Life and
Immortality comes to Light, and captivateth that, which hid Life and
Immortality; living in the Power of God, see over it, and in that standing, all
your Feet are shure. In which Power of God (the Gospel) which goes over the
Power of Darkness, and was, before it was, ye see before all Transgression, and
how all things were Blessed; which Power goes over all that, which brings the
Curse, Wrath, Woe, Misery, Thraldom, Bondage and Captivity, by which Power of
God that is taken Captive, in that live and dwell; in which ye all have Unity,
Peace, Concord, Love and Fellowship in the Gospel, which goes over the Enmity,
and was, before it was; in that ye bind and unite, and are established, and are
gathered up to Christ, who was, before Transgression was, which has scattered
from God. In the Power of God see over all the Meetings and the Gatherings,
that are in the Transgression, unestablished like Water; in this Power is the
Praying to the Living God, that lives for evermore: And then is the Gospel,
that is Everlasting, The Gospel to all Nation.
preached unto all Nations of Mankind, and all that are drove out from God in
the Power of Darkness; to the intent that they may all come up again to God,
and have Life and Immortality brought to Light by his Almighty Power; that
expels Death and Darkness. So, in this Gospel, the Power of God, let all your
Faith be and stand, then are ye all but One. And so all ye, that have tasted of
the Power, sit down under your own Vine, and abide in it, then will ye bring
forth Fruit through the Power of God and Christ Jesus, who is the Vine, The
Vine.
which goes over the Powers of Darkness, which is the cause of Vnfruitfulness.
Which Power of God, Christ Jesus, destroys the Devil and his Works of Darkness;
and dwelling all in the Power of God, ye will have every one of you a
Habitation in it, For God's Power is sprung up in your Hearts, so, in no wise
abuse it through Strife or Jangling, Strife and Jangling.
for that eats out. But all in the Power of God live and dwell, which makes you
subject to God, and one to another in his Fear, that keeps you from Sin and
Evil, which is the Author of Strife; and through the Power of God ye will be
all kept in Unity, and Peace and Love. And as many as Received the Light, The
Light.
Christ Jesus, the Power of God, which he has lighted you with (who has all
the Power in Heaven and Earth given him) he will give you Power to become the
Sons of God. Therefore every one receive Christ the Light, that has enlightened
you, and ye shall feel the Power, in which Light ye shall all have Fellowship;
which Light will give every one of you, the Knowledge of the Glory of God, in
the face of Christ Jesus, your Savior. And in the Power of the Lord God, which
has gathered you over the Powers of Darkness, and all the Meetings therein, in
that Power of God live, which is Everlasting, and keep your Meetings; Meetings.
in that ye may feel Fullness of Life and Wisdom from above, before that which
is below was, by which ye may all be ordered to God's Glory, and order all
things under your hands to his Honor. Through which Wisdom ye may be a
Blessing to the Lord God in your Generation, and a sweet Savor to him in the
Hearts of all People upon the Earth, yea, the very Heathen, who are enlightened,
to bring them to the Light, which Christ Jesus has enlightened them withal;
that they may come to the knowledge of the same Salvation or Condemnation.

So, spread the Truth abroad, ye that are in it, and have it, Devil is out of,
who has darkened People from God, Spead Truth.
and his Covenant and his Way; through which they are strangers to his Life and
Kingdom, that has no End, and Dominion, that is Everlasting; wandering in
strange Paths in the dark World, that lies in Unrighteousness, which the Devil
has made like a Wilderness, full of Briars and Thorns, that the Lambs in it
can hardly walk or work. Yet work ye Vineyards and Plantations, to the renewing
of Peoples Minds in the Light and Power of God, and the Knowledge of Christ
Jesus, turning them from the Enmity and the Darkness (the Power of Satan) to
the Light, and to God, that they may be Renewed into his Image and Likeness;
that the Image of the Devil, and his Likeness, may be defaced, which is gotten
up in the Hearts of Men and People, since the beginning in Transgression. So,
bring them to the Great Sacrifice, the Lord Jesus Christ, The Great Sacrifice.
the Seed of the Woman, who Offered up himself for the Sin of the World, the
Top-stone, which is over all laid, who is Restoring by his Power, who has all
Power in Heaven and Earth, who is Restoring all things into the place, as they
were in the beginning, and Reconciling in one by his Power, things in Heaven
and things in Earth, destroying that which made the Separation, and broak
Unity, which is the Enmity in Peoples Minds, which the Light, that does
enlighten every one that comes into the World destroys; through which all
People come to have Peace with God, and Fellowship, who do believe in it.

So, spread the Truth abroad, and be Valiant for it upon the Earth, Talent, and
be the wise Virgins, with Oil in your Lamps; The Talent, and wise Virgins.
that ye may enter in with the Bridegroom. Have Salt in your selves, that ye
may savor all things, and keep your Consciences clean and pure unto God and
all Men. Live in the Cross of Christ, and rejoice in it, which is the Power of
God, and goes over all that which lives out from God, and which is in the
Transgression, and its Fruits to which it is Death; to this Cross, the Power of
God, all must bend and bow. And in the Power of God is the Fellowship of the
Cross, The Cross.
which keeps over all the Fellowships in the World, and crucifies to them. And
so, ye who are Heirs of the Power of a World that has no end, and a Kingdom
that is Everlasting, sit down in your Inheritances of the Power, of the
Kingdom, of the Blessing, of the Promise, that are Heirs of the same; that ye
may increase in the Everlasting, in the Blessing and heavenly Riches.

And though the Oppressors of the Earth will not let you have a Foot of Ground,
Power of God to stand in, and so ye that are Heirs of that, Oppressors.
and Christ Jesus, whose the Earth is, and all things therein, and are in the
Power of God separated from the Power of Darkness, the Devil, and are come into
that, which was, before he was, ye have nothing to lose, for all yours is the
Lora's. For they that are separated by Sin and Transgression, into the Earth
drove, there they strick fast, and have much to lose; whose Hearts are
surfeited with the Earth, and to that Glewed; and all their Fellowship is out
of the Cross of Christ, the Power of God, and are within the Power of Darkness,
and its Dominion, over whom it has the Supremacy; which the Power of God goes
over, in which is the Son's Liberty, and the Saints Fellowship, that Lives for
ever, through which they have Eternal Life.

Let this be Copied over, and sent abroad to the Isls unto New England and
Virginia.

G. F.

ALL may Dear Friends and Brethren, Epist. 217.
who of the mighty Power of God have tasted, Life of Truth, Concerning Judging.
and to feel after God in it; unto which ye are turned, as a Way that is Living
and has no End, which is Christ Jesus, who is the Way of Peace, and destroys
the Devil, the Author of Strife. All ye, that are turned unto this living Way
by the Power of the mighty God of Heaven and Earth, Live in Peace one with
another, and Unity; and do not Judge one another, for that eats and wears out
the Good, and begets the Enmity; and hinders growth in Truth: Keep that down,
and live in Love and Peace, that edifies.

And all every where, Word of the Lord God, Live in the Power of the mighty God
of Heaven and Earth, that goes over the unrighteous World, The Power of the
mighty God.
in which is the Strife, and the Devil and his Works; which Power of God was,
before they were; in that ye will feel Unity, which was before Strife. So dwell
in that, in which ye may have a Kingdom, that has no End, and the Dominion
that is above all Dominions upon the Earth. In which Power of God ye may
enlarge your Borders, and spread Truth abroad both to Jews, Christians and
Heathens; having the Power of God, that goes over them all, and was before they
were. With that Power of God ye will answer the Witness of God in all, and
bring them to that; that with that they may have a part in the Kingdom of God;
and a share with you of the same; in which ye will have Peace, Life, Joy,
Dominion and Prosperity. And so, it will be your Life to do good, and to beget
into Life, up to God; and in that Power, that does so, Do good.
ye will not labor in vain. But above all things take heed of Judging one
another, for in that ye may destroy one another, and leave one another behind,
and drive one another back into the World, and eat out the good of one another;
and so hinder Unity, hinder Growth in the Life and the Power of God, in which
ye should have Peace and Joy in one another, and Love, which edifies, and
overcomes, and gets the Victory.

So, go on in the Truth, answering it in every one in the inward parts, and in
the Power of God, which comprehends Deceit, The standing Fellowship.
which was, before it was, in that is your Life, and in that the Kingdom is
felt, that never has an End, and the Dominion over all Dominions; in that
stands your Peace and Joy, in the Holy Ghost, which is the the Spirit of God,
that plungeth down that, which made the Separation from God; in that will be
your Fellowship, which will stand and remain, when all the Fellowships of the
Earth are gone. In which Fellowship in the spirit ye will have Fellowship with
God, the Father of Spirits, and all the Scripture given forth from the same
Spirit, and with all the Saints, that gave them forth, and with their Spirits;
through which Spirit of God ye will be brought, and come to the Spirits of Just
Men, which are made perfect, and to God, the Judge of all. In which (as I said
before) ye will have an Everlasting Fellowship, in which Spirit ye will have an
Understanding, in which Spirit ye will come to worship God, the Father of
Spirits, and in the Truth, which the Devil and his Works are out of, and all
the Will-worshippers. So, in that ye will know the Royal Dominion and Royal
Fellowship; in which Spirit ye will have the Spirit of Wisdom, in which ye will
know how to pray to God, who is a Spirit, and to praise and glorify the
Everlasting God, who lives for ever and ever Amen! And in that ye will come to
know and see to the Beginning, before the World began, and that which
quenches, and grieveth and vexes the Spirit of God, and that prays, and
that preaches, and that praises, and yet grieveth, and vexes and quenches
the Spirit of God; such God, the Father of Spirits accepts not, that judges,
rend to pieces, and tear one another about Inventions.

Now ye being led by the Spirit of God up to God, Father of Spirits, in which
ye have the Fellowship, out of all that you will be kept; and in that Spirit of
God the Lord God Almighty preserve you and keep you, and in that meet and
dwell, Meetings.
in which your Meetings may be preserved over all that, which is in the World,
that are out of the Spirit of God; who are in Confusion, contending about the
Words. Therefore ye in the Spirit of God, answer that of God in them all. So,
in that dwell and live, and let no man take your Crown.

Send Copies of this to all Friends that are convinced in New England,
Barbados, and all the Islands (thereways.)

G. F.

DEar Friends and Brethren,
Let Patience possess your Souls, Epist. 218.
and in the Seed of God dwell; that over all the Top-Stone may be laid and set.
And the Kingdom of Peace dwell in, which has no End; To Friends in Ireland.
in which ye will feel the Supreme Head: And in the Power of the Lord keep your
Meetings, which was, before the Waves were, or Winds either. So, in that look
over all, and keep in the Faith, by which ye will have Access to God over that,
which separates from God; in that ye will have Unity, and will not fear the
Amazements, which are in the Sea, Fear not Amazements.
because of the Winds, and Storms and Blusterings, who know the Election, which
was before the World began. And live in Peace and Unity in that, and send over,
how things are among you ( I am in the North at Swarthmoor.) And Dear Friends
and Brethren, be not troubled, but dwell in the Seed of God, whichgoeth over
all this; and remains and stands, when all this Blustering is ended and gone.
Therefore look at the Lord above all, and his Arm: For God had a Rid in secret,
to fetch down these Persecutors, A Rod ia secret.
which have long reigned in their Wickedness, until they were neither fit for
God, nor Man hardly. So again, God has a Rod in Reserve, to bring down these
Spirits, which have been a Rod. Therefore all dwell in the Power and Spirit of
God, which which ye will comprehend all that, which is to change, with that
which does not change, and has no End; in that live, and ye will have an
Everlasting Unity: And to you this is the Word of the Lord God.

G. F.

ALL my Dear Friends,
Epist. 219.
Dwell in the Life, and Love, and Power and Wisdom of God, and in Unity one
with another; and the Peace and Wisdom of God fill all your Hearts, that
nothing may Rule in you but Life, which stands in the Lord God.

G. F.

FRiends,
Epist. 220.
Truth is that which is Pure, and is that which the Serpent is out of; for
there is no Serpent in the Truth, and it admits of no Impurity: And so there is
no Serpent in the Way of Truth, to bite and hurt any; for the Way being the
Truth, is the same as it was in the Beginning, though many things have risen
against it: Yet it remains the same Pure Truth, and Holy Way. So if any (one)
have gone from it, they are for Condemnation and their Works.

And when any thing is once condemned and judged, let it not be raised up
again, but keep it in the Grave, and raise not up the Dead out of the Grave any
more; they living in the Life and Light which does Condemn and Judge it. And
all live in the Love of God, which gives Dominion over all, and Unites and
Edifies all that abide in it.

If among Friends, Reports to be stopped.
any Reports or Surmises be, about any, or any Back-bitings, or Whisperings,
all such things must be stopped and searched out; for thus says the Lord, Thou
shall not raise a false Report among my People. And that some of the faithful
Friends of every Meeting, whose Sincerity is for the Glory of God, his Honor,
and his Holy Name (into which they are all called) may be chosen to search out
such things, and follow it till they find out the Author or Authors of it, that
it may not lie upon any, nor in any; but that all may be cleared and taken out
of every Mind, and all the Reports stopped; and the things that are for
Judgment, let them be Judged and Condemned.

And furthermore, That Friends take notice of all such Friends as go to Sea,
Seamen, Merchants, Masters of Ships and Passengers, abroad and at home that
profess the Truth, That if they have any ways dis-honoured the Lord God, and
brought an evil Report, either in their Trading, Lives or Conversations, upon
the Truth and the good Land, Directions toward Seafering Persons.
and dishonored the Lord God and his Name, Truth and People; that they may
search into the bottom of it; that so, if they have done any thing worthy of
Condemnation and Judgment, it may be past upon them without any Respect of
Persons: And, if the Report be false, let their Innocence be manifest, and the
Reporter reproved. And so, that all that profess Truth, may walk in the Truth,
and the Light of the Lord, who are Children of Light, who have their Name after
the Living God.

And all to be circumspect, diligent and careful in all these things, that in
no wise God may be dishonored; but in all things your Lives and Words may
Preach, that profess the Truth. And all them, that have gone from England and
dishonored God beyond Sea, to write over Sea, to search out and know the
Ground of the Matter, that all Obstructins that have hindered the Glory of God,
and the spreading of his Truth, may be taken away; that the Lord's Name may not
be dishonored, nor his Way and Truth evil spoken of. And so, all Reports being
searched into, in all the Plantations, concerning Friends there, that if any
one has done any thing to dishonor Truth beyond Sea, let them come to
Judgment and Condmnation, and give forth Papers of the same, that the Papers
may be sent abroad to take off the Reproach from the Innocent, and so answer
the Witness of God in them through their Repentance: And, if they will not
write their own Condemnations, then Friends must write and deny them, and take
it out of the Mouths of the World.

And all Friends, that have dishonored God and his Truth and People, and
Friends have been to Admonish them in a Gospel-Way, and they still go on in
their Wickedness and not Repent; Friends may draw up a Paper at their Meeting
(when they are clear of them) against them and their disorderly Walking, and
unruly Spirits, and Looseness, in general Words, not mentioning the particulars,
except they be notoriously known: And Friends to do this with speed, Cancerning
the disorderly.
and to bring it to the Meetings; and if any one be known to be an open
Offender, that then there may be an open Testimony against him in the
particular; showing how that we have no Unity nor Fellowship with such Workers
of Darkness, and how that they cast out themselves from amongst us, being gone
from the Life and Power of God; in which our Fellowship is. And that Copies of
theh Paper may be read in Meetings, and the Copies of the Papers to be sent to
the Men's Meetings in the Countries where they live.

G. F.

MY Dear Friends all every where, the Power of the Lord God, Epist. 221.
that first Convinced you, and his Light and Truth, all wait and walk in, and
keep your first Habitations in the Power of the Lord God, and in his Light, and
Life, and Spirit, by which all your Minds may be stayed, and kept up to the
Lord God, in the unchangable Light, Life, Power and Spirit. And so ye living in
the unchangable Life and Light, ye see Christ, that does not change, but ends
all Changable things, Types, Figures and Shadows, and destroys the Author of
all evil Inventions and Traditions among all the Sons and Daughters of Adam in
the Fall; and so live all up in the Royal Seed, in which ye have Life, which
Life was before Death; walking in the Light, which was before Darkness, and in
the Power of God, which was before the Power of Darkness was; which Power of
God will keep you out of all feigned Spirits, creeping in a pretense of Love
and Innocence, to draw your Minds out from the Power of God, and your first
Habitations, into some outward things; which will draw the Mind outward from
the Power, and so from your Habitation of Peace; through which, trouble will
enter, as it has done upon some, which now do see, how they have gone from
their Habitation. (Therefore in the Power of the Lord God, which is
Everlasting, in which is the Fellowship, Live; which Power of God is perfect,
in which is the perfect Fellowship, which was before Imperfection was: In which
Power of God is the Joy and Life; and ye keeping in your Habitations of the
Light, Life and Power of God (the Gospel) by which you all see and discern your
own Conditions, with the Spirit of discerning, laying hands on no Man suddenly,
Spirit of discerning.
but proving and trying all things; seeing your own Conditions by the Power of
the Lord, and his Light, by which ye may have the Spirit of discerning, waiting
and walking in the Truth, that ye may adorn it; walking in the Truth, which was
before Untruth was.) And whatsoever is comely, decent, and of good report
follow, and walk in, which is to the answering that of God in every one; for
living in the Power of the Lord God, through which ye have every one a
Habitation in God; by the Power of God ye will come over Enmity, and see before
it was; for its Habitation is in the Earth, and some outward things, but the
Power of the Lord God, and the Truth he is out of (who is the Author of Enmity)
and being gone out of Truth, seeks to bring others out of their Habitations,
the Power of God. Therefore live in the Power of the Lord God, and keep your
Habitations in the Light and Spirit in your own particulars, that by it all
your Minds may be subjected to God; in which you may all live in Peace, Love
and Unity, and the Royal Spirit and Seed of Unity and Dignity, which keeps over
the Spirit of Strife, and was before it; for the Strife among the Sons and
Daughters of Adam in their Fall from Righteousness and Holiness, and the Image
of God is about these outward things. Therefore mind the Power of God, and the
Righteousness and Holiness, and your renewings into it (which was before the
Fall was) and follow that which makes for Peace in the Truth, and in the Life
and Power of God, which Peace will stand, in the same dwelling in Love and
Unity, by which ye may all honor the Truth, which will keep you over all the
fallen Spirits, that are striving, and are busy about that which is in the
Fall, manifesting that they be fallen from the Power of God, and gone from
their first Habitation; in which Power of God is the Peace, in which the
Kingdom stands. Therefore all mind that, and to be Heirs of that Kingdom, that
stands in Righteousness, Peace and Joy in the Holy Ghost: And so feel the Seed
of God over all that set, that makes to suffer, which was before that was, and
will stand and remain, when that which makes to suffer is gone, in which you
may all feel the Life, which was in the Father before the World began: and feel
Christ to reign amongst you, who is the Prince of Peace and Life; and this will
keep you from being tossed and carried about with strange Doctrines (for the
Seed Christ was before they all were, and will remain when they are all gone)
in a pretense of new discoveries and outward things, to bring Peoples Minds
from their Habitations of Life and Truth, which comprehends all things, and see
all things. Therefore mind the Spirit of Truth, and the unfeigned Love, and
Faith that works by it, over all the Feignedness, that by the Shield of Faith,
the Sword of the Spirit, that may be cut down, that none may be deceived by
that, but keep the Unity of the Faith, that gives you the victory and access to
God, and the Unity of the spirit, the Bond of Peace, and the Fellowship of the
Gospel, which is the Power of God; which Power of God was, before the Power of
Satan was, in that Live, and Meet and Walk in the Name of the Lord, which is a
strong Tower (whose Name is the Power) and in the Tower is the Safety, over
Wickedness, and before it was; siting under your own Vine, and abiding in it,
then ye abide in Christ, by whom the World was made, who is the Light, Life and
Truth, and the Power of God; and as ye abide there, ye bear Fruit to the Glory
of God, and through him ye come every one to have a Habitation in God, who
brings out of the Fall, where the Curse is, to the State that Man was in before
he fell, in whom the Saints sit down, in whom are the Pastures of Life, and
riches Eternal, Everlasting, and the Blessing of the Lord, that with that ye
may be clothed. And so Farewell! My Love to all Friends in the Everlasting
Seed of God, that never changes, which was before Changings were, and stands
when all Changings are gone, that ye may know Christ to reign amongst you, the
Prince of Life, and the Prince of Peace, and the Counselor, hearing the Voice
of the Light, the Life, the Power of God, and Truth's Voice, which goes before
you, who will give you Life abundantly, even that which is Eternal.

Now the Professors may see, that the Hireling is fled and flies, because he
was an Hireling, whose Religion was for the Summer, whilst the Sun shined; but
in a Storm, a Tempest, a Mist, or the Sun Clouded, their Religion they flee
from; his Flight is in the Winter: So the day manifests all things. Our
Religion is in the Power of God, before Winter-Storms and Tempests were, Mists,
Fogs or Clouds; in the Light, which shines over them all is our Religion, that
does not change, in which there is Fruit born in the Winter; by which Power of
God all their Religions are seen, which must have an end, and will have an end,
which People runs into. But in the Power of God, and his Righteousness and
Holiness, which was before the Fall was, live; which power of God never alters
not changes, in which is both Life and Peace which remains for ever, in that
dwell and live; and be Faithful and Valiant on Earth, your Hearts stablished
with Grace, and your Words seasoned with the same; keeping your selves in the
Love of God, and in the Life, in which is Peace, through which ye may be all a
Comfort one to another, living in the Life, in which is the Everlasting
Fellowship. And so in that the Lord God Almighty preserve and keep you all.

Let this be read in all your Meetings in Barbados, New England, Nevis, and
sent to Jamaica, Virginia and Maryland, to Friends there; and to all the parts
in the World, where there is Friends: A general Epistle to them all, from
Colchester in England.

G. F.
The 10th Day of the 11th Month, 1662.
A General Epistle to be read in all the Christian Meetings in the World.
Blessed is he that reads, and blessed is he that hears and understands,
and the eyes that see. Read this over, and you may read that which you have not
read, and see that which you have not seen.
MY Dear Friends all every where, in the Seed dwell, which is Christ the
top-Stone over all; Epist. 222.
feel it laid, in which is Life Eternal; which is over Death, and before Death
was, and the Devil, the Power of it; every one sitting under their own Vine,
which is Christ the Life, by whom the World was made, that in that ye may all
bear Fruit to God; and all walking in the Name of the Lord (which is the Power)
then you will walk in safety: For blessed are all you that rise in the Power of
God, and lie down in the same Power; your Beds are pare, holy and undefiled,
who lie down in the Power of God, before Unholiness was. And so you that are
gathered in the Name of Jesus, who have bowed to the Name of Jesus, whose Name
is called, The Power of God, and the Word, Light, Life and Truth; and for
bowing to his Name, for his Name sake have ye suffered all along by many
Powers; Christ a strong Twer.
his Name is a strong Tower: So who have bowed to the Name, and gathered in the
Name of the Lord, ye are in the strong Tower, in which is safety and Peace; for
being gathered in the Name of Christ Jesus, whose Name is above every Name (for
all things that was made, was made by Christ) above all other Names and
Gatherings are you gathered, who are gathered in the Name of Jesus Christ, by
whom all things were made and created; and being gathered in the Name of Jesus
Christ, by which Salvation is brought, by the Name of Christ, and not by any
other Name under Heaven, but by the Name of Jesus Christ is Salvation brought,
by whom all things was made. So ye being gathered in this Name, by which
Salvation is given, here ye come to be Heirs of Salvation, and then to Inherit
Savation, which is Christ; and by this you come to fathom all other Names under
the whole Heaven, and to see them, that there is no Salvation in them; and so
likewise all other Gatherings in all other Names, no Salvation in them;
therefore cry People, There is no assurance of Salvation upon the Earth, who
are gathered in other Names, but not in the Name of Christ, by which Salvation
is brought and given; by the Name of Christ, by whom all things were made; and
this is the standing Gathering; in the Name, in the strong Tower, where is the
safety, where is the Salvation given and brought. Rejoice ye all that are
brought into this Gathering, and have bowed to the Name of Jesus.

Now to bow at the Name of Jesus, who is called, the Power of God, is to bow to
the Power of God; all things in Heaven, and things in Earth, must bow to the
Name of Jesus, before they be Reconciled to God; Bow to the Name of Jesus.
for all things in Heaven, and things in Earth, are Reconciled by him in One:
So they must bow to the Name of Jesus, as they have bowed to the Evil, through
which they are at difference one among another, and not at Unity, but bowing to
the Name of Jesus brings to Reconciliation; for all things in Heaven, and
things in Earth, must bow at the Name of Jesus, must bow at the Power of God,
before they be Reconciled in One. So bow at the Name of Jesus.

2dly, You must bow at the Cross of Christ, which is the Power of God, which
since the Apostles days the Apostate Christians have lost; and therefore they
bow to a Cross, a Stick, a Stone, a piece of Iron, a piece of Wood: Now bowing
to the Cross of Christ, which is the Power of God, that strikes over the Nature
of fallen Man; for who bends, and submits, and yields, and bows to the Power of
God within, feels it to rise over, and strike over, and work over the carnal
Part, and that Part that turns into ungodliness, and all that is bad, and is a
cross to it. So bow to the Power of God: If all Christendom had done this, they
had had a Fellowship in this Cross of Christ, which is a Mystery; but a Cross
Stick, a Cross piece of Wood, or Iron, or Stone, Crosses of Wood, Iron and
Stone.
this is not a Mystery; but the Power of God, that crosses down the earthly,
carnal, ungodly Part in Man and Woman, and works over it, and strikes over it,
and goes over it, and crosses it. There is the Mystery of the Cross of Christ,
the Power of God, in which is the Fellowship; which Power of God keeps the Mind
over all outward things, in the Everlasting Power of God above them; for the
Power of God was before Unrighteousness and Uncleanness, and the Idolatrous
Part in Man was; which Power of God is a cross to it, and in that is the true
Glorying in the Cross of Christ, by which ye all are Crucified to the World,
and Dead to the World, and the World is Dead to you; Dead to the World through
the Power of the Cross. and the World is dead from the Power of the Cross (in
which Power is the Fellowship of the Cross of Christ.)

3dly, The Fellowship of the Gospel, the Power of God, expels away all that
which has darkened the Understanding, darkened the Mind, darkened the Heart; and
by the Power of God, Life and Immortality is brought to Light in you; by which
Power of God ye come to see before that was, that has darkened you from Life
and Immortality, and over that, Life and Immortaliy shines, being in the Power
of God, which was before that was, that had darkened Mankind; and the Power of
God (the Gospel) expels away that which burdened your Spirits, Minds, Hearts,
Consciences and Souls; so that being driven away by the Power of God, and the
Mind set at liberty, the Spirit, the Conscience, the Heart, the Soul that is
Immortal being brought up by the Power of God, here the Soul has its pleasure
in God; then, by the Power of God, Man sees over that which has burdened his
Spirit, Mind, Soul and Conscience, and beyond it, and before it was; where the
Spirit, Soul, Mind and Conscience cries glad Tidings: And here is the joyful
Gospel, and here is the Faith in the Everlasting Gospel, the Power of God; and
here is Life and Immortality come to Light through the Power of God (the
Gospel) which Power of God, the Everlasting Gospel, was before that was, that
darkened Man from Life and Immortality, and has loaded Peoples Minds, Herts,
Souls and Consciences; the Power of God was before that was, and remains when
that is all gone. So now, ye that are come to be Heirs of the Gosepl, know it
your Portion; for as a Man is Heir of a Piece of Land or Hourse, it is his
Portion (which must have and end) and he comes to Inherit it: So Heirs of the
Gospel, it is the Portion of Man and Woman; and they that Inberit it, they
Inherit the Power of God, which has no end; which was before the Power of
Darkness was, which has darkened People from Life and Immortality, and loaded
their Spirits; but being Heirs of that, which was before that was, here you
Inherit the Gospel, you Inherit the Power of God, in which is stability; here
you are Church Members, and here you are Living Stones, and here you are built
up together a Spiritual Household; here the Church in God is known (the Father
of Christ) who is the Way to God, where the Church is; for now, as Adam and Eve
were drove from God, and being in the Fall, there Sons and Daughters have their
Churches enough, heaps upon heaps, one against another, and Heads of every
Church, and there they plead for Sin while they live upon the Earth; but the
Church that is in God, the Father of Christ, does not so; for as Mankind was
drove from God, they must come up again out of that state, where they are
defiled, and be washed, sanctified and cleansed, and brought up out of the
Fall, up to God again. If they come to the Church that is in God, and the
Fellowship which is the Gospel-Fellowship, which is the Power of God, in which
is Stability, before that was, that has unestablished People; the Gospel, the
Power of God was, and before the Devil was, that has unestablished People: In
which Gospel is Peace, Stability, Life and Immortality, which is come to Light
again: In this is the Church Fellowship with Christ in God, which will stand;
for the Gospel is Everlasting; the Church of God is the Pillar and ground of
Truth: Therefore this will stand, when all other Churches and Fellowships
amongst the Sons and Daughters of Men in the Fall, will have an end: Pillar and
Ground of Truth.
The Church in God will stand, the Pillar and Ground of Truth, and the
Fellowship of it will remain. Therefore, ye Heirs of the Gospel (and
Church Members of it) inherit it, and sit down in the Fellowship of the same:
And this is beyond all the Writings, Subscribings and Promisings to the
Church-Fellowships that be among the Sons and Daughters of Adam in the Fall;
that when a storm comes, or a Tempest, they fly from their Church and
Fellowship both: But the Gospel stands, the Church in God stands, the Pillar
and Ground of Truth; which the Gates of Hell cannot prevail against.

4thly, Worship in Spirin and Truth.
The worship of God is in the Spirit and in the truth, that is the Public
Worship which Christ set up; he preached it when he put down the Worship at the
Mountain, and at Jerusalem, and said, God is a Spirit; and they that worship
him, must worship him in Spirit and Truth; and the bour is come, and now is,
that the Father seeks such to worship him: Then the Hour was, that Worship was
set up, above Sixteen hundred Years since, when he denied and put down the
Worship at the Mountain and at Jerusalem, where the Forefathers worshipped: So
this Worship in the Spirit and in the Truth, was contrary to the Forefathers:
This is the Public Worship, and this is not private nor particular; the
Nations Worships are particular, which the Sons of Adam are broken into the
several Worships one against another; but this Worship in the Spirit and in the
Truth, hits all Men and Women; they must come to the Spirit in themselves, and
the Truth in the inward parts; this is public, this is not a private Worship,
but brings every Man and Woman to the Spirit of God in their own Hearts, and
Truth in their inward parts; in which Spirit and Truth they must bow down, and
come into it, if they be Worshippers of God in the Truth and in the Spirit: And
this is the standing Worship that Christ preached up, a-top of the Hill, where
the Forefathers had worshipped: And this Worship is over the Worship that was
at Jerusalem, and over the Worship that was at the Mountain; so by this must
every Man, every Son of Adam, and Daughter, come to the Spirit in their own
particulars, and Truth in themselves; by which they must know God is a Spirit,
and will be worshipped in the Spirit, and in the Truth; and so no Man must
grieve, nor vex, nor quench the Spirit, but all must worship in it, and they
must come to the truth in the Heart, to the hidden Man in the Heart, to a meek
and quiet Spirit; and they must not rebel against the Spirit, if they worship
in it; and all coming to it, they have the adorning, that which beautifies and
adorns them in the Eyes of God; none must walk despitefully against the Spirit
of Grace, nor turn the Grace of God into Wantonness, if they worship God in the
Spirit; if they grieve, vex, quench the Spirit of God within, and turn the
Grace of God into Wantonness, and walk despitefully against the Spirit of God,
and rebel against the Spirit of God within, and are haters of the Light: These
go from the public Worship of God in the Spirit and Truth, to the particular,
which fallen Men have invented; but they that worship God in the Spirit and in
the Truth, are in that which the Devil is out of, and the Dragon's Worship, and
the Beast's Worship, and the Will Worship are out of; who worship in the Truth
and in the Spirit, are over all these Worships: For Truth is before they all
were (and the Spirit) and will stand when they are all gone.

5thly, To pray in the Spirit, this was public, the public Prayer set up
among the Christians; the Temple was the public Place of Prayer among the
Jews; but to pray in the Spirit, which is the Public Prayer set up by the
Apostles: Every Man, every Woman then must come to the Spirit of God in their
own selves; for it will give them Understanding and Knowledge, and give them
Instruction, it will help their Infirmities, it will let them see their wants.
So, in that must every Son and Daughter of Adam pray in the Spirit to God, who
is a Spirit: And this is Public, the Spirit of God in every Man and Woman to
pray with unto God, who is a Spirit; then in this Spirit have they Fellowship
and Unity, and a Bond of Peace; and this moderates all People, and mortifies,
circumciseth and baptizeth. (Now, who grieves, and quenches, and vexes, and
rebels against the Spirit of God within, in which they should pray, they are
like the Jews, Bablers, and go into the particular Forms, and go from the
Public, which is V;niversal, whereby all Men and Women must pray to God, who
is a Spirit, in the Spirit, and keep out of the particular: One has one
Set-Form, another another, that is particular, as I said before; but the
praying in the Spirit is general, by which every Man and Woman might see their
Necessities and Wants, and turn to God, who is a Spirit, for his help: For
Christ the quickening Spirit, and the Spirit of the Lord within, is that which
brings People to life up their Eyes to the Lord in Spirit and Truth, and to
watch and pray, by which they know Temptations; and the Spirit gives them
Understanding, and Wisdom and Power to withstand them.

6thly, Singing in the Spirit is Public; every Man and every Woman in the
whole World, Sing in the Spirit.
they must not grieve it, nor vex it, if they sing in it; and this is Public:
But they that go from the Spirit of God within, they go into the particular
singing, inventing this thing and that thing, and then one will do it, and
another will not do it, and so there is no true Felloship, because it is not
done in the Spirit; and there is no true Fellowship in their Worshipping, nor
in their Praying, because it is not done in the Spirit; for the true Fellowship
in Singing, in Praying, in Worshipping of God, is in the Spirit of God, which
the Devil is out of; for in that is the Bond of Peace.

7thly, The Teachers of the World told us (who called themselves Ministers of
Christ) That they had receved a Gift from Christ, who did ascend on high, and
led Captivity captive; and this Gift was for the work of the Ministry, and for
the perfecting of the Saints, and how that they were to bring People to the
Knowledge of the Son of God, from whence they had received this Gift, and to
the Unity of the Faith, which Faith gives the Victory, and brings to have
access to God, and also to a perfect Man's State, and to the Measure of the
Stature of the fullness of Christ. And thus People followed them, and were glad
that they would bring them to a perfect Man's State, that is, to the State of
Adam and Eve before they fell, for they were perfect then; and when we had
followed them, some twenty, some thirty, some more, some less Years; then they
told us again, that they hoped we would not look for Perfection while we are
upon the Earth, on this side the Grace, for we must carry a Body of Sin about
us; and they hoped we would not look for Perfection, and would not hold the
Erroneous Doctrine of Perfection; and yet told us, as before, That they would
bring us to a perfect Man's State; Perfection.
and so we looked they would have fulfilled their Words; for we have given our
Money, and have spent out Labor in following after them, and hoped they would
have fulfilled their Words, and brought us to the Knowledge of the Son God, and
so to he Unity of the Faith, and to a perfect Man's state, to our Father Adam's
and Eve's state before they fell; and now they have gotten our Money, they hope
we will not look for Perfection here. Oh, Deceivers! We will never set foot
more after them, who will neither fulfill their Words, nor give us our Money
back again; for we gave our Money, that they should bring us to the Knowledge
of the Son of God, and to the Unity of the Faith, and bring us to a perfect
Man's state, and to a Measure of the Stature of the Fullness of Christ: And now
the Scriptures that speak of Sin and Imperfection, they bring to prove that we
should not be Perfect, against their own Promises and Words; and all the
Scriptures that speak of Perfection or overcoming, they tell us there must be a
meaning put to them: And thus they deceived us, instead of bringing us to the
Measure of the Stature of Christ, who never fell, the Second Adam, the Lord
from Heaven, who said, they would bring us to his Stature; and now they cannot
bring us to the Measure of the Stature of the Righteousness and Holiness of our
Father Adam and Mother Eve, that they were in before they fell; for they had no
Body of Sin before they fell, nor Spot, nor Wrinkle, nor Blemish: So, the
Deceivers has got our Money, and now calls that an Error, which they said they
would bring us unto (a perfect man's state) and so will not fulfill their Words,
nor give us our Money back again neither. Thereforenow mark which of these
Theree States the Shepherds, and Teachers and Leaders kept their Flock in, and
do keep them in: Whether is it in the State of Adam and Eve in the Fall, where
the Body of Death, the Curse, Wrath and Woe is, Imperfection, Spots, Wrinkles
and Blemishes, and tell them they must be there for term of Life? Or, whether
or no can they keep them in the blessed and good State of Righteousness and
Holiness, as Adam and Eve was in before they fell? Or, whether or no can they
keep them in the Measure of the Stature of Christ, who never fell. Now consider
which of these Three States do they Shepherds pretend to keep their Flocks in,
that deny Perfection, and say their Sheep must carry a Body of Death on their
Backs while on Earth; for, as the Tree falls, it lies, and htere is no
Repentance in the Grave. Whether it be not in Adam and Eve in the Fall, with
his Sons and Daughters? Or, in that State before they fell, which was a good
State, in Righteousness and Holiness? Or, whether it be in Christ, that never
fell, whom it cost his Blood and his Life to fetch Adam and Eve, and his Sons
and Daughters, out of that State in the Fall (out of the unjust State) to set
them in the State, before they fell; and not only there, but to bing them into
himself that never fell. Now what Value and Price, and Worth have they made of
the Blood of Christ, that cleanses from Sin and Death; and yet told People
that they would bring them to the Knowledge of the Son of God, and to a perfect
Man, and now tell them they must not be perfect on the Earth, but carry a Body
of Sin about them to the Grave? As much as to say, They must be in the State of
their Father Adam and their Mother Eve in the Fall, under the Wrath, Curse and
Woe, and must not come to the State they were in before they fell, to the Image
of God, in Righteousness and True Holiness. And thus the Deceivers are not
worth the setting Foot after; and yet ask them for what End Christ came? They
will say, To destroy the Devil and his Works. And then ask them, if the Body of
Sin and Death be not the Devil's Works and Imperfection? They will say, Yes;
and so are in Confusion: Christ came to destroy the Devil and his Works, they
say, and yet they must carry them to the Grave; and yet People are saved by
Christ, they will say; but while you are upon Earth, you must not be made free
from Sin. This is as much as if one should be in Turkey a Slave, chained to a
Boat, and one should come to redeem him to go into his own Country; but say the
Turks, Thou art redeemed, but while thou art upon the Earth, thou must not go
out of Turkey, nor have the Chain off thee. So says Satan's Messengers, you
are redeemed, but must carry a Body of Death about you, and cannot go to your
Father Adam's House before he fell, but you must live in your Father Adam's
House in the Fall, while ye be upon Earth: Redemption to by the Blood of Christ.
But, I say, you are redeemed by Christ; it cost him his Blood to purchase Man
out of this State he is in, in the Fall, and bring him up to the State Man was
in before he fell; so Christ became a Curse, to bring Man out of the Curse, and
bore the Wrath, to bring Man to the Peace of God, that he might come to the
Blessed State, and to Adam's State he was in before he sell;and not only
thither, but to a State in Christ that shall never fall. And this is my
Testimony to you, and to all People upon the Earth. And so the Teachers of the
World cried, Men are redeemed, but while on the Earth, they must have Original
Sin in them, and that is the Devil, for he is the Original or Sin, and of the
Body of Death, and that they are redeemed; but they must never come to the
State of their Father Adam before he fell, while on the Earth. This is sad
Tidings! Are these Messenges of God, or Messengers of Satan? So you may see by
this where the Shepherds have brought their Flocks, and in what they sit, in
Adam and Eve in the Fall; not in Adam and Eve before they fell, a good blessed
State, but in Adam and Eve in the Fall, a bad, cursed State, and not in Christ
that never fell. Now mark, the Apostle said, He has quickened us, who were dead
in Sins and Trespasses, and has made us to sit together in the heavenly places
in Christ Jesus; that in the Ages to come he might show forth his exceeding
Riches and Kindness toward us. Now the Ages are come, Glory to the Lord God
over all, in the Highest for ever, that this Kindness and this Riches is seen,
that the Apostle's Preaching is fulfilled, who said, He had quickened us, and
made us to sit together in the heavenly places in Christ Jesus. So mark, in
Christ Jesus, [Vs] the Church, [Vs] the Saints, [Vs] the Believers and True
Christians, made us to sit together: Here was their meeting, here was their
sitting in the heavenly Places in Christ Jesus the Second Adam, the Lord from
Heaven, him that was glorified with the Father before the World began, him that
never fell, but fetched Man and Woman out of the Fall, to the State that Man
and Woman was in before they fell; and they not to sit there, in Adam in the
Fall, nor in Adam before he fell, but in heavenly Places in Christ Jesus,
before Adam fell: And there is the safe sitting, in Christ the New and Living
Way, the Word of God, the Power of God, the Light, the Life and Truth, in the
First, and in the Last, in the Beginning, and in the Ending, in him in whom is
no Shadow of turnings nor variableness; in him the Saints sit (the Church) in
Christ the Head, and there is the exceeding Riches and the Kindness known
again: For is not here Kindness and Riches, for Man and Woman to be brought out
of that State in the Fall, to the State of Adam and Eve before they fell:
Christ his Blood, the Prince of our Redemption.
And he that does bring them thither, is Christ, and it is by his Blood, it
cost him his Blood, his Life, and he does not leave them in the State as Adam
and Eve was in before they fell, but he sets them down in himself, who never
fell, a safer State than Adam was in the before he fell. Now who sits he in
the heavenly Places in Christ Jesus, the First and the Last, the Beginning and
Ending, State of Innocence.
the safe Place, in the Wisdom of God. 1. They see where Adam and Eve sat
before before they fell; blessed and in a good State, in the Image of God, in
Righteousness and Holiness. 2. They see where Adam and Eve sat in the Fall,
with their Sons and Daughters, fallen from Righteousness and Holiness, and the
Image of God, where they have no Peace, neither do they see God, State under
the Law
nor have Dominion over the Creation. 3. They see where the Jews sat, in the
Types, Figures and Shadows, and Temples, and Oaths, in the Offerings and
Sacrifices, and there were to sit till Christ the Substance came to end them
all; which Christ the Substance was, before they was. 4. They see where the
Apostles sat in the heavenly Places in Christ Jesus, the Substance of all the
Types, Figures and Shadows, who ended them all, and was before them all, and
will be when they are all gone. 5. States since the Law.
They see where the Gentiles sit, in the Traditions, Inventions, Idols Temple,
which God never commanded. 6. They see where all the Apostate Christians have
sat since the Apostles Days, in the Rudiments, Inventions, Handyworks, and
Traditions, and cannot sit long in them, therefore turn one against another. 7.
Now the Age is come, that the Kindness and Riches of the Lord is seen, which
was manifest among the Apostles and Saints, who sat in the heavenly Places in
Christ Jesus, where many sit now, in Christ the Seed, the First, the Last, and
Beginning and the Ending; and who sits in him, as I said before, sees where all
the Apostatized Christians have sat since the Apostles Days; who have removed
their Seat from the Apostles, and have not sat in the Seat the Apostles and
the Saints sat in; for had they sat in the heavenly Places in Christ Jesus,
him that destroyed the Enmity, the Devil and his Works, they had all sat in
Unity and Peace: And they see where Jews sit, where Gentiles sit, and where
Adam and Eve sat before they fell, and where they sat in the Fall with their
Sons and Daughters, and where the Apostles sat in the heavenly Places in
Christ Jesus: They that sit in Christ, they sit in him the Apostles sat in,
who is the First and the Last, the Beginning and the Ending; they see the Top
and Cornerstone over all set, in which the Life flourishes over all, which
was before the Devil, the Power of Death, and the Power of Darkness was; which
Seed (Christ) bruiseth and destroys the Saints sit, in whom they have the
Pastures of Life, that flows over all, Death, and was before it was, and the
Power of it. 8. So as Newborn Babes desire the sincere Milk of the Word, that
you may grow thereby (mark) the Milk that comes from the Word which was in the
Beginning, by that Milk is the growth, and not in the Traditions, handle not
them, nor the Rudiments, nor the vain Inventions of Men neither, touch them
not, taste them not, for they perish with the using of them; so then they do
not grow by them: But they may say, Thou deniest the Means, because thou do
not handle the Doctrines, the Commandments, the Rudiments that perish with the
using: Now that is not the Means, but that is the Means, the Milk that comes
from the Word, by which thou must grow, thy growth is not by that which
perishes; but, as I said, by the Milk that comes from the Word, which was in
the Beginning, before the false Doctrines, Traditions, Rudiments of Men, false
Churches, false Ways, false Teachings, Worship and Religion was; before all
these was, the Word of God was; thou do not grow by any of those, if thou
should teach them all thy Lifetime, and spend thy Days, thou art never the
nearer, neither do thou grow by them, nor by the Tongues, which makes their
Divines, the beginning of which was Babel, which builds up, and throws down, as
you may see; Did they not build up the Church-Faith and Directory, and now
throw them down again? Here is Babylon; and were they not offended because you
would not touch their Ordinances, and told you, you denied the means. Now does
not the Word of God live, abide, and endure for ever, when they are all gone.
So feed upon the Milk of the Word, that you may grow by that Milk that comes
from the Word, that was before their Tongues; and when you are redeemed from
the Tongues, and see the Beginning of Tongues, Babel, thou that feekest for the
Milk of the Word, Milk of the Word.
thou must seek to before Babble and Babylon was, for the Word was before Babel
was, and stands when Babylon is down: So the Milk which comes from the Word,
is it by which thou must grow up in the things of God; and this keeps the Eye
pure, and nourishes thee up in the Word of Wisdom, Word of Life, Word of
Patience, by the Milk that comes from it, up into the Word of Wisdom (for
Wisdom is with the gray Hairs) and so up into the Life, up into a living,
abiding State; for the Word lives and abides for ever; and by the Milk that
comes from the Word which was in the Beginning, before the Fall of Man was,
with all the Confusions, false Ways, Worships, Churches; the Word was before
they all were, and abides when they are all gone; feed of the Word, the Milk of
it, and be quiet with the Milk by which thou growest and art nourished up to
Everlasting Life, by which thy Fruits will be unto Holiness, and the End
Everlasting Life, feeding upon the Milk that comes from the Word which was
before Unholiness was, and stands and remains when all that is gone; by these
you are all nourished, by this you all grow in a living and abiding State, upon
into the Word Christ, whose Name is called the Word of God, in whom is the
sitting down; so Heirs of Christ, and of Salvation, inherit Salvation, and
Heirs of the Power of an Endless Life, and Heirs of a Kingdom that has no End,
and of a Power of a World to come. So know this to be your Portion every one,
that you may be Heirs of the Blessings, and inherit them that with them you may
be clothed, meeting in the Name, in the ftrong Tower, meeting in the Spirit in
which you may pray unto and worship God, and sing, which is the public Worship
of God, which has been lost since the Apostles Days, by, and amongst the
inward Raveners from the Spirit of God, which have been got up into particular
Worshipping and Praying; which if they come to the Public, they must come to
the Spirit of God, which their Forefathers inwardly ravened from and to the
Public Praying in the Spirit. So dwell in the Love of God, and build up your
selves in the most Holy Faith, and keep the Unity of the Spirit in the Bond of
Peace; and Worship God in the Spirit and Trath (which the Devil is out of) and
in that meet in the Truth, in the Power of God, which wwas before the Devil
was, in which is the perfect Fellowship, the Gospel-Fellowship, which stands in
the Power of God, which was, before the Devil was, or the Fall of Man either,
where all Imperfection was, and is, which the Power of God expels away, in
which is the perfect Fellowship, as I said before; the Worship of God is a
perfect Worship, it is in the Truth, in the Spirit; so the Truth is that the
Devil is out of, and all Imperfection, which Truth was before Imperfection was;
the Worship in the Truth never changes, which is of the God of all Truth, who
is a Spirit; and this is the perfect standing Worship, which will stand when
all the Worships in the Fall is gone, Devil, Dragon, Beast and Will Worship;
for Truth was before they all were; for they are not perfect, being out of
Truth, our of that which is perfect. So all Friends, be faithful and valiant
for the Truth of God upon the Earth: For there are Religions only for the
Summer, while the Sun shines, amongst the Sons of Adam in the Fall; but when
the Storm comes, their flight is in the Winter: So this Day manifests every
Birth of what sort it is, and at that look; it is not professing God, nor
Christ, nor the Scriptures, nor the Ordinances, but mind the Birth, he that is
Born of the Flesh, and he that is Born of the Spirit, together with each
Birth's Fruits: For he that is Born of the Spirit, is the Royal Birth of God,
whose Fruits is above him that is Born of the Flesh below, not in Righteousness
and Love, nor of the Spirit; and so each Birth has its Religion, has its
Worship, has its Praying and its Singing; but when the Winter comes, then is
its flight, and then the Wall-makers are discovered, the Hireling flies
because he is an Hireling; but ye, mind the Power of God, which was before
Winter-Storms was, and such Religions as is while the Sun shines and the Summer
is; but when the Winter comes are gone. Therefore mind ye the Power of God,
that ye may bear Fruit in Winter, and sit under your Vine, Christ Jesus, that
ye may see before Winter-Storms and Tempests was, and that which shall never
have an end, nor change, in this is the pure Religion: And so in the Name of
the Lord being gathered, having bowed to it, then ye are in the strong Tower,
in the deepest Storms and Tempest, being in the Name of the Lord, by whom all
things was made; there is the strong Tower, then ye are safe in all Waves,
Tempests, Winds Hail, Floods, being in the Name of the Lord, your strong Tower.
And so feel the Seed of God ( Friends, and Brethren, and Babes) over all that
set, that makes to suffer, which was before that was, and will stand and
remain, when that is gone that makes to suffer, that in that you may know
Christ's reign, and the Seed to reign, in which there is Life Eternal, and
therein ye will have Life Eternal: and so feel the Top-Stone overall laid; and
hearing the Voice of Christ, which is the Light, the Light's Voice, the Life's
Voice, the Truth's Voice, the Power of God's Voice, which goes before you,
through which ye may have Life Eternal, in Christ's Fold, where his Sheep carry
no Body of Sin upon their Backs, for that is carried in Satan's Fold, which
Christ's Sheep is put out of, in which Life (Christ) did foresee the Hirelings
flying, when the Wolf comes. And so Christendom have more minded the Hireling's
Voice, than Christ the Light's Voice, the Truth's Voice, the Voice of the Life
and Power of God in themselves, they have gone from that, and gone to the Voice
of the Hireling, who flies when the Wolf comes, and leaves his Flock, and cares
not for it. Therefore you that have heard the Voice of Christ, which are his
Sheep, and follow him, who has put you forth, who goes before you, and ye
have followed him; follow him still, and he will give you Life Eternal, for he
is the Rest; and know the sitting down in the Heavenly Places in Christ Jesus,
being Heirs of Grace, which Grace comes by Christ: Now the Grace of God that
brings Salvation, has appeared unto all Men; which if all Men minded it, this
is public, it would teach them to live Righteously, Soberly and Godly, and to
deny the contrary, and then come to be Heirs of this Grace, and Inherit it, and
so Inherit their Teacher that brings Salvation, and so come to enjoy
Salvation, and inherit Christ, in whom is the Light and Life, and in him is the
sitting down in the Salvation.

All keep to the Beauty of Holiness; for in Holiness lies your Beauty; and the
Fruits of Righteousness is a Tree of Life, and the Name of the Lord is a strong
Tower, and the Righteous flee into it, and are safe.

From Cockford in Essex the 12th Day of the 11th Month, 1662.

G. F.

ALL Friends and Brethren,
Epist. 223.
Stand fast in the Power of the Lord God Almighty with the Breast Plate of
Reghteousness, with the Shield of Faith, your Weapons, by which you have
Victory, and have access to God, in which you please him, and in which you have
Unity one with another; take unto all your Spiritual Weapons, and be ready with
the Sword of the Spirit the Word of God, which was in the beiginning, before
Death and the Power of it was: And all the false Worships, Churches and
Teachers; and that your Feet be shod with the Gospel, the Power of God, in
which you have all, Fellowship, (which is a Mystery) by which Life and
Immortality is brought to Light in you all; every one having the Word of God,
which hammereth down all that which is gotten up since the beginning; and every
one having the Sword of the Spirit, the Word of God, which does divide the
Precious from the Vile, in which you have Wisdom, which cuts down all that for
the Fire; which has gotten up since the Beginning, who knows the Earth in
which dwells the Righteousness, and dwell in Righteousness, and Truth, and
Justice and Equity, for in that ye dwell with God; and they that dwell not n
this, dwells not with him, but are such as greves, and vexes and quenches God's
Spirit in them. Be bold and valiant for the Truth upon the Earth, every one
according to your Measure, beholding the Face of God. And fear not the Power of
the Devil, but in the Power of God, which was before he was, tread on his Head;
and know the Honor of the Saints, and the Election in Christ the Seed, which
was before the World began, and your Salvation wrought out, and the Glory of
the Lord to be your Reward. And keep your Faith in the Power of God, in which
you may all know your Health grow, and all your Hearts to be established in
Grace, which is your Teacher, and brings your Salvation, that all may see it is
the Grace of God, by which you stand, which Stablisheth, Seasoneth, Teaches,
and brings Salvation; heed not the Earth, nor the Rudiments of the World, nor
the Swine nor Dog's Vomit, nor Men's carnal Understandings, Wisdom nor
Knowledge; but mind the Wisdom of God, that is pure from above, and keeps so;
and the Spirit that gives the true Understanding, and the right Knowledge of
God, which is Life Eternal; and know your Fellowship to be in the Spirit, which
is the Bond of their Peace, in that live, and keep in it, in which you may have
Perfection, and the perfect Gifts of God. And mind the Worship of God, which is
in the Spirit and Truth, which was before the Devil was, which he is out of,
and his ways: For God's Ways are in the Truth; and in his Power meet, and in
his Life live, in which you may feed in the Pastures of Life, in which Pasture
Christ is the Leader and Shepherd: So all that be plucked out of the fall by
his Crook, which is the Power of God, and that knows him and his Voice; follow
him, and ye will have Life abundantly, and Riches eternal. And every one on
your Watch and Guard keep, against the Enemy that led out from God, out of Life
and Truth. For all the Sufferings is by and through him that is out of the
Truth; so they will live Godly shall suffer Persecution; but you that suffer in
the Truth, and by the contrary for the Truth's sake, the Spirit of Glory will
rest upon you; and if you be evil spoken of for its sake, being faithful on
your parts, Christ is Glorified.

AND Friends, your House being built upon the Rock Christ Jesus, Storms, the
Floods, Rock Christ.
the Tempests you fear not; but all whose House is built on the Sands, the
Floods, the Storms, beats down and washes away, as you may see before your
Eyes. So Friends that are come to the beginning, see over Storms, and Tempests,
and Floods, and live on the Rock, which was before they were; on that you may
rest safe, and in peace. And Friends, Fear not him that can kill the Body, I
say, fear him not that can spoil thy Goods, be not afraid of them; for when
they have done that, they can do more; for the Life is over them all, they
cannot touch that. So mind that which is over them all.

G. F.

DEar Friends, whom Death, Epist. 224.
Bonds nor the outward Creatures can separate from the Love of God in Christ
Jesus, Live in Peace and Love one with another, and keep above that Sraightned
Spirit of Strife, which is below, and out of the Power, and Truth and Life of
God: Dwell in Dominion, in Love, in Life and in Unity one with another, in the
Power of God, which was before the Power of Darkness was, and in the Seed of
God, which was before Enmity was, and that you may all know Christ's Reign. And
feed in the Pastures of Life; and none stain your Virginity nor Holiness, where
lies your Beauty. And all that Minister abroad, walk as Examples to them you
Minister to: And keep in Peace, that you may not destroy them that you do
minister to. So in the Fear of God live, and spread the Truth abroad, and set
the Truth over all, and in it live; in which you will have Unity. So my Love is
in the Seed of God, which is Immortal to you all.

G. F.

FRiends, keep in the Power of the Lord, Epist. 225.
which will bring you over all, to the Fine Linen the Righteousness of the
Saints, and your Bread of Life; and the same Power of the Lord will bring all
your Persecuters to Rags and Poverty: When they have done their Work they will
have their Wages; when the Righteous and Wicked have done their Work, each
shall have their Wages; and so, do not think the Time long: For each must have
their Day to do their Work in, when the Wicked's Sun is gone down, their Day is
ended; and then they are Reconed withal, and paid, and then the People of
God's Day approches,

THE Power of God is over all, P. S.
and they that keep in it, it will carry them over all.

G. F.

MY Dear Friends, Epist. 226.
in the Everlasting Seed and Covenant of Life, be valiant for the Truth upon
the Earth, and dwell in the Power of the Lord God, and never heed that which
makes to Suffer; but the Power of the Lord, which was before it was, and all
live in that, and spread the Truth abroad; and every one improve your Lord and
Master's Money, your Talent, to the advantage of your Lord. And be of good
Faith, and Valiant for the Truth; you who are gathered in the Name of Jesus,
keep your Meetings in his Name, over all the Meetings which are gathered by the
Sons of Adam in the Fall; and look over all Prisons and out ward Boads, which
are in time, and will have an end; at the Power of God look, which has no end,
in which your Life is, and Peace, Crown and Dominion, and think not the time
long, that the Rod of the Wicked should lie on your Backs; but rejoice in
Tribulations and Persecutions, which is for the Trial of your Faith, that it
may be found more precious than Gold that perishes: For remember that Christ
the Word, was Tried, and Christ is the Tried Stone, and all the Prophets,
Apostles and Martyrs were Tried for their Testimony to the precious Pearl, Seed
and Truth; and what Sufferings they had in all Ages were for the same by the
dark World, which was not worthy of them; who were as Pilgrims and Strangers in
the Earth, and many of them forsook their Native Land and Country. And so live
in that which glorifieth the Lord, you who know the Kindness, Love and Mercies
of God, and are made partakes of the Heavenly Riches, and of the Inheritance
that never fades away, and are Heirs of the Kingdom that never has an end,
and are partakers of the Promises and Blessings, that was before the Curse was;
and know the New Covenant made manifest in your Hearts, and the Law of God
there written, and the Anointing within you to teach you, and then you need no
Man to teach you, but as it does teach you. So abide in him, and learn of him,
in whom God is well pleased; and none turn to them which God is not well
pleased with: For you who are Children of God, are not to look for Salvation
from the Hills, neither to look at the Arm of Flesh, nor to put Confidence in
Man, who are redeemed from under the Curse, and the Fear of Man, and are bought
with a Price, the Blood of Jesus Christ; and so are not your own, and cannot do
your own Wills, nor other Men's, but are to glorify your Father which is in
Heaven. And so dwell in the Love of God together, and in Peace, and Unity and
Fellowship in the Seed and Life: For there is your growth, and therein ye grow
in Grace and Faith together: The Lord God Almighty preserve you all in his
Everlasting Arm and Hand, which is his Power, over all to his Glory, bearing
one with another in the gentle Wisdom, which is peaceable and from above: For
how Joyful a thing it is, for Brethren to dwell together in Unity; and hereby
it is known, that you are the Desciples of Christ, if you love one another; and
a Mark, that you are passed from Death to Life, if you Love one another. And so
the Lord God preserve your Minds, and Souls and Hearts, all Holy and Pure to
his Glory; and all live and sit down in Christ the Seed, who is the Faithful
Witness, the Amen, the First and Last, the beginning and ending. No more, but
my Love is to you all, in the Everlasting Seed, Christ Jesus, that never fell.

And Dear Friends keep low, for there is no danger.

G. F.

SIng and Rejoice ye Children of the Day, and of the Light; Epist. 227.
for the Lord is at work in this thick Night of Darkness that may felt: And
Truth does flourish as the Rose, and the Lilies do grow among the Thorns, and
the Plants a-top of the Hills, and upon them the Lambs does skip and play. And
never heed the Tempests nor the Storms, Floods nor Rains, for the Seed Christ
is over all, and does reigh. And so, be of good Faith and Valiant for the
Truth: For the Truth can live in the Goals. And fear not the loss of the
Fleece, for it will grow again; and follow the Lamb, if it be under the Beast's
Horns, or under the Beast's Heels; for the Lamb shall have the Victory over
them all. And so all live in the Seed Christ, your Way that never fell; and you
do see over all the ways of Adam's and Eve's Sons and Daughters in the Fall:
And in the Seed Christ your Way, you have Life and Peace; and there you do see
over all the ways of Adam in the Fall, in which there is no Peace. So in the
Seed Christ stand and dwell, in whom you have Life and Peace; the Life that was
with the Father, before the World began.

The 9th Month, 1663. G. F.

DEar Friends, who have tasted of that which is precious, Epist. 228.
and have felt the Truth convincing of you; and also felt the Power of the Lord
God: I feel something amongst some of you that is not right; and how that such
get up into the wise Part, but are out of the Power, and out of the Life, and
with that Judges, and are beholding the Moats in others Eyes, whilst the Beam
is in their own Eyes: Oh! Abuse not the Power, in which is the
Gospel-Fellowship, which will keep all in Unity, and grieve not the Spirit, in
which is the true Fellowship, and the Bond of Peace. Keep down High-mindedness,
despise not Prophesies, and quench not the Spirit in the least; for that is
Flesh and not Spirit in your selves that does so. Judge not before the time
that the Lord do come, who brings to light all the hidden things of darkness in
you; run not into outward things, that is the fleshly Mind, that will run from
one thing, and so be restless, and will not know what Seat to sit in; after it
has been in one outward thing it will run into another, and call it, his
growth in the Truth, and fall a Judging others; but that Jadgment is after the
Flesh, and there growth is in the Flesh; for the Fruits of it is Strife,
Backbitings, Whisperings, and leads to Idleness, Busybodies from House to
House, Slandering, Scandalizeing, Vilisying, and are in Lightness, out of the
Fear of God, in Varience and sowing Dissension, and these are the Seeds-Men of
the Flesh, and not of the Spirit; and so feeds one another with that which
burdens the Seed, and quenches the Spirit, and destroys the Love and Unity,
which Love you should grow in: So the Fruits of every Birth manifests it
self; the Fruits of the Spirit is Love, and Peace, and Truth, and Plainness,
and Righteousness and Godliness: But the Frutis of the Flesh are Backbitings,
Whisperings, Lyings, Slanderings, Scandalizing. And therefore mind what this
Birth has brought forth (and shame it) that has cried up outward things, and
what it has run into, and what it has drawn you into, that are in it, and
what it has rent you from, and whether you are not come to a loss, and whether
you are not gone into the Flesh, and into the Air, and lost your first
Habitations of Tenderness and Compassion; for every Birth knows its own, and is
grieved when its own is Judged, and that will never love plain Dealing and
righteous Judgment, which is honest and true; but will have the false Prophets
Cushion and Pillow; and can neither endure sound Doctrine nor Judgment. And
therefore mind your first Habitation and first Love, and that which did
Convince you, that you may all come into Life and Power, to sit down in the
Habitation of it, in Love, and Life and Unity, and let there not be a Backbiter
nor Slanderous Tongue, nor Liar, nor Whisperer, Reproacher, nor a Busie-body
found amongst you; for if there be, it will leaven one another, and bring
Darkness and Death upon you.

Therefore, as I said before, Dwell in the Power of God, in which you may keep
Unity, Life, Love and Peace; and in which Power of God you may be drawn up out
of Satan's Power, into the Power of God, in which is my Life, and in it is my
Habitation and Dwelling, where I know the unspotted Garment hid from all the
unclean Beasts Tongues, Lips, Hands and Eyes; and Blessed are all you that
keeps in the Power, and have kept your first Habitation; for you grow up as
Calves in the Stall; and such gad not abroad to change their ways; for the
Birth of the Flesh would have some outward thing to feed upon, but the Birth of
the Spirit reigns over it, Farewell.

Lancaster Prison, the 6th Day. G. F.

FRiends,
Epist. 229.
Let not your Knowledge be after the Flesh, but in the Spirit: Let not your
Fellowship be in the Flesh, but let it be in the Spirit, So, know Unity in the
Spirit.
and in the Gospel: Let not your Affections be in the Flesh, and on things
below, but let them be set on things that are above, and on things that are
heavenly, above the things below: Let not your Souls be subject to the Lower
Power of Darkness, which is out of the Truth, lest you bring Destruction upon
your own selves; but let your Souls be subject to the Higher Power, that is
above the Lower Power of Darkness: Let your Acquaintance and Familiarity be in
the Spirit, over that which would ensnare or entangle you, and bring you not
Bondage: Let all your Minds be Heavenly, and not Earthly: Let all your Minds be
Spiritual, and kept above all that which is Carnal; then they are kept out of
Death, in Life and in Peace. For the Invisible is above all the Visible, and
the Immortal is above the Mortal, and the Eternal is above the External, and
the Incorruptible is above the Corruptible. As Life is above Death, Life, Light
and Truth over the contraries.
and Truth is above Error and Falsehood, and Light is above Darkness, and
Righteousness is above Unrighteousness, so the Goldy are above the Ungodly, and
Holy above the Profane, the Just is above the Unjust, and the true Prophets,
and the true Ministers or Preachers, and Apostles, and the true Desciples are
above all the False. And the true Christ is above all the Antichrists, and God
is above the Devil, and Virture is above Vice, and the true Worship in the
Spirit and in the Truth is above the false, which is out of the Spirit and the
Truth, and the true Belief, and Faith and Hope is above the false Belief, which
is Unbelief, and the Living Faith is above the Dead Faith, and the Hope that is
the Anchor, both sure and steadfast, Anchors the Soul in the great Sea, the
World, Sure Anchor.
when the Liviathan makes a Storm, among the Tongues, Peoples, Nations and
Languages, which are as Waters; then the true Hope stands and stays, and is
sure and steadfast, and keeps the Soul up to God, a-top of the Sea, when the
false Hope of the Hypocrite sinks therein, which are the Waters, and it goes
over them, and in it they are swallowed up. The Unity in the Spirit is the Bond
of the Prince of Princes Peace, and the Fellowship in the Gospel, and the
Liberty in it is a perfect one, above the imperfect, where is Bondage.

G. F.

FRiends,
Stand still and see, be still and hear, sit at Jesus Feet, Epist. 230.
and choose the better thing; to do the Work of God, A Greneral Epistle to
Friends.
is to believe in his Son Jesus Christ the Light; and your Hope and Faith is to
stand in God, and in his Son, walk by that Faith which he is the Author of, and
walk in the Light, and walk in the Spirit: As every one has received Christ,
so walk in him, and so serve God in the Spirit, and worship him in the Spirit
and in the Truth; for God is not worshipped out of the Spirit and Truth. The
Babes Milk is from the Word, and their Bread is from above, and there is no
true Religion, but what is pure from above; and the stayed patient People abide
in their own House, but the Whore is gadding abroad; and there is no true
Church, but where Christ exercises his Offices in and amongst them, and they
are asking their Husband at home, and he is their Head, and the true Marriage
to Christ the Heavenly Man is witnessed, by such as are Flesh of his Flesh, and
Bone of his Bone; none comes to be Children of the Light but such as believe in
the Light; no Sons of God, but by receiving Christ, and by being led by his
Spirit; no coming into all Truth, but by being led by the Spirit of Truth; no
running the true Race in the straight way to get to the Glorious Crown, but
with Patience; no Purifying, but by coming to Christ, the Hope of Glory, the
Purifier; and no overcoming, but by Believing in Christ the Light, and he that
does so, is Born of God: And there is no true Witness within, but the Light,
the Life and Spirit of Christ, the true Record; no true Faith, but that which
Christ is the Author of, which gives Victory; no true Anchor to the Immortal
Soul but by Christ, the Hope of Glory: So by Hope you are saved; no true
Liberty but in Christ, and in his Law of the Spirit of Life, and in his Gospel;
no true Knowledge of God, but by his Light and Spirit in the Heart; no
Salvation, but by the Name of Jesus; no true Praying, but in the Spirit; no
true Singing, but in the Spirit; Wherein true Rest, Peace, Joy, etc. stand, and
are enjoyed.
no true Fast, but that which breaks the Bond of Iniquity; no true Fellowship,
but in the pure Faith, Light, Spirit and Gospel of God and Christ; no true
Foundation, but Christ, to build upon; no true Way, but Christ; no true Seed,
but what Christ has sown in the Heart; no true Rest, but in Christ; no true
Peace, but in Christ; no true Service to God and Christ, but in the Newness of
Life; no knowing the things of God, but by the Spirit of God; no knowing the
Son nor the Father, but by the Revelation of the Holy Spirit; no knowing the
Scriptures, but by the same Holy Ghost that moved the Holy Men to give them
forth; no calling Jesus, Lord, but by the Holy Ghost, by which he was
Conceived; no Grafting into Christ, but by Believing in the Light, which is
called the Light in Men, and the Life in him; no true Wisdom, but from above;
and no true receiving it, but in the Fear of the Lord; and no true
Understanding of Spiritual Things, but what Christ gives; no Divine Reason, but
in the Faith that Christ is the Author of, which gives Victory over that which
is unreasonably, and separates from God; and no true Love to God, but what he
sheddeth abroad in the Heart; and to know a Fellowship with Christ in his Death
and Sufferings, is above the Fellowship of Bread and Wine, which will have an
end; but the Fellowship in the Gospel and Holy Spirit has no end.

G. F.

MY Dear Friends, Epist. 231.
be faithful to the Lord God every one in the Truth and Power of God, and his
Righteousness, that it may flow over all, Rock, which is above all Storms and
Tempests; for now is the Trial of your Faith, now is the Trial of your Meetings
(who are gathered in the Name of Jesus) by them that are gathered in the name
of Adam in the Fall; Time of Trial.
now is the Trial of your Worship, which is in the Spirit and Truth, by such as
Worship out of the Spirit and Truth: And now is the Trial of your Fellowship in
the Gospel, the Power of God; by such whose Fellowship lies in outward things;
now is the Trial of your Church, which is in God, by those that have their
Church in the Fall, unsanctified; and now is the Trial of your Faith, and your
Gospel-Fellowship in it, which is a Mystery, and Christ the second Adam is a
Mystery to fallen Adam, and Truth is a Mystery to all them that are out of it,
and the Light is a Mystery to all the Builders and Stumblers at it, and haters
of it; and Godliness is a Mystery to all the Ungodly. Therefore may you Praise
the Lord, and Bless his Name, who has reveaied these Mysteries to you in the
Day of Trial, by which you may withstand the Day of Darkness, and the Hour of
it. For those that have Oil in their Lamps, enter in with the Bridegroom, who
have heard his Voice at midnight. And so happy and blessed are all you that
have laid up in store against this Day, and the time that is now come, whose
Bread fails not, nor Water, and have found the Landmark of your Everlasting
Portion and Inheritance in the Kingdom, where nothing that defiles can enter.
And therefore be valiant for the Truth upon the Earth, and fear no Amazement,
but fear the Lord, who upholds all things by his Word and Power, in whom is all
your fresh Springs of Life. Live and walk in the second Adam, the Lord from
Heaven; and all keep out of Adam in the Fall, that is Earthly, that you may sit
down in the heavenly Places in Christ Jesus, that never fell, God's care over
his Heritage.
who is your Life, who is your Peace and Salvavation, who redeems you from the
Earth, that you may reign upon the Earth, who makes you Kings and Priests to
God; and blessed be the Lord for ever, who reigns, and lives and rules amongst
his Flocks and Assemblies, Gardens, Plants, Vineyards, Babes, Children, Sons
and Daughters, Servants and Prophets, watering them with the Water of Life,
giving the increase of Life to them; Glory and Praise be to his Name for ever.
And God accepts you in his Son, the second Adam, the Seed Christ Jesus, who
reigns. But God is displeased with People, as they be in Adam in the Fall, as
they are out of Christ. And so in him be faithful, who is your Crown, let no
Man take your Crown from you: Yea, I say, be faithful to him, who was the Lamb
slain from the Foundation of the World, who reigns and sits down at the right
Hand of God, till all his Enemies be made his Footstool; he who was Glorified
with the Father before the World began, sit down in him, the Amen and faithful
Witness.

Let this go among Friends, and dwell in Peace and Love, forbearing one
another, and so fulfill the Law of Christ.

From Lancaster Castle, the 1st Month, 1664. G. F.

Two General Epistles to be read in all the Congregations of the Righteous, who
are gathered out of the House of Adam in the fall, into the House of Christ
that never fell, to be read amongst them.
ALL Friends every where, Epist. 232.
who are gathered in the Name of Jesus Christ, that never Fell nor Changed, yea
into him that never Fell, being Gathered ye will see over all the Gatherings of
Adam and Eve in the Fall, from the Garden of God, and the blessed State, and
from the Image of God, and the Righteousness, and the Holiness that he was in
before he Fell; wherein all is in the confusion in the Fall: The Sons and
Daughters of Adam are broken into the many Gatherings, being in the Fall from
Righteousness and Holiness, and the Image of God and the blessed state that
they were in before they Fell; and so are from the Witness of God, the Spirit
and the Light in their own Particulars: And so as Jacobs prophecy was on his
Deathbed to his Sons, how that the gathering of all Nations should be unto
Shilo, unto Christ Jesus [mark] to Christ Jesus that never Fell, who was with
the Father before the World began, in whom is the Light, Life and Peace and
Rest in this Gathering, and so that Gathering is out of Adam in the Fall, up
into Christ that never Fell, and in him is Safety and Peace; and in this
Gathering you have every one a River, yea of Living Water, in your own Bellies,
which River comes from the Fountain; for all Nations are Blessed in him, Christ
Jesus that takes away the Curse that stood over all Nations, and destroys the
Devil the Author of it; and spreads over the Blessing again, and all are
Blessed in him, and therefore bless and curse not: And all they that are saved
walks in the Light of the Lamb, and so comes to the holy City, that comes down
from God out of Heaven, into which there is no unclean thing enters; in which
City there is no need of the Sun nor Moon, the Lord God and the Lamb is the
Light thereof: Of this City, which fences out all Bad, and Unclean, and
Unrighteous, and the Adulterer and Idolater, and the Liar; and the Power of the
Lord God goes over all the Bad; and they that come into this City are Seved (as
I said before) and walks in the Light of the Lamb. And therefore Friends, all
know the Blessed Truth, which the Devil is out of, which Truth makes you
Blessed, through which you come every one to have a Crown, and so to Feed upon
the Tree of Life, through which you come to Live for ever; the Leaves of which
Heals the Wounded Nations. So you that have bought the Truth, sell it not for
Trifles, neither give it nor leave it; for that which the Tempter will tempt
you unto, is out of the Truth, to outward things; but consider all the Faithful
all along how they Suffered, and by whom, and for what, in all Ages since the
Fall, from the Foundation of the World; since the Lamb has been Slain, not
joining to Men in any thing which the Sons of Adam have invented and set up,
the Sons of God nor the Faithful could not join to: They followed the Lord, his
Counsel, and his Word and Promises, and went through the great Tribulations to
the Rest, as Pilgrims and Strangers to all the Sons of Adam's evil Ways,
Religions and Worships; them that were in the Worship of God, and in the way of
God, Christ Jesus that never Fell, saw over them all.

And take heed of the rough Garments and rough Spirit of Esau's rough Nature,
but mind the plain Jacob, that supplants rough Esau; and mind the constant
Truth, and take heed of the unconstant, and such as are given to changing,
which the Son gives not himself unto, for he ends the changings, the Son Christ
does that never changes, and as every one has received him, so walk in him
that never changes; walk not in the Traditions of the Jews that changed, nor
the Gentiles, nor the Apostate Christians, but in him (as I said before, Christ
Jesus) that never changed, and the Way that never Fell, nor never changed, nor
never will change; and then you will see over all the ways of the Priests, the
Shepherds, the Prophets, and the Teachers of Adam and Eve's Sons and Daughters
in the Fall, that do change, and do fall and stumble, and are turned by every
Wind, you being in Christ Jesus that never fell nor never changed, in whom you
have Life and Peace, and Rest: For to Preach Christ the Way, the Prophet,
Priest and Shepherd, that never fell, and People to receive him, they come out
of all them that does fall, both Prophets, and Shepherds, and Priests ways; and
this is opposite to them all, in which they took Counsel against them that
Preached Christ the Word, which was in the beginning before the Jews Ways and
Traditions were, or the Gentiles, or the Apostate Christians, and he will be
when they are gone. So to Preach Christ, is not to Preach up the Jews
Traditions, nor the Gentiles, nor the Apostate Christians, nor to follow the
Traditions of their Forefathers, but to follow the Word; neither receive them,
nor them that Preach them, and to follow that which lives, and indures, and
remains for ever: And this is the Word that makes the Jews to Grieve, and the
Gentiles, and the Apostate Christians, to Preach the Word which was before
their Traditions were, and their Inventions; and this is the Word which makes
wise Men and wise Women; and the Word is the Seed, which Seed is sown in the
Field, and the Field is the World, and there is Stony, Thorny and Highway
Ground, and Good Ground; and so this is Universal Doctrine, the Universal Seed
hits the Stony, Thorny and Highway Ground, and falls upon all, only it is the
Good Ground that brings forth Fifty, Sixty, or a Hundred Fold Increase; and
such as is the Highway Ground, they are so full of the Fowls, and of the Air,
that it takes it away; and such as are sown among Thorns, they are so full of
the Cares of the World, and the Deceitfulness of Riches, that the Thorns choke
it; and the Cares of the World, they are such Stony Hearts that the Seed has
not much Earth, that when Trials and Persecutions comes with its heats, it is
scorched by the heat of the Sun. And therefore be ye all warned of these
Natures, both of the Stony, and of the Thorny, and of the Highway Ground, and
of the Fowls, and of the Air.

And Friends, keep down feigned Flattery: Keep in the Truth, that brings to
plain-heartedness, that all may be the good Ground, that you may abound in
Goodness, and Righteousness, and Holiness, for Peace is sown to the Righteous,
and Gladness to the upright in Heart; and see that you walk in the Light, and
the Life, that it may be your Life, that you may have Treasure in your Vessels,
that you may enter in with the Bridegroom, having the Oil in your own Lamps,
that you may inherit the Life, that is above all the foolish Talkers which be
out of the Peace (the Second Adam) in whom the Peace is, and the Life; for they
that be in Strife about the Body of Christ, are in Adam in the Fall, and they
are neither at Peace in themselves with God, nor Christ, nor them that be in
Christ; so whatever Men or People profess, their End manifests them, and crowns
them with Death or Life.

So live in the Word, which all ends in the Seed; this keeps over all Pretenses
in the Substance, and over the Airy Spirits that be out of the Life, running up
and down sowing Dissension, Tatling and Backbiting, and Whispering, and
setting one against another.

The Seed Christ is over that Spirit, and he has little room in their Hearts,
for they are abroad in the Fields, Above the World.
lifting up themselves higher than the World, but are worse to deceive the
Simple; but Truth, and the Light, and the Life is over all that, in which all
keep your Habitation; for Adam lost his Habitation, and so his Sons and
Daughters, who are in the Disobedience, are in the Fall; and the Jews lost
their Habitation from the Love of God, and so they lost their Authority, and
were mingled among the Heathen: And the Apostate-Christians lost their
Habitation from the Life and Power that the Apostles were in. And so have
brought all Christendom into Heaps and Sects about outward things, being out of
the Life and Word, which was in the Beginning before the Apostasy and the Fall
was: So live in the Word, in that you have Life, and Dominion, and Authority
over all that which Adam and Eve's Sons and Daughters invented; and also over
all in the Fall: In which Word you have Wisdom, as I said before, and there is
a faithful Witness, Christ, whose Name is called the Word, and he is the First
and the Last, the Beginning and the Ending, the Amen.

And Friends, keep over all the Bustlings, and Wars, and Strife, and the
Talkers of such things among the Sons of Adam in the Fall; you that be in
Christ Jesus that never fell, in whom is the Peace, who makes the First Adam's
Sons and Daughters to break their Swords into Plough-Shares, and their Spears
into Pruning Hooks, that they shall not learn War any more; for they that be
there, are in the foolish State, but they that are in Christ are in the wise
State, and have Spiritual Weapons, though accounted by the World foolish; yea,
the Wisdom of God is so to the Wisdom of the World, which is Foolishness. And
so you that the Lord has blessed in outward things for his Truth, keep over
them and out of them, serving the Lord who has blessed you, lest you be
entangled: So keep above them in the Righteous Life and Conversation, that
Righteousness may flow to all Men in all things; Honesty and Truth, and that
which does Justice, and doing justly, that may flourish; for whose Conversation
is ordered aright, they shall see the Salvation of God; keep out of all Heats
and Passions, and over the tempestuous Spirits, the ground of which is
Uncleanness, all which are up and down, and sudden; which makes a Mountain of
Wickedness and Unholiness; and keeps out of the Holy Mountain. which they that
walk in the Light of the Lord goes to, and they are taught his Ways.

Take heed of a false Liberty in any thing to the Flesh, but keep your first
Love and Habitation in the Power and Truth of God; for the lowly Mind, the
humble, and meek, and broken, and contrite Spirit and Heart the Lord does not
despise, but exalt.

Keep out of the many Words of the World, and take heed of a liberty of going
into them, but keep in the Power of the Lord God; over all, which was before
all, and is over all, that your Lives and Conversations may preach to all Men,
and adorn the Truth of God, and speak in the Hearts of all Men.

Forsake not the assembling of your selves together, as the manner of some was
in the beginning of the Apostasy, which entered into the reasoning Part, and so
went from the Exhorting daily, and the Building, and the Fellowship, and the
Communion of the Saints in the Spirit, and from the Flocks, and the Garden of
God, which he waters with his Water of Life, and feeds with his Bread of Life;
and sets open his broad Rivers of Living Water to drink. And such as forsake
the Assemblies of the Righteous; some for fear of the Earth and Sufferings,
become quarrelling Spirits, and so go out of the Path of the Flocks Footsteps,
and sits not down with the Flock at Noonday, in the heavenly Places in Christ
Jesus; for there the Flocks meet, and there they have all a Fountain, through
which they are all of one Soul, and Mind, and Judgment, and Heart, and Spirit,
and comes to be gathered out of all the Separations, and Sects, and
Fellowships, and Gatherings, and Meetings of Adam and Eve in the Fall, and sits
down in Christ Jesus that never fell, where the Fullness is and the Life: in
whom there is no Shadow, no Variableness, nor Turning, in him that is the Way:
But, Oh, the Poverty, the Shadows, the Variableness, the Turnings, the
Worships, and Traditions, and the Sects that be in the World among the Sons of
Adam in the Fall; Oh the Riches that is in him that never fell, the Peace and
the Life that was with the Father before the World began the Amen.

And Friends, take heed of the vain Inventions and Arts of the World, keep out
of their Rhimes and their Verses, for they are the Arts of Men and stirs up the
light part, and lifts up that, that pertains to it self, that is stirred up,
that will turn in the end to the Strife, or the Earth: But you that lives in
the Word of God that never fell, changes, nor alters, do not, but as you are
moved by it, and that will stand and remain; in whom you may know a Dwelling,
Life over Death, and before it was; for the Serpent that got into Adam and Eve
by Disobedience, they had Dominion over all things that God had made: Yea, over
the Serpent, and he came and told her, they should be as Gods, if they would
eat of the Fruit that was forbidden; and they thought to have been as Gods, and
to be made wise; but the Devil came to be God, and they came to be Slaves; and
so he got into Adam's Heart, and Eve's Heart, through their Disobedience,
through which they lost their Dominion, and the Serpent came to be God of the
World, the Deceiver. Now says the Lord to the Serpent, Upon thy Belly shall
thou go, and Dust shall be thy Meat all the Days of thy Life. So you may see
how the Serpent got into Adam and Eve by Disobedience.

Secondly, He rules in all Adam's Sons and Daughters Hearts that are
disobedient to the Light, the Truth, the Power of God in themselves, and he
darkens their Hearts and Minds, and makes them envious; and from him they have
their devilish earthly Wisdom, and all their invented Arts and Ways that be
bad, that keeps up, and stirs up the fallen Nature that is sometimss puffed up,
and sometimes down, through which the Earth is brought out of its Course, and
the Bonds of Civility broken: So here he that rules in the Disobedient, and got
into Adam and Eve's Heart by Disobedience. which is called the God of the
World, whose Meat is Dust, goes upon his Belly: Now if this Ruler, and this
Governor of the Hearts of such as are Disobedient, who is called the Prince of
the Air, and so whirles them up into the Air, who got into Adam and Eve's Heart
by Disobedience, and rules in his Sons and Daughters Hearts by Disobedience, if
he goes upon his Belly, how go they that he rules? Better than the Ruler, think
you? Must the ruled go better than the Ruler.

Thirdly, If this Rulers Meat be Dust that rules in the Hearts of the
Disobedient, which got into Adam and Eve's Heart by Disobedience, what feeds
the ruled upon then, if the Rulers Meat be Dust; for, can any feed upon Life,
but they that come to the Light and Life, and Truth in their own Hearts; by
which Truth they come to see how he got in by Disobedience, and how he rules
the Disobedient: Now, do you think that the Devil would have any Man or Woman,
or his Messengers or Apostles, to obey the Truth and Light in themselves? then
how can he rule in their Hearts nuless they went out of the Truth? The Devil,
the Serpent, got into their Hearts by Disobedience, and rules the Disobedient;
and therefore it is not like that the Devil, or his Messengers, or Prophets, or
Apostles, would have any Man or Woman to obey the Light, the Truth in their own
Hearts; for, if they obey the Light, the Truth, which the Devil is out of, and
abide just: By this they come to go upright, from under the slavery of him
which upon his Belly goes; they come to feed upon the Life, Christ, which was
with the Father before the World began; not upon the Dust, which he feeds upon,
which is out of the Truth; and they that he rules, are out of the Truth. So
it is no strange thing for him and his Messengers to speak against the Light in
the Heart, for he has made the World like a Wilderness, all wild and rough; he
that got in by Disobedience, and rules in the Disobedient, it is not like that
he would have People to obey the Light nor Life within them; he that is out of
Truth, who got into Adam and Eve by Disobedience, and rules in all them that
are Disobedient, going roaring up and down, seeking whom he may devour: And so
Adam came to be lost, and the Lamb came to be slain, from the Foundation of the
World; and therefore comes Christ the First and the Last, to destroy the Devil
and his Works in Men's Hearts, and sanctifies them by his Blood, his Life, which
was the Sacrifice for the Sins of the whole World, and destroys the Devil and
his Works, through Death; and him that has the Power of Death, and Sanctifies
and Washes Men and Women, and presents them back again to God perfect; but the
Devil would not have Men and Women to own Perfection; who has made them
Imperfect, nor his Messengers; but it is Christ that destroys him and his
works, and says, Be perfect, and presents Men and Women perfect to God out of
the Fall, up to Adam before he fell; and not only there, but up to himself that
never fell, the Royal Seed. And in him keep your Meetings, and dwell in Peace
and Love, that the Fruits of the Spirit may abound among you; for the Fruits of
the Flesh are in the Fall, where the Spirit is grieved; for there they be out
of the Quietness, and out of the Rest and Peace. Therefore in Christ, that
never fell, the Peace, and Rest, and Light, and Life, and the Power and Truth,
live; and God is well pleased, and does accept you in his Son, Christ Jesus, in
the Seed, in the Light, in the Truth, in the Power of God, in the
Righteousness, and in the Wisdom; but God does not accept them nor you, as they
and you be in Adam in the Fall, in their own Righteousness, in their own
Wisdom, out of the Light, out of the Truth, out of the Life, and not living in
it in themselves: And so God does accept you in Christ the second Adam, that
never fell, and is well pleased with you in Christ the Second Adam, that
Righteousness, which was before Adam was, is in Christ that never fell, as you
come out of Adam in the Fall, and live in Christ Jesus that never fell. And so
Christ comes to be manifest in Peoples Hearts, and the Son to be revealed, who
casts out the strong Man, which has kept the House, and spoils his Goods, who
got into Adam and Eve by disobedience, and rules in the Hearts of Adam and
Eve's Sons and Daughters, who are in disobedience: And so Christ the Second
Adam must rule in Peoples Hearts, who are in the Obedience, as he does in all
that have Power, and enjoy Life.

And so be valiant and faithful for the Truth upon the Earth, serving the Lord
in a new Life, that is in Christ Jesus that never fell, out of the old Life of
Adam in the Fall; for the old Life is in Adam in the Fall, where the Spirit is
grieved; and the new Life is in Adam that never fell, who was born in
Bethlehem: Beth is a House, and lathem is Bread, where the fullness is, who will
dry up the River Euphrates with its Froth, which has run so up and down among
the Sons of Adam; that People may drink at him the Fountain, the Water of Life,
through whom you come to know the mighty God of Heaven and Earth, the upholder
of all things, and creator of all things, to his Glory and Honor, being in
Christ Jesus, by whom were all things, who is the Top and Corner Stone, in whom
you all have Life; in him live: And so Farewell; that you may have the
Blessings of the Lord come upon you.

And Dear Friends, keep your Hands, Tongues, Feet, Bodies and Hearts clean and
open, out of all Polutions and Uncleanness; for blessed are all you whose Feet
are guided in the Way of Peace, which is in the Way of Righteousness, through
which the Immortal Life is lived in. And light Words and Jesting all avoid, and
Fables, and foolish Talk; but live in the Power of the Lord that is over all,
through which you follow Godliness and Holiness, without which none shall see
the Lord God.

And blessed be God the Father, who has set Christ over all, who is the First
and the Last, the Beginning and the End, God's faithful and true Witness, the
Amen; in him have you the Book opened, and in him you see all things unsealed,
in him manifest in you, who is your Life, who was with the Father before the
World began, the Amen.

For in this Night of Apostasy from the Spirit and Power, that the Apostles
were in, has all things been Sealed up, and no Man could open; but now is the
Lamb come again, that opens the Sealed Book. And all Friends, keep out of all
the vain Fashions of the World, and over that unchaste Spirit that invents new
Fashions daily, both in Apparel and Diet. Therefore keep Chaste in the Power of
God over them all, that your Lives and Conversations may Judge them in such
things, who devour those things upon their Lusts, which God has given to the
service of Man.

G. F.

The Second EPISTLE.
FRiends, this is the Day of the Trial of your Faith, Epist. 233.
and therefore be faithful; for the Faith is it by which you have Victory and
Access to God; by Faith all the Fiery Darts of Satan are quenched, and by Faith
the Mountains are subdued and removed; and in this Faith all your Sacrifices
are accepted of God, and that gives you Victory and Access to God; and in this
Faith you please God, and that gives you Victory over that which displeased
him; and in this Faith you have all Unity, which is the Faith of God's Elect;
the One Faith, which keeps you in the Oneness, and all the Sacrificers, and
Worshippers, and Religions that is not in this Faith, they are not One, their
Sacrifices nor Offerings God has no respect to, but it is like Cain's, that
went from the Presence of God, and Persecuted about his Religion, who built a
City in the Land of Nod, which signifies, Wandering to and fro, and unsettled,
and tossings to and fro, up and down: And this is the City, that all that
Persecute about Religion lives in, the Land of Nod, tossings, wanderings to and
fro; let them be of what Profession or Religion soever, Heathen, Jew or
Christian, if they be Persecutors about Religion with carnal Weapons, they are
in Cain's Land of Nod, wandering out of the Faith of Abel, of the Elect; in
which Faith God accepts the Sacrifice, and these be in the Land of the Living,
but the Cain's Land of Nod, where the envious Ones are Persecuting others about
Religion; in that Land God has no respect to none of their Sacrifices nor
Religions. The outward Jew had outward Weapons to hold up their outward
Services, for which they had a Command from God; but the Heathens had no
Command from God to hold up their Inventions; and Christ Jesus came to end the
Jews Law and Commandents, that held up their outward Services, together with
their outward Weapons, and all outward things: And he who is the Substance
reigns, for all the Types, and Figures, and Shadows was given to Man, after Man
fell, which Christ that comes to redeem Man out of the Fall, to the State that
he was in before he fell, ends them all, and in him there is no Shadow. So he
sets up a Spiritual Mininstry, and Spiritual Worship, and a Spiritual
Fellowship, and a Church that is without spot or wrinkle, and a Religion that is
pure from above; and this Religion is ruled with Spiritual Weapons. And now
Friends, here you may discern what is set up by Christ and his Spirit, and what
is set up by Man: For Christ who ended the Jews Law and Commandments, who
preached and taught his Disciples, who was to go into all Nations to Preach the
Gospel, to gather People unto him, and to Establish Churches; he gave forth no
Command nor Order, that them that would not hear them, nor receive them, his
Law, his Commandment, his Doctrine, that they should be Persecuted, Imprisoned,
or Banished; though he suffered, and was Blasphemed and Persecuted, and his
Apostles, for publishing forth the Truth; and he rebuked them that would have
had Men's Lives destroyed, and said, that He came to save Men's Lives: And the
Apostles, and the the true Church in the Primitive Times, before the Apostasy,
that were in the Spirit of Christ Jesus, walked in the Doctrine of Christ, and
his Commands, and did not Persecute any about Religion, nor Imprison among
themselves, nor others about Religion, though they had Ordinances and Commands
amongst them for the utmost; and if they did reject the Churches Counsel, they
was to be left as Heathen, which was the utmost Penalty. And so here you may
see, the Spirit of Christ did not Persecute any for not observing that which it
gave forth and set up, which it received from God. Now here is a distinction
betwixt the Spirit of Christ, and the Spirit of fallen Men; for that which
Man's fallen Spirit sets up, which he has invented, and if others will not
fall down to it, and worship it, they Persecute them: This is the Practice of
the Heathen and the Jews, that transgressed the Law of God, and followed their
Inventions, who persecuted the Prophets, and killed the just One. And this is
the Practice of the Spirit of all the Apostatized Christians, from the
Primitive Spirit, which was among the Christians, which was the Spirit of
Christ. So that Spirit that does set up Ordinances, Commandments, Ways,
Religions, Worships, and Persecute others because they will not observe them;
this is the Spirit of the World, that lusts to Envy, and not the Spirit of
Christ: And also those are the Works of Men which they Persecute about, and not
the Works of Christ, which neither he nor his Apostles persecuted about. And so
here is a clear distinction to you, that you may know what leads to the Spirit
of Christ, and what lusts to the Spirit of Envy; for the Spirit of Christ does
not Persecute any that does not receive that which he sets up; but the Spirit
of the World does persecute them that will not receive that which it sets up:
And in this you may try both Fruits and Spirits (as the Rod of Moses devoured
up all the Magicians Serpents) of the Lying Signs and Wonders; so shall the Rod
of Christ, who has all the Power in Heaven and Earth given unto him, who will
rule all Nations with his Rod of Iron. Christ's Rod shall and will devour all
the Serpents and Lying Wonders of the Spiritual Egypt and Sodom, yea, and all
the Serpents that be in all Nations; for all Nations are to be ruled by it. And
Moses Song was sung when his Rod had devoured the Serpents, and the outward
Egyptians in the Sea: So the Lamb's Song shall be known, as all the Spiritual
Egyptians Serpents are devoured by Christ's Rod; and the Spiritual Egyptians
being overthrown in the Sea, the Jews in Spirit shall rejoice and sing the Song
of the Lamb. The Abomination made Desolation, that is spoken of by Daniel the
Prophet, which should come in after the daily Sacrifice was taken way, and
should continue One Thousand Two Hundred and Ninety Days; this Abomination that
has made Desolate from the Truth, Light, Life, and the Power of God; true
Religion, and true Worship, and true Church and Fellowship: So the Beast that
John saw and speaks of, which must continue Forty Two Months, and the Whore,
the false Church upon the Beast; which Beast should be Worshipped Forty Two
Months, the time of his continuing; and the Whore should sit in her Scarlet,
the false Church upon the Beast. The true Church this time has been in the
Wilderness a Thousand Two Hundred and Threescore Days; which is now come out
again, and the Man-Child is come down from Heaven to Rule all with his Rod of
Iron, and the Lamb and the Saints shall have the Victory, who make War in
Righteousness, and are going on Conquering and to Conquer. And so you followers
of the Lamb be faithful and valiant for the Truth upon the Earth, and heed not
your Native Soil, but mind the Birth that is born and brought forth from the
Womb of Eternity, that separates you from your Mother's Womb, by which you
believe in God, and fear not Man, what he can do unto you; neither look at the
Hills for Salvation, for the Lord can make the Rocks a standing Pool, and the
Mountains Streams. And therefore dwell in the Power of God, which was before
the Fall of Man was; whose fallen Spirit persecutes those who are come to taste
of the Power of Christ's Resurrection and Life, and in this Power of God you
will not be weary nor faint, which was before the fallen Spirit was that does
assault you; and in this Power you will have stability, content, comfort, joy
and peace; and keep over that Spirit, let it not have power over you, that may
receive the Truth in a Notion, and may be a little Civilized by it, that is
ready to join with every gainsaying Core, and is ready to wander after every
strange thing that is new, and so will follow strange Flesh, who are uncleansed
by the Power of Truth, and unestablished in it; and such often has their
Religion to seek, that lives in Questionings and Disputings in carnal Reasons,
out of the Power of God, in which is the Fellowship, the one thing, which is
Christ the Substance, in which all Stability is felt, which has little room in
such Hearts.

G. F.

ALL you Prisoners of the Lord for his Truths sake, Epist. 234.
and for keeping the Testimony of Jesus Christ, against all the evil
Inventions, Traditions, Rudiments, Will-Worships, feigned Humilities, and
Self-Righteousness of them that be in the Fall, who are out of God's Power and
Righteousness, who have no Weapons but Carnal, like themselves Carnal: Your
Patience must overcome all these rough and hasty Spirits in the World, and your
Love must bear all things; for Patience obtains the Crown which is Immortal,
which runs the Race: So it is the Lamb must have the Victory over all the
unclean airy Spirits, and over him that is out of the Truth. So, be Meek and
Low, then you follow the Example of Christ, and come to bear the Image of the
Just, who suffered by the Vnjast; and put on his Righteousness, who suffered by
the Unrighteous; whose Back was struck, and his Hair was plucked off, and Face
was spit upon, and yet cried, Father, forgive them. Here he kept his Dominion,
a Sufferer who had the Victory, which the Followers of the Lamb do in Measure
attain unto. So, put on Conrage, put on Patience: Let your Loyalty be known;
for your King that has conquered the Devil, Death and Hell, in walking in
Righteousness, Peace and Truth, feeling the Power of God, teaching every one of
you when that Words are not uttered. And let your Faith be in the Power that
goes through all things, and over all things, and every one hearken to it. So,
the Power of the mighty God know (the Arm) and how it works, and the Hand how
it carries you, which brings out of Tribulation, and Thraldom, and Spiritual
Egypt, into Peace. And this is the Power of God, in which you will feel to
before Enmity was, and be at Peace one with another, then you live in the
Prince of Peace his Kingdom, and Dominion and Life; in which is Unity, which
was before Enmity was, which destroys it. And so in the Power of the Lord God
you are made strong, which goes over the Power of Darkness, and was before it
was, which is out of the Power of God. And all People that are from the Witness
of God in their own particulars, they are all weak and seeble, and stagger. All
Men and Women's Strength is in the Power of God; that goes over the Power of
Darkness. So, feel all this to go through all and over all, Preaching and
working in you; and let the Ear be lent to it, and hearken to it in one
another: And by it feel the Seed raised up in one another, which is Heir of the
Power, that you may know each your Portion. For all People that be from the
Witness of God in their own particulars, that be erred from it, and hate the
Light; they are full of Darkness, Sin and Iniquity: Inspiration and Revelation,
while their Minds are erred from the Spirit of God in themselves, is hid from
them. So, when their Minds are turned with the Light and Spirit of God, toward
God, then with it they shall know something of Revelation and Inspiration, as
they are turned with that of God from the Evil, and emptied of that, then there
will be some room in them for something of God to be revealed and inspired into
them. And therefore in that, they will have Prophesies, and seeing things to
come; being turned from the Evil that has darkened them, and separated them
from God; in which they will see the Covenant, through which they will come to
have Peace with God.

G. F.

FRiends,
Epist. 235.
You who now come to suffer by a Land-Flood, keep on the Rock, for there is
Safety, though a Storm be in the Sea, and the Flood be great, and the Winds
great, and the Way rough and crooked, the Seed Christ can make all plain. And
so think not the Winter and Cold Weather, nor the Night long; for the Lillies
do grow, and the Gardens do give a good smell; and there is a difference
between the Carnal Mind and the Spiritual, and the meetings of Adam in the
Fall, and them that be gathered into Christ the Resurrection, and the Life, and
Power, and Spirit. And the Sun shines, and the Light is clear, and not dim,
that you may see your Way, and Life, though there is a Storm and Tempest in the
Sea. And so mind the Summer, and singing of Birds; and not the Winter and
Night, in which evil Beasts do yell. And so blessed and happy are you that have
the Oil in your Lamps, and have risen at the Voice of the Bridegroom, and have
laid up in store against this Day that is come; which, now all the rich in
Profession, who thought they had something, are come to Poverty, your old
Opposers. And the Rock remains: And therefore all, and every one, from the
Highest to the Lowest, let none take your Crown, but be Faithful, for the
Lord's Ears are open to the Cries of his oppressed and afflicted Ones; he
hears the Groans and Cries, Day and Night, of them: And the Lord's Eye is
open, and he sees all the Actions of Men, and Times and Seasons, are in his
Hands, who is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords; the Strong and All-sufficient,
Omnipotent God, Elshdy, who destroys the Destroyer, and ruineth him that
would destroy and ruin all; who by his Seed destroys him and his Works: And
so in the Seed sit down, in whom ye have Life and Peace; and he remains, and
changes not, who now reigns and is over all; and in him live, that has been
slain-from the Foundation of the World, and prisoned and pressed as a Cart with
Sheaves, and yet gave his Back and Cheeks to the Smiter, and his Hairs to the
Pluckers of them off. And so in him, the Second Adam, you will not be weary,
nor faint, nor think the time long of your Sufferings: For all the Weariness
and Faintings is in Adam in the Fall. And so, your Church being in God, and
your Worship in the Spirit, and Power and Truth, which the Devil is out of; and
your Fellowship in the Gospel, the Power of God, which was before the Devil
was, keep your Fellowship in the Power of God, and look above all outward
Sufferings, and dwell in that which is above all, and will stand when all other
is gone. And so, dwell in the Love of God, and in the Unity of the Spirit, one
with another: And in that, the Lord God Almighty preserve you all; yea, over
all that which is contrary to his Power, to his Glory, for ever. Amen.

G. F.

ALL my Dear Friends, in the Everlasting Power,
Epist. 236.
Life and Truth live, for you cannot live without it, in the Winds and Storms:
And though the Hills and the Mountains are burnt, and the Trees are become
fruitless, and that Winter has devoured the former Fruits, and you do see that
Persecution has choked them, and the Heat has scorched them; whereby the
untimely Figs are fallen, and the Corn is withered on the Housetop, and the
Night is come, and the Evil Beasts go out of their Den: But Truth lives, and
the Power of God is over them all; and Christ rules, and there is Bread of
Lafe, and Water of Life in him, and in his House; though the Caterpillars and
Locusts are agreed to eat up all the Green: But, as you are in the Truth, you
are in its Day; and they in the Darkness, are in the Day of Darkness. And all
who are in the Truth, rejoice through Christ, in the God of Truth, and never
heed Prisons, for they are but for a time; and mind him who has all Times and
Seasons in his Hand: And never heed the raging Waves of the Sea, nor be
troubled at his Tongue that speaks nothing but Tribulation, Anguish and
Bondage; nor be troubled at the Cords of the Ungodly; for the Cords of Love,
the Power of God are stronger: And what does he that sits in Heaven, but laugh
them to scorn? And so be Valiant for the Truth upon the Earth, for the Power is
the Lords. And so my Love to all Friends in the Everlasting Seed, that never
fell nor changes.

G. F.

MY Dear Friends and Brethren,
Epist. 237.
The Lord is with you all every where, who suffer for his Name and Truths sake,
in all your Bonds and Afflictions be of good Comfort, for the Lord is with you;
neither be dismayed at your Sufferings, for if you suffer, Christ suffers;
and if you be persecuted, it is Christ that is persecuted; and if you be not
visited, it is Christ that is not visited; and if you be oppressed, it is He that
is oppressed: And He will lay no more upon you than you are able to bear: And the
Angel of his Presence suffered with the Outward Jew, and Christ suffers with
the Inward Jew in the Spirit: And so has a fellow-feeling with you all, in all
your Bonds and Afflictions; and Christ, who suffers, will overcome all his
Enemies: He reigns, and they must be his Footstool to stand upon. And so, be of
good Faith, and be Valiant for the Turth upon the Earth.

G. F.

MY Dear Friends and Brethren all every where,
Epist. 238.
Keep your Habitation and your First Love, and do not go forth from your Rule
of Faith and Life within; in which you all have Unity and Fellowship, and the
Lord will be your Comforter and Teacher: And if you do not go forth from the
Light, Spirit and Truth within, the Light you will feel to guide and lead you,
and instruct you: And by it you may have Immortality put upon you: And be not
ashamed of Christ Jesus the Light, and Life and Teacher; nor of his Spirit, to
lead you. For, can they find no occasion against you, but because you worship
God in Spirit, and obey Christ Jesus his Command. And so, as the old Cry was,
Away with such a Fellow from the Earth, it is not fit for him to live; so it is
now: But blessed are those that keep their Habitations clean, and live in the
Power of the Lord, which was before the Curse was.

G. F.

A General Epistle to all Friends.
ALL my Dear Friends and Brethren, Epist. 239.
who are of the Royal Seed of God: Patience obtains the Victory, that runs the
Race and obtains the Crown; be married and joined to the Seed Christ the Lamb,
slain form the Foundation of the World; form its Foundation I say: For as you
are joined to the Seed, and married to that which has been slain from the
Foundation of the World, which has the Victory and does overcome; by this you
come to the End of the World; mark, to its End. And now all Friends, look upon
the Sufferings that have been since the Fall, and since the World began. And
again, look upon the Valiant Prisoners, and such as stood with the Lord and for
the Lord, and followed and obeyed his Movings, and Motions, and Commands; with
the Victory they had, how they triumphed in the Lord, over that which was
against the Lord; for by Faith Abraham forsook his Country, and his Father's
House, and his National Worship. And by Faith was Abel's Offering accepted of
God, unto whom God had respect: Therefore did wicked Cain persecute and kill
him about his Religion: And this was not long after Man was fallen from the
Righteousness, and the Power, and the Image of God, which Man was made in. And
by the Faith, and the Power and Wisdom of God did Moses go down and speak to
Pharaoh the King of Egypt, and through the Power, and Hand, and Arm of God he
led them out of Egypt; which signifies Misery, Thraldom and Bondage; though
afterward when they were come out, and had tasted the Power of God, many fell.
And Moses saw Christ, the great Prophet that was to come, which was to build
his House (as Moses by the Wisdom of God had done his, in the time of the Law,
with Types, Figures and Shadows) and so look upon Moses how he conquered all
the Magicians, and comprehended all the Sorcerers, and Southsayers, and
Pharaoh's Religion and their Worship; and could not bow nor bend unto it.

Look upon Joseph, who through the Enmity in his Brethren was sold into Egypt,
who underwent Reproach and Imprisonment; unto whom God gave Power over all at
last, and confounded all the wise Men, and the National Worshippers in Egypt,
and came in Favor over them all by the Power of God: And remember Abraham, who
was in the Faith and the Fear of God; and how Abimalek's House for his sake God
plagued. Therefore keep in the Faith of Abraham, then who wrongs you, the Hand
of the Lord will turn against them: And whilst they stood in the Power of God,
what Victories they had over their Enemies! As instance Sampson, David, and
Saul: But when any went from the Command of God, how under the Heathen they
fell! So, now ye who are come to God's Power, which goes over the Power of
Darkness, and before it was; in that stand, tuiumph, and trample; who are come
to the End of Carnal Weapons and striving with outward Arms: And ye may lood
upon them, how Valiant they were over the Philistines, both Sampson and David,
and his mighty Men, when they were in the Power of God, and how David's three
mighty Men, broke through a whole Host to fetch Water to refresh David:
Therefore now ye in the Power of the Lord, the mighty God, go over all the
Philistines of the Earth, and their Carnal Weapons, as there they in the time
of the Law did with Carnal Weapons: And how often Jacob's Well was stopped up
(the beloved of God, the Second Birth by the Philistines; but Jacob did thresh
the Mountains, as he did arise, and drove them away; by which he might drink
again. So, read this in the Substance, who are come to the Second Birth, which
goes over Esau and the Philistines, both which was before they were: And also
remember how the Prophets were Imprisoned, and put into Dungeons and Stocks,
etc. As in particular Jeremiah, and how they were mocked, and scoffed at, and
reproached, for declaring against the Sins and Wickedness of the Times, both by
Rulers, Teachers and People; and yet by the Power of God they were carried
through, and over all: And the Cry was then, Cursed is he that puts his Trust
in Man, or feared Man, or the Arm of Flesh, etc.

So remember Daniel, and the Three Children, though Prisoners, yet could not
bow to the National Worship, and so were cast into the Fiery Furnace, and the
Den of Lions, unto whom the Lord God gave Dominion over their Enemies, and
confounded the National Worshippers, with all the Magicians, and made the King
to change his Decree and Law. And this was in the Babylonish Monarchy; and when
the Medes and Persians got up, the Power was changed, then they cast Daniel
into the Den of Lions, because he prayed to his God contrary to the King's
Decree, to whom God appeared again and confounded them all, and made the King
or Emperor to change his Decree. Therefore keep Faith in the Power of God, for
that is it by which the Elders of old obtained a good Report. And consider
Mordecay, who stood faithful, and could not bow to proud Flesh, though it was
in danger of destroying all the Jews, over whom, through Obedience to God, he
gave him Victory, by which he came to answer the Good in all People. Now
consider, they that came to profefs Christ, who was the Substance before the
Types, Figures and Shadows, which were held up by the Jews in the Law, and
first Covenant, and Priesthood and Ordinances (which Christ the Substance came
to end) how that I say, the Christians of Old by that kind of People, the Jews,
as you do now suffer the most, and have done by them that are the greatest
Professors of Christ's Words, but out of the Life and Power of Christ, which
the Apostles and Saints were in, in the Primitive Times.

So it is no new thing, and as Solomon says, Here is no new thing under the
Sun; for it is not a new thing for the Birth that is born after the Flesh to
persecute the Birth that is born after the Spirit. And look upon the Apostles,
and consider how they suffered (and by whom) that bore Testimony to the
Substance; their Sufferings were by such as were in the Husks, Shadows,
Inventions and Rudiments of the World, and such as were fallen from God's
Righteousness, Image and Holiness, and not in the renewed State. And consider
how that the Hebrews suffered the spoiling of their Goods by the Hebrews, who
were called Jews, as you may read in the Epistle to the Hebrews; for ye read in
few of the Epistles, that the Gentiles suffered the spoiling of their Goods (or
the Christians by the Gentiles) but mostly by the Jews, the great Professors,
as you do and have done in these Days.

And consider how the Witness has been slain, and (the true Church) the Woman
fled into the Wilderness, who was persecuted; and how she has been fed there
of God; and how since that time the Beast and Dragon's Worship has been up,
and the false Prophet, and the Whore (the false Church) which has riden on the
Beast in the Dragon's Power, whom the People have Worshipped; who has caused
all Nations to drink of the Whore's Cup of Fornication. Now you that have come
to the end, and beyond all the Worships of the Beast, and after the Worship of
the Dragon, who comes now to fathom the Whore (the fale Church) and the false
Prophets, and comes to see the Power, and to be in it, that takes them and and
casts them alive into the Lake of Fire (which has been Worshipped) and burns
the Whore's Flesh with- Fire; which Power gives them Dominion over them all,
and to see to the very Apostles Days, what they were in, and what has got up
since then; for it is Sixteen Hundred Years since the false Prophets and
Antichrists came in (therefore they may plead Antiquity.) Now with the Power
of God ye may look what Tricks they have played in the World, since the
Primitive Times in the Apostasy: But now is the Bride coming up out of the
Wilderness, and the Prophet is arisen and arising, and the Everlasting Gospel
shall be, and is, Preached again to all Nations, Kindreds, Tongues and Peoples,
of them that dwell upon the Earth; and the Reapers and going forth to reap
People down, and so up to God, and to bring them into the Barn, and to gather
the Wheat into the Garner. And People shall come to Worship God, that made
Heaven and Earth, the Sea, and all that is therein, and the Beast's Worship,
and Dragon's Worship, and the great Whore's Church is falling (the true Woman
is coming up) false Prophets are falling, true Prophets and true Witnesses are
rising and fisen: Sing, Triumph and Rejoice, Glory in the Highest, trample,
tread and bow them before the mighty God: Let the Wicked bow before the Gates
of the Righteous: Sing and Rejoice, the Heaven of Heavens Praise the Lord. Now
the Dragon's Worship, Beast, false Church, false Prophet is taken, the old
Dragon cast into the Lake of Fire (and with him the false Prophets) and the
Flesh of the Whore burnt: Reap out, reap out, reap out I say (with the Power of
God) ye Reapers unto the Lord, for here is the Day of Harvest, for as the other
falls, the Day of Harvest is known, a Day of Gathering; for it is that which
hat inwardly Ravened, that has scattered. For the inwardly Raveners, and
Wolves in Sheeps Clothing, whose Fruits have been Briars and Thorns, and
Thistles, are them which have made up the false Church, the Whore, the false
Prophets, and the Beast's Worship, and the Dragon's Worship out of the Truth,
which have made the World like a Wilderness, overgrown with Thistles, Thorns
and Briars, in which lodge the Wolves and Dragons; the beginning of this
Ravening into this State was a matter of Sixteen Hundred Years since, amongst
whom is found the Blood of the Martyrs, Prophets and Saints in the Faith, and
in the Testimony of Jesus, shed in this dark Night of Apostasy, Separation,
Degeneration, with all their compelling Worships, Inventions, Laws, Traditions,
Churches, Rudiments to be observed, and Cups for People to drink: In these (I
say) and among these, have the Righteous suffered since the Days of the
Apostles; and among them is the Blood of the Martyrs, and the Prophets, and
holy People of the Royal Seed found; and by them have they all suffered, and
from amongst them will God fetch his Royal Seed with his own Hand, and with his
mighty Power will he fetch it: Glory over all to him, Rejoice and Sing Praises,
He is now Tryumphing Gloriously, and bringing ye over with his Power, that ye
might see to the beginning before Man fell; and know the State of the Jews in
the Law, and the State of the Christians in the end of the Law, and the State
of the Apostatized pretended Christians since the Apostles Days, out of both
Law and Gospel, how they have gotten up, and in what they have lived out of the
Lofe and Power the Apostles were in, and Christ Jesus, who is the First and the
Last, the Top and Cornerstone, who is over all felt, and lies heavy upon the
Transgressors, who is the Rock, upon which the Lambs leaps and skips; him feel
in you all, then ye may all feel the First and the Last, who destroys the Devil
and his Works (which are imperfect) whose works are Persecution, and Murder,
and Banishment, and Cruelty, and Imprisonment: For the Devil shall cast some
into Prison, says John in the Revelations; and the Devil was a Murderer from
the beginning, and a Liar, whom Christ destroys, and his Works, who was before
he was, and remains when he is destroyed and gone, and his Works.

Therefore in him (the Seed) have ye Life Eternal, and in him meet together,
and then ye are in the Pastures of Life, who is the First and the Last, who is
over Death and the Power of it, and the Pastures of Death, So who are in this
Royal Seed comprehends the State and Time before the Law, the Time of the Law,
the Time of Christians, and the Time of the Apostasy: For the Seed Christ is
the First and the Last, the Beginning and the Ending; and in the Seed is the
stayedness and plainness of Words and Life (yet a Mystery to all them that be
out of it.) And comprehends and sees the State of the Sufferings of the Just
before the Law, and the State of the Sufferings of the Just in the Law, by
whom, and for what they suffered; and also comprehends the State of the
Christians, who lived in the end of the Law, in Christ the Substance, and by
whom they suffered, and for what; even by such as were the greacest Professors,
out of the Lofe of Moses and the Prophets, which, had they been in it, they
would have read Christ the Substance, and all them that testified of him, and
were Witnesses of him: And also comprehends the State, and sees who are them
that Apostatized from the Apostles, and the Church in the Primitive Times, who
have been the Sufferers, and who it is that has made them to Suffer, and for
what.

So the Measuring Line of Righteousness is in this known; and also the State
now wherein the Lamb and the Saints shall have the Victory; and the rising of
the Witnesses, and the Prophets, and the Reapers going forth to Reap the Earth,
and the Woman is coming out of the Wilderness, and the Worshipping of God that
made Heaven and Earth, the Sea and the dry Land is known; and the desturction
of the Devil's Worship, and the Dragon's, and the false Prophets, and the great
Whore (the false Church) and the Saints shall reign, and the Lamb shall have
victory; and the Bride, the Lamb's Wife, shall be known (which is the true
Church, which Christ is the Head of.) So in this live; that is, in the Life and
Power of Christ, in Christ the Substance, in which ye may know him, the First
and the Last, and the Gospel-Fellowship which is preached again; which Gospel
is the Power of God, which was before the Power of Darkness was, which has
darkened Life and Immortality from People; in which Power, Life and Immortality
comes to be brought to Light again to People; in which Power of God is the
Fellowship, which is a Mystery. So wait to know every particular of your
selves, to be Heirs of this; and know your Portion, the Power of God, the
Gospel-Fellowship, then are ye Members one of another, and living Stones, that
build up the Spiritual Household: And also know the Cross of Christ, which is
the Power of God, which Crucifies from the State in the Fall and the Apostasy;
in that State, I say, that Adam and Eve, and all their Sons and Daughters are
in, in the Fall; where, in that State, they glory in the Creaturcs, and in
their Shame, and in their Inventions, or in their Strength, Wisdom or Riches:
But glorying in the Cross of Christ, the Power of God, the glorying is in that
which does Crucify from the State of Adam and Eve, and all their Sons and
Daughters in the Fall; and from this State all the Apostate-Christians are
since the Apostles Days: And in this Power of God is Everlasting Glorying;
which is a Cross to all that live (as I said before) in the Apostasy, and in
the Fall; but not a Cross to them that be Redeemed and Crucified; for their
glorying stands in it which is over all the gloryings in the Fall, and all
Creatures. So in the Power of the Lord God meet, wait, live, and dwell, and
have fellowship; for in the Power, Christ lives: Therefore now you that are
come to know the Gospel preached again which was amongst the Apostles, in this
Power of God you will feel before the Fall of Adam and Eve, where all things
were good and blessed in the Beginning before the Fall; which, after the Fall,
the Curse came, which buought the Woe and Misery: So you that feel the
Redemption out of the Fall, you know the State of the Blessing before the Fall,
how all things were good and blessed: Come into the same Power that brings you
up before the Fall, and brings you to be gathered in the Name of Jesus, which
is above every Name, and be gathered into the Name of Jesus, by which Salvation
is brought; for there is no other Name under Heaven given, by which Salvation
is brought, but by the Name of Jesus. So, ye being gathered in the Name which
is above every Name, and also in the Name by which Salvation is brought, and by
no other Name; in that wait, and meet, and keep together; so ye will feel the
Blessing of the Lord in you, and amongst you. So Farewell.

And consider how the Servants of the Lord, and his Royal People, and Prophets,
feared not Flames, feared not Dens of Lions, or Dragons, heeded not
Prisonments, Bonds, Banishments, Whips nor Scourgings, nor spoiling of their
Goods, and their Tortures; nor feared not their being sawed asunder, nor their
Socks, their Clubs and Staves, nor Persecution; but chose rather to suffer
Reproach with the People of God, then to enjoy the Pleasures of Sin for a
season: And how that Reproaches, Slanders, vilifying Words they regarded not,
but trampled upon such, and said, The Sufferings were not to be valued with the
Excellency and Riches of Grace, which they were made Partakers of. And the Cry
was, What shall separate us from the Love of God, which we have in Christ
Jesus? Shall Death, shall Famine, or Sword, or Persecution, or Cold, or
Nakedness, or Things present, or Things to come, or Height, or Depth, or
Angels, or Men, or Principalities, or Powers, separate us from the Love of God?
etc. For by the Powers were all the National Worships held up, as they are at
this Day, and the false Prophets, the Teachers, and the Powers joined together
then against them that were in the Faith; by which Faith they overcame, and
said, There was not any thing that was able to separate them from the Love of
God which they had in Christ Jesus. Mark Christ the Seed, who destroys the
Devil and his Works; in which Seed (Christ) ye come over the Devil the Author
of all Prisoning, Persecuting, Darkness, Ungodliness, Unrighteousness,
Unholiness; Christ who does subdue all things to himself, whose Kingdom is an
Everlasting Kingdom, and Dominion, an Everlasting Dominion over all Dominions:
And in this Kingdom and Dominion have ye all Peace, where no unrighteous thing
enters: And so in this ye come to be a free People, in Life, and Power, and
Dominion. And there is no new thing under the Sun, for the Wicked cries, Light
is Darkness yet (as of old Time) and calls Good, Evil; and Evil, Good; and
Truth, Error; and cries up the false Teachers and Prophets, for the true; and
false Church and Worship, and the feigned Humility, for the true; and the blind
Zeal, for the good and true Zeal, now as in former Days: And so it is the old
Enemy of Mankind, and his Works, which the Seed destroys, who reigns. Glory for
ever to the Highest.

G. F.

FRiends,
Epist. 240.
All outward Things, Figures, Types, Shadows and Inventions, have been set up
since Adam fell; which Inventions Christ destroys, and the Types, Figures and
Shadows of him he fulfils, and brings Man up out of the Fall, to the State Ire
was in before he fell; and so in the Power of God, into Peace, Love, and Unity,
and into the Everlasting Fellowship. Cain differed from Abel in matter of
Worship; Abraham from his Countrymen and Nation: Likewise in matter of
Worship, Moses and the Children of Israel differed from the Egyptians and
Canaanites, and other Nations, in matter of Worship. Yet after the Children of
Israel were brought out of Egypt by the Power of God, how soon after did they
set up a Calf, an Outward thing? Therefore in the Power of God keep over all
things, and in his Wisdom. And how soon Chora, Dathan and Abyram began to offer
a strange Sacrifice, after they were brought out of Egypt by the Power of God;
and went from the Power of God, in which they should have offered; therefore in
the Power of God keep.

And how soon the Children of Israel (when they multiplied and grew numerous)
offered out of the Life of the Law, and the Power of God; then their Sacrifices
were like unto the cutting off a Dogs Neck, and blessing Idols; therefore keep
in the Life and Power of God. And ye may see Daniel's Religion and Worship
differed from Nebuchadnezzar's the Emperor of Babylon, and likewise differed
from the Chaldeans and Persians, as yours comes to differ now from all the
Apostates, gone from the Apostles, and Christ's Life and Doctrine; and there is
the Mystery of Babylon, as the Jews differed from outward Babylon; therefore
keep in the Power of God, that keeps you to the Beginning. And also ye may see
what differences there was among the Churches in the Primitive Times, about
Meats, Drinks, Days, and Times, but the Apostle tells them the Kingdom of God
stands not in such things, but in Righteousness, Peace, and Joy in the Holy
Ghost; and they were not to Judge one another about such things; for Meats was
for the Belly, and the Belly for Meats, but God would destroy both them and it,
and showed them that it was below Christians to jangle about such things. And
also what jangling was there in the Church in the Primitive Times about
Circumcision, which the Apostle brings them off, and tells them, That
Circumcision nor Uncircumcision avails nothing, but a new Creature. Therefore
mind that New Creature, and the Faith that works by Love. And how also there
was Janglings about Baptism and the Supper, and about Men, some for Paul, and
some for Apollo, etc. But the Apostle directed them all to know Christ the
Seed, in the Male and Female, and told them he preached Christ in them, and bid
them examine themselves, and prove themselves, and to know him to be in them,
otherwise they were Reprobates; and he brings them off from things that are
seen, for the things which are seen are Temporal, but the things that are not
seen are Eternal. Now these things which they jangled about, were things that
were seen, and not Eternal things, but Temporal; for, if they did not come to
Christ Jesus, the Substance of those things, they remained in the Reprobation
from the Life, Truth and Substance. And also what Janglings there was amongst
the Primitive Christians, about Marriage of Believers, and Unbelievers, and the
departing of the Believers from the Unbelievers; which the Apostle told them,
That Marriage was honorable in all, and the Bed undefiled; and how that they
should abide together, the Believer with the Unbeliever; and how that the
Believer sanctifies the Unbeliever, by which their Children were not unholy,
but clean; and how it was better to marry than to burn; though he spoke to the
same Corinthians of a State which was beyond that. And likewise, also how there
was Janglings about Ministers and Teachers, about such as transformed
themselves as into Angels of Light, and such as preached for filthy Lucre, and
such as served not the Lord Jesus Christ, but their own Bellies; which the
Apostle stops all such, and brings them to the Life, and Seed, and Power of God
over them all; and shows concerning Marriage, how God made them Male and Female
in the Beginning; which was the honorable Marriage before the defiled State
was.

And likewise what Janglings there was, whether the Woman should be covered, or
the Man should be covered, when they Prayed or Prophefied; in which the Apostle
set forth a Comeliness among them, of the Man's being uncovered, and the Woman
covered; in as much as the Man was the Image and Glory of God, and the Woman
the glory of the Man. Nevertheless, he would have them to know, that God was
the Head of Christ, and Christ was the Head of the Man, and the Man was the
Head of the Woman; and the Woman was made for the Man, and not the Man for the
Woman. And thus ye may see that these Corinthians were not come up to the State
of Adam before he fell, and of Eve, by the Apostles setting thus forth their
States: And whereas it is said by some, That Christ is the Head of the Man,
etc. Which Head of Man (say they) is the same that is Head of the Woman. Mark,
Now, if it be so, according to this Interpretation (which is wresting) then
Christ must be covered in the Woman, when she Prays or Prophesies, and the
Woman must have Power over Christ, and she be uncovered, then Christ must be
shorn or shaven; which is ridiculous, and shows then a difference of Christ in
the Male and the Female; which is not so, for God is the Head of Christ, and
Christ the Head of Man, as he was made, and Man the Head of the Woman: But as
Woman received the Temptation, and likewise also the Man, and so are both in
the Fall; now this was spoken as Man was made before he fell, which as Man
comes up again out of the Fall, and Woman, Christ in the Male and in the Female
he is Head of both. But now this was spoken to the Corinthians (who were not
come up to the State that Adam and Eve were in before they fell) among whom
this difference about covering or uncovering was, Whether the Man should be
uncovered, and the Woman covered when they Prayed? etc. Which was the comely
Order which the Apostle set amongst them, and told them there should be
Heresies among them, 1 Cor. 11 19.
that they that were approved might be made manifest, and looked upon them as
Heretics, who jangled contrary to his comely Order and Practice, which was, as
said before, spoken to such as were not come to the State of Adam and Eve
before they fell; for they that are come thither to that State by Christ, are
come before outward Coverings were; and them that are come to Christ, are come
to the end of Prophecy, to the Seed Christ, the Top-Stone, in whom all things
end; which Top and Cornerstone is over all that laid that Ends and Changes.
So, let your Life be in that which never ends, nor never changes, and in whom
there is no changing nor altering: And who are come to this, will not go back
again into outward things. And also ye may see what Jangling there was amongst
such as did forbid Meats, and Drinks, and Marriage; and such got up into
worshipping of Angels and compelling Ways, which after a time did separate, and
Apostatize from Christ, and the Apostles, and so afterward became
Antichrists, in an Anti-Liberty, and Anti-Freedom, to such as know all things
good and blessed as they were in the Beginning; which, who are there, are out
of the State which Adam and Eve was in before the Fall, where all the Janglings
are about outward things, which is in the fallen Wisdom; but who are come up
into the Wisdom, and the Seed, and the Life, and the Substance, and know the
State of Adam in the Fall, and his Sons and Daughters, where the Curse, Wrath
and Woe is, and know the State of Adam and Eve before the Fall, how all things
were good and blessed to them: These, I say, are above the Janglings about
outward things; for they that set up outward things are in the Fall, and there
keeps People from going home to the Beginning, and there is the Ground of
making Sects about outward things, which keeps them from the Universal Power of
God, which was before the Fall, and brings up out of it; and that is, not to
preach the Gospel, which is the Power of God, which was before Types, Figures,
and Shadows were, and brings up out of them: And in this Power of God is the
Fellowship of the Gospel, which lasts for ever; so is the Fellowship
everlasting, that never has an end. For all the Janglings in the Apostasy
brings into Sects, and Schisms and Heresies, since the Apostles Days (from the
Apostles, out of the Life and Power of God, as they were in) it has been in
outward things, and about outward things, and their Eyes have been at them, and
about them have been Jangling; which, now ye that have seen the Everlasting
Gospel, and known the Everlasting Gospel preached again, which was among the
Apostles, and have been reaped out from among the Apostates, got up since the
Apostles days; I say, live in it, and dwell in it; in which Life and Power ye
see over to the Apostles Days, by the Spirit that gives to have an
Understanding of things; in which Power of God ye do not only see to the
Apostles Days, but over the Jews Law without, and its Figures, Type, and
Shadows, which was given to the Sons of Men, and of Adam after he fell, in the
Fall, which types out the Life, that is to say, Christ, who redeems up out of
the Fall, which Man was in before he fell, and up into the State of Christ
which shall never fall, unto himself, And in this Man sees the Blessed State,
how all things were Good and Blessed, and how all the Works of God are perfect,
and he himself, God's Work, who set him in Dominion before he fell, as he was
in the Power, Image and Righteousness of God. And so Christ, who brings Man out
of the Fall, whom all the Types, Figures and Shadows, and typical things
figured forth; all which he ends, and is the Substance of all variable and
changable things, in whom all the true Christians have Life, and live in his
Life. Now the Janglings of the Jews against the Christians was, about their
outward things, in the First Covenant, Law, and First Priesthood that held up
these things (in opposition to the Christians) which God had commanded, not
seeing him whom the true Christians witnessed, who restored them out of all the
changeable things, up into the State Man was in before he fell, and before
those Types, Figures, and changeable things were, which since the Days of the
Apostles, and also in their Days, things were getting up, which the Apostles
judged; and setting up also by such whom the Apostles judged and denied, and
set forth Orders and Comeliness among the Saints, and preached up the Substance
Christ, in whom there is no Shadow, Changing, nor Variableness. And that the
Heat of some Spirits got up so high about their outward things, that when they
were not owned nor received, their Sacrifices, and their Will-Worships, and
their feigned Humility, and their observing of Days, and Times, and for bidding
Marriages, setting up their Doctrines, and Traditions, which was not to be
touched, tasted, nor standled, they went enviously into Cain's ay, and Balaam's
and got great Men on their sides, and admired their Persons because of their
Advantage. Such went from the Voice of God, which brought them out of Egypt, as
Core did.

And all the envious Spirits rose against them, that were in the Power of God
in all Ages, because they could not observe their outward things, which they
had set up to be observed, which they that were in the universal Power of God,
which was before the Fall was, could never do; for their Freedom stands in
that; therefore is Cain wrathful (against his Brother) who is the Wanderer and
Vagabond from God's Voice, Way, Life and Acceptance.

So ye may read all, the State in the Fall from God's Power, where the forcing
and compelling to outward things has been, which has kept People out of the
Power, and from coming up to the Beginning again, and from the universal
Fellowship; in which Fall and Apostasy have they broken to pieces into many
Sects, Heads, Heaps, Names and Peoples. Therefore ye all dearly beloved
Friends, that know the universal Power of God, that goes over all the Apostasy
and the Fall (where the Curse, and Wrath, and Woe is) to the Beginning; you know
the Redemption out of this State into the Beginning, where all things are blessed
to you that live in Love and Life, in which ye have the Everlasting Peace with
God. And so keep in the universal Eye, and the Power of God, which keeps you
over all to the Beginning, which is the pure Eye; for the impure Eye is in the
Fall, out of God's Power; for all the setting up outward things in the
Apostasy, and in the Fall, does but keep People from home, and from going home,
that is to the State which Man was in before he fell, up into that State home
again; which, when come thither, he is come both out of the Fall, and also out
of the Apostasy. Now they that do so (to wit, set up outward things) gathers
People to themselves, not unto God, nor home again to their first Habitation;
for they who set up outward things lost their first Habitation, to keep People
in the Fall: Adam and Eve lost their Habitation; Cain lost his Habitation not
doing well; Balaam from his Prophecy and his Habitation not doing well And all
they that went from the Apostles in Cain, Core's and Balam's Way, lost their
Habitations, and so came under a Chain of Darkness. As likewise all they that
are inwardly Ravened from the Spirit of God, who are gone into outward things
since the Apostles Days, in the Apostasy have lost their Habitation, and set up
outward things, to keep others out of their Habitations, and then if they do
not observe them, they are wrathful against them like Cain. And Core went from
his Habitation, from the Power that brought him out of Egypt; and so such come
under the Chain of Darkness, who lose their Habitations, and they that lost
their Habitations, lose their first Love.

Therefore to you all, this is the Word of the Lord God, who have tasted of his
Power, and believed in his Light, and enjoyed his Light, by which ye see his
Seed, keep your Habitations, then ye keep your first Love, then ye keep Unity
and Fellowship, then ye keep Dominion. And let Cain, Balaam, Core, and all the
Apostates, and the Devils out of Truth, and the Sons of Adam in the Fall, Roar
and Rage never so much, ye in your Habitations and in your Houses coming up to
the Beginning, ye are safe and at peace: In which ye feel the Power, and Life,
and Seed of God, that never alters nor changes, in which ye have the Blessing
and Promise of God; and know the State where the curse is, to them that goes
from their Habitation, and so lose their First Love. In which ye in your
Habitations and first Love abiding, the Power of God, and his Seed the
Top-Stone is over all set. And in the Wisdom of God ye come to answer that of
God in every one, and so come into Dominion, and the Habitation, in which ye
hear the Voice of God, and see the blessed State, where all things are Blessed,
as I said before, before the Apostasy, that Man was drove from God, in which ye
feel Life and Power, and the Seed which remains, when all that which is in the
Fall and Apostasy is gone; in which ye know the Kingdom of the Son of God that
lasts for ever; in which ye know the Worship of God in Spirit and Truth, which
the Devil is out of; and the Fellowship of the Gospel, which was before the
Devil was; and the Fellowship of the Cross, which crucifies from the State of
Adam and Eve, with their Sons and Daughters in the Fall; and in that be glad
and rejoice, in which ye have Settlement and Stablishment, and come to the
Church in God.

Therefore ye in the universal Seed of God, and Power of God, which fathoms all
things that never ends nor changes; in that all dwell and live, that the Seed
ye may feel over all set, and the Top-Stone over all laid, which is the First
and the Last.

G. F.

DEar Friends,
Keep your Meetings in the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ that never fell,
Epist. 241.
in which you may see over all the Meetings that are gathered by all the Sons
of Adam, that are out of the Power and Life. You that are gathered in the Name
of the Lord Jesus Christ that never feel, him will you feel in the midst of
your Gatherings, in the Light, Life and Truth: And so look (over all the
Wicked's Prisons) at the Seed of God, Christ, which was before they were, and
will stand when they are all gone.

And so never heed the Wicked's Tempest, Storm, nor Hail, nor his Arrows nor
Instruments of Cruelty; let nor the Back and the Hair, the Cheek and the
Shoulder be ever turned from him; though many Weapons be formed against him and
his followers, yet they shall never Prosper, for the Seed Christ shall reign
over all, and will stand when they are gone, which was before they were.

And so be Faithful unto the Lord God, and be Valiant for his Truth upon Earth!
Showing that something will oppose it, or else what need the word Valiant be
spoken? And so mind the Truth (and not the Wicked's Persecutions) and the
Living Way, which is Christ Jesus, who never fell nor changes, in which you
may see over all Adam's Sons and Daughters Ways in the Fall, who do change,
being in the Way, Christ Jesus that never fell, who does not change; in this
Way you have Life Eternal, in which you see over all in the Fall (in which is
Death) and so Christ being the Way, he that forsakes his Way, forsakes his
Life; and he that does not come out of the Way of Adam that fell (into the Way
of Adam that never fell) lives in Death. So let all haste and run for their
Lives into Adam that never fell, out of Adam that fell; for Adam's Ways that
fell, are the Ways of Death; but Adam that never fell is the Way of Life: In
Adam in the Fall is Trouble and Unquietness; but in Adam that never fell is
Peace and Rest: In Adam in the Fall is Shadows and Turnings; but in Adam who is
the Living Way is no Shadows nor Turnings. So every one in Adam that never fell
(Christ Jesus) who never changes, the same yesterday, to day, and for ever,
then you are in the Living Way, in which you all have Life, in Christ the
Living Way, which never fell: And so He is the Way, and he that forsakes the
Way, Christ, forsakes his Life. In this all may sound forth, Who has any thing
against this Way Christ, who nevr fell nor changed? 'Twas Adam changed, and Eve
changed, and their Sons and Daughters in the Fall are in the falling, changing,
changable Ways: But who are in Christ that never fell, sees over them all in
the Fall, that turns about with every Wind as it arises. And so in your Way
live, all in Christ Jesus, so will you feel Light, Life and Power; that Life
which was with the Father before the World began: In that all Feed, and in that
feel Power, and that way never changes with the Winds and Tempest; and the cry
is, Haste, haste, out of Adam and Eve's evil Ways, in the Death, Fall and
Changings; and run, run, out of them into the Second Adam, the Life, and the
Way that never fell nor changes.

G. F.

The Saints Weapons are Spiritual, that the Blessing of God may come upon all
Men.
Epist. 242.
but desire, that the Blessing of the Lord may come upon all Men, and that
which brings the Curse may be destroyed; and in patience do we wait for that,
and with Spiritual Weapons against it do we wrestle, and not against any Man or
Woman's Person: For amongst Us Christ is King, who brings the Blessing, and
destroys that which brought the Curse: And whoever dwells in Righteousness
(Man or Woman) and loves Mercy, and does Justly, and walks Humbly with God, and
has the Humility, which goes before the Honor, we are not against. But
whosoever does Unrighteously, or does not Justly, nor Righteously, nor walk
Humbly before God, and will have Honor before Humility, God will overturn such
by his Power: And in that let your Faith be; for we look not at Persons, but at
the Power of God; and know the reign of Christ amongst us. And as it is said,
God save the King, or God bless the King; we would not have him nor any Man
destroyed, but saved; and so blessed.

And the saved Man will not suffer any thing to rule that destroys; and so our
Mind is, and we would that all Men were saved, and come to the knowledge of the
Truth, which the Persecutors are out of.

And all Friends, dwell in the endless Power of the Lord, in which the
Supremacy is known, and the Power which has no end; whose Dominion is over all
Dominions, and will stand, when all other have an end; and in that is the
Patience felt, which runs the Race, and obtains the Crown; and that has
the Wisdom, which is sweet and cool, and pure, whereby the living Truth has
the Supremacy and Dominion, and in that keep your Meetings.

G. F.

ALL my Dear Friends, Epist. 243.
this is your Day to stand in him that stood steadfast, Adam and the Devil, and
all the Persecutors. Old Adam did not stand, but Christ the second Adam the
heavenly Man stood, and never fell: Ye, I say, in him stand; for now is your
time to stand in the Life over Death, and in the Light over Darkness, and in
the Seed that bruises the Serpent's Head, in whom you all have Life, Dominion
and Peace.

The Lord is coming upon the Wicked in his Thundering Power, for they are ripe:
For they are all corrupt with Blood, and their Flesb is rotten; and they are
all fallen into the Pit, being led by their Blind Guides into the Pit and
Ditches, where they are rot and stink, being putrified with the heat of their
Lusts.

G. F.

To Friends in Barbados, Virginia, Maryland, New England, and elsewhere.
OH! Epist. 244.
You all that have tasted of the Power of the Lord God, and of his Truth, that
is pure, and does not admit of any impurity nor change: O! therefore the holy
Truth mind, which will let nothing that is unholy in you live: For nothing that
is unholy can enter into the Kingdom of God; and none that are disobedient to
Truth must enter into the Paradise of God; Disobedience was Man and Woman put
out of Paradise. And therefore all every where, mind the pure Power of the Lord
God, and the Truth which first Convinced you; and whatsoever is gotten up
through the Carnal Reason, and your Eyes going from the Power of God, and that
which does Convince you; let that be purged out of your Hearts; if not, it will
lift up your Hearts to Consultations, Subtilty, Questionings, Reasonings and
Disputes. Oh! I fell too much of that which has gotten up into the wrong
understanding part, through which wrong Liberty gets up, which will bring a
Plague into the Heart, which is worse than an outward Plague. O therefore
consider, the Life and the Power of God has not the Supremacy in all your
Hearts; for I feel some Minds, and some Bodies have let in that which has
defiled them, and does defile them: O Cleanse, cleanse, cleanse, and join to
the pure Immortal Power; for the Power of the Lord God will make room for it
self, either in cleansing, or in vomiting, or casting out them, and that that
does not join to the Power of God: Sodom, that Whorish and Adulterous Spirit,
it must to the Fire; and gainsaying Core into the Earth: And it will throw down
that which has been lifted up. The Beesom of the Lord is going forth to sweep,
the Candle of the Lord is lighted to search every corner of your Houses; for
the Just walks in the Path, which is a shining Light, which admits of no
rubbish in it. O come out of all these things which you have entertained in
your Minds, which you received not from them that came to minister unto you in
the Beginning: O dwell in the Power of the Lord God, for to keep you low; and
take heed of getting up into Conceitedness and the Air, and to set up that
which pertains not to the Kingdom of God, but to Strife, which never the
Apostles, nor the Saints since, in the Power of God set up; for if you do, the
Power of God will sweep it and you all away. And O you that come to be Vessels
of Honor, and Vessels of the Mercies of God, have esteem of your Bodies; for
such as defile their Bodies, are neither Vessels of Honor, nor Vessels of the
Mercies, but of Wrath, and are for the Wrath. Therefore keep out Strife, keep
out Fornication and the Adulterous Spirit; keep out the Lusts of the Eye, the
Lusts of the Flesh, and Pride of Life, which is not of the Father; that that
which is of the Father, may be received, and have an entrance into every
Vessel. O be not lifted up with a vain Mind; and let Balaam's Nature be slain,
that erreth from the Spirit, and raises Stumbling Blocks; and such as keep not
their First Habitation in the Power of God and his Truth, become Enemies to
such as are Heirs of the Kingdom, and the Power of an endless Life. Therefore
all Friends and People, mind that which first convinced you, that Power of God
which first awakended you, and arise and live in it, that all your Eyes, Minds
and Hearts may be kept single and naked to God, and to one another; and
uncloathed of all that which is contrary, and is got up since: For the Seed and
the Life of Christ Jesus reigns and rules, Glory to him for ever.

I have been incapable to write or receive Writing along time, or to speak, or
bear to be spoken to, but have been as a Man buried alive, for else I should
have writ to you before now; and therefore, O Dear Friends, give no occasion of
stumbling; keep tender; for hardness of Heart is worse than an outward Plague,
for that brings Destruction many ways: And so grieve not the Spirit in others,
nor in your selves. And whatsoever is decent and comely follow; honest and of a
good report; that makes for Peace, and not for Strife under pretense of Love;
for that is not of God: For God who is Love, is not the Author of Strife and
Confusion, but of Peace.

So, I desire you to let Copies of this be sent into Virginia, Maryland, and
New England, to be read amongst Friends in all their Meetings. Things are
pretty well here, Friends being in Love and Unity, and the Dread of the Lord
God is amongst us, who reigns, and will reign.

G. F.

An Epistle to be read in all the Assemblies of the Righteous.
ALL my Dear Friends every where, Epist. 245.
live in the Noble Seed Christ Jesus, the Savior and the anointed One, and the
Righteous Holy One, that your Minds, Hearts, Souls, Spirits and Bodies may be
Righteous, living in the Righteousness of Christ Jesus in all Love, Virtue,
Truth and Holiness, without which none can see God: For the Lord loves the
Righteous, and the Righteous are in Peace, and all Workers of Iniquity their
Mouths shall be stopped: The Throne of Iniquity must down, and the Chamber of
Imagery in every Heart; for the Lord must have the Heart, for it is to be his
Offering and Sacrifice: All Lips must be pure, and Hands clean, that confess
the Lord Jesus Christ, and all Tongues and Eyes single to God and one to
another; and all mind the Lord's Business in the Truth, and be given up to him,
and in it, serving the Lord God in newness of Life; that all your Feet may be
guided in the Way of Peace, and to walk uprightly before the Lord in his Way,
which is Christ Jesus the Light, which is Perfect. This is the Way of the Just,
which is a shining Light; and in this Way is the Living God well pleased with
you. And you that grow rich in the World in earthly things, who have had a
stirring in you formerly in the Service of God, take heed lest your Minds run
into your outward Businesses, about outward things, and therein be lifted up
above the good and just Spirit, and so leave the Service of the Lord and his
Business, in minding your own: For outward Riches, and the things of this
World, will pass away with the outward Riches therein, for they have Wings; but
the Word of the Lord, which lives and abides, and endures for ever, will
remain. Labor for the Riches of it, for that will endure with you; and seek
the Kingdom of God, which will never have an end, that stands in Righteousness
and in Holiness, in which you have Joy and Peace in the Holy Ghost; then all
outward things will follow, which is below: So that in Righteousness, Holiness
and Truth, as just Men and holy Men, and Men fearing God, and as righteous Men,
Sons, and Servants and Children of God, you may all live, in all Righteousness,
Holiness, Pureness, Truth, Justice and Equity, in all manner of Life and
Conversation; so that your Conversations may shine as Lights of the World,
knowing that all Unrighteousness, Uncleanness, Unholiness, Unjustice, Untruth
and Impurity is not of God, but is out of the Kingdom of God; and likewise all
Cheaters and Cozeners, who do enrich themselves by Falsehood; and all Drunkards,
Adulterers, Whoremongers, Fornicators, Murderers, Idolaters and Liars; these
Works and Workers are out of the Kingdom of God and his Power, and they are of
their Father the Devil, who is out of the Truth: And therefore in the Truth
live, which the Devil and his Works are out of; and that Truth makes you free:
In which Truth and Spirit is God worshipped. All that do violence, cursed
Speakers and Swearers are out of the Truth and the Command of Christ Jesus; and
therefore live you in the Love of God, in which you may be sensible of his
Mercies; in which Love, you living in the pure Humility, you learn of Christ
Jesus: For Presumption is learned of Adam in the Fall, of the Serpent that
brought him into the Fall, where all the Defilement is, and the Profaneness:
Being in the Whoredom from God, where all manner of Whoredom and Uncleanness
is, and Deceit and Falsehood, the Liar, and all Sin and Unrighteousness and
Transgression: And this is comprehended all to be in the Fall, with the Serpent
that brought them into the Fall, whose Head Christ comes to bruise, that is, to
break his Power and Srtength, and to destroy him and his Works. And Christ is
Pure, the Holy One that does this, the Righteous One, the Holy One, and in him
live, the Second Adam that never fell; then shall you come to know a State that
will never fall, in that which is First and Last; for Christ that sanctifies he
is Pure, who sanctifies the Impure; he who never fell, sanctifies and washes
them that are in the Fall; he who never transgressed, redeems out of
Transgresson; he who never sinned, redeems out of Sin, and makes an end of it;
and he who never trespassed, comes to forgive Trespasses, and blot them out:
And every one that comes to witness this Forgiveness by him, who have been the
Trespassers against God, they cannot but forgive Men their Trespasses against
them, as they come into the Kingdom of Glory and Life, where the Lord has his
Glory. O the Glory of the Lord which lasts for ever! And Glory, Glory be to
him for ever, whose Everlasting Glory, and life and Power shines over all, and
spreads it self, and puts forth it self over all.

O Friends, let Righteousness flow amongst you all, Truth and Equity,
Vprightness and Holiness, which becomes the House of God; and live in the holy
Order of the Life, Spirit and Power of the Everlasting God. Keep in the Faith
that works by Love, that purifieth your Hearts; the Mystery of which is held in
a pure Conscience; which Faith brings you to have access to God, and gives you
Victory over that which separates from God. This is that by which you subdue
Mountains, and quench the fiery Darts of Satan, and overcome him withal; and in
this you have all pure Unity; and you edify and build up in the Holy Faith the
Gift of God; and this is that which is to be contendd for, which is the same
that was once delivered to the Saints. O live in the pure Hope, which purifies
you as he is Pure; which Hope is Christ, who was before the Hypocrites Hope
was, who both (him and his Hope) are impure; and so feel Christ your Hope,
which anchors your Immortal Souls, that stays it in all Waves, Storms and
Tempests, and is sure and safe in all Weathers; Christ, who is the same to day
as he was yesterday; so no new thing: For he is the Rock of Ages, who was
before Ages; who is the Cornerstone, and also the First and Last, who will
crush and bruise to pieces all giddy, wandering and unstablished Spirits, and
confound them who are cunning, and hunt before the Lord; for the Lord should go
before them, he should be the Guide: For they that hunt before him, will not
have the Lord to be their Guide, who is the same to day as he was yesterday,
and so for ever: For Adam and Eve did not abide in their Possession, not Cain,
nor Core, nor Balaam; see what came upon them, and what was their end: And
likewise the Jews did not abide in the Possession of the Law of God, which was
Just and Holy: And also the Apostatized Christians have gone from Christ, and
did not abide in him, who is the same yesterday, to day, and for ever;
therefore they are gone into so many Ways, and seek after so many new Ways, and
run into so many Fables, as though Christ, who is obeyed one day, should not be
obeyed next day: And this is disobedient Cain, wandering in the Land of Nod,
smiting at Abel, who obeys Him, who is the same to day as he was yesterday, and
so for evr; yea a Lamb slain from the Foundation of the World; who reigns over
that Nature that has slain him, and will reign till he has put all under his
Feet. And therefore, Friends, in Christ live, and in him walk, hear, obey and
follow him, who is the same to day as be was yesterday, and so for ever: And so
you that are the true Believes, who ar past from Death, and Sin that brought it,
and the Devil the Author of it, are come to the Life of Christ Jesus; who (as I
said before) is the same to day as he was yesterday; if your Belief stands in
him that is the First and Last, the same to day, yesterday, and for ever. And
this is the Believer that is born of God, the Immortal Birth; and this Birth is
he that overcomes the World, that does not Sin, that keeps himself, because he
is born of God, and the Seed of God remains in him; and hereby the Children of
God, and the true Believers are manifest from the false Believers and Children
of the Devil. He that does Righteousness is of God; he that does not
Righteousness, is not of God. Therefore you that feel the Law of the Spirit of
Life in Christ Jesus, to have put down the Law of Sin and Death in you (that
Authority of putting it down) Be ye ordered by the Law of the Spirit of Life
that is in Christ Jesus, which makes you free from the Law of Sin and Death: So
in this Law of the Spirit of Life in Christ Jesus have you Fellowship, Order,
Rule and Government in the Law of Life, and in the Law of Peace that gives
Victory, which Christ Jesus is the Author of, who renews you up into the
Righteousness and Holiness in the Image of God, out of the Unrighteousness and
Unholiness, and the Image of Stan. Here the Lord has the Glory, and Christ
your Holy Redeemer and Savior is confessed, to the Glory of God. So wait that
you may all sit down in Christ, who is the First and the Last, and the Image of
God, and Wisdom of God; that by his Wisdom, which is Pure, Righteous and Holy,
you may come to order all things to God's Glory.

Adam fell from the State God placed him in; and in the Fall, Adam's Sons and
Daughters turn from Way to Way of their own. But for Man and Woman to come out
of all National corrupt Ways, Religions, Churches, Worships, Fellowships and
Teachers, to the State that Adam and Eve was in before they fell, and no
farther; that is State where he may fall again: But, to come to Christ, who was
before the World began, who is First and Last, Beginning and Ending, such
abiding in him shall know a State that will never fall. For Adam's State before
he fell, was above all the earthly and worldly-wise, and knowing, and their
dark Understandings and perverse Ways, which their perverse Spirit leads into;
here are all manner of Uncleanness, Unrighteousness, Falsities, Puffing-up and
Pride, and all the crooked, rough, cross Ways, and Mountains of Sin, which are
become as Graves and Prisons for the Just. Adam's State before he fell is
beyond all this, who fell into this; but Christ that never fell, is a State
beyond Adam; and he is to be heard and followed that never fell; and in him are
People to sit down, who is the Rest, and Peace and Life; who destroys the
Devil and his Works, and makes and end of Sin, together with Ungodliness and
Unrighteousness, which has dishonored God; so bruiseth the Head of the
Serpent, and breaks his Power, and crusheth him to pieces, that the Seed Christ
may rise in all; which honors the Father. Now this being manifest and known
in all, then the Lamb is known to have the Victory, which has been slain from
the Foundation of the World; and then in the Seed you come to know your
Election before the World began: And here the Lord's Words are fulfilled, his
Glory he will not give to another, who destroys that that took the Glory to
it self; which brings up to that Noble Seed and Plant in Man which gives the
Glory to God. And here as you live in the Seed Christ Jesus, your Election you
know before the World began, and Reprobation since the World began. For Core,
Cain, Ishmael, Esau, Sodom and Egypt, Spritual and Temporal, have been since
the World began. For Egypt is Thraldom, Bondage, Anguish and Darkness, and
Sodom is Whoredom, and Cain disobeyed the Voice of God, and Core gainsaid the
Law; and whoever feels all this Nature in them, they are Vessels of Wrath; and
let them not complain and say, Why have thou made me thus? For there are
Vessels of Honor, and Vessels of Dishonor: Vessels of Mercy, Vessels of
Wrath: And it is not in him that wills and runs, but in God that shows
Mercy. Now Esau, the First Birth, signifies a Worker: Jacob is the Second
Birth, signifies a Supplanter; and when Jacob has supplanted Esau the First
Birth, the profane Nature, Jacob is called Israel; that is as much as to say,
Thou have Power with God now. So, where the Election is risen, and has put
down Cain, Core, Egypt, Sodom, the First Birth slain, which brought all the
Wrath into the Vessel, and the old Bottle broken: Here is a new Bottle that
holds the new Wine, and Vessels of Honor, and Vessels of Mercy in the
Election, before the World began; and you have all things made new, a new
Heaven and a new Earth.

(And all Friends, that be in any manner of Sufferings, Imprisonments or
Banishments for Christ and his Truths sake, live in Christ and sit down in him,
in whom you have all Peace, Life, Virtue and Rest in Christ Jesus, who was
before all that was, that makes to suffer, and will remain when it is all gone;
and was the First and Last, the Beginning and Ending, the same to day,
yesterday, and for ever: In him sit down and live, that does not change; then
your Religion does not change, your Worship does not change, your Way does not
change; for Christ being you Way, who is the same to day, yesterday and for
ever, and your Fellowship, and Unity and Community does not change, being with
the Father, who does not change, but is the same from Everlasting to
Everlasting: And they whose Religion, Fellowship and Worship changes and gads
about, and changes their Ways, are fickle, and have itching Ears after the
Ways that change from Christ, who does not change, who is the Way, the same to
day as he was yesterday, to be walked in.)

And all Friends, that are in any Temptations or Troubles, look at Christ, who
bruiseth the Serpent's Head, your Adversary, your Enemy, your Troubler, your
Tempter, your Defiler, your Accuser, he Wicked One; fear him not, but look at
Christ Jesus, that bruiseth his Head, breaks his Power and Strength, and
crusheth him to pieces; in Christ have you Peace, which was before the Devil
was: Reign in him, Christ Jesus, who is your Light, and Life, and Salvation;
and fear God, and give glory; glory to him for ever: For this Serpent, the
Enemy, the Adversary, the Devil, the Wicked One, the Dragon, the Accuser, the
Tempter, he tempted Christ to the Creatures, to the Glory of the World, and to
worship him, to destroy himself; but Christ bruiseth his Head, breaks his Power
and Strenght, and crusheth him to pieces, and destroys him and his works. So
in him live and rejoice, in whom you have Peace, and Life and Dominion; in him
who was before the Serpent was, the First and Last, the same yesterday, to day,
and for ever.

Ah my dear Friends and Brethren every where, the Power of the Lord God is over
all, live in it, that you may feel a Unity and Fellowship in the Power of the
Lord God; that through that Power of the Lord God you may all come to be Heirs
of the Power of an Endless Life; through which you may Inherit Eternity, and so
to feel Life Eternal abiding in you; the Manslayer has not Eternal Life
abiding in him; that is, he that envies his Brother. So all the Persecutors,
that envy their Brethren, have not Eternal Life abiding in them: Under this all
the Persecutors about Church, Religion, Worship, Faith, Ministry and
Fellowships and Envious Persons, having not Eternal Life abiding in them, are
comprehended. Therefore you all fee! this Eternal Life abiding in you: And he
that has the Son of God, has Life Eternal abiding in him; and so in this
Eternal Life you have an Eternal Fellowship with God and his Son, and with one
another. And in this the Law of Life, that is in Jesus Christ, passes Sentence
on the Law of Sin and Death in every Man and Woman, and brings it to the
Exceution: Through which Law of Life, Righteousness flows and runs down as a
stream, and also Justice and Truth. Here by this Law of the Spirit of Life in
Christ Jesus (Mark, in Christ Jesus) you come to know the Lamb's Throne, and
the Throne of Iniquity thrown down, its Mouth stopped, and the Chambers of
Imagery thrown down, and the Household of God raised; the Fruitless Trees thrown
down, and the Plant of God raised up, which is of his own planting; a Tree of
Righteousness, whose Fruit is unto Holiness, whose end is Everlasting Life. So
mark here the Fruits of this Tree, and the End of this Tree: By this you
distinguish Man's planting, and Man's plucking up; and God's building you will
distinguish from Man's building; and Man's plucking down, and Man's gathering
together, you that are gathered in the Name of Jesus distinguish, and their
scattering. Oh therefore be valiant for the Truth, which you are come to the
knowledge of, and worship God in that Truth which the Devil is out of, and
abode not in; this makes you free from the Devil and his Works, that are out of
Truth. Here in this Worship, in the Truth and in the Spirit, the Living God,
who is a Spirit, the God of all Truth; he has his Glory and Honor from the
Spirit of the Lord in every Heart. And so keep in the Spirit, and Truth and
Power of the Everlasting God, who is from Everlasting to Everlasting, that you
may know him Lord of the Earth and of the Heaven, and of the Heaven of Heavens,
Ruling and Reigning, whose Eye is over all his Works, that you may glorify him
in his Power and Spirit, and serve him in the New Life; which will keep you
over all Men's Fables and Devices, Whimsies and Imaginations, out of all
Janglings and vain Disputes of Men of corrupt Minds: And so it is good for you
all to live in him which is the same to day as he was yesterday, Christ Jesus,
the Power of God, and the Seed of Life, and Word which was in the Beginning: So
no new thing, but that which was and is to all Eternity: Let your Fellowship be
in that, and your Unity and Communion be in that; for this is seen by the
Eternal Eye, the Eternal Unity, and the Eternal God. So hear his Voice, every
one of you, that speaks from Heaven, whose Voice shakes the Earth, and not the
Earth only, but the Heavens also: The Heaven imports Joys. So all the false
Joys, the lifted-up Joys, or exalted Joys, and Joys in vain glory, and Joys in
the world, or any outward thing or creature, and Men or Women: His Voice that
speaks from Heaven shakes the Earth and the Heavens; and this must be shaken
and removed, both the Heavens and the Earth, before that does appear that can
never be shaken, the Noble, Royal Seed, Elect and Precious, before the World
began; being Heirs of Him, come to Inherit Him: In Him you shall know that
which cannot be shaken, and there is the true Joy, in that which is from
Everlasting to Everlasting, who is the Beginning and Ending: Here is not any
either lifted up or fallen down to despair. So, I say, hear his Voice, harden
not your Hearts; for not hearing the Voice, you harden your Hearts, and then
you provoke God to Wrath and sore Displeasure. Let Him have your Ear, that
speaks from Heaven, that you may come to observe his Counsel, Teaching,
Instruction and Direction; for all the Prophets and holy Men of God, and the
Apostles were attentive and obedient to this Heavenly Voice, who Witnessed to
the Truth, who had a Witness in Heaven also: And such declared forth the
Glorious Truth, which they had from the Instructions of the Almighty, as you
may read throughout the Scriptures, what glorious Expressions and weighty
Truths they declared, whose Ears were attentive to Him that spoke from Heaven;
and how also they declared against them that stopped their Ears, and closed
their Eyes, and hard ned their Hearts: Their Ears not being attentive to the
Heavenly Voice, but to the Earthly; and so if the Earthly, and the Sin and Evil
have the Ear, it will fill it with that which is bad, and harden the Heart, and
choke the Good; therefore the Lord must have the Ear, who is the Ruler of
Heaven and Earth. And as your Ears are attentive to the Lord's Voice, that
speaks from Heaven, Iniquity's Mouth is stopped in you, the Throne of Iniquity
is thrown down in you; that is, the Wicked Spirit and Power, where Iniquity
fits, and the Chambers of Imagery are thrown down in you, where all Thoughts
and Imaginations are. As the Ear is attentive to the Voice of Him that speaks
from Heaven, you will come to the Throne of the Lamb, who has the Power, who
has the Victory and the Dominion, that all may live there in the Everlasting
Power of God, that goes over all Deceit, which was before Deceit and Darkness
was; and always feel a growing in the Power of the Lord God, that is Universal
and Everlasting, that you may all be Heirs of the Power of an Endless Life, and
come to Inherit it, and possess it, and sit down in the Possession of the same,
that every one's Lot may fall in the Land of the Living, where the Lord has
his Glory and his Honor for ever and ever. O the Glory, Glory of the Lord,
that spreads it over all! And here you have his Savor, and can taste your Meat
in the Power of the Lord God, feeding upon every Word that proceeds out of the
Mouth of God, having every one's Ear attentive to his Voice: In this you grow
up in the Life that is Eternal.

G. F.

OH Dear Friends,
Epist. 246.
Mind every one your Habitation in the Power of the Lord God, that first
Convinced you, and keep your Possession in it, in the sense of God's Love and
Mercy to your Souls; for your Unity and Fellowship lies in the spotless Power,
Truth and Life of the Everlasting God of Life and Power; and herein to you the
Springs of Life will be opened, through which you may be daily Refreshed up to
the God of Life. Oh be tender of the spotless Truth and Life, through which you
may come to answer it in all Friends, that they may have Unity with you in the
same Life and Power, through which you may be a good Savor to God, and a
Blessing to him in your Generations, serving the Lord God in the Newness of
Life, as a Chaste Spouse and Bride to him, in Body, Soul and Spirit, having an
Esteem of your Bodies, which are for the Lord, and to be his Temple, not for
Adultery or Fornication, nor Idolatry. Oh therefore mind and keep in the holy
Life, and feel the Moving and Counselling Power and Spirit of the Almighty in
you, directing you into the Ways of Truth and Righteousness, Peace and
Holiness, without which none shall see God: Live in the Peaceable Life, and
love it; eye that which makes for Peace, for God is the Author of Peace, and
not of Confusion. So live all in the precious Truth of God, feeling it in its
Operation; through which Unity and the Peaceable Life may be preserved amongst
you in Righteousness and Peace; for Wars, and Strifes, and Troubles and
Fightings comes by Unrighteous Actions, which is below Truth and Righteousness;
for Truth leads into the modest, decent and comely Life, which is Honorable
and Esteemable to God, and in the Hearts of all his People. So live in the
Truth and the Power of it, that you may all come to be Heirs of the Power of an
Endless Life, and to Inherit and Possess the Endless Life, the Power of a World
that has no end. And so keep your Eyes to your Possessions, and to the Life
that has no end; and herein you will increase in the Truth, in the
Righteousness and Holiness, and the Power and Virtue of the Holy Life; and so
sit down in your Possessions, that you may all serve the Lord in a pure Mind,
Soul and Spirit, and none to defile your Bodies, but have esteem of them, as
Vessels of Honor, and Vessels fitted to receive the Treasures of the Lord.

London, the 16th of the 9th Month, 1666. G F.

DEar Friends,
Dwell in the gentle Wisdom of the Lord God, Epist. 247.
which is easy to be entreated; and let not Wilfulness, Hastiness and
Impatience, lay open your Nakedness to the World; but dwell in the Power, Seed,
and Life of Christ Jesus, the Wisdom of God, that with that ye all may be kept
Clothed in Patience, and in the Love of the Lord God, and in the Light; in
which is the Unity one with another, and with God: And in the peaceable Mind
and Spirit dwell, for the Patient Sufferer wears the Crown, and has the
Victory at last; and not the hasty, agravating, revengeful, killing and
fighting Spirit; which must be crushed down with the Seed of the Lord God, that
bruiseth the Serpent's Head; which is the cause of Enmity, Venom and Poison;
which Head being bruised down with the Seed and Life, then nothing is fed upon
but Life and Glory: And in that is the Peace.

G. F.

FRiends,
Keep your Meetings in the Power of the Lord God, Epist. 248.
that has gathered you; and none quench the Spirit, nor despise Prophesying,
An Exhortation to set up Women's Meetings.
but keep up your Testimony in Public and Private: Let not the Mouths of Babes
and Sucklings be stopped, nor the Seed in Male or Female, but all be Valiant
for the Lord's Truth upon the Earth. Concerning the Women's Meetings; encourage
all the Women of Families, that are convinced, and mind Virtue, and love Truth,
and walk in it; that they may come up into God's Service, that they may be
serviceable in their Generation, and in the Creation, and come into the
Practice of the pure Religion, which you have received from God, from above;
that every One may come to know their Duty in it, and their Service in the
Power and Wisdom of God: For now the practick Part is called for. For People
must not be always Talking and Hearing, but they must come into Obedience to
the Great God of Heaven and Earth.

And so, that none may stand idle out of the Vineyard, and out of the Service,
and out of their Duty; for such will Talk and Tattle, and Judge with evil
Thoughts, of what they in the Vineyard say and do: And therefore the Power of
the Lord God calls in all, into their Duty, into their Service, in their
Places, in Virtue and Righteousness, and into the Wisdom and Power of God: For
all that are out of this, are out of their Duty and Services, though they may
have the Knowledge of it, yet are not serviceable in the Creation nor in their
Generation; and the Power of God must go over, and is over all such; in which
all must be acted, and in which true Obedience is known.

And therefore train up your young Women to know their Duty in this thing, that
they may be in their Services and Places; Young Women to be Instructed.
for all Truth's Business you are to do in the Power and Wisdom of God; by
which you are kept open to the Lord, to receive of his Gifts and Graces, and of
his Life, through which you are to minister one to another: And all keeping in
it, then there is none to let nor stop its Flowings; but through it you are
all watered, as a Garden of Plants; by which you are nourished. And so, all be
Faithful and Diligent. And make all the sober Women, both of Town and Country,
acquainted with this thing. And read this in your Monthly Meetings, when you
are gathered together. And when you have made the sober Women acquainted, in
the Towns and Countries, and have them together, then read this amongst them.
So, no more but my Love.

G. F.

A General Epistle to Friends, and all People, to read over and consider in the
Fear of God.
Minds are staid upon the Lord, Epist. 249.
for they shall be kept in Perfect Peace; I. Concerning the Word of God, and
the Original, what it is.
so where the Mind is staid upon the Lord, there is a Perfect Peace; for it is
a whole Peace, which cannot be broken: So here is not only a Perfect Peace, but
a Blessing; a Perfect Peace which comes from the God of all Peace, (that
bruiseth the Serpent's Head under your Feet, the Troubler) and the Blessings
which come from the blessed God. Perfect Peace in God only, and not in the
Creatures.
So all imperfect Peace may be broken, that is when the Mind is staid upon the
Creature, or in any Creature, and not upon the Creator; or in any outward
Things, Goods, Houses, Lands, or Inventions of Vanities, in the foolish vain
Fashions; which the Lust of the Eye and the Pride of Life go into, which will
defile and corrupt it. When any of these things fail, and are not according to
your Mind, it being in them, then your Peace is broken, and you are cross and
brittle, and Envy gets up: So this is not a perfect Peace, but is a broken
Peace, and then you have the Trouble and not the Blessing: And the Reason is,
because your Minds are in the Creatures, and the outward Things, and are not
staid upon the Creator, where the perfect Peace is, and the Blessing, where
nothing can get betwixt you and the Lord. And this is below Job, to have the
Mind in the Creatures and visible things; for when you are tried, and Creatures
fail you, you are crossed and troubled; that shows an imperfect State; for God
said, That Job was a perfect Man: And when that the Lord suffered him to be
tried, and when that his Goods and Houses were thrown down, and driven away,
and Servants killed, he said, Blessed be the Name of the Lord; for the Lord
gave, and the Lord takes: Here his Mind was stayed upon the Lord, and he
retained his Peace. And when that his Children were destroyed, and his Wife
said to him, What, do thou still retain thy Integrity? Curse God and die; he
rebukes her, and calls her, A foolish Woman; and said unto her, Shall I receive
good of the Lord, and not evil? Naked I came out of my Mother's Womb, and
naked I must return. Here Job kept his Integrity still, and did not all this
while offend with his Lips. Now many of you, who think your selves high, and
above Job, if that your Goods and Children should be after the same manner
taken away (whose Minds are in them) you would be found in a troubled brickle
State, far below Job. And when that Job's Friends came to reason with him, who
kept his Integrity, and would no way yield to them, they counted him an
Hypocrite, and said, He restrained Prayer, and filled his Belly with East Wind;
and said, What, shall mortal Man be more pure than his Maker? Shall Man that is
born of a Woman be just? God charge his Angels with Folly, and the Heavens
are not clear in his Sight. And these are the Scriptures the Priests use to
bring against Friends (who keep their Integrity) as Job's Friends did against
him: But at the last the Lord commanded Job to offer a Sacrifice for his
Friends, because they had sinned, and spoken not right, as Job had, who was
Perfect and kept his Integrity. And the Apostle said to the Saints, That he had
learned in all Conditions to be content. (Mark) in all Conditions; but this was
when he was Paul, not when he was Saul, running up and down with his Packet of
Letters, halling the Saints before the Rulers like a Parater; then he was not
Content, neither with his own Condition, nor others: But when he came to learn
Christ, who destroys the Devil and his Works, who teaches to know all things,
then in all things he learned to be Content; so that you know that there is
Learning, and Learned; as a Child when he is Learning and become Learned, is
witness of two States; so Paul, he had learned in all conditions to be content;
and who was his Schoolmaster, but Christ, by whom all things were made, not of
Man, nor by Man (out of the Truth) so while he learned of Men, and by Men, he
was not Content, neither are any others.

Therefore all are to learn of Christ the Light, the Life, and the Truth, that
you may come to that Condition, to have learned in all Conditions to be
content, and not to trust in uncertain Riches, for they have Wings, and will
flee away: And so he is never counted a wise Man, that will put any Confidence
in that which will flee away from him; for those are the Heirs of the Earth and
the World, that load themselves with thick Clay, that they may set their Nests
on high; but they that be Heirs with Christ, and of the Power of an Endless
Life, trust in the Living God, and come to possess an Everlasting Inheritance
of the Power of an Endless Life, and come to increase in the Riches of the
Everlasting Inheritance, and there lay up Riches that are Everlasting, which
will abide for ever. And mind every one God's Word in your Hearts, and in your
Mouths, and obey it and do it; and be not of them that are saying in their
Hearts, Who shall ascend, or descend, to fetch him from above, or from the
deep? Keep down that Sayer under reproof, and then your Ear will be open to
that which the Righteousness of Faith says, The Word is nigh thee, in thy
Heart, and in thy Mouth; so thou need not to say, Who shall ascend or
descend? And that was the Word which the Messengers of God preached and do
Preach, and rebukes the Gain-sayer.

And so all People, seeing the Devil has made the World like a Wilderness, and
there is so many Ways in it, that they do not know which Way to come out of it,
nor which to follow: Therefore this is my Answer to you all, Take David's Lamp
and Light; you may say, What is that? And where is it? I say it is within you,
the Word of God: You may say, People do not use to carry Lamps in the Daytime,
but in the Night. I say, you be in the Night of Darkness, and therefore the
Word is called a Lamp, and a Light to you; by which you may see the Way of the
Lord, which is Perfect, from all Men's Ways, which are imperfect; by which ye
may see the Path of the Just to be a shining Light, from all the unjust Paths
that are in the Darkness; for by this Word did David come to outstrip his
Teachers, and was made wiser than them all; so it will you, if you obey it; for
by this Word he saw Christ, and called him Lord: Therefore he loved the Word
and hid it in his Heart; and by it he spoke so many glorious Expressions, which
the World since has turned into Meeter, and made Songs of them: And this was
the Word that came to Abraham, which made him forsake his National Religion and
Worship, and obey the Lord; and this was the Word that came to Jacob, the
Shepherd, by which he saw Christ, and prophesied of him to his Sons on his
Deathbed, when he said to Judah, The Scepter should not depart from Judah; nor
a Lawgiver from betwixt his Feet, till Shilo came (meaning Christ) and the
gathering of all Nations should be to him, as it is at this Day; the Gathering
is to Christ: And this was the Word that came to Moses, the Shepherd, when he
was keeping Sheep, which he obeyed and went to Egypt, and brought the Children
of Israel out of Egypt; by which Word he was made a Minister; and when that the
Children of Israel were come out of Egypt into the Wilderness, Deuteronomy. 30.14.
he told them, They need not go for the Word beyond the Seas, etc. for it was
nigh them, in their Hearts and Mouths, to obey it and do it. And this was the
Word that made Moses a Prophet, who prophesied of Christ, and said, Like unto
him God would raise up a Prophet, him should they hear in all things. Mark (in
all things) we are to be ordered both inward and outward, through hearing
Christ, by whom all things were made: And every one that would not hear this
Prophet (Christ) should be cut off: For how should they continue or reign, that
will not hear Christ?

And this was the Word that came to Samuel, and made him a Prophet, who spoke
to Eli the Priest, and reproved his Sons, and the Children of Israel: and this
was the Word that made Saul to Prophecy, and Balaam, though they erred from
it: And this was the Word that made all the Prophets to Prophecy, and to
reprove the Kings of Israel, and their Priests, of their Superstition and
Idolatrous Ways, in setting Groves and Images in high places; Isaiah 47.13.
and reproved all their Monthly Prognostications, who spoke and acted from
them, and not from the Lord.

And this was the Word that came to Isaiah, by which he prophesied of Christ,
and of his Preaching, and of his Sufferings, and by which Word he reproved the
Shepherds, which were as greedy dumb Dogs, that could never have enough,
seeking their Gain from their Quarter: And by this Word he saw, that all the
Children of God should be taught of God, and be established in Righteousness
and Peace; and though many Tongues should rise up in Judgment against them, yet
those that were taught of God should condemn them all; such Power should be
given to his Children. And the many Weapons formed against them should not
prosper, God would restrain them: And also he saw them that were cast out, that
trembled at God's Word; to whom God would appear to their glory, and to the
shame, and to the confounding of them that cast them out for his Name sake, as
it is at this Day.

And this was the Word of God that made Jeremiah a Prophet, by which he saw the
New Covenant; by which Word he was said to reprove the People and the Princes,
of the filthy and horrible thing committed in the Land, that the Priests
preached for Hire, and the Prophets prophesied falsely: And for reproving them
for their Superstition and Idolatry, they struck him, and put him in the Stocks
and Prison, and persecuted him in the Dungeon, till his Persecutors were
carried into Captivity: And by the Word Jeremiah saw the number of Seventy
Years of his Persecutors being in Babylon's Captivity.

Elijah by this Word was made a Prophet, and by the Word reproved Ahab and
Jezebel for their Idolatry, and Worshipping of Images: For which Word's sake
they persecuted him, and the rest of the Prophets; and was not he fed of the
Ravens by the River? And did they not seek to take away his Life? And did not
he think all the Lord's Prophets had been killed, and he left alone; yet did
not the Lord say to him, He had reserved Seven Thousand that had not bowed the
Knee to Baal? And Elisha the Plowman, by this Word, was made a Prophet, and
forsook his Plough; and by the Word reproved the Idolatry in his Age of Priests
and People.

And by this Word was Ezekiel made a Prophet; by which Word he reproved the
Shepherds of Israel, that made a Prey upon the People, and Taught them for the
Fleece: And by the Word he saw that God would bring the People from under them,
that they should be made a Prey upon no longer; and would gather them from
their Mouths, and set one Shepherd over them, even Christ (who is witnessed)
and by the Word he reproved the false Prophets, that taught for handfuls of
Barley, and pieces of Bread, and daubed with Untempered Mortar, and sewed
Pillows under the Arm-holes: And by the Word he saw the Pattern of the Temple,
and the return of the Jews.

And by this Word Daniel was made a Prophet, and saw Christ and his Kingdom,
and how the Saints should take his Kingdom: And by the Word he saw such that
should rise up against the People of God: And by the Word he numbered the Years
of Christ to his time, Four Hundred Ninety Nine Years, and of his Death, and
how he should end the Sacrifices; and how that Christ should bring up
Everlasting Righteousness, and put an end to Sin, and end their Prophets, and
seal up their Visions.

And by the Word was Micah made a Prophet, by which he cried against the
Priests that preached for Hire, and the Prophets that prophesied for Money, and
the Judges that judged for Rewards, and such as preached Peace to the People
that put in their Mouths (like the Priests in these times) and when they did
not, they prepared War against them, and chopped their Flesh, and broke their
Bones: But Micah saw by the Word, that the Sun was gone down upon such Prophets
and Priests, and they should have no Vision nor Answer from God. Therefore such
are against Revelations and Visions, on them the Sun is fet, and gone down
upon, and the Night comes upon them.

And by the Word was Amos the Herdsman made a Prophet, who was a gatherer of
Fruits; and likewise all the rest of the Prophets, who spoke forth Divine
Things, and reproved the Superstition and Idolatry in their time and day: And
by the Word did the Prophets speak forth Divine Things; which Word brought them
into the Divine Nature and Mind; which Word hammered and cut down that which
corrupted their Natures: And this was the Word that made so many Fishermen
Preachers of the Gospel, which is the Power of God.

And this was the Word which made Matthew the Toll-gatherer, Luke the
Physician, and Paul the Tent-maker, Ministers and Preachers of the Gospel, and
Power of God: And this was the Word which made Peter to see Joel's Prophecy,
how that God would pour out of his Spirit upon all Flesh, and Sons and
Daughters should Prophecy, and young Men should see Visions, and old Men dream
Dreams; and the pouring forth of the Spirit upon Servants and Handmaids, that
every one should have something to speak to the Glory of God. And now Priests,
and proud Prelates, and Bishops, and Popes, though you have made a Trade of the
Saints Words, and the Apostles and Prophets Words, and gotten a great deal of
Money by them (which were Fishermen and Shepherds Words from the Word) Yet
nevertheless if a company of Shepherds, Herdsmen, Fishermen, Tent makers and
Toll-gatherers should come amongst you to Preach, you would say, Away with
these Mechannick Fellows, they have not served Seven Years Apprentiship at the
Coledges, which were set up to make Ministers; therefore they are not to set
up, because they have not served their Apprentiship. What say the Shepherds,
Herdsmen, Fishermen, Tent-makers, Physicians and Toll-gatherers? Do you make a
Trade of our Friends Words, who were of our Occupation, that never served
Apprentiships in Colleges, before they spoke forth the Words you make a Trade
of? What, will you make a Trade of our Friends Words, who were of our
Occupation? Away with you, to Work, and away with your Colleges; for our
Brother Paul the Tent-maker said, He that will not Work must not Eat. For,
would you own Christ if he had come in your Day, who was called, A Carpenter's
Son? You Popes with your Triple Crowns, and you Lord Bishops, with your Coaches
and pampered Horses, and gorgeous Apparel, with your Black Coats, and White
Coats, and Silk Girdles: Are you like to entertain him who was called, A
Carpenter's Son? Or to cast him and his Mother into the Manger in your Stables?

This was the Word by which John the Evangelist saw Christ, who does Enlighten
every Man that comes into the World, and saw how, he became Flesh, and came to
his own, and that his own did not receive him; but to as many as received
Christ the Light, that to them he gave Power to become the Sons of God; which
all they that are Ministers of the Letter, made by their Seven Years learning
in their Colleges, and not by the Word (hating the Light) cannot know. And by
this Word, the Minister of the Word preaches Christ's Word, Life, Death and
Resurrection: And therefore as John says in his Epistle, That which our Eyes
have seen, our Hands have handled, and our Ears have heard of the Word of Life,
do we preach unto you; that which was from the Beginning: In the Beginning was
the Word; Scriptures, the Words of God and Christ.
though since the Beginning were the Words and Letters; for the Scriptures of
Truth are the Words of God, and the Words of Christ; and he that adds to these
Words (faith John in the Revelations) God shall add unto him the Plagues that
are written in this Book, etc. So the Word was in the Beginning, and Christ's
Name is called, The Word of God; but Christ is neither called Scriptures nor
Writings, for Scriptures signify Writings. So, In the Beginning was the Word;
since the Beginning were all false Ways, false Churches, false Teachers; and in
the Word ye comprehend them all. The Priests say, That Hebrew, Greek and Latin
are the Original, and the many Languages began at Babel, which Nimrod, the
Hunter before the Lord, began to Build, after God had destroyed the Old World
with Water; then would he go Build a Tower, which should reach to Heaven; then
God came down and confounded them into many Languages: So he hunted before the
Lord, but the Lord followed him, and confounded him in all his Work, as he will
all the Builders that run before him. And all the Priests that have gotten the
many Languages, which began at Babel, they tell simple ignorant People, that
they have the Original, and are the Orthodox Men, and get into a different
Habit from them, and say, The Quakers are a simple People, and despise the
Learned Orthodox Men, who have the Original. Give Ear O People! If these
Languages, which came up at the confounding of Babel, are the Priests Original
that makes them Orthodox and Divine; then Pilate, that crucified Christ, was as
good an Orthodox Divine as they; for when he crucified Christ, he writ a Paper
in Hebrew, Greek and Latin, and set a-top of him, he was as ignorant of
Scripture, and of Orthodox and Divine Matters as you, and you as he: And the
Apostle says, That Tongues must cease; 1 Cor. 1^.8.
then that which makes Orthodox Men and Divines, as you say, must cease,
according to the Apostles Doctrine; and so then Tongues neither are the
Original, nor make Orthodox nor Divine; and John, that gave forth the
Revelations, says, That the Whore and Beast set upon Tongues, etc. and the
Everlasting Gospel must be preached again to all Kindreds and Tongues; which
was before Babel was, where was the first beginning of Tongues. Now it is clear
that the Gospel must be preached to all Nations and Tongues; and that Tongues
are not the Original, neither do they make Divines or Orthodox Men; but it is
clear that it is the Word which was in the Beginning which makes a Divine; yea,
Tradesmen, which are base and contemptible in the Eyes of the Proud, and them
that have gotten Babel's Tongues, who are confounded by the Ministers of the
Word, which was in the Beginning before Babel was; for all the Earth was of one
Language and Speech before Babel. And you that call your selves Orthodox Men
made by Tongues, and say, That is your Original, who are so blind, and cannot
see that there was an Original before Babel was; for, did not Enoch the
Prophet, the seventh from Adam, who prophesied in the Old World before it was
destroyed, and long before Babel was, speak concerning the coming of Christ in
Ten Thousand of his Saints, as in Jude: And Lamech prophesied in the Old World
concerning Noah and Adam, and others might be instanced, who were before your
Tongues (which you call your Original) were: And so we say, that the Word of
God is the Original, which does fulfill the Scriptures; and the Word is it which
makes a Divine, which is called a Hammer, but it is a Living Hammer; and is
called a Sword and Fire, but it is a Living Sword, and a Living Fire, to
hammer, and cut down, and burn up that which separated and kept Man from God;
by which Word Man is reconciled again to God, which is called, The Word of
Reconciliation; by this Word are Men and Women sanctified and made clean; and
this is the Word that makes both Men and Women Divine, and brings them into the
Divine Nature, which hammers and cuts down that which corrupted their Nature;
and by this Word are they brought into a Divine Wisdom, Understanding,
Knowledge, Spirit and Power: And this is the Word that lives, and abides, and
endures for ever, by which the Saints are born again of the Immortal Seed and
Word of God (who feed upon the Milk of the Word) up into a Divine Life, Wisdom
and Understanding, and Divine Nature; and by this Word they do see all Flesh to
be as Grass, and as the Flower of the Field that fades; and the Word of God
that lives, and abides, and endures for ever is Christ, whose Name is called,
The Word of God.

And so keep the Word of Patience, which is over all the Impatient Spirits, and
then you will know that the Word of Life, the Word of Patience, and Word of
Wisdom is Everlasting, and abides and endures for ever; which all they that are
in the Letter, out of the Life and Word, have neither Patience to themselves
nor others; for the Word of Patience, and the Word of Life, which is to be kept
in all Tribulations, was before Death and impatient Spirits were.

Concerning the Worship of God, and the Jew Outward, and the Jews Inward
Offering, with their Garments.
1. THere was a Worship at Jerusalem.

2. There was a Worship at the Mountain, where Jacob's Well was. Jacob went
down into Egypt with his Family, and he died in Egypt, and his Sons carried him
out of Egypt, and Buried him in the Land of Canaan, in his Grandfather
Abraham's Burying-place; and after several Hundred Years the Children of Israel
came out of Egypt into the Land of Canaan, and there they built Jerusalem and
the Temple; and there was but one Temple in the whole World commanded of God,
and that was at Jerusalem. And before, in the days of Jacob, there was a
Worship set up at the Mountain, near unto Samaria, where Jacob dug a Well:
Therefore when the Woman of Samaria came out to fetch Water at Jacob's Well,
the Woman reasoned with Christ about Worship, and she said, Our Fathers
worshipped at this Mountain, but others at Jerusalem; and Christ answered her
again, The time comes that neither at Jerusalem, nor at this Mountain shall
God be worshipped: There he denies the continuance of these two public Places
of Worship; and when he had done that, he sets up another Worship, for he said,
God was a Spirit, and they that worshipped him, must worship him in the Spirit
and in the Truth; for the Hour comes, and now is, that such God seeks to
worship him. And this Worship he set up, and preached up above Sixteen hundred
Years since; which Worship he set up many Hundred Years before Mass Book,
Common Prayer Book, Directory or Church-Faith was: And this was the public
Worship that Christ set up in the Spirit and in the Truth; For God is a Spirit,
and such he sought to Worship him; that worshipped him in Spirit and Truth. So
all are to mind the Worship that God seeks, and not the Worship that Men seek
And Christ said, That the Temple should be thrown down, and the City of
Jerusalem, and the Jews scattered over all Nations: And the Apostle says, He
is not a Jew that is one outward, but he is a Jew that is one inward in the
Spirit, and not of the Letter; for that kills, but the Spirit makes alive.
What, cries the World, do you deny Temple-worship? Nay, we say every Man and
Woman must come into the Temple, if he Worship God in the Spirit and Truth: And
is not the Spirit within, and the Truth in the inward parts? For, Do not you
know that your Bodies are the Temples of the Holy Ghost, which is the Holy
Spirit? And can any Worship God, who is a Spirit, in the Truth, but they must
come to the Spirit and the Truth of God in their own Hearts? Here we set up the
Public and Temple Worship, which Christ set up, which every Man and Woman in
the World must come to, Truth in the inward parts, and the Spirit of God within
them, and Worship in the Spirit; they must be in it, and in the Truth, to
Worship the God of all Truth, who is a Spirit. And this is the Public and
Universal Worship; and this brings every Man and Woman in the World to Truth,
and the Spirit of God in their own Hearts: And so this brings all to know their
Bodies to be the Temples of the Holy Spirit, in which they worship, as the Jew
outward worshipped in his outward Temple: But the Temple, since the Apostles
days, has been so filled with Smoke out of the Bottomless Pit, and so filled
with Darkness, that no Man could enter into the Temple to Worship God; and
there the Spirit of God has been vexed and grieved: And so their Prophecy,
Revelation and Vision has been denied by the Authors of this Smoke; but the
Seventh Angel has poured out his Viol, that Men begin to enter into the Temple
to Worship God in the Spirit and Truth; and the Glory of the Lord shall fill
the Temple. And Christ and his Apostles never altered this Worship, in the
Spirit and in the Truth; though the Beast and the Whore, the false Church have
set up another Worship since the Apostles days: But all must come to Worship
God in Spirit (which was before their Worship was set up) which was set up in
the Apostles days. And so all must come to Worship God in the Spirit and in the
Truth, which was before Mass Book was, which got up many Hundred Years after
Christ; but that is and was the Public and Universal Worship, set up by Christ
the Second Adam, to the Sons of Adam in the Fall, which brings every Man and
Woman to Truth, and the Spirit of God in their own Hearts, in that Spirit and
Truth they must Worship God.

But, cries the World, Did not they Pray in the Temple, the Jew outward, and
must not you Pray in the Temple? Yes, the Jews in the Spirit prays in his
Temple, and sings, and rejoices in his Temple; for what, Do you not know, that
your Bodies are the Temples of the Holy Ghost? And so, if you Pray, you must
Pray in the Holy Ghost, and rejoice in the Holy Ghost, and sing in the Spirit:
And how can you sing, and rejoice and pray in the Spirit, but you must go into
the Temple, your Bodies being the Temples of the Holy Ghost? For the outward
Jew his Temple was thrown down: And He is not a Jew that is one outward, but he
is a Jew that is one inward in the Spirit. Stephen was Stoned to Death, for
denying the Jews outward Temple, and witnessing Christ; and Stephen was full of
the Holy Ghost; so he was the Temple of the Holy Ghost: And so they whose
Bodies are the Temples of the Holy Ghost, are the Temples made without Hands,
which are set above all Temples made with Men's Hands.

But if you say, Did not the Jews Priests dwell in the Temple, and there they
were to offer in the Temple?

I answer, Yes; there was but one Temple in the whole World commanded of God,
and it was set up at Jerusalem, and never commanded to be set up in England,
Ireland, Scotland, France, Spain and Rome; but the Jews were to go either to
worship at Jerusalem, and there to keep the Feast of Tabernacles, or else their
Eyes were to rot in their Heads, and their Tongues in their Mouths, and their
Camels were to die of such and such Plagues; as in Zachary you may read. And
they were to come out of all Nations under Heaven to worship and keep the Feast
of Tabernacles at Jerusalem; and the Apostles did there wait, at the time of
Pentecost, to be endued with Power from on High: And so that Temple was thrown
down about Forty Years after Christ: For you that cry up outward
Temple-worship, made with Men's Hands in your own Nations, are worse than the
Jews; for they were to have but one Temple, and one People; and that Temple is
down, and the Worship; and he is not a Jew that is one outward, but he is a Jew
that is one inward in the Spirit. And so Christ's Worship in the Spirit and
Truth is set above the Jews outward Worship at Jerusalem, and the Mountain
Worship near Samaria; and the Jew inward is set above the Jew outward; and
above the Jews outward Offering in his outward Temple, and the Priest having
Chambers in the Temple, that was the Place of their Offering; the Jew inward,
he offers in his Temple the Spiritual Sacrifices; and no where else does he
offer but in his Temple; for by the Spirit, does he offer to God who is a
Spirit. And they that offered in the Jews Temple, were to wear the holy
Garments; so are you to do that are the true Christians, and are called a Royal
Priesthood. What, are all true Christians Priests? Yes: What, are Women
Priests? Yes, Women Priests. And can Men and Women offer Sacrifices without
they wear the holy Garments? No: What are the holy Garments Men and Women must
wear? The fine Linen; and they must go in White: What, is this the Priest's
Surplice? Nay; the Surplice got up when the fine Linen, the Righteousness of
Saints, and going in White, was lost. What is the fine Linen and going in
White, that this Royal Priesthood must wear, which are the Royal Garments? It
is the Righteousness of Christ, which is the Righteousness of the Saints; this
is the Royal Garment of the Royal Priesthood, which every one must put on, Men
and Women; so every one put of your Robes, put on your Garments, the
Righteousness of Christ, as a Cloak, that you may offer to the Lord an Offering
in Righteousness: You that be sensible of the Lord's Mercies, offer to him his
Praise, his Glory and Honor, his Spiritual Sacrifice in your Temple, as the
sweet Odours, Myhre and Frankincense. And when the Jews Temple was cleansed,
and the Rubbish cast out of it, the Glory of the Lord filled the Temple: And
when your Temples are cleansed, and the Rubbish cast out of your Temples by
your High Priest Jesus Christ, in the Male and the Female, who destroys the
Devil and his Works, you will witness renewing up into the Image of God, into
Righteousness and Holiness, as Man was in before the Serpent got the Rubbish
into him. So Christ, who destroys the Devil and his Works brings them to the
State as Man and Woman was in before he got into him, that is, into
Righteousness and Holiness, and up into himself, to the Measure of the fullness
of Christ, who was glorified with the Father before the World began: Here the
Glory of the Lord will fill every one of your Temples, through which you will
come to Praise the Lord in your Temple, and to offer an Offering in
Righteousness in your Temple by the Spirit, a Spiritual Sacrifice to God, who
is a Spirit. So here you are a Royal Priesthood, offering up the Spiritual
Sacrifices. And was not the Jew outward, to have Fire and Lamps burn always in
his Temple? And are not the Jews in Spirit always to have the Word, which is a
Fire in their Temple, and the Light of Christ? For does not Christ say, Have
Oil in your Lamps? And were not their Bodies that Lamp? And was there not to be
Salt in the Jews Temple, to season their Sacrifices? And so, are not you to
have always Salt in your selves (does not Christ say so?) by which you may
savor and be seasoned, that all your Sacrifices may be seasoned with Salt? And
you know that the Jews outward were not to offer the Blind, the Lame, the
Unclean, and the Halt in their Temple; neither are you, that be the Jews in the
Spirit, to offer the Halt, the Lame, the Unclean, nor the Swine, nor the Blind;
but the Spiritual Sacrifice with the Spirit to God (who is a Spirit) by which
Spirit you see, and by which Spirit you are made clean and sanctified, and are
enabled to mortify that Swinish Nature; by which Spirit you come to walk
upright, not to halt; as you walk in the Spirit, by the Spirit you come to
offer to God the Spiritual Sacrifices. And this is the standing Offering in the
Temple, which Christ your Priest dwells in, who ends the Jews Priests that
dwelt in their outward Temple, and their Temple; and ends their Offerings and
Sacrifices, and the Blood of Bulls and Goats; Christ the Offering, once for all
their Offerings; and Christ the Everlasting Covenant, ends the first Covenant;
and Christ the Temple, ends the Jews outward Temple, where their Offerings and
Sacrifices were, and the Priesthood, and sets up the Royal Priesthood, with his
Royal Garment, his Righteousness, that offers to God the Spiritual Sacrifices
in the Temple: And so Christ ends all the Types, Figures and Shadows, and
variable things that were given to Man since the Fall, and held up by the Law,
which they were not to add to the Law of God, nor take from it; which stood
very nigh Two thousand Years: Which Law served till Christ came, and was good
in its Place, and was added because of Transgression; when many transgressed
the Image of God, his Righteousness and Holiness, and were fallen from it, then
the Righteous Law, which is Good, Holy and Just, came a-top of Man; and this
served (till the Seed Christ came) with all its Shadows; but Christ is come,
who was the End of the Law for Righteousness sake, to every one that believes;
and in Christ is no Shadow, Variableness, nor Turning, for he was before
Shadows were, glorified with the Father before the World began; who is the
First and Last, the Beginning and Ending, the Top and Cornerstone, the chief
Master Builder, the Elect and Precious One, whom all the Builders in all Ages
rejected, that were of Men, and by Men, and from Men; whom the Heirs of the
World cast out, and could not abide that he should Reign, whose Right it is,
though he be the Foundation of many Generations, all the Heirs of the World
know not his Generation; they that are in the First Birth, whose Building is
not on Christ the Rock, but on the Sand; and therefore have their Houses of
Religion and Worship so often been beaten down with the Storms of the Sea, not
being upon the Rock Christ Jesus, which is above all the Storms and Tempests in
the World, and before the Sea was; who is the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, and
the Root of David, and the Lamb of God which takes away the Sins of the World:
And the Lamb must have the Victory over all that are in the Nature of wild
Beasts, wild Heifers, Dogs, Wolves and Horses. And is not this a Mystery to
you all, that the Lamb should take away your Sins, that the Lamb should have
the Victory over the Doggish, Wolfish, Heiserish and Swinish Nature in you,
like Horses or Serpents? The Clean and Holy Lamb must have the Victory over all
this in you; and therefore join to him that has the Victory, who is the
Captain of your Salvation, who bruiseth the Serpent's Head; Christ the Seed
(that is he) that breaks the Serpent's Power, and crusheth him to pieces,
destroying him and his Works: Here Christ is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords,
above all Principalities, Powers and Thrones is he ascended; Who opens and no
Man shuts, and shuts and no Man opens; so he that opens to you by his Light,
none can shut from you, who fills your Lamps with Oil of Gladness; and Christ
shuts to all them that deny his Light, for they deny him; no Man among them
then can open; and that makes them go together by the Ears about their
Worships, and Churches, and Scriptures, and to Persecute one another: Though
they do profess Christ, yet denying his Light, they deny him: These be
Antichrists, that be against him, though they do profess him; and such are by
the Light condemned, that are against the Power of God and the Gospel; the
Power of God is the savor of Death to them, but a savor of Life to them that
be in the Life. And, In me you have Peace, says Christ; and he gives Peace to
them that are in him, that no Man can take away: But in the World you have
Trouble, says Christ: that is, in Adam, in the Fall from Righteousness and
Holiness; for in Righteousness there is Peace, and in Holiness People see God;
and out of this Holiness they do not see God.

Concerning who drink the New Wine, and who drink the Old, and who are the
Bottles that hold each: And whose Teeth are set an Edge, and whose not.
NOW all that are called Christendom, they do profess to believe in the Name of
Christ; yet look upon them, see what a confused Family it is, worse than the
Turks, and Moguls, and the Heathen; for in the Turks Country there are Jews,
Christians and Turks, and the Turks keep their Sabbath upon the Sixth Day, the
Jews upon the Seventh Day, and the Christians upon the First Day; and the Turks
does not Persecute them about Religion, but lets them enjoy their Meetings. And
the Mogul, it is said of him, That there have been Sixty Sorts of Religions in
his Country; but he Persecutes none for their Religion, but lets them have
their Meetings. And that all that are called Christendom, professing the Name
of Christ, that they should Persecute one another, and tear one another to
pieces about Worship, and Religion, and the Steeple-House, which they have
given the Title of Church to; which is a Title taken from the People, and given
to an House: And that they should persecute one another about eating Flesh and
Fish, the Lents, and Holy Days, and about Fastings, and about White-Coats,
Black-Coats, Girdles, Tippets and Hoods, Altars, Crosses and Candlesticks, and
about Processions, and running to Graves for Relics, and such visiting Places.
And that they that profess Christ should fall out about outward things, and
tear one another to pieces about outward things, and kill, imprison, and burn
one another about such things; and about their Sacraments, and Baptisms, which
is Bread, and Water, and Wine; the Kingdom of God stands not in Meats nor
Drinks, nor Flesh, nor Fish, nor Holy Days, nor Fasting-Days, nor Tippets, nor
Hoods, nor Girdles, nor White-Coats, nor Black-Coats, nor Altars, nor
Candlesticks, nor Processions, nor Beads, nor Steeple Houses: The Kingdom of
God stands in Righteousness, and Faith, and Joy in the Holy Ghost; and where
there is Righteousness there is Peace; and where there is true Faith there is
Victory, and Building one another up in the Holy Faith; but out of this Faith
there is no Building, no Victory; but Cain, the Sacrificer, persecuting Abel.
And therefore they are not counted wise Men and wise Women that persecute one
another about such things that the Kingdom of God stands not in. Therefore love
one another, instead of persecuting one another; and be meek, and not high; and
entreat, and not threaten; and bless, and not curse; and love, and not hate;
and do good, and not evil; and live in the Will of God, and be not self-willed;
and mind the Religion of Christ, and not your own; for you persecute one
another about your own things (that you invent) and not Christ's; for Christ's
Religion does not admit of any Persecution or Violence, nor to hate Friends or
Enemies; but Self-Religion will hate and persecute both; such deny Christ,
manifesting they are not of God. And so biting and devouring one another, has
been the way of consuming one another: For, was there not more true Christians
before, than there was after the Pope got up? For when they did begin to bite
one another, then they consumed one another. And you read in the Scriptures of
Two Bottles, the Old Bottle, that holds the old Wine; and the New Bottle, that
holds the New Wine; and he that drinks the New will not desire to drink the
Old; and he that drinks the Old, will not desire to drink the New. And Christ
is the Vine that affords this New Wine, which is put in the New Bottle; which,
they that believe in his Light, and become Children of his Light, sit under his
Vine, and drink of his Wine. And Adam in the Fall is the Old Bottle, that holds
the Old Wine of Transgression, where all the sour Grapes are, and they that
sit in Transgression drink of the sour Grapes, of which their Bottle is full,
full of the Wine of the Wrath of Fornication: So they will not drink of the
New. So this old Wine, that comes from the sour Grapes, sets all their Teeth
on Edge, by which they bite and devour one another, and so are consumed one of
another, and devoured one of another, by their biting with their edged Teeth:
Let all the Places called Christendom witness to this since there has been a
Pope, and since there has come up a Turk; and how it was before there was a
Pope or Turk either; what grinning and biting with their Edged Teeth, and
consuming one another there has been, and is to this Day about Religions,
which they made themselves, and are the works of their own Hands (contrary to
Christ and the Apostles Religion) and have fed of the works of their own hands,
and bitten others (with their edged Teeth) that would not. But they that drink
of the New Wine, and desire not to drink of the Old, bite not, but love one
another, and love Enemies; and so they are not consumed one of another, but
live in Love, Peace and Unity, and mind that which the Kingdom of God stands
in, Righteousness, and Faith, and Joy in the Holy Ghost; and there is the pure
Religion from above, that keeps it self from the spots of the World; which is,
To visit the Fatherless, and relieve the Widows; and live in the Unity and
Fellowship of the Spirit, which is the Bond of Peace; and lives in the Law of
the Spirit of Life, which makes free from the Law of Sin Death, which Life was
before Sin was or Death either: And such sit under their own Vine Christ, in
the Fellowship of the Gospel the Power of God, which Power of God was before
the Devil was, and are the Church in God, and Christ is their Head: But they
that have the old Bottle full of the old Wine, that comes from the Grapes of
Transgression (by which their Teeth are set on edge) obey the Law of Sin and
Death, and are under the Authority of the Prince of the Air and Darkness, and
are under the Power of Death, and his Lusts and Works they do, who was a Liar
from the Beginning, whose Religion lies in a Lie, and not in the Truth that
makes Free; but that is it which the Devil is out of, and all his Servants, and
therefore they fight against the Truth with their edged Teeth, who are drunk
with the old Wine; and such cannot abide to hear talk of Truth, and the Spirit
to guide People, who first hate it in themselves, and quench it, and grieve it;
but such the God of Truth will quench their fierceness, and will grieve them
that grieve his Spirit, which is given to them; Who will judge the World in
Righteousness, and the secrets of every ones Heart, according to the Gospel,
and every one shall have a Reward according to his doing: And all you that
profess Jesus, and live out of the Law of Jesus, the Law of Love and Faith, and
the Spirit of Life that is in him, you are all on Heaps about His and the
Apostles Words, like unto the Scribes, Pharisees, Jews and Saduces, that
professed the Law of God and his Prophets, and lived out of the Law of God, and
the Life of his Prophets, such were Heaps, as the Christians are now, that live
not in the Law of Jesus, which cannot build up one another, but are the old
Bottles, full of old Wine, whose Teeth are on edge with it, tearing and biting
at the Righteous, and one at another; but the Righteous shall Reign, and his
Seed shall have the Victory, and God will break the Teeth of the Wicked.

Concerning gathering in the Name of Jesus.
CHrist Jesus the Second Adam, who came amongst the Sons of fallen Adam, you
may see the beginning of his setting up his Meetings, when he says, Where two
or three are gathered together in my Name, I am in the midst of them: So you
see here Christ begins with a few, two or three, for there was the gathering of
the Jews, Scribes and Pharisees, their Temples and Synagogues. And likewise
there was the gathering of the Heathen to Diana's Temple; and all them that
gathered in the Name of Jesus came from the Jews Synagogue and Temple, and
likewise the Gentiles, into the Name of Jesus, whose Name is above every Name,
and there is no Salvation by any other Name under the whole Heaven, but by the
Name of Jesus, into which the true Gathering is, where all know their
Salvation. And so who are gathered into the Name of Jesus, are gathered into
his Power and Authority: For you know when a Tax or Assesment is gathered in
the Name of the Head or Heads of a Nation, it comes with Power and Authority,
and you obey it either actively or passively.

And so who are gathered in the Name of Jesus, they are gathered in the Power
of the Second Adam, whose Power and Authority is above the Power of the First
Adam's Sons and Daughters; by which Power, and in whose Names their People are
gathered; but Christ, whose Name is above every Name, there is no Salvation by
any other under Heaven, but by the Name of Jesus; and they that are gathered in
this Name of Jesus, by his Power in which they know their Salvation; they do
see that there is no Salvation by any other Name under the whole Heaven, nor
Gathering, by which they gather; they bid Farewell to all other Names and
Gatherings under Heaven, as knowing there is no Salvation but in the Name of
Jesus; and this fulfils Jacob's Prophecy, who said, The Lawgiver shall not
depart from between Judah 's Feet until Shilo come, and the Gathering of all
Nations shall be unto him: So then it is clear, if the Gathering of all Nations
be unto Christ, they must forsake all that, into which they were gathered
before: And therefore that makes all the Heads of the National Ways to be angry
that holds them up; and with such, The Lamb makes War in Righteousness, going
on Conquering and to Conquer, that he may Rule whose right it is, that he might
subdue all things to himself; in whose Name all things are to be done, and to
whom all People are to be gathered, whom God has given for Salvation to the
ends of the Earth: And likewise this does fulfill Moses prophecy, who said, Like
unto me will God raise up a Prophet, whom in all things the People shall hear,
who is the Salvation to the ends of the Earth, to whom the Gathering of all
Nations must be; and they who are gathered in his Name do and must hear him in
all things, by whom all things were made and created, who was glorified with
the Father before the World began.

A Warning to all to keep out of the vain Fashions of the World, which lead
them below the Serious Life; and not to Fashion themselves according to the
World.
FRiends,
Keep out of the vain Fashions of the World, Epist. 250.
let not your Eyes, and Minds, and Spirits run after every Fashion (in Apparel)
of the Nations; for that will lead you from the Solid Life into unity with that
Spirit that leads to follow the Fashions of the Nations, after every Fashion of
Apparel that gets up: But mind that which is sober and modest, and keep to your
plain Fashions, that therein you may judge the World, whose Minds and Eyes are
in, What they shall put on, and what they shall eat: And Friends that see the
World so often alter their Fashions, if you follow them, and run into them, in
that ye cannot judge the World, but the World will rather judge you. Therefore
keep all in the Modesty, and Plainness, and Fervency, and Sincerity, and be
Circumspect; for they that follow those things, that the World's Spirit invents
daily, cannot be Solid; and many Fashions might be instanced, both of Hats,
Caps and Clothes of Men and Women that daily are invented, which they that run
into them are near unto the World's Spirit, and their Eyes are gazing after
them, when they should be upon the Lord, from whom they should receive
Judgment. Therefore all keep down that Spirit of the World that runs into so
many Fashions to please the Lust of the Eye, the Lust of the Flesh, and the
Pride of Life: And Fashion not your selves according to your former Lust of
Ignorance; and let the time past be sufficient, in which you have lived
according to the Lusts of Men, and the Course of the World, that the rest of
your time you may live to the Will of God, taking no thought what ye shall Eat,
what ye shall Drink, or what ye shall put on; that therein your Lives may judge
the Heathen, and that you may be as the Lillies: For nothing you brought into
the World, neither any thing shall you take out. And therefore, while the Eye
is gazing after every new Fashion, and the Mind and Desire is thirsting to get
it; when it has it, it lifts up the Mind, and so brings under the Judgment of
them that be in the sober Life, and of the World also, and to be like them.
Therefore take heed of the World's Fashions, lest ye be molded up into their
Spirit, and that will bring you to slight Truth, and lift up the wrong Eye, and
wrong Mind, and wrong Spirit, and hurt and blind the pure Eye, and pure Mind,
and quench the Holy Spirit; and through such foolish Toys, and Fashions, and
fading things, you may lose your Conditions. Therefore take heed of the World's
Vanity, and trust not in uncertain Riches, neither covet the Riches of this
World, but Seek the Kingdom of God, and the Righteousness thereof, and all
other things will follow; and let your Minds be above the costly and vain
Fashions of Attire, but mind the hidden Man of the Heart, which is a meek and a
quiet Spirit, which is of great Price with the Lord: And keep to Justice and
Truth in all your Dealings and Tradings, at a Word, and to the form of sound
Words, in the Power of the Lord and in Equity, in Yea and Nay in all your
Dealings, that your Lives and Conversations may be in Heaven, and above the
Earth, that they may preach to all that you have to deal withal; so that you
may be as a City set on a Hill, that cannot be hid, and as Lights of the World,
answering the equal Principle in all, that God in all things may be glorified:
So that you may pass your time here with Fear, as Pilgrims, and Strangers, and
Sojourners, having an Eye over all things that are uncertain, as Cities,
Houses, Lands, Goods, and as things below; possess them as if ye did not; and
they that Marry, as if they did not; yet as having a City, whose Maker and
Builder is God, and a Possession of an Inheritance that will never fade away,
in which you have Riches that will abide with you Eternally.

G. F.

MY Dear Friends in the Truth and Seed of God, Epist. 251.
in which is Purity and Life, let that flow from the Head to the Feet, that
Righteousness and Judgment may run down our Streets as a stream: For now
Friends are become a People gathered in the holy Name of Jesus. Therefore all
are to walk worthy of the High Calling of God in Christ Jesus; and every one as
he has received Him, so walk in Him, as becomes the Gospel, which is the
Power of God, which was before the Devil was; that in that your Life may shine
before Men, to answer that of God in all, that they may behold your good Works,
and glorify your Father which is in Heaven: And so, walk in the Light as
Children of the Light and of the Day. For you know that formerly we did cry
against the Powers of the Earth, because that Judgment, and Justice, and
Righteousness did not run down their Streets: And now that Friends are become a
great People, shall not Judgment, and Justice, and Righteousness run down our
Streets as a Stream and a Flood, to drive away all the filth from amongst us?

And now that Friends are become a good Savor in the Hearts of all People,
they have a Friend in their House that will plead for them; by which Friends
have been kept and preserved in the Life, to answer the Friend in their House:
And God having given them his Dominion and Favor, lose it not, but rather
increase it in the Life; for at first ye know that many could not take so much
Money in your Trade as to buy Bread with; all People stood a loofe of you, when
you stood upright, and gave them the plain Language, and were at a Word; but
now you, through the Life, come to answer that of God in all, they say, they
will trust you before their own People, knowing that you will not Cheat, nor
Wrong, nor Cozen, nor Oppress them: For the cry is now amongst them that are
without, Where is there a Quaker of such and such a Trade? So that they will
deal with Friends before they will deal with their own. Oh! Therefore Friends,
who have purchased this through great Sufferings, lose not this great favor
which God has given unto you, but that you may answer the Witness of God in
every Man, which witnesses to your Faithfulness, that they may glorify your
Father on your behalf.

And now Friends, if there be any Oppression, Exaction or Defrauding by making
a Prize, through the Freedom which God has given you, the World will see such,
and say, the Quakers are not as they were; therefore such should be exhorted to
Equity and Truth: And also if any run into Debt, and aim at great things, and
make a great Show in the World of others Goods, which comes to burden others,
and lift up themselves with that which is not their own, and are not able to
satisfy them, according to their time and word; such hurt themselves, burden
others, and oppress them, and brings grief and cause heart-rising in them to
see such grown up by Oppression; therefore such must be exhorted to Justice,
Equity and Righteousness, and an even Measure, to do as they would be done by.

And also, such as go under the name of Quaker, that are gotten into the Earth,
and settle their Nests there in ease; such comes to cry against Quakers
Meetings, saying, Away with your Forms; and will not come to our Meetings, and
hurts others, by which the World gets occasion against the Truth. Therefore
such must be exhorted, for such never knew the purchase of the Truth, and if
they did, they have sold it.

And Friends, forget not the Assembling of your selves together, as the manner
of some is, and was; lest there be an evil Heart of Unbelief, in departing from
the Living God, but exhort one another daily; and so much the more, as the Day
does appear, showing the more Light, the more Day, the more Building, the more
Exhorting in the Light, and in the Spirit, in Fellowship one with another: And
they that do forsake the Assembling of themselves together, as the manner of
some was in the Apostles Days, and is the manner of some now, such grow more
and more in the evil Heart, departing from the Living God: And this brought in
the Apostasy, which the Apostates set up, and all the whole Body of trifling
Traditions: Therefore such as be in the Everlasting Power of God, must exhort
such to take heed and be wise.

And also, all such unruly Spirits that have professed (falsely) and got under
the Name of Quakers, whose evil Words corrupt good Manners, must be exhorted
from House to House.

And also such young People, Lasses and Lads, that goes in youthful Ways, and
takes Liberty to go into Pleasure, and to Play, and to Alehouses and
Drunkenness; which corrupt the Earth, which is one Mark, that they are dead
whilst they live: And kills the Just, and burdens the Righteous, and causes
the Way of Truth to be evil spoken of: Therefore such must be exhorted to live
in the Truth, and to come to that which will mortify that, which leads to
Death; so that Truth may be adorned by them.

And also such that will not go to Meetings, and cries against others that do,
and says, they are Forms of Men; and one while they will not give the Hand; and
another while they will keep on their Hats when Friends Pray, and yet secretly
they can go to bad Houses, as several have done: From these abominable things
they must be exhorted and reproved. And if they do not repent, and come to
judge and condemn those things that they have done amiss, and do live in that
which does condemn, and give forth a Paper to take their Transgressions and bad
Doings out of Friends Minds; and to the People of the World, manifesting their
Repentance: But, if they do neither repent, judge nor condemn, nor give forth a
Paper against such bad Actions, which makes the World to speak evil of the
Truth and the right Way, then Friends must give forth a Paper to the World, to
certify against them, for clearing the Truth: And better such had never
professed the Name, nor known the Truth, nor come among them who were gathered
into the Name of Jesus, and into the Form of Sound Words, and into the Son of
God and Godliness; then to have gone into a Form of their own, which they have
received; yea, even from the worst of Men, who are thereby come under the
Judgment of common, outward People: And therefore Friends, all Uncleanness, of
all sorts, and Unrighteousness, and Unfaithfulness, and youthful Ways of running
out, and liftings up, such must be exhorted and reproved; that Truth and
Righteousness may flow; through which you may keep that which you have bought,
and kept through great Sufferings, and some to Death; that Truth in all things
may be adorned.

And all such as are Tattlers, Busybodies, Back-biters and Gossippers, are to
be exhorted to mind their own Conditions, that they may live in the Truth, and
not to draw others out to Words, wherein there is no profit; that Truth may
flow, and the Life may flow, and the Unity may increase in the Spirit and
Power; that all may come to live in the Gospel Order, which was before the
Devil, or Enmity or Adversary was.

And all such as cry, Away with your Laws, we will have none of your Laws: To
such as come to the Law of the Spirit of Life in Christ Jesus, which makes free
from the Law of Sin and Death, and puts down that Authority; which Life was
before Death and Sin was, and remains when it is gone; and in the Life in
Christ Jesus, is the Saints Fellowship, and Unity, and Bond of Peace: All such
as cry against Laws so much, are the Sons of Belial, and would be without the
Yoke of the Law of the Son of God: Such always were the stirrers up of Mischief
and Schism from the Body, and they took Liberty to say any thing; as ye may
read in the Book of Kings, in the Days of Jezebel, and in the Days of Stephen;
and yet these that cry so much against Laws, yet they live themselve in the Law
of Sin and Death; which they obey when they do Evil; who are without the
Understanding of the Righteous Law, which the Righteous live in and sees:
Therefore such must be exhorted and reproved, if they go under the Name of
Quakers, and are not in the Life: That Justice, Judgment and Righteousness may
flow as a River, and as a Stream, and drive away all the Filth from among us;
that nothing but the Power of God, and the Life of Truth, may amongst us rule;
that the Living God, which has blessed you with his heavenly Riches and
Mercies, and largely manifested them among you, may be in all things honored,
magnified and exalted: To whom all belongs, God over all, blessed for ever. So
that every one may adorn the Truth, and the Gospel, and mind the Lord's
Business above their own: And every one be tender of the Glory of God, and be
careful, that in no ways his Name and Truth be dishonored.

So let this be read in all your Men and Women's Meetings, who are to take
notice of all such things. So no more, but my Love in the Universal Seed of
God, which never sinned, which is First and Last, the Top and Cornerstone.

G. F.

For Friends in the Ministry, scattered abroad in Virginia, Maryland,
New England, Barbados, and other Plantatations beyond the Sea.
TO all you that minister abroad in those Parts, Epist. 252.
this is the Word of the Lord to you all, Live in Lowliness of Mind, and
Meekness of Spirit, and Pureness of Heart, and be Examples in your Lives, and
Chaste in your Conversations, in Holiness of Mind, that you may be a good
Savor amongst the People where you come. Let all ungracious, light, unseasoned
Expressions, be kept out of your Minds and Mouths, which edifies not the New
Life, and keep single unto God, and single-hearted to Man, and plain in all
things and low. For it is the Word of the Lord, and the Light of God, that
Prophesies and Reveals, the Dispensation of the Gospel of Christ unto
People: Be ye faithful in it, Epist. 252.
and walk answerable to it, and to that holy Gift or Manifestation of
Prophecy. And let none be lifted up with it, for Life brings low, and down, as
you are kept in the Holiness of it, and the Wisdom of God; through which you
answer that of God in all: This does not hinder the effect of that which you
have to minister; but the Life is opened to receive it, in walking and
answering that which you have to minister; though the contrary part may rise up
against you: Be at Unity amongst your selves, that you may not make Sects nor
Schisms, or stumble the Weak: For you know that cursed Spirit that made Rents
and got into the Affections and uppermost Part of People, has buried the
Witness of God in many, and made open Rents (which may break also into other
Ages against Truth, and them that live in it) which in time will wither and
fade away, as Grass upon the House top, and their Arrows will turn into their
own Bowels, that are shot against the Righteous, both of the Professor and
Profane. And so, be Valiant for the Truth upon the Earth, abhorring all
Uncleanness and Unrighteousness, flying all youthful Ways and fond Affections
below, being kept above them; showing the new Life to them that be in the Old,
and a New Conversation to them that be in the Vain, and Gentleness to all the
Perverse, and Straightness to all the Crooked, and Plainness to all the Rough,
and Lowliness to all the Mountains of Ungodliness and Unrighteousness; for the
Lamb must have the Victory: And so you may be one another's Crown, Joy and
Rejoicing in the Lord; and not one another's Sorrow and Grief. And so, that all
may be brought to the Witness of God (which first convinced them) who have run
out, and to the Life to answer it; through which you may come to have Unity
with God, and with them in the Eternal and Everlasting Life. And some of you
should take some of the eminent, true, good and upright Friends, and go and
discourse with some of the Heathen Kings, desiring them to gather their Council
and People together, that you may declare God's Everlasting Truth, and his
Everlasting Way of Life and Salvation to them, knowing that Christ is the
Promise of God to them, a Covenant of Light to the Gentiles (which is the
Heathen) who is also the New Covenant to the Jews; for you have been amongst
the old, rotten-hearted Professors, and seen the Power of the Lord come over
them. So, now turn to the Gentiles, to whom Christ is given for a Covenant of
Light, and of Salvation, to the Ends of the Earth. So that the Light must be
preached and sounded throughout all the Heathen Kings and Princes Countries;
and therefore, as you feel and are moved, about Six or more Persons, living in
those Parts near unto them, to go with you, as I said, and desire the King to
gather his Council and Subjects together, that they may hear that which has
been promised to them (God's Everlasting Covenant of Light, and Life and
Salvation, to the Ends of the Earth) And so, be faithful in his Power, which
was, before the Devil was; who has darkened People, and set them one against
another: You having on the Armor of Light, which was before the Power of
Darkness (and which must stand against them) and having on the Breast Plate of
Righteousness, that you may stand against all Unrighteousness, and the Shield
of Faith, the Helmet of Salvation, and the Sword of the Spirit, which is the
Word of God, which was before the World was; through which you may savor and
discern in Wisdom, and in Understanding you may judge, and feel by the Word of
Reconciliation committed to God's Servants, his Sons and his Daughters; which
Word of Faith is now preached, even the same which was amongst the Apostles;
which all must obey and do; which reconciles to God, and to just Men's Spirits,
and to one another. So, no more, but my Love to you all in the Everlasting Seed
of God that never changes. For the Word is the same now as it was in the
Beginning, in Ages past, manifested over all; which many Thousands have
received. Glory and Blessing to the Lord God for ever. So, be Faithful, that
you may be one another's Crown, and rejoicing in the Lord, going together in
the Love and Fear of the Lord.

For Friends in Maryland were a pretty People: And Friends, you have had large
Experience of that Spirit that run into the Hat, that it was not of God, which
scatters to the World (and begot none to God) which is to be bruised by the
Seed of God, Christ Jesus, which gathers to God.

London, the 1st of the 7th Month, 1667. G. F.

To Friends in Holland.
DEar Friends,
In the Everlasting Power of the Lord God, Epist. 253.
I salute all the Faithful and Upright, among whom the Lord has Joy and
Delight; in which Everlasting Power of God have you your Unity Fellowship, and
Dominion. And so Friends, all Sufferings of Friends, of what sort soever, for
Conscience sake to Christ, in Holland, in Germany, in Zealand, in Gilderland,
in the Palatinate, in Freezland, Sweedland, Switzerland and Hambrough, send an
Account for what they have suffered, and by whom; together with the Examples
that are fallen upon the Persecutors; with their Mittimusses and Examinations,
send all these to London, to Friends there; that if any Ambassadors or Agents,
out of any of those Places, come to London, Friends may make Application to
them; for there are some Friends, who are ordered for the same Purpose, to take
knowledge of such things. And likewise, if any Friends have come over into
those Parts of the World, and have not walked answerable to the Gospel of
Truth, but have walked scandalously and disorderly; whether they have been such
who have come over to Minister, or Seamen, and Factors, or Merchants, or
Masters of Ships, whereby the Lord God has been dishonored, and his Holy Name
blasphemed; by which his People are called. And also all such who have not been
Faithful in their Callings between Man and Man, but have been deceitful in
their Callings, and have been Exactors, and have not been true to their Word;
by such Doings they cause the Holy Name of the Lord God, and his Righteous
Truth, to be evil spoken of. That a List of all such may be gathered up, and
sent over to London, to such who are to receive them; and that if they condemn
those things, and have given forth a Paper of Condemnation against them, if so,
that we may have a Copy of it also, to take away the Reproach of their
Transgressions from Frinds.

And let the Faithful Friends amongst you meet together, to consider and take
Care about these things.

G. F.

FRiends, Epist. 254.
let your Affections be set on things that are above; for if they be on things
below, Minds, Bodies, Souls and Spirits will be brought into Bondage, and in
that the Evil will get into you and burden you, which ought to be kept down by
the Seed of Life: And learn the true Humility of Christ the Second Adam. And so
all they that watch for the Soul, must have the Immortal Eye; for the Soul is
Immortal: And therefore all Eyes must be kept above that which is Mortal, and
out of it up to the Immortal God, whose Dwelling is in the Light. And so mind
the Gospel, which is Immortal, and the Government of him that never sinned nor
fell, and to know the increase of it daily, which has no end. For the Lord is
establishing his Church in Righteousness and Truth, whose Church is without
spot, wrinkle and blemish, or any such thing; and his People are a holy
Generation, and they are to stand up for Holiness, in which Holiness they will
see God among them: And let every one see that they do keep their own Vineyard
clean.

Dear Friends, mind the Gospel, which is the Power of God, that was hefore the
Devil and old Adam was; in this Power is the Comely Order; and out of this
Power is all the Uncomely Orders. And so know the Government of Christ, and the
Increase thereof, which has no end: And this Governor and Government was
before the Devil and old Adam was, and will stand when all that is gone.

G. F.

DEar Friends, Epist. 255.
all who from the Beginning have been convinced of God's Truth, and are turned
to the World, or gone into Drunkenness, Swearing, Pleasure and Looseness, or to
the old Mass-house, or have fold the Truth for a Wife or Husband, and gone to
the Priests covertly to be Married, contrary to the Truth they have professed:
These all must be Admonished to come to the Light that did first Convince them,
and give forth a Paper of Condemnation, and send it to the Priests, and to
those Places where they have dishonored God, his Truth and People. And so to
clear the Truth, that none may make a Jest of their Transgressions; and by
walking out of the Truth, cause the Blind to wander, so that the House may be
swept: And ye being an holy Generation, may stand up for Holiness in your
Generation, as the Wicked World stands up for Unholiness.

Surrey, the 10th of the 7th Month, 1668. G. F.

MY Dear Friends,
Epist. 256.
Live in the Wisdom of God, which is gentle and pure from above, and easy to
be entreated, all bear one another Burdens, and so fulfill the Law of Christ.
And if any weakness should appear in any in your Meetings, not for any to lay
it open and tell it abroad, that is not Wisdom that does so; for Love covers a
multitude of Sins, and Love preserves and edifies the Body; and he that dwells
in Love dwells in God; for God is Love, and Love is not easily provoked; and
therefore keep the Law of Love, to keep down that which is so provoked; for
that which is easily provoked has Words, which are for Condemnation. Therefore
let the Law of Love be amongst you, which is not easily provoked; and this Law
of Love being amongst you, it will keep down that which is so provoked, and its
Words; and so the Body edifies it self in Love.

G. F.

DEar Friends, be faithful in the Service of God, Epist. 257.
and mind the Lord's Business, and be diligent, so will the Power of the Lord
be brought over all those that have gain-say'd it. And all ye that are
faithful, go to visit them that have been Convinced, from House to House, that
if it be possible ye may not leave a Hoof in Egypt. And so, every one go seek
the lost Sheep, and bring him home on your backs to the Fold, and there will be
more joy of that one Sheep than the Ninety and nine in the Fold.

And Friends, all take heed of Sleeping in Meetings, and Sottishness, and
Dullness; for it is an unsavory thing to see one sit Nodding in a Meeting, and
so to lose the Sense of the Lord: And it is a Shame and a Sadness both, and it
grieveth the Upright and Watchful, that wait upon the Lord, to see such things;
and for the Priests People and others, that come into your Meetings, and see
you, that come together to Worship God, and to meet together to wait upon him,
and to have Fellowship in his Spirit, for you to sit Nodding, it is a shame and
an unseemly thing. Therefore be Careful and Watchful, and let it be mended; and
mind the Light and Power of Christ Jesus in you, and that will condemn all such
things, and lead you out of, and above, such things, and make you watchful one
over another for your Good.

Let this be read in all your Meetings.

G. F.

DEar Friends, in the Truth of God that changes not, Epist. 258.
is my Love to you in that which is unfeigned and everlasting, in the same
Power, and the same Seed of Life as ever was, and was at the first going forth
among you: And so Friends, the Lord in his everlasting and mighty Power has
moved some to go over in those parts to Declare his Word of Life and
Everlasting Gospel. And some have not walked afterward as becomes the Gospel,
both them that have declared it, and them who have received it; whereby there
has been a stop to the progress of the Truth and Power of God, that it has
not had its full Course; and by that, burdens have been brought upon the Just
and Innocent, and the Mouths of the World, instead of stopping them, they have
opened them to speak evil of the Truth and Way of God. And so Friends, this is
the thing in short and plainness, all that have come over into your Plantations
and Islands, either to Minister or Plant, or as Passengers to see the Country,
or Seamen, Masters of Ships, Factors, or Merchants, that have dishonored the
Lord God and his Truth, and have opened the Mouths of the World to Blaspheme
God, and to speak Evil of his Way and Holy Truth that the Righteous live in:
Such, I say before mentioned, that have gotten into Drunkeness, or Looseness in
Words and Life, and have not been faithful in their Dealings, or have showed
any immodest Carriages, or are gotten up into those things which the Power of
God did not set up in the beginning (which faithful Friends have continued in)
and have gone into Sects and Jangles, which is out of the Power of God, which
Friends are in, who keep their Habitations in Christ Jesus, in whom there is
Peace: And all such likewise, who are gone into Uncleanness, and such who
pretend to preach the Gospel, and are sat down in the Earth, like Demas, and
have forsaken the Gift of God, and sit down in the Earth, and esteemed the
Earth before it; and so set up their own Business, and slighted the Lord's: And
such who are gotten into the rotten Principles of the Ranters, who wear their
Hats when Friends pray; who out of the Wisdom of God would manifest to the
World a Separation, and to show that they are not of the Spirit, Power and
Mind, as Friends were in at the first. As also, all such that raise false
Reports, which are forbidden by the Lord among his People: These things are to
be searched out to the bottom, that Righteousness and Truth may flow, and have
its passage through all Hearts, and all may come to the Habitation which they
had at the first; and all that is contrary may come to Judgment and
Condemnation: For the House must be swept and cleansed of all the things
abovementioned that has gotten into any, that all may come up into the
Sanctified Life; for the Ancient of Days is come, and the Judgment is set, and
they that have kept their Habitations witness this. And therefore Friends, this
is my Advice to you, I would have you to gather up a List of all these things
aforementioned, in all your Istands and Plantations, let them be searched
thoroughly, that what is for Judgment and Condemnation may be brought to it; and
that you may send an Account to Friends at London of such that come from
thence, that have been since Scandalous in their Conversations: So that every
one may come to that which did at first Convince them, and to condemn their
contrary Actions: And that Papers may be sent to the World, who have known
their Transgressions, to clear Truth and Friends, and to fetch it out of their
Mouths; that so they may not feed upon any ones Transgressions; that the
Miscarriages of some may not be charged on the Body of Friends.

G. F.

MY Dear Friends, Epist. 259.
be faithful in the Truth which the Devil is out of; in which Truth you have
Dominion over him: And live in the Power of God, which was before the Devil
was; in which Power of God, which is the Gospel, is your Fellowship: And live
in the Light, which was before Darkness was, and the Power of it: in which
Light is also your Everlasting Fellowship; and in this you will know God's
dwelling, which is in the Light: And dwell in the Life, which was before Death
was, and the Devil, the Power of it; and in this Life you will have Dominion
over Death and the Power of it: And so you do well that take heed to the Light,
and walk in it; and they that do Evil do not take heed to the Light: And so,
walk in the Light, as Children of the Light, and in that ye will have
Fellowship one with another, and with the Son and the Father. And so mind the
Ingrafted Word, which is able to save your Souls; and that will keep your Eyes
and Minds over all that which is not able to save, and keep your Feet on the
top of that. And so be of that good Faith which gives you victory and access to
God, in which you do all please God, and have Unity one with another. And so
mind the Seed Christ, which is over all that which makes to Suffer, and was
before that was, and will stand when that is gone, that makes to suffer; in
that Seed live, and know it your Crown and Life, and in that you will be one
another Crown and Joy in the Lord God blessed for ever. And so keep your
Meetings in the Name and Power of the Lord Jesus Christ that never fell; and
the Seed Christ reigns, in whom you have Life, that was with the Father before
the World began.

G. F.

DEar Friends,
If the Truth make you free, then are ye free indeed: Epist. 260.
So then there are none made Freemen, but by Truth; and all that are Freemen,
they are made free by the Truth, they are God's Freemen; they are
Free-Citizens, they are Freeholders of an Everlasting Inheritance, and free of
an Everlasting Kingdom; and they are Free-Heirs of Salvation; and they are free
of the heavenly City Jerusalem, which is from above; and they are free of the
Power of an Endless Life, which was before Death was. So, they are not
Captives, they are not Bondmen, they are not Servants, nor Slaves. But (Mark)
Freemen and Free-Women. And what has made them Freemen, and Free-Women, but
Truth? For, if the Truth has made you free, then are you free indeed. So, free
to worship God in the Spirit and in Truth (which the Devil is out of) for to
serve the Lord God in the Spirit and in the New Life. They are above the
Serpent, and from under his Control; and from under the Control of old Adam,
and his beggarly Rudiments, and Will-Worships, and false Righteousness: Truth
makes free from all these; and makes free to be Partakers of Christ Jesus, and
of his Blood, and his Spirit, and Mind; who is the Prince of Peace, and Prince
of Life; and makes free to be Partakers of the Divine Nature and Precious
Faith; and to be Members of the True Church, and Gospel Fellowship, and Power
of God, which was before the Devil was. So, stand fast in the Liberty wherewith
Christ has made you free, free from the Devil, Dragon, and Serpent, and all
Slavery and Servitude. For Freemen do walk in their Freedom; for it is the
Truth makes them Free, and so to Triumph in Glory. And so, if the Truth have
made you free, then are you free indeed; free from all the Will-Worships, and
from all the windy Doctrines; from all the evil Inventions, Traditions,
Imaginations and Notions, and Rudiments of Adam in the Fall, who are from
Truth; and free from the Devil, who is out of Truth. So, it is plain, none are
free but by the Truth, and all in the Truth are Freemen. And all, out of the
Truth, are Slaves in Old Adam, and Slaves to Sin and Satan, and to his
Will Worship, and to their own Self-Righteousness, and to their Rudiments,
Doctrines and Traditions; serving diverse Lusts, Pleasures and Corruptions, and
serving the Creatures more than the Creator, who is God blessed for ever, and
serving the Desires of their own Minds; and so as Slaves are kept in Bondage;
all in Prison all in the Bonds of Death and Jaws of Death; for who are out of
Truth are no Freemen. Though they be High Priests and Readers, Preachers and
Expounders, as the great High Priests, and the lofty Pharisees and Scribes
were, Professing the Scriptures, yet not in the Truth, and so not Freemen. For
they are in Malice and Envy, like Cain; Oppressors, like Pharaoh; raging
Persecutors, like Nebuchadnezzar and the Jews; as Wild as Ishmael, as Profane
as Esau; out of the Truth are all those found, fasting with Fists of
Wickedness, lifting up bloody Hands, mingling their Sacrifices with the Blood
of the persecuted, praying to the Majestrates for Persecution: All this is out
of Truth, and not in the Freedom; so not Freemen, but doing the Devil's Lusts
and Service, as the Jews did. And so, if the Truth make you free, ye are free
indeed; ye are free from all those things abovementioned. The Truth makes free
from Envy, and from Profaneness, and from Wildness, and from Wickedness, and
from the bloody Hands: Free from the Fasts of those that hang down their Heads
like a Bulrush, free from the persecuting Spirits, free from the false
Prophets, Deceivers, Seducers, Antichrists; and all Antichristian false
Prophets, Deceivers and Seducers, are Satan's Bondslaves, Vassals and Bond
men; and being with his Oars chained in his Galleys, they carry his Wares, and
do his Work up and down the World; which is the Sea: But Truth makes free from
all these, free from the Hipocrites Hope, which perishes; free from
Nebuchadnezzar's Fury; and it makes free from the wild Heifers Nature, and from
the Dog, Swine, Horse, Viper, Cockatrice, Serpent's Nature, and from the
Spider, and his Webb; and from the Oak and Cedar, and the Bramble and Briar,
and Bear and Lion: The Truth makes free from all these, and brings Man and
Woman into the Image of God. And so, if the Truth makes you free, then are you
free indeed. And the Truth is Christ, and Christ is the Truth, which makes you
free from all Falsehood, and makes you free from the World, which lies in
Wickedness and Unrighteousness; by which you come to be Freemen of the World
which has no End.

And an highway shall be there, Isaiah 35.8.
and a way, and it shall be called the way of holiness; the unclean shall not
pass over it. (Mark) The unclean shall not pass over it. This Way, which is
called the Way of Holiness, was spoken of by Prophecy; and this Way is Christ,
who is the Way of Holiness, who is above the Unclean, and destroys it, and the
Ground of it, the Devil; and so, the Unclean cannot pass over this Way of
Holiness. This is our Way, who are in scorn called Quakers, to wit, Christ: And
this Way of Holiness shall be for the wayfaring Men, though Fools, yet they
shall not err therein; where no Lion, nor ravenous Beast, nor Lion's Whelp
shall go thereon. All the ravenous Beasts are without, in the Way of the World,
without Christ and God: But the Redeemed shall walk in this Way of Holiness,
Christ Jesus; and the ransomed of the Lord shall walk in this Way of Holiness;
and they that do return from the Way of the World to Sion, shall walk in this
Way of Holiness, with singing and everlasting Joy upon their Heads. And they
that walk in this Way of Holiness, Christ Jesus, shall obtain Joy and Gladness;
and Sorrow and Sighing shall flee away: And all that walk in this Way of
Holiness, their deaf Ear is unstopped, and their blind Eye is opened. And the
lame Man here shall leap as an Heart, and the dumb Man's Yongue shall sing: Way
of Holiness: And here he shall see in this Way the patched Ground become a
Pool, and the thirsty Land full of Springs; and in the Habitation, where
Dragons lay, shall be Grass with Reeds and Rushes, which begins to spring:
Glory be to the Lord for ever. And this Way of Holiness, which the Prophets
prophesied of, is Christ Jesus, the Way, who said of himself, I am the Way; and
he is over all the fallen Ways, and before the Way of the Serpent; glorified
with Father, before the World began: And this is the Way of the wayfaring Men,
who have been wayfaring up and down from Religion to Religion, from Worship to
Worship, from one People to another, from one Minister and Teacher to another,
and could not sit down in any of their Ways, but way-fared, traveled and
sought: And now, Glory be to the Lord for ever, Thousands of these wayfaring
Men are come to find their Way, Christ Jesus (and though Fools) yet shall not
err therein; that is, they shall not err in their Way: They shall not err in
Christ Jesus, for there is no Error in him, for he was before Error was; for
Christ, the Way, destroys the Devil and his Works, the Ground of all Error. So,
though they be called Fools (these wayfaring Men) by all the Sons of Adam,
that are set down in their own Rudiments, and have persecuted these wayfaring
Men as Fools, because they would not sit down with them in their Rudiments,
Worships, Self-Righteousness and National Church, which National Powers have
established; yet those wayfaring Men walk on in their Way, Christ Jesus (where
though Fools) yet they shall not err in the Way, Christ Jesus, though they be
called Fools by all the Sons of Adam, who are in their own Ways and Rudiments;
yet those Fools shall not err in the Way, Christ Jesus, though counted Fools
for Christ sake. And they see how all the wise Men in old Adam mixed with the
Wisdom of the Serpent, how they are all in their own Ways, Worships and
Religions; and all the Sects in it, how they are like Tradesmen, plucking from
one Church to another, and getting Customers, and drawing People from one
another's Church to their own Ways; and tearing one another to pieces, to get
People from one another's Church to themselves. And so are like Lions and
ravenous Beasts one against another, to get from one another's Church to
maintain themselves; and thus they seek the Peoples, not the People; and feed
themselves, and not the Flock; for they are out of the Way, Christ, and sit
down in their own Ways. But, for the wayfaring Man, the Way of Holiness is;
for him, that is wayfaring and seeking up and down for his beloved. I sought
my beloved by Night, and the Watchmen smote me. Did not the wayfaring Man go
to the Papists and say, You Watch men of the Night, did ye see my Beloved? What
is thy Beloved more than another's Beloved, said they? What is thy Religion,
more than another's Religion? Or, thy Profession, more than another's
Profession? So the Papists smote and wounded the wayfaring Men. The wayfaring
Men did not ask the Papists for his Beloved; for the Papists had a Beloved, a
Mass Book; but he asked him for his own Beloved, Christ Jesus.

Well, the next Watchmen was the Common Prayer Men of every Parish. The
wayfaring Men went to those Watchmen of the Night, Did ye see my Beloved?
They stormed at the Wayfaring Men, and said, What is thy Beloved more than
another's Beloved, and thy Religion more than another's Religion: They smote
him, and wounded him also.

Well, the next Watchmen of the Night were the Presbyterians; they were also
the Watchmen of some People, the Wayfaring Men went to them, and said, Ye
Watchmen of the Night, did ye see my Boloved? And they were exceeding angry,
and said, What is thy Beloved more than another's Beloved, and what is thy
Religion more than another's Religion? He did not ask him for his Beloved; for
he knew he had a Beloved, his Directory: And these Watchmen smote the
Wayfaring Men, and punished some, spoiled some of their Goods, and killed
some, (as some at New England) because they would not follow their Beloved, as
the Papists and others had done before them.

The next Watchmen were the Independents and Baptists, the Wayfaring Men went
to them also; for they were the Watchmen of some People, and said unto them,
Ye Watchmen of the Night, did ye see my Beloved? And these Watchmen of the
Night were also exceeding angry, and said, What is thy Beloved more than
another's Beloved, and thy Way more than another's Way, and thy Religion more
than another's: And these Watchmen of the Night smote cruelly.

Then the Wayfaring Men went to the private Meetings of the Manifesterians and
seekers; and these Watchmen fell a Mocking, and Scoffing, and Railing, and
Smiting with the Tongue, and thrust them out of their Meetings: And when it was
asked them, If they saw the Wayfaring Man's Beloved? And they scoffed at their
Beloved. And so the Wayfaring Men way-fared up and down from Watchman to
Watchman to seek their Beloved; and many were imprisoned and persecuted by
some of these Watchmen of the Night. And now Glory for ever be to the Lord,
Thousands of these Wayfaring Men have found their Beloved, and have found
their Way, Christ Jesus, and a Fool shall not err therein; for there is no
Error in Christ Jesus, all the Error is out of Christ, who is the Way, wherein
the Wayfaring Men, though counted Fools, yet shall not err. And now my Beloved
is mine, and I am his; we are come to the Banqueting House, and his Banner
over us is Love. And the Watchmen of the Night told the Wayfaring Men, That
there was not any Way, but there was Error in it; and that all the Religions,
and Worships and Churches erred. And so the Wayfaring Men way-fared up and
down to find the Way of Holiness: For all the Ravenous Beasts, and the Lions
Whelps trod in the Way of Error. And all those Night Watchmen were among the
Ravenous Beasts and the Lions Whelps; And so neither the Watchmen nor Ravenous
Beasts could pass over this Way of Holiness, nor enter into it, which is the
Way for the wayfaring Men, the Way of Holiness, where the Fools shall not err;
which fools, all the wise Men in old Adam, and the Serpent's Error, cannot see,
nor their ground, nor how they Err in their own Ways. And this is the Eye which
the Wayfaring Man has opened in him, who sees his Beloved: And the Way where
the Fools shall not Err in. And all that shall come to this Way of Holiness, in
which the Fools shall not Err, which is the Way of the Wayfaring Men, into
which all must come; and out of the Way of the Serpent, and out of the Way of
old Adam in the Fall.

And did not you Watchmen of the Night tell the Wayfaring Men, That the
Scriptures were not truly Translated that speaks of a Way of Holiness, and a
Way that the Wayfaring Men, though Fools, should not err therein? For ye
Watchmen of the Night could not see this Way of Holiness: For, do you not say,
that a Fool will Err in every thing he does? And was it possible there should
be a Way wherein the Fool should not Err? for you said, the wisest Man that was
sinned: And here have not you Wise Men of old Adam manifested your Ignorance
and Error of the Scriptures and the Way of Holiness, which is the Wayfaring
Man's Way: For all Error is in your own Way, and there is no Error in Christ,
the Way of Holiness; for Wayfaring Men and the Fools shall not Err therein;
that is to say, they shall not Err in Christ Jesus; for he was before Error
was, and destroys the ground of it.

The Outward Jew worshipped in his outward Temple made with Hands, at Outward
Jerusalem, Concerning the Worship of God that Christ set up above 1600 Years
since; and concerning the Worship of the Jews before.
and they came up Yearly to Worship there; and if they did not come up to
Worship at outward Jerusalem, and keep the Feast of Tabernacles in the Temple,
upon them should be no Rain; and their Eyes were to rot out of their Heads, and
their Tongues out of their Mouths, that fought against Jerusalem, as in Zachary
14.12. So the outward Jew had but one Temple in the whole World, and there they
went to Worship in it; and the Priest had a Chamber in the Temple. And when
Christ came, he ended the Priesthood, he ended the Offerings, and the Temple
and the Worship therein of the outward Jews; and set up another Worship in the
Spirit and in the Truth: For when the Woman of Samaria, that came to Jacob's
Well, said unto Christ, How that our Father's Worshipped in this Mountain,
where Jacob's Well was, and the Well was made before Jerusalem was, or the
Temple either; for Jacob died in Egypt, and after him his Sons came out of
Egypt, and builded a Temple in Jerusalem; and so there they set up a place of
Worship after the Well was made: So Christ said unto the Woman, The Hour is
coming, and now is, that they that Worship the Father must Worship him in
Spirit and Truth; and not at Jerusalem, nor at this Mountain is God worshipped;
For God is a Spirit, and they that worship him, must worship him in the Spirit
and in the Truth: And then did Christ set up his Worship, which was before the
Popes, Turks, Common Prayer, Presbyterian, Independent, and other Worships
were, and the Worship that Christ Jesus set up, was in the Spirit and in the
Truth. Now where is this Spirit, and where is this Truth? Is it not within
People? So as the Jew outward was to Worship in the Temple, and there was but
that one Temple commanded of God to be built, which Christ came to end, who set
up his Worship in the Spirit and in the Truth. So seeing the true Worship is in
the Spirit and in the Truth, and the Truth is within you, in the inward parts,
the Spirit of God is within you; you must not grieve, vex nor quench it. And so
every Man and Woman in the whole World must come to the Spirit and Truth in
their own Hearts, by which they must know the God of Truth, who is a Spirit,
and to feel the Spirit in their own Hearts, and in the Spirit of Truth to
Worship the God of Truth, who is a Spirit.

So now, as the Jew outward was to offer his Sacrifice in the outward Temple,
and no where else, which Temple is now thrown down, he is not a Jew who is one
outward, but he is a Jew who is one inward, in the Spirit and in the Truth; and
so, all ye Jews inward, in the Spirit, ye must worship in the Truth and in the
Spirit. And so, the Jew inward can worship no where but in the Temple. What
Temple? It is not a Temple that is made with Hands. The Jews outward worshipped
in the Temple that was made with Hands; but the Jew inward his worship is to be
in the Spirit, and in the Truth, and in a Temple not made with Hands. So to
worship in the Spirit, and in the Truth, is to worship in the Temple, and no
where else. And so, every Man and Woman in the whole World must worship in the
Temple. What Temple? The Temple that is not made with Hands. Where the Spirit
of Truth is. Know ye not, that your Bodies are the Temples of the Holy Ghost;
that is to say, the Holy Spirit: And so, every Man and Woman must be brought to
Truth in their own Hearts, and brought to the Spirit of God in their own
Hearts. This is the standing and perfect Worship, and it will stand when all
the Worships of old Adam are gone, and when the Jews, and Turks, and Christians
Worships, that be not in the Truth, are gone: For this is a standing and
perfect Worship; the Spirit of God is Perfect. And this is an Universal
Worship, and brings every individual Man and Woman to the Spirit of God in
their own Hearts. This makes no Sect, but every one in the Spirit, which is the
Bond of Peace, is in the Truth, which the Enmity is out of: And this Spiritual
Worship is in the Spirit and Truth, Christ Jesus, the Spiritual Man, the
Heavenly Man, which the Second Adam, the Lord from Heaven set up above Sixteen
hundred Years since. And so, every one is to be in it, and to walk in the
Truth, and in the Spirit, and to come to the Truth in their own particulars.
For that Spirit makes Sects, which persecutes People for not following them;
but they are all to Worship in that Spiritual Worship, which Christ Jesus set
up; and every Son and Daughter of Adam is to come to the Truth and Spirit in
their own Hearts; and so in that Spirit and Truth to Worship the God of Truth,
who is a Spirit; for he seeks such to Worship him. And Christ persecuted none
for not following his Worship; but all are condemned by the Spirit in their own
selves, who grieves it, and vexes and quenches it, and all are Condemned with
the Light and Truth that hate it, who will not come to it, but hate it. So they
all that Persecute about Religion run into Heaps, and Sects and Darkness, and
are with the Light condemned. And so none can Worship the God of Truth, but who
comes to the Truth in their own Hearts; and none can Worship God, who is a
Spirit, but who comes to the Spirit of God in their own Hearts, which mortifies
Sin and Evil; which Spirit leads into all Truth: So every one who is a Jew
inward must Worship in the Spirit and Truth; and every one must be brought to
the Temple which is not made with Hands, and to Worship in the Spirit which
Christ set up, who is the Spiritual Man. Carnal Men may set up Worships, who
have not the same Spirit and Power the Apostles had. And such leads People into
Sects and Heaps, and leads People out of the Spirit, and persecutes one another
about their Worships, which is not the Way of Truth, nor the Command of Christ,
but on the contrary, to love one another. So all that Worship in the Spirit and
Truth, comes to the Spirit and Truth in their own Hearts, and loves one
another, and loves Enemies. And so as the outward Jews Priests had Chambers in
the Temple; which Priests, Chambers and Temple Christ has ended. So let Christ
Jesus now have a Chamber in your Temple, to sanctify your Temple, and cleanse
your Temple, that the Glory of the Lord may fill your Temple: The Jews Priests
were to cleanse the Temple, and when they had cast the Rubbish out of it, the
Glory of the Lord filled their Temple: And so Christ, as I said before, has
ended the Jews Priests Chambers and Temple. And so all ye who are Jews inward
in the Spirit, let Christ your Priest have a Chamber in your Temple, that he
may cleanse your Temple, and cast the Rubbish out of it, which is come in by
Transgression, who does renew you up into the Image of God, as Adam and Eve
were in before they fell; so that the Glory of the Lord may fill your Temple.
And so as the Jew outward had but one Temple to Worship in, the Jew inward must
not have two; for then they make a Sect, and goes from Truth in their own
Hearts, and from the Spirit of God. And so to Worship in the Truth and in the
Spirit, is to Worship in the Temple. So every Man and Woman come to this one
Temple: Where is this one Temple? Where the Spirit is in the Heart, and the
Truth in the inward Parts: And this is the Temple that is not made with Hands;
do you not know that your Bodies are the Temples of the Holy Ghost? And so this
is the true Worship that Christ set up, in the Spirit and in the Truth; every
Man and Woman in the whole World must come to it, the Truth in their own
Hearts, that by it they may know the Truth, and the God of Truth. And by the
Spirit they may know God, who is a Spirit, and so Worship him in the Spirit and
in the Truth; and this is the standing universal Worship, that Christ the
Second Adam, the Lord from Heaven, the Spirtual Man, set up above Sixteen
hundred Years since; John 4. when he denied the Mountain Worship, where Jacob's
Well was, and the Temple Worship of the outward Jews at Jerusalem, where they
went to the outward Temple Yearly to Worship. And so every one are to Worship
in the Spirit, and come to the Spirit and Truth in their own Hearts; and in
that to Worship the God of Truth, who is a Spirit, as Christ commanded. And so
by the Spirit of Truth, they come to Jerusalem which is above, which comes
down out of Heaven from God. So this is a true, certain, standing, infallible
and perfect Worship; for Truth and the Spirit of God is certain, infallible and
perfect; and so this Worship is a certain perfect Worship. And so every one, as
I said before, come to the Truth in your own Hearts, and to the Spirit of God,
or else you cannot Worship the God of Truth, who is a Spirit: And every Man
that Worships in the whole World, who would find this Spirit and Truth, they
must go into the Temple.

And so in the Spirit and Truth Worship God, who is a Spirit; and this Spirit
gives an Understanding to know God, who is a Spirit; and the Truth, and to know
the God of Truth, who is to be worshipped in the Spirit and Truth, who is God
blessed for ever, Amen.

G. F.

FRriends,
To call Men Masters or Gracious Lord, and putting off the Hat to them, Epist.
261.
and the Man's Scraping with his Foot, and the Woman's making a Curchey. These
Titles and Fashions not giving and observing, does not break the Law of Christ,
nor of God, which respects no Man's Person, but they are the customs of Nations
which are vain; and the great Manners and Civilities that lies among
Christians, is in saying You to one Man, and the Man's putting off his Hat, and
scraping with his Foot, and the Woman's bending her Knees; and in these and
such like things lies their Civilities, their Honor and Manners, and
Well-Breeding, as they call it: But the right Manners is to keep People from
evil Words, which corrupts good Manners, and God's Law; and Christ respects no
Man's Person: And Man and Woman in their not Youing, nor Scraping and Bowing,
are not unmannerly, nor uncivil: for Man was forbidden by the Angel to bow to
him, but to bow to God, and to Worship him, and to bow at the Name of Jesus,
who is called, The Power of God, and the Word of God; for the Angel said to
John, he was his Fellow Servants. So Servants were not to bow one to another;
and if they do, is it not reproved by the Angel, and reproved by Christ, the
seeking Honor one of another? For how can you believe, says Christ, that
receive Honor one of onother, John 5. So it is a mark, that they are
Unbelievers, who receive Honor one of another; and they are like the
Pharisees, that love the Praise of Men, and are called of Men Master, and like
the Heathen, that will be called Gracious Lords; For, says he, you are all
Brethren, and have one Master and Lord, Christ Jesus, and one Lord, who is the
Creator of all. For all things were made subject to Man, and Man subject to
God; all Creatures was to fear and dread Man and Woman, but Man and Woman were
to fear and dread God. So all Christians are to have one heavenly spiritual
Head, Christ Jesus, and heavenly spiritual Master, and they all as Brethren are
to serve and worship him. And the Prophets and Apostles Thou Would God and Christ,
Kings and Princes, and great Men and Women, as you may see in the Scriptures,
and they were never offended at it. And you never read in all the Scriptures of
any that feared God, that were offended at any for saying Thou to a single
Person, and standing with their Hats on (unless it were the Pharisees, that
loved the praise of Men) as it is said in the Book of Job, If I give flattering
Titles to Men, my Maker would soon take me away: And so all their flattering
Titles, and loving the Praise of Men, and seeking Honor one of another, it
comes from that Ground that is out of Truth, in the Image of the Beast and the
Dragon, who will be worshipped; but the Angel would not be bowed down to by the
Servant of the Lord; he says, God must be worshipped. So they that Worship the
Beast and the Dragon receive the Mark from the Dragon; he Brands them and Marks
them with his Spirit (out of Truth) and then he receives Honor from them, and
the vain Glory they give to him; but they which are sealed with the Spirit of
Promise, they have their Father's Mark in their Foreheads; these Worship the
Living God, and are in his Image and his Likeness, that he made them in the
Beginning, and in the Spirit of Christ Jesus, and those are Christ's.

G. F.

ALL Friends and People,
That is to be condemned in your selves, which has led you from Christ, from
God, Epist. 262.
and from Unity in the Light; I say, is condemned by the Light, and must be
executed and killed, and stoned with the Living Stone, and run through with the
Living Sword, and hammered down with the Living Hammer to pieces, and burnt up
with the Living Fire, and so made an end of: For that which leads into
Looseness, Whimsies, Imaginations, false Visions, though it be condemned, yet,
if it be not executed, it is in danger to rise again; and if it rise again, and
get over you, it will be your Ruler, if it get out of Prison and be alive, and
not executed: For, after a thing is condemned, as Drunkenness, Adultery,
Fornication, or any manner of Looseness whatsoever, or runnings out from the
Spirit and Light, if it be condemned, and Judgment passed upon it, if it be not
executed, there is danger of it is reviving: For, after a thing is Condemned,
and Judgment passed upon it, it is to be executed. For you know, after a Thief
or a Murderer is Condemned and Judged, and have Sentence past upon him, yet he
is not executed that Day; the Execution comes afterward. And therefore, after
Condemnation or Judgment is past upon any inward Evil, or any outward Action of
Evil, let Execution be speedily done with the Living Hammer, and the Living
Sword, and the Living Stone; that the Living Fire may burn it up and consume it.

No Man after he has beaten his Child, hates him ever afterward, but loves
him (if he repent and amends, so does the Eternal Father) and if the Child be
fallen down into the Dirt, he does not go and tumble him more into the Dirt, or
into the Ditch, and there let him lie in the Dirt and Ditch, but takes him out,
and washes him; and so does the heavenly Father, which leads his Children by
his Hand, and dandles them upon his Knee. And so, all that be called Fathers in
the Truth, or Mothers, their Tenderness should be the same to all little
Children in the Truth, that can hardly go without leading, that sometimes may
fall into the Dirt and Ditch, and ship aside, and then be troubled, and cry. To
such there should be Tenderness shown, and to wash them, and help them; and
Love to such should be manifest; for there is difference betwixt a stubborn,
rebellious and wilful Child, and one that is Penitent; for those must have
great Chastisements, that knows the will of their Father, and does it not; they
must have greater Stripes, and sorer Stripes they must look for (be sure to
expect it) than the other. For Christ is manifest in the Flesh, to condemn Sin
in the Flesh, all that witness Christ in them. Male and Female; I say, Christ
manifest in their Flesh; he does condemn the Sin that is in their Flesh; yea,
and makes an end of Sin, and finishes the Transgression, and brings in
Everlasting Righteousness into them: But first he condemns the Sin that is in
their Flesh, the Unrighteousness in their Flesh, and Ungodliness in their
Flesh; the Liar, the Swearer, that is in their Flesh; the Adulterer, the
Fornicator, the Idolater, and all Sin, whatsoever it is, he condemns in the
Flesh. So Christ is manifest in the Flesh, to condemn the Sin that is in the
Flesh; that every one that witnesses Christ condemning Sin in the Flesh, that
they through Christ, that condemns Sin in the Flesh, might become God's
Righteousness; so they become another: But the Sin being uncondemned in the
Flesh, they are of the Serpent, of the Unrighteous One, of the Ungodly One, who
adulterated from Truth, they are his: But the Sin being condemned in the Flesh,
Christ is manifest in the Flesh, so that they become Christ's; they are God's,
and are in Christ, who destroys the Devil and his Works, that are out of Truth.
And these know the New Life, which God is served in; and these know the New
Earth, wherein dwells Righteousness; and these knows the Old Earth, wherein
dwells Unrighteousness: And these can bring forth things New and Old.

For they that are led by the Spirit of God, are the Sons of God; they that are
led by the Spirit of the Devil, are the Children of the Devil, and his Works
they do, the Works of their Father; as they that are led by the Spirit of God,
his Works they do, the Works of their Father; and all they that quench the
Spirit of God, and vexes the Spirit of God, and grieves the Spirit of God, and
hate the Light of Christ, and walks despitefully against the Spirit of Grace,
and turns it into wantonness, and disobeys the Word of God in their Hearts and
Mouths: Sure you all may see such are not the Sons of God, and do not the Works
of God; though they may profess the Scriptures from the beginning of Genesis to
the end of the Revelations: Neither does that Birth know the Scriptures, for
they are known by the Spirit of God, the Holy Ghost, which led the holy Men of
God to speak them forth; by the same Spirit are they known again: And Christ,
who was conceived by the Holy Ghost, born of the Virgin, he is known by the
Holy Ghost again, which led the holy Men of God to give forth Scriptures; which
now leads into all Truth. And all them now, who despise Revelations,
Inspirations, Prophecies, Gifts, and Talents, they despise the Spirit of God
and his Gifts. Such are neither Ministers of God, or Christ, nor his Sons; but
are the Sons of him that is out of the true Spirit, that is of God, in the
Darkness, Babel and Confusion; who think they can do great matters with their
Languages, and with them make a Trade of the Scriptures; who cannot endure any
People should come to the Spirit, that gave them forth; for none can walk in
the Spirit, that quenches it, and vexes and grieves it. And none comes into the
Church Fellowship that grieves, and vexes, and quenches the Spirit of God: For
the Fellowship is in the Spirit, that is the Bond of Peace; and none is led
into all Truth, but by the same Holy Ghost, that was in the holy Men of God,
that gave forth the Scriptures of Truth. And all that are led by this Spirit of
Truth, are led from the Spirit of the Devil, that is out of Truth. And all that
are led by the Spirit that is out of Truth, are the First-Birth of the Flesh,
and of that Murderer, which will persecute him that is born of the Holy Spirit
of God, which leads into all Truth: Which they that are led by the Spirit that
is out of Truth, are out of both the Father and Son. And they that are led by
the Spirit of Truth, are the Sons of God; and here are both in the Father, and
in the Son, and in the Truth, which abides for ever. And here the Heir, the
Son, inherits his Possession, his Inheritance in the Kingdom that never has an
end.

The true Hope, the true Cross, the true Faith, the true Worship, the true
Religion, the true Way, true Image, and true Fellowship have been lost since
the Apostles-Days, amongst those called Christians, which are out of the Life.
And they that have lost the Cross of Christ, which is the Power of God, in
which is the true Fellowship, they have set up a wooden or a stone Cross, etc.
so false Crosses, false Christians. They that have lost the true Hope, which
purifies, as He is Pure, they have set up a Purgatory to cleanse them when they
are dead. And others cry up a Body of Sin and Death on this side of the Grave,
with their Hypocrites Hope; and they have lost the true Ministry, and set up a
false One, to preach up Imperfection. And People were imperfect in old Adam
before Christ came; for the Law made nothing Perfect; but the true Minister,
Christ, in you the hope of Glory, does make Perfect both in the Apostles Days
and now: Christ in you, the hope of Glory, said the Apostle, whom we preach,
warning every Man, that we may present every Man perfect in Christ Jesus. So
the Perfection is in Christ Jesus; the Imperfection is in old Adam. So this is
the true Hope that purifies, which every one that has it purifies himself,
even as he is Pure: And every one that has not a Possession of this Hope,
pleads for Impurity and Imperfection, and a Body of Sin and a Body of Death
unto their Grave, and a Purgatory when they are dead. Such have a Profession of
the Scriptures, like the Pharisees; and the Hypocrites Hope which shall perish.

And the true Faith has been lost since the Apostles Days; the true Faith
which purifies the Heart, which is the Faith of God's Elect, which Faith gives
Victory over that which separates from God; in which Faith ye all please God;
which Faith is the Gift of God, and Christ is the Author of it; every one look
unto him for it, for the finishing of it, who is the Author of it: In this
Faith have all the Saints Unity in that which gives Victory over the Devil; for
by the Faith, which is the Shield, do they resist him and quench his fiery
Darts; and they resist him that would defile them and make them imperfect, and
lead them into those things which would displease God. And all that be out of
this Faith, they cry, No Victory while we be upon the Earth; but they must have
a Body of Sin unto the Grave, and a Purgatory to cleanse them in; these be all
in the Error concerning the Faith, these have made Shipwreck of Faith and a
good Conscience, these are all in the dead Faith, and so cannot preach the true
and Living Faith of God's Elect: These are all out of Unity; for the Unity is
in the Faith, which gives Victory over the Devil. These be out of the just
Life; which Just lives by his Faith. The Life that I now live, is by the Faith
of the Son of God; yet it is not I, but Christ that lives in me, said the
Apostle. And all that walks in the Faith of God's Elect, which is the Victory
over the Devil, they walk in Unity over the Enmity.

And the true Worship has been lost smce the Apostles Days; yea, the Worship
that Christ set up above Sixteen hundred Years since, in the Spirit, and in the
Truth; yea, in the Spirit of God, which was, before the Spirit of the Devil
was, who is out of Truth; and in the Truth, which the Devil is out of: In this
Spirit, and in this Truth, God, who is a Spirit, and the God of Truth, seeks
that Men should worship him in the Truth; and so every Man and Woman must come
to Truth in the inward Parts, and to the Spirit of God within themselves, if
they be Worshippers of God in the Spirit and Truth; which the Devil abode not
in: And this is the standing and perfect Worship, in which there is Unity in
the Truth; for the Enmity is out of it, and he cannot get into it. Glory be to
God for ever. And Men that are erred from the Worship that Christ set up, above
Sixteen hundred Years since, they are from the Truth within, and the Spirit of
God. And by that unclean Spirit they have worshipped Images, they have
worshipped the Works of their own Hands, they have worshipped the Dragon, they
have worshipped the Beast, they have worshipped the Creature, they have
worshipped Angels, persecuted one another about their Worships, and they have
persecuted the true Worshippers. These are in the Blind Zeal, who have hated
the Light. And so none can worship God, who is a Spirit, but they must come to
the Truth in their inward Parts, and to the Spirit of God in themselves; by
which Spirit they must know God to be a Spirit, and to worship him in the
Spirit. They must know God to be the God of Truth, and then worship him in the
Truth; which the Devil is out of, in the Enmity, an Adversary. And this is the
standing, perfect, infallible Worship, that Christ Jesus, the perfect,
infallible Man, set up above Sixteen Hundred Years since.

And the true Way is lost since the Apostles Days, which Christ set up above
Sixteen Hundred Years since; who said, I am the Way to the Father; and no Man
comes to the Father, but by me. So, no one comes out of Old Adam, but by
Christ, the Second Adam. No one comes out of Darkness, but by Christ, the
Light; no one comes out of Death, and from under the Prince of Death, the Power
of it, but by Christ, the Life. So, he is the Way to God. No one comes out of
Unrighteousness, but by Christ, the Righteousness; no one comes out of the
Wisdom below, but by Christ, who is the Wisdom of God, which is from above. And
no one comes out of Error and Evil, but by Christ, the Truth. So, he is the
Door and the Way to God Almighty. And no Man comes to the Father, but by him.
No one comes out of Captivity or Prison, but by Christ, the heavenly Man. And
so, they having erred from Christ, the Way, they have set up so many Ways in
Christendom among them; and fall out about their Ways one with another, Enmity
being among them. Now Christ is the Way, which the Unclean cannot walk in, who
was before the unclean Way was; for he is over all the unclean; and he is over
all the perverse and crooked Ways, and Mountainous Ways, and evil and
unrighteous, and ungodly Ways; he is over them all. And none comes to this New
and Living Way, Christ Jesus, but who come to the Grace of God in their Hearts;
the Spirit of God in their Hearts. So, he is the New and the Living Way, who is
the First and the Last, the Beginning and the Ending, set up from Everlasting
to Everlasting. And all that be out of this New and Living Way, though they
have all the Scriptures, from the beginning of Genesis to the Revelations, yet
they are dead, and under the Power of Death; which Christ the Way destroys,
through Death, yea, the Power of Death, the Devil; and was before Death and his
Power was. Here is the New and the Living Way.

And the true Religion has been lost, and erred from, since the Apostles days:
The Religion that is pure from above, and undefiled before God, which keeps
from the spots of the World, which is to visit the Widows and the Fatherless.
Now they that are out of this Religion have made many Religions, but they are
spotted and defiled, and they cry up a Body of Death, and Sin and Imperfection
to the Grave, and a Purgatory when they are Dead: And their Widows, and their
Fatherless and Strangers go begging up and down their Streets and Highways; so
their Steets and Highways are Judges against them and their Bodies of Death,
and their Purgatories, manifests their Errors and Ignorance from this pure
Religion, that comes down from above, which is not of Man's making; but comes
down from God, which is Pure before God, and undefiled in his Sight, that keeps
from the Spots of the World. ( Mark, the Spots) And these do not cry up a Body
of Death, nor a Purgatory, when they are dead; they are kept from the Spots of
this World. So, they are far degenerated from this pure Religion from above
(which is undefiled before God, which keeps from the Spots of this World, and
leads to visit the Fatherless, Widows and Strangers) whose Religion is, that
they must have a Body of Sin and Death unto the Grave, and a Purgatory when
they are dead. And their Fatherless, and Widows, and Strangers must go a
begging in the Streets. All these Religions are from below, and of their own
making, and not from above, but of him that is out of Truth. And all they that
come to this pure Religion, that is from above, and comes to receive it, it
must be by the Spirit of God within, and the Light of Christ within, and his
Grace within, and his Faith within.

And the Image of God in them has been lost since the Apostles days, that Man
and Woman was renewed into by Christ; and therefore they have set up so many
Inventions of their own Brain, and outward Images, and Likenesses, and worship
them; for Man and Woman was in the Image of God, before they fell: And when
they fell from the Image of God, they set up many Images of God and Man, and
other Creatures of things in Heaven and things in Earth: And when Christ came,
he renewed Man into the Image of God again, and into his Likeness; but since
the Apostles days have they lost this Image of God, and this Likeness; and made
a profession of Christ and the Apostles words, as the Jews did of the Law, and
worshipped the Works of their own Hands, and Images: But now is Christ renewing
Man again into the Image of God, as they were in the Apostles days; yea also I
say, as Adam and Eve were in before they fell: Yea, and in this Image of God
they will reign over all Images and Image-makers, either with hand or brain;
for they have made those Images and Likenesses by the Evil Spirit, that is out
of Truth, which the Spirit of Truth leads out of, and above them, and from
their works: Glory to God for ever, for his Image and his Likeness is led into
by Christ Jesus, and into Adam and Eve's State before they fell; and not only
into that State, but into Christ Jesus that never fell.

And the true Praying has been lost since the Apostles days; for none can pray
truly, but by the Spirit of God, unto God, who is a Spirit, or unto Christ, who
is a Quickening Spirit. And all they that have erred from the Spirit, cannot
abide to hear talk of it; and yet may have the Scripture from Genesis to the
Revelations, and make Prayers, and say them over, and give them to others to
say over; and so Pray by the Book, and that must help his Infirmity; and so
have erred from the Spirit, and from the true Doctrine of the Apostles, who
said, The Spirit must help their Infirmities; and they must pray in the Spirit.
So all that grieves, and vexes and quenches the Spirit of God cannot pray in it
to God, who is a Spirit: But they think to be heard by their much Babbling, and
asks and prays, but do not receive; and every one must come to the Spirit of
God in themselves, and to the Light,, and to the Faith that purifies his Heart,
and to the Spirit of Grace and Supplication; and by this his Mind is to be
turned toward Christ, who prays to God, and asks in the Name of Jesus, and in
the Power, and Light, and Spirit of Christ.

And the true Fellowship has been lost, and Sanctification, and Belief, and
the Righteousness since the Apostles days. For many have had the letter, but
lost the Life; the Notion, but lost the Possession; the Profession, but lost
the Substance, Christ Jesus; but the true Fellowship is in the Gospel, the
Power of God, which was before the Devil was; and since Men lost this Power of
God they have not known the Scriptures aright, but they have set up Fellowships
by that Spirit, which is of him that is out of the Truth, that have destroyed
one another, and persecuted them which are in the Power of God, which is the
Gospel, which was before the Devil, and all the Fellowships in old Adam was,
and will be when they are all gone.

Now the Gospel-Fellowship is a perfect Fellowship, a pure and an holy
Fellowship, it is an everlasting Fellowship; for the Power of God is
everlasting, it is over the Jews Fellowship in the outward things, and the
Gentiles invented Fellowships, and the Fellowships of Bread, Water and Wine;
for these are no Mysteries, the World's Fellowship is no Mystery, the
Fellowship of Bread, Water and Wine is no Mystery; but the Gospel-Fellowship is
a Mystery, and none sees it, but who comes to the Light of Christ, and to the
Truth in the inward parts: For this is a standing Fellowship, the Gospel, the
Power of God; and all Fellowships out of it are imperfect and corrupt, where
the Body of Death and Sin and their Purgatory is pleaded for, which Fellowships
below, Men make, and are of Men, and from Men; but the Gospel is not of Men,
nor by Men, but of God, and from Christ: So this Fellowship is the
Church Fellowship that is in God, and it is a pure Fellowship, the
Gospel-Fellowship is, which Gospel brings Life and Immortality to Light, and
expels away all that which darkens, and burdens, and loads the Soul, Mind,
Spirit and Heart. So this is Glad-Tidings to the Immortal Soul, which comes by
the Immortal Power up to the Immortal God, where Life and Immortality comes to
Light, and to shine over him that has darkened it: Here is liberty to the
Immortal Soul, Mind, and Spirit in the Gospel, the Power of God, which is the
Gospel-Fellowship, which is a Mystery (but Bondage and Darkness to the other)
so Life and Immortality is hid from all them that makes Fellowships below, and
have their Fellowships by Men, and of Men, who are out of the Power of God, the
Gospel; and makes Fellowships of old Authors, and makes Fellowships of the
Scriptures: But being erred from the Spirit, they know not the Scriptures, nor
the Power of God, and there they are in Strife and Enmity in their Fellowships,
and falling-out about their Bread and Wine, some taking it one way, some
another; and falling-out about their handy Works, and plucking People from one
another to themselves, and not to Christ, nor his Gospel-Fellowship, that came
not by Men, neither was it of Man. So they that deny Revelation cannot preach
Christ until he be revealed, nor cannot preach the Gospel until it be revealed.
And they that say Revelations are ceased, they may as well say, there is no
Gospel; and so have no Christ to preach, and are only Ministers of the Letter;
neither have they the Secrets of God to preach, which are revealed to them that
fear him. And that is the Spirit of Darkness from the Prince of Darkness, that
is out of the Fellowship of the Gospel, where is Enmity, which speaks it self
sufficiently abroad among all their Fellowships; and into this Fellowship of
the Gospel, the Power of God, which was before the Devil was, he cannot get.

And the Righteousness has been lost since the Apostles days; therefore People
have been found in their own Self-Righteousness and Unrighteousness; and
therefore they are all found out of Peace with God, and with Christ, and one
with another; for where there is Righteousness there is Peace.

And Sanctification has been lost since the Apostles days; therefore both
Teachers and Hearers are found in Uncleanness, and preach up the Body of Death,
and Sin and a Purgatory; and so have forsaken him that should sanctify them,
and make them clean.

And the Sanctifying Belief has been lost since the Apostles days; for he that
Believes is born of God; and he that Believes in the Light, may become a Child
of the Light; every one that comes into the World are enlightened by Christ,
that they should believe in the Light, as he commands them, and so become
Children of the Light; and he that believes, overcomes the World. And if there
be no overcoming on this side of the Grave, as the World's Preachers, made of
Men, say, then there is no true Believing on this side of the Grave; and
therefore the World is not overcome in them; and he that is their God, is of
the World also: For he that believes, overcomes the World; for greater is he
that is in you, than he that is in the World: So this greater overcomes the
less, and he that Believes passes from Death; and Sin, that brings Death, and
the Devil the Power of Death. So becomes a Child of Light and of the Day; and
of the Light, which was before Darkness was, or the Prince of it; for this is
the Belief that overcomes the World, that sanctifies the Unbelieving Husband,
and the Unbelieving Wife, else their Childeen were unholy, but now they are
clean, 1 Cor. 7.14.

For this Belief is greater than he that is of the World, which overcomes him
that would defile; for this Belief in Christ, which passes from Death to Life,
it takes away the root of Sin and Iniquity, which is complained of in the
Scriptures, which they were born in, though they had the Law which made nothing
perfect, which took hold of their outward Actions or Branches; but this Belief
makes the Root holy, and if the Root be holy, the Branches that springs from
the Root will be holy also.

And all you that preach up a Body of Sin and Iniquity, and that you must have
a Body of Sin and Death unto the Grave, and a Purgatory when you are Dead.
Neither Man nor Woman of you do believe aright; for the Believing Wife
sanctifies the Unbelieving Husband; and the Believing Husband sanctifies the
Unbelieving Wife; else their Children were unclean, but now they are holy.

So from this Sanctifying Belief you are all erred since the Apostles days: But
have made Beliefs and Creeds of your own, and then say, there is no overcoming
on this side of the Grave; you may as well say, there is no true Belief.

G. F.

An Exhortation to keep to the Ancient Principles of Truth.
FRiends,
Epist. 263.
Keep at a word in all your Dealings, without Oppression. And keep to the sound
Language, Thou to every one.

And keep your Testimony against the World's vain Fashions.

And keep your Testimony against the Hireling Priests, and their Tithes and
Maintenance.

And against the old Mass-houses, and the repairing of them.

And against the Priests and the World's joining in Marriages.

And your Testimony against Swearing, and the World's corrupt Manners.

And against all Looseness, Pleasures and Profaneness whatsoever.

And against all the World's evil Ways, vain Worships and Religions, and to
stand up for God's.

And to see that restiution be made by every one, that has done wrong to any.

And that all Differences be made up speedily, that they do not fly abroad to
corrupt Peoples Minds.

And that all Reports be stopped that tend to the defaming one another.

And Friends, Live all in the Power of the Lord God, and in his Truth, Light
and Life, that with it you may all with one Heart, Soul and Mind keep Dominion;
and in the Light, Life, Truth, and Power of God do true judgment, Justice and
Truth, Righteousness and Equity in all your Men and Women's Meetings, without
favor or affection to Relations, Kingdreds and Acquaintance, or any Respect of
Persons; for if you do not so, Judgment will come upon you from God, to put you
down from your Places: For the Power of God, Light, Life and Truth respects not
any, but Justice, Truth, Righteousness and Equity, etc.

Let Mercy overshadow the judgment Seat, and let Mercy be mixed with Judgment.

Take heed of Foolish Pity; and if you be not diligent against all Profaneness,
Sin, Iniquity and Uncleanness, Looseness and Debauchery, and that which
dishonors God, then you let those things come up upon you, which you should
be a-top of, and subdue, and keep down with Righteousness, and the Truth, and
the Power of God.

And in all your Men and Women's Meetings, let all things be done in Love,
which does edify the Body; and let nothing be done in Strife and vain Glory,
but keep in the Unity of the Spirit, which is the Bond of Peace: And let all
things be done in the Wisdom of God, which is pure and gentle from above, above
the Earthly, which is below, sensual and devilish.

And take heed of hurting any concerning Marriages, if the thing be right
(through any earthly Reasoning) lest they do worse.

And so all be diligent for the Lord God and his Truth upon the Earth, and the
Inheritance of a Life that has no end, that you may live in that Seed that is
blessed for evermore.

And be diligent in all your Meetings, and see to the setting forth of
Apprentices, all Fatherless and poor Friends Children; and that all the poor
Widows be carefully looked after, that nothing may be lacking among you; then
all will be well.

And keep your Testimony against all the filthy Rags of the old World; and for
your fine Linen, the Righteousness of Christ Jesus.

And keep your Testimony for your Liberty in Christ Jesus, and stand fast in
it, against all the false Liberties in old Adam, and your Liberty in the Spirit
of God, and in the Gospel of Christ Jesus, against all the false and loose
Liberties in the Flesh.

And train up all your Children in the Fear of the Lord, and in his New
Covenant, Christ Jesus; as the Jews did their Children and Servants in the old
Covenant, and so do you admonish your Children and Servants: And let no Man or
any live to themselves, but in that Love that seeks not her own.

And have an Eye over them that come to spy out your Liberty in Christ, and
will report out of your Meetings things to make Advantage, and to the defaming
of Persons.

And let every one seek the good of one another, and their Welfare in the
Truth, and make others Condition their own; and this keeps as a Father and
Mother to condescend to a Child. And all live in the Seed which has the
Blessing, and in the Wisdom, by which you may order all things to God's Glory,
over the evil Seed, that is out of the Truth.

And if any one has any thing to say, in opposition to the matter of
Marriages, propounded by any to the Meeting, such Friend or Friends to make it
known (what they have against the Parties) to such as are appointed by the
Meeting, to enquire into the Clearness of the Parties, who laid their
Intentions before the Meeting, And such Friends, as have Intentions of
Marriage, first to lay it before the Men and Women of the Monthly Meeting they
belong to, and to see that things are Clear, before they are brought to the Two
Weeks Meeting.

And if any Difference arise, either about Marriages, or any other Case, in the
Two Weeks Meetings, that the Business be presently referred to Six Friends, to
have a hearing of the Matter another day, or else for them to go forth and
determine it presently, and not to discourse it in the open Meeting.

And if any Legacy be left by any deceased Friend, to a particular Use, as to
putting forth Apprentices, and breeding up poor Friends Children; that the said
Money be kept distinct, as a Stock for the said Use, and a particular Account
thereof to be kept. And the Quarterly or Six Weeks Meetings to see, that the
said Moneys be disposed of to the Uses as aforesaid. And if any of the
principal Money so given, be at any time made Use of to any other Use, that it
be again made up by the Meeting of Friends in General. And though the Money be
left or given to any particular Friend for the Use aforesaid; yet the same to
be paid to Two or Three Persons, whom the Quarterly Meeting or Six Weeks
Meeting shall appoint to receive such Money; that so the Meeting may have the
Ordering and Disposing of the said Money to the best Advantage, and Use
intended.

And that Friends do keep in their Testimony against the vain Fashions of the
World, and all Looseness and Uncleanness whatsoever; and againsT all Profane,
idle Tippling, and taking Tobaccor in Coffee-Houses and Alehouses, which is an
ill Savor: And against all Strife and Contention whatsoever.

And that some Friends be appointed at every Meeting to keep the Doors, to keep
down rude Boys and unruly Spirits; that so the Meetings may be kept Civil and
Quiet.

And if one Friend has any thing against another, let him not treasure it up,
till the time of his Marriage, and then cast it upon him publicly; but let him
presently speak to the Friend, and also to them, that the Meeting has
appointed to see after his Clearness, etc. And that things may not be deferred
too long at the Two Weeks Meeting concering Marriages; but that they may be
answered in a short time, lest they be put to a strait in the Matter.

And stop all bad Reports (for thou shall not raise a falfe Report upon my
People, says the Lord) and minister Justice upon it presently, so that no Man
or Woman may be defiled or defamed with such things.

Read this in the Men and Women's Meetings in the Fear of the Lord, as often as
you see occasion, and record it in your Book.

G. F.

An Additional Extract from other of G. F's Epistles, Friends by him (from time
to time) to be taken notice of at their Quarterly and other Meetings.
FRiends Fellowship must be in the Spirit, Epist. 264.
and all Friends must know one another in the Spirit and Power of God.

And in all the Meetings of the County, Two or Three may be appointed from
them, to go to the Quarterly Meetings, for to give Notice one to another, if
there be any that walk not in the Truth, and have been convinced, and gone from
the Truth, and so have dishonored God. And likewise if any that profess the
Truth, follow Pleasures, Drunkenness, Gamings, or are not faithful in their
Callings and Dealings, nor Honest, nor Just, but run into Debt, and so bring a
Scandal upon the Truth, Friends may give Notice to the Quarterly Meeting (if
there be any such) and some may be ordered to go and Exhort them, and bring in
their Answers to the next Quarterly Meeting.

And so to query and search out all such, as live not as becomes the Truth and
the Gospel, and yet do profess it, so that they all may walk in it, as well as
talk of it; for none has the heavenly Comfort of it, but who do walk in it.
For all the Talkers of Christ and his Gospel, that do not walk in him,
disthonour him. And all Uncleanness and Looseness in all your Meetings, Judge
and Condemn with the Light, Power and Spirit of Christ; so that nothing may
reign among you, but that which does glorify God and Christ.

And to admonish all them that be Careless and Slothful, to Diligence in the
Truth and Service for God, and to bring forth heavenly Fruits to God; that they
may mind the good Works of God and do them, in believing in his Son, and show
it forth in their Conversations; and to deny the Devil and his bad Works, and
not to do them.

And to seek them that be lost, or driven away from the Truth into the Devil's
dark Wilderness, by his dark Power; seek them again by the Truth, and by the
Truth and Power of God, bring them to God again.

And to see, that all that come amongst Friends, and profess Truth, keep to Yea
and Nay, in their Dealings and Communications, in Justice and Equity, and not
in Oppression.

And that in all the Monthly Meetings there be an Inquiry, whether any that
profess Truth, are out of the pure Language, Thou to every one, whether they
keep up God and Christ's Language, that the Holy Prophets and Apostles used,
over all the flattering Words in the World.

And Friends, my Desire is, That ye all may be preserved in the Lord's Power,
and in his Everlasting Seed, and so in the Order of the Gospel, and in the
Government of Christ Jesus; of the Increase of which there is no end. And that
ye may keep up your ancient Testimony (in the Power and Spirit of God) against
Tithes; and that ye may keep up your ancient Testimony in the sincere Life for
Christ, your High Priest, against the Heireling Priests and their Old Temples;
manifesting that ye are the Temples of God.

And let Inquiry be made concerning all such among Friends as do pay Tithes,
which makes void the Testimony and Sufferings of our Brethren, who have
suffered (many of them) to Death; by which many Widows and Fatherless have been
made; and which is contrary to the Doctrine of the Apostles, and the Doctrine
of the Martyrs, and contrary to the Doctrine of the Righteous in this present
Age; all which are to be inquired into, and to be exhorted to Faithfulness
therein.

And that ye may keep your ancient Testimony for the Church which is in God,
the Living Members, which Christ, the Spiritual Man, is the Holy Head of, and
your Heavenly Rock and Foundation.

And all such as marry by the Priests, who have some of them the rought Hands
of Esau, and Fists of Wickedness, and who have had their Hands dipped in the
Blood of our Brethren in New England, and who have been the Cause of the
Banishment of some of our Brethren, and have spoiled so many of their Goods,
casting them into Prisons, and keeping so many of them in Prison at this day.
All such as go to them for Wives or Husbands, must come to Judgment and
Condemnation of themselves and that Spirit, that led them to the Priests to
marry them; or else Friends, that keep their Habitations, must write and bear
their Testimony against them both. For from Genesis to the Revelations you
never read of any Priests that married any People, but its God's Ordinance; and
whom God has joined together, let no Man put asunder. And they took one
another formerly in the Assemblies of the Righteous (when all things were
clear) therefore let all these things be inquired into, and brought to the
Quarterly Meeting; and from thence some ordered to go to them, and to return
what they say, at your next Meeting. And let all this be done before they (or
any of them) be declared as Heathens, or written against, let them be Three or
Four times admonished, that they may have Gospel Order, so that if it be
possible, they may come to that which at first did Convince them, and to repent
and condemn their Unrighteous Doings: So that ye may not leave, if possible, a
Hoof in Egypt.

Now, all Friends, who have known the Power of God, and do believe in the Light
of Jesus Christ, who is your High Priest, who is made higher than the Heavens;
you come to know him to be your Teacher, and to hear him in all things, and
that God may work all your Works in you and for you. And all such pretended
Friend or Friends, that have gone to the Priests to marry them, or have been
drawn by their Heirs) such have gone from the Light of Christ in themselves,
and have quenched the Motions of the Spirit of God in their own Hearts, and
distrusted God, and let a Spirit of Unbelief enter into them, and thereby such
cause the World to glory over them, and Friends; and both Priests and the World
say that such are Hypocrites, and they come to them but to save their Estates.
And they talk of the Living God, but it is seen, the World is their God, and the
Priest must do their Work to preserve their Estate. Such distrust the Living
God about outward things, though formerly they used to cry against them, and
their Teaching, and their Marrying, and their Baptizing; but now they can come
to them to marry them to save their Earth, and to shun Suffering. And thus they
manifest their Hypocrisy. And therefore all such, as have gone to the Priest,
to be married by him, come to the Witness of God in your Consciences, by which
you may come to condemn that Spirit, that led you to them to be married. For
all those are far gone, who can come so near a Priest as to hear his Prayers
for Money, and to partake of his Works. Such have turned against the Light, and
quenced the Spirit, and abused the Power which would have risen in them against
it. And such in their Apostacies may have cried the Power of God is not amongst
Friends, as it was in the Beginning; when they have abused it in themselves,
and grieved the Spirit of the Lord, and Friends, which live in the Spirit. For
it is not the Bishops nor Priests Work to marry People, nor is it to be seen;
nor you never read throughout the Holy Scriptures, that either Priests or
Bishops married any; but it is God's Work, and his Ordinance; for whom God
joins together, let no Man put asunder. And Marriage is honorable in all, the
Bed being undefiled: And they took one another in the Assemblies of the
righteous, the Saints, and holy Ones of God, who were of the Seed of the
Righeous. Which Practice is now followed amongst the People of God, called
Quakers, who are of the Seed and Generation of the Righteous, the Elect People
of God. And also you may read, how Jacob, who was of the Seed of the Righteous,
took his Wife in the Assembly at Laban's House, who gathered the People
together when he took her, having declared it before; and all Parties were
satisfied: And Jacob was the beloved of God, who took his Wife of the best sort
of People; his Father and Mother would not have him unequally yoked, as Esau
had been before. And also you may read Isacc's Marriage, in whom the Blessed
Seed was called, as the Apostle says; In Isaac shall they Seed be called. And
how wonderfully it was carried on by the Lord! See Genesis 24.25. And also read,
how Boaz took his Wife Ruth (after both Sides were satisfied) in the Assembly
of the People and Elders; and how he declared it unto the Elders, Ye are
Witnesses this day, that I take Ruth to be my Wife; and they said, We are thy
Witnesses. And of this Boaz came the Line of Christ. For Boaz begat Obed, and
Obed begat Jesse, and Jesse begat David. And also Isaiah the Prophet, who
prophesied of Christ's Birth, Sufferings and Death, God commanded him, when he
was to go to the Prophetess, that he should take Witnesses, and write it in a
Roll: and this was the Command of God; and he was of the Seed of the Righteous.
And likewise the Children of Israel, when they were carried into Captivity,
when any did Marry, and all things on both sides were clear, they took one
another, according to the Law of Moses: As for Example, see Tobias. And also
Christ Jesus went to a Marriage in Cana in Galilee (who ended the First
Priesthood, who is the Everlasting Priest;) And he went with his Disciples and
the Mother of Jesus: Whence it is clear that there was a Meeting and an
Assembly of People. And Marriage Being God's Ordinance, and God's Joining; here
Christ owns it; for it was God's Joining before the Fall; and God's giving
before the Fall; and it is so in the restoration out of the Fall again by
Christ Jesus, who are come into the Spirit and Power of God; they know it is
God's Joining again in the Restanration; and whom he joins together, let no Man
put asunder. And so Marriage was a Figure of Christ and his Church, as the
Apostle instanceth in Ephesians. And therefore they were not to be unequally
yoked, Believers with Unbelievers: The Law of God did forbid it; they were not
to give their Sons and Daughters to the Heathen, or marry with them, for it
grieved the Lord in the Old World, and brought Destruction upon those bad
Marriages. When the Sons of God saw the Daughters of Men were fair, and they
took them Wives of all which they chose, who corrupted the Earth, and filled it
with Violence: Yet the Holy Men of God, their Marriages were never judged of
God in the Old World. Neither Seth's, Lamech's, nor Mahalaleel, nor Methusalah,
nor Noah, nor Abraham, Isaac nor Jacob; and so none before the Law, nor none in
the Law, nor in the time of the Gospel, their Marriages were not judged by the
Lord, who walked in the Power and Spirit of the Lord, and knew God's Joining;
who brings the Man and Woman together; but such as mingled with the Heathen and
Unbelievers, and followed strange Flesh, they went from the Spirit, the lost
the Sonship; through such the Earth was corrupted and filled with Violence; and
such could not know God's Joining, who went from the Spirit, and from the Law
and Gospel; and such are mingled among Heathens and Unbelievers, and follow
strange Flesh, and corrupts their own, who go from the Spirit, by which they
have been sanctified and led into the Sonship.

And such as Marry with Unbelievers and Heathen, they go contrary to the Law of
God, and grieves him and their Righteous Parents.

So Marriage is God's Holy Ordinance, and Christ, that comes to restore all
things again into their place, he says, Whom God joins together, let no Man
put asunder: And brings it to the beginning again, how God made them Male and
Female. So in the Restoration inther Image of God and Sanctification they are
brought to the joining one Male with one Famale again: not for one Man to have
many Women at once, God did not make many for him; but in the Fall from the
Righteousness of God and his Image, there they run together like Beasts, a Man
and many Women. There Men join and put asunder; but in the beginning it was not
so, says Christ the Heavenly Men, the Second Adam, for God made them Male and
Female, and whom he joins together, let no Man put asunder: And so God joins
with his Spirit and Power, for he is a Spirit; and this is a heavenly and
spiritual Joining; and them that God joins, they do not follow strange Flesh,
but the Spirit of God; and such a Marriage is sanctified by the Spirit, and by
the Lord, and such knows his Heavenly Ordinance: And this is the Marriage
Christ owns, and sets up and encourages, who is the Covenant and the Quickening
Spirit. And so God, who is a Spirit, joins with his Spirit, Power and Light;
this joying is in the Covenant of God, all such Marriages are honorable in all
things, for their Bed is nt defiled; but where the Bed is defiled, that
Marriage is not Honorable. And all that forbid Marriage are in the Doctrines
of Devils; and they that are in the Doctrine of Devils, are out of Truth, who
destroys the Creation, and destroys some one way and some another, that are
under his Power and Command from Truth; but they that obey the Truth, and obey
Christ, and obeys God; they are over him and his Doctrine, and the defiled Bed,
and strange Flesh; and the Spirit gives them an Understanding to know God, and
his joining by his Spirit, who is blessed for ever.

Now if any should say, That Adam took his Wife alone; and so run into the
Works of Darkness, and go together in the Dark, contrary to the Righteous Seed
and Holy Generation: Such are judged by the Holy Seed, and by them in the Holy
Life and Law of God, and with the Light of Christ Jesus condemned.

And as for Adam taking his Wife alone, that was before there was any
Witnesses: But there was a Form of Words betwixt them before they went
together, or he knew her (as follows) viz. And when the Lord God brought the
Woman to Adam, Adam said to the Lord, This is Bone of my Bone, and Flesh of my
Flesh,; she shall be called Woman, because she was taken out of Man; and they
shall be one Flesh. But this Form of Words of Adam's and his doing is nothing
to them that are Workers of Darkness, and run together in the Dark. For after
the Earth was peopled, you may read how the Generations of the Righteous did
take one another in the Assemblies of the Righteous, and it was Recorded before
Witnesses.

So all such as Marry by the Priests, or Marry by the World, that are
Unbelievers, do go from God's Power and Spirit, and his joining, and do break
the Law of God in their Marriages, who forbad to join with Unbelievers: And
therefore with the Light of Christ Jesus are such judged and condemned, and
must come through Condemnation and Judgment.

For the right joining in Marriage is the Work of the Lord only, Right joining
in Marriage is the Work of the Lord:
and not the Priests or Magistrates; for it is God's Ordinance, and not Man's:
And therefore Friends cannot consent, that they should join them together: For
we Marry none, it is the Lord's Work, and we are but Witnesses. But yet, if a
Friend through tenderness have a desire that the Magistrate should know it
(after the Marriage is performed in a public Meeting of Friends and others,
according to the holy Order and Practice of Friends in Truth throughout the
World, and according to the manner of the Holy Men and Women of God of old) he
may go and carry a Copy of the Certificate to the Magistrate; Friends are left
to their Freedom herein. But for Priests or Magistrates to Marry or join any in
that Relation, it is not according to the Scripture; and our Testimony and
Practice has been always against it: It was God's Work before the Fall, and it
is God's Work only in the Restoration.

Let not any go disorderly together in Marriage, contrary to the Practice of
the Holy Men of God, who declared it in the Assemblies of the Righteous, Twelve
or more faithful Friends Relations to be present at Friends Marriage.
when they took one another (all things being clear) and they both being free
from any other, in respect to Marriage. And when any take one another in
Marriage, let there not be less than a dozen Friends and Relations present
(according to your former Order) having first acquainted the Men's Meeting, and
that they have Clearness and Unity with them, and then it may be Recorded in a
Book. And if any walk contrary to the order of Truth herein, let some be
appointed to speak to them, and give notice thereof to the next Meeting.

And all that are Widows, who have Children, and do intend to Marry, All
Widows to set out a proportionable part for her first Husbands Children before
she Marries.
let inquiry be made, what she has done for her Children (if there be no Will
made) then let such part of her late Husband's Estate be set out for the
Children, as is equal and according to Truth; and what they can do more
afterward, let them do it also. And where there is a Will made, let those
Legacies and Portions be improved and secured (before their Marriage) for the
Children of the Deceased, with what more they can do for them. And then, when
these things are done, let them be Recorded in a Book at the next Quarterly
Meeting.

And all Men that hunts after Women, from Woman to Woman; Such reproved as run
from one Woman to another a Suiting.
and also Women, whose Affections run sometimes after one Man, and soon after
to another, and so hold one another in Affection, and so draws out the
Affections one of another; and after a while leave one another, and go to
others, and then do the same things there; these doings are more like Sodom
than Saints, and is not of God's moving nor joining, where they are not to be
parted. For Marriage is God's Ordinance, and God's Command one to another, and
in that is felt the Power of God.

And if any goes together in Marriage, Friends to bring a Copy of the
Certificate to the Magistrates, if thereunto required.
having declared it at Friends Meetings, if the Magistrates do cast them into
Prison, because they are not married according to the National Law, or by a
Priest, all the Men Friends and Women Friends in the Meeting (or Twelve of them
may set their Hands to a Paper and send it to the Justices, it being done in
Truth and Righteousness, and according to the Scriptures of Truth. As Boaz
declared his taking of Ruth in the Town-gate; and Jacob when he was married,
Laban called in his Kindred; and other Examples you may see in the Scriptures,
who did Marry, and had no Ring, nor Priest neither to Marry them.

Now, All Friends to speak first to the Parents, before they speak to the Party.
no Man ought to speak to a Woman concerning Marriage, before that he has
spoken to her Father and Mother, and have their Consent; and if she have no
Father or Mother, but Guardians and Trustees, then they must speak to them, if
she be under Age, that they may have their Consent, and so proceed accordingly,
as Abraham's Servant did concerning Isaac's Wife. And you are to see, that all
Widows do make Provision for their Children, before they are married to
another, according to Truth and Righteousness.

And you are to see, Strict Inquiry to be made into Friends Clearness from all
others.
that every Man and Woman are free from all Entanglements, with any other Woman
or Man, before that they are married; and if they have been engaged, you must
have a Certificate under the hands of the Person, that they have been entangled
with to discharge them; so that all things may be done in Peace and Unity, and
Righteousness, according to the Truth that is in every Man and Woman. And if
the young Man or young Woman's Relations be of the World, they must have their
Consent, and a Certificate from them. And if the Man or Woman comes from beyond
Sea, or out of another Country, ye must have a Certificate from the Men and
Women's Meetings there, how they have lived, and whether they are free from all
other Persons, by any Engagement, Covenant or Contract concerning Marriage; and
if they are not clear, they must answer that, and be cleared by a Certificate
under their Hands, before they proceed any further.

And if any Man should defile a Woman, If any one defile a Woman he is to Marry
her.
he must Marry her, if she be a beggar, though he have never so many Hundreds;
for he must fulfill the Law of God, for the Law of God commands it, that he must
Marry her, and condemn his Action, and clear God's Truth. But no such
Marriages, where the Bed is defiled, we bring into our Men and Women's
Meetings; but some Friends (if such a thing happen) draw up a Certificate, and
they to set their Hands to it, that they will live faithfully together, as Man
and Wife, and fulfill the Law of God.

And this I write, if ever such a thing should happen; but I hope that Friends
will be careful, and keep in the Fear of the Lord, that they may have an Esteem
of the Lord's Truth, and their own Bodies, and of the honorable Marriage,
where the Bed is undefiled.

And when any Marriages is to be propounded, Marriages first to be propounded
to the Women's Meetings.
let it be laid before the Women's Meeting first. And after they have declared
it there, if they do know any thing of the Man or the Woman, that it should not
proceed so far as to the Men's Meeting, then let two or or three Women go to
the Men's Meeting, that some of the Men and Women may have a distinct Meeting
concerning it, and let them end it before it comes to the Men's Meeting; and if
there be no such occasion of any such Meeting, let two or three Women go along
with them to the Men's Meeting: And so after Friends have taken their Names,
and Places of abode, let two Women of the Women's Meeting be nominated, and two
Men of the Men's Meeting, that if any one have any thing to say against the
Couple before the next Meeting they may speak to them; and if there should
appear any thing, they may end it before they come to the Meeting. And if there
be nothing, when they come the second time again to the Women's Meeting, the
Woman may go along with them to the Men, and testify, that they know nothing
against their proceedings. And likewise the Men, that are appointed to inquire
out to make the like report (and let the Man and the Woman always appear
together, when they lay their Intentions of Marriage) So then the thing is left
to the Men to give their Judgment and Advice to the Couple that is to be
married, all things being clear, and nothing appearing to the contrary; and
their Fathers and Mothers, or Guardians, or Overseers being satisfied, then
they may have their Liberty to appoint a Meeting, where they please, in some
public Meeting Place, where their Relations and Friends may be present, After
they have past through the Meetings, then the Persons to be married to appoint
a solemn Meeting for their Marriage.
and there get a Certificate ready drawn up, with the Day of the Month, Place
and Year, how that such a Couple did take one another in the Presence of God,
and in the Presence of his People, who had laid their said Intions so often
before them; and all things being found clear, according to the Law of God and
the Practice of the Holy Men, recorded in the Scriptures of Truth, to live
together in Christian, Honorable Marriage, according to God's Ordinance and
his Joining, to be Help-meets together as long as they live.

And if any Man or Woman come out of another Country, they must bring a
Certificate from the Men and Women's Meeting to them, where they take their Wife
and Husband.

And no Man or Woman is to be permitted to proceed in Marriage, if they be
engaged or entangled with any other, till they be cleared.

Dear Friends, All Differences amongst Friends to be ended by some appointed
out of the Meetings.
if there happen any Difference betwixt Friend and Friend, let them speak to
one anothe; and, if they will not hear, let them take Two or Three of the
Meeting they belong to, that they may End it, if they can. And, if they cannot
End it, then it may be laid before the Monthly Meeting. And if it cannot be
ended there, then it may be brought to the Quarterly Meeting, and there let it
be put to half a Dozen Friends, that they may End it, that they may keep their
Meetings quiet. Or, Friends to stand to the End made by Six or more.
they that are at Difference, may choose Three Friends, and Friends may choose
Three more to them, and let them stand to their Judgment: For there is few,
that love Quietness and Peace, will have their Names brought to a Monthly or
Quarterly Meeting, to have their Names sounded over the Country, That they are
in Strife; but will rather endeavor to End it amongst themselves or at their
own Meeting, before that they come to the Monthly Meeting.

And if there be any Difference brought to the Monthly or Quarterly Meeting,
either Men's or Women's, Friends to speak but one at a time.
after you have heard them one by one, and let but one speak at a time, know of
them, whether they will stand to your Judgment? And, if they will, let half a
Dozen Friends make a final End of it. But, if they will not stand to your
Judgment, they are not fit to bring it thither.

And if any Brother or Sister hear any Report of any Brother or Sister, Reports
to be stopped.
let him or her go to the Party, and know the Truth of the Report; and if true,
let the thing be Judged. If false, go then to the Reporter, and let him or her
be Judged. And if any should report it at a second or third hand, without going
to the Party, of whom the Report goes, let such be brought to Judgment: For
thou shall neither raise nor suffer a false Report to lie upon my People, says
the Lord; for they are to be Holy, as he is Holy; and Just, as he is Just.

Now concerning Gospel Order; though the Doctrine of Jesus Christ requires his
People to admonish a Brother or Sister twice, before they tell the Church, yet
that limiteth none, so as that they shall use no longer forbearance, before
they tell the Church, but that they shall not less than twice admonish their
Brother or Sister before they tell the Church. All disorderly Persons to be
admonished.
And it is desired of all, That before they publicly Complain, they wait in
the Power of God to feel, if there is no more required of them to their Brother
or Sister, before they expose him or her to the Church: Let this be weightily
considered.

And further, when the Church is told, and the Party admonished by the Church
again and again, and he or they remain still unsensible and unreconciled, let
not final Judgment go forth against him or her, till every one of the Meeting
have cleared his or her Conscience; that if any thing be upon any further to
visit such a Transgressor, they may clear themselves, that if possibly the
Party may be reached and saved. And after all are clear of the Blood of such an
one, let the Judgment of Friends in the Power of God go forth against him or
her, as moved, for the Lord's Honor and Glory's sake, that no Reproach may
come or rest upon God's Holy Name, Truth and People.

And all such as behold their Brother or Sister in a Transgression, Such as
admonish others, to do it in a Spirit of Meekness.
go not in a rough, light or upbraiding Spirit to reprove or admonish him or
her, but in the Power of the Lord, and Spirit of the Lamb, and in the Wisdom
and Love of the Truth, which suffers thereby, to admonish such an Offender. So
may the Soul of such a Brother or Sister be seasonably and effectually reached
unto and overcome, and they may have Cause to bless the Name of the Lord on
their behalf, and so a Blessing may be rewarded into the Bosom of that faithful
and tender Brother or Sister that so admonished them.

And be it known unto all, Friends casts out none, but such as go from Truth
casts out themselves.
we cast out none from among us; for if they go from the Light, and Spirit, and
Power, in which our Unity is, they cast out themselves. And it has been our Way
to admonish them, that they may come to that Spirit and Light of God, which
they are gone from, and so come into the Unity again. For our Fellowship stands
in the Light, that the World hates, and in the Spirit which the World grieves,
vexes and quenches; and if they will not hear our Admonitions, as before, the
Light condemns them, and then goes the Testimony of Truth out against them.

And no Condemnation ought to go further than the Transgression is known; No
Condemnation to go further than the Transgression.
and if he or she returns, and gives forth a Paper of Condemnation against him,
or her self (which is more desirable, than that we should do it) this is a
Testimony of his or her Repentance and Resurrection before God, his People, and
the whole World; as David, Psalm. 57. when Nathan came to admonish him.

And that no Testimony, by way of Condemnation, Admonition to be before
Condemnation.
be given forth against any Man or Woman, whatever Crime they commit, before
Admonition, and till such time as they have had Gospel Order, according to
Christ's Doctrine.

And so keep the Church Order of the Gospel, Admonition to be in the gentle
Wisdom of God.
according as the Lord Jesus Christ has commanded; that is, If thy Brother
offend thee, speak to him betwixt thee and him; and if he will not hear, take
two or three: If he will not hear two or three, then tell it to the Church, etc.

And if any one do miscarry, admonish them gently in the Wisdom of God, so that
you may preserve him and bring him to Condemnation, and preserve him from
farther Evils, which it is well if such do not run into; and it will be well
for all to use the gentle Wisdom of God toward them in their Temptations and
condemnable Actions, and with using gentleness to bring them to condemn their
Evil, and to let their Condemnation go as far as the bad Action has gone, and
no farther, to defile the Minds of Friends or others; and so to clear God's
Truth and People, and to convert the Soul to God, and preserve them out of
further Evils. And take heed of spreading such things in the Minds of the
World, and farther than they are gone there, lest you by that means do cause
them to blaspheme God's Name, and cause them to speak evil of the Truth and
God's People; such do deserve Reproof that so do, and Condemnation. So be Wise
in the Wisdom of God.

And let no one accuse any one, None to be publicly Reproved before privately
spoken unto.
either in a Monthly or Quarterly Meeting, publicly, except they have spoken
to them by themselves first, and by two or three as before.

And Dear Friends, in the Power of the Lord God, you who are gathered with it,
which is the Authority of your Men's and Women's Meetings; in the Power of the
Lord Jesus see, that all things be well amongst you, and that all do walk in
the Truth, All Friends to walk in the Truth they do profess.
and as becomes the Gospel of Christ, and his Glorious Light and Life, so that
all may stand up for God's Glory, and be valiant for his Truth, and all to grow
up in it. And if any hear Reports, or have any thing against any Brother or
Sister, let them first speak to them, before that they declare it abroad; and
this will keep down Backbiting and Whispering, and preserve in Brotherly Love.
And all Looseness whatsoever, let it be reproved: And Admonish, and Exhort, and
Encourage such as are young and tender, to keep and preserve them in the Way of
Life; and so watch over one another for good.

And that Care be taken from time to time, Friends to take care of the Poor,
and of Prisoners, and such as are Sick.
as Friends are moved thereunto, for relieving faithful Friends Necessities,
and for other Services of Truth which shall be delivered into the Hands of a
faithful Friend or Friends, (who are desired to be Receivers for that Purpose)
who are to give an Account of all Moneys, that shall be by them received and
disbursed at the next Monthly or Quarterly Meeting, after it shall be laid out
(if it be desired) and so the Account to be ended, that ministering Friends may
not be cumbered with outward things, but kept out of them; and that what Moneys
shall be by them disbursed for the Service of poor Friends, as aforesaid, shall
be disposed of, as Friends of the Monthly or Quarterly Meeting see meet to
dispose of the same.

And all Friends, be tender over all Friends that are Prisoners upon Truths
account, and that are sick and weak People, Strangers and Fatherless, and
Widows, Servants and Children, that their Parents, Masters, or Dames and
Relations are not Friends; keeping in the Power of the Lord, it will lead you
in all things without many Words, and bring you to see and feel, and live in
that which was before Enmity was, or Words either, which will chain it under.
In that you all will have Unity, and be all as a Family, and in it be all as
one; in that is the Peace and Unity.

And also all Widows, in all your several Meetings, let them be taken notice
of, To take Care for the Widows, and to set out their Children Apprentices.
and informed, and encouraged, in their outward Business, that there be not any
hindrance put to them in their inward Growth, and so to be carefully looked
after, that they may be nourished and cherished, and preserved in the Truth,
that Love may be increased. And if they have many Children, to put them out
Apprentices (or Servants) which may be a Burden to them to bring up, then let
Friends take Care to case them, by putting them forth, as may be seen meet. Let
all these things be looked into every Meeting, and Notice thereof given to the
next Monthly or Quarterly Meeting, and some ordered to see, that all these
things are done according to Truth and Righteousness.

And in all your Meetings, let notice be given to the Quarterly Meeting of all
poor Friends: And when ye have heard, that there is many more Poor belonging to
one Meeting than to another, and that Meeting thereby is burdened and
oppressed, One Meeting to help another.
let the rest of the Meetings assist and help them, so that ye may ease one
another, and help to bear one another Burdens, and so fulfill the Law of
Christ. And so see that nothing be lacking, according to the Apostles's words
(mark) nothing lacking; then all is well. For the Jews outward, though they
were as the Stars of Heaven, and as the Sand upon the Seashore for multitude,
ye there was not to be a Beggar amongst them, according to the Law of God. And
amongst the Christians in the first Age, there was a Men's Meeting set up at
Jerusalem to see that nothing was lacking, which was the Gospel Order,
according to the Law of Jesus; and this continued as long as they lived in the
Life, Power and Spirit of God. But when the Apostasy came in, and the true
Church fled into the Wilderness, which was to continue there One thousand two
hundred and sixty Days, and the Witnesses prophesied in Sackcloath One thousand
two hundred and sixty Days, and the Beast was worshipped just so long, One
thousand two hundred and sixty Days; and then all things went out of order, and
every thing was wanting in that time they worshipped the Dragon and the Beast;
and the Devil made the World like a Wilderness. But now the Judgment of the
Great Whore, and of the Beast is come, and with them the false Prephet and the
Dragon, who shall be cast alive into the Lake of Fire: The true Church coming
out of the Wilderness.
And the true Church is coming up out of the Wilderness, and the Man-Child
(which was caught up into Heaven) is come down again to rule all Nations with a
Rod of Iron: And the Marriage of the Lamb is come, and the Lamb and the Saints
shall have the Victory, and the Everlasting Gospel is and shall be preached
again, as was among the Apostles; and the Gospel Order shall be set up, as was
amongst them; and a Men's Meeting, as was at the first Conversion, to see that
nothing be lackingi in the Church; then all is well. So there is not to be a
Beggar now amongst the Christians, according to the Law of Jesus, as there was
not to be any among the Jews, according to the Law of Moses.

And Dear Friends, who feel the Power of the Everlasting God (for all who are
out of it, are in Confusion) you being come into God's Fear, which is the
beginning of true Wisdom, by which all things were made and created; and by it
all things must be ordered again to God's Glory. All that are out of this
Wisdom are in the earthly, devilish and destroying State; but the Wisdom from
above is gentle and pure, and preserves you, yea, and the whole Creation to the
Glory of God.

And now, The Monthly and Quarterly Meetings to be made up of two or three
faithful Friends out of every particular Meeting.
that Monthly and Quarterly Meetings of two or three out of every particular
Meeting of true and faithful Friends are set up, and kept in the most
convenient place in the middle of your County, you may know in your Meetings of
the Wants and Necessities of all Friends, whether in Bonds, or out, Widows or
Fatherless, or aged People, their Necessities being looked into, and every one
feeling one another's Condition; this keeps in Tenderness and Love, as a
Family; and nothing being lacking amongst you, then all is well, every Want and
Necessity being supplied. And by this, one Meeting may be serviceable to
another in outward things, for that is the least Love; and by this you may come
into the Practice of the pure Religion, which is to relieve the Widows,
Strangers, Fatherless and Helpless.

And Friends all the Legacies that are given to the Men or Women's Meetings,
let them be kept as a public Stock for the setting forth of Apprentices, and
setting them up.

And Friends to have and provide a House for them that be distempered, and not
to go to the World. And to have an Almshouse or Hospital for all poor Friends,
that are past Work.

And Friends to have and provide a House or Houses, where an Hundred may have
Rooms to Work in, and Shops of all sorts of things to Sell, and where Widows
and young Women might work and live.

And Dear Friends, dwell all in the Everlasting Power of God, and his Life, in
which is both Unity, Order, Peace and Fellowship; and wait in the Fear of the
Everlasting God, that his Wisdom you may receive, which is pure and gentle from
above, by which all things were made, by which Wisdom you may order all things
to the Glory of God. The Poor, the Sick, the Widows, the Fatherless, the
Prisoners be tender of, and feel every one's Condition, as your own, and let
nothing be lacking amongst you, according to the Apostle's Doctrine to the
Church of God of Old Time; and if nothing be lacking, all is well.

And Dear Friends, know in all your Meetings who is Sick, and Weak, and in
Want, and Widows, and Fatherless, and aged People, that cannot help themselves;
and such as God has distributed unto, of that which God has distributed, to
lay aside for the Necessities of others, as you are moved and commanded of the
Lord God by his Power and Spirit; for he that gives to the Poor, lends to the
Lord; and he loves a cheerful Giver.

Secondly, That all Prisoners for Truth be minded, who are in want, and who are
not, and the Families of such who are in Prison, whether they are in want or
not; and such as are decayed any manner of way, and cannot help themselves; and
such as have left a Calling, which they cannot for Conscience sake follow; do
the best you can to help them, and further them to Employment, that they may
labor in the thing that is good, and be a Blessing in the Creation; that this
you may do, that you may be a Blessing in your Generation.

And all the Fatherless Children their Estates to be Recorded in a Book at the
Monthly or Quarterly Meeting; and all that are entrusted with any Estates may
be entered at the Monthly or Quarterly Meetings ( Fatherless or Widows Estates)
that the Meeting may see, that Justice be done unto them, and require them to
give an Account (if need be) and to do that which is just and equal; so that
there may be no Strife about outward things amongst you. And that every one
that is entrusted with any Widows or Fatherless Children Estates may be
faithful, and not fail them in time of need. And that every Quarterly Meeting
may have an Eye over such as are entrusted, and assist them in that which is
right and righteous, and to see that they are faithful to their Trust. So that
Righteousness, and Justice, and Truth and Equity may flow down amongst you, and
that the Wisdom of God be among Friends, to order them in all things to his
Glory.

And let two faithful Friends in the Truth in every particular Meeting be
ordered to receive all Collections, and to bring them to the Monthly Meetings;
and let two such Friends receive them there, and bring them to the Quarterly
Meeting; and let four faithful Friends receive them there. And whatever
Collections are received, let an Account be kept of what is received, and to
whom it is disbursed; that so an Account may be given to any faithful Friend
that may desire it. And in every Monthly and Quarterly Meeting to inquire, what
Poor there are, and who are fit to go Apprentices or Servants; and that Friends
then and there may order them to Apprentiships to such Trades, as they in
Wisdom shall think fit.

And if any Legacy be left by any deceased Friends to a particular Use, as to
putting forth Apprentices, and breeding of poor Friends Children, that the said
Money be kept distinct as a Stock for the said Use, and a particular Account
thereof to be kept; and the Quarterly Meeting to appoint some Persons to
receive the said Money, and to keep the Account thereof, and the Meeting to see
that it be disposed of to the Uses aforesaid. And if any of the Principal Money
so given be at any time made use of to any other Use, that it be again made up
by the Quarterly Meeting of Friends. And though the Money be left or given to
any particular Friend for the Use aforesaid, yet the same to be paid to the two
or three Persons, whom the Quarterly Meeting shall appoint to receive such
Money, that the Meeting may have the ordering and laying-out the said Money to
the best Advantage to the Uses aforesaid.

So that the Legacies given a part to the Meeting of Men or Women, be kept a
part for the setting forth poor Friends Children, and setting them up in their
Trades, that the Memory of the deceased just Friend, that gave it, may not be
forgotten.

And all Friends in the Wisdom of God train up your Children in the Fear of
God, Friends to train up their Children in the fear of the Lord.
that they may receive the Wisdom of God; and as they are capable, they may be
instructed and kept employed in some lawful Calling, that they may be diligent,
serving the Lord in the things that are good; that none may live Idle, and be
Destroyers of the Creation, or unserviceable in the Creation, and thereby
become burdensome to others, and to the Just in themselves; but that in the
Wisdom of God all may walk, and with it all things may he ordered.

And all Friends, see that your Children be trained up in Soberness, And in
Soberness, etc.
and Holiness, and Righteousness, and Temperance, and Meekness, and Gentleness,
and Lowliness, and Modesty in their Apparel and Carriage, and so to Exhort your
Children and Families in the Truth, that the Lord may be glorified in all your
Families. And teach your Children when they are young, then will they remember
it when they are old, according to Solomon's Counsel: So that your Children may
be a Blessing to you, and not a Curse.

And all Men and Women are to order their Children and Servants in the Order of
the Gospel, and in the New Covenant, And to order them in the Order of the
Gospel.
that they may all come to know the Lord. For the outward Jews were to train up
their Children in the Old Law, in the Old Covenant: And so you that are called
Christians are to train up your Children in the Fear of the Lord, and in Christ
Jesus, that they may walk in Him in Modesty, and Holiness and Virtue. And so
all to govern their Families: And they that are to Govern, are to be governed
and ordered themselves, by the Spirit and Power of God, to God's Glory, and as
Examples in their Families; for all Looseness is out of the Power of God, either
in Word or Life. And so by the Power of God, and his Righteousness, and Truth,
and Light and Life, all that is to be judged, and kept under and down; and the
Truth, and the Light, and Spirit of God must be walked in, which all Looseness
is out of.

And so, whatsoever things are of good Report, or whatsoever things are Lovely,
or whatsoever things are Pure, and Decent, and Virtuous, and Godly, and
Righteous, and Holy, and Just, that follow after; and do the Works of Charity,
and not your own, but the good Works of Hospitality, which are accepted of God.

And keep the Order of the Gospel, the Power of God, which Power of God was,
before the Devil was, and is over him, which brings Life and Immortality to
Light in Men and Women; and Men and Women they are to walk in this Power of
God, and to keep in it, Men and Women to walk in the Power of God.
being Heirs of the same, and under the Government of Christ Jesus, who bruiseth
the Serpent's Head, and destroys him and his Government; Men and Women being
Heirs of Grace and Life together, and of the Power of God, and of the Gospel of
Christ Jesus, the Amen. And so as they come to possess and inherit him and his
Gospel Order, they come to possess him and his Government and Order; the
increase of which there is no End.

And that Notice be taken of all evil Speakers, Backbiters, Slanderers, and
foolish Talkers, and idle Jesters, for all these corrupt good Manners, and are
not according to the Saints and Holy Men's Practice, Against Backbiters.
whose Words were seasoned with Salt, ministering Grace to the Hearers.

And all such as go up and down to Cheat, Against Cheats.
by borrowing and getting Money of Friends, and have cheated several, all such
are to be stopped and judged (and Notice of them is to be given to Friends, and
to other Persons.)

And Dear Friends in the Everlasting Seed of Life, Wisdom and Salvation, my
Desire is, that you all may be preserved in it, to the Glory of God, For
heavenly Unity.
and in his Power, and Light, and Life, over Death and Darkness, in the
heavenly Unity, in all your Meetings.

Now concerning them that do go to the Quarterly Meeting, they must be
substantial Friends, Quarterly Meetings Members.
that can give a Testimony of your Sufferings, and how things are amongst you
in every particular Meeting. So that none that are raw or weak, that are not
able to give a Testimony of the Affairs of the Church and Truth, may go on
behalf of the particular Meetings to the Quarterly Meetings, but may be nursed
up in your Monthly Meetings, and there fitted for the Lord's Service. So that
two may go one time from every particular Meeting, and two another time, or as
it is ordered in your Monthly Meetings. So that some may go from all your
Meetings, that make up your Monthly Meetings; for the Quarterly Meeting should
be made up of weighty, seasoned and substantial Friends, that understands the
Business of the Church; for no unruly and unseasoned Peasons should come there,
nor indeed into the Monthly Meetings, but who are single-hearted, seasoned and
honest.

And if any one should speak or tattle any thing out of your Monthly or
Quarterly Meetings, Against Partling.
to the blemishing or defaming any Person or the Meetings, such are to be
brought to Judgment and Condemnation; (for it breaks the Privilege and Order
of your Christian Society in your Meetings) so that all may be kept and
preserved in the Power of the Lord, and in his Spirit, in Love and Unity.

And therefore keep your Meetings solid and sober, and let the Authority of
your Men and Women's Meetings be in the Power of God; Authority of Meetings.
for every Heir of the Power has Right to that Authority, and in it keep the
King of Kings and Lord of Lord's Peace in his Church.

And so, the Lord give you Wisdom, that by it you may be ordered to his Glory,
Care of God's Glory and Truth.
and that every one may have a care of God's Glory, and of his Name and Truth;
and that in his Power you may see, that all do walk, as becomes his glorious
Gospel, which has brought Life and Immortality to Light in you; which will
preserve you in Life and in Immortality, over the Devil that has darkened you.
So that nothing may get betwixt your Souls and Minds, and the Lord God, that he
may be glorified in you all, and through you all, and over you all, blessed for
ever. Amen.

And the least Member in the Church has an Office, and is serviceable; and
every Member has need one of another.

And now Friends, so many Monthly Men's Meetings as you have in your County, you
may have so many Monthly Women's Meetings; and if once a Year, at least, you had
a General Women's Meeting it would be well (for in some Counties they have as
many Quarterly Women's Meetings as Men's) and in others they have only two in the
Summertime, Women's Meetings.
because the Ways are foul and Days short in Winter.

And that one or two Friends in every Meeting do take an Account of all the
Marriages, Births and Burials, Births, Burials.
and carry them to the Monthly Meetings; and let one or two there be ordered to
receive them, and record them there in a Book, which is to be kept at the
Monthly Meetings. And from thence a Copy of what is recorded there, to be
brought to the Quarterly Meeting, and let one or two Friends be appointed there
to receive them; and to record them all in one Book, which is to be kept for
the whole County. And this will be most safe, that if one Book should happen to
be lost, the other may be preserved for the Use of such, as may have occasion.

And that all Friends, who are not already provided, may speedily procure
convenient Burying-places, Burying Places.
and that thereby a Testimony may stand against the Superstitious Idolizing of
those places, called holy Ground. For Abraham bought a place to bury his Dead
in, and would not Bury them amongst the Egyptians and Canaanites. And Jacob was
brought out of Egypt, and Joseph, and they were buried in their Grandfather
and Father's Burying-places. And so Friends, get decent Burying-places for your
Dead, and let them be decently and well fenced, that you may show a good
Example to the World in all things.

And Dear Friends, do all that you do in Peace and Love, Do all in Peace and
Love.
and in the Fear of God, condescending one unto another, in the Simplicity and
Innocence of Life, and Truth, and in the Wisdom of God, that that may be every
ones Crown, that nothing may be done in Strife, to occasion Words; for you are
called to Peace and Holiness, in which the Kingdom stands, and to serve one
another in Love. And my Love is to all Friends in the Everlasting Seed of God,
in which is Life, Purity, Cleanness and Righteousness that shines over all.

And all Friends, do that which ye do in the Power of God, And in the Power of
God.
and then you are the Lord's Freemen in Love, and not Captives: For all which
is done out of the Power of God is in the Captivity. So wait all in the Power
of the Lord, and in the Light, in which you will feel Life and Peace, and the
Lord's Blessing. So in that the Lord God Almighty preserve you, and keep you
over all that which is contrary, and give you Victory and Dominion. And in
Peace and Love live, in the Spirit and Power of God, in which is the Unity and
the Fellowship in the Bond of Peace, that Truth and Life may reign amongst you;
that in all things you may adorn and grace the Truth, that never has an end.

And the Lord God Almighty preserve you in his Seed, His Prayer for the same.
Life and Wisdom, and give you Discerning, Victory and Dominion over all that
which is contrary, that you may feel Christ's Reign and Authority, in which you
may all act in his Power and Authority. So in that, God Almighty preserve you.

And draw up an Account of all that have died in Prison, Of Prisoners.
in every County for Truth's Testimony, and lay them before the Magistrates;
and so to keep Friends clear from the Blood of all Men. And preserve a Lift of
their Sufferings, together with the Number that have died in Prison; that their
Blood may come upon them that have thirsted after it, And Sufferings.
and that their Testimony may not be lost, who have sealed it with their Blood,
but that it may be preserved. And so keep a Record of them in your Quarterly
Meeting Books. So that the Memorial of the Innocent Sufferers for the Truth and
the Name of Jesus may not be lost nor forgotten; that his Name and Power, that
has supported them, may be exalted, that has carried them over Death, and
their Persecutors, and the spoiling of their Goods. So in the heavenly Seed
Christ Jesus, that reigns, who is the Living Rock and Foundation, and stands
sure for all his Elect to build upon, stand above all the Rocks and Foundations
that are below, and will have an end; and in him the Lord God Almighty preserve
you, and keep you all. Amen.

And all my Dear Friends every where, Speaking in Steeple Houses.
who have been moved of the Lord God to speak in Steeple Houses to the Priests,
or in Markets to the People, or in Courts, or Fairs, or Assizes, or Towns; let
an Account thereof be drawn up together in one Book, with the substance of
their Words, that they spoke in the Power of God: This would be a Book, that
may stand to Generations, that they may see their faithful Testimony, and what
Strength God did ordain out of the the Mouths of Babes and Sucklings. And
Friends that have been moved to go to the Professors Meetings; that their
Testimony there may not be lost, together with all the Examples that have
fallen upon the Persecutors.

And such Testimonies of Friends as are deceased, Of Deceased Friends
Testimonies.
let them be Recorded, that so the Testimony of the Lord through his Servants
may not be lost, that he raised up in his People, for the same they were
carried on through great Tribulations and Sufferings; and many laid down their
Lives, and had their Goods spoiled, and they persecuted to Death) to keep up
their Testimony (which the Lord moved them to speak by his Spirit) to future
Generations: So that those Words, that they were moved to speak forth by the
Power, may not be lost; that the Power and Spirit of the Lord may be exalted.
So that an account may be taken of that which has been spoken and done by the
Motions of the Spirit of God from the first, as abovementioned. And so be
Diligent, and those that can write, help them that cannot: This may be easily
done.

And all they that be Public Ministers (if unknown) that pass up and down the
Countries, What Ministers to have Certificates.
and to other Nations, for them to have a Certificate from their Meeting, where
such Persons are known, and all their Practices are looked into, that will
prevent any bad Spirits, that may scandalize honest Men. For they that do
minister to others, must have a double Diligence in Virtue, and Chastity, and
Patience, and Carefulness, and Watchfulness, more than their Hearers, lest they
Judge them. For Christ, the heavenly Man, is our Example; and the Apostle
says, Follow us, as we do follow Christ. For who esteems the beggarly Lusts
before Virtue, is not worthy of it; and who prefers his Ungodliness, and his
Unholiness, and his Earthliness, before that which is Heavenly, is not worthy
of the Heavenly, nor of Godliness, nor Righteousness, etc.

And Dear Friends, be Faithful, you that know the Light, the Truth and the
Power of God, and his Life; in the Wisdom of God be Faithful; by which Wisdom
all things was made and created; In Wisdom.
and by which Wisdom all things that are created, must be ordered again, to the
Glory of the Creator. And you that are come to know the Truth and the Power of
it, all come to know the Order of Life, so that all things may be kept in that
sweet Order and Government to the Glory of God and the Refreshment of all,
Order.
and a sweet Savor to God and in the Hearts of all People, that through the
Wisdom of God ye may adorn the Truth in all things, for the preserving of Love,
Peace and Unity amongst all.

And live in the peaceable Truth, and keep in the heavenly Order of the Gospel,
and in the Government of the heavenly Man, And Government of Christ.
the Increase of which there is no end; and walk in the pure and underfiled
Religion, that keeps you from the spots of the World, and in the Worship of God
in the Spirit and Truth, which the Devil is out of. So that in the Truth you
may be preserved in Peace with God, and one with another: And in the Spirit of
Truth you may be preserved in the Unity and Fellowship of it, in which is the
Bond of Peace.

And my desire is, that all the faithful Men, and faithful Women in the Light,
and Power, and Spirit of Christ, And Possession of Truth.
all may be kept in the Possession of the Truth, and that all such may make up
the Men and Women's Meetings, so that you all may be in your Possessions of the
Order of the Gospel, and the Government of Christ the Seed, that bruises the
Head of the Serpent, who is the Head of all ill Government, and Disorders. So
that the joyful and glorious Order of the Everlasting Gospel, all may be in the
Possession of; so that in the Light, Spirit and Power, ye may all have a care
of God's Glory, and his Honor, and his Church's Peace, keeping in the Unity of
his Everlasting Spirit, which is the Bond of the Heavenly and Spiritual Prince
of Princes Peace. And all that are in the Possession of this, Admonish.
may admonish and exhort all such as walk not as becomes the Gospel, and
glorify not the Lord with their Bodies, Souls and Spirits; and so see, that as
every one has received Christ Jesus, that they do walk in him; that all may
walk in the Holiness, which becomes the House of God: so that God may be
glorified by his Light, Power and Spirit in all, who is over all, God blessed
for ever.

And so, the God of Glory, who has brought Christ from the Dead, Quickened for
what end.
by him are you quickened and raised from the Dead, that henceforth you should
not live to your selves, but to him, and walk in him, who is the Amen, and over
all, the First and Last.

G. F.

ALL you that are Believers in the Light of Christ, Epist. 265.
which manifests Darkness, ye are kept by the Power of God unto the Day of
Salvation. So, though your Salvation is not yet completed, Believers how kept.
yet you have your Keeper, the Power of God, which neither slumbers nor sleeps,
and it will keep you unto that Day. For those Virgins, in the Parable, they had
their Keeper, by which they were preserved in their Virginity, which they were
never accused of loosing; for it is said, that the Cry was at midnight; that
is, the mid time of Darkness; for Darkness is called Night, and the Voice of
the Bridegroom was at midnight, Arise: Now they that had no Oil in their Lamps
did not enter with the Bridegroom, but they that had Oil did. Now that which
does keep, is the Power of God, and preserves pure unto him in the Virginity,
from that which would defile the Virgin Mind, Virgins.
and the Virgin Soul and Spirit. For it is all from the same Man of Sin that
defiles the Mind, and the Spirit, that leads them out to defile their Bodies,
and corrupt them; therefore all is to mind their Keeper, the Power of God,
which was before the Devil, the Man of Sin, Oils, Lamps.
was; by which Power of God they have Oil in their Lamps, through which their
Lamps may be always Burning in their Temple, and such come to be the Temple of
God; for they that defile the Temple, defile their Souls and Bodies, they let
in the Defiler and Destroyer, and so their Lamps go out, and they go from God
and his Power, the Keeper, and such God will destroy; and so many as are kept
by the Power of the Lord unto the Day of Salvation, Day of Salvation, Power.
though the Day of Salvation is not yet completed, yet in the Day of
Salvation, the People of God are a willing People, even in this Day of his
Power. And so they are to abide with their Keeper, which is the Power of God;
for while they be in the Night, and not in the Day of Salvation, nor Day of
Power, though they may be in the Widerness of Temptations and Trouble, Spiritual
Israel's Travel.
yet may feel the Power, the Keeper, to lead through all these things, out of
Egypt, through the Red Sea, through the Wilderness, through Jordan, the River
of Judgment, and over the Canaanites; and therefore every one's Faith is to
stand in the Power of God, and believe in the Power of God, that will bring to
the Day of God's Power, and to the Day of his Salvation. For the outward Jew
did not enter, because of Unbelief; and so this great foul Man of Sin has
defiled all Mankind outwardly and inwardly. And therefore all to have their
Faith to stand in the Power of God, their Keeper; for the defilement is in the
Night, by the Power of Darkness, and through it. By Faith in the Power, safety.
Therefore let thy Faith stand in the Power of God, thy Keeper, which will keep
both Body, and Soul, and Spirit clean and blameless to the Day of Redemption,
and Day of Salvation, and by the Power of God such will have a Dominion over
the foul Man of Sin, the Devil; for it is he in People that leads and tempts to
outward Defilement of their Body, Loss of Virginity, the Cause.
and so to lose their Virginity; and it is he that draws their Minds from God
and Christ, and from God's Ways, and his Worship, and his Truth, and his
Spirit, and his Grace, and his Faith that he works in People: Therefore if thy
Faith stand in the Power of God, all by it is preserved in this Body, Soul and
Spirit, in Purity and a hidden Mind, Soul and Spirit secret to the Lord, who is
a Spirit; and they are preserved by his Power, their Keeper: For, as is the
saying of some of the World, that are the most modest, that they will keep
their outward Virginity to the Day of their Death, or of their Marriage, but
such as before that have no esteem of their Bodies, no more than unruly Beasts,
Uncleanness.
give up their Bodies to Uncleanness, and Themselves to work Wickedness, and so
forsake their Keeper, the Power of God, which should keep both inwardly and
outwardly: And so all the inward Virgin Minds, and Souls and Spirits, that are
hidden to the Lord, they will dye before they will lose their inward Virginity,
but will keep it to the Marriage of the Lamb, as the Wise Virgins did; by which
Power they are preserved over the Man of Sin, whom Christ their Husband bruises
the Head of, and destroys him and his work; for Christ was before the Man of
Sin was (the Devil, and his Works either) who was glorified with the Father
before the World began; and therefore all such Virgins as are come to Christ,
and are married to him, Christ your Husband, He will deal with the foul Man of
Sin, Who are married to Christ.
and bruise his Head, and break his Power and Strength to pieces, and will take
him and cast him into Everlasting Fire. And therefore keep your Faith in the
Power of God, which will bring you to the Marriage of the Lamb; by which Power
of God, which was before the Devil was, you may have Oil in your Lamps, that
your Lamps may burn always; by which Power of God you may come to the Day of
God's Power, and all to be a willing People, to serve God, and walk in Truth,
and to obey Him; and so by the same Power of God, Day of God's Power, and of
Salvation.
which is your Keeper, you may come to the Day of Salvation; you may have the
Song of Salvation, and Joy of Salvation, and Comfort of Salvation, and the
Possession of Salvation, and be Heirs of the same. And so here you have your
Keeper, to wit, the Power of God. And Peter's words answers to this, You have a
Light which you do well to take heed unto, that shines in a dark place, until
the Day dawn, and the Day Star arise in your Hearts; signifying it is
sufficient, which you must take heed to, it will lead you to the Day dawning
(the Light) that shines in the dark place of your Hearts, in the dark place of
your Minds; now you do well to take heed to this Light, for it leads you to the
Day Star, and Day Dawning.) Out of Egypt have I called my Son, says the Lord;
How to come to that Day.
and Israel was called God's Son, who was called out of the House of Durkness
and Bondage; they had Light in Goshen, when the Children of Egypt were in
Darkness, and could not see one another: For now the Children of Light have
Light, and can see one another; the Children of Egypt, Sodom, and Babylon
cannot see one another: And so, they do well that take heed to the Light, but
they do ill that do not take heed to the Light, for they walk in Darkness, and
know not whether they go, and stumble at Noon day, the highest time of Light;
Who stumble
for this Light leads to the Day Dawning, and Day Star arising in their Hearts,
which is a sure Word of Prophecy: A Prophet is a Seer, and so with the Light
he will see, that which does make manifest is Light; by it you shall see the
Day Dawning, and the Day Star arising, and when that arises, the Sons of God
sing together, because of the joyful Day; How to see the Day Star.
and the Saints sing, who has been long in the brambly, briary Walderness, and
in the House of Bondage, of Darkness and Trouble, and of Sorrow and Misery.
Therefore there is joy, when the Day Star appears, and the Day dawn, there is
great cause of joy for all the Sons of God, when the Day Star appears, and for
them to sing together; for long Nights of Trouble and Travel have they been in.
The Path of the Just is a shining Light, the Path of the Unjust is Darkness:
Two Paths.
So there is but two Paths. Now the Unjust cannot abide to hear talk of the
Light, but call it Natural, and created and made, or conscience, they do not
know what to call it, whose Darkness cannot comprehend the Light, though it
shines in the Darkness; and so, the Path of the just being a shining Light,
which shines more and more unto the perfect Day; signifying that the Day is
come, that the Just has his Path, and his Path is a shining Light; and so
increases, Shines more and more unto the perfect Day. Now the Unjust being in
Darkness, they hate the Light, Of the truer Light.
and love Darkness rather than Light; the Just Man's Path, the Light, because
their Deeds are Evil; for the Light will reprove them. So the Just Man's Path
is sufficient, a shining Light; for if it shines more and more, The just Man's
Path.
it increases, it is sufficient, and brings to the perfect Day: Now the
Unjust, whose Path is Darkness, say, It is not sufficient, but such cannot
abide the Light, cannot abide the Just Man's Path, nor the Just neither, but
hate both, and speak against him and his Path, with his Darkness, that cannot
comprehend the Light, though Light shines in his Darkness; and therefore if he
cannot comprehend the Light with his Darkness, (how can he comprehend the
Prophets, and Apostles, and Christ's Words?) but calls Light, Darkness, Where
mistaken.
and Darkness, Light, and calls it natural, or created, or made, or conscience;
and so this come to be fulfilled on them, as John said, Who with their Darkness
could not comprehend the Light, yet they would be talking of the Saints Words,
Law and Prophets, with their Darkness, which could not comprehend the Light.
They would call light, Darkness. Says Christ, If that Light that is in you be
Darkness, how great is that Darkness? You neither know the Scriptures nor the
Power of God: How should they know the Scriptures or the Power of God either,
whose Darkness does not comprehend the Light? A dark Man, In Blindness.
is a blind Man: A blind Man has not true Judgment: Therefore how should they
call it otherwise, but a natural Light, a created or made Light? So the
Pharisees believed that Christ was to come, and preached him to come; as the
Protestants and Papists preach him, that He is come and to come; and can tell
by Scripture where he was crucified, as the Jews could tell by Scripture where
he was to be born: Who were against Christ, the Light.
But they were all against Christ, the Light: When he came, they said, Christ
had a Devil: the Pharisees said of him, who was Light, That he was the Prince
of Devils; who was the Light, and the Truth, and the Life; and that he was the
Carpenter's Son. So without the Light they could not see him, nor his Works,
with their Darkness; neither can they do now; neither can they know the
Scriptures nor the Power of God, whose Darkness cannot comprehend the Light,
John 1.6, 7.
And John was a Man sent from God, the greatest Prophet born of a Woman, who
came for a Witness, to bear Witness of the true Light, which lights every Man
that comes into the World, that all through him might believe; John 1.4.
and it is said, in Christ was Light; and this Light was the Life of Men: And so
the Life that is in Christ, is the Light of Men. So this is a Heavenly Light, a
Divine Light, a Spiritual Light, The Life in Chhist, the Light in Men.
a Saving Light; which is the Life of Christ, which is the Light of Men; though
the Professors in Christ's Time, and these Times, Papists and Protestants, with
their Darkness, cannot comprehend the Light, so not the Life; so no true
Preachers of Christ without the Light and Life. John said, he was not the
Light, but was sent to bear witness of the Light: That he was not worthy to
unloose the Latchet of Christ's Shoes. And yet John, who had seen Christ, the
Lamb of God, that takes away the Sins of the World, pointed his Disciples to
him, and showed them Christ; and they forsook him and went to Christ: For John
came for a Witness, to bear Witness of him, who was the true Light, and that He
that was to come after him, was preferred before him, for he was before him:
Yet when John was cast into Prison, he questioned whether Christ was he, or
whether he should look for another; and sends to Christ: And Christ answers his
Messengers, and says unto them, the Blind receive their Sight, Christ the
Messiah, and not another.
and the Poor receive the Gospel, etc. And as for these Papists, and
Protestants and Jews, they question whether Christ, the Light that lights
every Man that comes into the World, be the Spiritual, Divine, Saving and
Heavenly Light. And further, mark Christ's own Words, John 12.46. He says, He
is the Light of the World, that teaches you how to believe; to wit, All his
Disciples, as Christ has taught them, who says, Believe in the Light. Now,
believing in the Light, you believe in that which does make manifest all
things; for that which does make manifest, is the Light; The Light makes
manifest all things.
and therefore to believe in the Light, is to believe in that which does make
manifest Christ to be their Way, their Teacher, Priest and Mediator,
Interceeder, Savior and Redeemer: And he that believes in the Light, he
believes in that whcih makes manifest all false Ways, and false Religions, and
false Worship, and false Teachers, and Antichrists: For they that believe in
the Light, it manifests all true Ways, and true Religions. And so, they are no
true Believers, True Believers believe in Christ, as both outwardly and
inwardly manifest.
neither Protestant, nor Papists, who only believe Christ is come from
Scripture, as the Jews, believed Christ was to come from Scripture: But, I say,
they are no true Believers, but as they also believe in the Light as Christ the
Heavenly Man does teach: For the Jews, they may teach their People to believe
from the Scripture, the Papists and Protestants may teach their Children to
believe from the same; but, not believing in the Light, they are no true
Believers, as Christ has taught; for Christ, who is the Savior, he teaches
People how to believe, and says, Believe in the Light: Which is plain, that
they are no true Believers that do not believe in the Light, neither Jews, nor
those that have got the name of Christians; for Believing in the Light, they
become Children of the Light. And so it is plain, they are no Children of Light
but who Believe in the Light, nor Children of the Day: For Children of Darkness
may profess Scriptures, the Devil may bring Scripture, and Protestant, and
Turk, and Papist, and Jew may bring Scripture, with a dark Spirit, and hold
them in the Unrighteousness; but there is no true Believer in God, nor in
Christ Jesus, but who Believes in the Light, which the Scripture testifies of;
showing there is no Salvation, Redemption, Justification, Sanctification, but
to them who Believes in the Light, that manifests all things, nor seeing
Christ, who died, and is risen for them: And therefore the heavenly Man, the
second Adam, the Lord Jesus Christ, teaches how to believe, and says, Believe
in the Light, The second Adam, the Lord Jesus teaches how to believe.
while you have it; and this Light will manifest him to be their Way, their
Truth and Life; which Light comes from him, who enlightneth every Man that
comes into the World, that all through the Light might believe. And so they
that believe not in the Light, as Christ has taught, are no true Ministers,
nor no true Messengers, nor true Disciples, nor no true Christians, nor true
Preachers of Christ Jesus, who believes not, as he has taught them; but they
that lay away Christ's teaching, and teach one another to deny the Way that
Christ has taught to Believe in, are keepers of People in Darkness, out of the
Light, and call it Natural, created, and made, and conscience, and so with
their Darkness and Blindness give the Light such names, who with their Darkness
cannot comprehend it; for he that believes in the Light, The Light
distinguishes Truth from Error.
it lets him see the Scriptures, the Prophets, Christ and the Apostles words,
and by it they do distinguish the true Prophets words from the false, the holy
Men's words, from the unholy, the sanctified from them that are not sanctified,
Christ's words from Anti-christ's, the true Apostles words from the false: So
Christ the Light teaches his People to believe in that which manifests all
things; and they that believe in the Light has the Witness in themselves of
Christ, in whom they do believe, they have the Witness in themselves, that he
is their Redeemer, and Savior, and their Way, their Truth and their Life; for
with the Light they see him (they believing in the Light) that does make
manifest; and after they believe in the Light, become Children of the Light;
they witness themselves, that they are sealed, for their Belief in the Light
stands in Christ the Light, who has bought and purchased them; and after that,
they are sealed by the Spirit of Promise, having God's Mark or Stamp set upon
them, they can set to their Seal, That God is true in all his Promises, in all
his Prophets, concerning Christ Jesus, who taught them to believe in the Light:
With the Light they see, and come to know, the three that bear Record in
Heaven, and the three that bear Record on Earth, Three that bear Record on
Earth.
the Spirit, the Water, and the Blood; first the Spirit that bears witness in
the Earth, which mortifies them, which circumcises them, which leads them into
all Truth; in which Spirit is their Fellowship, and a Bond of Peace, that keeps
down that which troubles them; by which Spirit the Believers are Baptized into
one Body, brought out of the many Bodies; and so by the Spirit they are brought
to the one Head, The Spirit.
which is Christ Jesus (though there are many Heads in the World) by which Spirit
they are sanctified, by which Spirit they are instructed, by which Spirit they
worship God, by which Spirit they are covered, by which Spirit they pray, and
by which Spirit they sing praises to God, who is a Spirit, by which Spirit they
have an understanding, the Spirit of Wisdom and Knowledge, which is to know
God, and Jesus Christ whom he has sent, which is Life Eternal. 2dly. They come
to know the Water, The Water.
which is a Witness in the Earth; by which Water they are washed, their Minds,
their Souls, their Spirits, and in their Bodies, with this pure Water; and this
is a Witness in the Earth, with the Light, they that Believe in it, it
manifests these two Witnesses in the Earth, and with the Light they see the
Pope's counterfeit Holy Water, which he has set up since the Apostles Days,
who with the Light bears witness against it, not to be God's witness, nor
God's setting up. And so the Children of the Light, that believe in the Light,
their Bodies, their Souls, their Spirits, and their Minds are washed clean in
this pure, clean, holy Water, that comes from above, from the pure holy God,
which is one of these Witnesses in the Earth. And the Blood.
The third Witness is his Blood, with which the Hearts of People are sprinkled,
and their Consciences are sprinkled with the Blood of Jesus: As Moses sprinkled
the outside of the Posts, etc. with the Blood of Bulls and Goats; which Blood
of Bulls and Goats, Christ's Blood ends, which sprinkles the Heart and
Conscience of People. So this Blood of Jesus Christ, the heavenly Man, is felt
in the Hearts and Consciences of People; by which Blood they are sanctified,
they are cleansed from all their Dead Works, to serve the Living God, and to
serve their Dead Works no longer: So by this Blood they are cleansed from all
Sin. They that walk in the Light, and believe in the Light, they are Children
of the Light, and Children of the Day; and the Blood of Jesus Christ, the Son
of God, Blood of Christ cleanses from all Sin.
cleanses them from all Sin; and their Garments are made white in the Blood of
the Lamb; by which they come to testify of Jesus, they overcome the Beast, the
Whore, the false Church. And so every true Believer, believes as Christ has
taught them, to Believe in the Light, that so they may become Children of the
Light. The true Believer has the Witness in himself.
They have these three Witnesses that bear witness in the Earth, to bear
witness in themselves; and they can set to their Seal, That God is true in all
his Works, in Prophets and Apostles, and his Son; and they shall come to know,
and do come to know, the Three that bear Record in Heaven, and the Three that
bear Record in the Earth.

G. F.

AND all ye Believers in the heavenly Light, as Christ has taught, Epist. 266.
you seek that which is lost and driven away; but the false Prophets, false
Ministers and Teachers, they did not seek that which was lost, True Ministers
seek that which is lost.
and driven away from God; they put no difference between the precious and the
vile, but mash all together, like the Priests and Prophets of our times;
therefore seek that which was lost and driven away; some may be driven away by
the Storms, some may be driven away by the great Winds of the Wicked, and
Storms of the Ungodly; some may be driven away by Tempests and foul Weather,
and some may be lost in the foul Weather, and lost in the Sea of the World; for
it is this wicked One that raises all these foul Weather and Storms; therefore
seek that which is lost, ye that believe in the Light, by which you see, then
you are distinguished from the false Prophets and Teachers, and by the Light
you put a difference between the precious and the vile; for Jacob was found in
a desert Land, and you see all the Prophets, how they sought that which was
lost, and the Apostles, and how Christ encouraged to seek that which was lost;
and when the lost Sheep was found, what Joy there was, more than of the Ninety
and Nine; an who were they that make the Land desolate, but the rough Esau's,
and wild Ishmael's, and Core's; and who makes the World as a Wilderness but the
Devil; and who brings the whole World to lie in Wickedness, but the Devil, that
wicked One; and if you should not find that which is lost and driven away, at
the first, nor second, To continue in seeking.
nor third time of seeking, if you sold not find him that is lost, go again,
that you may have your joy, and rejoice others; for Christ in the Parable
says, The Prodigal Son was lost, yea was dead, and is alive again; when he had
been feeding among Swine, and upon Husks, and could never fill his Belly: When
any such come back again, they will tell you how hungry they were, they could
never fill their Bellies among the Husks, while they went astray, and tell you
long Declarations of the Citizen that he was joined to: And therefore when the
lost is found, and brought back again to the Father's House, where there is
Bread enough, Joy for the lost Sheep is found.
there is Joy, and the heavenly Instruments of Music, and the heavenly Feast
of the heavenly Fat Things, and the heavenly Robes of Righteousness are
enjoyed. And so all be diligent, ye Believers in the Light, as Christ has
taught you; look up and down, in the Light you will see where the lost Sheep
are, and such as have been driven away, you will spy them out, out of the
Woods, or Brambles, or Pits, where there is no Water, where they are ready to
be Famished, where they are tied with Thorns and Briars; and so with the Light
you will see, and put a difference, between the precious and the vile; for
whatsoever makes manifest is Light: For by that you see, and you will see with
it, how the false Prophets, and Ministers and Teachers drive People away; they
drive them away from God, and his Way, from Christ, and the Covenant of Light.
How angry they are with them that believe in it? With their Clubs, how have
they beaten many, and wounded many, and imprisoned many, because they would not
be driven by them into the Devil's Pit-fold, or Prison; but do you never give
over seeking, for the Light shines over all, which believe in, and walk in the
Path of the Just, which is as a shining Light; for it has been the work of all
the false Teachers and Ministers to drive away from God, and his Truth and
Light, and those have been the Devil's Servants, and the Wages he gives them is
Death. This has been the Way of all true Ministers, to seek that which was
lost, and that which was driven away; as you may see Christ and the Apostles,
and all the true Prophets did, and to bring them to feed in the Pastures of
Life, and gently to lead them, whose Wages is Life; and he gives them their
heavenly Penny of Life Eternal.

G. F.

To Ministering Friends.
FRiends,
Epist. 267.
All ye that Believe in the Light, as Christ has commanded, that are become
Children of the Light, and of the Day, and of the Promise, Not to Judge one
another.
and do minister therein, do not judge one another in public Meetings, you
that do Minister, as you have received the Grace, and have the Word of the Lord
God committed to you that Minister abroad, or go abroad in Cities, Towns,
Countries or Nations, do not judge one another, nor reflect one upon another in
public Meetings, for that hurts the Hearers; and you do more hurt than you do
good, and that makes Confusion; for if you have any thing to say, have
Patience, let that Gift be exercised, and speak to one another by your selves
alone; But exercise the Gift often Patience.
for that was the way before any thing was spoken against any of the Church,
and that will show the Spirit of Order and Government, and the Spirit of Love,
and of Patience and Humility; and keep down Passion, and that part in your
selves that cannot bear all things, nor endure all things, whereby the Love
comes up that will endure all things, and bear all things, which edifies the
Body, and by which the Body is edified; for the Spirit of the Prophets, is
subject to the Prophets; this shows the true Spirit, for that which cannot bear
all things, many times, is forward in Judging, that cannot bear all things, nor
endure all things, and so goes out of the true Love and Edification, which
breeds Confusion and Distraction, and destroys more than ever it will beget to
God. And also goes out of the Church Order, first speak to him alone; for by
that he may win his Brother: Speaking publicly makes Strife, some owning and
some disowning, and that Spirit must be shut out, by the true Spirit that keeps
Order, and Unity and Fellowship, and the true Love which edifies the Body. And
so every one which feels the Power stirring in them to Minister, when they have
done, To live in the Power wherein they minister.
let them live in the Power, and in the Truth, and in the Grace, that keeps in
the seasoned Words, and that keeps in a stablish'd and seasoned Life: And so
all may Minister as they have received the Grace; so every one is a Steward of
the Grace of God, if he do not turn the Grace of God into Wantonness; and so to
Minister in that Love, and Grace, and Power that keeps all things in Subjection
and Order, and in Unity in the Life and in the Power, and Light, by which you
may see that of God in every Man, and answer to that which God has showed unto
People: For the true Laborers in the Vineyard do answer that of God, the true
Ministers brings People to that which is to instruct them, viz. the Spirit of
God, True Ministers reaches to the Witness of God in Men's hearts.
and so are Ministers of the Spirit, and Ministers of the Grace, they answer
the Spirit, and the Grace and Truth in all, in which all that do Minister have
Unity, and through which they have Fellowship with God and Christ.

G. F.

Not to be over-thoughtful of the things of this World.
FRiends,
Epist. 268.
Did not God provide for Man and Woman before he made them? Did he not make all
things in Six Days? And the sixth Day he made Man in the Image of God, in
Righteousness and Holiness: And therefore Christ, who is the Son of God, who
comes to restore Man up again into the Image of God, Not to be over-thoughtful.
and leads Man up into his Image in Righteousness and Holiness, as he was in
before he fell: Does he not reprove such as take thought, and told them of
their little Faith, and that they could not add one Cubit to the Stature that
God had made; and it was the Practice of the Heathens and of the Gentiles to
take thought? So it is clear, before God made Man, he took care for him; but
after Man was fallen from the Image of God, and his Righteousness, he took care
and toiled, though he cannot add one Cubit to his Stature in the Lord's Work:
For thou may sow thy Seed in the Ground or Garden, thou may have much
Cattle, But trust in the Lord for all.
and other things, but yet there is no increase but by the Lord, neither of thy
Seed, nor of thy Cattle; for is not the Earth the Lord's and the Fullness
thereof? Mark, and does he not give the increase, who upholds all things by his
Word and Power, who is the Creator of all, and provided for Man before he made
him, and set him in Dominion over all the Works of his Hands; which Dominion
Man lost: Man lost Righteousness and Holiness, in his disobeying the Command of
God, Christ restores Man into the Image of God.
which Christ comes to restore Man to, and sets Man above all again, as he was
in the Beginning, and up to his own State beyond Adam before he fell, to him
that never fell. And so all that believe in the Light, as Christ commanded, in
the Light they see, they cannot add Cubit to the Stature, and so they come to
grow in the Faith in Christ and in God. And so herein has the Lord the Praise
of his Works; and all things praise him, who has created them all to his
Honor, and to his Glory, and to his Praise; and Man to glorify him in
Righteousness and Holiness, in the Image of God and of Christ Jesus, above all
other Creatures in the Covenant of God, in the Covenant of Light and Life in
Christ Jesus; Him by whom the World was made, by him they praise and please
God; and in their pleasing God, they Honor God and Christ.

G. F.

Concerning the single Language.
ALL Friends, Epist. 269.
that do believe in the Light, as Christ has commanded you, and are become
Children of Light, keep to the proper Speech; Proper Speech, Thou to One, and
You to many.
that is, Thee and Thou to a singular, and You to many; as you may see
throughout the Scriptures, it was the Language of God and Christ, his Prophets
and Apostles, and all good Men's; though it is the Practice of the First Birth,
and of the Flesh, to say You, when they should say Thou; therefore take you
heed of Flattery to please Men, and of letting the World's Spirit over you;
though they have learned in their Grammar and Accidence, and other teaching
Books, the Plural and Singular Language, yet they speak Plural when they should
speak Singular to One.

G. F.

FOR all that be gathered in the Name of Jesus, Epist. 270.
and are mad a live by him, and quickened by him, they come to the Flock of
Christ; and know where they feed at Noonday, they are gathered into the Name
of Jesus Christ, Salvation in no other Name than the Name of Jesus.
whose Name is above every Name; and know that there is no Salvation under the
whole Heaven, but in the Name of Jesus, in the Testimony that they have of
Jesus, which is the Spirit, by which they see Jesus, and see his Pastures of
Life, see his Springs of Life, and his Rivers of Life, and his Bread of Life;
and see the Footsteps of the Flock, the Testimony of Jesus, the Spirit, by
which they see him and his Flock; and they see the barren Mountains they have
been upon and come off from: And therefore all you that be gathered into the
Name of Jesus, and walk in the Path of the Just, where the Footsteps of the
Flock are; quench not the Spirit in any; and if any will not have of your Bread
of Life, and Water of Life, let them fast, Of the Bread of Life.
that will neither receive, nor give; for the Bread of Life and Water of Life,
is not only given to feed your selves, but by it you may feed others, and
refresh others, therefore have Bread in your Houses, and Water in your own
Well, and Fruit of your one Tree, and Salt in your selves, to Savor withal,
that you may try all things; and have Oil in your own Lamps, that they may burn
in your own Temple; and Odor and Frankincense, that it may burn continually
upon your own Altar, that it may ascend as a sweet Savor, Holy and Pure, up to
God, who is Holy and Pure. Be not removed off your Ground, wherein you may grow
and increase: And so quench not the Spirit, despise not Prophecy, hate not the
Light, but improve your Talent; hide it not, but improve it; mind the Kingdom
within, and the heavenly Penny, and the Spirit of God, which is given to
Instruct you; and walk according to the Rule of the Spirit of God, that he has
given to you to profit withal; and mind the Truth in the Inward Parts; so that
you may be adorned and arrayed with a meek and a quiet Spirit. For the Light
that shines in your Hearts will give you the Knowledge of the Glory of God in
the Face of Jesus Christ, How the Knowledge of God is attained.
that you may know the Heavenly Treasure in your Earthly Vessels, and the
Day Star to arise, the Day to dawn in your own Hearts, that you may become
Temples of Christ; He to dwell with you, and walk with you, and sup with you;
and the Blood of Christ to sprinkle your Hearts from dead Works, and your
Consciences also, that you may serve the Living God.

So, know the true Faith, to purify your Hearts, Christ the Author of true
Faith.
which Christ is the Author and Finisher of; and the true Hope, to purify you.
And so, be true Believers in the Light, as Christ Commands, and become Children
of the Light; for he that believes, has the Witness in himself: And know the
true Word in your Hearts and Mouths; which is the Word of Faith the Apostle
preached, which distinguishes your good Thoughts from bad, and your good Words
from bad; which Word is in your Hearts to obey and do: Which is as a Hammer to
hammer down Sin and Evil, and as a Sword to cut it down, and as a Fire to burn
it up: So that by that Word you may be sanctified, The Word Sanctifies, etc.
by that Word you may have Salvation, by that Word you may be reconciled to
God; by which all things are upheld by his Word and Power; by this Word you may
be born again of the Immortal Seed, that lives and abides for ever: And so from
this Word you may have your Milk; for this is the ingrafted Word, that is able
to save the Soul, and raise the Soul, that is Immortal, up unto the Immortal
God: And by this Word you will see over all the Deceivers of your Souls; which
Word was before they were: And by this Word you will understand the Scriptures
of Truth, that cannot be broken: And by this Word you will come to Judge all
those that are got into the Imaginations concerning the Scriptures, and that
set them up in the room of God and Christ, in their dark Imaginations, who in
their Darkness cannot comprehend the Light: And by this Word you will have
Riches; out of this Word is Poverty: And by this Word you will come to know
Life and Salvation; for in the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with
God; and Christ's Name is called The Word of God; and the Scriptures are the
Words which are to be fulfilled. So all be diligent in the Truth, that you may
be fruitful in the Word of God, that it may have its Passage through you all.

G. F.

Concerning those that go out of Unity and deny Forms.
THose that are gone from the Light, Epist. 271.
from the Spirit and Power of God, and so from the Unity, by the Light, and by
the Spirit, True Unity in the Light and Spirit.
and by the Power are judged; and the Power, and Light, and Spirit is over
them; and they being gone into their own Wills, and into a perverse Spirit,
then they say, they will not be subject to Men's Will, nor to the Will of Man;
and that Spirit leads them out of the Bonds of Humanity, when they are thus
gone from the Light, and the Power and Spirit of God, they go out of all true
Forms, into Confusion and Emptiness, without Form; then they say, they will not
be subject to Forms, and cry down all Forms with their Darkness and a perverse
Spirit, and so mash all together.

For there is a Form of Godliness, Of the Form of Godliness.
and there is a Form of Sound Words, many have a Form. All Creatures have a
Form, the Earth has a Form, and all Things were brought into a Form by the
Power of God; for the Earth was once without Form, and was void, and empty and
confused.

So they that be gone out of the Covenant of God and Life, and out of the Power
of God, are gone into a confused Condition without Form, a State which is out
of the Bond of Civil Men and Women: And so such are confused without the right
Form; for the Form that God has made, viz. The Form of the Earth, the Form of
the Creatures, the Form of Men and Women, the Form of Sound Words, the Form of
Godliness, nor the Form of Sound Doctrine, was never denied by the Men and
Women of God: Those testified against, who deny the Power and quench the Spirit.
But such as got the Form only, and denied the Power of Godliness, those were
denied, for they deny the Power; and do not only so, but quench the Spirit, and
grieve and vex it, and hate the Light; by which Light they are condemned.

G. F.

To Friends in Ireland.
KEep to the equal Measure and just Weight in all things, Epist. 272.
both inwardly and outwardly, that you may answer Equity, answer Truth in the
Oppressed, and the Spirit, and Grace, and Light in all People: To do Justice
and Equity in all things.
And so, being kept in Righteousness, and Equity, and Truth, and Holiness, that
preserves you over the Inequality, Injustice, and the false Measure, and
Weight, and Balance in all Things, both inward and outward: And this keeps
your Eye open, keeps you in a Feeling Sense, keeps you in Understanding, and
true Wisdom, and true Knowledge, what you are to answer to all Men in
Righteousness, and Truth, and Equity, both inward and outward. And this is to
all you that have purchased or bought any Irish Land, so that Justice and
Righteousness, and the true Measure, and true Weight, and even Balance, may be
among you, to answer that which is True, and Just, and Even, and Equal; that
you may answer that which is Equal, and Just, and True in your selves, and in
every Man and Woman; that you may be preserved in the Sense and Favor of God,
and so may answer the good and righteous Principle in all, by which they may be
brought to Truth, the equal Principle, and just Measure, and true Weight and
Balance; by which they may know the just and true God in all his Works and
Outgoings

G. F.

Not to trust in uncertain Riches.
ALL Friends,
Epist. 273.
Be ye as Strangers to all Things visible and created, but be acquainted with
the Creator, your Maker, the Lord God Almighty; Outward things not durable.
for outward Things are not durable Riches, nor durable Substance, nor durable
Habitations, nor durable Possessions, for they have Wings and will fly away;
and so, therefore be as Pilgrims and Strangers to the World, and all worldly,
created and visible things, and witness Redemption from the Earth, that you may
reign upon the Earth, as Kings and Priests to God, The Righteous are as Kings
and Priests to God.
that you may know a Habitation in God, and the Riches of his Grace and Life,
that is everlasting, and a Substance that fades not away, the Riches which
has not wings, and the Riches that is not deceitful, that is durable and true.
For Men trusting in outward Riches, and outward Things, they will deceive and
fail them, and have Wings and flees away from them: And so Man in that State is
deceived, and Riches are deceitful to him. Therefore, as I said before, be as
Strangers and Pilgrims to the World, and all things therein, possess, as though
you did not possess them, and what you enjoy, as though you did not; be above
all such things, and loose to them in the Invisible Life and Power, which is
over all things; for the Birth that is born again of the Immortal Seed by the
Word of God, that lives and abides, and endures for ever, and is above all
things; for all things are upheld by his Word and Power. And so be acquainted
with the heavenly and certain Riches, the durable Substance, and the
everlasting Possession and Inheritance of Life, through which you may be
acquainted with your Maker and Creator, the Lord God Almighty.

G. F.

MY Dear Friends in the pure and undefiled Life,
Epist. 274.
All live in the Holy Seed that changes not, that will wear out all in the
Transgression, and was before Transgresion was (and this Seed was never a
Transgressor) and it will be when Transgression is gone, and is over that
Spirit which is in Transgression, and is a burdensome Stone to the
Transgressor, and him that is out of Truth, and it will out-last all; and so in
that live, in which ye may reign in the Life and Truth, and in its time it will
break all their Bonds: For that Spirit that does transgress, does Persecute in
the particular the Just, and Persecution makes the Just to suffer in the
general; and so, they that will live Godly in Christ Jesus must suffer
Persecution, by them that Persecute those that are Godly; it is no wonder for
them to persecute the Godly in Christ the heavenly Man; so the Just Suffers,
within and without, by the Unjust. And so be Valiant for the Lord's Truth upon
the Earth, and dwell in Love, and in Humility, and Meekness, and Patience, and
Righteousness, in which the Love of the Lord is manifested: So no more but my
Love.

G. F.

ALL Friends every where, in the living Spirit, and living Power, Epist. 275.
and in the heavenly Light dwell, and quench not the Motions of of it in your
selves, nor the Movings of it in others; Not to quench the Motions of the
Spirit.
though many has run out, and gone beyond their Measures, yet many more has
quenched the Measure of the Spirit of God, and after became dead and dull, and
questioned through a false Fear; and so there has been hurt does ways. And
therefore be obedient to the Power of the Lord, and his Spirit, and his
Spiritual Weapons; War with that Philistian that would stop up your Wells and
Springs. Jacob's Well was in the Mountain (read that within) he was the second
Birth. And the Belief in the Power keeps the Spring open, and none to despise
Prophecy, neither to quench the Spirit; so that all may be kept open to the
Spring, that every one's Cup may run over: For you may all Prophecy one by
one, All may Prophecy one by one
and the Spirit of the Prophets is subject to the Prophets: Would all the
Lord's People were Prophets, said Moses in his time, when some found fault; but
the last time is the Christians time, which injoys the Substance, Christ Jesus;
and his Church is called a Royal Priesthood, offering up Spiritual Sacrifices;
and his Church are his Believers in the Light. And so in the Light every one
should have something to Offer; and to Offer an Offering in Righteousness to
the living God, else they are not Priests; and such as quenches the Spirit
cannot Offer, In the time of God's pouring out of his Spirit upon all Flesh.
but becomes dull. I will pour out of my Spirit upon all Flesh, in the last
time, says the Lord, which is the true Christians time, God's Sons and
Daughters shall prophecy, and your young Men shall see Visions, and old Men
shall dream Dreams; and on my Servants and Handmaids I will pour out of my
Spirit in those Days, and they shall Prophecy. Now Friends, if this be
fulfilled, Servants, Handmaids, Sons, Daughters, old Men, young Men, every one
to feel the Spirit of God, by which you may see the things of God, and declare
them to his Praise; for with the Heart Man does believe, and with the Mouth
Confession is made unto Salvation; first, he has it in his Heart, before it
comes out of his Mouth; and this is beyond that Brain-beaten-heady stuff, which
Man has long studied, about the Saints words, which the holy Men of God spoke
forth, as they were moved by the Holy Ghost: So the Holy Ghost moved them,
before they came forth and spoke them. And therefore, as I said before, do not
resist the Holy Ghost, for they that did so, grew stiff-necked, and their
Hearts were uncircumcised; but feel this Holy Ghost, this Spirit of Truth, that
leads you into all Truth. So with the Holy Ghost, and with the Light, Build
upon Christ the true Foundation.
and Power of God, do you build upon Christ the Foundation, and Life, and by
the same heavenly Light, and Power, and Spirit, do you Labor in the Vineyard,
and do you minister and speak forth the things of God, and do you digg for your
Pearls; therefore bring them forth, and let them be seen how they glister, the
glistering Pearls. And all come into the Vineyard of God to labor, in the
Light, which was before Darkness was, and with the Life, which was before Death
and his Power was; and in the Truth and Power of God, which the Devil is out
of, that every one of you may have your Penny, that precious Penny, and
heavenly Treasure from God Almighty, the great Lord, who is the orderer, and
disposer, and governor, and ruler in the Vineyard among his Servants, who pays
them their Wages, and gives them their heavenly Penny of Life: Mark, it is the
Laborers in the Life, And the Lord will give us the beavenly Penny.
Truth, and Power of God, that labors in God's Vineyard, that have their
heavenly Penny, that Everlasting Treasure: So see that you have it, if you be
in the Labor of Life, you will have it. Friends you see how Men and Women can
speak enough for the World, for Merchandise, for Husbandry, the Plowman for
his Plow; but when they should come to speak for God, they quench the Spirit,
and say, and do not obey God's Will; but come let us see what the Wife
Merchants can say, have they found the Pearl and Field, and purchased the
Field, which yields those glorious glistering Pearls, let us see what can you
say for God, and that heavenly Merchandise? 1670
What can the Plowman say for God with his Spiritual Plow? Is the
Fallow-Ground Plowed up? Has he abundance of the heavenly Seed of Life? So what
can the heavenly Husbandman say, has he abundance of Spiritual Fruit in store?
What can the Thresher say, his he gotten the Wheat out of the Sheaf, the
heavenly Wheat, with his heavenly Flaile? and let us see, what can the
Spiritual Plowman, Husbandman and Thresher say for God? And how they have
labored in the Vineyard, that they may have their Penny, some are breakers of
Clods in the Vineyard, some are Weeders, some are cutting off the Brambles and
Bushes, and fitting the Ground, and cutting up the Roots with the heavenly Ax
for the Seed, some are Harrowing in, some are gathering and laying up the
Riches; so you may see, here are Merchants, Plow-men, Harrowers, Weeders,
Reapers, Many sorts of Laborers in Gods Vineyard.
Threshers in God's Vineyard, yet none are to find fault one with another, but
every one laboring in their places, praising the Lord, looking to him for
their Wages, their heavenly Penny of Life from the Lord of Life: So none are to
quench the Spirit, nor to despise Prophecy, lest ye limit the Holy One; and
every one is to minister as he has received the Grace, which has appeared to
all Men, which brings Salvation; so that the Lord's Grace, his Light, and
Truth, and Spirit and Power may have the passage, and the rule in all Men and
Women, that by it he may have the Glory, and from it in all, who is blessed for
ever and for ever. The Lord has said, From the rising of the Sun to the going
down of the same, my Name shall be great among the Gentiles. Now mark Friends,
this is a large Space, wherein God's Name shall be great; and the Lord further
says, Holy and pure Incense is to be offered to God.
In every place, Incense shall be offered unto my Name, and a pure Offering;
for my Name shall be great among the Heathen, says the Lord of Hosts. Now mark
Friends, this heavenly Incense, and pure Offering, is a spiritual Offering,
which is to be offered by the Spirit to God, who is a Spirit; then here none
quenches the Spirit of God in their own Hearts, and all such comes under the
Title of the Royal Priesthood, offering up Spiritual Sacrifices; which Royal
Priesthood has a Priest that lives for ever, Christ Jesus.

And Friends, do not quench the Spirit, nor abuse the Power, when it moves and
stirs in you, be obedient; but do not go beyond, nor do not add to it, nor take
from it; for if you do, you are reproved, either for going beyond, or taking
from it: And when any has spoken forth the things of the Lord, by his Power and
Spirit, let them keep in the Power and Spirit, and that keeps them in the
Humility, that when they have spoken forth the things of God, they are neither
higher nor lower, but still keeps in the Power, before and after; and being
obedient to the Spirit and Power of God, it keeps them from deadness, and alive
to God, and keeps them in a Sense, that they do not go beyond, and run out, as
some (you know) have done; and all that has come for want of living in the
Power of God, and in his Spirit, which keeps all things in Subjection and in
Order, and in the true Fear of the Lord, always to feel the Presence of the
Lord with you.

Come Fishermen, what have you catched with your Nets? What can you say for
God? Your Brethren Peter and John, Fishermen, could say much for God? Acts and
you may see it; I would not have you degenerate from their Spirit.

Shepherds and Herds-men, where are you? What can you say now for God, whose
abiding is much in the Fields? David, Jacob and Amos, your fellow Shepherds and
Heards-men (do not you see) they could say much for God; I would have you to be
like them, and not to degenerate from their Spirit.

Come Tradesmen, Tent-Makers, Physicians and Custom-Men, what can you say for
God? Do not you read that your fellow Tradesmen in Ages past could say much
for God? Do not degenerate from their Spirit. Do not you remember the
Accusations of the wise and learned Grecians, when the Apostles preached Christ
among them, that they were called Poor Tradesmen and Fishermen? Therefore be
Faithful. The Preachers of Jesus Christ now, are the same to the Wise of the
World as then.

G. F.

DEar Friends, Epist. 276.
live in Peace, and Love, and Patience one with another, for that does edify
the Body, and Strife does not, but does eat out the Good; To live in Peace and
Love.
for the Body does edify it self in Love; in which there is Nourishment, and
Virtue, and Life from the Head; so in that meet and build up one another. Dear
Hearts be faithful, and live in the Life, and Power, and Seed of God, and in
Love and Peace one with another. And so the God of Peace in it preserve you.
Peace be among you, and live in that which keeps Peace; for the Peacemakers
are blessed: And all strive for that which makes for Peace; and they that are
Lowest, and so keeps, receives the most from God.

G. F.

MY Dear Friends, Epist. 277.
when you were formerly in a Profession, you took your Servants, your
Apprentices, your Children along with you to your Places of Worship. Care in
training up Friends Children and Servants.
And now, that you are come to Truth, and are convinced that the same is the
Truth of God, through which you come to have a Portion and Inheritance of Life
and Salvation, and of a Kingdom and World which has no end, and into a
Possession of that which formerly you did profess in Words. Now therefore,
Friends, you that are come to this Possession, and go into the Assemblies of
the People of God, that be gathered into his Name (where Salvation is) and in
no other Name under Heaven, but in the Name of Jesus Christ: Is it not more
Reputable for you, to take your Servants, And bring them to Meetings.
Apprentices, Children and Maidens along with you to the Meetings, to be
partakers of the Eternal Truth, that they may have a Possession with you of the
same that you do possess? For, if you should leave them behind, and be careless
of them, they are many of them apt to run into Liberty, and to Looseness, and to
Plays, and to Tippling-Houses, and so into loose Company: Such Liberty has
been a great hurt to Youth, and the Truth has been much dishonored thereby:
And such do not only lose the Wisdom of God, and the true Understanding given
to them by his Son, but the Reason of Men in these Practices. And then after
you may come to find fault with your Servants, Children, etc. and for a small
matter put some of them away, when the Fault is in your selves, that you did
not take them along with you to the Meetings, and govern them in the Wisdom of
God, and true Understanding and Knowledge; which is to know the true God, and
his Son Jesus Christ, who he has sent; whom to know is Life Eternal: By which
Liberty such do not keep Authority over them; for you should bring them to the
Meetings with you, to wait upon the Lord. For truly my Life has been often
burdened through the want of restraining them of that Liberty they run into;
wherein you should be more Prudent, Wise and Careful, and should keep more in
your Dominion and Authority in the Life, Power and Seed, in which you have the
true Wisdom, Knowledge and Understanding. Therefore consider of these things in
all your Families, and remember the time of your former Professions, wherein
you exercised the Reason of Men, as to bring your Servants, etc. to an outward
Profession. Now you being come to a Possession of Life, take heed lest you lose
the right Reason, Wisdom, Understanding and Knowledge. Therefore rouse up your
selves, that you may exercise the right Wisdom and Understanding in that which
lives for ever, and is and will remain when all the contrary is gone; Masters
to be good Patterns to their Children and Servvants.
into which all must be brought; that in that you may be good Patterns and
Examples in all your Families, and bring them forth with you to your Meetings,
that they may find the Substance of that which you did formerly profess in
Words: And now you enjoying the Substance, be more careful, be more diligent
and circumspect, that God may be glorified throughout all your Families, and
his Name may be called upon, and honored, and exalted, who is God over all,
blessed for ever.

And Friends, some among you breed up your Children not as when you were in a
Profession only, in such a rude, heady Way, that when they grow up, they do not
matter you, nor care for you; so they are not a Blessing and a Comfort to you;
but in many Things they are worse than many of the World's, more loose,
stubborn and disobedient: Which Truth teaches no such things, but brings more
into Humility, and Meekness, and Gentleness, and Tenderness; so that when they
come to be set to Prentice, many times they run quite out into the World: And
therefore, by the Power, and Life, and Wisdom of God, these things you must
take notice of, that all such may be brought into, and kept in subjection by
the Power of God, that God may be honored and glorified, through the breaking
of the stubborn Will in them, and subjecting them to Truth; and let them all
know their Places, and not to give way to that which may get over you; so then
you will not know how to rule them at last, but bring a Grief, and Sorrow, and
Trouble upon you, as too many Examples may be seen. Therefore while they are
young restrain them from such things, and every one in the Life, and Power and
Seed of Truth, And to restrain Youth from evil Practices.
keep your Authority, and lose not the true Wisdom and Understanding given you
by Christ, nor the true Knowledge, nor true Reason, which gives to distinguish
good from bad; but in all things keep your Authority which is given to you of
God, and your Places in it; for they that fear and worship the Lord, shall have
a Place with him: And in the Power, and Life and Wisdom of God, you will breed
up and govern your Sons and Daughters, Servants and Prentices, and cause them
to keep in their Places, and in the Power of God answer the Good in them all:
For an outward Father or Mother, over their Families, Apprentices and Maidens,
are to keep all things that are outward, civil and subject in their Places,
with Reason and true Wisdom: And such as come to be Fathers in Truth, are to
train them up in the Truth, and to exercise that Wisdom, and that Knowledge and
Understanding which is beyond the outward: Therefore in it they should train
them up in the Truth, through which all should be free; not in the Eye-service
of Men, but serving the Lord in Righteousness and Diligence, in their Services:
That they may be Partakers of the heavenly Life, and come to be Heirs of
Salvation, and Children of the Promise, and Sons and Daughters of Sion, to whom
Christ is elect and precious, and through him their Conversations may be
brought up into heavenly Things, and their Minds and Affections to be set on
Things above. So Friends, all these Things consider of, in the Life which was
before Death was, in the Truth which the Devil is out of, in the Wisdom of God,
which is Pure from above, and in the Righteousness, which was before
Unrighteousness was, that God may be glorified throughout all your Families,
who is blessed for ever.

G. F.

AND Friends,
Epist. 278.
See that all Apprentices that are bound amongst you may serve out their times
faithfully, according to Covenant, that all may know their Places; Apprentices
faithfully to serve out their Times.
for Youth if they be let loose are like wild Asses, and wild Heisers; and such
many times bring a great dishonor to God, by running into Looseness; which are
more fit to be under Rule and Order than to Rule; and through a foolish Pity of
some, they let up a great deal of Airiness and Wildness in them: All which
should be kept under by the Power of God, wherein the Honor of the Lord may be
preserved; and so, that Liberty may not be given to Youth in those Cases; for
the true Liberty is in Christ Jesus, which gives Authority over that which will
dishonor God; for many such things has spoiled several, in letting unbridled
Youth at Liberty, in taking the Reins to themselves, and brought Trouble upon
their Parents, Masters and Mistresses, and great dishonor upon God: Let care
be taken, that Truth suffer not about such things, and that none buy out their
Time without the Consent of their Parents or Guardians; or, And none buy eut
their Times without Consent of Parents, etc.
in the want of them, to advise with the Mothly-Meetings. For do you not see
what Hurt has been done in such Cases? Wherefore keep all such, under the
Yoke; and hinder and stop Wickedness and Looseness that would break forth. So in
all such things you should exercise the pure Wisdom of God, the pure Reason,
Knowledge and Understanding; and in the Authority of it keep, that none under a
Profession of Truth be let into Looseness; whereas Youth should be kept under a
Bridle and Restraint, and be nurtured and trained up in the Fear and Wisdom of
God, that the Power of God and God's Truth may have it is Passage through all,
and over all; and all Lightness, Frothiness, Wildness and Looseness may be kept
down: So that the Good may be kept up in all, to honor and to glorify the
Lord God Almighty, who is blessed for evermore, who Reigns among us.

G. F.

The Substance of a General Epistle. 1670

ALL Friends, every where, Epist. 279.
who are Friends of Christ the heavenly Man, by whom the World was made, and
are become Friends of God through Christ Jesus, who are quickened by Jesus, and
made alive by him, who were dead in Old Adam, and now are made alive by the
Second Adam, and have drank his Blood, through which you have Life, and by
which you come from among the Congregations of the dead, who only talk of his
Blood and his Flesh.

And now being gathered in the Name of Jesus, Friends to keep cheir Meetings in
the Name of Jesus.
who has made you alive, in the Name of him, whose Blood you have drank, yea
even of the heavenly Man's, which is his Life; and so are come out of your
native Countries, Religions and Worships, and left the old Stuff behind, who
are gotten a top of the old House, and will not go down again to fetch out any
of the old Stuff. I say, ye that are gathered in the Name of Jesus, the
heavenly Man, out of the Old Adam, and are made alive by the heavenly Man, keep
your Meetings in the Name of Jesus.

Then it is he, that is persecuted, if you be persecuted; and he, Christ
suffers in his persecuted Members.
that suffers; for in all your Afflictions and Sufferings, he is with you, who
are made alive by him, and have drank his Blood, and so are come to be faithful
Witnesses of Christ Jesus, as all that are made alive by him are, and have
drank his Blood; for they that have not drank his Blood, and are not made alive
by him, are no true Witnesses of Christ Jesus. And therefore you that the Lord
has gathered, and sought and searched out, who have been scattered in this
cloudy dark Day (since the Apostles Days of Light) and have been made a Prey
upon, by the Hireling Shepherds, and have been left to the Wolves by the flying
of the Hirelings, whom you thought had been true Men, and now the Lord has
sought and searched, and found and gathered you from their Mouths, to whose
Mouths you have been a Prey; and the Lord is known to feed you a top of the
Mountains with his heavenly Bread, and he has set one Shepherd over you (the
heavenly Man) who lives for ever, who is the Shepherd over all the Living, that
are made alive by him; and so the Lord has the Glory of seeking and of
gathering you out of the Wildernesses, Pits, Graves and Ditches of Old Adam and
the Serpent, and from him Brambles and Briars; and so Christ, by whom the World
was made, is the Rest of the Living, that he has made alive, and is their
Shepherd, to feed them with Life, and with the Springs of Life, and is the
Bishop of their Souls, that does Oversee them, that they do not go out of the
Pastures of Life, and from the Springs of Life, nor from the Fold of Life. It
is a glorious Pasture, to be fed a top of all the Mountains in the Life, in the
Pastures of Life, by the living Shepherd, and to be overseen by the living
Bishop, and to be sanctified, and to be presented to God by the living Priest,
and to be counseled by the living Counselsor to an Everlasting Inheritance,
and to a Kingdom, and to a World, that has no End, by an everlasting Priest,
that sanctifies and offers you to God without Spot or Wrinkle, a perfect
Offering, who sprinkles your Consciences and Hearts with his Blood, that you
may serve the living God, and not the dead Works among the Dead.

And now you having an Everlasting Preacher, Christ the Everlasting Minister,
etc.
whom God has anointed to preach, and an Everlasting Minister, that ministers
Grace, and Life, and Salvation, and Truth to you; an Everlasting Prophet that
God has raised up, who s to be heard; all the Living hear him, but the Dead
talk but of his Fame; So none can silence or stop the Mouth of them whom he
opens, or take away your Shepherd, your Bishop, your Minister, your Freacher,
your Prophet, your Councellor, etc. And therefore let him have your Ears,
hearken to him, let him be set up in your Hearts, who was set up from
Everlasting to Everlasting by the Father, whom all the Righteous Witness,
Christ Jesus, who is your Possession, being Heirs with him, by whom all the
living are made alive; and so in him live, by whom the World was made, who was
glorified with the Father before the World began. So in Christ the heavenly
Man, you have rest, but in old Adam (the Transgressor) you have no rest; there
is the Wilderness, Sodom, Egypt, Babylon and Confusion. For God blessed Abraham
in his obeying of his Commands, when he went from his Native Country, and
Relations; yea, and made him a Prince. So they that are redeemed out of
Kindreds and Tongues, Christ makes as Princes, to overcome the Prince of
Darkness.

And Abraham was to walk before God, who was perfect, and he was to be perfect;
so must all who are of the Faith of Abraham. Abraham saw Christ's Day, and did
rejoice; but Thousands now come to enjoy the Day that Abraham saw.

The outward Jews did eat of the Manna in the Wilderness, and disobeyed, and
perished; The blessed effects of eating of the Flesh of Christ.
but they that eat of the Flesh of Christ, and drink his Blood, have Life
Everlasting; and this gives an Eternal Life, by which they come to an Eternal
Possession, and to the Land of the Living, as the outward Jews came to possess
the Land of Canaan: And so you that are Heirs of Christ, the heavenly Man, and
are come to possess him (whom he has made alive) stand fast, now is your time
to stand; stand in the Life, which was before Death, or the King of it was;
stand in the Light, which was before Darkness, or the Prince of it was; and
stand in the Power of God, which was before the Devil was; and sit down in the
heavenly Places in Christ Jesus, who was set up from Everlasting to Everlasting.

And therefore keep your Faith in the Lord; for he is the same, who has given
you Dominion, through Faith over the Mountains of Opposition, by which they have
been subdued, and by which the Fiery Darts have been quenched: And has not
this been fulfilled, In all their Afflictions he was Afflicted; Have Faith in
Christ in time of Trial.
and that the Angel of his Presence should be with them in their Trials and
Sufferings: So the Lord has a tender Care of his Sheep, his People, that the
Angel of his Presence should be with them in all their Trials. And therefore
let your Minds be out of all outward things, and visibles; and fear not the
Fleece, for it will grow again; and if the Lord should try you now, with the
spoil of outward things, after he has blessed you with them, to see whether
your Minds be with them, or with him. Therefore now stand, having on the whole
Armor of God, and his Righteousness; and your Feet shod with the Power of God,
which was before the Devil was, this will keep you from slipping; and have on
the Armor of Light, to stand against Darkness; and the Breast Plate of
Righteousness, which is Armour-proof, against the Devil and his Fiery Darts;
and keep the Shield of Faith, and Sword of the Spirit, the Word of God, and the
Helmet of Salvation, that preserves the Head in all Battles, with the Devil and
his Instruments.

And thus with your heavenly Armor and Arms stand, and keep your Possession of
Life, who are brought out of Spiritual Egypt, Sodom and Babylon, having one to
go before you, the Captain of your Salvation (Christ Jesus) who was before
Moses and Joshua were; and see how the Children of God all along in the
Scriptures through Faith had the victory; Daniel by Faith, the three Children by
Faith, Abraham by Faith, The Excellency of Faith.
Joshua by Faith, and Caleb by Faith; and the other Spies, which had no Faith,
and the Elders among the outward Jews and the People, how they fell through
Unbelief; but by Grace through Faith the Just were saved, by Faith they had
victory, and by Faith they pleased God; and therefore keep in the Faith, and
you will have the Water of Life, and the Bread of Life, from above; and stand
still in the Faith, for the Just live by Faith; and they that had not Faith to
Believe, they perished; and Christ has taught all how to believe, To Believe
in the Light.
who has enlightened every one that comes into the World, he says, Believe in
the Light; which was a blessed Doctrine of the heavenly Man; for, you believing
in the Light, you believe in that which makes manifest all Things, all Fruits,
all Creatures, all Religions and Worship; for the Light was before they all
were, and will be when they are all gone: Therefore Believe in the Light, says
the heavenly Man, who teaches what to believe in; for whatsoever is made
manifest, is made manisest by the Light: So to believe in the Light, that does
make manifest all things that are reproveable, therein you will become Children
of the Light, and Children of the Day, and Sons of God, And so will become
Children of the Light.
and Daughters of God, and Sons of Zion, and Daughters of Zion, the heavenly
Zion, the heavenly Joy; and so herein you come to be of the Royal Family, above
all the Families of the Earth, above all the Households of the Earth, a Household
of God, the Workmanship of God, the Planting of God, the Building of God, the
Household of Faith; which are Titles higher than all the Titles among Men in the
World, in the Creation, Sons and Daughters, and Servants and Hand maids, every
Man to enjoy something in the Household. Every one to have an Inheritance (of
their own) of Life, that they may offer to God of their heavenly Substance, who
are called a Royal Priesthood; that is, a Kingly Priesthood over the Devil, and
over Adam, in a Possession of a Spiritual Kingdom, and of a World that has no
End, and of an heavenly durable Substance and Riches which are Spiritual; and
so to offer up Spiritual Sacrifices to God, who is a Spirit.

So now the time of Trying is, therefore all to stand, To stand faithful in
time of Trial.
and see if there be any thing able to separate you from Christ, who is from
Everlasting to Everlasting, who is First and Last, who makes an end of Sin, and
finishes Transgression, and destroys the Devil and his Works, and is the Top
and Cornerstone, the Possession of all the Righteous, the Rest and Sabbath of
all the Righteous, that have drank his Blood, whom he has made alive. So in
Christ you shall bear no burden, for he destroys that which oppresses both Man
and Beast; and in Christ you shall not go out to gather your Meat, who is your
Sabbath and Rest; but in old Adam there is no Rest, in the second Adam the
heavenly Man, there is the Rest; and in him, to wit, Christ the heavenly Man,
you need not go out to gather your Meat.

For he is the Bread of Life, Christ is the Bread of Life, and living Way to
God.
that comes down from above, in him stand, and sit down in the heavenly Places
in Christ Jesus, who was with the Father before the World began, who is your
Way to God; which Way was set up above Sixteen Hundreds Years since, before all
these got up, among the Papists and Protestants, who is the New and Living Way
to all who are made a-live by him, and drink his Blood: The Dead make dead Ways
for the Dead to walk in; but mind you Christ's Worship, which was set up above
Sixteen Hundred Years since, by himself, in the Spirit and Truth, whereby every
one comes to the Truth, the Spirit of God in his own Heart; in which Truth and
Spirit he worships the God of Truth (who is a Spirit) and feels him always
present. Now to Worship God in the Truth, is that which the Devil and old Adam
is out of; and this is the perfect and standing Worship; and People that have
lost this Worship, that Christ set up, they have set up so many false Worships
among Protestants and Papists, and compelling one another to them, since they
have lost the peaceable Truth, in which the God of Peace is worshipped.

And therefore enough all prize the standing Truth, To stand in the Liberty which
Christ gives.
and walk as becomes, the Gospel, the Power of God, which was before the Devil
was, which destroys the Devil and his Works; and so, Stand fast in the Liberty
where with Christ has made you free; yea, free from the Devil and old Adam;
for the freedom is in him, in Christ, and not in the Devil, who is out of
Truth, nor in old Adam; yea, Christ is able to deliever out of the Six
Troubles, and the Seventh Trouble, the perfection of Trouble; he who is the
Perfection it self, so he is the Deliverer and Mediator, Who is our Deliverer,
Mediator and Intercessor.
and the Intercessor, that makes Peace betwixt you and God: So in Christ (who
is the Deliverer) is the Peace and the Rest; yea, an everlasting Rest, he was
set up over all Troubles, and Persecutions, and Persecutors, who was before
they were, glorified with the Father before the World began, and he will be
when they are all gone, as I said before, all that have drank his Blood, and
are made alive by him, have Life; yea, a Possession that will never have an
end; but them that are Dead in old Adam, are against Christ, who is the Life,
till he make them alive by Believing in the Light; and then they become the
Congregation of the Living. And these are them that are gathered together by
the Lord; and them that are not gathered together by the Lord, but by Men, to
themselves, they come to be scattered: Now the Congregation of the Living, they
have drank the Blood of Jesus, that are alive by him, and so are gathered
together by him, the heavenly Man, and he is in the midst of them, to preserve
them, and exercife his Offices among them, as a Shepherd, and a Bishop, and a
Prophet, etc.

And these are the living Members, who have a living Head, Christ Jesus; and
that saying comes to be fulfilled, Thy dead Men shall live together, with my
dead Body shall they arise; so come to live with Christ Jesus. And they are the
Congregation of the Dead, that believes not in the Light, nor drinks the Blood
of Jesus, but Death and Destruction talks of him, and of God, and his Prophets
and Apostles words; and they come to set their House upon the Sand, To build
upon the Rock, Christ Jesus.
and so are the Fools; and then a Storm arises upon the Sea, and their House is
presently in the Sea again, and there they are drowned; the House sits so nigh
the Sea, that in a little Storm they are drowned, they are so nigh the World:
But the Wise Men sets their House upon the Rock, and the Rock is Christ, the
Life, who was before the World was, and will stand over all; and they that are
built upon it, the Storms and and Tempests cannot move their Rock, nor their
House. So here is the Wisdom of the Wise, who build their House upon him, by
whom all things was created, who is the Rock of Ages: So in all Storms they
keep to their House, and they meet in Him, and are gathered in Him, and He is
their Head and Counselor, to order them; and in Him they all please God; and
in Christ Jesus are one another Crown and Life; and so through him they have
all a Crown of Life, who was with the Father before the World began: So in him
sit down, over all the windy Doctrines, that tosses the Chaff abroad in the
World.

I say, in Christ sit down, in him who was before the World was, for out of him
is all wearisomeness, but in him ye have rest.

G. F.

ALL Dear Friends every where, who have no Helper but the Lord, Epist. 280.
who is your Strength and your Life, Let your Cries and Prayers be to him, from
whom all your help and strength comes; God is the only Help of his People.
who with his Eternal Power, has kept up your Heads above all Waves and
Storms, let none go out of their Habitations in the stormy Time of the Night,
and stand in his Lot, the Seed Christ Jesus, to the end of the Day. There is
the Lot of your Inheritance, and in this Seed you will see the Bright and
Morning Star appear, which will expel the Night of Darkness that has been in
your Hearts; by which Morning Star you will come to the Everlasting Day, which
was before Night was. So every one feel this Bright Morning Star in your Hearts
there to expel the Darkness.

G. F.

DEar Friends,
The Truth of God mind, and his pure holy Power, Epist. 281.
which the Lord has made you partakers of, by his good Spirit. Grieve not the
Spirit.
O let not his Spirit be grieved by you: Let that be mortified that would get
up to grieve or quench the Spirit, for that will corrupt your Reason,
Understanding and Knowledge; and that which gives you to know God and Christ,
that is Life Eternal. And all have a care that you do not abuse the Power, Nor
abuse the Power.
nor crucify to your selves the Seed a-fresh, but let that be crucified by the
Seed; in which Seed you have Life Eternal: And therefore prize the Truth above
all things. Now you have Liberty to spread it abroad; for you are called to
Righteousness and Holiness, without which none shall see God. Therefore mind
your High Calling in God, out of lod Adam, into Christ Jesus, the second Adam;
and keep your Meetings in the Name of Jesus, and feel him in the midst of you,
who is your Life and Salvation; and that all occasions and stumbling blocks may
be taken away, so that the precious Truth may be minded by you all, wherein all
are to live in Unity, and walk in Peace, Live in Unity, Peace, etc.
with the God of Peace, and one with another; that all your Springs may be kept
open, and all your Fountains may run with living Water; and all your Candles
may burn, and every one may have Bread on his own Table in his Temple, and his
Rod budding there, that he may be known to be a Priest of the Royal Priesthood.
So that all may have Salt in your selves, that you may be good for something;
for if you be not the good Salt, you cannot make the Earth savoury. Therefore
all keep in the Sense of Truth, and be digging for the Pearl in your own Field,
and to find the Silver in your own House, that was lost, and the Leaven in your
own Hearts; that where it works, and is joined to, will leaven into its own
Nature. So in all your Meetings, be faithful in the Power and Life, that you
may be watered by the Spring of Life, that you may grow. And so whatever
Strife, or whatever runs out, Shun all occasion of Offense.
or whatever occasion of Offense has been, let the Seed of God rise, and put
all that down in All; that all you, in the everlasting Seed, the second Adam,
may have your Peace, Familiarness, and Kindness, and Affableness, and
Courteousness, and Gentleness, and Love, one with and toward another; for the
Power of the Lord God is over all, and his Everlasting Seed, Christ Jesus,
reigns over all, in whom is Eternal Fellowship, Peace and Unity, and not in old
Adam; for old Adam's Sons and Daughters may get the words of Christ, and of the
Prophets, and Apostles, but are out of their Life, as their Practice speaks.
And therefore it is the Life that differs, and the New way differs from the Old,
and the Religion that is above, from that which is below; and the Worship Christ
set up above 16 Hundred Years ago, from all them that are made since, amongst
the Nominal Christians; and the Fellowship of God in the Spirit and Gospel,
differs from all the Fellowships that have been made since the Apostles Days,
and the Liberty in Christ, in the Gospel, in the Spirit, is far above the
Liberty of old Adam in the Flesh, in the Sin, the Wages of which is Death; here
no false Liberty can be in the Spirit, and in the Power of the Gospel, and in
Christ Jesus; nor no false Freedom in the Truth, for all false Freedom is out
of the Truth; and therefore keep over all those false Liberties and false
Freedoms: In old Adam, and his Spirit, and Power of God, that is holy and pure,
without Spot. So no more, but my Love in the Holy Seed, that is over all.

To be read in all Friends Meetings: And send Copies of this to Maryland,
Virginia, Barbados, New England, etc.

G. F.

FRiends, Epist. 282.
in the Seed that bruises the Serpent's Head, and destroys the Devil and his
Works, live; and in the Light, which is the Life, In Christ the Seed who
bruiseth the Serpents Head.
in the Word, by which all things were made; which Light, and Life, and Word,
does hammer, and cut down, and condemn, and judge, all evil Words and Works,
and the Spirit of them, that is out of the Light, Life, Seed, and Word of
Reconciliation; in this, I have Unity with you, and in this all true Believers
are reconciled to God, and one to another, Is our Unity and Fellowship.
and in it is the heavenly Wisdom, in which is the holy and spiritual
Fellowship preserved, over that short, brikle, defaming and unconstant Spirit,
which must be kept down with the Spirit of God that does not change, which has
been crucified by the Wicked; but the Seed of Life does slay the Enmity, and in
Life and Power reigns over it: Glory to the Lord God for ever, Amen.

G. F.

To Friends at Bristol in time of Suffering.
DEar Friends,
Epist. 283.
Now is the Time for you to stand; therefore put on the whole Armor of God,
from the Crown of the Head unto the Soles of your Feet, To public Men to keep
their Testimony.
that you may stand in the Possession of Life: And you that have been Public
Men, and formerly did travel abroad, mind to keep up your Testimony, both in
the City and in the Countries, that you may encourage Friends, to keep up their
Meetings as usual there-away; so that none faint in the time of Trial; but that
all may be encouraged, both small and great, to stand faithful to the Lord God,
and his Power and Truth; that their Heads may not sink in the Storms, but may
be kept up above the Waves. So, go into your Meeting-Places as at other times:
And keep up your Public Testimony, and visit Friends there-abouts, now in this
time of Storm; for there is your Crown, in the Universal Power and Spirit of
God. So let your Minds, In the time of Persecution.
and Souls and Hearts be kept above all outward and visible things. Few travel
now the Countries: It may be well to visit them, lest any should faint. Stir up
one another in that which is Good, and to faithfulness in the Truth, this Day.
And let your Minds be kept above all visible things; for God took Care for Man
in the Beginning, and set him above the Works of his Hands: And therefore mind
the heavenly Treasure, that will never fade away; and dwell in the Seed, in
which you may know your Election. It Is hard for me to give forth in Writing
what is before me, because of my bodily weakness; but I was desirous in some
measure to ease my Mind, desiring that you may stand fast, and faithful to
Truth. Of my Travels and Weakness it is like you have heard, and of my
Affliction, both by them that are without, and also by them that are within,
which are hard to be uttered and spoken. My Love is to all faithful Friends.

The 2d of the 11th Mouth, 1670. G. F.

DEar Friends and Brethren,
Truth, into which no Enmity can come; Epist. 284.
for the blessed Seed, Christ Jesus, takes away the Curse; They who receive
Christ, receive Power to become the Sons of God.
the Increase of whose Government there is no End; who rules in Righteousness
amongst the Righteous for ever. And see that this Righteousness, (in which you
all have Peace) run down and flow as a Stream among you, who are begotten again
into a lively Hope, and born again by the Immortal Seed of the Word of God,
which lives and abides for ever. And you who have received Christ, have
received Power to become the Sons of God, and to believe in the Light, in
Obedience to Christ's Command; by which you become Children of the Light, and
Children of the Day: Therefore this I say unto you, Let no Man abuse this
Power, that is Everlasting; and keep the Gospel Order, which was before any
Impurity was, and will be when it is gone. So that in all your Men and
Womens-Meetings, see that Virtue flow, and see that all your Words be gracious,
and see that Love flows, which bears all things, that Kindness, Tenderness and
Gentleness may be among you, and that the Fruits of the good Spirit may abound;
That Love, Kindness, and Gentleness abound.
for nothing that is unclean must enter into God's Kingdom, which stands in
Righteousnss, and in Holiness, and in the Power of God, and in the Joy of the
Holy Ghost: For all Joy that is out of the Holy Ghost, will have an End. And
see in all your Men and Womens-Meetings, that God be no ways dishonored, nor
the pure and blessed Name of Christ (in which you are gathered) be blasphemed;
but in all things that God may be glorified, exalted, and honored; And to take
Care that nothing be lacking among the Poor.
for you have the Light, to see all Evil, and the Power to withstand it, And to
take Care that nothing be lacking among the Poor.
and to see, that nothing be lacking, then all will be well among you, in all
your Men and Womens-Meetings. And see that nothing be lacking, neither within,
nor without, for God is rich in both, and abundance of his Riches you have
received. And so this is a Warning and a Charge to you all, in the Presence of
the Living God, that you keep up the Testimony of Jesus, against all that which
is contrary to Jesus the heavenly Man, that your Fruits may appear to his
Glory, and your Works to his Praise; and that you may have Water in your own
Cisterns and know those Clouds through which Christ gives you Rain, having
purchased the Field wherein the Pearl lies; and now is the Spring time that the
Lilly and the Rose begins to flourish, and the Power of the Lord God, who is
over all. And keep your Testimony for your Religion, that you have received
from God, and for your Worship in the Spirit and in the Truth, that Christ
Jesus has set up; and for your Gospel-Fellowship which is in the Power of God,
before the Devil was: And see that all live in Peace and in the Love of God,
for Love edifieth the Body; for he who is the Head of it, is the beloved of
God, who is from Everlasting to Everlasting. And see that every ones Affections
be set on things above, To set our Affections upon things above.
and not upon things below that be Earthly; for now is the time to contend for
the Faith, that gives Victory, which was once delivered to the Saints, in which
you have Unity. And so the God of Power preserve you all, and keep you in his
blessed Seed (to wit) Christ Jesus, that none of you may be without a Minister,
without a Priest, or without a Prophet, or without a Shepherd, or without a
Bishop, but let every one receive him in his Offices: Then you all have One,
who will exercise his Offices in you all, whom God has given for a Leader and
a Covenant; yea, an Everlasting Leader, who was the Foundation of the Prophets
and Apostles, and is to us this Day. And so be Valiant for the Truth upon the
Earth, in the Seed Christ Jesus, that through him who Destroys Death, you may
have a Crown of Life; and through him you may be one another's Crown and Joy in
the Lord; yea, I say, through Christ, who was glorified with the Father before
the World began.

I am just now upon leaving this Island, where I have had very great and
blessed Service; though I underwent very great Weights, and Burdens, and
Sufferings, and Travels: But all is well, and the blessed Seed and Power is
over all; to whom be Glory for evermore. Amen, Amen.

G. F.

DEar Friends,
This is the Counsel of the Lord to you all, who are brought into the Eternal
Truth of God, Epist. 285.
whose Minds are guided out of the Earth up to God, and have received their
Wisdom from God; which Wisdom order all the Creatures; To receive Wisdom from
God.
that with it you may come to know, how to order in the Creation, with the
Wisdom by which all was made: This I charge you, and warn you all, in the
Presence of the Living God, That you suffer no Creature to perish for want of
the Creatures, and that none be lost through Sloathfulness, Laziness and
Filthiness; and let not these things be, which are for Condemnation with the
Light that leads to the Wisdom, To Order the Creation.
with which the Creation must be ordered. And Friends, let there be no
Sloathfulness among you; but all keep in Diligence and Liveliness: For he that
is Sloathful, he is an evil Example; and such must be judged with the Light,
that they may come to know the Servants Place, and be Diligent. And such as
have gone up and down begging, which you have received in amongst you, with the
Light which has convinced them, And to Inccurage Industry.
see that they be kept in Diligence, and not wander, but be kept in Obedience
to the Light, to receive their Wisdom from God, how to Labor in the Creation;
and see that they have things decent and necessary, and that their Nakedness
may be covered, that no Reproach nor Shame may come upon the Truth, from such
as are without; but that with the Light all such may be denied, who act
contrary to it; and in the Light, which condemns the evil World, ye may walk,
and receive the Light of the Son of God (which the World stumbles at, which is
their Condemnation) and in which the Saints have Unity. And all being kept
diligent, walking in the Light, there will be no Sloathfulness. For that is
judged with the Light, And Condemn that which is Evil.
which is one with that in his Conscience, which condemns him for Evil.

This to go among Friends every where.

G. F.

FRiends,
When you are met together, Epist. 286.
in the Name of Jesus your Savior, let your Minds be over all to him, and out
of all things that changes and perishes and dies of it self, and will
corrupt, Our Mind to be over all things which perishes
and is visible, up to him that is invisible, the Lord God, and his Son Jesus
Christ, that you may see him and feel him among you, and in your Meetings, in
his Life, and Light, and Power, and Spirit; and that you may know that God is,
and that he is the Rewarder of all them that diligently seek him; and to know
that God is present: And that which gives the knowledge of him, is the Light
that shines in the Heart, in the Face of Jesus Christ, and so see him in all
your Troubles and Afflictions; and that God is present, God is present
beholding our most secret Thoughts.
beholding all your Actions done in your Bodies, and your Consenting to your
Evil Thoughts, Lusts, or Motions; the Thoughts, what you will speak, or act; or
Motions which you have not acted outwardly; but if you do consent to do them in
your Mind or Heart, the Lord sees them there to be done, though they be not
done outwardly to the sight of Men; and so to God you must give an account of
things done in your Bodies, and of things done out of the Body; for God both
hears, and sees what is done in the Body, and what is said, and done without
the Body; and therefore turn from the Evil that leads to destruction, and
judge it, and your selves for cleaving to it; and turn to the Lord, and know
him who is mighty to save, and to reward all them that diligently seek him, who
is Almighty in his Power to save and deliver, and to help in time of need. So
know him that was from Everlasting to Everlasting: And here thou know God in
his Power, Light, Kingdom of God stands in Righteousness.
and Life, and Righteousness, which his Kingdom stands in, in that
Righteousness, and Power, and Holy Ghost, and Peace, that never will have an
End; and is over all Kingdoms that will have an End, and are unclean; and any
unclean and imperfect thing may enter into them; and in them is Troubles,
Tumults, and Sin, and not Peace, but Sorrow: But into the Kingdom of God, no
imperfect thing enters, nor Sin, nor any unclean thing: For the Kingdom of
God stands in Righteousneass, and Everlasting Peace, and in Joy in the Holy
Ghost.

G. F.

FRiends,
Epist. 287.
Consider you that have known the Mercies of the Lord God, To remember the
Mercies of the Lord.
and of Jesus Christ: Look back, and see (how) them that had known much of God,
how soon they forgot him, as in the Days of the old World, and in the Days of
Moses, and in the Days of the Judges, how they soon forgot God, that had done
great things for them, and for sook God, and his Way, and Religion and Worship,
and followed such Gods as Men had made. And in the Days of the Prophets, how
the People forsook the Lord God; and in the Days of Christ and his Apostles,
how they were mostly gone astray from God; though they kept an outward
Profession of their Words, yet denied Christ in his Light, and Life, and Power;
who was the End of the Law and the Prophets. Many of old Time forsock the
Truth, and ran into Error.
And them that did receive Christ Jesus, and believed in him, in a few Ages
after the Apostles, how most of Christendom ran from the Life into Death, and
ran from the Light into Darkness; and into Error, from the Holy Sprit, and into
Babylon, which is Confusion; and from the Worship in the Spirit, and in the
Turth, that Christ set up, and follwed after the Worship of the Beast and the
Dragon; and went from the true Church, after the Whore; and from Christ, the
Way to God, after the Ways that Men had made; and from the Religion that is
Pure from above, after the Religions that Men have made. And so, now the Gospel
is preached again, Now the Gospel is preached again.
and the Living Way (Christ) to the Living God, and his Religion and his
Worship is set up and received of many, and they come to the true Worship,
which is in God. And all be Faithful, All be faitbful.
and take heed of running back again, where you were before, lest you and your
Children perish, as others have done, that forsook the Lord God for Mercies.
And therefore train up your Children in the Fear of God, and in the Way of
Christ, and in his Worship and Religion, that they may observe and keep in it,
when you are gone.

And walk in the Spirit and Truth, And walk in the Spirit, and keep in the
Order of the Gospel.
in which God is worshipped, and keep in the Order of the Gospel, in the Power
of God, which was before the Devil was; which Power of God will keep you Pure
to God, that nothing may get betwixt you and the Lord God. And be obedient to
the Law, that God has written in your Hearts, and put in your Minds, that you
may be the Children of the New Covenant; and that you may be the Royal
Priesthood, offering up to God the Spiritual Sacrifices. And sitting under your
Teacher, the Grace of God, which brings Salvation, and seasoneth your Words,
and establishes your Hearts. And this Grace saves, and is sufficient, says
God Almighty: And you need no Man to teach you, but as the same Anointing does
teach you to know all things; which Anointing abides in you: And hearken all
what the Righteosness of Faith says, speaking on this wise, Romans 10.6, 7, 8.
The Word is nigh thee, even in thy Heart and in thy Mouth, to obey it and do
it; That thou need not say, Who shall ascend to bring Christ from above, or
descend to bring Christ from the Grace, etc. for that is the Word of Faith
which we do Preach.

G. F.

To Friends in Carolina.
DEar Friends, to whom is my Love in the blessed Seed, Epist. 288.
which bruiseth the Head of the Serpent, and is over all, and changes not,
which is the First and Last, in whom you have Life and Peace with the God of
Peace. So you few that are that ways, keep your Meetings, Keep your Meetings in
the Name of Jesus.
and meet together in the Name of Jesus, whose Name is above every Name, and
Gathering is above every Gathering; and there is no Salvation in any other
Name, but by the Name of Jesus; and you Gathering in his Name, where Salvation
is; he is your Prophet, your Shepherd, your Bishop, your Priest, in the midst
of you, to open to you, and to santifie you, and to feed you with Life, and to
quicken you with Life; wait in his Power and Light, that ye may be Children of
the Light, by believing in the Light, which is the Life in Christ; that you may
be grafted into him, the true Root, and built upon him, the true Foundation,
Who is the Foundation of his People.
who was the Foundation of the holy Prophets and Apostles, and of all the holy
Martyrs, and is the Foundation of all his holy People now; and is the Rock of
Ages, yea, of the Ages of the Prophets, and of the Ages of his Apostles, and of
the Ages of his People now, and Martyrs, who kept them above the Raging of the
Seas, and does now; which Rock the Wise Men builds upon, the Rock that stands
against all the Storms and Tempestuous Weather. And therefore be valiant for
God's Truth upon the Earth, and his good Spirit; and live in it by which you
may profit in the things of God, through which ye may answer the Witness of God
in all, and the Spirit which they grieve and quench, which they are erred from,
through which he may be served, and his Truth spread abroad. So every one in
your Measoures of the Spirit of God and Christ, be faithful, that in it you may
increase, and answer the Lord in a good Life and Conversation, for all his
Mercies. And as every one has received the Lord Jesus Christ, so walk in him,
that you may serve the Lord in a New Life, and worship him in the Spirit and
Truth, which the Devil is out of; and by this Truth you may be made free, by
whith ye may be espoused and married to Christ Jesus, for the Marriage of the
Lamb is come and coming. And therefore if you want Wisdom, keep in the Truth,
that you may go to the Treasure of Life and of Salvation, that you may be Heirs
of the same, and of Life, and Possessors of it: Yea, I say, Heirs of Life, and
Inherit that, and that will be more to you, than if all the World was your
Portion; and the Riches you lay up there, will stand buy, and be with uyou when
time is gone, and shall be no more. For the Truth is the Truth, and changes
not, in which live, and it will be your Peace and Joy everlasting. And in the
Seed, Christ Jesus (who bruises the Serpent's Head, who was before the Devil
was, glorified with the Father before the World began; and was from
Ecverlasting to Everlasting, the First and Last, the Top and Cornerstone in
him live, that you may inherit Life Everlasting; and dwell in the Love of God
in Christ Jesus, that will edify and build one another up; and therein walk in
all Holiness of Life and Conversation, for that becomes God's House; and dwell,
and live, and walk in the Peaceable Truth, that keeps you in Peace, and in the
Holy Fellowship of the Spirit, the Bond of Peace; by which Spirit you may be
led into all Truth, up to God and Christ, from him who is out of the Truth:
Amen says my Soul.

G. F.

DEar Friends every where, Epist. 289.
be faithful to God, who has been faithful and true to you; therefore be you
true to God, and faithful Witnesses to him, To be faithful Witnesses of Christ
in time of Persecution.
and to Christ Jesus; that now ye may all have Riches and Treasure laid up in
store, against a time of want, storms and tempests, that you amy stand; for if
you do not stand now, you are as bad as such Professors, who stood only when
the Sun shined, and crept out when it was fine and fair Weather, but when a
Storm or Tempest came, then they ran creeping into their Holes and Corners, and
sculked into by-corners and fled by bace-doors, who were ashamed or their
Religion, and what they Professed; but when the Sun did shine, then they showed
their Enmity to the Righteous. And therefore be you of the Faith of Dvid, and
of his Spirit, who said, I was Young, and now am old: I never saw the Righteous
for saken, nor his Seed begging Bread; and the Lord (to encourage his People)
says, In all their Af-flicions he was Afflicted, and the Angel of his Presence
saved them; and Christ tells you, It Is he that Suffers and is Persecuted, when
his Children are persecuted: And so it is for the Lord's sake that the JusT
suffer by the Unjust; and you read how such as suffer the spoiling of their
Goods, and Scoffing and Mocking, yet they were not to forsake the Assembling
themselves together, as the manner of some was; for they that suffer with
Christ shall reign with him; for the Lord, may try you (who has blessed you
with outward things) whether your minds do stand with him, or in the outward
things.

G. F.

DEar Friends,
Epist. 290.
Live in Love; for that is of God, and does edify the Body of Christ, and keep
in the Truth of God, which the Devil is out of; To live in Love and Peace with
God, and one with another.
and walk in Righteousness; and then you will walk in Peace with God, and one
with another; and walk in Holiness, for that becomes the House of God, and in
Holiness you will see the Holy God among you. And so that you may keep the
Unity in the Spirit, which is the Bond of Peace, and dwell in Love one with
another; for all Eyes in upon you, and some watches for Evil, but do you answer
the Good in all, in your Words and Lives. This is the Counsel of the Lord God
to you all, and that you may be the Salt of the Earth, and the Light of the
World, and as a City set on a Hill that cannot be hid; so that all that do
profess Christ and God, may show forth Christ and Godliness in Life and Word.

G. F.

To all the Women's Meetings, that are Belivers in the Truth.
FRiends,
Keep your Women's Meetings in the Power of God, EpisT. 291.
which the Devil in out of; and take your Possession of that which your are
Heirs of, and keep the Gospel Order. Man and Woman helps meet in the Image of
God.
For Man and Woman were helps meet in the Image of God, and in Righteousness
and Holiness, in the Dominion before they fell; but after the Fall, in the
Transgression, the Man was to rule over his Wife; but in the Restoration by
Christ, into the Image of God, and his Righteousness and Holiness again, in
that they are helps meet, Man and Woman, as they were in before the Fall. Sarah
obeyed Abraham, and called him Lord. Abraham did also obey the Voice of his
Wife Sarah, in casting out the Bondwoman and her Son. Dorcas a Woman was a
Disciple: So there was a Woman Disciple, as well as Men Disciples; and mind the
Women that accompanied her. And Wo-men are to take up the Cross daily, and
follow Christ daily, as well as the Men; and so to be taught of him their
Prophet, and fed of him their Shepherd, and councelled of him their Councellor,
and sanctified by him who offered up himself once for all. And there were Elder
Women in the Truth, as well as Elder Men in the Truth; and these Women are to
be teachers of good thins; so they have an Office as well as the Men, for they
have a Stewardship, and must give an Account of their Stewardship to the Lord,
as well as the Men. Deborah was a Judge; Examples of amny good Women.
Miriam and Huldah were Prophetesses; old Annah. was a Prophetess, and a
Preacher of Christ, to all them that looked for Redemption in Jerusalem. Mary
Magdalen, and the other Mary, were the first Preachers of Christ's Resurrection
to the Disciples, and the Disciples could not believe their Message and
Testimony that they had from Jesus, as some now adays cannot; but they received
the Command and being sent preached it: So is every Woman and Man to do, that
sees him risen, and have the Command and Message; Daughters shall Prophecy as
well as Sons. So they are to be obedient, that has the Spirit poured upon them:
Women are to Prophecy; and Prophecy is not to be quenched. Them that has the
Testimony of Jesus, are commanded to keep it, whether Men or Women. Priscilla
and Aquilla were both Exhorters and Expounders, or Instructers to Apollos: So
in the Church there were Women Instructers, and Prophetesses, and Daughters
Prophetesses in the Church; for Philip had four Virgins that were Prophetesses;
and there were Women Disciples in the Church, and Women Elders in the Church,
as well as Men. So Women are to keep in the FGovernment of Christ, and to be
Obeyers of Christ; and Women are to keep the ComelyOrder of the Gospel, as well
as Men, and to see that all that have received Christ Jesus, that they walk in
Christ Jesus; and to see that all that has received the Gospel, do walk in the
Gospel, the Power of God, which they are Heirs of; for this is a Day for all to
keep their Possession in the Gospel Order, who be Heirs with Christ, of the
increase of whose Government there is no end. So the Foundation of our Women's
Meetings is Christ, to all them that be Heirs of him, and of his Government.
And the ground of our Order of the Women's Meetings is the Gospel, the Power of
God, which was before the Devil was; and all that be Heirs of the Gospel, which
has brought Life and Immortality to Light in them, which shines over him that
has darkened them, and was before he was: I say, they are Heirs of the Comely
Order of the Gospel; and therefore, I say, take your Possessions of it, and
walk as becomes the Gospel; and keep the Comely Order of it, and in it keep
your Meetings: And here is the Ground and Foundation of our Women's Meetings.
Now Mothers of Families, that has the ordering of Children, Maids, and
Servants, may do a great deal of Good in their Families, to the making or
spoiling of their Children, Maids and Servants; and many things Women may do,
and speak of, amongst Women, which is not Men's business. So, as I said before,
that you, both Men and Women, be helps meet in the Image of God, in the
Righteousness and Holiness in the Restoration, as Man and Woman was in the
Image of God before they frll; and not only so, but in Christ the Foundation,
and in his Gospel that never fell, nor never will fall, whose Foundation stands
sure, for all his Members and Heirs to build upon. And so see that nothing be
lacking amongst you, then all will be well.

And the Elder Women in the Truth were not only called Elders, but Mothers.
Postscript.
Now a Mother in the Church of Christ, and a Mother in Israel, Mothers in the
Church are to feed, cherish, etc.
is one that gives Suck, and Nourishes, and Feeds, and Washes, and Rules, and
is a Teacher in the Church, and in the Israel of God, and an Admonisher, an
Instructor, an Exhorter. So all that are come to that Office, Growth and
Stature, be diligent; for a Mother in Israel, or in the Church of Christ, is
beyond all the Mothers in Egypt, and in Sodom, and the Mother of Harlots,
Mystery Babylon, who had Power over Tongues, Nations and People, with the Cup
of her Fornication: But the Mothers in Spiritual Israel, and Church of Christ,
has the Cup of Salvation, and the Breasts of Consolation, which are full of the
Milk of the Word, to Suckle all the Young Ones, and to Nourish, and Instruct,
Admonish, and Exhort, and Rebuke all the contrary; and to Refresh and Cherish
every tender One. So the Elder Women and Mothers are to be teachers of good
things, and to be teachers of the Younger and trainers up of them in Virtue, in
Holiness, and Godliness, and Righteousness, in Wisdom, and in the Fear of the
Lord, in the Chruch of Christ. And if the Unbelieving Husband is sanctified by
the Believing Wife, then who is the Speaker, and who is the Hearer? Surely such
a Woman is permitted to speak, and to work the Works of God, and to make a
Member in the Church; and then as an Elder, to oversee that they walk according
to the Order of the Gospel.

G. F.

To Friends in New England, Virginia and Barbados.
DEar Friends.
Epist. 282.
Be faithful in the Power of the lord God, in what you know, and then the Lord
will preserve you; that you may answer the Witness of God in every Man, whether
they are the Heathen, that do not profess Christ, or whether they are such as
do profess Christ, that have the Form of Godliness, and be out of the Power.
And keep your Meetings, you that know the Power of the Lord, and fell it, that
in it you may have Unity with God, and one with another. The Lord God has a
Seed in those parts, who shall be Heirs of his Grace, that brings Salvation,
which Grace is it that teaches, in which Grace they sing Praises to the Lord.
So, now you who are come to the dawning of the Day, and to the ending of the
Night of the Apostasy; happy and blessed are you, who are come to see these
things, to see the hidden Mysteries of God revealed, and his Glorious Riches to
the Gentiles, through the Power of an endless Life. And you that are and have
been faithful, spread the Truth abroad, To spread Truth abroad.
ye that know it; and feel that which makes free; let not Principalities and
Powers separate you from the Love of God, which you have in Christ Jesus, who
has all Power in Heaven and Earth given unto him, mind his Reign, his
Teaching, his Kingdom, which has no end; for God has some to be brought out
from amongst those Heathens, if you be faithful among them, answering the
Witness of God in them; for as the Lord says, I will give him for a Covenant
to the Gentiles: And keep your Meetings in the Power of Truth.
and those are called Heathens. Therefore keep your Meetings, and dwell in the
Power of Truth, and know it in one another. and be one in the Light, that you
may be kept in Peace and Love in the Power of God, that you may know the
Mystery of the Gospel: And all that ever you do, do in Love; do nothing in
Strife, but in Love that edifies the Body of Christ, which is the Church. So as
any is moved to go amongst the Heathen, in the Power and Love of God, to Preach
the Gospel (which is the love of God to them) bing them to the Power of God; to
that God, which is the God of the Stones, whcih they make Idols of, and the God
of the Trees, Earth, Brass, Silver, Iron and Gold, which they make Gods of; and
that he is the Living God; for those are dead Gods that are made with Men's
hands; He is the Living God that Clothes the Earth with Grass and Herbs, and
causes the Trees to grow, and bring forth Food for you, and makes the Fishes of
the Sea to breath and live, and makes the Fowls of the Air to breed, and causes
the Roe and the Hind, and the Creatures, and all the Beasts of the Earth to
bring forth, whereby they may be Food for you: He is the Living God, For God is
the living God.
and causes the Stars to arise in the Night, to give you light, and the Moon to
arise to be a light in the Night: He is the Living God, that causes the Sun to
give warmth unto you, to nourish you when you are cold: He is the Living God,
that causes the Sonw and Frost to melt, and causes the Rain to water the
Plants: He is the Living God, that made the Heaven and the Earth, and the
Clouds, and causes the Springs to break out of the Rocks, and divided the great
Sea from the Earth, and divided the Light from the Darkness, by which it is
called Day, and the Darkness Night, and divided the great Waters from the
Earth, and gathered them together: which great Waters he called Sea, and the
dry Land Earth: He is to be worshipped that does this: He is the Living God
that gives unto you Breath, and Life, and Strength, Who gives Breath, etc. to
all Creatures.
and gives unto you Beasts and Cattle, whereby you may be fed and clothed: He
is the Living God, and He is to be worshipped. And that which gives you to be
sensible of him, and to know him, is that which Convinces you in your Hearts
of Sin and Unrighteousness. So all Gods that are made of Stone, Mortar, Wood,
Silver, Brass, Iron or Gold, are not the Living God, but are made of Men's
Hands; and the Living God is he that gives you Life, and Breath, and Strength;
and all things that is Good, and would have you to feel after him, with that
which checks you for Sin and Evil; and would have you to worship him in Spirit,
and serve him who is Holy and Righteous, and to live in Peace; who has
promised he will give Christ Jesus for a Covenant of Light and Peace, to you,
who are called Gentiles and venant of Light,) by which you shall come to have
Peace with the Lord God, the King of the whole Earth: This is the King of Kings
and Lord of Lords, in whose Hand is the Breath of all Mankind: This is the God
of the Spirits of all Falsh, who has made all Nations of Mankind of one Blood,
to dwell upon the Face of the Earth. And God having divided the Sons and
Daughters, of Adam, and scattered them up and down the Face of the Earth, being
in the Transgression and Sin, led away with the God of the World, the wicked
One, the Devil, that abode not in the Truth, who causes People to destroy one
another, and murder one another about Earthly things: This is the Prince of
Darkness, that rules in all the Hearts of the Children of Disobedience;
disobedient to that which is Righteous in them, which discovers the unrighteous
Actions and Words drom the Righteous: And Christ, the Second Adam, the Lord
from Heaven, saves Men from Sin; Christ the Second Adam, the Savior of Men.
who is Prince of Peace, and of Life, and the Covenant of God, who brings Men
to have Peace with God, and one with another, who destroys the Devil, the
Author of Strife: This is Christ the Second Adam, which brings the Sons and
Daughters of Adam, into Reconciliation with God again, and destroys Sin, and
finishes it, and makes Reconciliation for Sin and Iniquity.

G. F.

To Friends in Barbados.
DEar Friends,
Epist. 293.
To whom is my Love in the Lord Jesus Christ, by whom were all things made, and
by whom all things do consist, and who fills all things, and does uphold all
by his Word and Power; Christ the Head of his Church, etc.
who is the First and Last, the Holy Head of his Holy Church, and the Door into
the Holy Way, for his Holy People to walk in, and the setter up of a Holy
Worship in the Holy Spirit and Truth, to worship the Holy God in; and the
setter up of a Holy Religion, to keep from the Spots of the World; which
Religion is pure in his Sight: And this never came out of the Brain-beaten
Stuff of Man, nor of his Chamber of Imagery; but for his People to walk in,
that they might sing forth his Praises in Righteousness.

And therefore, all Friends, in your Men and Womens-Meetings, be faithful, and
see how you do grow in the Truth and Power of Godliness, and are circumcised;
and witness your Renewings into the heavenly Image of him that created you; and
that you all may be fruitful in the Knowledge and Grace of our Lord Jesus
Christ, who is the Orderer of all things; and wear his Livery and fine Linen,
the Righteousness of Christ; and hold forth his Ensign and his Standard, and
all to be filled with his Grace, and Love, and peaceable Truth, and be over all
outward Earthly things; so that none be Carnally but Spiritually minded: And
walk as becomes the glorious Order of the Gospel, having the Water of Life in
your Cisterns, and the Bread of Life in your Tabernacles, and Fruits on your
Trees, to the Praise of God. Amen.

And all your Family Meetings do not neglect, among your Whites and Negroes,
but do your Diligence and Duty to God and them; To keep Family Meetings.
which you will not neglect, if you keep in the Faith of Abraham, and of the
blessed Seed which inheriteth the Crown. And be at Peace among your selves,
that each one show that you are in Christ the Prince of Peace; and that does
show that you are the Disciples of Christ, and Learners and Followers of him:
So possess him who is Life Eternal. Aman.

And your Love and Kindness toward us, the Lord redouble it of his Mercy into
your Bosoms. We are all pretty well. We have had great Travail by Land and Sea,
and Rivers and Bays, and Creeks in New England, Jersey, Delaware, Maryland,
Virginia, Carolina, where we have had great Service, among Friends, and
Governors, and others, (and Men and Womens-Meetings) and with the Indians, and
their Kings and Emperoar. O blessed be the Lord God Almighty, who is over all,
and over all gives Dominion: And Glory be to his Great Name for ever. Amen.
And his Truth is of a good Savor in the Hearts of People, and spreads. So no
more but my Love.

Read this in your Men and Womens-Meetings.

G. F.
Maryland, the 24th of the 12th; Month. 1672.
FRiends,
The Truth is above all, Epist. 294.
and will bring their old House on their own Heads, to their great Trouble;
Truth above all.
and in the Winter, and cold Weather, when that their HoUse is down, and their
Religion is frozen, and their Rivers are dried up, and their Husks are gone,
and the Swine begin to cry about the Plantations, and the Vermin runs up and
down amongst their old Rubbish, and their Sparks and Candles are gone out, and
Hail and Storms lights upon the Head of the Wicked, then Woe will be to God
and Magog, and to all the Wicked, who have no Covering. In Christ you have
Peace, in the World you have Trouble. No Peace with God can be enjoyed, but in
the Covenant of Light; which it Trouble. Amen.

G. F.

FRiends, at the first Convincement there is not so much danger, Epist. 295.
for the Spirit of God keeps in the Fear of the Lord, and under Judgment; Our
Knowledge must be in the Spirit.
then after getting Acquaintance or Knowledge, and a Familiarity, and a
Liberty, but not in the Holy Spirit, there is great danger; and therefore your
Knowledge and Familiarity must be in the invisible Spirit; for the Flesh Fades
and withers, as the Grass: So that Knowledge and Familiarity is as Grass that
withers; but the Word of the Lord endures for ever. And the right knowledge of
one another is this, To know one another in that Word which was in the
beginning, before Man fell; For Man lives not by Bread alone, but by every
Word that proceeds out of the Mouth of God. This is the fresh and heavenly
Food from above, and above all the Husks that the Swineherd feeds his Swine
with, in the unrepented State.

G. F.

FRiends,
All keep your Meetings in the Power of the Lord God, that has gathered you;
Epist. 296.
and none to quenth the Spirit, nor despise Prophesying; Quench not the Spirit,
etc.
and so keep up your Testimony in public and private. Let not the Mouths of
Babes and Sucklings be stopped, nor the Seed in Males or Females; but all be
valian for the Truth upon the Earth.

Concerning your Womens-Meetings; encourage all the Women of Families that are
convinced, and minds Virtue, and loves the Truth, and walks in it, that they
may come up into God's Service, that they may be serviceable in their
Generation, and in the Creation, and come into the Practice of the pure
Religion, which you have received from God from above, that every one may know
their Duty in it, and their Service, in the Power and Wisdom of God; for now
the Practick Part is called for: People must not be always talking and
hearing, but they must come into Obedience to the Great Power of the Great God
of Heaven and Earth.

And so that none may stand out of the Vineyard idle, and out of Service, None
to be idle in the Vineyard.
and out their Duty; for such will talk and talle, and judge with evil Thoughts
of what they in the Vineyard say and do: And therefore the Power of God must
call all into their Duty, into their Service, into their Places, into Virtue,
and Righteousness, and into the Wisdom of God: For all that be out of their
Duty in their Service, though they have the knowledge of it, yet are not so
serviceable in the Creation, nor in their Generation; for the Power of God must
go over, and is over all such; by which Power all must be acted; in which true
Obedience is known.

And therefore train up your young Women to know their Duty in this thing, the
Elder women train up the Tounger Women, etc.
that they may be in their Services and Places; which they are to do in the
Power and Wisdom of God; by which you are kept open to the Lord, to receive of
his Gifts, and Graces, and of his Life, through which you are to minister one
to another: And all keeping in it, then there is none to let or stop its
flowing, but through it you all are to be watered as a Garden of Plants, by
which they are nourished; and so all be faithful and diligent in the Lord's
Business, and make all the sober Women, professing Truth in the Country about
you, acquainted with this thing; and when you have them together at the Monthly
Meeting, read this among them. So no more but my Love.

G. F.

DEar Friends,
Epist. 297.
Keep in the Power of the Lord; for if you do lose that, To keep in the Power
of the Lord.
you lose the Kingdom which stands in Power and Peace, and Righteousness, and
Joy in the Holy Ghost; for out of the Kingdom is Strife, and no Peace; and
therefore keep in the Power, and Life, and Love, which you did first receive;
that you all may be Heirs of the Kingdom, and fit under your Teacher the Grace
of God, which will bring your Salvation, that you may witness that you have a
Teacher from God, that does bring your Salvation; which Salvation is your Walls
and Bulwarks, that he may be glorified, and ye may have your Comfort in your
Salvation. And keep your Men's and Women's Meetings, both being Heirs of Life,
and of the Gospel Order, and of Christ and his Government; though you may have
some Opposers; but this is a Day of possessing of Christ, and his Government,
and of the Gospel Order; and therefore do not lose your Authority, Men nor
Women, in the Gospel, nor in Christ; though some may slight it: For the
Foundation of our Men's and Womens-Meetings is Christ Jesus, who bruiseth the
Serpent's Head, who is the Head of all false Orders, and Foundations, and the
Gospel, which is the Power of God, which brings Life and Immortality to
Light, shines over him that did darken you; which Power of God he is out of.
And therefore all in the Power and Spirit, encourage both Men and Women in
their Duty, in the Order of the Gospel of Christ, in whom you have Dominion,
and in him who changes not. My Love is to you all.

G. F.

DEar Friends, to whom is my Love in that which changes not, Epist. 298.
the Royal Seed, that bruiseth the Serpent's Head, in whom you have Life and
Peace, in that live and walk, that you may bear Fruit to the Glory of God, and
answer that of God in every one. And live in the Peace that passes Knowledge
and Understanding; and in this troublesome time of Wars and Strife, mind the
Power or God, and his Kingdom, that stands in Righteousness, and Joy in the
Holy Ghost, that is over all, and never will have an end; and that will keep
you over all these times of Trouble, fresh in the Life and Power. My Troubles
have been great in the Service of the Lord; and the Convincement of People is
great in America, and the Islands in those parts, Blessed be the Lord God over
all for ever, Amen. whose Power, and Life, and Truth is over all; and he in his
Power gave Dominion over all, by Sea and by Land. And People and Friends are
well settled beyond the Sea; and Meetings are precious, beyond words. So in
haste, my Love to all Friends, in all those parts, as though I named them; and
live in Love, for that does edify you.

Bristol, the 1st of the 6th Month, 1673. G. F.

To Friends at Jamaica.
FRiends,
We do hear that some, professing Truth amongst you, Epist. 299.
do not keep to your Meetings so diligently as they ought to do, nor yet meet
but few of you together on the First Days. And the reason is, That upon the
First Days some of you write and make up your Accounts; so as you cannot have
time to go to and frequent the Meetings. Truly Friends, this is an ill Savor
to come over here into England, and shows that you mind your own Business more
than the Lord's, and the things of this Life, more than the things that
appertain to the Life that is without End; which should be sought for first, if
you desire to be blessed and to presper. And if you do not, you will grow
loose, and wither, and not have the Blessing of God with you; you cannot expect
it. And therefore you that go under the Name of the Friends of God and of
Truth, keep diligently your Meetings on the First Day together, that the Lord's
Power may stir among you; for if you do not keep your Meetings upon the First
Day of each Week, you are worse than the World, that meet in their
Steeple Houses or Places of Worship, who prefer your own Business before the
Lords. The Lord, I say, will not, in so doing, prosper you in it. And
therefore, I say once more, in the Name of Christ Jesus, keep your Meetings,
who are gathered in it. And let there be Meetings on the Week Days, and also
Men's Meetings, to see that nothing be lacking among you, once in a Fornight;
and likewise a Women's Meeting, though there be but a few. For you that have
seen the Order of Truth in England, and other Places, how can you go out of the
Practice of it, without growing wild and withering? That so Men and Women in
their distinct Places, may be Helps meet in Government, in the Seed of Life,
and in the Widom of God, by which all things was made, and in the Gospel, the
Power of God, which was before the Devil was. So that you may feel the Presence
of the Lord with you. And-that all Friends may be invited to the Meetings; and
that you may be good Examples and Patterns unto all in the Island in righteous
Dealing and Doings, in Weights and in Measures. And keep to the sound Language,
and the Honor that you have received from above; so that your Lives and
Conversations may preach in Virtue, Righteousness and Holiness, that God may be
glorified through you, and among you all, that you may be Patterns in Holiness
and in Truth, as you expect the Blessing of God in, with and among you. And owe
nothing to any Man but Love. And so feek first the Kingdom of God, and keep in
it, then all outward things will flow to you, so as there will be no want of
them, if you enjoy God, who upholds all with his Word and Power, and gives the
increase of all. And see that there may be no ill Example among you, and no
such ill Report may be heard of you in Old England. And when you have got up
your First Days and Weekly Meetings, and Men and Women's Meetings, in the Power
of God, which will preserve you in Truth and Righteousness, see that nothing be
lacking among you; then send over how things are with you, how Truth speads and
prospers, from your Men and Women's Meetings, to the Men and Momens Meetings in
Old England. So no more but my Love.

G. F.

DEar Friends,
Epist. 300.
Let your Faith stand in the Power of God, for that is your Keeper unto the Day
of Salvation; so every one that has not yet obtained it, come to that Day, for
the Kingdom stands in Power, and not in Words. Therefore, as I said before, let
you Faith stand in the Power of God, in which the Kingdom stands, Kingdom of
Peace and Joy, which stands in Righteousness, and Holiness, and in the Holy
Ghost; where no unclean things enters, neither can it: For the Power of the
Lord God keeps you fresh, keeps you open, and keeps you alive, and keeps you in
a sense of the things of his Kingdom, the Treasures, the Pearls, and Riches,
and Jewels thereof; and this Power will keep you all in Peace, and in Unity,
and Quietness, and Condescension, and Love, and Kindness one to another; and in
the Power of the Lord, and in his Spirit, you will be enabled to give the Lord
his Glory, and continual Praise, and continual Thanks, which is due unto him
from you all; it will ascend to him who is worthy of all, blessed for evermore.
And so none quench the Spirit, nor the Motions of it in you, lest Isaac's Well
be stopped up by the uncircumcised Philistine, that must go down into the Pit,
who has lived aloft; for as Christ comes to take the Peace from the Earth,
which Men are in, as all Sects and Ways, that have Peace in their Ways,
Religions, and Worships, and Traditions of their Forefathers; as in the Days
of his Flesh, when he came amongst the Pharisees, Sadduces, Herodians, Scribes,
and other Sects among them; and likewise all others, that now have a Peace in
the Earth, and that are settled in it, they must know that Peace taken away
before they are redeemed out of the Earth; and so as he takes away that Peace,
such as come to learn of him, and to be his Disciples and Followers, his Peace
he gives unto them; who is the King of Peace, the Prince of Peace, and of Life;
and which is such a Peace that the World cannot take away from them: And this
you and all Friends, every where, have sufficiently known, who have been and
are the Learners of Christ Jesus, both Men and Women, that in all your
Persecutions, Mockings, Imprisonings, spoiling of Gods, they could never take
your Peace away, which you had from this Prince of Peace. Is not this true, and
the Scripture fulfilled in you? Therefore let him have the Praises and the
Glory out of all your Hearts; and keep this Peace, in the Unity of the Spirit,
the Bond of Peace; you are bound to keep it with the Spirit, this Prince of
Princes Peace; you are all bound to keep it by the Law of Life, the Law of the
Spirit; for Christ is the same now, to day as yesterday, and so for ever; the
same as in the Apostles Days, who said, Think you that I came to send Peace on
Earth? I tell you, Nay; but rather Debate. For the Father shall be against the
Son, and the Son against the Father: And the Mother against her Daughter, and
the Daughter against her Mother: And the Daughter in Law against the Mother in
Law, etc. Luke 12.53. And he that loves Father or Mother more than me, is not
worthy of me, said Christ Jesus: Or he that loves Son or Daughter more than
me, is not worthy of me: And he that takes not up his Cross, and follows not
me, is not worthy of me. He that will save his Life, shall lose it; and he that
is willing to lose his Life for my sake, shall save it. And, speaking to his
Disciples, said, He that receives you, receives me; and he that receives me,
receives him that sent me, Matthew. 10. These things, Friends, have been seen,
and have been fulfilled, and must be fulfilled; for Christ is the same to day
as yesterday, and so for ever: For have not you seen, Son against the Father,
and Father against the Son; and Mother against the Daughter, and Daughter
against the Mother? etc. And this has been through retaining Christ, who sets
at Variance, and so not at Peace; for he does not bring a Peace to that Nature
they lived in in Old Adam: And so we may see, when People are convinced, what
Variance it makes in a Family: This has been seen and fulfilled, when a
Husband is convinced, or a Wife is convinced, or Son or Daughter in a Family is
convinced: And this must be fulfilled, and interprets its self in the
fulfilling; for he brings a Sword and War, and not Peace to tha Nature they
lived in, and had in Old Adam, before they received the Prince of Peace, and te
Sword of the Spirit from him, to war against the other Peace which they had;
and so the Peace of all Religions must be broken, before they come to the true
Religion from above; and the Peace of all Worships must be broken, before they
come to the worship in the Spirit and Truth, the Davil is out of; and the Peace
of all Ways must be broken, that Men and People are in, before they come into
the Way of Christ Jesus; and the Peace of all Churches must be broken, before
they come to the Church which is in God; and the Peace of all Fellowships must
be broken, before they come into the Fellowship of the Spirit, and Unity
therein, which is the Bond of Peace; and the Peace of all Earthly Teachers must
be broken, who are made of Men by natural Tongues, before they come to the
Heavenly Teacher, and the Tongue of the learned indeed; and the Peace of all
Earthly Bishops and Shepherds must be broken before they come unto Christ, the
Bishop of the Soul, and heavenly Overseer, and heavenly Shepherd, who feeds
with his heavenly Food, and so the heavenly Priest, made higher than the
Heavens, who is holy, harmless, separate from Sinners, breaks the Peace of the
Earthly Priests, and of all them that are made lower than the Heavens
(mischieful) that are not separate from Sinners, nor from Sin, but hold up
Sinners, and prop them up, and plead for Sin term of Life; this Prince of
Peace, made higher than the Heavens, breaks all their Peace, as he did above
Sixteen Hundred Years since, for he is the same now as then, and his Power and
Spirit will make them rage still, and they that confess him before Men, they
will rage at them still; and therefore, as I said, keep in Christ's Power, in
which the Kingdom stands, and not in words, that you may see the fulfilling of
the Scriptures; and stand still in the Power, which will keep you all to the
Day of Salvation, that are not come to it. And so the Lord preserve you in his
Fear, and give you Wisdom from above, that you may be preserved in the Unity of
the Spirit, which (as I said before) is the Bond of Peace, which is your Duty
to keep the Peace of the Prince of Princes.

And all you that have received the Power of Christ in your Hearts, have you
not seen what Wars, and what Rumors, and Nation against Nation, as it was in
the two Births in the Womb, that came forth, two Nations, two Births, Nation
against Nation; and much may be seen, what Wars outwardly there has been, and
bringings down, before the appearance and receiving the Lord; and so here he
being received, here is People against People, and Nation against Nation, and
Earthquakes, and Shakings within and without: They that receive the Lord's
Power must feel this, and know this, and see the fulfilling of it, and not look
out, for his Kingdom without, like a company of Pharisees, lo here, lo there,
but as Christ, the Power of God, is known within (as Christ said, The Kingdom
of Heaven is within) and as they come to feel it there, they shall know the
Shakings and Earthquakes, and Wars, and Rumors, and that part that partains to
Nations, that must be shaken before they come to be of the holy Nation, which
is against the other; and this is to be known, and seen, felt, and fulfilled
with the Power of Christ Jesus, and by his Spirit; as they that live in it may
take a prospect of these wonderful things and workings of the Lord God and his
Power in this Age. Therefore be still in the Power of God, which is your
Keeper, as I said before; for it is your Keeper in the Night, before you come to
the Day, and it keeps you to the Day of Salvation; for the Virgins Lamps did
burn in the Night, and it was their Light, and they that were wise, that got
Oil in their Lamps entered; for the Voice of the Bridegroom was at Midnight, and
bid them atise. And so as outward Midnight is a great while off, the Day-Star's
arising; yet here is a Lamp burning. Therefore every one see that you get Oil
in your Lamps, that you may not go forth, that you may arise at the hearing of
the heavenly Voice of the Bridegroom, and enter with him; though Satan's
Messengers have told you, there is no hearing his Voice nowadays: Sad
Messengers they are, and have been, they see who have received the true Message
of the Messiah in his Power, through which they see over them, and see their
own Foundation, Christ Jesus, who was the Foundation of the Prophets and
Apostles.

Let this be read in your Men's and Women's Meetings, and Copies kept in their
Books.

Worcester Prison, the 2d of the 7th Month, 1673, G. F.

To all the Women's Meetings.
DEar Friends,
This is the Day for all to take your Possessions, Epist. 301.
that knows the Gospel, the Power of God, which brings Life and Immortality to
Light in them: I say, this is the Day for all to take their Possessions of this
Gospel Order, which was the Apostles Doctrine to the Church in the Primitive
Times, that they should keep the Comely Order of the Gospel. The words are
general to Men and Women; and now you being Heirs of the Gospel, as was said
before, that has brought Life and Immortality to Light in you, by which you
see over the Devil, that has darkened you, and before he was, in whom is all
Disorder. Therefore keep this Comely Order of the Gospel, the Power of God, the
Everlasting Order and Gospel, it will out last all other Orders in old Adam; in
which Order of the Gospel you have Joy, you have Peace and Comfort. So every
one take your Possessions of this holy, everlasting, joyful and peaceable
Gospel and Order; for the Peace is in the Power of God; so it is called the
Gospel of Peace, that keeps all in the Peace, which you have from the Prince of
Peace, that the World cannot take away from you; and likewise that you may be
Heirs and Possessors of Christ, and of his Government, which is pure, holy,
righteous and heavenly, of the Increase of this heavenly Man's Government there
is no end; but there will be an end of old Adam's and the Devil's, which began
in time, and will end in time, but there will be no end of his, that was set up
from Everlasting to Everlasting. So all be Possessors of this heavenly
Government, and of this heavenly, glorious and comely Order.

And whereas it has been said, by them which are without, you must come to
hear the Gospel preached; the answer is, and will be from the Possessors of the
Gospel, I am an Heir of the Gospel, and do ^^her it it; for it is my Portion,
and do know it and possess it, and need not thee to tell me of it, and of my
Portion.

And whereas it has been said, by them without, You must come and hear Christ
preached: The answer is from the Possessors of him, I have examined my self,
and proved my self, and have found Christ Jesus in me, and he rules in my Heart
by Faith; and I am in him, and he is in me; And behold ye (that is as much as
to say, take notice) all things is become new.

And whereas the saying has been, by them that are without, Why do not you come
to hear the Word preached? The answer is, and will be, from the Possessors of
him, The Word is nigh me, in my my Heart and Mouth, to obey it and do it; and
need not say to any, who shall ascend to bring it down from above, or who shall
descend to bring it up from the Grave; for I am come to the Righteousness of
Faith's speaking (mark Faith's speaking) that says on this wise, The Word is
nigh thee, in thy Heart and Mouth, to obey it and do it; by which Word I am
born again of the Immortal Seed, which lives, and abides, and endures for ever;
by which Word I have Milk to give freely to Babes and Sucklings. So the
Possessors have Breasts; and the Possessors Breasts are not dry, Glory to the
Lord for ever. So no more but Love; and God Almighty preserve you in his
Wisdom, that is pure and gentle from above, by which you may be all ordered,
and order all that you have under your Hands to his Glory: And keep in the
Unity of the Holy Spirit, which is the Bond of Peace, of the Prince of Princes
Peace, which is every one of your Duty to keep this heavenly Peace of the
Prince of Princes, which none can take away from you; for you are bound with
the Spirit to keep it, so that your Praise may be in the Gospel; that you may
admonish and exhort all that does profess the Truth of the Gospel, that they
may walk in the Truth, and as becomes the Gospel, and that every one that does
profess Christ Jesus, and has received him, may walk in him in the new and
living Way, out of the old Way.

G. F.

TO all Friends that live in the Truth, Epist. 302.
and by it are become God's Freemen and Women, and by the Truth and Power of
God, are brought out of the Worlds vain Fashions and Customs, in their
Feastings, and Revelings, and Banquetings, and Wakes, and other vain Feastings,
where they spoil the Creatures, and dishonor the Lord God more those Times and
Days, which they call Holy Days, and Feast Days, than any other Times and Days;
and therefore you that are brought out of such things, and do see the Vanity
and Folly of them; and likewise you that are brought out of all the extravagant
Feastings of Compannies in Corporations, and of making of Feasts, when the
Masters of Companies are Chose, and Cunstables, and Head-Burroughs, you see
their Vanity, and their Folly and Madness, in their destroying of the
Creatures, to the Reproach of Christianity, and the Dishonor of God, and the
Blaspheming of his Name; and many times through the abusing of themselves by
excess, are more like Beasts than Men, in these things and doings; and
therefore as you do see the Folly and Vanity of all such Doings, in their
voluptuous and vain Feastings, and cannot observe their evil Customs, then that
vain Spirit is in a great Rage and Fury, because you have, and do, break off
Fellowship with them in all this their vain Customs. And therefore you that are
redeemed from these things by Christ, and from the Feasting of the Rich, and
all other their Vanities, and voluptuous Dishonouring of God therein; I say to
you, mind and practice Christ's words, as you may read in Lake 13.14. Christ
says, When thou make a Dinner, call not thy Friends, nor thy Brethren,
neither Kinfolks, nor thy Rich Neighbors, lest they also bid thee again, and a
Recompense be made thee; but when thou do make a Feast, call the Poor, the
Maimed, the Lame and the Blind, and thou shall be blessed; for they cannot
recompense thee again, but thou shall be recompensed at the Resurrection of the
Just. So here you may see how Christ orders thee to make a Feast or a Dinner,
and to whom, contrary to the World; and though it be a cross to them, yet it is
to be obeyed, and observed, and practiced; for it is the heavenly Man's
Doctrine, and Command, and Will, and he that does it shall know his Doctrine;
and this will judge the World in their vain Feasts, Dinners and Suppers, which
they make for the Rich, for which they have self Reward; but Christ's command
being obeyed, denies self, and has the Lord's Recompense; and all that call
him Lord, should do as the Lord commands; and they that are his Disciples,
and do love him, will keep his Commands; for says Christ, If you love them
that love you, what thank have you? For Sinners also loves those that love
them: And if you do good to them that do good to you, what thank have you? For
Sinners also do even the same: So give and it shall be given unto you. Good
Measure pressed down, shaken together, and running over into your Bosoms; and
the Lord is kind to the unthankful, and therefore, be ye Merciful as your
heavenly Father is Merciful, Luke 6. And therefore as you have forsaken all the
World's vain Feastings, and Dinners and Suppers (if so) give the Blind, the
Lame, the Maimed, the Widow, the Fatherless, and the Poor, a Feast or a Dinner,
and obey Christ, the heavenly Man's Doctrine, though it do cross old earthly
Adam's Will and Practices; and though he be angry, never heed him, but obey the
Lord.

G. F.

DEar Friends, Epist. 303.
all be Faithful in the Eternal Power of God that is over all; I say, keep in
this Power of God, that you may answer that of God in all, and not that which
is contrary; for the Kingdom stands in Power, and in Righteousness, and Joy
in the Holy Ghost: So that which does not live in the Power, and Righteousness,
and Joy in the Holy Ghost, comes not into the Kingdom. So this Kingdom, and
Power, and Righteousness, and Holy Ghost, in which is the Joy, is over all; and
this Kingdom stands not in Word, but in Power. So know one another in the
Power, and in the Spirit of God (who is a Spirit) know and confess Christ in
his Death and Sufferings, and in his Resurrection. So no more but my Love in
him.

Worcester Prison, the 21st of the ^th Month, 1673. G. F.

To Friends in Virginia.
DEar Friends, to whom is my Love, Epist. 304.
I am glad to hear of the Increase of Truth amongst you, and the Lord prosper
his Work, and increase People in his Knowledge, who will fulfill his Promise,
That the Knowledge of the Lord shall cover the Earth as the Waters covers the
Sea, in the New Covenant; though in the Old Covenant, the Word was to Jacob,
and the Statutes to Israel; the like was not to other Nations, but the New
Covenant is to all Nations, Jews and Gentiles; For I will give him for a
Covenant of Light to the Gentiles, and he shall be my Salvation to the ends of
the Earth; therefore he says, Look unto me all ye ends of the Earth, and be ye
saved; And there is no Salvation by any other Name under Heaven, but by the
Name of Jesus, which signifies a Savior. And in his Name keep your Men's and
Women's, and all your other Meetings, that you may feel Him in the midst of you,
exercising his Offices; as he is a Prophet, which God has raised up to open to
you, and as he is a Shepherd, who has laid down his Life for you, to feed you;
so hear his Voice, and as he is a Councellor, and a Commander, follow Him and
his Counsel; and as he is a Bishop to oversee you, with his heavenly Power and
Spirit; and as he is a Priest, who offered up himself for you, who is made
Higher than the Heavens (and that is Higher than all the Priests that are made
upon the Earth) who Sanctifies his People, his Church, and presents them to God
without blemish, spot or wrinkle: So, I say, know him in all his Offices,
exercising them amongst you, and in you. I am glad to hear of some of your
diligence, in taking that great Journey to Carolina through the Woods; for if
you visit them sometimes, it would do well: And there is a People at that place
you call New-Country, as you go to Carclina, which had a great desire to see
me, amongst whom I had a Meeting. I received Letters, giving me an account of
the Service some of you had with and amongst the Indian King, and his Council;
and if you go over again to Carolina, you may enquire of Capt. Batts, the Old
Governor, with whom I left a Paper to be read to the Emperor, and his Thirty
Kings under him of the Tusrowres, who were to come to Treat for Peace with the
People of Carolina: Whether he did read it to them or no, remember me to Major
General Benett, and Col. Dew, and the rest of the Justices that were Friendly
and Courteous to me, when I was there, and came to Meetings; and tell them, that
I cannot but remember their Civility and Moderation, when I was amongst them:
And so the Lord redouble it into your Hearts, and theirs, the Love and Kindness
which they and you showed unto me. I have been a Prisoner here about these
Eight Months, and now I am Premunired, because I cannot take an Oath; but the
Lord's Seed and Power is over all, blessed be his Name for ever, and Glory and
Honor to Him, who is over all, and is worthy of all.

Read this amongst Friends in their Meetings.

G. F.
Worcester, 1673.
MY Dear Friends,
Epist. 305.
Live in the Seed that bruiseth the Serpents Head, who is the Head of all false
Teachers, and Ways, and false Worships, and Religions: But Christ is the Head
of all the true Worshippers; and in his Name keep your Meetings, in whom you
have Salvation, and not by any other Name under Heaven. And fit under your
Teacher, Christ Jesus, that does bring your Salvation, the Grace of God, that
you may all witness that you have a Teacher, from God, that does bring your
Salvation; and in your Hearts you have received him, and believed in him, and
with your Mouths confession is made to Salvation, that your Teacher has
brought you; that you all may witness his Salvation to be your Walls and
Bulwarks, that does surround your Camps and Tabernacles.

London, 1673. G. F.

To Friends in Holland.
FRiends,
Root abiding, Epist. 306.
ye will spring upward, and bring forth much Fruit in this Life, To grow in the
Root.
and in the Life to come, inherit Life Eternal; and so your Lives being hid
with Christ in God, you will be made conformable to his Image, and know the
Power of his Resurrection, and the Fellowship with him in his Sufferings, and
the Fellowship with him in his Death, that you may have Fellowship with him in
his Resurrection and Life; And as you have born the Image of the Earthly, so
also you may bear the Image of the Heavenly: And as your Vessels has been full
of Wrath and Dishonor, so your Vessels may be full of his Mercies, and Praises
to God; and as in your Old Earth has dwelt Unrighteousness, so you may see and
know the New Earth, wherein dwells Righteousness. There is a Belief that God
is not the Author of, for such have not the Witness in themselves of what they
do believe; and a Belief may be of God and Christ, and of the Scriptures, and
yet such may be in Death, Faith.
for they are not in Christ the Light, and so are not Children of the Light;
and there is a Faith, which Christ is not the Author of, and that Faith gives
not the Victory, nor purifieth the Heart, neither do they in it please God, nor
have they access to God, and that is the dead Faith which has no Works. And
there is a Hope that does not purify, and that Hope is that which is not of
Christ, who saves, and purifieth, as he is pure; but that Hope is the Hope of
the Hypocrites. Hope.
And there is a Way that may be defiled, where all the Wolves, Dogs and Beasts,
and the Unclean passes, and has many turning Ways in it, and many crooked,
and rough, and mountanious Ways in it; and there is the broad Way that leads
to Destruction; and these are not the Way of Christ, that leads to Life,
which is the narrow and strait Way. And there arem any Names in the World, by
which there is no Salvation,; the Beast has many Names, which all the World
wondereth after, and receive the Beast's Mark, that he marketh them with his
Beastly Spirit and Power, which he has from the Dragon; but there is but one
Name under the whole Heaven by which People shall be saved, and that is the
Name of Jesus; Salvation in the Name of Jesus only.
and they gathering in his Name, by whom the World was made, and receiving
their Father, (the Lord God Almighty's) Name and Mark in their Foreheads,
Christ is in the midst of them, and they will not receive the Beast's Mark, nor
will not be marked by him. And there are many Religions in the World, all which
are spotted and defiled with the World's Spirit, with which they do destroy one
another; but there is but one pure Religion from above, that is undefiled in
the sight of God, and that keeps from the Spots of the World, Pure Religion.
and leads to visit the Widow and Fatherless in their distress; and they that
receive this pure Religion from God (who is above) it is by God's Spirit, the
fruits of which is Love; and this pure undefiled Religion from God has the
Glory in all the Hearts of them that do receive it, who is the Author of it;
and it is above all those Religions that are below, that are made by Men's
earthly, sensual and devilish Wisdom, who with it compel People to conform to
them, and such are not gentle, pure, nor peaceable, as the Wisdom which is from
above is. And there is but one true Worship, which the Devil is out of, and his
unclean Spirit, and he cannot get into it; The true Worship in the Spirit.
which Worship is in the Spirit and in the Truth, which Christ the heavenly Man
has set up above Sixteen Hundred Years since; and every one that comes into
the Spirit, and into the Truth, are the true Worshippers of the God of Truth,
who is a Spirit; and all that are not in the Spirit and Truth, are in the
Beast's Worship (out of the Spirit of God) and in his Wrath under the Dragon's
Power; and there are many Instructors that causes People to err; but there is
but one Spirit of Truth, which leads into all Truth; and this is the one
Spirit that led the Prophets and Apostles to give forth the Scriptures; and all
the Instructers that are out of it, causes People to err from the Spirit that
the Prophets and Apostles were in, and so are in Confusion. And there is one
Leader, One Leader, Jesus Christ.
Christ Jesus, that God has given; and all that are not led by him, are led
into the Ditch, the corrupting place, and they tell them, there is no
Perfection here; and all the Learned in Babel's confused Tongues, who have the
Letter of the Scriptures, yet following their own Spirits (sees not) and the
Divination of their own Brains, and using their Tongues, such builds up
Babylon again, who are not in the Spirit the Prophets and Apostles were in, and
know not the Tongue of the Learned, nor the Scriptures of Christ, and the
Prophets, and the Apostles; but they are as a sealed up Book to them; and
therefore they are Raging and Contending about the meanings of them, teaching
their People, by their Example, to do the same.

G. F.

MY Dear Friends, Epist. 307.
who feels the precious Truth of God, by which you are made God's Freemen and
Women, and have bought the Truth, To be fruitful in good Works.
do not sell it for Dross or Dung, but be valiant for the Truth upon the Earth,
you who have received God's Seed into the good Ground, that in this Life some
bring forth Fifty, Sixty and a Hundred fold of Fruit from God's Seed, to his
Glory, and that have received the Anointing Oil in your Lamps from the Holy
One, that they may burn and shine both Night and Day in your Tabernacles,
through which you may be lighted into the Bridegroom's Chamber; and the Power
of God has always been your Keeper, and will be unto the Day of Salvation;
which Power of God is over all, yea, over the Power of the Devil, the Waster
and Destroyer, who makes the World like a Wilderness, and fills it with
Unrighteousness, Death, Darkness and Cruelty. Therefore let your Faith stand in
the Power of God, which the Kingdom stands in, which is a Cross to the World's
Power, that causes Persecution; which Power of God is the Gospel, which was
before the Devil was, that brought Death and Darkness into you; this Power of
God brings Life and Immortality to Light in you, by which Power you see over
him that has darkened you, and before he was. And you that are Heirs of this
Gospel, keep the holy and heavenly Order of it; by which Power of God you come
to digg, and has found the Pearl in your own Field, of great Price; by which
Power of God you come to sell all, and to purchase the Field, then you have
Riches enough. And have Salt in your selves, that you may savor withal; and
that your Salt lose not its savor, through which you may be kept from under
the Feet of Men, though they that will live Godly in Christ Jesus must suffer
Persecution; and it is not only given you to believe in Christ, but to suffer
for his Name, whose Name is above every Name; and there is no Salvation by no
other Name under Heaven, but by the Name of Jesus; The Name of Jesus, a strong
Tower.
whose Name is a strong Tower, and the Righteous flee unto it, and are safe; by
whose Name and Power (that is over all) you have been upheld through all your
Tribulations, Sufferings, Imprisonments, spoiling of Goods: And Christ Jesus,
and his Power, is the same to day as he was yesterday, and so for ever. And
therefore, as I said before, let your Faith stand in his Power; for Christ's
Kingdom stands not in Word, but in Power, and in Righteousness, and in Joy in
the Holy Ghost; whose Kingdom is an Everlasting Kingdom, and the Riches in it
is Everlasting: Blessed are all they that are Heirs and Possessors of this,
their Minds and Hearts are kept over all fading things, and the Riches that has
Wings, that the Spoiler may spoil. And therefore Consider all the Faithful
before you, The excellency of the knowledge of Christ.
how they Accounted all but as loss, dross and dung, to the excellency of the
Knowledge that they had in Christ Jesus; and Consider likewise the Faith of the
Martyrs, the Faith of the Apostles, and Primitive Christians, that kept the
Faith and Testimony of Jesus; their Patience was seen: And likewise Consider
all the Prophets of God to Enoch, how their Faithfulness is made manifest; and
all the rest, how they were tried by Persecutors, by Prisons, and by spoiling
of their Earthly Goods and Riches, but never of the Heavenly Goods and Riches;
for there the Thief and Spoiler could not come. And therefore mind that Noble
Seed, that never bowed to Sin and Iniquity, nor the Devil, but bruises his
Head, and destroys him and his Works, that ye may all be Flesh of his Flesh,
and Bone of his Bone, who is your heavenly Food and Bread that comes down from
Heaven, through whom you may eat and live by him, as he lives by the Father;
and so by eating this heavenly Bread that comes down from Heaven, you may have
Everlasting Life. The Lord may try you by Persecution, or spoiling your outward
Goods, which he has given you, by permitting the Spoilers and Persecutors come
to try you, that you may come forth like Gold seven times tried in the Fire
(the Perfection of trial) for many are the Troubles of the Righteous, but the
Lord will deliver out of them all; and happy are they that are tried, Above all
Earthly Riches.
that they may come forth more purer than Gold. And let none sell their
Birthright for a Mess of Pottage, and a Piece of Bread ( Esau-like.) And let
let none have their Eyes wander after their carrying away the Fleece; nor look
back at Sodom's Judgments; for the Earth is the Lord's, and the fullness
thereof; and he can make the Fleece grow again: And therefore consider the
Riches of Job, and the Poverty of Job, and how his Friends despised him in his
Poverty, and how they were reproved; and God increased his Prosperity, and
lenghthened his Tranquillity. And as Daniel's Windows were open toward outward
Jerusalem, in the time of the Informers, when he prayed to his God, as he did
before, in the time when they were not: And therefore should not all your
Windows and Doors be open toward heavenly Jerusalem, your Mother, that God may
come in and help you against the false Mother, and her Children. And therefore
keep your Meetings in the time of Sufferings, as you did before, and preach the
Word in season, and out of season; the Word, I say, that commands the Clouds
and Storms, and was before they were: And therefore blessed are those Eyes that
sees the Sun of Righteousness that never sets, the Sun of Righteousness that
changes not; for the Prophet speaks of a Sun and Moon that shall be turned into
Darkness, before the Notable Day of the Lord come; and where this Notable Day
of the Lord is seen, and by whom it is seen, they see the Glorious Son of God,
the Son of Righteousness, by whom was all things, who is over all things, who
is the Head of his People, and dwells in them, who is present with them, and
who was, and will be, to all Eternity; of whose Kingdom there is no end, who is
God over all, blessed for ever.

Kinston, the 1st of the 7th Month, 1674. G. F.

MY Dear Friends in England, Epist. 308.
and all parts of the World; the Gospel, which is the Power of God, which you
have received from the Beginning, Given forth in the time of his Sickness in
Worcester Prison, 1674.
keep in it, and the Fellowship of it; in which there is neither Sect, nor
Schism, but an Everlasting Fellowship, and an Everlasting Order; which Gospel
brings Life, and Immortality to Light, in every one of your Hearts, and lets
you see over him, that has darkened you. Now every Man and Woman here, will
have a Testimony in their own Hearts, Friends to have their Fellowship in the
Truth.
of this Order and Fellowship, being Heirs and Inheritors of it; by which you
will see over all the Jalse Orders and Fellowships, that are or may be fet up,
or made. Therefore it is good for every one to keep their Habitation: For those
that went in Cain's Way (as the Apostles speaks of) they envied the Apostles
that kept the Fellowship. And Corah's Way, and Balaam's Way; these were them
that had been great Professors, that envied the Apostles. For mark, it was the
Way of such as were of Cain, Corah and Balaam's Spirit, to oppose the Power,
who were against Abel, and Moses, and the Apostles; and so there began the
Apostasy, and there came up the many Orders, amongst them in the Apostasy: So
that at last the Gospel Order was lost amongst them, And keep the Cospel-Order.
and the Government of Christ, and his Worship; and the Beast was then set up.
And therefore now the Gospel Order is to be set up again, and the Government of
Christ Jesus, by them that be Heirs of him, and of his Government, who is First
and Last, the Beginning and the End, of the increase of whose Government there
is no End. Now, I say, you that be Heirs of Christ, possess him, and walk in
him; and as you have received him, so walk all in Peace, and Love, and live in
his Worship in the Spirit and Truth, which the Devil is out of.

And at your General Assemblies of the Ministry at London, or elsewhere,
examine, as it was at the first, whether all the Ministers that goes forth into
the Countries, The Ministers to watch over one another.
do walk as becomes the Gospel: For that you know was one End of that Meeting,
to prevent and take away Scandal. And to examine, whether all do keep in the
Government of Christ Jesus, that preach him, and in the Order of the Gospel,
and to exhort them that does not: For the Foundation is already laid, which is
Christ, and his Government is set up; of the increase of which, there is no
end. So had all these called Christians, kept in his Order, and Government,
they had not troubled themselves, and others, with so many Disorders, if he had
been Head of their Church; so if you keep in the Gospel Order, and Government
of Christ Jesus, you will keep out of the Apostasy, which they have been in,
and the many false Orders, That more go from Gospel Order to the Apost acy.
and Governments, that they went into, and made one against another, when they
went from the true; as you may see in the Scriptures of Truth, that it was some
high Cain and Corah-like Spirits that did so; for Cain was able to build a
City: And Corah, that opposed the Chief Leader Moses, was of the Princes of the
People: And so these opposed (with their many Orders) the true Order. And
Balaam, that was able to teach a Nation, and Prophecy before a King, and made
the Children of Israel to stumble by his bad Counsel: These were Men of Esteem,
these are them the World went after, these came to ride upon the People; and
such as these opposed Abel, Moses and Christ, (the Leader and Governor) and his
Apostles, and set up the many Orders, and Governments, in their Churches, and
broke all into Sects. And therefore, Friends, if you keep under Christ, the
Governor, who governs his Church in Righteousness, and who is a Prophet, and
Preacher, and keep in his Gospel Order; none of these can deceive you, let them
come with never so fair Pretenses: For Christ bruises the Serpent's Head, who
is the Head of all false Teachers, and false Orders, that are not in his Power,
and is the First and Last; and therefore, keep in his Power, and in the Unity
of his Spirit, which is the Bond of Peace. Mark, the Pure, Holy, Eternal,
invisible Spirit of God, is the Bond of Peace: Therefore forfeit not your Bond,
of the Prince of Princes; for if you do, you lose your Life, and go into Death,
and into an evil Spirit, and break the Prince of Princes Peace, so that you
lose your Peace with him Christ Jesus. And therefore it concerns all, that
profess themselves to be Ministers, to be humble, else they are no Learners of
Christ, not to be harsh nor high minded, but walk as Examples amongst God's
Flock, and not to be Lords over God's Inheritance; but let him be Lord whose
Right it is, etc.

And you have known the manner of my Life, G. F's great Labor in the Gospel.
the best part of Thirty Years, since I went forth, and forsook all things; I
sought not my self, I sought you and his Glory that sent me; and when I turned
you to him, that is able to save you, I left you to him: And my Travels has
been great, in Hungers and Colds when there was few, for the first Six or Seven
Years, that I often lay in Woods and Commons in the Night; that many times it
was as a byword, That I would not come into Houses, and lie in their Beds; and
the Prisons have been made my Home a great part of my time, and in danger of my
Life, and in Jeopardy daily: And amongst you I have made my self of no
Reputation, to keep the Truth up in Reputation, as you all very well know it,
that be in the Fear of God: With the low, I made my self low; and with the weak
and feeble, I was as one with them, and condescended to all Conditions, for the
Lord had fitted me so before he sent me forth; and so I passed through great
Sufferings in my Body, as you have been sensible. And few at the first took
Care for the establishing Men and Women's Meetings, though they were generally
owned when they understood them; but the Everlasting God, that sent me forth by
his Everlasting Power, first to declare his Everlasting Gospel, and then after
People had received the Gospel, I was moved to go through the Nation, to advise
them to set up the Men's Meetings, and the Women's; many of which were set up; G.
F. Advice effectual, for the establishing good Order in the Church.
and I was moved to write to other Places, for them to do the like, that kept
the Power: And this was the End, that all that had received the Gospel, might
be Possessors of it, and of the Gospel Order which is Heavenly; and that all
that had received Christ Jesus, might so walk in him, and possess his
Government in the Church, who are Members of him the heavenly Head; and so Men
and Women being Heirs of Christ, they are Heirs of him, and of his Government:
So that Men and Women may be both Possessors of this Government; and Men and
Women being Heirs of this Gospel, might inherit it: Then Men and Women are
Heirs of the Order of the Gospel, which is from Heaven, and not by Man, nor of
Man; which is an Everlasting Order, which is from the Power of God; for the
Gospel is called, the Everlasting Gospel: So that all now in the Restoration by
Christ Jesus, into the Image of God, may be helps meet in Holiness and
Righteousness, as Adam and Eve were in, before they fell; for in the Church of
Christ, where he is Head, there is his Gospel, and his Order, and his
Government; there is his Power felt in every ones Heart, and there is these
Offices of Admonishing, Rebuking, Exhorting, Reproving, amongst them that are
convinced, and converted, by them that are in the Power; for there are several
States. So they that would not have People to be Admonished, that goes under
the Name of Truth, and yet goes into Sin and Wickedness, those are out of the
Gospel Order, and Government of Christ Jesus, and of a loose Mind themselves,
and would be up themselves, and Lords: But that Spirit is for Judgment, for it
is out of the Power of God, and out of the Spirit, in which is the Fellowship.

G. F.

FRiends,
Epist. 309.
Seek the Peace of all Men; which Peace is in Christ, which is a Peace that the
World cannot take away; and blessed are the Peacemakers, To seek Peace.
that makes Peace among the Brethren and People; these shall have a Blessing
from the Lord, the King of Peace; but Woe be unto them that cause Strise and
Offense. And all walk in the Righteousness of Christ, the Lord, over your own
Righteousness, and do, and act, and speak in his Righteousness; then you act,
and do, and speak and walk in that, in which you have Peace, and then God will
delight in you, and you will be loved of him, for he loves the Righteous.

And let it be below any of God's People to raise an evil Report on his People,
Not to receive false Reports.
or any others, or to give both their Ears to any one's Report of his People or
Matter, till they have heard both Parties; so that Righteousness, and Truth,
and Judgment, may be kept up, and not fall. And in your Men and Women's
Meetings, you are in and about the Lord's Business, and not your own; and
therefore let the Lord be in your Eyes, that all of you his Presence, and
Power, and Wisdom, and Judgment may receive, to do, and act, and speak in: And
this keeps all in his Fear, to be careful of their Words and Doings, and keeps
all Solid, and Virtuous, and Sober; and then whatsoever is of a good Report,
and is Decent and Comely, and whatsoever is Virtuous, and tends to Virtue, and
is Lovely, that to follow after and cherish: And here your Eyes are kept open,
to see that nothing be lacking, and that you stand in that which shall never
fall, in the Power, and Spirit, and Seed Christ, who is the sure Foundation,
and the Rock of Ages.

G. F.

FRiends,
In every thing give Thanks to the Lord; Epist. 310.
for from him every good thing you do receive; for the Apostle says, 1 Thessalonians.
5.18. In every thing give thanks: To be Thankful for every good thing.
For this is the Will of God in Jesus Christ concerning you; and they that do
not obey this Doctrine, do not do the Will of God in Christ Jesus. And the
Apostle says, Every Creature of God is good, and nothing to be refased, if it
be received with thanksgiving, etc. 1 Timothy 4.4. And David says, At midnight I
will rise to give thee thanks, because of thy righteous Judgments, Psalm
119.62. And David says, O give thanks unto the Lord, for it is good, because
his Mercies endures for ever, Psalm. 118.1. So the Lord is worthy of all the
Thanks and Praises, through Jesus Christ, who created all by Jesus Christ, to
his Glory and Honor for evermore.

G. F.

For the Men and Women's Meetings in Barbados.
DEar Friends,
Let all things be done in Love, Epist. 311.
and in the Spirit of Christ, which is the Spirt of the Lamb, that must have
the Victory; To keep in Love.
for Patience runs the Race, and has the Crown. And keep down rough Esau's
Spirit, for that will not let the Jew inward pass the King's Highway. And
therefore quench nothing that is good; but keep in the Love of God, that is
shed in your Hearts, and every one keep to your own Springs, and at your own
Breast, and feel your own Bread in your own House (from Heaven.) And strive not
for Mastery, but let Christ be the Master, who is the Wisdom of God, and your
Wisdom, and Righteousness, and Sanctification, and Justification, And dwell in
Humility.
and you to dwell in Humility and Love, that will bear all things; and that is
not easily provoked, and envieth not: If your Love is not in this Love, it is
not the Love of God. Though you may be convinced of the Truth; but they are
happy that do obey the Truth of what they are convinced; and if they do not,
they will lose the Days of their Innocence, and Simplicity. And know the Birth
that is Freeborn, which can give the Cheek to the Smiter; for there is a Birth
of the Mortal Seed, and there is a Birth of the Immortal Seed, by the Word of
God, that lives and abides for ever; which latter has a Habitation that is
for ever. And take heed Friends, in laying open one another Weakness; Not to
expose the Weaknesses of one another.
but if any one has any thing to say, let them speak to the Person concerned;
and if they will not hear, take two or three more before they are brought into
Public. This is the Order of the Head Christ, to his Body, his Church. And if
any Report be upon any, let them speak to the Parties that are concerned; for
the Report may be false: And the Lord says. Thou shall not raise a false
Report upon my People. So in this you will have a Care one of another for one
another good, preferring one another in the Truth. And so let the true
Brotherly Love continue, and Kindness, Affableness, and Courteousness, and
whatsoever is Decent, Comely, and of a good Report in the Eyes of God, and the
Hearts of all good Men, that to follow after; and so, that in your Men and
Women's Meetings, nothing may be seen of the old Leaven, of the old Malice, nor
of the old Man, nor hid Deeds, nor his old Image, nor his old Bottle may not be
drank of, nor his sour Grapes eaten of; for if you do, it will set your Teeth
on edge one against another: But mind the Royal Seed, Christ Jesus, that makes
all things new, that new and Living Way, a new Man, after God and his Image: So
Children of the New Covenant, having the new Leaven, that leavens up onto the
Love of God, which edifies the Body, of which Christ is Head; and new Bettles,
full of new Wine from Christ the Vine; the new Wine which makes all your Hearts
glad to God, and Christ, and one in another. To serve God with a new Heart.
So here is the new Heart, the new Spirit, the new Life, in which the Living
God is sered. And therefore, this is the Word of the Lord God to you all, Let
this new Way, new Covenant, new Man, new Leaven, new Wine, new Life, show forth
its Fruits in the new Life, from the new Man. So that the Fruits, of the Old
may not appear, and that the Bond of Peace, in the Unity of the Spirit, may be
kept amongst you. So keep in this Unity of the Spirit, which is the Bond of
Peace; and none to break their Peace, and go into the ill Behavior; for that
is out of the Spirit of God and Christ, which is meek, gentle, etc. So that the
Lord God of your Lives may be Glorified in you all, and above all, who is over
all, God blessed for ever and ever.

London, the 15th of the 3d Mouth. G. F.

ALL Friends that are in the Power of God, Epist. 312.
and in his Spirit; through which Spirit you pray unto God, and ask in the Name
of Christ Jesus (which all true Prayers are to be in) and the true Singing and
Rejoicing is to be in the Spirit, All true Worship performed in the Sptrit.
and the true Preaching and Ministry is to be in the Spirit; for the Saints
were made able Ministers of the Spirit, and not of the letter.

Now when a Minister, in the Spirit of the living God, does minister Spiritual
and Heavenly Things, and they that receives them, receives them with joy in the
Assembly; now he that is a Minister of the Spirit, and ministers Spiritual
Things, and if they that receive them, receive them in Sincerity, with Joy and
Gladness, and Rejoice in the receiving of them, whilst the other is ministering;
of them, he that is a Minister of the Spirit, does not judge such; but Rejoices
in them, that does receive them, and praises God for the same.

And so likewise they that do Sing in the Spirit does reach to the Spirit in
others, whereby they have a sense that it proceeds from the Spirit; for at
the Hearing of the Speech the true Minister, there is Joy to all that seek and
thirst after Righteousness; for the preaching the Gospel is the Glad-Tidings,
the Joyful News, and is a comfort both to Soul, Body and Spirit, to all that
receive it in Integrily and Sincerity, and they cannot but Rejoice at the Cound
of the Power, where it is received; and they that preaches in this cannot judge
such as Rejoices in the Spirit and Power, and in their Souls praises God when
they hear the Sound of it.

Oh the Everlasting Gospel, the Everlasting Power of God, which is Liberty,
where this is heard (the Sound of it) which is the Liberty to the Spirit, to
the Soul, to the Creature; if a Creature should praise God in his Soul, in his
Spirit, in the very hearing of the Sound of this glorious Gospel, or make a
Joyful Melody; the Minister of the Spirit, which preaches the Glorious Gospel,
cannot judge such for that, and say, it is a confused Noise; for that is the
Minister of the Letter that so judges, who may gather up parcels of the Letter,
and make a Song of that, or Preachment of that, to which the Gospel Ministry of
the Spirit is the Savor of Death unto Death, and of Life unto Life.

And concerning Praying in the Spirit; which Spirit make Intercession to God,
with Sighs and Groans that cannot be uttered. Of Prayer in the Spirit.
Now where this Spirit is prayed in (which all true Prayer is to be in) it
makes Intercessino through the Vails, through the Clouds and thick Darkness, by
the Invisible Powere, to the Invisible God; and this prayer being made in an
Assembly to the Throne of Grace; and there the Assembly (in their Spirits)
joins in this Spirit, and does make Intercession, and does enter through the
Vails, Clouds and thick Darkness to the Throne of Grace; and if some of these
should praise God in a Joyful Sound with their Souls and Sprit, can he that
prays in the Spirit, and makes Intercession therein, judge them that Groans in
the Spirit, and feels the Intercession to the Throne of Grace? No, he cannot;
for he feels a Unity in the Spirit; and set case that some do Groan and Sight,
when another is Praying in the Spirit, that makes the Intercession easy in the
Invisible Spirit, to the Invisible God, and Throne of his Grace; which the
Spirit of God operating in the Assembly, makes some to Sigh and Groan, being
sensible of their wants; and the Power has awakened such; therefore can any
judge such that prays in the Power and Spirit, that has awakened them? Nay, but
hears them, and is glad where it stirs; and so having the Mind of the Lord, and
makes Intercession to him by his Spirit, who hears the Sighs of the Needy, and
Groans of the Oppressed, he cannot judge such; and therefore they that do judge
such Sighers, Prayers, and such who make a joyful Melody (from the Word
dwelling in their Hearts) they who judge such, are not in the Spirit that makes
Intercession; and that which is contrary is to be reproved and admonished in
private, by them that are in the Spirit of God, lest they pluck up the Wheat
and Tares together, and make a Confusion in the Church; for God is not the
Author of Confusion, God the Author of Peace. etc.
but of Peace and good Order: But that Spirit which is High and Lofty, and can
form a Praise by words, and Pray in his own Spirit, will judge such Sighing,
Groaning, Praising and Singing, as before; but that exalted Spirit is to be cut
down with the Sword of the Spirit: For if any should Sigh. or Groan, or
Rejoice, or make a joyful Sound, when another is Praying in the Spirit of God,
and Ministering in the Spirit, Spiritual Things; this the Spirit of Error cannot
bear, but swells, and breaks out into Confusion and Disorder, which (as I said
before) is to be cut down with the Sword of the Spirit; for he denies the
effect of true Prayer, and the Spirit of Prayer, which makes Intercession; who
has, or would have, no feeling of the effects of true Prayer, but that which
is Formal, and in the Imitation, that makes many to Groan and Sigh, which is
burdened with that Spirit; yea, many tender ones. And therefore all is to keep
low before the Lord, in the Humility, in the Spirit and Power; out of the
Imagination, Imitation, and Self-exaltation. And so keep in the Unity of the
Spirit, which is the Bond of Peace; Caution to keep cut Imagination, etc.
yea, the Bond of the Prince of Princes Peace; hear the Gospel of Peace is
known, and the Peace of God, which passes all Understanding; which is the King
of Kings, and Lord of Lords, and Prince of Princes Peace, who says, In me you
have Peace; and all is bound by the Spirit of God to keep his Peace; and all
his Believers, and faithful Ones, and true Christians, are bound to keep it
amongst themselves, and in all their Assemblies (his Church which he is the
Head of.

Worcester Goal, the 14th of the oath Month, 1674. G. F.

FRiends,
Epist. 313.
All that are sensible of the Power of God, and has received it, All live in
the Power of God.
which is Immortal and Everlasting, live in it, and grow up in it; for the
Power of God is over the Power of the Devil; which Power of God is the Gospel,
and it is called the Cross of Christ. And therefore all ye Men and Women, that
has received the Gospel, the Power of God, and come to be Heirs of it, take
your Possessions of the same; and init keep your Men's and Women's Meetings, in
your Possession of the Gospel, the Power of God; herein is the holy, heavenly
and powerful Order, which is Everlasting, and will have no end; and this Order
of the Gospel, which is the Power of God, is over all the Orders is the World,
and before they were, whether Jews, Gentiles, or Apostate-Christians. For the
Apostle says, in Gal. 1.11, 12. Now I certify you Brethren (to wit, the
Church) that the Gospel which was prech'd of me, was not after Man; for I
neither received it of Man, neither was I taught it, but by the Revelation of
Jesus. So I can declare to you all, in the Presence of the Lord, That the
Gospel, which is the Power of God, I neither received of Man, neither was I
taught it, but by the Revelation of Jesus Christ. And all you that have
received the same Power (to wit, the Gospel and are Possessors of it, can
testify, that the Gospel, the Power of God, is neither by Man, nor of Man;
though some Men and Women, in their Carnal Wisdom, may oppose it; but as Peter
says, 1 Pet. 1.11, 12. The Gospel by the Holy Ghost, sent down from Heaven,
was it which was preached to the Churches then, and so it is now.

And therefore all you that have received it, this heavenly and everlasting
Power of God, the heavenly Dignity, keep in your Possessions of it, beig Heirs
of it, and in the Holy Order of it, and walk as becomes the Gospel, and let
your Conversation be accordig to it, as the Saints, As the Saints did in
Primitive Times.
and the Churches were in the Primitive Times; for Christ That redeemed his
People out of their vain Conversation, and purchased them with his Blood, and
is become the Head of the Church, the heavenly and spiritual Man has given them
a heavenly and spiritual Possession and Order to walk in, and to keep in, which
is the Heavenly, and Eternal, the Power of God, whcih I am not asamed of, of
the Gospel of Christ; for it is the Power of God unto Salvation, to every one
that believes Romans 1. 16.

And the Cross of Christ is the everlasting Powere of God; so no longer do you
keep in Fellowship, but as you keep in the Cross of Christ; for the Enemy to
the Cross of Christ is the Mind that runs into outward and earthly things, and
sets up another God, to wit, their Belly; and another Glory, to wit, their
Shame; and therefore it is called the Mystery of the Fellowship of the Cross of
Christ, which is the Power of God; so this Fellowship is not of Man, nor by
Man; for it is in the Everlasting Power of God.

And therefore forsake not the Fellowship, And forsake not the Assembling your
selves together.
and the Assembling of your selves together in it, as the manner of some is,
and was; but Exhort one another, and so much the more, because ye see that the
Day draws nigh more and more unto you; for if there be a Sinning wilfully,
after that ye have received the Knowledge of the Truth, there remanins no more
Sacrifice for Sin, but a fearful looking for Judgment, and for Indignation,
which shall devour the Adversaries.

And therefore keep in the new and living Way, which is prepared for all the
true Believers, as you may see in Heb. 10.20. And exhort one another daily,
while it is called to day; mark while it is called to day; for thou may lose
the Harvest Day, and be hardened before to morrow; and lest any of you be
hardened, through the Deceitfulness of Sin; and this was the Practice of the
Church, that was in the Light, Power and Spirit of God, as in Heb. 3. And in
Titus, see how the Apotle admonishes him, who was in the Power of God, to
Exhort and Rebuke, with all Authority; and so forth, after he had showed him
how the Grace of God, which brings Salvation, which appears to all Men,
which taught the Saints how to live, etc. and they that went from it was to be
Rebuked, and others Exhorted to it, Tit. 2.11.

And also he Instructs Timothy, who was in the Power of God, to Exhort the
Church; and likewise that the Scriptures, Scriptnre profitable for Reproof,
Instruction, Correction. etc.
which were given forth by the Inspiration of God, were profitable for
Doctrine, to Reprove, Instruct and Correct, in Righteousness, that the Man of
God may be Perfect; thoroughly furnished to all good Works; mark, the Man of
God, not the Man of the World, that denies Perfection; and they that have the
Spirit of God, that gave forth the Scriptures, does the same, 2 Timothy 3.16, 17.
And they that was to Exhort, was to be an Example in Word and Conversation, in
Love, in Spirit, in Faith, and in Pureness; such was to give attendance to
Exhortation, and to Doctrine, and still are, as you may see in 1 Timothy 12.13.
And Peter says to the Church in the Primitive Times, which ought to be the
Practice of the Church of Christ now, as every Man has received the Gift, even
so let him minister the same one to another, as good Stewards of the manifold
Grace o God: If any Man speak, let him speak as the Oracles of God; if any Man
minister, let him do it as of the Ability which God gieth; mark, God gives,
and not Man, or as God has ministered to him, that God in all things may be
glorified through jesus Christ, to whom be Praise and Dominion for ever and
ever, Amen. 1. Pet. 4. And the Apostle says to every one of us is given Grace
according to the measure of the Gift of Christ; for there is one God and Father
of all, which is above all, and through all, and in you all; so every one, now
as then, is to mind him that is in them all, who is above all, and his Gift,
and the measure of Grace, the Gift fo Christ; for it will teach them, and bring
their Salvation; and through the measure of the Gift of Grace they grow up to a
perfect Man, and to the measure of the Stature of the fullness of Christ, as may
be seen Ephesians. 4.

And as God has dealt to every Man a Measure Of Faith, in the Faith they
should walk, which gives them Victory and access to God, which purifies their
Hearts; with which they please God. And the Apostle said to the Church then,
which is to be the Practice of the true Church now, That according to the Grace
that was given, whether we Prophecy, Every one to keep to the Measure of Grace
received.
let us Prophecy according to the Proportion of Faith; or any Office, let us
wait on the Office; or, he that Teaches, on Teaching; and he that Ministers,
on Ministering; or, he that Exhorts, on Exhortation; and he that distributeth,
let him do it with simplicity, etc. And be that shows Mercy, with
cheerfulness; as you may see, Romans 12. So all this is to be done, in the Faith,
and according to the Measure of the Grace given to every one; so that all may
be done in the Faith, according to the Measure of Grace given to every one, so
that all may be done in the Faith from one Spirit, which the manifestation of
is given to every one to profit withal; by which Spirit they are all baptized
into one Body, which Christ the heavenly Spiritual Man is the Head of. So all
Members, from the Eye to the Foot, are serviceable in the Body, in the Grace of
God, who are joined together by the Spirit of God, and to Christ their Head,
from whom they receive Nourishment; for the Spirit of God does distribute to
every one severally, as he will, and so are all made to drink (mark to drink)
into one Spirit; in which they have all Fellowship in the heavenly drinking of
the Spiritual Drink, and eating of the Spiritual Bread that comes down from
Heaven. Therefore every Man and Woman's Eye must be lifted up to Heaven, and
Minds, and Thirsts, and Desires, and Hearts, and the Soul that hungers, and the
Needy that sighs, and the Poor that groans, for this Bread that comes down from
Heaven; and the Spiritual Drink, and so they may have the Spiritual Bread in
their own Houses, and heavenly Water in their own Cisterns, with which they may
have to refresh them felves and others: So, here may all eat and drink to the
Praise and the Glory of God, for all drinks into one Spirit: And as they eat of
the Bread that comes down from Heaven, then they can say the Scripture is
fulfilled, all Eyes are Lifted up unto thee, thou opens with thy Hand; to wit,
thy Power; and thou fillest with thy Blessings; and then with their Souls,
Hearts and Spirits, Minds and Lips, they will show forth his Praise, in
praising God, the Creator, who is in all, over all, through all, and above all.

And therefore, in the Power and Name of Jesus, in whose Name you were
gathered, keep your Meetings, your Mesn and Women's Meetings, that in the Power
you may be kept in the Holy Unity, and Holy Order, in Diligence, in the Church
of God, and in his Business, and Affairs, Admonishing, Exhoring, Rebuking, such
as talk, and does not walk accordingly; such as professes, and does not
possess; and such as are the Sayers, and are not the Doers: So that every ones
Life and Conversation may be, as becomes the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ,
the heavenly Man, and keep in the Unity of the Spirit, which is the Bond of the
Prince of Princes Peace; which, if you break, you fonfeit your Riches in your
Estate and Inheritance of Life.

And some Men may say, Man must have the Power and Superiority over the Woman,
because God says, The Man must rule over his Wife; and that Man is not of the
Woman, but the Woman is of the Man: Man and Womin to be helps-meet, now as in
the beginning.
Indeed, after Man fell, that Command was; but before Man fell, there was no
such Command; for they were both meet helps, and they were both to have
Dominion over all that God made. And as the Apostle says, for as the Woman is
of the Man, his next Words are, so is the Man also by the Woman; but all things
are of God. And so the Aposcle. clears his own Words; and so as Man and Woman
is restored again, by Christ up into the Image of God, they both have Dominion
again in the Righteousness and Holiness, and are helps meet, as before they
fell. So then the Man is not without the Woman, neither the Woman without the
Man in the Lord. He that has an Ear to hear, let him hear. But there is some
dark Spirits that say, That for Women to meet together to worship God, apart
from the Men, is monstrous and ridiculous: But this dark Spirit has not defined
what Worship is; for if a Company of Women should meet together, and some of
these Women should kneel down, and lift up their Hands and Eyes to God, and
pray to God, or praise God, as John would have fallen down to the Angel; this
is Worsbip: And if the dark Spirit calls this Monstrous and Ridiculous, because
Men is not with them, then it will follow, it will be monstrous and ridiculous
to pray to God, or to worship God, except Men be with them: Therefore with the
Spirit of God, all may see what Confusion this dark Spirit is running into,
that is against Womens-Meetings, and that Women must not worship God apart from
the Men, and calls it monstrous and ridiculous; but from their own monstrous
Spirit, their own ridiculousness is manifest. For you may see in the Scripture
what Worship was, and what Worship is; such as was not to worship Idols; they
were not to lift up their Hands nor Eyes to them, nor to fall down to them, but
to worship God, and to bow bown to him, and to lift up their Hands and Eyes to
him; for all Men and Women must lift up their Eyes, Hands, Hearts and Spirits
to the Lord, and to bow to him, and worship him; and ought in all their
Meetings, that gather in the Name of Jesus, to wait upon the Lord for Wisdom,
Counsel and Under standing, that by it they may be ordered and directed in his
Holy Service and Business, in his Holy Church, which Christ is the Holy Head
of, as they are directed and ordered by the Lor's Power and Wisdom, to praise,
and magnify, and glorify him, with Thanksgiving, both in your mesn and Women's
Meetings, and all other Meetings, in the Name of Jesus Christ, for he is in the
midst of them, their Prophet, Priest, Teacber, Shepherd, Bishop and Counselor,
opening with his heavenly Power, feeding with his heavenly Food, counselling
with his heavenly Counsel, sanctifying them, to present them to the Holy God
without Spot, over-seeing them with his Holy Power, and Spirit; that God may
have the Praise and the Glory through Jesus Christ, in all, and through all,
who is bleffed for ever.

So Friends are not to meet like a Company of People about Town or
Parish-Business, neither in their Men's nor Women's Meetings, Frienas to feel the
Pewt of God in their Meetings for the Affairs of Truth.
but to wait upon the Lord; and feeling his Power, and Spirit to lead them, and
order them to his Glory; that so whatsoever they may do, they may do it to the
Praise and Glory of God, and in Unity in the Faith, and in the Spirit, and in
Fellowship in the Order fo the Gospel; and the Devil and his Instruments cannot
get into this Gospel, which is the Power of God; and that makes him rage; and
he would not have the Woman to have a share in it (who first deceived the
Woman, and now would again) nor the Men neither. Nor he cannot get into the
worship of God, which is in Spirit and Truth, which the Devil is out of; and
therefore keep your Possessions in the Power of God, and your Habitations there
within, and in Christ Jesus, who bruises the Head of the Serpent, who is the
Head of all false Orders, and Disorders, and has made the World like a
Wilderness, and he in his Instruments is against the Order of the Gospel, and
the Power of God; that Men and Women should be in the Possession of, and the
Dignity thereof: And this many spoke evil of in the Apostles Days, and so they
do now; but the Power stands, and the Order of it over his Head, and his
Instruments; and Christ is the same to Day as Yesterday, and so for ever; and
of the increase of his Government there is no End. So all that be Heirs of
Christ, and of his Power and Righteousness are Heirs of his Government; and
they see there is no End of the increase of it.

And you may see how the Apostle, after he had convinced People, he brought
them into Order of the Gospel; and the Jews after they came out of Egypt, they
were brought into the Order of the Law of God. And as the Christians come to
believe in Christ, then they are to come into the Order of the Gospel.

So as I was first moved of the Lord God, G. F. moved first to preach the
Gospel.
to go up and down the Nation to preach the Gospel, then after the Lord moved
me to go up and down, to exhort and to write, that all People might come into
the Possession of the Gospel (and the Order of it) which is the Power of God,
which was before the Devil was; which is not of Man, nor by Man and his Word;
by which all things are upheld and ordered to the Glory of God. And Christ is a
Priest after the Order of Melchizedeck. So you may see there was a Heavenly
Order in the Power and Spirit of Christ's Priesthood, as there was of Aaron's;
of whose Order Christ came not.

And the Apostle says to the Church, Let all things be done decently, and in
order: And this Order was in the Power of God, the Gospel, 1 Cor. 14.
Afterward to exhort to the walking in the Order of the Gospel.
where all Decency is. And the Apostle says, Though he was absent in the
Flesh, yet he was present with them in the Spirit, rejoicing and beholding
their order; to wit, the Churches Order, and their stead fastness in Christ.
And as you have received Christ Jesus the Lord, so walk in him.

So this was the Spiritual Order of the Gospel, which the Apostle in Spirit
beheld, and does admonish them unto; in whom their walking should be; to wit,
in Christ, the Spiritual heavenly Man; and not to walk in Old Adam, who was
without this Spiritual heavenly Gospel Order; which is the Duty of all true
Christians, to walk in Christ and his Gospel Order. And it is said in Psalm
37.23. The steps of a good Man is ordered by the Lord; and that is, by his
Power and Spirit.

And in Psalm 50. To him that orders his Conversation aright will I show
forth the Salvation of God; and whosoever offers Praises, Glorifies me, says the
Lord. So they that offers up Praises by the Spirit, they glorify God, which
all must keep to, and not quench. And all whose Conversation is ordered aright,
it is by the Power of God, the Gospel; for they are kept by the Power of God
unto the Day of Salvation; and this is the right Order, and everlasting Order,
which all must keep and walk in; by which all Conversations must be ordered
aright, that all may see their Salvation, Christ Jesus, who is the Head of the
Church, and who fees and receives him, has Life Everlasting, and through him
they have Peace with God. So all in him live, and meet, in whom you have Life
and Peace that is Everlasting, that none can take away; which Peace is not this
World's Peace.

And also the whole- Church of Christ, which are the Believers in the Light,
Children of the Light, living Stones, that makes up the Spiritual Household;
over which House Christ is the Head; True Believers, a Chosen Generation, etc.
all such Believers Men and Women, are a Chosen Generation, a Royal Priesthood,
and Holy Nation, a Peculiar People, that they should show forth the Virtue of
Christ, that has called them out of Darkness into his Marvelous Light.

So into him the Life, to wit, Christ Jesus, by whom the World was made, here
in him they know their Election, before the World began: So a Royal Priesthood,
Christ's Church is called, offering up Spiritual Sacrifices to God, who is a
Spirit; and this Royal Priesthood has a High Priest, made higher than the
Heavens, to wit, Christ Jesus; and this Royal Priesthood is not after the order
of Aaron, whose Order was proved by his Rods bearing Fruit, laid over Night in
the Tabernacle, and in the Morning brought forth Fruit; but your Order is
proved by your Rods budding, and bringing forth Fruit, in the Morning of God's
Day, which are the Fruits of the Spirit; through which Spirit you come to offer
according to your Order, which is in the Power of God, the Gospel; the
Spiritual Sacrifices, To offer up Spiritual Sacrifices, etc.
the first Fraies of the Spirit to God, who is a Spirit; according to your
Order (as I said before) of the Gospel, the Power of God: For the Jew outward
was to offer the first Fruits of the Earth, according to the Order of Aaron;
but according to the Order of the Gospel, you (both Men and Women) are to offer
the first Fruits of the Spirit to God, who is a Spirit, over all, blessed for
ever: And show how the Lord has blessed you in your Spiritual Fruits, and how you
have been Captives, in Spiritual Egypt, and how you were redeemed. Much more I
might Write concerning these things but they are hard to be uttered, or to be
born; for there has so much Strife and Foolishness entered into the Minds of
People, and a want of the stilness and quietness in the pure Spirit of God, in
which things are revealed that has been veiled; in which things are opened
that has been hid, and uncovered that has been covered: But wait all in the
Diligence, in the holy Life, by which the holy things are seen and received,
in which the holy Unity and Fellowship is. So no more but my Love.

G. F.

To all my dear Friends, Elect and Precious, in America.
Christ Jesus is the Author of, Epist. 314.
by his heavenly Ensign, To stand fast in the Faith.
in your heavenly Armor, and your Feet shod with the Preparation of the
Heavenly Gospel of Peace, and your Heads preserved with the Helmet of
Salvation, and your Hearts fenced with the Breast Plate of Righteousness, and
so stand feeling and seeing God's Banner of Love over your Heads, manifesting
that you are the good Ground, that God's Seed has taken Root downward in, and
springs upward in, and brings forth Fruits in some Sixty, and some Hundred fold
in this Life, to the Praise and Glory of God, always beholding the Sun of
Righteousness, that never sets, ruling the supernatural Day, of which you are
Children, and the Persecutors Sun (the heat of it, which rises and sets again)
cannot scorch your Blade, which it may do, that Seed that grows on the Stony
Ground.

And therefore be valiant for God's Truth upon the Earth, and fear him, And be
Valiant for God's Truth.
that can break their Fetters, their Goals, and their Bonds in sunder, and can
make your Fleece to grow again, after the Wolves have torn the Wool from your
Backs; for the Rod of the Wicked shall not be always upon the Backs of the
Righteous.

And therefore mind Christ, who is the first and last, who bruises the Head of
him who is the Head of all Persecutors, (to wit, the Devil.)

And consider how all the Faithful in all Ages suffered, from Righteous Abel to
Just Lot, and the Children of Isreal by Pharaoh, and the true Prophets by the
false, and Christ and the Apostles by the vagabond Professing Jews (out of the
Possession) and what rejoicing it was to them to suffer for the Lord Jesus, and
how it was given unto them, not only to Believe, but also to Suffer; so it was
the Gift of God to them, not only to Believe, but to Suffer, and to bear them
up in their Sufferings.

And consider how all the Martyrs and Saints have suffered since the Apostles
days, by the Heathens and false Christians; and so there is no new thing under
the Sun,

And therefore keep your Meetings in the Name of Jesus, And keep your Meetings
in the Name of Jesus.
whose Name is above every Name, in whose Name you have Salvation; and be
valiant for God's Truth upon the Earth, and sound his Name abroad, and keep in
the Truth, and give no just Occasion to the Adversary; for the Lamb must have
the Victory; and keep in the Lords Power, that is over all, and in his
peaceable Truth, in which you will seek the Good and Eternal Welfare and
Salvation of all People.

And the Prophet Isaiah speaking of Christ, says, In all their Afflictions he
was afflicted, and the Angel of his Presence saved them; so all Friends feel
the Lord in all your Afflictions.

And the Apostle says, We our selves glory in you (to wit, in the Churches of
God) for your Patience and Faith in all your Persecutions and and Tribulations
that you endure.

So here you may see the Saints are one another Joy in the Lord, who does
uphold them in all their Persecutions, Tribulations, and Sufferings; and
therefore look over the Devil, that is out of Truth, that makes to suffer, to
Christ, who bruises his Head; and in Christ, who is First and Last, in him have
you Rest, Life and Peace.

And you see by Faith, Examples of Faith.
Moses chose rather to suffer Afflictions with the People of God, than to enjoy
the Pleasures of Sin for a Season.

So by Faith, he esteemed the Reproaches of Christ greater Riches, than the
Treasures in Egypt.

And by Faith Moses forsook Egypt, not fearing the Wrath of the King, for he
endured, as seeing him who is invisible; and so by Faith God's People now
forsake Spiritual Egypt.

And by Faith the Mouths of the Lions were stopped; and by Faith they endured
Tortures, not accepting Deliverance that they might obtain a better
Resurrection; and by Faith they underwent all the cruel Mockings, Scornings,
Bonds and Imprisonments; and by Faith they underwent Stoning and Sawing
asunder, and were tempted and slain with the Sword; and they wandered about in
Sheep skins and Goats-skins, being destitute, afflicted and tormented; of whom
the World was not worthy, etc.

Now all these lived in the one Faith, by which they saw him who was invisible;
which is the Faith of God's Elect now (which Christ Jesus is the Author and
Finisher of) which Faith upholds his People now, as it did them, against the
Persecutors in Days and Ages past.

And hold fast the Hope which anchors the Soul, which is sure and steadfast,
that you may float above the Word's Sea; for your Anchor holds sure and
steadfast in the bottom, let the Winds, Storms and raging Waves rise never so
high: And your Star is fixed, by which you may steer to the Eternal Land of
Rest, and Kingdom of God. So, no more, but my Love to you all.

Swarthmore in Lancashire, the 12th of the 12th Month, 1675. G. F.

To Friends in Barbados.
DEar Friends,
To whom is my Love in the Holy Truth, Epist. 315.
my desire is, that you may all be valiant for it, against all Deceit, that the
Camp of God may be kept clean; Faithful in their Testimenies.
and all may be faithful in your Testimonies of Light and Life, against all
those things which have come up in this Night of Apostasy, from the Light,
Life, and Power of God: So look at the Lord and his Eternal Power, which has
brought you out of the Night of Apostasy, to his Eternal Praise, and his Power
has preserved you to this Day: The Lord with his glorious Power was with us,
in all our Assemblies, at this Yearly Meeting, he has the Dominion, and over
all evil Spirits gave Dominion to his People: Glory to his Name for ever. Amen.

Great Persecutions are in most Counties in England, and may are imprisoned in
many Places, and their Goods spoiled. and we had a very large Yearly Meeting
here, and very Peaceable and Quiet: And the Lord's Power and Presence was
richly manifest in our Meetings, and the Lord wonderfully supports Friends in
all their Trials and Sufferings, and Friends generally are in much Love and
Unity one with another.

Now Friends, we desire that at your Quarterly Meeting, you may write over an
Epistle to the Yearly Meeting in London, of the Affairs of the Church of
Christ, and the Prosperity, and the spreading of his Truth there; for we had a
large Epistle from the Half Year Meeting in Ireland, which declares, that
Friends were all in Unity there; and likewise and Account was given from
Scotland, that Friends were in Unity there; Account from diverse parts of
Friends Love, etc.
and likewise an Epistle was read in our Yearly Meeting here, from the Yearly
Meeting in Holland, which gives an Account, that Friends are in Love and Unity
there; and in Freezland, Germany, and other places; but at Embden and Dantzick,
they are under great Persecution; and we have lately a new Meeting set up
beyond Holland, who have been under much Suffexings and Persecutions, but they
stand faithful so the Lord. And at Algier, in the Turks Country, Friends there
have set up a Meeting amongst themselves (which are Captives) about Twenty
Friends, A Meeting of Captive Friends at Algier.
and some other of the Captives have been Convinced at that Meeting.

And one Thomas Tilby, a Captive Friend, has a Testimony for God, and speaks
there among them; and their Patroons, or Masters, lets them meet; and one of
their Masters spoke to a Friend, as he was going to a Meeting, and thought he
had been going to a public Tippling House, and he stopped him, and asked him
whether he was going, and he told him, to Worship the Great God; and he said,
it was well, and let him go; and some of the Turks said, They had some among
them of their People, that would not buy Stolen Goods. I have written a large
Epistle to them to encourage them, and that they might Preach the Gospel abroad
in those Parts, both in their Words, Lives and Conversations; and this Meeting
there, among the Turds, may be of great service.

And now Friends, all be careful of God's Glory, and seek the good one of
another; and strive all to be of one Mind and Heart, and that the Peace and
gentle Wisdom of God may order you all: And be courteous, and kind, and
tenderhearted one to another; and so the Lord God Almighty, in his Holy
Spirit, preserve you all in Unity and Fellowship one with another, Amen.

And Friends you may send a Copy of this to the Caribbe Islands, to be read in
their Quarterly Meetings; and you may read it in your own.

G. F.

DEar Friends,
Epist. 316.
All that feels the Life, and Power, and Spirit of the Living God, who are made
alive by Christ Jesus, the living, heavenly and spiritual Man; and sp are come
to feed upon the Heavenly and Spiritual Things, which Christ your Shepherd
directs you to, according to your Capacity, Age and Growth; and so to know him
that God has sent to Feed you, above all the Feeders that Men have sent. To
look to Jesus
Therefore look unto him, who with his Net (which is his Power) has gathered
you out of this great Sea, the World: And now, do not build like the Fools upon
the Sand of the Seashore; but upon the Rock and Foundation, which is Christ
the Life, that will stand over Death, Tempests, Winds and Storms; and so
looking unto Jesus, that is your Savior, that has saved you out of the Flood
you may walk upon the World's Sea, looking unto him that will finish it; and so
in truth you can say, Faith is your Victory; this is your Victory, even your
Faith, that Jesus has been the Author of, the heavenly and spiritual Man: And
Faith comes by hearing of the Word, by which all things was made and created,
and by which all things are upheld, which lives, and abides, and indures for
ever; which Word was in the beginning with God, and God was the Word; which
Word became Flesh, and dwelt among us, who beheld his Glory, the Glory, as of
the only begotten Son of God, who is risen, whom you come now to hear and see,
and not only so, but come to be made partakers of his Glory, and of his
Resurrection from the Dead: So blessed are they, They are blessed who have a
part in the first Resurrection.
and you that comes to have part in the first Resurrection, that on you the
second Death may have no power; and such as does, they know a dying to Sin
here, and putting off the Body of Sin and Death, and a crucifying the Old Man,
with his Affections and Lusts; and a putting him off, and to be dead from the
Rudiments of the World: And so they that die with Christ, shall live with him;
and they that are risen with Christ can never touch, taste nor handle the
Doctrines, Commandments, and dead Rudiments of Men of the World; but let such
put on the New Man, which (after the Image of God) is created in Righteousness
and Holiness; and such comes to live in Christ, and walk in him, and have their
part or lot in the first Resurrection, in Christ Jesus, and the second Death
has no power over them; but they live in him, that has Power over Death,
Hell, and the Grave (and over the Devil, and the Power of Death) Christ Jesus,
who was before he was, the First and Last; but they that will not believe in
Christ the Resurrection and the Life, are for Condemnation with the Devil, Hell
and Death, which is to be cast into the Lake of Fire; and over such the second
Death has Power. And therefore all that comes out of Death, and partake of the
first Resurrection, and know that they have been Dead in Sins and Trespasses,
and are quickened by Christ Jesus, and know a living here in Christ, and a dying
here with Christ, while upon the Earth (for John spoke it, whilst he was upon
the Earth) the second Death shall have no power over them; and they that does
not, the second Death has power over them, which (as I said before) must be
cast into the Lake of Fire, that burns with Brimstone; and such has not the
Blessing (as they in the first Resurrection) but the Curse, Woe and Misery. And
therefore all you who are the first Fruits to God, in the Resurrection by Jesus
Christ, and who know him, the Resurrection and the Life, and are translated
from Darkness to Light, and into the Kingdom of his dear Son, that stands in
Righteousness and Holiness, and Joy in the Holy Ghost; that you may show forth
righteous and holy Fruits, so that you may glorify God, the Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ; and may beas lights to the dark World, and Salt to season the
Unsavory; for every Sacrifice, which was offered up to God, it was to be
seasoned with Salt; Every Sacrifice to be seasoned with Salt.
so every Sacrifice now that is to be offered up to God, it must be seasoned,
and made savoury with this heavenly Salt, of his heavenly Spirit, so that all
may give a good savor to him, and be as a sweet smelling Sacrifice to the pure
holy God, that made all to his Glory; and you cannot bring forth this holy,
righteous, and pure Fruit unto God, but as you abide in Christ Jesus, the
Truth, who did descend and ascend far above all Principalities, Thrones and
Dominions, that he might have the Pre-eminence above all, and that ye in Him
might live above all unto God; and so every one of you that has received Christ
Jesus the Lord over all: So in Him (who is your Lord) walk, who is the Amen;
and there all the Living can Praise God together; and the Living gathers in the
Name of Jesus, the Name of him who was dead, and is alive again, and lives for
evermore, who is the First and Last: And here you all know, that there is no
Salvation in any other name under the whole Heaven, but in the Name of Jesus;
who is a Priest made highter than the Heavens. So in his Name keep your
Meetings, To keep their Meetings in the Name of Jesus.
in whom you have Salvation; and these are the true Meetings, and true
Gatherings, who feels Jesus Christ in the midst of them, their Prophet, their
Councellor, their Leader, their Light and Life, their Way and their Truth,
their Shepherd, that laid down his Life for them, that has bought you, his
Sheep, who feeds you in his Pastures of Life, and your heavenly Bishop, to
over-see you, that you do not go astray again from God: And so it is through him
you overcome, and he that overcomes shall go no more forth out of his Fold, out
of his Pastures, who shall sit down in the heavenly Places in Christ Jesus, who
is your Priest, that offered up himself for you, and Sacrifices you, and makes
you holy and clean, that he may present you blameless up to the the holy and
pure God; and here you come to witness and know him in his Offices, by his
Light, Spirit and Power; and all your Men's and Women's Meetings, in the Power of
God, which was before the Devil and his Power was, Of the holy Order of the
Cospel.
in the Holy Order of the Gospel keep them, you being Heirs of the Everlasting
Gospel, the Everlasting Power of God, that will last for ever; a joyful Gospel,
in joyful Order, a comfortable Gospel, so a comfortable Order, a glorious
Gospel, and glorious Order: So in this Everlasting Gospel, the Power of God, in
which you have Everlasting Fellowship and Dominion over all Sin and Wickedness,
Unrighteousness, Unholiness, and all that is bad whatsoever, you have Dominion
over, in the Gospel, the Power of God, yea over the Devil. And this Gospel may
every one testify unto, and to the Order of it, that it is not of Man, nor by
Man, neither is it received but by the Revelation of Jesus Christ, sent down
from Heaven, which all the Believers, that have part in the first Resurrection,
lives, walks, and keeps in the Order of this Gospel; and so has Power to
Admonish, Exhort, Reprove and Rebuke, with all Authority, such as talks of
Christ, and does not walk in him; such as profess him, and does not possess
him; such as lives not in the Religion that was set up above Sixteen Hundred
Years since; such as profess Christ, the Way, and walk not in the Way, the
Truth, and the Life, all such talkers, and not walkers, are dishonourers of
God, and causes his holy Name to be blasphemed among such as make no
Profession. And therefore all Friends that knows that you are alive to God, by
Jesus Christ, and knows your translation from Death to Christ the Life, and
from Darkness to Christ the Light; so that you may all come now to be helps
meet in your Restoration by Christ Jesus, into the Image of God, and his
Righteousness and Holiness, as Man and Woman was in before they fell: For
before they fell they were meet helps to subdue the Earth, they had both Power
over all that God made, while they kept in the Image of God, and his
Righteousness and Holiness; and so all that God made was blessed and good to
them; and so none can renew up into the Righteousness and Image of God, but
Christ Jesus. And therefore, I say, in him live and walk, and keep his
Gospel-Fellowship and Order; so that Men and Women may be meet helps in the
distinct Men and Women's Meetings one unto another in the Gospel, the Power of
God, Men and Women helps meet i^ their services.
in the Restoration, as Man and Woman was in before they fell: So if the Men
has any thing to communicate unto the Women, or the Women any thing to the Men,
in the Righteousness and Wisdom, and Power of God, in the Gospel Order, in
which the heavenly Fellowship, Unity and Order is kept, they may as Brethren
and Sisters. So here is the Foundation of our Meetings; and our Men and Women's
Meetings is testified unto by the Spirit of the Everlasting God, that the
Foundation of them is Christ, of the increase of his righteous, glorious and
spiritual Government and Peace there is no end; nor of the glorious,
everlasting, heavenly Unity and Order of his Heavenly Gospel, which the
spiritual and heavenly Minds keeps and walks in accordingly, which is not of
Man, nor by Man; so Man has no Glory, but God and Christ, alone, who is
Almighty, Omnipotent, Immortal, Everlasting and Eternal, and dwells in the
Light, blessed for ever, the Inexpressible God.

And so all keep the Unity of his Eternal Spirit, which is the Eternal Bond of
your Heavenly and Eternal Peace of your King of Kings, Lord of Lords, and
Prince of Princes Peace, Amen.

All Friends be faithful in the Lord's Power, and in his Spirit to the Lord God
and his Truth, that is over all, and will keep you over all, as you all do live
and walk in it, to the Glory of God, and bring forth Fruits that is heavenly to
his Praise. So live in the Possession of Life Eternal, which was before Death:
And so in this Power of Christ, nothing can get between you and the Lord, your
Everlasting Home. So with my Love.

Swarthmore, the 10th Month, 1675. G. F.

To all the Elect and Chosen of God in Christ Jesus, before the Foundation of
the World.
FRiends and Brethren,
Epist. 317.
It lies upon me from the Lord to write unto you these following Lines. First I
was sent out by the Lord God, in his Eternal Light and Power, G. F. sent to
preach the Word of Life.
to preach the Word of Life, which was before the Word of Death, and to turn
People to the Light, which was before Darkness, and the Power of it, that all
might be reconciled to God, by the Word; and that all might believe in the
Light, which is the Life in Christ the Word, and so become Children of the
Light, and to know Christ the Author of their Faith; and their Faith to stand
in him, who is the Author and Finisher of it; and to turn People to the Spirit,
which they had quenched, vexed, grieved, and rebelled against; that in that
Holy Spirit, they might see before the Spirit of Error was; and that in the
Spirit they may know God and Christ, and the Scriptures, which were given forth
from it; and that in the same Spirit, they might all have Fellowship one with
another, and with the Father and Son; and so to preach the Everlasting Gospel,
the Power of God (which was before the Devil was) that brings Life and
Immortality to Light, in all that do receive it, that they might see over him
that had darkened them: Which Gospel I received not of Man, nor by Man, but of
the Lord Jesus Christ, by his Holy Spirit, sent down from Heaven. And so after
I had received this, and preached it, and many Thousands were come into it, G.
F. advised to Gospel Order.
in several Places of the Nation, then by the same Power, and Spirit, and
Light, I was moved to advise, to the setting up the Men's Monthly and Quarterly
Meetings, and the Women's Meetings. So that all in the Power of God, the Gospel,
which was before the Devil was; and in the Light, which was before Darkness
was, and all in the Holy Spirit, before the unholy Spirit was: That they might
be all in their Possessions of the Light, Spirit, and Power of God; and therein
to keep this heavenly Order of the Gospel, being Heirs of Christ, and of his
Government; of the increase of which there is no End. Which Gospel Order is
over all the Orders of Adam in the Fall, or amongst the Apostates, from that
Gospel the Apostles was in, and will stand (the Power of God, the Gospel) when
they are gone. So that all the Heirs of Life, and Grace, and Heirs of the
Gospel, might be in their Possession, and keep in the Power which was before
the Fall was; and into this no Apostasy can come. So here in this Power of the
Gospel, all have their Liberty, and all have Unity, and all have Liberty in the
Spirit, and Unity in the Light, and Unity in the Faith, that Jesus Christ is
the Author of: So that all may see Him and his Government, which is over the
Government of Adam in the Fall; for he was before Old Adam was, and will be
when he is gone. And so that all might be in the Possession of Christ, and as
they have received him, so to walk in him, the Heavenly and Spiritual Man; of
the increase of whose Government there is no End; but there will be an End of
Old Adam's.

Now, A Caution to such who oppose God's Discipline in the Church.
Friends, whosoever shall come under what Pretense soever, to alter these
Meetings, or to deny or speak against the Men and Women's Meetings, it is the
Spirit of Confusion and Opposition, which would be seeming to do something, yet
it is Work is to disquiet the simple Minds; and it is the very same Spirit with
John Parrot's; and mark his End, and their End, and such as joins with it. For
it is against the Power of God, in which the Order is established, and the
Eternal Spirit and Light, in which the Men and Women's Meetings were set up; in
which all things should be established, and are fastened, in the Light which was
before Darkness was, and in the Power of God, before the Devil was, and in the
Holy Spirit, before the unclean Spirit was, and will stand when he is gone.
Therefore in it keep your Possessions in the Power of God, and in his Light and
Spirit, that you may know the Mountain of the Lord, established above all
Mountains. And they are none but loose Spirits, and such as tends to Looseness,
that stand against the Men and Women's Meetings, though it may come under
pretense to set up a better Way; or, under pretense only to alter them to
another Day; and, it may be, pretend their Fear of the Corruption of observing
a Day. All this is but from a corrupt Spirit of Darkness; which God will blast;
for we put no Holinss in the usual and constant Days of Monthly and Quarterly
Meetings. For I would have them all to know, that they who be Heirs of the
Gospel, and of Christ Jesus, are redeemed out of the vain observation of Days,
and out of the Jewish and Apostate Christians Holy Days, to God by Christ, who
made all Days, and every thing Good, and their Eyes are to the Supernatural
Day of Christ; and they are the Children of this Day.

And that is a creeping Spirit, To keep the appointed Days for Meetings.
that would go to alter the usual and constant Meeting-Days, under pretense to
prevent People from the Corruptions of observing a constant Day, or under a
pretense of keeping People out of a Form, and so would father their Deceit upon
God. For them who be in the Possession of the Power, by which all true Forms,
and all things are upheld (which Word and Power gives Form and Being to all
Things) and all they that are in it, are above all such Things, and Judges all
such dark Spirits. And they that be in the Observation of Days, they are not
Heirs of the Power, nor of Christ, who was before Days was; and such cannot sit
in the heavenly Places in Christ Jesus, to do his Churches Business. So, I say,
that after People were turned to the Light, Power and Spirit of God; and they
all come into the Light, Power and Spirit of God; all such are to make up the
Men and Women's Meetings; and in it to feel the Wisdom of God, by which all
things were made and created, and with it to be ordered, and to order all
things to God's Glory. So that Wisdom may be justified of her Children.

Now concerning laying all Marriages before the Men and Women's Meetings. Some
have darkly objected, This is not as was in the Beginning. Whereas in the
Beginning we were but few in Number, and could not presently be so sensible of
the service of them, as when grown more numerous, and a Body of People; but in
the Beginning there was a Care things might be kept clear: For, in 1653,
several Friends came to me, concerning Marriage, and to know what they should
do in that Case. And I waited upon the Lord, and saw in his Eternal Light, that
all that did Marry, they should lay it before some faithful Friends in the
Wisdom of God, that they might see into it: These were my Words then, as in a
Paper of mine, given forth that Year, may be seen.

And afterward I was moved to go round the Nation, to advise to the setting up
the Men and Women's Meetings, and to write to those Places where I could not go;
That all the Faithful might keep their Meetings in the Power of God, and in it
be settled, and established: And that all Marriages might be laid before the
Men and Women's Meetings, who were in the Wisdom of God, and in the Possession
of his Gospel Order, who had the Care of the Church of Christ's Business, that
they in the Wisdom of God might look into it, and see that they were clear from
all other Persons, etc.

And therefore now that Pretense is generally taken away from all, they cannot
say now, That they cannot tell where to find a Meeting of the Faithful, to lay
their Marriages before them, before they declare it in the common Public
Meetings. Now that the Men and Women's Meetings are settled in the Power of God,
to look after the Churches Affairs; for all knows where they may be found at
certain Days, Times and Places, to lay it before them. And they that go
together in the Truth and Power of God, will be willing to lay their Marriages
before them that be in the same Truth and Power of God: So that all things may
be done in Truth, Love, and Unity, and Pureness, Clearness and Holiness, to the
Praise and Glory of God. And all, whosoever they be, that oppose this good
Order, are loose Spirits, out of the Power of God; and their Work tends to
Looseness, and to draw into a loose Liberty, under a deceitful Pretense of
keeping People out of Forms.

So the same Power and Spirit, that directed all Marriages to be laid before
the Faithful, at the first, when there were but few Friends, in many parts of
the Nations, and no Men's nor Women's Meetings: I say, the same Power of God that
did convince Friends at the first, the same Power and Spirit directed to the
setting up the Men's and Women's Meetings, that they might be in the Possession
of the Gospel, and its Order. And the same Power and Spirit of God set up our
Order for Marriages in our Men's and Women's Meetings: All to seeck first to the
Parents before they engage the Affection of the Child.
And that all are to speak first to their Parents, and have their Consent,
before they engage the Affections of the Children; and this Order is settled by
the Power of God, in the Men and Women's Meetings; for some formerly did speak
to neither Father nor Mother, till they had drawn out, and entangled the
Affections of the Daughter; and that brought great troubles and discontent upon
the Parents, and among Friends. And therefore this is to be enquired into, in
the Men and Women's Meetings, where their Marriages are to be spoken of: So as
Friends come to Truth, which the Devil is out of, and to the Power of God,
which was before the Devil was; all being Heirs of Life, and the Gospel, and
Heirs of Christ; I say, take your Possession of Life, and come into the Order
of Life, and into the Order of the Gospel, and then you will have a Witness in
your selves, and will say with me, our Order is not of Man, nor by Man, but by
Jesus Christ, and his Gospel; and of his Government, the increase of which
there is no end. And so all be faithful, keeping in your Possessions, and in
your Inheritance, in that where no Apostasy can come: For I must tell you, here
is the same Spirit stirring, if it could prevail, that would lay waste God's
Heritage, and bring you out of your Possessions, that it might rule over you:
But if you keep your Possessions of the Gospel Order, the Power of God in
Christ Jesus, you will rule over it, being in and upon the Foundation of God,
that stands sure; thought some earthly loose Spirits it may draw after them.
But mark the end of it; for the Power remains, and will remain, and the Seed
reigns over the Head of all such false Spirits, A Warning to Oppose rs.
and Orders, and Governments, that is not set up by Jesus Christ, and it will
grind them to pieces: That is the Word of the Lord God to you, let whoever will
oppose it; for the Power was before they were, and will stand when they are
gone: For all our Men and Women's Meetings, which are set up by the Power and
Spirit of God, these Meetings are for the Practice of Religion, and to see that
all that do profess Truth, do practice it and walk in it. And all such as are
against them, are begetters of People into talking, and not walking, and of
Saying, but not Doing; and such always were Judged by all them that walk in the
Truth, and in the pure Religion, that is undefiled before God, that kept and
keeps from the Spots of the World: And all such are never like to prosper, that
are against the Practice of the pure Religion.

And therefore, as I said before, live in the Possession of the Gospel and its
Order, the Power of God, which was before the Devil was, or the Apostasy
either; and know his Government; of the increase of which there is no End, who
is set up from Everlasting to Everlasting, the Amen.

And live in Love and Unity one with another; for that edifies the Body of
Christ, and that is it, which will bear all things; and in the Patience run the
Race, and have the Crown, and keep in the Meekness of the Lamb, that will have
the Victory.

And such Opposers as cries against Forms, and Prescriptions, and Edicts of Men,
they are the most in it themselves this Day, and gathers into a Separation, by
Prescriptions and Subscriptions; and under a Pretense of crying against such
things, oppose the Power, and them that be in the Possession of it. But the
Power will blast them, and make them to wither, like the Grass and Corn on the
Housetop, as it did John Parrot and his Company; to whom it was the Word of
the Lord then, and so it is to these now; and the Word lives, and abides, and
endures for ever.

So with my Love in the Lord Jesus Christ to you all, in whom is my Labor and
Travel for your Eternal Good and Settlement, upon the Eternal Rock. Amen.
Farewell.

Let this be read in the Men and Women's Meetings, when Friends are assembled
together.

Swarthmore, the 12th of the 12th Month, 1675. G. F.

ALL Dear Friends and Brethren,
Keep up your Testimony, Epist. 318.
in the Light, Power and Spirit of God, for the Worship, Friends to keep their
Testimony against the Antichristian Ministry.
that Christ set up above Sixteen hundred Years since, in the Spirit and Truth
(which Truth the Devil is out of, who is an unclean Spirit) which is a Worship
that cannot be shaken. And keep up your Testimony, against the Antichristian
Ministry, that is inwardly ravened from the Spirit of God, and the Light of
Christ, and his Antichristian Tithes, and Maintenance, which he has set up,
by that inwardly ravening Spirit, who has ravened from the Spirit of Christ,
who said, Freely you have received, freely give; and Christ's Ministers coveted
no Man's Silver, nor Gold, nor Apparel. And keep up your Testimony in the Power
of Christ, for the Church that is made of Living Stones, And for the true
Church.
(which he is the Head of) who are the Firstborn written in Heaven, a
Spiritual Household, a Royal Priesthood, that offers up Spiritual Sacrifices: So
that every one may have something to offer from the Spirit to God, who are of
the Church that is in God; gathered by the Power and Spirit of Christ to him;
who feed on the Bread, that comes down from Heaven; and drinks of the heavenly
Wine, and so become Flesh of his Flesh, and Bone of his Bone, and sits together
in the heavenly Places in Christ Jesus; who is the heavenly and Spiritual Head
of his Church, which is written in Heaven, etc. And also keep your Testimony,
for your pure and undefiled Religion, And for the pure Religion.
etc. And for the Wisdom that is above, etc. And keep your Testimony for the
Cross of Christ, which is the Power of God, by which the World is crucified to
you, and you to the World. And you that were dead, and are risen with Christ,
keep your Testimony for those things, that you have sought, and have found, and
received from above; (those heavenly Things) where Christ sits, at the
Right Hand of God.

And likewise keep your Testimony, for the new and living Way, Christ Jesus;
and likewise for the Light of Christ, which you believ in and become Children
of the Light and of the Day. The New and Living Way.


And keep your Testimony for your Men and Women's Meetings, in the Power of God,
by which you are gathered out of the Apostasy, and over it, into the
Everlasting Gospel Order, as was in the Apostles Days: Which Gospel Order is
not of Man, nor by Man; but by Christ, the Spiritual Man.

And all ye that are Ministers of this Gospel, help and encourage all those
Women in their Meetings, Ministers of the Gospel to help the Women Laborers
therein.
that Labors in the Gospel; and the Women may in the same Power of God (the
Gospel) help and assist you: So that you may be helps meet together, in the
Restoration by Christ, in his glorious Gospel and Order, who never fell, nor
changed, nor will change. So that all the Plants that God has planted, may
flourish, bud, and spring, and bring forth Fruit, to the Praise and Glory of
God, in his Power: And this Gospel of Christ Jesus, is Everlasting, and Holy,
and Glorious; which you all, that feel it, are Heirs of; which has brought
Life and Immortality to Light in you; which Gospel, the Power of God was,
before the Devil was, that had darkened you. Now, in this Power of God, the
Gospel, is all your Comfort, and glad Tidings; and an Everlasting Joy, in this
Everlasting Gospel; and an Everlasting Possession and Comfort, in the
Everlasting Order, which is the Gospel of Christ Jesus, who is the First and
Last, the Spiritual heavenly Man; his Spiritual and Heavenly Order, for his
Spiritual and Heavenly Ones to keep and walk in.

And Friends, keep your Testimony, against the World's vain Ways, Words,
Fashions, Customs and Worships, as you did at First, and to your proper, Sound
plain Language.

And Friends, keep your Testimony to the Lord in all your Sufferings and
Afflictions; for by the Testimony of Jesus, and the Blood of the Lamb, did and
does the Saints overcome; and the Testimony of Jesus is the Spirit of
Prophecy; by which they see him that gives them their Victory; and they feel
him that suffered for them; and in all their Sufferings and Afflictions, he
suffers with them, and is afflicted with them; who is able to save to the
uttermost, and to help and succor you, in all Distresses; who is blessed for
ever. Amen.

And Friends, To keep their Testimony for Christ our Counselor, Priest,
Bishop, etc.
keep your Testimony, (who are Children of the New Covenant, and are taught of
God; in whose Hearts, God has written his Law, and put it in your Minds) for
your Counselor and Leader, which God has given you; and for your Prophet,
which God has raised up, whom you ought to hear; and for your Shepherd, that
God has given, who laid down his Life for you, who has Redeemed you from the
World's Hireling Shepherds, and feeds you in his Pasture of Life, and brings
you to Rest in his Fold. And keep your Testimony for Christ, your Priest, who
is made higher than the Heavens, who laid down his Life for you, and sanctified
you, and presents you to God, without Spot or Wrinkle; who is Holy, Harmless,
and separate from Sinners: And so keep your Testimony for your Heavenly
Spiritual Bishop, Christ Jesus, who is the Bishop of your Souls, who does
oversee you with his Light, Power and Spirit.

And keep you Testimony, for the Sufferings and Resurrection of Jesus Christ;
for they that suffer with him, shall Reign with him: But they that shuffle, and
flee, in the time of Persecution, To keep our Testimony to Christ, etc.
and denies him before Men, such he will deny; or, be ashamed of, before his
heavenly Father. Who denies him, or is ashamed of him, before earthly Men, such
fear the Wrath of Men, more than the Wrath of God; and such are the stony
Ground, whose Blade is scorched up by the Heat of Persecution; but the good
Seed, sown in the good Ground, that brings forth Thirty, Sixty, and an Hundred
fold in this Life.

And keep your Testimony, for your Unity in the Faith, that gives you Victory;
and your Fellowship and Unity in the Spirit, which is the Bond of the Prince of
Princes, King of Kings, and Lord of Lords Peace. Amen.

G. F.

To Friends in Nevis, and the Caribee Islands.
DEar Friends,
To you all in Nevis, Epist. 319.
and the Caribee Islands there abouts, I have seen a Letter from some of you,
wherein I understand that there has been some Scruple concerning Watching, or
sending forth Watchmen in your own way.

Truly Friends, this I declare to you, Advice to Friends, to keep Watch in
their own Way, without Arms, etc.
That it is a great Mercy of the Lord, to subject the Govenor's Mind so much by
his Power and Truth, that he will permit you to Watch in your own way, without
carrying Arms, which is a very civil thing, and to be taken notice of: For,
Could Friends obtain the same in Jamaica, and other places, they would
willingly have done it, and did profer themselves for to do it to the
Governors. But because that they would not bring Swords and Guns, and other
Arms, to watch against the Spaniards, as they pretended; their standing Fine
was about 17 s. each Man's neglect, but they took often 30 s. worth for it, and
tied some of them neck and heels besides, till the Blood has come forth at
their Mouths, Nose, and Ears: And this I have seen upon Record, who freely
profer'd to watch in their own way, but it would not be accepted. And in other
places it has been the same.

And now as for Watching in it self: Don't you Watch your Plantions against
Thieves in the Night? And are not common Watches, set to discover Thieves in
the Towns, or House-Breakers, or such as might wickedly Fire Houses? Such civil
Things we were subject to, and do submit our selves, for Conscience sake, unto
every such Ordinance of Man, which are for the punishment of Evil Doers, and
for the praise of them that do well.

Now those Evil Doers that may Rob your Plantations, or Houses, you complain
to the Magistrates, for the Punishment of them, though you cannot Swear against
them; or if the Indians come to Rob your Plantations, or Houses, you complain
to the Magistrates for the Punishment of such evil doers, to stop them, which
Magistrates are for the Praise of them that do well. So this Watching is for
the preventing Thieves and Murderers, and stopping Burning of Houses: So we do
submit to every such Ordinance of Men for the Lord's sake; for the Apostle
exhorted to Submission; whether it be to the King, as supreme; or Governors; as
unto them that are sent by him; for the Punishing of the Evil Doers, Of
Subjection to Magistraies.
and for the praise of them that do well; for so it is the Will of God, that
with well doing you might put to Silence the Ignorance of Foolish Men, as free,
not using your Liberty for a Cloak of Maliciousness, but as Servants of God; so
that Justice, and Truth and Righteousness may be set upon the Unrighteous and
Unjnst, not using this Liberty for a Cloak of Unrighteousness to any one, but
as Servants in the Righteousness of the Righteous God, as you may see in 1 Pet.
2.13. and in Titus 3.1. Put them in mind to obey Magistrates, and to be ready
to every good Work: Mark (every good Work) that is against the evil, as
Drunkeness, Murder, Whordom, these and all manner of Uncleanness; so far we can
obey them, in the Lord's Power and Truth, as they act against the Evil, and
that which dishonours God; and if they Act against the Good, or if they would
comple us to those things, which is matter of Conscience in us toward God, we
resist not, bur suffer under them: For Rulers are not to be a Terror to the
Good Workers, but to the Evil, and will thou then not be afraid of the Power;
do that which is good, and thou shall have Praise of the same; for he is a
Minister of God to thee for good, for he should keep down the Evil, but if thou
do that which is Evil, be afraid; for he bears not the Sword in vain; for
he is a Minister of God to Revenge and Execute Wrath upon him that does Evil.
Who is the Executor of Wrath upon the Evil Doer.
So he is the Revenger and Executioner of the Wrath upon the Evil Doer, as God
has placed him, upon the Adulterer, and him that Steals or Kills, and bears
false Witness, etc. But when the Magistrate turns his Sword backward upon the
Just and Righteous, then he abuses his Power, and therein the Just suffers
under him: And therefore such has been Warned by the Just, as you may see
through the Scriptures. So you are not to be the Revengers, but he is the
Revenger; and to that Power that executes the Revenge, and brings the Sword
upon the Adulterer, Murderer, Thief, false Witness, and other Evil Doers, we
must be subject to that Power, and own that Power, not only for Wrath, but for
Conscience sake; which is for the Punishment of the Evil Doers, and the Praise
of them that do well. For if any should come to Burn your House, or Rob you, or
come to Ravish your Wives or Daughters, or a Company should come to Fire a City
or Town, or come to Kill People; don't you watch against all such Actions? And
will not you watch against such evil things in the Power of God in your own way?
You cannot but discover such things to the Magistrates, who are to Punish such
things; and therefore the Watch is kept and set to discover such to the
Magistrate, that they may be Punished; and if he does it not, he bears his
Sword in vain. So if thou watches thy own Plantation against Thieves, in thy
own way, which thou art desired, for the good of thy self and Neghbours,
against such as would Burn thy Plantation, and thy Neighbors, and Destroy and
Rob you, wilt not thou discover this to the Magistrates, to Punish such Evil
Doers, who is set for the Punishing of the Evil Doers, and Executing Wrath upon
them, and for the Praise of them that do well? Surely Yes.

And for this cause we pay tribute to them, and give Caesar his due, that we may
live a Godly and Peaceable Life under them, as they are God's Ministers
attending upon this very thing, to wit, the Punishing of the Evil Doers, and
the Praise of them that do well; for the Law was not made for the Righteous,
but for the Sinner and Disobedient, which is good in its place. Now if they do
not do their Duty, we are clear in giving them their Tribute or Customs; I say,
if they do not do their Duty to keep down Evil Doers, and be for the Praise of
them that do well, God Almighty will turn against them. But if the Magistrate
would have all, both God's due, and Cesar's too, that we cannot give; for God
must have his Worship, his Praise, his Honor, and his Due; and Caesar must have
his Due, Render to God the things which are his, and to Caesar the things which
are his.
his earthly Custom and Tribute; and so herein, we render unto God the things
which are God's, and unto Caesar the things which are his. And whereas some may
say, That the Apostle would not eat Flesh, lest he should offend his Brother,
that was upon a Religious Account; and not to give offense to the Magistrate,
who is set for the Punishing of the Evil Doers, and for the Praise of them that
do well.

And whereas the Apostle says, Col. 2. Wherefore if you be dead with Christ,
from the Rudiments of the World; why, as though living in the World, are ye
subject to Ordinances, touch not, taste not, handle not, which all are to
perish with the using, after the Commandments and Doctrines of Men? Now these
Ordinances, these Doctrines, these Commandments, were concerning Religion and
Worship; and that was another thing, where the Apostle says, Be subject to
every Ordinance of Man, for the Lord's sake; for the Punishment of Evil Doers,
1 Pet. 2.13. For this was for the Lord's sake, which was for the Praise of them
that do well, and for the Punishment of the Evil Doer. So he makes a
distinction here.

And you know that Masters of Ships, and Friends, have their Watches all Night
long, and they Watch to preserve the Ship, and to prevent any Enemy, or Hurts,
that might come to the Ship, by Passengers, or otherwise.

And Christ came in the Fourth Watch of the Night, walking on the Sea, etc. And
Peter was in the Ship, and his Disciples, as you may see in Matthew. 14. and in
Mark 6. and 48.

And Simon Peter had part of the Ship, as you may see in Luke 5. And so it was
that James and John, Sons of Zebedee were Partners with Simon.

And Christ says, Luke 12.38, 39. speaking of his Coming, We are to keep our
Watch, both outwardly and inwardly
and Exhorting to watch, If he (to wit, the Master) should come in the second
or third Watch, and find them Watching, blessed are those Servants. So this
Watching was for Christ, and against Sin and Evil in their own Hearts. And then
he brings a Comparison, And this know, that if the good Man of the House, said
he, had known what Hour the Thief would come, he would have watched, and not
suffered his House to be broken up, etc.

And so here is the good Man's watching against Sin and Evil without, and the
Spoiler and Thief without, whom the Magistrate is to Revenge, and to lay his
Sword upon: And here is also a watching against Sin and Evil within, and a
waiting to receive Christ the Lord at his Coming.

And as there is a shutting the outward Doors, to keep out the Murderers and
the Thieves, and a Bolting and Locking of them out: So there is a shutting up,
and locking the Door of the Heart, to keep out the Adulterer and Murderer, and
all that is Deceitful, from coming within, into the Heart.

And Friends, the Priests and Professors used to bring this Scripture, You must
be subject to every Ordinance of Man for the Lords sake; to the end that we
should pay them their Maintenance, and hold up their Worship.

And when the Magistrates brought that Scripture for these ends, we could not
obey them in these things, nor touch, nor taste their Ordinances, Doctrines nor
Commandments. But to be subject to every Ordinance of Man for the Lord's sake;
which was for the Punishment of Evil Doers; as Drunkards, Thieves, Murderers,
Adulterers, and such like, and to keep down such Evil Doers, and that we might
live a Godly and Peaceable Life under them; which was for the Praise of them
that do well; this we always owned, and were subject to, and watched against,
and declared against in our own way, and laid such Actors and Actions before
the Magistrates, for them to punish, and keep down with their Power, If a
Magistrate compel against our Conscience, we patiently Suffer.
which is their Sword of Justice; but if they would compel us to things that we
could not do, contrary to our Conscience, for the Lords sake, we suffered for
it.

So where Friends has the Government, as in Rhode Island, and that Province
Friends was willing to watch, in their own way, and they made a Law, that none
should be compelled to take Arms.

So Friends have always proffered the Magistrates, though they could not join
with then in carrying Arms, Swords and Pistols; yet to watch in their own way
against the Evil Doer.

And this they have proffered in Barbados, as I have heard, to discover, if
Negroes should rise up to Burn Plantations, or Steal, or do any hurt, or other
Indians invading their Land.

And so if the foreign Indians should come to Steal your Goods, or to Kill; for
you to be left to your freedom to watch in your own way, and to discover to the
Magistrate such as would destroy your Lives or Plantations, or Steal, let them
come from at home, or come from abroad, such Evil Doers the Magistrate is to
punish, who is for the Praise of them that do well. So that you may live and
lead a Godly and Peaceable Life under them: And you that are Righteous, you
watching, discovering and declaring against such Evil doers, and things, you
clear your selves, and demonstrate that your testimony is against such things:
And if the Magistrates should be evily inclined, and God should bring the Evil
Doers as a Rod upon them; yet you are clear in your testimony, that knows
Truth, and are in your Duty, and in your Obedience. And for this cause he has
his Tributs, To give to the Magistrate Tribute, Custom and Due, and double
Honor.
and his Custom, and his Due, and double Honor, if he Rules well, and God has
his Praise, and his Honor; and in that Power and Truth of God, which is
against Untruth, and the Power of Darkness; and in the Light, which is against
Evil; and in the Life, which is against Death, you discover the Bad to him, for
him to Punish them upon true Evidence; and if he does not do it, it will lie
upon him.

And if he be a Praise to the Evil, and a Discouragement to the Good, then the
Lord will deal with him; and though to such, for Conscience, and for the Lord's
sake, we cannot be subject to the Evil, but rather suffer thereby, and are
subject to that which punishes and keeps down the Evil, and are glad of it: And
we desire that Justice were uppermost in all Magistrates, that they would hear
Friends at their Yea or Nay, that do come to them, and discover to them the
Evil, and that they might see what they should do, and what they should not do.
So Friends may discover all that which is Evil, which comes to devour and
destroy, both within and without; both within the Island and without, to them
that should keep it down.

And so, in the Lord's Everlasting Power, in which Freedom is and Dominion, the
Lord God Almighty keep you in his Power and Life, in the Gospel, which brings
Life and Immortality to Light in you, that you may see over the Devil that had
darkened you, and kept you in a separation from God: So that by his Gospel, the
Power of God, which was before the Devil was, and will be when he is gone, who
was the Author of Strife: That in that Power you may all freely approach to
God, and in it feel nothing betwixt you and the Lord of hindering your Passage
unto him. So that in this Gospel, the Power of God, in which Life and
Immortality is brought to Light, you may keep and feel your Everlasting
Fellowship and Order of the Gospel; which is not of Man, nor by Man.

So with my Love to all Friends in all those Parts, as though I named them; and
be at Peace one with another; neither Judge one another about such things, but
live in Love, which does edify. And in the Power of God, that your Hearts, and
Souls, and Minds, may unite together in it; and all to walk as becomes the
Gospel: That our Lives and Conversations may preach, etc.
And let your Lives and Conversations Preach, that with a Measure of the Spirit
of God, you may reach to that of God in all; so that his Name may be glorified,
and he honored, in your bringing forth much heavenly Spiritual Fruit, from the
heavenly Seed, that Christ the heavenly Seeds-Man has sown in your Hearts;
that so an Hundred fold of Holiness, Righteousness, Godliness, Virtue and
Piety, from this heavenly Seed, you may bring forth and increase in this
Lifetime, and in the World to come reap Life Everlasting.

And give no occasion to your Adversaries, neither in your Lives nor Words; but
that you may all serve God in the New Life, showing forth that you are new Men,
and that you are renewed in the Image of God, and that you are born again of
the Immortal heavenly Seed, by the eternal Everlasting Word, that lives, and
abides, and endures for ever. And that you do feed upon the heavenly Milk and
Bread from above, and that your Conversation is in Heaven, and that you are
clothed with the fine heavenly Linen, which is the Righteousness of Saints,
which is Christ's (the Heavenly and Spiritual Man's) Livery; by which his
Servants are known by his Badge of Righteousness, and distinguished from all
the Servants of Old Adam, Egypt, Sodom and Babylon, with their Badge of
Unrighteousness.

And so be valiant for God's Truth upon the Earth, And be valiant for the
Truth, etc.
and spread it abroad, preach Christ and his Kingdom, his Light, his Grace, his
Truth to Men; that all should walk in it; and his dreadful Day upon all the
Talkers of God, Christ, his Prophets and Apostles Words, that do not walk in
the same Power, Spirit and Life, Grace and Truth, as they walked in.

I say, Preach this to the Magistrates, and amongst the Heathen-men, and show
your seles to be quickened (by Christ) who have been dead in Sins and
Trespasses; but that you are now made alive by him; and so show forth his
Light, Life and Truth, and that you are awakened to Righteousness; and
therefore show it forth to them that are asleep in the Unrighteousness: So that
the Lord's Glory, and righteous Power, Truth, Light and Life, may flow over
all, to his Glory over all, for ever. Amen.

And much I could write to you concerning these things, but I have not been
very well; but, blessEd be the Lord God, his Everlasting Seed is over all,
which reigns from Everlasting to Everlasting, and my Life is in it.

And therefore stand and live in the Lord's Name and Power, which is against
all manner of Unrighteousness; and in the Light, which is against Darkness, and
all the Works thereof; and in the Life, which is against Death, and over Death,
and all the Actors of it: and in the Truth, that is over all Evil, and against
all the Doers thereof, within and without. And so, that in the Light, Life,
Power and Truth of God, and in his Holy Spirit, you may live in Fellowship, and
in the Unity of the Spirit, which is your Bond of Peace; yea, even of the
Prince of Princes Peace; which the World cannot take away from you.

Swarthmore. the 5th of the 9th Month. G. F.

An Encouragement to all the Faithful Womens-Meetings in the WORLD,
FRiends,
Epist. 320.
You may read in the old World, how one FAmily after another, till Noah's time,
served the Lord God. And then from Noah, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and their
Wives, and after Moses and Aaron had brought the Children of Israel out of
Egypt, and that they were come to be a great People, Moses said, I would all
the Lord's People were Prophets, Numb. 11.29. And when a young Man said unto
Moses, Eldad and Medad do Prophecy in the Camp; Moses desired that all the
Lord's People were Prophets.
and he would have had Moses to forbid them: But Moses ansered and said unto
him again, Would to God all the Lord's People were Prophets, and that the Lord
would put his Spirit upon them.

So Moses here (who was Captain, Governor, and Judge over Israel) was far from
restraining any from Prophesying in the Camp, but reproved his Envy that would
have had him forbid them; and did moreover encourage them, by saying, I would
to God all the Lord's People were Prophets: And surely all the Lord's People
are made up of both Men and Women.

And the Lord having given his Law to the Children of Israel, which was Holy,
Just, and Good, the Lord said, I have poured out my Spirit upon the House of
Israel: So that by this Spirit, they might understand his Law, which was
Spiritual, Ezekiel. 39.29.

Now in the time of the Law, there were the Assemblies of the Women;

And all the Women those Hearts stirred them up in Wisdom, Assemblies of the
Women under the Law.
these Women wrought about those holy Things that belonged to the Tabernacle
and Sanctuary; as you may see in Exodus 35.

And likewise the Assemblies of the Women, in the 38th Chap. and of the Women's
assEmbling at the Door of the Tabernacle of the Congregation; and in the
Margent it is said, They assembled by Troops.

Now, here you may see, That the Women were in the Work and Service of God, as
well as the Men; and they had their Assemblies. For God had poured out of his
Spirit upon the House of Israel, to give them an Understanding, both Men and
Women, to do that, and make those things which God had commanded, which were
called holy things; which were but Figares and Shadows of the Substance, Christ
Jesus, the Holy One.

Now Moses and Aaron, and the Seventy Elders, did not say to those Assemblies
of the Women, We can do our Work our selves, and you are more fitter to be at
home to wash the Dishes; or suchlike Expressions; but they did encourage them
in Work and Sevice of God, in those things which God had commanded them in the
time of the Law.

For God having pured his Spirit upon the House of Israel, God give his Spirit
to the House of Israel under the Law.
to give them an Understading, to do those things, which God had commanded
them; by which Spirit their Hearts were stirred up to do God's Work, both Males
and Females.

And in the time of the Law, the Women were to offer up Sacrifices and
Offerings, as well as the Men, upon God's Altar; as you may see, Hannah when
she brought Samuel, and offered him up to the Lord, she brought him to the
House of the Lord in Shiloh, and when she brought him, she took up with her
three Bullocks, besides Flower and Wine: So see how she paid her Vows to the
Lord, and offered up her Sacrifices upon God's Altar. And other Places might be
showed of the Women's Offerings and Sacrifices.

And you may see Hannah's fervent Zeal to God, and what a large Speech she made
in magnifying and exalting the Lord, in 1 Samuel 1st. and 2d. Chap.

And so you may see, the Offerings and Sacrifices of the Women were accepted
upon God's Altar, as well as the Men's.

But the hire of a Whore was not to be brought into the House of God for any
Vow, for it was an abomination to the Lord, Deuteronomy. 23.10.

Now Hannah's Husband, and the other Women's Husbands, Hannah's Offering.
that offered up their Offerings upon God's Altar, were not offended at them,
nor did they say, their Offerings were enough for them both; but every one was
to offer up their Peace Offerings and Thanksgiving-Offerings themselves, and
other Offerings.

So here youmay see the Service and Work of the Women, and how serviceable the
Women were in their Assemblies in the time of the Law, about the Tabernacle and
Holy Things, and how the Women offered upon God's Altar, as well as the Men,
they had their Liberty. But the hire of the Whore was to be kept out of God's
House, and not to be offered up upon God's Altar.

So ye may see man and Woman were meet helps in Paradise, before the Fall; and
Death reigned from Adam till Moses, and after Moses received the Law from God,
which went over Death (and Sin that brought it) who saw the State of Man and
Woman in Paradise: Men and Women in the time of the Law were meet helps again
to one another, in the Work and Service of the holy Things about the Tabernacle
and Sanctuary, and the Women had their Assemblies.

And it is said, in Joel 2. and in Acts 2. That the Lord would pur cut of his
Spirit upon all Flesh in the last Days or Times.

So this Spirit being poured upon all Flesh in the Christian Times, God pours
his Spirit upon all Flesh under the Gospel.
Sons and Daughters, Handmaids and Servants, old Men and young Men, that by
the Spirit of God, all these might have his Visions, Prophesies and Dreams: and
this is his Spirit, by which all should profit in the things that be Eternal,
and to serve God in the Spirit, both Men and Women, Sons and Daughters, old Men
and young Men, Handmaids and Servants; and all offer up to God his Spiritual
Sacrifices.

For all being dead in old earthly Adam, Christ, the heavenly Adam has tasted
Death for them all, and is a Propitiation for the Sins of the whole World, and
he enlightens all, and his Grace has appeared unto all, and his Spirit is
poured upon all Flesh, and his Gospel, which is the Power of God, is preached
to every Creature under Heaven.

And now, must not all receive the Grace, and believe in the Light, and receive
this Gospel, and walk and labor in it, both Men and Women, Sons and Daughters,
old Men and young, Servants and Handmaids.

Yea, I say, the Gospel being preached to all Nations, and to every Creature
under Heaven, old Men and young, Servants and Handmaids, Sons and Daughters; I
say, then must not all these receive this Gospel, and the Light and Grace? And
are they not all to walk in it? and to offer up their Spiritual Sacrifices upon
the heavenly Altar, in the New Covenant, and to walk in the New and Living Way;
and all to receive the Light of Christ, which enlightens all; and to become
Children of Light, and to feel the Blood of Christ to cleanse them from all
Sin, which they have in old Adam.

So as the Women were to offer in the old Covenant, and in the time of the Law,
upon the outward Altar their Offerings; and God poured out his Spirit upon the
House of Israel, that they might understand, and do what he commanded them: At
which time they had the Assemblies of the Women, which were not forbidden.

So now, in the time of the Gospel, and the Day of Christ, which enlightens
all, and in the time of his Grace, which has appeared unto all Men, to teach
them, and to bring their Salvation; and in the time of his Gospel preached to
every Creature, and in the time of his pouring out of his Spirit upon all
Flesh, that they might understand, and walk, and live in his Gospel, and by his
Spirit offer up their Spiritual Sacrifices.

So in this the Time and Day of Christ, the captain of our Salvation, must not
all these Labor in the Gospel, and in the Word, and in the Grace, and in the
Light, and know and do God and Christ's Work and Service about his heavenly
Tabernacle and Sanctuary? Assemblies of the Women in the time of the Cospol.
etc.
Has not every one their Service that are enlightened? And his Grace, that
has appeared unto them, are they not Stewards of it? And must not they have
their Assemblies of the Women in the time of the Gospel, and of the New
Covenant, and in the time of Grace, and Light and Life, as well as in the time
of the Law, and of the old Covenant?

And are not all to albour in that which tends to God'd Glory, and Praise, and
Honor? For which End he has made them all, and for which End he has redeemed
them, and converted them, and translated and sanctified them, to make them
VessEls of his Honor, and of his Grace and Mercies.

And so now the End of all our Men and Women's Meetings in the time of the
Gospel (the Power of Christ being the Authority of them) is, That they might
all labor in his Power, and in his Grace, and in his Spirit, and in his Light,
to his Service, and his Business in Truth and Righteousness.

So the Women in the time of the Gospel, Light and Grace, are to look into
their own selves and Families, and to look to the Training up of their
Children; for they are oft-times more amongst them than the Men, and may
prevent many things that may fall out, and many times they may make or mar
their Children in their Education.

So now they come to be exercised in the Grace of God, and to admonish and
exhort, reprove and rebuke, and to keep all their Families modest, honest,
virtuous, sober and civil, and not to gibe Liberty, nor indulge that which
tends to Vice, or Lasiviousness, or any Evil, or Idleness, or Sloathfulness, or
the Fashions of the World, which pass away; and to stop all vain Words, and
idle Talking, and Stories and Tales, which are unproffitable; but rather to
turn their Ears to Godliness, which they should be trained up and exercised in,
and not to fulfill the Lust of the Eye; for that being satisfied, brings the
Pride of Life, and then comes the Lust of the Flesh; and this is not of the
Father, but of the World.

And if either Men or Women suffer such things, they suffer that which defiles
their Children and Families; And therefore such things are to be reproved in
Families, and their Children to be stopped from going into such things.

And therefore they are to have an Esteem of Truth and Virtue above all such
things, and not to indulge any such things as will draw out their Minds from
Virtue to Vice.

Now when the Women are met together in the Light, Women when met, to be
helpful to one another.
and in the Gospel, the Power of God; some are of a more large Capacity and
Understanding than other Women, and are able to inform, and instruct, and stir
up others into Diligence, Virtue, and Righteousness, and Godliness, and in the
Love and Wisdom of God, to Inform and Reform, their Families, and to help them
that be of weaker Capacities and Understandings in the Wisdom of God, that they
may be fruitful in every good Work and Word.

So that they may see that all their Families are ordered to God's Glory; and
that which tends to Looseness or Evil, either in words, ways or actions, that
would corrupt them, either in their Lives or Manners, may be kept down and
reproved.

So that all their Children and Servants may be trained up in the Fear of God,
in the New Covenant; for among the Jews in the Old Covenant, them that
sojourned amongst them were to keep the Sabbath, and if they did eat of their
Sacrifice, they were bo be circumcised.

And the Women had their Assemblies in the Days of the Judges and the Kings;
and old Ely's Sons abused them, and old Ely did admonish his Sons, but he did
not resTrain them from their Wickedness; and therefore God cut off his Sons,
and he lost the Ark of God, and the Priesthood, and his own Life also.

So many of you may admonish your Children, but if ye do not restrain them by
the holp of the Spirit of God, which God has given to you, you will quench the
Spirit of God in you, by indulging them; so by that you will lose your
spiritual Offering, and your Priesthood therein; Ely an example to all Parents.
and take heed if you do not lose your own Lives, and your Childrens also;
therefore mind old Ely for your Example.

Now old Ely was not against the Assemblies of the Women, who assembled by
Troops, as (in the Margent of the Bible) you may see, 1 Samuel 2.21, 22. though
some Men now a days may be against Women's Meetings or Assemblies in the
Gospel Times, and against Woments Speaking or Prophesying, but they are
ignorant of the universal Spirit, and of their Service and Labor to God, in
his Grace and Gospel, and are of a narrow Spirit, and are not the true Servers
of God themselves; for if they were, they would have all People to serve God in
his Power, and to keep the true Religion, which is to visit the Fatherless and
the Widows, and to keep themselves from the Spots of the World.

And some there have been, that would not have the Women to meet without the
Men; and some of them say, the Women must not speak in the Church, and if they
must not speak, what should they meet with them for?

But what Spirit is this, that would exercise Lordship over the Faith of any?
And what a Spirit is this, that will neither suffer the Women to speak amongst
the Men, nor to meet amongst themselves to speak?

But all this is for Judgment, with that Spirit that gives Liberty unto all
that Labor in the Gospel, in the Light, and in the Grace.

And some Men and Women there are that suggest, if Women should meet (by
themselves) in the Order of the Gospel, the Power of God, they would be too
high; but such Men and Women, as so suggest, are too high already, and would be
ruling over Men and Women's Possessions, and waste their own; for if they were
in the Power and Spirit of God, they need not fear any one's getting over them:
For the Power and Spirit of God gives Liberty to all; for Women are Heirs of
Life as well as the Men, and so Stewards of the manifold Grace of God.

And they must all give an account of their Stewardship, All must give account
of their Stewardship
and are to be Possessors of Life, and Light, and Grace, and the Gospel of
Christ, and to Labor in it; and to keep their Liberty and Freedom in it, as
well as the Men.

And they are Believers in the Light, as well as the Men, and so Children of
the Light and of the Day, as well as the Men.

And so the Assemblies of the Women, Assemblies of Women to be in the Gospel,
as was in the time of the Law.
whom God has poured out his Spirit upon, are to be in the time of the Gospel,
as well as in the time of the Law, that they may be helps meet to the Men in
the time of the Gospel, in the Restoration, as they were in the Beginning, and
time of the Law.

So all the Women (in all their Assemblies in the time of the Gospel, and of
the New Covenant of Light, Life and Grace) are to be encouraged, as they were
in the time of the Law, and to be stirred up in the Wisdom of God to their
Diligence and Service of God and Christ, in his New Covenant, in his
Gospel-time, Concerning the? Substance.
to do the Lord's Business about the Heavenly Tabernacle, and Heavenly
Garnients, as the Women were about the Figure in the time of the Law.

And now, you that stumble at Women's Meetings, had not your Women many vain
Meetings before they were convinced, and you were not then offended at them,
when they met to satisfy the Flesh. and had Junketing Meetings to themselves,
did you reprove them for such Meetings?

And why should they not now meet in their Conversion in the Lord's Power and
Spirit, to do his Business, and to visit the Fatherless and Widows, and to keep
themselves from the Spots of the World, which is the Practice of the pure
Religion, wherein the Men and Women may be helps meet in the Religion that is
not of the World, that keeps from the Spots of the World.

But some have said, That such Meetings must not be, That they may be helpful
with the Men to prevent Evil, etc.
but as Business requires or occasions them: As much as to say, you must not
make up the Hedges till the Beasts have devoured your Corn; and then the Parish
Overseers must meet together to compute the Damage. And here their Wisdom is
seen, as if it were not more their Duty to meet, to prevent bad Actions that
may fall out, and with the Power of God to stop up Gaps to prevent Evil, or
weak Places; for when the Evil is entered into, it is of the latest to meet
then, which rather brings Scandal that Remedy; and therefore the Laborers in
the Gospel, Men and Women (being helps meet) are to see that all walk and live
in the Order of the Gospel, and to see that nothing be lacking, then all is
well: For the Women in their Assemblies may inform one another of the poor
Widows and Fatherless, and in the Wisdom of God may find the best way for the
setting forth of their Children; and to see that their Children are prerseved
in Truth, and to instruct them in the Fear of the Lord.

And you may see the care of Abraham, about Isaac taking of his wife; The Care
of Abraham, Isaac, and their Wives, for their Children.
and the Care of Sarah, that the Son of the Bond Woman should not be Heir with
her Son, and how that he sent his Servant, that spoke to the Parents, before he
spoke to Rebecca the Daughter, concerning the MessAge of his Master Abraham,
and they confessed it did proceed from the Lord, as in Genesis 24.

And also you may see the Care of Rebecca concerning Jacob, who said, If jacob
Take a Wife of the Daaghters of Heth, what good will my Life do me?

And here you may see Isaac and Rebecca helps meet; and Isaac did not say, Hold
thy Tongue, thou Foolish Woman: For Isaac exhorted Jacob, and charged him, not
to take a Wife of the Daughters of Canaan; as you may see in Genesis 27.

And when Rebecca was with Child, the Children struggled in her Womb, and she
said, If it be so, why am I thus? And she went to the Lord to enquire, and the
Lord said unto her, Two Nations are in thy Womb, and two manner of People, and
the Elder shall serve the Tounger, etc. as in Genesis 25.

So you may see, that she had Recourse to the Lord, and enquired of the Lord,
and he heard her, and spoke to her, and she heard the Lord's Voice: she is an
Example to all Women in that Condition, to ask Counsel of the Lord, as she did.

And when Sarah said to Abraham, Abraham obeythe Voice of his Wife.
Cast forth the Bondwoman and her Son; for the Son of the Bondwoman shall not
be Heir with my Son Isaac; but this thing was grievous in Abraham 's sight,
because of his Son Ishmael: But God said unto Abraham, Let it not be grievous
in thy sight, because of the Lad, and because of the Bondwoman; for in all
that Sarah has said unto thee, hearken unto her Voice; for in Isaac shall thy
Seed be called.

Here you may see God justified this honorable Woman's speaking and her
Husband Abraham did according to her words, as in Genesis 21 for the Church was in
Abraham's House at that time; and so Sarah spoke in the Church.

And you may see the Counsel of Rebecca to Jacob, and how she instructed her
Son, in Chap. 27. etc.

And likewise you may see Rechel and Leah their Counsel to Jacob, who answered
Jacob, And Jacob was Counseled by his Wives.
and said unto him, Is there yet any Portion or Inberitance for us in our
Father's House? Are we not counted of his as Strangers? For be has sold us,
and has quite devoured also our Money; for all the Riches which God has taken
from our Father, that is ours, and our Childrens; and now therefore, whatsoever
God has said unto thee do. This was Rachel's and Leah's Counsel unto Jacob;
and were not these three a Church then? And did he forbid them from speaking in
the Church? see Genesis 31.14, 15, 16.

And in Exodus 1. there you may see the Midwives, which feared God, did not obey
King Rharaoh's Command, in destroying the Male-Children, but saved them alive.

And after that the King of Egypt sent for the Midwives, The Egyptian Midwife's
an Example.
and asked them, Why they had done so, in saving the Male-Children? Yet these
Midwives, after he had thus examined them, and reinforced his Command, yet
they still disobeyed his Command, and would not yield to his Persecuting,
Murdering Devree; and therefore it is said, God dealt well with the Midwives.

And it came to pass, because the Midwives feared God, that he made them
Houses.

And here you may see the Lord took Care for these honorable Women that feared
him.

And do ye think that these honorable Women did not meet often together, and
took Counsel together, to stand together, and adventure their own Lives and
Estates to preserve the Lives of those Male-Children? Would you not say, if
this were in your Days, that these were bold Women to answer the King after
such a manner, and to disobey the King's Commands thus? as in Exodus 1.

And after the Children of Israel came out of Egypt, and saw the Destruction of
Pharaoh and his Host; after Moses made an End of his Song, and praising of the
Lord, then Miriam the Prophetess, Miriam tra the Women's Song.
the Sister of Aaron, took a Timbrel in her Hand, and all the Women went out
after her with Timbrels and with Dances (mark, all the Women) and Miriam
answered them, and said, Sing ye unto the Lord; for he has triumphed
gloriously, the Horse and his Rider has he overthrown in the Sea, etc.

Now, here you may see what an Assembly there was of the Women, that praised
the Lord, which were instructed by Miriam the Prophetess; and Moses and Aaron
were not offended at them; for they were sensible of their Joy, and were
Partakers of the Deliverance and Salvation, the Women as well as the Men; as
you may see in Exodus 15.

And Deborah, a Prophetess, she judged Israel, Deborah a Judge and Prophetess.
and sent to Baruch and exhorted and encouraged him; and she prophesied to him,
that he should not have the Glory of the Battle; but that the Lord should sell
Sisera into the Hands of a Woman; as you may see in Judges 4, 5. Chap.

Then sung Deborah and praised the Lord; and there you may see her large
Declaration, in praising and magnifying the Name of the Lord, the whole Chapter
throughout; and how she said, BlessEd be jael above all Women, the Wife of
Heber; blessed shall she be in the Tent, etc. And we do not read that the
Elders did reprove her, or bid her hold her Prating; for she was filled with
the Power of the Lord to praise his Name, Judges 5.

And you may see how the Apostle set forth the honorable Women, and their
Faithfulness and Constancy, who by Faith received the Dead, raised to Life
again, Hebr. 11.35.

And Hannah, who prayed in the Temple before Ely, as aforesaid, Hannah's Prayer.
who was ignorant of her Condition, he teproved her, and thought she had been
Drunk; but she convinced him; so that at last he encouraged her, and desired
the Lord to grant her Petition: And when the Lord had granted it to her, you
may see how this honorable Woman exalts the Lord, 1 Samuel 2.1, to the 10th.

And Ruth and Naomi, you may see what virtuous Women they were, and how the
Women blessed the Lord on their behalf, and how they declared of the Goodness
of the Lord to them.

And Huldah the Prophetess, which dwelt in Jerusalem, in the College, Huldah's
Instruction to the King's Ministers.
where the King sent out the Priest Hilkiah, and his Scribe, and others, to
enquire of her. Now the Jews here did not despise Communication with a Woman.
And she instructed the Priest and the King's Scribe, which came to her.

So neither King nor Priest did despise this Propheress's Teaching and
Instruction, but obeyed it, as you may see what a large Sermon she preached to
them, in 2 Kings 22. from 14, to the end.

And you may see Abigail, that honorable Woman's Wisdom, Abigail's Conduct and
advice to David.
how she saved her FAmily and her House from DesTruction. Yet she did not go to
ask her Husband (old churlish Nabal) at home, but she, who was innocent and
wise, took it upon her self; and you may see what a brave Sermon she preached
to David, who heard her patiently; and she tole David, how that he was bound up
in the bundle of Life with the Lord God. And David blessEd the Lord God that
she come to him, and said, The Lord God of Israel had sent her that day to meet
him; and said, Blessed be thy Advice, and blessed be thou which have kept me
this day from shedding Blood; as you may read in 1 Samuel 25th. And was not this
a Noble and Honorable Act of his Woman, which prevented so much Evil and
Bloodshed, which her Husband had like to have brought upon them. So David did
not despise the Counsel of this honorable Woman, who was wiser than her
Husband Nabal.

And now, must not the Virgins, in the time of the Gospel, trim their Lamps,
and get Oil into their own Lamps, by laboring in the Grace, Light and Power of
Christ, and keep their Lamps trimmed and always burning.

In the time of the Law it was Aaron the Priest's Office; but in the time of
the Gospel all the Virgin. Minds must trim their Lamps, that their Lamps may
burn the clearer; and to see that they have Oil in their Lamps from the
heavenly Olive Tree, Christ Jesus.

And therefore, they that would not have the Virgins and Women to be diligent,
serving the Lord in his heavenly Business and Service, their Lamps are going
out, and they are become Fools, and would have others like themselves.

And the Lord sent Elijah in the time of the Famine, Widom of Zaphath's Faith.
and said unto him, Behold, I have commanded a Widow Woman to sustain thee; and
he arose, and went to Zarephath, and when he came to the Gate of the City, the
Widow-Woman was gathering Sticks to make a Fire, to bake her a Cake, who had
but one handful of Meal and a little Oil in a Cruce, and yet in Faith she made
the Man of God a Cake, though she had no more than his, that she and her Son
might eat and then die; but her Meal wasted not, nor her Cruce of Oil,
according to the Word of the Lord; and so the Lord blessed his Woman, as you
may see in 1 Kings 17.

And in the 2d of Kings and the 4th, there you may see the Faith of the
Widow-Woman, and how largely she spoke unto the Prophet Elisha, and how the
Lord increased her stock of Oil through her Belief and Faithfulness.

And Elisha passed unto Shunnim, And the Shunamite Woman's Hospitality to the
Prophet.
where there was a great Woman, and she constrained him to eat Bread; and so it
was, as often as he passed by, that he truned in thither to eat Bread; and she
said unto her Husband, Behold, now I perceive, that this is a Holy Man of God,
which passes by us continually, let us make him a little Chamber, I pray thee,
on the Wall, and let us set for him there a Bed, and a Table, and a Stool, and
a CandlesTick, and it shall be that when he comes to us, that he shall turn in
thither. Now to this good Action of this holy Woman was her Husband subject;
and how she was blessed afterward for her Faithfulness, and receiving of the Man
of God.

Now the Prophet of the Lord did not despise this Woman's speaking in the time
of the Law.

Neither did Solomon despise the Prophecy his Mother taught him, Prove. 31.

And David said, The Lord gave the Word, and great was the Company of those
that published it, psalm 68.11.

And the King's Daughter was among the honorable Women: So there were the
honorable Woman, that feared and served the Lord God, in the time of the Law
and before the Law.

But now there should be much more in the time of the Gospel, Women should be
more Servicealle in the Church, in the time of the Gospel, than they were under
the Law.
which is preached to every Creature; which Gospel Light has enlightened every
Man that comes into the World; and in the time of the Covenant of Grace, which
has appeared unto all Men, to teach them and bring their Salvation: And so in
the time of the Gospel, Light and Grace, the honorable Women should be meet
helps, and Fellow Laborers together in the Work and Service of the Lord, as
Man and Woman was before they fell, and as they were in the time of the Law.

For that honorable Deborah, which was a valiant Mother in Israel, Deborah a
valiant Mother in Israel.
was a Judge and a Prophetess, Judges 5.

And Jephtha's Daughter, was not she a virtuous young Woman? and see what a
Sermon she preached to her Father, and said to him, Jeptha's Daughter virtuous.
Let me go up to the Mountains to bewail my Virginity: and he said unto her,
Go; and she went and her Companions, Fellow-Virgins, and she said unto her
Father, As thou have opened thy Mouth unto the Lord, so do unto me according to
what has proceeded out of thy Mouth, forasmuch as the Lord has taken
Vengeance for thee of thy Enemies.

And the Daughters of Israel went yearly to lament the Daughter of Jeptha,
Judges 11.

So here they had a Yearly Meeting upon this Occasion: But the Assemblies of
the Women about the Works and Services the Lord commanded, was beyond this.

And Manoah, Sampson's Mother, Manoah had more Faith than her Huaband.
unto whom the Angel of the Lord appeared, and declared unto her great things,
which she declared unto her Husband, but her Husband did not reprove her; and
when her was in fear that they should die, then his Wife encouraged him,
saying, If the Lord were pleased to kill us, he would not have rceived a
Brunt-Offering, and heave showed us all these things.

And here you may see the steadfastness of this Woman's Faith, beyond her
Husband's, as in Judges 13.

And the Woman of Tekoah, see what a Sermon she preached to King David, 2 Samuel
14.

And you may see what a large Sermon the Woman of the City of Abel preached
unto Joab the General; she told him, The wise Woman of the City Abel.
she was one of htme that were peaceable and faithful in Israel; and thou
seek to destroy a City and a Mother of Israel; why will thou swallow up th
Inheritance of the Lord? So she convinced him and preserved the City.

And so these and such Women are recorded to Posterity for their Wisdom, and
their Virtue, and Zeal, and their Faith, as you may see in the 2d of Samuel and
the 20th.

And what think you of Esther? read her Book, Faster a Nursing Mother, and by
her Interecssion saved the Nation of the Jews.
and see the Behavior of this virtuous honorable Woman, who by her Wisdom,
Faith and Virtue preserved her People Israel, she was a Nursing-Mother to them;
as you may read in the Book of Esther, who kept a Fast with her Maidens to the
Lord, and also desired Mordecai to keep a Fast in Shushan, Esther 4.16.

Now, Awarning to Careless Women.
all you careless Women, that are out of God's Service, and think ye have no
need to be in the Service and Work of the Lord, hear the Word of the Lord, what
Isaiah says to such: Arise up, ye Women, that are at ease; hear my Voice, ye
careless Danghters, give ear to my Speech; Many days and years shall ye be
troubled, ye careless Women; for the Vintage shall fall, and the Gathering
shall noit come. Nor you cannot expect it in your Ease and Carelessness, that
neglect God's Voice and Speech, and are not Diligent; your heavenly Vintage
will fall, and of it ye will have little gathering. Tremble ye Women, that are
at ease; be troubled, ye careless Ones; strip ye, make ye bare, gird Sackcloth
upon your Loins, etc. Isaiah 32. Therefore put off that careless Garment, and
shake off Sloth, and put on diligence in the Service of God.

Now, the Jews had their Assemblies of Mourning-women; and therefore the
Prophet calls for the Mourning-women, and let them bewail, says he, when the
Jews went into Transgression.

And this was because the Men and Women were not Diligent in his Service, in
the Power and Spirit of God, which he had poured upon them.

And Jeremiah says, Hear the Word of the Lord, O ye Women! and let your Ears
receive the Word of his Mouth, and teach your Daughters wailing, and every one
their Neighbors Lamentation, Jer. 9.20.

So, here the Prophet exhorts the Women, to hear the Word of God first, and
then to teach and exhort their Daughters and Neighbors, yea Wailing and
Lamentation.

And were they not, and are they not, to teach their Families and their
Neighbors from the Word of the Lord, both in the time of the Law and the
Gospel, to prevent Wailign and Lamentation.

And see in Ezekiel, how he exhorted, and what the Lord says there; I will
cause Leadness to cease out of the Land, that all Women may be taught not to do
after their Lewdness.

And then, as they are obedient to this Teaching, they will shun the Judgments
that came upon the Jews, which were compared to Women; as in Ezekiel. 23. And the
Assemblies of the Women did continue amongst the Jews till they went into
Captivity.

And when Saul and David had made a great slaughter upon the Philistines, A
General Asembly of Women
the Women came out of all the Cities of Israel (mark, out of all the Cities of
Israel; and surely this was a great Assembly of Women) singing and dancing,
etc. with Joy, and with Instruments of Music; and the Women answered one
another as they played, and sung Praises unto God.

And Saul the King was not angry with the Women, but at David, because they
ascribed so much Honor to him; for they were Partakers of the Salvation of the
Lord, and of the Deliverance, as well as the Men, 1 Samuel 18.6.

And so they are Partakers in the Gospel, of the Deliverance over the Devil,
the grand Enemy of Mankind: and are exhorted to praise the Lord, and to make
Melody in their Hearts to the Lord, for their Salvation and Deliverance by
Christ in the time of the Gospel, as well as the Men, 1 Samuel 18.

And in 2 Chronicles. 25. there Jeremiah lamented for Josiah, and all the Singing
Men and Singing-Women spoke of Josiah in their Lamentation.

So here was not only Singing-Men, but Singing-Women, which did not only Sing
but Lament for this good Man Josiah.

And in the days of Ezra, after the Jews returned from their Captivity to their
Land, there were Two Hundred Singing-Men and Singign-Women, uEzra. 2.

And in Neh. 7. Women assistants to the Men in the Worship of God under the Law
where the Priest stood up with Vrim and Thummim (that is, Light and
Perfection) they had Two Hundred and Forty Five Singing-Men and Singing-Women.

So these were encouraged by the Priests, according to David and Solomon's
Order; and these were besides the Assemblies of the Women, about Works and
Services in the Holy Things; for these sung Praises to God.

And in Zeph. 3. he says, Sing ye Daughters of Zion, shout and rejoice with
all thy Heart, ye Daughters of Jerusalem; the Lord has taken away thy
Judgment, etc. the Lord is in the midst of thee, thou shall see Evil no more.

And in Zach. 2. he encourages them, to Sing and Rejoice, Oh Daughter of Zion;
for, lo I come, and I will dwell in the migst of thee, says the Lord.

So here is great cause for the Daghter of Zion to rejoice; and who shall stop
her Mouth?

And in Luke 1. you may see, how the Angel of the Lord appeared unto Mary the
Mother of Jesus, and what he said to her, and what a Noble Veruous Mind was in
her; and she said unto the Angel, Behold the Handmaid of the Lord, be it unto
me according to thy Word; so her Belief was beyond Zachariah's the Priest.

And when Mary came unto Elizabeth, what a Meeting and Salu. Mary the Mother of
our Lord and her Cousin Elizabeth's Meeting, etc.
tation wat there; and how she was filled with the Holy Ghost, and the Babe
leaped in her Womb, and she praised the Lord God, and called her, the Mother of
her Lord. Read from the 40th to the 57th verse, and see how she extols the
Lord, and magnifies Christ Jesus; for here was a Heavenly Meeting of these two,
which is chronicled to Ages.

So you may see her Belief was above Zachariah's the Priest: So Mary and
Elizabeth were notable Preachers of Christ Jesus.

And you may see in Luke 2.7. how Mary wrapped Christ in Swadling-Cloaths, and
how tender she was of the Heavenly Birth, conceived by the Holy Ghost. And so
must all true and tender Christians, that receive him in the Spirit, and how
she kept all the Sayings that were spoken of Christ, and pondered them in her
Heart, ver. 19. And so should every true Christian.

And there was Anna a Prophetess, Annah spoke of Christ in the Temple.
which was Eighty Four Years old, who departed not from the Temple, but served
God with Fasting and Prayer Night and Day, and she gave thanks unto the Lord,
and spoke of Christ unto all that looked for Redemption in Israel; she spoke of
Christ: Here was a notable old Woman of Eighty Four Years of Age, a Preacher
and Declarer of Christ.

And you do not read that ever any despised her, or said, it was forbidden for
a Woman to speak in the Church.

But this Woman is set forth for an Examp;e to all Young and Old Women, of her
Love to Christ her Savior; and not only so, but a preacher of him to all that
looked for Redemption in Israel.

And the Woman of Canaan that came unto Jesus, and said, Lord help, The Woman
of Canaan, her Faith.
but he answered and said, It is not meet to take the Childrens Bread and cast
it unto Dogs; and she said, Truth Lord, yet the Dogs eat of the Crumbs which
fall from the Master's Table: Then Jesus answered and said unto her, Oh Woman!
Great is thy Faith, be it unto thee even as thou will.

So you may see, by this Woman's Faith in Christ Jesus, this Woman's Daugher
was made whole, which was an Example for all the Faithful to look unto Jesus
for Help, as you may see in Mat. 15.

And Mary, The Bounty and Humility of Mary.
that took a Pound of Oinment of Spikenard, very costly, and anointed the Feet
of Jesus, and wiped his Feet with her Hair; and the whole House was filled with
the Odor of the Ointment: But when Judas saw it, he had Indignation, saying,
What profit is this waste? Why was not this Ointment sold for Three hundred
Pieces of Silver, and given to the Poor, as you may see in Mat. 26. and Mark
14. and John 12. Now this was Judas, which carried the Bag, and betrayed
Christ; and many there are that carry the Bag now, that would not have their
Wives nor the Women bestow any thing upon Christ, nor his poor Followers.

But Jesus said, Let her alone, why trouble you her? she has wrought a good
Work on me / for the Poor ye have with you always, and whenever ye will, ye
may do them good, but me ye have not always; she has done what she could; she
is come before hand to anoint my Body to my Burial. Verily I say unto you,
wheresoever this Gospel shall be preached throughout the World, this also that
she has done shall be spoken of, for a Memorial of her.

So Christ did not forbid the Woman's Practice, but encouraged her, and so he
does still, them that obey him.

And the Woman that was Twelve Years troubled with an Issue of Blood, who had
spent all upon Physicians, and grew worse and worse; her Faith was so strong,
that she believed, if she could but touch the Hem of his Garment, she should be
well.

And as soon as she had touched his Clothes, The Faith of the Woman Twelve
Tears diseased.
virtue went from Christ and healed her; and then the Woman came fearing and
trembling, and fell down before Christ, and told him all the Truth, what she
had done; And he said unto her, Daughter, thy Faith has made thee whole, go in
Peace, Mark 5.

Now Christ, who is the Head of the Church, here sufferedf a Woman to speak
before him, from whom she had received the Healing-Vertue.

And you may see when Christ was crucisied, how many Women were there, as Mary
Magdalen, and Mary the Mother of James, and many others which came up to
Jerusalem, that were about Jesus at the time of his being crucified, as in Mark
15.

And Mary Magdalen, Women the first Wienesses of Christ Resurrection.
and Mary the Mother of James came to the Sepulchne, and the Angel said unto
them, Be not afnaid, ye seek Jesus of Nazareth, which was crucified, he is not
here, he is arisen, behold the place where they laid him. But go your way, tell
his Disciples and Peter, that he goes beofe you into Galilee there shall you
see him, as he said unto you. For Jesus appeared first, viz. to Mary Magdalen,
as in Mark 16.

And in John 20. it is said, The two Angels said to Mary, Woman, why weepest
thou? And she said, because they have taken away my Lord, and I know not where
they have laid him; and when she had thus said, she turned her self, and saw
Jesus standing, and knew not that it was Jesus, etc. But Jesus said unto her,
Mary, and she turned her self, and said unto him, Rabbi (as much as to say
Master) and Jesus said unto her, touch me not; for I am not ascended yet unto
my Father, but go unto my Brethren, and say unto them, I ascend unto my Father,
and your Father; and to my God, and your God, etc. And Mary Magdalen came and
told the Disciples, that she had seen the Lord, and that he had spoken these
things unto her.

So here Mary Magdalen was a Messenger of Christ Jesus, Mary Magdalen a
Messenget of Christ.
who did not despise her speaking before him, who was the Head of the Church,
nor did not refuse to send her to preach his Resurrection to his Disciples,
though she was a Woman.

And in Luke 24. it is said, It was Mary Magdalen, and Joanna, and Mary the
Mother of James, and other Women which were with them, which told the Apostles,
that Christ was risen; and this was said unto them, Why seek ye the Living
among the Dead? He is not here, he is risen: Remember that he spoke unto you,
when he was yet in Galilee, saying, The Son of Man must be delivered into the
Hands of Sinful Men, etc.

And they remembered these words, and they returned from the Sepulcher, and told
all these things unto the Eleven Disciples, and all the rest.

And mark, as I said before, it was Mary Magdalen, and Joanna, and Mary the
Mother of James, and other Women that were with them, which told these things
unto the Apostles; and these words seemed unto them as idle Tales, and they
believed them not.

Now mark their Message, and to whom it was, and who they were that were the
Messengers, the weaker Vessels, and to whom, to the Apostles; and what they
preached was, what they remembered Christ had spoken to them before, to wit,
that Christ should suffer, and rise again.

And Christ appeared again unto two of his Disciples, The Disciples going to
^maus, etc.
and lie talked with them, and asked them, What Communication they had? And
they said unto him, Art thou a Stranger in Jerusalem, and know not the
things that have befallen, etc? And he said unto them, What things? And they
said unto him, Concerning Jesus of Nazareth, that was a great Prophet, and
mighty in Deed and in Word, before God and all People, which the Jews have
crucified; but they trusted he should have redeemed Israel; and besides all
this, to day is the third day since these things were done. And certain Women
also of our Company made us astonished, which were early at his Sepulcher; and
when they found not is Body, they came, saying, That they bad seen a Vision of
Angels, which said, he was alive.

So here the Woman's Testimony of the Resurrection of Christ aftonished them.

And Jesus said unto them, O Fools, and slow of Heart, to believe all that the
Prophets have spoken! Ought not Christ to have suffered these things, and to
enter into his Glory, etc?

Now here you may see it was Mary, and Joanna, and Mary the Mother of James,
and the other Women that were with them, that declared the Resurrection of
Christ unto the Eleven, which seemed but as idle Tales to the Apostles.

And here was a joyful Woman's Meeting indeed, Women spoke in the Church by
Commission from Christ, the Head of the Church.
of Messengers and Preachers of Christ's Resurrection, which is Recorded to
Posterity to their Renown, that all should believe; though their Message and
Speech were as idle Tales to the Disciples; but they were owned by Christ the
Head of the Church, as aforesaid, though their Preaching was slighted by the
Apostles, and counted as idle Tales; but they came to believe afterward, as in
Luke 24.

And the Woman of Samaria, that Christ Jesus convinced, and taught her how God
was to be worshipped, to wit, in the Spirit and Truth; you may see what a large
discourse Christ had with her, as in John 4. from the 7th to the 27th, and
suffered her to speak before the Head of the Church.

And Christ's Disciples marvelled that he talked with a Woman; and the Woman
left her Pitcher of Water, The Woman a Preacher of Samaria.
and went away into a City of Samaria, and said unto the Men of the City (mark,
unto the Men) Come and see a Man that told me all that ever I did, is not this
the Christ? And many of the Samaritans believed because of the Sayings of the
Woman, which testified, He told me all that ever I did. And when they heard
Christ, they said unto the Woman, Now we believe, not because of thy saying
only, but we have heard him our selves, and know that he is indeed the Christ,
the Savior of the World.

So here you may see, there was a Woman Preacher, that Christ (the Head of the
Church) suffered; and through her means many were converted unto Christ.

And when they had crucified Jesus Christ, there were many Women that beheld
him afar off, which followed him from Galilee, ministering unto him, amongst
which were Mary Magdalen, and Mary the Mother of James, and Joses the Mother of
Zebedee's Children.

And here you may see, there was a Woman's Meeting with Christ, in his
Sufferings, which when he was risen, some of them preached his Resurrection, as
you may see in Matthew. 27.61. and Chap. 28.5, 6, 7. where you may read the
Message Christ gave to the Women, to declare to the Apostles, as aforesaid,
which is recorded and set forth that others might believe their Message.

And when Christ spoke in Reproof to the Jews, he said, I tell you of a Truth,
many Widows were in Israel in the days of Elisha, etc. but to none of them was
Elisha sent, save to Zarephath, a City of Sidon, unto a Woman that was a Widow,
The Widow of Zarephath.
etc. And the Jews arose up, and thrust Christ out of their City, being filled
with Wrath against him, for this Saying, and his Reproving of them.

And you may read at large the Acts, Doing and Sayings of this faithful Woman,
in 1 Kings 17.9. and Luke 4.

And in Luke 7. Christ turned him to the Woman, and said unto Simon, See thou
this Woman: A Reproof upon Covetousness.
I entered into thy House, but thou gave me no Water for my Feet; but she has
washed my Feet with Tears, and wiped them with the Hair of her Head: And thou
gave me no kiss; but this Woman, since the time I came into the House, has
not ceased to kiss my Feet: My Head with Oil thou did not anoint; but this
Woman has anointed my Feet with Ointment: Wherefore I say unto thee, her sins,
which are many, are forgiven; for she loved much; but to whom little is
forgiven, the same loved little.

And they that sat at Meat with him began to say, Who is this that forgiveth
Sins? and he said unto the Woman, Thy Faith has saved thee; go in Peace.

So here you may see how Christ justified the Woman's Actions above Simon,
whose Faith saved her; which is chronicled to her Renown, and the Honor of
God. And in Matthew. 28. there you may see this Mary Magdalen, which was a
Preacher of Christ, it was she, The Charity of diverse Women.
out of whom Christ had cast seven Devils; and with her Joanna, the Wife of
Chusa, Herod's Steward, and Susanna, which ministered unto Christ of their
Substance.

Now, would not some Niggards be ready to say, These Women picked their Husbands
Pockets; and others with Judas, who carry the Bag, may say, We must have but
one Purse, and is not our Gift and Benevolence sufficient? as in Matthew. 28.
Luke 24.

But his Woman loved Christ; and Christ said, My mother and my Brethren are
these, which hear the Word of God and do it, Luke 8.21.

And Martha received Christ into her Honse, and she had a Sister called Mary,
that sat at Jesus 's Feet, and beard his Words; The excellency of Mary's
Choice.
but Martha was cumbred about much serving; and Jesus said unto her, Martha,
thou art careing and troubled about many things, but one things is needful, and
Mary has chosen that good things, which shall not be taken away from her.
Which is the Duty of every good Man and Woman to do, if they will be kept out
of the many things. And you may see how Mary talked with Christ, and Christ
with her.

So this is chronicled, that all might choose the Good Part, and the One Thing,
which cannot be taken away from them; and to be kept out of the many things,
that cumber, as you may see in Luke 10.

And does not Christ say, The Kingdom of Heaven is like unto Leven, which a
Woman took and hid in three Measures of Meal, till all the Lump is levened? So,
must not every Man and Woman know this Leven in their Hearts, if they will know
the Kingdom of Christ? Luke 13.

And the Parable of Christ, concerning the Woman that lost her Piece of Silver,
who lighted a Candle and swept her own House, and found it in her own House;
and when she had found it, she rejoiced, and told her Neighbors. And must not
every Woman light her own Candle at the Light of Christ Jesus, and sweep her
own House with the Power of God, before she finds God's Treasure? And then for
Joy that they have found it, The Woman who found her lost piece of Silver.
go and declare it unto their Friends and Neighbors? And do not all those
Women that have found this, preach Christ to their Friends and Neighbors, and
call them together? For may they not be suffered after they have lost an
outward Treasure, and found it again, to call their Neighbors together to
rejoice with them, which they may find by lighting an outward Candle? But their
Spirits being the Candle of the Lord, this must be lighted at the Heavenly
Light and Fire, by which their Everlasting Treasure is found; and must not they
say then to their Neighbors and Friends, Rejoice with me, for I have found the
Piece which was lost? Likewise, I say unto you, says Christ, there is joy in
the Presence of the Angels of God, over one Sinner that repents; as you may
see in Luke 15.

Now, here you may see all these renowned, faithful Women, were encouraged by
Christ and his Followers; and are recorded and set forth to encourage all that
are faithful to wait upon Christ, and to light their Candle at God's Light and
Fire, that so they may sweep their House and find their Treasure, that they may
declare their Joy of it to their Friends and Neighbors.

And also you may see Dorcas was full of good Works, and Almsdeeds which she
did: Dorcas full of good Works.
And all the Widows stood by Peter weeping, showing the Coats and Garments
which Dorcas made, whilst she was with them, ( to wit, the Widows:) Mark, and
was not there a Womens-Meeting then? whilst Dorcas was with them; to wit, the
Widows; and Dorcas was a Disciple of Jesus, Acts 9.

And Paul on the Sabbath went out of the City by a Riverside, where Prayers
were wont to be made, and spoke to the Women which resorted thither; and was
not there a Womans-Meeting also, which resorted there to pray together?

And there was a certain Woman named Lydia, THe Feithfulness of Lydia.
a Seller of Purple, of the City of Thyatira, which worshipped God, whose Heart
the Lord opened, that she attended unto the things spoken by Paul, and she
besought him to come to her House, if he judged her faithful to the Lord, and
abide there, and she constrained him and them that were with him, Acts 16. So
you may see the Faithfulness of this Woman, and the Practice of the other Women
before they were converted.

And Priscilla, Priscialla a Labourer in the Gospel.
which was a notable Faithful Woman, whom Paul often mentions with her Husband
Aquilla; and Philip's four Daughters, which were Prophetesses, which were set
forth to encourage others. And you may see Phebe, whom the Apostle Paul sends
his Epistle to the Romans from Corinth by, and calls a Servant of the Church of
Cenchrea; and he says, Greet Mary, which bestowed much Labor upon us; and
Priscilla and Aquilla, my Fellow Laborers in Christ Jesus.

So here you may see there were Women Laborers and Helpers in the Gospel. With
other Women Laborers in the Gospel.
And he farther says, I commend unto you our Sister Phebe, Who is a Servant
unto the Church, etc. And says, That Priscilla and Aquilla, my Fellow-helpers
in Christ Jesus, which for my Life have laid down their Necks, unto whom not
only I give Thanks, but also all the Churches of the Gentiles.

So here you may see in what esteem was this Man and Woman, and Phebe, and
other Women for their Faithfulness to the Churches; as you may read, Romans 16.

And the Apostle says, That the unbelieving Husband is sanctified by the
unbelieving Wife, etc. else their Children were unholy; but now they are clean;
and the unbelieving Wife is sanctified by the believing Husband: So here is an
equal share in the Belief, 1 Cor. 7. And the Apostle says, That every Woman
that prays or prophesies with her Head uncovered, dishonors her Head.

So Women may Pray and Prophecy here, according to Order, in the Church, as
well as the Men, 1 Cor. 11. And yet the same Apostle in the 14th Chapter,
forbids a Woman to speak in the Church.

And the Apostle says, Let the Women keep Silence in the Church; and if they
will learn any thing, let them ask their Husbands at home.

But when they have learnt of Christ their Husband at home, What sort of Women
forbid to speak in the Church.
they are not forbididen of Christ from Prophesying or Praying; but to lie
babbling and prating in the Church, such Speaking in the Church is a Shame.

Now a Widow has no Husband to ask but Christ; nor a Virgin, yet she may
Prophecy; and a believing Woman, that has an unbelieving Husband, he is to be
sanctified by her: So she is not to learn her Salvation of him, but of Christ,
and to do his work.

And the same Apostle says, Let the Men keep Silence in the Church, if they
speak in an unknown Tongue, and there be not an Interpreter.

So, here the Men must keep Silence in the Church in this case, Men forbid in
some Cases to speak in the Church, as well as some Women.
as well as the Women, 1 Cor. 11. and Chap. 14.27.

And the Apostle further says, I permit not a Woman to speak in the Church,
but to be under Obedience; as also says the Law.

But though the Law did not permit their usurping Authority in the Church, yet it
did permit their Prophesying in the Church, in the time of the Law, as well as
in the time of the Gospel; as you may see by those Famous Women
beforementioned, in the Old Testament, as well as in the New.

And the same Apostle says, I beseech thee, Euodias, and I beseech Syntyche,
that they may be of the same mind in the Lord; and I entreat thee also, true
Yoke Fellow, help those Women which labored with me in the Gospel; with
Clement also, und iwth other my Fellow Laborers, whose Names are in the Book
of Life.

So here the Apostle entreated his Yoke Fellow to help those Women which
labored with him in the Gospel (the Power of God:) So these Women were meet
Helps with the Apostle in the Labor of the Gospel (the Power of God) as you
may see in Phil. 4. And all that be of his Mind in the Lord, will encourage
either Women or Widows, or Virgins, that have received the Gospel, to labor in
it; and all that have not the Mind of the Apostle in the Lord, will discourage
Women's laboring in the Gospel, and not entreat others to help them; but such
will give them Liberty to labor in the Power of Darkness, and to Slothfulness,
and Carelessness; which the Woe is unto, and not the Blessing.

And again, the Apostle writes to Timothy, That the Women should adorn
themselves in modest Apparel, and Shamefacedness, and Sobriety, not with
broidered Hair, or Gold or Pearls, or costly Array, but which becomes Women
professing Godliness, with good Works; and let your Women learn in Silence with
all Subjection, etc. But I suffer not a Woman to teach nor to usurp Authority
over the Man; but learn in Silence, etc. For the Woman being deceived, was
first in Transgression, etc.

Now for a Woman to Preach or Teach, such a Teaching as Eve taught Adam, such a
Sermon as she had from the Serpent, that drew her self, and Adam her Husband,
from God's Teaching; here, in this Teaching, she usurped Authority over the
Man; and therefore God se the Man to rule over the Woman; but they were meet
helps before, while they were under God's Teaching.

Now, to usurp Authority over the Man by such Teaching, is out of the Unity;
which Teaching is forbidden both by Law and Gospel; and they are not fit to
Teach, if they have not learned Subjection to the Spirit of God, and know the
Silence of all Flesh before the Lord, and have not learned to adorn themselves
with that which is modest, and the Lesson of Sobriety, whith becomes Godliness;
and with the good Works, the Fruits of the Spirit.

And such Women as have learned this Lesson may Teach and Prophecy; for the
Spirit is poured upon them to that End.

And the same Apostle says, Elder Women, Nurses, Mothers, Teachers, etc. in
the Church of Christ,
1 Timothy 5. That the Women should be as Mothers; and a Mother is a Nurser, and a
Teacher, and Instructor of her Children; and the younger Women as Sisters, with
all Purity; and Sisters in Christ and in Purity, all have but one Father; and a
Sister is in the Unity, in the Spirit, in the Gospel, 1 Timothy 5. And if any
Woman that believes have widows, let them relieve them: So here was the Woman's
Work, to relieve their Widows, etc.

And again, The Apostle writes to Titus, and says unto him, Speak thou the
things which become sound Doctrine, etc. The aged Women, that they be of good
behavior, as becomes Holiness; not false Accusers, not given to much Wine;
teachers of good things.

Now here they must be qualified before they can be Teachers of those good
things.

And that these aged Women teach the younger Women; first, To be Sober;
secondly, To love their Husbands; thirdly, To love their Children; fourthly, To
be Discreet; fifthly, To be Chaste, and keepers at home, and Good, Obedient to
their own Husbands, that the Word of God be not blasphemed.

Now here the aged Women, not a Woman, but the aged Women, were to teach the
younger Women these things.

And how could these Women be Teachers of all these Virtues and good Things, if
these Mothers and holy Woman did not meet togeter, and converse together of
Holiness and Virtue; as in Tit. 2.

And in 1 Pet. 3. Women to win Husbands by the Word and Conversation also.
he encourages Wives and Women, That if their Husbands will not be won by the
Word, they may without the Word be won, by the chaste Conversation of the
Wives; whilst they behold your chaste Conversation, says he, coupled with
Fear; and whose adorning, says he, Let it not be that of the Outward, with
plaiting of the Hair, or wearing of Gold, or putting on costly Apparel, but let
it be the hidden Man of the Heart, in that which is not Corruptible, even the
Ornament of a meek and quiet Spirit, which is in the sight of God of great
Price.

And this, he says, was the Ornament of the holy Women in the old time, with
which they adorned themselves, who trusted in God, as Sarch, etc. whose
Daughters ye are as long as ye do well, and are not afraid with any Amazement.

And likewise the Believing Husband, and the Believing Wife are Heirs together
of the Grace and Life.

And therefore the Believing Women being Heirs of Grace and Life, as well as
the Men, they may impart of their Life, which they do inherit, as well as Men;
for an Heir of Life is beyond an Heir of the Earth.

And there is no Believing Husband will hinder his Believing Wife, Men not to
binder Wives from administering to the Necessity of the Poor, etc.
being Heirs of Life, to adiminister some of their temporal things to them that
are in Necessity; he will not have all the Earth to himself, but let her have
the disposing of some of it, as well as himself, whilst they do enjoy it; and
ministering of outward things is the least Love: And Women many times know the
Condition of poor Families, and Widows, and such as are in distress, more than
the Men, because they are most conversant in their Families, and about such
things.

But there are many Idle Talkers, and Busy Bodies, that are out of the Sense
and Service of God, that will not do good themselves, nor suffer others to do
their Service of Love and Charity for the Lord in the Church.

And John writes in his Second Epistle unto the Elect Lady and her Chidlren,
whom I love in the Truth, says he, and not I only, Note, John the Evang list
sent his Epistle to a Woman.
but also all they that have known the Truth, for the Truth's sake, which
dwells in us, and shall be with us for ever, etc. I rejoice greatly, says he,
that I have found they Children walking in the Truth. And further says, I
write no new Commandment unto thee, but that which we had from the beginning
that we love one another.

And so he trusts to come and see her, and speak Face to Face unto her; the
Children of thy Elect Sister greet thee, Amen. The elect Lady, and her elect
Sister.
So was not this an honorable Woman, that had trained up her Children in the
Truth, as was commanded by John? And he admonished her against such as did
transgress, and did not abide in the Doctrine of Christ Jesus, that they had
not the Father nor the Son; but they that did abide in the Doctrine of Christ
Jesus, had both the Father and the Son.

So, is not this an Encouragement to all faithful Women, to see that their
Children do walk in the Truth, and abide in the Doctrine of Christ, that they
may have both the Father and Son?

And farther Solomon says, A gracious Woman attains Honor, The virtues of a
gracious Woman.
and a virtuous Woman is a Crown to her Husband, and every wise Woman builds
her own House. Surely then she has a work to do; he that has Ears let him
hear: But the foolish Woman plucketh it down with her Hands. And there are too
many of those that are in the Transgression of the Spirit and Power of God,
with which they must build. But a Woman that fears God, she shall be praised;
give her of the Fruit of her hands, and let her Works Praise her in the Gates.
And then surely she has a work to do, that must praise her in the Gates.

She stretches forth her hands to the Poor; yea, she reaches forth her hands
to the Needy, Prove. 31. And must she not then have something of the Outward to
do it withal?

She opens her Mouth in Wisdom, and in her Tongue is the Law of Kingness: She
looks well to the Ways of her Household, and eats not the Bread of Idleness:
She is like the Merchant's Shir, she brings her Food from far; she rises
also whilst it is Night, and gives Meat to her Household, and Portions to her
Maidens; she considers a Field, and buyeth it with the Fruit of her hands;
she planteth a Vineyard; she guirdeth her Loins with strength, and
strengthens her Arms; she perceives that her Merchandise is good; her Candle
goes not out by Night, etc.

And here is an Example to all Women, a Pattern of Virtue, and of Fruitfulness,
and Faithfulness, and Valor, and Practice in the Lord's Work; and such their
Children will rise up, and call her blessed. Many Daughters have done
Virtuously (says he) but this Woman excels them; that is, the Nurse of them.

And now Friends, many of other Examples in the Scriptures might be showed, to
encourage Women's Meetings in the Service of God and Christ, both concerning
their Faithful Testimony for the Lord and Christ, and their Encouragement by
the Faithful in the Old and New Testament, how that they had their Assemblies
and their Meetings; and now they being Heirs of Life, and of Grace, and of the
Gospel of Christ, which has brought Life and Immortality to Light, you may see
over him that has darkened you, and before he was.

Therefore this Gospel, the Power of God, which is the Everlasting Orderer, is
to keep you in Life and in Immortality, that you may be meet helps in the Power
and Image of God to the Men, as Man and Woman was in before they fell.

So, to administer of the Heavenly and Temporal Refreshments, to such as want
it; and to stand up for your Liberty in the Light, and Life, and Grace, and
Glorious Gospel, being Heirs of Life and Grace, and of the Gospel of Salvation,
and of Christ Jesus, as well as the Men.

So that all, Males and Females, are one in Christ Jesus, who is the First and
Last, and over all from Everlasting to Everlasting, your Everlasting Joy, Peace
and Happiness.

And if there was no Scripture for our Men and Women's Meetings, Christ is
sufficient, who Restores Man and Woman up into the Image of God, to be helps
meet in the Righteousness and Holiness, as they were in before they fell: So He
is our Rock and Foundation to Build upon.

Wisdom she has sent forth her Maidens, she cries upon the high places of the
City, Who so is simple, let him turn in hither; as for him that wants
Understanding, she says to him, come, eat of my Bread, and drink of my Wine,
which I have mingled; forsake the Foolish and live, and grow in the Way of
Understanding.

Here you may see the Wisdom of God sends forth Maidens True Ministers, who are
Chaste to Christ.
though the Wisdom of the World will not receive them (that makes Ministers by
their Wisdom) and such as will not receive Wisdom, will not receive her
Maidens, Prove. 9.1, 2, 3.

The Lord faith, I will pour out upon David, and upon the Inhabitants of
Jerusalem, the Spirit of Grace and of Supplication, and they shall look upon me
whom they have pierced, and mourn, etc. In that Day there shall be great
Mourning, the House of David apart, and their Wives apart; the House of Nathan
apart, and their Wives apart; the House of Levi apart, and their Wives apart;
the Family of Shimei apart, and their Wives apart; all the Families that
remain, every Family apart, and their Wives apart, Zach. 12.10. And this would
be Madness to all them that are not in that Spirit; but here every one has the
Sense of Christ, whom they have pierced in the Spirit, which is poured upon
them, but the Hard-hearted are not sensible.

Marshgrainge. the 16th of the 9th Month, 1676. G. F.

To all the Men and Women's Meetings that are gathered in the Name of Jesus:
Several Scripture Testimonies to the Saints Practices, Wherein all may see the
Practice of the holy Men and Women of God, in their Services in the Church of
Christ, and what good Works and Practices, and Services, they exhorted unto, as
follows, as you may see both in the Old and New Testament, which is the Duty
of all True Christians to follow.
WHO gave himself for us, Epist. 321.
that he might redeem us from all Iniquity, and purify unto himself a peculiar
People, zealous of good works, Titus 2.14.

The Woman wrought a good work upon Christ, as he says, Mat. 26.10.

Paul says to the Church of the Collossians, Being fruitful in every good
work, and increasing in the knowledge of God, Col. 1.10.

And that you may be established in every good word and work, Encouragement to
good Works.
2 Thessalonians. 2.17.

She (to wit, a Widow) well reported for her good Works, 1 Timothy 5.6, 10.

That the Church which believe in God might be careful to maintain good works;
these things are good and profitable to Men, Tit. 3.8.

And let ours also (to wit, the Church of Christ) learn to maintain good works
for necessary uses, that they may not be unfruitful. This says Paul to Titus,
and to the Church, Tit. 3.14.

Let us consider one another, to provoke unto love, and to good works, Heb.
10.24.

That they do good, that they be rich in good works, ready to distribute,
willing to communicate; for God gives us all things to enjoy, 1 Timothy 6.17, 18.

But to do good, and to communicate, forget not; for with such Sacrifices God
is well pleased, Heb. 13.16.

As God has distributed to every Man, Distributious for the Plor.
and as the Lord has called every one, so let him walk, and so ordain I in all
Churches, 1 Cor. 7.17.

And Paul exhorts the Church of the Romans to their distributing to the
necessity of the Saints, and of being given to Hospitality, Romans 12.13.

And to make Contribution for the poor Saints that were at Jerusalem, which the
Apostle Paul mentions to the Romans, Chap. 15.26.

Only that we should remember the Poor, the same which I also was forward to
do, said the Apostle to the Church at Galatia, Gal. 2.10.

If any Man minister, let him do it, as of the ability which God has given
him, that God in all things may be glorified through Jesus Christ, to whom be
praises and dominion for ever and ever, Amen. 1 Pet. 4.11.

And let us not be weary in well-doing; for in due season we shall reap, if we
faint not; as we have therefore opportunity, let us do good unto all Men,
especially to the Household of Faith, Gal. 6.9, 10.

And whatsoever you do in word or deed, do all in the Name of the Lord Jesus;
and whatsoever ye do, do it heartily, as unto the Lord, knowing that of the
Lord ye shall receive the Reward of the Inheritance; for ye do serve the Lord
Christ, Col. 3.17, 23, 24.

Therefore to him that knows how to do good, and does it not it is to him
Sin, James 4.17.

He that has pity on the Poor, Compassion to the Poor.
lends unto the Lord; and that which he has given will he pay him again,
Prove. 19.17.

And you may see, such as were careful to hearken unto the Voice of the Lord
God, and to obey and keep his Commandments; for the Lord thy God will bless
thee, as he has promised, Thou shall lend unto many Nations, and thou shall
not borrow, etc. Deuteronomy. 15.5, 6.

For the Lord shall open unto thee his good Treasure, the Heaven to give thee
Rain unto thy Land in his season, and to bless all the works of thine hands,
and thou shall lend unto many Nations, and thou shall not borrow; and all
People of the Earth shall see, that thou art called by the Name of the Lord;
and they shall be afraid of thee, Deuteronomy. 28.10, 12.

And David said, I have been young, and now am old, yet have I not seen the
Righteous forsaken, nor his seed begging Bread; for he is ever merciful and
lends, and his Seed is blessed, Psalm. 37.25, 26.

A good Man shows favor, and lends, he will guide his affairs with
Discretion, Psalm. 112.5.

The Righteous shows mercy, and gives, Psalm. 31.21.

The Righteous gives, and spares not; he that has a bountiful Eye shall be
blessed; for he gives of his Bread to the Poor, Prove. 21.26. and 22.9.

And he that gives to the Poor, shall not lack, Prove. 28.27.

God gives to all Men liberally, and upbraideth not: So all Men should give of
that which they have received of him, liberally, without upbraiding, as in
James 1.5.

And he that gives, let him do it with Simplicity, Romans 12.8.

Give and it shall be given unto you, says Christ, Luke 6.38.

And see the Care of the Apostles of the poor Saints, as in 2 Cor. 9.6, 7, 8,
9, 10, 11.

But this I say, he which sows sparingly, shall reap sparingly; and he which
sows bountifully, shall reap bountifully, 2 Cor. 9.6.

So every Man, To give liberally, not grudgingly.
according as he purposes in his Heart, so let him give, not grudgingly or of
necessity; for God loves a cheerful giver [mark, a cheerful giver] and God is
able to make all Grace abound toward you, that ye always having
All Sufficiency in all things may abound to every good work, as it is written,
He has dispersed abroad, he has given to the Poor, his Righteousness
remains for ever; [mark] now he that ministers Seed to the sower, both
ministers Bread for your Food, and multiplies your Seed sown, and increases
the Fruits of your Righteousness, Isa. 55.10. and 2 Cor. 9.7, 10.

Being enriched in every good thing to all Bountifulness, which causes through
us thanksgiving to God.

And you may see how the Disciples, every Man according to his ability,
determined to send Relief unto their Brethren, which dwelt in Judea, and they
sent it by the Hands of Saul and Barnabas, Acts 11.29, 30.

And so of Brotherly Love, ye need not that I write unto you; for God teaches
you to love one another, 1 Thessalonians. 4.9.

But whosoever has this World's goods, and sees his Brother have need, Brotherly
Love.
and shuts up his Bowels of Compassion from him, how dwells the Love of God
in him? 1 John 3.17.

There is a Generation whose Teeth are as Swords, and their Jawteeth as Knives,
to devour the Poor from the Earth, and the needy from among Men, Prove. 30.14.

And therefore the Poor and Needy is not to be oppressed nor vexed, nor sent
away empty; but relieved, and their Cause is to be pleaded; as in Prove. 31.9.

And the Apostle says to the Church, Give to him that needs, Ephesians. 4.28.

But my God shall supply all your need, according to his Riches in Glory by
Christ Jesus, Phil. 4.19.

And Christ said, That the Father knows what things ye have need of, Matthew.
6.8.

And you may see the manner and way of Collections, that the Apostles ordered
for the Saints, in 1 Cor. 16.1.

And the Lord says, If thou deal thy Bread to the hungry, To feed the Hungry.
and that thou bring the Poor that are cast out to thy House, and when thou
see the Naked that thou cover him, and that thou hide not thy self from thy
own Flesh, then shall thy Light break forth as the Morning, and thy Health
shall spring forth speedily, and thy Righteousness shall go before thee; the
Glory of the Lord shall be thy rereward, Isa. 58.7. and 8.10.

And if thou draw out thy Soul to the hungry, and satisfy the afflicted, then
shall thy Light arise in Obscurity, and thy Darkness shall be as the Noonday.

And the Lord shall guide thee continually, and satisfy thy Soul in Drought,
and make thy Bones fat, and thou shall be like a watered Garden, and like a
Spring of Water, whose Waters fail not: Here is the Practice of Godliness, Isa.
58.7, 8, 9, 10, 11, etc.

The hungry and thirsty, their Souls faints in them, then they cry unto the
Lord, and he fatisfieth the longing Soul in their trouble, and fills the
hungry with Goodness (or good things) Psalm 107.50.

The Lord which made Heaven and Earth, which gives Food to the Hungry,
preserves the Stranger, and relieveth the Widow and Fatherless; but the way of
the Wicked he turns up-side down, Psalm 146.9.

If thy Enemy hunger, give him Bread to eat; and if he thirst, give him Water
to drink: Thou shall heap Coals of Fire upon his Head, and the Lord shall
reward thee, Prove. 25.21, 22.

And the Law of God ye may see in Ezekiel. 18.7, 9. Against Oppression.
He that has not oppressed any, but has restored the Debtor his Pledge, and
has spoiled none by Violence, and has given his Bread to the Hungry, and has
covered the Naked with his Garment, he shall surely live, faith the Lord God.

And Job said, Because I delivered the Poor that cried, and the Fatherless, and
him that had none to help, the Blessing of him that was ready to perish came
upon me: I caused the Widows Heart to sing for Joy, and I was a Father to the
Poor, Job 29.12, 13.

Dorcas (a Woman) a certain Disciple of Jesus Christ; when she was dead it is
recorded, This Woman was full of good work [mark] full of good Works and
Alms-deeds, which she did in her Lifetime; and all the Widows [mark] all they
stood by Peter (the Widows) and wept, and showed him the Coats and Garments
that she had made whilst she wasalive with them [ mark, with them] A Women's
Meeting in the Practice of Religion, Acts 9.36, to the end.

Pure Religion, Pure Religion and undefiled.
and undefiled before God and the Father (is this to visit the Fatherless and
Widows in their Affliction, and to keep himself unspotted from the world, James
1.27.

And this Religion is to be practiced by all the right and true Christians: For
if a Brother or Sister be naked, and be destitute of daily Food, and thou say
unto one of them, Depart in Peace, warm your selves, and fill your Bellies,
notwithstanding you give them not those things which are needful to the Body,
what helps it? Even so Faith, if it have no Works, is dead in it self, James
2.15, 16, 17. See how James encourages to practice Religion, and to show forth
the Works of Faith, that works by Love.

If thou afflict any Widow of Fatherless Child in any wise, and they cry at all
unto me, To relieve the Widom.
I will surely hear their Cry, says the Lord, and my wrath shall wax hot, and
I will kill you with the Sword, and your Wives shall be Widows, and your
Children Fatherless, Exodus 22.22.

The Lord is good to all, and his tender Mercies are over all his works, Psalm
145.8, 9.

The Righteous considers the Cause of the Poor; but the wicked regards not
to know it ( to wit, the Cause of the Poor) what Condition they are in, And
consider the Poor.
Prove. 29.7.

And if thy Brother be waxen poor, and fallen in decay with thee, then shall
thou relieve him; yea, though he be a Stranger or a Sojourner, that he may live
with thee, Lev. 25.35.

The Poor is hated even of his Neighbor, but the Rich has many Friends; but
he that is merciful to the Poor, happy is he, Prove. 14. 20, 21.

He that oppresses the Poor, reproaches his Maker; but he that honors him (
to wit, his Maker) has Mercy on the Poor, Prove. 14.31.

Whosoever mocks the Poor, reproaches his Maker, Prove. 17.5.

Whosoever stops his Ears at the Cry of the Poor, he also shall cry himself, but
shall not be heard, Prove. 21.13.

The Lord makes Poor, and makes Rich; he brings low, and lifts up, I Sam.
2.7.

Therefore I command thee, thou shall open thy Hand wide unto thy Brother, to
thy Poor, and to thy Needy in the Land, says the Lord, Deuteronomy. 15.11.

The Poor uses Entreaties; but the Rich answers roughly, Prove. 18.23.

Here you may see what Care the Lord lays upon his People, to look after the
Poor, Widows and Fatherless, both in the time of the Law and in the time of the
Gospel; and how that they should obey him in his Commands, the Lord God, who
created all, and gives the increase of all, and gives Man and Woman good
things, both Temporal and Spiritual, to do good withal: So the Lord is to be
obeyed, and his Truth is to be practiced; and the pure Religion, that in
undefiled before God and the Father, is above all Religions in the World: And
this Religion is, To visit the Widows and Fatherless in their Affliction, Of
the pure, unspotted Religion.
and to keep himself unspotted from the World; (mark, unspotted from the
World.) And this Religion is above the Papists, that must have a Purgatory to
wash off their Spots of the World; and above those Potestants, that plead they
must have a Body of Death and Sin to the Grave, with which they are spotted
like Leopards: And these are the Religions of the World; and are not the pure
and undefiled Religion before God and the Father; and their Fatherless and
Widows in their Afflictions are not visited, as they ought to be: And
therefore, you who are come to be of this Pure Religion, that is undefiled
before God and the Father, and do visit the Widows and Fatherless in their
Afflictions, and do keep your selves unspotted from the World; you are of the
Religion that was not set up by Man, but by Christ and his Apostles above
Sixteen Hundred Years since; by which you see over all the Religions set up
since; and see therefore that you practice it.

And Job said, If I did despise the Cause of my Manservant, Not to despise the
Cause of the Poor.
or of my Maidservant, when they contended with me, what then shall I do when
God shall arise? and when he visits, what shall I answer him? See the Care of
this patient Man! Is not this for all the true Christians to practice? Job 31.
ver. 13, 14, 15. And, says Job, Did not he that made me in the Womb, make him?
and did not one fashion us in the Womb? Verse 15. And if I have withheld the
Poor from their Desire, or have caused the Eyes of the Widow to fail, or have
eaten my Morsel my self alone, and the Fatherless have not eaten thereof; for
from my youth he was brought up with me as with a Father, and I have guided her
( to wit, the Widow) from my Mother's Womb: If I have seen any perish for want
of Clothing, or any poor without Covering, if his Loins have not blessed me,
But to relieve the oppressed and the stranger.
and if he were not warmed with the Fleece of my Sheep, if I have lift up my
Hand against the Fatherless when I saw my Help in the Gate; then let mine Arm
fall from my Shoulder Blade, and mine Arm be broken from the Bone: The Stranger
did not lodge in the Street, but I opened my Doors for the Traveller, Job 31.
Did not I weep for him that was in Trouble? was not my Soul grieved for the
Poor? Now, here ye may all see the Actions and Practice of this Man, by his
practicing the pure Religion: So it is not a Talk, but a walking in it; as you
may see in Job 30, 31 Chapters.

And blessd is he that considers the Poor, the Lord will deliver him in time
of Trouble, Psalm 41.1

Now, all you that profess God and Christ, see how you walk in the Steps of
these good Men and Women; and not only to talk as they did, but do and practice
as they did; for it is not every one that says Lord, Lord, enters the Kingdom,
but be that does what he commands.

And Christ says, Ye call me Lord and Master; and ye say well, for so I am;
and if I then your Lord and Master have washed your Feet, Of Self-denial.
ye also ought to wash one another's Feet: For I have given you an Example,
that ye should do as I have done unto you. And if ye know these things, happy
are ye if ye do them, John 13.17.

And Christ says, Not every one that says unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter
into the Kingdom of Heaven; but he that does the Will of my Father which is in
Heaven, Matthew. 7.21.

So all People may see by Christ's own Words, that their Saying and Speaking of
God and Christ, and his Prophets and Apostles, signifies nothing, except they
Do his Will; that is, Practice it, and be obedient to what be commands and
requires.

G. F.

To Friends in Cumberland.
DEar Friends,
Epist. 332.
Who are gathered in the Name of Jesus, by whom all things were made and
created, who upholds all things by his Word and Power, To be faithful in
Sufferings.
and gives the increase of all things; the Earth is his, and the fullness
thereof. And therefore let your Minds and Hearts be with the Lord, and your
Care cast upon him: And though the Lord is pleased now to try you, and to
exercise you in Sufferings, and permits your Persecutors to spoil your Goods,
or cast you into Prison, to try whether your Minds be in him, or in the outward
things he gives you: Yet let not visible things separate you from the Love of
God in Christ Jesus, nor no Persecutions amaze you, nor separate your Minds
from the Love of God. For all things shall work together for Good, to them that
love God; for the Love of God bears all things and suffer all things; and they
that spoil the Goods of the Innocent and cast them into Prison, for serving and
worshipping of God, the Lord fees it and beholds it; and so leave them to the
Lord to deal with them. For that which they get by spoiling you, they will
never be the richer for; and when they have done spoiling, the Lord can spoil
them and theirs. And all the Goods they take from Friends, for serving God,
will torment them at last, and be a greater Plague to them, more than keeping
on your Hats, and saying Thou to them was.

And you have had Experience how the other Powers spoiled your Goods; The Spoil
of the Righteous, not durable Riches to their Persecutors.
but were they either the richer, or the fatter? Nay, the more thery did eat,
destroy and devour, the more they look like Pharaoh's lean Cattle.

And did not the Christians of old suffer joyfully the spoiling of their Goods,
by Professors and Profane? So, they that are born of the Flesh, will persecute
them that are born of the Spirit; and they that will live Godly in Christ
Jesus, must suffer Persecution; and blessed are they that do suffer Persecution
for Christ and his Righteousness sake.

And so never fear the loss of the Fleece, for God can make it grow again, as
he did poor Job's. And it is the way of the Enemy and Adversary, to set upon
the young convinced, to think by that means to make them to yield. For, have
you not read, it was the way, how that the Enemies of Israel, of old, fell upon
the weak and feeble of their Camp, and the hindermost of the Flock; but they
had their Reward at the End. And so wait upon the Lord, and he will support
you, though he may try you a while; as he does all his Saints, that the Trial
of your Faith may come forth more pure than Gold.

And so never fear Man, nor what they are permitted to do unto you, but the
Lord: Though the hungry Lions may lack, yet they that wait upon the Lord, shall
not want any good thing; for his Promise is, he will never leave them nor
forsake them.

And so the Lord God Almighty give you Power and Courage, to stand against all
the Wiles of the Enemy, and to be Valiant for his Truth upon the Earth. And so,
with my Love in the Everlasting Seed, Christ Jesus, who is over him that makes
to suffer, and will be when he is gone.

Marshgrange, the 6th of the 4th Month. 1676. G. F.

To Friends in Barbados.
MY Dear Friends in the heavenly Relation, and Zion's Children, Epist.333.
amongst whom the Stone that the Builders rejected, is elect and precious, and
in him, Christ, you are Elect, Christ the Head of God's Church.
who is the Head of the Corner of God's Building: And therefore in the Name of
Jesus keep your Meetings, in whom you all have Salvation, and not by any other
Name under Heaven; and though the Lord may try you, where your Minds are, and
in what, by the outward Powers, yet be valiant for God's Truth upon the Earth,
and if some of you be cast into Prison, and your Goods be spoiled, the Seed is
upon the Head of him that makes to suffer, and will remain when he is gone:
And the Lord God, who gives the increase of all, both Invisible and Visible,
can make the Fleece to grow again. And therefore let your Faith be in the Power
and Word of Life: And the Authority of your Men and Women's Meetings is the
Power of God; and all the Heirs of the Gospel are Heirs of Christ, the heavenly
Man, and of his Government, the increase of which there is no end. And so all
walk in Christ, So walk in Christ.
who bruiseth the Serpent's Head, that has gotten between you and God; so as
you all are in him, then nothing can get between you and the Lord God; and so
in the glorious Order of the Gospel, the Power of God, dwell, which is over the
Devil, and the World, and before he and it was, and the Power of God will be
when he and it is gone: This is the everlafting Gospel, which brings Life and
Immortality to Light; and that you all may see over him that has darkened you,
to him who was before he was, and the Power of God will be when he is gone. And
therefore walk in the glorious, blessed, peaceable and comfortable Order of the
everlasting Gospel; for the Gospel, the Power of God, is the Gospel of Peace,
and the Truth is Peaceable: The Devil, the Destroyer and Adversary abode not in
the Peaceable Truth, and the Kingdom of God stands in Peace and Joy in the Holy
Ghost; and the Unity of the Spirit is a Bond of Peace, yea, the Bond of the
heavenly Man, the Prince of Princes Peace, that Bond must be kept, by all
Zion's Children, the Heirs of Life.

And all seek the Peace and Good one of another, To seek Peace, and dwell is
Love.
and dwell in the Love of God, thet does edify the Body of Christ, and bears
all things, and endures all things; and build up one another in the most holy
Faith, which you have from Christ, the holy One; for Holiness becomes the House
of God. And therefore all mind that which becomes his House; and now is the
time for every one to put on the Armor of God, and to take his Weapons and
Arms, that you may stand by God's Ensign in the Truth, against him that is out
of Truth, keeping on your Helmet of Salvation; as a token of your Victory, and
your Breast Plate of Righteousness, which preserves both Mind, Heart and Soul,
and your Loins girded with Truth, Keep on the Armor of Righteousness.
that you may be Valiant for it, and your Feet shod with the Preparation of the
Gospel, the Power of God, that your Feet may stand fast over all slippery
Places, in the Power of God, the Gospel, that is sure and everlasting: Here is
your Armor; and your Weapon is the Sword of the Spirit, the Word of God, the
Word of Life and Salvation, and Wisdom and Reconciliation; that is as a Sword
and a Hammer, to cut down and hammer down that which has made a separation
betwixt you and God, and is as Fire to burn it up: And the Shield of Faith,
that is your Shield by which you have victory and access to God; by which Faith
all the Just lives, and are saved, and contend for it, which is declared to the
Saints by Christ, who is the Author and Finisher of it. And by this Faith you
come to Christ, the Author, and as many as receive him, walk in him, that you
may be always fresh and green in him, who bruises the Head of the Serpent, that
has made People lean and barren, and has made so many barren Mountains, which
Christ is gathering and calling his People from, that they might walk in the
Light of the Lord, and come to the Mountain of the House of the Lord, that is
established above all the Mountains, where God teaches all his, the Way of
Life, Truth and Salvation. And the Mountain of the House of the Lord is always
green, with fresh Springs, and Fruitful, and all that lives under God's
Teaching knows it. So serve God in the Spirit, and in the newness of Life,
which is over the old, that the Lord God's Presence may be felt amongst you;
and his Son, a Prophet to open to you, and a Priest to sanctify you, a Bishop
to oversee you, and a Shepherd to feed you; the Rock of your Age, and Ages, the
Foundation of your Generation, and many Generations, and who are in him, who
was elected before the Foundation of the World, they build upon him, who is the
First and the Last, the Beginning and Ending; in him you have all Life and
Salvation, who is the Amen.

And my desire is, To Encourage the Faithful Women in the Service of God.
that you may, in the Power of God, encourage all the Faithful Women in your
Island, in the Work and Service of God; and now you have Six Men's Meetings, if
you had as many Women's Meetings, it would include all the faithful Women in all
the Corners of your Island, and some of your ancient faithful Women to go from
Meeting to Meeting, till they are settled in the Power of God, and that will
keep all alive in the Lord's working Power and living Life.

And all that are not Faithful, let them be admonished to Faithfulness, that so
they may come into the Light, and Life, and Service of God and Christ; for all
the Wise-hearted and Faithful Women, in the time of the Law, were to work about
the Tabernacle of God, and the Holy Things: And they were called the Assemblies
of the Women.

And all the Women in the time of the Law was to offer Sacrifices upon God's
Altar, as well as the Men. And now in the time of the Gospel, which has
brought Life and Immortality to Light, God does pour out of his Spirit upon all
Flesh; and therefore live in the Gospel, and its Order; and all true
Christians, Men and Women, does offer their Spiritual Sacrifices to God, who is
a Spirit.

And therefore my Friends, be valiant for God's Truth upon the Earth; dwell in
Love, that will bear all things; and let there be an Order entered in your
Books, To avoid provoking Words.
that there be no provoking Words spoken in your Meetings, but if any have any
thing to say, let them speak to them in love privately. And when ye have
settled your Six Women's Meetings, then you may have a Six Weeks, or a Monthly
as well as a Quarterly Meeting, as you may see meet. And so that all your Wells
of Life may be kept open, and every one have a fresh Spring springing up in
you; so that in every one of you the living Water of Life may flow; so that ye
all may be refreshed with the Fountain of Life, and feel Christ a Bishop to
oversee, and a Counselor to counsel, and a King to rule in your Hearts, and a
Prophet to open, and a Shepherd to feed you with his heavenly Food.

And so see that nothing be lacking among you, To follow whatsoever is of good
Report.
both inward and outward; and whatsoever is decent, comely, modest, virtuous,
righteous, and of good report, follow after, and be steadfast upon Christ the
Rock and Foundation. And whatever you do, let it be done in the Name of Jesus
(that is, in his Power) and mind the Gospel of Peace, and its Ordr, which has
brought Life and Immortality to Light, that you may be preserved in Life, and
in Immortality, by the Immortal Power. And all to be Children of the Wisdom
that is from above, which is pure and peaceable, and easy to be entreated,
keeping the Unity in God's Holy Spirit, in which is the Bond of the Prince of
Princes Peace, in whom you have all Peace, Life and Salvation.

I received your Letter from your Quarterly Meeting, and I am glad taht you are
in the Lord's Work and Service.

And my desire is, That ye all may stand up for the Glory and Honor of the
Lord God, and that his Blessings may abound among you.

And so if you do Write to New England and Jamaica, where I hear they have
precious Men and Women's Meetings, it might do well, to encourage one another in
the Work and Service of God: So that the Women may all be helps meet to the Men
in the Restoration, in the Image of God, as Man and Woman was in before they
fell. So with my Love in the Seed of Life to all Friends in the Island.

Swarthmore, in Lancashire, the 25th of the 8th Month, 1676. G. F.

To Friends in the Isle of Man.
MY Dear Friends, be valiant for God's Truth upon the Earth, Epist. 334.
and and live in the Light, and Power and Spirit of God, that you answer that
of God in all, by which their Minds may be turned to God. And keep your
Meetings in the Name of Jesus, To keep your Meetings in the Name of Jesus.
in whom you have Salvation; whose Name is above every Name under the whole
Heaven; that the Lord's Glory you may see to shine in and about your
Tabernacles, and his Presence among you to teach and order you, and be you
obedient to it. So with my Love to you all in the Everlasting Seed, that
bruiseth the Head of the Serpent; which Seed lives and reigns over all, from
Everlasting to Everlasting, in his Glory, in whom the Saints do sit down in
their Peace, and Rest and Joy for evermore, Amen.

Swarthmore, the 5th Month, 1676. G. F.

To Friends in Virginia and Maryland.
MY Dear Friends, Epist. 335.
all dwell in the Love of God, and in his Power and Truth, that the Presence of
the Lord God you all may enjoy, who is the Life of you all, and the length of
your Days, who has the Breath of all Mankind, and the Spirits of all Flesh in
his Hand; and in him you do all live, and move, and have your being, who is
your Rock and Salvation, and Fountain of Life, and of all your Mercies, and of
your Water of Life: And therefore serve, and honor, and fear, and worship him
in his Spirit and Truth; and that you all may abide in the holy, heavenly and
spiritual Vine, and in him bring forth heavenly and spiritual Fruits, to the
Glory of God, who sent his Son to be a Leader, Christ the Leader and Way to God.
and the Way to God, who draws all Men up to himself, where he is ascended,
to sit together in Heavenly Places in Christ Jesus, out of all Sin and
Transgression, by which Man was droven from God, that made him barren and
unfruitful. And therefore be ye separated from the World to the Lord, by the
Word which was in the Beginning, which divides the Precious from the Vile;
that by that Word ye may be reconciled to God; which Word reconcileth all
things in Heaven and in the Earth in one; which Word hammereth down that which
made twain; and so by the glorious Everlasting Word of Life you are born again
of the Immortal Seed of God, and feeds upon the Milk of this everlasting Word
which lives, and abides, and endures for ever, and was in the beginning; by
which Word you have Wisdom and Salvation, by which Wisdom all God's Children
are justified. The Lord God in his Immortal Power preserve you out of all Evil,
and out of the Earth, and over your Enemies, within and without, in his
everlasting Seed Christ, that is over all, to his Glory, for ever, Amen.

G. F.

To Friends at Dantzick.
DEar Friends, Epist. 336.
in the Love of God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, look above all your outward
Sufferings, and him that is out of Truth, that makes you to suffer; and let
nothing separate you from the Love of God which you have in Christ Jesus, by
whom all things were made: Not to be moved from the true Foundation Christ
Jesus.
I say, let not the Birth of the Flesh, with all his carnal Weapons, Goals and
Prisons, Threats or Reproaches, move you, nor separate you from the Love of
God, nor from your Foundation, the Rock of Ages, Christ Jesus: But feel the
Well of Life springing up in you, to nourish the Plant that God has planted in
you, of his Renown, that that may grow up within his Hedge, his Power, which
will keep out the Devil and all the Venomous Beasts, from entering into God's
Garden, or Kingdom. And therefore let your Faith stand in the Lord's Power,
which is your Hedge and Defense, and which is your Keeper, and will keep you
safe, that you need not be afraid of your Enemy your Adversary; for the Lord's
Power is over his Head, and you within his Power, then nothing can get betwixt
you and God; and in the Power of the Lord is the City set upon his Hill, where
the Light shines, and the heavenly Salt is, and the Lamps burning, and Trumpets
sounding forth the Praise of God, of the Eternal Joy, in his Eternal Word of
Life, that lives, and abides, and indures for ever. And so to the Praise and
Glory of God you may bring forth fresh and green Fruit, being grafted into the
green Tree, that never withers.

Oh, be valiant for God's Glory and his Truth upon the Earth, To be valiant for
the Truth, and spread it abroad.
and spread it abroad, answering that of God in every Man and Woman's
Conscience; knowing him that has brought Everlasting Peace into the Earth: So,
that the Songs of Salvation may be in your Mouths; for it is said, With the
Heart Man believes, and with the Mouth Confession is made to Salvation. So
every true Believer will confess to Christ his Salvation, their Way, Light and
Life, out of Death and Darkness; their Prophet, to open to them; their
Shepherd, to feed them; and their Bishop, to oversee them; their Captain and
Commander, to command and to lead them; their Counselor, for to counsel them;
and their Priest, who has offered himself for them, and also sanctifies them,
and offers them up to God: To whom be all Praise and Golory for ever. Amen.

I writ something to the Magistrates, which is in Print in England; which, if
you have it not to give them, you may send into Holland, and let it be
translated into your Language and given to them, and spread it up and down in
your Country.

And as for Truth in this Part of the World, and in America, Truth prospers
it prospers, and spreads, and goes on; and by it many Men and Women are made
God's Free Men and Women, being redeemed from him that is out of Truth, that
they may serve God in the New Life in Christ Jesus (out of the Old Life in Adam
in the Fall) and so come to live in the heavenly Unity, Wisdom, Love and
Dominion.

So, in that Love that bears all things, and keeps your Hearts, Minds and Souls
up to God, which comes from God, through which you come to love God, and
Christ, and one another; in that live and dwell.

Swarthmore, the 17th of the 3d Month, 1676. G. F.

To Friends in Holland.
DEar Friends,
To whom is my Love in the Seed of Life, Epist. 337.
that bruises the Head of the Seed of Death; and through him you have all Life
Eternal; who is the Foundation of the Prophets, and the Apostles, and all God's
People, in all Ages, their Rock to build upon, that will stand the Waves of the
Sea, and all Storms and foul Weather, who is the Horn of your Salvation, to
push down all, that stands in your way to God; and to push down him, that has
led Man and Woman from God: So, that you may all sing of your Rock, and the
Horn of your Salvation, as the Holy Ones did in Ages past; and Christ, who is
your Foundation, the Lamb of God, who has been slain from the Foundation of
the World, Christ overcame the World and is ascended far above all things.
but now he has overcome the World, and is risen, and ascended far above all
Principalities, Powers, Thrones and Dominions; and is razing down to the Ground
the World's Foundation, from which Foundation he has been slain, and is setting
up himself, the Living and Everlasting Foundation, for all his to build upon;
and therefore, because the World and its Foundation, Christ is razing down,
they are are offended and angry, and the Heathen Rage and take Counsel against
the anointed; but it is to no purpose, for he will shake the Foundation of all
false Religions, Ways, Worships, Churches and Teachers, and will make the
Pillars of them to totter, and they must be at their wits end, before they see
another Foundation; for God shook down the Four Monarchies, the great Empires
of the World, and scattered them abroad with his Wind, as the Chaff of the
Summer Floor, all those great Persecutors, and the little Stone that is cut out
of the Mountain without Hands, The Stone out of the Mountain without Hands, etc.
that no earthly Man has the glory of, is becoming a great Mountain, and will
fill the whole Earth (Glory to God for ever) and it will dash down all Men's
Glory and Pride, let them soar as high as Nebuchadnezzar, and shelter as many
under them as he did, in their Sects, that he may make them to know, that the
most High rules in the Kingdom of Men, and that his Kingdom is an Everlasting
Kingdom. And therefore, all Friends, that know the Light, which is the Life in
Christ, be faithful in the Truth, and spread it abroad, answering the Light of
Christ in every one; for Christ bid his Disciples go preach the Gospel unto all
Nations: And since that was done, are many gathered into the Fellowship and
Order of it; but since the World has worshipped the Beast, and given their
Glory and Honor to him, instead of God and Christ; which Beast is out of
Truth, and had his Power from the Dragon, and the Whore, which all Nations has
drunk of her Cup, and she has rid upon the Beast; and now the Everlasting
Gospel must be preached again to all Nations, Tongues and People that dwell
upon the Earth: So all Nations has been darkened from Life and Immortality; and
now the Gospel, which is the Power of God, brings Life and Immortality to light
again, that they may come to see over him that has darkened them, and before he
was; and such comes into the City of the heavenly Jerusalem, and drinks of the
Waters of Life freely.

And therefore all live and walk in the Light, in which you have Fellowship and
Unity, To live in Unity, Peace and Love, which edifies.
and be at Peace among your selves, and in Love, which edifies, and bears all
things; for this is that which passes Knowledge, and keeps in the Humility of
Christ Jesus. So, my desires are, That you may all spread and grow in the Vine,
for the Lord has a great People to come out in those Parts, which I saw in
1651. And therefore Labor in God's Power, that you may increase your heavenly
Treasure, and enter into the Joy of the Lord. And so, with my Love to all in
the Truth, that walk and live in it, that by it they may be made God's Freemen.

Swarthmore, the 2d of the 7th, 1676. G. F.

To Friends in Maryland and Virginia.
MY Dear Friends, Epist. 338.
be Valiant for the Truth, and the Power of it, in the Spirit and Faith of
Jesus, and let no one take your Crown, for the Saints overcame by the Blood of
the Lamb and the Testimony of Jesus; and so fear not the Wrath of Man, but fear
the Lord, and keep your Men and Women's Meetings in the Name of Jesus; in whose
Name you have Salvation, Life and Peace; so that all may be in the Vine,
bringing forth heavenly Fruit, to the Glory of God; and so feel his Banner of
Love over you, and you sitting under the Shadow of the Almighty, and look over
that which makes to suffer, to that which was before it was; and know your
Faith, to stand in the Seed that bruiseth the Head of it; which Seed Christ is
your Rock and Foundation, who will raze down the Foundation of the World of
Wickedness, from which Foundation the Lamb has been slain, but he is risen,
and has overcome the World, and has the Victory, Glory to the Lord God and
the Lamb for ever, Amen. And in him you have the Victory, and do overcome; and
they that do overcome, From which Foundation in Christ we have the Victory.
shall eat of the hidden Manna, and shall go no more forth into the barren
World of Wickedness, but feed in the fruitful Land of the Living, and their
Feet shall be set in a sure Place; and beautiful are the Feet of those that
publish Peace and glad Tiding, and that says in Truth and Righteousness to
Zion, Thy God reigns. Who is a consuming Fire to the Wicked; and the Joy of
the Lord if strength to the Righteous: So serve the Lord in the Newness of
Life; for the Lord is dishonored in the Old Life of Wickedness, and keep the
Unity of the Spirit, which is the Bond of Peace, which no Man can take away.
So, with my Love to you all, in the Everlasting Seed, that changes not.

G. F.

ALL my Dear Friends and Brethren, every where, Epist. 339.
in the Name and Power of Jesus Christ, your Lord and Savior, Life and Peace,
To live and walk in Christ.
live and walk in the Lamb which has the Victory; and so in the Humility of
Christ, which you have learned of him; and in Patience, with which you run the
Race, and obtain the Crown of Immortal Life; and in the Love of God all dwell,
which will warm all your Hearts, and knit and unite you together, and build you
up a Holy Temple for the Lord: And his Love will keep and carry you above all
things, to the Glory of God: And this Love will enable you to bear all things
whatever wicked Men can do unto you; or, what the Lord may try you withal. So,
let your Faith be in the invisible God and his Son, who is able to succor you,
and save you to the uttermost; who is over all, King Immortal, Invisible, the
only wise God, blessed for ever, Amen.

So, God Almighty establish you all upon this Holy Rock and Foundation, Christ
Jesus, who is the same to day as yesterday, and so for ever, who was all the
Holy Men and Women's Foundation, who is the First and the Last, the Beginning
and Ending, the Saints Mediator and Peacemaker between them and God: Their Joy
and Rejoicing is in him, their Everlasting Joy, the Amen, blessed for ever. So,
with my Love in the Lord Jesus Christ unto you all, in whom I have labored,
(and) among you.

Swarthmore, the 19th of the 12th Month, 1676. G. F.

To Friends in New Jersey in America.
MY Dear Friends, in New Jersey, and you that go to New Jersey,
Epist. 340.
My desire is, that you may all be kept in the Fear of God, and that you may
have the Lord in your Eye, in all your Undertakings: For many Eyes of other
Governments or Colonies will be upon you; yea, the Indians, to see how you
order your Lives and Conversations. And therefore, let your Lives, and Words,
and Conversations, be as becomes the Gospel, that you may adorn the Truth, and
honor the Lord in all your Undertakings: Let that only be in your Eye, Honor
God in all Undertakings.
and then you will have the Lord's Blessing and increase, both in Basket, and
Field, and Store House; and at your lyings down you will feel him, and at your
goings forth, and comings in. So that you may answer the Light, and the Truth,
in all People, both by your godly Lives and Conversations: Serving the Lord,
and being valiant for his Truth, with a joyful Heart, upon the Earth, and the
Glorious Name, in whom you have Salvation.

And keep up your Meetings for Worship, and your Men and Women's Meetings for
the Affairs of Truth, both Monthly and Quarterly: And, after you are settled,
you may join together, and build a Meeting House. And do not strive about
outward things; but dwell in the Love of God, for that will unite you together,
and make you kind and gentle one toward another; and to seek one another Good
and Welfare, and to be helpful one to another; and see that nothing be lacking
among you, then all will be well. And let Temperance, and Patience, Temperance.
Patience and Brotherly Love be exercised.
and Kindness, and Brotherly Love be exercised among you, so that you may
abound in Virtue, and the true Humility; living in Peace, showing forth the
Nature of Christianity, that you may all live as a Family, and the Church of
God, holding Christ your heavenly Head, and he exercising his Offices among
you, and in you; and hold him, the Head, by his Light, Power and Spirit; and
that will keep your Minds over the Earthly Spirit, up to God; for the Earth,
and the Sea, and all things therein, are his, and he gives the increase thereof.

And therefore be not over eager after outward things, but keep above them in
the Lord's Power, and Seed Christ Jesus, that is over all; in whom you have all
Life, Election and Salvation.

And write over Yearly, from your Meetings, how you are settled, and how your
Affairs go in the Truth, and how your Men and Women's Meetings are settled.

And my Desires are, That we may hear that you are a good Savor to God, in
those Countries: So that the Lord may Crown all your Actions with his Glory. So
with my Love to all.

Swarthmore, the 4th of the 1st Month, 1676. G. F.

MY Friends,
Epist. 341.
All you that do know God and Christ your Teacher, and are come to be the Sons
and Daughters of the Lord God, and are in his New Covenant; in which you all do
know the Lord, and need not any Man to say unto you, Know the Lord: And are
Heirs of the Gospel of Peace and Salvation, that has brought Life and
Immortality to light; and that by the Power of God, the Gospel, you do see over
him, the Adversary and the Destroyer, that has darkened you: And so does know,
that the Power of God is the Authority of your Men's and Women's Meetings; in it
keep them, and all other Meetings; and all such as be Heirs of Grace, and Heirs
of Life, and Heirs of the Gospel, keep your Men's and Women's Meetings, in the
Power of God, the Authority of them; and they that cries against them, or you
strive not with them, for they will in God's time die of themselves, and wither
away; but keep your Testimony of the Life, and of Grace, and of the Gospel, and
of the Order of it, and your Faith in him, your Teacher, who bruises the Head
of the Serpent, the Author of all Disorder and ill Government; even Christ, the
increase of whose Government (in his Truth, and Power, and Righteousness) there
is no end: Glory to the Lord God for evermore.

And so all strive to be of one Mind, and Heart, and Soul, and Spirit, To live
in Unity in the Love of God.
and Faith, living together in Unity, and in the Love of God, all drinking into
one Spirit, by which you are Baptized into one Body, having one Head, who is
Heavenly and Spiritual; and in the one Spirit, by which you are Circumcised,
which puts off the Body of the Sins of the Flesh. So as you do keep to the
Spirit of Christ, it will keep you to be one Body, and to him the one Head,
Christ Jesus, the Amen.

G. F.

MY Dear Friends and Brethren,
Epist. 342.
That Faith (which is the Gift of God) which all the Saints lived in, and by
which they pleased God, and had Victory, by which they had access to God, and
by, To live in that Faith, wherein the Ancients pleased God.
and in which Faith they did walk: And all the Just, in all Ages and
Generations, did live by the same Faith: Do you all live and walk now in your
Age? I say, walk in that Faith by which Enoch (the Seventh from Adam) was
translated, and by which he had this Testimony, that he pleased God.

And also keep in that Faith by which Noah built his Ark, wherein he and his
Family were preserved; and the old World, that grieved God, and his good
Spirit, were drowned.

And also walk in that Faith by which Abraham forsook his Father's House, and
Native Country, and their Idolatrous Religion.

And live in that Faith, by which Moses forsook Egypt, and refused to be called
the Son of Pharaoh's Daughter, and chose rather to suffer Affliction with the
People of God, than to enjoy the Pleasures of the World for a season: And by
this Faith (which is the Gift of God) he saw God, who is Invisible.

And by this Faith was Rahab. the Harlot saved, and her Family: And by this
Faith the Walls of Jerico fell down, without any outward Instrument of War.

And by this Faith Jacob went down into Egypt, and his Children; and by this
Faith he knew they should return again. And the Jews that did not keep in this
Faith, their Carcases fell in the Wilderness; but they that kept in this Faith
entered into the Land of Promise. And by this Faith had all the Valiants of God
the Victory, and his holy Prophets and Prophetesses, as you may read all along
in the Scriptures. And by this Faith were they kept in the Fire, and by it the
violence of the Fire was quenched; and by it the Mouths of the Lions were
stopped: So by this Faith they had the Victory.

And by this Faith was Elijah taken up to Heaven: And so as Christ Jesus says,
Faith saves, and makes whole. To look unto Jesus.
And all are to look unto Jesus, the Heavenly and the Spiritual Man, the Second
Adam, the Lord from Heaven, by whom all things was made and created, who is the
First and the Last, to be both the Author and Finisher of their Faith.

Now Christ said, When the Son of Man comes, shall he find Faith in the Earth?
For all, both Jews and Gentiles, were concluded under Sin and Unbelief; so Sin
and Unbelief was over them, and they shut up under it. So whosoever has this
true, saving and justifying Faith, Christ Jesus has been the Author of it, and
is the Finisher of this Divine and Precious Faith. So all Eyes must look unto
him, for he is both the Author and Finisher of this Living, Precious and Divine
Faith: And this is the Faith of God's Elect; by which Faith they have access to
God, and know their Election; by which Faith they are translated from Death to
Life, and from the Darkness to the Light, and from the Power of Satan unto the
Power of God, and from the Corruption to the Incorruption, and from the Mortal
to the Immortal, and from the Natural to the Spiritual.

And by this Faith, By Faith the Devil is resisted.
the Devil, the Destroyer, is resisted, who abode not in the Truth; and by this
Faith the Fiery Darts is quenched, of Satan (the Adversary of Man) and he
thereby is overcome. So by this Faith you come to know the Partition Wall
broken down, that has been betwixt you and God. So in this Faith are all the
Household of Faith to build upon Christ Jesus (who bruises the Serpent's Head)
who is the Author and Finisher of Faith; and this is called the Holy Faith, and
the One Faith, and by this one Faith, which Jesus Christ is the Author and
Finisher of (by whom all things was made and created) by it we do understand
the Worlds were made [by the Word of God] and this is the Faith which all the
Household of Faith are to contend for, That Faith which Christ is the Author of.
this One Faith which Christ Jesus is the Author of; which Faith is the Gift of
God, and is held in a pure Conscience: And it is called the Mystery of Faith;
for no natural Men, with all the Arts, Languages and Wisdom, upon the Earth,
can find it out, or know this Mystery, nor make it; for Christ Jesus, the
heavenly and spiritual Man, is the Author and Finisher of it; and no natural
Man, though he may have all the Languages that began at Babel, and yet he may
not know the Mystery of this One Faith, which Christ Jesus is the Author of:
For Pilate, that set Hebrew, Greek and Latin a-top of Christ, who was the
Author and Finisher of Faith; he was so ignorant of the Mystery of Faith, that
he asked Christ, What is Truth? And the Greeks, that spoke Natural Greek, and
the Hebrews, that spoke Natural Hebrew, the Preaching of Christ, the Author and
Finisher of the true Faith, was a Stumbling Block and Foolishness to them.

So I do conclude, That no Man or Woman has true Faith only by the Natural
Knowledge, Reading, or Understanding of the Original Tongue and Language of the
New Testament, no more than the Natural Jews had by the Reading or Knowing of
the Natural Tongue of the Old Testament; nor can any in the whole World have
true Faith, except Jesus Christ be the Author and Finisher of it.

Now those that do say, That the Tongues are the Original, and by them the
Orthodox Men, and the Divines (so called) are qualified, (which Tongues began
at Babel) and these be the Preachers that makes Faiths for People, who has
gotten Scriptures in Hebrew, Greek and Latin: But I must tell you, that Pilate,
and Herod, and the Jews, and the Chief Priests, and the Grecians, and others
that could speak Latin, and Greek and Hebrew Naturally, knew not Christ, nor
this One Faith, which is the Gift of God, which Christ is the Author of: No
more can they, with all their Natural Knowledge of all the Tongues, until
Christ Jesus (the Author of the true and saving Faith) give it unto them; by
which One Faith was Enoch translated before the many Languages were; and by
which Faith Abel's Sacrifice was accepted, and by which Faith Noah built the
Ark, and by which Faith he was saved; and by which Faith now all the Household
of Faith are saved from the Wrath, by which God will destroy the wicked World,
which is reserved in store by the same Word unto Fire, against the Day of
Judgment and Perdition of ungodly Men; which Word will hammer down all, and
burn up all, and cut down all the Ungodly; and by which Word all things were
made; by which Word of Life and Wisdom his People are reconciled to God; and
therefore they love the Word Christ, who does fulfill the Mind of God.

G. F.

FRiends,
In the Power and Image and Truth and Wisdom of God, Epist. 343.
who are come under God and Christ's Teaching (the heavenly and spiritual Man)
Don't you strive about Men, like the Carnal Corinthians, Not to be carnal and
divide about Men.
that cried, I am of Paul, and I am of Apollos: And them that do so, leave them
to themselves, after you have admonished them, to keep to the Light, Grace and
Faith that comes from Christ; if they will not hear it, nor him, nor you, then
I say, they must be left to themselves. And you, whose Faith stands not in Men,
but in Christ, the Author of it, and in his Gospel of Salvation, by which you
are saved; which Gospel is the Power of God, your Keeper: Keep ye in the Order
of the Gospel (the Power of God) all ye that are Heirs of it; and in this Power
of God keep your Men and Women's Meetings, the Power of God being the Author and
Authority of them; by which Power of God, the Gospel, you are saved, and have
your liberty; and in it you are over him that would destroy you, and darken
you, and keep you in Bondage: In which Power of God (the Gospel) you see Life
and Immortality brought to light. So it is the Gospel that has brought it to
Light, and keeps Life, and Immortality, and an Understanding up in you, above
him that has darkened you from it. Now this is an Everlasting and Invisible
Power, in which you are all help meets in the Restoration, by Christ the
heavenly and spiritual Man, whereby you are brought into the Image, Lakeness,
Righteousness, Holiness, and Power of God, as Man and Woman were in before they
fell. And now the same Spirit that drew Adam and Eve from the Image and
Likeness of God, and his Power, and Righteousness, and Holiness, under a
pretense to feed upon that which God had forbidden them (for they thought they
should have been wiser than God had taught them) would keep Man and Woman in
the Fall. Now they, by harkening to that Spirit, and eating of the forbidden
Fruit, fell and lost the Image of God, The cause of Man's fall.
and Righteousness, and Holiness, and the Power in which they had the Dominion,
and were brought into the Fall by harkening to this false Spirit, the
Adversary, who envied their Happiness and Prosperity. And so by their Fall they
came under another Power, another Image, another Likeness, and another God,
even the God of the World.

Now this Adversary and Deceiver appeared against Man in Paradise; and now Men
and Women are deceived by him, and under his Power in the Earth; who creeps on
his Belly, and Dust is his Meat: This same Spirit, who is the Adversary and
Destroyer, that led Adam and Eve into the Fall, strives to keep Men and Women
in the Fall, and in the Earth, and opposes them in their Conversion,
Regeneration and Restoration.

And this was the same Spirit that rose in Cain against Abel, and envied his
Acceptable Sacrifice, and his Righteous State, as it did Adam and Eve's
Prosperity in the Ruling Power, wherein they had Dominion over all. And the
same Spirit is risen now, which strives to keep People in the Fall (where he
has got them) that Men and Women should not be helps meet in the Restoration,
by Christ Jesus, as they were in before they fell, in Power, and Righteousness,
and Holiness, and Likeness, The same Spirit that envied M^^s happiness, the
same opposes good Order in the Church.
and Image of God. So, I say, the same Spirit that envied Adam and Eve before
they fell, the same Spirit opposes the Men and Women's Meetings in the Order of
the Gospel, in their Restoration: And that which led them into the Fall, does
strive to keep them in the Fall, that It might be Lord, and not Christ Lord,
who Restores them; so the same Spirit now would not have Men and Women to have
Dominion in the Power of God, over all in the Restoration, as they were help
meets together in the Beginning. And this is the Adversary, the Serpent, that
led into the Fall, and would keep in the Fall, and there be Head: But Christ,
who is the Head, and gives forth the Order of his Gospel (for his People to
live and walk in, and under his Spiritual and Heavenly Government) bruises the
Head of this Adversary, to Man and Woman, and God's Order, and Government, and
Teaching; and Christ (that does bruise his Head) is the Head of all his People,
that fits under his Teaching, and under his Order and Government, which they
are to walk in: So the same Spirit is risen, that rose against Noah in the Old
World; yea it is seen what the Sons of God run into then, even that which
grieved God, by following that Spirit which led from God (which led Adam and
Eve also from God:) But Noah was preserved in the Ark, over the Floods, when
the Old World was drowned, but all God's People are preserved in Christ Jesus,
over the Floods of the World; and that Spirit that led Adam and Eve into the
Fall, and to feed upon that which made them think they should be wiser than God
had taught them: I say, they are preserved in Christ Jesus (the Ark) over all
the Floods of the Adversary, and from the Judgments that God brings upon him,
and them that follows him: And as Noah was preserved in the Ark, over the
outward Floods that drowned the Old World, so will God's People be preserved
from the Fire and Brimstone, that is prepared for the Wicked, and the Devil and
his Angels.

And the same Spirit is risen now, that led Nimrod to build Babel, a City to
preserve him and them after the Flood, but God did confound Them and their
Work: And so he will do all such Builders. For you see how God did confound all
the Jewish Builders, yea, the Wise Master Builders, who rejected Christ the
Cornerstone, and his Order, and his Government, and his Counsel.

And the great City Babylon, which this Spirit, and its Followers has built
since the Apostles, is come into remembrance with God, which the same
destroying Spirit has built, that led Adam and Eve from God, and from the Order
he placed them in. So this same Spirit, which has led Man and Woman from the
Order the Apostles were in, strives to lead People from it now, where it is
risen.

And the same Spirit that led Cain to kill Abel, who afterward built a City;
and the same Spirit that led Adam and Eve from the Command of God in Paradise,
leads from it now; but God will lay Cain's City waste, and there is no Lodging
in it for the Saints, who seek another City, whose Builder and Maker is God.

And the same Spirit is risen now, that arose in Pharaoh, and in Corah, Dathan
and Abiram; in Pharaoh, to oppose the People, and stop them from going out of
Egypt, and walking in the Law of God, in which they might worship God; which
Law of God was Good, Just and Holy, and went over all Transgression and Sin,
which led into Death, that it might reign; and not the Lord and his Law.

And that Spirit that led Corah, Dathan and Abiram, who thought Moses took too
much upon him, and busied himself too much, pretending that the People were
Holy; so would not have them go further, but there to have made a stop, and set
down according to its Will: But see how they were stopped, and what became of
Pharaoh, how he was sunk in the Sea, and the other into the Earth.

And what became of them that opposed Aaron in his Priesthood, The Spirit of
Coran risen now to oppose the Servants of the Lord.
their Rods did not bud, yet they would have been Teachers and Ministers, but
had not the Fruit in the Tabernacle in the Morning, that they might see how to
deal their Bread to the hungry; and therefore they whose Rods did not bud,
God's Fire consumed them; for they have nothing to offer to God, but manifest
Presumption and Rebellion: And see the end of such.

And the same Spirit that rose against the Prophets in the Jews, who resisted
the Holy Ghost, and rebelled against the Spirit, is risen now, and is the same
Spirit that deceived Adam and Eve in Paradise, which led the People from God,
and his Law, and his Prophets: But what became of these Jews, and what was
their end? Some to the Fire, some to the Sword, and some to Captivity; as you
may read. And those that rebelled against Moses, and Joshua, and Caleb, wandered
in the Wilderness till they perished, and came not to the good Land.

And therefore keep under Christ Jesus's Teaching, To keep under the Teaching
of Christ.
who is the Prophet God has raised up, like Moses, whom all should hear and
obey. And the same Spirit is risen now, that rose against Christ and the
Apostles. And Christ called them Serpents, and of their Father the Devil, the
Destroyer, the Adversary, who had deceived Adam and Eve by his false Teaching;
and envied their Happiness, and led them from God.

So you may see how these Jews, high and low, were gone from God, and his Law,
and his Command, by harkening to, and obeying this Spirit, which had led Adam
and Eve to disobey God's Command; and therefore they would not receive his Son,
nor his Order, nor Doctrine. And what became of all these Jews? was not their
City laid waste, and they scattered over all Nations, and they destroyed of the
Destroyer, who had denied Christ their Savior, that wept over them, and would
have saved them from Destruction?

And such as came to John, and was baptized by him, and rejoiced in his Light
for a season, and many that followed Christ, and said he was a Prophet; yet at
last these turned from him that descended and ascended; and he told them that
rejoiced in John's burning Light for a season, God's Mind was not abiding in
them, and that they had not seen his Shape, nor heard his Voice at any time;
and that they received Honor of Man, but knew not Christ the heavenly Man,
that received not Honor of the earthly Man, who received their Favor one of
another: And such as said he was a Prophet, when he said, They must eat his
Flesh, the heavenly Bread that came down from Heaven, they forsook him; for
their Minds turned downward, to feed upon that which was below.

And the same Spirit is risen now, The same Spirit that rose against the
Apostles is risen now.
that rose against the Apostles, as you may see in their Epistles, in the
Romans, Corinthians, and in Peter, Timothy, Titus, Jude and John. Some got the
Form of Godliness, and denied the Power; and some were Enemies to the Cross of
Christ, the Power of God; others were getting another Gospel than the Power of
God, which brought them under the Curse; others were speaking the things of
God, in the Words that Man's Wisdom taught them; others their Faith was
standing in Words, and not in the Power of God; others their Faith was standing
in Paul, and Apollo's, which should have stood in Christ: Which grieved the
Apostles, for their Faith should have stood in Christ, whom they preached:
Others with good Words and fair Speeches deceived the Hearts of the Simple.

And therefore, all they which preached Faith, and made shipwreck of Faith,
was, and are still denied: And all such as preach God and Christ, and crucifies
Christ to themselves afresh, and denies God in their Works, were then, and are
denied. And all such as preach the Light, and walk in Darkness, and preach the
Spirit (the Fruits of which is Love and Peace) and are in Strife and Enmity,
were never owned by God, nor Christ, nor good Men, though they may be called
Christians. And all such as preach Liberty, and themselves were Servants of
Corruption, were, and are still denied. And all such as cries Lord, Lord, and
preaches Christ, Christ, and does not his Will, enters not into his Kingdom
themselves: And into it they can bring none, that do not go into it themselves:
Which Kingdom stands in Power, and in Joy and Peace in the Holy Ghost.

And all such as preach the Word of God, and are not doers of the Word, they
are Deceivers of their own Souls, and they may deceive others with the good
Words: And such cannot be reconciled to God, neither can they bring others to
Reconciliation with God.

So this Spirit is but One; which Spirit all along has wrought against the true
Spirit of God in all his People: and was in Srife, and Contention, and
Disquietness against the Righteous in all Ages; but it wrought its own
Destruction and the Fall of them that followed it; as you may see, through all
the Scriptures.

And therefore all are to keep the Unity of the Spirit, All are to keep the
Unity of the Spirit.
the Bond of the heavenly Man Christ Jesus's Peace, who renews Man up into the
Image of God, as Man was in before he fell; and not only into that State, but
up into himself, that never fell, where they know both his Gospel Order and his
Heavenly Government, and are subject to it: He being the Head above all
Principalities, Powers, Thrones and Dominions: Who is ascended above all,
Beginning, and Ending, and Lives and Reigns from Everlasting to Everlasting,
the Amen.

G. F.

An Epistle to be read in the Men and Women's Meetings.
DEar Friends,
Epist. 344.
My Love in the Lord Jesus Christ (to you all) in whom I have labored, and my
Desires are, the God of all Peace, and the Son of Peace, may fill all your
Hearts with his Love and Peace, and Wisdom and Knowledge in all things, to do
his heavenly glorious Will, in that you will know his Son's Doctrine; and as
you know it, obey it. And my Desires are in the Lord, All to walk worthy of
their Holy Vocation.
that you may all walk worthy of your Vocation, and of him that his called you
to Holiness and Righteousness, and to Peace; so that his Peace may flow as a
River, and Righteousness run down as a Stream, to the gladding of the City of
God; the Walls of which is his Power and Salvation, and Light and Life.

And now, My Friends, Keep all your Meetings in the Name of Jesus, in whom you
have all Salvation; which is above every Name under the whole Heaven, in which
there is no Salvation.

And also, all your Men and Women's Meetings every where, keep in the Power of
the Lord Jesus Christ his Gospel, by which he has brought Life and Immortality
to light in you, that you may see over him that has darkened you, and before he
was; which Power will preserve you in Life and Immortality: So that you may now
all labor in the Gospel, the Power of God, in his glorious and comfortable
Gospel, joyfully serving the Lord in his Gospel of Peace; through which Gospel
you have Peace with God: So that in this Gospel, All to be stirred up to Labor
in the Lord's Service.
the Power of God, there can come nothing between you and God: Here is your
heavenly Order, not of Man nor by Man. So that all the faithful Men and Women
may, in the Lord's Power, be stirred up in their Inheritances of the same
Gospel, and to labor in it, helps-meet in the Restoration, as Man and Woman
was before the Fall, in the Garden of God; all are to work in his
Righteousness, and in his Image, in his Power, in his Garden, to subdue the
Earth, and keep the Dominion in his Power, in the Restoration, as Man and Woman
did in the Image of God before the Fall: Whosoever would hinder you in this
Work, it is the same Serpent's Spirit that led Adam and Eve into the Fall, from
the Work of God, which now would keep you in the Fall, to do his Work and
Command, and not the Lord's; and therefore over that keep your Dominion,
Authority and Inheritance in the Restoration, in the Power of God, in which
every one of you must give an account to God; and therefore be diligent in the
Lord's Power, Light, Life and Spirit, in which you all see your Services to
God; so that he may be glorified among you all, and in you all, and over you
all, his Glory may shine.

And you all, Men and Women, in your Men and Women's Meetings be diligent,
laboring in the Light, Life, and the Power of God, the Gospel, in the Garden
and Church of God; so that Righteousness and Peace may flow down amongst you,
and Truth and Godliness, Purity, Virtue, and Holiness, over all that is
contrary; and that the Weight and Care of God's Glory, and his Honor, and his
pure Holy Name, and his Truth, Religion and Worship you may all stand up for,
against that which would in any wise cause it to be evil spoken of by ill
Walkers and Talkers; and let all things you do, be done in Love, and condescend
one to another in the Power of the Lord, and in his Truth, have esteem one of
another, and let all things be done among you without any Strife; for it is Love
that edifies the Body, and knits it together, and unites it to Christ the
heavenly and holy Head. The Reproach taken from Woman, that was first in
Transgression.


And now, you Women, though you have been under Reproach, because Eve was first
in Transgression; the Promise was, The Seed of the Woman should bruise the
Serpents Head: And this Promise of God is fulfilled, A Virgin should have a
Child, and they should call his Name Emanuel, God with us, again: For Man and
Woman was drove from God out of Paradise, and the Serpent became their Head,
and god of the World; but Christ is come according to the Promise of God and
his Prophets, who was born of a Virgin; and therefore says Mary, My Spirit
does rejoice in God my Savior: My Soul does magnify the Lord, for he has
regard to the low estate of his Hand maid; for behold, from henceforth all
Generations shall call me Blessed: Now, here comes the Reproach to be taken off
from Women, which were first in Transgression, who are not suffered to speak in
the Church; but here Mary did speak, and believe that which was spoken to her:
And also the Reproach and Transgression taken off Men, that believe in the Seed
Christ Jesus, who bruises the Head of the Serpent, that has brought Man and
Woman into his Image, and his Works; which Christ destroys both him and his
works, and renews Man and Woman up into the Image of God, as they were in
before they fell, and into the Power, to have Dominion, to work in his Garden,
to subdue the Earth, etc. So that all are now to labor in the Garden of God,
that are in the Power and Image of God, being brought into it by Christ Jesus,
that bruises the Serpent's Head, that has been Head in them all. So that Christ
Jesus may be Head in all Men and Women, and every Man and Woman may act from
him their Holy Head, their Life and Salvation, and keep his heavenly Peace in
his Church, and every living Member (believing in the Light, which is the Life
in Christ) may be grafted into him the Fountain of Life, and receive from him
the Water of Life, that they may feel the living Springs, and the Rivers
springing up in them to Eternal Life: These are living Stones, the spiritual
Household, of which Christ is both Head, Rock and Foundation.

And Christ is called the Green Tree, Christ the green Tree, from whom all the
Branches receive their Nourishment.
which Green Tree never withers, into whom they are grafted by Belief in the
Light, which is the Life in him, from whom they all receive their heavenly
living nourishment, through which every Graft is nourished; then it comes to
bud and bring forth Fruit to the Praise of the Eternal God. Now every one of
these living Believers are Members of the living Church in God, which Christ is
the Head of, and every Member in the Church has an Office; and so every Member
is serviceable in the Body in his Office, in the Light, which is over Darkness,
and was before it was; and in the Life which is over Death, and was before it
was; and in the Power of God, which was before the Power of the Serpent was;
and so they are in this Light, Life and Power to execute their Offices: I say,
in this Divine Light, Life, Power and Spirit of God for God's Glory, in Truth,
Purity, Virtue, Holiness and Righteousness, they are to stand up for, and the
Honor of his Son, and receive him, who has all Power in Heaven and Earth
given to him; and all that receive him, he gives them Power to become the Sons
and Daughters of God; then in his Power all are to act and walk, and to serve
God in their Generation, and in it to serve him in the New Creation, in
Righteousness and Holiness, and to stand up in his Power for his Glory, in his
Power, Righteousness and Holiness, that Christ brings into them, and renews
them in, and so into the Restoration; that they may Labor in the Church and
Garden of God in his Power, to his Everlasting Praise and Glory, Amen.

And all Friends, To stand fast in the Liberty of Christ.
stand fast in the Liberty wherewith Christ has made you free, and in the
Liberty in the Faith, which Christ is the Author and Finisher of; which Faith
purifies the Hearts, and gives Victory, in which you have access to God, the
Mystery of which is held in a pure Conscience; in which Faith it has its true
Liberty. And keep in the Liberty of the Everlasting Glorious Gospel of Peace,
which is not of Man, nor by Man, but from Heaven; which Gospel brings (and
has brought) Life and Immortality to Light, and will preserve you in Life and
Immortality, over him that has darkened you; and in this Gospel you have
Everlasting Liberty and Peace, and in the Truth, which makes you free from him
that is out of the Truth: This free State all are to keep in; and also in the
pure holy Spirit of God and Christ, that does Mortify all that is to be
mortified and crucified, and does Baptize you into one Body: In this Holy
Spirit you are to walk, which leads you into all Truth, in which is your
Unity and Fellowship; and gives Liberty from that which has grieved it, and
quenched, and vexed it. And so in the Liberty, and Fellowship, and Unity of the
holy, pure and peaceable Spirit you are all to dwell and walk, which is the
Bond of the Prince of Princes Peace, which the World cannot take away.

London, the 13th of the 9th Month, 1677. G. F.

MY Dear Friends,
To whom is my Love in the Everlasting Seed, Epist. 345.
that reigns over all, and will overcome all your Persecutors, and the Devil,
that is the cause thereof, who fights against the Light, (which is the Life
in Christ) as they did against him in the Flesh, above Sixteen Hundred Years
ago.

And now my Friends, Suffer as Lambs in the time of your Sufferings, To suffer
as Lambs in the Patience of the Lamb.
let all your Wills be subjected with the Patience that has the Victory; and
run the Race, and obtain the Crown of Life; and be willing to go to Suffer for
Christ's sake; for the Apostle said, It is not only given you to Believe, but
also to Suffer for his Name sake, in whom you have Salvation; for, They that
suffer for Righteousness sake are Blessed, and theirs is the Kingdom of God;
and by Faith the holy Men of God had Victory, as you may see at large in Heb.
11. So nothing is overcome by any Man's Will, but by Faith that gives access
to God, in which they do Please God: And I do believe that all your Sufferings
will be for good for your Establishing upon the holy Rock of Life, which was
the Rock of all the Sufferers, the Prophets and the Apostles, who is the
anointed Savior, to the answering that of God in all People: for the Lord has
a great Work and Seed in that place. So live in the Spirit, that Mortifieth
all, and Circumciseth all, and Baptiseth all; so that with the Spirit you may
sow to the Spirit, and of the Spirit reap Life Everlasting.

And my desire is, All to live in the Unity of the Spirit, and in the Bond of
Peace.
that you may all be kept alive to God, and live in the living Unity of the
Spirit, which is the Bond of the heavenly Peace, that passes the Knowledge of
the World; which Peace brings such Joys which transcend all your Sufferings,
and will carry you above them: And so in love to God, and in love to your
Persecutors, you can pray for them who persecute you; and this Suffering is
above all the Sufferings in the World, which are without Love and Charity, who
makes one another to suffer, when they get the upper hand; but such are not
the Sufferers for the true Lord Jesus, who suffered, though he was above all,
yet he made none to suffer; and when he was Reviled, he reviled not again, but
said, Father forgive them; and committed himself to him that judged
Righteously: So let the same Mind be in you as was in Christ Jesus; for the
Apostle said, That they had the Mind of Christ, and the Lamb overcame, and had
the Victory: and his sanctified Ones, that following him, are partakers
thereof; Glory to his Name for ever, Amen.

The 18th of the 5th Month, 1677. G. F.

To Friends at Sussex.
MY Dear Friends,
Epist. 346.
To whom is my Love, and to the rest of Friends that a-ways: And my desire is,
that you may all Suffer as Lambs of Christ; for when he was reviled, he reviled
not again; and he gave his back and cheek to the Strikers and Smiters, and his
hair to be plucked off, and was as a Lamb led dumb before his Shearers, and he
opened not his Mouth; though he was the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords; and
so left his Fellowers and Believers an Example that they should follow him,
like Innocent Lambs; for the Lamb and the Saints have the Victory over all the
Tearers, and Strikers, and Pluckers, Let Patience have its perfect Work.
and Devourers, and Persecutors; and so let Patience have its perfect Work in
you and among you, in which you run the Race, and do obtain the Crown of
Eternal Life. And do not strive, but keep down that Spirit that would strive,
with Love, which differs you from all other Sufferers that have not Love,
which envieth not, neither is provoked, but bears all things, and indureth
all things, and will wear out all Evil Doers: And so be Faithful, and of the
good Faith that has the Victory, and in it suffer joyfully, as the Saints did,
and leave the Gainsayers to the Lord God, who will Reward and Re-pay them. And
keep in the Seed that will out-last all, and bruise the Head of the Serpent.
And so the Lord God preserve you all both in Life, Word, and Conversation to
his Glory; and that all your Words may be Gracious, Amen.

The 8th of the 5th Month, 1677. G. F.

Concerning Subjection of the Spirits of the Apostles one to another in the
Unity of the Spirit of Christ.
THE Apostles heard at Jerusalem, Epist. 347
that the Samaritans had received the Word of God, and they sent unto them
Peter and John, Acts 8.14. Now Peter and John did not, in opposition say, Peter
and Paul.
We will stay till we have a Motion: But as the Spirts of the Prophets were
subject to the Prophets, so the Spirits of the Apostles were subject to the
Apostles: And when tidings came to the Church at Jerusalem, That the Grecians
had believed, they sent forth Barnabas to them, Barnabas.
and when he came, he Exhorted them; and when Barnabas had found Paul, he
brought him to Antioch ( and there the Disciples were first called Christians)
and the Church sent the Collection by the hands of Paul and Barnabas unto the
Elders, Acts 11.22, 23, 30. and 9.27. Paul and Barnabas.
Paul and Barnabas took with them John, whose Surname was Mark; and Mark did
not Gainsay, and tell them, I must wait for a Motion, Acts 12.25. It pleased
the Apostles and Elders, with the Church, to send chosen Men to Antioch, with
Paul, and Barnabas, and Judas Surnamed Barsabas, and Silas, chief Men among the
Brethren, Barsabas and Silas.
and writ Letters by them unto the Gentiles, Acts 15.22. saying, For as much as
we have heard, that certain that went out from us have troubled you with words,
subverting your Souls, saying, Ye must be Circumcised and keep the Law; unto
whom we gave no such Commandment: It seemed good unto us, being assembled with
one accord, to send chosen Men unto you; Men that have hazarded their Lives for
the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ. Paul said unto Barnabas, Let us go again
unto every City, The Care of the Apostles to visit those again, to whom they
bad preached the Gospel.
where we have preached the Word of the Lord, and see how they do; and Barnabas
determined to take Mark with them; and Paul chose Silas, being recommended by
the Brethren unto the Grace of God; and they went through Syria and Cilicia;
and as they went through the Cities, they delivered them the Decrees for to
keep, that were ordained of the Apostles and Elders which were at Jerusalem;
and so were the Churches confirmed and established in the Faith, and increased
in number daily, Acts 16.4. The Brethren exhorted the Disciples to receive
Apollos, Acts 18.27. Apollos.
And Paul sent unto the Ephesians, and called the Elders of the Church, and
exhorted them, Acts 20.17. Paul commends Phebe, Phebe.
a Servant of the Church which is at Cencrea, and bid them receive her in the
Lord, and assist her in whatsoever business she has need of, Romans 16. Now if
Timothy come, so that ye receive him without fear, let no Man despise him, but
conduct him forth in Peace, that he might come unto me, for I look for him with
the Brethren. Paul said to the Corinthians, Did I make a gain of you by any
whom I sent unto you? 2 Cor. 12.17. Or did Titus make a gain of you? Tychicus a
beloved Brother and faithful Minister of the Lord, shall make known unto you
all things, Titus and Tychicus.
whom I have sent unto you for the same purpose, that you might know our
affairs, and comfort your hearts, Ephesians. 6.21, 22. Paul sent to the Colossians
Onesimus with Tychicus, to make known all things unto them that was done with
him, Col. 4.9. And when they had read his Epistle, Onesimus.
they were to cause it to read at Laodicea; and Paul charged the Thessalonians
by the Lord, that they did read his Epistle amongst all the holy Brethren, 1 Thessalonians. 5.27. And Paul says, Take Mark, bring him with thee, for he is
profitable to me for the Ministry; and Tychicus I have s^at to Ephesus, Artemas
and Zenas the Lawyer.
2 Timothy 4.11.12. Paul said to Titus, Chap. 3.12. When I shall send Artemas or
Tychicus unto thee, be thou diligent to come unto me to Nicopolis, and bring
Zenas the Lawyer, and Apollos, on their journey diligently, that nothing be
wanting unto them. Paul says to Philemon, Having confidence in thy obedience,
I wrote unto thee, knowing that thou will also do more than I say, Philemon 21,
22. John says, 2 Epist. Look to your selves, that we lose not these things
that we have wrote, but that we may receive a full reward. I wrote unto the
Churches, but Diotrephas, who loves to have the pre-eminence amongst them
received us not: Wherefore if I come I will remember his deeds which he does,
prating against us with malicious words, 2. and 3. Epistle of John. The woeful
End of such as separate themselves, having not the Spirit.
And in Jude, Such as goes in Balaam. Cain, and Corah's way, wandering Stars,
raging Waves of the Sea, Wells without Water, Clouds without Rain, Trees
without Fruit, twice dead and plucked up by the Roots, their Mouths speak great
Swelling Words, to whom is reserved the Blackness of Darkness for ever: These
are they that separate themselves, such as have not the Spirit: But Beloved
build up your selves in the most holy Faith, praying in the Holy Ghost; and
keep your selves in the Love of God, Jude. Now I praise you Brethren that ye
remember me in all things, and keep the Ordinances as I delivered them unto
you; and the rest will I set in order when I come, 1 Cor. 2.11, 34. Paul in his
Second Epistle to the Thessalonians, Chap. 3.4. And we have Confidence in the
Lord touching you, that ye both do, and will do the things which we command
you. Now we command you Brethren in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye
withdraw your selves from every Brother that walks disorderly, and not after
the Tradition which he received of us: Now we exhort you Brethren to warn them
that are unruly, and comfort the feebleminded, and support the weak, and be
patient toward all Men, for ye your selves are taught of God to love one
another; and that ye study to be quiet, and walk honestly to them that are
without; and that ye may have lack of nothing, 1 Thessalonians. 5.14. And in 2 Thessalonians.
2.15. Therefore Brethren stand fast, and hold the Traditions which you have
been taught, whether by Word or our Epistle.

G. F.

DEar Friends,
Epist. 348.
To whom is my Love in the heavenly Seed Christ Jesus, Abraham, and all the
Faithful blessed in Christ, without the Deeds of the Law.
in whom all Nations are blessed: O, therefore keep all in this Seed, in which
ye are blessed, and in which Abraham and all the faithful were blessed (without
the Deeds of the Law) and so the Promise was and is to the Seed, and not to the
Law of the first Covenant; and in this Seed all Nations and ye are blessed,
which bruiseth the Head of the Seed which brought the Curse, and separated
between Man and God: This is the Seed which reconciles you to God, and this is
the Seed in which ye are blessed, both in Temporals and Spirituals; through
which you have an Inheritance, that cannot be defiled among the sanctified,
neither can any defiled thing enter into its Possession, for all Defilements
are out of this Seed; this is that which Leavens up into a New Lump, and
bruiseth the Head of the wicked Seed, that Leavens into the Old Lump, upon whom
the Sun of Righteousness goes down and sets; but never goes down nor sets to
them that walk in the Seed in which all Nations are blessed, by which Seed they
are brought up to God, which puts down that Seed which separated betwixt them
and God; so that there comes to be nothing betwixt them and God.

And so now, all my Dear Friends, my Desires are, To be valiant for Truth, and
to spread it abroad.
That you may all be valiant in this heavenly Seed, for God and his Truth upon
the Earth, and spread it abroad, answering that of God in all; that with it the
Minds of People may be turned toward the Lord, that he may come to be known,
and served, and worshipped, and that ye may all be the Salt of the Earth, to
make the unseasoned Savoury. And in the Name of Jesus, keep your Meetings, who
are gathered into it, in whose Name ye have Salvation, and he in the midst of
you, whose Name is above every Name under the whole Heaven. And so you have a
Prophet, and Bishop, Shepherd, Priest and Counselor, above all the
Counselors, Priests, Bishops, Prophets and Shepherds under the whole Heaven,
to exercise his Offices among you, in your Meetings, that are gathered in his
Name. And so Christ's Meeting and Gathering is above all the Meetings and
Gatherings under the whole Heaven. And so his Body, his Church, and He the Head
of it, is above all the Bodies, and Churches, and Heads under the whole Heaven.
And so the Faith that Christ is the Author of, and the Worship that he has set
up; and his Fellowship in his Gospel is above all Historical Faiths, and the
Faiths that Men have made, together with their Worships and Fellowships, under
the whole Heaven.

And now, Dear Friends, Light and Immortality brought to Light.
keep your Men and Women's Meetings in the Power of God, the Gospel, the
Authority of them, which brings Life and Immortality to light in you. And this
Gospel the Power of God will preserve you in Life and in Immortality, which
has brought it to light in you, that ye may see over him that has darkened
you, and so from the Knowledge of the things of God. And so, it is he and his
Iustruments, that would darken you from Life and Immortality, and that would
throw down your Men and Women's Meetings, which are established in the Power of
God, the Gospel, and would darken you again from this Life and Immortality,
which the Gospel has brought to light, and will preserve you in Life, and in
Immortality, as your Faith stands in the Power of God the Gospel, in which
every one sees your Work and Service for God; and every Heir of the Power of
God, the Gospel, has Right to this Authority, which is not of Man, nor by Man;
which Gospel, the Power of God is Everlasting, and leads you into an
everlasting Fellowship; and in the Gospel is everlasting Joy, Comfort and
Peace, which will-out-last all those Joys, Comforts and Peace, that will have
an End; and also that Spirit that opposes its Order, and the glorious
Fellowship, Peace and Comfort that is in it.

And now, my Dear Friends, my Desire is, By the Spirit are we all baptized into
one Body.
That ye may keep in the Unity of the Spirit, that Baptises you all into one
Body, which Christ is the Heavenly and Spiritual Head of; so that you may see,
and witness to your Heavenly and Spiritual Head; and all drink into that one
Spirit; which all People upon the Earth is not like to drink into, while they
grieve, quench and rebel against it; nor be baptized into one Body, nor keep
the Unity of the Spirit, which is the Bond of Peace: Yea, the King of Kings and
Lord of Lords Peace, true Christians to keep, who are inwardly united to
Christ. So with my Love in the Everlasting Seed.

Swarthmore, the 26th of the 7th Month, 1678. G. F.

To Friends in the County of Oxford.
DEar Friends,
Epist. 349.
Keep in the Lord's Power, that his Kingdom stands in, In what the Kingdom of
God stands.
and in Righteousness, and Peace and Joy in the Holy Ghost, which the Devil and
all his Instruments of Strife and Debate, and Sowers of Discord among Brethren,
are out of; and keep that Spirit out with the Power of God, which was before it
was; in which Gospel (the Power of God) is your Holy and Heavenly Order; in the
Possession of the same Labor, walking in the New and Living Way, over all the
dead Ways in Adam, let them be what Sect they will; and in this New and Living
Way you have the Life and the Truth, which Death and Darkness cannot get into,
which is out of the Truth, though they may talk of the Words of the Truth; but
keep in the pure Religion that was set up above Sixteen Hundred Years ago; and
this pure Religion, which is undesiled before God, will keep you from the Spots
of the World, and above all the spotted and dirty Religions that are not pure,
but are defiled before, and in the sight of God. And in this Religion, in your
Men's and Women's Meetings, that are in the Gospel of Christ, and in the Order of
it, you will see that nothing is lacking, being ordered by the holy, pure,
peaceable and gentle Wisdom of God from above; and so keep in the Worship of
God, in the New Covenant, in the Spirit, and in the Truth; which the Devil that
foul Spirit, who is out of the Truth, cannot get into, nor his Company: And so
in the Seed of Life, which bruiseth the Head of the Serpent, all dwell, and sit
down, who is the Amen, the First and Last, in whom you have Peace with God; and
then nothing can get between you and the Lord God.

G. F.

To the Yearly Meeting in Yorkshire.
MY Friends,
Epist. 350.
In the Service, and in the Work of the Lord Jesus Christ, the Second Adam, in
his Power, Light and Truth live, over Death and Darkness, and him that is out
of the Truth: So, all in the Seed that bruises the Serpent's Head, stand up for
God's Glory and Honor; All to walk as becomes the Gospel.
in which Seed you are all one, Male and Female; and in which Seed you all have
Peace and Unity that is Everlasting. And in this heavenly Seed, see that all
walk as becomes the glorious Gospel of Christ Jesus, which has brought Life
and Immortality to light through the Gospel; by which you do see over him that
has darkened you. And this Gospel, the Power of God, will keep you in Life and
in Immortality; in which you may all see your Work and Service for the Lord
God, in Holiness, and in Righteousness, and in Godliness, that the Lord God may
be glorified in you all, and among you all, who is over all, blessed for ever.
Amen.

And Friends, see that all your Children and Families be trained up in the New
Covenant of Grace, and in Life, and Peace, and circumcised and baptized with
the Spirit, That Families be seasoned with Truth.
that they may all eat of the Spiritual Food, and drink into one Spirit in the
New Covenant, and to feed upon the Substance, as the Jews did on the Shadows in
the Old, which faded away: And the Power of God, the Gospel, is the Authority
of your Men's and Women's Meetings; and every Heir of the Gospel is to Labor in
their Inheritance and Possession, in the Restoration, into the Image of God, in
Righteousness and Holiness, being made by Christ, that never fell, helps meet
in the Restoration (as they were before the Fall) who is the First and Last,
the Foundation and Rock of Ages; in him sit down in Life, and Peace, and Rest,
the Amen, that nothing may get between you and the Lord God; and see that
nothing be lacking among you, then all is well. So with my Love in the Lord
Jesus Christ.

London, the 3d of the 4th Month, 1678. G. F.

FRiends,
Know what the Lord does require of you, Epist. 351.
and all have a Sense of that in your selves, that he does require; which is,
to do Justly, and to love Mercy, and to walk humbly with God. Now, the Lord who
is Merciful and Just, Holy and Righteous, Pure and Perfect, he does require,
The Lord requires but in propoation to what he gives.
That Man and Woman should do Justly and Righteously, and live Godlily and
Holily, by the Holy Light and Spirit, and Truth and Grace, that the Lord has
given every Man and Woman to profit withal: And so, to answer the Holy, Pure,
Righteous, Just God of Truth, in all their Lives, and Words, and Conversations;
and so, to glorify him upon the Earth. And the more the Lord gives, the more
he requires; and the less that he gives, the less he requires: But the Lord
requires of every Man and Woman as he gives, who will judge the World in
Righteousness, by the Man Christ Jesus, according to the Gospel, the Power of
God, that is preached to every Creature under Heaven; that is, according to the
invisible Power; manifesting, that there is something of the invisible Power of
God in every Man and Woman: So, here the Lord Jesus Christ does not Judge
according to the hearing of the Ear, and to the seeing of the Eye; for with
Righteousness shall he Judge you, according to the Light, which is the Life in
the Word, Christ, with which he does enlighten every Man that comes into the
World, to the Salvation of them that believe in it, and the Condemnation of
them that do hate it, and that will not receive the Gospel, nor the Grace,
which brings Salvation, which has appeared to all Men, but walk despitefully
against the Spirit of Grace, and iurn it unto Wantonness. So, according to his
Grace, and Light and Gospel will the righteous God Judge the World in
Righteousness, by Christ the Heavenly and Spiritual Man, who has died for the
Sins of the World; though they deny him that bought them, and tasted Death for
every Man: Such deserve his Judgment.

Send this abroad among Friends, to be read in their Meetings.

Swarthmore, the 11th Month, 1678. G. F.

An Epistle to Friends, to keep in the Power of God in their Peaceable
Habitations, over all the Troubles of the World
ALL my Dear Friends and Brethren, Epist. 352.
who are gathered by the Light, Grace, and Truth, and Power, and Spirit of
Jesus Christ, to him, the Head over all, by whom were all things created; the
Firstborn of every Creature, and the First-begotten from the dead, know him,
and the Power of his Resurrection, that you all may be Partakers of it, and of
Life Everlasting, and may sit together in the heavenly Places in Christ Jesus,
who is over all, the First and Last; and in him you have Peace, who is not of
this World; for in this World there is trouble; and the World did and does hate
Christ, The World hated Christ before it hated them.
yea, and his Light, Grace, Truth, Power and Spirit; and therefore it is no
marvel if the World do hate Christ's Members, that do follow him in his Light,
Grace, Truth, Power and Spirit; and so with it receive him into them, their
Life and Salvation; and so he that has the Son of God has Life; who is the
Fountain that fills all that wait upon him, with his heavenly Blessings and
Riches of Life, from Christ the Rock and Foundation, that cannot be shaken,
though the Rocks and Foundations of the World may be shaken, and cloven in
pieces, and the Pillars of the Earth may reel and stagger, and all Hypocrites
and Sinners may fear; but they that fear the Lord, and wait upon him, shall be
as Mount Sion, that cannot be removed; for the Lord's Power is over all, by
which he keeps his People to the day of Salvation.

And therefore all you that have this Keeper, Let the Lord be your Keeper.
the Power of the Lord, through Faith unto the Day of Life and Salvation, need
none of the slumbering Keepers or Watchers; for the Lord was the Keeper of
Israel, who neither slumbered nor slept, till Israel forsook the Lord, and then
they set up slumbering and sleepy Watchers and Keepers; like the Apostate
Christians, who have forsaken the Power of God to keep them, and then they are
soon forsaken.

And therefore, Friends, you that do know the Power of God, in which the
Kingdom of God stands, you know your Keeper, through the Faith which Jesus
Christ is the Author of, which stands in his Power, and not in Words; and so
your Faith standing in his Power, it will keep you out of the Words of Men's
Wisdom, and above them.

And the golden Lamp in your Tabernacle, all are to have to burn with the
heavenly Oil, Heavenly Oil.
which you have from Christ your High Priest, being returned to him, the great
Shepherd and Bishop of your Souls, who will bring you, his Sheep, into his safe
Fold; who gives unto his Sheep eternal Life, and his Sheep shall not perish,
neither shall any pluck them out of his Hand. Though Men may pluck Hypocrites
and Apostates one from another; Feel the Hand that preserved you.
but Christ says, No Man is able to pluck his Sheep out of his Fathers hand.
And therefore, all feel the Hand that has brought you out of Spiritual Egypt,
where Christ has been crucified, to Christ, in his new Covenant of Light and
Life, as the Jews were brought out of Egypt in the Old Covenant, which Christ
has abolished, and makes all things new; so that all may be grounded on him,
who was the Foundation of all the holy Prophets and Apostles, and of all the
holy Men of God to this day.

And therefore consider who it is that abides in the Tabernacle of God, and
dwells in his Holy Hill; it is the Faithful and the Upright, which Holy Hill is
a safe place for all the Upright: As the Lord said, In the last days the
Mountain of the Lord's House should be established on the top of the Mountains,
and should be exalted above the Hills, and all Nations should flow unto this
established Honse: And here the Lord does teach his People that comes up to the
Mountain of the House of the God of Jacob: So all Mountains, Houses, Hills and
Teaching will be shaken, but the Mountain of the Lord's House shall be
established in the last Days, as the Prophet said, which is the Days of Christ.

Is not this the Stone that became a great Mountain, and fills the whole Earth,
which smote and broke to pieces the Iron, Clay Brass, Silver and Gold, Image or
Monarchs, which were as Mountains? And this Stone which becomes a great
Mountain, The Stone that became a great Mountain.
sets up a Kingdom which shall never have an end: Is not this the Kingdom of
Christ, which Christ says, Except a Man be born again he can neither see the
Kingdom of God, nor enter into it?

And therefore Friends, all you that do know his Kingdom that stands in Power,
in Peace and Joy in the Holy Ghost, over the Power of the Evil, and all the
unclean Ghosts, which keeps them in their first Birth, and leads them into all
Evil, as the Holy Ghost leads them into all Truth.

And so dear Friends and Brethren, know this Rock, this Stone, this Foundation,
the House of God, that is established upon the Lord's Mountain, above all other
Houses, Hills, Mountains and Teachings in the World, where God does teach his
People, and establish them upon Christ Jesus, the living Rock and Foundation,
and living Way: And so though there may be troubles without, and troubles
within; yet if you wait upon the Lord, he will renew your strength.

And the Children of God they are set for Signs and Wonders; for as it is said,
Lo the Children that thou have given me they are for Signs and Wonders.

And therefore Friends, keep your Habitation in Christ Jesus, Keep to Christ,
out of vain jangling.
in whom you have Peace; for all the rude Talkers and vain Disputers and
Janglers, which cankers and rusts, goes out of the peaceable Truth; and that
which is torn, and dies of it self, must not be fed upon, but the Life must be
fed upon, which gives you Life Eternal.

And the Lord did not build his Zion, and outward Jerusalem with Blood, in the
Old Covenant; for they that did build their Zion and Jerusalem with Blood, made
their Zion a Field, and their Jerusalem an Heap; so if this Practice was
forbidden in the Old Covenant, much more in the New, Zion not buil: with Blood.
who think to build Zion and Jerusalem with Blood and Iniquity; for such has
not been Zion's Children, nor Jerusalem's, that is from above, who shed Men's
Blood concerning Religion, Church and Worship; for Christ rebuked such that
would have had Men's lives destroyed, and told them, They knew not what Spirit
they were of; so they that do not know what Spirit they are of, they are not
like to build up God's Zion and Jerusalem.

For Christ said, He came to save Men's Lives, and not to destroy them; for the
World's God was the destroyer of Men's lives, but Christ came to destroy Him and
his Works, and to save Men's Lives and Souls also.

And so dear Friends, let the Love of God, which is shed abroad in your Hearts,
cast out all Fear: And keep in the Name of Jesus, in which you are gathered,
which is above every Name under the whole Heaven, in whom you have Life and
Salvation, and his Presence among you; whose Name is a Strong Tower; and Christ
is a Rock to hide your selves in, and his Spirit to cover you, which is a
Covering sufficient enough for you; and Woe will be to that Spirit which is
covered, but not with his Spirit; they may fly to the Rocks and Mountains to
cover and hide them, No help in Egypt.
which will not be sufficient; for the Rocks will rend, and the Mountains will
be removed; such may run down into Spiritual Egypt for strength, where Christ
was crucified, like the Jews in the Old Covenant, that ran into outward Egypt
from his Spirit, but all was in vain.

And therefore trust in the Lord, who has preserved you by his Glorious Light
and Power to this day, that you may be settled upon the Seed Christ Jesus,
which is over all that, within and without, that is contrary to it, and
bruiseth the Head of the Serpent, that has been between you and God: So that
in Christ the Seed you have Peace with the Lord God, Life, and Dominion, and
Election, and Salvation, who Redeems out of the Curse, and Fear of Men, or that
makes the Arm of Flesh his strength, and not the Arm of God; and therefore the
Arm of the Lord being your Strength, Christ your Rock and Salvation, then you
need not fear what Man can do unto you; for all God's Children are dear and
tender to him, whom he has begotten again by the Word of God to be Heirs of
his Kingdom, he feeds them with Life Eternal, and the Milk of his Word, which
Word lives, and abides, and endures for ever, and is always full and plentious
of Milk to nurse and nourish all God's Children unto Eternal Life, and to
inherit his Kingdom, and the World which is Everlasting, which Christ is the
Ruler of (the heavenly and spiritual Man) and therefore they that are in him,
must be New Creatures; for all the Old Creatures are in old Adam.

And therefore my Desires are, that you may all be settled in Christ Jesus, who
was dead and is alive again, and lives for evermore, a Prophet, Counselor,
Priest, Bishop and Shepherd, a Circumciser and Baptiser, a living Rock and
Foundation for evermore, the Beginning and Ending, the First and Last, the
Amen; sit down in him, and he in you, in whom you have Peace with God. Amen.

Swarthmore, the 6th of the 12th Month, 1678. G. F.

MY Dear Friends,
Epist. 353.
Whose Faces are set toward Zion, from this Dunghill World of Vanity and
Vexation of Spirit; the Glory, Comfort and Pleasures of which pass away; they
that have more or less of it, and that enter into it, enter into Trouble; and
when they are in it, it is a great Trouble to come out of it, and to be a Fool
for Christ's sake, Be a fool for Christ's sake.
who is not of this World, but of the World that has no end: And therefore you
must believe in the Light, Grace and Truth that comes from him, in the Inward
Parts or Heart, which directs your Minds to Christ, from whence this comes,
and to unite to him that is Heavenly, who says, Seek the Kingdom of God first,
and the Righteousness of his Kingdom, then all outward things will be added to
them that have found the Kingdom of God, that stands in Righteousness over
Unrighteousness; and it stands in the Power of God, over the Power of the
Devil, and was before he was, and it stands in Peace and Joy in the Holy
Ghost, over all the Unclean Ghosts, or Unholy Spirits; and the good Seed are
the Children of this Kingdom, which is Everlasting.

And take heed of your Wills, and give not way to them, but give way to the
Power and Spirit of God, which crucifieth it, Submit your Wills to God.
and keeps it under the Cross of Christ; so that your Inward Man may be
renewed, and the Old Adam put off, so that the Day Light of Jesus Christ may be
seen, which Abraham rejoiced to see, and so do they that be of the Faith of
Abraham, which Faith is the Gift of God, that see the Son of Righteousness
shine in their Hearts, to nourish that which God has there planted, who
waters it with the living Water of the Word, his living Plant: And here is
Water in your own Wells, that you may drink out of your own Wells or Cisterns,
and to have Grapas off their own Vines, from which they may have the new Wine
in their new Bottles to glad and cheer their Hearts with the Wine from the
heavenly Branch of the heavenly Vine, of which the Lord is the Husbandman; and
this must every one of God's People feel.

What is the matter that all the World is of so many Ways since the Apostles
days? Because they are out of Christ, the Way, Out of Christ the one Way.
the new and living Way (which is over all the dead Ways) which was set up
above Sixteen Hundred Years ago.

And why have they so many Religions? Because that they are out of the pure and
undefiled Religion before God, which was set up above Sixteen Hundred Years
ago, which Religion keeps from the spots of the World; and then this Religion
must be above the World, that keeps from the spots of it; and they that are
gone from this Religion, into them of their own making, and tell People, They
must not be Perfect here, and must carry a Body of Death with them to the
Grave: and others say, That they must have a Purgatory when they are Dead; this
Doctrine is contrary to the Apostles, who said, Cleansed by the Blood of Jesus.
that They were cleansed by the Blood of Jesus, and washed by the Water of the
Word; and this Blood and Water God's People must feel the effects of within, to
wash and cleanse their Hearts, Souls, Minds and Consciences; Their Hearts and
Consciences being sprinkled (as the Apostle says) with the Blood of Jesus from
their dead Works, to serve the Living God: For many may talk of the Blood of
Jesus without them in their dead Works, not serving the Living God, their
Hearts and Consciences being not sprinkled with the Blood of Jesus; and they
must feel it within as well as without: And if they have Life, they eat his
Flesh and drink his Blood, if they do live by him that is Heavenly and
Spiritual, the second Adam, the Lord from Heaven: For they have drank long
enough into old Adam's unclean Spirit, which is the cause that there are so
many Bodies, that they do vex and quench the good Spirit, and resist the Holy
Ghost, which should Baptize them all into one Body; that is, to plunge down all
Sin and Evil that is got up by Transgression, and burn that up which is Chaff
or Corruption, and so to drink into one Spirit, as the Apostles and Churches
did in the Primitive Times, and so to have the same Fellowship and Unity in the
holy spirit of Christ, as they had, to wit, in Christ Jesus, who was, and is,
the holy Head of his Church, his Elect in him: And Jerusalem, that is above, is
the Mother of all such; and such do worship God, as Christ taught above Sixteen
Hundred Years ago, in Spirit and in Truth.

So all must come to the Spirit and the Truth in their Hearts and Souls, if
they do know the God of Truth, who is a Spirit, and must worship him in Spirit
and in the Truth; into which holy Spirit and Truth the unclean Spirit, and him
that is out of Truth, cannot come: So all Will-worshippers, and the Dragon, and
Beast, and False Worshippers, are out of this Holy spirit and Truth, in which
the Pure and Holy God is worshipped; and as all that did eat of the Passover in
the Old Covenant were to be Circumcised in the Flesh, so are all in the New
Covenant to be Circumcised with the Spirit, by putting off the Body of the Sins
of the Flesh, that came upon Man by Transgression, if they will feed on Christ
their Heavenly Sacrifice; All feed on Christ your beavenly Sacrifice.
for the Old Covenant of Circumcision was held in the Flesh, and then they did
feed upon the Natural Sacrifices; but the New Covenant is held in the Grace,
Light and Spirit, by which they are Circumcised, and so do feed on their
Heavenly Sacrifice: For in the Old Covenant they were not to eat the Blood of
Beasts, or any Blood; but in the New Covenant Christ tells you, Except ye do
eat my Flesh, and drink my Blood, ye have no part in me: For as by Adam and
Eve, their eating that which God forbad, came Death; so if Adam and Eve's Sons
and Daughters have Life again, it is by eating of that which Christ commands;
and as by eating came Death, so by eating gometh Life, and not by talking; no,
not by talking of the Son of God; for all Reprobates may do so; for the Apostle
says, If Christ be not in you, ye are Reprobates; and he that has not the Son
of God, has not Life; and he that has the Son of God, has Life; and the
Saints did confess the Son of God was come, and had given them an
Understanding, and they were in him, and they were to walk as he walked, and
not only to talk as he talked: For there are too many Talkers, and few Walkers
in Christ; my desire is there may be more.

And the Lord God Almighty strengthen you in your inward Man, and over all give
you Dominion in the Seed of Life, which bruiseth the Head of the Serpent (tht
brought Death and a Curse) and this Seed brings the Blessings, in which all
Nations are blessed; and out of this Seed they are not blessed, though they may
profess all the words of this good Seed; and if they are not in it, they have
not the Blessing in it; and they that be in this, their Blessings and Peace
flow as a River from the Rock and Foundation of Life, that stands sure, which
all the Prophets, Apostles and sanctisied Ones did and do build upon, who is
their Life and Salvation.

So feel the Stone that is cut out of the Mountain without Hands, which must
become a great Mountain, and foll the whole Earth, which has a Kingdom that is
everlasting, which, except a Man be born again, he neither can see it, nor
enter into his Kingdom.

And my Desire is, that you (in your Measures) may be preserved to the Lord,
Love Mercy, and do Justly.
and know what he does require of you, to love Mercy, to do Justice, and to
walk Humbly with God; for the more he gives, the more he requires; and the
less that he gives, the less he requires, who will judge the World in
Righteousness according to the Gospel preached in every Creature, showing that
there is something of God in every Creature that shall answer his Judgment: And
therefore my desire is, that all may be faithful to what the Lord has made
known unto them by his Grace and Truth, Light, Power and Spirit, and then the
Lord will supply them with more; to whom be Glory and Praise, who is the
Creator of all, through Jesus Christ, by whom all things were made. Amen.

G. F.

AND Dear Friends,
Epist. 354
My Love to you all in the Seed of Life and Peace, which flows as a River,
and bruiseth the Head of the Serpent, that has brought Death and Darkness,
Woe, Elected in Christ the Seed.
Misery and Imperfection upon and in Man; and in this Seed Christ is all
Nations blessed and elected; and out of it is the Curse and Reprobation: And
out of this Seed are all the false Religions, false Ways, false Worships, and
false Churches, or Bodies without Heads, like so many Monsters, which the Seed
of the Serpent has brought forth since the Apostles days, and then they have
made them Heads, out of their Bodies, or Churches; and when one Head is fallen
off, then another they make, and set it upon their Body or Church, having lost
and gone from the true Head, Christ.

And sometimes the Members do fall out about making a Head for their Body, so
that the Members do destroy one another about it: Going from Christ their Head,
they make to themselves Heads.
Now this monstrous Body is brought in by this ovil Seed in such as are gone
from the Light, Grace, Truth, Power and Spirit, that comes from Christ, the
heavenly Head, in whom dwells the fullness of Divinity: And they are never
like to come to the true Head, Christ, but by coming to the Light, Grace,
Truth, Power, Faith and Spirit of Jesus, which comes from him, and turns to
him again (the Head) and so to hold him their Head, by which all the Members
are coupled together by Joints and Bands, which do receive their Nourishment
from him their Head, who does supply every Member with Life Everlasting from
him that is alive, and lives for evermore.

And since such have gone from the Light, Grace, Truth, spirit and Power of
Jesus in this Night of Apostasy, they have gone from that which comes from the
Head, Christ, which should join to him. And therefore in this night of Apostasy
there have been many Bodies without the true Head, which have made so many
Heads, and set them upon their Bodies, and when they are gone, they do make
more; and the Beast, Dragon, Wolves, and flse Worships or Bodies of People,
without the true Head, Christ, being out of the Grace, Truth, Light, Power,
Faith and Spirit which the Apostles were in, they have brought forth so many
monstrous Bodies without Heads, till they have made Heads for them; and when
one is gone, they do make another. And therefore all must come to the Grace,
Truth, Power, Spirit and Faith that comes from Jesus, if that they do come to
him, from whence it comes, and so hold him their Head, Christ, which Head all
things were made by, who is First and Last, the Beginning and Ending. Halelujah.

And my desires are, That all may be in their Services for Christ, Men and
Women, in his Grace, Truth, Light, Power and Spirit, that from him they may all
have their Penny, Diligence rewarded.
who does reward every Man and Woman according to their Works, and not stand
idle chaffering in the Marketplace.

So, with my Love in the Lord, the Creator of all, and in the Lord Jesus
Christ, by whom was all, who is over all, the First and Last, a living Rock and
Foundation for all the Living to build upon that are quickened by him, and do
believe in his Light, which is the Life in Christ, the Word, by whom all things
were made; and so are grafted into Christ, Grafted in Christ.
the living Tree, that never withers; and so from him the green Tree every
Graft does receive its Nourishment, that is grafted into him; and so the living
Root does bear every living Branch, and nourishes it, that it may bring forth
Fruit to the Praise of God over all, blessed for ever.

And this is the Tree whose Leaf never fades, nor Fruit fails; but its Fruit
feeds all the Living, and the Leaves thereof heal the Nations: And this Tree
stands in the midst of God's Garden, who says, In the midst of thy Church will
I sing Praise, The Eyes of People are upen it.
which are living Stones, a spiritual Household of Faith, Elect and Precious,
the Church of the living God, written in Heaven; so Holiness becomes the House
of the Lord. And therefore the Lord does require more from Friends than all
other People, because he has given more to them; and so all People do expect
more from Friends than all other People, in answering that of God in them all
in truth and in Righteousness, Holiness and Godliness; for ye are the Lights of
the World, and the Salt of the Earth to season it: So all must glorify the
Lord God in their Lives and Conversations with their Bodies, Spirits and Souls,
which are Christ's, who has bought them and cleansed them with his Blood and
the pure Water of his Word, who makes them sanctified Vessels of his Mercy for
his Glory; therefore none must dishonor the Lord.

And therefore my Desires are, that you may all be valiant for the Truth upon
the Earth; and keep up all your Men and Women's Meetings in the Lord's Power,
the Gospel, which has brought Life and Immortality to Light, and it will
preserve you in Life and Immortality over hom that has darkened you; and in
this all will see their Works and Services for the Lord God, and his Son Christ
Jesus, in that which has brought Life and Immortality to Light; in which
Gospel is an Everlasting Perfect Fellowship and Order, which will stand when
all others are gone; all the Saints that do enjoy this, cannot but Praise the
Lord, and sing Praises to him for ever and ever, Amen.

The Apostle says, If any Man be in Christ he is a new Creature; old things
are passed away, behold all things are become new, 2 Cor. 5.17.

So they that are in Christ are new Creatures; and they that are in old Adam
are old Creatures, and are in their old Things, old Ways, old Worships, Old
things done away.
and old Religions, and have the old Garments, and the old Bottles, that hold
the old Wine, and cannot endure the new; and have the old, rusty, moth-eaten
Treasure: And they that are in Christ, the heavenly and spiritnal Second Adam,
who makes all things new, are new Creatures, and spiritual Men, and are
heavenlyminded, and are new Bottles, that hold the new Wine and the new
heavenly Treasure, and have the new Clothing, the fine Linen, the
Righteousness of Christ, and are in the New and Living Way, over all the dead
Ways; and they are in the New Worship; which Christ set up above Sixteen
hundred Years ago, which is in the Spirit and in the Truth; in which Holy
Spirit and Holy Truth the Holy God is worshipped: And this was new to both Jews
and Gentiles, and is new to all the Apostate Christians, who are not in the
Holy Spirit and Truth that the Apostles were in. And this new Creature in
Christ has a new Religion, which is pure and undefiled, The new Creature bath
the pure Religion.
and keeps from the spots of the World: And this Religion is new to the Jews
and Gentiles, and all the apostatized Christians that plead for a Body of Death
and Sin to the Grave, and a Purgatory when they are dead. And they that be in
Christ are new Creatures, and they have a new Head, who is the Head of all
things, the First born of every Creature, and the Frist-begotten from the dead,
who is alive, and lives for evermore, who bruiseth the Serpent's Head, who
has made things old, but Christ makes all things new; and they tht be in him,
are new Creatures; and they that be out of Christ, are the old Creatures in Old
Adam; and these old Creatures are doting about their old things, and their old
Bottles, old Wine, old Garments, and are doting about their old Ways, old
Religions, and old worships, and persecuting one another with their old Carnal
Weapons, these old Creatures, which dote about their old Worships, Religions
and Ways; so that one old Creature falls out with another old Creature, so
that these old doting Creatures in Old Adam, out of Christ the Second Adam, do
wrestle with Flesh and Blood about their old Ways, Religions and Worships: And
these old doting Creatures (which be out of Christ the Savior) do destroy one
another about their old Ways, Worships, Religions and Churches: And these old
Creatures, that be out of Christ the Head, are monstrous Bodies without a Head,
till that they have made one, and then the old Creatures set it upon their
Body; which Head (as they do think) does pardon their Sins; and when this their
Head is fallen off their Body, then they do make another, and set it on their
old Creature's Body: But they that are in Christ, are new Creatures, And Christ
is their Redeemer, etc.
and Christ is their Head, who is their Redeemer, Sanctisier and Savior, who
is alive, and lives for evermore; and walk in Christ, the Second Adam, who is
Heavenly and spiritual. And the old Creatures, out of Christ, their Walk is in
old Adam, who are Natural and Carnal; and so are their Weapons and Armor, that
they defend their old Ways, Church, Religion and worship with, they are Carnal
(and not Spiritual) by which they kill one another; and the old Creatures do
study or dote which way they may destroy or imprison, persecute or banish,
spoil or torture the Righteous or new Creatures in Christ. And they that be in
Christ are new Creatures, their Weapons and Armor are Spiritual, and they do
not wrestle with Flesh and Blood, but Spiritual Wickedness and Rulers of
Darkness in high Places, and bring down Imaginations and high Thoughts, as
Christ (whom those new Creatures are in) teaches them, who says, that He came
not to destroy Men's lives, but to save them; and rebuked such as would have had
Men's Lives destroyed, and told them, that they did not know what Spirit they
were of: So it is clear, that the old Creatures; that be out of Christ (which
destroy Men's Lives about their old Ways, Churches, Religions, and their old
Worships) do not know what Spirit they are of; and although they do not know
what Spirit they are of, whether it be a good spirit or a bad one; yet People
must conform to that Way, Religion, Worship and Church that this old Creature,
that is out of Christ, has set up, or else he will persecute them or destroy
their Lives, They that do Persecute for Rcligion are ignorant what Spirit they
are of.
though Christ says, They do not know what Spirit they are of: And is not this
hard, to conform to that which the old Creatures have made and set up, which do
not know their own Spirits, nor what Spirit they bd of? And therefore were not
those Doctrines, Ordinances, Traditions and Rudiments of the World the old
Creatures (who are in old Adam) which they did and do dote after, which the new
Creatures in Christ Jesus, the second Adam, were not to taste, touch, nor
handle, for they did perish with the using? And are not all the Will-worships,
and the Beasts and the Dragon's Worships, of the old Creatures, that be out of
Christ, bearing the Mark of the Beast in their Hand or Forehead? And they that
be in Christ, which be new Creatures, have their Father's Mark or Name in their
Fore heads, and worship the Holy, Pure and Living God in Spirit and in Truth.
And it was the old Creatures that made Images and Idols; and such make them
now, and worship them: But they that are in Christ, are new Creatures, and are
renewed up into the Image of God, and worship him in his Holy Spirit and Truth,
that lives for ever. Amen.

And these cannot touch, taste nor handle the old Creatures Images, Idols, Not
to touch with the Rudiments of the World.
Doctrines, Ordinances, Traditions or Rudiments of the World, which are the old
Creatures, in Old Adam, which does touth, taste and handle them: But the new
Creature cannot, who is in Christ, the express Image of the Father; and he
makes his new Creatures like himself. Moses appointed Servants for God in the
Law or Old Testament; but Christ made Sons in the New Testament; for as many as
received Christ, he gave them Power to become the Sons of God.

Swarthmore in Lancashire, the 30th of the 11th Month, 1678. G. F.

To Friends in America, Negroes and Indians.
ALL Friends, Epist. 335.
every where, that have Indians or Blacks, You are to preach the Gospel to
them, The Gespel to be preacked to the Blacks, Indians, etc.
and other Servants, if you be true Christians; for the Gospel of Salvation was
to be preached to every Creature under Heaven; Christ commands it to his
Disciples, Go and teach all Nations, baptizing them into the Name of the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. And this is the one Baptism with the Spirit into
one Body, which plunges down Sin and Corruption, which has gotten up by
Disobedience and Transgression: For all has been plunged into Sin and Death
from the Life, for all died in Adam, then they have been all subjected by the
Evil Spirit, which has led them out of the Truth into the Evil; and therefore
they must all be baptized into the Death of Christ, and put on Christ, if they
have Life.

And also, you must preach the Grace of God to all Blacks and Indians, which
Grace brings Salvation, that has appeared unto all Men, to teach and instruct
them to live Godly, Righteously and Soberly: Which Grace of God is sufficient
to teach and establish all true Christians, that they may appear before the
Throne of Grace.

And also, you must teach and instruct Blacks and Indians, and other, Indians
and Negroes directed to God's Spirit.
how that God does pour out of his Spirit upon all Flesh in these days of the
New Covenant, and New Testament; and that none of them must quench the Motions
of his Spirit, nor grieve it, nor vex it, nor rebel against it, nor err from
it, nor resist it; but be led by his good Spirit to instruct them; and with
which they may profit in the things of God; neither must they turn from his
Grace into Wantonness, nor walk despitefully against the Spirit of Grace, for
it will teach them to live Soberly, Godly and Righteously, and season their
Words.

And also, you must instruct and teach your Indians and Negroes, and all
others, how that Christ, by the Grace of God, Christ tasted Death for every
Man, and is the Propitiation for the Sins of the whole World.
tasted Death for every Man, and gave himself a Ransom for all Men, to be
testified in due time, and is the Propitiation not for the Sins of Christians
only, but for the Sins of the whole World: And how, that he does enlighten
every Man that comes into the World, with his true Light, which is the Life in
Christ, by whom the World was made.

And Christ, who is the Light of the World, says, Believe in the Light, that
ye may become Children of the Light. And they that do Evil, and hate the Light
(which is the Life in Christ) will not come to the Light, because it will
reprove them, and love the Darkness more than the Light, this Light is their
Condemnation. And so, all must be turned from Darkness to Light, to believe in
the Light; and from the Power of Satan to God; and, if they do not believe,
they will be reproved, condemned and judged by Christ, who has all Power in
Heaven and in Earth given unto him, who will judge both the Quick and the Dead,
and reward every Man according to his Works, whether they be good or evil.

And therefore you are to open the Promises of God to the Ignorant, and how God
would give Christ a Covenant, a Light to the Gentiles, Christ a Light to the
Gentiles.
the Heathen, and a New Covenant to the House of Israel, and the House of
Judah, and that he is God's Salvation to the ends of the Earth; and how that
the Earth shall be covered with the Knowledge of the Lord as the Waters covers
the Sea; so that the glorious Knowledge of the Lord, should cover the Earth.

And the Lord said, The Example of Abraham for the Instruction of Families.
He knew that Abraham would teach and instruct his Family, that they should
learn to keep his Laws and Statutes after he was gone; and Abraham did
Circumcise all his Males, yea, them that he had bought with his Money of any
Stranger. Now who are of Faith, and walks in the steps of faithful Abraham,
does preach up and instruct all their Families in the Circumcision of the
Spirit, that they might be Circumcised with the Spirit, which puts off the Body
of Death, and the Sins of the Flesh, that is come up in Man and Woman by
Transgression; so that in the Spirit they may serve and worship the true and
living God; and so that ye all may come to enjoy the Presence of the Lord in
your Families, and improve your Talents that Christ has given unto you; for
David says, that saw Christ in his New Covenant, Let all Nations Praise the
Lord; and again, All that have Breath Praise the Lord; again, Let the Poor and
Needy praise thy Name: And let all People praise thee, O God: And O ye Servants
of the Lord praise the Lord; for the Lord is good to all, and his tender
Mercies is over all his Works: And all thy Works shall praise thee, O Lord; and
thy Saints shall bless thee, they shall speak of thy Glory and of thy Kingdom,
and talk of thy Power: For the Lord says, From the rising of the Sun to the
going down of the same, my Name shall be great among the Gentiles: And in every
place Incense shall be offered unto my Name; and a pure Offering; for my Name
shall be great among the Heathen, says the Lord of Hosts. And this heavenly
Incense, and Offering in every place, is the Spiritual Offering in the New
Covenant; for the Jews was to offer but in one place, in the Temple, in the Old
Covenant, but in the New Covenant their Offering is in the Holy Temple of their
Hearts, in the Spirit, with which they Offer the pure, and holy and acceptable
Sacrifice to God; with that Spirit which God has given them, they have a
living Sense of God their Creator, and Father of all their Mercies, who has
made them, and has made all things for them, and redeems them by his Son
Christ Jesus, to whom be Praise, and Glory, and Honor and Thanks for evermore.

So let all bow at the Name of Jesus, to his Power, and Light, and Spirit, All
are to low to the Name of Jesus.
for they have bowed to the Power of Darkness, that foul and unclean Spirit,
who is out of Truth, and in whom there is no Truth. And therefore now all are
to bow at the Name of Jesus; for there is no Salvation in any other Name under
Heaven, but in the Name of Jesus, whose Name is above every Name under the
whole Heaven, who is the First Born of every Creature, and the First Begotten
from the Dead, whom God now speaks to his People by, his Son; and all are to
hear him, the great Prophet; and every Tongue is to confess to Christ Jesus, to
the Glory of God the Father, who is the First and Last, who bruises the
Serpent's Head. And so through Christ Jesus Man and Woman comes again to God:
All Blessings and Praises be to the Lord God, through Jesus Christ, for ever
and evermore, Amen.

Swartmore, the 10th Month, 1679. G. F.

DEar Friends every where, that have received the Truth as it is in Jesus,
Epist. 356.
which is holy and pure, and brings to live in him that is Pure and Holy. The
Truth is Peaceable, and a Peaceable Habitation; and the Truth is sufficient and
able to make you free from him that abode not in the Truth, To live in the
peaceable Truth out of Strise, etc.
and in whom there is no Truth; and all that do not live and walk in the
Peaceable Truth, follows him that is out of the Truth, into Strifes, and vain
Janglings and Disputings, like Men of Corrupt Minds, destitute of the Truth.
And now the Grace and Truth that comes by Jesus Christ, is that which all
People should be under in this New Covenant of Light, and Life, and Grace, and
Truth; as the Law came by Moses in the Old Covenant, and the Jews were to be
under the Law: But the true Christians who has received the Grace and Truth
comes to be under this Grace's teaching, leading and eftablishing; by which
Grace and Truth they are united and joined to Jesus Christ, from whence it
comes. And this Grace and Truth is able and sufficient to make you free from
him that is out of the Truth, and to come to have a Peaceable Habitation in
Christ Jesus, their Eternal Rest and Sabbath: For Christ Jesus says to his
Believers and Followers, In me ye have Peace, but in the World ye have Trouble;
and the trouble is in the World of Wickedness. In Christ we have Peace.
And therefore God's People are not to love the World, nor the things of the
World; for the love of the World is Enmity to God.

And therefore feel God's Love shed abroad in all your Hearts, through Christ
Jesus, to carry all your Hearts and your Minds above the Love of the World; and
this Love is that which will preserve you in the excellent way of bearing all
things; and the Love of God fulfils the Law.

And the Fruits of the pure holy Spirit of the God of Truth is Love, which is a
peaceable Spirit; but the foul unclean Spirit, that is out of the Truth, is a
ravenous, unquiet, unpeaceable Spirit: And the Faith that Jesus Christ is the
Author and Finisher of, it works by Love; and the Spirit of Faith is a
Peaceable Spirit; which Faith gives the Victory over the unpeaceable, unruly,
ravenous Spirit; and by which Faith you have the Inheritance.

And the Glorious Gospel of Christ Jesus, which is the Power of God, the Gospel
of Peace, which is over the Power of Darkness, and was before it was, and it
will be when it is gone; and in this Gospel all the Heirs of it have an
Everlasting Unity, and an Everlasting Glorious Fellowship in the Glorious
Gospel of Peace, yea, a Glorious, Peaceable Fellowship and an access to God.

And the Wisdom of God from above is gentle and peaceable, and justifies and
preserves all her Children above the unpeaceable Wisdom that is below; and this
Peaceable Wisdom preserves above all the unruly Spirits, and vain Talkers and
Janglers, such as talk of the Wisdom of God, but lives not in it, but in the
Wisdom of the World.

And such as talk of the Gospel of Christ, the Power of God, Such as talk of
the Gospel, and live out of it, have not comfort in the Scriptures, nor the
Spirit of God.
but lives not in it, but do live in the Power of Satan, the Enemy and
Adversary, and the Devil, the destroying Power and Spirit; and such have no
comfort of the Scriptures, nor of the things of God, nor of the Grace, nor of
the Truth, nor of the Wisdom of God, nor of Faith, nor Light, though they may
talk of all these things, while they follow that unruly, foul, unpeaceable
Spirit, that abode not in the Truth (in whom there is no Truth) and where there
is no Truth there is Confusion and Disorder. Now the God of Truth is a God of
Order, from whom you have Grace, Truth, and Faith, which is his Gift, and his
Spirit, and Gospel, and Wisdom, that you may all live in the Order of it, and
as it orders you: For God is a God of Order, and his Order is known in his
Light, Grace and Truth, and Spirit, and his Gospel, the Power of God, and in
his Wisdom. And all his Children and People should live in the Order of his
Light, Spirit, and Gospel and Wisdom, and delight in the Order of it.

And all you that know God, and Jesus Christ, which is Eternal Life; then in
this Eternal Life you do know, that the God of Truth is a God of Order, and you
love his Order, in his Light, and Life, and Grace, and Truth, in his Gospel,
and in his Spirit, and in his heavenly pure Wisdom, by which all his Children
are justified.

And in his Truth, that makes free from him that abode not in the Truth (in
whom there is no Truth) that all his Children should walk in the Order of
Truth, which has made them free, who are born again of the Incorruptible Seed
by the Word of God, The Truth makes free.
that lives, and abides, and endures for ever: And so feeds of the Milk of this
Immortal Word, and so are of an Incorruptible Generation, which is above the
Corruptible; and here is the hidden Man of the Heart, that is Incorruptible,
known, that has an Everlasting Fellowship, and has an Incorruptible Crown,
and is an Heir of an Incorruptible Kingdom.

And now the God of this World (and his Followers) that abode not in the Truth,
in whom there is no Truth, cannot endure to hear talk of the Order of Truth,
which is in the Light, and Life, and in the Gospel, and in the Wisdom of the
God of Truth: For the World is full of Disorder and Confusion; but the Living,
Eternal, Immortal God of Truth is a God of Order, and not of Confusion, who
has sent his Son to destroy the Devil and his Works: Blessings and Praises,
with all Glory and Thanks, be unto him, who has all Power, Might, Majesty and
Dominion, now henceforth and for ever, Amen.

G. F.

DEar Friends,
Epist. 357.
All live the Life of the true Christians, and not the Life of old Adam, that
went from God's Command and Voice; nor like the Jews, To live the Life of
Christianity.
and such as have got the Name of Christians, that say, There is no hearing of
God and Christ's Voice now, which are out of the Life, Power, and Spirit, Grace
and Truth, and Image of God, that the true Christians were in, and Adam and Eve
before they fell; so that none can live the Life of the true Christians, and
the holy Prophets and Apostles, except they are in the same Power and Spirit,
Grace and Truth, and Faith and Image that they were in, which is a Life above
the World and its God, in whom there is no Truth, no Life, Light, nor Power of
the Living God abiding in them. And therefore before any can live the Life of
the Saints, they must bow to the Name of Jesus, their Savior, in his Light,
Grace, and Truth, and Power, and Spirit, which comes from him, who submitted
himself to the shamesul Death of the Cross, and destroyed Death and his Power,
who had no Sin, nor Guile in his Mouth, and is risen again for our
Justification, and so has tasted Death for every Man, and given himself a
Ransom for all, that all should now bow at his Name Jesus a Savior; and so to
his Power and Authority bow, who has all Power in Heaven and Earth given to
him: So all Men have bowed under Death and Sin by Transgression: Christ
submitted to the Cross and Death for us.
And Christ has submitted to the Cross and Death for them, and has born their
Stripes for Sin and Iniquity, who had no Sin, neither knew any, to bring us out
of Death and Sin. Therefore every one must bow at the Name of Jesus (as before)
whatsoever they do in Word or Deed, it must be done in the Name of Jesus; and
before that they can confess to Jesus Christ to the Glory of God the Father,
they must all bow at the Name of Jesus, and bow to his Grace and Truth, Light,
Spirit and Power that comes by Jesus, which they know; Him the Fountain, the
Rock and Foundation to build upon, who brings out of Death and Darkness into
Light and Life, and a Kingdom and a World that is Everlasting; and there to
have Food and Clothing that is Everlasting.

G. F.

DEar Friends,
With my Love to you in the holy Peaceable Truth that never changes, nor admits
of no Evil, Epist. 358.
but makes all free that receive it, and tht walk in it, To live in Truth,
which admits of no Evil.
and is over all the Clouds without Rain, and Wells without Water, and Trees
without Fruit: And from the Truth flows Justice, Equity, Righteousness and
Godliness, Mercy and Tenderness, that brings a Man's Heart, Mind, Soul and
Spirit to the Infinite and Incomprehensible God, and from it a Love flows to
all the Univerfal Creation, and would have all to come to the Knowledge of the
Truth; and it bends every one to their utmost Ability to serve God and his
Truth, and to spread it abroad, and it brings their Minds out of the Earth,
which makes them brittle and changeable, and uncertain; for it does not change,
neither does it touch with that which does change. As to Unity: It makes all
like it self, that do obey it: Universal, to live out of narrowness and self,
and deny it: So it brings all into Oneness, and answers the good Principle of
God in all People, and brings into Humility, and the Fear of the Lord, which is
the beginning of his Wisdom; and it brings all to have a care of God's Glory
and his Honor; and watches over all the Professors of it, for their good, to
keep within its bounds, and walk within its order; which he that is out of
Truth, leads into all disorder, in whom there is no Truth; and the Truth makes
all its Children free from him, and in it to reign over him. Thanks, Glory and
Honor to the Lord God of Truth over all for ever, Amen.

The Lord, who is the God of all Peace and Order; The Lord is the Protect or of
his People.
alone Protects and Preserves his People with his Eternal Power; for the
Devil's Power is not Eternal, it had a beginning, and must have an ending; for
the Eternal Power limits that Devourer and Destroyer. And therefore Friends,
Patience must be exercised in the Truth; and keep to the Word of Patience,
which Word was before the World was, and abides and endures for ever; and it
will keep Friends over and out of all the Snares of the World, and its
Temptations.

So with my Love in the Seed of Life, that reigns over all, and in it the Lord
God Almighty preserve and keep you all to his Glory. Amen.

G. F.

An Epistle to be read amongst Friends.
FRiends,
You that are Believers in the Light, Epist. 359.
which is the Life in Christ, To Gather in the Name of Jesus.
and are grasted into him who is ascended far above all Principalities, Power,
Thrones and Dominions, by whom all things were made and created, all the
Children in the New Covenant do Gather together in the Name of Christ Jesus,
whose Name is above every Name under the whole Heaven, and in whose Name they
have Salvation, and not by any other Name under the whole Heaven: And at this
Name must every Knee bow, and every Tongue confess Christ Jesus, to the Glory
of God the Father; and they that have bowed their knee to the Name of Jesus,
and do confess him to the Glory of God the Father, cannot Gather in any other
Name under Heaven, below the Name of Jesus; but, Gather in the Name of Jesus,
which is above every Name under Heaven, in whom they have Salvation, and so
cannot not Gather in any Name below Christ; for, they do know that they have
not any Salvation in whatsoever Name that they do Gather together in below the
Name of Jesus: And being gathered in the Name of Jesus, he is the midst of
them, the Prince of Life and Peace, and Captain of Salvation, and a Prophet to
open the Book of Couscience, Christ the Prince of Life and Captain of our
Salvation.
and the Book of the Law, and Prophets, and Gospel, and his Book of Life to
them, and a Bishop to oversee them, and a Heavenly Shepherd to feed them in his
Heavenly Pasture of Life, and a Heavenly King to rule in their Hearts, and in
his glorious Kingdom, amongst them that are born again; and that sees and
enters into his Everlasting Kingdom of Righteousness, Peace, and Joy in the
Holy Ghost: And all these Children in the Kingdom, and in the New Covenant of
Grace, Light and Life, cannot feed of any Bread for their Immortal Souls that
is made by Man, which he has heavened with the sour Leaven; for that sour
leavened Bread will make their Hearts to burn, and the Jews were not to keep
their Feasts with leavened Bread in the old Covenant; The Jews in Spirit keep
their Feast with unleavened Bread from Heaven.
then much more the Jews in the Spirit, in the new Covenant, who has their
Bread from Heaven, their unleavened Bread, who in the new Covenant does keep
their Feast with unleavened Bread from Heaven, and cannot feed their Souls with
any Bread, but that which comes down from Heaven; and this Bread from Heaven
gives Life to the Soul, and is the Staff of their heavenly Life; this heavenly
Bread, as the outward Bread is the Staff of the natural Life, in this World
that must have an end, but the Bread from Heaven is the heavenly Staff of Life,
that does nourish up into a heavenly Life, and a World, and a Kingdom that is
without end: And such as feeds on this heavenly Bread cannot feed their Souls
with any Bread below that which comes from Heaven, for it does not give them
Life: So that they can neither touch, taste nor handle that which is below,
which perishes; for the Breaa of Life from Heaven does not persh, but gives
Life Eternal; and this Bread is sure, and they that feeds upon it shall
hunger no more. So all Eyes are to look up to Heaven for this Bread of Life,
which gives them Life; and not below Heaven; for neither are they to follow
them that cries, Lo, it is here, and lo, there, or to drink of their Cup that
are whored from the Spirit of God, nor to eat of their leaveneed Bread; for
they that do believe in the Light, which is the Life in Christ, are grafted
into him the true Vine. So the Believers do feel a living Spring springing up
in them to Eternal Life, True Believers drink of the Spring of Eternal Life.
from the Fountain from whence it comes. And so here all the true Believers
have the upper and the nether Springs in themselves; and such may drink freely,
and eat freely of the Bread and Water of Life, and does hunger and thirst no
more, but eat and drink that which is Eternal, which nourishes them up to
Eternal Life, and so bears Heavenly Spiritual Fruits, to the Praise of the
Eternal God; which Plants he has watered by his upper and nether Springs,
which Trees or plants, their Fruits are unto Holiness, and their End is
Everlasting Life. So none of the Children of the New Covenant need go to the
World for Bread or Water, to give them Life Everlasting, to keep them from the
World's Storms; or Weapons to defend their Church or Worship, for they have
them from Heaven, and heavenly Bread and Water, and Spiritual Weapons and
Armor, and the Righteousness of Christ, the fine Linen, their Clothing;
Glory to the Lord for ever, who makes all his spiritually Rich, and to be
Lenders and not Borrowers, and Givers and not Receivers, which is more blessed
than the Receiver.

And the Jews in the old Covenant were to wash their Clothes, and to sanctify
themselves when they did appear before the Lord, and so are the Children of God
in the New Covenant of Life, Light and Grace, who do appear before the Lord,
God's Children are to put on the Righteousness of Christ.
are to be washed and cleansed, and sanctified, and to put on the Righteousness
of Christ, their fine Linen that never will wax old; and so to put off all the
Old Adam's Garments, that he has covered himself, and his Sons and Daughters
with in the Fall and Transgression, which will wax old and rot; but that which
God and Christ does put on and cloth his Saints withal is Everlasting. So
Man's Righteousness and his filthy Rags must be put off, and they must come
into the Righteousness of Christ, and put it on, which does exceed the
Righteousness of the Law, if they do enter into the Kingdom of God, which does
stand in Righteousness, and Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost.

Now in the Old Testament it is said, The Priests Lips is to preserve the
Peoples Knowledge: But the New Testament says, Christ is the Treasnre of
Wisdom and Knowledge.
That Christ is the Treasure of Wisdom and Knowledge. The Old Testament says,
That you must offer your Sheep, Goats, Bulls, and Heifers, and other Creatures,
which God commanded by the Law in the Old Testament, for your Sins and
cleansing: But the New Testament says, That Christ is offered up once for all:
And the Old Testament says, That the Blood of Bulls and other Creatures
cleanses from Sin: But the New Testament says, That Christ's Blood cleanses
from all Sin. And in the Old Testament it is said, You must carry your
Offerings, and First Fruits and Tithe to the Storehouse: But the New Testament
says, Freely you have received, freely give; and forbids Bag or Staff. And
in the Old Testament the Priest was to light the Candles and Lamps in the
Tabernacle and Temple, and to circumcise the Men-Children: But the New
Testament says, And enlightens his People with his Light and Life.
Christ does enlighten every Man that comes into the World with his heavenly
Light: which is the Life in Christ the Word; and the Spirit of Man is the
Candle of the Lord: So he does enlighten the Candle and Lamp in the Tabernacle,
and says, Believe in the Lght, that ye may become Children of the Light; and
Christ does minister the Circumcision in the Spirit, that puts off the Body
of the Sins of the Flesh, that came upon Man and Woman by Transgression. So
that the Children are the Circumcision of the Spirit in the New Testament, and
not of the Flesh and Letter, as they were in the Old Testament. And in the Old
Testament it is said, That the Priests put the Testament, and the Law, and the
Pot of Manna into the Ark, in the Tabernacle and Temple: But in the New
Testament, God pours out of his Spirit upon all Flesh in the new Covenant.
God pours out of his Spirit upon all Flesh, and the Holy Ghost proceeds
from the Father and the Son into the Hearts of his People, to lead them into
all Truth, and reproves the World of Sin; and the Bread of Life that they have
from Christ, is in their Arks and Hearts, or in their Temples; and God does
write his Law in the Hearts and Minds of his People. So, in the New Testament
they have the Law written in the Heart and Mind, and the Old they had in the
Letter and Tables of Stone; and in the New they have the Testament and
Testimony, the Spirit of Christ in their Hearts, and the heavenly, unleavened
Bread in their Hearts, which they do keep the Everlasting Feast with. And in
the Old Testament, The circumcised in Heart do eat of the heavenly Bread and
Flesh.
the Clean and circumcised out wardly did eat of the Passover, the Lamb without
blemish: But in the New Testament, the clean and circumcised in Heart do eat of
the Passover Christ, the heavely Bread and Flesh, and so does keep the Feast of
their Passover in the New Testament. And the Old Testament had the outward
Temple and Tabernacle, and outward Lights: But in the New Testament, the Saints
Bodies are the Temples and Tabernacles of God, and his Light does shme in their
Hearts, to give them the knowledge of the Glory of God, in the Face of Jesus
Christ. And in the Old Testament it is said, Do this and live; and the New
says, Believe in the Light (Christ) and be saved. And the Old Testament says,
Thou shall Swear, and perform thy Oaths to the Lord: But Christ says in the
New True Christians are not to be angry without a Cause.
Swear not at all. And the Old Testament says, Thou shall not kill, nor commit
Adultery: But Christ in the New says, Thou shall not be Angry without a cause,
and thou shall not lust after a Woman. And the Old Testament says, Thou shall
stand up and Curse: But the New says, Bless, and curse not. The Old Testament
says, Thou shall hate thine Enemy: But the New says, Thou shall love thy
Enemies, and do good to them that hate thee, and despitefully use thee. So the
New Covenant and Testament is not according to the Old. And in many other
things besides these, it might be showed how one does exceed the other in Glory.

G. F.

To all the Men and Women's Meetings every where.
ALL the faithful Men and Women, Epist. 360.
are to be as Abraham and Sarah; Abraham, the Father of the Faithful; and
Sarah, a Mother in Israel, Men and Women are meet belps in the Restoration by
Christ Jesus.
to give Suck, and to nourish up the Seed, the Heir of the Promise. Likewise to
be as Adam and Eve, before they fell, weet-helps in the Image of God, and in
the Power of God, with which they were to sudue the Earth: In which Power of
Image of God, they were not only to subdue the Earth, but subdue
Unrighteousness and all Ungodliness, and that which they know does dishonor
God.

And likewise all the faithful Women are to be as Dorcas, And to be fellow
helpers in Christ Jesus.
a Disciple of Christ Jesus, that their good Works of the Spirit and Faith may
follow them: And also they are to be as Phebe, who was a Minister of the Church
at Cencrea, and she was such a faithful trusty Minister, that the Apostle sent
his Epistle by her to Rome, from Corinth, with a Recommendation of her. And
also all the faithful Men and Women are to be as Aquilla and Priscilla, who
were the Apostles fellowhelpers in Christ Jesus, and had a Church in their
House, and were Inftructers concerning the things of God, and Christ Jesus (in
his New Testament and New Covenant) and of his Kingdom: And likewise to be as
Mary Magdalen, and Joanna, and mary, the Mother of James, and other Women that
were with those Women, which first preached and declared to the Apostles the
Resurrection of Jesus Christ; and Christ said unto those Women, Go and tell his
Disciples that he was risen from the Dead; so these Women were the first
Messengers of the GladTidings, Matthew. 28. Luke 24. Mark 16. And these Tidiugs
did astonish the Apostles at first; for they said, Certain Women of our Company
(which were of the Disciples) made us astonished, saying, That Jesus was risen
from the Dead; this two of his Disciples said when they were talking with
Christ, Women were the first Preachers of Christ's Rgsurrection.
but they did not perceive it till he opened their Eyes, as in Luke 24. So the
Women continued in their firm Belief; and then after wards the Apostles came to
believer also. And therefore it is good for every one to have a Sense of the
Resurrection of Christ, and not seek him below; but seek him above, for he is
risen from the Dead, and lives, and sits at the Right Hand of the Living God.
And also all the Faithful are to be as Miriam the Prophetess, to Encourage the
Church, and Praise God. And also to be as Huldah the Prophetess, who instructed
the King, his Princes and Priests in the Law of God, and the Old Covenant: So
they should be much more diligent to teach and instruct in the New Covenant,
and Testament, which does exceed the Old in its Glory. And also to be as Anna
the Prophetess, an ancient Woman of Eighty four Years Old, and she gave thanks,
and spoke of Christ to all them that looked for Redemption in ferusalem; and so
here was general and a public Preaching of Christ Jesus. And also to be as
Hannah, in the old Testament, who conscecrated her Son Samuel unto the Lord;
and the Lord accepted her Prayers, Tears, and Offerings: So she had not a mind
to let him run Wild. And likewise as Deborah, Deborah both a Prophetess and a
Judge in Israel.
who was a Prophetess in the Old Covenant, and a Judge in Israel; what
Victories, with outward Weapons, the Lord did give her, and how she praised the
Lord, which was by Faith in the time of the Old Covenant: But in the time of
the New Covenant the true Believers wrestles not with Flesh and Blood, but are
all to be diligent in the Spiritual Judgment, and warfare in the Spiritual
Israel.

And the Apostle writes to Titus, how he had left him in Creete, that he should
set in order the things that were wanting, and ordain Elders in every City, as
he had appointed him. And after he had spoken many things to Titus concerning
Overseers and Teachers, that they must be Blameless; he says, That the Aged
Men must be sober, grave, temporate, sound in Faith, in Charity, and in
Patience. Aged Men and Women that their behavior be as becomes the Gospel.
And the AgedWomen likewise, that they be in Behavior, as hecomes Holiness,
not false Accusers, etc. but to be teachers of good things; and that they teach
the younger Women to be sober, to love their Husbands, and to love their
Children, and to be chaste, keepers at home, good, obedient, etc. that the Word
of God be not blasphemed. And likewise Titus was to exhort the young Men to be
sober-minded; and here you may see the Apostle, which did forbid one sort of
Women to be teachers, which were Usurpers of Authority, which both the Law and
the Gospel forbids; yet the Law, and Christ, and the Apostles in the Gospel,
encouraged the Honorable Women to Preach and to Teach: For Christ sent the
faithful Woman to declare and preach his aged, And to be teachers of good
things.
and honorable, and faithful Women to Prophesied and Teach, and to be teachers
of good things, as before: That is his Charge to them in general. Then he comes
to Particulars, charging them, that they should teach the young Women to be
sober and discreet, chaste and good, and to love their Husbands, and their
Children that the Word of God be not blasphemed: So these to be were as Mothers
to the younger Women, and were public Women in their public Services, and
Charge that was committed to them. And a Bishop, and an Elder, or a Deacon, was
to order and rule well his own House, and to have his Children in subjection,
with all Gravity: For if a Man know not how to rule his own House, And to rule
well their own House.
how shall he take care of the Church of God? So every Man and Woman is to
teach, instruct and order their own Children and Families, as the Jews did in
the old Covenant; then much more they should Train them up in the new Covenant,
which exceeds the old; so that in all things they might give thanks, and
praises to God, that in all things the Lord might be glorified in all their
Families: So all Christian Families are concerned in these Particular Services,
before they come to the General Service (to wit) to be Overseers and Ministers,
faithful Men as Fathers, and faithful Women as Mothers, and Teachers of good
things; and the young Men and Women as Brethren and Sisters in purity. And so
let none spoil their Families with bad Lives, And to keep their Tongue under
the Bridle.
and unruly Tongues, with letting the Poison of Asps be under their Tongue, by
which they spoil and corrupt their Families; which begets into a loose and bad
Language; but that is to be bridled by the Word of God; for a soft Tongue
breaks the Bone, the Tongue of the Just is as choice Silver, and the Tongue
of the Just is Health, and uses Knowledge aright, and a wholesome Tongue is a
Tree of Life; and who keeps his Mouth and his Tougue, keeps his Soul from
Trouble: And after that Solomon had spoken of a Virtuous Woman, he says, And
the Law of Kindness to rest in their Tongne.
In her Tongue is the Law of Kindness, and her Children rises up, and calls
her Blessed; and her Husband also praises her: He that has an Ear to hear, let
him hear. And therefore all is to keep in this Law of Kindness, and there your
Candle does not go out by Night, and your Virtue will flow; for the Hoary Head
is a Crown of Glory, if it be found in the way of Righteousness; and Better is
he that rules over his own Spirit, than he that takes a City; for he that has
no rule over his own Spirit, is like a City that is broken down, without Walls;
then the security and strength is gone: And to rule over their own Spirit.
And therefore let every one keep his own little City with the Spirit and Power
of God, by which you have Power over your own Spirit; and then the Power of God
is your strength, and keeps you safe in it, that be led by the Spirit of God.

And so that all Men and Women may exercise their Talent, their Gift that God
has given them in the true Light which lights every Man that comes into the
World; that is, the Light in Christ, that they may become Children of the
Light, and grafted into Christ, and walk as Children of the Light and of the
Day: And that all may profit in the Manifestation of the Spirit that God has
given them; and be led by the Spirit, that you all may be the Sons and
Daughters of God in this day of his New Covenant, and New Testament, wherein
God pours forth of his Spirit upon all Flesh, which none is to grieve, vex,
nor quench, nor rebel against, but obey it: And the Grace of God that brings
Salvation has appeared unto all Men, to teach them to live Godly, Righteously,
and Soberly, All to be faithful Stewards of the Grace of God
and to deny Ungodliness and Unrighteousness. And therefore all are to be
Faithful Stewards of this Grace of God, which teaches them, and brings them
their Salvation: For the Apostle says, As every one has received the Gift,
even so minister the same one to another, as good Stewards of the manifold
Grace of God, that the God of all Grace, and Christ by whom it comes, may be
glorified in all his People, who gives unto them freely the spiritual and
heavenly Gifts. And the Gospel of Peace and glad Tidings, God and Chrift has
sent to be preached to every Creature under Heaven: And all you that have
received it, by which Life and Immortality is brought to Light in you, by which
you see over him that has darkened you; by the Everlasting Gospel, the Power of
God, and are come to be Heirs of this Everlasting Gospel, the Power of God; so
you are Heirs of the Everlasting Order of the Gospel; for the Power of God, is
the Order and Authority of all your Meetings: This Everlasting Gospel, the
Power of God, is an unlimitted Order; and this Glorious Order of the Gospel,
the Power of God, is beyond the Order fo Aaron, God's Order is beyond the Or-of
Aaron.
and beyond all the Orders of the Heathen. And the Power of God cannot be
limited, though it may limit that which is contrary to it, and out of the
Truth. So our Order and Government is of Christ, and his Gospel, and in his
Light, and Holy Spirit, and we are Heirs of it: Being Heirs of Christ, and
grafted into him by Belief; and all his Sons and Daughters do know his Glorious
Liberty, and their rest in him: The Liherty in Christ is a glorious Liberey.
For we have received the Spirit of Adoption, whereby we can cry Abba Father;
for the Spirit it self bears witness with our Spirits that we are the
Children of God; and if Children, then Heirs of God, and joint Heirs with
Christ.

And now Friends (as I said before) Train up all your Children in the Fear of
God, in his New Covenant of Light and Grace, Friends to train up their Children
in the Fear of God.
that they may know Christ, who is their Baptizer and Circumciser, and he
sprikles your Consciences and Hearts with his Blood to cleanse you from all
Sin, and the Lord writes his heavenly Law in their Hearts, that they may obey
it and do it: For, does not all People in their several false Religions, Ways
and Sects, yea, the very Turks and Heathens train up their Children in their
own Ways? And likewise, did not the Jews train up their Children in the Old
Testament, and Old Covenant, of works; which old Testament and Covenant Christ
has abolished, and has established the New Covenant of Light, Life and Grace?
And therefore must not all the Jews in Spirit, in this New Testament, train up
their Children in this New Covenant of Light, Life and Grace? Or else do they
not bring themselves under Condemnation? For, does not the Beasts and the
Fowls teach their Young to pick, suck, and feed their Young? All our good
things comes from God, and Christ the giver of them.
And will not the Young one cry after the Old ones for their Food? All these
things might teach People. Now you having your Food from Christ, and God your
Father; yea, your Bread, your Milk, your Water, your Wine, your Honey, your
Fine Linen, your Clothing, your Breath, your Life, your Souls, and the Image
of God, which he made you in, which Man and Woman has lost by Transgression,
but are to be renewed into it again by Christ, your Redeemer, and Sanctifier,
and Reconciler, and Mediator, who makes your Peace between you and God, from
whom you have your Light, Grace, and Truth, who gives you his Gospel, and
Faith, and Spirit, in whose Name you have Salvation, and not by any other Name
under the whole Heaven, who is your heavenly spiritual Rock and Foundation; and
have not you all these things from above freely, and none of them from below?
And also your Heavenly Armor, and Spiritual Weapons, in which you stand
Witnesses for God and Christ: And cannot you train up all your Children in the
Fear of God, and tell them from whence you have all these good things, that
they may come to receive of all these good things which you receive from the
good God, and Christ the Treasure of Wisdom and Knowledge, Good Children are
the Crown of old Men.
that you may say, The Children of your Children are the Crown of your old Men
in the Truth, and the Glory of their Fathers in God; and that you may say, Your
Wives are as fruitful Vines by the sides of your House, and your Children like
Olive Plants round about your Table; thus shall they be blessed, that fear the
Lord, that you may say, Your Sons are Plants of God, growing up in their Youth,
And Daughters in Truth as polished Stones.
and that your Daughters may be as Corner-Stones, polished after the similitude
of a Palace; and that your Garners are full, and affords all manner of Store,
so that there is no complaining in your Streets: And happy is that People whose
God is the Lord.

And now my Friends, if there happen any Difference among Friends, either with
Friends or the World, Let it be put to Referrence, if it cannot be ended
between themselves: And all that are concerned to End any Difference, Friends
not to go to Law, but to end Differences amongst themselves.
let them have but one Ear to one Party, and let them reserve the other Ear to
hear the other Party; so that they may Judge Impartially of Matters, without
Affection or Favor, or Respect of Persons: For you may see how the Jews in the
Old Covenant did judge of things among themselves, as long as they kept the Law
of God, and did not go to other Nations, or to the Heathen for them, to judge
of their Matters; and therefore the Apostle reproves the Corinthians for that
fault, for going to Law one with another before Unbelievers, and told them,
that the Saints should judge the World, yea, Angels; and then how much more
might they Judge of things appertaining to this Life? And therefore the Apostle
exhorted, If then ye have Judgment of things pertaining to this Life, set them
to judge that are least esteemed in the Church: And to speak to him that has
Offended alone.
And Christ says, If thy Brother trespass against thee, go and tell him his
fault between him and thee alone; if he should hear thee, thou have gained thy
Brother: But if he will not hear thee, then take with thee one or two more,
that in the Mouth of two or three Witnesses every Word may be established: And
if he neglect to hear them, tell it to the Church; and if he neglect to hear
the Church, let him be unto thee as a Heathen and a Publican. Verily I say unto
you, whatsoever is bound on Earth shall be bound in Heaven; and whatsoever ye
shall loose on Earth shall be loosed in Heaven: And farther Christ said, If two
of you shall agree on Earth, as touching any thing that they shall ask, it
shall be done for them of my Father which is in Heaven: For where two or three
are gathered together in my Name, there am I in the midst of them, Mat. 18. And
Christ says, And if he neglect to hear them, to tell the Church.
If thy Brother trespass against thee, rebuke him; and if he Repent, forgive
him: And if he trespass against thee seven times in a day, and seven times, if
he turn again, saying, I Repent, thou shall forgive him, Luke 17. Here you may
see what Instructions Christ (who is the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords)
gives to his Church, and much more, which is too large to write. And they had
Elders in the Old Covenant then, much more ought there to be Elders in the New
Covenant, which are grown in the Truth. Christ, the Holy One, has abolished,
and put an end to in the Old Covenant: All are to walk in the fear of God.
So much more the Believers in Christ in the New Testament, in the time of the
Gospel, are to have their Assemblies and Meetings; besides their Instructing
and looking into their own Families, whether they walk in the Fear of God: And
then after, in the General Service of the Church of God, the aged Men, and aged
Women in the Truth are to be Teachers of good things, as the Lord shall order
them with his Spirit, to Teach and Instruct, Exhort, Admonish, Reprove, Rebuke
with the Holy Spirit; And to rebuke and reprove in the holy Spirit.
for the least Member has an Office, and every Believer in the Light (which is
the Life in Christ) is a Member of Christ's Church, and grafted into him; and
so he is the holy Head of the Church, and they are Heirs of his Order, and of
his Government, of the Increase of which there is no end, in his Eternal Power
and Spirit.

And therefore all that deny the Men and Women's Meetings that are established
in the Light, Power and Spirit of Christ, by which we are gathered together; He
being in the midst of them, they may as well deny Christ, as deny his heavenly
Order of his Gospel, and his Heavenly Spiritual Government.

And all them that deny the Men and Women's Meetings, People are to come into
the possession of what they profess.
in the New Covenant, in the Restoration out of Death and Darkness, by Christ,
and in his Gospel of Light and Life, they may as well deny the Preaching of the
Gospel, if People shall not come into the Possession of that which is Preached
and Practice it.

For the Faithful Men and Women that are restored into the Image of God, by
Christ Jesus, as Adam and Eve were in before they fell, they were meet-helps in
Righteousness, and in the Image of God, and in Christ Jesus; yea, they were
meet-helps one to another; and Christ makes them as Kings and Priests to Reign
upon the Earth, over the Serpent and the Devil, the Destroyer in the Power of
God, which was before he was, in which is the holy Order. And they do that
offer the Spiritual Sacrifices to God, and are his heavenly Witnesses, stands
for God and Christ, and his Righteousness, in his Light and Life, They that do
offer Spiritual Sacrifices are to stand up for God and Christ.
by which they are grafted into Christ; and so by and in his Power, Light and
Life stands over Death and Darkness, and the Prince and Power of it, and in it
Reigns over him: And so does Praise God, and his Son that lives for ever, and
sings Hallalujah.

Swarthmore, the 10th Month, 1679. G. F.

An Epistle to Friends, for them to read.
MY Dear Friends,
The peaceable Truth live in, Epist. 361.
which you have received from Jesus your Savior, and that by the Grace and
Truth that is come by him into your Hearts, No bringing forth good Fruits but
by abiding in Christ.
you may all abide in Christ, and grow up in him, from whence it comes: For, as
Christ says, Except you abide in me, ye cannot bring forth Fruit. And there is
none that abide in Christ, but who abide in his Light, Grace and Truth.

And Christ says, Without me ye can do nothing; who is the Heavenly and
Spiritual Man, without Christ we can do nothing.
the Second Adam, the Lord from Heaven, who has all Power in Heaven and Earth
given to him.

So without this Truth and Grace, and Light, and Power, and Spirit of Christ
Jesus, which you receive from him, you cannot abide in him: This brings you to
abide in him, and to have his Presence to strengthen you, so that through him
you may do all things which he commands and requires of you.

And now, The Grace and Truth that comes from Christ brings to Christ the Rock
and Foundation.
Dear Friends, to the Light, and Grace, and Truth in your Hearts you were
turned at the first, and now as you do all walk in the Light, and are
established in the Grace and Truth, in your Hearts, Minds and Souls, it brings
you to Christ, the heavenly spiritual Rock and Foundation, and to build upon
him, with the Light, Grace and Truth that comes from him; and then you will see
such as Christ speaks of, that did profess him and preach him, but did not
abide in his Light, Grace and Truth, so not in Christ Jesus; and such Christ
will not know, that do not abide in him, with his Light, Grace and Truth, from
whence it comes.

For the Grace, And the Grace and Truth that comes from Jesus makes inward
Christians.
Truth and Light that comes by Jesus, this makes inward Christians, and the
Jews inward, who have the Praise of God, though may be not of Men.

And the Apostles in their Days, they had to do with several sorts of People,
some that preached Christ of Envy, and some of Contention, and some of
Good Will, notwithstanding the Apostles rejoiced that Christ was preached. But
then after a time, when many had gotten the Form of Christianity and Godliness,
and denied the Power thereof, he exhorted the Faithful, that kept their
Habitation in Christ Jesus, to turn away from such.

And yet such went under the Name of Christians, else they could not have the
Form of Godliness.

And likewise, Such as have the form of Godliness, but deny the Power of it,
are to be turned away.
such as got the good Words and fair Speeches, with which they deceived the
Hearts of the Simple, these were got to be Preachers among the Christians.

And the heady, high-minded and fierce Despisers, these had the Form of
Godliness, though they denied the Power of it, which they were turned from.

So they that lived in the Light, Grace and Truth, and the Power and Spirit of
Christ, were to turn away from such, that had the Form of Godliness, and denied
the Power.

And such as these, that had the Form of Godliness and denied the Power, were
come farther than such as taught for Doctrine the Rudiments and Precepts of the
World, and Doctrines of Men; or the professing Jews and Gentiles, that stood
against the Name of Christ, which were altogether Unbelievers of the very Form
of Godliness of the New Covenant.

And likewise such, that were doting about Questions, and Strife about Words,
The vain Talkers were the Persecutors of the Church in the Apostles days; and
so are now.
vain Janglers and Disputers, Men of corrupt Minds, and those that were unruly,
and vain Talkers; many of these were Teachers, which were Troublers of the
Churches in the Apostles days.

And those that Peter and Jude cried against, that were come so far as Balaam
to Prophecy, and Cain to hear the Voice of God, and a Corah, which came out of
Egypt; many of these got up to be Teachers, having high swelling Words, which
the Apostle judged amongst the fallen Angels, and the old World, and Sodom; who
were turned to be Mockers.

And suchlike as these were they, that separated themselves, being sensual,
having not the Spirit. And so it seems these did set up Separations from the
Apostles and Saints in their Days.

And the Apostle declares, how the Lord saved his People out of the Land of
Egypt, and afterward destroyed them that believed not; Angels left their first
Habitation.
and the Angels that kept not their first State, but left their own Habitation,
he has reserved in everlasting Chains under Darkness, unto the Judgment of the
great Day.

And so these, which went under the Name of Christians, that had been
convinced, and had got a Form of Godliness and Christianity, that kept not
their first State, in the Light, and Grace and Truth, and by it, their
Habitation in Christ Jesus, they came under the Chain of Darkness.

And therefore, Friends, you see how the Apostle was troubled with the false
Apostles and Satan's Messengers, that got among the Corinthians, and how they
despised the Apostle.

And likewise what was got up among the Romans and Galatians, and in the Days
of John, as he manifests in his Epistles.

And therefore, how Careful were the true Apostles, of the Saints, in their
Watching over them!

For John said, If ye walk in the Light, as he is in the Light, then have we
Fellowship one with another. And that ye also may have Fellowship with us; for
truly our Fellowship is with the Father and his Son Jesus Christ. And these
things write we unto you, that your Joy may be full.

For many may talk of the Light, and preach the Light; Those that walk in the
Light are accepted.
but to walk in the Light; that is it which grafts into Christ Jesus, and
brings to live in him, which talking of him does not.

And as the Apostle said, As every one has received Christ Jesus, so walk in
him. And the Sayers of the Word, and not the Doers, deceived their own Souls.

So there may be many Sayers of the Word, deceivers of their own Souls and
others, and Preachers of Christ Jesus. But the Doers of the Word, and the
Walkers in Christ Jesus, are they that are accepted of the Lord.

And again, as the Apostle says, The Word of Faith was nigh them, in their
Hearts and Mouths, to obey it and do it; and that was the Word of Faith which
they preached.

And the Light shined in their Hearts, to give them the knowledge of the Glory
of God in the Face of Christ Jesus.

And the anointing which you have received of him, abides in you; and ye need
not that any Man teach you, but as the same anointing teaches you all things,
that is true, and is no Lie; and even as it has taught you, ye shall abide in
him. And these things I have written unto you, says the Apostle, concerning
them that seduce you.

So here may all the inward Christians in the Grace, Light, Truth, Power and
Spirit of Christ Jesus, see what the Apostles exhorted the Saints unto, that
they might be preserved in their Day, and so by the sme now, from them that
deceived their own Souls and oaths.

And so by this Light, The Anointing the Saiats Guide.
this Word, the Anointing, Grace, Truth, power and Spirit of Jesus Christ in
the Heart, Mind and Soul, must all the Saints be guided now, by which they may
come to be inward Christians and have a Habitation in Christ Jesus, and so
built upon Him the Living Rock and Roundation, as the Saints were in the
Apostles Days; and so to have Salt in your selves, and the Leaven in your own
Meal, and the Pearl in your own Field, and yuor Lamps lighted in your own
Tabernacles, and nourished with the heavenly Oil. So that you may put a
Difference betwixt the Clean and the Unclean, and what you are to touch, and
whaat you are not. And that no Man or Woman may look below Heaven for their
Bread, tonourish their Souls and inward Man, and below God and Christ for their
Springs, which by continuing in the Light, which is the Life in Christ, the
Word, by which all things were made and created, they shall have a Spring from
him the Fountain, springing up in them to Eternal Life; so they shall have both
the upper and nether Springs to nourish the Plant that God has planted.

And such as came out of Egypt with Moses, and after rebelled against the Lord,
and Moses, and the Law and the Prophets, were a greater Grief, to Moses and the
Prophets than the Heathen.

And likewise, Apostates both under the Law and the Gospel the greatest
Exercises to the Servants of God.
those that came to be Christians (called) and had got the Form of Godliness,
came to be a greater Grief to the Apostles than the World; for their Work was
to seek to destroy that which the Apostle had begotten, and them that they had
turned to Christ. And therefore well might the Apostle exhort the Saints, to
turn away from such, that had the Form of Godliness, and denied the Power; and
therefore he told the Saints, The Kingdom of Heaven stands not in Words, but in
Power; and therefore they were to know one another in the Spirit and Power; and
that is the Internal Knowledge: And their Fellowship was to be in the Holy
Ghost, and their Unity in the Spirit, which was the Bond of Peace; and their
Fellowship was to be inthe Gospel, which was the Power of God. So an
Everlasting Fellowship in the Everlasting Power of God, that will out-last the
Power of Darkness; for it was before it was. And also, their Unity was to be in
the precious Divine Faith, which Christ was the Author and Finisher of; the
Mystery of which was held in a pure Conscience; and their Worship was in the
Spirit of God, and in Truth. So you may see what a Heavenly Unity and
Fellowship, and a Worship Christ and the Apostles set up.

And the Saints in the Light, Grace, Truth, Spirit and the Power of God the
Gospel, lived in it, and walked in it. So with the Light, Grace, Truth, Power,
Spirit and Word of Life in the Heart, all hold Christ the Head, who is the Head
of all thigs, by whom all things were made, who is the Treasure of the heavenly
saving Wisdom and Knowledge, who is called the Second Adam, the Lord from
Heaven.

And therefore all are to have their Knowledge and their Wisdom from him the
Treasure, by the Light, Grace, Truth, Power and Spivit that comes from him, it
leads you to him your Treasure of heavenly Wisdom and Knowledge; by which
Knowledge you know God, and Jesus Christ whom he has sent, which is Life
Eternal to know.

And now, my Dear Friends, concerning True Liberty.
THE True liberty is in the Gospel, the Power of God, which the Devil and his
Instruments, with his false Liberty, cannot get into.

And in this Gospel is the Saints Fellowship, which the Devil with all his
false Fellowships cannot get into, nor find it; True Liberty in the Faith of
Christ.
for it is a Mystery. Likewise, true Liberty is in the Faith, which Jesus
Christ is the Author and Finisher of, which gives Victory over that which
separated Man and Woman from God, and by which they have access to God again.
And in this holy, pure, divine, precious Faith, that is held in the pure
Conscience; which pure Conscience has its pure, holy, divine, precious
Liberty, in this holy, divine, precious Faith, which works by Love (and not as
the dead Faith does, which works by Enmity) which is the Fruit of this holy,
pure, divine Faith; and in it is the divine, pure, holy and precious Liberty
and Freedom. So here is the divine, holy, pure and precious Liberty in this
Faith, which works by Love, that is the Victory over that which brought Man and
Woman into Bondage, and Slavery, and false Liberty. Faith is the Saints victory.
So this living Faith is the Victory over all dead Faiths and false Freedoms
and Liberties; which holy, divine, pure and precious Faiths the Saints were and
are to contend for, which Christ the Holy One is the Author and Finisher of: So
in this holy, divine, pure and precious Faith, they have a holy, divine, pure
and precious Unity and Liberty, which is the Victory over the Enmity and the
Adversary, the Destroyer, and all this Instruments; and they cannot come within
this holy, divine, pure and precious Unity and Liberty, which is in the Faith;
for it is a Mysteryj; and gives Victory over him, and the access to the pure
God, and to Christ the Author of it; which all are too stand fast in that
Liberty wherewith Christ has made them free, who is the heavenly and spiritual
Man, the Second Adam.

For the Bondaged, Captivity and Thraldom, false Freedom and false Liberty was
and is in Old Adam, in Transgression; and the true Liberty is that, which
Christ the pure and holy One makes free in; and this is a pure holy Liberty,
which Christ makes, and sets his People free in; in which they are all to stand
fast over all the false Liberties and Freedoms, which are Bondage.

Also, the true Libertyis in the Truth, which if the Truth has made you free,
then are you free indeed, from him that abode not in the Truth, in whom there
is no Truth. So then there is no true Freedom nor Liberty in him; and he in
whom there is no Truth, cannot come into this Freedom and Liberty, which is in
the Truth, but remains in the False.

For the Jews in the days of Christ, boasted of their liberty and Freedom,
though they were in Bondange both inwardly and outwardly; and that they were of
Abraham their Father; but Christ told them, The Devil was their Father, and his
lusts ye will do.

And also in the Days of the Apostles, many of the false Christians boasted of
their Liberty; but who was overcome by them was brought into Bondage.

And the Apostle was so careful of his Liberty in Christ Jesus, To be careful
of our I iberty in Christ.
that such as came to spy it out, and were somewhat in Conferrence; but they
added nothing to him; and unto such he would not give place by Subjection, but
rather reproved them; and directed every one to walk according to the measure
of the Rule which God has distributed to them.

And also true Liberty is inthe Light and Grace, and the Spirit which comes by
Jesus, which by believig in te Light, they are grafted into Christ, and so into
true Liberty and Freedom, and so are entered into the Rest, out of the Toil of
old Adam; for they are grafted into him, who was before old Adam.

For Unbelievers in the Light are grafted into old Adam, in Transgression. And
the Believers in the Light (which is the Life in Christ) are grafted into
Christ the Word, by which all things were made and created. So here is perfect,
true Freedom and Liberty.

And likewise, the true Liberty and Freedom is in the Grace, which brings
Salvation, and not Destruction; and teaches to live Godly, not Ungodly; and
Soberly, not Unsoberly; and Righteously, not Unrighteously; and teaches to deny
the World, and not to cleave to it, and follow it.

This Grace establishes the Heart, and seasons the Words; the Fruits of its
Liberty and Freedom will manifest it self.

And also, the true Liberty in the pure Holy Spirit of God and Christ does
Baptize and Plunge down that which is gotten up by Transgression in Man and
Woman, and circumcises and cuts off the Body of Death and Sin in the Flesh,
that is gotten up in Man and Woman by Transgression, and mortifies and kills
that which would grieve, vex or quench the Motions of the pure Spirit of God;
so that in this holy pure Spirit, of this pure God and Christ, is the holy pure
Freedom and Liberty over all Bondage and false Liberties and Freedoms.

And the Fruits of this pure Spirit is pure Love, Righteousness and Godliness,
Fruits of the Spirit.
Patience, Temperance and Humility; by which Spirit all are made to drink into
one Spirit; so that all are the living Wells, that have their living Water from
God and Christ, their true and living Fountain; and in which Spirit they have a
holy and spiritual Fellowship, in this Baptizing, Mortifying, Circumcisig
Spirit, yea, one wit another, and with the Son and the Father also, through
which the Love of God warms every one's Heart: But when the Love of many waxes
cold, as Christ says, then they go from this Grace, Ligth, Truth, Power and
Spirit, and the Anointing, and the Word of God in their own Hearts; then such
turn to be Betrayers, and not Saviors upon Mount Zion: And against such God's
swift Judgment turns, and suddenly falls, though they may cry for a time,
Liberty, Freedom, and Peace, Peace; but a Day of trouble will overtake them ere
they are aware.

And therefore all ye Friends of Christ Jesus, stand fast in that Liberty
wherewith Christ has made you free, by his Light, Grace, Truth, Spirit, Faith
and Everlasting Gospel, the Everlasting Power of God, which is an Everlasting
Freedom and Liberty above all Bondage and false fallen Liberties and Freedoms;
in this glorious Gospel, and glorious joyful Libert, where all may exercise God
and Christ's Holy Gifts in his Holy Supernatural Light, Grace, Truth, Spirit,
and Divine Faith, and Word of Life, and the Gospel; which Word cannot be bound
with all the World's Cords or Chains; For it is a Fire to burn, and a Hammer to
break, and a Sword to cut in pieces; and therefore love the Word, and keep the
Word of Patience, and the Lord will keep you (for it is a tried Word, and it
will keep you) in all trials, which shall come upon all the World to try them:
For the Word was before the World was, and will be when the World is gone,
which all the newborn Babes of the Incorruptible Seed, who partake of the Milk
of the Word, grow by it up into an Immortal Life, and Kingdom that is without
End; Glory and Praises to the Lord God for ever.

And now ye Babes of Christ, If the World do hate you, it hated Christ your
Lord and Master also; if they do mock, and reproach, and defame, and buffet
you, they did so to your Lord ad Master also; who was and is the Green Tree,
that gives nourishment to all his Branches, his Followers.

Now if the World do Persecute you, and take away your Goods or Clothes, was
not your Lord and Master so served? Christ was persecuted, mocked and crucified
for us.
Did not they cast Lots for his Garments? Was not he haled from the Priests to
Herod, and before Pontius pilate, and spit upon? And if they hate thee, and
spit upon thee, he was hated and spit upon for thee: Did he not go to Prison
for thee? And was he not mocked and scourged for thee? Did not he bow to the
Cross and Grave for thee, he who had no Sin, neither was Guile found in his
Mouth? And did he not bear they Sins in his own Body upon the Tree? And was he
not scourged for thee, by whose Stripes we are healed? Did not he suffer the
Contradictio of Sinners, who died for Sinners, and went into the Grave for
Sinners, and died for the Ungodly, yea, tasted Death for every Man, who through
Death destroyed Death, and the Devil, the Power of Death, and is risen? For
Death and the Grave could not hold him, nor the Powers and Principalities,
Death could not hold Christ in the Grave.
with all their Guards and Watches, could not hold him within the Grave; but he
is risen, and is ascended far above all Principalities, Powers, Thrones and
Dominions, and is set down at the Right Hand of God, and remains in the
Heavens till all things be restored: And he is restorign with his Light, Grace,
Truth, Power, Spirit, Faith, Gospel, and Word of Life; so that you read of
some, that came to sit together in Heavenly Places in Christ Jesus.

And therefore all must bow at the Name of Jesus their Saviou, in his Light,
Grace, Truth, Power, Spirit and Gospel (for he has bowed for you) if you rise
with him; and you must suffer with him, if you will reign with him; and die
with him, if you will live with him: And all that are dead and buried with
Christ, and are risen with him, they will seek those things that come down from
above, where Christ sits at the Right Hand of God; and there you will seek
those things which come down from above and not things which are below.

For those which seek those things that are below, are the Talkers of God and
Christ, and the Prophets and Apostles words, but they are not dead with Christ,
nor risen with him; and therefore they do not seek those things that come down
from Heaven, where Christ sits at the Right Hand of God. But they are them that
seek the things that are above, To seck those things which are above.
that are dead with Christ, and risen with him; they, I say, do seek those
things which come down from Heaven, where Christ sits at the Right Hand of God;
and they have not only sought them, but have found them, and received them, and
come to sit together in Heavenly Places in Christ Jesus, a safe established and
heavenly sitting in the heavenly Rest and Habitation in Christ Jesus, who is
the First and Last, and over all, from Everlasting to Everlasting: Blessings
and Praises over all be to the Lord God through him for ever, Amen. God is a
God of Order.


The Eternal Living God of Truth, he is a God of Order, and is not the Author
of Confusion, but of Peace in all the Chruches of the Saints.

Now the Author of Confusion, and not of Peace, is the God of the World, who
abode not in the Truth, because there is no Truth in him; and when he speaks a
Lie, he speaks of his own; for he is a Liar, and the Father of it.

Now the Jews, which did the God of the World's Lusts, and them called
Christians that do, were in Strife, Confusion and Disorder.

For the Jews, they went out of the Order of Aaron and oses, going from the
Spirit of God poured out upon the House of Israel, and so went from the Lord,
and his Law, into Confusion and Disorder, which the living God of Truth was not
the Author of.

Also the Christians, who go from te Light, Grace, Truth, Power, Spirit, Gospel
and Faith, which Christ Jesus is the Author of, they go from Christ and his
Order, who was not madee a Priest after the Order of Aaron, but after the Order
of Melchizedeck, who was without beginning of Days, or end of Life; an
Everlasting Order.

And such go into Strife and Confusion that go from Christ, which Christ and
God is not the Author of, but the World's God, who got into Man and Woman by
Transgression and Disobedience of the Command of God; who is the Author of
Confusion, Strife and Disorder, in whom there is no Truth. For what Order can
there be in the World's God, and amongst his Subjects, in whom there is no
Truth? For in whom there is no Truth, there is no true Order; and they that
abide not in the Truth, Grace, Light, Spirit, Gospel, Faith, and Word of Life,
they abide not in the Order of God and Christ

And such will cry against the Order of the Truth, Light, Grace, Spirit,
Gospel, Faith, and Word of Life, which bring into the Order of Christ, and the
Order of the Living Eternal God of Truth, who is a God of Order, and delights
in Order, having Pleasure in them that live in his Sprit, and Law of Life, and
the Gospel, and its Order: For Blessed is the Man that delights in the Law, or
Order, of God; it was so under the Old Covenant: Much more Blessed is the Man
or Woman that delights in the Law and Order of Love, and the Law and Order of
Faith, and the Law and Order of Life, and of the Gospel, the Power of God.

And none keep the Law of Faith, but who keep in the Faith which Christ is the
Author of, which wourks by Love. And none keep the Law of Life, but who keep in
the Law of the Spirit, and walk in it, which is in Christ Jesus, the heavenly
and spiritual Second Andam, who was before old Adam, who under the World's God,
out of Truth, in whom there is no Truth, nor true Order, but Confusion and
Disorder.

And therefore all who come to God, who is a God of Order, must come bythe
Grace, Truth, Light, Power, Gospel, Faith and Anoitnting, the Word of Life
within; and such come to love the Lord Jesus Christ, and to delight in God and
Christ's Order. So you may see, that God is a God of Order, who called Aaron
and Moses, and they had an Order from God. And Melchizedeck had an Order; and
Christ is after his Everlasting Order. Christ'r Kingdom is Everlasting.


And Christ, the Truth, has an Everlasting Kingdom, that stands in Everlasing
Righteousness, and Power and Joy in the Holy Ghost; yea, an estableshed
Kingdom, that will never have an end, and cannot be broken; and no imperfect,
defiled nor corruptible thind enters into is.

And all Christ Jesus's Subjects of his Everlasting Kingdom, that see it, and
enter into it, are born again (not of the Will of Man) but of an Incorruptible
Seed, by the Word of God, and have the Incorruptible Milk of the Word of God,
by which the grow from Babes to Men of God; and have the Fine Linen, the
Incorruptible Clothing, the Righteousness of Christ, which is the Linen,
which they do wear in Christ's Kingdom.

So all Christ's Subjects of his Kingdom are known by their Birth and
Clothing, and live in the Order of hiw Gospel of Love, Lifew, Light, Grace and
Truth; and no Man comes into his Kingdom and Order, but by the Light, Grace,
Truth, Faith, Power and Spirit, and Anointing, and Word of Life within, through
which they know Christ, and his Everlasting Kingdom, that stands in Power, and
Righteousness, and Joy in the Holy Ghost; and by ti keep in the Order of the
Law of Life, whcih they have in Christ Jesus. Such as follow the God of the
World, bate the Order of Truth.


And they that follow the World's God, that are out of Truth, and disobey their
Creator, the God of Truth, and the Lord Jesus Christ; I say, all such obey and
follow him in whom there is no Truth; and such cannot endure to hear talk of
the Order of Truth and of the Gospel, or the Law, or Order of the Spirit of
Life which is in Christ Jesus; which all they that do obey the Voice of the
Lord, and Christ Jesus in his Light, Grace and Truth, and Gospel, the Power of
God, and his Holy Spirit, and Faith, and Word of Life within, come into Unity
and Fellowship one with another, and with the Son, and with the Father; and in
this they know the Order of Christ, and God to be a God of Order, and delights
in his Heavenly and Eternal Order of Light, Life, Power and Spirit of God, that
is over Death and Darkness, and the World's God, who is a God of Disorder, in
whom there is no true Order, but Confusion; and into this holy Order of the
Everlasting Light and Life he cannot come: Glory to the Lord God, and his Son
Christ Jesus, who is over all from evelasting to Everlasting, and is the Rock
and Foundation, and Habitation of his People, blessed for ever and evermore.
Amen.

G. F.

POSTSCRIPT.
Here you may see by these following Scriptures, how the Apostles loved the
Good and holy Order of Christ in his Gospel, Some Scripture Collections
concerning good Order in the Church.
and Light, and Life and Truth; but as Job said, The Land of Darknese is
without any Order. And Babylon signifies Confusion, which is the false Church,
and is called a Woman, and a City of Confusion, who iw against the Order of the
true Church, and gets the Titles of the true Chruch that is called a City, and
a Woman, which brings forth the Man-Child, Christ Jesus; and of the increase of
his Government and peace there shall be no end; who sits upon the Throne of
David, and upon his dom, to order it, to establish it with Judgment and with
Justice, henceforth and for ever. So here you may see Christ does in his
Kingdom; and them that have him, have his Order. Isa. 9.7.

And David says, Although mine House be not so with God, yet he has made with
me an Everlasting Covenant, ordered in all thins, and sure; for this is all my
Salvation, and all my Desire, etc. 2 Samuel 23.5.

Again David says, Order my steps by thy Word, and let not Iniquity have
Dominion over me, Psalm 119.133.

Which is the Duty of every Christian, to have their Steps ordered by the Word
of God, that lives, and abides, and endures for ever; which Word is a Word of
Order.

And David says, The Steps of a good Man are ordered by the lord, and he
delights in his Way. I have been young and now am old, yet I have not seen the
Righteous forsaken, nor his Seed begging Bread: He is ever merciful, and
lends, and his Seed is blessed, Psalm 37.

Here you may see, how the Lord delights in him, and them that walk in the
Steps, the Lord orders them with his Word.

And him that orders his Conversation aright, shall see the Salvation of God,
Psalm 50.23.

And this Order must be in the Light, which is the Life in Christ the Savior.

And the Apostle Paul, after he had spoken many things to the Corinthians, he
said, Therest will I set in Order when I come, 1 Cor. 11.34.

And he says concerning the Collections for the Saints, in 1 Cor. 16.1. As I
have given Order to the Churches of Galatia, even so do ye (to wit, the
Corinthians.)

So they were to practice the same Order, which were the Believers in Christ,
which the Apstle in the Power of Christ had given to them.

For the Apostle had the Wisdom of God, which he had ordained before the World
began, unto the Glory of his People then and now also, 1 Cor. 2.

And the Order that the Apostle did give to the Churches of the Galatians and
the Corinthians was, That upon the First Day of the Week, every one of them lay
by him in store as God had prospered him, etc. 1 Cor. 16.2.

And in Acts 14. When they had ordained Elders in every Church, and had prayed,
they commended them to the Lord on whom they had believed, confirming the Souls
of the Disciples, Elders Ordained.
etc. and exhorting them to continue in the Faith; and that they must through
much Tribulation enter into the Kingdom of God.

And as Paul and others with him went through the Cities, Decrees to be kept.
they delivered them the Decrees for to keep, that were ordain of the Apostles
and Elders which were at Jerusalem; and so were the Churches established in the
Faith, and increased in Number daily, Acts 16.

And the Occasion of these Decrees was, because some Men that went from Judea,
taught the Brethren, saying, Except ye be circamcised after the manner of
Moses, ye cannot be saved, Acts 15. And these Decrees were to stop such
Preachers.

For the Apostles and Elders said, Forasmuch as we have heard, that certain
which went out from us, have troubled you with ords, subverting your Souls,
saying, Ye must be circumcised, and keep the Law; to whom we gave no such
Commandment.

Now it is clear, the Apostles and Elders gave these Teachers no such
Commandment, to preach such Doctrine to Trouble the Chruches.

And the Apostle Paul, after he had spent some time t Caesaria and Antioch, he
went over all the Country of Asia and Phrygia in Order, strengthening all the
Disciples, Acts 18.

So you may see, how they were a Comfort one to another.

And the Apostle writes to Titus, Titus in Creete.
Chap. 1. For this Cause I have left thee in Creete, that thou should set in
Order the thins that are wanting; and ordain Elders in every City, as I have
appointed thee.

So here Titus in the Sapirit of God did observe that which Paul in the Power
of Christ did exhort him to.

But such as are against the Order and Pracxtice in the Light and Gospel,
cannot order their Speeches by teason of SDarkness.

And the Apostle says, Col. 2.5. Though I be absent in the Flesh, yet am I
with you in the Spirit, joying and beholding your Order, and steadfastness of
your Faith in Christ: As ye have therefore received Christ Jesus the Lord, so
walk ye in him.

Here the Apostle rejoiced in the Order that kept them in the Faith and
Steadfastness in Christ Jesus.

Therefore the Apostle says, Every Man in his own Order, Christ the First
Fruits, etc. For in Adam all died, even so in Christ shall all be made alive.

And they that are alive in Christ Jesus, are in his Order of Life and Light,
and in his Gospel the Power of God.

And the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 14. 40. Let all things be done Decently and in
Order.

And the Heavens and the Earth, and all things therein, All things ordered by
the Lord.
are governed and ordered by the Lord, in his Power and Wisdom; and all God's
Holy Angels are governed and ordered by God; and all God's Children and People
are governed and ordered by God and Christ in his Light, and Spirit, and Grace,
and Truth, and Power, Gospel and Word of Life.

And the Lord has set apart him and them that are Godly for himself, Psalm 4.

And God has ordained his Arrows against the Persecutors, Psalm 7.13.

And it ought to be the Practice of all the true Christians now, that are in
the same Power and Spirit as the Apostles were in, to let all thins be done
Decently and in Order, in the New Covenant of Ligth, Life and Grace, to the
Glory of the Great God, who is over all, and orders all things to his Glory.
Amen.

G. F.

AND now, 1680
Friends, you who are called into this glorious Liberty of the Sons of God,
Epist. 362.
stand fast in it. And as the Apostle says, Brethren, ye have been called unto
Liberty, Of ture Liberty.
only use it not for an Occasion to the Flesh; but in Love serve one another,
Gal. 5.13.

As free, not using your Liberty for a Cloak of Maliciousness, but as the
Servants of God, 1 Pet. 2.

For there were some, who while they promised themselves Liberty, they
themselves were Servants of Corruption: Such were like the Dog and the Sow,
biting, and renting, and vomiting, and wallowing in the Mire; and as bad as the
Synagogue of the Libertines that turned against Stephen, 2 Pet. 2. and Acts 6.9.

And therefore the Apostle was careful of the Churches Liberty in Christ, when
he said, But take heed, lest this libet of yours become a Stumbing-block to
them that are Weak, etc. 1 Cor. 8.

For the Apostle was so careful and tender, that he would no have his true
Liberty judged of another man's Conscience, etc. as you may see more at large
in 1 Cor. 10.

And the Apostle said, Falss Brethren came unawares privily, to spy out their
Liberty, which they had in Christ Jesus, that they might bring them into
Bondage; to whom we gave place by Subjection, no not for an Hour, that the
Truth of the Gospel might continue with you (to wit, the Galatians,) Gal. 2.4.

And therefore he exhorts them to stand fast in that Liberty wherewhith Christ
Jesus has made them free, To stand fast in the Liberty of Christ.
etc. which is the Duty of all true Christians now, for to stand fast in that
heavenly glorious Liberty, which Christ the heavenly and spiritual Man, the
Second Adam, makes them free in; and in this they will have Salt int hemselves,
to discern between the true Liberty and Freedom and the false, and know how to
use their holy and spirtual Liberty and Freedom in Christ Jesus, to the Praise
and Glory of God.

So, Friends, the Lord God Almighty preserve you all, in the heavenly Order of
Christ Jesus, in his holy Seed, Life, Pfower and Spirit, that all may live and
walk in it, to the Praise, and Glory, and Honor of God and Christ. Amen.

The 3d of the 9th Month, 1679. G.F.

DEar Friends and Brethren, Epist. 3^3.
in the Lord Jesus Christ, and blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, who has blessed us with all spiritual Blessings in the heavenly Places
in Christ Jesus, and has chosen us in him, before the Foundation of the World.

And now, that all may walk in him in Love, who has seen the great
Deliverances of the Lord, and has been acquainted with his great Mercies that
endure for ever; Deliverance after Deliverance, multitude of Deliverances, out
of great Trials and Temptations; and has seen how the Lord has brought to
Confusion, the Enemies of his Truth, both within and without, from the
Beginning; and therefore in the Lord's Spirit and Power, all that live in it,
that know the Lord, are encouraged to trust in him: God has raised you up
together, and quickened you who were dead in Adam, and made you to sit together,
in heavenly Places in Christ Jesus, that you might show forth the Riches of his
Grace, and Glory, and his Kindness toward you through Jesus Christ. By one
Spirit are we baptized into one Body.
For by one Spirit we are all baptized into one Body; wherther we be Jews or
Gentiles, Bond or Free; and have been all made to drink into one Spirit: And
therefore endeavor all to keep the Unity of the Spirit in the Bond of Peace,
and live and walk in the Spirit: And the Fruits of this Spirit of God, is Love,
Joy, and Meekness etc. And by this one Spirit, you have access to the Father of
Spirits; and this one Spirit, which baptises you into one Body, both Male and
Female, knows your Service to God: For the Spirit of God divides severally to
every one of you, as he wills your Offices and Places, yet all in Unity in the
Spirit, with which you are baptized into one Body, and drink into one Spirit.
And the Apostle Paul, who writ from Rome to the Collosians, told them, That
they were complete in Christ Jesus; and said, Though I be absent in the Flesh,
yet am I with you in the Spirit, joying and beholding your Order, and the
steadfastness of your Faith in Christ.

And now the Lord has gathered his People, by his Power, into the same Spirit
that the Apostles and Churches were in, in the Primitive Times: And though they
be absent in the Body, or Flesh, Men in one Room, and the Women in another;
yea, as far as the East is from the West, or the North is from the South, The
Spirit present every where.
yet they are present in the Spirit, rejoicing and beholding with the Spirit,
the Spiritual Order that the Churches and Apostles were in, and the
stedfastness of their precious, holy and divine Faith, which Christ (the Second
Adam) is the Author and Finisher of; and this is no Separation, but they are
the Household of this holy, divine and precious Faith; and live and walk in this
holy Faith, and Spirit of God, by which they are baptized into one holy Body,
of which Christ Jesus, the holy and spiritual Man, is the Head: And this I say
again, is no Separation, thought they be absent in the Body or Flesh, yet they
are present in the Spirit, and with the Spirit behold the Spiritual Order: And
this is not an imposed outward Form, Order or Prescription, as some Ignorantly
think. But they that do say, and prescribe, that Men and Women must meet all
together outwardly, in a Bodily Presence in one Room, or else it is a
Separation, I say, it is an outward Form, an outward Order, and Imposition, and
Prescription, and fiercely Press it, that know not the Spiritual Order; yea, I
say, if all Men and Women in the World could meet outwardly together, and are
not in the Power and Spirit the Apostles were in, they are in a Separation. But
God Almighty is bringing his People by his Son Christ Jesus, and by the same
Power the Apostles were in, out of this Separation, and Apostasy from the
Apostles Spirit, that began in the Apostles days, into the same Spirit that the
Church and the Apostles were in, in the Primitive Times; and though they be
absent in the Body, or Flesh, yet they are present in the Spirit, seeing and
beholding, in the Spirit, the Spiritual Order, and the Stedfastness of their
divine Faith, which Christ (the Second Adam, the Spiritual Man) has been the
Author and Finisher of. And therefore, let no Man beguile you by enticing
Words, from this Spiritual Order, Fellowship and Unity. And again, the Apostle
says, For I verily, as absent in the Body, but present in the Spirit, have
judged already, as though I was present, concerning him that has so done this
deed. So here was a Spiritual Sight, and a Spiritual Judgment; yea, a Judgment,
though absent in the Body, by a Spiritual Sight of such as walk not in the
Spirit, but walk out of the Order of it, 1 Cor. 5.3.

And this is to the Spiritual-minded, who can judge of these things, for as
many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the Sons of God; and the Lord
now by his Spirit, is separating his Sons and Daughters from the Apostasy and
Sin, which has separated from the Spirit that the Apostles were in; that they
may behold one another with joy and comfort with the Spirit, in the Spiritual
Order, Fellowship and Unity, though they be absent in the Body, and in the
Flesh, yet they are present in the Spirit, and know one another in the Spirit
of God. And also, All one in Christ.
the Apostle says, As many as are baptized into Christ, have put on Christ:
There is neither Jew nor Greek, Bond nor Free; and here is neither Male nor
Female, but ye are all one in Christ Jesus. So, though these be absent in the
Body, one from another, Jews, Greeks, Bond or Free, Males or Females, yet they
are all one in Christ Jesus, the spiritual and heavenly Man, and with the
Spirit joying and beholding one another Spiritual Order; so the Joying, Unity
and Fellowship stands in the Spirit of God, and not in the outward Fleshly
Bodily Presence, and Carnal and Natural Sight. And therefore keep your
Spiritual Order, To keep in the spiritual Order.
joying in the Spirit, beholding your Spiritual Order, and Stedfastness of your
Faith in Christ Jesus; and in this you will be all steadfast Men and steadfast
Women, and not tossed up and down with every windy Doctrine, and the cunning
Crafts and Slights of Men, but steadfast Men, and steadfast Women in the Faith of
Christ, as Trees of Righteousness, the Planting of the Lord, whose Fruit is
unto Holiness, and whose end is Everlasting Life; and such have Fruit on their
own Trees, and Water in their own Wells, and are not shaken with Winds, Storms,
nor Tempests, that may rise up within or without, but are steadfast and
unmovable, built upon the Rock and Foundation of Life, Christ Jesus; so that
as every one has received the Gift, even so minister one to another, as good
Stewards of the manifold Grace of God. And this is the Grace of God wherein ye
stand, that will teach you to live Godly, Righteously and Soberly, and brings
Salvation; so not only to talk Godly, but to live Godly, keeping your selves in
the Love of God, and building up your selves in the most Holy Faith, which you
have from Christ Jesus, which makes you steadfast and unmovable, from him who
is the Author and Finisher of it; and with the Spirit of God, in which you
(spiritually) behold your substantial and steadfast Spiritual Order, over all
outward and carnal Orders, and will out-last them all; with which Spirit you
all see your work and service for the Eternal Immortal God of Truth, to whom be
all Glory, Honor, Thanks and Praises in the Church of Jesus Christ, throughout
all Ages, World without end, Amen.

From your Friend and Brother in the Kingdom and Patience of Jesus.

Worplesdom, the 22d of the 5th Month, 1680. G. F.

To Friends in America.
DEar Friends,
My Love to you all in the holy peaceable Truth; Epist. 364.
and my Desires are, that whatsoever ye do may be done in the Name of Jesus, to
the Glory of God the Father; and all be subject one to another in the Fear of
the Lord God, so that ye may all come to dwell in the Love of God, which
edifies the Body of Christ, who is the heavenly Man; and let all Strifes, and
Divisions, and Backbitings, All Strifes, Divisions, etc. to cease.
or Whisperings or Prejudices, cease and be buried; and so whatsoever is amiss,
or has been amiss, let it be put down by the Truth and Spirit of God, that it
may be uppermost, which is a strong Bond to Unite your Hearts, and Minds, and
Souls together, and to the Lord; and be kind and courteous one toward another,
all studying to be quiet, and to excel one another in Virtue, and Purity, and
Holiness, and Righteousness, and Godliness, in all your Words, and Lives, and
Conversations; so that you may all walk as become Saints and Christians, every
one esteeming and preferring one another above your selves in the Truth, in
Meekness, and Lowliness of Mind, and Humility: for he that Inhabits Eternity,
dwells with an humble Heart. Not to quench the Spirit.
And therefore do not quench the least Motion of God's good Spirit in your
selves, nor in any other; but let Truth and Goodness be cherished in all; and
let all Harshness, and Bitterness, and Revilings be kept down by the Truth,
that it may have its passage through you all, and in it you may bear one
another Weakness and Infirmities, and so fulfill the Law of Christ; keeping
down Revenge, Hastiness or Passion, as knowing Vengance is the Lord's, and he
will repay it, on every one that does wrong, without respect of Persons: For,
Friends, you there should be as Lights, or as a City that cannot be hid:
Lights, I say, to to give Light in all People; and also, to be as the Salt of
the Earth, to be a good Savor, and savoury to all People; for he, or she, that
is an ill savor, has lost the Salts savor, and is good for nothing, and is
trodden under the Foot of Men; and therefore take heed of loosing the Salts
savor, either in Word or Conversation; for if you do, you will come under the
Foot of Men, they will trample upon you; therefore be Careful, Fervent,
Circumspect and Faithful in the Truth, and let your Moderation, Temperance and
Sobriety appear to all Men, showing forth the Work of the Lord, and your
Honesty and Justness in all your Words and Dealings between Man and Man; and
that you may owe nothing to any Man but Love, that every one of you may be
adorned with a meek and quiet Spirit, which is with the Lord of great Price;
and every one of you to be endued with Wisdom from on High, which is pure and
peaceable, gentle and easy to be entreated, and full of Mercy and good Works;
let the Fruits of this appear among you all, and then you will all be gentle
and easily entreated one of another. And keep in the Unity of the Spirit, which
is the Bond of the heavenly Peace (and then none quenches it) and all walking
as becomes the Glorious, Joyful, Peaceable Gospel of Christ, which is the Power
of God, which was before the Devil, and his Power was, and is over him; in this
Gospel you all know Life and Immortality brought to Light, that you all see
your Everlasting Glorious Fellowship, in the Everlasting Gospel of Peace; in
this Gospel, the Power of God, that was before Enmity was, and will remain when
it is gone. And therefore all you who know this Glorious Gospel of Peace live
and walk in it, keeping your Glorious, Heavenly, Comfortable Fellowship in this
Glorious Gospel of Peace, in which Enmity cannot come, as before; and in this
Everlasting Gospel, the Everlasting God (who is over all, from Everlasting to
Everlasting) will have the Praise, Glory and Thanks, who is worthy of all, for
ever and evermore.

London, the 7th of the 12th Month, 1680. G. F.

To Friends in Yorkshire.
DEar Friends,
Epist. 365.
In the Lord's Power and Holy Spirit, feel his Presence amongst you, who has
drawn you with his Spirit to his Son; and you that have received him, he gives
you Power to become his Sons and Daughters; and so from the Son of God, the
second Adam, you have Power to meet, whose Power is above Adam's Power, and his
Sons and Daughters in the Fall.

And now my Friends, If you do want Wisdom and Knowledge to order you in the
Affairs and Service of God: Christ the Treasure of Wisdom, etc.
Christ is the Treasure of your Wisdom and Knowledge; and so receive them from
his Treasury which is above: This heavenly, saving Wisdom and Knowledge, from
whence you have your Grace and Truth, Light and Life, and the Gospel, the
heavenly Spirit; yea, heavenly Food, and heavenly Bread, and Water of Life from
above; and the unleavened Bread, and sweet Milk of the Word, and Water of Life,
to keep the Feast of the heavenly Man's Passover, which is not to be found in
any of old Adam's Sons and Daughters Storehouses in the Fall; but his old
moldy leavened, sour Bread, which makes his Sons and Daughters Hearts to burn
one against another, and Clothes them with his old Rags, which will not cover
their Nakedness, which they have stitched together, which must be all cast off,
and trodden under Foot by the Spirit and Power of Christ; which Power turns you
to Christ, who Clothes all his Sons and Daughters with his heavenly Fine
Linen, which will never wax old.

And therefore let all your Lamps be trimmed, and Candles lighted, that all of
you may see your Work and Service for God and Christ, in this his Day. So that
you may have the Blessings from above from him, as the holy Men and Women of
God had in the days of old; so that there may be nothing lacking, neither
Spiritual nor Temporal.

And so let all things be done in Peace and Love, in the Name and Power of
Jesus, amongst you; and all condescend to one another in Meekness, Patience and
Quietness, in the Fear of the Lord; being all ordered with the Wisdom of God,
which is from above, which is pure, peaceable, gentle and easy to be
entreated, that all your Hearts, Minds and Souls may be knit together in the
Love of Christ, and that you may be all of one Mind and Spirit in him; and
whatever you do, let it be done in the Name and Power of Jesus, to the Glory of
God the Father, that created all, and takes care for all, Blessed for ever,
Amen.

London, the 6th of the 4th Month, 1680. G. F.

A Letter to the Captives who met together to Worship God in Algier.
DEar Friends,
I understand by a Letter from a Friend, Epist. 366.
a Captive amongst you, dated the 20th of the 10th Month, 1681, That you have a
Meeting there in Algier of about Twenty, I am glad to hear you meet; and it is
very well, that you have so much Liberty from your Patroons; and my desire is,
That the Lord may preserve you all, that do meet in the Name of Jesus, that in
your Lives, and Conversations, and Words, To preach Righteousness in Life and
Conversation.
you may preach Righteousness and Holiness, and Godliness, and the Life of
Truth; so that you may answer the Spirit of God, both in the Turks and Moors,
and the rest of the Captives; that God's City may be set upon the holy Hill
there, which cannot be hid; but that all may see it with the Light wherewith
Christ has enlightened every Man that comes into the World. And that Christ's
Ensign may be set up in those Parts; that with his Light in all Men, they may
all see it, and flock to it; and Christ the Ensign furnishes all that come to
him, with heavenly Armor and Spiritual Weapons. Now Christ enlightens every
Man that comes into the World, that every one may believe in the Light, and
may become a Child of the Light, and have Eternal Life, and be saved; and so
the Gospel of Salvation, the Power of God, is to be preached to every Creature
under Heaven. And he that believes, is saved, and has the Salvation; for
Christ by the Grace of God, has tasted Death for every Man. And the Grace of
God that brings Salvation, has appeared to all Men: And therefore all Men, if
they will have Salvation, it must be by believing, receiving, and walking in
the Grace of God, which brings it. And the Lord pours out of his Spirit upon
all Flesh; and therefore all Men and Women must come to this Holy Spirit of
God, by which the Spirit of Enmity may be slain and crucified in them; that in
this Holy Spirit of God, they may all be in Love and Unity; and with the Spirit
of God, they may all come to know the Eternal, Immortal God, and serve and
worship him in his Holy Spirit of Truth, which he has poured upon them. And in
this, all will honor God, and glorify him through Jesus Christ in his New
Covenant of Light and Grace.

And so, my Dear Friends, be faithful and valiant for God's Truth upon Earth,
and do not deny the Name of Jesus, To be valiant for the Truth.
in whom you have Salvation; whose Name is above every Name under the whole
Heaven; that ye may all be with his Light built upon him your Rock and
Foundation that stands sure. And now, my Dear Friends, though you remain as
Captives, yet if ye be Christ's and God's Freemen, who leads the Devil into
Captivity, that led you Captive into his Prison of Death, Darkness and
Corruption: If Christ, I say, has led you out of that Prison and Captivity,
into the glorious Liberty of the Sons of God, stand fast in the Liberty
wherewith Christ has made you free; and be not entangled with any Yoke of
Bondange, to bring you out of that heavenly, spiritual Liberty. For in this you
are free, notwithstanding the Prisons and Captivity of Men; and they are but
small matters to it: And therefore trust in the Arm of the Lord's Power, who
can lay the Mountains low, and remove the Hills out of their Places, and make
his Lambs to skip over all. And therefore mind the Lord and his Power, Good
effects may come out of Afflictions.
that is over all that, that makes you to suffer. Now your Sorrows and
Afflictions may bring many to call upon the Name of the Lord, when he has
brought you low; for God is Merciful and Gracious to the Righteous, and his
Mercies endure for ever. And though Hunger, and Thirst and Cold, many times you
are in, and many Distresses, yet the Lord is able to support you. And now, that
you may mind the Lord in your Poverty, and prize his Mercies; and consider how
that did not enough prize his Mercies, and Liberty and Plenty. And ye may read
107th Psalm throughout; there ye may see how the Lord brought down such as
contemned his Counsel, and rebelled against his Words: Well, what can you tell
but that this may be the Day of the Lord with you, in your Captivity, to bring
down your Hearts and Spirits, that with the Spirit of the Lord you may turn to
him, who is a God at Hand; and that you may call upon the Lord in Truth and
Righteousness, that all your Sufferings, Afflictions and Captivity may be
sanctified to you. So, that you may say, All things shall work together for
good, to them that love God. And so with Job you may bless God, who gives and
takes away, and that you may glorify God in whatsoever Condition you may be;
that no Trouble may move you; and that you may rejoice in Afflictions,
Persecutions and Tribulations in the Lord, through his Spirit that does uphold
you. And as you do walk in the Light, Grace, Spirit and Gospel, you may turn
others to it: That you may have Unity with them in it; and that they may come
out of the spiritual Prison of Death, Darkness, and Corruption and Captivity,
into the Liberty of the Sons of God in Christ Jesus. Amen.

So with my Love to you all in the Holy Seed Christ Jesus, that Reigns over all
from Everlasting to Everlasting: The Lord preserve you all tender Vines in him.
Amen.

London, the 17th of the 1st Month, 1682. G. F.

To Friends in Burlington, West-Jersey.
DEar Friends,
Epist. 367.
The Lord by his mighty Hand and Power having brought you to that Place; and
now you are settled there, my desire is, That your Lives and Conversations may
preach Righteousness and Holiness; for without Holiness none shall see God. And
going into Unholiness, that is the Cause that none sees God; and the Cause why
there is not Peace among a Nation or People is, because they do not live and
walk in Righteousness; but walk and follow the unrighteous Spirit, which is out
of the Truth. And again, Christ says, Blessed are the pure in Heart, for they
shall see God: For it is the defiled and impure Hearts that do not see God. And
therefore keep in the pure Spirit of God, that does mortify all Impurity and
Unholiness, which does blind People from the Sight of the pure God.

And now, my Friends, Friends to be Circumspect.
The Eyes of other Nations will be upon you; and now you, professing Truth
beyond them all, but if that you don't exceed them in Truth, in Righteousness,
in Holiness, Justice and Equity; and in the Wisdom of God, that is Pure,
Peaceable, etc. by which you may answer the Good in your Government, and all
Governments about you likewise (which is my desire that you may, that they may
not see any Nakedness among you) if you do not, you will bring both the
Judgment of God upon you, and the Judgment of Truth that you and we profess.

For you know how that Friends in England and other Places have admonished the
Governors and Rulers to do that which is Just and Right; and therefore now you
are come into Place, Rulers must be Just.
have a Care that you do that which is Just and Right, lest you come under the
same Reproof by others.

And therefore have an Eye to the Lord in all your Actions: For David says (2 Samuel 23.3. The God of Israel said, the Rock of Israel spoke to me, He that
rules over Men must be just, ruling in the fear of God: and he shall be as the
light of the morning (that does so) when the Sun rises, even as a morning
without Clouds; as the tender Grass springing out of the Earth by clear shining
after Rain. Here you may see, it must not be unjust Men, and Men that do not
fear God, that must be Rulers, for they do not receive his Wisdom to rule
withal; and such will be as Clouds without Water (as in Jude) and then they are
not like to refresh the tender Grass, but hurt it.

And Solomon says, As the roaring Lion, and the ranging Bear, Majestrates a
Terror to evil doers, etc.
so is a wicked Ruler over the poor People. And therefore with the Spirit of
God keep down the wicked Spirit in you, and then you will keep down the roaring
Lion and the ranging Bear, with the Spirit of Meekness, and Patience, and
Wisdom and Understanding, Prove 28.15.

And the Apostle says, Rulers are not a terror to good Works, but to the evil.
Therefore both Rulers and ruled must be out of the evil Works: And the Rulers
cannot be a Terror to evil Works, if they live in them themselves. Therefore
all ought to live in the Power of God, which brings them out of the Evil to do
that which is Good; and then they will be an Honor to God, and a Praise one to
another, both Ruler and Ruled.

Now the Lord said unto Moses, Judges and Officers shall thou make in all thy
Gates, (so they was not to be made in Corners,) which the Lord gives thee in
all the Tribes; and they shall judge the People with just Judgment: (Mark just
Judgment.) Thou shall not wrest judgment, Not to wrest Judgment, etc.
thou shall not respect Persons; thou shall take no Gift: For the Gift blinds
the Eyes of the wise, and perverteth the Words of the righteous. Thou shall not
wrest the judgment of the Poor in any Case: Keep the far from a false matter:
The innocent and righteous slay thou not; for I will not justify the wicked.
That which is altogether just, shall thou follow, that thou may live and
inherit the Land which the Lord thy God has given thee. Now a People following
and doing that which is not Just, is the Cause they do not live and inherit the
Land, Deuteronomy. 16.18, 19, 20. Ex. 23.6. And therefore do that which is Just, that
you may inherit Christ and your spiritual Land. Thou shall not oppress a
stranger, seeing you were strangers; nor vex the Widows and Fatherless. And the
Lord says, You shall be holy Men unto me. Again, the Lord says, Thou shall not
raise a false Report, etc. Put not thy Hand with the wicked to an unrighteous
Witness. Thou shall not follow a multitude to do evil; neither shall thou speak
in a Cause, to decline after many, to wrest Judgment, Exodus 23.1, 2.

Again, To Respect no Man in Judgment.
the Lord says, Ye shall not do unrighteousness in judgment; thou shall not
respect the Person of the Poor, nor honor the Person of the Mighty: But in
righteousness thou shall judge thy neighbor, Levit. 19.15. And Deuteronomy. 1.16, 17.
and Josh. 7.24. I charged your Judges (says Moses) saying, Hear the Causes
between your Brethren, judge righteously between every Man and his Brother, and
the stranger that is with him. So let all the Strangers that are with you have
righteous Judgment, as well as those among your selves. And again he says, Ye
shall not respect Persons in judgment; but ye shall hear the small as well as
the great: You shall not be afraid of the face of Man; for the judgment as
God's: So long as ye judge Righteously.

And therefore, now Friends, my desire is, That you all may be kept in the
Power and Spirit of God and Christ in Humility, and in that you will have a
sense of all things, that whatever you act, it may be done in the Spirit and
Power of Jesus Christ, to the Praise of God the Father, who is over all, from
Everlasting to Everlasting, who beholds and sees all your Words and Actions;
that you may behold and see with his Spirit, His and his Sons Divine Majesty
among you. Amen.

Read this in your Assembly, and in your Meetings.

G. F.

To suffering Friends at Horsham in Sussex.
DEar Friends,
Epist. 368.
Who suffer for your Testimony, and to all the rest in your County, I am glad
to hear of your Faithfulness, and of your standing for the Church which Christ
is the Head of, Two or three gathered in Christ's Name is a Church.
which is in God, and are become his living Members; and therefore wheresoever
ye are in Prison, or out of Prison, where two or three are gathered in his
Name, there is a Church, and Christ the Living Head in the midst of them; a
Prophet, to open to his Church the things of his Kingdom; and a Bishop, to
Oversee his Living Members, that they be preserved in his Light, Grace, Truth,
Spirit and Gospel; and he is a Shepherd, to feed them with heavenly Food, who
gives Life Eternal to his Sheep, which he has purchased with his own Blood;
and a Priest, who has offered up himself a Sacrifice for the Sins of the whole
World, who cleanses, and washes, and purifies his Church, his People; a High
Priest, made higher than the Heavens, Heb. 7. And no Priest made below the
Heavens will become Christ's Church; and therefore feel and see Christ
exercising his Prophetical, Priestly and Kingly Offices, and his ruling in your
Hearts. And all that will know the right Way, or Highway, or Path to the
Church in God, 2 Thessalonians. 1. must walk in the Light, which is the Life in Christ,
and that will guide them to Christ, the Way to God, the Head of the Church, the
Rock and Foundation of God that stands sure.

And now, Dear Friends, my Desires are, that you may all live in the Love of
God, and in the Unity of his Spirit, which is the Bond of Peace, in which you
will be all Kind and Courteous one to another; and so the God of all Peace and
Power support you, and strengthen you, and uphold you, throughout all your
Trials and Sufferings, that he may be glorified in you all, who is over all,
from Everlasting to Everlasting, blessed for ever; from whom ye have Blessing
and Life.

London, the 20th of the 12th Month, 1681. G. F.

To the Flock of Christ Jesus every where, to be read in their Assemblies.
GRace, Epist. 369.
Mercy and Peace be multiplied among you all from God the Father, and the Lord
Jesus Christ, who is the Fountain of all: And God, who has called you by his
Grace, and gathered you to be a People by his Power and Spirit, to his Son
Christ Jesus, your holy, heavenly, spiritual Head, Life, Rock and Foundation.
Now that you may all walk in Christ Jesus, and abide in him your Vine, and in
him you will all bring forth heavenly Fruit to the Praise and Glory of God.

Christ says, In me ye have Peace, in the World ye have Trouble; In Christ we
have Peace.
and therefore keep out of the Spirit of the World; let not the Spirit of the
World come into you; for if ye do, ye go into Trouble both inwardly and
outwardly: But if ye keep in Christ, who is not of the World, you keep in your
heavenly Place and Region: For, He that has the Son of God, he has Life; and
therefore keep in the Life in Christ; and he that has not the Son of God, is
in old Adam, in Death without Life.

And, Without me (says Christ) ye can do nothing; without his Grace, Without
Christ we can do nothing.
his Light, his Truth, his Gospel, his Power, his Spirit, his Faith, ye can do
nothing; and, If Christ be not in you, ye are Reprobates; and if he be in you,
and you in him, you are in the Election, and in the Seed, in which all Nations
are blessed.

And therefore my Friends and Brethren, both Males and Females, keep and walk
in the Seed, in which all Nations are blessed, which bruises the Head of the
Serpent, and destroys the Devil and his Works, which brought Misery and the
Curse upon all Nations. So that in this holy Seed, you all may be the Children
of the Kingdom of God that stands in Righteousness and Power, and Joy in the
Holy Ghost: I say, in the Righteousness of Christ, which was before
Unrighteousness was; and in the Power of God, which was before the Power of
Satan and Dragon was; and in the Peace of God, that passes all the
Understanding of the World, and was before the God of the World was; and in the
Holy Ghost, which was before the unclean Ghost got into Man and Woman.

And so that you may all come to walk in the New Covenant of Light, which was
before the Prince of Darkness was, and Life, that is over Death, 1601
and was before Death was. Here in this you will have your heavenly Religion to
walk in, which will keep you out of all the World's unruly Ways and Actions,
and ungracious Words and Languages, that all your Words be seasoned with the
Grace of God, that has brought you Salvation, that you may edify the Hearers,
and your Conversation may be in Heaven.

And keep in the Cross of Christ, The Cross of Christ, the Power of God.
the Power of God, that keeps you crucified to the World; that is, Dead to the
World, and the World Dead and Crucified to you: For if you do not keep in this
Power of God, which was before the World and its God was, to keep you crucified
to the World, but let in the Spirit of the World, you let in his God, which
will crucify the Good in you, and you will come to crucify to your selves the
Son of God afresh, and put him to open shame. Therefore keep that crucified
with the Power of God, the Cross of Christ, which did and would crucify the
Just; and then you will keep alive in the Power of God, and live in Christ
Jesus, and he is alive in you, and you in him.

And now, all Friends and Brethren, let your Meekness, your Temperance, and
your Gentleness and Sobriety, and Tenderness and Moderation appear to all Men,
That your Light may so shine, that they may see your good Works, and glorify
your Father which is in Heaven.

And ye being the Salt of the Earth, you will make all Savoury; therefore take
heed of losing your Salt, lest you be trodden under the Feet of Men.

And keep out of the restless, discontented, disquieted Spirit of the World
about the Government: To be peaceable under Government.
For you know it has been always our way to seek the Good of all, and to live
Peaceably under the Government, and to seek their Eternal Good, Peace and
Hapiness in the Lord Jesus Christ; and to lay our Innocent Sufferings before
them, who have suffered as Lambs and Sheep, and made no Resistance, but have
prayed for them that persecuted us, and despitefully used us, and hated us,
according to the Command of Christ.

For ye were as Sheep gone astray, but are now returned unto the Shepherd and
Bishop of your Souls: For hitherto ye are called; because Christ has suffered
for us, leaving us an Example, that ye should follow his steps, who did no sin,
neither was guile found in his Mouth: Who when he was reviled, reviled not
again; when he suffered, he threatened not; but committed himself to him that
judges Righteously. And he that will love Life, and see good Days, let him
refrain his Tongue from speaking Evil, and his Lips that he speak no Guile, 2
Pet. 2.
The 21st of the 9th Month, 1681. G. F.

To Suffering Friends in Leicester.
DEar Friends, Epist. 370.
that are in Prison, and all Friends and Sufferers that are in the County, to
whom is my Love in the Lord's Eternal Power, and Seed of Life, that reigns over
all, in whom you have Peace with God, and Riches that is Everlasting.

Now Dear Friends, your Sufferings has been long in that County, and great have
been your Trials, and spoiling of your Goods, through your Adversaries and
Persecutors Rage against you; but the Lord's secret Hand and Power is that
which has upheld you through all to himself; and therefore we may say, What
shall separate us from the Love of God that we have in Christ Jesus? Shall
Tribulations, Pesecutions, Powers or Principalities, Thrones or Dominions? Nay,
there is not any thing able to separate us from the Love of God in Christ
Jesus, whom you have chosen; a Priest that is from above, not from below, who
has offered up himself to God for you, who is not like the Jews Priests, that
had the Tithes of the People for offering up their outward Offerings, and such
like Services. So you have a Priest from Heaven, Christ a Priest made higher
than the Heavens.
and is made higher than the Heavens, and is the Prophet that God has raised up
like Moses, whom ye are to hear in his Light, Grace and Truth. And he is your
Shepherd from Heaven, who has laid down his Life for his Sheep, who is above
all the Earthly Shepherds below; and this Shepherd will feed you with that
which is Heavenly. And he is your Bishop from Heaven, to oversee you, that you
may be kept from sitting down in any Earthly Place with your Minds, Spirits and
Souls, but only to sit down in the heavenly Places in Christ Jesus, who is the
heavenly and spiritual Bishop, who lives for evermore, the First and Last, the
Beginning and Ending, who is the First Born of every Creature, and the First
Begotten from the Dead, who does quicken and makes alive, and begets from the
Death, and makes them to sit together (whom he has made alive) in the Heavenly
Places in himself.

And now, Dear Friends, I do feel the Lord's Eternal Power present with you, in
all your Sufferings, Faith to stand in the Power of God.
how it has and does support you; and therefore let your Faith be steadfast in
the Power of God, which will keep you all unto the Day of Salvation. And that
you may all be Valiant and Faithful for God's Truth upon the Earth in this Day
of Trial and Persecution, from both Teachers, Professors and Profane, which are
below, whose Persecuting Spirit will have but a time; and therefore be of good
Faith; for a Sparrow shall not fall to the Ground without the Will of the
Father; and ye are of more value than many Sparrows. And Blessed are they which
suffer Persecution for Righteousness sake, for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven:
And blessed are ye when Men shall revile you, and persecute you, and say all
manner of Evil against you falsely for my sake: Rejoice, and be exceeding glad,
for great is your Reward in Heaven: For so the old Persecutors persecuted the
Prophets and Apostles before you. But Rejoice in as much as ye are partakers of
Christ's Sufferings; for the Spirit of Glory, and of God, rests upon you, who
are railed upon, and suffer for his Name sake. And though he is evil spoken of
by your Persecutors, but on your part he is glorified, that suffer for his
Name. And therefore let none be ashamed to suffer as a Christian, but let him
glorify God in his Sufferings, who does support him.

And so, Dear Friends, live in Love and Unity, and be Kind, To live in Love and
Unity.
and Courteous and Tenderhearted one toward another; yea, and to all your
Persecutors, that you may heap Coals of Fire upon their Heads; and so overcome
Evil with Good. And so the God of all Peace establish you all upon his heavenly
Rock and Foundation of Life (Christ Jesus) which stands sure, and cannot be
moved. And so with my Love to you all in the holy Seed, in which all Nations
are blessed: And in this Seed, the Lord God Almighty keep and preserve you, which
bruises the Head of the evil Seed, that makes you to suffer. And the Lord God
Almighty arm you with his Armor, and strengthen you, that you may be able to
stand to his Glory, and that he may be glorified in and amongyou. Amen.

So Fare ye well in the Lord.

G. F.
London, the 18th of the 12th Month, 1681.
To Friends in Carolina.
DEar Friends, Epist. 371.
with my Love to all the Faithful and Tender Friends, in Christ the Holy Seed,
that bruises the Head of the Serpent (the cause of Enmity) in which Seed no
Enmity is, Christ bruises the Head of the Serpent.
nor can come; for in this Seed is all Nations blessed, which destroys the evil
Seed that brought the Curse, and his cursed Works and Workers: So let this Seed
Christ rule in all your Hearts, who was promised and prophesied of to come, who
is come, and reigns, in whom is Wisdom, Salvation, Life and Glory over all, the
First and Last; this Seed does live and reign over all that does change, and
will have an end. Now in this holy Seed you enjoy the Blessings, and your
Election in it, which was before the World began: Now in this holy Seed is the
Treasure of Wisdom and Knowlede, and as you all live and walk in this Seed, you
will have Wisdom and Knowledge that is heavenly from this Treasure; with which
Wisdom and Knowledge you will have Understanding, that all your Conversations
may be ordered by it aright, and to preach Righteousness and Holiness, and
Godliness, so that you may glorify God in your Lives and Conversations, and
all your Words may be gracious, and seasoned with Grace; and whatever Promises
you may make to any Man, you may consider before, that you may perform them;
that so your Words may preach Righteousness and Truth; so that you may be the
Lights of the World, and the Salt of the Earth, that by your Light shining, you
may answer the Light in all Men; and by the Grace, and by the Salt, you may
savor that which is unsavory; and so by your good Works, and keeping to the
Salt, and to the Light shining, you may be Instrumental to open the Eyes of
others, to know your Father which is in Heaven, that they may glorify him.

And my Desire is, To keep low, week, etc.
that all Friends may keep low, and meek and humble, that he that does Inhahit
Eternity may dwell with you; and that you may take upon you Christ's Yoke, that
you may draw with his heavenly Plow, that with it the Earth may be turned up,
that has oppressed and grieved the tender Seed, and God's Holy Spirit; so that
God's Plantations may be minded above the out ward, that his Lillies and Vines
may grow, and bring forth Fruit to his Praise, who gives the Increase.

And now, Dear Friends. Keep in the Love of God, which does edify the Body of
Christ; that will bear all things. And be gentle, and courteous, and kind one
to another in the fear of Lord; for there is no danger in keeping low; for the
danger is to such that are high and lofty, and puffed up: Such will swell; and
though they may have good Words, and a form of Godliness, yet such that do so
swell, will break out into bitter Fruits Strife and Contention; and such go out
from the Power of God and his Spirit, and so out of the Camp of God, and then
out of the Unity of the Spirit, which is the Bond of Peace; and therefore all
must keep in the holy Spirit of God, if they will keep in Fellowship with the
Saints in Light, and so keep the Bond of Peace: For they that go from the
Spirit of God in themselves, though they have the whole Form of Godliness, they
break the Bond of Peace; and such runs into vain Disputes, Strife and
Contention. But there is no such Custom in the Church of Christ, which keeps
the Unity in the Spirit, which is the Bond of Peace.

And now, Dear Friends, in the Name and Power of the Lord Jesus Christ, and his
Spirit, keep all your Meetings for Worship, and your Meetings for Business,
that you may see that all that professes the Light of Christ, and his Truth,
and has received it, that they do wald according to Truth, and as becomes the
Gospel, that the Name of God may not be blasphemed amongst you. And if that you
of Ashly Cooper River, and that ways, and Albermarle River, and that ways,
Advice for a Yearly Meeting.
had once a Year, or once in a half Year, a Meeting together, it might do very
well, some where in the middle of the Country, as you shall see meet, as they
have in Maryland and Road Island. And if you had sometimes some Meetings with
the Indian Kings and their People, to preach the Gospel of Peace, of Life, and
of Salvation to them; for the Gospel is to be preached to every Creature; and
Christ has tasted Death for every Man, and died for their Sins, that they
might come out of Death and Sin, and live to Christ, that died for them; who
has enlightened them, with the Light, which is the Life in himself; and God
pours out of this Spirit upon all Flesh; that is, upon all Men and Women. And
the Grace and Favor of God appears unto all Men; so that all may believe in
his Light, and walk in his Holy Spirit, and receive his Grace, which will teach
them to live Godly, etc. and bring them Salvation; so that you may come to see
the Light of Christ's Glorious Gospel set up in those Parts. And God has
promised he will lift up an Ensign unto the Nations. And again, There shall be
a Root of Jesse, Christ God's Ensign to the Nations.
which shall stand for an Ensign to the People; to it the Gentiles shall seek.
And again, he says, For the Earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord,
as the Waters cover the Sea. So, I desire that That part of the Earth may be
filled with the Knowledge of the Lord.

And now, dear and tender Friends, my tender desire is, That you may in no wise
abuse, neither by your Words, nor by your Lives nor Conversations, the Liberty
which God or the Rulers have given you; but in all things you may have an Eye
to God's Glory, that he may be glorified by you all, who is worthy of all, who
is the Lord of all, both in Heaven and Earth, blessed for ever.

G. F.

An Epistle concerning the Government of Christ and his Peace, of whose Kingdom
there shall be no End.
COncerning the Government of Christ and his Peace, Epist. 372.
the increase of which there shall be no End upon the Throne of David, and upon
his Kingdom to order it, and to establish it with Judgment, and Justice, from
henceforth and for ever: The Zeal of the Lord of Hosts will perform this.

Now Christ Jesus thd Second Adam, the Lord from Heaven, it is He who Rules,
and Reigns, and Governs in the Hearts of his Saints, who are the Believers in
his Light (the Life in him) who is their Governor and Counselor, who died for
their Sins, and is risen for their Justification, and is the Captain of
Salvation.

And Christ's Government in the Hearts of his People, is by his Grace and
Truth, Christ governs by his Light, etc. in the Hearts of Men.
that comes from Christ Jesus, by whom all things were made, who does enlighten
every Man that comes into the World, which Light is the Life in Him; he says,
Believe in the Light, that you may become the Children of the Light; and such
have the Light of Life, and by it comes under Christ's Government and Peace,
and his Order in his Light and Life. Now, they that hate his Light, they hate
the Life in Christ the heavenly Man; and such will hate Christ by whom all
things were made and created; and hate his Order, and his Justice, and
Judgment, and his Light and Life: And such are not like to come into his
established Government and Kingdom; so Christ, who is the Governor, the
Counselor, the Orderer, He orders and governs with his Light (his Life) in the
Hearts of all the Believers in the Light; and all the Believers in the Light,
have the Witness in themselves, of Christ their Ruler, Counselor, Orderer,
heavenly Governor, and of his Judgment, Justice, and Peace; and that of the
increase of his Government there is no End.

Now, they that hate the Light, which is the Life in Christ the Second Adam,
They that hate the Light, refuse Christ to Rule over them.
the Lord from Heaven, they are them that would not have Christ rule over them,
nor in them; therefore it condemns them; and, what is the matter that all Men
and Women do not see, but are blind, and are not in Unity? Is it not because
they hate the Light (the Life in the Second Adam) and will not come to the
Light, nor wald in the Light? And then, is not the Light their Condemnation,
who are in transgressing Old Adam? And, how are they like to see or believe, or
have Faith in Christ, that hated his Light, and will not come to it (which is
the Life in the Second Adam?) And therefore all that hates his Light (which is
the Life in him) are not like to see, nor receive Faith from him, that will not
believe in his Light, nor come to it, but hate it; and such will hate both the
Divine Faith and the Author of it: And therefore all that do hate the Light
(which is the Life in Christ) which he enlightens them withal, they hate his
Order, they hate his Government, his Rule; yea, Christ the Second Adam, the
Lord from Heaven: And all such haters of Christ, his Light, Life, Order,
Government, and Counsel, are in a false Liberty, though they may profess
Christ, or his Government in Words, yet not believing in the Light, and walking
in the Light (the Life of Christ) they have no true Fellowship one with
another, but are in Confusion; and have no true Fellowship with the Believers
in the Light (the Life in Christ) nor with the Son, and the Father; for, how
should they? For, until they come to believe in the Light (the Life in the
Second Adam) they cannot see their own States, they are in a blind State; for
none sees, nor enters into the Kingdom of God, till they are Boru again; and
those that are Born again, are the Believers in the Light (the Life in Christ)
and so Bocome Children of the Light, grafted into Christ; and such do know and
see the true Liberty in Christ Jesus, the Second Adam: All such do see, and
know, that all false Liberty is out of the Light (the Life in the Second Adam)
in Old Adan in the Transgression.

And Christ that does enlighten every Man that comes into the World (which is
the Life in him) such comes to Christ, Christ enlighteneth every Man.
and are grafted into him the Head, and so holds Christ their Head, by whom all
things were made and created: who is over all from Everlasting to Everlasting,
the First and the Last, the Beginning and the Ending: These are they that see
his Order, his Government, and his Rule in their Hearts, and receives his Law
of Spirit and Life, and live and walk in it, which makes them free from the Law
of Sin and Death: These see Christ to be the Author and Finisher of their holy,
divine, precious Faith: And their Faith stands in Christ, who is the Author of
it, who has all Power in Heaven and Earth given to him. Christ has all Power
in Heaven and in Earth.
And the Mystery of this Faith they hold in a pure Conscience, and do know the
Law of this Faith, and the Law of Love that God has shed in their Hearts
through Jesus Christ: And so in this Light, Faith and Life, that they have from
Jesus the Second Adam, the Lord from Heaven, they come all to be of one Faith,
of one Light, and one Life; and so of one Mind, Heart, and Judgment, in this
New Covenant of Light and Life; so in it they are under the Government, and
Counsel, and Order of Jesus, that he establishes in his Everlasting Covenant of
Light and Life in their Hearts.

The Law came by Moses, and all the Jews were to be under the Law in the Old
Covenant; and this Law served till Christ (the Seed) came, in his New Covenant;
He is come, and now Grace and Truth is come by Jesus Christ, the great
Governor. And now this Grace, and this Truth is come form Him, into the Hearts
of all his Believers.

And with and in this Grace and Truth, Christ rules in the Hearts of them that
receives his Grace and Truth; and with this Grace and Truth, and in it, every
Believer and Saint receives Christ their Governor, and his Order, and his
Counsel, and heavenly Judgment, and Justice from the heavenly Man, in his
established Government, The Grace of God brings Salvation.
which he establishes with his Grace and Truth. Now this Grace of God which
brings Salvation, which has appeared unto all Men, which does manifest, that
all Men have a Day of Grace and Favor: Now this must needs be the special
Grace of God, which brings Salvation, which has appeared unto all Men. Now
then, not receiving this Grace and Favor of God, but turning from this Grace
into Wantonness, and walking despitefully against the Spirit of Grace; therein
they are hardened, and blind, and turns that into Wantonness, and walks
despitefully against it; which should teach them, and bring their Salvation:
And therefore such comes to be blind, and hardened against the Grace and Favor
of God, that truns it into Wantonness, as I said before, and walks despitefully
against the Spirit of Grace and Truth; and such turns against God and Christ,
from whence Grace and Truth comes, and turns from and against his People that
are established in the Grace of God, that brings their Salvation: Though such may
profess God and Christ in Words only, and his Grace and Truth, their Profession
will come to nothing, except they receive his Grace and Truth into their
Hearts: They that do receive Christ in his Grace and Truth, which comes from
him; they know his Government in the Truth, They who receive Christ in his
Grace, know his Government in the Truth.
and in the Covenant of Grace; yea, in their Hearts, and knows their gracious
and true Liberty in the Grace and Truth, and in Christ from whence it comes,
and his holy and heavenly Order in his Grace, and his Reign in their Hearts.
And all such that walks despitefully against the Spirit of Grace, and turns the
Grace into Wantonness, though such may profess God and Christ, their Profession
will come to nothing, and all their Liberty is false, and in the Flesh, in Old
Adam in Transgression: For true Liberty is in the Grace and Truth that is come
by Jesus, which leads up unto Jesus, from whence it comes, in whom the
everlasting true Liberty is.

For Christ, who is the Truth, Holy and Pure, he reigns in the Truth, and in
his Grace: And therefore every Man and Woman, must with this Grace and Truth in
their Hearts (which they have from Christ) feel and see Christ's Reign, and
Rule in their Hearts; and him in his heavenly Eternal everlasting Government.

The Lord spoke by his Prophet Joel, That it shall come to pass in the last
Days, tht God will pour out of his Spirit upon all Flesh, etc. Joel 2.28.

And Peter said, This is that which was spoken by the Prophet Joel, It shall
come to pass in the last Days (says God) that I will pour out of my Spirit
upon all Flesh, and your Sons and your Daughters shall Prophecy: Your young
Men shall see Visions, and your old Men shall dream Dreams; and on my Servants,
and on my Handmaids, I will pour out in those days of my Spirit, and they
shall Prophecy, Acts 2.17, 18.

Now it is God that pours out of his Spirit upon all Flesh, by which Sons, God
pours out his Spirit upon all Flesh.
Daughters, young Men, old Men, Servants and Handmaids, have their Visions, and
Prophesies, and Dreams. And these last Days, are the Days of Christ, in his
Gospel and New Covenant.

It is said in the Old Covenant. That God did pour out of his Spirit upon the
House of Israel, and the House of Judah. But in the Days of the New Covenant of
Light and Grace, God poured out of hes Spirit upon all Flesh, both Jews and
Gentiles. Now all Flesh must come to the Spirit of God, and be led and guided
by it, if they will see Christ's heavenly spiritual Government and Order; and
with this Spirit, to know Christ the spiritual Man, to rule and govern in their
Hearts. And all that by this Spirit are circumcised, they eat of the heavenly
Passover, or their Bread from Heaven. And all that are baptized with the
Spirit, are baptized into one Body, and do all drink into one Spirit. So here
they are one, in this spiritual Fellowship, which is the true
Church Fellowship; even that Church which is in God, the Pillar and Ground of
Truth, which Church Christ is the heavenly and spiritual Head of; and well he
may, for he is the Author of their Faith, and the Author of their Light and
Life, Grace and Truth, and Spirit, and Gospel of Peace and Salvation; by which
he Rules in the Hearts of his living Members (the Church.) And all they that
grieve, vex, quench, and rebel against the Spirit, comes to be blind, as the
Jews, and will not see with their Eyes, nor hear with their Ears, nor perceive
with their Hearts; and such may profess Christ in the New Testament, and the
Apostles Words, and the Government, and Order of Christ; as the Jews did
profess the Old Testament, and Christ to come; but they would not receive him
then, when he was come. No more do they now, that profess he is come, who vexes
and quenches his Spirit, and grieves it, and rebels against it, and errs from
it. And such are not like to receive Christ into their Hearts, nor come into
his heavenly Order, and established peaceable Government; as those that are led
by the Spirit of God, which are the Sons of God, and keeps the Unity of the
Spirit; which Holy Spirit is the Bond of Peace amongst all Christ's Subjects,
Lambs and Sheep, thet feed together in his Pasture of Life. For it is God that
gives the heavenly Understanding of Christ's established Government and Order.
And they that quench, and vex, and rebel against the Spirit of God, will rebel
against Christ's established Government and Order; and his People that are in
it, that are led by the Spirit of Wisdom and Understanding, and a sound Mind.
And such as will not hear the Spirit of God in themselves, will neither hear
God nor Christ, nor his Sheep, nor such as he sends, but rebel against them.

Now the Gospel being preached to, or in, every Creature under Heaven; which
Gospel is the power of God to Salvation, to every one that Believes: So that
all that receives this Gospel, the Power of God unto Salvation, in their
Hearts, receives Christ (the Power of God) and his Government and Order in the
Power: And Christ reigns in their Hearts in his Power; and such comes into the
Gospel Order; and they that come to be Heirs of the Gospel, the Power of God to
Salvation, are Heirs of Christ's peaceable established Government, and are true
Subjects to Christ's Power, and established peaceable? Government; and so this
Gospel, the Power of God to Salvation, is peaceable, joyful and comfortable,
which is the Gospel of Christ, the Second Adam, Christ the Second Adam, the
Lord from Heaven.
the Lord from Heaven; and is not called the Gospel of old Adam in
Transgression; and this Gospel, which is the Power of God unto Salvation, it
keeps all that believes in it, in the Everlasting Joy, Peace and Comfort, and
in Order; for it is the Everlasting Gospel, which brings Life and Immortality
to Light, by which they see over the Devil, and before he was, that has
blinded them, and darkened them from Life and Immortality. So in this Gospel,
that has brought Life and Immortality to Light in God's People, both Men and
Women, they are established in the Order of it, in which they do serve the
Eternal Everlasting God of Truth.

Now all they that do not receive the Gospel of Christ, the Power of God to
Salvation, which is preached to every, or in every Creature under Heaven, Life
and Immortality is not brought to Light in them; and such the God of the World
has blinded (and so they remain Blind under the God of the World) and such are
Blind concerning the Order of the Gospel, and are ignorant of their Salvation,
and of that Joy, and Comfort, and Peace of the Gospel; neither can they serve
God in the Gospel, though they may profess Christ, and his Gospel in words, yet
such has no Comfort of it. And therefore such as disobeys the Gospel of
Christ, the Power of God to Salvation, and will not receive it, nor believe in
it, How can they receive the Order of the Gospel of Christ, the hevenly Man,
from whence the Gospel comes; or to receive him to reign in their Hearts, when
they will not receive his Gospel, the Power of God to Salvation, in their
Hearts? And again, How can they receive his People, or believe his People, that
are in the Order of the Gospel of Christ, and has received it, and him in
their Hearts, who disobeys it, and will not receive it in their own Hearts?
Such are not like to come into the Order of the Gospel, that disobey it: Such
will disobey Christ, and will not regard his People, in whom he reigns, who
walk in the Order of his Gospel, the Power of God unto Salvation.

Now it is Christ the Second Adam, that lights every Man that comes into the
World, with the Light (which is the Life in himself) and every one that
believes in the Light, and becomes Children of the Light, and walks in it,
they walk in Unity and Fellowship, and in the Order of the Light and Government
of Christ; in such Christ does reign: And all them that hate this Light, and
will not come to it, nor believe in it, they are condemned by it.

Now, The Grace of God has appeared unto all Men.
The Grace of God that brings Salvation has appeared unto all Men; and all Men
that receives this Grace and Truth, that is come by Jesus, they receive Christ
from whence it comes, in their Hearts, to be their Teacher and their Salvation;
and so comes into Christ's Government and Order, in the Truth, and into the
Covenant of Grace: And they that hate the Truth, and turn from the Grace mto
Wantonness, and walk despitefully against the Spirit of Grace, they turn
against Christ, his Order and Government, and his Power also.

And God pouring out if his Spirit upon all Flesh: All that are led by the
Spirit of God, and Christ, are the Sons of God; and such are obeyers of
Christ's Spiritual Order and Government: And they that quench the Spirit of
God, and rebels against it, rebels against Christ's Order and Government, and
Him in his People; and their Spiritual Fellowship, and the Gospel of Salvation
being preached to every Creature under Heaven; which Gospel is the Power of
God: Every Creature under Heaven must receive this Gospel in their Hearts, if
they receive Christ and his Government, and his Order of the Gospel, and him to
rule in their Hearts.

And all you that have received it, have received the Comfort of it; and those
that disobey and rebel against the Gospel, the Power of God, such disobeys and
rebels against God and Christ, and his Government, and his People, which are in
the Order of the Gospel, the Power of God. And as it is said, Christ is in you,
except you be Reprobates; and all that receives Christ in them, it is by his
Light (which is the Life in him) and the Grace and Truth that comes by Jesus,
and the Faith that he is the Author of, and his Spirit and Gospel: This they
must receive in their Hearts, if they receive Christ in them.

And Christ said to his Disciples and Followers, That He would send them the
Spirit of Truth (the Comforter) which should proceed from the Father and the
Son, which should lead them into all Truth: and be should reprove the World of
Sin, Righteousness and Judgment: So that which leads the Believers and
Diseiples of Christ into all Truth, and is their Comforter, is the Reprover of
the World of their Sin, Righteousness and Judgment. So here is that which is
the World's Reprover, is the Saints Comforter, and Leader into all Truth, and
so into all true Fellowship, and true Liberty: And this Holy Spirit, and
Comforter, does not proceed from old Adam, nor any of his Followers, but from
the Father and the Son. And so every one is to have Oil in your own Lamps, from
the heavenly Olive Tree, To have Oil in our own Lamp from Christ the Olive Tree.
that your Lamps may burn always, both Night and Day in your Tabernacles,
looking to your High Priest, who will feed your Lamps with heavenly Oil.

And every one have heavenly Salt in your selves to favor withal, what is
Earthly, and what is Heavenly; and what is from Below, and what is from Above;
and what is out of the Truth, and what is in the Truth.

And that every one may keep their own Vine in their own Garden, Vine.
and their own Lilly in their own Field, or Orchard; which Lilly does exceed
Solomon in all his Glory. And every one have the Word of Faith in their Hearts
and Mouths, to obey and do, which will Sanctify, and make you Holy, and
Reconcile you to God.

And every one have the Anointing, or Unction, within you, Anointing.
which you have from the Father, or Holy One; so that in it you may continue in
the Father, and in the Son.

And every one continue in the Grace of God, Grace.
which will teach you how to live, and what to deny, adn will bring your
Salvation, and establish you upon Christ, the Rock and Foundation, from whence
the Grace does come.

And every one abide in the holy, divine and precious Faith, Precious Faith.
which you do hold in a pure Conscience, by which Faith you do live, and have
Victory over that which displeases God: And in this Faith you do please God,
which Jesus Christ, the Lord from Heaven is the Author and Finisher of.

And every one that has dug deep, Pearl.
and found the Pearl of great Price; and has sold all, and purchased the
Field, then the Field and Pearl is your own: Such do know a through Redemption.

And all you Believers in the Light (which is the Life in Christ) that are
become the Children of Light, walk in the Light, and in Christ, as you have
received him.

And every one mind the heavenly Leaven, Leaven.
that will leaven you into a new Lump.

And every one keep the Feast of Christ our Passover, Passover
with his heavenly unleavened Bread, in Sincerity and Truth.

And every one mind the Light, that God has commanded to shine out of
Darkness, and has shined into your Hearts, to give you the Light of the
Knowledge of the Glory of God in the Face of Jesus Christ (your Savior) that
the excellency of the Power may be of God, and not of your selves: In this you
are sensible of his heavenly Treasure in your earthly Vessels; and every one
have Water in your own Wells and Cisterns, and heavenly Fruit on your Trees,
which God has planted.

Nebuchadnezzar, though his Greatness reached to Heaven, Nebuchaadnezzar
bumbled.
as a Tree, yet he was to be hewn down, until he knew that the Most High rules
in the Kingdoms of Men: And the God of Heaven shall set up a Kingdom which
shall never be destroyed; and the Kingdom shall not be left to other People,
Dan. 2.44. And the Stone that smote the Image became a great Mountain, and
filled the whole Earth, verse 35.

They shall not hurt nor destroy in my holy Mountain: Isa. 11.9.
The 27th of the 8th Month, 1681. G. F.

To Friends in Jamaica.
Dear Friends, Epist. 373.
with my Love in the Lord to you all: It has been often in my mind, from a
Sense of the Spirit of the Lord; which thing I shall lay before you, and
commend it to the Witness of God in all your Consciences.

The thing is this, Advice to have a Yearly Meeting in Jamaica.
That if you had (once in a Year) a Yearly Meeting, as they have in Holland,
Cermany and Freezlan, and at Road Island, and in England, and else where, which
is, and has been, of great Service; for Friends to see one another, and know
how the Affairs of Truth prospers, and how Friends does grow in the Truth of
God, to the Comfort and Joy of one another in it; in which the Lord Jesus
Christ is exalted: And if there should be any Difference among Friends, it may
be ended at the Yearly Meeting, by some Friends out of the Meeting, which could
not be ended at other Meetings: So that all things (by the Truth, and Power of
God) may be kept in Peace and Love, all dwelling in the Wisdom of God that is
from above, which is pure, and peaceable, and gentle, and easy to be
entreated. And so for you once in a Year to meet together in the Lord's Power,
and to wait upon him in his Spirit and Truth one day, and then another day you
may have a Yearly Men and Women's Meeting in the Lord's Power; which in time you
may find and feel a great Service in the Lord's Spirit and Power; in which you
may feel his Presence and Blessing flow among you; and as for Place and Time, I
shall leave it to your best Convenience; and the Lord direct you, that you may
do all things, whatever you do, to his Glory; for you know that in other
Countries, or Provinces, they have either Half-Year Meetings, or Yearly
Meetings, except it be in Jamaica, which several times has been in my Mind for
you to have one there; for where they are settled, they see a great Service in
them; and the Lord has owned them, and honored them with his Presence, and
that keeps all in a Sense of a care of his Glory, and a care of one another,
that they may be kept and preserved in God's Eternal Truth, in meekness, in
gentleness, and in tenderness, and in love, that edifies the Body of Christ,
the second Adam, the Lord from Heaven. And so that all of you, in Godliness,
Holiness and Righteousness, may spend your Days to the Glory of God; that your
Conversations may be in Heaven, and not below in the Earth, among the wicked,
that the Lord God, and his Son Christ Jesus may be glorified in you all, who is
over all, blessed for ever, Amen.

And Friends, it would be very well, if that you brought on your your Case of
not Swearing, and taking Oaths, which has been lost through that Spirit which
was unfaithful: Now the same Governor is come over again, in whose time (when
he was there formerly) that Act was obtained, Yea and Nay instead of an Oath.
at the Assembly, in which your Yea and Nay was taken instead of an Oath and
Swearing. Therefore see if you can prevail with this Governor, and his
Assembly, to have the same Act renewed again, and to clear your selves from
that Spirit which was the cause that the Act was repealed. So with my love in
the Lord Jesus Christ to you all.

And my Desires are, That you may all be preserved in God's Power, to his
Glory; and that you may grow in the Truth, and with the Truth answer the Truth
in every one's inward parts; so that ye may spread the Truth abroad, and that
with it your Hearts may be united together. And walk in it, and in the love of
it; for Love edifies the Body of Christ. And that ye may be good Examples in
the Truth, and in Righteousness and Holiness, and show forth Christianity in
the Possession of it, above the outside Professors.

From Dolston, the 24th of the 7th Month, 1682. G. F.

To Friends in Holland.
FRriends and Brethren, in the Holy Seed of Life, Epist. 374.
that reigns over all; in it walk, and in the Power, and Spirit, To be as the
Salt of the Earth, etc.
and Truth of God, that you all may be as a City set upon a Hill, that cannot
be hid; and the Salt of the Earth, and Light of the World, to answer the Light
of Christ in all, and be a good Savor in them that are saved, and in them that
perish; and all live in Love, that bears all things, and does deifie the Body
of Christ, and grow up in him, your Head and Life; and be kind, and courteous,
and tender in Affection to one another, and walk as becomes the Gospel of
Christ, the Power of God.

And dear Friends, this Yearly Meeting the Lord's Power Was over all, and his
Seed of Life; and the Lords living refreshing Presence was among us in all our
Meetings: And your Epistle from your Yearly Meeting in Holland was read, to the
refreshing of Friends; and another from the half Years Meeting in Ireland; and
a Testimony from Scotland, that Friends are in Love and Unity there, and the
Truth prospers and spreads; and by Letters from America, Friends have set
up a Meeting about Twenty that are Captives among themselves; and a Friend that
is a Captive, declares the Truth there among them; and their Masters does let
them meet, and it may be of great Service there; and the Lord's Power is over
all, and in it be Valiant for God's Truth upon the Earth, and spread it abroad;
and that you may all, in Humility, exalt the Lord, and that the Presence of
God, and his Son, may be among you all; and so the Blessing of the Lord be
among you all. Amen.

London, the 17th of the 4th month, 1682. G. F.

To Friends in Barbados.
DEar Friends,
In all your Meetings see that the Lord God be glorified, and have an Eye to
his Glory, Epist. 375.
and let all things be done without Strife or Reflections; but all to mind the
Testimony of Life, and that which does preserve your Unity in it; and in that
you will seek one another good, and not slight one another; but to esteem one
another in the Truth, and keep low in Humility, for such God will exalt; and be
kind and tenderhearted one to another, and dwell in the Love of God, To be
kind and tender hearted one to another.
that he does shed abroad in your Hearts; for that Love which comes from God
does edify the Body of Christ; and therefore you must be of a noble Spirit,
that are of the noble Birth, born of the Spirit; and to love the Brotherhood in
the Spirit, and to esteem all Men and Women, as they are God's Creation; whose
natural Sun and Rain shines and falls upon the just and unjust, and on their
natural Fields; and so does God's Eternal Son of Righteousness shine with his
Light, and Grace, and Spirit, that he does enlighten them withal, and gives his
Grace and Peace to all; for his Spirit is poured out upon all: Thus does he
shine through all, and upon all, and over all, and above all; and therefore let
your Light shine, that are the Believers in the Light, that are become the
Children of the Light, that others may glorify your Father which is in Heaven,
in seeing your good Works, and your good and gracious Words, and Lives and
Conversations; and mind the more excellent way the Apostle shows to the
Corinthians, which is the Charity that will bear all things, and is not puffed
up, nor envieth not: This does keep above all brittleness.

And Friends, Friends not to alter their settled Meetings without Mutual
Consent.
after that your Meetings are settled and seasoned by the Power of the Lord, if
that you do alter them, without the Consent of Friends, in the Power of the
Lord, that makes and breeds Discontent; and therefore keep them, after they be
settled, in the Power of the Lord (and you settled in it) upon Christ the holy
Rock and Foundation of God, that stands sure. And in all your Meetings, if
that there be any Difference between Brother and Brother, do not reflect one
upon another in Meetings, but speak one to another between your selves, as
Christ Commands; and then you may preach the Gospel of Peace freely, and speak
the Truth in the love of it, as it is in Christ Jesus: And this is the best
way; that so nothing may be seen in your Meetings but the Life, Truth and
Peace; so that the Serpent, whose Meat is Dust, may find none in your Meetings;
and none to quench nor abuse the Power or Spirit, nor none to go beyond it is
Motion; for, if you do, you will both bring Trouble and Burdens upon your
selves and others, and run out, that so you cna hardly get in again; and
therefore be wise in the heavenly Wisdom of God, to be ordered in his Spirit of
Understanding, to the Glory of God, and the Comfort and Edifying of his People;
that you all may know how to behave your selves in the Church of God, to the
glory of God: And let all your Lives and Conver sations preach Virtue, Purity,
Righteousness, Holiness and Godliness, else you cannot be the Lights of the
World, nor the Salt of the Earth, And when any does badly or wickedly, they
instead of being Lights or Salt, are unsavory, and are stumbling blocks; and
when the Salt has lost its savor it is good for nothing, but to be trodden
under the foot of Men; and therefore keep your favor, and then you will not
come under the Foot of Men; and in the Light, and then you will not go into
Darkness.

And therefore have Salt in your selves, and Oil in your own Lamps, and keep in
your own Houses (for it is the Whore that abides not in her own House) with
the Word of Life, and Grace and Truth within, and to the Light and purifying
Faith, and mortifying and baptising Holy Spirit of God; (the Fruits of which
Spirit is Love, Peace, The Fruits of the Spirit.
Long suffering, Gentleness, Meekness, Temperance, and bear one another
Burdens; and so fulfill the Law of Christ, and forgive one another, as Christ
has forgiven you; and ftrive to excel one another in Holiness, and
Righteousness, and Godliness, and Meekness, and Modesty, in Virtue, Truth and
Love, that you may all live to the Praise and Glory of God, Amen. And the Lord
says, Isaiah 49.8. speaking of Christ, I will give thee for a Covenant of the
People, to establish the Earth, Christ a Covenant of the People.
to cause to inherit the desolate Heritages. So that you may see the fulfilling
of this in the Promise, and have a Care of God's Glory; and all live in the
Seed Christ, your Sanctuary, which is a safe Place, over all Storms, and
Destroyers, who was before they were, and will be when they are gone; in whom
you all have Rest and Peace; and by whom you are presented to God, holy in
Body, Soul and Spirit; and therefore all must be kept clean and holy, if that
they do offer up, or be presented to him that is Holy; and therefore you must
be a holy People, and walk in the holy Truth, and obey the holy Word of God,
and walk godly, as the Grace of God teaches, which brings Salvation, and walk
in the Light: If that you do keep in the Fellowship, in the heavenly Light; and
in this you do differ from the World, that makes a profession of the Scriptures
of Truth, and dishonors God, and causes his Holy Name to be blasphemed, by
their not obeying the Word, nor walking in the Light, Spirit, and Grace, and
Truth, whose Candle is gone out, and now cannot endure to hear talk of the
Light; and therefore let your Light so shine before Men, that they may see your
good Works, and glorify your Father which is in Heaven; and then you will have
both his Favor, Presence and Blessing; and the Lord God Almighty preserve you
all, and Friends every where in his Power and Seed Christ Jesus. Amen.

The 26th day of the 8th Month, 1682. G. F.

To Friends in New Jersey and Pensilvania.
DEar Friends,
With my dear Love to you all, Epist. 376.
in God's holy peaceable Truth; and my desires are, Wisdom of God gentle, kind
and easy to be entreated.
That you may be all kept careful of God's Glory. Now in your settling of
Plantations and Provinces, and especially in woody Countries, as those are, you
may have many Trials and Troubles; but if you keep in the Wisdom of God, that
will keep you both gentle, and kind, and easy to be entreated one of another,
that will preserve you out of Heats, or Extremes, or Passions; and that all
Friends that come over, be with speed settled in their Plantations, that they
may not lie and waste their Time, both of themselves, and their Servants, and
spend that which should help to settle them in their Plantations. And therefore
you that are concerned in ordering those things, have a Care that no Reproach
come upon your selves, and your Countries; but there may be such Care taken in
all things, that there may be no Complaints come into England against you.

And I desire that you may be very kind, and courteous, to all in Necessity, in
the Love of God; for there are many People goes over to your Countries, some
Poor and some Rich; and so, many Eyes are upon you, To be kind to all in
Necessity.
and them that come over to you; and therefore my desire is, that you may all
be careful in the Love of God, and in his Truth and Righteousness, as the Family
of God; and be careful and tender to your Servants, in all Respects, that there
may come no Complaints from them or others; that so in all things you may be
ordered by the Wisdom of God, that his Blessing may be amongst you.

And Dear Friends, I desire, that you would send over an Account by the next
Ship how many Meetings you have, and how many Meetings Monthly, of Men and
Women, and how many Quarterly Meetings, and Half-Year Meeitings; and let us
know how Truth spreacs and prospers amongst you; which you would do well to
write over every Year, to the Yearly Meeting at London. So, with my Love in the
Seed, which reigns over all, in whom you have all Life and Salvation, and Peace
in the Lord God.

G. F.

To Friends that are Prisoners in York.
DEar Friends, Epist. 377.
with my Love to you, and all the rest of the faithful Friends in Bonds; and my
desire is to the Lord, that ye all may stand faithful and valiant for his
glorious Name, To stand saithful in the time of Storms.
and his holy peaceable Truth now in this Day of Storm and Tempest, that none
may turn their Backs on the Lord in this Day of Trial, and none may be ashamed
of confessing of Christ, before the Adulterous Generation, as Christ said, lest
Christ be ashamed of them before his Father, and before his holy Andels; and
therefore now is the Time and Day of your Trial; for the Lord is Just; though I
know that the Faithful and Innocent, Just and Righteous must stand it out; and
therefore mind the Lord in all your Sufferings, and keep all low, and in the
Humility of Heart, and there you will feel that he taht inhabits Eternity,
dwells with an humble Heart, and he will be your Shield and Buckler, and
defender in time of Trouble; and the Lord has promised to deliver his People
in the Six Troubles, yea in the Seventh, the Perfection of Troubles; and
therefore do not think Time long, and your Sufferings long, for the Lord will
lay no more upon you but what you are able to bear; yea, upon his faithful
People: I know it, and am a Witness for God in all my Sufferings and
Imprisonments, and haling before Magistrates about Sixty times, about this
Thirty six Year. And so Friends, when you are tried, you may come forth more
precious than Gold that is tried in the Fire; and keep the Word of Patience,
and it will keep you from the Temptations that comes upon the World to try
them; for the Word of God was before the World was: And though you be in
outward Bonds from your Wives, Families, Houses and Relations, yet the Word of
God is not bound, The Word of God is not bound.
neither can they bind the Word of God, it is at Liberty, it abides and indures
for ever, it will make you all rich, though they think to make you poor with
their Bonds, and casts you into Prisons; but, I tell you, the Word of God will
make you rich, for the Word of God was before the Wicked and his Bonds were;
for in the Beginning was the Word, but since the beginning was the Devil, who
had cast some into Prison, spoken of in Revelations, that ten Days might be a
longer time than ten natural Days: For they that will live Godly in Christ
Jesus shall suffer Pesecution by the Ungodly; for it was the Just that suffered
by the Unjust in all Ages; and Christ said to Saul, Why Persecutest thou me? So
they that stood in Christ, and were in Christ Jesus, it was Christ that was
Persecuted, as well as they in whom he reigned: And do not you understand, and
know, the Sufferings and Trials of the holy Men of God went through; and how by
Faith they subdued the Mountains; and consider the Faith of Abraham, Isaac and
Jacob, The Faith of the Patriarchs.
and the Faith of Abel, and Enoch, and Noah, and the Faith of Jeremiah, and the
rest of the Prophets, and the Faith of Daniel, and the Three Children, and the
Faith of all the Apostles, what Sufferings and Imprisonments they went through;
and consider all the Martyrs since the Apostles days, consider what Sufferings
they have gone through; and God and Christ is the same to uphold you, that are
given up in his Spirit, Power and Faith, to stand for his Glory; and be valiant
for his Truth and Name upon the Earth. And therefore keep in your Sanctuary,
Christ Jesus, who destroys the Destroyer, and bruises the Serpents Head; and so
in Christ Jesus, your Sanctuary, you all are in safety, in whom you have all
Life and Salvation, and Peace with God, in him you may all Triumph and Rejoice
with exceeding great Joy, and say, What shall separate us from the Love of God
which we have in Christ Jesus? And the Apostle said to the Saints in their
Days, That there was not any thing able to separate him from the Love of God in
Christ jesus; you feeling the same Love, you feeling the same Faith to dwell in
you, and walk by; For the just shall live by Faith, which is his victory, and
has access to God, in which he pleases God. And so with my Love to you all in
Christ Jesus, who was before the Devil was, that makes you to suffer, and will
be when he is gone: In Christ you have heavenly Peace, that none can take away
from you; in him dwell and live, Amen.

POSTSCRIPT.
AND all be Faithful in their Testimony of Life, against Riches, and all those
things which has come up in this Night of Apostasy, from the Light, Life and
Power of Christ and God, against all Looseness whatsoever, that the heavenly
Camp of God may be kept holy, clean and pure.

And all Friends, look at the Lord above allyour Sufferings, and trust in him,
who with his his Eternal Power has preserved you to this day; and the Lord in
his Glorious Power was with us in all our Assemblies, at this Yearly Meeting;
he over all has the Dominion, and over all evil Spirits gave Dominion to his
People: Glory to his Name for ever, Amen.

And therefore let you Faith be in the Gospel, the Power of God, which has
brought Life and Immortality to Light in you.

G. F.

To all the Elect of God, Chosen and Faithful, who have known the Work of the
Lord, and his Dealings, and his Eternal Hand, his Spirit and Power, in
preserving of you to this Day, and in this Glorious Gospel Day of Christ Jesus,
who are built upon him, the holy Rock and Foundation of God, that stands
sure, and are fed with the Heavenly Bread, and feel the Springs of Living
Water, and enjoy the Presence of Lord, who daily gives the Increase.
AND now Friends, Epist. 378.
with the Eternal Power, and Heavenly Light of Christ, with it you have seen,
and do see, and will see, that which Christ has spoken, Matthew. 13. and Luke 8.
which he taught to the great Multitude in Parables, Parable of the Srwer.
when he sat in a Ship; Behold, says Christ, a Sower went out to sow his Seed,
and as he sowed, some fell by the Highway side, and it was trodden down, and
the Fowls of the Air devoured it; and some fell upon the Rocks, or Stony
Places, where they had not much Earth, and as soon as it was sprung up, it
withered away. So he that receives the Seed into rocky and stony Places, the
same is he that receives the Word with joy, yet has he not root in himself,
but endures for a while, or for a while believes, and in Temptations falls
away; for when Tribulations or Persecutions arise because of the Word, by and
by he is offended; and upon too many such have we seen this Parable fulfilled
in Times of Persecutions, and Tribulations, and Sufferings; the Heat of
Persecution, when it is up, they are scorched, and withered away, and so come
to nothing: And some fell among Thorns, and the Thorns sprung up and choked
it; and they also that received Seed among the Thorns, are they that hear the
Word, and when they have heard, go forth, and are choked with the Cares of
this World, and Deceitfulness of Riches, and Pleasures of this Life, and become
Unfruitful, and bring no Fruit to Perfection: And this is seen to be the
Condition of too many: But the other fell into good Ground, and brought forth
Fruit, some Thirty, some Sixty, and some an Hundred fold: So they that received
the Seed into the good Ground, are they which (in an honest and good Heart)
have heard the Word, and understand it, and keep it, and bring forth Fruti with
Patience, some an Hundred fold, some Sixty, some Thirty, as was said before;
these are the honest and good Hearts, upon whom Christ, the Son of
Righteousness, shines, that nourishes his good Seed, whole brings forth Fruit
unto Perfection, who lives over the deceitful Riches and Cares of the World,
and the Pleasures of this Life that pass away; who are not offended nor moved
at Tribulations and Persecutions, but patiently do endure them; such do bring
forth Fruit unto Perfection, yea, an Hundred, Sixty, Thirty fold in Christ
Jesus, who bruises the Head of the Serpent that makes Men and Women's Hearts
like the Highway, thorny, rocky and stony Ground; for Men and Women, whose
Hearts are like unto the Highways, stony, rocky and thorny Ground, the Seed
has fallen into these Grounds (as before) and from these Grounds all can talk
of the Seed, and of the Word, but bring forth no Fruit unto Perfection. And
therefore let all consider what Ground you are, and what Fruit you bring forth;
and when ye hear the Word of the Kingdom, that ye understand it, which none
can, without the Light and Spirit of Christ (and walk in it) but he that shall
endure to the end in the Light, in the Grace, Truth and Spirit, and in Christ,
from whom you do receive these, shall be saved.

For the Apostle says, The just Man lives by Faith: The just lives by Faith.
And this is not by any Faith which Men make, but by the Faith which Christ
Jesus is both the Author and Finisher of, in your Hearts and Consciences; and
in this Faith ye have access to God, and do please him: But, If any Man draw
back (to wit, in not living by this Faith) does not the Lord say, my Soul shall
have no pleasure in him? But we are not of them who draw back unto Perdition
(that is a sad drawing back) but of them that believe, to the saving of our
Souls.

From Kingston upon Thames, the 2d of the 9th Month, 1682. G. F.

An Epistle to all Planters, and such who are Transporting themselves into
Foreign Plantations in America, etc.
MY Friends, that are gone, and are going, over to Plant, Epist. 379.
and make outward Plantations in America, Keep your own Plantations in your
Hearts, with the Spirit and Power of God, that your own Vines and Lillies be
not hurt. And in all places where you do outwardly live and settle, invite all
the Indians, and their Kings, To invite the Iddian Kings to Friends Meetings.
and have Meetings with them, or they with you; so that you may make inward
Plantaions with the Light and Power of God (the Gospel) and the Grace, and
Truth, and Spirit of Christ; and with it you may answer the Light, and Truth,
and Spirit of God, in the Indians, their Kings and People; and so by it you may
make Heavenly Plantations in their Hearts for the Lord, and so beget them to
God, that they may serve and worship him, and spread his Truth abroad: And so
that you all may be kept warm in God's Love, Power and Zeal, for the Honor of
his Name: That his Name may be great among the Heathen, or Gentiles; and ye may
see over, or be Overseers with the Holy Ghost, which was before the unclean
Ghost got into Man and Woman: So with this Holy Ghost you may see, and
over-see, that the unclean Ghost and his Works may be kept out of the Camp of
God: So that his Camp may be Holy, and all the Holy may come into it; and He,
who is Holy, may walk in the midft of you his Camp, and be glorified in and
among you all, who is over all, and worthy of all Glory, from Everlasting to
Everlasting, blessed and praised for evermore.

From the rising of the Sun, even to the going down of the same, my Name shall
be great among the Gentiles: And in every place Incense shall be offered unto
my Name, and a pare Offering; for my Name shall be great among the Heathen,
says the Lord of Hosts, Mal. 1.11.

The Lord reigns, let the Earth rejoice, let the Multitudes of the Isles be
glad; let every thing that has Breath praise the Lord, for the Lord takes
pleasure in his People: He will beautify the meek with Salvation, Plal. 97,
and 98. and Plal. 149, 150.

London, the 22d of the 9 the Month, 1682. G. F.

To all christians, to keep to Yea, Yea, and Nay, Nay, and to fulfill their
Words and Promises.
ALL my Dearly Beloved Friends and Brethren every where,
The Lord God Almighty, Epist.382.
with his holy Power and Spirit, has gathered, and kept, and preserved you to
this Day a People to himself: And now dear Friends and Brethren, in all your
Words, in all your Business and Employments, Have a care of breaking your Words
and Promises to and People; but that you may (before you make and Promises to
any Man or Woman) consider beforehand, that you may be able to perform and
fulfill both you Words and Promises to all People, that you make your Promises,
or give your Word unto: And that you Yea be Yea, That our Yea be Yea.
and Nay, Nay, in all things, which Christ has set up instead of an Oath; yea,
above an Oath and Swearing, in his New Covenant and Testament: And the Apostle
James holds forth the same Doctrine. And this Yea, Yea, and Nay, Nay, was set
up when they forbad all Oaths and Swearing: And therefore every one's Yea
should be Yea, and every one's Nay should be Nay, and so to stand.

And therefore all are to consider aforehand, before they speak their yea,
yea, and before they speak their Nay, Nay, in the New Covenant of Grace, Light
and Life; that with the Light they may see safely when they speak their yea,
yea, and their Nay, Nay, which is the Practice of the Children of Light in the
New Covenant of Light; by and in which Light they see and consider what they
are albe to perform, what they speak at Yea, Yea, and what they are able to
stand to at Nay, Nay. So if you walk in the Light, it will preserve you out of
all rash and hasty Words and Promises, which many runs into, that do neither
perform either their Yea, Yea, or their Nay, Nay.

Therefore in the New Covenant of Grace, Light and Life, all are to speak Yea,
Yea, to what they can do and perform; and what they say Nay, Nay to, thatin the
Light, and Life, and Grace of God they may likewise stand to their Nay, what
they say Nay to.

So that none make any Promise, or speak Yea, Yea, or Nay, Nay, rashly, To keep
Promises.
which they cannot perform: For such kind of inconsiderate and rash Speaking is
not in the Everlasting Covenant of Light, Life and Grace: Take heed, lest you
be numbered among the Covenant-breakers, spoken of, Romans 1.31. and such
Truce Breakers, which the Apostle speaks of, 2 Timothy 3. Which have a form of
Godliness, but deny the Power thereof; from such turn away, says the Apostle.
And therefore they that deny the Power of Godliness, will not be faithful to
God nor Man; and such cannot exercise a good Conscience to God, in Obedience to
him, nor to Man, to perform that which is just, righteous and honest. Therefore
the Apostle exhorts the Christians in the New Testament, to speak the Truth in
Love, and to put away Lying, and to speak every Man the Truth to his Neighbor,
Ephesians. 4.15, 25. And David says, Who shall abide in thy Tabernacle, and who
shall dwell in thy holy Hill? He that walks uprightly, and works
Righteousness, and speaks the Truth in his Heart: But they that speak Vanity,
every one to his Neighbor, with flattering Lips and a double Heart, the Lord
shall cut off. And Solomon, speaking of Wisdom, say, My Mouth shall speak
Truth, and Wickedness is an Abomination to my Lips. And James says in his
General Epistle, So speak ye, and so do, etc. So see here how certain and
steadfast the holy Men of God would have God's People to be in their words and
doings. And also James was careful, that the Saints in their very outward
Dealings were to be just, and reproved such for saying, To day or to morrow we
will go into such a City, and continne there a Year, and buy, and sell, and get
gain: To have regard to God in our Purposes.
Whereas they did not know what should be on the morrow. But they ought to say,
If the Lord will, we shall live, and do this or that. Therefore you may see how
careful the Apostle was, to keep all true Christians in the Fear of the Lord,
and in the Sense of his Will. God is true and faithful to his People in all
Generations; and so he would have his People to be true and faithful to him,
and to one another, and to all Men in his Spirit and Truth. And Christ says,
He that is faithful in that which is least, is faithful also in much; and be
that is unjust in the least, is unjist also in much. And further he faith, If
ye have not been faithful in the Unrighteous Mammon, or Riches, who will commit
unto you the true Riches? Therefore there must be a Justness and Faithfulness
in the outward Riches between Man and Man, if you will have a place in your
Hearts for the true heavenly Riches: The inword Faithfulness to God brings
forth Faithfulness to Men in outword Things: And as the Apostle said to the
Saints, Finally Brethrean, whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are
honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, Follow
whatsoever is pure, and of good Report.
whatsoever thing's are lovely, whatsoever things are of good report; if there
be any virtue, and if there be any praise, think on these things: Which are
very good things to be minded, thought upon, and practiced by the Church of
Christ. The Lord faith by Zachary, These are the things that ye shall do, speak
ye every Man the Truth to his Neighbor, execuse the Judgment of Truth and
Peace in the Gates: Again, Therefore faith the Lord, I am returned unto Zion,
and will dwell in the midst of Jerusalem; and Jerusalem shall be called a City
of Truth, and the Mountain of the Lord of Host, an holy Mountain. And if
outward Jerusalem was called so in the Days of the Old Testament, surely much
more is heavenly Jerusalem, in the New Covenant and Testament, called The City
of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem; into which nothing that is unclean
can enter; but all the Believers in the Light, and the Children of the Light,
enter into it, whose Names are written in the Lamb's Book of Life; and are to
walk in Truth and Righteousness, and speak the Truth every Man to his
Neighbor, according to the Apostle's Doctrine.

And so as every one has received Christ Jesus, who is the Truth, walk in him
the Truth, and speak the Truth, as it is in Jesus: For you are bought with a
price, therefore glorify God in your Bodies and in your Spirits, which are his.

And the Lord in Mercy grant, that all his People (who profess his Name) may do
s to his Praise, to his Glory, and to his Honor, over all for ever, Amen.

And do not slight the form of sound Words in Truth: You who have bought the
Truth, do not sell it: And, He that orders his Conversation aright shall see
the Salvation of God. And the Apostle says to the Philippians, Let your
Conversation be as it becomes the Gospel of Christ: For the Apostle says, Our
Conversation is in Heaven, where must be the Conversation of all the true
Followers of Christ, that are built upon him the Rock and Foundation, who is
from above. And the Lord GOD establish all his People upon this Rock and
Foundation which stands sure, that upon him they may stand fast with the
Grace and Truth that comes from him. Amen.

Edmonton, in the County of Middlesex, the 23d of the 11th Morth, 1682. G.F.

A way to prevent the Indignation and Judgments of God from coming on a
Kingdom, Nation or Family; commended to the Consciences of all concerned.
First, Epist. 381.
All you Vintners that sell Wine, that keep Taverns or such like Houses; and
all you Innkeepers, and you that keep Victualling-Houses, Alehouses, Not to
suffer Men to abuse the Creation.
Strong-Water-Shops, etc. see that you never let any Man or Woman have any more
Wine, Ale, strong Drink, Brandy or strong Waters, or other strong Liquors, than
what is for their Health and their Good; in that they may praise God for his
good Creatures. For every Creature of God is good, and ought to be received
with Thanksgiving.

But if you do give or let Men or Women have so much Wine, Brandy, strong
Liquors, strong Beer or Ale, till they be Drunk, or to make them Drunk: 1. You
destroy the good Creatures of God. 2. You destroy them, that have not Power
over their Lusts, no more than a Rat or a Swine, who will drink till they are
Drunk. 3. You are a great caufe of ruining them in their Healths, Purses and
Estates (their Children and Families) in feeding of them in their Lusts, The
occasion of the Judgments of God.
by letting them have more than does them good; which also tends to bring God's
Judgments upon you, to your own Ruin and Destruction.


For many when they are full of Wine, Beer or strong Liquors, then they will
call for Music, Pipe and Harp (and it may be their Whores also:) And so in
this, you that suffer or allow such things, are Nursers of Debauchery and
Corrupters of them, and of your own Families also.

And also such Men, when they are full of Wine or strong Liquors, and have
destroyed the Creatures, by taking more than does them good, then they are got
to that height that they are ready to Quarrel and Abuse, or Kill or Destroy one
another; and sometimes kill other People (who do them no harm) as they are
walking or traveling in the Streets or Highways. For when they are overcome
by strong Liquors, then are they fit and do lie open to all manner of
Wickedness.

And though you think by selling or letting People have Wine or strong Liquors,
more than does them good, or is for their Health, The more they arink, the more
Gain you think it brings you; and the more you vend your Goods, the more Profit
you get: Ah poor Sellers! Do not you think, that God with his all seeing Eye
does behold you and your Actions? And cannot the Lord soon bring a Blasting
upon all your Undertakings, and such ungodly Gain and Profits, and whatsoever
you have gained by your Covetousness, and from the Lusts of others, through
which they do destroy their Estates, Children and Families? Will not this bring
destruction upon you and your unrighteous Gain, which you have gotten by
feeding their Lusts? For that which feeds the destroying Lust must needs be
Destroyed; and the Profit of That will not be Gain to you in the End.

For, are not you sensible, how many, after they have spent their Estates or
part of them, they will run into your Debts for Wine or strong Liquors, yea,
such as you let have more than did or does them good? And is not this the
Cause, that many break by trusting, and other ways as before mentioned? Trust
should be with that which is Trusty, which does not Waste or Destroy; and such
God will bless. And therefore take heed of letting any Man or Woman have any
more Wine or strong Liquors, than what is for their Nourishment, Health and
Good.

See what a dreadful Woe the Lord pronounced against them, That rise up early
in the morning, that they may follow strong Drink, that continue until night,
till Wine inflame them: Then they call for the Harp and the Viol, the Tabret
and the Pipe, etc. But such regard not the work of the Lord, neither consider
the operation of his Hands: A sad state! Woe unto them that are mighty to drink
Wine, Woe to them that are mighty to drink Wine.
and are Men of strength to mingle strong Drink. And therefore all to shun such
thing; all are to be sober, and to mind and fear God, that they may escape
these Woes: As you may see in Isaiah, Chap. 5.

And therefore all Vintners and such as sell Wine, with Alehouses, Inns and
Victualling-Houses, who sell Ale, Brandy and strong Liquors, never let any one
have more than does them good, and is for their health (as is said before) so
that all may eat and drink the good Creatures of God to his Praise and Glory;
which Drunkards and Gluttons cannot, nor they who let them have the Creatures
of God in excess or immoderately, till they are drunk and surfeited, for such
do feed themselves without the Fear of God.

Secondly, Let all who go under the Name of Christian Families, train up their
Children in the Fear of God, and keep themselves in the Fear of God, that they
may keep all their Servants and Familes in the Fear of God; out of all Looseness
and Wantonness, and Vanities and Excess, and from all Drunkenness, Fornication,
Whordom or Uncleanness, and Unrighteousness, and all Ungodliness; that they may
keep out of all those things, that displease or dishonor the Lord God. And do
not nourish up the Lust of the Eye, nor the Pride of Life, nor the Lust of the
Flesh; for if you do, Sin the Cause of God's Wrath upon Families.
you nourish up that which is not of God the Father. And therefore to shun all
these Evils, and to depart from them, and keeping in the Fear of God; this is
the way to bring the Blessing of God upon a Land, Kingdom, Nation or Family.

God will destroy them which destroy the Earth, Revel. 11.18.

Drunkenness makes a Man worse than a Beast, and makes a strong Man Weak, and a
wise Man a Fool.

This Testimony and Warning was and is owned and subscribed by (many) Vintners
and others, concerned in the Trades and Callings beforementioned, who were
present at the reading of the Manuscript.

G.F.

An Epistle to the Household of Faith.
FRiends,
Epist. 382.
Consider how the Blessing of the Lord came upon the Obedient and faithful to
the Lord, and rested upon them. The Lord said to Abraham, Get thee out of thy
Country, and from thy Kindred, and from thy Fathers House, The Promise to the
Faithful.
etc. And I will make of thee a great Nation, and I will bless thee, etc. And
thou shall be a Blessing, and I will Bless them that Bless thee, and Curse them
that Curse thee; and in thee and thy Seed, shall all the Families of the Earth
be blessed. Abraham obeyed the Lord, and went forth from Vr of the Caldees, and
so he left all the Religions and Worships, and Teachers of the Country of the
Caldees behind him, and followed the Lord: And the Lord said unto Abraham, Walk
before me, and be thou perfect, Genesis 17.1. And again, The Lord said unto
Abraham, Seeing that Abraham shall surely become a great and mighty Nation, and
all the Nations of the Earth shall be blessed in him, Genesis 12.1, 2, 3. and
18.18. And again, The Lord said unto Abraham, That in Blessing I will Bless
thee, and in Multiplying I will Multiply thy Seed as the Stars of Heaven, and
as the Sand which is upon the Seashoar, and thy Seed shall possess the Gates of
his Enemies; In the Seed are all Nations blessed.
and in thy Seed shall all the Nations of the Earth be Blessed, because thou
have Obeyed my Voice. Abraham Obeying God's Voice, brought this Blessing upon
him, as in Genesis 22. And the Lord said, I know Abraham that he will command his
Children and his Household after him, That they shall keep the way of the Lord,
to do Justice and Judgment, that the Lord may bring upon Abraham all that which
he has spoken of him. Now you may see here what it is that brings the
Blessing, and kept the Blessing upon Abraham and his Seed, Faithful Abraham.
etc. Now if you be of the true Faith, you are of Abraham, and are blessed with
faithful Abraham, Gal. 3.9. And in this Seed and Faith of Abraham, you will
Command your Children and your Household after you, to keep the way of the Lord,
to do Justice and Judgment, that the Lord may bring the Blessing upon you and
your Household and Children; keeping in the same Faith and Seed of Abraham, and
you and your Children and your Household, keeping in the way of the Lord to do
Justice and Judgment, then I say the Blessing which came upon Abraham will come
upon you, and upon your Children and your Household, and then you will know the
Promise of God fulfilled; Cursed is he that Curses thee, and Blessed is he that
Blesses thee; and therefore live and walk in the Seed, which bruises the Head
of the Serpent, in which Seed all Nations are Blessed, yea all Families,
Households and Children, in which Faith and Seed you Command. (Mark Command)
your Children and your Household after you, to keep the way of the Lord as
Abraham did, to do Justice and Judgment, Genesis 18. and 19. Now you that have not
this Authority to Command over your Children and Households, you are not in the
Faith and Seed of Abraham, to wit, To Command our Families to keep the way of
the Lord.
To Command your Children and Household after you, to keep the way of the Lord,
and to do Justice and Judgment. Now the Lord had a Confidence in Abraham, and
so he has in all them that be of his Seed and Faith now, that they will
Command their Children and Household to keep the way of the Lord, as he did, and
walk before the Lord, and to do Justice and Judgment; and that Abraham's Family
and Children should not go back again into those Country Religions or Ways,
which the Seed and Faith of Abraham has and had led them out of: For they that
are commanded to come out of them, into God's Way, into the Way of the Lord,
are commanded to keep in the Way of the Lord, and they are to command their
Children and their Household to keep the Way of the Lord, and to keep out of all
the Ways of the World, and out of all the Ungodly, Unjust Ways, in the Seed,
which bruises the Head of the Serpent. And the Lord said to Isaac, I will make
thy Seed to multiply as the Stars of Heaven, etc. And in thy Seed shall all the
Nations of the Earth be blessed, Genesis 26.4. Now here you may see that Isaac
inherited his Father's Inheritance in the Seed, and in the Faith and Way of the
Lord; in which Seed all Nations are blessed: And so do all they that are of the
Faith and Seed of Abraham, that walk in the steps of faithful Abraham, in the
Way of the Lord, and obey his Voice, They who obey God's Voice inherit the
Blessing.
inherit the Blessing of Abraham; for you may see it was not the only Care,
that their Children might inherit a little Earth after them, but that they
might inherit the Seed and the Faith, which had the Blessing

And Isaac said to Jacob, God Almighty bless thee, and give the Blessing of
Abraham to thee, and to thy Seed with thee, Genesis 28. And this Isaac spoke to
Jacob before Jacob had any Children; and here you may see Isaac's care, that
Jacob and his Seed might inherit the Faith and Blessing of Abraham and Isaac;
and this should be their first Inheritance, and then they should inherit the
outward Land: And this should be the care of all them that walk in the steps of
the Faith of Abraham, to see, that their Children and Household do inherit the
Faith, Seed and Blessing of Abraham, in the first place, by keeping in the Way
of the Lord, etc. And they are to command their Children to walk in the Way of
the Lord, etc. that they may so do; and you may see, that Jacob did inherit the
Blessing of Abraham and Isaac, in Abraham and Isaac's Seed and Faith.

When the Lord said unto Jacob, Thy Seed shall be as the Dust of the Earth, and
thou shall spread abroad to the West, and to the East, and to the North, and to
the South, and in thee, and in thy Seed shall all the Families of the Earth be
blessed: So here you may see Jacob's Possession, who did inherit the Blessing
of Abraham and Isaac; and they that are of the Seed and Faith, which keep the
Way of the Lord, they do inherit this Blessing in the Seed, in which all
Nations are blessed: And this is according to Christ Doctrine, Seek the Kingdom
of God first.
Seek ye first the Kingdom of God, and his Righteousness, and all these things
shall be added unto you, to wit, What ye shall eat, or what ye shall drink, or
wherewith shall ye be clothed; for after all these things do the Gentiles
seek: For your Heavenly Father knows that you have need of all these things.
And here Christ, (who was of the Seed of Abraham, and of David, according to
the Flesh) would have People to seek their Inheritance in the Kingdom of
Heaven, and its Righteousness, before they seek outward things; and they were
to Lay up for themselves Treasure in Heaven, etc. And to know that Portion for
them and their Children, Matthew. 6. And the Apostle says, The Children of the
Promise are counted for the Seed, Romans 9.8. For in Isaac shall thy Seed be
called, Genesis 21.12. And Christ says, The good Seed are the Children of the
Kingdom, Matthew. 13.38. And this is the Seed in which all Nations are blessed, who
keep the Way of the Lord, and Justice and Judgment, such the Almighty has
blessed with the Blessings from above, The Blessing of the Faithful.
the Blessings of the deep, the Blessing of the breast, and of the womb, Genesis
49. And he will also bless the fruit of the Land, thy Corn, and thy Wine, and
thy Oil, and the increase of thy Kine, and the flocks of thy Sheep, Deuteronomy. 7.
And they that serve the Lord their God, he will bless their Bread and their
Water, Exodus 23. And a faithful Man shall abound with Blessings, Prove. 28.20.
So you may see, they that are in the Faith, and in the Holy Seed, which keeps
in the Way of the Lord, and commands their Children and Household to do the
same; they have the Blessings from Heaven above, and the Blessings below, yea,
the Blessings of the Eternal Inheritance, and of the Kingdom of God; and that
was their chief Inheritance, That all the Faithful Seed of Abraham sought to
possess their Household and their Children in, who did command their Children
and Household to keep the Way of God, that they might inherit the Blessing.
David says, Blessed is the Man that walks not in the counsel of the Ungodly,
nor stands in the way of Sinners, nor sits in the seat of the Scornful:
But his delight is in the Law of the Lord, and in his Law does meditate Day and
Night. Now here is the condition of them that do enjoy the Blessing, they must
keep from the Counsel of the Ungodly, and the Way of Sinners, and the Seat of
the Scornful: Now here you may see David's Instruction, how People might
inherit the Blessing.

Levit. 10. That you may put a difference betwixt the holy and unholy, and
between the clean and unclean, and that you may teach your Children all the
Statutes, which the Lord has spoken unto them by the hand of Moses. And it was
so in the Old Testament, that they might learn the Statutes there: Surely much
more they are to learn the Commands of Christ in his New Testament.

And in Deuteronomy. 4.9, 10. To Teach our Children the Fear of the Lord.
They were to Teach their Sons, and their Sons Sons; and again, they were to
Teach their Children, that they might learn to fear God all the days that they
lived upon the Earth, etc. This they were to teach their Children; and again,
in Deuteronomy. 11. It was the Command of God, that they were to Teach their Children
the Commandments of God, and they were to speak of them, when they sat in their
House, and when they walked by the Way, when they lay down, and when they rose
up; and in Deuteronomy. 30. Moses told them, that The Word was nigh them, in their
Mouths, and in their Hearts, that they might do it. And David said, Come you
Children, hearken to me, and I will teach you the fear of the Lord. O fear the
Lord you Saints; there is no want to them that fear him, Psalm. 34.9, 11.

Ye that fear the Lord, trust in the Lord, he is their Help and their Shield,
Psalm. 115.11. And you may see all along in the Old Testament, they that feared
the Lord were commanded to teach and instruct their Children the Way of the
Lord, that they might walk in it, and inherit the Blessing; which was a better
Portion than outward Riches which will pass away; for they make themselves
Wings and fly away. Solomon says, Train up a Child in the may he should go,
and when he is old he will not depart from it: Foolishness is bound up in the
Heart of a Child, but the Rod of Correction shall drive it far from him, Prove.
22.15. He that spares the Rod, hates his Son; but he that loves him,
chastises him betimes. By Mercy and Truth, iniquity is purged out; and by the
Fear of the Lord, they depart from evil, Prove. 13.24. and 16.6. And the
Apostle's Command is, For Children to obey their Parents in the Lord, for this
is right, Ephesians. 6.1. and Col. 1.3, 20.

It is well pleasing to the Lord, Children to obey their Parents; Children to
obey their Parents.
and the Bishops or Elders, were to Rule well their own Houses, and to have
their Children in subjection, with all gravity; and likewise, the Deacons were
to rule their own Children and their own Houses well, Tim. 1.3. And likewise
you may see the good Report of the Widows bringing up Children, which followed
every good work, etc. And in Titus, such as were Elders or Overseers, their
Children were to be Faithful, Elders to govern their Families well.
not accused of Riot, or Unruly; and the aged Women were to be of good
Behavior, as becomes Holiness, etc. and Teachers of good things; and that
they Teach the younger Women to be Sober, etc. And That the Word of God be not
blasphemed. And Titus was to exhort young Men to be Sober-minded: For the Grace
of God which brings Salvation has appeared unto all Men, teaching us, that
denying Ungodliness and Worldly Lusts, we should live Soberly, Righteously and
Godly in this present World; that being justified by his Grace, we should be
made Heirs according to the Hope of Eternal Life. And Peter says, As Obedient
Children, not fashioning your selves according to your former Lusts, in your
Ignorance; but as he who has called you is Holy, Be Holy in all manner of
Conversation.
so be you Holy in all manner of Conversation; and be not like them, feeding
themselves without fear, which are the Clouds without Rain, and Wells without
Water, and Trees without Fruit, whom Jude declares against, such cannot eat and
drink to the Praise and Glory of God, etc. So you see what care, both in the
Old and New Testament, the faithful Parents had to teach their Children the Way
of the Lord; and the Lord has a Confidence in all them that fear him, and are
of the Faith and Seed of Abraham, that they will not only admonish their
Children and Household, but Command their Children and Household after them, to
keep the Way of the Lord, etc. Genesis 18. And to keep out of the wicked Ways of
the World: The Apostle says, They which be of Faith are blessed with faithful
Abraham: And so are all the Children of God by Faith in Christ Jesus; and if
you be Christ's, then are you Abraham 's Seed, and Heirs according to the
Promise, Gal. 3. And so the Children of God are counted for the Seed, which the
good Seed Christ says, are the Children of the Kingdom.

And the Apostle spoke to the Romans, that they should Walk in the steps of the
Faith of Abraham. Again, the Apostle says to the Corinthians, concerning
Titus, Walked we not in the same Spirit, walked we not in the same steps? And
in the first Epistle of Peter, Christ has suffered for us, leaving us an
Example.
Christ has suffered for us, leaving us an Example that we should follow his
steps, who did not sin, neither was guile found in his mouth. So these were
holy steps, and are a Religious Holy People that walk in the steps of faithful
Abraham, and of Christ and the Apostles, and these have the pure Religion, and
do visit the Fatherless and Widows in their Affliction, and keep themselves
unspotted from the World; and these are they that are Circumcised with the
Spirit, and Baptized with the Holy Ghost, and serve God Night and Day, and
worship him in Spirit and Truth; and these are the Religious Families, which
are of the holy, divine, pure and precious Faith, which Christ is the Author
and Finisher of, which Faith purifieth their Hearts, and is their Victory, by
which they have access to God, True Faith purifieth the Heart.
in which they please him, in that Truth which Christ is the Author and
Finisher of, which is called the Gift of God; and they that are of this Faith,
the same are the Children of Abraham, and are blessed with faithful Abraham;
and Abraham was called the Friend of God; and so are all his Children that are
of his Seed and Faith, they are not Friends of the Devil, the wicked and
unrighteous One, but him and his Works they forsake, who are Friends of God,
they are Friends of Righteousness and Holiness, etc. And such the Blessings of
God rest upon, them that are of the Seed, and walk in the Seed, Christ, that
bruises the Serpent's Head, and in that Seed are all Nations blessed; and out of
the Mouth of the Seed's seed, shall not God's Word depart; but it shall abide
in the Mouth of the Seed's seed (this living Word of God) but the Word of God
does not abide in them, who make a Profession of the Scriptures, but live not
in the Power and Spirit of the Holy Ghost, that gave forth the Scriptures; such
are like the Jews, John 5. and such think to have Life in the Scriptures, but
they will not come unto Christ that they may have Life; for none come to
Christ, but by believing in the Light, which is the Life in him the Word.

Now dear Friends and Brethren in Christ Jesus, if you keep in the Seed and
Faith of Abraham, in it you will command your Children and Families to walk in
the Way of the Lord; for in it you have Authority that they may keep the pure
holy and righteous Way of the Lord after you, when you are gone, that they may
succeed you in the Faith and Seed, and Way of the Lord, and in the Blessing of
God, as Abraham, Isaac and Jacob did. Amen.

G. F.

To the Quarterly Meeting at York.
Friends and Brethren in the Lord Jesus Christ, Epist. 383.
your Life and Salvation, your Rock and Foundation, Rest and Sanctuary, in all
Storms, Trials and Sufferings.

Now dear Friends, my desire is, that you may all strive for that which makes
for Peace: For Blessed are the Peace makers, they are called the Children of
God. And therefore, whatsoever things are Honest, Just, Pure, Lovely, and of
good Report, if there be any Virtue and Praise, think on these things to
Practice them. So that in the Power of the Lord, that is over the Devil and his
Power, all may be kept Chaste, In the Power of God all to keep Chaste, etc.
Pure and Holy, to the Glory of God; and all that are in the true Faith and
Knowledge may show it forth in Virtue, Temperance, Patience, Godliness,
Brotherly Kindness, and true Charity or Love, which bears all things: For
they that dwell in Love, dwell in God, that is their Habitation. And let all
things be done in Love, in the Name and Power of Jesus Christ: And all to
strive in the Spirit of the Lord God, and his Truth, to be of one Mind and
Judgment; so that you may all be baptized with one Spirit into one Body, and so
all to drink into one Spirit. And keep the Unity and Fellowship in the Holy
Spirit of God, which is the Bond of Peace amongst all God's Children, that are
led by his Holy Spirit, whose Communion and Fellowship is in the Holy Ghost, by
which ye are led into all Truth.

Now Dear Friends, Let there be no Strife in all your Meetings, nor vain
Janglings nor Disputings; but let all that tends to Strife be ended out of your
Meetings, that they may be kept Peaceable; so that you may be at Peace among
your selves, and the God of Peace and Love may fill all your Hearts, which Love
edifies his Church. To condescend one to another in the Fear of the Lord.
And condescend one to another in the Fear of the Lord, to that which is
Honest, Just, Virtuous, and of good Report: And where any Weakness has been in
any thing, let it be covered and buried in the Spirit and Love of God, that his
Spirit and Love may be uppermost in you all, to unite all your Hearts together:
And that you may all show forth that you are the Children, which the heavenly
Wisdom is justified of, which is Pure, (mark) Pure, Peaceable, Gentle, and
easy to be entreated, which is above the Wisdom that is below, that is neither
Pure, Peaceable, nor easy to be entreated, etc. And in all matters of
Business, or Difference, or Controversies, treat one another in such things
kindly and gently, and be not fierce, or heady and high minded; for that Spirit
will bring Men and Women to be Lovers of themselves, and to be Despisers of
others, and that which is good, which leads Nature out of its Course, and so
looses Natural Affections, and at last comes to be without Natural Affections;
which Spirit we see most of Christendom is led by: For, if they were in natural
Affections they would not destroy their fellow Creatures about Religion; but
being without natural Affections, they have not Affections to their fellow
Creatures; to wit, Man and Woman, which were made in God's Image. The Law and
the Prophets Commanded to Love their Neighbor as themselves; To love our
Neighbor as our selves.
and Christ Commands, to do unto all Men, as they would have Men do unto them.
And the Gospel Commands, to Love one another; by which they are known to be
Christ's Disciples; and to Love their Enemies, and to pray for them, and to
forgive one another, as Christ has forgiven them. So that those, whose
Conversation is according to the Gospel of Peace, do establsh the Law and the
Prophets; who know the Divine Nature, and are made Partakers of it, are not
without natural Affections, but have Affections to it, to cherish and preserve
it. And this the Word of Wisdom teaches, by which all things were made and
created good and blessed; by which all things are upheld, by which all things
are sanctified to God's People, that God created by his Word, and made them
good, and blessed them: By which Word and Wisdom all things are sanctified to
God's People (as before) and are used and ordered by his Word of Wisdom to his
Glory and Praise.

And now, Dear Friends, whereas there have been formerly some Discourses by
some in your Meeting, of Marrying within a Year after the decease of the Wife
or of the Husband; my desire is, in those things, Friends may show forth both
Chastity, and Virtue and Temperance: For formerly hasty Marriages was reckoned
amongst the infamous Persons, Marriage within the Year not of good Report.
as for a Man or a Woman to Marry within the Year of the Death of the Wife or
Husband. And therefore, for Virtue and Chastity's sake, and the Truth, and good
Examples sake, that which is Honest, Lovely and of good Report, keep and walk
in, and follow: For we ought in the Power of Christ Jesus to outstrip the World
in Virtue, Chastity, Modesty and Temperance, and in that which is of good
Report. Our Light to shine before Men.
For our heavenly Light ought to shine so before Men, that they may see our
good Works, and glorify our Father which is in Heaven. And therefore all in
the Church of Christ ought to live in the Spirit and Power of Christ, in which
they do Judge the World and all the fallen Angels. So in this Heavenly Power,
the Virtue, Purity, Chastity flows and shines over all; and they that do
possess, as though they did not; and they Marry, as though they married not:
They are all resigned in the Power of Christ, that gives Dominion over the
World, which brings all into one Mind, and to be of one Heart and Soul, and to
one Judgment, and are a Chosen Generation, a Royal Priesthood, and Holy Nation;
a peculiar People, that shows forth the Praise of Christ, who has called them
out of Darkness into his mavelous Light, and as Living Stones, are built up a
Spiritual Household, an Holy Priesthood, to offer up Spiritual Sacrifices
acceptable to God by Jesus Christ.

And so my Dear Friends, To walk in Christ.
my desire is, That in Jesus Christ ye may all live and walk, who is the Seed
of the Woman, that bruises the Serpents Head; that is, the Head of all
Wickedness and Strife; and in this Seed Christ all Nations are blessed, as they
live and walk in him: And the Blessings from above, and the Blessings beneath,
rest upon them: And in this Seed Christ all have Rest and Peace, who is the
First and the Last, over all Blessed for ever. Amen. In him is my Love to you
all, as though I named you.

Read this in your Quarterly Meeting at York.

G. F.

To the Six Weeks Meeting in Barbados.
DEar Friends,
Epist. 384.
In Christ in whom we have Peace, Purity, Holiness and Righteousness, you must
be kept Holy and Righteous to the Glory of God, and Righteousness, and
Holiness, and Puririty must wear and outlive all that is contrary to it; and
Patience, and Meekness, and Humility, and Kindness, and Sobriety must wear out
Passion, Envy, Strife, and Wrath, High-mindedness, and Loftiness, and
Wilfulness; and therefore consider the Holy Men and Women of God must not
strive, but be gentle to all; and in that alone keep their Dominion: Not to
strive, but be gentle.
For truly Friends, Love gathers into Love, and edifies the Body of Christ;
and let nothing be done with Strife, but in Love, to the Glory of God, in the
Name of Christ, and in his Power; so that you all may see and feel Christ among
you, ordering you all to his Glory with his Wisdom, which is Pure, Peaceable,
and Easy to be entreated; so that none may be burdened nor oppressed in your
Meetings, but that the Life and Seed may reign in you all; and so the Lord may
have the Glory of all, and ye may all have Comfort in him your Head: And do not
much strive with unruly Talkers, but keep your Peace in the Spirit and Power of
Christ, that will overcome and wear out all that is contrary to it. So that all
may keep their own Habitation in Christ Jesus, who is over all, the First and
Last; and in his Power and Spirit live and walk, that so you all may be Trees
with Fruits, and Wells with Water, and have Bread in your own Tabernacles, and
your own Lamps trimmed and burning, and that there may be no Strife among you,
but dwell in Love; for he that dwells in Love, dwells in God; so, God who
is Love, is to be your Salvation: To condescend to the Meek, etc.
And condescend to the meek, and to every appearance of the Lord God, and make
every one's Condition in the Truth your own; in that you will deny your selves,
and become all to all in the Truth, so that none may be hurt in the Truth, nor
made to stumble, nor the blind caused to wander, but be directed into the right
way, and all as the tender Plants may grow together, as the Lord's Planting,
and he watering them, and giving the increase and growth to his Glory; so that
the Lord may have the Praise and Glory of all his Works. Amen.

And be careful in all your Meetings, that they may be kept peaceable in the
Wisdom of God, that is pure and peaceable, and easy to be entreated; so that
Wisdom may be justified of her Children: That there be no Harshness or
Fierceness, but Meekness and Mildness, and gracious Language, which will edify
and season the Hearers, and be of a good savor: And this will honor the Seed
Christ, from whence Grace and Truth comes, and will be to your Comfort, and
show forth whose Children you are; for, as Christ said, Blessed are the
Peacemakers, they are Children of God: And therefore all do this Work, that
you may have this Blessing. And so, with my Love to you all, that are convinced
of God's Truth, as though I named you all; and all to dwell in Love; then you
all do dwell in God, as I said before; and so the Lord God Almighty preserve
you all in Christ your Sanctuary. Amen.

You may read this in your Monthly or Quarterly Meetings.

Kingston, the 7th of the 9th Month, 1683. G. F.

To suffering Friends in Prison at Bristol.
DEar Friends,
With my Love to all the Prisoners and the Faithful, Epist. 385.
as though I named them: It is the time now for all the Faithful to keep in
Christ their Sanctuary, To keep to Christ our Sanctuary.
in whom you have all Peace, Rest, Life and Salvation, and by the Testimony of
Jesus, and the Blood of the Lamb, whose Names are written in the Lamb's Book of
Life, before the Foundation of the World, they were they that did overcome, and
did eat of the hidden Manna, and had the new Name; and therefore now is the
time to keep the Word of Patience, and the Testimony of Jesus; for they that
keep the Word of Patience, the Lord will keep them in the Hour of Temptation,
which will come upon the whole World, to try them which dwell upon the Earth;
for the Word was, before the World was, and the Tempter; for all things were
made by the Word: And it is also the Word of Reconciliation, the Word of Power,
the Word of Wisdom, and the Word of Life, and the Word of Salvation, by which
People are reconciled to God, that are born again of the incorruptible Seed by
the Word of God; and they feed and grow by the Milk of the Word, which lives,
and abides, and endures for ever, which strengthens all the Faithful, in all
Ages, in all their Afflictions, Imprisonments and Sufferings; and it is the
same to God's People now in this Day of Trial, to preserve all his People every
where, in his Spirit and Power, faithful to himself; for, he that endures
faithful to the End shall be saved: He that end ares to the end shall be saved.
And Christ says, He that is ashamed of me before Men, him will I be ashamed
of before my Father, and his Angels, which are in Heaven. And therefore it is
good to confess Christ before Men, to be your Priest, Prophet, your Shepherd,
your Bishop, your Way, your Mediator, that makes your Peace betwixt God and
you; and be valiant for his glorious Name and Truth upon the Earth. And so with
my Love in the Seed, in which you and all Nations are blessed.

From Dosston, the 6th of the 10th Month, 1683. G. F.

To Friends in Charlestown in Carolina.
DEar Friends, Epist. 386.
of the Monthly Meeting of Charlestown, in Ashley Cooper River in Carolina, I
received your Letter, dated the Sixth Day of the Eighth Month, 1683. Wherein
you give an Account of your Meeting, and of the Country, and of your Liberty in
that Province, which I am glad to hear of, though your Meeting is but small;
but, however, stand all faithful in Truth and Righteousness, that your Fruits
may be unto Holiness; and your End will be Everlasting Life: And that you may
be Patterns of Virtue, Modesty, Chastity and Sobriety, showing forth the Fruits
and Life of Christianity in your Lives and Conversations, To be Patterns of
Virtue, etc.
that they may preach Righteousness, Truth and Holiness to all People in that
dark Wilderness, that you may answer the Truth both in them that are called
Christians, and in the Indians. And my desire is, that you may prise your
Liberty, both Natural and Spiritual, and the Favor that the Lord has given
you, that your Yea is taken instead of an Oath; and that you do serve both in
Assemblies, Juries, and other Offices, without Swearing, according to the
Doctrine of Christ: Which is a great Thing, worth prizing. And take heed of
abusing that Liberty, or losing the Savor of the Heavenly Salt, which seasons
your Lives and Conversations in Truth, Holiness and Righteousness: For you
know, when the Salt has lost its Savor, it is good for nothing but to be
trodden under the Foot of Men. For we here are under great Persecution, betwixt
Thirteen and Fourteen Hundred in Prison; an Account of which has lately been
delivered to the King: Besides the great Spoil and Havoc which is made of
Friends Goods, by Informers; and besides the great Spoil upon the two thirds of
our Estates, About 1400 Friends in Prison in 1683.
and upon the Twenty Pound a Month Acts, and for not going to the
Steeple-House; and besides many are imprisoned and premunired for not Swearing
Alegiance, both Men, Women, Widows and Maids; and many are fined and cast into
Prison, as Rioters, for Meeting to worship God. And we are kept out of our
Meetings in Streets and Highways in many Places of the Land, and beaten and
abused: And therefore prise the Liberty, both Natural and Spiritual, that you
enjoy. And many are cast into Prison because they cannot pay the Priests
Tithes; and also many are cast into Prison by the Bishops Writs, De
Excommunicato Capiendo. So, that at present we are under great Sufferings,
Persecutions and Imprisonments: But the Lord's Power is over all, and that
supports his People.

But in Ireland, Scotland, Holland, Germany and Dantzick, we hear that Friends
are in peace and quietness; and therefore you that have great Liberty, both
natural and spiritual (as aforesaid) be valiant for God's Truth upon the Earth,
and spread it abroad, To spread Truth abroad.
both among them that are called Christians and Indians, turning them from
Darkness to Light, Christ Jesus, the Savior, whom God has set up for an
Ensign among the Gentiles or Heathen, and to be his Salvation unto the ends of
the Earth: So seek the Good of all, and the Profit of all, and the Salvation,
and the Glory of God above all, and the Exalting of his Name and Truth in your
Day and Generation; and live in Love, and in the Truth, and the Love of it; and
overcome evil with good; and hold fast that which is good, then you can try all
things.

And so with my Love to you all in the holy Seed of Life, Christ Jesus, that
reigns over all, who is your Sanctuary, in whom you have all Life, and Peace,
and Salvation, in Him, the Lord God Almighty preserve and keep you all Holy,
Pure and Clean, to his Glory, Amen.

London, the 23d of the 12th Month, 1683. G. F.

To the Monthly and Quarterly Meeting in England, etc.
FRiends,
Be all Faithful in your Testimony against Tithes, Epist. 387.
and all those things that have come up in the Night of Apostasy from the
Light, Life and Power of God and Christ, and against all Looseness whatsoever,
that the heavenly Camp of God may be kept clean and pure. And all Friends, look
at the Lord above all your Sufferings, To look at the Lord above all Sufferings.
and trust in him, who by his Eternal Power has preserved you to this Day. The
Lord in his Glorious Power was with us in, all our Assemblies, at this Yearly
Meeting; he over all has the Dominion, and over all evil Spirits gave Dominion
to his People: Glory to his Name for ever, Amen.

And therefore let your Eye be to the Gospel, the Power of God, which has
brought Life and Immortality to Light in you, which is farther than the Law to
be looked at.

The 9th of the 4th Month, 1683. G. F.

To Friends that are Captives at Algier.
DEar Friends, who are Captives in Algier, Epist. 388.
whom the Lord has enlightened with his Day spring from on High, and visited
you with his tender Mercies in your Slavery and Captivity, that you may know
his Will, and do it in his Light, Grace, Truth and Spirit, that you may serve
and worship the Holy, Eternal and Invisible God, that made you.

Now dear Friends, to you is my Love, and to all the rest that fears God, that
meets with you; my Desires are, To keep in Humility, and the Fear of God.
that you may all keep low in Humility, in the Fear of God, there is no danger;
for God dwells with the Humble, and teaches the Humble the way they should
walk. And therefore be careful of God's Glory, you who profess the Name of God,
and his Son, that your Lives and Words, and Conversations may preach Godliness,
Righteousness, Holiness, Virtue, Sobriety and Modesty, both to Turks, Moors,
Jews, and to your Patroons, and to the Families where you live; for Christ has
enlightened every Man that comes into the World, Christ has enlightened all Men.
he has enlightened the Turks, Jews and Moors, with the Light (which is the
Life in him the Word) that all in the Light might know God and Christ; and The
Grace of God which brings Salvation has appeared unto all Men; so to the
Turks, Jews and Moors, yea, to all Nations; so that with the Grace of God they
may be taught to deny Ungodliness and Unrighteousness, and live Righteously and
Godly; and therefore all must come to this Grace of God in their Hearts, which
brings their Salvation (if they have Salvation) and come to the Throne of
Grace; and this is the Covenant of Grace, in which is the Election; and God
(who made all) pours out of his Spirit upon all Men and Women in the World, in
the Days of his New Covenant, yea, upon Whites and Blacks, Moors, and Turks,
and Indians, Christians, Jews and Gentiles, that all with the Spirit of God,
might know God and the things of God, and serve and worship him in his Spirit
and Truth, that he has given them; but they that do resist the Truth, and
quench, and vex, and grieve and rebel against the Spirit that God has given
them, such are not like to serve and worship God in his Spirit and Truth; but
he that endures to the end in God's Grace, Spirit, Light and Truth, shall be
saved; and the Gospel of Salvation is preached to every Creature under Heaven;
which Gospel is the Power of God, and the Gospel of Peace; and so it is glad
Tidings to every Creature under Heaven, and to all Nations, to the Turks, Jews,
Indians, Moors, Christians and Gentiles, if they receive and obey the Gospel of
Salvation, it is glad Tidings to them all. Now, this is the Day of God's
gathering: And therefore all must come to the Light, Grace, Truth, Power and
Spirit of God in their own Particulars, which they have from God and Christ,
that by it they might be built upon Christ, their heavenly Rock and Foundation,
who is their Way to God, who bruises the Serpent's Head, and through Death
destroyed Death, and the Devil the Power of Death, and so destroys Death, and
so destroys the Devil and his Works; for Sin brought Death; and now Christ, who
destroys Death that Sin brought, and makes an end of Sin, is the Sanctuary for
all his Believers in all Storms and Tempests, Trials, and Troubles and
Sufferings to rest upon, in whom they have Peace; yea, Life and Salvation.

Now there is a common Saying among the Turks to the Christians [Your Crucified
God] meaning Christ: Now this is their mistake, though God was in Christ
reconciling the World to himself, it was not the Eternal God that died, It was
Christ, as he was Man, who suffered in the Flesh, upon the Cross, and not God
that was crucified.
and was crucified, that was in Christ; for Christ said, when he was about to
suffer, My God my God, why have thou forsaken me? So Christ suffered in the
Flesh, and died, and was crucified, as he was Man, not as he was God, the Word,
which was in the Beginning; but as he was Man, who bore the Sins and Iniquities
of all Mankind, and was an Offering for the Sins of the whole World, who
through Death tasted Death for every Man; all being in Death in Adam; so that
they might have Life through Christ the Second Adam: So, I say again, that
Christ did not die as he was God, but as Man: He was crucified and buried, and
rose again the third Day, and ascended, and is at the Right Hand of God; this
he did by the Power of God, as he was Man. So the Turks are mistaken, to say,
or to think, that the Eternal God could be crucified or dye.

Dear Friends, I thought needful to write a Letter to you concerning this their
mistake, which you may be wise in making use of; To exalt God's Name in their
Captivity.
and my desires are, that you may be preserved, and exalt God's Name in your
Places of Captivity, and in your Lives, Words and Conversations, answering
God's Witness in the Turks, Jews, Moors, and your Patroons. And keep low, and
walk wisely, that you may be a good Savor in the Hearts of all there-aways;
and then the Blessings of the Lord, and his Presence, will rest upon you, and
be in you: I think you have more Liberty to meet there than we have here; for
they keep us out of our Meetings, and cast us into Prison, and spoil our Goods.
And therefore prize your Liberty in your Meetings, and do not abuse it; and the
Lord preserve you all in his Grace, Fear and Wisdom, that you may grow up in
Christ the Head, and walk in him, to the Glory of God, Amen.

Read this openly in your Meetings; and I have sent you here some Books that
you may read them, and give them to the Turks or English, as you may see fit;
which Books are to the Turks, one concerning Good Conversation; and another
concerning the Temple; and another concerning Abraham instructing his Family,
and one to all Kings and Princes; and another concerning Revelation and
Inspiration, with some others, to read among your selves.

And Friends, it would be very well for you, if you could get the Turks and
Moors Language, that you might be the more enabled to direct them to the Grace
and Spirit of God in them, which they have from God, in their Hearts; and then
geting their Language, you would be able to write and translate any Papers to
them, which may be serviceable to instruct them, and for the spreading of the
Truth among the Turks and Moors. So with my Love to you.

Gousey in Essex, the 10th of the 2d Month, 1683. G. F.

To all the Household of Faith, which is the Church of Christ, who is the Author
and Finisher of Faith; who are to do good unto all, but especially to them of
the same Faith.
THE Apostle says to the Church of Christ, Epist. 3^3.
I wrote unto you an Epistle, not to keep company with Fornicators; yet not
altogether with the Fornicators of this World, nor with the Covetous,
Extortioners, Not to keep Company with Scandalous Persons.
Idolaters, etc. For then ye must needs go out of the World, 1 Cor. 5. But now
I have written unto you, Not to keep Company; if any Man that is called a
Brother, be a Fornicator, or Covetous, or an Idolater, or a Railer, or a
Drunkard, or an Extortioner, etc. with such an one, no not to eat. Therefore
you see all such are to be avoided, as knowing, neither Fornicators,
Adulterers, Effeminate, and Abusers of themselves with Mankind, nor Thieves,
nor Covetous, nor Drunkards, nor Revilers, nor Extortioners shall inherit the
Kingdom of God. So ye may see, all such Workers you are not to keep Company
with, nor so much as to eat with them, though they have gone under the Notion
of Brothers and Sisters. So the Camp of God must be kept clean of such; for the
Feast must be kept with unleavened Bread of Sincerity and Truth. So the old
Leaven must be purged out; For a little Leaven leavens the whole Lump. And
therefore ye must be a new Lump, as ye are leavened by it; For even Christ our
Passover is sacrificed for us. Therefore (as is said before) let us keep the
Feast with Sincerity and Truth.

And the Apostle says, Not to be unequally yoked.
Be ye not unequally yoked together with Unbelievers: For what Fellowship has
Righteousness with Unrighteousness? And what Communion has Light with
Darkness? And what Concord has Christ with Belial? And what part has he that
Believes with an Infidel? (Mark, Part) and what agreement has the Temple of
God with Idols? Wherefore come out from among them, and be ye separate, says
the Lord, and touch no unclean thing; and I will receive you, and I will be a
Father unto you (that is, take care for you) and ye shall be my Sons and
Daughters, says the Lord God Almighty.

And therefore if God's Sons and Daughters must be separated from all such
things without, and not to touch them, neither to have an agreement or unity
with them, nor be yoked with such Actions and Actors without, and not touch
such as act such things: Then, are they not to be separated from all such
Actions and Actors within, and not to touch such as act such things, though he
be called a Brother or Sister, seeing such Actions makes them Infidels, and
like Belial, and bring them into Darkness? And if there be no Fellowship,
Communion, Yoaking or Agreement with such Actions and Actors without, then what
Yoaking, Communion, or Fellowship and Agreement (mark Agreement) can there be
with such as act such things within, that is called a Brother or Sister, or
keep Company with such, or Eat with such, that have a form of Godliness, but
deny the Power?

Therefore such Leapers that defile the Camp of God ought to be turned out of
it, till they be healed and cleansed from such Leprosies; as knowing that such
Actions and Actors are out of the Kingdom of God, and out of the Holy City, New
and Heavenly Jerusalem: And no unclean thing comes into the Kingdom of God, nor
enters into the Kingdom, the Holy City: And none comes into the Holy City, but
by Repentance, and being turned and changed from all manner of Evil and
Uncleanness whatsoever.

The Adulterer is brought to a Morsel of Bread, and the Sloathful goes in
Rags: But the Virtuous are Happy, and the Diligent are Rich that serve the
Lord. To have no Fellowship with the Works of Darkness.
Therefore have no Fellowship with the unfruitful Works of Darkness, but rather
reprove them: For the Church of Christ's Fellowship (that are the Believers) is
in the Light, which is the Life in Christ: And so their Fellowship is with the
Father and the Son, and their Communion is in the Holy Ghost, which proceeds
from the Father and the Son. And therefore the Church of Christ is to abstain
from every Appearance of Evil: And if they are to abstain from every Appearance
of Evil, then they cannot join or have unity with them, where Evil appears.

And again, the Apostle says to the Church of the Thessalonians, That they
were to study to be quiet, and to do their own business, and to work with their
own hands, and to walk honestly toward them that are without; and that ye may
have lack of nothing. So here you may see the Diligence in the Truth that the
Apostle exhorted the Church to Practice. First, They are all to study to be
quiet. Secondly, They are all to do their own business, and work with their own
hands, that they may lack nothing. None to be busy Bodies.
And Thirdly, To walk honestly toward them that are without: And if they walk
honestly toward them that are without, they must walk honestly to them that
are within. For the Apostle had some occasion to write to the Thessalonians
upon the Matter: For, says he, we hear that there are some which walk among
you disorderly, working not at all, but are busy Bodies: Now them that are
such we command and exhort by our Lord Jesus Christ, that with quietness they
work, and eat their own Bread: And if any Man obey not our Word by this
Epistle, note that Man, etc. and have no company with him, that he may be
ashamed. Yet count him not as an Enemy, but admonish him as a Brother. You may
see there were not those gross Evils charged upon him, as were upon some among
the Corinthians. So you may see the Apostle's care in the Church of Christ was
to keep all things clean and pure, and all diligent in their places, serving
the Lord, and not to be busy Bodies, and talkers about other Men's business;
but to be quiet, and not idle, but doing their own business, that they may lack
nothing; and so eat their own Bread Natural and Spiritual.

Now the Apostle speaks of Widows in his first Epistle to Timothy, Chap. 5.
what sort of Widows they were to receive: To instruct the Elder as Fathers, and
the younger Men as Brethren.
And ye may see first the decent and lovely Practice in the Church of Christ;
Rebuke not an Elder, but entreat him as a Father, and younger Men as Brethren;
and the elder Women as Mothers, and the younger Women as Sisters, with all
purity: So are these to be entreated; And honor Widows, that are Widows
indeed. And if any Widow have Children or Nephews, let them learn (mark, learn)
first to show piety at home, and requite their Parents; for that is good and
acceptable before God. So this Piety must be learned and showed at home; and
these the Widows must learn to look to. Here these Widow-women have a service;
and in the first place they must learn to show Piety at home, and to their
Parents and Nephews, and to show it abroad then in the Church of Christ. So all
must learn this Lesson, to show Piety to their Children and Nephews, and to
requite their Parents. For this Practice and Service is good and acceptable
before God.

Now the State of desolate Widows, She that is a Widow indeed, A Widow indeed.
and desolate, trusts in God, and continues in Supplications and Prayers
night and day: But she that lives in Pleasure is dead while she lives. These
things give in charge, that they may be blameless: But if any provide not for
his own, and especially for those of his own House, he has denied the Faith,
and is worse than an Infidel (mark, that is worse than the World) For the Faith
brings every Man and every Widow to be diligent, and to provide for their own;
that is, their Children and Nephews, or Kindred and Parents, as before: But the
Apostle says, Especially those of his own House: And so here is Piety to be
shown still two ways; For his own, and especially to those of his own House or
Family; and here are Nephews and Parents, as before mentioned.

Again the Apostle says, Let not a Widow be taken into the Number under
Threescore Years Old, etc. Mark, here was a Number that the Widow was to be
taken into; and the Widow that was to be taken into this Number, see her
qualifications before she come into the Number. She must be well reported of
for good Works, if she have brought up Children, The Qualifications of a Widow
indeed.
if she have lodged Strangers, if she have washed the Saints Feet, if she have
relieved the Afflicted, if she have dilgently followed every good Work, etc.
These are the qualified Widows that are to be taken into the Number: So here
was a great Practice, and a diligence in Piety for this Woman to do, before she
was receivinto the Number of the Faithful. But says the Apostle, The Younger
Refuse; for when they begin to wax Wanton against Christ, etc. they cast off
their first Faith, and withal, they learn to be Idle; so they forsake to learn
and show Piety, and to live in that; and so do not learn to be diligent; and
wander about from House to House, and not only Idle, but Tattlers and
Busybodies, speaking things they ought not; and therefore such things were,
and are to be reproved: such as these were not to be received, and taken into
the Number of the Faithful but to be refused.

And again the Apostle says, I will therefore, that ye Younger Woman Marry,
bear Children, guide the House, give no occasion to the Adversary to speak
reproachfully.

And the Apostle says, To relieve our own Relations, and to charge the Church
with them.
If any Man or Woman that believes, have Widows, let them relieve them, and
let not the Church be charged; that it may relieve those that are Widows
indeed. So here you may see the Care, Piety and Duty, if either Man or Woman
that Believes, have Widows, they are to relieve them, and not let the Church of
Christ be charged with them. So let Men and Women learn to show Piety to
Widows, to Nephews, and to Parents.

And the Apostle says to Timothy, I charge thee before God, and the Lord Jesus
Christ, and the Elect Angels, that thou observe these things, without
preferring one before another, do nothing by partiality, lay hands suddenly on
no Man. So here you may see the Apostle's Care in the Church of Christ, who
would have all to be exercised in Truth and Piety, and be diligent in their
Service, that Truth requires of them.

And then again, the Apostle speaks of such as are Lovers of themselves,
Covetous, Proud, Boasters, disobedient to Parents, Unthankful, Unholy, without
natural Affections (to wit, to Husband or Wife, Children, Parents, or others)
and likewise, Truce Breakers, which break their Covenant or Promises in their
Marriages, with God and with Man; and so likewise, break their Truce and
Covenant with Men in Outward Things; and also, such as are false Accusers,
Incontinent, Fierce, Despisers of them that are Good, such are not like to be
subject to the good Spirit of God in themselves; and Traitors, Heady,
High-minded, Lovers of Pleasures, more than Lovers of God, having the form of
Godliness, but deny the Power thereof; from such turn away, says the Apostle;
now if they were to turn away from them, they were not to be heeded, though
they had the Form of Godliness, and of Christianity; if they were to turn away
from them, they were not to receive them into the Camp; for such are as Lepers
are to be turned away from. And therefore the Camp of God must be kept clean.
And Christ has given Authority to his Church to admonish and exhort, and to
reprove and rebuke all such things with his Authority.

Now, Friends, concerning putting on of Apparel: The Apostle in the Spirit and
Power of Christ had a Care in the Church of God, that they should adorn
themselves as becomes the Gospel, The Gospel Adorning.
with chaste Lives and Conversations, and with the hidden Man of the Heart, in
that which is not corruptible, even the Ornament of a meek and quiet Spirit;
which is in the sight of God of a great Price. This is that which arrays and
beautifies God's Church; and not the outward adorning and plaiting the Hair,
and every new Fashion that comes up into the World, 1. Pet. 3. And also the
Apostle writes to Timothy, and gives him that Exhortation to the Church, That
Women adorn themselves with modest Apparel (mark, Modest) with shamefacedness
and sobriety, (mark, Sobriety) not with broidered Hair, or Gold, or Pearls. For
that was the Practice of the Jew outward, and is to this Day; (or costly
Array.) But with that which becomes Women professing Godliness, with good
Works. So this is the Adorning that all that profess Godliness must be arrayed
withal, 1 Timothy 2.9. So that all may be in that good Behavior, as becomes
Godliness and Holiness. And likewise Chaste and Discreet, Teachers of good
things; that the Word of God may not be blasphemed, which they profess; as in
Tit. 2.

And it is desired, That all Friends, that have Children, To train up Children
and Servants in the pure Religion.
Families and Servants, may train them up in the pure and unspotted Religion,
and in the nurture and fear of God; and that frequently they read the Holy
Scriptures, which is much better than to be gadding abroad. And exhort and
admonish them; that every Family apart may serve and worship the Lord, as well
as in Public. And that when they go to Meetings, they may take their Servants
and Families with them, that they may not go wandering up and down in the
Fields, or to Alehouses, as many have done, to the dishonor of God, and to
the dishonor of their Masters and Mistresses Families, and to their own Ruin
and Destruction. And therefore, for Christ's sake and his pure Religion, let
there be Care taken, to prevent all these things. For such an one as cannot
rule well his own House, having his Children in subjection with all gravity,
how can he take Care of the Church of God, 1 Timothy 3.

And now, Friends, concerning Marriages, Concerning Marriages.
of which very many things have been written, it is desired that all may be
careful in that thing, of running hastily together: And consider it first; that
first, as it is God's Joining, so it is his Ordinance, and it is honorable in
all, and the Bed undefiled. And again, such Men as draw out young Women's
Affections, and run from one to another; and leave them, and run to others. And
such Women as draw out Men's Affections, and then leave them, and draw out other
Men's Affections: These Practices bring many young Women, and many young Men
into Trouble; and are sharply to be reproved. For this Work is not of God's
Joining, but out of his Covenant: Some of which have gone so far, as to
Promises, Espousals and Contracts, and then left them, and gone to others. This
is to be Judged and Reproved. For, as we make no Contract for Marriages, we
break none.

And likewise such young People, that trim up themselves in gay Apparel, and
make a great show, and hang most on their Backs, that appear what they are not
in Substance; The ill Consequence of Pride and Vanity.
which Women have sometimes deceived young Men; and Men deceived Women, and
drawn out their Affections and Minds by outward show, and deceived one another,
and brought one another into Trouble: Such are out of the Fear of God and a
chaste Mind. And therefore they are not like to expect a Blessing in this Life,
nor in that which is to come, without great Judgment and Repentance. Therefore
such Actions are to be reproved, that they may be brought into Chastity, Virtue
and Piety, and to the Adorning the hidden Man of the Heart, which is not
corruptible, and the Ornament of a meek and quiet Spirit; which Ornament or
Adorning is acceptable with the Lord. For after this manner, in Old Time, the
Holy Women, who trusted in God, adorned themselves.

And likewise such, To keep Covenant in Marriage.
as after they are married break their Covenant in Marriage, such go from the
Spirit of God, and his Joining, and from the Spiritual Society of God's People,
and their Unity and Fellowship. Such are to be reproved by the Spirit of God.
And if they do not return after Reproof, Friends cannot have Unity or
Fellowship with them, but turn away from them; though they may have the Form of
Godliness, and have been called a Sister or a Brother, but have denied the
Power of Godliness. Therefore all must abide in Christ the Vine, if they bring
forth Fruit to the Glory and Praise of God. Amen.

The Apostle says, Now, we command you, Brethren, in the Name of our Lord Jesus
Christ, that ye withdraw your selves from every Brother that walks disorderly,
etc. 2 Thessalonians. 3.

Now, The Case of old Eli, a Warning to Parents.
Dear Friends, consider old Eli's Case, who did admonish his Children; but
because he did not restrain them from the Follies and the Evils they run into,
therefore the Lord brought his Judgments upon him, that he lost his Childrens
Lives, and his Priesthood, and his own Life. And do you think, that this was
not written for an Example, that others should be warned hear and fear? And was
not the Gospel and the Law given forth to restrain People from Sin and Evil,
and such things as dishonor God?

G. F.

An Epistle to all Friends every where.
FRiends,
Epist. 390.
This is the Word of the Lord unto you all: All live in the Seed, in which all
Nations are blessed; in which Seed you are blessed every way, Christ the Blessing
of all Nations.
in your rising up and lying down; in your goings forth and comings in: And you
have the Blessings from above, and the Blessings from beneath, in this Holy
Seed; yea, the Blessings of him that dwelt in the Bush, that made the very
Ground Holy, that Moses trod upon, who brings you out of the World, which is as
a Bushy, Thorny Wilderness, that ye might dwell in this blessed Seed, in which
all Nations are blessed; which bruises the Serpent's Head, who was the first
Questioner, and Tempter, and Liar, and Deceiver; and Man and Woman by harkening
or giving Ear to this Questioner, Liar and Tempter, the Serpent, they fell from
their Habitation in the Image of God, and so went out of their Habitation and
Service, that God had placed them in, and commanded them to do.

But, the Seed of the Woman is come, that bruises the Serpent's Head, in which
Seed Christ, all Nations are blessed.

And all you who live and walk in this Seed, you live in him that bruises the
Serpent's Head, that Liar, Tempter and Questioner; yea, and every one by this
Seed Christ, may be renewed up into the Image of God, as Adam and Eve were in,
in the Beginning: Then you are all in your Habitations of Life and Truth, and
the Image of God; and in it you know your Services, Unruly Talkers.
that the Lord God Almighty commands you. And you living in this Holy Seed, you
live over all vain unruly Talkers, and vain Disputers, Men of corrupt Minds,
which have the Form of Godliness, but deny the Power thereof: All you as live
in the Seed that bruises the Serpent's Head, turn away from such, for their
Work is to destroy; whose Words eat as a Canker; who do profess Truth in Words,
and may have the Form of Godliness, but in their Works deny the Power thereof,
who are to every good Work or Service Reprobated.

And these are as the raging Waves of the Sea and Tempests, they are known by
their tempestuous Spirits, and its raging, like a raging of the Sea, cassing up
Mire and Dirt; a murdering Spirit, like Cain; a Gainsaying Spirit, like Corah;
and erred from the true Spirit, like Balaam: No Rain in their Clouds, no Water
in their Wells, nor Fruit on their Trees; twice dead; that is, once dead, and
made alive, and dead again; so they cannot grow in the Truth, Light, nor the
Spirit of God, nor his Gospel; but such corrupt the Earth, and corrupt Peoples
Minds; are sowers of Discord, Strife, and Contention; Co-workers with the
Serpent to beguile the unstable Minds; all such the Seed of God reigns over.

And therefore in this Holy Seed Christ, all live and walk, and shun such evil
Spirits and their Works; and all be established in this Seed Christ Jesus, that
the Serpentine Spirit, either by its Strife, Vain Jangling, Vain Disputing, or
its sowing of Dissension, Tempting and Questioning, not with feigned, fair,
flattering, enticing Words may not draw you out of your Habitation of the Seed,
Christ Jesus; and the Image of God, and your Work and Service in it, that God
and Christ Commands you.

And therefore beware of this Serpentine Spirit, Beware of Dogs who will
devour.
that you may not be deceived, as Eve was; and beware of Dogs that will bite
and devour you; and beware of Evil-workers, though they have never such fair
Words to deceive the Hearts of the simple. Beware of false Prophets, which are
inwardly ravened from the Spirit of God, and are become Wolves, though they
have got the Sheeps clothing, and the Words of Truth, of Christ and his
Apostles, whose Fruits are as Thorns and Thistles: But the Seed Christ, that
discovers all these things, in him live, grow up, and walk and be established.

And beware of the Leaven of the Pharisees, And of the Leaven of the Pharisees.
who make an outward Profession of the Holy Men's Words, but are Persecuters of
the Seed Christ Jesus, in whom all Nations are blessed, and Despisers of his
peaceable Government; of the increase of which there is no end: And into this
blessed Seed, the Serpent cannot come, nor none of his Instruments nor his
Angels, which are evil Spirits: And all the Doters about Questions and Strife
of Words, and the vain Janglers, and vain perverse Disputers and Contenders,
and the sowers of Strife and Dissension, Not to dote about Questions and strife
of Words.
makers of Debate and Strife. All these, are out of the blessed peaceable Seed;
although they may profess the Truth of all the New and Old Testament in Words,
without the Power of God (that they are turned away from, and therefore they
are to be turned away from) the Trumpet of the Lord, his Spirit and Power is
blown against them, though they have never such high swelling Words of Vanity,
and have never so many flattering fair Words and good Speeches, and trimmed and
decked with the Sheeps clothing, yet they are in the Wolfs Nature, and Whored
from the Lamb and his Nature, and so from the Seed Christ, in whom all the
Children of the Kingdom and the Elect are to walk, that are of his Heavenly and
Spiritual Generation, and grow up in him as Trees of Righteousness, whose
Fruits are unto Holiness, and whose End will be Everlasting Life. And the End
of that Spirit and Fruits, before mentioned, that are out of Christ and his
peaceable Truth, will be Destruction in the Lake of Fire. And that is the Word
of the Lord to you all; therefore be warned what you join to, and what you lay
hands on suddenly.

For I remember, before we were called Quakers, as I was sitting in an House in
Nottinghamshire (about the Year 1648) the Word of the Lord came to me and said,
Some of those that should come to be convinced with the Light and Spirit of
God, and should come so far as Cain to hear God's Voice, and as far as Balaam
to hear God's Voice, and to have some Openings, and to come so far as Corah,
Dathan and Abiram, these should be the Deceivers, and the Troublers of the
Church of Christ, and seek to destroy the Faithful, and to betray them: Who
formerly had some Experience to talk of, but did not live in the Truth. Which I
and many others have seen come to pass and fulfilled.

For Christ said to his Disciples, False Prophets and Antichrists.
That the false Prophets and the Antichrists (which were inwardly the ravened
Wolves, which the Apostles and Believers should beware of) should come to them,
to try them, they had the Sheeps-cloathing, and Outward Profession of
Christianity, but were Inwardly ravening Wolves to devour them. Now, these were
Inwardly ravening from something. And the Apostle John speaks of such as went
out from us: It seems, they were one among them, But (says he) they were not
of us; for if they had been of us, they would no doubt have continued with us;
but they went out from the true Church, that they might be manifest that they
were not of it. And these were the Antichrists and false Prophets, that Christ
said, should come, which John and the Apostles saw were come, and exhorted the
Church to beware of, and to keep to the Unction which they had from the Holy
One. And this Unction and Anointing, as it abides within the Saints, the true
Church, and they in it, it will teach them all things, and is Truth; and by it
they shall continue in the Son and the Father, and so in the Holy Seed, Rock
and Foundation, that cannot be shaken.

And the Apostle says, There was to be a falling away first, before the Man of
Sin was revealed; the Son of Perdition, who opposes and exalts himself, etc.
And when the Apostle saw the Mystery of Iniquity already working; and his
coming is after the working of Satan, with all Deceiveableness of
Unrighteousness in them that perish, because they receive not the Love of the
Truth, that they might be saved. And such go into strong Delusions, that they
should believe a Lie, and not the Truth. And here you may see there is a
falling away, before the Son of Perdition, or Judas, be revealed; and they that
fall away, receive not the Love of the Truth, that they might be saved, but
believe Lies that they shall be damned. And the Lord will consume him with the
Spirit of his Mouth, and will destroy him with the Brightness of his coming,
the wicked One, and Son of Perdition, that is against the Righteous, and is the
Opposer and Betrayer of them.

Therefore all the Church of Christ are to stand steadfast, To stand steadfast in
Christ.
and be established in Him, in every good Word and Work, who are from the
beginning chosen for Salvation through Jesus Christ, through the Sanctification
of the Spirit, and the belief of the Truth, and are called by the Gospel, the
Power of God, to the obtaining of the Glory of the Lord Jesus Christ, in whom
the glorious Rest and Peace is.

And you may see, how the Church of Christ was troubled by such as went out
from them, and fell away from Truth, and Inwardly ravened; some went like unto
the Swine into the Mire; and some like the Dogs to the Vomit; and some like
Wolves, that Inwardly ravened, and yet kept the Sheeps-cloathing: Some went in
the Nature of Cain, Sacrificers, and yet were Destroyers of the Righteous; and
some went in the Nature (or Spirit) of Jannes and Jambres, that withstood
Moses; and others in the Nature of Judas to Betray; and others in the Nature of
Corah, Dathan and Abiram, to Gainsay and Resist the Truth; and others in the
Nature of Jezabel.

And this Spirit and Nature troubled the Church in the Old Testament, Troublers
of the Church.
and troubled the Church in the New Testament, and are troubling the Church of
Christ in this Gospel-Day, that is come and coming out of the Apostasy. But
God's Trumpet, Spirit and Power was and is always sounded against it, that all
People may beware of this Evil Spirit and Nature, and keep in the Seed Christ
Jesus, that bruises the Head of it, in whom you have Love, Rest, Salvation,
Quietness and Peace. Hallelujah.

And all dwell in Love, then you dwell in God, who is Love; All dwell in God,
who is Love.
let that be all your Habitations, which Love edifies the Body of Christ, and
builds you up in him, and all strive to excel one another in Virtue, in
Patience, Courteousness, Kindness, Tenderness, Meekness and Humility, in
Temperance, Modesty and Chastity; and whatsoever things are Decent and Comely,
and of good Report, Honest and Lovely, that follow: For these are the good
Fruits of the Spirit of God, and his Heavenly Seed; which Fruits are acceptable
to God, and will make you all lovely and comely to him, and unto one another in
his Heavenly Seed; in which (as I said before) you are blessed, and all Nations
are blessed; which Seed (Christ) is your Sanctuary, who destroys the Devil the
Destroyer, and so is over him, and was before he was, in whom the true
Believers live, and have Peace, who Clothes them with Salvation, and with his
Righteousness, the sanctified One's fine Linen.

So all walk worthy of the Mercies of God and his Blessings from Above,

And they that dwell not in Love and Charity, are like the sounding Brass, and
tinkling Cimbals; as you may read 1 Cor. 13.1, 8.

This you may read amongst the Children of the Light, and of the Day.

Dolston, the 13th of the 10th Month, 1683. G. F.

To the Meeting of Friends in Truth, that are Captives in Algiers.
NOw, Epist. 391.
Dear Friends, The Lord having drawn you by his Spirit to his Son Christ Jesus,
in whose Name ye come to be Gathered, in whose Name ye have Salvation, and not
in any other Name under the whole Heaven: So that now you come to know Christ
your Savior, who destroys the Destroyer, the Devil and his Works; and it is He,
that brings forth Everlasting Righteousness, that makes an End of Sin, and
finishes Transgression. So that now, you may live and walk in the Everlasting
Righteousness of Christ Jesus, who is your Priest, Christ our Priest and
Prophet.
that is made higher than the Heavens, Hebr. 7. And who is your Prophet, that
God has raised up, and not Man, whom ye must hear in all things, Acts 3.22. and
7.37. who were as lost Sheep gone astray; but are now retarned to the chief
Priest and Bishop of your Souls; namely, Christ Jesus, 1 Pet. 2.25. And Christ
says, He is the true Shepherd, that has laid down his Life for his Sheep; and
his Sheep know his Voice, and follow him: Who is the Holy and Just one, and
never Guile was found in his Mouth. And Christ says, No Man comes to the Father
but by me. So he is the New and Living Way; and God has given him for a Leader
and Counselor, to Counsel his People; who is the Holy Living Rock and
Foundation, which is above all the Rocks and Foundations below: For He the Rock
and Foundation is from above, whom all the Children of the Light, that believe
in his Light, which is the Life in him, and are grafted into him, do build
upon. And so, the Lord God Almighty with his Eternal Power support you all, in
all your Afflictions and Sufferings, Trials and Temptations, that you may be
built and settled upon this Rock and Foundation, that cannot be shaken.

And now, dear Friends, my desires are, and the Desires of Friends here, that
you may all walk soberly, honestly, modestly, and civilly, and lovingly, and
gently, and tenderly to all your Patroons, and to all People.

And, To walk Justly and Holily in all Words and dealings.
That ye may walk Righteously, Justly and Holily in all your Words, Dealings
and Doings; that his Name you do profess now, may be honored, and you may
reach by your Righteous Godly Lives and Conversations, the Good in all your
Patroons, and in all others; so that you may show forth the Fruits of the
Spirit, and the Fruits of Christianity; and that you are the Possessors of
Christ Jesus your Mediator, who has made Peace betwixt you and your God. And as
you have received Christ, so walk in him, and know him to rule in your Hearts
by Faith. For herein (as Christ said) is my Father glorified; that you bring
forth much heavenly Fruit, and that your spiritual and heavenly Light may shine
before Men, that they may see your good Works, and glorify your Father which
is in Heaven.

And now, Friends, we understand, That some that have come lately among you,
have been under great Sufferings and Abuses by their Patroons, because they
cannot honor them with that Honor as other Slaves do, or as they have done
before. Now, To wear out Sufferings by Patience.
if you wait in Patience upon the Lord in his Truth (for you are to buy the
Truth, and not to sell it; and Truth is that that is stronger than all) the Lord
in his time (though he may try you) can mollify that Nature in them there, as
he has done in other Places, where he has tried his People with such things.
And when they have seen, it is for Conscience sake toward God, and it is from
the Principle of Truth and the Spirit; in which Spirit and Truth they worship
the Most-High God, who is an Eternal, Incomprehensible Spirit, who is God in
Heaven and God in the Earth, and dwells by his Spirit in his humble People,
they have been overcome.

And now Friends, consider, They are blessed who suffer for Christ's sake.
they are blessed that suffer for Christ's sake; and it is not only given you
to believe, but to suffer for his Name: And they that will live Godly in Christ
Jesus must suffar Persecution. But the Apostle says of the true Christians, Who
shall separate us from the Love of Christ? Shall Tribulation, or Distresses, or
Persecution, or Famine, or Nakedness, or Peril, or Sword? As it is written, For
thy sake are we killed all the day long: We are counted as Sheep for the
slaughter; In all these things we are more than Conquerers through him that
loved us. I am persuaded that neither Death nor Life, nor Angels, nor
Principalities, nor Powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor highth,
nor depth, nor any other Creature shall be able to separate us from the Love of
God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord, Romans 8.36, 39. Psalm. 44.22.

Now dear Friends, you may see here was a Godly Sincerity, Fervency,
Stedfastness and Resolution in the true Christians, which ought to be in all
such now, without boasting. And the Apostle says, Rejoice, for as much as ye
are partakers of Christ's Sufferings, that when his Glory shall be revealed, ye
may be glad also with exceeding Joy: For if ye be Reproached for the Name of
Christ, happy are ye: for the Spirit of Glory and of God rests upon you; on
their part he is evil spoken of, but on your part he is glorified, 1 Pet. 4.13,
14, 15.

And so dear Friends, Be wife, that you may give no just occasion: To give no
just occasion of Offense.
And keep low in the Humility; for such learn of Christ, and the meek follow
him. And so my desire is, That you may all be preserved to the Glory of God,
and that you may be Valiant for the Truth upon the Earth, and spread it abroad,
that all may come to the Spirit of God, that God pours upon all Flesh, and to
serve and worship him: And so that all Flesh may see the Glory of God, by his
Spirit; and that all might come to the Light, which is the Life in Christ the
Word, by whom all things were made and created, with which Light he enlightneth
every Man that comes into the World, to believe in, and to love it, and to try
their works, whether they be wrought in God, yea or nay, 1 John 3.19, 20, 21.

And that all might come to the Grace of God, which has appeared to all Men,
and brings Salvation. which will teach to live Godly, Righteously and Soberly,
and deny Unrighteousness. This is the true Christian's Teacher, which brings
Salvation, and teaches to deny that which would lead them into Destruction,
The true Christians Teacher.
into Ungodly, Ungracious Ways and Words; but this Grace teaches the Saints to
walk in Gracious Ways, and their Words come to be seasoned with Grace, which
teaches them, and brings their Salvation. So that which is the true Christian's
Teacher, brings their Salvation.

And so every one sit under this Teacher, as the true Church of Christ did; as
you may see Tit. 2.11, 12.

And so dear Friends, I do commend you to him that has all Power to support,
who is God All-sufficient to supply you, and is near unto all that calls upon
him in Truth and Righteousness. Therefore cast your Care upon him; for he Cares
for you: And so, as you walk in the Truth, to answer the Truth in your Patroons
and others, you will see in time, you will reach the Good in them, that they
will give more Credit to you, and Trust you more than them that disobey the
Spirit of God in their Hearts. So the Lord preserve you Faithful to himself.

Let us hear as often as you can how things are with you.

G. F.
London, the 4th of the 3d Month, 1684.
To the Quarterly and Monthly Meetings in England, etc.
DEar Friends and Brethren in the Lord Jesus Christ, Epist. 392.
who reigns over all, and has all Power in Heaven and Earth given unto him, by
whose Eternal Power our Meetings this Year have been preserved unto his great
Glory and Honor; and his living refreshing Presence has livingly been amongst
us, for which his People do give him the Honor, Glory, Thanks and Praise, who
is Lord over all, and worthy of all, blessed for ever and ever. And therefore
we desire and entreat all our Friends and Brethren every where, who are of the
Seed of the Promise, and the Children of the Kingdom of God, and of the New
Covenant of Light and Life, To walk as becomes the Gospel.
To Walk in the same, and worthy of the same, to the Glory of God. And you that
do profess the primitive, pure and undefiled Religion, which is above all the
Religions in the World: Show it forth in Life and Practice.

And you that profess the Worship of God in the Spirit and Truth, which Christ
has set up, which is above the Jews Worship, and all the Worships that the Men
of the World have set up: Be steadfast in the same; for all Worships out of
God's Spirit and his Truth, are Idolatry.

And now dear Friends and Brethren, who profess and possess that which is above
all Religions, Ways and Worships in the World; our desire is, To exceed in
Virtue, etc.
that you may always outstrip and exceed the World in Virtue, in Purity, in
Chastity, in Godliness, and in Holiness, and in Modesty, Civility, and in
Righteousness, and in Love, with that you may overcome the Evil, and with the
Good overcome the Bad: So that your Moderation and sober Life may appear unto
all Men, and answer that of God in all, that so the Fruits of the Spirit of God
may show themselves forth in Meekness, and Kindness, and Humility from the holy
Understanding, and the pure heavenly Wisdom, and the Word of Life and Patience,
by which all things were made, in that you will be able to bear all things, and
endure all things through him that strengthens you: And whatsoever things are
lovely, decent, or comely, and honest, and of a good Report, that answers the
Truth in all, That mind and practice, that God Almighty may be glorified
through you in the Seed, in which all Nations are blessed, which bruiseth the
Head of the Serpent, that brought the Curse; in which Seed no Enmity nor Strife
can come; in which Seed, Christ Jesus, your heavenly Unity and Fellowship is
preserved.

And whatsoever Storms or Tempests should arise in the World, keep in the Seed
Christ Jesus, your Sanctuary, Christ our Sanctuary.
who was before the World was, who is your Savior, that destroys the
Destroyer, in whom you have all Life, Peace, Rest, Safety and Salvation; in
him, who is the Amen, the First and Last, in him Farewell, and from him the
Blessings of the Lord rest upon you.

G. F.

To Friends in Holland.
DEar Friends in the peaceable Truth, The Glory of God all mind, Epist. 393.
in all your Lives and Conversations, and that the heavenly Fruits of the Holy
Spirit of God you may all bring forth to his Praise, living in Righteousness,
Godliness and Meekness, Lowliness and Humility, To live in Righteousness, etc.
learning of Christ Jesus your Savior, who is meek: For the humble God does
teach, and they grow up in his Grace and Favor. And therefore all take heed of
going back again into the World's Ways, Spirit and Words, but keep to the holy
Spirit of God, that does lead you in the narrow way, that is to Life Eternal:
And in the Lord's Light, Power and Spirit meet together, and keep your Meetings
in the Name of Jesus Christ, who has all Power in Heaven and Earth given to
him, that you may feel his living and divine Presence among you, and in his
pure gentle and heavenly Love and Wisdom you may be valiant for the Name of
Jesus, and his Truth upon the Earth, Not to be ashamed of Christ.
and not to be ashamed of Christ your Teacher and Prophet, that God has raised
up in his New Covenant and Testament, whom you are to hear; neither be ashamed
of Christ your Shepherd, who has laid down his Life for his Sheep, whose Voice
you are to hear; who does feed his Sheep, and give them Life Eternal, and none
is able to pluck his Sheep out of his Hand, his Power; neither be ashamed of
your High Priest, who has offered up himself for you, and does sanctify you,
who is a Priest made higher than the Heavens; neither be you ashamed of your
Bishop, and the chief Shepherd of your Souls, to whom now ye are returned by
his Grace and Truth, who does oversee you with his heavenly Eye, that you do
not go astray from God: So in him let your Faith stand, who is the Author and
Finisher of it. So with my Love to you all in the Lord Jesus Christ, who is
your Sanctuary, in whom you all have Life, Peace, Rest and Salvation, who is
the Amen.

Greet ye one another with a Kiss of Charity: Peace be with you all that are in
Christ Jesus, Amen. This Charity keeps all God's People in the heavenly Love
and Unity.

Amsterdam, the 14th of the 4th Month, 1683. G. F.

DEar Friends and Brethren, who are Elect and Chosen in Christ Jesus before the
the Foundation of the World; Epist. 394.
in Christ you have Peace, and in the World you have Trouble: But be of good
cheer, Christ has overcome the World.
Christ has overcome the World, that lies in Wickedness, and all the
Persecutors in it; and in him you all overcome the Devil and his Works, and
without him you can do nothing; but through Christ and his Power and Strength,
you will be able to do all things according to the Will of God: And though for
a time ye may suffer for the Name of Jesus, and for his Truth, and be cast into
Prison, and suffer the spoiling of your Goods; the Eternal God knows, and his
Son Christ Jesus, it is for him alone, and his Truth's sake we suffer, and not
for any evil doing, or doing wrong to any Man. And so the Lord has given us
not only to believe, but also to saffer for his Name and Truth's sake; and so
it is the Gift of God, with his Eternal Spirit and Power, that does uphold us
in all our Sufferings, which has made so many to finish their Testimony for
the Truth in Goals and Prisons; and not to love their Lives to the Death, but
love God and Christ Jesus above their Lives, and all outward things; as
Practice and Experience have declared it.

And now dear Friends, To be faithful to the end.
be faithful in Christ Jesus to the end, that you may all have the Crown of
Life, and that Peace from Christ Jesus, which the World, and all the Apostate
Spirits from the Truth, cannot take away from you; I say, neither the World,
with their outward Persecutions and spoiling of Goods, nor the Apostate Spirits
from the peaceable Truth, with all their Lies and Defamations, and their
filthy, scandalous Books, and evil Tongues, though they be like the raging
Waves of the Sea, casting up Mire and Dirt, whose Folly is manifest to all that
hear and see them; yet all this cannot disturb the Peace of the Righteous: And
all the restless, unquiet, unruly Murmurers and Complainers, that are filled
with false Jealousies, and are the wandering Stars, who are wandered from the
Witness of the Lord in their own Hearts; such their Judgments do not linger,
nor their Damnation does not slumber, though they may be suffered for a time to
try God's People.

And now Friends, you know envious Cain was a Sacrificer as well as Abel, but
out of the Faith and Righteousness, who Murdered his Brother Abel, he may be
said to have been a Type of Judas, who was a partaker of the Ministry, yet
betrayed his Master. And you read that Ishmael and Esau were circumcised as
well as Isaac and Jacob; but Esau hated Jacob, and would have slain him; and
Ishmael scoffed at Isaac, and so he that is born of the Flesh persecuteth him
that is born of the Spirit; and that Birth is not Heir with the Seed of the
Promise, though it may come into the outward Form, and outward Profession.

And likewise you read of Corah, Dathan and Abiram, and their Company, and
their Rebelling against the Lord, and his Servants, Moses and Aaron; and of
their false Liberty; but what became of them, in Numb. 16. you may see.

And likewise how that the Jews (after the Lord brought them out of Egypt) made
themselves a Calf of their Jewels and Earrings, as in Exodus 32. Psalm 106.19.
The Jews made a Calf in Horeb, and worshipped the Golden Image, and forgot God
their Savior, who had done great things in Egypt, and wondrous things in the
Land of Ham, and murmured in their Tents, and hearkened not to the Voice of the
Lord: And therefore God overthrew them in the Wilderness, and they came not
into the promised Land.

And you read how the Jews run into false Liberty in the Days of Baalam, and
joined with Baal-Peor, Examples of Apostates of old Times.
and how the Anger of the Lord was kindled against them, and what a destruction
he brought upon them, who had turned against the Lord and his faithful People;
as in Numb. 25.

And likewise how often the Jews murmurred against Moses and Aaron, and what a
destruction came upon them in the Wilderness, that none of that old Stock the
Lord brought out of Egypt that dishonored him; though they had seen his Glory,
none entered into the Land save Caleb and Joshua, but they perished in the
Wilderness for their Murmurring and Rebelling; and therefore take heed of
Murmurring and Rebelling against the Lord and his Spirit, but in all things
learn to be content.

And also you read in Judges, how often the Jews forsook the Lord, and what
Judgments came upon them; and also how the Jews turned against the Prophets,
and imprisoned and persecuted them: And in the Days of the Kings, as in the
Chronicles, how David and many of the Prophets, and the Righteous suffered: But
what became of them that made them suffer? And likewise in the Days of Christ,
and his Apostles, how did they fuffer, by the professing Jews? And there were
many Comers and Goers in the Days of Christ that could say, Lord, Lord: But
such do not enter into the Kingdom of God, except they do the Will of God.

And you read how the Apostles and the true Church were troubled with false
Christians and false Brethren; whom Paul writes against in many of his
Epistles, and Peter, and John, and Jude; and John in his Revelations. And
therefore, all Friends, dwell in the Seed Christ Jesus, in whom ye cannot be
deceived, who bruises the Head of the Serpent, who is the Head of all
Deceivers; and the Head of all Enmity, and false Ways, Worships and Religions;
and the Head of all false Liberties: But in Christ Jesus, in whom all Nations
are blessed, is the true Liberty; in him all stand fast, so far as he has made
you free; and in him all walk, as ye have received him, to the Praise and Glory
of God: In whom you have all Eternal Life, Peace, Rest, and Salvation; and in
him the Lord God Almighty preserve you all in Love, Unity, and Fellowship. Who
is able to support you, and supply you with his Eternal Hand and Power, with
what you do need in all your Sufferings and Trials. Amen.

G. F.

To Friends at the Yearly Meeting in York.
DEar Friends,
Who are turned to the Light, Epist. 395.
and are the Believers in the Light, which is the Life in Christ, my Desires
are, To be established upon Christ the Rock.
That you may all be established upon him, your Eternal Rock and Foundation,
and grow up in Christ Jesus, the Second Adam, by his Light, Grace and Truth,
that is come from him; for you know Christ had many Enemies (and his Disciples
and Followers, and Moses in the time of the Law) such as turned their Backs on
the Lord, Christ and his Followers have many Enemies.
and erred from his good Spirit, and rebelled against it, they turned against
the Lord, and Moses and Aaron, and they went from the Fellowship of the Law of
God and his Spirit, and then Destruction came upon them: Such Jews were they
that rebelled against Christ and his Apostles, and yet were great Professors of
the Old Testament. And such that were called Christians, that got the Form of
Godliness, and the fair Speeches, and good Words, but denied the Power thereof,
and so the Order thereof: Such as these separated themselves, and erred from
the Spirit and the Faith, and so from the Unity of the Faith, and the
Fellowship of the Spirit of God. Such were and are to be turned away from by
all them that are in the Faith, and the Spirit of God; and all the Spiritual
Witnesses in the Tabernacles of God, testifies against such, though they may
make a great Profession of Christ and the Apostles Words, but deny the Power,
and err from the Spirit, and the peaceable Truth: Such cannot be the true
Worshippers of God in the Spirit and Truth: And thereforefore, Friends, you
that have been turned to the Light, and Truth, and Grace of Christ, and know
the Power and Spirit of Jesus, walk in the same, and in it keep your
Fellowship, and your Dominion, over all that which is out of the Truth, and
abides not in the Truth: And that your heavenly Light may shine, and you may
all be kept in Love and Unity in the same Light, Power and Spirit, to the Glory
of God, and the Comfort one of another. Amen.

London, the 27 of the 3d Month, 1684. G. F.

To the suffering Friends of Dantzick.
FRiends,
Epist. 396.
With my Love in the Lord Jesus Christ to you, who is your Savior and Prophet,
Christ the Prophet, Shepherd, High Priest, and Bishop of Souls.
that God has raised up for you, to hear in all things; your Shepherd, that has
laid down his Life for you, whose Voice ye must hear, who will seed you in his
Living Pastures of Life, who is your Priest, that offered himself for you, who
sanctifies you, that he might present you to God: So is become your High
Priest, who is made higher than the Heavens; so is a higher Priest than the
Priesthood of Aaron, and all the Priesthoods upon the Earth, that are made by
Men below: For he is a High Priest, made higher than the Heavens, Hebr. 7. And
so, is the chief Shepherd and Bishop of your Souls, to Oversee you, that you do
not go astray from God, who is your Sanctuary, in whom you are preserved from
the Destroyer; who destroys the Devil, the great Destroyer, and his Works, and
bruises his Head, and breaks his Power: He, namely Christ, is your Savior; in
him you have Rest and Peace, Salvation and Life Eternal.

Now, Dear Friends, We do hear and understand, that the Magistrates have cast
you into Prison again in Dantzick; and that they have proffered you your
Liberty, upon Condition that you would go away, or forsake your common
Meeting Place, or divide your selves into several little Meetings. Truly,
Friends, we have had many of these proffers made to Us within this Twenty or
Thirty Years, but we never durst make such Bargains or Covenants, to forsake
the Assembling of our selves together, as we used to do; but did leave our
suffering Cause wholly to the Lord Christ Jesus, To Commit our Cause to God.
in whose Name we were gathered, who has all Power in Heaven and Earth given
unto him: And the Lord at last did and has tendered the Hearts of many of our
Prosecutors both in England and other Places; and therefore in the Spirit and
Power of the Lord Jesus Christ, it is good to be faithful; who is God all
sufficient to support and supply you all in whatever you do, and strengthen you
in all Conditions. For if that should get a little Advantage upon you, and get
you into Weakness, it would not rest so, but get more upon you. And therefore
it is good to stand fast in the Liberty in Christ Jesus, the Second Adam, the
Lord from Heaven, who has made you free out of the Snares, and Bondage, and
Limitations of the Wills of the Sons of Old Adam.

And whereas some of the Magistrates have alleged, That Christ departed out of
the Coasts of the Gadarenes upon their Request, after he had cast the Devils
out of the possessed Men, and they entered into their Swine, and run into the
Sea. This Argument is of no weight, for you to go out of their Coasts or City,
who are settled Citizens, and have Wives and Families; for Christ went up and
down from Place to Place and preached; as he said, The Son of Man has not
where to lay his Head, though the subtle Foxes had Holes, and the high-flown
Fowls had their Nests. And would they take it kindly themselves, if the King of
Poland, their Protector, who is of a contrary Profession, should use the same
Argument to them, and say, Be gone, or else do not meet at your great Public
Places of Worship, but meet in small Companies, or else to depart out of these
Coasts, as Christ did out of the Coasts of the Gadarenes. And, if ye do not,
then you are disobedient to Christ's Example; as they do apply it upon you. And
so, let them weigh the Matter and their Argument with the just Law of God to do
unto you, as they would be done unto themselves.

And now, Dear Friends, I desire, however, that you walk wisely, To walk wisely
before all.
and gently, and lovingly, and meekly, and soberly to all the Magistrates, and
all People, that they may have no just Occasion in any thing against you: For
the Good must overcome the Bad, as the Apostle says, Overcome Evil with Good,
and dwell in that Love that can bear all things, and endure all things: And
nothing can separate you from this Love which you have in God through Jesus
Christ: In this Love build up and edify one another, that by it you may answer
the Good in all People, and spread his Truth abroad, and be valiant for that
upon Earth. So in his Holy peaceable Truth, and his Seed Christ Jesus, in which
all Nations are blessed, God Almighty preserve and keep you to his Glory. Amen.

And now, Dear Friends, To take beed lest Flattery prevail more than Cruelty.
you that have stood such hard and cruel Sufferings so long, for the Lord's
Name and Truth, and could not be overcome by Cruelty, take heed now lest you be
overcome by fair Words and Flattery; for in that there is a greater Danger.

G. F.

An Epistle to Friends, against Pride, Haughtiness, and the vain Customs and
Fashions of the World.
FRiends,
Epist. 397.
Here you may see, how the holy Men of God testify against Pride, Against
Pride, Haughtiness, etc.
Haughtiness, High-mindedness, and the abominable Customs and Fashions, and the
ungodly Lusts of the World, which is not of the Father, but of the World. And
how Man and Woman came into these things by forsaking the Lord, and so falling
from his Image. And how Christ renews them up into the Image of God again, to
serve him in Humility. And all that are in the Image of God are of one Mind.

To all Friends and Brethren every where.
Peace from God and the Lord Jesus Christ be multiplied in you, who by his
Grace, Light and Spirit, are turned toward the Lord, to receive it from him;
and that by it you may grow up in the Lord Jesus Christ, out of the Worlds
Nature and Spirit.

For Christ said unto his Believers and followers, Ye are not of the World,
even as I am not of the World. I have given them thy Word, and the World has
hated them, because they are not of the World. And therefore, as the Apostle
says, love not the World, nor the things of the World, for the love of the
World is Enmity to God.

And in the beginning God created Man in his own Image: So in the likeness of
God created he him; Male and Female created he them, and God blessed them. And
in this state God set them, above all things that he had made. But, after Man
and Woman had transgressed the Command of God, they sewed Figg-leaves together
to make them Aprons; for their Eyes were opened, and they came to see their
Shame. By their Transgression, and by transgressing the Command of God, the
spiritual Eye came to be shut, and Man and Woman came to fall from the Image of
God.

And so, after Man and Woman had transgressed the Command of God, and fallen
from his Image, the Lord God made Coats of Skins to cloth them withal. So, you
may see, That the first Covering which Adam and Eve made after Transgression,
was made of Figgleaves; and the natural Sun would soon scorch and dry them to
Powder: But those that the Lord made them, was of Skins.

So the transgression of the Command of God came, when the Ear went out after
the Serpent, Sin the cause of Shame, and Shame the cause of Covering.
and the Eye went after the Fruit of the Tree, which God forbid them to Eat of.
So here they came to see their outward Shame and Nakedness; who had fallen from
the Image of God that covered them; and therefore they went to cover the
outward Shame.

And now Man and Woman in the Fall, is taking thought what they shall eat and
drink, and what they shall put on: And this is come upon them by forsaking the
Lord's Teaching, and following the Serpents.

And does not John say, Love not the World, neither the things that are in the
World. If any Man love the World, the love of the Father is not in him. And
farther says, For all that is in the World, the Lust of the Flesh, the Lust of
the Eye, and the Pride of Life; this is not of the Father, but of the World;
and the World passes away, and the Lust thereof.

Now, all may see, what Man and Woman is fallen into, by transgressing the
Command of God; and therefore it is not good for any to live in that which will
pass away, and is not of the Father, but of the World.

And you may see how Pride is cried against throughout the Scriptures of Truth.
And they that fear the Lord, do hate Evil, The evil Consequences of Pride.
Pride and Arrogance: By Pride comes Contention, and a Man's Pride shall bring
him low; but Honor upholds the Humble in Spirit, Prove. 29.23.

For when Pride comes, then comes Shame; and Pride goes before Destruction,
and an haughty Mind before a fall; but with the lowly is Wisdom, Prove. 11.2.
and 16.18. And better it is to be of an humble Spirit with the lowly, than to
divide the Spoil with the proud.

And Isaiah says, The Lord of Host has purposed to stain the Pride of all
Glory, and to bring into contempt all the Honorable of the Earth, Isa. 23.9.
And therefore love not that which God will stain.

The Lord says, He will spread forth his Hands in the midst of them, as he
that swimmeth, and he will bring down their Pride, Isa. 25.11. And therefore it
is good to keep it down in every one. And the Lord cries, Woe to the Crown of
Pride, whose glorious Beauty is a fading Flower; and when the Crown of Pride is
trodden under Foot, the Lord of Host shall be for a Crown of Glory, Isa. 28.1,
5.

And the Lord says, He will mar the Pride of Judah, and the great Pride of
Jerusalem, Jer. 13.9.

And does not Jeremiah say, Because of the Pride of Moab, he was so exceeding
Proud, his Loftiness, his Arrogance, and the Haughtiness of his Heart brought
him unto Derision, Jer. 48.26, 29.

And therefore it is good to keep in the Humility: For Pride is that which
deceives the Heart, and brings the Judgments of God, Jer. 49.16. And therefore
take heed, let not Pride budd, lest the Rod blosom, Ezekiel 7. to verse 11.

And the Children of Israel, they were grown in Pride and fullness of Bread,
like Sodom, when they transgressed against the Lord, like their Father Adam.
And therefore let them that profess themselves Christians take heed, lest they
be found in the same steps.

And see in Ezekiel 16.49. what became of Sodom, and the Children of Israel.

And when Nebuchadnezzar confessed the Kingdom of God, and Praised, and
Extolled, and Honored the King of Heaven, and said, All his Works are Truth,
and his Ways Judgments; and those that walk in Pride. God is able to abase,
Dan. 4.34, etc.

And Hosea says, The Pride of Israel does testify to his Face; and therefore
Israel and Ephraim shall fall in their Iniquity: And Judah shall fall with
them, Hos. 5.5.

And therefore you may see, and take heed of Pride, for it is the cause of Man
and Woman's fall.

And in Hosea 7. you may see that Pride has hindered Man from seeking after the
Lord, and turning to him. And you may see Edom's Destruction was for his Pride,
Obad. 1.

And you may see the Judgments that came upon the Philistines, and Moab, and
Ammon, and Ashur for their Pride, Zeph. 2.

And in Zachariah 10 and 11 Chapters, Judgments of God because of Pride.
does not Lord say, The Pride of Jordan shall be spoiled, and the Pride of
Asyria shall be brought down; and there shall be a Voice of Howling of the
Shepherds, for their Glory is spoiled.

And Christ says in Mark, Pride is one of those Evils that comes out of the
Heart, and defiles the Man; so take heed of that which defiles.

And as John says, The Lust of the Flesh, the Lust of the Eye, and the Pride
of Life; this is not of the Father, but of the World; all this must be kept
down in Christians.

And David says, The wicked in his Pride does persecute the Poor; but are they
not taken in their Devices that they have imagined, Psalm. 10.2.

Again David says, The Lord hid them that feared him, in the secret of his
Presence, from the Pride of Man, and kept them secretly in a Pavillion, from
the strife of Tongues, Psalm. 31.20.

And also David says, That Pride compasses the wicked as a Chain, etc. and
they speak loftily; and they set their Mouths against Heaven; but the Lord
casts down such to Destruction, and saves the Righteous that fears him.

And so you may see how Pride was testified against by Christ and his Prophets,
and the holy Men of God, both in the Old and New Testament, since Man and Woman
fell from the Image of God; and therefore all is to fear the Lord, and learn of
Christ Jesus, who is meek and low in Heart.

For it is said, That Josiah's Heart was tender, and he humbled himself before
the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 34.33.

And if my People, The effects of true Humility.
which are called by my Name, shall humble themselves, and pray, and seek my
Face, and turn from their wicked Ways; then will I hear from Heaven, and
forgive them their Sins, and heal the Land; and mine Eyes shall be opened, and
mine Ear attentive to their Prayer; this is the Comfort of the humble, 2 Chronicles.
7.12.

And David says, The Lord forgets not the cry of the humble, Psalm. 9.12. Again
David says, Arise O Lord, lift up thy Hand, forget not the humble: Lord thou
have heard the desire of the humble, thou will prepare their Hearts, and wilt
cause thine Ear to hear, Psalm. 10.12, 17.

And the Lord, who Inhabits Eternity, whose Name is Holy, says, I dwell in the
High and Holy Places: And also with him that is of a contrite and humble
Spirit; to revive the Spirit of the Humble, and to revive the Hearts of the
Contrite Ones, Isa. 57.15. Here is Joy and Comfort to the Humble. And James
says, God gives Grace to the Humble, but he resists the Proud, James 4.6.
Humble your selves therefore under the Mighty Hand of God, that he may exalt
you in due time; and be clothed with Humility, 1 Pet. 5.6.

So you may see how God resists the Proud, and dwells with the Humble, as is
testified, both in the Old Testament and the New. And Christ says, Whosoever
shall humble himself as this little Child, the same shall be greatest in the
Kingdom of Heaven.

So here you may see Christ, and the Prophets, and the Apostles taught
Humility, and judged Pride. And again Christ says, He that humbles himself
shall be exalted, and he that exalts himself shall be abased, Luke 14.11. and
18.14.

And therefore learn of Chirst, who is meek and low in Heart: For he rules in
the Hearts of the Humble, who is King, Priest and Prophet, and a Shepherd to
feed them, and a Bishop to oversee them, and an Everlasting Father, who begets
Man and Woman up into the Image of God, and an Everlasting Prince of Peace.

And so all that are in true Humility, are the true Subjects of Christ; and all
the Children of Pride are subject to the Prince of the Air, the God of the
World, who is the King of Pride, in whom there is no Truth.

Now concerning vain Fashions, Deckings and Customs, etc.
THE Lord forbids his People, by Jeremiah, to follow them, Not to follow the
People in their Customs, etc.
nor to learn the way of the Heathen, for the Customs of the People were vain,
and they did not only deck themselves, but they also decked their Images and
Idols; and God's People were not to be dismayed at the Signs of Heaven, in the
Old Covenant; for the Heathen was dismayed at them; much less in the New
Covenant should the true Christians not be dismayed at them, Jer. 10.2, etc.

And again, does not Jeremiah cry against the Paintings and Deckings of Judah?
And though Judah rent her Face with painting, yet her Lovers would despise her.
And this was when they forsook God, and followed other Lovers; and therefore
God's Anger was against them in the Old Covenant; much more in the New, Jer.
4.30.

And it is true, God did deck the Jews in the Old Covenant with outward things;
but when they played the Harlot with them, and decked their Images with them,
the Lord's Anger was against them, as in Ezekiel 16.15, 16.

And Hosea cries out against the Jews decking of themselves with Earrings and
Jewels, and going after other Lovers, and forgetting the Lord, Hosea 2.13. And
you may see the attire of the Harlot, and the subtilty of her Heart, how she
decks her self, and decks her Bed, and deceives a young Man among the Youth,
Prove. 7. And therefore let all that profess themselves Christians take heed of
such deckers.

And you may see how the Lord sent Isaiah to cry against their Haughtiness, and
stretched out Necks, and wanton Eyes, and Tincklings, Pride and Haughtiness.
and Mincings, and their round Tires like the Moon, and their Chains, and
Braclets, and their Rings, and Nose-Jewels, and other vain Ornaments; and told
them, They should be, desolate, for the spoil of the Poor was in their Houses,
Isa. 3.16.

Now if such things was testified against in the Old Covenant, then surely much
more in the New.

And in Revelation 17 and 18 Chapters, you may see how the Whore decked her
self, who drank the Blood of the Martyrs; but at her fall God's People sung
Hallelujah.

And in Levit. 18. The Lord commanded the Jews in the Old Covenant, Not to
defile themselves with the Customs of the Heathen; so much more they should not
do it in the New Covenant.

And the Apostle Paul exhorts the Corinthians, to use this World, and not abuse
it; for the Fashion of this World passes away.

And Peter exhorts the Saints, Not to fashion themselves according to their
former Lusts, in their ignorance; but as Christ, who had called them was Holy,
so be ye Holy in all manner of Conversation, 1 Pet. 1, 14.

So see what a Care the Apostle had, lest that they should go into their former
Lusts of Ignorance.

And the Apostle Paul tells the Philippians, Their Conversations was in Heaven,
from whence we look for a Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall change our
vile Bodies, that they may be fashioned like unto his glorious Body, Philip.
3.21.

This is the fashion that all true Christians is to look at.

Now concerning wearing and putting on of Apparel.
Isaiah testifies against the vanity in the Apparel, Vanity in the Apparel.
and the changable Suits among the Jews, Isaiah 3.

And what became of Tyrus, with all his broidered Works, and Chests of Rich
Apparel, did not the Lord bring them down in their Pride, Ezekiel. 27.24.

And did not Zephaniah say, The Lord would punish all such as were clothed
with strange Apparel? Zeph. 1.8.

But first they were clothed Inwardly in Transgression before they clothed
Outwardly with the strange Apparel.

And what became of Dives, with all his Sumptuousness and Bravery, who despised
poor Lazarus? And also Herod: And are not Peoples Eyes gazing more after fine
Apparel than after the Image of God, Luke 16.19. and Acts 12.21.

And you may see that the first Apparel that Adam made after Transgression was
of Figg Leaves, and then God made them Coats of Skins: But now People are so
far degenerated from that, and have gotten so far into the Lusts of the Flesh,
the Lusts of the Eye, and the Pride of Life, that they know not what to put on.

And their Life is below the Lillies, and the Fowls of the Air, as Christ
says, The Fowls of the Air do not sow, nor reap, nor gather into Barnes: And
the Lillies they toil not, neither do they spin; but the heavenly Father feeds
and clothes them.

And Christ also says (speaking to People) That ye are much better than the
Fowls of the Air, or the Lillies: And therefore take ye no thought what ye
shall eat, or what ye shall drink, or wherewith ye shall be clothed; for after
these things the Gentiles do seek; for your heavenly Father knows that you
have need of all these things; but first seek ye the Kingdom of Heaven, and the
Righteousness thereof, and all these things shall be added unto you, as in
Matthew. 6.

Here you may see how Christ is restoring People up into the Image of God, out
of the Thoughts and Cares of the Heathen; for God took care of Man and Woman
before he made them.

And the Apostle exhorted Timothy, how the Women should adorn themselves with
modest Apparel, Modest Apparel, etc.
and with Shamefulness and Sobriety, and not with broidered or plaiting the
Hair, or Gold, Pearls, or Costly Array, but with that which becomes Women
professing Godliness, with good Works, 1 Timothy 2. mark this every one.

And James, he reproves and and exhorts such, whose Eye and Esteem was to the
Gold Ring, and goodly Apparel, more than the poor in vile Raiment, and tells
them, They were not to hold the Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ with respect to
Persons; much more not with gay Clothing or Apparel, James 2.1.

And Peter, in 1 Pet. 3. exhorts the Saints how to adorn themselves: The
Adorning of the Holy Women.
Whose Adorning, let it not be the outward Adorning, of plaiting the Hair, or
wearing of Gold, and putting on of Apparel. But let it be the hidden Man of
the Heart, in that which is not corruptible; even the Ornament of a meek and
quiet Spirit: Which is in the sight of God of great Price.

For after this manner, in old Times, the holy Women also, who trusted in God,
adorned themselves. And this ought to be the Adorning now in the New Covenant.
And though you may say, The Jews or Hebrews adorned themselves with Jewels, and
they did adorn the Temple, etc.

But in the New Covenant these things were forbidden: And they were to adorn
the Temple of the Heart, and not to defile that, and to know the hidden Man of
the Heart, which is not corruptible. And therefore look into all your Hearts,
and see if you can find any thing there, which is not corruptible, and to put
off the old Man with his Deeds; with the Lust of the Flesh, the Lust of the
Eye, and the Pride of Life; which is not of the Father, but of the World.

And this old Man delights in the glory of the World, which must be put off.
And all Christians in the New Covenant must put on the New Man, that is renewed
in Knowledge, after the Image of God that created him, which walks and serves
God in the New and Living Way; who is born again, not of corruptible Seed, but
of incorruptible Seed, by the Word of God; and feed upon the incorruptible
Milk, and Wine, and Water, and Bread, and the incorruptible Flesh and Blood of
Christ, and wears the fine Linen, the Righteousness of Christ, the
incorruptible Clothing. And this is the Birth born of the Spirit, that enters
into the incorruptible Kingdom of God, as in John 3.5. and in 1 Pet. 1.23.

And the Apostle Paul exhorts the Ephesians in Chapter 4.22. To put off out
vain Conversation.
To put off their former Conversation, the old Man, which is corruptible,
according to the deceitful Lusts; and be renewed in the Spirit of your Minds;
that is out of the Fall of Adam. And that ye put on the New Man, which after
God is created in Righteousness and true Holiness. So here Man comes to know
his first Creation, and his Degeneration; so always to see the New Man put on,
which is in Righteousness, and Holiness; and the old Man put off, with all his
vain Deckings, Trimmings, and Cloathings, which is not acceptable both in the
sight of God and his People.

And so all in the New Covenant are to be conformable to the Image of God, Romans
8.2. For all has been conformed long enough to the Image of Satan.

And the Apostle says, We all behold with open face, as in a Glass, the Glory
of the Lord; and are changed into the same image from Glory to Glory; even as
by the same Spirit of the Lord, 2 Cor. 3.10. So every one are to mind this
happy and blessed Change.

And the Apostle says, Put on the Lord Jesus, and make no provision for the
Flesh, to fulfill the Lust thereof, Romans 13.14. And as every one has received
the Lord Jesus, so walk in him, and then you will put off the Old Adam, and his
Deeds in Transgression; and not walk in him, but walk in Christ that never
sinned, nor was guilt found in his Mouth.

And if any Man be in Christ, he is a new Creature: Old things passes away,
and all things become new, 2 Cor. 5.17.

Therefore the Apostle exhorts the Colosians, Chap. 2.8. That they were not to
follow the Rudiments of the World, for they were not after Christ. And so
People are not to follow the World's Rudiments, but Christ.

And you may see, how the Children of Israel, that came out of Egypt, Not to
Lust and tempt God, as Israel did.
and the mixed Multitude, lusted after the Fleshpots of Egypt. And the Lord
smote them with a grievous Plague, Numb. 11. And David says, They tempted God
in their Hearts, by asking Meat for their Lust, Psam 78.18.

And again David says, They lusted exceedingly in the Wilderness, and tempted
God in the Desert. And he gave them their Request, but sent leanness into their
Souls, Psalm 106.14, 15.

And therefore in the New Covenant the Apostle says, These things were for our
Examples, to the intent we should not lust after evil things; as they also
lusted 1 Cor. 10.11. And Solomon exhorts to keep from the evil Woman, from the
flattery of the Tongue of a strange Woman. Lust not after her Beauty in thy
Heart, neither let her take thee with her Eyelids. For by means of a whorish
Woman, a Man is brought to a piece of Bread: And the Adulterous will hunt for
thy precious Life, Prove. 6.26.

And Christ not only forbids Adultery, but Lust also, Matthew. 5. And again
Christ says, The Cares of the World, and the Love of other things choaks the
Word, and it becomes unfruitful to them, Mark 4.19.

And you may see what became of such, as the Apostle speaks of in Romans 1.21.
Who when they knew God, they glorified him not, as God; neither were thankful:
How at last God gave them up, when they forsook him, through the Lust of their
Hearts. And there you may see what Evils they run into. And also you may see in
Jude 16.18. How he declares against Murderers, and Complainers, and Mockers,
who walked after their ungodly Lusts.

And in 1 Pet. 2.11. there the Apostle Peter says, Dearly beloved, I beseech
you as Strangers and Pilgrims, abstain from fleshly Lusts, which war against
the Soul.

And James says, Wars and Fightings came from the Lusts.
War and Fightings came from the Lusts, that warred in their Members. And such
asked, but received not, because they asked amiss, that they might consume it
upon their Lusts. Therefore, says he, know ye not that the friendship of this
World is Enmity to God: Whosoever therefore will be a Friend to the World, is
an Enemy to God, James 4.1.

And Paul says, That the Grace of God, which brings Salvation, has appeared
unto all Men. Teaching us to deny ungodliness and worldly Lusts: That we should
live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present World. Which is the Duty
of every true Christian, that to deny, and so to live, Tit. 2.11.

And thefore the Apostle exhorts Timothy, to fly Youthful Lusts, and to follow
Righteousness, Faith and Charity, and Peace with all them that call on the Name
of the Lord out of a pure Heart. And such Teachers who had the Form of
Godliness, but deny the Power which the Saints were to turn away from; those
were them that led silly People Captive, laden with Sin and diverse Lusts, 2 Timothy 2.22. and 3.5. And such as could not abide sound Doctrine, but after their
own Lusts, shall heap to themselves Teachers, having Itching Ears; they turn
away their Ears from the Truth and Grace that comes by Jesus Christ (which
should teach them to bring their Salvation) and from the Spirit of God, which
they should walk in, To walk in the Spirit.
as the Apostle says, If ye walk in the Spirit (mark, in the Spirit) ye shall
not fulfill the Lusts of the Flesh, Gal. 5.16. And the Apostle further says,
That every one of you should know how to possess his Vessel in Sanctification
and Honor, and not in the Lusts of Concupiscence, even as the Gentiles which
know not God, 1 Thessalonians. 4.4.

If a Man purge himself from these things, he shall be a Vessel unto honor,
and sanctified, and meet for his Masters use, and prepared for every good work,
2 Timothy 2.21. But they that will be rich, fall into Temptations and Snares, and
into many foolish hurtful Lusts, which drowns Men in Destruction and Perdition.
But the Man of God is to fly these things, and follow after Righteousness,
Godliness, Faith, Love Patience and Meekness, 1 Timothy 6.11. And they that are
Christ's, have crucified the Flesh, with the Affections and Lusts, Gal. 5.24.

And Haughtiness and High-mindedness was forbidden both by God and his People.
And David says, The afflicted People the Lord will save. And his Eyes are upon
the haughty, to bring them down, 2 Samuel 22.28.

And David said, Lord my Heart is not haughty, nor mine Eyes lofty; and my Soul
is like a weaned Child, Psalm 131.2. Then he was fit for the Kingdom God. And
again David says, God will save his afflicted People, but will bring down high
looks, Psalm 18.27.

And Solomon says, Before Destruction, the Heart of Man is haughty; and before
Honor, is Humility, Prove. 18.21.

And Isaiah declared against the Haughtiness of the Daughters of Zion, Isaiah
3. And how the haughty People of the Earth do languish, because they had
transgressed God's Laws, and changed his Ordinances.

And does not the Lord say by Isaiah, Chap. 16.6. The Pride of Moab.
That Moab should howl for his Pride and Haughtiness? And I will punish the
World for their Evil, and the Wicked for their Iniquity. And I will cause the
Arrogance of the Proud to cease. And I will lay low the Haughtiness of the
Terrible. The lofty looks of Man shall be brought low, and the Haughtiness of
Men shall be bowed down; and the Lord alone shall be exalted in that Day. And
this is a good Day; for the Day of the Lord of Hosts, shall be upon every one
that is proud and lofty, and upon every one that is lifted up, and he shall be
brought low, Isaiah 2.3. and 10.24.

And Ezekiel says, That the Children of Israel was haughty, and like Sodom,
and committed abominations before the Lord, and he took them away, Ezekiel. 16.46.
And Zephaniah says, Thou shall be no more haughty, Zeph. 3.11. Neither shall
ye go haughtily, Mic. 23.1. And therefore all are to learn Humility, that they
may exalt the Lord their Maker.

And the Apostle exhorted the Romans, Not to be high-minded, but fear; for they
stood by Faith, Romans 11.20. And the Apostle exhorted Timothy, to charge those
that were Rich in this World, The Rich not to be high-minded.
That they be not high-minded, nor trust in uncertain Riches, but in the living
God, who gives us richly all things to enjoy, 1 Timothy 6.17. And the Apostle
again tells Timothy, That the heady high-minded are lovers of Pleasure more
than lovers of God. And daily Experience shows; as you may see at large the
Fruits of such, 2 Timothy 3.4. And therefore all those things the Faithful are to
shun, and to be kindly affectioned one to another, with brotherly Love, and in
Honor preferring one another, Romans 12.10. And the Apostle exhorts the
Corinthians, to be perfectly joined together, in the same Mind, and in the same
Judgment; that they might all speak the same thing: So that there may be no
Division among them, 1 Cor. 1.

And again, To be of one Mind, and to live in Peace.
in 2 Cor. 13.11. The Apostle says, Be Perfect, be of good Comfort, be of one
Mind, live in Peace. And the God of Love and Peace shall be with you. For by
one Spirit we are all baptized into one Body, whether Jews or Gentiles, Bond or
Free: And have been all made to drink into one Spirit, and the Spirit of the
Prophets, are subject to the Prophets. For God is not the Author of Confusion,
but of Peace, 1 Cor. 12.13. and 14.32, 33. And the Apostle writes to the
Philippians, That they should be of one Accord, and of one Mind; and said, Let
nothing be done in strife, or vainglory, but in lowliness of Mind, etc. Phil.
23. And the Apostle says to the Romans, Be of one Mind toward one another,
and not mind high things, and to be wise in their own Conceits, but condescend
to Men of low estate, Romans 12.16. And the God of Patience and Consolation grant
you to be like minded all toward one another, according to Christ Jesus: That
ye may with one mind, and one mouth glorify God, even the Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ. Receive ye one another, as Christ also received us to the glory
of God, Romans 15.5, 6, 7. For God has given to his People the Spirit of Power,
and of Love, and a sound Mind, 2 Timothy 17.

And Peter in his first General Epistle, Chap. 3. ver. 8. says, Be ye all of
one Mind, and have Compassion one of another, love as Brethren, be pitiful, be
courteous. And the Apostle Paul says, in Acts 20.19. how he served the Lord in
all humility of Mind.

And it is a Mark of Christ's Disciples (as he says) if they love one another,
and love Enemies. And so all that are Believers in him, are to love one another
as he has loved us, who has laid down his Life for us.

And therefore all are to deny themselves; yea, and to offer all up for him.

And whatsoever you do, do it in the Name of Jesus, to the Praise and Glory of
God.

G. F.

POSTSCRIPT.
A Testimony out of the Old Testament and New, of the Lord sending his Prophets
to declare his Judgments against the Disobedience and Pride of the Jews; and
how his Judgments were fulfilled upon them that did not Repent; and how the
Apostle did admonish and reprove such as went into Pride and the Fashions of
the World.
THE Lord says, Because the Daughters of Zion are Haughty, The Pride of the
Daughters of Zion.
and walk with stretched forth Necks and wanton Eyes, walking and mincing as
they go, and making a tinkling with their Feet; therefore the Lord will smite
with a Scab the Crown of the Head of the Daughters of Zion; and the Lord will
discover their secret Parts; in that Day the Lord will take away the Bravery of
their Tinkling Ornaments about their Feet, and their Cauls, and their Round
Tyres, like the Moon, the Chains (mark the Chains) and the Bracelets, and the
Mufflers, the Bonnets, and the Ornaments of the Legs, and the Head-bands, and
the Tablets, and the Earrings, the Rings, and Nose-Jewels, the Changable Suits
of Apparel, and the Mantles, and the Wimbles, and the Crisping-pins, and
Glasses, and the fine Linen, and the Hoods, and the Vails. And it shall come
to pass, that instead of sweet smell, there shall be a stink; and instead of a
girdle, a rent; and instead of well set hair, baldness; and instead of a
stomacher, a girding of sackcloath; and burning instead of beauty: Thy Men
shall fall by the Sword, and thy Mighty in the War; and her Gates shall lament
and mourn, and she being desolate shall sit on the Ground, Isa. 3.16, to the
end. And you may read in 2 Kings 17. how that the Children of Israel were
carried into Captivity in Assyria; for the King of Assyria besieged Samaria,
and after three Years Besieging, he took it and carrried away the Ten Tribes of
the Children of Israel into the Land of Assyria. And Isaiah, according to the
Word of the Lord, went to the Prophetess, and she conceived and bore a Son,
etc. And the Lord said, Before the Child should have the Knowledge to cry, My
Father and my Mother, the Riches of Damascus, and the Spoil of Samaria shall be
taken away by the King of Assyria, Isa. 8.3, 4.

Now here you may see what a Destruction came upon Samaria and the Jews,
because of their Rebellion and Disobedience, The Ten Tribes punished for their
Pride.
and their Haughtiness and Pride, as Isaiah cried against in Chap. 3. And then
what became of all their Haughtiness and Pride, and their Mincing, and their
Tinkling with their Feet, and their Chains, and Bracelets, and Jewels, and
Round Attire, with their Glasses, and Hoods, and Veils, when they were driven
away by Droves, by the King of Assyria, into Captivity, into Assyria, out of
their own Land, Houses and Cities? Then Isaiah 's Prophecy was fulfilled upon
those Haughty and Proud Jews: And did not Nebuchadnezzar afterward carry away
the two Tribes, and destroy Jerusalem, because of their Disobedience,
Rebellion, Haughtiness and Pride, who would not regard the Lord nor his
Prophets; therefore the Lord suffered them to be led away Prisoners, out of
their own Houses, Cities and Land, into Babylon, so stripped them of their
Pride, And the Two Tribes also.
and caused them to be carried away into strange Countries; so, was not the
Prophets Prophecy fulfilled upon them?

The Lord says, Behold the Day comes that shall burn as an Oven, and all the
Proud, yea, all that do Wickedly, shall be as Stubble; and the Day that comes
shall burn them up, The proud as Stubble.
says the Lork of Host, that it shall leave them neither Root nor Branch: But
unto them that fear my Name, shall the Son of Righteousness arise with healing
in his Wings, and ye shall go forth, and grow up as Calves in the Stall, Mal.
4.1, 2.

Therefore it is good for all to keep out of Pride and Wickedness, in Humility,
lest they be burnt up.

And the Apostle commanded, That Women adorn themselves in modest Apparel,
with Shamefacedness and Sobriety, not with Broidered Hair, or Gold, or Pearls,
or Costly Array, but that which becomes Women professing Godliness, with good
Works, I tim. 2.9, 10.

And likewise Peter in his General Epistle, says to the Women, Whose Adorning,
let it not be that outward Adorning, of plaiting the Hair, and of wearing of
Gold, or of putting on of Apparel; but let it be the hidden Man of the Heart,
in that which is not Corruptible, even the Ornament of a meek and quiet Spirit,
which is in the sight of God of great price: For after this manner in the old
time, the holy Women, who trusted in God, adorned rhemselves, being in
subjection unto their own Husbands, 1 Pet. 3.3, 4, 5.

Here you may see both the Prophets and Apostles declared against the Pride and
Haughtiness of People, both in the Old and New Testament.

And the Apostle John says in his first General Epistle to the Church of
Christ, Love not the World.
Love not the World, neither the things that are in the World; if any one love
the World, the love of the Father is not in him; for all that is in the World,
the lust of the Flesh, the Lust of the Eye, and the Pride of Life, is not of
the Father, but is of the World; and the World passes away, and the Lust
thereof; but he that does the Will of God, abides for ever, 1 John 2.2, 15,
16, 47.

Now here you may see an express Command to the true Christians (the Church of
Christ) against the Love of the World, and the Things of the World, and the
Lust of the Eye, and the Lust of the Flesh, and the Pride of Life; and they
that love the World, the love of the Father is not in them; and how that the
World passes away, and the Lust thereof; and therefore love not the Lust of
the Eye, the Lust of the Flesh, and the Pride of Life, which is not of the
Father.

And do not most of Christendom say the Lord's Prayer, Our Father which art in
Heaven, hallowed be thy Name, etc. and you that live in the Lust of the Flesh,
and the Lust of the Eyes, and the Pride of your Life, which is not of the
Father which is in Heaver, but of the World that passes away, and the Lust
thereof. And is it not said, The Devil is the king of Pride? And therefore do
not do his Lusts; but he that does the Will of God abides for ever: And
therefore consider when you say, Our Father which art in Heaven, hallowed be
the Name, etc. when you live in those things which are not of the Father which
is in Heaven, and daily obey and love the Lust of your Eye, the Lust of your
Flesh, and the Pride of your Life, which is not of the Father, but of the
World. And the Apostle John tells you, He that toves the World, the love of the
Father is not in him.

G. F.

An Epistle to all the Prisoners, and Sufferers for the Name of the Lord Jesus
Christ and his Worship.
The Word of God is not bound, 2. Tim. 2.9.
Dear Friends, in the Seed of Life that is over all, Epist. 398.
whom the Lord does support, and has supported by his Eternal Arm and Power,
to stand for his Glory; be valiant for his Truth and his Name upon the Earth,
who is God All-sufficient and Almighty, over all to support you all, and to
supply you with all things needful. Now dear Friends, it is not only given you
to believe in the Name of Christ, but also to suffer for his Name sake; so you
see and know, To suffer for Christ is the Gift of God, as well as Faith.
it is a Gift given you to believe, and a Gift to suffer for Christ's sake, and
his Righteousness; but however, as Christ says, Be ye wise as Serpents, and
harmless as Doves; for Christ's Believers are as Sheep or Lambs among Wolves,
he has declared that they shall be brought before Counsels, and before Rulers,
for his Name sake: But Christ bids his Disciples, Take no Thought what they
shall speak, for it shall be given you in that same Hour what ye shall speak:
for it is not you that speak, but the Spirit of your Father that speaks in
you; and this Spirit of the Father is sufficient to trust to, for it shall
answer all, if they have Ears to hear, and comfort his People, his Lambs and
Sheep. And Christ further said, speaking to his Disciples, Ye shall be hated of
all Men for my Name sake; but he that endures to the end, the same shall be
saved; and he that hears you (to wit, Christ's Sheep) hears me, says
Christ; and he that despises you despises me (namely Christ) and he that
despises me, despises him that sent me, to wit, the Father, Matthew. 10. Luke
10. And the Disciple is not above his Master, nor the Servant above his Lord;
for Christ the Lord and Master of the Sheep was despised; so it is enough for
the Desciple that he be as his Master, The Desciple is not above his Master.
and the Servant as his Lord; for if they call the Master of the House (namely
Christ) Beelzebub, how much more shall they call them of his Household? But the
very Hairs of your Head are all numbered: Fear ye not therefore, ye are of more
value than many Sparrows, and not one of them shall fall to the Ground without
the heavenly Father. See here Christ encourages his Lambs and Sheep; therefore
stand in his Will. And if the Lord suffer you (who are his Lambs, and Sheep,
and are as Doves and Chickens, that Christ has gathered under his Wings, and
none are able to pluck you out of his Hands (his Power) who has all Power in
Heaven and Earth given to him; and now if it be the Will of the Lord to try
you, his Lambs and Sheep, by spoiling of your outward Goods, as he did his
Servant Job, and others of his Servants and Children, in the days of the
Apostles, who took joyfully the spoiling of their Goods; and Moses by Faith
chose rather to suffer Affliction with the People of God, than to enjoy the
Pleasures of Sin, which are but for a season; esteeming the Reproaches of
Christ greater Riches than all the Treasures of Egypt; for he had an Eye to the
Recompense of Reward; as in Heb. 11.

And therefore consider how Noah, Lot, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, by Faith
served the Lord, and went through Sufferings and Trials; and Jeremiah, and the
rest of the Prophets, through Faith went through great Sufferings and
Imprisonments; and Daniel, and the Three Children, passed through great
Sufferings and Trials by Faith; so Faith was their Victory, which was the Gife
of God, which Christ is the Author and Finisher of; and you read in the Days of
the Apostles, what Sufferings and Imprisonments they were carried through by
Faith; and since the Apostles Days, how all the Martyrs were carried through
great Sufferings and Imprisonments by their Faith, which was their Victory; in
which Faith they pleased God, and had Victory over the Devil; and in which
Faith they were all in Unity.

Now dear Friends and Brethren, if it does please the Lord to try you, who are
the Believers in the Light, and Children of the Light and the Day of Christ: I
say again, if it please the Lord, and it be his Will, to try you in stinking
Prisons and Dungeons, Bride-wells, Houses of Correction, and suffer you to be
put in such places, who are his Sheep and Lambs, The Lord can Sanctify all our
Sufferings to us and make them pleasant.
Plants and Branches; I say, the Lord can sanctify all such places for his
People, his Children, his Sons and Daughters, and make all pleasant to them:
For his Sheep and People cannot go any where from the Lord, for the Lord and
his Presence is with them, and the Angel of his Presence faves them; and
therefore such Goals and Dungeons, bridewells, Houses of Correction, which are
for evil Doers, if the Lord do try, or suffer his People to be put in such
places, yet his People are all in the Hand, and under the Wings of Christ, and
he can sanctify all such places to them; and you, in that State, are to pray
for the Enemies that put you there; and if they curse and hate you, you are to
bless them, and to do good unto them, and you are to pray for them that
despitefully use you, and persecute you, and love your Enemies, that you may be
Children of your Father which is in Heaven; for he makes the Sun to shine on
the Evil and on the Good, and causes his Rain to fall on the Just and on the
Unjust. And the Apostle says to the Believers, Try all things, hold fast that
which is good; so you holding fast that which is good, with that you cna try
all things, whether they be good or bad; and be not overcome with Evil, but
overcome Evil with Good; To over come Evil with Good.
This is the Command. So it is the Good that must overcome the Evil; and what
has the Children of God to overcome the Evil withal, but the Good? Therefore,
then all must hold fast that which is Good, if that with the Good they overcome
the Evil, and can try all things; but when any do go from the Good in
themselves, then they are not like with it to ovecome the Evil, nor with it try
all things, without holding fast that which is Good; for without it you cannot
try all things, nor overcome the Evil, except you hold fast that which is Good,
which was before the Dad was, or Evil either; for by the Good, Evil is
overcome, and with it you can try all things, whether they are Good or Bad; and
a good Man; David says, He has dispersed, he has given to the poor; his
Righteousness endures for ever; his Horn shall be exalted with honur. They
that choose the things that please the Lord, and keep his Covenant, even them
will I give a Name in my House, and within my Walls, a Place and a Name, better
than of Sons and Daughters, says the Lord, and I will give them an everlasting
Name, which shall not be cut off, Isa. 56. So you may see how the Lord does
encourage his People to walk in the Truth, in Faithfulness to him; for the Lord
has loved his People with an everlasting Love; therefore with loving kindness
has he, and does he draw them unto himself, to serve and worship him, Jer. 31.
And Christ says, He that believes on him has everlasting Life. Mark, has
it, as in John. And again Christ says, He that drinks of the Water that I
give, shall never thirst; but the Water that I shall give, shall be in him as a
well of Water springing up to Eternal Life. So every one mind this Well in you,
who have drank of the Water which Christ has given you.

And the Apostle says, God will punist them who disobey the Gospel.
God will punish them that disobey his Gospel with an everlasting destruction
from the presence of the Lord, and from the Glory of his power, 2 Thessalonians. 1.9.
Here you may see everlasting Destruction to the Wicked, that disobey the
Gospel; and everlasting Life, to them that believe and obey the Bospel of
Christ. Now they that disobey the Gospel of Christ, refuse their own Comfort
and Joy of Life and Salvation; which Gospel is the Power of God, which is
preached to every Creature under Heaven to believe and obey; therefore happy
are you who have received it, and obeyed it, which brings Life and Immortality
to Light in you; that you see over the Enemy which darkened you, and are now
become Heirs of this comfortable and joyful Gospel of Life and everlasting
Salvation; in which everlasting Gospel you have an everlasting golrious
Fellowship; and in this everlasting Gospel, you can praise the everlasting God,
that reigns over all from everlasting to everlasting. And all that are of the
Seed and Faith of David can say as David said, Blessed be God from everlasting
to everlastin; and let all the People say, Amen. Praise ye the Lord. And
further can say, That the Mercy of the Lord is from everlasting to everlasting,
upon all them that fear him and his Righteousness unto the Children of Men,
Psalm 103.17. For the Lord God he changes not, he is the same that he was, who
inhabits Eternity, and dwells in the humble Heart; and therefore you humble
Ones, fear and serve and worship him. And keep under the Wing of Christ, and in
him your Sanctuary and Savior, who destroys the Destroyer, and is over all the
First and Last. Amen.

Dear Friends, To show forth the Nature of the Lamb.
Who are under Sufferings for the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ, and for his
new and living Way, and his pure undefiled Religion, and his Worship in the
Spirit and Truth, that Christ who is from above, and has all Power in Heaven
and Earth, has set up, for all the followers of the Lamb to walk in his new
and living Way, and to keep in his pure undefiled Religion and Worship, in
Spirit and in Truth.

And now, Dear Friends and Brethren, my desire is, That you may show forth the
Nature of the Lamb, and the Virtue and the Life, in which the Nobility of true
Chriftianity is seen and manifested in your peaceable, modest and virtuous
Behavior, before the Powers that you are brought before; and that none are to
question or take thought what they are to say; for it shall be given you in
that same Hour what ye shall speak, says Christ; Whosoever therefore shall
confess me bfeore Men, hism will I confess also before my Father which is in
Heaven: For with the Heart Man believes unto righteousness, and with the Mouth
Confession is made unto Salvation, Romans 10.10. And every Tongueshall confess to
God, Romans 14.11. And again, the Apostle says, That every Tongue shall confess
that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the Glory of God the Father, Philip. 2.10. So we
cannot but confess and declare what our Eyes have seen, Every Tongue shall
confess to Christ.
and our Ears have heard, and our Hands have handled of the Word of Life Christ
Jesus, by whom all things were made and created.

And Christ and his Disciples, who often met on Mountains, and in the
Wilderness, and on the Seaside, and in Ships, and sometimes in Houses. We do
not read, that the Jews and Priests called Christ and his Apostles Meetings
Routs or Riots, though the Jews and the chief Priests were bad enough against
them.

For, all Routs and Riots are out of the Spirit of Truth; and so is
Misbehaviour of all People; for the Truth is peaceable, and brings People into
peaceable Lives and Conversations, out of Routs and Riots, and Misbehaviour;
and in Peace they worship God; and they worship God in the Spirit, who is a
Spirit, an din this holy pure Spirit is the Unity and Bond of Peace, and is the
Bond of good Behavior, and of holy Walking and Talking, and it is the Bond of
peaceable Lives and Conversations of all that worship God in Spirit and Truth,
and walk in the New and Living Way, and keep in the pure, holy and undefiled
Religion.

And so, Dear Friends, be of one Mind, and heart, and Spirit, and God Almighty
Arm you with Patience and Humility; who is God All-sufficient, to give you
Dominion with his Power, and to support you. And so, with my Love to you all in
the Lord Jesus Christ. And let your Moderation appear unto all Men; for Wisdom
is justified of her Children: And what any one of you does want, God is
Allsufficient to supply you; trust in him, and in fear walk before him.

London, the 3d day of the 10th Month, 1684. G. F.

POSTSCRIPT.
JOhn said, Of evil Spirits.
That he saw three unclean Spirits like Frogs, that came out of the Mouth of
the Dragon, and out of the Mouth of the Beast, and out of the Mouth of the
false Prophet. Mark, they do go out of their Mouths, for they are Serpents and
Devils working Miraracles, that goes out of their Mouths, the foul unclean
Spirits which goes forth unto the Kings of the Earth, and of the whole World.
Mark, the whole world to gather together them. (Mark. to gather them) so here
they are to be gathered to the Battle of the great day of God Almighty, Rev.
16.13, 14. And Satan the old Serpent shall go out to deceive the Nations, which
are in the four Quarters of the Earth, God and Mgog, to gather them together to
Battle; the Number of whom is as the Sand of the Sea (so here is a gathering
together by the Devil) and they went upon the breadth of the Earth, and
compassed the Camp of the Saints about, and the beloved City, and Fire came
down from God out of Heaven and devoured them; so these were gathered together
by the Devil, the Destroyer, was destroyed by God the Savior of his People,
Rev. 20.8.

And the Lord scattered Nimrod, that mighty Hunters gathering, who gathered up
People together to build Babel, and confounded them, Genesis 10.11. And Isaiah
said, All they Children shall be taught of the Lord, and great shall be the
Peace of thy Children; and in Righteousness shall they be established. Behold,
they shall surely gather together, but not by me, says the Lord: And whosoever
shall gather together against thee, shall fall for thy sake. No Weapon that is
formed against thee, shall prosper; No Weapon formed against God's Heritage
shall prosper.
and every Tongue that shall rise against thee in judgment, thou shall condemn.
This is the heritage of the Servants of the Lord, and their Righteousness is of
me, says the Lord, Isai. 54. And Christ Jesus says, Where two or three are
gathered together in my Name, there am I in the midst of them. And the Apostle
said to the Jews, speaking of Christ, That there is no Salvation in any other:
For there is no other Name under Heaven given among Men, whereby we must be
saved, Acts 4.12. but by Christ Jesus. So here is the Saints true Gathering in
the Name of Christ Jesus the Second Adam; and none is able to pluck them out of
his hand, John 10.

For Christ the Seed of the Woman bruises the Serpent's Head, and Christ
through Death destroys Death, and the Devil the Power of Death; and so does
reconcile all things, both in Heaven and in the Earth into one.

The Devil abode not in the Truth, and so he became a Devil, The Devil not
abiding in the Truth became an Enemy.
a Destroyer, and a Serpent, and Enemy, and a Satan, and Adversary to the
Truth, and to Righteousness, and Holiness, and to Man and Woman, that God made
in his Image, in Righteousness and Holiness, so he became an Enemy, and
Adversary, and Destroyer, who is out of the Truth, and abode not in it, in whom
there is no Truth, and so is called the Old Serpent, and Satan, and Devil,
Tempter, and false Accuser; and Christ through Death destroys Death and the
Devil, the Power of Death.

And when the Jews went from the Truth, they became Enemies and Adversaries to
it, and Destroyers of the Righteous, and the Just; yea, they were Adversaries,
and Accusers, and Enemies to the Prophets, and Christ Jesus, and Apostles; and
Christ called the Jews, Vipers and Serpents, and said to them that made a
Profession of the Scriptures of the Old Testament, but were gone from the Truth
of them, that they were of their Father the Devil, and his Works and Lusts they
would do.

And here the Jews that went out of the Truth, did not they become as Serpents,
Enemies, Satan's, Adversaries, and Judas's, Betrayers, and of the Devil,
Destroyers of the Just?

And when they which are called Christians became haters of the Light, and
Walkers despitefully against the Spirit of Grace, Despisers of the Word in
their Hearts, and erred from the Truth and the true Faith, and professed the
Form of Godliness, but denied the Power thereof, and so denied the Spirit ot
true Christianity: These became as Serpents, Enemies, Satan, Adversaries to
true Christianity, and of the Devil, that seek to destroy it, and Judas's,
Betrayers of it, and of the Righteous and the Just, wherever it appeared to
the unjust: And this has been the Work of that Spirit, that did not abide in
the Truth in all Ages, to be as Enemies, Adversaries and Judas's, Betrayers,
who seek to deftroy the Truth; but Christ the Truth, does destroy that
destroying Spirit, who is the Savior.

And Christ said to the Jews, and to the Scribes and Pharisees, which were the
greatest outward Professors, and appliers of the Prophets and Promises of the
Old Testament to themselves upon the Earth, and yet the greatest Persecutors of
the holy Men and Women, and the Lord's Prophets upon the Earth.

I say, that Christ said to them, O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the
Prophets, Christ lamented over Jerusalem.
and stonest them which are sent unto thee, how often would I have gathered
they Children together, even as a Hen gathers her Chickens under her Wings,
and ye would not! Behold, your Houses are left unto you desolate, etc. Matthew.
23.37, 38.

Jersalem was the chiefest Place of Worship, and the chiefest City among the
Jews, and the greatest Place of Persecution, and yet the Lord Jesus Christ wept
over this City, and would have gathered these persecuting Professors (who were
without possessing of the Life of what they did profess) but they would not
come to him that they might have Life.

And these persecuting Jews, Scribes and Pharisees, Christ said unto them, Te
compass Sea and Land to make one Proselyte, and when he is made he is twofold
mord the Child of Hell, Matthew. 23.

Here you may see these Scribes, Pharisees and Jews, the great Professors and
Temple-Worshippers without Life, what they gathered into, and what Disciples
they made in their compassing Sea and Land, they made them like themselves, and
the Devil, and Satan, and the Serpent, who abode not in the Truth, and seek to
draw all out of the Truth, and to make them as Serpents and Satan, Adversaries,
and of the Devil, Destroyers; and so he rules in the Hearts of the Disobedient,
and blinds the Eyes of the Heathen or Infidels, and the apostatised
Christians from the Spirit of Christ, and the Life of Christianity, they do
seek to draw all from the Truth and Spirit of Christ, and the Life of
Christianity into Death, Enmity, and into Persecution and Destroying, like the
Devil, Jews and Judas, both in one Spirit, according to their Measures that
they have from the Devil; but all that live and walk inthe Truth and the Spirit
of Jesus, labor to bring and draw, and gather all into the Truth, and to
Christ their Savior, who destroys the Destroyer.

G. F.

Concerning the pure and undefiled Religion, that was set up above Sixteen
Hundred Years ago: Which all that do own God and Christ are to walk in.
DEar Friends,
Epist. 399.
You, who profess the Light, Faith, Grace and Spirit of Christ, and the pure
undefiled Religion before God the Father, To keep from the Spots of the World.
are to keep your selves unspotted from the World, and to bridle your Tongues
from evil Words, which corrupt good Manners; the Light of Christ Jesus lets
you see the Spots of the World; and the Grace of God will teach you tho deny
them; and the Spirit of Truth, if you be led by it, teaches you to mortify
and subdue them.

And now, Friends, Here is the pure and undefiled Religion, which the Apostles
in the Primitive Times did own, and which now we do own: This is pure Religion,
and is undefiled before God the Father, and to keep unspotted from the World.
First, This Religion is Pure. Secondly, It is undefiled before God the Father.
And that which is pure and undefiled before God the Father, if you live in it
and obey it, it will keep you unspotted from the World, and so from the Spots
of the World: And that which keeps you from the Spots of the World, will keep
you from the Body of Death, and Sins of the World; which you are made free
from, by the Circumcision of Christ, by his Spirit, and by the Law of the
Spirit of Life in Christ Jesus, are made free from the Law of Sin and Death.

And now Friends, you that do profess this pure and undefiled Religion before
God the Father, to keep unspotted from the World, or from the Spots of the
World; take heed you that profess this pure and undefiled Regilion, tha tie
keep your selves from the World, or that you do not get the World's Spots upon
you. And take heed of Grediness, and Earthly-mindedness, and Covetousness,
which the Apostle called Idolatry; for it is a great Spot and Blot of the World
that lies in Wickedness. And take heed of Unrighteousness in your Trades,
Commerces or Dealings: For Unrighteousness is a Spot. To be Just in Trade, etc.
And take heed of Overreaching, or using any Deceitsulness or Defraud in your
Trade or Commerce: For Overreaching, and using Deceit, of any Unjust thing,
will Blot you an Spot you, and is contrary to the pure and undefiled Religion.
And take heed of Unrighteousness, Ungodliness, Unholiness, Profaneness,
Looseness, Filthiness, Naughtiness, and Evil Words, which corrupt good Manners:
These things will Blot you and Spot you, and are contrary to the pure undefiled
Religion before God the Father. And also take heed of Drunkenness, Theft,
Murder, Whordom, Fornication, Adultery, and all manner of Uncleanness: For they
which act such things are void of the pure undefiled Religion before God the
Father, and they are blotted and spotted with the Actions of the World that
lies in Wickedness, and their Religion is vain. And take heed of Lying,
Swearing and Cursing, which are Spots of the World, and forbid by Christ and
the Apostle.

And all such that follow the Lust of the Eye, the Pride of Life, and the Lust
of the Flesh, which is not of the Father, but of the God of the World, that
abode not in the Truth, such are spotted with the Spots of the World, and are
Proud, Vain, Lofty, Scornful, High, Spots of the World.
and Spotted with the World's Spots, and are void of the pure undefiled
Religion before God the Father. And take heed of Malice, Hatred, Envy, Wrath,
Rage and Fury, these are the Spots of the World, who bear such Fruits, contrary
to the Spirit of Meekness, Gentleness, Kindness, Tenderness, Sobriety, Love and
Mercifulness, which are the Fruits of the pure Spirit of God, which leads to
the pure undefiled Religion before God the Father, which is To visit the
Fatherless and Widows in their Affliction, and to keep unspotted from the
World; this pure undefiled Religion keeps in the Purity of Life and
Conversation; and this is above all, and keeps from all the vain Religions in
the World; which pure and undefiled Religion, it is the Duty of all true
Christians to walk in, by which they may be kept from the Spots of the World;
and this is the Religion that was set up above Sixteen Hundred Years ago, in
the Church of Christ; and happy had all Christendom been, if they had kept to
this pure undefiled Religion to this day, and then they would not have made so
many Religions, as they have done; but to this pure undefiled Religion they
must come again, if ever they come to the true Religion; The pure Religion, and
undefiled, is the hest Religion.
for none can make a better, than the pure undefiled Religion, which was set up
in the Church (in the Apostles days) above Sixteen Hundred Years ago; unto
which all that profess Christianity should be conformable; even to this pure
undefiled Religion, which will keep them from the Spots of the World, and then
their Religion will not be of the World: And this is the one pure undefiled
Religion that all Christians should be of, which is from one God, the Creator
of all: So there is one God, the Creator of all, and one Lord Jesus christ, by
whom all things were made and created, who is the one Mediator betwixt God and
Man; even the Man christ Jesus, there in one Body, and one Spirit, even as you
are called to one Hope of your Calling, and one God and Father of all, who is
above you all, and in you all, and through you all; and there is one Faith
which Christ Jesus is the Author and Finisher of; and there is one Baptism, and
by one Spirit we are all baptized into one Body, whether we be Jews or
Gentiles, Bond or Free, must all drink into this one Spirit of Christ and so to
keep the Unity in the Spirit, which is the Bond of Peace; for the Apostle
says, If any Man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his, Romans 8.9.
for Christ says, in his Prayer to his Father, That they may be all one
(meaning the true Christians) as thou Father art in me, and I in thee, that
they also may be one in us, that they may be one, ever as we are one; I in
them, and thou in me, that they may be made perfect in one; to wit, the
Believers and Followers of Christ, John 17.21, 22, 23. Here you may see, God
and Christ are one in them (so he Prays, that his People may be one) in whom
they have Rest, Life, Peace and Salvation with God, through Jesus Christ, Amen.

Let your Conversation or Practice be without Covetousness, etc. Hebr. 13.5.
Only let your Conversation be as becomes the Gospel of Christ, Philip. 1.17.
The 4th of the 2d Month, 1685. G. F.

To Friends at York.
DEar Friends,
Epist. 400.
To you is my Love in the Seed of Life, that bruises the Head of Enmity; and in
this Seed you all have Life and Peace that is Everlasting: And my Desires are,
That you may all dwell in the Love that can bear all things: To keep the Word
of Wisdont and of Patience.
And keep the Word of Patience, which will never be worn out; for the Word
lives, and abides, and endures for ever, and over all Trials keeps; for the
Word was in the Beginning, and all things are upheld by the Word of his Power;
in it abide.

And so, live and walk in the Wisdom that is from above, that is heavenly,
pure, peaceable, gentle and easy to be entreated: And keep in the Lamb-like
Nature; for the Suffering Lamb must have the Victory. And so the Man of God
must not strive, but be gentle, and yet valiant for God's Truth, and not to
fell it; for they that do, go into Bondage and Captivity; for the Truth makes
all God's People free, and the peaceale Truth is a peaceable Habitation: And so
in it God Almighty preserve you, and all the Lord's People every where, that
they may Glorify the Lord God of all their Comforts, Lives and Mercies, Amen.

Kingston, the 13th of the 10th Month, 1685. G. F.

DEar Friends and Brethren, in the Lord Jesus Christ, Epist. 401.
who is your holy, heavenly Rock and Foundation of God, that stands sure, who
was the Foundation and the Rock of his Church, Christ the Foundation of God,
that stands sure.
in the Apostles days, and is now. You may see how Christ sent John tho
Encourage his Church, and says in Rev. 3.8. I know thy Works: Behold, I have
set before thee an open Door, and no Man can shut it: For thou have a little
strength, and have kept my Word, and have not denied my Name. Behold, I will
make them of the Synagogue of Satan (which say they are Jews, and are not, but
do lie) behold, I will make them to come and worship before they feet, and to
know that I have loved thee: Because thou have kept the Word of my Patience, I
also will keep thee from the hour of Temptation, which shall come upon all the
World, to try them that dwell upon the face of the Earth.

Now you may see what Comfort the Sons and Daughters of God have, that keep the
Word of Patience, what a Door is opened to them of the Blessings, Mercies and
Riches of God, which no Man can shut from them. And they which said they were
Jews, and were not, or such as make outward Profession of the Words of Truth,
and Form of Godliness, and are not in the Truth; such the Lord says, Behold, I
will make them of the Synagogue of Satan, etc. So here you may see the Lord
would have his Children, his Church, to take notice, what he will make of them
that do not possess. the Truth, namely, The Synagogue of Satan, he will bow
them down, and make them to know, He loves his faithful People.

And all such as went out from the Church of Christ, Those who go from the
Church maifest themselves.
in the Apostles days, which were not of them; and Corah, Dathan and Abiram,
that went out from the Jews, etc. and all they that separated themselves in the
Apostles days, from the Church of Chrift, and all they that separated
themselves now, etc. and are gone out from the Church of Christ, have maniseft
they were not of them: They that went out from the Church of Chrust, in the
Apostles days, and separated themselves from them; and all they that go from
the Church of Christ now, and separate themselves from them, they have erred
from the Word of Patience, and have not kept that; but such are gone into
Temptations of the World, and are become as the Synagogue of Satan, and like
Raging Waves of the Sea, Satan's Fruits and Works they do manifest; so that by
their Fruits it is known of what Synagogue they are, and have and do,
sufficiently discover it in all Ages, how that Patience is worn out, and
wears out, and that they have not kept the Word of Patience; and none such
are like to preach the Word of God, and the Word of Life, and the Word of
Patience, and the Word of Wisdom, that lives, and abides, and endures for
ever, that keep not the Word of Patience; for, how can such keep the Word of
Patience, or the Word of Life, or the Word of Wisdom, when they separate
themselves, and go out from the Church of shrist, and are not of it? For had
they been of it, they would have continued with the Church of Christ, in the
Word of Life, Wisdom and Patience: But now they do manifest themselves to be
out of the gentle Wisdom of God, The Fruits of hem who ere not led by the
Wisdom of God.
and out of the Word of Patience, in a Rash, Hasty, Furious, Envious,
Malicious, Hateful, Lying, Defaming, Slandering, Gainsaying and Envious Spirit
of Cain, Corah and Ham; and the Fruits of this Spirit is manifest sufficiently
now, as in other Ages, to them that live in the Word of Life, Wisdom and
Patience; by which Word all God's Children are born again of the Immortal Seed,
and feeds upon the Milk of the Word; by which Word all things were made and
created; by which Word all God's People are reconciled to God; which Word
lives, and abides, and endures for ever.

Now as there isa growth and adding to Faith, and Virtue, and Knowledge, and
Temperance, and Godliness, and Patience, and Brotherly Kindness, and Charity,
as God's Children are led by the Spirit of God, in which they have Unity, and
it is the Bond of their Peace: So as there is an erring from the Spirit of God,
there is a degenerating from Virtue, Kindness, and true Knowledge, and
Godliness, and Temperance, and Patience, and Brotherly Kindness, and Charity,
this we have seen both now in this Age, as in the Days of the Apostles; and
this degenerating Spirlt, whose Patience is worn out, they may get all the good
Words in the Scriptures, Words of the Spirit, Words of Truth, Words of Faith,
and the Promises, and apply them to their Impatient Spirits, but they will lose
the Comfort of them: But the Word of Life, the Word of Wisdom, the Word of
Patience will never be worn out, but lives, and abides, and endures for ever.

Dear Friends, f we suffer for Righteousness, appy are we.
Be ye Followers of that which is good; and if ye suffer for Righteousness
sake, happy are ye: For it is better (if the Will of God be so) that ye suffer
for well-doing, and not for evil-doing, because Christ also suffered for us,
leaving us an Example that we should follow his steps: Who, when he was
reviled, reviled not again; when he suffered, he threatened not, but committed
himself to him that judges Righteously: If ye suffer for Righteousness sake,
happy are ye; and be not afraid of their Terror, neither be troubled, having a
good Conseience; that whereas they speak Evil of you, as of Evildoers, they
may be ashamed that falsely accuse your good conversation in Christ: And if ye
are Reproached for the Name of Christ Jesus, happy are ye; for the Spirit of
Glory and of God rests upon you; on their part he is Evil spoken of, but on
your part he is Glorified: But let none of you suffer as a Murderer, or a
Thief, or as a Busie-body in other Men's matters: But if any Man suffer as a
Christian, let him not be ashamed, but let him Glorify God upon this behalf,
that he suffers as a Christian, not as a Murderer, Thief, Evil-doer, or a
Busie-body in other Men's matters, for that is not a Suffering for Christ, who
has suffered for you; and they that will reign with him, must suffer with him:
The God of all Grace, who has called us into his Eternal Glory, by Jesus
Christ, after that ye have suffered a while, make ye perfect, stablish,
strengthen, and settle you; this is through the Sufferings for Christ Jesus,
the Captain of our Salvation, who was made perfect through Sufferings, and is
able to succor all his Followers in their Temptations and Sufferings.

And the Apostle says to the Church of Christ, the Philipians, I count all
things but loss for the Excellency of the Knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord,
for whom I have suffered the loss of all things, and do count them but dung,
that I may win Christ, and be found in him, Of the Excellency of the Knowledge
of Christ.
that I may know him and the Power of his Resurrection, and the Fellowship of
his Sufferings; being made conformable unto his Death: Which every true
Christian should be of the same mind, as this Holy Apostle was. So here you may
see the Apostle exhorts People to Suffer with Christ, and for him, but not as
Murderers, Thieves, Evildoers, and Busybodies in other Men's matters. And as
David says, Depart from the evil, and do good; seek peace, and pursue it; keep
thy Tongue from evil, and thy Lips from speaking guile: For the wicked have set
their Mouths against the Heavens, and their Tongues walk through the Earth: But
be not as the Horse and the Mule, whose Mouth must be held with the Bit and the
Bridle. And David says, I will take heed unto my Ways, that I Sin not with my
Tongue: I will keep my Mouth with a bit, while the Wicked is before me. And
this is good Advice, that God's People be not ensnared by the Wicked's Snare:
And therefore it is good for all God's People to be careful and wise, that none
do suffer as Busybodies in other Men's matters, or as Evildoers etc. but let
their Sufferings be foi Righteousness sake, and with Christ, that they may
reign with him. And keep out the Athenians Spirit, spending their time in
hearing and telling of News, which the World is full of, in whom your Trouble
is; But in me ye have Peace, says Christ. And therefore as every one has
received Christ, so walk in him, and let your Conversations be in him, Amen.

And blessed are they who suffer for Righteousness sake, and in whose Hearts
there is no Enmity: And blessed are they that dwell in the Love of God, that
can bear all things, and are in the Wisdom of God, which is pure and peaceable.
For Troubles, Afflictions, Sufferings, Imprisonments, spoiling of Goods, and
many Perils do attend God's People, by the World that lies in Wickedness: And
therefore it is good for all God's People to keep in Christ their Sanctuary, in
whom they have Eternal Rest and Peace.

And also God's People are exercised now (as in days past) with Trials and
Perils by false Brethren, as the Church of Christ was in the Apostles day, such
as went from the Chruch, in Cain's, Trials by false Brethren.
Corah's and Balaam's Way, as the Apostle says, Fierce Despisers, false
Accusers of those that are good; and you may read in 2 Pet. 2. throughout, of
such as forsook the right Way, and of many following their pernicious Ways, by
reason of whom the Way of Truth was evil spoken of: And so it is now, as it was
in the Apostles days. And the Apostle says to the Church, You have heard say,
that Antichrists should come; even now are there many Antichrists: They went
out from us, but they were not of us; for if they had been of us, they would no
doubt have continued with us; but they went out from us, that they might be
manifest they were not of us, 1 John 2.18, 19. Christ did forewarn his
Disciples of these Antichrists and false Prophets, that they should be in
wardly Ravening Wolves, and by the Fruits of their Trees they should be known;
to be of the Nature of the Wolf, and not of the Lamb: Such as these went from
the Church (in the Apostles days) into the World; and such as these are gone
from the Church of Christ now, into the Spirit of the World; their evil Spirits
are tried; as in 1 John 4.

And the Sufferings, and Perils by false Brethren, have been more Grief many
times to the Church of Christ, than open Persecution; for they cause the Way of
Truth to be evil spoken of; that turn from the Way of Righteousness, like the
Dog to the Vomit, or the Sow to the Mire. And in the Way of Righteousness,
Christ Jesus, God preserve all his People from all the biting devouring Dogs,
and greedy Swine.

And you read how Righteous Abel suffered by his false Brother Cain; The
Righteous suffer by the Unrighteous.
and did not Ishmael persecute his Brother Isaac? And would not Esau have
destroyed his Brother Jacob: But God prevented him? And was not Ishmael and
Esau in an outward Profession of the Circumcision? And how often did the Jews
(that were brought out of Egypt by the Power of the Lord) turn against Moses
and Aaron, and other Elders, and so turned against the Power and Spirit of God,
that brought them out of Egypt, whom the Lord destroyed in the Wilderness, and
they never came to see the Land of Promise? And how often did the Jews turn
against the holy Prophets of God, after they came into the Land of Canaan, and
what was their end, when they had rebelled against the good Spirit that God
gave them to instruct them? And were not these holy Prophets the Jews Brethren,
whom they killed, and imprisoned, and presecuted? And was not Joseph sold into
Egypt, and persecuted by his Brethren; but God was with him, and preserved him:
And so he will his faithful People? And did not Moses say unto the Children of
Israel, A Prophet shall the Lord your God raise up of your Brethren, him shall
ye hear in all things, whatsoever he shall say unto you, Deuteronomy. 18.15. Acts
3.22. and 7.37.

Now when God had raised up this Prophet, Christ the Prophet.
Christ Jesus, you see many of the Jews would not receive him, nor believe him,
nor many would hardly hear him, though they were called Brethren; but they
Mocked him, and Persecuted him, and Blasphemed him; and the Chief Priest gave
Money to Juaas (one of his Disciples) to betray him: And what became of all the
Jews, and of Judas, that betrayed and persecuted Christ and the Prophets? And
what became of all those false Apostles and Anti christ's that went in Cain's,
Corah's, Balaam's and Jezabel's Way? And will not all of the same Spirit in our
Age, that has gone and goes in the same Way, or Path, have the same End, yea
their latter End will be worse than their Beginning, and to be as the Synagogue
of Satan, who makes them to Accuse, Slander and Revile God's Righteous People,
from whom Christ will save and deliver his People, who bruises the Head of the
Serpent; and against such Synagogues of Satan the Wrath of the Lamb is turned:
And in Christ, the Lamb of God, the Saints have their Rest and Peace, and can
Sing Hallelujah.

Bednal-Green, the 14th of the 4th Month, 1685. G. F.

A General Epistle.
DEar Friends,
Go not out from your Habitation, Epist. 402.
but keep in your heavenly Habitation, in the Spirit of Grate and Truth, and
the Gospel, the Power of God, To keep our Habitation in Christ Jesus.
and the holy Divine Faith you will feel in your Habitation Christ Jesus; for
all Storms and Tempests, and Clouds of Darkness, and the Tempter with his
Temptations you will see without; and therefore keep in your Habitation Christ
Jesus; there you are safe, and there you have your heavenly Weapons and Armor,
to war with him and his Followers, that is out of the Truth; to wit, the Devil,
whom Christ destroys, and his Works; and Christ reconciles to God all things in
Heaven and in the Earth: And so, all that be reconciled do seed upon the Milk
of the Word, by which Word all things were made, and by this Word all things
are upheld, and by this Word all things do increase, and by it all things have
their Virtue and their Being, and Man and Woman comes to feed upon the Virtue
of the Creatures; and Man and Woman is sanctified by the Word; and by the Word
all things are sanctified to them; by which Word all things are reconciled, all
things in Heaven, and all things in the Earth. And so, Man lives not by Bread
alone, but by every Word that proceeds out of the Mouth of God. And he that
reads the Scriptures of Truth, and understands them, he must have Christ Jesus
in him, who is the Substance of them: For if Christ Jesus be not in you, the
Apostle says, you are Reprobates.

And is not Christ the Substance or Body of Divinity? And if Men that are
unlearned in natural Language and Tongues, have Christ Jesus the Substance, do
not they come to know the Body of Divinity?

And if natural Men do learn all the natural Tongues and Languages, and Arts
and Sciences in the Earth, at natural Schools, can those natural Men receive or
perceive the Body of Divinity, or things of God. without the Spirit of God and
Christ in them?

And, if not, then what do all the natural Tongues and Languages, or natural
Arts or Sciences, profit natural Men, to perceive or receive the things of God,
by which they learn at Schools or Colleges?

For the Apostle says, The natural Man receives not the things of the Spirit
of God, for they are foolishness to him; neither can he know them, because they
are spiritually discerned. And again the Apostle says, The things of God
knows no Man, but the Spirit of God. So it is clear, the things of God are
revealed and discerned by the Spirit of God, 1 Cor. 2.10, 11, 14.

And the Apostle says, The World by Wisdom knew not God, The World by Wisdom
knew not God.
nor yet be their Wisdom do they know God. Therefore the Christian's Faith is
not to stand in the Wisdom of Men, etc. by which they do not know God; but in
the Power of God. And the Apostle says, We speak the Wisdom of God in a
Mystery; even the hidden Wisdom, which God ordained before the World to our
glory, which receives it, 1 Cor.1.21.and 2.7. And so in the Wisdom of God,
which was before the World and its Wisdom was, the living God is known: And the
beginning of this Wisdom is the Fear of God; and the Fear of God is, to depart
from Evil.

And so, True Believers Sanctification.
to all the true Believers and Christians that are called in Christ by his
Grace and Truth, Christ is made unto them, the Power of God, and the Wisdom of
God, and Righteousness, and Sanctification and Redemption; as in 1 Cor. 1.24,
30.

And now, such that are redeemed and sanctified by Christ, and he is their
Righteousness and their Wisdom, which is from Above, and above the World's
Wisdom that is Below, who by their Wisdom do not know God; they that know
Christ made so unto them, witness Christ, by whom all things were made and
created: Such cannot look down into the World after the World's Wisdom, nor the
natural Man's natural Tongues, Arts and Sciences, which he learns at the
natural Schools and Colleges, thereby to know God: For by all his natural
Parts, and his wordly Wisdom, the natural Man knows not, nor receives not the
things of the Spirit of God; for they are Foolishness to him. And therefore all
Men and Women must come to the Spirit of God, and to Christ the Wisdom of God,
if they do know God and the things of God.

The Apostle says, If any Man be in Christ Jesus, he is a new Creature, old
things are past away: behold, all things are become new. And Christ saih,
Behold, I make all things new, 2 Cor. 5.17. Revel. 21.5.

Are not the old things in the Old Testament, and the old Covenant, which
Christ abolishes and does away? Christ abolishes the outward Priesthood,
Sacrifices, etc. under the Law.
And is not outward Circumcision, and all outward Offerings and Sacrifices, and
the Blood of Bulls, Goats, Lambs, and other Creatures, and the sprinkling of
their Blood, and cleansing with it; are not these old things in the Old
Testament and Old Covenant, abolished and done away by Christ in his New
Covenant and New Testament?

And is not Aaron's Priesthood, with his outward Linnen-Garments, and other
Garments, and Bells, and outward precious Stones, are not all these old things
in the Old Covenant, abolished and done away by Christ in his New Covenant, who
is the precious Cornerstone? And were not all the outward Washings, and
Tabernacles, and Sanctuaries, and Temples, and all the Surplaces and fine
Linen of the Priests Garments in the Old Testament, and Old Covenant the old
Things which are done away and abolished by Christ Jesus?

And are not all the Jews Feasts, and New Moons, and Sabbaths, and Holy Days,
and Aaron's Priest's Lips, which were to preserve Peoples Knowledge, and the
Priests receiving Tithes, and paying Tithes to Aaron; are not all these old
Things, in the Old Covenant and Old Testament, held up by the Law, which served
till the Seed Christ came, done away and abolished by Christ?

And Christ said to his Disciple, Learn of me; freely ye have received, freely
give, in his New Testament. And soall these old Things, held up by the Old
Covenant and Old Testament, which Old Things and Old Covenant is decayed, and
vanishes and passes away, being abolished by Christ Jesus in his New Covenant
and New Testament: And all that be in Christ are New Creatures, and they see
Old Things are past away; and can say, Behold, all things are become new, to
the new Creatures in Christ. For to the new Creature, Christ is the Offering
once for all; and his Blood gives Life in the New Testament, and New Covenant,
and taking Oaths and swearing to the Lord, and performing them to the Lord,
this was in the Old Time, in the Old Covenant and Testament; and Christ has
abolished that Law and Covenant, Whatsoever is more than Yea, Yea, and Nay,
Nay, comes of Evil.
and those Old Things that were in the Old Time. And in his New Covenant and
New Testament, he says, Swear not at all; but let your Yea, be Yea; and your
Nay, Nay: Whatsoever is more than these, comes of Evil.

And in the New Covenant and New Testament, Circumcision is of the Spirit, and
of the Children of the New Covenant, their Bodies are the Temples of the Living
God; and none are saved or justified by the Works and Righteousness of the Law
in the Old Covenant, but by the Faith of Christ and his Righteousness.

And so all the Figures, Shadows and Types, Christ the substance of all Figures
and Types.
in the Old Testament and Covenant, Christ the Substance is come and abolishes
them, and does them away; and he says, Behold, I make all things new. So the
New Creature in Christ Jesus, sees the Old Things are past away, and all
Things are become New. So the New Creature is the new Bottle, that holds the
new Wine, he has the new Garments; and a piece of new Cloth must not be sewed
in the Old Garment. So the old Garments, and old Bottle, and old Wine, must be
kept distinct from the new Garments, and new Cloth, and new Bottles, and new
Wine. So the New Covenant, and New Testament, is distinct from the Old
Covenant, and Old Testament: The New and Living Way in the New Testament, and
New Covenant, is distinct from the Way in the Old Testament, and Old Covenant;
and the new Creatures in Christ Jesus, that beholds all things, are become new
to them; and see that the old Things are past away from them: Here is a
Distinction betwixt the new Creatures and the old Creatures, that cry up the
old Thing, and live in them; and the New, that cries up the New, and lives in
them.

And in the Old Testament, the outward Jews defended their Religion by Carnal
Weapons, and outward Armor; but in the New Testament, the Children of the New
Covenant, their Armor and Weapons are Spiritual, not Carnal.

And in the Old Testament, and Old Covenant, there was a Tribe of Priests that
offered up outward Offerings and Sacrifices; but in the New Testament, the
Children of the New Covenant are called, A Spiritual Household, and a Royal and
a holy Priesthood, to offer Spiritual Sacrifices, acceptable to God by Jesus
Christ.

And in the Old Testament, and the Old Covenant, the Priesthood was made by the
Law of a Carnal Commandment; but Christ, our High Priest, in the Testament, was
made after the Power of an endless Life. And the High Priest in the Old
Testament entered into the outward Sanctuary, called, The Holy Place, made with
Hands; which Priesthood and Sanctuary is abolished and done away by Christ: But
Christ in his New Testament, is entered into Heaven it self, now to appear in
the Presence of God, for the Children of the New Testament, who do praise God
through Jesus Christ their Mediator, who makes their Peace betwixt them and
God; for he that sits on the Throne, makes all things new, and reconciles
to God.

The Temple built by Solomon, The Temple of Solomon a Figure of Christ and his
Church.
was partly a Figure of Christ, and partly of his Church: For, when Christ
suffered the Temple of his Holy Body to be destroyed, and was raised again from
the Dead, John 2.19. then Christ raised up us the Christian Church; which is
the true spiritual House and Temple wherein God dwells, 1 Cor. 6.19.

And Isaiah the Prophet, and also the Apostle, speaking of Christ's Sufferings,
says in Isa. 53. and Acts 8.33. how that the Lord should make Christ his Soul
an Offering for Sin, Christ's Soul an Offering for Sin.
who poured out his Soul unto Death; and the Prophet says, Who shall declare
his Generation? Yet the Prophet says, He shall see his Seed (namely Christ)
and did not Christ see his Seed, his faithful Apostles and Disciples? And the
Apostle says, For both he that Sanctifies (namely Christ) and they who are
Sanctified are all of one; for which cause Christ is not ashamed to call them
Brethren: So then they are of his Seed, which can preach Christ, and can
declare his heavenly and holy Generation.

And again he says, I will declare thy Name among my Brethren: So here Christ
calls his Believers his Brethren; Christ our Brother.
and again he says, Behold I, and the Children which God has given me, are
for Signs and for Wonders in Israel; so they are now to all outward Professors
without Possession, Isa. 8.18. and Heb. 2.11.

And Isaiah says, The Lord himself shall give you a Sign (namely, the outward
Jews.) Behold, a Virgin shall conceive and bear a Son, and shall call his Name
Emanuel, Isa. 7.14. Mat. 1.23.

This Christ, Christ the Emanuel.
the Emanuel, God with us, he was a Sign to the Jews, and a Wonder, when he
came; and he is a Sign and a Wonder to all outward Professors of the Scripture,
without Possession, where he is revealed and manifest in his People; for he
says, Behold I, and the Children whom the Lord has given me, are for Signs
and for Wonders in Israel. So where Christ, the Son of God, is revealed in his
People, and they come to be of his Seed, Brethren and Generation, and declare
his Generation, they are for Signs, and for Wonders, and for Gazing-Stocks to
all the outward Professors of God, and Christ, and the Prophets and Apostles,
without the Possession of their Life and Spirit.

And the Apostle says, That Abraham was called a Friend of God, James 2.24. We
are the Friends of God if we keep his Commandments
And Christ says to his Disciples, Ye are my Friends, if ye do whatever I
command: Henceforth I call you not Servants, for the Servant knows not what
his Lord does: But I have called you Friends; for all things that I have heard
of my Father I have made known unto you. Here Christ called his Disciples
sometimes Friends, and sometimes Brethren, as before; as in John 15.19. and
Heb. 2.11.12.

And as many as received Christ, to them he gave Power to become the Sons of
God; even to them that believed on his Name; which were born not of Blood, nor
of the Will of the Flesh, nor of the Will of Man, but of God, John 1.12, 13.
These are they that declared the Generations of Christ.

And John says, Behold (or take notice) what manner of Love the Father
bestowed upon us, that we should be called the Sons of God: Beloved, now we are
the Sons of God; therefore the World knows us not, because it knew him not, 1
John 3.1, 2. Here you may see the World knows not God, nor his Sons: So it is
no marvel, if the World that lies in Wickedness, be haters of God, and haters
of his Son, and Sons, but greater is he that is in God's Sons and Daughters,
than he that is in the World; by which they do overcome the World, as in 1 John
4.4.

And the Lord said to Job, When the Morning Stars sang together, and all the
Sons of God shouted for joy, Job 38.7. There was cause of Joy to hear that
heavenly Harmony. And God has Anointed Christ with Oil of Gladness above his
fellows, Heb. 1.9.

Moses was faithful in all his House, as a Servant, Christ the Son to abide for
ever.
for a Testimony of these things which were to be spoken after (namely, the
Substance, Christ) but Christ as a Son is over his House, whose we are (namely,
that are the Sons and Children of God) as in Heb. 3.5, 6. So here is a
distinction betwixt the Servant's House, Moses; and the Son's House, Christ
Jesus.

And Christ said, While ye have the Light, believe in the Light, that ye may
become Children of the Light; as in John 12.36. So the way to become the
Children of the Light, is to believe in the Light.

And the Apostle says to the Ephesians, Chap. 5.8. Ye were sometimes Darkness,
but now are ye Light in the Lord; walk as Children of the Light.

And again, the Apostle writes to the Thessalonians, Ye are all Children of
the Light, and Children of the Day; we are not of the Night, nor of Darkness, 1 Thessalonians. 5.5. These were the Believers in the Light, that were become Children of
the Light, and Day of Christ. And Christ said unto such, Ye are the Light of
the World, and a City set on a Hill, To be Blameless, and without Rebuke.
that cannot be hid; and such are to be blameless and harmless, the Sons of
God, without rebuke, in the midst of a crooked and perverse Generation, among
whom ye shine as Lights in the World, Philip. 2.15. For as the Prophet says in
Isa. 54.13. and Christ says in John 6.45. All thy Children shall be taught of
the Lord, and great shall be the Peace of thy Children; in Righteousness shall
they be established.

And the Apostle says, As many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the
Sons of God: The Spirit it self bears Witness with our Spirits that we are
the Children of God; and if Children, then Heirs of God, and Joint Heirs with
Christ: If so he that we suffer with him, that we may be also glorified
together, namely, with Christ, Romans 8.14, 16, 17.

Here you may see the Sons of God are Heirs of God, and Joint Heirs with
Christ; such can declare of his Generation; for they which are Children of the
Flesh, these are not the Children of God, nor cannot in Truth declare of
Christ's Generation; but the Children of the Promise are counted for the Seed,
as in Romans 9.8. For Christ says to Nicodemus, Except a Man be born again of
Water and the Spirit, he cannot see the Kingdom of God, nor enter into it: That
which is born of the Flesh is Flesh, and that which is born of the Spirit is
Spirit, John 3.3, 5, 6. For he that is born of the Spirit is persecuted by him
that is born of the Flesh; and Jerusalem, that is above, is the Mother of all
them that are born of the Spirit; and so are all the Children of God by Faith
in Christ Jesus, as in Gal. 3.26. and 4.26. So as the Apostle says to the
Church of Ephesians, Chap. 3.6. That the Gentiles should be Fellow Heirs of the
same Body, and Partakers of his Promise in Christ by the Gosspel, who were
built together for an Habitation of God through the Spirit, Ephesians. 2.22.

And God has chosen the poor of this World rich in Faith, and Heirs of the
Kingdom, which he has promised to them that love him; as in James 2.5.

Christ said, Chirst sows good Seed in the Heart.
He that sows the Seed is the Son of Man, the Field is the World; the good
Seed are the Children of the Kingdom, but the Tares are the Children of the
wicked One, the Enemy that sows them is the Devil, Matthew. 13.37, 38, 39. Here
Christ makes a distinction betwixt the two Seeds and the two Sowers; and the
good Seed are the Children of the Kingdom of God, but the bad Seed must be cast
into the Fire, which are the Children of the wicked One. And Christ said in
Luke 8.11. The Seed is the Word of God.

And Peter says, Being born again, not of Corruptible Seed, but of
Incorruptible, by the Word of God, which lives, and abides, and indureth for
ever; such feed upon the Milk of the Word, and grow thereby, I Pet. 1.23. and
2.2.

And John says, Whosoever is born of God does not commit Sin; for his Seed
remains in him; and he cannot Sin, because he is born of God; in this the
Children of God are manifest from the Children of the Devil; and in this the
true Birth is manifest, and this Seed and Birth knows the Kingdom of Christ,
and declares of his Generation, who is built upon him the heavenly Rock and
Foundation; for Jesus Christ our Savior abolished Death, and has brought Life
and Immortality to Light, through his Glorious Everlasting Gospel, the Power of
God, 2 Timothy 1.10.

And the Apostle says, The Law served till Christ came.
The Law served, and it was added because of Transgression, till the Seed
should come, namely Christ, Gal. 3.19. And now Christ the Seeds-Man is come,
who is the end of the Law, for Righteousness sake, to every one that believes;
and they that Believe are all the Children of God by Faith in Christ Jesus.

And the Lord said to Abraham, In thy Seed shall all the Kindreds (or all the
Families) of the Earth be blessed, Acts 3.25. Genesis 12.3. Acts 7.6. And this is
the Seed that sojourned in a strange Land, and they that did evilly entreat
this Seed, and bring it into Bondage, God did judge. And the Promises of God is
sure to all the Seed, as in Romans 4.16. And the Children of the Promise are
counted for the Seed; for these are the Children of the Kingdom, as in Romans 9.8.

And the Dragon was wroth with the Woman, and went to make War with her Seed,
which kept the Command of God, and had and have the Testimony of Jesus, Rev.
12.17.

Now here you may see it is against the Seed, which keeps the Command of God,
and Testimony of Jesus, the Dragon makes War; but Christ, the Seed of the
Woman, bruises the Serpent's Head: For the Lord says, I will pour out my
Spirit upon thy Seed, and my Blessing upon thy Offspring, Isa. 44.3. All who
are in the Seed know God's Spirit and Blessings. And the Lord said, My Words
which I have put in thy Mouth, shall not depart out of thy, nor out of the
Mouth of thy Seed, nor out of the Mouth of thy Seeds Seed: Now is not this the
Seed in which all Nations are blessed, in whose Mouch God's Word remains? As in
Isaiah 59.21.

And are not these the Children of the Seed, which are the Children of the
kingdom of God.

And the Lord said concerning Christ, Ask of me, and I will give thee the
Heathen for thine Inheritance, and the utmost parts of the Earth for thy
Possession. Thou shall break them with a Rod of Iron, thou shall dash them to
pieces like a Potters Vessel, Psalm. 2.8.9.

And the great Image of Gold, Silver, Brass, Iron and Clay, spoken of in
Daniel, which was broken to pieces by Christ the Stone, and became like the
Chaff of the Summer Threshing-Floor, and the Wind carried them away, that no
place was found for them; and the Stone that smote this Image, became a great
Mountain, and filled the whole Earth, Christ fills all things with his
Divinity.
Dan. 2. Is not this Christ Jesus, who has all Power in Heaven and Earth given
to him, that he fills the whole Earth with his Divinity, to whom God gave the
Heathen for an Inheritance, and the attermost parts of the Earth for his
Possession; and his Seed does inherit the Gentiles, Isa. 54. And does not
Christ now inherit the Gentiles or Heathen? Yea, the uttermost parts of the
Earth he possesses with his divine Power, Light and Seed, who fills the whole
Earth, and has all Power in Heaven and Earth, and Rules with his Spiritnal
Divine Rod of Iron: Not a Rod of corruptible Iron, but he Rules them with his
Divine Rod, and dashes them to pieces like a Potters Vessel; they that are the
Children of the Kingdom see this, and know Christ to rule in their Hearts, and
sit down in the heavenly Places in Christ Jesus, who is the First and Last, the
Beginning and Ending, by whom all things were made.

G. F.

DEar Friends, in Holland, Friezland, Hamborough, Frederickstad, Dantzick,
Palatinate, and all other places there-aways, where God's Truth and Ensign is
set up,
Epist. 403.
Peace, Grace and Truth be multiplied among you from God the Father, and the
Lord Jesus Christ, the Fountain of all Life, Peace, Grace, and heavenly Wisdom
and Understanding; and the God of all Power and Peace, through our Lord Jesus
Christ, fill you with it, and his heavenly Riches, and that you may all walk
worthy of his heavenly Calling, in all Holiness, Righteousness and Godliness,
etc. in Life and Conversation, and that by the Word of Life and Patience, you
may answer the Truth in all both High and Low; so that you may be of good
savor to God in the Hearts of all People.

For you know there is no other Way to God but by Christ Jesus; No Way to God
but by Christ Jesus.
and you know, that God has raised up Christ to be a Prophet in his New
Testament to be heard in all things; and you know, He opens, and none can shut,
and he shuts and none can open; and you know, that Christ is the Bishop of your
Souls, to oversee, that you do not go astray from God: And you know that Christ
is the true Shepherd, and has laid down his Life for his Sheep, and they know
his Voice, and they follow him, and he gives them Life Eternal: And also you
know, that Christ is your High Priest, made higher than the Heavens, by the
Power of an Endless Life, and by him you are made a Spiritual Priesthood, to
offer up Spiritual Sacrifices to God.

And as for our Yearly Meeting, the Presence of the Eternal God Was amongst us,
and his Glory, which shines over all; and all was quiet and peaceable; and it
was the Lord's doing, blessed be his Name for ever.

And your Epistle was read in the Yearly Meeting, and Friends in the Lord's
Power Read it, and had Unity with your Spirits, and are Sensible of your
Spiritual Care in the Lord's Eternal Power concerning Truth's Affairs in those
Parts: In which God Almighty preserve you, and increase you, both in his
Wisdom, Knowledge and Understanding, that you may spread his blessed Truth
abroad, and answer it in all People. Amen.

London, the 10th of the 4th Month, 1685. G. F.

To Friends in Pensilvania.
DEar Friends,
Epist. 404.
I am glad to hear of the good Yearly Meeting at Road-Island, and that the
Lord's Power and Presence was there among you, and it would be very well to
Visit the Generation of the Righteous, and to see how their Seed and Vines do
grow in their heavenly Vineyards and Plantations, and what heavenly Riches they
have laid up in Store in God's Kingdom, and to see how the Wheat is gathered
into God's Garner; and that all keep in the Worship that Christ set up in his
Spirit and Truth; and that all walk in the New and Living Way, over all the
Dead Ways in the World; and all walk in the pure undefiled Religion, that keeps
from the Spots of the World; and to see that all are guided in the pure and
gentle Wisdom that is easy to be entreated, and in the Love of God that can
bear all things; by which all peevish, short and brittle Spirits may be kept
down; so that all may have their good Conversation in Christ Jesus, all
striving for Unity in the Spirit, and the holy Faith, that gives and keeps
Victory over the Enemy: And so that all may have a care of their Minds running
into the Earth and Carnal Things; For to be Carnally-minded is Death, but to be
Spiritually-minded is Life and Peace; and let all take heed of neglecting the
Gift of God, but stir up the pure Mind one in another; and the Lord, with his
Eternal Arm and Power, preserve you diligent in his heavenly Work and Service
in his Vineyard, that it may not grow over with Briars, Thorns and Thistles, to
choke the tender Plants.

And so my Desires are, That you may live and walk in Christ Jesus, and that
you may answer the Truth in all the Professors, and the Heathen: And prize your
Liberty, both Natural and Spiritual, while you have it; and labor in the
Truth, while it is Day. Remember me to all Friends, as though I named them; and
as for the State of Friends here, we are under great Sufferings, and spoiling
of Goods, and Imprisonments; and they have of late increased in spoiling of our
Goods; but God is All-sufficient, who does support us: Glory to his Name for
ever. So, with my Love in Christ Jesus, to you all, in whom you have all
Eternal Rest and Peace with God, Amen.

Bednal-Green, the 10th of the 9th Month, 1685. G. F.

To Friends of the Ministry in Pensilvania and New Jersey.
DEar Friends,
With my Love to you all, Epist. 405.
and all the rest of Friends; I was glad to hear from you; but you gave me no
account of the increase of Truth amongst you, nor what Meetings you have had
amongst the Indian Kings and their People abroad in the Countries, and of your
visiting Friends in New England, Virginia and Carolina, nor of your Travels and
Labors in the Gospel; who has in all those Countries, liberty to serve and
worship God, and preach the Truth. And I understand many have a desire to live
in it, especially in Carolina; and you who travel now from Friends, to Friends
thither, it is thought strange that you do not visit them; therefore I desire
that you may all improve your Gifts and Talents, and not hide it in a Napkin,
lest it be taken from you; and not to put your Candle under a Bushel, lest it
go out; and not to be like the foolish Virgins, which kept their Name of
Virgins, but neglected having Oil in their Lamps: Such were not diligent in the
Work of God, nor in the Concerns of the Lord, nor in their own Particulars: And
therefore my desires are, That you may all be diligent, serving the Lord and
minding his Glory, and the Prosperity of his Truth, this little time you have
to live; and be not like Adam in the Earth, but use this World as though you
did not use it; for they that covet after this World, fall into diverse Snares
and hurtful Lusts: And therefore consider, that you are but Sojourners here,
that you may pass your time in the Fear of God; and you being many, and having
many of the Friends of the Ministry, going over into those Parts, you may be a
hinderance one unto another, if you do not travel in the Life of the Universal
Truth, taht would have all Men to be saved, and come to the Knowledge of the
Truth: And if you would have them come to the Knowledge of Truth, let them know
it, and where it is to be found. So I desire that you be valiant for it upon
the Earth, that you may give a good account unto God at the last with Joy. So,
I desire that all Friends in the Ministry may see this in Pensilvania and
New Jersey.

And so with my Love to you all in the Holy Seed of Life that reigns over all.
Amen.

Enfield, the 30th of the 5th Month, 1685. G. F.

To Friends in Wales.
DEar Friends and Brethren,
In the Lord Jesus Christ, Epist. 406.
whom he has gathered by his glorious Hand and Power to himself, who is the
Rock of Ages, and the Foundation of many Generations, that cannot be shaken, in
which you have all Life, Peace, Rest, Salvation, and Eternal Happiness.

Your Epistle, dated the Second of the Second Month, 1685, by Order of your
Yearly Meeting, signed in behalf of that Meeting, was received and publicly
read in our Yearly Meeting, and well accepted of in Love and Unity with the
Spirit that gave it forth: And Friends are very glad to hear, feel and see your
Fellowship and Unity in the Lord's blessed Truth, and your Communion in the
Holy Ghost, and your Care in the Concerns of the holy, pure, peaceable Truth.
And how that you are, and have been preserved over those unruly Spirits, that
have been as Trees without Fruit, and Wells without Water, inwardly ravening
Wolves, that have got the Form of Godliness, and the Sheeps Clothing, but are
out of the Spirit, and Power, and Life of the Sheep of Christ: And over such
Spirits, we praise God, that he has given you Dominion.

And our desire is, That you may all live and walk in Christ, and sit down in
him, in his Grace and Truth, and that you may answer the Truth of God in all
People with the Word of Life; and also answer the Good in all, with a Godly,
and an Holy Life and Conversation.

And likewise all the Magistrates and Officers that are in Power you may answer
the just Principle in them all, To answer the just Principle in all Men.
and live in the Spirit of Supplication, and pray for all, that you may lead a
righteous and a godly Life under them all. So that God over all, and through
you all, and by you all, may have the Glory, the Thanks, and the Praise: To
whom all is due, God blessed for ever.

Our Yearly Meeting was peaceable, and the Lord's glorious Presence was amongst
us; whose Glory shines over all, God blessed and praised for ever. Amen.

Now all Dear Friends, You know your Teacher and Leader Christ Jesus, and you
know him your High Priest, that is made highter than the Heavens, by the Power
of an Endless Life; by whom you are made a Royal Priesthood, to offer up
spiritual Sacrifices to God by Jesus Christ. And you know there is no other way
to God but by Jesus Christ; and you know that God has raised him up a Prophet
in the New Testament, who is to be heard in all things, who opens, and no Man
can shut; and shuts, and no Man can open. And ye know that Christ is the Bishop
of your Souls, to Oversee you that you do not go astray from God: And ye know
that Christ is the true Shepherd, and has laid down his Life for his Sheep; and
is to be heard and followed; who gives unto his Sheep Life Eternal. And so
abide in him who is your Life Eternal and Everlasting; in whom you have Peace
with the Everlasting God. Amen.

London, the 10th day of the 7th Month, 1685. G. F.

To Friends in Dantzick.
DEar Friends,
Epist. 407.
I am glad to hear of your Welfare in the Lord: And my desires are, To be
valiant for Truth.
That in the Eternal Power of God you may be valiant for his holy, pure Truth
upon the Earth, and his holy Religion, that keeps from the Spots of the World;
and the new and living Way Christ Jesus, that will keep you out and over all
dead Ways that are in the World; and the Worship of God in his holy Spirit and
pure Truth, which Christ Jesus set up above all the Worships in thd World. And
all Men and Women must come to the Spirit of God in their Hearts, if they serve
and worship God that made them.

And my Desires are, That you may live in Peace and Love one with another, and
in the pure, gentle Wisdom of God, that is easy to be entreated. And let your
Faith stand in the Power of God, and feel that in your Hearts, which will keep
you until the Day of Salvation. And let all your Conversations be according to
the glorious Gospel of Life and Salvation; so that you may come to answer the
Truth in all People; and in your Words and Actions you may preach Truth,
Righteousness, Virtue, Pureness, Godliness and Holiness; without which none
shall see the Lord.

And now, Friends, consider the Lord's great Mercy and Kindness toward you,
who has brought you through great Sufferings, To praeise Good Mercies.
Tribulations and Persecutions, and that you have your Meetings peaceable; it
is a great Mercy of the Lord to you, for you to prize, and be faithful.

So with my Love to you all in the Lord Jesus Christ, that reigns over all; in
whom you have Eternal Rest and Peace. Amen.

And as for the Affairs of Truth here, we are under great Persecutions,
Imprisonments, and spoiling of Goods; but the Lord does support his People
above them all. And of late the chief Magistrates have showed some Favor
toward us.

Bednal-Green, the 11th of the 9th Moutb, 1685. G. F.

To Friends in Pensilvania, East and West-Jersey.
Epist. 408.
and after his Likeness, in Righteousness and Holiness, he blessed them, and
said unto them, Be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the Earth, and subdue
it; and have dominion over the Fish of the Sea, and over the Fowl of the Air,
and over all Cattle, and over all the Earth, and over every creeping thing upon
the Earth, and over every living thing that moves upon the Earth, Genesis I.

Now, here you may see the Power and Authority that God gave unto Man over all
the Earth, and the Sea, and all things therein. The Authority God gaveMan in
the beginning.


And now when Cain had done wickedly, and killed his Brother about Religion,
the Lord told him, He was cursed from the Earth; and when thou tillest the
Earth, it shall not henceforth yield unto thee her strength. And then C ain
said, It shall come to puss, that every one that finds me shall slay me. And
then Cain went and built a City in the Land of Nod, Genesis 4.

Now, here you may see what was the Cause that the Earth should not yield her
strength after it was tilled; and of Cain's fear of being killed; and of
building the City.

And John says in his Epistle. He that hates his Brother, is a Murderer, or a
Manslayer; and no Murderer has eternal Life abiding in them, 1 John 3.15.

Now, here you may see that Cain and such Murderers have not Eternal Life
abiding in them; and then they are not like to have Dominion, but be in Fears
and get into Cities. But Abraham who sojourned in the Land of Promise, as in a
strange Country, dwelt in Tabernacles with Isanc and Jacob, as Heirs with him
of the same Promise; for he looked for a City which has Foundations, whose
Builder and Maker is God.

So they looked above all the Cities that were built by Men in the Land of
Promise; as in Heb. 11. 9,10. For Abraham was in the Faith, in which he pleased
God, and had Victory.

And the Lord God blessed Noah and his Sons when they came out of the Ark, and
said unto them, Be fruitful, and maltiply, and replenish the Earth; and the
fear of you, and the dread of you, shall be upon every Beast of the Earth, and
upon every Fowl of the Air, and upon all that moves upon the Earth, and upon
all the Fish of the Sea, into your Hands are they delivered, Genesis 9.

Here again you may see that faithful Noah had Power over all the Creatures
that God made upon the Earth and in the Sea, and they were delivered unto Noah
and his Sons hands; and the Lord said unto the Children of Israel, Great
Blessings to the Obedient.
in Levit. 26. If that they were obedient, and kept his Commandments, he would
give them their Rain in due season, and the Land should yield her Increase, and
the Trees of the Field should yield their Fruit, and their Threshing should
reach to their Vintage, and their Vintage unto their sowing Time, and you shall
eat your Bread unto the full, and shall dwell in your Land safely (mark,
safely) and I will give Peace in the Land, and ye shall lie down, and none
shall make you afraid; and I will rid evil Beasts out of your Land, neither
shall the Sword go through the Land: I will set my Tabernacle among you, and my
Soulshall not abhor you; and I will walk among you, and will be your God, and
you shall be my People: This is to all them that are faithful, and obey and
serve the Lord; but if you be disobedient, then see what Fears, and Judgments,
and Plagues, Many Judgments to Disobedience.
and Sorrows comes upon you; and the Curse will come upon you, both in City and
Field, when thou go out, and when thou come in; and the Curse will be in
thy Basket and in thy Store, and the Fruit of thy Body, and the Fruit of thy
Land, and the Increase of tby Flocks; and the Lord will send his Vexations and
Rebukes upon all that thou sets thy Hands unto; and the Lord will smite with
Consumptions, and Fevers, and Blastings, and Mildews. etc. and the Heavens
that is over their Heads shall be Iron; and the Earth that is under thee shall
be as Brass; and the Lord shall make the Rain of the Land Powder and Dust; thou
shall carry much Seed into thy Field, and sbalt gather little; the Locusts
shall consume it, and thou shall plant Vineyards, and the Worms shall eat them,
because thou hearkens not to the Voice of the Lord thy God to keep his
Commandments, etc. And because thou servest not the Lord God with joyfulness,
and with gladness of Heart, for the abundance of all things the Lord thy God
gives thee; and therefore shall thou serve thine Enemies, which the Lord thy
God shall send against thee in hunger, and in thirst, and in nakedness, and in
want of all things, and thine Enemy shall put a Yoke of Iron about thy neck, to
yoke thee down: Who will not bear the Yoke of Christ, and does not hearken to
the Lord to serve and obey him; but they that diligently hearken to the Lord
their God, and obey and serve him in Truth and Righteousness, he blesses them
in the City, and in the Field, and in their Basket, and in their Storehouse,
and in all they set their Hands to; and he blesses the Fruit of their Body, and
the Fruit of their Ground, and the Cattle, and their Flocks; and the Lord shall
open his good Treasure, the Heavens to give them Rain upon their Land in his
season, and to bless all the Works of their Hands, that thou may lend to other
Nations, and shall not borrow: And these are the Blessings of them that hearken
to the Lord, and serve him, as you may see in Deuteronomy. 28. the Blessings that come
upon the Faithful, and the Judgments upon thd Disobedient and Unfaithful.

When God gives quietness, who then can make trouble? etc. whether it be done
against a Nation, or against a Man only, Job. 34.29.

The Lord shall save the humble Person; he shall deliver the Island of the
Innocent; it is delivered by the Pureness of the Hands, Job 22.29, 30.

Read this in all your Assemblies, both in Pensilvania and West-Jersey.

Bednal-Green, near London: the 4th Month, 1686. G. F.

To all the holy Women that trust in God, and do profess Godliness with good
Works, according to the Apostles Doctrine in this Age, for them to read over
and put in Practice.
FRiends, the Apostle says, Epist. 409.
I will therefore that Women adorn themselves in modest Apparel, with
Shamefacedness and Sobriety, and not with broidered Hair, or Gold, or Pearls,
or Costly Array, The Christian Adorning.
but as becomes Women professing Godliness with good Works, 1 Timothy 2.9, 10.
And likewise Peter says in his General Epistle to the Church of Christ, to the
Women, Whose adorning, let it not be that outward adorning of plaiting the
Hair, and wearing of Gold, and of putting on of Apparel; but let it be the
hidden Man of the Heart, in that which is not Corruptible, even the Ornament of
a meek and quiet Spirit, which is in the sight of God of a great price; for
after this manner in old time the holy Women also who trusted in God adorned
themselves, 1 Pet. 3.3, 4, 5.

Now all Women may here consider what is to be the Practice of such Women that
profess Godliness, and trust in God, their Adorning is the hidden Man of the
Heart, which is Incorruptible, and their Ornament is to of a meek and quiet
Spirit, which is in the sight of God of great Price; but those Women whose
outward Adorning is with broidered and plaited Heir, and Gold, and Pearls, and
Costly Array: these have not the modest Apparel, which become Modest, Sober,
Shamefaced Women, that profess Godliness with good Works; but such as are
Unsober and Immodest, such as look upon such things to become them, are
clothed with corruptible and unquiet Spirits, that do not possessed Godliness
with good Works; and these outward Ornaments, as plaiting and broidering the
Hair, and wearing of Gold, and Pearls, and Costly Array, the Apostle says, Do
not become Women professing Godliness with good Works; but them that do not
profess Godliness, that are Shameless and Unsober, they may become such Women
that do not trust in God, their proud Spirit may lead them to adorn themselves
with such things, as is said before, which the Apostle forbids; but the holy
Women of God, which professed Godliness with good Works, and trusted in God,
adorned themselves not with plaiting the Hair, or wearing of Gold, or Pearls,
or Costly Array; but with the hidden Man of the Heart, in that which is not
corruptible, even the Ornament of a meek and quiet Spirit, which is in the
sight of God of great price.

And now consider also, you Women that profess Godliness, and go under the name
of Holy Women, who trust in God, see that your selves and your Children, and
all your young Women are Adorned and Arrayed, and have on this Ornament, as the
Apostle wills the Church of Christ to put on, as the holy Women did of old; and
be not of an unmeek and unquiet Spirit, and unsober and immodest, when you are
admonished and exhorted, nor act contrary to the holy Women of old that trusted
in God, and such as professed Godliness, according to the Apostles Doctrine.

And here you may see what care the Apostles had to keep the Saints (the Church
of Christ) their Eyes, Minds, and Spirits above the wearing of Gold, plaiting
their Hair, and Pearls, and Costly Apparel, which is the Glory of this World,
which the holy Women that trusted in God, and professed Godliness with good
Works; these things were not to be their Adorning nor Ornaments, but (as is
said before) the hidden Man of the Heart, which was not Corrupt, even the meek
and quiet Spirit, which is with the Lord of great price: And this ought to be,
and is the Adorning and Ornament of all the holy Women, that profess Godliness
with good Works, and trust in God.

And all you that have been Convinced of the Lord's Truth, by his Spirit, To
refuse the Glory of the World.
take heed of Satan taking you up into a Mountain, and of his showing you the
Glory of the World, and of your Minds and Eyes going after it, and receiving of
it; and so in that you fall from the Spirit and Truth of God that did Convince
you, and then to worship the Devil, the King of Pride, the God of the World,
that abode not in the Truth, in whom there is no Truth; and he to lead your
Minds and Eyes after every new vain Fashion of the World that passes away, and
that lies in wickedness; and so draws you to the Love of the World, which is
Enmity to God, and into the Wisdom of the World, by which ye do not know God;
and then to such the Gospel of Life and Salvation is hid, in whom the God of
this World has blinded their Minds; and in such disobedient Ones the Prince of
the Air rules, and gets into them by disobeying the Truth; and in such Christ
does not rule in their Hearts by Faith: And it is not like, when they make
Shipwreck of it, and a good Conscience. And therefore walk in the Light of
Christ, and grow in his Grace, and the Knowledge of the Lord Jesus Christ, that
bruises the Serpent's Head, and destroys the Devil and his Works, that you may
all be established upon Christ, the Rock and Foundation.

And if ye do believe in the Covenant of Light, Life and Grace; then, why do
not you all train up your Children in the same? To Train up our Children n the
Coveant of Grace.
Did not the Lord command the Jews to train up their Children in the Old
Covenant, and teach them to walk in it? And were not all the Males to be
Circumcised? And they that were not Circumcised were to be cut off from the
Congregation of the Lord: So are not all you that profess the New Covenant of
Grace, Light and Life, and the Gospel of Salvation preached to every Creature;
and the Grace of God which brings Salvation, that has appeared unto all Men,
to teach them to live Godly, and to deny Ungodliness? etc. I say, are not you
all to train up your Children and Families in this Light of the Gospel and
Grace of Christ which brings Salvation, and brings them into favor with God,
that you may have the Comfort of your Children in this World, and in that which
is Everlasting? And that they may be Circumcised with the Spirit of God, which
he pours out upon all Flesh, that with his Spiritual Circumcision the Body of
Death and Sins of the Flesh may be cut off, which are come into Man and Woman
by Transgression, that neither you nor they might dye in the Body of Death, and
in the Sins of the Flesh, and such do not dye in the Lord; for they that are
not Circumcised with the Spiritual Circumcision are cut off from the heavenly
Jerusalem, and the Kingdom of God and Christ, and from the Church of the Living
God written in Heaven. And therefore, if you will have the Comfort of your
Children in this World, and that which is to come, train them up in the Fear of
God, and in his Covenant of Light and Grace; which Grace brings their
Salvation, and brings them into Favor with God, and into the Spiritual Baptism
and Circumcision, so that they may serve and worship the Living God in his
Spirit and Truth. Amen.

And if Children and young People must be left, and let alone to themselves,
and not be Admonished, Exhorted and Restrained from the Evil and Vanities of
the World, then why did Moses, and the Prophets, and the Apostles, which were
sent of God, exhort the People to train up their Children in the Fear of the
Lord, and to teach them his Law while they were young, that they might not
depart from it when they were old? And if that they did, the Lord did judge
them, as ye may read in the Scriptures of Truth; and if that they must be left
to themselves, and not restrained from Evil, then how came it to pass that old
Ely lost his Life, and his Priesthood, Ely, an Example to Parents.
and the Ark of God, for not restraining his Children from Evil?

And again, if that they must be left to themselves, why did the Prophets and
the Apostles say, That they must not quench, nor vex, nor grieve, nor rebel
against the Spirit of God, nor turn the Grace of God into Wantonness, nor walk
despitefully against the Spirit of Grace; but walk in the Spirit, and in the
Truth, and in the Light, and to love it, and not to hate it; for they that do
not love the Light, but hate it, are condemned by it, and so grow in the
Condemnation, and are not in the Justification of Life.

The Lord God commanded Abraham to Circumcise himself and his Children and
Servants, that were bought with Money, and were born in his House. He was to
bring all his Males into this Covenant of outward Circumcision; and the Lord
said, That Soul shall be cut off that is not Circumcised, he has broken my
Covenant of outward Circumcision, as you may see Genesis 17. Here you may see
Abraham was to teach and instruct his Family and Servants, and he was not to
keep any Man or Servant that was Uncircumcised in his Family.

Now you that profess the New Covenant, True Circumcision.
are not you and all your Children and Servants to be Circumcised with the
Spirit of Circumcision? And do not they that have not the Body of Death, and
the Sins of the Flesh cut off by Circumcision, go down into the Pit, and not
into Paradise, and the kingdom of God? And therefore may not such Uncircumcised
by the Spirit hurt the Families of true Christians in the Light?

Therefore consider, Abraham was not to suffer and of his Children and
Servants, that were bought with his Money, or born in his House, to be
Uncircumcised in the Old Covenant: This care the Lord laid upon him, Spirit of
Circumcision, what Care lies upon you in your Families, of Teaching and
Instructing your Servants and Children, and to bring them to the Spirit of
Circumcision.

And now, do not say but you are all warned in your Lifetime; and therefore
prise your time, while you have it, that you spend it to the Honor and Glory
of God.

The 9th of the 5th Month, 1686. G. F.

An Epistle for them that are learned in Christ, to read and understand.
THe Lord says, Epist. 410.
In this Mountain shall the Lord of Host make unto all People a feast of fat
things, etc. And he will destroy in this Mountain the Face of the Covering cast
over all People, and the Veil that is spread over all Nations. And he will
swallow up Death into Victory; and the Lord God will wipe away Tears from off
all Faces, Isai. 5.26, 27. 1 Cor. 15.54. Rev. 21.4.

Is not this Mountain Christ, Christ fills the whole Earth.
that fills the whole Earth, where this Feast of fat things is? And does not
Christ through Death, destroy Death and the Devil, the Power of Death, and so
takes away the Veil and Covering that is spread over all Nations, that they may
be covered with the Spirit that he pours upon all Flesh? And the Apostle says,
Moses put a Veil over his Face, that the Children of Israel could not
steadfastly look to the end of that which is to be abolished; for their Minds
were blinded. For, until this Day remains the same Veil untaken away. in the
reading of Moses and the Old Testament the Veil is upon their Hearts; which
Veil is done away in Christ; and when they shall turn to the Lord, the Veil
shall be done away; as in 2 Cor. 3.

So, here you may see the Veil that was spread over the Hearts of People, The
Veil over Peoples Hearts, done away by Christ.
is done away by Christ; and all they that are turned to the Lord, with open
Face, behold, as in a Glass, the Glory of the Lord, and are changed into the
same Image, from Glory to Glory, even by the Spirit of the Lord. And the Lamb
which is in the midst of the Throne, shall feed his People, and dwell amongst
them; who has made their Robes white in the Blood of the Lamb: And this is the
Days of Christ, whom God gives for a Covenant of the People, to establish the
Earth. Sing O Heavens, and rejoice O Earth, and break forth into Singing, O
Mountains; for God has comforted his People, and has Mercy upon his
afflicted. And Christ says to the Prisoners, Go forth, unto them that are in
Darkness, show your selves; and they shall feed in Pastures: For he that has
Mercy on them, shall lead them, and by the Springs of Water shall he guide
them, Isai 49. For God gave Christ for a Covenant to the People, for a Light to
the Gentiles, to open the blind Eyes, to bring out the Prisioners out of
Prison, and them that sit in darkness out of the Prison-Houses, Isai. 42.2, 6,
7. Rev. 7.15, 16, 17.

So, Jesus Christ. Behold, the Tabernacle of God is with Men, and he will dwell
with them, and they shall be his People, Rev. 21.3.

This is the Day of the New Covenant, which People enjoy in Christ Jesus.

The Lord says, I will ransom them from the Power of the Grave, I will redeem
them from Death: O Death, I will be thy Plague: O Grave, I will be thy
Destruction, Hos. 13.14.

And the Apostle says, O Death, where is thy Sting? O Grave, where is thy
Victory? The Sting of Death is Sin, and the Strength of Sin is the Law: But
thanks be to God, which gives us the Victory, through Jesus Christ our Lord, 1
Cor. 15.55, 56, 57.

So, here you may see the Grave had its Victory, Christ gives Victory over
Death and the Grave.
and Death has its Sting; which is Sin: But the Strength of Sin is the Law:
But Christ gives us the Victory; who makes an end of Sin, the Sting of Death;
as in Dan. 9.24. And who through Death destroys Death and the Power of Death,
and is the End of the Law for Righteousness sake, to every one that believes;
and so are dead to the Law, by the Body of Christ, Romans 7.4.

And Christ says unto the Jews, Verily, verily, he that hears my Word, and
believes on him that sent me, has everlasting Life, (Mark, Everlasting Life)
and shall not come into Condemnation; but has past from Death unto Life. Then
they have past from the Sting of Death, which is Sin: And, as John says, we
know that we are past from Death unto Life, because we love the Brethren; for
he that loves not his Brother, abides in Death, John 5.24. 1 John 2.44.

So, if they were past from Death to Life, then they were past from Death, and
his Sting, which is Sin, through Jesus Christ, who destroys Death, and makes
and End of Sin.

And again Christ says to the Jews, Verily, verily, I say unto you, the Hour
is coming, and now is, when the dead shall hear the Voice of the Son of God;
and they that hear, shall live, John 5.25. Christ saying, The Hour comes, and
now is, that the Dead should hear his Voice: So that they past from the Death
that came by Adam into Everlasting Life in Christ Jesus: See Ephesians. 2.1, 2. And
so they thanked God through Jesus Christ, who gave them the Victory over Death
and Sin, Death's Sting; so as it is written, Death is swallowed up in Victory.
For Christ, as I said before, makes an End of Sin, that is the Sting of Death,
and through Death destroys Death and the Devil, the Power of Death. So thanks
be to God, through and by Christ Jesus, we have the Victory unto Everlasting
Life, over the Grave, Death, and its Sting.

And the Apostle says, Flesh and Blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God.
Flesh and Blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God, neither does Corruption
inherit Incorruption. And Christ says, Except a Man be born of the Spirit, he
cannot see the Kingdom of God; neither can he enter into the Kingdom of God, 1
Cor. 15.50. and John 3.3, 5.

And Christ says, He that hears my Word, and believes on him that sent me,
has everlasting Life, and shall not come into Condemnation, but is past from
Death to Life, John 5.24. And he that believes not is condemned already: And
he that believes on the Son of God shall not perish, but have eternal Life.
And again, God so loved the World, that he gave his only begotten Son; that
whosoever believed in him should not perish, but have everlasting Life, John
3.15, 16, 18.

Now this Death which Adam fell into was a spiritual Death; for by one Man's
Disobedience or Offense, namely Adam, Judgment came upon all Men to
Condemnation. So all Men are under this Judgment and Condemnation in Adam in
the Fall. Even so, by the Righteousness of one, namely Christ, the free Gift
came upon all Men unto Justification of Life, Romans 5.18, 19.

So they that do not believe in Christ, They who believe not in Christ abide in
Death, etc.
the Light, as he Commands, John 12.36. they abide in spiritual Death and
Darkness, and under the Judgment and Condemnation in Adam in the Fall, in the
perishing state: But he that believes on the Son of God has Everlasting Life,
and passes from Death to Life, and shall not perish in Darkness, and is not
condemned, but comes out of Condemnation, etc. But he that believes not in the
Son of God is condemned, and shall not see Life; and the Wrath of God abides
on him. Such abide in the perishing state, in the Death and Darkness in Adam in
the Fall, under Judgment and Condemnation: But they that believe in Christ, the
Light, do come out of Darkness, and passes from Death to Life, and come from
under Judgment and Condemnation, that came upon all Men by the Offense of one
Man Adam, and come from under the Wrath of God, and from under Judgment and
Condemnation into Favor with God, and into Eternal and Everlasting Life in
Christ Jesus, and so have Victory over Death, Darkness and Sin, its Sting, and
the perishing State, and the Grave of Adam, in the Fall from Life Eternal; and
so are blessed, that have part in the first Resurrection in Christ Jesus: On
such the second Death shall have no Power, for they are in Christ Jesus, the
Resurrection, and Eternal Everlasting Life, and their Names are written in the
Book of Life; who destroys Death, and Hell, and the Devil, the Power of Death,
Revel. 20.10, 14, 15. And casts the Devil, Death and Hell, into the Lake of
Fire, that burns with Brimstone; which is the second Death.

And, The last Enemy that shall b destroyed is Death
as the Apostle says, The last Enemy that shall be destroyed is Death. But as
it is written in Hos. 13.14. Death is swallowed up into Victory: For by Man,
namely Adam, came Death; and by Man, namely Christ, came also the Resurrection
of the dead: For, as in Adam all died, even so in Christ shall all be made
alive.

So, as by the one Man Adam, Sin and Death came over all; and by the Man
Christ, Life comes over all. And by Nature we are born of Adam; and in Christ
we are made the Children of God, by Grace in Christ, and quickened and made
alive, and restored to Life Everlasting by him. And Christ, who puts all things
under his Feet, he subdues Death under him; who through Death destroys Death,
the last Enemy, and the Devil, the Power of Death, and so makes an End of Sin,
the Sting of Death, and brings in Everlasting Righteousness.

And in the way of Righteousness is Life; and in the Pathway there is no
Death.

The Law of the wise is a Fountain of Life, to depart from the Snares of Death,
Prove. 12.28. and 13.14.

The Lord says, Behold, I create new Heavens, and a new Earth; and the former
shall not be remembered nor come into mind: But, be you glad and rejoice for
ever in that which I create: For, behold, I create Jerusalem a Rejoicing, and
her People a Joy. And I will Rejoice in Jerusalem, and Joy in my People, and
the Voice of Weeping shall be no more heard in her, nor the Voice of Crying,
Isa. 65.17, 18.

And Peter says in his General Epistle to the Church, We, according to his
promise, look for new Heavens, and a new Earth, wherein dwells Righteousness,
2 Pet. 3.13.

And John says, I saw a new Heaven and a new Earth; Of New Heavens and the New
Earth.
for the first Heaven and the first Earth were passed away; and there was no
more a Sea. And I John, saw the holy City, new Jerusalem, coming down from God
out of Heaven, prepared as a Bride adorned for her Husband. And I heard a great
Voice out of Heaven, saying, Behold, the Tabernacle of God is with Men, and he
will dwell with them, and they shall be his People; and God shall be with them,
and be their God; and God shall wipe away all Tears from their Eyes, and there
shall be no more Death, mark, no more Death, in new Jerusalem, neither Sorrow,
nor Crying, neither shall there be any more Pain: For the former things are
passed away. And he that sat upon the Throne said, Behold, I make all things
new. And he said unto me, Write, for these things are true and faithful. And he
said unto me, It is done: I am Alpha and Omega, the Beginning and the End, I
will give unto him that is athirst of the Fountain of the Water of Life freely;
he that overcomes shall inherit all things; and I will be his God, and he
shall be my Son, Rev. 21.1. to the 8th.

Jerusalem which is below, is in Bondage with her Children; but Jerusalem which
is above, is free, which is the Mother of us all, which believe in the Light in
Christ. And in this New and Heavenly Jerusalem there is no Death nor Night; and
the Nations of them that are saved shall walk in the Light of this New and
Heavenly Jerusalem. For the Glory of God does enlighten it, and the Lamb is the
Light thereof; and the Lord God and the Lamb are the Temple of this New and
Heavenly Jerusalem that is from above; and the Lord creates this Heavenly
Jerusalem.

So, this Heavenly and New Jerusalem is not made by the Workmanship of Men's
Hands, nor of Wood and Stone; neither are People cast in Prison for not mending
or repairing a Temple there; for there is no outward Temple in the Heavenly
Jerusalem; for the Lord God Almighty and the Lamb are the Temple of it. And the
New Creatures that are in Christ Jesus, and dwell in Love, they dwell in God:
Such are in the Temple in Heavenly Jerusalem, and are in Joy and in Fellowship
with the Father, and the Son, blessed for ever. Amen.

And Christ said to the Jews, The Bread of God is he that comes down from
Heaven, and gives Life to the World; No Persecution in New Jerusalem.
signifying that the World is Dead in Adam, and wants Eternal Everlasting
Life; and they that eat not the Flesh of Christ, and drink not his Blood, have
no Life in them: For Adam and Eve, by eating of the Fruit which God forbid
them, brought Death, and all died in him; but they that eat the Flesh of
Christ, the Bread from Heaven, and drink his Blood, have Eternal Life, and
shall live for ever, and they do live by Christ, and they do dwell in Christ,
and he does dwell in them: So you may see Adam and Eve, by their eating of that
which God forbad, brought them into Spiritual Death; and by eating the Flesh,
and drinking the Blood of Christ, as he commands, brings Men into a Spiritual
Life, that is Eternal. And the Lord says, Ezekiel. 37. concerning the whole House
of Israel, which were the dry scattered Bones, That he would open their Graves,
Of the Restoration of the House of Israel
and bring them out of their Graves; and yet these dry Bones, which were the
whole House of Israel, that were in their Graves, could speak (who were the
scattered Bones) and say, Behold, our Bones are dry, and our Hope is lost, we
are cut off for our parts: So it seems that the whole House of Israel,
scattered Bones, who were in their Graves, could speak these words: Then they
were alive outwardly, and their Breath was in their Nostrils, but they were
gone from the Breath of the Almighty, that gives Life and Understanding:
Therefore the Lord poured his Spirit upon them, and caused Breath to come upon
them, that they might live to God; and so that they might all have one Shepherd
(namely Christ) and come into his Everlasting Covenant, and Christ their
Sanctuary; and then God's Tabernacle would be with them, and then the Lord will
be their God, and they shall be his People.

G. F.

To the Yearly Meeting in Yorkshire.
DEar Friends, Epist. 411.
who are the Sons and Daughters of God, who have his Law written in your
Hearts, by which you know God and Jesus Christ, which is Eternal Life to know;
and you that have put on Christ Jesus are the New Creatures, and are in him,
Clothed with Christ the Son of Righteousness, To be Clothed with Christ.
who is the Light of the World; and you that believe in the Light, have the
Light of Life, and are Clothed with the Son of God that does not change, and
are the true and living Members of the Church of Christ Jesus, that is in God,
and have the Moon (that is changeable) under your Feet: So all changable
Religions, Worships, Ways, Churches and Teachers, which are like the Changeable
Moon, and the Changeable World, with its Changeable Fashions; the true Church
of Christ, that are Clothed with Christ, the Son, that does not change, has
all these Changeable Things, like the Moon that changes, under her Feet; for
the Son of God never changes; for all things were made by him, who is the First
and Last, the Beginning and Ending. So as every one has received Christ Jesus,
the Son of Righteousness, walk in him to the Praise and Glory of God. Amen.

London, the 31st of the 3d Month, 1686. G. F.

To Friends in West-Jersey and Pensilvania.
DEar Friends,
Epist. 412.
I am glad to hear that the Truth's Concerns is so well as it is with you, and
that you have set up your Half Years Meeting there, which may be of great
Service: Half Years Meeting in America.
For indeed all the faithful Men and Women, in the Power of the Lord, do keep
their Meetings, that they may take care of God's Glory, and to see that all are
diligent, that profess the Truth, to walk in it; and all the Loose, and such as
despise Dignities, and the Power of God, and true Christianity, should be
Admonished and Exhorted, and not to have a Name of Truth, without the Nature of
it. And so that all may walk in the Truth, and by it come into a holy Life and
Conversation; by that they may answer that which is good, both in the People
among you, and in the Indians: For, through want of Order in the Power of God,
and his Light, Life and Truth, there has been so many runnings out, some one
way and some another way.

And therefore all that are Faithful in your Country, being kept in the Lord's
Eternal Power, To keep our Meetings in the Lord's Power.
in it keep up all your Men and Women's Meetings, that the Power of the Lord God
may sparead over all, and by it all Deceit and Looseness may be kept under; and
this will ease all the Magistrates, and their Courts, of all Evil and Looseness,
by having it stopped and killed in the Birth, before it comes into Action; and
to see in your Meetings, that Friends may give no Occasion to the Indians.

And if sometimes you should have some Meetings with the Indian Kings and their
Councils, to let them know the Principles of Truth; To inform the Indians of
the Way of Salvation.
so that they may know the Way of Salvation, and the Nature of true
Christianity, and how that Christ has died for them, who tasted Death for
every Man: And so the Gospel of Salvation must be Preached to every Creature
under Heaven; and how that Christ has enlightened them, who enlightens all that
come into the World: And God has poured out his Spirit upon all Flesh; and so
the Indians must receive God's Spirit; for the Grace of God which brings
Salvation has appeared to all Men: And so let them know, that they have a Day
of Salvation, Grace and Favor of God offered unto them, if they will receive
it, it will be their Blessing.

And so, now you that are settled in those Parts, which have had a Testimony
from the Lord to bear to People of the Truth, you should spread abroad God's
Eternal Truth; and have Meetings (as I said before) with the Indian Kings and
Peopie; so that all the Earth may come to look unto the Lord for Salvation. For
if ye should seetle down in the Earth, and have plenty, and be full, Not to set
our Hearts on the Earth.
and at ease for a time, and not keep in the Power, and Service, and Spirit of
God, you would quickly come to lose your Condition, as some did in Road-Island,
when settled down in the Earth, after a while, and then turned to Jangling
about it, and some ran out one way, and some another.

And therefore, I desire that the Lord may grant, that you may be all kept and
preserved by his holy Power, on his holy Mountain, that ye may be of the holy
Camp of God; that with his Power, Light, Spirit, Friends.

My Desire is, that you all may keep in the Power and Spirit of the Lord, in
the heavenly Unity, that you may all shine forth to his Glory and Praise, to
whom all belongs, God over all, blessed for over, Amen.

Edmunton, the 27th of the 11th Month, 1687. G. F.

DEar Friends, Epist. 413.
my Desire is, that all Friends may prize the Mercies of the Lord, and live in
Humility, in his Power, that is over all, To prize God's Mercies.
that you may answer God's Witness in all People, in his Spirit and Truth, in a
Righteous, Godly Life and Conversation; and let not Liberty lift them up, nor
Sufferings cast them down; but live in the Seed of Life, that no Man can make
higher nor lower; for that is the Heir of God's Everlasting Kingdom. So in this
Seed, which is your Sanctuary, God Almighty keep you, in whom you have Life and
Wisdom, that it may be justified of all her Children, and they exercised in it,
in this Day of Christ. Amen.

G. F.

ALL my dear Friends and Brethren in the Lord Jesus Christ, Arm and Power,
Epist. 414.
has supported, upheld and preserved you steadfast to himself; so that neither
Reproaches, Imprisonments, nor spoiling of your Goods, to the almost Ruining
you outwardly; and besides long and tedious Imprisoning of you, and many to
Death: Persecutors could not drive the Faithful From Christ.
And yet all these Persecutors could not make you turn from Christ, your Life,
Priest, Bishop and Shepherd, and through him you have been made more than
Conquerers: And so live and walk in him, who is the same to day, yesterday, and
for ever; who does overcome, and will have the Victory, in whom you have Life
and Salvation, and Peace with God. So no more but my Love.

Goosey in Essex, the 18th of the 12th Month. 1688. G. F.

DEar Friends, Epist. 415.
my Love is to all Friends in the Truth, in the Eternal Life; and my Desires
is, that in the Everlasting Life you and I may live, To live in Christ.
even in the Lord Jesus Christ, that is over all, from Everlasting to
Everlasting, Amen.

G. F.

To the Quarterly Men and Women's Meetings in London.
All Friends,
Spirit of Christ, which is the Bond of the heavenly Peace, Epist. 416.
and that you Elders may be Examples in the heavenly Wisdom, To keep in the
Unity of the Spirit.
and Word of Life, and of Power and Patience, to all the younger, that hardly
know the right Hand from the left; so that they may be trained up, both by the
Word and Law in their Hearts, and good Example from their Elders in Grace,
Truth, Virtue, Modesty and Sobriety, as becoming Men and Women professing and
possessing Godliness, being adorned with a meek and a quiet Spirit, which is
with the Lord of a great Price; and keep that Eye blind, and that Spirit under,
that would go into the Fashions of the World; for that will blind and burden,
and will not bear sound Doctrine; and therefore that must be kept down with the
Spirit of God, by which all may have Power over their own Spirits, and they
that have not, are like unto a City, whose Walls are broken down, that any
thing that is evil or had may come in: And therefore the Power and Spirit of
God is as the Wall that preserves. Therefore be Wise; for when Lust is
conceived, it brings forth Sin, and Sin when it is finished, it brings forth
Death.

Now here you may see what brings forth Sin and Death in Man and Woman, which,
by the Spirit of God, is to be mortified, The Spirit of God mortifies Sin.
and by it their Affections to be changed, and set on things above, where
Christ sits at the Right Hand of God; so that you may come to fit in the
heavenly Places in Christ Jesus; which is a holy, pure and safe Sitting, in
which all may keep that heavenly Feast of Christ, our Passover, not with the
old Leaven of Malice and Wickedness, but with the heavenly unleavened Bread of
Sincerity and Truth; for Christ our Passover has been sacrificed for us; and
therefore he is the heavenly Bread, which the Feast of him our Passover must be
kept withal, by the clean and circumcised in Spirit in the New Testament and
Covenant: For the Jews in the Old Testament and Covenant, they were to be clean
and circumcised outwardly, before they eat of the outward Sacrifices; which
Sacrifice and Circumcision Christ our Sacrifice has ended; and therefore keep
to him our Circumcisor, and the Feast of our Passover, and let all the old
Leaven of Malice and Wickedness be purged out, that you may become a new Lump
in Christ Jesus. Amen.

Goosey, the 29th of the 10th Month, 1689. G. F.

DEar Friends and Brethren in Christ Jesus, Epist. 417.
whom the Lord by his Eternal Arm and Power has preserved to this Day, all
walk in the Power and Spirit of God, that is over all, in Love and Unity: For
Love overcomes, and builds up and unites all the Members of Christ to him, the
Head; for Love keeps out of all Strife, Love keeps out of all Strife.
and is of God; and Love and Charity never fails, but keeps the Mind above all
outward Things, or strife about outward Thins; and is that which overcomes
Evil, and casts out all false Fears, and it is of God, and unites all the
Hearts of his People together in the heavenly Joy, Concord, and Unity. And the
God of Love preserve you all, and settle and establish you in Christ Jesus,
your Life and Salvation, in whom you have all Peace with God. And so, walk in
him, that you may be ordered in his peaceable heavenly Wisdom to the Glory of
God, and the Comfort one of another. Amen.

London, the 27th of the 3d Month, 1689. G. F.

To the Six Weeks Meeting in London. 1690

THe Six-Weeks Meeting is for to see, Epist. 418.
that all their Meetings are preserved by the Wisdom of God in the Unity of the
Spirit, The Care of the Six Weeks Meeting.
the Bond of Peace, and in the Fellowship of the Holy Ghost, being ordered by
the pure, gentle, heavenly, peaceable Wisdom, easy to be entreated, Holy and
Virtuous Examples to all other Meetings, both in City and Country. And that all
may be careful to speak short and pertinent to Matters in a Christian Spirit,
and dispatch Business quickly, and keep out of long Debates and Heats; and with
the Spirit of God keep that down, which is doting about Questions and Strife of
Words, that tend to Parties and Contention: Which in the Church of God there is
no such Custom to be allowed. And likewise not to speak more than one at a
time; nor any in a fierce Way; for that is not to be allowed in any Society,
neither Natural nor Spiritual; but, as the Apostle says, Be swift to hear, and
slow to speak; and let it be in the Grace, which seasons all Words. And if
there be any Differences, that cannot be quickly ended in the Meeting, let the
Six-Weeks Meeting order some Friends to hear the Matter out of the Meeting,
without Respect of Persons, and bring in the Report to the same Meeting the
same Day (if possible,) and the Meeting may give Judgment; that no Business be
delayed from time to time. And so with my Love to you all in the Seed of Life
Christ Jesus, in whom ye have all Peace and Wisdom from him, who is the
Treasure of Knowledge and Wisdom. Amen.

Kingston upon Thames, the 5th of the 3d Month, 1690. G. F.

DEar Friends,
Epist. 419.
Something was upon me to write unto you, that such among Friends, who marry,
and provide great Dinners, that instead thereof, it will be of a good Savor on
such Occasions, that they may be put in mind at such times, to give something
to the Poor that be Widows and Fatherless, To be Charitable and relieve the
Poor.
and such like, to make them a Feast, or to Refresh them: And this, I look
upon, would be a very good Savor, to feast the Poor that cannot feast you
again; and would be a good Practice and Example, and would be a means to keep
the Mind to the Lord; and in remembrance of the Poor; for they that give to the
Poor, lend to the Lord, and the Lord will re-pay them. And I do really believe,
what ever they give, less or more, according to their Ability, cheerfully, they
will not have the less at the Years End, for the Lord loves a cheerful Giver. I
know this Practice has been used by some Twenty Years ago. And so it is not
only to give the Poor a little Victuals, which you cannot eat your selves, but
give them a little Money, that the Lord has blessed you with; and give it to
some of the Women's Meetings for to distribute to the Poor: So you will have the
Blessings of the Lord, and the Blessings of the Poor: And so, to be of a free
noble Spirit, above all the churlish Misers and Nigards, and narrow Spirits

These things I do recommend to you (though it may look a little strange) to
weigh and consider the thing, it will both be of a good Report, and a good
Savor, and manifests a self-denial and openness of Heart, and of the general
Love of God.

London, the 4th of the 4th Month, 1690. G. F.

To Friends Captives at Macqueness.
DEar Friends,
st. 420.
With my Love to you all in the Lord Jesus Christ, in whom you have Life and
Salvation, and Rest and Peace with God; and the Lord God Almighty with his
Eternal Arm and Power uphold and preserve you in Christ, in whom you have Rest
and Peace; though in the World Troubles, and though you be in Captivity, from
your Wives and Children, Spirit of Grace, Light and, Truth: And so feel him at
all times, and stand in his Will; do not Murmer nor Complain, but stand still
in the Faith and Power of God, To stand in the Faith.
that you may see your Salvation; for by Faith the Lord delivered his People
out of Egypt by his Power; and by Faith Enoch and Noah were preserved, and
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob; and by Faith the Prophets were delivered out of many
Perils; and Daniel out of the Lions Mouth. And you may see how the Righteous
were delivered by Faith, in Heb. 11.

And it would be very well, if you that be Captives and Friends, To meet to
worship God.
could have Meetings as they had at Algier, to the comforting and refreshing
one another. And you may speak to your Patroons of your meeting together to
worship God that created Heaven and Earth, and made all Mankind, and gives you
Breath, Life and Spirit, to serve and worship him.

And my Desires are to the Lord, That you in his Truth and Power may answer the
Truth in all, both King, and Prince, and Turks and Moors, that you may be a
good Savor among them all, and in them all; manifesting that you are the Salt
of the Earth, and the Light of the World; and a City set on a Hill, that cannot
be hid; So that they may see your good Works, and glorify your Father, which
is in Heaven.

And what do you know, but the Lord has set you there to preach in Life, and
Word, and good Conversation? Therefore while you are there, mind your Service
for God, who has all things in his Hand: And a Sparrow cannot fall to the
Ground without his Providence. And Christ is the Mountain that fills the
whole Earth; and so you will feel him there.

And therefore keep in the Word of Power, and in the Word of Patience, and the
Word of Wisdom, that will give you Dominion over all. Amen.

London, the 25th of the 8th Month, 1690. G. F.

You may petition the Emperor, or King, and your Patroons, Postscript.
whose Captives you are, that you may have one Day in the Week to meet together
to worship and serve the Great God (that made you) in Spirit and Truth. For you
worship no Representation, Image, or Likeness, neither in Heaven nor in the
Earth, but the Great God, who is Lord over all, both in Heaven and Earth; and
is manifest by his Spirit in his People; from you, poor Captives, who desire
their Good here, and their Eternal Happiness hereafter.

And you may draw up a Paper to this Effect, and get it Translated into their
Language, and send it to the Emperor and his Council, and your Patroons; and
set your Hands to it with all speed, after the the receipt of this.

George Fox.

THE END.
THE FIRST TABLE, CONTAINING
The Names of Countries, Cities, Towns and Places, mentioned in this Collection
of Epistles; being those from, or to which they were sent and directed by the
Author, on Truth's Account, in England and other Places.
A
AMerica 2. 352. 399. 401. 426. 453. 471. 477 Algier 455. 471. 491. 502
Amsterdam 505
B
Bishopric 2. 36. 45. 52 Bristol 123.317. 329. 489 Barbados 129. 138. 143.
181. 226. 228. 253. 316. 324. 326. 343. 353. 366. 395. 471. 488 Burlington 456
Bednal-Green 532. 540. 543. 545
C
Cumberland 3. 31. 36. 45. 52. 394 Castle 5. 203 City 6 Colchester 186 Cockford
196 Carolina 321. 462. 490 Carribby Islands 354. 363 Charles Town 490
D
Darbyshire 2 Dover 5 Dantzick 398. 491. 508. 529. 542 Dolston 471. 490. 502
E
England 2. 5. 329. 399. 470. 473. 491. 504 Exon 88 Essex 196. 493. 554
Edmunton 480. 554 Enfield 541 East-Jersey 543
F
France 140 Friezland 255. 470. 539 Frederickstadt 539
G
Germany 129. 151. 255. 470. 491 Guilderland 255 Gousey 493. 554. 555
H
Holland 129. 151. 255. 337. 399. 470. 471. 491. 539 Hamborough 255. 539
Horsham 458
I
Ireland 2. 112. 129. 181. 304. 471. 491 Jamaica 4. 153. 186. 329. 363. 397.
470 Islands 138. 144. 178. 180. 181 Italy 140 Isle of Man 397
K
Kendal 19 Kingston 340. 477. 489. 529. 556
L
Leicestershire 2. 460 Lancashire 13. 18. 36. 52 Lancaster 154. 200. 203 London
4. 5. 76. 77. 108. 109. 127. 164. 235. 255. 344. 411. 417. 454. 455. 456. 459.
462. 471. 477. 491. 504. 508. 540. 542. 545. 552. 554. 555. 556. 557 Leghorn
140 Low Countries 140 Lynn 172
M
Malton 63 Markets 61. 128 Medlesham 172 Maryland 177. 186. 226. 228. 253. 316.
327. 398. 400 Marshgrainge 389. 394 Middlesex 480 Macqueness 556
N
Nottinghamshire 2 Northumberland 2. 36. 45. 52 North 11.65.115 Northern 13
Newcastle 36. 52 New England 129. 138. 146. 178. 181. 186. 226. 253. 262. 277.
316. 324. 397 Norway 140 Norfolk 172 Nevis 186. 363 New Jersey 401. 473. 541
O
Oxford 416
P
Plymouth 77 Poland 140. 151 Palatine 151 Palatinate 255. 539. 541 Pensilvania
473. 540. 543. 545. 553
R
Reading 147 Rode Island 366. 470
S
Scotland 2. 125. 129. 471. 491 Southwark 5 Suburbs 6 Swarthmore 10. 353. 357.
361. 368. 397. 399. 400. 401. 402. 416. 417. 420. 426. 428. 439 Sedburgh 12
Sweedland 255 Swisserland 255 Surrey 256 Sussex 412. 458
V Virginia 129. 138. 146. 177. 180. 186. 226. 228. 253. 316. 324. 335. 398.
400
W
Westmorland 2. 36. 52 White-Chappel 6 Wales. 112. 541 Worcester 129. 333. 335.
336. 340. 346 Worplesdom 453 West-Jersey 456. 543. 545. 555
Y
Yorkshire 2. 416. 455. 552 York 474. 486. 488. 507. 528
Z
Zealand. 255
THE SECOND TABLE, Being a Catalogue of the Epistles, of that Faithful Servant
of Christ, G. Fox, to Friends, contained in this Volume.
1643.
A Testimony how the Lord sent G. F. forth at the first, Page 1
1644.
Concerning the spreading of the Truth, and how that many were Imprisoned, etc.
Page 2
1650.
Upon the fourth Day of the first Month, I felt the Power of the Lord to spread
over all the World in Praise, Page 7 Epistle 1. Friends forsake the Company of,
etc. Page 8 2. Friends, the Children of the Devil, how expert are they in Evil,
Ibid. 3. Friends, there is an Eye that looks to see the good Seed, Page 9
1651.
4. All Friends mind that which is pure in you to God, Ibid.
1652.
5. Dear Father and Mother, etc. Page 10 6. Friends, no one is justified
breaking the Commands of Christ, Ibid. 7. To Friends at Swarthmore, Ibid. 8.
Dear Friends, those that will Live Godly in Christ Jesus, Page 11 9. Friends,
that which is set up by the Sword, is upheld by the Sword, Ibid. 10. To Friends
to stand still in Troubles, and see the strength of the Lord, Ibid. 11. Dear
Hearts, Brethren and Babes of Christ, wait to feed, Page 12 12. Friends, if you
love the Light, and walk in it, ye love Christ, Ibid 13. To the Flock of God
about Seburgh, Ibid. 14. A word from the Lord to Friends, Page 13 15. To the
Church of God in Lancashire, Ibid. 16. To all you my Dear Friends, who have
tasted of, etc. Page 14 17. Dear Friends, prize your time and the Love of the
Lord, Page 15 18. All Dear Friends every where, Ibid. 19. Dear and Tender
Friends, Page 16 20. To all my Dear Brethren, Page 17 21. To Friends at Kendal,
Page 19 22. Oh Friends keep close to the Light in you, Ibid.
1653.
23. Friends fear not the Power of Darkness, Page 20 24. To all Friends every
where, dwell in the Truth, Ibid. 25. To Friends in the Truth, Page 22 26. To
Friends concerning Marriages, Friends all they, Page 23 27. To all my Dear
Friends and Brethren, Ibid. 28. To all you that are enlightened, etc. Page 24
29. Concerning Tithes, Ibid. 30. To a Suffering Friend, Page 26 31. Dear
Friends, mind the steadfast Guide to the Lord, Ibid. 32. To Friends that their
Minds go not from the Spirit of God, Ibid. 33. To Friends for all to wait and
walk in the Truth, Page 28 34. Friends I do warn you, etc. Page 30 35. To
Friends in the Ministry, Page 31 36. Friends take your heavenly Censures, and
offer, etc. Ibid. 37. Dear Friends prize your heavenly Calling, Ibid. 38. An
Epistle to the Travelers in the Lord's Way, Page 33 39. All Friends in
Westmorland, Cumberland, Bishopric, Northumberland and Lancashire. Page 36 40.
Friends I do you all warn and charge to be Faithful, etc. Ibid. 41. Friends to
you all this Exhortation is from, etc. Page 36 42. To Friends concerning the
Light, Page 37 43. To all my Dear Brethren the Flock of God, etc. Page 38 44.
All Friends wait upon the unlimitted Power and Spirit, etc. Page 40 45.
Concerning the Heirs of the Kingdom of God, Page 41 46. To all Friends who are
in the Unity which is in the Light, Page 44 47. All Friends every where, who
with the Light, etc. Page 45 48. To Friends concerning Judging, Page 47 49.
Friends, in the Life and Power of God dwell, Page 49 50. All Friends dwell in
that which is Pure, etc. Page 51 51. To Friends concerning the Cross of Christ,
the Power of God, Ibid. 52. All Friends in Westmorland, Lancashire, Cumberland,
Bishopric, Page 52 53. Concerning the Duty of all Friends in Truth, etc. Page
53 54. This is sent among Friends who be in the Light, Ibid. 55. The Word of
the Lord God to all my Brethren, etc. Page 54 56. To call the Minds out of the
Creatures, Page 55
1654.
57. To a Friend in Distress, Page 57 58. Oh Friends look not out, etc. Ibid.
59. Friends make not Flesh your Arm by carnal Reasoning, Ibid, 60. To Friends
to keep in the fear of the Lord, Page 58 61. Friends dwell all in the Immortal
Seed of God, Ibid. 62. All Friends be low in the Life of God, Ibid. 63. To
Friends concerning the Covenant of Light and Life, Ibid. 64. To Friends in the
Ministry, Page 61 65. This is the Word of the Lord to all Friends and
Fellow Laborers in the Truth, Ibid. 66. All Friends meet together in the
Light, etc. Page 62 67. To Friends concerning Marriages, Ibid. 68. Friends,
know the Life and Power of God, Page 63 69. To Friends at Malton, Ibid. 70.
Friends I do Judge that in all which is contrary to the Life and Power of God,
Page 64 71. To Friends to live in the Power of God, in Christ that never fell,
Ibid. 72. To Friends in the North, Page 65 73. Concerning Tithes, Ibid. 74. My
Dear Friends live in the Immortal Seed and Power of the Lord God, Page 66 75.
Dearly beloved Friends and Brethren in the Power and Life, Page 67 76. Oh all
Friends in the Unchangable Life, Power and Seed, etc. Page 68. 77. Friends in
the Measure of Life, Ibid. 78. Friends in the Power and Life of God dwell in
Unity, Page 69 79. To all Friends to abide in their Callings, Ibid. 80. To seek
the Kingdom of God first, Page 72
1655.
81. All Friends every where, etc. Page 73 82. The Word of the Lord to all
Friends, Page 74 83. Dear Friends in the Eternal Truth of God, etc. Page 75 84.
To Friends to sit under their own Vines, etc. Page 76 85. An Epistle to
Friends, that with the Light they may see, etc. Ibid. 86. To Friends in London
Page 77 87. Friends in the Power of the Lord go forth Ibid. 88. Friends, meet
together waiting upon the Lord, etc. Ibid. 89. For Plymouth Ibid 90. Friends,
all ye whose Minds are turned, etc. Ibid. 91. A General Epistle to Friends,
concerning the Priests Page 78 92. To all the Seed of Abraham, etc. Page 79 93.
That Friends should have a sense of one another Sufferings Page 80 94.
Friends, I do Warn and Exhort you all, Ibid. 95. Grow in the Increase of God
Page 81 96. A Warning to Friends, to keep to the Light, out of Deceit Ibid. 97.
To a Friend Ibid. 98. Dear Friends, stand in the Faith Ibid. 99. To all that
make mention of the Name of the Lord, etc. Page 82 100. Concerning all such as
set up outward Crosses, etc. Ibid. 101. Dear Friends and Brethren in the
Everlasting Seed of God, etc. Page 83 102. Friends encourage not, etc. Ibid.
103. To keep to the Witness of God Page 84 104. All Friends every where in the
Power of God dwell Ibid. 105. Concerning the Light, etc. Page 86 106. To
Friends to keep in the Life, etc. Ibid. 107. Now dear Friends in the Power of
the Everlasting God Page 87
1656.
108. Friends, wait in the Light, etc. Ibid. 109. Friends, keep to the
Patience, etc. Ibid. 110. To Friends Prisoners at Exon, Page 88 111. A Warning
from the Lord for Plainness of Speech to be used Ibid. 112. All Friends mind
the Light Page 91 113. To a Friend in the Ministry Ibid. 114. Dear Brethren, in
the mighty Power of God, etc. Ibid. 115. To Friends, concerning the Word of
Life, etc. Page 92 116. Concerning Judging in Meetings Ibid. 117. My dear
Friends keep your Meetings, etc. Page 93 118. Let no Friends go beyond their
own Measures Ibid. 119. Friends, wait in the Life, etc. Ibid. 120. My dear
Friends, dwell in the Everlasting Seed, etc. Ibid. 121. To Friends, to take
care of such as suffer for owning the Truth Page 94 122. Friends, to that which
is pure I speak, etc. Ibid. 123. Men in the Fall are in the Wars and Strife,
etc. Page 95 124. My Friends, be faithful, and keep your Meetings, Page 96 125.
Friends, to you all, this is, etc. Page 97 126. For Friends to dwell in Love
and Unity Ibid. 127. All Friends every where, do not delight in Apparel, etc.
Ibid. 128. To all Friends, to keep in the Power of God, etc. Ibid. 129. My dear
Friends and Brethren, keep in the Seed of Peace Page 98. 130. All Friends dwell
in the Truth, Ibid. 131. Friends, every where, dwell in the Power of the Lord
God, Page 102 132. An Epistle to Friends, for all to keep in the Light, Page
104 133. Friends, toward all Men walk in Wisdom, etc. Page 106 134. Live in
Peace, etc. Ibid.
1657.
135. To Francis Howgill and Edward Buroughs, Ibid. 136. Dear Friends, dwell
in that which keeps your Peace, etc. Page 107 137. Friends, let God's Wisdom
have the Stay of your Minds, Ibid. 138. Friends, ye that are Prisoners of the
Lord Jesus Christ, Ibid. 139. Friends, know the Praying in the Spirit, Page 108
140. All Friends every where that do suffer for Tithes, Ibid. 141. To Friends,
to gather up their Sufferings, and lay them before Judges, Page 109 142. All my
dear Friends, keep up your Heads above the Waters, Page 110 143. All Friends
and Brethren in the Noble Seed of God, Page 111 144. Friends, get not Knowledge
in the unsanctified Part, Ibid. 145. Friends, where there is Strife among any
of you, etc. Ibid. 146. To Friends in Ireland, Page 112 147. To Friends in
Wales, Ibid. 148. An Exhortation to fervent Prayer, and steadfast Faith, Page
113 149. To Friends to know one another in the Light, etc. Page 115 150.
Friends all every where, in the Life and Power of God live, Page 116 151.
Friends, there was a time when the Apostles preached Christ, Ibid. 152. This is
the Word of the Lord God to you all, Page 117 153. To Friends beyond the Sea,
that have Black and Indian Slaves, Ibid. 154. Oh Friends, keep out of that
State, etc. Ibid. 155. Concerning the Light, Page 119 156. All Friends, I do
Warn and Charge you, Page 120
1658.
157. Friends, by the Wisdom of God was all things made, etc. Page 121 158.
Friends and Brethren every where, dwell in that which makes for Peace, Page 122
159. Dear Friends, all dwell in the Everlasting Seed of God, Christ Jesus, Page
123 160. All my dear Friends, Folly and Wickedness will have an end, etc. Ibid.
161. Oh Friends, do not dye from the Good, Ibid. 162. Friends, keep your
Meetings in the Power of God, etc. Page 124 163. Dear Friends, in the Life
live. Ibid. 164. My dear Friends, keep your Meetings in the Power of the Lord,
Ibid. 165. All Friends, be faithful in the Power of God, Page 125 166. To the
Church of God in Scotland, Ibid. 167. My dear Friends, be not carried away by
good Words, etc. Page 126 168. Friends, all every where, who have tasted of the
Love, etc. Page 127 169. To all the Elect, Chosen and Faithful, Ibid. 170.
Friends, every one of you having Light from the Son of God, Page 129
1659.
171. A General Epistle to them who are of the Royal Priesthood, Ibid. 172. We
are of the Royal Seed, Elect and Precious, etc. Page 133. 173. All Friends,
take heed of running on in a Form, etc. Page 135 174. Dear Friends all every
where, feel the Seed of God over all, Ibid. 175. To Friends to serve one
another in Love, Page 136 176. Friends that Minister, etc. Ibid. 177. All
Friends every where, who are dead to all Carnal Weapons, Page 137 178. To
Friends in Barbados, Virginia, New England, and all the Islands about, Page
138 180. My dear Friends in the Love and Life, etc. Page 139 181. Friends, live
in the unchangeable Power of God, Ibid. 182. My dear Hearts, do your Business
faithfully, Page 140 183. Friends, dwell in Patience, etc. Ibid. 184. Oh my
dear Friends and Brethren, Page 141 185. All Friends be obedient to the Power
of God, Page 142 186. Friends, which have known and tasted of the Power of the
Mighty God, Page 143 187. This to go among Friends, Page 144 188. Friends, live
in the Seed of God, Page 145 189. To Friends in New England and Virginia, Page
146 190. Oh Friends, have an esteem of Truth and God's Glory, Page 147
1660.
191. All Friends every where, that are Convinced with Truth, Page 148 192.
Friends in the fear of the Lord God live, Page 150 193. Dear William, thou
have, etc. Page 151 194. Dear Friends, who have found the better Part, Ibid.
195. Friends, all that are moved of the Lord, etc. Page 152 196. Dear Friends
in Jamaica, and elsewhere, Page 153 197. Dear Friends in the Power of the Lord
dwell, Ibid. 198. Dear Friends keep over all that which tends to Strife, Page
154
1661.
199. Friends the Matter concerning not putting off the Hat in Prayer, Ibid.
200. The Line of Righteousness and Justice stretched forth over all Merchants,
etc. Page 156 201. Dear Friends, in the Stilness and Silence of the Power of
the Almighty dwell, Page 162 202. An Answer to a letter sent to G. F. Page 163
203. What Friends do ye Reign as Kings, etc. Ibid. 204. To all Friends
Prisoners, Page 164 205. All Friends live in God's Dominion, Ibid. 206. In the
Power of God that is Everlasting, Page 165 207. Dear Friends look over all
Sufferings, Page 170 208. All ye Prisoners of the Lord for his Truth, Ibid.
209. My Dear Friends in the Power of God, etc. Page 172 210. Friends trust not
in Man, etc. Ibid. 211. Friends all ye that know the way of Truth, Page 173
212. To a Friend under an exercise of Spirit, Page 174 213. Dear Friends in the
Life and Power of God dwell, Ibid. 214. Friends the Power of the Lord God is
over all, Page 175
1662.
215. To Friends, to Labor in the Ministry that their Lives may Preach, Page
177 216. To Friends in New England, and the Islands beyond Sea, Page 178 217.
All my Dear Friends and Brethren, etc. Page 180 218. Dear Friends and Brethren,
let Patience possess your Souls, Page 181 219. All my Dear Friends dwell in the
Life, Page 182 220. Friends, Truth is that which is pure, Ibid. 221. All my
Dear Friends every where, the Power of the Lord God, etc. Page 183 222. A
General Epistle to be read in all the Christian Meetings, etc. Page 186 223.
All Dear Friends and Brethren stand fast in the Power of the Lord God, Page 196
224. Dear Friends, whom Death, Bonds nor the Outward Creature, can separate,
Page 197 225. Friends keep in the Power of the Lord, Ibid.
1663.
226. My Dear Friends in the Everlasting Seed, etc. Page 198 227. Sing and
Rejoice ye Children of the Day, Page 199 228. Dear Friends, who have tasted of
that which is precious, Ibid. 229. Friends, let not your knowledge be after the
Flesh, Page 200 230. Friends stand still and see, be still and hear, Page 201
1664.
231. My Dear Friends be faithful to the Lord God, Page 202 Two General
Epistles to be read, etc. 232. (1.) All Friends every where, who are gathered
in the name of Jesus, Page 203 233. (2.) Friends, this is the day of the trial
of your Faith, Page 209 234. All you Prisoners of the Lord, etc. Page 211 235.
Friends you who now come to suffer by a Land-Flood, keep on the Rock, Page 212
236. All my Dear Friends in the Everlasting Power, etc. Page 213 237. My Dear
Friends and Brethren, the Lord is with you all, etc. Page 214 238. My dear
Friends and Brethren, all every where keep your Habitations, Ibid. 239. A
General Epistle to all Friends, Ibid. 240. Friends, all Outward Things,
Figures, Types, Shadows and Inventions, etc. Page 220 241. Dear Friends, keep
your Meetings in the Name of the Lord Jesus, Page 225
1665.
242. The Saints Weapons are Spiritual, Page 226
1666.
243. All my Dear Friends this is your day to stand, Ibid. 244. To Friends in
Barbados, Virginia, Maryland, New England, etc. Ibid. 245. An Epistle to be
read in all the Assemblies of the Righteous, Page 228 246. Oh Dear Friends,
mind every one your Habitation, etc. Page 234 247. Dear Friends, dwell in the
gentle Wisdom of the Lord God, Page 235 248. Friends, keep your Meetings in the
Power of the Lord God, Ibid.
1667.
249. A General Epistle to Friends, and to all People, etc. Page 236 1st,
Concerning the Worship of God, and the Jew Outward, etc. Page 242. 2d,
Concerning who drink the New Wine, and who drink the Old, Page 246 3d,
Concerning Gathering in the Name of Jesus, Page 248 250. A Warning to all to
keep out of the Vain Fashions of the World, Page 249 251. My Dear Friends in
the Truth and Seed of God, etc. Page 251 252. For Friends in the Ministry,
scattered abroad in Virginia, etc. Page 253 253. To Friends in Holland, Page
255
1668.
254. Friends, let your affections be set on things which are above, Page 256
255. Dear Friends all who from the beginning have been Convinced, Ibid. 256. My
Dear Friends live in the Wisdom of God, Ibid. 257. Dear Friends be faithful in
the service of God, Page 257 258. Dear Friends, in the Truth of God Ibid. 259.
Dear Friends be faithful in the Truth, which the Devil is out of, Page 258 260.
Dear Friends, if the Truth make you free, then are you free indeed, Page 259
261. Friends, to call Men Masters, or Gracious Lord, etc. Page 266 262. All
Friends and People, this is to be condemned, etc. Page 267 263. An Exhortation
to keep in the Ancient Principles of Truth, Page 274
1669.
264. An Additional Extract from other of G. F's Epistles, Page 276 265. All
you that are believers in the Light, which manifests Darkness, Page 293 266.
And all you believers in the heavenly Light, etc. Page 299 267. To Ministering
Friends, Page 300 268. Not to be over-thoughtfull of the things of this World,
Page 301 269. Concerning the single Language, Page 302 270. For all that be
gathered in the Name of Jesus, Ibid. 271. Concerning those who go out of Unity,
and deny Forms, Page 303 272. To Friends in Ireland, Page 304 273. Not to trust
in uncertain Riches, Ibid. 274. My Dear Friends in the pure and undefiled Life
all Live, Page 305 275. All Friends every where, in the living Spirit and
living Power, etc. Ibid. 276. Dear Friends live in Peace and Love, Page 308
277. My Dear Friends, when you were formerly in a Profession, Ibid. 278. And
Friends, see that all Apprentices that are bound amongst you, etc. Page 310
1670.
279. The Substance of a General Epistle, Page 311 280. All Dear Friends every
where, who have no helper but the Lord, Page 315 281. Dear Friends the Truth of
God mind, Ibid. 282. Friends, in the Seed that bruises the Serpent's Head, etc.
Page 316 283. To Friends at Bristol in time of Suffering, Page 317
1671.
284. Dear Friends and Brethren, see that all live in the peaceable Truth,
Ibid. 285. Dear Friends this is the Counsel of the Lord to you all, Page 319
286. Friends, when you are met together in the Name of Jesus, Ibid. 287.
Friends, consider you that have known the Mercies of the Lord, Page 320
1672.
288. To Friends in Carolina, Page 321 289. Dear Friends every where be
faithful to God, Page 322 290. Dear Friends, live in Love, for that is of God,
Ibid. 291. To all the Women's Meetings that are Believers in the Truth, Page 323
292. To Friends in New England, virginia and Barbados, Page 324 293. To
Friends in Barbados, Page 326
1673.
294. Friends, the Truth is above all, etc. Page 327 295. Friends, at the first
Convincement there is not so much danger, Ibid. 296. Friends, all keep your
Meetings in the Power of the Lord God, Page 328 297. Dear Friends, keep in the
Power of the Lord, Ibid. 298. Dear Friends, to whom is my Love in that which
changes not, Page 329 299. To Friends at Jamaica, Ibid. 300. Dear Friends, let
your Faith stand in the Power of God, Page 330 301. To all the Women's Meetings,
Page 333 302. To all Friends that live in the Truth. Page 334 303. Dear
Friends, all be faithful, etc. Page 335 304. To Friends in Virginia, Ibid. 305.
My Dear Friends, live in the Seed, etc. Page 336
1674.
306. To Friends in Holland, Page 337 307. My dear Friends, who feel the
Precious Truth, Page 338 308. My dear Friends in England, and all parts of the
World, Page 340 309. Friends, seek the Peace of all Men, Page 342 310. Friends,
in every thing give thanks, Page 343 311. For the Men and Women's Meetings in
Barbados, Ibid. 312. All Friends that are in the Power of God, Page 344 313.
Friends, all that are sensible of the Power of God, etc. Page 346
1675.
314. To all my dear Friends Elect and Precious in America, Page 352 315. To
Friends in Barbados, Page 353 316. Dear Friends, all that feel the Life, and
Power and Spirit of the Living God, Page 354 317. To all the Elect and Chosen
of God, in Christ Jesus, before the Foundation of the World, Page 357 318. All
Dear Friends and Brethren, keep up your Testimony, etc. Page 361 319. To
Friends in Nevis, and the Caribby Islands, Page 363
1676.
320. An Encouragement to all the faithful Women's Meetings, etc. Page 368. 321.
To all the Men and Women's Meetings that are gathered in the Name of Jesus,
Page 389 332. To Friends in Cumberland, Page 394 333. To Friends in Barbados,
Page 395 334. To Friends in the Isle of Man, Page 397 335. To Friends in
Virginia- and Maryland, Page 398 336. To Friends at Dantzick, Ibid. 337. To
Friends in Holland, Page 399 338. To Friends in Maryland and Virginia, Page 400
339. All my dear Friends and Brethren, etc. Page 401 340. To Friends in
New Jersey in America, Ibid. 341. My Friends, all you that know God, and Christ
your Teacher, Page 402 342. My dear Friends and Brethren, that Faith, which is
the Gospel of God, etc. Page 403 343. Friends, in the Power, and Image, and
Truth, etc. Page 405
1677.
344. An Epistle to be read in the Men and Women's Meetings, etc. Page 409 345.
My dear Friends, to whom is my Love in the Everlasting Seed, Page 411 346. To
Friends at Sussex, Page 412 347. Concerning the Subjection of the Spirits of
the Apostles one to another, etc. Page 413 348. Dear Friends to whom is my Love
in the heavenly Seed, Page 414
1678.
349. To Friends in the County of Oxford, Page 416 350. To the Yearly Meeting
in Yorkshire, Ibid. 351. Friends, know what the Lord does require of you, etc.
Page 417 352. An Epistle to Friends, to keep in the Power of God, etc. Page 418
353. My dear Friends, whose Faces are set toward Zion, Page 420 354. And dear
Friends my Love to you all in the Seed of Life, Page 423
1679.
355. To Friends in America, concerning their Negroes and Indians, Page 426
356. Dear Friends every where, that have received the Truth as it is in Jesus,
Page 428 357. Dear Friends, all live in the Life of the true Christians, Page
430 358. Dear Friends, with my Love to you all in the holy peaceable Truth,
Page 431 359. An Epistle to be read among Friends, Ibid. 360. To all the Men
and Women's Meetings every where, Page 434 361. An Epistle to Friends for them
to read, Page 439 And now my dear Friends, concerning true Liberty, Page 443
1680.
362. And now Friends, you who are called into the Glorious Liberty, Page 450
363. Dear Friends and Brethren in the Lord Jesus Christ, Ibid. 364. To Friends
in America, Page 453 365. To Friends in Yorkshire, Page 454 366. A Letter to
the Captives, who meet together to worship God, in Algier, Page 455
1681.
367. To Friends in Burlington, West-Jersey, Page 456 368. To suffering Friends
at Horsham in Sussex, Page 458 369. To the Flock of Christ Jesus every where,
Page 459 370. To suffering Friends at Leicester, Page 460 371. To Friends in
Carolina, Page 462 372. An Epistle concerning the Government of Christ, Page
463
1682.
373. To Friends in Jamaica, Page 470 374. To Friends in Holland, Page 471 375.
To Friends in Barbados, Ibid. 376. To Friends in New Jersey and Pensilvania,
Page 473 377. To Friends that are Prisoners in York, Page 474 378. To all the
Elect of God, chosen and faithful, etc. Page 476 379. An Epistle to all
Planters, etc. in foreign Plantations, America, Page 477 380. To all
Christians, to keep to Yea, Yea, and Nay, Nay, etc. Page 478 381. A Way to
prevent the Indignation and Judgments of God, Page 480 382. An Epistle to the
Household of Faith, Page 482
1683.
380. To the Quarterly Meeting at York, Page 486 384. To the Six Weeks Meeting
in Barbados, Page 488 385. To suffering Friends in Prison at Bristol, Page 489
386. To Friends in Charlestown in Carolina, Page 490 387. To the Monthly and
Quarterly Meeting in England, etc. Page 491 388. To Friends that are Captives
at Algier, Ibid. 389. To the Household of Faith, which is the Church of Christ,
Page 493 390. An Epistle to all Friends, Page 498
1684.
391. To the Meeting of Friends in Truth, that are Captives in Algier, Page 502
392. To the Quarterly and Monthly Meetings in England, etc. Page 504 393. To
Friends in Holland, Page 505 394. Dear Friends and Brethren, who are Elect and
Chosen in Christ, Page 506 395. To Friends at the Yearly Meeting in York, Page
507 396. To the Suffering Friends of Dantzick, Page 508 397. An Epistle to
Friends, against Pride and Haughtiness. Page 510 398. An Epistle to all the
Prisoners and Sufferers for the Name of the Lord Jesus, Page 521
1685.
399. Concerning the Pure and Undefiled Religion, etc. Page 526 400. To Friends
at York, Page 528 401. Dear Friends and Brethren in the Lord Jesus Christ, Page
529 402. A General Epistle, Dear Friends go not from your Habitations, Page 533
403. Dear Friends in Holland, Friezland, Hambrough, Frederickstadt, Dantzick,
Palatinate, etc. Page 539 404. To Friends in Pensilvania, Page 540 405. To
Friends in the Ministry, in Pensilvania and New Jersey, Page 541 406. To
Friends in Wales, Ibid. 407. To Friends in Dantzick Page 542
1686.
408. To Friends in Pensilvania, East and West-Jersey, Page 543 409. To all the
holy Women that trust in God, etc. Page 545 410. An Epistle for them that are
learned in Christ, to read and understand, Page 548 411. To the Yearly Meeting
in Yorkshire, Page 552
1687.
412. To Friends in West-Jersey and Pensilvania, Page 553 413. Dear Friends, my
desire is that all Friends prize the Mercy, etc. Page 554
1688.
414. All my Dear Friends and Brethren, Ibid. 415. Dear Friends my Love is to
all, Ibid.
1689.
416. To the Quarterly Men and Women's Meetings in London, Ibid. 417. Dear
Friends and Brethren in Christ Jesus, Page 555
1690.
418. To the Six Weeks Meeting in London, Ibid. 419. Dear Friends, something
was upon me to Write to you, etc. Page 556 420. To Friends, Captives in
Macqueness, Ibid.
The End of the Second Table.
ERRATA.
PAge 14. l. 45. no Parenthisis, p. 15. l. 36. for and so r. but, p. 16. l. 42.
for into r. of, p. 18. l. 10. for into r. in, p. 3 r. l. 23. for they r. ^e, p.
39. l. 44. after Friends dele that, p. 42. l. 42. for so r. for, p. 43. l. 3.
after reason add which, p. 59. l. 8. for is r. are, p. 64. l. 6. after ending
add and, p. 67. l. 34. for Beauty r. Joy, p. 137. l. 23. for he r. the, Ibid.
l. 31. dele the before of, p. 142. l. 29. r. Lord's r. Lord, p. 146. l. 6.
after it dele to, p. 153. l. 23. for which r. but, p. 180. l. 26. after Ills
add and, p. 211. l. 7. after Abomination add that, Ibid. l. 11. dele that, p.
226. l. 39. dele are, p. 234. l. 13. dele it, p. 267. l. 3. after say add that,
p. 334. l. 44. for this r. these, p. 338. l. 47. for has r. have, p. 339. l.
39. dele let, Ibid. l. 40. for wander r. wandering, p. 344. l. 26. for which r.
this, Ibid. l. 34. after things dele and, p. 353. l. 22. for Word's r World's,
p. 356. l. 17. after Sacrifices add for, p. 398. l. 22. for feeds r. feed, p.
437. l. 27. for sprikles r. sprinkles, p. 455. l. 9. for met r. meet, p. 456.
l. 5. for Bondange r. Bondage, Ibid. l. 17. after how add He brought them down,
p. 462. l. 45. after of add the, p. 475. l. 40. dele his p. 508. l. 19. dele
fore, p. 514. l. 49. dele and, p. 517. l. 8. for to r. and, p. 534. l. 45. for
Disciple r. Disciples, p. 545. l. 27. after to add be.

BOOKS Printed and Sold by T. Soul, next Door to the Meeting House in
White-Hart-Court in Gracious-Street. And at the Bible in Leaden. Hall-Street
near the Market, 1699.
SAmuel Fisher's Works, in Folio.

Robert Barclay's Works, in Folio.

George Fox's Journal, with W. Penn's Preface, Folio.

The Works of the Long, Mournful, and Sorrowful Distressed Isaac Penington,
Folio.

The Works of that Memorable and Ancient Servant of Christ, Stephen Crisp;
containing also a Journal of his Life, giving an Account of his Convincement,
Travels, Labors, and Sufferings, in and for the Truth. price Bound 5 s.

A Collection of the several Writings and Faithful Testimonies of that
suffering Servant of God, and patient Follower of the Lamb, Humphry Smith,

Truth's Innocence and Simplicity Shining through the Conversion,
Gospel Ministry, Labors, Epistles of Love, Testimonies and Warnings to
Professors and Profane, (with the Long and Patient Sufferings) of that Ancient
and Faithful Minister and Servant of Jesus Christ, Tho. Tailor; Who finished
his Course in the Year MDCLXXXI. price 5 s.

A Collection of certain Epistles and Testimonies of Divine Consolation,
Experience and Doctrine; Written by that Faithful, Patient and Long-suffering
Servant of Christ, William Bennit.

The Memory of the Righteous Revived, being a brief Collection of the Books and
Written Epistles of John Camm and John Audland: Together with several
Testimonies relating to those two Faithful Laborers. price Bound 2 s.

Truth Vindicated, by the Faithful Testimony and Writings of the Innocent
Servant and Handmaid of the Lord, Elizabeth Bathurst, Deceased. price Bound 1
s.

Baptism and the Lord's Supper, Substantially Asserted; being an Apology in
behalf of the People called Quakers, concerning those Two Heads. By Robert
Barclay. price Bound 1 s.

A Catechism and Confession of Faith. By R. Barclay. price Bound 9 d.

No Cross, No Crown. A discourse showing the Nature and Discipline of the holy
Cross of Christ. By W. Penn. In Two Parts. The Fifth Addition. price Bound 3 s.

An Address to Protestants of all Persuasions; more especially the Magistracy
and Clergy, for the Promotion of Virtue and Charity. In Two Parts. By W. Penn,
a Protestant. The Second Edition, Corrected and Enlarged. price Bound 1 s. 6 d.

An Account of W. Penn's Travails in Holland and Germany, for the Service of
the Gospel of Christ; by way of Journal. Containing also diverse Letters and
Epistles writ to several Great and Eminent Persons whilst there. The Second
Impression, Corrected by the Author's own Copy, with some Answers to the
Letters, not before Printed. price Bound 2 s.

A Brief Account of the Rise and Progress of the People called Quakers, in
which their Fundamental Principle, Doctrines, Worship, Ministry and Discipline
are plainly Declared, to prevent the Mistakes and Pervertions that Ignorance
and Prejudice may make to abuse the Credulous. With a Summary Relation of the
former Dispensations of God in the World, by way of Introduction. By W. Penn.
price Bound 1 s.

Primitive Christianity Revived, in the Faith and Practice of the People called
Quakers. Written, in Testimony to the present Dispensation of God, through them
to the World: That Prejudices may be Removed, the Simple Instructed, the
VVell-enclined Encouraged, and the Truth and its Innocent Friends Rightly
Represented. By W. Penn. price Bound 1 s.

The Harmony of Divine and Heavenly Doctrines, Demonstrated in sundry
Declarations on Variety of Subjects. Preached at the Quakers Meetings in
London, by Mr. W. Penn, Mr. G. Whitehead, Mr. S. Waldenfield, and Mr. B. Cool,
taken in Shorthand as it was delivered by them; and now Faithfully transcribed
and published for the Information of those who by reason of Ignorance may have
received a Prejudice against them. By a Lover of that People. price 1 s. 6 d.

England's Present Interest-considered, with Honor to the Prince, and Safety
to the People, In Answer to this own Question; What is most Fit, Easy and Safe
at this Juncture of Affairs to be done, for Quieting of Differences, Allaying
the Heat of Contrary Interests, and making them Subservient to the Interest of
the Government, and Consistent with the Prosperity of the Kingdom? Submitted to
the Consideration of our Superiors. By W. Penn. The Fourth Edition. price
Bound 1 s.

A Defense of a Paper, entitled, Gospel Truths, against the Exceptions of the
Bishop of Cork's Testimony (against the Quakers.) By W. Penn. price Bound 1 s.

The Christian-Quaker and his Divine Testimony Stated and Vindicated, from
Scripture, Reason and Authority. By W. Penn. price Bound 2 s.

A Diurnal Speculum; containing, I. A plain and easy Method to find out those
things that are most useful to be known Yearly: And may serve as an Almanac
for Thirty Years; and many other things suitable to the Matter, etc. II. An
Explanation of Weights, Money, and Measures, both Scriptural and Usual, with
sundry Tables depending thereon, etc. III. Some Remarks on England; or a Brief
Account of every County, with the Names and Days of the Markets, and the Chief
Commodities therein, etc. The whole consisting of great Variety, explained by
diverse Examples, the like in all particulars not extant, as by the Contents
does more at large appear. Collected by J. B. Price Bound 1 s 6.

The Spirit of the Martyrs revived, in a brief Compendious Collection of the
most Remarkable Passages and Living Testimonies of the True Church, Seed of
God, and Faithful Martyrs in all Ages. Price 2 s. 6 d.

The Arreignment of Popery; being a Collection taken out of the Chronicles, and
other Books of the State of the Church in the Primitive Times. I. The State of
the Papist; how long it was before the Universal POPE and MASS was set up; and
the bringing in their Rudiments, Traditions, Beads, Images, Purgatories, Tithes
and Inquisitions. II. A Relation of the Cruelties they acted after the Pope got
up, being worse than the Turk and Heathen: New Rome proving like Old. III. What
the People of England worshipped before they were Christians. IV. To which is
added, The Blood of the Martyrs is the Seed of the Church. With several other
things, very profitable for all that fear God to Read, Try and give Judgment by
the Spirit of Truth, against the Worship of the Beast and Whore. price 1 s. 6 s.

Instructions for Right Spelling, and plain Directions for Reading and Writing
True English. With several delightful things, very Useful and Necessary, both
for Young and Old to Read and Learn. price bound 6 d.

A New Book for Children to Learn in. With many wholesome Meditations for them
to consider. With Directions for true Spelling; and the Ground of true Reading
and Writing of true English. price 3 d.

An Invitation from the Spirit of Christ, to all that are a Thirst, to come and
Drink of the Waters of Life freely, which proceed from the Fountain of Eternal
Life: Showing how all may come, that are willing, to Drink thereof to their
full Satisfaction; whereby they may attain unto perfect Health and Salvation of
their Souls for ever in the Lord Jesus Christ. And also, showing what it is
that hinders People from being truly a Thirst after the Waters of Life; and
from coming to Drink thereof, etc. By Henry Mollineux. price Bound 1 s.

The Spiritual Guide, which disintangles the Soul, and brings it by the Inward
Way, to the getting of perfect Contemplation, and the Rich Treasure of Internal
Peace. Written by Dr. Michael de Molinos Priest. Translated from the Italian
Copy. price Bound 9 d.

(...). Or, the Doctrine of Baptisms; Reduced from its Ancient and Modern
Corruptions; and Restored to its Primitive Soundness and Integrity; according
to the Word of Truth, the Substance of Faith, and the Nature of Christ's
Kingdom. By William Dell, Minister of the Gospel, and Master of Gonvil and
Caius College in Cambrige. price Stich'd 4 d.

Christ's Spirit, a Christians Strength: Or, a plain Discovery of the Mighty
and Invisible Power that all Believers receive through the Gift of the Spirit.
First held forth on two Sermons, on Acts 1.8. and after Published for the
Instruction and Use of them that are Spiritual. Anno. 1649. By William Dell,
Minister of the Gospel of Jesus Christ. price Stitched 6 d.

Primitive Christianity continued, in the Faith and Practice of the People
called Quakers: Being in Answer to a Pamphlet, Entitled, Primitive Heresy,
etc. and which may serve as an Appendix to a Book, Entitled, An Antidote
against the Venom of the Snake in the Grass, by George Whitehead. Joseph Wyeth.
price Stitched 6 d.

The Friendly Enquirer's Doubts and Objections answered: Concerning the Light
within, the Word of God, the Church of Christ, Gospel Ministers, Ordinances in
General and in Particular, Water Baptism and the Lord's Supper; together with a
brief Testimony against Oaths and Tithes. First Intended and Written for the
Satisfaction of some particular Aquaintance; and now Published for more General
Service. By James Jackson. price Bound 6 d.

The Trial of Spirits both in Teachers and Hearers. Wherein is held forth the
clear Discovery and certain Downfall of the Carnal and Anti christian Clergy of
these Nations. Testified from the Word of God to the University Congregations
in Cambrige. By William Dell, Minister of the Gospel, and Master of Gonvil and
Caius College in Cambrige. Whereunto is added, a plain and necessary
Confutation of diverse Gross Errors delivered by Mr. Sydrach Sympson, in a
Sermon preached to the same Congregation at the Commencement, Anno MDCLIII.
Wherein (among other things) is declared, that the Universities (according to
their present Statutes and Practices) are not (as he affirmed) answerable to
the Schools of the Prophets in the time of the Law; but rather to the
Idolatrous High Places. And that Humane Learning, is not a Preparation
appointed by Christ, either for the Right Understanding, or Right Teaching the
Gospel. With a brief Testimony against Divinity-Degrees in the Universities. As
also Luther's Testimony at large upon the whole Matter. And lastly, the Right
Reformation of Learning, Schools and Universities, according to the state of
the Gospel, and the Light that shines therein. All necessary for the
Instruction and Direction of the Faithful in these last times. price Bound 1 s.
6 d.


