HERE IS DECLARED The manner of the naming of CHILDREN IN The old time, without
a Priest sprinkling them with Water, which now is, and has been in these
times, yet they have the Scriptures, but shows their contrary walking to
Scripture.

And also, the Practice of the holy men of God by Scripture; How that God named
Adam, and Adam gave Names; and men and women gave names to children. And how
Angels was sent to some, to tell them what their Names should be, without
Godfathers, or Godmothers, or Sureties, or Priests to sprinkle them with
Water. Which shows, They that have Godfathers, and Godmothers, and Gossips,
and use Priests to sprinkle them, are contrary to Scripture and the practice of
the holy men of God, as you may read in the follovving Treatise.

With an Addition of the spevving, and vomiting, and drunkenness of all
Professions.

Thus says the Lord, Learn not the way of the Heathen, for the customs of the
people are vain, Ier. 10.2, 3.

Why do you transgress the commandment of God by your tradition, Matt. 15.3.

Given forth by G. F.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Simmons, at the Bull and Mouth near Aldersgate,
1658.

Here is declared the manner of the naming of Children in the old Time, without
a Priest sprinkling them with Water, etc.
IN the day that God created man, Genesis 5.
in the likeness of God made he him a male and female, and blessed them, and
called their n^^e Adam; in that day when he created them, God gave unto them
their names; and God brought every beast of the field, and every fowl of the
air which he had formed out of the ground, to see what Adam would call them,
and whatsoever Adam would call them, and whatsoever Adam called them, Adam ^ave
them Names. Genesis 2.
all the fowls of the air, and all the beasts of the field, whatsoever Adam
called every living creature, that was his name: Adam said, This is bone of my
bone, and flesh of my flesh, she shall be called Woman, because she is taken
out of man; and Adam called his wifes name Eve. And Adam begat a Son in his own
image, after his likeness, and called his name Seth. And Seth, to him also was
born a son, and he called his name Enos. Gen 4.
Now here was no Priest spoken of to sprinkle them with water, nor no Sureties,
no Gossips, nor circumcision; but their father gave them their names; so the
Lord gave Adam his name, and he did give names to his children without a
Priest: Neither do we read that here were Godfathers, or Godmothers; and is
it not blasphemy to say God has a father, or God has a mother? If you say it
is not, Who is Gods father? and where is his mother? And if you say it is, blot
it out of your Catechism you teach your children. Genesis 16.
And the Angel of the Lord said unto Hagar, Thou shall have a Son, and call his
name Ishmael. Here the Angel taught her what to call her child, and not a
Godfather, or a God-mother, as you call them. And Hagar bare a son, and called
his name Ishmael, according to the word of the Angel of the Lord. And God said,
Genesis 17.
Sarah thy Wife shall bare a son indeed, and thou shall call his name Isaac:
Here God taught Abraham what he should call his sons name, and he obeyed the
voice of God; and you do not read that he did seek to a Godfather, or
God-mother, or sprinkled him with water: And the two daughters of Lot which
bare two sons, which called the name of the one Moab, and the name of the other
Ben-ammi; when that they said there was not a man in the earth to come in unto
them, Genesis 19.
what Priest was there to sprinkle them? Or who was there then to be their
Godfathers, or Godmothers? But they called their children by their names; and
Abraham called his sons name which Sarah bare to him, Isaac; Ge^ (...)
but no talk of a Priest, or of sprinkling with water. And Rebecca bare two
boys unto Isaac, and the first he called Esau, Genesis (...)
and the second he called Jacob; and here again is no talk of a priest, nor
water, nor of Godfathers, or Godmothers. And Laban had two daughters, the
name of the one was Leah, and the name of the other was Rachel, but it does not
say there was any priest (or water) sprinkling of them at their naming. And
Leah conceived and bare a son, and she called his name Ruben: mark, Genesis (...)
She called his name: It was she that gave the name here. She conceived again,
and bare another son, and called his name Simeon. Mark, She again conceived and
bare a son, and called his name Levi; mark, she again gave his name. She again
conceived and bare a son, and called his name Judah: Now here was no speech of
Godfathers, or Godmothers, or Priests to have money for sprinkling them, nor
sureties, their names were recorded. And Rachel bare Jacob a son, and Rachel
called his name Dan; and she conceived again, and bare Jacob a second son, and
Rachel called his name Napthali. And Zilpah bare a son, and Leah called his
name Gad: And Zilpah bare a second son, and Leah called his name Asher. And
Leah she conceived and bare Jacob a fifth son, and called his name Issachar.
And Leah conceived again, and bare a son, and called his name Zebulon, and
after she bare a daughter, and called her name Dinah. Now here was no priest,
nor talk of Godfathers, nor Godmothers, but the women named their children.
Rachel conceived, and she bare a son, and called his name Joseph: Mark, she
called his name Joseph: Here is no speech of Godfathers, and Godmothers to
name him, neither of a priest to sprinkle. Now if you follow the example of
Scripture, they will lead you from Godfathers, and Godmothers, and Priests to
sprinkle your children. And Rachel traveled and brought forth a son, and she
called his name Ben-oni, but his father called his name Benjamin; Genesis 35.
here is no talk of Godfathers, or Godmothers, or a priest. And Judah took
Shuah, and she bare a son, and he called his name Er. And she concived again,
and bare a son, and she called his name Onon; mark, Genesis 38.
she called his name. And she conceived again and bare a son, and she called
his name Shelah. Tamar bare two children, the name of the first was called
Pharize, and the name of the other Zarah. And unto Joseph was born two sons,
and they called the name of the one Manasses, Genesis 41.
and the name of the other called he Ephraim: Now here is no talk of
Godfathers, or God mothers, or priests to sprinkle them. And Moses, Ziporah
bare a son to him, and he called his name Garshon: And here is no talk of a
priest likewise with his water, nor of Godfathers, nor Godmothers, nor
Gossips, nor Priests, Churching nor Christning money. And Pharoah's daughter to
Moses which became her son, she called Moses, Exodus 2.
mark, she called him Moses, no Godfathers, or Godmothers. And Man^ahs wife
she bare a son, (...) 13.
according as the Angel spoke, and she called his name Sampson. Here was no
priest to sprinkle it, nor Godfathers, nor Godmothers spoken of. (...) 4.
And Ruth bare a son, and they called his name Obed, the father of Iesse. And
the Lord visited Hannah, and she conceived and bare a son, ^n. 1. ^^ron. 7.
and called his name Samuel. And Maachah bare a son to Machir, and she called
his name Peresh, and the name of his brother was Sheresh: Mark, here she called
his name. And again, 1 Chronicles. 7. Ephraims wife bare him a son, and he called
his name Beriah. And the Lord spoke to Isaiah, who declared the name of Christ,
as you may read Matthew. 1. And the Angel of the Lord said, Thou shall call his
Name Jesus. And it does not say here was a priest to sprinkle with water, or
any Godfathers, or Godmothers. And the Angel of the Lord told Zacharias he
should have a son, and he should call his name John; and they called his name
Zacharias, and they made signs to his father, ^^ke 1.
and Zacharias called for a writing-table, and wrote, and said, His name is
John.

Now you may see all along where ever they had any priests to sprinkle their
children for money, or with a little water, as the priests now in England (or
elsewhere) does, and Godfathers, and Godmothers, as they had; but sometimes
the Lord did direct the people what to call their children, and sometimes the
fathers named their children, and sometimes the mothers named them, without
Godfathers or Godmothers, and without a Priest to sprinkle them, and these
were not heathen; for sometimes the Angel of the Lord came and told them what
they should call them; and sometimes some that took their children as Pharoah's
daughter that took Moses, and called him Moses: Moses was not a heathen, nor
Sampson was not a heathen, nor Abel, nor Abraham, nor Seth, nor Enoch, nor
Samuel, nor Jacob, nor Isaac, nor John was not a heathen; and the Angel named
Christ, now these were not heathen: Now you that say they are heathen because
your priests have not thrown a little water upon their faces, and have not
Godfathers, or Godmothers: Are not you blasphemers of God, and
contrary-walkers to Scriptures? Where did any in ages past, sprinkle any of
their children, and they have wages for it and say then it is Christened, in
the days before the Law, and in the Law, or in the days of the Prophets,
Christ or the Apostles? Where is there any such Scripture as says, Christen,
or sprinkle Infants? And is not your sprinkling of Infants as superstitious as
the Papists, who dips their faces in the Fonts, and spits upon their noses, and
under both their ears, and puts a little salt in their mouths? How long is it
since your priests has left crossing of their children when they christened
them? And do not the Jesuit Priests do the same? wherein do you differ from
them, seeing you have quoted them? What Scripture have you for this, for
crossing your children when you christen them, as you call it? Is it not
popery? And was not the Pope the Mother and Father of it? And did not you act
as servants for him in doing that? What priests in all the Scripture had money
for burying the dead, and a Clark to say Amen, and eight or ten shillings for
preaching over the dead? Where had any of the Prophets, Christ, or the
Apostles, an Hourglass? some preach by the hour, have ten shillings, or twenty
shillings at a time for their preaching; are not they them that are given to
filthy lucre, that buy and sell? Are not you like to Simon Magus, (that would
buy the gift of God with money, and sell it, and set it at a price) which
thought the gift of God might be bought and sold for money? Does not, or may
not all people here see you have not the gift of God which are buying and
selling it for money, which it cannot be? Come, What Scripture have you for
your name Sacrament? Does not these come from the Papists? Did ever Christ, the
Prophets, or Apostles, preach by the hour, or prison any, or persecute any that
had spoke to them in the hour, and the Papists law to uphold to the end of your
hour, as the worlds Teachers has in these days? Do not you love the wages of
unrighteousness that have so much silver for preaching an hour? Are not you
such Teachers as preach for hire, and divine for money? Such Hirelings as will
fly if you can hear of a bigger Benefice? And are you not such shepherds as
seeks for your gain from your quarter? And take away your gain, and you
shepherds will fly from your flock. And are you not such as bear rule by your
means? And take away your means, and the Priest is gone, leaves the people; and
such as divines for money, take away your money, and you are gone, and leave
the people all on heaps to look upon walls. And has there not been such
Teachers in Ages past? And was not they and the people offended at them that
cried against them in ages past, and persecuted them, and stock't them, and put
them in Dungeons? And does not the people now rage against them that cry
against such now in this age, and put them in prison in Holes and Corners, for
crying against such as the Prophets cried against? And are not such now to be
cried against in this age? Are such to be held up by them that be in the life
of God, as they were that gave forth the Scripture? Here all ye priests are
proved to be contrary to the Scripture, out of the New Testament and Old.

Christening is a name which you have had from the Pope. Are not you false
priests, and teachers, and ministers, and prophets, and apostles, that will
quench the spirit, and limit the Holy One, and despise prophesying, and despise
revelation, and quench the just? Has not your fruits made you manifest? And do
not you pretend a gift, and set sale of it in every parish, and so sell it for
Tithes, Glebe-lands, Easter-reckonings, Midsummer-dues, stipends, or great sums
of moneys, and sell it by the Hour-glasse, giving the people two glasses a day,
and sometimes but one, and when the glass is run, then Neighbors, the time is
spent? And do you pray, or preach, or sing, or preach without money? and if any
speak to you in the time of your glass, he is disturbed in his merchandising,
and is in confusion, in Babylon: When such as are moved of the Lord God in the
unlimited spirit to witness against such things, those you imprison.

Circumcision nor uncircumcision avails not any thing, but a new creature: The
children was named before circumcision came in, which they say the baptism
succeeded; Abel, and Enoch, and Enos, and Abraham, and many, which God gave
them Wisdom to name their children without priests sprinkling of them, and
without Godfathers, and God mothers, or Gossips; and this was before
circumcision, and the promise of God, which was to the seed, which was, That
the seed of the woman should break the Serpents head; which promise God again
confirmed to Abraham, That in his seed should all the Nations of the earth be
blessed; and the promise was to his seed before he was circumcised, and before
circumcision came in, or was practiced, and before the law was given: So the
promise was not with the circumcision, but with the seed; and so the promise is
not with the sprinkling Infants, Godfathers, and Gossips, but the promise was
with the seed before the children was born, before Abel, or Enoch, or Abraham;
and the promise was with the seed before circumcision was, and before
sprinkling Infants was; and this promise the Apostle again brings to the seed,
and said, Circumcision nor uncircumcision availed not any thing, but a new
creature. And as for sprinkling Infants, it is an invention set up by the Pope
since the days of the Apostles, and practiced by the Papists, and since them,
and from them practiced amongst the Protestants: But the Heir of the promise is
known, the Seed, Christ in the male, and in the female, the new creature, and
all things are become new; and the circumcision within, ends circumcision
without; as the baptism within, ends that without, made with hands, and brings
from the things that are seen, to the things that are not seen, 2 Cor. 4. If
now circumcision avails not any thing, which was a command of God, what does
sprinkling of Infants (an invention of man) avail, and Godfathers, and
Godmothers? Therefore that which avails, is the new creature; and the seed is
the heir of the promise, not of Seeds, but of one Seed, which is Christ; so
Christ in the male, and in the female known, there is the heir of the promise,
and there is the birth known that is born again of the spirit, which enters
into the kingdom: And to you priests which have the mark of the Papists in your
foreheads, as your Crosses a-top of your Mass-houses, as your tithes, Popes
mark in your foreheads; as your sprinkling Infants, the Popes mark in your
foreheads: The tenth Bishop of Rome ordained that there should be christening
of children, and that the child should have Godfathers, and Godmothers: For
your Schools, Colleges, and names of your Houses, your preaching by the glass,
as the Popes Crew say their Mass; and your persecuting wrestling with flesh and
blood, with creatures, Popes mark in your foreheads, and not Christ's, that
saves men's lives, nor the Apostles that warred not with flesh and blood; you
that prison to death for your bellies as you do no work for.

And oh what a vomit have the Priests vomited! and how are they casting and
vomiting daily! And how does the prejudiced professors lick up their vomit,
that which they vomit and spew up! And how do the other Priests and Teachers
suck and sup up what they have vomited forth! and it makes the professors and
teachers to vomit again, who have licked up that which they have vomited, and
eat up that which they have spewed and cast up, as all their Books, and
Pamphlets, and Pulpits declare their vomiting: Let the Nations witness, and all
sober people, how sick they are by licking up that, and eating up that which
the Priests vomited up again! O what a loathsome sickness is there upon people!
which the one people spew and vomit up, and others licking up again what they
have vomited, and it makes them to vomit and spew: and bitter professors full
of prejudice, they gape, and they catch in that which the priests have vomited
and spewed forth, and it makes them vomit again, and so all tables are full of
vomit, as says Esaias, chap. 28.8. From the priests to the people they are all
sick; and such are these that are against the light, with which Christ has
enlightened every man that comes into the world: That which one spews out, and
vomits out in their Books and Pamphlets, that another priest he takes the same
up, and he eats the book, and vomits it up again, till the whole Nation is
filled with their vomit: And this has been the state since the days of the
Apostles, in the apostasy. What a sickness has been because of vomits! For
first transgress, and then vomit. First sick, and then vomit. So all are given
to vomiting, having nothing to seed upon but what another vomits out; what
transgressors vomits out that has the Scriptures and Saints words, and are
sick, and then vomit out, being out of the Saints life, and the life of the
prophets, Christ, and the Apostles, and feed not upon the flesh of Christ, and
so have wanted the meat that endures, for him that eats the flesh of Christ,
lives for ever, and are well, such vomits not, such spews not. But what a
shameful spewing has here been among them as feeds not upon the flesh of
Christ that came down from Heaven, which whosoever does, never hungers more;
and they that does not, are the transgressors, and vomits, and spews, and
others eat that as they have spewed and vomitted: For it is just so, when they
are in the transgression, there is nothing but vomits, and so the transgressor
can eat nothing but what others vomits, and that makes whole Nations sick: And
that which these priests and professors vomits out, is not that meat which
comes down from Heaven, which whoever eats, shall never hunger more. So they
that are in the transgression, vomits, and are as the dogs, that vomit up what
they have licked up, and so one dog licks up what another dog has vomited up,
2 Pet. 2.22. and Prove. 26.11. and so many have been filled with their vomit,
and has eaten up their vomit, Prove. 23.8. and many are as drunken men
staggering in their vomit; for all tables are full of vomits in the
transgression, and as Moab wallowing in the vomit, Ier. 48. and because of this
transgression the Land vomiteth out her Inhabitants, Lev. 18. And so all tables
being full of vomit, all tables to the savoury gives a bed smell. The Lord God
is spewing you out of his mouth, all gathered Churches and separations
whatsoever, that have got up since the days of the Apostles, that has had the
sheeps clothing, but be out of the sheeps nature, spirit, life and mind; and
your secrets shall be uncovered, and God will fill you with shame: The cup of
the Lords right hand shall be turned to you, and shameful spewing shall be on
your glory, Hab. 2. that have been drunk, and are the drunkards that are filled
with strong drink, with new wine, with the cares of this life. Thus says the
Lord of Hosts, the God of Israel, Drink ye, be drunk, spew, fall, and rise no
more; and the Inhabitants of the earth are drunk, all Nations have drunk the
Cup of fornication: The Kings of the earth, and the Inhabitants of the earth
has drunk of the Whores Cup, and so are spewing. Therefore learn soberness,
which none does but they who are come to the Spirit of God. Therefore the great
Whore is drunk with the blood of the Saints, which ravened from the spirit of
God, got up since the days of the Apostles, having the sheeps clothing, and
they that are drunk, are drunk in the night, 1 Thessalonians. 5. and the Whore that
ravened from the spirit of God, which is drunk with the blood of the Saints,
and made the Kings of the Earth drunk, and the Inhabitants of the earth drunk,
they are in the night, and will not own the light Christ, which enlightens
every man that comes into the world, but with that are they made manifest; for
that which makes manifest, is light; and drunkards must no enter into the
Kingdom of God: And the Inhabitants of the earth has showed their drunkenness
with the wine of her fornication sufficiently, since the days of the Apostles,
and the Kings of the Earth: But such must drink the Cup of the wrath of the
Almighty, and of the Lamb, poured out without mixture, and the judgment of the
great Whore is come, and Babylon is confounded, and confounding, with the
Beast, false Prophet, and the old Dragon, and are taken, and with him cast cast
alive into the Lake of fire, and the Lamb and the Saints have the victory, and
the everlasting Gospel shall be preached to them that ^well upon the Earth.
Glory in the Highest, Halelujah.

The End.

