A Controversy
which has been betwixt the Quakers Protestants and Papists, above this twelve
years, Concerning the Church.
Prot. and Pap.
THe Protestants and Papists say their Steeple house is the Church to the
Quakers, and say to the Quakers, what are you wiser then your forefathers?
your fore fathers called it a Church, and owned it to be a Church, and gave it
the Title of a Church, a Company of Silly people Say they, yea would be wiser
then all your fore fathers, Ministers and priests, Clergy and Pope that have
called it a Church these many hundred years.

Qua. Answ. We do grant that the Papists and Protestants have called it a
Church, with the Priests and Clergy and learned men, and if that be theirs and
their fore fathers wisdom to call it a Church; we are wiser then those their
fore fathers that said so, for we are come to the wisdom of our forefathers
the Apostles, who said Christ shed his blood for his Church, and is this the
wisdom of you and your forefathers, that Christ shed his blood for a Steeple
house? It is the wisdom of our forefathers that Christ shed his blood for the
people: And so the People are the Church, and is it the wisdom of your
forefathers that Christ came to purchase a Steeple house with his blood, the
Apostle said he purchased the people with his blood, the People were the Church
and are ye no wiser then your forefathers that said the Steeple house was the
Church, and that Christ purchased it with his blood? and the Apostle said that
Christ came to sanctify, cleanse purify and w^sh his Church. And is this the
wisdom of your forefathers that Christ came to cleanse, sanctify and purify
the Steeple-house; which the Apostles said was the People and not an old house
made with men's hands? Christ says upon this Rock will I build my Church,
Papists say it is upon Peter that Christ would build his Church: What would he
set a Steeple house on top of Peter? The Church was built upon that which flesh
and blood had not revealed to Peter. But our Father which is in heaven, and
Christ said Mat. 18. and 19. If thy Brother trespass against thee, if he will
not hear, thee and them, then tell it to the Church, and what is this the
wisdom of your forefathers that they mu^t tell it to the Steeple houses, that
can neither hear not see, has this been the wisdom of your Clergy and
forefathers and learned men? he must tell it to the Church which is the
People, and if he neglect to hear the Church, let him become a heathen man; and
what can the Steeple house speak, is this your fore fathers wisdom? It is the
People that has the Title of Church, which he neglects to hear: In Acts the
2. and 47. The Lord added to his Church daily such as should be saved, and what
was this adding to a Steeple house, was this your forefathers wisdom, your
learned men? he added to the believers who were the Church, not a Steeple house
Act. 5.11. Great fear came on all the Church: Is this your forefathers
wisdom, that great fear came on the Steeple-house? No, it was the People that
was the Church fear came upon, that have the title of the Church.

Acts the 8. and 1. Great persecution was against the Church, what great
persecution against the Steeple house is this your learned men's wisdom? It was
the People that was persecuted and not the Steeple house.

Acts the 11. and 26. Where they assembled themselves together with the Church,
what is this your forefathers wisdom that the Steeple-house could assemble
with the Elders? Nay it is the People that assembled with the Apostles and
Elders.

Acts the 14. and 23. They ordained Elders in every Church, that is they
ordained Elders in every Congregation, he does not say they ordained Elders in
every Steeple-house.

And when they came together and gathered the Church together, then they
declared what God had done for them: what is this the wisdom of your
forefathers that they gathered the Steeple houses together, and rehearsed to
the Steeple house what God had done for them? nay this was before the Steeple
house was, it was the People the Apostles gathered together which had the title
of a Church and not an old house.

And the Apostles were brought on their way by the Church as they passed their
journey Acts the 15. and 3. what is this the wisdom of your learned men and
forefathers that the Steeple house could bring the Apostles on their way? No,
it was the People had the title of a Church who brought the Apostles on their
Journey, for the Steeple house cannot go. It pleased the Apostles and Elders
with the whole Church to send chosen men etc. Is this the wisdom of your
forefathers that this whole Church with the Apostles and Elders is a Steeple
house? Nay it was the People that were the Church, the whole People.

Acts. 18.22. When the Apostles had landed in Cesarea and gone up and saluted
the Church: What was it the wisdom of your forefathers that he went and
saluted a Steeple house? Nay it was the People that he saluted and gave the
title of a Church to.

Romans 16.5, Paul says greet me to the Church that is in thy house: so here
you may see the Church was in the house; and that it was the People that was in
the house and what is this the wisdom of your forefathers, that the Apostle
bid them greet a Steeplehouse. Cor. 1 and the 4. The Apostle said I teach in
every Church, that was in every Congregation, he does not say every Steeple
house.

Cor, 14. and 4. He that prophesi^th ed^fieth the Church. Is this the wisdom of
your Clergy and fore fathers, that he edifie^ the Steeple house? and are you no
wiser then they? this prophecy was among the People which edified them, who
had the title of Church.

In the Church (the Apostle says) I had rather speak five words with my
understanding, then ten thousand in an unknown tongue; and this was in a
Congregation of People who were called the Church.

Seek (says the Apostle) that you may excel to the edifying of the Church:
What is this the wisdom of your Fathers that the Steeple house should be
edified? No it was the People that was to be edified who were the Church.

And the Apostle says, when the whole Church comes together to one place and
all speak with tongues etc. Is this the wisdom of your forefathers that a
Steeple house should gather together and speak with tongues, and an unbeliever
should come into a Steeple house and think the Steeple house was mad? This was
the People that was the Church and were gathered together and spoke with
tongues.

The Apostle faith the Spirit of the prophets is subject to the Prophets, and
God is not the author of confusion but of peace, as in all the Churches of the
Saints. This was in all the congregations of the Saints, he does not say in all
the Steeple houses. The Church is the pillar and ground of truth, and truth
were before Steeple houses: And is this the wisdom of your fore fathers that
the Steeplehouse is the pillar and ground of truth? the Church is the body of
Christ which he is the head of.

The Apostle says the Churches of Asia salute you. Is this the wisdom of your
forefathers to say the Steeple Houses salutes people? No it is the people of
Asia which have the title of Church, that Christ is head of does salute the
Brethren. And the Church which is in their house 1 Cor. 16.19. This contradicts
you and your Fathers, for if the Church were in their house it was not the
Steeple house, but the People met in their house, who had the title of Church.

Ephesians. 1.22. Christ is the head over all things to the Church, which is his
body, what is this the wisdom of your forefathers? is the Steeple-house Christ
body? No it is the People.

Ephe. 3.10. The manifold wisdom of God might be known by the Church. And what
is this your forefathers wisdom that the manifold wisdom of God should be
known by the Steeple house?

Ephesians. the 5. the Church is subject to Christ. And is this your fore fathers
wisdom to say it is the Steeple-house? No it is the People that is subject to
Christ not an old house.

Christ loved his church and gave himself for his church, what did Christ love
the Steeple-house and gave himself for it? No it was for the People.

That Christ might present to himself a glorious Church, without spot or
wrinkle, holy without blemish, and what is all this put to the Steeple-house by
the wisdom of your fore fathers? what does Christ present the Steeple-house
without spot or blemish or wrinckle.

The Lord cherishes his Church, what are you wiser then your forefathers? is
it a Steep'e-house he cherishes.

Col. 1.18. Christ is the head of the body the Church. And what is he head of
the body of your Steeple-house? Nay this church which is the body is the People
and not the Steeple-house. Col. 4.15. Salute the Brethren of Laodicea and
Nymphas and the Church in his house; Mark here again the church was in his
house which was the People, and the Steeple-house was not the church, neither
was to be saluted.

These. 1.1. 2 These. 1. Paul and Silvanus and Timotheus unto the church of
Thessalonica, which is in God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. And what is
this the wisdom of your forefathers, are the Steeple Houses in God the Father
of Christ? No it is the People and children of God which be in him, which have
the title of church.

Philemon 2. To the Church in thy house, Mark here again it was in Philemons
house, and not his house nor the Steeple-house, it was the People.

Heb. 12.23. To the General Assembly and Church of the first borne which are
written in heaven. Is this the wisdom of your forefathers to say the
Steeple-house is the firstborne, the general Assemble written in heaven? Nay
these were the Saints born of God the Assembly of them written in heaven, who
had this title of the Church.

1 Peter 5 13 The Church, which is at Babylon elected together, salute you. Is
a steeple house elected together to salute the Saints? is this the wisdom of
your forefathers it is not the wisdom of our forefathers the Apostles, for
the Elect are the Saints.

Ioh. 3.9. I wrote unto the Church and. What did John write unto a Steeple
house? nay it was the People, it was the Saints.

Acts the 8 and 38 the Church that was in the Wilderness, what was it, the
Steeple-house that was in the Wilderness? no it was the People that was in the
Wilderness the Assembly of Gods People.

Acts the 8. Now there were certain Prophets in the Church at Antioch: That
was, the Prophets was in the Congregation, which was the People.

1 Cor. 6.4. who are the least esteemed to be set up in the Church to Judge of
outward matters, this was in the assemblys of the righteous who had the title
of a Church before a Steeple-house was.

1 Cor. 11.18. When ye come together in the Church etc. This your forefathers
might think was coming together in the Steeple-house, nay, this was before your
Steeple house was hallowed by the Pope, coming together was the People in the
Congregation.

Cor. 12.28. God has set in the Church Apostles and Teachers and Pastors etc.
That was in the Assemblyes of the Righteous, which was the People which was
before the hallowed Steeple-house was.

Col. 4.16. The Epistle was caused to be read in the Church, so that was among
the Assembly of the Saints, which was before Steeple houses were.

Ephe. 3.2. Unto God be glory in the Church by Christ Jesus throughout all
Ages, world without end; The Steeple Houses were not in all ages, but it was
the People that were in all ages, which had the title of the Church.

Acts the 8. and the 3. Saul made hayock of the Church, what was it the
Steeple-house Saul made havoc on? is this the wisdom of your sore fathers?

Acts the 11.22. Tidings came to the Ears of the Church at Jerusalem, what
has your Steeple-house Ears which you call your Church? are you no wiser then
your forefathers yet? Tidings came to the Ears of the People, of the Saints
which were titled the Church.

Acts the 12. 1. Herod the King vexed certain of the Church,this was not
certain of the Steeple Houses but certain of the Saints.

And Prayers was made without ceasing of the Church, this was not prayers made
of the Steeple Houses without ceasing, but of the Saints which is the Church.

The Apostles was brought on their way by the Church, Acts the 15. and the 3.
That is, they were brought on their way by the Saints, and not by the
Steeplehouses.

And Paul called the Elders of the Church of Ephesus, not the elders of the
Steeple house, but the Elders of the Saints.Acts 20.17.

Phebee a servant of the Church not servant of a Steeplehouse but servant of
Saints, who was before Consecrated Steeplehouses were.

Paul says Gaius mine host and the whole Church Salutes you, this was not the
whole Steeple house that did salute, is this your forefathers wisdom? but
this was the whole Saints, which had the Title of a Church.

Cor. 1.14. That you may excel to the edifying of the Church, this was not to
excel to edify a Steeplehouse but the People is called a church.

1. Tim. 3.5. Paul says to Timothy how that he should take care of the Church,
what is this your forefathers wisdom that Paul said that Timothy should take
care of a Steeple house? No it was of the People.

Heb. 1.12. Christ said he would sing praises in the midst of his Church. That
was in the midst of the People and not in the midst of a Steeple-house.

James the 5. and 14. Let them call for the Elders of the Church etc. that was
for the Elders of the Saints.

Diotrephes which loved to have the pre-eminence did cast some out of the
Church which was rep roved, that was not out of the Steeple house, for it was
before they were, but it was out of the Assemblies of the Saints Jo. 3. Ep. 10.

Rev. 2.1.8.11.18. unto the Angel of the Church of Ephesus write, unto the
Angel of the Church of Smyrna write, and unto the Angel of the Church of
Pergamos write, unto the Angel of the Church of Thyatira write, what were these
Angels of Steeple Houses, which your forefathers call Churches? No they were
the Saints and People of Ephesus and Smyrna etc.

Rev. 3. unto the Angel of the Church of Sardis, to the Angel of the Church of
Philadelphia, and to the Angel of the Church of Laodicea, what were these also
Angels of Steeple houses, which your forefathers call Churches? No they were
Angels of a Church of People.

Acts the 20.28. the Apostles says take heed to your selves and to the flock,
which the Holy Ghost has made you overseers to feed the Church of God, which
he has purchased with his own blood, are you no wiser then your forefathers
the Papists, that say the Steeplehouse is the Church? and is this the
Steeple-house that they are to feed? For the Apostle says they were to feed the
Church of God; and is it not the wisdom of your fore fathers that say the
Steeple house is the Church? And it was not the Steeple-house they were to
feed, but the People which were the flock of God, Christ purchased the People
with his own blood, not the Steeple-house. 2 Cor. 1. where Paul writes, to the
Church of God at Corinth; he does not write to the Steeple Houses (which you
call Churches) at Corinth but it was to the People.

The Apostle says give no offense to the Church of God, despise not the Church
of God, what was the wisdom of your fore fathers that they were not to give any
offense to a Steeple-house nor despise a Steeple house? Nay it was the People
that they were to give no offense to, nor to despise.

The Apostle Paul said he once persecuted the Church of God, what was it an old
house he persecuted? No it was the People of God called the Church that he
persecuted 1 Cor. 15.9. and in the Galathians he says the same.

Acts the 15.31. The Churches had rest in all Judea and Galilea and were
edified and walked in the fear of God and comfort of the Holy Ghost what was it
the Steeple Houses that walked in the fear of God and the comfort of the Holy
Ghost? And was it the Steeple-house was edified and had rest? No it was the
People of God. Paul went through Syria and Cilicia confirming the Churches,
these was not the Steeple Houses that he confirmed, but the People of God.

Acts. 16.5. The Churches were established in the faith; these were the People
of God, that were established in the Faith and not the Steeple Houses.

Romans 16. The Churches of the Gentiles gave thanks; and is this the wisdom of
your fore fathers? can the Steeple house give thanks? no it was the Saints.

The Churches of Christ salute you, these are not the Steeple Houses salutes
you but the Saints.

1 Cor. 7.17. And so ordained I in all the Churches, that was in all the
Assemblies of the Saints and before your Steeple houses were hallowed and
called Churches.

1 Cor. 11.16. No such custom is in the Church of God says the Apostle, that
was not in the Steeple Houses, but in the Assemblies of the righteous.

1 Cor. 16.16. I have given order to all the Churches, he does not say he has
given order to all the Steeple Houses, which you call Churches by the wisdom
of your forefathers, but not from the Apostles, for this order was to the
Saints, who had the title of Church.

2 Cor. 8.1. The grace of God bestowed on the Churches of Macedonia, this grace
of God was not bestowed upon the Popes consecrated Steeple Houses, but upon the
People, which were before they were that are called Churches.

Whose praise in the Gospel throughout all the Churches, who was chosen of all
the Churches, meaning Titus, he was not chosen of all the Steeple Houses which
you and your forefathers call Churches, but this was the People that had
chosen Titus whose praise was in the Gospel throughout all the Churches, and
Titus was a Messenger of the Churches, he was not a Messenger of the
Steeple Houses that you call Churches, but a Messenger of the Churches before
Steeple houses were. Before the Churches they were "to show the proof of their
Love, that was before the Assembly of the righteous not before the Steeple
houses.

Paul said upon him was the daily care of all the Churches; that was not of a
company of houses which are Steeple Houses, but it was the Saints which are
called Churches.

2 Cor. 12. Wherein you were not inferior to other Churches; that is to other
congregations, not to other Steeple Houses.

Paul writes to the Churches of Galatia 1 Gal. 2. that was to the Saints and
congregation, and not to an old house a Steeple-house.

Paul says in the same Chap. I was not known by face to the Churches of Judea.
Is this the wisdom of your forefathers to say the Steeple-house is the
Church, for can the Steeple-house know faces?

1 These. 2 Cha. 14. for ye brethren became followers of the Church, of God that
was followers of the congregation of the Saints, and not followers of the
Steeple Houses, for the Steeple-house cannot go.

1. These. 2, Paul says we our selves glory in you, in the Churches of God; so
the Churches were the Assemblies of the Saints. For the Apostle did not glory
in men nor in houses as the Apostate Christians have done, neither did they
hallow houses as them that have consecrated houses and called them Churches,
have done, and given the title to houses which belongs to People,

Rev. 1.4.11.20. The seven Churches of Asia are seven Candlesticks, and what is
the wisdom of you and your forefathers to call the Steeple houses which the
Pope has consecrated Candlesticks? Nay, this was the People of Asia the seven
congregations, yea they are called golden Candlesticks, and the Steeple Houses
are not golden Candlesticks, but this Title was given to the People of Asia who
were golden Candlesticks,

Rev. 2.7. for he that has an ear let him hear what the Spirit says to the
Church, this was to the People, for the Steeple Houses cannot hear, for they
have no ears which you and your forefathers call churches, and finds fault
with the Quakers that will not give your house the Saints Title. And all the
Churches shall know " that I am he that searches all hearts and tryes the
reins and this is the Congregation of the People of God, for the Steeple-house
which you and your fore fathers call Churches cannot know that God searches the
hearts and tryes the reins but it is the People must know this.

Rev, 22.16. I Jesus send mine Angels to testify these things unto you in the
Churches, this was to the Congregations of his People, and he did not send them
to the Steeple Houses which you call Churches, for that title belongs to the
Saints, for the Church is flesh of his flesh and bone of his bone, and the
Steeple-house is not flesh and bone: for it is his People that are. Christ's
Church is a Spituall household made of living stones, but so is not the
Steeple-house: it is not living stones nor a Spiritual household offering up
Spiritual sacrifices, and the Church is Christ's Spouse, the Steeple-house is
not Christ's Spouse: the Church is Christ's Bride and and his Wife, but the
Steeple-house is not Christ's Bride nor his Wife, but his People. The Bride
says come which is the Church; but the Steeple house cannot say come, it
cannot speak no more then Baals God. The Church which is the woman she fled
into the Wilderness and was there fed of God 1260 days: Then the witness
prophesied in sackloth and ashes 1260 days: Then the Beast got up having the
Dragons power (and the whore the false Church) and he was to continue 42.
Months 1260 days this time did he set up a wooden and stone house, and called
it a Church when the true Church was gone to the wilderness, and so came up the
wood and stone Cross 300 years after Christ, and then was set up instead of the
fine linen and white, which is the Saints garment, the righteousness of
Christ, then did they set up the Surplice. And again after the judgment of the
great whore should come and the beast the Dragon and false prophet should be
taken, and cast alive into the lake of fire, and the everlasting Gospel should
be preached again to all Kindreds, tongues and People, and the true Church the
Bride should prepare her self and make her self ready for her husband, and the
Man child which was caught up to God should come down again to rule all Nations
with a rod of Iron, and the Marriage of the Lamb should be known, and now the
marriage of the Lamb is come Christ and his Wife which is the true Church,
which he is head of: and flesh of his flesh and bone of his bone, who reigns
over the false Church, so the true Church, the title of Church belongs to her,
she cannot give her title away to a house made with men's hands, the true Church
cannot give an old Steeple house the title of Church, nor worship, who sees
over it and is come to the Church worship which belongs to her self and the
wisdom that was amongst the Apostles: so cannot give a house made with men's
hands the title of the flesh and bones and body of Christ, which is the Church
no more then they can give the title to bread and wine, and say that is Christ
and his body, no more then the true Prophets could give the title of God to
Jesebels baal, so you must never look for us more to give that title to Christ's
body and wife which is flesh of his flesh and bone of his bone to an old house,
for Christ's Church were the Temples of God and his body is set above all those
Temples or Churches which are made with men's hands, as it was in the Apostles
days, so Gods work is set above man's work.

G. F.

POSTSCRIPT
YOur Steeple Houses you call Churches when there is no People in them, this is
as much as to say that the Steeple-house is the People, seeing the People is
the Church; so whether People be in or out you call a house of Wood, Lime and
Stone a Church, which you never read neither Jews nor Heathen did so, for a
Church signifies a Congregation of People, you know: And all the persecutions
ever since the Papists set them up both amongst Papists and Protestants has
been the greatest part of it for not going to the Steeple Houses, which you
call Churches, which are the works of men's hands; which never did the Apostles
nor Christ persecute any for not coming to their Assemblies which was the
Church, and not a house. For what Laws have been made, and Fines since the
Apostles days, and set upon People for not coming to that house you have set up
which you call a Church, which People could not give a house the title which
belongs to themselves: And what persecution has been, and Stocking, and
Prisoning, and Shedding of their blood that have come to declare against those
houses, and the teachers made of men, and testifying that all should b^ taught
of God, and the title Church: belongs not to the house made with men's hands but
to the People, and the other ground is as holy as that ground, for the Earth is
the Lords and the fullness thereof, and so all is made holy by him, and all that
he made was good and blessed, as you may read in Genesis, and so one place not
holyer then another.

And do you not give the some worship to the house of wood and stone which you
call your Church, in putting off your hatts? Yea, and when you go through it do
not you commonly go bare headed all the way through it, though there be no body
in it, and what do you more to them that are in it.

The End.

