Christ's Parable OF DIVES AND LAZARUS, For all Called CHRISTIANS and others To
Consider.

By G. Fox.

Printed in the Year 1677.

Christ's Parable OF DIVES AND LAZARUS, etc.
ALL People in Christendom and elsewhere, consider in your Life time the
Parable of Christ, concerning the Rich Man, and Lazarus the Beggar.

For Christ says, There was a certain Rich Man, which was clothed in Purple
and Fine Linen, and fared sumptuously every Day.

And there was a certain Beggar named Lazarus, which lay at his Gates (to wit,
at the Rich Man's) full of Sores; and desiring to be fed with the Crumbs which
fell from the Rich Man's Table, (to wit, the poor man Lazarus) moreover the
Dogs came and licked the Sores of the poor man.

And it came to pass that the Beggar died, and was carried by the Angels into
Abraham 's Bosom.

The Rich Man also died, and was buried; and in Hell he lift up his Eyes, being
in Torment, and sees Abraham a far off lift up his Eyes, being in Torment, and
sees Abraham a far off, and Lazarus in his Bosom: And the rich man cried, and
said, Father Abraham, have Mercy on me, and send Lazarus (to wit, the Beggar)
that he may deep the Tip of his Finger in Water, and cool my Tongue (to wit,
the rich man's) for I am tormented in this Flame. But Abraham said to the rich
man, Son, remember that thou in thy Life time received thy Good things, and
had thy Pleasure; and likewise Lazarus the Beggar the Evil Things, but now he
is comforted, and thou art tormented.

And besides all this, between us and you there is a Great Gulf fixed (to wit,
Abraham and the Beggar, and the rich man in Hell) so that they which would pass
from hence to you cannot, neither can they pass to us, that would come from
thence (to wit, the rich man, that has lived in pleasures upon the Earth.)

Then he said (to wit, the rich man in Hell) I pray thee therefore Father, that
thou would sent him to my Father's House; for I have five Brethren, that he
may testify unto them, lest they also come into this Place of Torment.

And Abraham said unto the rich man in Hell, They have Moses and the Prophets,
let them hear them (to wit, while they be upon the Earth.

And the rich man in Hell said, My Father Abraham, but if one went unto them
from the dead, they will repent; and Abraham said unto him, If they hear not
Moses nor the Prophets, neither will they be persuaded, though one come from
the dead, Luke 16.

Nor now they that will not hear Christ and his Gospel; and if they will not
hear Christ and his Gospel, they will not hear one that comes from the dead;
So the Christians in profession without possession, are like the Jews that
would not hear Moses and the Prophets, nor one come from the dead.

But the Jews did seek to put Lazarus to death (which Christ had raised from
the dead) because by reason of Lazarus much people were turned unto Christ, and
did believe on him, that Christ had raised him from the dead. They were so mad
against Christ and his Miracles, as they are now against his Light, which is
his Life in the Word.

Now all ye great and rich men upon the Earth, that fare sumptuously every day,
of what sort soever, Jews, Heathens, Turks or Christians, consider the Parable
of Christ on the rich man, who had not Compassion on poor Lazarus; and the rich
man's Kindred nor himself regarded not the Law, nor the Prophets, neither would
they regard one if he came from the dead, to tell them of the Misery that this
rich man was in, when he was in Hell.

Now you that are called Christian and others, that fare sumptuously every day,
that be the rich men, do you regard the poor Lazaruses? Do you regard the Life
and Practice of the Law and Prophets? And do you regard the Life of
Christianity, and the life and practice as Christ and the Apostles command?

But, have you not slighted God's Messengers, and Prophets, and Servants, Sons
and Daughters, and Handmaids that have been moved of the Lord God to warn you
in your life time, of the Torment and Misery of Hell Fire, that this
Hard-hearted Rich Man fell into when he was dead.

And such as have exhorted you who are alive and would have turned you to the
Lord, you have prisoned, persecuted and banished: And do you not think that
your End will be like this rich man's, when he dyed, who went into Hellfire?
And poor Lazarus that he had not Compassion on went into Heaven.

And do you not think, that all these poor Lazaruses, that you have persecuted,
and do persecute, that when they dye, they will not becarried into Abraham's
Bosom? And out of Hell, when there you are tormented, that you will cry like
this rich man in Hell, to Abraham to send one of his poor Lazaruses to dip the
Tip of their Fingers in Water, to cool your Tongues, which are scorched with
the Flames of Hellfire?

But then consider what Abraham's Answer will be to you, you who have received
the good things in your life time, and had your pleasure, and the poor
Lazaruses the evil things.

But Abraham tells you, though he call you Sons, There is a great Gulf betwixt
you and him,; and he cannot come to you, neither can you come to him.

And Abraham will say unto you, Remember, how in your Life Time you fared
sumptuously every Day, and received the Good Things, and likewise the poor
Lazaruses the Evil Things from you, who had no Comfort amongst you.

But now the poor Lazaruses are comforted in Abraham's Bosom, after they are
dead, and after you are dead you are tormented in Hellfire, for all your
Purple Coats, and Gorgeous Apparel, and your faring sumptuously every Day.

And therefore all ye Hard-hearted Rich Men, be warned, and mind the Law and
the Prophets, and Christ and the Apostles, and walk as they commanded; and mind
the poor Lazaruses, and not talk only, if you will escape Hellfire: And this
you must mind in your Life Time, or else when ye are dead ye must go to
Hellfire, and there be tormented, as the Rich Man was when he was dead, and
could not come out to Abraham, nor Abraham could not go to him.

And do you not think that he was a jolly Fellow, while he was upon the Earth,
with his Dogs and his sumptuous Fare, and Apparel in Purple and Fine Linen,
and fared sumptuously every Day?

Now this Parable Christ spoke to the covetous Pharisees, which justified
themselves and derided Christ.

And therefore consider all ye rich men that are called Christians, and others
that do fare sumptuously every Day; and are clothed in Purple and Fine Linen,
that deride that Life that is in Christ, which lights every man that comes
into the World; do you regard the poor Lazaruses, the poor Beggars that lie in
your Gates full of Sores?

And do you consider whither ye must go when ye dye? Do ye think upon this rich
man where he is? and where poor Lazarus is? You that receive the Good Things in
your Life Time, remember now while you are alive; and do not eat and drink
without the Fear of God, to make your selves wanton, lest you be lifted up, and
regard not the poor, and look loftily and disdainfully upon your
Fellow Creatures that be in Misery, lest the time come that you come into
Torment with the rich man, when they are comforted in Abraham's Bosom.

For you hear what Christ says in his Parable, and what Abraham says: Abraham
tells the rich man that is tormented in Hell, that There is a great Gulf fixed
between the rich man in Hell, and Lazarus and Abraham: So that they which would
pass from Abraham to the rich man in Hell cannot, neither can they from Hell
pass unto Abraham, that would come from thence.

So this does manifest, that when the wicked dye, they go to Hell: so there is
no Purgatory, nor middle place, as some imagine: And they in Hell cannot pass
to Abraham, nor Abraham to them, so there is no Prayers that will get them out
of Hellfire.

And therefore consider ye this that fare sumptuously every day, and are
clothed in your purple and fine linen, and regard not the poor, lest the day
of your visitation do pass over your heads, and you do continue in your
Wickedness, and dye in your Sins; for the Wicked must be turned into Hell, and
all that forget God.

For this rich man in Hell cried unto Abraham to have Mercy upon him, and for
him to send poor Lazarus that he might dip the Tip of his Finger in Water to
cool his Tongue; for he was tormented in the Flame in Hellfire.

Now Abraham could show him no Mercy, that was in Hellfire, nor Lazarus they
could not comfort this rich man with as much Water as they could take up on the
Tip of their Finger; so there was no Comfort to be showed to him.

And though Abraham called him Son, this was a Parable to the Jews, who professed
themselves Children of Abraham, and did not do the Works of Abraham.

So this Parable may stand to them that profess themselves Christians, and do
not the Works of Christianity.

And when they be in Hell, what good will all their Riches, and their sumptuous
Fare, and their fine Linen and Purple do them? When they live without Mercy
and Compassion in their Life Time, and without the Fear of God, and go to
Hellfire, and be in Torment when they dye.

And therefore for them to see the poor despised Beggar Lasarus in Happiness in
Abraham's Bosom, and a great Gulf fixed between them in Hell, and the poor that
be in Abraham's Bosom, that Abraham and the Beggar cannot pass to them in Hell,
neither can they pass to them in Heaven.

And therefore what does all your Pleasures, and sumptuous Fare and Aparel
avail you, whose Dogs have more Compassion upon the poor then you in your Life
Time.

Abraham tells you the Reason, how that there is a great Gulf fixed betwixt you
and them, as aforesaid: And therefore remember this in your Life Time, and be
warned, and repent; and while you have Time prize it: This is the Day of your
Visitation, who live in Pleasures and Fullness and Wantonness; despising the
poor, and persecuting the just and innocent; and comforting your selves with
your pleasures, and Things of this World: And nourishing your Hearts, as in a
Day of slaughter, and living wantonly upon the Earth.

And live neither according to the Law of Moses, nor the Prophets; nor
according to the Gospel of Christ Jesus, though they all tell you what Misery
will be your End, yet you will not hear them, nor obey them.

And therefore if you will not hear, neither the Gospel, the Law nor the
Prophets, then hear what the rich man in Hell says to you in his Torment, as
in Luke 16.

For Abraham nor Lazarus could not help him, nor comfort him, nor show him any
Mercy, who had showed no Mercy in his Life Time.

So you may see plainly by Christ's own Words, here is no Purgatory or Middle
Place; but when the Wicked dye they go to Hell, and the just are carried in
Abraham's Bosom with the Angels.

And when this rich Man could get no Hope of any Comfort in Hell from Abraham
and Lazarus, he was so tormented, that he desired Abraham that he would send to
his Father's House; for he had five Brethren, that they may testify unto them,
lest they should come into that place of Torment, to wit, Hell.

And Abraham told the rich man in Hell, That they had Moses and the Prophets,
let them hear them.

So now you have Christ to hear, and his Apostles, and if you do not hear
Christ's Voice that speaks from Heaven, and follow him, who is the Way to God,
the Truth and the life.

Then consider and see if your Way be not the rich man's to Hell, to his place
of Torments: But i^ it not your Principle to say, that there is no hearing
Christ's Voice whilst you are alive hereupon the Earth?

Oh! Therefore be warned, and be serious, and consider your latter End; and now
you have Time, prize it, ^est you say, you had Time, when it is past.

For if you do not prize your Time whilst you are upon th^^ Earth, Christ
tells you, you must go to Hell: Nay, though you call Christ Lord, and say, you
have preached in the Streets, yet, if you be found workers of Iniquity; though
you may have preached Christ's Death and Resurrection, and prophesied in his
Name, yet, if ye be found workers of Iniquity, Christ will say unto you, Depart
from me, I know you not; go ye cursed into Everlasting Punishment, prepared for
the Devil and his Angels.

And though you may say as many Prayers, as the babbling Pharisees did, three
times a Day, and call Christ Lord, and do not the Things which he commands, he
tells you, Ye shall not enter into the Kingdom of God.

For Christ tells you, It is those that Do the Will of his Father, which is in
Heaven, that enter into the Kingdom of God.

And therefore do not vex, nor quench, nor grieve the Spirit of God, which is
given unto you, to instruct you to shun the Ways of Sin and Evil, and
Pleasures, which lead to Hell,

And do not hate the Light, which Christ has enlightened you withal, that
shines in your dark Hearts, which would given you the Knowledge of your lost
State; and of your Sins, and of Christ that saves you from your Sins.

And do not walk Despitefully against the Spirit of Grace, nor turn it into
Wantonness; which Grace of God that brings Salvation, has appeared unto all
Men, to teach them, and to bring them Salvation.

I say, To teach you to live soberly, and godly, and to deny all
Unrighteousness, and Ungodliness, which leads to Hell.

And if you do hate the Light, and quench his Spirit, and walk Despitefully
against the Spirit of Grace, and turn it into Wantonness; God and Christ will
be clear of you, when you are condemned to Hellfire, and in it roar.

For, what could God do more for you, who sent his Son to dye for you, and sent
his Grace, which has appeared to all Men to teach them, and bring their and
your Salvation; and poured out of his Spirit upon all Flesh, and his Son has
enlightened every man that comes into the World; and he bids them Believe in
the Light, that they may become Children of the Light.

And sent his Apostles and Disciples into all Nations, To preach the Gospel
unto every Creature freely, as they had received it freely; and yet you to hate
his light, and quench his spirit, and resist it, and turn his Grace into
Wantonness, and not obey his Gospel, but persecute his free Messengers of it;
and so not do the Thing which God and Christ command; but live in Pleasures and
Wantonness, and despise the poor, and persecute the just; How can you expect
any other End, but this rich man's in Hell?

And acknowledge that God and Christ were Just and Merciful all your life time
to you, before he gave you up to your Hearts-lusts, which you walked after, who
resisted his Grace and Spirit, and his Servants and Messengers, that admonished
you, within and without.

Now if any should imagine, that by giving Means unto Priests, that they can
pray your Souls out of Purgatory, or Middle Place, Abraham and Christ tell you
no such thing; but tell you, you cannot come to Abraham, nor Abraham unto you,
when you are dead and in Hell.

And therefore be warned in your Life Time; for There is no Repentance in the
Grave, it must be in you Life Time, and before you go to the Grave: for, As the
Tree falls, so it lies, as the Scripture tells you; therefore consider this
while you be alive.

The 7th Mo. 1676 G. F.

THE END.

