CAROLVS GVSTAVVS King of Swethens, Goths, and Vandalls, great prince of
Finland, Duke of Esthonia, and Carelia. Lord of Ingria. and Crowned Ano Dom^:
1654.
P S excudit
portrait of King Carl X Gustav of Sweden

THE HISTORY Of the Troubles of SUETHLAND AND POLAND, Which occasioned the
Expulsion of Sigismundus the Third, King of those Kingdoms, with his Heirs
for ever from the SUETHISH Crown.

WITH A CONTINUATION OF THOSE Troubles, until the Truce, An. 1629. As also, a
particular Narration of the daily Passages at the last and great Treaty of
Pacification between those two Kingdoms, concluded at Stumbsdorff in Prussia,
Anno 1635.

CONCLUDING WITH A BREIFE COMMEMORATION OF THE Life and Death of Sr. GEORGE
DVGLAS Knight, Lord Ambassador Extraordinary from the late King of Great
BRITAIN, for the Treaty above mentioned.

Faithfully couched by J. FOVVLER, Secretary to his Lordship for that Embassy.

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Roycroft for Thomas Dring, and are to be sold at the
George near Cliffords Inn in Fleetstreet, 1656.

Collegium S. S. et Individuae Trinatatis in Academia Cantabrigiensi


TO HIS HIGHNESS THE LORD PROTECTOR,
MY LORD,
THE remembrance of having read, that a Great Emperor was once graciously
pleased to accept of an Apple from the hand of a poor Peasant, has encouraged
me to the presenting of the ensuing Discourse unto your Highness.

As that Prince was (doubtless) induced to daign the reception of so slight a
Gift from (...) mean a Giver, not for any merit either in the Person or
Present, but by the conjecture he made of the dutiful affection wherewith it
was Offered; so, I am willing to hope that, the boldness of this address may be
the more excusable, in regard, the like affectionate duty is, in the most of
submissiveness, herewith tendered.

Your Highness has moreover (I humbly conceive) a Peculiar right hereunto, as
being the sole adaequate Parallel to the famous Princes of the Gustavian Line,
mentioned in the following Narrative; for if they were great in Arms, which
none can deny, and that their Heroic Actions have rendered their Memories
renowned to Perpetuity; Your Highness Name is certainly engraven in Characters
indeleble upon the never decaying Pillars of immortal Fame, whose Trumpet has
sounded your more then Admirable Successes, unto the most Remote Regions: Nor,
is Caesar's Veni, Vidi, Vici, less illustrated by your Highness Pourtraict
than it was by his Statua.

As Victory did constantly accompany the Second and great Gustavus whilst
living, and attend him even in death, contrary to that observation of the
famous Marquess of Malvezzi, That the death of valiant Leaders is the loss of
Battles; So, it is truly affirmed, that whenever your Highness has led on
your Forces, your Foes have as often fallen before you, and the most Numerous
Enemies that have ever hitherto dared to look you in the Face, have been
always constrained to turn their backs: Neither can the most black-mouthed
Detraction gainsay this Truth.

Your Highness has one Advantage more, which was not by Providence permitted
unto that Great Monarch; in that by the Protection of the All-mighty, you live
to reap the Fruit of your Labors, in Praising the God of your Salvation.

May your Highness, Religiously and Magnanimously, still go on to do
worthily in this our Judah, and to be famous in our Israel; and after a
continued Series of Glorious Tryumphs here below, remain Tryumphantly Glorious
above in the Mansions of Eternity.

So craving Pardon for this Presumption, I rest In all humble Obedience At your
HIGHNESS Command, J. FOWLER.

THE PREFACE OR ARGUMENT To the ensuing DISCOURSE.
THERE is nothing new under the Sun, says the wisest of Kings. This, as it is
in it self a certain truth, so it is not more evident in any thing then in
the Stupendous alterations which History in general does manifest to have
happened in Kingdoms and Commonwealths, even from the Flood; the
recapitulation whereof would not only outswell this bulk, but likewise tire
the Reader, whose curiosity therein may be elsewhere abundantly satisfied.

Many in England may perhaps think, that the Changes we have seen of late
years among our selves admit of no President. The Pages ensuing will show
otherwise; and that what has been done of late times in this Nation, has been
in great part formerly presented upon Foreign Stages; yea, within the memory
of Men yet living, if diligent Scruteny were made into the Actings in other
Regions, and wherein they have come short of Ours, it may seem, by their
published expressions, that they regretted the overslipping of oppertunity. The
subsequent Discourse is a Narrative truly Epitomized out of the Public Acts
of the Suethes: The passages of the Pacification ensuing, with other Germane
Occurrences of those times, are no less faithfully annexed.

The Method used is, First, A breife mention of Polands exaltation from a
Ducall to a Regal Government, An. 1000. with a particular deduction of their
Kings from the time that Jagello, great Duke of Lithuania (in the right of his
Wife) was there Crowned; whose merits toward that Kingdom are still celebrated
by the Polanders, and whose Descendants have constantly swayed that Scepter
(until this present) for the space of two hundred sixty nine years: The
interposition of Henry Duke of Anjow, afterward King of France, the third of
that Name, usually styled Henry of Valois, only excepted.

The next thing presented is a like deduction of the Kings of Suethland (much
more ancient then the other in the Title of a Kingdom) from the time of Magnus
Erickson, surnamed Smeeke, in favor of whom and of his Posterity the Suethish
Crown (always formerly Elective) was rendered Hereditary by a general Act of
Union at Varburg, An. 1343.

A more strict Hereditary Union is next exhibited in the Reign of Gustavus
Erickson (the Deliverer of his Country from the slavery of Strangers) and the
same confirmed and corroborated by the whole States of Suethland, An. 1544. in
whose Race that Scepter has ever since remained and does still continue. Nine
Crowned Kings have (within the third degree) descended from his loins, Viz.
Erick, John, and (harles, his three Sons; Sigismund the son of John (King of
Poland and Suethland) Gustavus Adolphus the son of Charles; the late Queen
Christina of Suethland; Vladislaus and Casimir, the sons of Sigismuna,
consecutively Kings of Poland; and the present King of Suethen, Carolus
Gustavus, great Grandchild to the forenamed Gustavus Erickson, as being the
son of the Princess Catherine Daughter to the foresaid Charles, who All act
their parts in the Scenes of the ensuing Narrative.

The Marriage of John forenamed, then Duke of Finland (afterward King of
Suethland) with a Royal Virgin of the Polish Jagellonian Race, and the
Election (by virtue of that Alliance) of Sigismund their Eldest to the Regal
Chair of Poland, with his Coronation in Suethland after his Fathers decease,
follows next in order.

The dissensions afterward arising between King Sigismundus and his subjects
of Suethland are mentioned: His taking up Arms; Their opposition and raising
of Forces, under the Conduct of his Uncle Charles (then Duke of Sudermannia,
etc.) by them Parliamentarily Constituted Governor of Suethland, is
demonstrated.

The heads of the several Letters which passed between that King and his said
Uncle in that conjuncture (and even when the Armies of both sides were in the
Field, and in sight of each other) are touched: The Kings bad success; the
accord ensuing between them, with his Retreat into Poland, contrary thereunto,
set forth: Contents of their subsequent (as well as preceding) Acts of
Parliament, inserted: Their renouncing of Fidelity and Subjection to him and
his Heirs for ever, with their exaltation of the forenamed Duke Charles unto
his Nephews Throne, manifested: The Wars (thereupon) between them (with
advantage to the Suethes) and upon other intervenient occasions, a Truce
mediated and concluded for six years, An. 1629. hinted.

That Truce near expiring, a second Treaty being set on foot, An. 1634. for a
final Peace or longer Truce, and the latter for six and twenty years, assented
unto by both Parties the year following, the daily passages thereof are
faithfully couched.

Lastly, A breife Commemoration of the Ambassador; who, from England, did
Mediate that Truce: A touch likewise of sundry (as aforesaid) Emergencies in
Germany (relating to Englands and the Protestant Interest there in those times)
not unnecessary for the better understanding of Passages referring, as well to
the said Treaty, as to the Ambassadors Person and Death, wherein sundry
occurrences not usual may be observed, with a cursory mention of the now
Reigning Princes of Suethland and Poland, and the present posture of affiares
in those Nations, conclude the Triple Narrative.

SUETHLAND AND POLANDS TROUBLES; Preceding, Causing, and Ensuing the Expulsion
of King SIGISMUND the Third from the Crown of SUETHLAND.
The Rise of the WARS between Suethland and Poland.
THE Crown of Poland (as also that of Suethland, until of latter Ages) has
ever been and still is Elective; and albeit not near so ancient as the other
(in the Title of a King(...) yet at present, not of consideration inferior to
most in Christendom; the same being the only Bulwark in those parts against the
incroaching power of the insulting Turk, and his Blood-hound the numerous
overrunning Tartar.

Unto the time of Boleslaus (sur-named) Chrobrus, that Country was governed
sometimes by Dukes, otherwhiles by Palatines: But Otho the Third, the Germane
Emperor (who in the year 997. first instituted the College of Electors for
the choice of future Successors to the Imperial Crown) after an expedition by
him made into Italy, undertaking a Journey into Poland to visit the Tomb of S.
Adelbert, and being there Magnificently received and entertained by the said
Boleslaus, in requital thereof, and to tie him in the more strickt Bonds of
Amity Poland erected into a Kingdom, An. 1000.
toward himself and the Roman Empire: Of Duke, styled and Crowned him King of
Poland, about the year of Grace 1000. After whom the said Title continued by
the space of 82. years, unto the time of Vladislaus the first, who abandoned
the same, using only that of Prince, or Duke; in which frame the Government
remained for the term of 213. years, at the end Settled elective, An. 1295.
whereof, Lescus Niger deceasing (and the State, distracted into diverse
Factions, being for some time without a Prince) the supreme Rule was at last
electively settled upon Primislaus (surnamed) Posthumus, who resumed the Title
of King. An. 1295.

That Royal Title has been (ever since) retained by his Successors, yet not
fully established until the Reign of Casimir the second, styled the Great,
after whose death his Nephew Lewis, King of Hungaria (son to Charles King
thereof, by Elizabeth, Sister of the said Casimir) succeeding electively to the
Regal Chair of Poland, deceased without Heirs Males, and Mary eldest Daughter
of the said Lewis, being chosen Queen of Hungaria; Heduigis the younger was
elected to the Crown of Poland, and married unto Jagello, great Duke of
Lithuania, who Commencement of the Jagellonian Race in Poland.
in contemplation of the said Match and the Crown of Poland, whereunto he was
thereby advanced, became a Christian in the year 138^. by the name of Vladislaus
the fifth, and wrought so with his Subjects the Lithuanians, as that they also
embraced the Christian Profession; and likewise united his said Duchy of
Lithuania, with Samogitia, and that part of Roxo^ania which was under his
obedience, unto the Crown of Poland for ever. To which three conditions he was
obliged by the Articles of his Marriage.

The first was forth with, the second soon after effected, albeit not without
reluctance, as may be conceived, where a Lithuania Christianized.
People is rooted and thereby become obstinate in Idolatry.

The third point, the Union, was yet more hard to compass and took more time
of deliberation, neither was it fully accomplished until of latter years. For
the Princes of the Race of Jagello (who after him succeeded to the Crown of
Poland) being unwilling to deprive their Posterity of their Hereditary Estates,
and to submit the same to the election of the Polanders, least being
pre-termitted therein, they might remain deprived of their ancient Patrimonicall
Rights and Dignities, deferred the fulfilling thereof from one time to another,
alleging that the States and people of Lithuania would not consent thereto, as
apprehending future prejudice by that Conjunction.

But at last, seeing that of the one side their Princes Males began to fail (as
they did in the time of Sigismundus Augustus) and on the other part
apprehending the power of the Russians, and the renewing of former pretensions;
the Lithuanians condescended to the Union, in the Reign of the said
Sigismundus, Incorporated by union into Poland.
who procured that the Lithuanian Bishops, the Palatines and a certain number
of Castellans should have Session and Vote in the Parliaments of Poland at the
election of their Kins, and all other Privileges which the Native Polonians
have, whereby the Rights of the Lithuanian Princes to their Patrimoniall Estates
might seem secured.

It may be generally observed that in those Elective Kingdoms, In Kingdoms
elective, regard usually had to the next in line.
regard is had to the next in right line, unless known to be unfit and unworthy
of so great a Power, as is apparent in Hungaria, Bohemia, and Suethland (before
the same became Hereditary) in Denmark also, and in Russia most usually, and at
present is and has been practiced in Germany since the time of Charles the
fifth.

By virtue of this regard to the Progeny of well deserving Princes, the
Jagellonian Posterity has continued successively elected to the Crown of
Poland, ever since his death, about 137. years, under the Reign of six Kings;
Viz. Vladislans the sixth, his Son; Casimir Son to the said Vladislans, John
Albert Succession of the Jagellonian Race in Poland.
second Son of Casimir, (the elder being pre-termitted by reason of his
embracing the Crowns of Hungaria and Bohemia) Alexander the third Brother, and
these two dying without Issue, Sigismund fourth Son of the said Casimir
succeeded, and to him, his Son Sigismundus (the second sur-named) Augustus the
last Prince of the Issue Male of Jagello, who deceased about the year 1573.

After him was chosen Henry of Valois Duke of Anjow, second Son to Henry the
second King of France: The only mere stranger to the blood in all the Catalogue
of the Polish Kings, who secretly deserting that Crown and Kingdom (upon notice
of the death of his Brother Charles the nineth) conveyed himself privily into
France, where An. 1574. he succeeded by the name of Henry de Valois, his Reign
in Poland not during one whole year.

Sigismundus Augustus had left (albeit no Sons to whom that Crown might accrue)
two Sisters, of whom Anne the elder was wedded to Stephen Bathor Prince of
Transylvania, an unequal Match, her years (much exceeding his) considered. He
was thereupon chosen King of Poland, An. 1579. having been also recommended to
that Crown by Amurath the third, then Emperor of Turkey, which administered
occasion to the proud Sultan of boasting that he had given the Polanders a King.

During the Reign of Sigismund Augustus, John Duke of Finland, Alliance (the
Iniation of conjunction) between Poland and Suethland.
brother to Erick King of Suethland had been sent into Poland to treat a
Marriage between his Brother and Catherine the second Sister of the said
Sigismund; but upon his Brother Ericks mean and unworthy matching with another,
himself espoused that Princess in the year 1562. by means whereof Sigismundus
(their firstborn) being descended from the Jagellonian Regal Race was (upon
the death of Stephen) preferred before all the other Candidates (as the Duke of
Parma, the Archduke Ernest of Austria, the Wayvode of Transylvania, and his
Kinsman the Cardinal Bathory) to the Scepter of Poland, and was there Crowned
during the life of his Father John, who (having seized his Brother King Erick,
whom he kept in Prison until his death) then reigned in Suethland, as will
appear more particularly, when the Suethish Princes of the Gustavian Race shall
be deduced, which now follows in order to the matter in hand.

Suethland according to Bureus (a Native there) is a most Suethland an ancient
Kingdom.
ancient Kingdom, the people whereof issue from that Scandia, or Scandinavia,
comprehending the two Northern Countries of Suethen and Norway: Ancient Writers
have called the same the Shop of Nations, and some have termed it the Magazine
or Storehouse of People, for from thence flowed not only those Warlike
Suevians, Normans, Vandalls, but likewise the Terrors and Tamers of the World,
the Stock or Race of the (homebred Goths and Suethes, the) Visi-gothes, or
Westro-gothes, and Ostro-gothes, who having penetrated into sundry Realms, and
wearied out not a few of the Europaean Kingdoms with often renewed Wars, seated
themselves at last in Spain, where they continue (even hitherto) their Empire.

Gothland (if I may use the words of Johannes Magnus) seated between the
Suethes and Danes, too mighty and scarce ever well agreeing Nations, fearing
least if the same were infested by both, it should be constrained to an
unequal defense, did enter into a perpetual conjunction of Amity and Society
with the Suethes, either in regard of their Potency, or the conformity between
them of dispositions and manner of living. Thus far he.

Jornandes (according to Bureus) writes, that Rudolphus King of Scandia
leaving his own Kingdom, went into Italy to visit Theodoricke a King of the
Goths there, and was (as says the said Bureus) the 85. King of the Suethes.
It is likewise apparent (say their Authors) that the Goths were in Graecia and
Thracia before the time of Alexander the Great, whom he pronounced were a
people to be shunned. They were also (before the birth of Christ) a terror to
the Romans, by means of whom they dared not to extend their bounds beyond the
Danubius. And even the Romans themselves, not concealing the Military virtue of
others, that they might extol their own, have recorded to posterity how the
Visi-gothes and Ostro-gothes had like a deluge overflowed other Nations, under
their several Princes, the Theodorick's, Attalarick's, Totila's, Tesa's,
Radagir's, Alarick's, Attulph's, Sigerick's, Villia's, Roderick's, and other
like cognominations.

The same Author says further, that from the time of the first introduction of
Monarchy amongst the Suethes, both the Nations, viz. they and the Goths were
subject (mostly) to one and the same Prince, and became as one and the same
people; and howbeit that sometimes (through emulation) they might have distinct
Princes, yet those breaches were seldom long lasting, but they re-peiced and
renewed their former concord, with mutual force opposing each others enemies:
Neither may it seem unworthy of recordation that the Goths, who were so famous
amongst all Nations for warlike fortitude, as (in a manner) they became
formidable to most in Europe, did nevertheless so far submit unto the
Suethes remaining in their Native soil, that (as the most ancient Laws of the
Westro-gothes affirm) the power of electing or rejecting a King for both those
peoples remained unto those of Suethland.

Alphonsus Carthaginensis does also assert the same; saying, albeit the Goths
did many times divert to other parts and people, their Rulers who had the
government of the whole Nation remained in Scythia; now what that Scythia is,
Rodoricus Sancius does explain; saying, that Isidorus and other writers agree,
concerning the original of the Goths, that they are of the Island of Scandia,
to wit, Scythia Septentrionalis. And A. Kranizius, treating of Suethen, in his
first Book and first Chapter, comprehends the sum of those things which were
performed by the Goths, after the time of Alexander the Great, in these words:
The renown of the Goths in remote Military expeditions was great, and famed
with most losty Titles, for that in contestation with the Romans (then most
Masters of the known world) sometimes repressed they rested quiet; but other
whiles, they afflicted the Romans with greater blows, and not seldom retired
on equal terms: And at last, treading the Roman Empire under foot, they
overspread Italy, and having sacked Rome, kept there their Kingdom many years:
They infested Gaul; laid the foundations of their Monarchy in Spain, and
have from thence derived a Stock of most noble Families of Princes. So far he.

Wolfgangus Lazius relates, that out of those Septentrionall Islands many and
great Bands went frequently toward their people, the Visi-gothes who had
planted themselves in France, and the Ostrogothes seated in Illyrico and Italy;
yea, that before the destruction of Troy, sundry of the Goths being as then in
Thracia, several Colonies removed toward them; Nor were those expeditions
undertaken constrainedly; but they, allured with the success of their
Compatriots in foreign parts, and with the fame of their exploits, did
emulously flock unto them; which being observed by the then Kings of Suethes
and Goths, Laws (for preventing the utter desertion of the Original
territory) were there enacted, that no persons abandoning their native soil
should retain any inheritance therein; and that (in regard of the uncertainty
of the death abroad of such as so removed, and for avoiding the intricacy of
contention between their nearest of blood) he, who so departed, should be
reputed as dead from that very hour, and his nearest kinsman possessed of the
inheritance: And therefore it seems not consentaneous to reason that the
Original Seats should be subject to the extraneous Goths, for if the Kings of
that people who warred abroad, had retained a power over them that remained in
the Ancient and Paternall Soil; they would not, probably, have permitted that
they who marched under their Standarts, and with them underwent the dangers and
uncertainties of foreign Warfare, should have been dispossessed of Suethland
anciently elective.
their Inheritance at home.

But leaving these things, it is evident from their Authors, that the Suethes
have anciently been an elective Kingdom, and free to choose either a Native or
Stranger to possess the Regal Chair; with this Obligation enjoined, that the
King (who ere he were) should defend the Multitude committed unto him from
injury and violence, and should endeavor the enforcement and observation of
their Laws, ancient Customs, rightful Constitutions and Privileges, according
to the received custom in all well regulated Nations: Notwithstanding which
freedom of Election, they always made choice of the Son to succeed the Father,
where they found the Rays of Virtue corresponding to the Royal Dignity, as
being conformable to the Laws of Suethen, and the continued Annals of that
Regions History.

The truth hereof may appear by the Royal Progeny of Ericus Sanctus, whose Son
Canutus obtained the Regal Wreath; of King Suercherus also, to whom his Sons
Charles and John succeeded; after them Ericus Balbus, the Nephew of Ericus
Sanctus, by election ascended the Royal Chair, next whom Valdemarus Nephew to
Ericke (last named) by his Sister and Birgerus that Illustrious Prince of the
Ostro-gothes, obtained the Scepter, which was afterward swayed by his Brother
Magnus (sur-named) Ladulas: Birgerus the Son of Magnus was next elected; and he
(ejected for Cruelty and Fratricide) was succeeded by Magnus Erickson (his
Nephew) surnamed Smeek. Virtue and beroick Actions to be preferred to a Crown
before all other pretensions.


The Suethes, as themselves assert, have always esteemed that (beyond the
Proximity of blood, pretense of hereditary right, or utilitie of friendship)
Virtue only and Heroic Actions were worthy of a Crown. This freedom of
Sufferages or Votes in the election of their Kings, flourished amongst them
many Ages, even until latter times, wherein they (not moved with the wind of
Levity (to use their own words) but induced by the strickt Law of necessity,
having first at Strengnesia upon the sixth of June, 1523. proclaimed, and
afterward at Vpsall, on the eighth day of January, 1528. Crowned Gustavus
Ericke Son (sprung from Illustrious Ancestors, and Suethland of elective
rendered hereditary.
worthy of the Regal Charge, as having freed them from the Tyranny of
Christierne the second, King of Denmark) did at Orobrogia, the fourth of
January, 1540. by an Act of hereditary Union of their whole Senatoriall
College, with a numerous Circle of the Equestriall Order, assume his Heirs
Males (from the first to the last) into a right of Succession: which Act was by
the universal States of Suethland, assembled in Parliament, confirmed and
established at Arosia, the 13. of January, 1544.

Thus of Elective, the Crown of Suethland became hereditary: Neither did their
Rulers thereby obtrude ought of new (or never before practiced) upon that
Nation, but followed the stepts and examples of their Ancestors: For about 200:
years before, the whole Orders of that State, had bound and obliged themselves
(almost in the same manner) to the forenamed Magnus Smeeke, and to his Sons
Ericus and Haquinus, under such limitations and conditions as are contained in
the heredirary Union made at Varburg in Holand, An. 1343: whereunto the Curious
are referred.

Yet for the better comprehending of what has been said, Succession of
Suethish Kings from the time of Magnus 4. surnamed Smeeke.
we will deduce the Succession of their Kings from the said Magnus (the fourth
sur-named) Smeeke; who having (in his own time) conferred Norway upon his
second Son Haquinus, was, after the death of Ericke his eldest, to whom he had
designed the Crown of Suethen, ejected by the practices of his Nephew Albert,
Duke of Meckleburg.

But by the forenamed Bureus, this Magnus is taxed of contempt of things
sacred, of libidenous lust, and inhumane cruelty, deserving the name of a
Spoyler of the Public: And that he, not brooking the co-partnership of his
Sons, which he had seemed to desire, had caused to attempt the murder of his
Son Ericke, who, the Traitor being suppressed before he could perpretrate the
Fact, was soon after poisoned by his Mother Blanca (or Blanch) a French-woman:
Magnus being not long after taken in Battle by his second Son Haquin King of
Norway, yet soon freed, fled into Denmark: He intercepted the Duchess of
Holstein his Sons betroathed, and obtruded upon him Margaret of Denmark, and
whilst he prepared greater Forces, he thundered out Proscriptions against the
Suethish Nobility.

Albert Duke of M^ckleburg, Son of Euphemia, Sister of the said Albert of
Meckleburg:
Magnus, was by the proscribed Peers (in prejudice of Haquin King of Norway)
elected to the Crown of Suethland, in the year 1363. but being afterward
vanquished, An. 1387. by Margaret Queen of Denmark and Norway; the Widow of
Haquin forenamed, after seven years detention (desirous to regain his liberty)
to her he resigned the Kingdom.

Margaret Queen of Denmark, Suethland, and Norway (by Margaret of Denmark and
Norway, Queen also of Suethen.
some styled the Semiramis of Germany) having united the three Kindoms under
her Sovereignty, caused an Act of State to be passed in Calmar, for a
perpetuation of the said Union to her Successors, the Laws and Privliedges of
each Kingdom reserved entire: She is by the Suethes taxed of extreme
covetousness and of breach of promise; hated of them, she departed into
Denmark, having by threats and terrors obtained the Kingdom for her Nephew
Ericke, a youth of fourteen years of age: It was she, who being admonished not
to commit the Forts of the Kingdom unto Strangers, contrary to her agreement;
replied, Keep you those Our Covenants the best you can, We will take care for
the securing of the Castles.

She (being dead) was succeeded by Ericke Duke of Pomerania, E^icke of
Pomerania.
in the year 1411. by virtue of the said Union, and of his Adoption by the
forenamed Margaret, being the Son of her Sister Ingelburgis: He Reigned over
the three Kingdoms, but was expelled from them all by a strong faction, as some
say; Others (as the forenamed Suethish Author) that enleavened by his Aunt, he
was a Violater of promises, an Extirpator of the Nobility by extraneous Wars
and unseasonable tempestuous Navigations, a Spoyler at home: He had for
Antagonist, Engitbert a Prince, elected out of the Nobility of the Dalicartes,
and he being bereaved of life by Danish treachery, Carolus Canutus was
appointed Governor of the Kingdom. He fled into Denmark and (there also hated)
attempting a return into Suethen, seized on Gothland, from thence infesting the
Aquilonian Navigators with Piracies: At last besieged by Carolus Canutus, and
distrusting the Danes, he retired to his ancient Inheritance and rest when he
had Reigned from his Coronation fourteen years, this happened, An. 1433.

Christopher Count Palatine, and Duke of Bavaria in title only, Son of another
Lady Margaret, Sister of Ericke forenamed, promoted Christopher Count Palatine.
by the endeavors of the Danes, and their exceeding commendation, was (not
without much reluctance) consented unto by the Suethes, in the year 1442. His
laudable beginnings, by dessention and mutual supplantings, changing to worse;
he prepared by craft to have surprised Lubecke, but in vain, for suffering
Shipwreck on the Suethish shore, he was necessitated to quit the design of
attempting upon the Vandalian Cities: His libidinous desires were by divine
Justice punished with Famine and a Plague through the Kingdom, himself having
lost by Sea the treasure he exported from Suethen, deceased in Denmark without
Issue, An. 1448.

Carolus Canutus, the Governor forenamed, after a vacancy Carolus Canutus.
of some years (albeit not of the chiefest of the Nobility) was by the great
Ones, who disdained an extraneous Yoke, Crowned King, An. 1458. He subdued the
Norwegians, and sorely vexed the Danes then waging War: The people, moved by
the insolency of his Commanders (the Archbishop of Vbsall sounding the
All-arme) make insurrection, and whilst Charles retired to Dantzig to crave aid
of the Polish King, they call in and Crown Christierne of Denmark. In the mean
time Catillus (Nephew to the Archbishop) Prelate of Lincopia, turning
Soldier, gathers Forces from several parts of the Country, and expels all
that favored Christierne: and having defeated himself in a memorable Battle
given upon the Ice, he recalled Charles out of Prussia, who recovered the
favor of the people, and placed over them more mild Governors; and finally,
full of Honor both for his Virtues and his Reign, deceased An. 1470.

After Charles, some place the forementioned Christierne, called in by a
Faction of the Suethes, but soon again ejected, and the Kingdom governed for a
time by Marshals: yet he, by promises drew the Norwegians to his subjection.
After him, his Son John King of Denmark and Norway, in An. 1458. was received
(say they) by the Suethes, whom the Russians then overpowred; but their turn
served, they forthwith expelled him, returning to their former Government by
Marshals. And lastly (they name) Christierne the second, the Son of John. But
Johannes Magnus, omitting the three last named (whom he esteems but as Usurpers
or Kings of a factious Party) accounts of none but of the three following, who
ruled under the notion of Princes only.

Steno Sture, Sisters Son to the forenamed Charles, having totally Suethland
governed by Steno Sture.
routed Christierne the first, who had brought a Navy and an Army to the Gate
of Stockholme, compelled him to desist from attempting upon Suethen all his
time. He likewise repressed his Son John, who had entered the Kingdom, and was
Crowned by faction, at such a time when as Suethland was infested by the
Russians, and that Emulation had sprung up between Steno and Suanto. Afterward
conducting the Queen of Denmark (whom he had taken) into Smaland, to her
Husband King John, at a Feast, he contracted sickness, whereof he died in the
year 1503. and of his Government the thirtieth: A man of most eminent Virtues,
yet (by this) the more eminent, in that he refused the Diadem when offered unto
him.

Suanto Prince of the Ostro-gothes, a Counselor of the Kingdom, Suanto.
was constituted Prince or Governor of Suethland: He confederating with the
Lubeckers, waged War with Christierne the second, the Son of John, who seemed
to be now desired by many, against whom whilst he made greater preparations, he
departed this life, An. 1512. and of his rule the eight. A man endowed with
most choice Virtues, liberal and free from praevious severity.

Steno Sture the younger, the Son of Suanto, prudently evaded Steno Sture the
younger.
the Traps and Snares of Christierne the second, by sending Gaddus Bishop of
Lincopia and Gustavus Erickson to the Parley desired by the Dane: But whilst he
valiantly opposed Christierne who had invaded Suethen with a new Army, he was,
in a most violent conflict, slain with a great shot, and the Suethes being
Slain in battle.
(by his fall) discomfited, Christierne was received by the Nobles of the
Danish Faction, and Crowned, and on his very Coronation day and Feast, beheaded
the chief of the Nobility, whom he conceived to be averse unto him; for which
outrageous cruelty he was expelled the Kingdom the first month of his Reign,
being in the year 1520.

But let it not seem tedious that here be inserted what that excellent
Historiographer Thuanus has written more fully concerning these three
forementioned Danish Kings, Christierne the first, John his Son, Christierne
the second, the Son of John, who had each (by faction or otherwise) been
Crowned over Suethland.

Christierne the first (the Stock of the ancient Regal Race Christierne first
Earl of Oldenburg, made King of Denmark, after of Suethen.
of Denmark being extinct, was (from the Earldom of Oldenburg) advanced to the
Scepter of Denmark, by the Suffrages of that Kingdoms Senators; but chiefly by
the recommendation of his Uncle Adolphus, Duke of Holstein: Sedition arising in
Suethland, and Carolus Canutus their King being forced to withdraw himself,
Christierne was called in (by the faction of John Benedict Archbishop of
Vbsall) and constituted King, from thence came the Danish pretensions to the
Crown of Suethland. John (his Father being dead) held the Kingdom of Denmark
thirty and two years; and he also (Steno the elder, who had succeeded John King
of Denmark and Suethen, driven out by Suanto.
his Uncle Canutus, being rejected) was by the tumultuous Goths elected King,
but soon after driven out, and being in many Battles defeated by Suanto, who
through the favor of Heningius Gaddus, the stout Lincopian Prelate, was
substituted to Steno, he betook himself into Denmark.

Suanto dying in the City of Arosia, a Prince of so eminent Virtues as not to
be equalized by many: his Son Steno Sture the younger, after many contentions
(as being opposed by Ericus Trollus of the Danish faction) was by the Senators
of the Kingdom (the fresh memory of his Fathers merits prevailing) ordained
King. Two years after the death of Suanto, Christierne the second, succeeding
his Father John in Denmark, resolved to pursue by Arms the revenge of those
great defeats his Father had sustained, and the pretensions of right to the
Crown of Suethland, which he derived by succession from his Father and
Grandfather.

Steno, being (as he thought) confirmed in the Kingdom, became corrupted by the
counsel of flatterers, doing many things amiss, and the minds of the Peers
being alienated from him, he lost liewise the love of many of the people: The
Dane observing this, and conceiving it to be very advantageous to his
pretenses, raises a great Army, and therewith begirt Stocholme the Regal City;
yet upon the approach of Steno he raised the Siege: But when, by reason of
contrary winds, he could not in three months time transport his Forces back,
being oppressed with extreme want of all things; from Steno, who endeavored to
merit and obtain his friendship, he received supply and permission to retire
securely with his Army into Denmark.

This exceeding humanity the Dane recompensed four years after, with as great
(and detestable) ingratitude and treachery: For pretending to a Parley with
Steno, when but little wanted that he (unwarily) had adventured his person into
his Enemies Ship, he (finding himself frustrate of that hope) carried away
Gaddus and Gustavus Erickson (sent by Steno to treat with him) Prisoners into
Denmark, contrary to his faith given.

Christierne having thus exhibited a notable testimony of a Treachery of
Christierne 2: of Denmark.
violated faith, gave in the year following, no less demonstration of cruelty
and treachery at once; for falling upon Westro-gothia with a much greater Army
then before, a Battle was fought upon the congealed Balticke, wherein Steno
wounded in the thigh with a great shot forthwith died: And the General being
slain, the numerous Army of the Suethes was immediately routed. Christierne thus
victorious, was received by the Nobles of his Faction, and dignified at
Stocholme with the Regal Crowned King of Suethland.
Diadem, and on his Coronation day (fearing least in his absence the Children
of Steno might be again restored to the Kingdom by the Princes of the adverse
party) the City Gates being shut, he caused the chief of all the Orders whom he
had invited His inhumans cruelty.
to the Feast (to the number of ninety four persons) to be beheaded (the people
gazing and trembling) and commanded the dead Carcasses to be left (for the more
horror) three days before the Court gate: Even the body of Steno, not long
before committed to the Earth, was by order of this new Tyrant again dug up,
and with the rest consumed by fire. Last, the Widows and Children of the
Murdered were bereaved of their Goods.

This done, he departed from Stocholme when he had exercised various cruelties
upon many: The Suethes upon the rumor of this Fact, gathering in Arms to the
number of 30000. he, Andexpulsion.
through Woods and unwonted Paths conveyed himself away, yet more by night
then day Marches, and hardly at last returned into Denmark, where cruelty by so
many slaughters, being changed into his nature, when he could not abstain from
satiating his Salvage thirst with the blood of his own; he was Warred upon by
his Uncle Frederick Duke of Holstein, and those of Lubecke: And his conscience
being terrified, he with his Children and his Wife, the Emperors Sister, fled
into Zealand, the third year after the Stockholmian butchery, which was An.
1523. Thus far out of Thuanus.

Gustavus Erickson of Illustrious extraction, escaping out of Gustavus Erickson
crowned in Suethland, An. 1528
the hands of the Dane, did under pretense of soliciting the Affairs of Steno's
Widow, marry with the Daughter of Steno, and by favor of the Princes, assisted
also by those of Lubecke, attained the Vacant Royalty; but the more easily in
having through many personal hazards (as is by the Suethes acknowledged)
vindicating his bleeding Country from the forenamed unparalled Tyrant, and
was not only (as has been said) proclaimed at Strengnesia in the year 1523.
and Crowned at Ubsall, An. 1528. but had the Crown also entailed upon his
Hereditary union, with motives thereto.
lawful Male Issue at Orobrogia, in the year 1540. which Act of the
Senatoriall College, and the Equestriall Order was confirmed at Arosia, in
January 1544. by the whole States of Suethen assembled in Parliament.

Other Motives there were inducing them thereunto (declared by themselves) as
the future avoiding of those cruel dissentions and contests with the
Senatoriall College, had many times fallen into about the Election of this or
that man; of a Native or Stranger, as affection or interest suggested, and
power was prevalent, to the unutterable prejudice of the Commonweal, by
intestine Seditions, Sanguinolent effusions, and multitudes of other mischiefs
tending to the ruin of the Nation, but more particularly since the time of
Magnus Smeeke, in whom sailed the Progeny of the ancient Suethish Kings, as may
be (by what has been already said) observed.

Further reasons (given by themselves) for their so gratifying this deserving
Prince, were his freeing that Kingdom from the horrible darkness of Romish
Superstition, and being the first who (to use their own expression) sent down
from Heaven, brought them into the light of the divine Word: Neither was he
less careful of the Kingdoms Laws and Statutes, and of introducing the best
ways of Policy; yea, that night and day he studied the good and Emolument of
his Subjects by animadvertancies into, and contrivances for their Tillage,
Structures, and other Rural advantages, from which they derived plenty of
profits, and do therefore record his Providence and Paternall care, with
extraordinary testimonies of praise and thankfulness. Nor do they acknowledge
him to have been less industrious (howbeit to his own excessive toil) in
searching out the Metal Mines, wherewith Suethen abounds, or of inventing means
for the more easy gaining of them, as artificial Fabrics, poised Engines of
immence weight, useful Aquaducts, and other beneficial Mountaneous Works: As
also in erecting (throughout all Suethland) of Workhouses, or houses of
Correction, for vagrant and idle people: Neither did his care extend only to
things present, and which might occur during his own time, but even to those
that might befall his dear Country, when his Princely Spirit should have
forsaken its earthly Mansion.

To which end, that he might timely obviate all disturbances in the Kingdom,
but especially to decline the Seeds of contention from his Children; He framed
a laudable and most Christian Will and Testament, which he imposed strickly as
a rule, not only to his Posterity, but even to all the Orders and His Will and
Testament.
States of the Kingdom; The bounds whereof they were not any way to exceed: The
scope of the said latter Will, was, that his Children and the whole States of
Suethland should preserve, worship, and zealously maintain, the honor and
service of God and his most holy word, even to their utmost, in that manner in
which himself by Divine assistance had settled the same, without mixture of
humane traditions; and this they were to observe as they hoped for Heaven, or
desired to avoid the loss of eternal blessedness: He admonished his Children
to continue in mutual fraternall affection, and each to rest contented with
his condition: As also faithfully, diligently, and by all ways and means, to
procure the Weal of the Kingdom and people, to study and embrace Peace and
Concord, to avoid and (like Poison) detest the Pest of Suspicion, with those
other mischiefs (dissentions, tumults) which like a Torrent flow from that
Fountain.

Last, he exhorted his Sons, that neither by themselves nor any other, they
should procure or permit the limits of the Kingdom (which had been bounded with
much blood of their Ancestors) to be in the least sort diminished, but rather
to enlarge, and with all their industry, power and might continually de^end the
same; With such zeal of affection toward the good of his Country, was this
most excellent Prince transported: And therefore (say the Suethes) they could
not but account them for bruits, and unworthy to be numbered amongst the Sons of
men, whom such Ardour of Royal Benevolence, did not inflame to some grateful
compensation toward so true a Father of his Country and his Posterity.

For the reasons before alleged, the States of Suethland, to the end, so large
and various benefits might remain in perpetual memory: and in some measure to
testify their thankfulness for the same, did in their forementioned solemn
Assembly at Arosia, unanimously ordain and decree, that so soon as this
Incomparable Gustavus should be translated from this Vale of misery to the
Mansions of Eternity, his eldest Son should sway the Scepter, and after him his
firstborn, and so, that Designment of the Succession.
whole Line successively: And that, if it should so happen that the eldest Son
should depart this life without heirs Males, then the second Son of this great
and good Gustavus should ascend the Royal Chair, wherein also his lawful Male
Issue was to succeed so long as any of them should survive: but the Male
Posterity of the second likewise failing, the third, and (in the like case) the
fourth of the Gustavian Virill Race were in the same manner to inherit,
according to the Prescript tenor of that Act, whereunto the curious are
referred.

There have been the more particularities used in setting down the last Will
and Testament of this deserving Prince, because we are now entering, as it were,
upon the Threshold of those differences that for so many years caused a vast
expense of blood, and Inundations of other Miseries between the two flourishing
Kingdoms of Suethen and Poland, and the rather, because (as the Suethes affirm)
the breach of most, if not of all the heads of this Testament, gave beginning to
those differences by causing the expulsion of his Grand child, Sigismundus
(King of Poland, with his whole Posterity for ever) from the Crown of
Suethland, which also gave birth to the promised Treaty of Pacification.

This Royal Gustavus Erickson (of whom it may be said, His Wives and Issue.
that to his Subjects he was like a second Titus, the delight of mankind)
after thirty eight years of a most laudable Reign, changed the same for one
more glorious, upon the third of the Calends of October, 1560. By Catharine,
Daughter of Magnus Duke of Saxony, he had Ericke who succeeded him in the
Kingdom. His next Consort was Margaret the Daughter of Ericke Abraham of
Loholme Knight, Governor of the Westro-gothes, who brought unto him John Duke
of Finland (afterward King of Suethland) Katherine, whom he married to
Echardus Earl of Frizeland; Cecilia, who espoused Christopher Marquess of
Baden, Magnus, Duke of the Ostro-gothes; Steno, who died a Child, Anna, wedded
to George Joannes, Count Palatine of Rhyne, and Duke of Bavaria; Charles who
forthwith deceased, Sophia married to Magnus Duke of Saxony, Elizabeth Wife
unto Christopher Duke of Meckleburg, and Charles Duke of Sudermannia, Nericia
and Wermelandia; his last Wife was Catharina daughter to Gustavus Olaus of
Torpa, Governor of Westro-gothia, by whom he had no Issue.

Ericke his eldest succeeded and was Crowned, An. 1561. He Ericke his eldest
succeeds.
for sometime waged strong War with the Danes and Lubeckers, and not only
incurred the hatred of his Neighbors, but provoked also the dislike of his own
Subjects. He married so meanly (say the Suethes) as was not only to the
dishonor of his Crown and Race, but likewise to the contempt of his Nobility,
whose extirpation he endeavored, and the perpetration of that horrible Tyranny
at Vbsall, by the wicked counsel of others, and his own naturally malicious
disposition.

John, Duke of Finland, to whom the ways of Ericke were little pleasing,
having (as has been said) married the Princess Catherina, younger Sister to
Sigismundus. Augustus King of Poland, and was thereby allied unto the
Jagellonian Family, (whose merits toward that Crown have been already
mentioned) had lent unto his Polonian Brother the sum of an hundred thousand
Rix-dollars, for which he received (in pledge) certain Forts and Governments in
Leifland, and so returned to Revalia in Finland, where he was by his Brother
King Ericke, (who out of a suspicious nature made a sinister construction of
Duke John's actions, as intended for a Confederacy with the Polander and the
Dane against him) oppressed with cruel War, and himself with his Wife and
Family taken at Abo, a Town in Finland, and brought to Stocholme, where he was
publicly accused, many of his Familiars executed; four whole years Taken and
imprisoned by his brother.
he was under restraint, but afterward set at liberty, and the year ensuing
(the chance of War being turned) he seized upon his Brother Ericke, whom he
kept incarcerated until his death. This happened in the year 1568.

Duke John having thus disthroned his elder Brother, was John Duke of Finland,
King of Suethland.
with great applause, and the unanimous consent of the Peers, and all the
Orders of Suethland, declared King, and Crowned An. 1569. He likewise waged War
with the Dane, but with the Muscovite both cruel and long. Toward the end of
his Sigismund his eldest elected King of Poland, and crowned there 1588.
Reign, his Son Sigismundus descended by his Mother (as has been showed) from
the Jagellonian Race, was elected King of Poland, and there Crowned, An. 1588.
Not long after, viz. An. 1590. The former Orobrogian and Arosian constitutions
for hereditary Union were renewed in favor of Sigismundus and his lawful
Heirs Males, and they failing in the like to his Brother Prince John, which
also failing, Charles Duke of Sudermannia, Nenicia, and Wermelandia, was, with
his Male Posterity to succeed.

At this Convention there passed also an absolute exhereditation King Erickes
Posterity expelled by Parliament.
of the Children of the late King Ericke, and all his Posterity, for the
reasons before expressed.

John followed the same Profession (in point of Religion) as did Gustavus his
Father, which was that of the Evangelicall or Augustane Confession: And albeit
his Son Sigismundus (instructed by his Mother) had secretly embraced that of
Rome, yet did not the Father decline from the Augustane, but constituted his
Brother Duke Charles (who was strongly Lutheran) as a pledge to the people,
that therein no innovation should be made, having by Testament appointed him for
Governor over them, until the return of Sigismundus from Poland.

King John, as he observed his Fathers Testament in matter of Religion, so he
was no less sollicitous, that the Sueth^sh Dominion should receive no
diminution by his Sons accession to the Polish Crown; and to that end he
strickly enjoined Earl Brake and Ericus Sparre, whom (at the instance of the
Polanders) he had sent as Ambassadors to treat and conclude about his Sons
Inauguration to that Kingdom, not to consent to ought that might tend to the
prejudice or impairing of Suethland, as by their instructions dated at Vastena
the fourth of May, 1587. may appear, whereunto the Curious are referred.

This Prince having Reigned three and twenty years, or therabouts, changed his
mortal life in November, or December, An. 1592. His memory is celebrated by
the Suethes, for many benefits conferred upon their Nobility and the people in
general, and for freeing them from the rigid and cruel government of his
Brother Ericke, with the tyranny which other persons (under him) did exercise
over them; for which in the forecited convention (at Stocholme) 1590 they not
only confirmed Hereditary union renewed.
the former hereditary Unions, in favor of his and the forementioned Princes,
Heirs Males (as has been showed) but further also enacted that if the Nobler
Gender of the Royal and Ducall Line should totally fail, the eldest of the
unmarried Females of the same should succeed unto the Crown, Assumption of
Females, Male Issue failing.
each in order according to their birth: And that they would not enforce or
obtrude upon them any Husband against their own will and consent; nor admit of
their alliance with any People, Kingdom, or State that were at enmity with or
sought the prejudice of the Suethish Nation, but rather endeavor to match them
with some One (who should be acceptable) of the Princely Families of Germany,
descended from the Illustrious Gustavian Race, unless the same were prohibited
by proximity of blood: And that they would provide the other Regal and Ducall
Daughters of Dowries corresponding to their Dignity: Conditionally that they
also should not contract Matrimony either with Forraigner or Native, except by
the approbation and consent of the States of Suethland.

His first Wife (as already said) was Katherine, second Daughter to Sigismund
the first, and Sister to Sigismund the second, His Wives and Issue.
Kings of Poland, whom he married, An. 1562. and had by her Sigismund (the
third of that name King of Poland and) King of Suethen, also one Daughter the
Princess Anna.

In second Bed, he wedded Gunila, the Daughter of John Axell Bielke of
Heresetter Knight, Governor of the Ostro-gothes, in the year 1585. who brought
unto him John, hereditary Prince of the Kingdom, and (afterward) Duke of
Ostrogothia, who in the year 1612. took to Wife the Illustrious Mary, daughter
to the forenamed Duke of Sundermannia, etc. but then King of Sueth and, by the
name of Charles the ninth.

Thus far has been for the deduction of the Polish Kings from Boleslaus
Chrobrus the first, but more particularly from (Jagello, or) Vladislaus the
fifth of that name, King of Poland; as also of the Suethish Princes from Magnus
Smeeke, but chiefly from Gustavus Erickson, the Liberator of his Country from
extraneous bondage, and the Founder of his Family. and likewise of the alliance
thereof with Poland, with the conjunction of both those Crowns in the person of
the last named Sigismundus, elected in Poland, hereditary of Suethen, Crowned
in both, which was promised at the beginning of this Narrative. The disjunction
and dessensions ensuing thereupon between these two Crowns, follow next in order
to be handled.

It will not (nevertheless) be unnecessary (for the better Former grudges
between Suethland and Poland.
understanding of all the differences between those two Potent Nations) to
insert that, before their latter discords, about the expulsion of Sigismundus
and his Heirs from the Crown of Suethland, several grudges and jars had been
on foot concerning certain parts of Leifland; The Polanders and Suethes having
(both) incroached thereon, whilst the same was under the Russian, each catching
at what lay most commodious for them, and not seldom reaving from one another:
Albeit the Polish Authors assert that Joannes Basilides the great Duke (or
rather Tyrant) of Russia, whereunto all Leifland formerly belonged, was forced
to quit the same wholly to Stephen King of Poland, in the year 1588. whereby he
became deprived of the best and richest Country of his Empire (by reason of the
Commerce that Province has in the Balthicke Sea) in which was numbered thirty
four Castles. Notwithstanding which, the Suethes seized on Tolezeburg,
Vdsenburg, Bercholm, As and Est, which they gained from the Russian, and from
the Polander, Revell, and Badis in the Province of Haria, Vitenstein also, the
chief Fort in the Duchy of Gervanlandia, with the Towns and Palaces of sundry
of the Nobility of that Dukedom: To the Duchy of Esthonia the Kings of Suethen
(to this day) entitle themselves. The Polish Forces had in like manner wrested
from the Sueths Karxhaus, Helmeth, Rugen, and Parnaw, a fair and well fortified
Castle and Town joying to the Sea, all of the Province of Esthonia aforesaid.
In the Bishopric of Habsell, the Suethes had gotten both City and Castle being
the Episcopal Seat: Lode a strong Castle, and Lehall both City and Castle were
possessed by their Forces, besides sundry other important places; All which
premised, we proceed.

It has been already said, that King John of Suethen had by his instructions
enjoined his forenamed Ambassadors, that no Alienation of ought belonging to
the Suethish Crown, should be accorded in contemplation of his Sons assumption
to that of Poland, but rather to break off the Treaty: Notwithstanding
Ambassadors stretching their Instructions.
which charge the said Ambassadors did act and conclude sundry things contrary
thereunto; for (say the Suethes) in the third Article sworn unto and signed by
both parties, at the great Parliament, in or near Warsaw, An. 1587. it is
expressly provided, that the King Elect should be bound to incorporate that part
of Livonia or Leifland, which the King of Suethland then possessed, unto Poland
or Lithuania: And the then Queen Dowager of Poland (Aunt unto the said elected
King) was to secure the same by Caution out of her own peculiar Goods, as well
in the Kingdom of Naples and the Duchy of Baresano, Duoano and Foggiano, as
out of her Dowry, and any other goods and Possessions, movable or immovable,
within or without the Kingdom of Poland.

This Concession, which (accordingto the Stipulation of The first complaint of
the Suethes.
the Ambassadors) Sigismund the King Elect, was to sign at his entry into that
Kingdom; the States of Suethen object, as the first breach of the Auitall
Gustavian Testament, and that these Transactions were unknown, and contrary to
his Fathers mind and will, may appear by a Schedule to his Uncle Duke Charles
in his Letter from Calnear, the second of December, 1587: wherein he expresses
to this effect. That albeit some weak hopes concerning Leifland, unwitting to
us and our dear Lord and Father, and without our command or permission, were
given to the States of the Kingdom of Poland; yet notwithstanding the
Ambassadors of Poland present, with those of the lower house, have ingeniously
granted, and by Covenant and Oath have secured Us that no such thing shall be
exacted of Us, as We also have firmly concluded with Our self never to yield
up that which the Kingdom of Suethland has gained, with the blood of many
famous men, besides a notable expense of labor, treasure, and time.

Dated as abovesaid.

And in his first Letter to his Father, after his reception of that Crown,
dated at Cracovia the first of May, 1588. he insinuated the same thing, and
that he had been urged to declare himself in the matter of Leifland; but that
he by the advice of the Suethes (then attending him) had answered in these
words: That this matter should be wholly deferred, thereby to oblige the
Polanders to forbear the importunity he might otherwise have received thereupon;
promising withal (to his said Father) never to grant them any further hopes
thereof, or to do ought therein contrary to his Majesty's mind: And that he had
already told them, he would rather renounce the Kingdom by them tendered unto
him, then alienate ought of the bounds of his most dear Country, purchased with
the blood of so many gallant men of the Suethish Nation.

His Father King John deceasing (as has been said) An. Death of King John.
1592. Charles (his Uncle) Duke of Sudermannia, etc. before named, took upon
him the Government (as next of blood) during the absence of his Nephew. His
first Act was to call to Stocholme, and reconcile to himself, sundry
Counselors of the Kingdom, with others of the Senatoriall Order, who had been
long in the late Kings displeasure, and who had likewise provoked himself: To
them (passing by former Injuries) he granted Letters of security, An. 1592. and
both from the one and other received Letters Obligatoricall, dated January
1593. to join unanimously in Counsel and endeavors for the public good, and
to be in all things assisting and subservient to him the said Duke, reserving
their fidelity and obedience to their lawful hereditary King.

Duke Charles had advertised his Nephew King Sigismundus King Sigismund
advertised thereof by Duke Charles.
of his Fathers decease, by Letters from Stocholme, of the twenty fifth of
November, 1592. and desired his acceleration withal due convenience, to
receive the Crown of his Native Kingdom: The like he did from Vbsall, by Olaus
Suerkerus, the seventh of March following; to him he gave instructions to
assure his Majesty, that he would contain the Kingdom in peace and tranquillity,
and so resign the same into his Majesty's hands: That he hoped likewise and
expected, that his Majesty would maintain his Subjects (of what condition
soever) in the true Religion and Divine Worship, as also preserve inviolably
the Laws of Suethland, with all the Privileges granted by his Predecessors in
each, and all the points and Articles of every of them, with several other
circumstances contained in those Instructions, the whole in thirteen Heads or
Sections.

Not long after, King Sigismundus so desiring, Turo Bielke of Nynes was by Duke
Charles, sent Ambassador into Poland, with Letters and Instructions, dated the
26th of May, 1593. importing as before, preservation of Religion, as
established in the latter times of Gustavus Erickson, and the first of King
John, and as the same had been lately approved and confirmed at a generally
Synod held at Vbsall, the maintenance of Laws and Liberties to great and small,
poor and rich were likewise inserted, and security thereof (with other points
touched in the said Instructions) to be by the Ambassador humbly desired under
the Royal Signature.

The twenty seventh of July following, Ericus Sparre, and Claudius Bierke, were
sent to Dantzig with other Letters, and a Fleet to receive and attend his
Majesty honorably into Suethen.

Sigismundus returned answer by Turo Bielke, referring the Peace to ensue with
the Russian (which had likewise been touched upon in the forecited
Instructions) and the security desired by the Prince and Counselors of State,
in the name of all the Orders of Suethen, until his arrival and Coronation
there, at which time he would confirm to every one freedom of his Religion,
observation of the Suethish Laws, retention of ancient Privileges and
Liberties, not prejudicial to the Regal and Ducal Succession, with all other
things convenient to be secured unto them, under his hand and Seal, and that
the same might be then done much better and more commodiously then at such a
distance. These were dated at Dantzig the eighteenth of August, 1592:

But the Suethes complain in that he gave not present assecuration Second
complaint of the Suethes.
in the point of Religion, and those other things desired in the Ambassadoriall
Instructions, but that (over-passing them) he proceeded on his Voyage; whereby
(say they) he not obscurely discovered, that either he would not give, or not
observe (when given) any such security, especially touching Religion. It was
likewise observed, that the Duke meeting King Sigismundus and his Queen, upon
their landing at the Bridge of Stocholme, after congratulation of their safe
arrival, with a long Oration, did admonish him so to receive and govern his
Hereditary Kingdom, as he might with a good conscience answer before God and
the World, and particularly those of the Suethish Nation: Whereunto the King
gave but small regard, and made but a short reply.

The Coronation time approaching, and the chief of all the Orders repairing to
Stocholme to attend the King to Vbsall, where that Solemnity is usually
performed: They besought him to confirm their Liberties and Privileges: Which
he, whilst there remaining, delayed with uncertain hopes; wherewith the whole
Political and Ecclesiastical Orders being moved, did by Letters and
Emissaries Solicit the Duke to mediate with his Majesty not to procrastinate
longer, but to dispatch those and other Emergent Affairs, lest longer delays
might beget some stop to the Regal Ceremony; and some of the said several
Orders were in the name of the rest, deputed unto his Highness (then at
Gripshold Castle) to request his repair to the Solemnity, and his Intervention
with the King for their satisfaction: Whereupon the Duke by Letters of the
nineteenth of January, 1594. did in most faithful and friendly manner advise
his Majesty, to take the desires of the States into his serious consideration.

King Sigismundus, nevertheless still delayed, until almost the Coronations
Eve, from whence they gathered that he had no propension to their desires,
especially in the matter of Religion, seeing that, notwithstanding all
instances used both by the Duke and Senators, seven weeks were wasted before
ought could be effected, or the Coronation celebrated: Which consumption of
time was chiefly imputed to the obstinacy of Francisco de Malaspina the
Pontificiall Legate, who by injunction from the Romish Prelate, severely
prohibited his assent, but was at last constrained to advise and persuade the
King to grant (unto the States of Suethland) the Assecuration desired, which he
was the rather induced unto, as having (on his Holiness behalf) one starting
hole remaining; to wit, That Faith was not to be kept toward Heretics: which
(say they) was afterward verified; and that King Sigismundus observed no
Covenant contained in his Coronation Oath, or in his Letters of Assecuration.

It is (by them, and not without detestation) likewise affirmed, Criminations
by the Suethes against King Sigismund.
that Sigismundus intending mischief to the Duke his Uncle, appointed some
Ensigns of Heyduckes to lie in wait to murder him; which had been effected,
but that a certain person (Hieronimo Strozzi) discovered the design, and that
this not succeeding, a second plot was hatched to have been perpetrated by
Italians in disguise, by means of a Comedy to have been by them acted (with
naked Swords, a thing unusual) amongst whom was Salvator Fabriz, Author of,
an Actor in that Scene which should have ushered in the fatal Tragedy; and
that this cursed Plot is testified and confirmed by James Tipotius a great
Sectator of the Romish Religion, and not ignorant of the designs of the
Jesuits and Polanders, himself being then at Vbsall. But the Duke by his
absence from those sights (contrary to expectation) prevented the intended
butchery.

Neither (say they) were those Traiterous Counselors, And some Senators.
who afterward induced King Sigismundus to infest his Native Soil with armed
Bands, unwitting of these treacherous devices: But that it was they who did
first blow the coals of this pernicious discord, albeit they kept close
sometime; that so, if the Tragedy had taken the wished effect, they might have
seemed innocent, and with Pilate have justified themselves; but that God of his
goodness by withholding the Event did frustrate their Machination.

They likewise assert (for clearing the Duke from suspicion of ambitious
affectation of the Crown) that even at Vbsall before the Coronation, his
Highness was, by many of the States, not once, but often urged and invited to
take the Diadem; and this ingemination frequently used Your Highness is the
Crown of Suethland tendered to Duke Charles.
only remaining Son of King Gustavus; and as your Predecessor (of happy memory)
appeared a Father and Defender of his Country, so We doubt not, but that your
Highness will advance the Commonweal of Suethen: but from this King
Sigismundus We cannot hope for ought of good. Which desire of theirs, Duke
Charles not only rejected, but like wise frustrated the purpose of certain of
the several Orders, who would have committed the Raynes of the Sovereign Rule
unto Duke John (as then of tender years) who should have been Crowned at the
age wherein he might have Legally secured the Liberties of the Suethish Nation.
Whence (say they) all people of what Condition soever, may easily collect from
what Root these Seeds of discord first sprung: but let us now (with them) turn
our Pen and Sickle to the remainder of these growing Weeds:

They allege also, that it was apparent whereat Sigismundus Further
Criminations.
aimed in bringing such a troop of Popish Priests into the Kingdom, the chief
of whom was the before-named Malespina, who in the Metropolitan Arch-Episcopall
Seat of the Suethes, Goths, and Vandals, did dare to attempt the Crowning of
their King, wherein he was withstood by all the Orders of the Kingdom, but
mainly by Adamus Adracanus Archbishop Elect of Vbsall, who stoutly showed that
it was contrary to their Statutes, and the Laws of Suethland, that any but the
Vbsalian Prelate should perform that Office, and that before the consummation
thereof, it behoved the King to bind himself by Oath to observe those things,
which (in the Augustane Confession were exhibited to the Emperor Charles the
fifth, above sixty four years then past, and likewise) had been decreed by
Gustavus and King John his Grandfather and Father, as also ordered by a late
Synod at Vbsall to be observed in Suethland, where into no Church other then of
that Profession was to be admitted: But that the King (whilst there) might
have a private Chapel in his Palace; Whereupon the Legate interceded that (at
least) with the Evangelicall Religion, the Romish erroneous and idolatrous
Superstition might be tolerated; In prejudice of the Gustavian admonition and
testament, which was not granted.

At last, King Sigismundus (having attempted all means that Sigismund crowned
King of Suethland.
might compass his ends, and they failing) received the Regal Ensigns at
Vbsall, in the year 1594. the forenamed Andracanus Officiating, and Ericus
Sparre Chancellor of the Kingdom, solemnly reciting the form of the Coronation
Covenant, whereby he promised to maintain all persons high and low, Clergy
Obligatory Articles.
and Laiety, in the liberty of the received Religion, to maintain Justice and
Truth, and to suppress Injustice and Falsehood; to pronounce equitable Judgment,
and not to prejudice any in Life, Body, or Goods, unless convicted by the Laws
of Suethen; to govern the same by the advice and counsel of Duke Charles, and
of the Native (not extraneous) Senators: SIGISMVNDVS III. D G REX POL. M: DVX
LIT: RVSS: PRVS: MAS: SAMO: LIVO: NEC NON SVECOR: GOT: VAD HAEREDI: REX The
Most Excellent Prince Sigismundus 3d King of Poland etc. (...)
portrait of King Sigismund III Vasa (Zygmunt III Waza) Into which number, as
also into the command of any Castles, Provinces, or Patrimony, no stranger to
be admitted; to raise no new Taxes or Impositions within the Kingdom, except
necessity compelled: thereby also confirming to the Peers, Clergy, and
Inhabitans of Suethen, all former Privileges, Liberties, and Immunities, and
by all means to procure the public tranquillity and peace. The Clause ensuing
being added for conclusion: This Oath I Religiously promise and Vow to keep to
all His Oatk.
my Subjects, young, and old, born, and to be born, beloved, or not beloved,
present, or absent, no way infringing, but rather consummating the same with
all Regal affection; So God be propitious unto my Soul and body.

He gave likewise Letters Assecutoriall to the like effect, to Letters of
security.
all the States, under his hand and Seal, at Vbsall the ninteenth of February,
1594. wherinto the Curious may make inspection. It being intended here to
mention only the heads of things most necessary to be inserted, in reference to
the ends before proposed.

Contrary to this Oath, King Sigismundus is (by them) Contrary actings
charged to have erected a Popish Church in the Regal City, to which end, he
purchased a Stately Structure of Stone from a stranger there inhabiting: He is
likewise taxed for placing Count Ericke of Visingsborg (a most zealous Adherer
to the Romish Sect) Governor of Stocholme Castle, in which the Regal
Ornaments, with the Records of their Cancellariae, are usually deposited; as
also the Arms, Ammunition, and the great Ordinance of the Kingdom: And in the
Port whereof the main body of their Navy was reserved, contrary to his
forementioned Letters of Assecuration.

To a certain Jesuit, Adam Steinhall by name, he committed the Arcensian
Temple, placing also his Romish Priests in the Queens Island, and in the
Vastenan Monastery, contrary to what he had given under his hand and Seal, to
this effect: That neither in the Ecclesiastical or Political Affairs of that
Kingdom, he would use the help of any person who did not profess the Religion
then generally received in Suethen.

They further argue, that he no sooner returned from his Further Objections.
Coronation to Stocholme, but that he gave the Raynes unto his Polish and other
Romish affected followers, to enter their Churches, and disturb their Service
and Devotions, by tumultuous perambulations in all parts of their Temples, with
loud voices and scandalous Gestures (during their Sermons and other Religious
Exercises) to the great oppression and scandal of minds; yea, to the hazard of
men's lives, branding and reviling them with the name of Heretics, and other
infamous and scurrilous Appellations, insomuch as they were constrained to set
Guards about their Ministers ascending their Pulpits; and complaint being made
unto the King of these abuses, the Plaintiffs were dismissed with reproaches and
contumelious words, no redress at all afforded.

It is moreover objected, that besides extraneous Forces introduced Continued.
at his Arrival, he ordered others to be brought from Dantzig by Ernest
Wejerus, and other Commanders, furnished as to a declared War; whereby Floods of
blood might have over-flowed, if by other weighty Affairs he had not been
recalled and induced to return into Poland: but what he could not then (say
they) effect, he afterward endeavored at the Papal Legatorian instance, when
with a numerous Army he reentred Suethen in the year 1598.

In this manner do they charge King Sigismundus, that he no Hit second
departure from Suethland.
way observed his Regal Oath and Assecuration in point of Religion: after
which he departed the Kingdom (as at first he had done) without the consent and
approbation of the States thereof; leaving behind a Romish affected Governor in
his chief Fort and City, besides several Churches with the Vastenan Monestary
filled with Jesuits and others of that Erroneous Sect, whereby much dissension
a rose within the Land soon after his departure.

Hereupon certain Senators of the Kingdom thought it expedient to write unto
the Duke, signifying the Kings departure, and that they had endeavored to
their utmost, that the weighty Affairs of the Realm might have been settled
before his Exit, several whereof remained yet unperfected: That Duke Charles
sought unto by seem Senators.
therefore they besought his Highness to afford a helping hand with his wonted
Patriotall affection, for the dispatch of things as necessity required. That
touching the form of Government, which his Highness had (by Copy communicated
unto them, to be) desired of his Majesty, no proceed had been made, as he might
happily have understood by Ericke Gustavus one of their number: That the Regal
Ensigns were deposited in the Stocholmian Castle, whereof Count Ericke was
appointed Governor, against whom they had protested in his own presence, and
had entreated his Majesty to ponder the same more maturely: Other things also
were in the said Letter contained, as their most earnest desire for his
Highness speedy repair to Stocholme: These were dated the fifteenth of July
1594. and their requests reiterated by a second invitation of the twentieth
ejusdem.

The Duke returned answer to their first the eighteenth of the same, therein
expressing, that albeit most willing (as by duty obliged) to procure his dear
Countries good, yet the same seemed a work of no small difficulty, the King
having prescribed no direct form of Government, especially in those disturbed
times, wherein the public Treasure was much exhausted the Kingdom obvious to
the inconveniences of a Russian War, and uncertain of obtaining a wished
Peace; the Crown Revenues so diminished (during his Majesty's being there) as
they appeared not a little deficient: That nevertheless he would not be wanting
to afford his utmost of counsel and assistance for the redress of things
amiss, whereunto his Propinquity of blood and maturity of years invited him;
conditionally, that they would join with him for the Weal of his Majesty and
the Kingdom, whereof he desired their speedy resolution and compliance to those
things that for the said ends should be decreed; and that they would not
separate until conclusions were taken concerning the frame of future
Government, to which effect he would (upon their intimation) speedily repair to
Stocholme. These were dated from Nicopia.

In pursuance hereof they again instance unto him, that his Again desired to
assume the Government.
presence was both their hope and expectation, renewing their requests that he
would assume the Government. Promising that they would not be wanting to their
power in Counsel, Assistance, security, and Obedience for the good of the
Kingdom, the glory of God, and the Emolument of the Natives. This was dated the
ninth of August, 1594. and signed by Nicolaus Gyldenstierne, Gustavus Baner,
Turo Bielke, Hogenschildus Bielke, Claudins Bielke, and Gustavus Gabrielis.

Duke Charles thus invited, repaired to Stocholme, where, no The Duke comes to
Stocholme.
sooner arrived, but he cleared the Arconsian Temple, the City, and the Queens
Island, of the Romish Priests, and likewise deprived their great Patron, Count
Ericke, of his Command of the Regal Castle; for he being a strong Promover of
the Papal Creed, was formidable to those of the contrary Profession, by reason
of his power and great Alliances within the Kingdom; His Sister being Wife to
Ericke Sparre the Chancellor: his Aunt married to Claudtus Flemingius
Governor of Finland, and his Uncles, Ericke Gustavus, Aruidus Gustavus, and
Carolus Gustavus, were Rulers and Governors of the Westro-gothes, the
Ostro-gothes, and Smaland, with others of no mean power.

To the former Criminations against their King, they add, Further criminations
against Sigismundus.
that contrary to his Regal Oath, and promise under his hand and Seal, to
protect from injury the Poor, as well as the Rich, he permitted (without
punishment or inquisition made) the Nightly Watches to be abused and beaten:
The Polanders (of his Train) to be day and night in Arms; by whom (with others
of the Natives who delighted in such mischiefs) sundry of the said
Night-watches being frequently murdered, were so found lying in the Streets,
others miserably wounded; yea, even their houses were unsecure from violence:
and notwithstanding complaints were many times preferred, yet no redress was
granted, nor Justice executed upon the Murderers.

Sundry other things to the same purpose, they repeat; as the Concession
(formerly mentioned) of Leisland to the Crown of Poland; as also, the
diminishing of the Navy and Ordenance, to the great damage of the
Commonwealth: And that, unwitting to the Duke or States of the Kingdom; in
prejudice also of the Gustavian Testament, and the Constitutions of Calmar, An.
1587. he had transacted with the Neighbor Princes, touching certain most
weighty Affairs of Suethland; the peculiar Badge or Cognizance whereof he had
alienated, requiring by Ericke Sparre, his Ambassador, a dilation or
prolonging of the compromissoriall transaction about the said Badge; viz. The
three Crowns, which in the year 1591. at the Treaty with the Dane by the River
Flakesiobecke, had been at their earnest and most instant request suspended
until An. 1597: And that Sigismundus (by that Embassy sought to attain by
entreaty from the Dane that which he had formerly (not without much difficulty
and suit) obtained from the States of Suethland, thereby alienating the right of
the Suethes to those three Crowns, the proper and peculiar Badge, and one of
the chief Regalities of the Kingdom, which he ought not to have done.

And this he did (say they) by the persuasions of his said Counselor Ericke
Sparre, the better to compass his hostile intensions toward his Uncle the
Duke, to the notorious breach of the foresaid Testament; the express words
whereof are, viz.

Our dear Sons, not only he, who with his posterity shall succeed us in the
Regal Chair, but the rest likewise of our dear Sons, shall neither by
themselves apart, or with their familiar Counselors, Servants, or Subjects,
attempt, treat, or decide any Affairs wherein the welfare and honor of the
Kingdom are concerned; by concluding of War, Peace, Leagues, or other
Concernments of the Commonwealth, of weight and moment, except by the counsel
and consent of them all, with approbation of the Prime, States of the Kingdom
jointly.

They further objurgate his causing of Arrest to be made at Lubecke (and other
Maratine Cities) of their Ships and Goods, and spoiling them of their said
Goods and Merchandises: And that, some years past (Suethland being afflicted
with a great dearth of Corn, whereby many thousands perished, and the residue
much exhausted, in their Substance) he, by the counsel of Steno Baner, Olaus
Suercherus and Lindormias Bond, severely prohibited those of Dantzig and other
Sea Ports of the Polish Dominion, from administering relief to those of Suethen;
and at the same time enjoyed those of Rivell (albeit incorporated into
Swethland) not to furnish them with any provision, and solicited the like with
other Marine Places belonging to the Romish Empire.

By all these things, they show, that his second departure produced no better
fruit then his first (both being without the privity of the States) and that,
as his first discession, to receive an Extraneous Crown, accasioned a
conceding of Leifeland to the Polander; So, his second left them in a
confusednesse, without any prefect form of Government, contrary to his
promise; which Comedy (say they) was commenced by those Counselors who were
unwilling to be longer ruled by the Gustavian Line, but that themselves might
prevent each other in the domination of the parts, whereby would have ensued
the ruin of the whole.

King Sigismundus (say they) precipitating his departure, Plenipotentiary sent
unto D. Charles.
had sent to his Uncle, then at Nycopia, by Ericke Gustavus and Claudius
Slatte, a certain Plenipotentiarie, importing that, induced by his urgent
Affairs and by his promise, he now intended to repair into Poland; and that, to
the end his Native Country might not be destitute of good Government and
Administration of Justice, until God should grant him a return, he committed
the same unto him his said Uncle, as being a Prince Hereditary, and chief among
the other Orders of the Kingdom, together with others the faithful Senators
thereof, to whom with him this Plenipotentiary was jointly given, to be governed
and administered accordingly; Provided, that in the first and chief place, he
and they should honor and acknowledge him and his Heirs Males (if any should
be) for lawful Heirs and Kings of Suethland: and next to them his Brother John
Prince of Finland, that they should endeavor and by all means procure his and
the Kingdoms good, preventing all prejudice and loss by Mature Counsel, and
Administer the other affairs of the Kingdom with the joint Senatorial consent
and concordall unanimity conform to the Laws of Suethland, that no damage or
detriment might thence redound. But that, they should not celebrate or call any
public Assembly, Prohibition distasteful.
or Parliament, nor upon any occasion make or enact Laws without his special
and express consent, as being agreeable to and demonstrative from the
Reversoriall Letters given unto him by the Duke and Senators: In order whereunto
he commanded all and every the Subjects of Suethland and inhabitants thereof, of
what eminency, degree, or condition soever, to render and perform to his said
dear Uncle (as to the chief in Government) and to the Senators, according to
the state and dignity of each, all due obedience, honor, and assistance in all
things which they should enjoin for the good and emolument of the King and
Kingdom, given in the Port of Elsnaben the eighteenth of July, 1594.

But this Plenipotentiary was by Duke Charles rejected as imperfect, Rejected
as impersect.
and a draught more ample (by Letters from Nycopia of the twenty third ejusdem)
sent to the King for the Regal Assent and Signature, with a Schedule annexed,
wherein his Majesty was desired (in case that Peace intended with the Russian
should not take effect) to consider of some way whereby the Nerves of War might
be supplied; Provisions made of Victual, Ammunition, and other Necessaries
equally incident, which with other particulars mentioned in either, are
referred to inspection into the Original by such as are curious.

But the King was gone, before this answer could be tendered unto him, leaving
Suethland in much disorder: which the Duke considering, and that only a lame
form of power and government was left, and that others were ordained with
equal, yea, greater power both in Suethland and Finland (albeit the same
appeared not until his Exit;) So as almost in every Province some or other did
rise up, boasting himself Governor in the Royal absence, from which Fountain
many misfortunes, mischiefs, and miseries might have flowed: Tumults and
dissentions would have sprung up on each side, to the ruin of the public
Weal, unless timely obviated: for the better effecting whereof, the Duke by the
Senatoriall Consent, indicted a Parliament at Sudercopia against the month of
October, 1595. To which general Convention, the whole Senate and Orders
Parliament at Sudercopia.
of the Kingdoms, Counts, Barons, Bishops, Knights, Gentry, Clergy, Commanders
of Forts and Forces, Burgesses, and common people, did emulously flock to
consult upon the Urgencies of the Kingdom, wherein (they assert) many things
were treated and transacted tending greatly to the good of King Sigismundus and
the whole Nation, if due execution had not been obstructed.

In these Parliamentary constitutions, after thanks rendered to the Divine
goodness, for having (by tolerable conditions) freed them from apprehension of
a long and bloody Russian War, so as being then in Concord with all their
Neighbors, they might more freely endeavor a settling of the like at home
which was their aim in that assembly; they unanimously by virtue of their
respective Provincial Plenipotentiary, and each for himself particularly, did
bind themselves to observe their Oath and promise made to King Sigismundus, in
the points of Fidelity, and obedience, to him and his Heirs: And that whereas
his Majesty at his Coronation, had promised the entire liberty of their
Religion, with exclusion of all other, which was not yet effected, and that
certain of the Romanists had already begun to use threatenings, in confidence of
their increase: They therefore enacted and concluded, that all Conventions
public or private, used by the Papalists or any other Sects, by what notion
soever frequented, should be taken away; their Priests and Preachers banished,
and to depart the Kingdom within six weeks after the rising of that present
Parliament.

That none of the Commonalty of that, or any other Sect, separate from the
Profession there generally received, should be admitted to any Office within
the Kingdom, but all Pensions toward such to be revoked: yet that they, living
peaceably, might still remain and enjoy the Laws, Liberties, and Privileges of
Suethen; but if doing otherwise, either in public or private, to be punished
and exiled as the others were.

That, in reference to the Vastenan Monastery, whereas the Regal Assecuration
did bear that no Scholastic Exercise or Function Ecclesiastical, contrary to
the Augustane Confession, and the Vbsalian Synod, celebrated An. 1593. should
be obtruded upon the Kingdom, or be suffered to impede the received Religion,
but that therein the proceedings should be according to the last year of King
Gustavus (forementioned and the first of King John: Therefore all abuses in the
foresaid Monastery, and the present Incumbents were to be thence excluded.

That (furthermore) whereas the most Illustrious Duke Charles had then, before
all the Orders of the Kingdom, signified that by reason of several notable
defects, represented sometimes Orally, and also in the written Paper then
exhibited unto them, he desired to be freed from the Government, unless those
were removed. They therefore in regard his Highness was a Prince hereditary of
the Kingdom, whom it merely concerned, that the Affairs thereof should be
rightly and orderly administered, humbly desired that his Highness would The
Duke desired to embrace the Government.
embrace the same for the good and emolument of the King and his Successors, as
also of the younger Brethren, and in a word, of the whole Regal and Ducall
Heirs, according to the Acts of hereditary Succession; whereby the Subjects and
Inhabitants of the Kingdom might (in like manner) freely enjoy the Nations
Laws, with their legally acquired Liberties and Privileges: And that whereas
his Highness had consented to undergo the Administration of the Government,
with the Senators of the Kingdom jointly; They (therefore) the respective Orders
thereof, Ecclesiastical and Political, Nobility, and Commonalty, high, and
low, did promise, that to their utmost they would acknowledge and observe his
Highness as their Prince and Governor in his Majesty's absence, and until his
return into the Kingdom; and accordingly render unto his Highness all lawful
obedience, fidelity, and duty, saluting and intitling him the Governor of the
Kingdom: yet no way to any prejudice of the Regal Jurisdiction or Dignity,
conform to the litterary transaction, approved of between his Highness and the
Kingdoms Senators: Wherefore, that what Affairs soever of weight and moment,
relating to that Kingdom, his Majesty should desire to be there expediated;
were first, and before all others to be signified unto his Highness and the
Senatoriall College: But if otherwise, and whosoever he were who should obtain
any Commission, he should have no power of appointing or acting ought in
reference thereunto, before his Highness and the whole Senatoriall Order were
consulted therein, who undoubtedly would thereupon conclude and ordain, so as
might be most conducing to the honor and advantage of his Majesty and the
Kingdom, according to the Oaths and Assecurations alternatively given:

It was concluded also, that no trouble or molestation should accrue to the
King, by seeking or desiring any determination or resolution in Poland
concerning the Affairs of Suethland, in regard his Majesty had not (there)
those persons near him, to whom he might commit the expediting of the Suethish
Affairs; for which cause (they concluded that) all Juridicall Process,
Grievances, and Controversies, should be examined and defined within the
Kingdom, conform to the Laws of Suethland and the Decree relating thereunto,
published at Vbsall, An. 1593. which the King himself had confirmed: And that
they should not be transmitted into Poland, nor that any sentence or resolution
(touching them) should be expected thence, but that if any one thought himself
injured thereby, he might appeal unto the Kings return, whether that any Regal
Sentence given without the Kingdom should obtain execution within the same;
Otherwise no man to be prohibited to repair or seek unto the King about his
private Affairs, or other things lawful and rational, not tending to the
prejudice of any, especially of those who sat at the Helm: Provided, that (as
aforesaid) the Kings Mandates and Writs should be first directed and addressed
unto his Highness and the Senatoriall Order, the execution of them not to be
immediately committed unto any other.

Concerning the Offices of the Kingdom, it was decreed that his Highness and
the Senatoriall College, with the counsel and consent of the chief other
Orders (whom the matter might concern) should as occasion required, in his
Majesty's absence, consider of meet persons, so that such men and Servants
might be preferred to Offices and Charges in the Kingdom respectively, as did
rightly belong and were tied by Oath to the King and to the Commonwealth, and
that special and serious regard were had to ancient and well deserving
persons: As also that none of the Prime Offices of the Nation should be
entirely committed to any one, before the Provincial Inhabitants where such an
Officer was requisite, and any others therein concerned, might have free
Sufferages or Votes, by whom three Candidati or persons elective were to be
named, as the Laws of Suethland (to the observation whereof his Majesty had
sworn) concerning the chief Offices, do in some sort mention, which three
persons elected, were to be signified unto his Majesty, out of which number he
might appoint one whom he best approved of; and if it should so happen, that
the King had no rationally lawful objections against them, and did
nevertheless defer the approbation of some one of them, perhaps not without
detriment to the Kingdom and the Government thereof, his Highness had power to
place one of the three (so elected) in the said Office; yet that no Officials
formerly perferred by his Majesty, should be dismissed, unless lawful causes
were found; whereby upon due inspection and examination, they might appear
worthy of deprivation, neither that any one should be advanced to a greater
Plurality of Offices then he could commodiously, and with utility to the
Kingdom undergo.

These things being by them enacted, the Duke on the other Duke Charles excepts
thereof.
part, did stipulate in these words.

We Charles by the Grace of God, hereditary Prince and Governor of the Kingdom
of Suethland, Duke of Sudermannia, Nericia, and Wermelandia; do promise that we
will diligently (assisted by the Senatoriall Order, as well of Spiritual as
Secular Persons) endeavor to the utmost of our abilities so to manage the
Kingdoms Affairs, as we shall know or conceive to be most advantageous to his
Majesty, commodious to this our most dear Country, beneficial to the Orders
and faithful Subjects thereof, and Emolumentall to all persons: whereby every
one may be maintained and protected in the pure Evangelical Religion, according
to the Augustane Confession, and the Profession of faith instituted at Ubsall,
and agreeable to the Laws of Suethen, and those Privileges and Prerogatives
which each man, conform to his condition, enjoys, and has obtained from
precedent Kings and Governors: As also that we will govern the Kingdom of
Suethen and the Affairs thereof, wholly according to the Oath which his Majesty
at his Coronation at Ubsall, did swear to his Subjects, and did secure unto
them by writing; and as We with Our best and cleerest judgment shall find or
can imagine may be profitable to his Majesty and Emolumentary to the Orders and
Subjects of the Kingdom, as well of the Clergy as the Laiety, even as we
desire, God assisting, to answer for the same before God, his Majesty, and the
(respective) Orders of the Kingdom.

Whatsoever likewise shall by Us, with the free advice of the Senators, which
without any prejudice they may safely communicate, be approved and concluded
(as We will not decree ought in weighty Affairs relating to the Kingdom,
without the Senatoriall Sufferage) We will unanimously maintain and defend,
that the same may be preserved firm and irrevocable, to the present and future
times: And that We will accordingly, All as One, and One as All, profess and
protect the same, if in process of time it shall be needful and requisite.

Lastly, in testimony that We do willingly constitute and approve of this
Transaction, in manner as aforesaid, for the good of his Majesty our most
gracious King; the prosperity of the Kingdom and the Inhabitants thereof, and do
ordain the same to be unviolably observed word for word, according to the clear
literal sense thereof, without prejudice or violation to the Regal Eminency,
and Jurisdiction, and our Oath, as the Laws of Suethen require: We Charles by
the grace of God Hereditary Prince, and Governor of the Kingdom of Suethland,
Duke Mutual agreement.
of Sudermannia, Nericia, and Wermelandia: And We the Orders of the said
Kingdom forementioned, have hereunto affixed our Seals, and subscribed the
same with our hands. And if We, or others present, or absent, who have not
assisted at this Convention (which We are not willing to impute, as proceeding
from pertinaciousness or disobedience) shall refuse to approve with Us, of what
before recited, concluded for the Common good of his Majesty and our Country,
(whereof the Parliament being ended, intimation shall be given to all the
Provinces) and that by previous information and admonition, they shall not
offer or produce any lawful reasons in contradiction hereunto, which they have
free liberty to do; We, certainly will send Messengers unto them, and will hold
them for nonconforming and disturbing Ministers of the Kingdom; and whosoever
shall not adjoyn themselves hereto, if constituted in any of the Eminent
Offices of the Kingdom, We will endeavor to diminish their public Authority
and Power, as We shall judge consentaneous to equity and reason; least the
Kingdom of Suethland, should from thence receive detriment and seeds of
dissension. In like manner they who shall detract or apostatize from this our
general, free, and unanimous Transaction; Whether for favor of great Ones,
peculiar profit, or other causes, under what notion soever comprehended, or
shall refuse to contribute their endeavors hereunto, whereby force, secretly,
or openly may be obtruded by any whosoever, in prejudice of what his Majesty
has given assecuration to the Kingdom, and whereupon this our Transaction is
founded; We shall account them as persons treacherous to the King, and
seditious to the Kingdom, perfidious men, and to their Country Traitors, and
that we will mutually assist each other to their prosecution and extermination.
Enacted at Sudercopia the twenty second of October, 1595:

More particularity has been used in reciting (albeit briefly) the heads of
this Parliamentary Act and its conclusions, then is intended with others the
like; this being that which King Sigismundus (afterward) so much endeavored
the disannulling of, and which the Suethes do so much instance and justify
themselves upon.

In this manner was Duke Charles designed Governor of the Kingdom, which was
no way pleasing to King Sigismundus; King Sigismund, displeased.
(suspecting the like) had severely forbidden all men the repair to that
Convention, and afterward endeavored the frustration thereof, by discouraging
and diverting the observances requisite, and partly by Letters Patents, partly
by threatenings, by promises and rewards, he drew sundry to his party.

But the States of the Kingdom, foreseeing (as they affirm) great disturbances
to arise, which were of necessity to be crushed, assembled in full body; valuing
more the general good then the Regal Injunctions in prejudice thereof: Albeit
several (and of the Finlanders not a few) did decline their appearance: Nor
did the King by his Letters only endeavor (say they) the annihilation of this
Convention, but likewise stirred up most grievous tumults and dissentions in
Finland, where, by the Tyranny of the Governor there, so cruel Wars were
raised as sundry thousands of innocent Rusticks, Tenants (or Tributaries) of
the Crown, were miserably slain for opposing themselves to unheard of Exactions
and Military (Stations, or) Quarterings; great numbers of Soldiers being there
kept on foot along time, whom the King by the treacherous insinuations of the
Claudius Flemingius, Aruidus, Ericke, and Axell Kurike allured to his side,
arming and incensing them to the ruin of his Country: And when the Country's
grievances were dilated unto him, they were (say they) slighted, and no redress
obtained, by means whereof the Soldiers and Subjects exasperated against each
other, did rush together with mutual Wounds and Slaughterings: Many of the
forementioned Crown Tenants (or Tributaries) losing not only their Goods but
their lives: For the Lawless Soldier first spoiling the Inhabitants of their
Possessions, the poor people were provoked to resist force with force; whereby
the Militarians finding themselves frustrate of gorging their licentious
desires, did with armed Bands assault the unarmed Rural Menie, whom they
miserably slaughtered, and (a sad sight to see) extended on Wheels.

These things (say they) thus perpetrated: King Sigismundus Sent his
Ambassadors into Suethen.
soon after the Sudercopian Parliament, sent as his Ambassadors into Suethland,
Count Ericke of Visingsburg with his Uncle Aruidus Gustavus, and from the Crown
of Poland were emitted Stanislaus Dzialinskie and Nicolaus Sapieha, who
vehemently accused Duke Charles, and those States of the Kingdom that had
assisted at the forecited Convention, or assented to the conclusions thereof:
But because the accusatory Oration of the Polanders (albeit most elegantly
delivered) with the Criminatory Articles of Count Ericke, and Aruidus Gustavus,
as also the reply to either, and the refutation of the several particulars in
each contained (as well by Duke Charles apart, as by him and the Senators
jointly) are overlong to be here (Verbatim) inserted, I shall refer the more
diligently Curious to the Acts themselves long since published, and only
deliver the heads of either with as much brevity as the circumstance will
permit.

THe Oration did begin with the comparison of a Kingdom The O^ation.
under one Prince, to the body of man united in its Members by such a strickt
conjunction, voluntary consent, mutual co-intelligence, and admirable sympathy
under the government of the head; that any of them being ill affected, the rest
moved with the danger, do with all diligence endeavor its remove; but that
they all are jointly carried on with far more earnestness to preserve the head
safe and unhurt, as knowing that upon its welfare, dignity, and authority, the
wel-being of the whole body depended, and that the same being forsaken by the
Members, a total decay, disturbance of their Order, with the dissolution of
the whole, speedily insues.

That the same harmony ought to be between the Subjects of one and the same
Prince, and that instructed by the same admirable Office of Nature, they should
be lincked with bonds of love, and nourish mutual Peace and Concord, and not
offer, but divert and resist any prejudice that might accrue to either; but
chiefly to provide that the Dignity, Authority, and Preheminency of their
Prince and Sovereign, as head and Director of the whole body of the
Commonwealth should not suffer the least diminution or derogation: And that
exhibition of due honor, fidelity, and obedience, should not be wanting in all
Services that were to be rendered, especially from the Subjects, in regard that
by violation of the Rights of Majesty, or their Usurpation, the Harmony
Politic was disturbed, and the Kingdoms ruin must consequently follow, even
as the hand or foot indulging themselves, and refusing their service to the
head, the same would soon langish, and the whole therewith perish.

He next commemorated several former Leagues and Alliances between Poland,
with its dependencies, and Suethland, but mainly (as nearest related) that by
the present Sigismundus the third, King of both the Realms; but Suethlands
Nursling and the true Progeny of the ancient Suethish Kings, begotten upon a
Jagellonian Polish Infanta, and adorned with all Princely gifts, Sanctimony,
Piety, Justice, Prudence, Fortitude, Wisdom, and Magnanimity: the pattern of all
Virtues, merciful to his Subjects, devout, meek, gracious; To his Friends most
friendly, but to his Foes a terror and destruction.

That to this Sigis. the third, Heir, Inaugurated and Crowned King of
Suethland, Elected also and Crowned King of Poland, and of the great Dukedom of
Lithuania, the said Nations and People did owe obedience, and did acknowledge
honor and reverence as the sole Ruler and Moderator of both the Kingdoms,
whose Reign they wished might exceed Nestors years: And that the Orders of both
the Kingdoms, ought to take equal care, that as their mutual peace and
tranquillity was (under God) from him to be derived, so the Dignity, Majesty,
Regal Rights, and Prerogatives of their mutual Prince should be preserved
unviolated, with his Majesty's particular Rights, Dignity, and Praeeminency in
all things, saving to each Kingdom their own, for otherwise any one might
easily judge that neither of the Kingdoms could remain safe and entire.

That the late Parliament at Warsaw in Poland, understanding what things (there
purposely published) had been enacted at the Sadercopian Parliament in
Suethland: the Senators of Poland, with the Lithuanian Orders, had appointed
this Embassy principally for the nearer conjoyning of those Potent Kingdoms in
peace and unity, and as thereunto conducing to enquire into the whole matter, as
not being of particular concernment to Suethland only, but had like reference
to the (not to be violated) Regal Dignity of his Majesty, who was of both
those Realms the sole Lord and King, from whom they had obtained permission to
treat with his Highness and the Senators of Suethen, in a way of Brotherly
Charity and Amity, which is not wont to act rashly.

That the Senators and Orders, of Poland and Lithuania doubted not but that the
Orders of Suethen would continue faithful toward their King, to whom they were
astricted by Nature, by Oath, and hereditary Right, even as they had professed
in that Sudercopian Enaction: but that notwithstanding they could not but
apprehend the intervention of sundry things at that Parliament, which (unless
corrected by Mature Counsel) might breed disturbance in the Kingdom; such
Initiations usually springing up, when slighting the Lawful Lord, public
Counsels were convened by another Call, Laws were enacted, the form of
Government changed, Ministers placed by the King, removed from their Charge,
things peculiar to the Royal Majesty, transferred upon others: All which may
easily appear to be full of, and obnoxious to many dangers.

That the Polonian and Lithuania Orders did conceive the Suethes could not be
ignorant of his Majesty's affections toward his Paternall Realm, or that he
desired to have a regardfull eye unto the good of his Subjects, nor would have
refused, but rather granted them a Parliament (if he had seen it necessarily
requisite) that Method and Order consentaneous to the Laws of the Kingdom
might have been observed: It being undeniable that a Convention in a Kingdom
cannot be rightly called without the consent, authority, and presence of the
King, but that as then no such thing had appeared wanting either in reference
to the Kingdom, or its ancient accustomed Laws and Constitutions, his Majesty
having concluded a peace between them and the Russian, and so disposed of all
things within the Kingdom, as that no detriment or disturbance could
rationally be feared.

That the said Convention was not only made without public necessity
impelling, contrary to his Majesty's and the Pedish Senatoriall expectations,
and wanted the consent and authority of their lawful Crowned King, but even
contrary to his Edicts prohibiting the same: yea, that many things had been
therein enacted diametrically opposite to the Regal Rights and Superiority. As
the Call it self in manner as aforesaid: The remove of persons entrusted by the
King with Forts, and these committed to others; Exauthorization of the Royal
Mandates, coining of money in other (then the Regal) name: Appeals to his
Majesty, and therein the Regal Dignity it self many ways circumscribed.

That these things having been weighed in an equal Balance, the Senators and
Princes of Poland and Lithuania, with the respective Orders of the depending
Provinces, Dukedomes, and Cities, did by them their Ambassadors earnestly
desire his Highness to preserve entire his Majesty's Rights and Dignity,
wherein the Kingdoms welfare was involved, as their propinquity of blood
required; and did also in Brotherly manner admonish and entreat the Senators of
Suethland, as such to whose vigilance, prudency, and Fidelity, that Kingdoms
care was by him committed and entrusted, to return a diligent demonstration of
their duty and fidelity toward their hereditary and crowned King; and by a
vigorous resistance of any who affecting Innovations (as in large Empires many
times happens) would for private disturb the public Interest, manifest to the
world how freely they had employed the Talent entrusted unto them from Heaven
and his Majesty.

That all Innovations in Kingdoms were perilous and pernicious, but especially
such as tended to violate the Rights of a lawful, hereditary crowned King, as
might be evidenced by France, which by a thirty six, and the Opulent Belgian
Provinces by a twenty seven years War were almost reduced to an utter
extermination: And that those Rights neither could nor ought to be impaired,
but by that Majesty by whom Kings Reign and Princes decree Justice. That
wicked men did never proceed at first to open height of evil, but by peicemeals
plucked up the Fences, until that from faithful Subjects they had wrested the
Power; whereby (having overturned the Kingdom) to augment their own Wealth
and Greatness, Which evils it beseemed his Highness and their Lordships to
obviate timely, and to abolish any Laws, Constitutions: or Confederations,
contrary to his Crown, his Dignity, and Regal Rights, and by their prudence
and authority, to divert the course of ill undertaken Counsels, least the head
thereby weakened, the Kingdoms body might faint and fall into decadence.

That the Duke and Senators of Suethland might assure themselves, that his
Majesty (albeit at present detained by greater cares for Christendomes
universal good) would never intermit his due regard of his native Country, no
more then suffer the Rights of Royalty to be disjoynted: But that whatsoever
faithful Subjects should crave in a just and orderly way, (his Dignity
preserved) he would undoubtedly grant. That therefore his Highness and their
Lordships ought to prosecute his Majesty with due return of Love, observancy,
obedience, and faithful endeavors: The rather, for that his Majesty did no
way oppress or burden them, but like to an indulgent Father, with a mind
truly Royal, more prone to mercy then to cruelty, was willing to pass by
offenses, the more grievous because proceeding from his own, by whom he ought
not to have been injured: Notwithstanding which, he Promised no less for the
future, then that amidst the Community of Christendomes concernments, whereof
Suethland did partake, he would endeavor their good; and as a return of his
Highness and their Lordships constant and faithful affections toward his
Majesty, was no way doubted of by the respective Orders of Poland and
Lithuania, so the continuance therein was their earnest desire.

That the Polanders, as they had abundantly testified by a voluntary conferring
their Crown upon his Majesty, and according to their Nations custom, had
vowed unto him their Fortunes, Liberties, life it self, so they were now ready
to bestow all those, and what else could be dearer unto them, for the
vindication of his Regal Rights and Dignity, and would to that end unanimously
join with his Highness, their Lordships, and that Kingdoms Orders, and did
promise (as the present Oration might testify) that they would never be
wanting to endeavor the repair of the least injury done to his Majesty, or
Kingly name, whereunto they expected and did promise to themselves a mutual,
assured, and an untergiversing concurrence from his Highness and the Orders of
Suethland; from whom, for conclusion, they earnestly desired they might receive
an authentic written answer to the several heads of their Embassy, whereby
their diligence and faithful delivery of what they had in charge, might be
approved to their principles.

In like manner Count Ericke and Aruidus Gustavus (forenamed) did present
certain Articles Criminatoriall against Duke Charles, the substance whereof
follows.

THat the chief points of the Ambassadoriall instructions, were to rememorate,
how frequently his Majesty after Criminations against Duke (...) by the
A(...)rs.
his Coronation, had by Messengers and Letters, dealt with his Highness,
concerning a form for governing his hereditary Kingdom during his absence, and
that the same had been much and long time disputed between his Majesty and the
Senate of Suethland, which was at last concluded to be signed and sealed by his
Majesty, and had been afterward sent to his Highness and the Senators.

That albeit his Majesty did then conceive that Ordination to be such, as
nothing he could confer (his Prerogative Salved) conducing to the Kingdoms
well-being, was therein wanting, he had nevertheless understood partly by
Ambassadors, partly by Letters, that his Highness did not lacquiesce therein,
but desired a more ample Plenipotentiary; which as he could not grant, without
detriment to the Regal Title, so he had gravely admonished him to forbear such
molestatious requests, and to rest therewith satisfied, in regard it was not for
perpetuity, but in vigor only until his Majesty's return into Suethland,
which he intended speedily, for disposing, ordering, and reforming things
needful: But that his Highness impatient of deferring the matter so long, had
incited the Kingdoms Orders to celebrate the Sudercopian Parliament, to gain
by their Sufferages a larger Power: That his Majesty was much displeased that
his Subjects (bound to him by Oath of Fidelity) should have appeared contrary
to his Edict; or have made conclusions contradictory to his intentions.

Yet that his Highness might see how constantly his Majesty desired the
Religious observation of that fraternall mutual respect, which their proximity
of blood imposed; and that the Orders of the Kingdom might perceive his
Majesty's willingness to a wholesome and timely preventing of all confusions,
tending to the disturbance of the Kingdom, he had been pleased to send
(besides his Royal Exhortatoriall Letters) Ambassadors fully instructed to
interpose and provide for the removing of all brands of dissension, and that
the form of Government his Majesty left at his departure, might be submitted
unto, and repugnancies therefrom abstained; especially for that many
particulars were inserted in the Printed Sudercopian Decrees, which seemed to
trench upon Treason, by a violation of such things as by the Swethish laws did
rightly belong to the King: All which, his Majesty did challenge to himself
and his Posterity, and would so leave unto the Kings his Successors, as from
his Progenitors he had received them; unto the maintenance whereof the
Subjects of Swethen were bound by the Laws and by Oath.

That the Ambassadors were also to endeavor from his Highness an Antiquation
of the Sudercopian Decrees that contradicted the fore-specified Ordination, and
that he would acquiesce in the Kings former grants and Statutes, and that the
Orders and Offices appointed might remain in full Vigor.

That the Kingdoms Rents might be collected by those thereunto ordained, and
to be issued by them, according to his Majesty's Orders or Letters granted to
any thereupon.

That Officers might be continued in their respective Charge, and that such as
have been removed be re-integrated.

That the Crown Forts, Garrisons, Provinces, Cities, Governments, and all other
things formerly committed to his Majesty's sworn Servants be restored unto
them; and that his Highness Servants be removed from them, and receive no
stipend from the Crown.

That all regal Protections be had in due regard, and that no person having
such, be exposed to Prison or other punishment, until their cause be heard and
legally tried.

That all justly acquired Privileges have their due respect and vigor, and
that the contraries thereunto be expunged and made void.

That unwonted Burdens, Exactions, Structures, and Hospitable Expenses, be not
imposed upon the Subject, without the Regal command or permission.

That fit Salery be duly paid to the ancient Court-servants, and that such as
by Age are not longer serviceable, have necessary maintenance allowed them.

That whereas the Hereditary Title of his Highness is more magnificent and
honorable (as well toward Strangers as Natives) then that of Governor of
Suethland, lately given by the Sudercopian Decree; and for that the same is
ambigious, and not understood by all alike, and does neither increase nor
impair the Dukes Power and authority. The Ambassadors are to endeavor his
renouncing the same, as not being formerly used in the times of Legitimate
Kings, and that he rest satisfied with his accustomed Title, as being of
sufficient Dignity and estimation amongst all men.

That his Majesty will not, that the broils raised against Flemingius proceed
any further, but requires that all things committed may be cleared or
corrected by the Law of the Land.

That in regard of the great scarcity of Grain, causing dearth, his Highness
would not permit any transportation thereof abroad, for prevention of Famine,
poverty, and calamity to the Subject, whereof his Majesty is very solicitous.

Last, That the Accounts of the Kingdoms Revenues, which his Highness has
had for some years in his hands, might be forthwith stated and cleared, that so
his Majesty at his return into the Country, may know what debts of the
Kingdom have been satisfied, and what otherwise.

To the fore-specified Oration, whereby his Highness, the Senators, and whole
Orders of Suethland, did hold themselves aspersed and reproached, as also to
those criminations by Count Ericke and Arnidus Gustavus, the Duke with the
Senators returned Answer, as hereafter is showed: But to the Kings particular
Objections against the Duke, the ensuing (...) (...)kes an(...) the cri(...).
reasons were by his Highness exhibited for their refutation.

That the Duke had altered the, prescribed, form of Government. Object. 1.


That he had neither altered nor seen any Form of Government, an imperfect
Plenipotentiall excepted, brought Ans(...).
unto him by Ericke Gustavus, not containing the form of Power requisite in a
well constituted Commonwealth, whereto he had never acquiesced; nor would he
have accepted the Government, but for the earnest reiterated requests of the
Senators and Orders of the Kingdom, who desired him to have more regard unto
the public welfare, then to the defects in that prescribed Form.

Moreover, That a certain Form for a Kingdoms government in the Regal
absence, cannot be prescribed to Subjects, by reason of frequent emergent
alterations and Novations, not inclusible within the limits of a straightened
Form. And that albeit Laws be enacted, for a perpetual Rule of the
Inhabitants actions, yet necessity urging, they are changed or abrogated, and
others instituted more conducing to, present, public good.

That whereas he is taxed of many things not couched in that Plenipotentiary,
it follows, either that he is unjustly argued of having acted contrary
thereunto, or that the same must be imperfect, as not containing all things
which his Majesty required in a well regulated Empire.

That the said Form was even repugnant to it self, for his Highness being
thereby enjoined to Act for the good of the King and Kingdom, is nevertheless
prohibited the calling of Parliaments, without which the public weal cannot
be rightly provided for, as is manifest, in that seldom any Kings without
Parliaments, have laudably administered the Common wealth.

That the same did likewise contradict the Regal Oath, and that Kingdoms
Privileges: That his Majesty having sworn to govern his Hereditary Country by
the Counsel of the Duke and the Senators thereof, they had neither approved of,
nor been consulted in the draught of that form, but the same had been compiled
by Strangers, and the Subjects compulsion to its obedience would be a violation
of the Regal Oath: Next Suethland, by most ancient Privileges had power to
call Parliaments in the Royal absence, which Privileges the King had by Oath
bound himself to maintain.

That whereas it had been insinuated, his Highness ought to have rendered
obedience to the foresaid Form, albeit imperfect, by reason it was not for long
duration, in regard of his Majesty's intention for a return within short time
into that Kingdom: It is answered, that Emergencies in Kingdoms admit not of
delays: That a month only may produce unremediable evils, how much more two
years: That the King at his departure had deprived them of all hopes of his
return, having affirmed to the Senators and Orders of Poland, that he would
remain with them to the end.

That his Highness had disposed of his Majesty's Fee-farmes or Object. 2
Copyholds, which by the Law was reserved to the King solely, in Sign of his
Supreme Praeeminency.

That if his Majesty will rightly discern the sense of their Laws in that
case, his Highness cannot appear to have done Answ.
ought therein contrary to the Regal Authority: That the Assignation of certain
Lands or Manors to some honorable persons in satisfaction, out of the Annual
proceed for sums of money, long owing to them by the King and Kingdom, that
so the Capital sum might not, to the detriment of both, increase by interest,
was not an alienation of those Lands: That if this were unacceptable, the King,
who had been several times advertised thereof, should have showed by what
ways those Debts (whereof, as being just, the Creditors could neither be
denied, nor ought to be by force defrauded) might have been discharged, and the
course of interest stopped: And that whatever he had conceded unto any, it was
upon condition they should obtain the Royal Assent, which might evidence that
he did acknowledge a Superior, without whose approbation he would not conclude
in ought that peculiarly belonged unto his Majesty.

That his Majesty's faithful Ministers had been oppressed and removed from
their Offices. Object. 3.


1. That his Highness cannot be taxed to have oppressed his Answ.
Majesty's faithful Ministers, for having deprived some (infected with the
Romish Pontificiall Leven) of those Governments which the King, without
consulting himself and the Kingdoms Senators, had promoted them unto,
forasmuch as by the Regal Assecuration the entry into those Honors and
Offices was forbidden to such.

2. Distributive Justice prohibited maintenance from the Crown Revenues to
those who by the Royal Cautionary prescription were not to bear Office, and
were unserviceable to the Kingdom:

3. That forasmuch as (his Majesty's Oath being salved) those persons could not
pretend to more then a common enjoyment, with the other Inhabitants, of the
Kingdoms Privileges, Laws, and Immunities; the permission to them of more,
would have been an offense against the same: Wherefore his Highness had not
oppressed them (if it were so to be styled) but they first themselves, by
declining the received Religion and transiating into the Tents of Rome; and
next, his Majesty, who by his assecuration had deprived them of Office and
Dignity.

Moreover it was evident that part of them so preferred, were incapable of
those duties and unprofitable to the Subject; neither were they by consult
admitted according to the prescript Laws, and therefore legally deprived: As
also that some of them were charged with heinous Crimes: And it was not meet
that such should rule over others who could not govern themselves, neither were
they to be numbered amongst the Kings faithful Servants, in regard it would be
a reproach to his Majesty to make use of their Service.

That his Majesty's Letters of Inhibition, and other Patents Object. 4.
were slighted.

That his Highness had never slighted any Legal Regal Mandates; neither did
he conceive that by constraining some Answ.
of evil Fame, accused of notorious Crimes, to appear in Judgment with other
lying Detractors, who against himself had published many false Criminations; or
that by diminishing the power of such as had opposed the Sudercopian Decree,
(who by Patents had been all received into the Royal Protection) he had
trespassed in ought against his Majesty's Inhibitions, when as by Law such were
void.

Next, that his Majesty could not by his Patents protect such persons, having
sworn to preserve the Kingdoms Laws in their Entry; and in them is expressly
couched, That he who is tainted by Common Fame, must acquit himself from
suspicion: Neither does the Imperial Power extend to the taking away the right
of a third, nor to pardon a wrong done to any until the injured party be first
satisfied: and therefore his Majesty's Inhibitions could not free the Defamers
of his Highness and others from process.

That the Sudercopian Parliament tended wholly to the welfare of the King and
Kingdom, and to concord in Religion, and had not therefore been wrongfully
called; so that the Letters which protected the Impugners thereof were invalid,
and opened a great gap to dissentions and disturbances (as was then evident in
Finland) from which Fountain ruin to Kings and Kingdoms does usually flow.

Lastly, that such Letters were repugnant to the Regal Oath, and the
Municipall Law of Suethen, wherein is expressed, He shall defend his Subjects,
especially the quiet and peaceable, who live conformable to Law, not only from
Strangers, but likewise from turbulent and contentious Inhabitants: Chiefly, he
shall maintain Ecclesiastical Immunities, etc. But such had been excepted in
the Kings Patents. Open War raged in Finland; the Subjects, there, so exhausted
by new Exactions as they could not pay the Kings Rents: Sundry hundreds had
perished by hunger; That other grievances were here omitted, as Rapines, Rapes,
Stuprations, open Violences, Violation of domestic Peace, and the like: which
not only were hitherto unpunished, (notwithstanding several advertisements
given) but his Majesty did also prohibit proceedings against the Author or head
of those mischiefs. That as to any other of the Royal Mandates, their
Authority, when conform to the Laws and Royal Oath, had ever been entirely
preserved.

Moreover, that not only in Suethland, but almost in all other Nations, it had
been a received custom, that Kings when absent did direct their Commands
(concerning ought to be done) unto him who was over the Kingdom: And it had
and might happen that by false Narrations of the procurers of such Patents, his
Majesty had and might be led into error, and issue forth such Letters and
Grants as would be much prejudicial to the Kingdom, if put into present
execution.

Lastly, his Majesty had promised by Oath to govern that Kingdom (during his
absence in Poland) by the Counsel of the Duke, and the Senators of the
Kingdom.

That new Exactions, Structures of Edifices, and burdensome Object. 5.
entertainments are imposed:

That since his Highness undertook the Government, he had altogether
endeavored an alleviation of the Subjects Answ.
former pressures, as could be witnessed by themselves. That the contribution
condescended unto at Sudercopia, had been by joint consent of the Subjects
unanimously concluded, upon the Senators report to the other Orders, concerning
the Kingdoms debts, which without their assistance could not be discharged,
whereupon their result was desired; and that himself had given charge to the
Collectors not to require more from any Subjects then their estates would bear,
and themselves willingly undergo. That the same was more tolerable then those
new exacting ways whereby the Subjects Goods were ensnared, and they reduced
to extreme poverty.

That those Leavies had not been made but in cases allowed by the Laws, and
that albeit peace had been concluded with the Russian, yet the Soldiers, and
others who had lent great sums of money, for waging that War, were not paid
their Salery and Debts. This was the cause of that imposition, as if in the
Exigency of War, in regard the Debts therein contracted were not satisfied:

Next, that there were some Illustrious Persons also; Kings Daughters, who
demanded their Dowries from the Kingdom: yea, that the King himself had
required the Duke to impose a contribution upon the Subject, for the marrying
of the Princess Anna a Regal Virgin: So that his Highness was injured whilst
blamed for onerating the Subject with new exactions, and the more in regard the
Subjects willingly consented to those contributions, and affirmed that by Law
they ought to pay them. Hereto is added that the Kingdoms necessities which
are above all Law, required them.

As to new Structures, his Highness remembered not any to have been by him
commanded, otherwise (then by the Laws of Suethen) the Subjects were obliged
unto; Viz. Repairing the Forts, Frontiers, and Navy, with other like, for
defense of the Kingdom, and the repulsion of hostile Irruptions; Nor that in
them he had not exceeded the constitution made by his Majesty's late Father,
and left (when dying) to his Majesty's performance: But that if his Majesty
thought good they should be wholly neglected, he would surcease.

That for the entertainments insisted on, how, or by whomsoever obtruded, and
whether right or wrong, his Highness was confident that neither of him nor his
Servants any just complaint could be made in that matter.

That the Crown Kevenues were not rightly administered, and the Duke therefore
desired to render account. Object. 6.


That what he had received had been by him issued toward Answ.
the discharge of the Kingdoms debts and necessary expenses, and that he
therein referred to the Auditors accounts: But the Copper, Butter, and other
Merchandises received by his Ministers he challenged to himself, for payment of
money and other things, lent sundry years past unto his Majesty's Father and
the Kingdom, whereof a considerable sum was yet unsatisfied, as might appear
by the respective Instruments.

That if his Majesty would reflect upon the profusions made of the Crown
Revenues by his Largesses and Mandatory Epistles, he should find but small
cause to call him to account: That the Demaines of Finland had been so
lavished, and the Inhabitants Estates so attenuated and exhausted by Soldiery
entertainments, as they could render no Debit either to the King or Kingdom:
That himself had contracted envy from many for endeavoring a right
conservation of the Kingdoms Rents, and had likewise improved them, as was
evident by the Revenue of the Mines, which might have yielded yet more profit,
had not the same been obstructed by the disobedience of certain persons.

That Innovation in Religion was endeavored. Object. 7. Answ.


That he had not altered ought in Religion; But that the Senators, Bishops, and
other Orders, remembering the dissentions and discords of former years during
the Reign of his Majesty's Father, had convened at Vbsall to compound
controversies and settle uniformity in Religion, as the strongest bond for
conciliating the minds of Subjects, as on the other side, no greater
distraction could be of wills and affections, nor greater disturbance to the
public, then proceeded from difference and disparity in Religion: That what
had been there concluded he had left to them, and was therefore unjustly
aspersed therewith; but that the same might more deservedly be retorted upon his
Majesty, who had, contrary to his Oath and Assecuration, planted his
Emissaries, Romish Priests, to disperse Pontificiall Superstitions and books in
public, as Stocholme, with the Monasteries of Dortningolmense and Vastena
could witness.

That moreover, in latter days, his Majesty had by writing exhorted his
Subjects to embrace the Papal Superstition of Elevation, Salt and Tapers, with
other like, not grounded on Sacred Writ: And unbyassed Judgments might discern
whether this rather were not an attempt upon Religion: Which a godly and free
counsel, if called by his Majesty in imitation of that Synod, would not have
been, but his Oath and Regal Assecuration had remained unviolated: The
dispersing of Popish books, seducing the Children of honest Natives, nor
practicing upon the illiterate youthful Menie, would not then have needed, as
has been in former years and still is done.

That his Highness was also confident, that if any useless or scandalous
Ceremonies, resembling Romish Idolatries, had been abrogated, the same could
not be called innovation in Religion: That he rendered thanks to the most High,
for so inlightning his mind by the Divine Word, that he could discern the true
word of God from the traditions of men; and that the constitutions of their
Church did permit those abrogations that had therein been made.

That his Highness had Ministered occasions of mutation in the Object. 8.
State of the Commonwealth.

That he was ignorant of any such occasion administered by him: That by Gods
goodness he had studied the pure Religion, Answ.
and (without boast) had maintained the Laws and good Order in the Kingdom:
That by these no motives to alteration could be tendered, but that by their
neglect or violation a Kingdom becomes liable to ruin: And that therefore he
entreated his Majesty not to afford matter of change, as not being ignorant how
often his Majesty's Oath and Assecuration, with the Laws of Suethland, both in
Ecclesiastics and Politics, had been trespassed upon.

That the Duke had degenerated from his Fathers Virtues, whereby Object. 9.
the Hereditary Right had been obtained.

That this reflected more upon his Majesty, as having but Answ.
meanly traced his Grandfathers steps, and had acted much contrary to the
Auital Testament, which was the groundwork of the Hereditary agreement: That
such Unions are not attained to the end a King should neglect his Oath, Right
and Justice; Act Arbitrarily, and abolish things constituted for the Countries
good, but preserve them unviolated, and that thereby Hereditary Unions retained
their vigor.

That the Prince, under pretense of Religion, did render his Majesty Object. 10.
obnoxious to the envy of his Subjects.

That no alienation of the Subjects minds from his Majesty Answ.
by his Highness can be proved, and that on the contrary, he had always
exhorted them to persevere in Fidelity, as might appear by the Sudercopian
Decree: But that if any such thing had or should hereafter happen, the cause
were to be imputed to himself, for not performing the things he had confirmed
unto them by Oath, as has been already said.

That the Prince had affected the Kingdom. Object. 11.


That this Assertion can never be made clear, nor that he Answ.
had ever coveted the Regal Title, albeit it were not hard to prove that the
same had been often tendered unto him, and again might be, if contrary to the
hereditary Covenants and his Oath of Fidelity, he would use the means and power
at present in his hand: That affection of Sovereignty cannot be imputed unto
him, because that he with the Senators, underwent the troublesome burden of
Government; for as much as in former times many more meanly descended, and of
less Right, Dignity, and Power then himself, had in the Regal absence
administered the Suethish Commonwealth, yet without any such aspersion upon
them, as might appear by the union in the Reign of Queen Margaret, renewed
under Ericke the thirteenth, in whose time and absence the great Sewer of the
Kingdom was invested with power equal to the King; yet was not he to be
compared unto his Highness, who is Hereditary Prince of the Realm, whom the
prosperity thereof more nearly concerns.

That his Highness had detained the Soldiers means, and defrauded Object. 12.
them of their Stipends:

That he never expected a Crimination of this nature, as Answ.
being by Gods goodness provided of such competent annual Revenues, that he
could live according to his Rank, without making any such sordid gain,
neither needed he to hunt after Lucre with the Kingdoms loss.

That his Highness had given obligatory Letters to his Majesty, Object. 13.
but had afterward violated them.

That albeit his Majesty had required such Letters from Answ.
him before he departed the Kingdom, yet it cannot be proved that he ever
obtained them, neither could he have so obliged himself, the same being
repugnant to the Laws of the Kingdom, from which he was not to vary, and
therefore his being by them obliged, as his Majesty alleged, and did endeavor
to demonstrate, was not of consequence.

Secondly, admit it were proved, which is not yet done, yet it did not thence
follow, that he was tied to an absolute observation without exception, and that
it is to be considered whether such letters were given of right or
conditionally; if the latter, they are not further binding then the condition
is fulfilled: but that is not done, for his Majesty had not granted such a
Plenipotentiary as he demanded.

Moreover the Obligation is merely civil, and may be evaded by exception, in
regard that ensued not for which those Letters are said to have been given, and
therefore he cannot be reproached to have acted contrary unto them: And yet he
is willing to submit unto such letters as are conform to the Plenipotentiary by
him required; but how just it is to affirm that he gave such Obligatorials as
the form transmitted hither (which has no conformity with the obligation given
by him) is left to the judgment of all equitable men.

Lastly, That the Prince had coined money in his own name and Object. 14.
stamp, which is a Royalty, and had thereby derogated from the Regal Rights and
dignity.

1. That albeit the coining of money be Regal, yet he had acquired Answ.
the same by the consent and approbation of the Superior: And that albeit King
Erick was a Tyrant, and wholly endeavored to diminish the Rights of his
brethren, yet he deprived them not of that of Coinage, provided, that in Weight
and Alley it were not inferior to the Royal money, as appears by the Arbogian
Constitutions, Anno 1561. which nevertheless in reference to certain other
points, he had not accepted of.

2. That his Majesty's Royal father had conceded unto him that Privilege, as
might appear by the Constitutions made at Vastena and Stegeburg: And that after
the composure of all differences between the late King and himself, and the
abolition of the Vastenan Decree formerly obtruded upon him, he had coined
money in his own name, the late King yet alive; wherefore his Majesty could not
revoke things which had been constituted and were unquestionable.

3. That the most renowned King Gustavus (of famous memory) had by Testament
bequeathed to his brothers and himself, their respective Dukedomes, in the same
manner his said Majesty possessed them, and he, having Power and Right of
coining money in each, had thereby devolved the like unto him: Wherefore his
Majesty of Suethland and Poland, by depriving him of that Privilege, would
contradict his Grandfathers Testament.

4. Last, The refusal to his most faithful Uncle of what his Majesty permits
to his Subjects, can be but small honor to his Majesty, as to the debasing of
the Kingdoms coin, either in Weight or Alley, to the prejudice of the Subject,
the Mint-Master, and thousands of others can testify the contrary.

Wherefore forasmuch as his Highness had no way violated the Regal dignity,
Right nor Justice, the Laws or hereditary Union of Suethland, but from his
Majesty's Cradle had demeaned himself like a most faithful Uncle, and promised
so to continue for the future, he is ignorant of the motives to such minatory
criminating Letters, but suspects they proceed from his not approving of his
Majesties-Religion, and his opposing the admittance of Papal Superstition into
the Kingdom; for as to other things he remembers not the commission of ought
that deserved reprehension.

That therefore he did in brotherly and earnest manner beseech his Majesty, and
likewise most friendlike and lovingly desired the Senators, Peers, and Orders
of the Kingdom of Poland, and the great Dukedom of Lithuania, to accept this
answer as satisfactory, and not to make a Sinister Construction of these his
just defenses, whereunto most weighty Considerations, in a time most pressing
had urged him: That nevertheless he did hope, that the King his Kinsman and
Brother, would futurely forbear such Criminations, and return, preside over,
and govern his hereditary Kingdom, according to his Oath, whereby all
distempers, that had made irruption into the Common Wealth might vanish; But
that if his Majesty were so minded, he did earnestly beseech him to settle such
a Form of Rule, whereby the Kingdoms welfare, and the Subjects good might be
provided for: That he doubted not but his Majesty had been incensed against him
by false accusations for undertaking the Commonweals most troublesome
Government, and that albeit, he had not obtruded his endeavors thereupon, but
at his Majesty's request, and by approbation of the whole Orders of the
Kingdom, by whom he had been called and desired to the discharge of that duty
upon his Majesty's several discessions therefrom: yet he was resolved not to
intermeddle with the public Administration against his Majesty's mind, but
leave to the arbitrament of the Senators, and other Orders, the Consideration
of the Government thereof, during his Majesty's absence.

And that, albeit many weighty occasions did at present occur to be consulted
of and settled, for avoiding of unrecoverable detriment to the Kingdom, as
Discords and Controversies in Religion: a perfecting of the Peace with the
great Muscovian Duke, with sufficient security for its perpetuity, and the
rendition of the Castle of Kexholme. The present troubles of almost ruinated
Finland, with other most urgent affairs for the Kingdoms future Weal, which by
means of the Councels now in agitation, may be neglected, whence discords
greater then formerly may arise: His Highness does nevertheless hereby protest
his innocence, and that he has given timely advertisement of these evils to
the Counselors and Orders of his Majesty's Kingdom, and does hope, and in
friendly manner desire, that all good men will take this his Protest in good
part, concluding with most loving and friendly tender of good will and favor
to all the Orders, Citizens and Inhabitants of the Kingdom, as well Civil as
Ecclesiastical, to each according to his degree.

The further Answer made by his Highness and the Senatoriall Further Answer.
Order unto the other Regal Objections, was as follows.

That the Duke by indicting the Sudercopian Parliament, and Object. 1
by the Decree thereof, had derogated from all his Dignity, Praeeminency and
Regal Rights.

That albeit, according to the common rule in Law, where the Plaintiff proves
not, the Defendant is absolved, this Answ.
accusation might be over-passed in silence, in regard his Majesty produces no
evidence of such derogating by those Articles, but barely criminates without
any fortifying reasons: yet his Highness, to testify his innocence, will
demonstrate by the ensuing arguments, that the foresaid Decree does no way
impair but confirm and establish his Majesty's honor and dignity. For,

1. No man of sound unbyassed Judgment, can deny, but that a Decree producing
Concord in Religion, administration of Law and Justice, expelling confusions
crept into the Commonwealth, maintaining the Regal Oath and Assecuration,
with the Hereditary Union unblemished, does rather augment then diminish the
Regal Dignity and Rights: But that the Sudercopian Decree is such a one may
easily appear to all men, and will be more fully showed hereafter; wherefore
the suspicion of weakening his Authority thereby must vanish: Natural Reason,
History, and daily Experience do show, that where diversity of Religion sets
foot, no account is made of right or just; Ataxia or confusion reigns; the
vulgar multitude are apt for Insurrections; thereby the Commonweal cannot be
long safe, the Sovereigns rule will be of small duration, neither are their
Rights and Dignities preserved: Discontinuance of Supreme Authority proceeds
from neglect of Kingly Offices; Viz. Propagation of Religion in a Realm,
administration of Right and Justice, abolition of disorder. By these, as sure
foundations, the Weal public is preserved, and the Regal Rule so long
prosperous as they are endeavored: Those laid aside, it vanishes, as
Histories (overlong to be here recited) do testify.

Hence arises a question, What particular in that Decree is there repugnant to
the things mentioned: At its very beginning, promise, and confirmation of
fidelity is exhibited, according to the Subjects Obligation in reference to his
Majesty's Inauguration Oath: next, Concord in Religion is established; for all
persons introducing and sowing Extraneous Superstitions (the Regal Oath and
Assecuration so requiring) are expelled: Unlawful Conventicles are prohibited,
by which means the Weal Public is duly provided for. How Concord is
maintained in Regions where disparity of Religion is admitted, the ruins and
subversions of most potent Kingdoms and Commonwealths do show.

2. The mention of his Highness Title and Authority in point of Government,
during his Majesty's absence, in the second Article of that Decree, does rather
confirm then retract form his Majesty's Dignity and Rights: for the presidency
of one, exceeding the rest in power and authority, is of advantageous
concernment to the Commonwealth, as by the prejudices of Policratia, or
Democratie in this and other Kingdoms, and by this Nations Annals may be
demonstrated: Hence Civil Wars take rise, and Kingdoms become subject to
extraneous Yoaks to their own detriment and destruction: for men are naturally
prone to dissension. Where several bear rule with equal power, it follows
mostly, that each has regard to his private not the public good. Moreover,
each trusting to other neglects his own part of duty, according to that saying,
Affairs committed unto many have slow expedition, There is a certain natural
Vice, that Possessions in common are for the most part neglected.

3. The Laws of Suethland do thus express, that the same shall be rotally
subject unto One, not unto many Kings; Whence it is apparent, that the
Welfare and Dignity of the Kingdom cannot firmly consist but under one
Governor. Hereunto external Laws and the Judgments of Forraigners do accord,
as the following Texts do witness; Kingdoms and Empires may be better
governed by One then by many. Item, Hardly can a Plurality effect ought of
good: Item, It is Heretical to place two Vicars in a Land.

4. It has not been usual in this Kingdom, in former ages, that (in the
Regal absence) several persons should equally govern the Commonwealth, as
may appear by the Union made in the Reign of Queen Margaret, renewed in that
of Ericke the thirteenth. Moreover it has been customary, that in the Vacancy
of the Regal Chair, some One, not more of the Kingdoms Senators, should be
elected to administer the Affairs of the Commonweal. Seeing therefore that
his Highness is a Prince Hereditary of the Kingdom, unto whom, with his Heirs
the Inheritance thereof does properly belong, if any unwitting Accident should
befall, (howbeit he wishes the contrary, and that his Majesty and his Progeny
may enjoy by Gods goodness, a long, peaceable, and ligitimate Government over
the same) the right of Hereditation requires that his Highness should preside
in his Majesty's absence: The rather for that there is none extant of the
Regal Family ripe for Government, and the Laws permit not the preferring of
any but the next of blood.

As from the precedent (and other not here inserted) reasons it may be
concluded, that the King absent, more then One cannot be constituted over the
whole, nor any but his Highness; It follows without controversy, that
nothing has been herein acted in derogation of his Majesty's Dignity: but such
only decreed as the Laws commanded and the public good required: For his
Highness did not this to exclude his Majesty, but to be serviceable to the
Country in his Majesty's absence; neither did he obtrude himself, but lent his
hand to the Helm, at the earnest request of the Orders of Suethland:

The Title it self does no way diminish the Regal Praeeminency: For,

1. It is the Title of a King, but of him who executes the Office and
represents the Power.

2. Both in this and other Kingdoms the Rulers have been called by such
Titles, as is evident in our Histories, where Torchilus the Son of Canutus,
Suanto the Son of Nicolaus, Steno Sture the younger, and many others, have been
entitled Governors and Administrators of the Kingdom.

3. This Title cannot derogate from the Regal Dignity, for his Majesty had (by
Writ) honored Claudius Flemingius, with the like; which he was incapable of,
as not being approved by the States of the Kingdom, neither had they both
equal right to the Government: For his Highness sprung from the Regal
Family, is a Prince hereditary of the Kingdom, but Flemingius a Subject of his
Majesty and of his Highness.

The third head of the said Decree contains likewise nothing but what is
consentaneous to the Laws of Suethland: For by those written Laws, each cause
is to be tried in the Province where the Delict was committed; and the
punishment to be made exemplary where the Crime was so; besides, many
confusions and prejudices would accrue to the Country, if the cognition of all
Causes should be made in Poland. As,

1. There could not be so ample information as were requisite, in regard the
true state of Crimes may be more certainly known upon the place.

2. A just Cause might happen to be lost for want of ability to attend
personally and prosecute the definition; to produce Witnesses, and exhibit
other instruments conducible to its legal cognition

3. The Natives Estates would be utterly exhausted by those long Journeys,
whence their unavoidable ruin must of necessity follow.

4. The ancient Jurisdiction, Laws, and Privileges of Suethland would be
violated, which may not be tolerated: All Nations have unanimously and
obstinately maintained their own, and have pronounced that the Infringers of
the Jurisdiction of others were to be punished as Peace-breakers. Item, that
who so should bring an Action before a Court incompetent was to be fined.

Whereas therefore his Majesty had bound himself by Oath not to impair the
Jurisdiction of Suethland, he should trespass against the same by constituting
either in Poland, or elsewhere, any extraneous Judicatory to be competent for
the Suethes. Our Annals do likewise show that, for the like, great troubles did
arise to Ericke the thirteenth, and other Kings.

5. Hereunto is added, that his Majesty whilst in Poland, cannot determine the
causes of Suethland, as not having those persons there with him, by whose
counsel he is sworn to administer this Kingdoms Affairs.

The fourth Article of that Decree is grounded upon the Laws of Suethen, as
treating of distributing of Offices: And if his Majesty will preserve the Laws
entire as he has sworn, he may not, whilst absent, confer Offices at the
request of every one who shall sue unto him: According to the Laws of Suethen,
the King (absent) is expressly prohibited from constituting a Provincial Judge,
but such constitution belongs to him who (in his absence) supplies his place:
How much less then may he dispose of the more weighty charges? And it has
been always usual here that the great Sewer or Viceroy of the Kingdom,
should collate Offices in the Regal absence, as appears by the Union whereby
he is endowed with that Power.

In regard therefore of what before alleged, it is uncontrovertably apparent
that the foresaid Decree does not violate his Majesty's Rights nor Dignity, but
does rather enlarge and illustrate them: and that, if regard were had to the
Laws, his Highness might expect and receive thanks for having, in his
Majesty's absence, undergone a Government so replenished with cares and toils:
However, it was not decent to vitiate this pious Office with such contumelies
and ignominious expressions, as the Letters delivered unto him are farced with.

But if his Majesty shall say, that he does not so much argue and protest
against the Decree it felf (in regard those Articles seem not so averse unto
the Regal Dignity and Rights) as against the power and authority assumed by
his Highness of indicting a Parliament, that being a Prerogative Royal
belonging to the King solely.

His Highness answers, that by the Laws, it is not easily proved, that the
right of calling Parliaments is peculiarly Regal; for those Royalties which by
special concession are conferred upon any person, go not beyond the same, but
that it is otherwise observed in Parliamentary Rights, examples do show; for
even in Poland the Archbishop of Gnesnen has power to call Parliaments and to
enact Laws in the Kings absence: And albeit that a Law to the contrary might
be alleged, yet ought it not to be of any validity in this case, for as much
as the Suethes, by a long prescription of time, have acquired this right in the
same manner that all Regal Privileges are, as may appear by many Parliaments
celebrated in this Kingdom, in the Reigns of Ericke XIII. and John II.
Moreover, the Countries welfare and necessities required the calling hereof:
And necessity is above all Law, neither admits of any.

Forasmuch then as by the precedent reasons it is manifest, that the
Sudercopian Decree contains nothing but what is conducing to the preserving
and promoving of Unity in Religion, to the maintaining and confirming the Laws
and Privileges, his Majesty cannot, by the most Subtilized Arguments, render
the same Invalid, without revoking his Oath. But for the better cementing of
things, his Highness will briefly resolve and refute the Arguments used by his
Majesty for the illuding of that Sudercopian Transaction.

HIs Majesty argues that in all lawful Conventions two things are chiefly
requisite: First, the Superiors Argument 1.
approbation and consent: Secondly, That the necessity and motives for calling
a Parliament be maturely signified unto him: But whereas the Sudercopian
Covention was held without the Regal assent, and timely signification of the
Cause impelling thereunto, his Majesty pronounces the same needless and
unlawful.

And that his Majesty's affirmation may appear grounded upon Reason and the
Authority of the Law, he confirms and fortifies the same out of the second
Chapter of the Title of Regalls, by a Text, wherein is expressed, that Subjects
are bound to obey their King; but his Majesty, by Edict, prohibited that
Convention, as appears by the Writ. Ergo, etc.

This Proposition is not rationally laid down: For thus Answ.
many evil Conventions would be approved, and laudable ones, tending to the
good of Empires and Kingdoms, would be rendered of no valididity, because held
without the Knowledge or consent of the Supreme Magistrate, which were
dangerous to say. The Syllogism ought therefore to be thus formed: It is a
lawful Convention wherein nothing is treated, but what is consentaneous to the
Laws, and appertains to the well-being, and to the best State of a Common Weal,
but ^n the Sudercopian Convention, nothing was determined that is not agreeable
to the Laws of Suethen and other Nations: Who therefore will call such a
Convention unlawful? And if that be to be called a lawful Assembly, of the
causes and necessity whereof his Majesty had been advertised, this cannot be
termed an unlawful one; timely Advertisements of the reasons inducing his
Highness and the Councillors of the Kingdom to call that Parliament, having
been sent to his Majesty, as by their Letters of the 28. of July may appear.

Neither was it unknown to his Majesty in what Confusion and Perturbation he
left the Kingdom at his departure; nor yet, if the causes had not been
signified, ought this Parliament to have been judged unlawful, for as much as
in our Municipal Laws there is not one which commands the same, and that ought
to be called unlawful, which is contrary to the Law: And if any Law
prohibiting the celebrating of Parliaments, were extant, it ought deservedly to
be restrained or altogether abolished, where danger may be apprehended by
delay, in which case the common rules of Law may be receded from, and
undoubtedly this exception may take place here, for daily Experience shows
what delays are contracted by expectation of answers out of Poland. The
deferring thereof for the Regal approbation would have been of small
conducement, seeing the whole Matter appears disrellishing to his Majesty, who
also by an absolute prohibition might have procured detriment to the Kingdom,
and prejudice to the Royal Dignity. And albeit his Majesty had deigned an
acceptable answer, yet it had been repugnant to the Custom (time out of mind)
of this Kingdom; both because it had ever been permitted here to call
Parliaments, Necessity urging, and the King being in foreign parts, as also
that it would have been a reproach and ignominy to the Kingdom, to have
sought a form and frame of administering the same from abroad. How necessary
that Convention was, the ensuing Reasons will demonstrate.

1. It will be granted by all men, and his Majesty must acknowledge, (unless
he will affirm that his Kingdom may want him without prejudice) that no
Kingdom can continue without a King or head, and a certain form of
Administration. The King was departed out of his hereditary Kingdom, and had
left no Governor nor settled form of Government, nor hopes of his return;
having, as aforesaid, promised the Polanders to spend his remaining life with
them, so soon as he should have received the Crown, and had settled his affairs
in Suethland: and therefore deliberation for governing the Common Wealth in his
absence, was necessary for the avoiding of prejudice by confusion, which began
to sprout forth: But the Subjects consent being requisite for such a
Settlement, it was needful, that the Orders of the Kingdom should be convened
to make an Election by common sufferage.

Further, without a Governor, to whom should the Subjects have addressed their
Complaints? for each one would have ruled as he listed, which is hardly now
abstained from (and the rather because his Majesty renders the Sudercopian
Decree subject to Suspicion and Contempt) by means whereof the Subjects finding
themselves deserted by their lawful Crowned King, might have taken occasion of
swerving from their duty; neither would reason nor the examples of Ancestors
have been wanting. Here may be added, that the Russian War, which had lain upon
us twenty six years was not then ended, and winter approached, affording to the
enemy notable opportunities of infesting the Kingdom; the Borders were denuded
of military Guards, and as it were exposed to incursions; to obviate these
evils, mutual consent, Counsel and assistance was requisite, which could be no
way better effected then by the Sudercopian Parliament.

But whereas his Majesty endeavors to prove the same unlawful by the
forecited Text of the second Chapter in the title of Reals, it may be worthy of
observation, how this deduction can be made from thence: His Majesty's words
admit of a double construction: First, that Subjects are bound to obey the
Kings command, when they are fortified with and conformable to law, unto which
sense his Highness does submit, and it is only inquired, whether such a
Convention be forbidden by the Law? but if no such Law can be produced, he
collects from thence, that the same is legally permitted: For what is not
prohibited, is conceived to be allowed: and where the Law is silent, we ought
to be so likewise: Which Laws are the more pertinent to our purpose, because
that here the Privation of a Right is concerned, whereof no man can be (justly)
deprived but by express provision of the Laws. But if the words signify that,
according to Law, the Subjects are bound to obey whatsoever the King shall
command: many inconveniences would redound thence; for thereby all his
injunctions, just or unjust, must have the force of a Law, which would savor
more of a Tyrant then of a Christian Prince.

Caesar, albeit a Monarch, in the Cabinet of whose breast all Laws are
contained, and who can prescribe and ordain against Law Positive, has not
thought it below him to say, that he is subject to the Laws; contrary to the
common voice of Tyrants is, Sicvolo, sic jubeo, sit pro ratione voluntas.

2. That Law cannot be so generally understood as his Majesty would have it,
because his Sovereignty is circumscribed and limited by his Oath, by his
Assecuration, and by the Laws themselves, neither can it extend further then
they permit: And here that clause of his Majesty's Letter, That he granted not
unto his Highness an absolute but a limited Rule, is answered; for his Majesty
not having (as is here showed) an absolute Rule, how could he transfer to
another what himself had not.

3. Whereas it is expressly contained in the Regal Oath and in our Municipall
Law, that the King ought to command his Subjects nothing but what is right and
just before God and man; how can the King command what ever he will? or how are
the Subjects bound to obey his command in all things, if he shall enjoin ought
contrary to the Laws and Statutes of the Land.

Seeing therefore that this Law is to be understood with an exception, and
extends not further then the Regal Oath and the Kingdoms Laws permit, it may
be demanded whether the King could rightly hinder or disturb the Sudercopian
Parliament? For first, he promised by Oath to impose no new Law upon his
Subjects without their consent: but whereas in all the body of our Law there is
not one which forbids the celebrating of a Parliament, the King remaining in
foreign parts, and that his Majesty endeavors to introduce such a Law, let
the Subjects approbation be first required; which certainly they will never
afford as having unanimously concentred in and confirmed the Sudercopian
Convention: and therefore his Majesty can not make such a Law, nor disanull
those Decrees, unless he will act against his Oath and Faith, and against the
Laws of the Land, besides the hazard of reducing his Hereditary Kingdom into
extreme danger.

Secondly, his Majesty made Oath to preserve all the Rights and Privileges of
the Kingdom: But that of calling Parliaments in the Regal absence is most
ancient, as is manifest in former Ages; especially in the Raigns of Ericke the
thirteenth, and John the second, in which the Orders of the Kingdom convened
to admonish the King (by writing) of his duty, and to exhort him not to leave
the Kingdom in the distractions it then was. And albeit his Highness is not
ignorant that Judgment is not to be given by example, but by Law, he holds it
(yet) worthy of consideration that examples are of a twofold kind; the one
diametrically repugnant, the other consentaneous to the Laws; the former of no
authority, the latter of equal force with the Law: But those before cited are
not contrary thereunto, and therefore cannot be legally rejected by his Majesty:
Moreover, not so much the example as the frequency of such actings, and the
time requisite for such prescriptions are to be regarded; which custom is not
only of equal force with the Laws, but does sometimes eclipse their Authority.

Thirdly, Whereas his Majesty did religiously promise that he would intermit
nothing which might conduce to the welfare and flourishing estate of the
Kingdom, he cannot nullify the Sudercopian Decree which wholly tended to the
Patriall good and safety: And albeit a Law were extant, forbidding Parliaments
to be held in the Royal absence, yet it ought to be restrained when the
Kingdom by reason of that absence were in danger. For, Salus Populi Suprema
Lex Esto. And a Prince ought to prefer the public good before his own
particular.

As therefore his Highness and the Kingdoms Inhabitants are not further bound
unto his Majesty, nor obliged to obey his commands then his Oath, his Caution
given, and the Laws of the Land do permit, and that these would be
contradicted if his Majesty should obstruct the Parliamentary Decree made and
ratified by common consent; It follows of right that the Subjects are not
bound to the obedience of his Edict, especially in regard the Kings and
Kingdoms wel-being was endeavored by that Convention.

That since this Kingdom, of Elective, became Arg. 2.
Hereditary, no such Parliaments were ever celebrated the King living; and that
this therefore opposed his Dignity and Regal Rights.

That since the first time this Kingdom became Hereditary, Answ.
never did any of their Kings at one and the same time govern two Kingdoms so
far distant and differing both in people and language, but always remained in,
and laudably ruled their Hereditary Kingdom; and therefore it was not
necessary that another should undertake the work and call Parliaments; albeit
even they, as Affairs required, could not otherwise govern then by such
Convocations: So as this ought not to turn to his Highness reproach, the
Kingdom being in a manner destitute of a King, and disorders increasing.

It may also be here demanded, whether more right and power accrues to the King
by Succession, then his Predecessors had whilst Reigning by a free Election?
But if it cannot be showed that more power and authority is devolved unto his
Majesty, what should now hinder Parliamentary Indictings and the constitutions
of things tending to the good of the King, the Kingdom, and total
Posterities, seeing that Histories do show the same has been done, they
reigning and governing other Kingdoms.

That in the Sudercopian Convention new Laws Arg. 3.
were enacted, and that to make and promulgate Edicts is solely Regal:
Wherefore the Transactions there did undoubtedly derogate from the Royal
Dignity and Authority, and ought to be abrogated.

That to ordain new Laws is not solely Regal, but the Answ.
Subjects consent is likewise requisite, without which it cannot be done. It is
also affirmed that no new Law was enacted in that Convention, and consequently
nothing derogatory to his Majesty therein acted.

That much time was not Elapsed since his Majesty's Arg. 4.
Coronation, so as the promises then made might easily be remembered, and
therefore their renovation by any particular Convention was unneedfull.

His Highness regards not so much the time as the manner Answ. 1.
of his Majesty's observing those agreements, and that many things could be
made appear to have been acted contrary to the most of them, but that he is
tender of his Majesty's honor and fame.

2. This Objection is more hurtful then helpful to his Majesty's cause, in
saying he was mindful of what had been transacted at his Inauguration, for his
Judgment may suggest unto him what suspicion may arise from a (voluntary)
omission of what one knows ought of right to be done.

3. From hence also conjecture may be made how that will be kept unto Posterity
which is wilfully neglected at the very first.

4. Renewing of things formerly concluded is not unusual, for many things are
comprehended in the Law and published, which neither ought nor can be unknown
to any: yet forasmuch as they are many ways trespassed against, Kings with the
Orders of the Kingdom, have thought meet to digest the heads, mostly swarved
from, into new Edicts and Constitutions, and so republish them to the people;
which might be also exemplified by other Nations, but that the repetition would
be overlong.

That his Highness had by that Parliament administered Arg. 5.
occasion to deprive his Majesty, with himself, and whole Posterity, of the
Succession and Kingdom, and therefore those Decrees ought to be abolished.

Experience, the continued consent of Histories and all Politics Answ.
do accord, that for two causes chiefly God does transfer the Empire of one
Nation to another; Viz. Impiety and Injustice: And therefore by the rule of
contraries it follows, that he who provides for Concord in Religion, and who
administers Right and Justice, affords no matter for such Mutations: But that
this is the maine scope of the Sudercopian Decree is evident from it self;
wherefore his Highness cannot be justly accused of giving occasion thereby to
deprive his Majesty and his Successors of the Kingdom: For caution being
therein given that the Oath of subjectional Fidelity should be preserved, and
all erroneous Decrees dissenting from our received and admitted Religion,
abrogated; it follows consequentially (for Negation of the whole admits of
Negation of parts) that whosoever impugnes that Decree does equally free the
Subjects from their Oath of Fidelity to his Majesty, disturbes Concord in
Religion, and overturnes the Hereditary Covenants: His Highness therefore does
Jurally affirm that his Majesty cannot disanull the same without absolving the
Subjects from their said Oath and exclusion of himself and Posterity from the
Succession.

2. The Subjects Obligation to his Majesty is conditional, agreeable to the
Regal Oath and Assecuration, as has been showed: Whence it is that by
over-throwing the Sudercopian Tractation the Covenant will not be fulfilled:
ANd it is evident in Law, that where the Condition is not observed the
Obligation is void: The rescinding therefore of that Transaction may administer
cause of defection, as his Highness has, brotherly, admonished his Majesty.

3. None can be ignorant that it is usual, in all Nations, for Subjects to
renounce their fidelity and obedience upon violation of the Regal Conditions
and Covenants: Histories do record, nor can it be unknown unto any, what has
been acted in Suethland, Poland, France, England, Scotland, and Denmark; yea,
near at hand, some may be found, who, by their Laws, have expressly prohibited
obedience to be rendered to their Kings in things contrary to the Laws;
Witness the Statutes of Poland.

By the Law it is permitted that either party acting contrary to agreement, the
other also may recede: there is likewise a Relative Fidelity so equal between
a Prince and his Subjects, that a faithful Prince renders his Subjects such;
and therefore the Evertion of the Sudercopian Decree would be dangerous to the
King and his Successors, neither can his Majesty anihilate the same without
hazarding the forecited inconveniences.

Some may be of opinion, that Subjects ought not to desert their allegiance,
albeit the King should act contrary to his Covenant; and that they being bound
to him by Oath, their violation thereof were Perjury, how enormously soever
dealt with: yet here it is to be considered that an Oath is not a Bond of
in-equity and unjustice, which would follow if his Majesty might swarve from
his, and the Subjects remain bound by theirs.

That albeit Treachery had been impending, his Arg. 6.
Highness ought not to have called a Parliament without the Royal assent, how
much less when apparently no danger was to be feared.

This seems to be without grounds, seeing that in such cases Answ.
men are wholly freed from the Law: For, albeit Paracide be a crime so atroce,
and of that horrible and detestable nature, as the Ancients could not conceive
it to come into the mind of man, or invent for it a condign punishment: Yet
the Son who should slay his Father in the practice of Treason, was not only
legally acquitted but rewarded likewise: Moreover the general exception of all
Laws is, Salus Populi Suprema lex esto: And necessity is above all Law. If
then in those Nefarious acts we are exempted from the law when Prodition
threatens danger, how much more lawful is it to call a Parliament (like
necessity urging) which is not forbidden by any Law; and his Majesty may gather
by what before specified, that from the longer Government by the form he left
behind him, little less prejudice would have been derived then if present
treachery had been to be feared.

To the Ambassadoriall Oration of the Polanders, Answer to the Oration.
the Duke and Counselors of the Kingdom of Suethland made answer as follows.
THat amongst the admirable Works of God upon Earth, nothing is more
wonderful then the Bond or Order whereby men have been governed from the
beginning, with due preservation of mutual Society; and albeit partly in
confused, mostly in very different manner, yet their universal ruin has not
hitherto succeeded. In some places One, in others a few, the more noble and
more wise; in others more, sometimes the multitude have ruled. And yet in such
varieties of Men and Nations, and difference of Governments, that Soveraigntie
should subsist and be durable to the Worlds end, no wiseman but will admire and
acknowledge it to proceed from the Singular goodness of God, and chiefly to
that end whereunto all Empire seems to Verge; that the Almighty may receive
praise, and that Justice may be preserved unblemished.

That amongst all those Forms, the Government by one person, the counsel of
prudent men annexed, has always been the chief in estimation: The same by one
King as the humane body with its members being better governed, as the Lords
Ambassadors in the beginning of their Oration did prudently deliver, in the
enumeration of the ancient alliances between the two Kingdoms of Suethland and
Polard, for many years, under several Princes of each Nation, but especially
this last and nearest of Sigismundus hereditary of Suethland, freely and
voluntarily elected King of Poland, which friendship had ever been honorable
to both the Nations: To Poland hitherto beneficial mostly; To Suethland most
grateful.

As to the comparison of the body of man to a Kingdom, and the Rule of the
head over the same to the Regal Dignity; the similitude is most fitly adapted
and an argument of great Erudition, taken out of Menenius Agrippa in Livy, but
is not rightly applied to the Suethes, ever most faithful to their Kings. No
question is made how the Statutes of Poland are observed toward his Majesty
who was called thither, not of necessity but by their own free will: His
Majesty's Fame was their inducement to his Election; but the Suethes are bound
to their King by hereditary right of blood, coupled with Virtue: They by their
free electing him have testified a singular gratitude and propensity toward the
maternall Regal Stock: but who can say, that the Suethes have ever come short
of any toward their King and Regal Family, having conceded the Electory
Sovereignty of a most ancient Kingdom into a perpetuated Inheritance of a
Masculine Royal Line, without other wise antiquating any Law of Privilege of
the Kingdom? It must be granted, that nothing is more consentaneous to nature,
then that the body with all its members and parts universally should be
governed by the head, and that the like right belongs to a King in a Kingdom:
yet so, that the Office of the members, which are to obey, be not confounded,
or any thing contrary to Law obtruded; as also that consideration be had
whether the King remain fixed within or without the Kingdom.

The heads of the Polish Complaint against the Sudercopian Assembly were then
rehearsed as they are couched in the Oration, but the repetition for brevities
sake (here) omitted: And to the whole it was replied; That,

To the Suethes an Embassy so magnificent, from the Senatoriall Orders of
Poland and Lithuania, would have come most acceptable for the weeding out of
any discords that might have sprung up, and the renewing of mutual friendship;
for thereby their great fidelity, and regard to his Majesty, and their good
inclination to this Kingdom, would have appeared But that it was beyond the
expectation of his Highness, and the Orders of Suethland, that they should
incur a suspicion so harsh from friends and associates, the fidelity of the
Suethes, not being so slightly seated, as that such grave Persons should be
moved with a vain rumor: It was not meet, yea by so much more unmeet, in that
they seem to be charged with high Treason, wherefrom the Suethes have ever been
most averse: The Orders of Poland ought to have been better instructed in the
affairs of Suethland, before they had made so sinister a National
Construction, as that the State thereof was disturbed, and the Regal Dignity
prostituted; and this upon a rumor in Poland far greater (doubtless) then the
Ambassadors do find to be really here: Admonition amongst equals and fellows
is admittable, but such a censure in no wise. The Orders of Poland and
Lithuania mistrust that many things have been transacted at Sudercopia, tending
to the disturbance of ancient Order, and the right Government of this Kingdom,
directly undermining his Majesty's Dignity and Superiority, etc. It is contrary
to duty and mutual benevolency to thrust ones Sicle into another man's Harvest,
and to meddle with things that properly belong to the State and Orders of
Suethland, who have never had ought in more, or more ancient, estimation, then
their fidelity and obedience toward their Kings; and then whom it concerns none
more that the right form of Government should not be changed; and, if it were,
to have it restored.

The Sudercopian Parliament was convened by his Highness, to whom, with the
Senators, the King had committed the kingdom: Not upon light grounds, as the
Ambassadors may have partly perceived by the Acts, for it was necessary to
call a Parliament, neither was ought therein concluded derogatory to the regal
Dignity, or to the Patriall Rights; nor were new Laws enacted, but the old put
in execution: That which preserves tranquillity of Religion generally received
in a kingdom, which executes the Laws, abolisheth civil dissension,
establishes the regal Oath and the hereditary Covenants, does more confirm
then weaken the Regal Rights: No man therefore will doubt, but that his
Majesty will have it unviolably observed, and will think nothing can more
conduce to the illustration and amplification of his Dignity: It was called for
his good, not for sedition or disobedience; neither was it unwitting to him,
for he had been certified of the motives by Artizouskie in August preceding;
he protested indeed, but the thing was done. The power of calling Parliaments
is known to be in the Supreme Prince when within the Kingdom; but if
otherwise, it has never been observed that Treason was imputed, if they to
whom the Government was committed did call a Parliament in the Regal absence
so long as nothing was acted contrary to their Faith and Oath given. This
Kingdom has some Presidents, as in the times of Christian the first, and John
the second, when the effects of the Regal Oath began to languish, which may
easily happen in the Kingly absence: Foreign examples are not wanting, nor
argumentative proofs of the best learned in Politics many years past, as well
of the Roman as of our Religion, that the King being absent, Parliaments may be
kept without derogating from Majesty: According to Cominaeus, they swarve from
the Law of Nations, and the custom of their Ancestors who plot to root out the
most laudable institution of celebrating common Counsels, the greatest strength
and establishment of a Kingdom: Under Edward the second of England, Charles
the eighth, and Lewis the eleventh of France, and these also are Hereditary
Kingdoms, Parliaments have been called the King present: In Germany it is no
new thing for the States to convene against the Emperors mind, and it is yet
fresh in memory that the like has been done in Poland, the King, even this
Sigismund the third, not only unwilling but also prohibiting and protesting
against it, which is not here mentioned to accuse others, for all men have
judged Parliaments to be lawful, when publicly called for weighty causes and
not contrary to the good of King and Kingdom, albeit against his mind being
absent. Confederacies opposite to the Regal Dignity, Praeeminencie, and
Rights, have not been undertaken as is unjustly objected: Such savor of
Sedition which never entered into the thoughts of the Suethes. Conspiracy is
close, treacherous, distructitive to King and Country; but Parliaments are
lawful and do fortify both: It is therefore Illegal to tax the Suethes of
treason, for so convening, when as the same appears not to be forbidden them
by any Law; but unto Kings is not permitted to Enact Laws without the Peoples
consent, no more then to govern the people contrary to the Law and without the
assent of the Senators.

The more weighty inducements to that Parliaments indiction were, the public
Debts; the unpaid stipends of the Soldery, whose Military Virtue is not unknown
to any; the settling of Dowries whereunto extraordinary collection was
necessary; which by the Laws of Suethland, the King himself (when present)
cannot compel without a Parliament: His Majesty was absent whose part it was
to clear the debts of his Father and the Kingdom, which cannot stand safe
without salving the public Faith. Another motive was that in the Form of
Government prescribed, several things seemed wanting in conformity to the
Laws and Regal Oath, whereunto the Orders of the Kingdom conceived they
ought to adhaere the more constantly by reason of discords about Religion,
which were not when the right of Hereditation was conferred upon the Regal
Family. To the said Form the Senatoriall Votes were also requisite, without
which the King is by our Laws forbidden to settle ought of the Kingdoms more
weighty Affairs. These reasons may suffice for the calling of that Parliament,
albeit more might be given: Let us now discuss the heads of what was therein
concluded.

It is reputed treason that some are removed from Office; that the Regal
Letters receive not due regard; that appeals to the King are prohibited with
sundry others: To all which articulate answers shall be made, that so the
innocence of the Suethes may appear to equal minds.

That some are reduced is not denied; and if, the Ambassadors were acquainted
with the reasons, not unjustly; for some could not be admitted to bear rule
without infringing the Regal Oath: Others, refractory to the public peace had
like members lost from the body, not only separated themselves from the
Sudercopian Decree, but from others also of greater antiquity which had been by
Regal Oath confirmed: not without suspicion of innovation, which is mostly
studied by such as esteem nothing more then to be pleasing to the Supreme
Majestrate without discerning what is just and commodious for the Common Weal,
and so to grow upon the ruins of others: yet these are permitted to enjoy the
benefit of the Laws and ordinary Privileges. It is moreover to be considered
that the more honorable Offices of this Kingdom cannot be immediately rightly
conferred by the King, howbeit fixed within the Kingdom, unless that first,
if One be to be admitted into the Senatoriall Counsel; if into any other great
Office, the Provincial Votes have conceded to One of Three. Neither can Judges
(the King even present) be otherwise appointed: But he remaining out of the
Kingdom, by his Vicegerent, which Office the Kingdoms Sewer (as they here
term it) did anciently, by virtue of a certain Law discharge in the Regal
absence: This is testified by the Laws themselves, by the privileges of sundry
Kings and famous Constitutions of the Kingdom for above five hundred years, as
also by the union of these three Kingdoms in the Reigns of Queen Margaret,
and of the Kings, Ericke, Christopher, John the second, and Christierne the
first and second.

Come we now to the point of appealing. It is not unknown to any, that the most
High God has Instituted the Supreme Magistrate for a Sanctuary and refuge to
the oppressed: So that appeals to the King and to those that bear rule, and
such as the King has appointed as chief in his absence, are lawful even by
the greatest Offenders: And this is a custom practiced in the Roman
Provinces, and observed by other Kings whose Extents are large, but if it were
free for guilty and indebted persons to make continual appeals to the King,
what end would there be of Suites. When should Crimes be punished? Appeals to
the King ought to be of the more weighty causes only, and the maine matters of
the Commonwealth: nothing is done herein contrary to the manner of other
Nations. Portugal and Naples are governed by Vice-royes; the Belgian Provinces
by Governors, yet no appeals from either are made unto the Spanish Court,
albeit each of those Countries have Senatoriall persons there residing, who
solicit the Affairs of the Nation, according to their Laws and Privileges.
But who remain in Poland negotiating for Suethland the Ambassadors can tell:
Or will they judge that those being in another Kingdom, can duly provide for
the Emergencies of Suethen? yet admit that sundry of our Senatoriall Patriots
were there, were it lawful for them to draw the controversies of the Suethes
thither? Neither is this a Right peculiar to us, but equally observed amongst
all Nations; for what King has desided the causes of one Kingdom in another,
unless the one were subject to the other: The declining a competent Court
within a kingdom loses the cause. Appeals to the King are not abscinded but
reserved in the Tribunal proper for the Majesty of the Kings of Suethland
until the Kings return: Neither can he alone, even within the Kingdom, give
sentence without able and unbyassed Assistants, no more then without a just
hearing of the Plaintiff and Defendant: Nor is any appeal admitted by Law from
the chief Tribunal unto the King, even in the most weighty Affairs, when he
is within the kingdom, the Courts of Justice being administered according to
custom and our written Law; how much less lawful then is it, the King
remaining out of the kingdom? And if permitted, would it not be dishonorable
and prejudicial to Regal Majesty, and to an unconquered kingdom, when the
chief Court of Justice should seem to wander, like an exile in a strange Land,
without fixation of place? many other inconveniences might be apprehended by
Appeals into Poland, as tediousness of way, vastness of expense, and at length
the undoubted extinction of the most ancient Right of a kingdom, which is
sacred and unviolable to all Nations.

Next, it is complained, That the Royal Letters and Patents are slighted;
whereunto is answered, that those Letters which are the Kings, are had in
reverence; but others, that is, such as are contrary to the mind, dignity, and
good of the King and Kingdom are received, as if the Suethes were assured,
that his Majesty desires nothing that is not conformable to the Laws confirmed
by the Regal Oath; and conducing to the preservation and emolument of their
mutual, most ancient dignities: Such are indeed suspended, that due honor may
be exhibited to the Royal hand and Seal, and that his Majesty may deliberate
more maturely. But some may say, thus, more wisdom and power is attributed to
the Subject, then to the Sovereign: in no wise. No question is made of the
Regal Power, which nevertheless, Alphonsus of Arragon did most rightly define,
when he said: unto Kings, whatsoever is honest is permitted; and that they may
do what they may legally do. It was a Royal Speech of the Emperor Honorius,
when he professed, that he, a Prince, was bound by the Laws: by those the
Kings of Suethland are confined. Things unequal, howbeit small at first, prove
in the end obnoxious to Cities and Kingdoms. In France (an hereditary
Monarchy) excessive bounty is frequently restrained without derogating from
Majesty, even in Suethen, the meanest may, by protection of Law, defend himself
and his against the King, by whom if ought upon false information be ordered at
the instance either of Plaintiff or Defendant, the same without consulting (or
derogating from) Majesty is ejected and abrogated. Kings have sometimes
entertained Advocates for poor men, who not only have boldly refused to obey
the Regal permissions or inhibitions, but have openly, unblamed, opposed them.
If this be tolerable in private persons, how can that be obtruded in the
Government of a Kingdom, the King absent, which by the Law may be overthrown
and may prove prejudicial even to Majesty it self.

The Prince and Senators, are charged moreover with Treason, because they had
decreed not to have regard to such Letters, as many times are by bad men,
unversed in the Suethish Affairs, extorted from a gracious Prince, to the
prejudice of himself and the Kingdom: sometimes by private persons, who
neither have nor deserve any power to enjoin obedience. What is this, but
putting the feet to do the work of the hands? whence that must necessarily
follow, which the Lords Ambassadors, most prudently did allege, viz The
Office of the Members would be confused; all would languish; their Order would
be disturbed, and the dissolution of the whole body must necessarily ensue. If
his Majesty will have ought of moment acted within the Kingdom, may not his
pleasure be better signified, to those that are over the same, as is usual in
all Nations? The Provincial Rulers have ever had such respect from kings, that
the Royal Mandates are directed to them for execution according to right, or
advertisement if Noxious or unjust: How much more unseemly is it to over-passe
them to whom the care of the whole Kingdom is committed? yet so it is mostly
that the first understanding must be from others, and that Letters are heaped
to diverse persons from whom most favor may be expected, not for what is
expedient for the King and Kingdom but themselves. A certain person is said
to have brought Letters out of Poland not long since surreptitiously obtained
from the King, for present payment of a certain sum of Dollars as a due debt
which sum had been satisfied some years before: Do not such Letters deserve
regard? Some are brought into the Kingdom manifestly taxing the Prince and
others of Infidelity toward his Majesty, the names concealed, tending to
incite, the Popularity especially, to insurrection, by which like instigations,
probably the Governor of Finland has dared to oppose the whole Kingdom of
Suethland: The King consented; yet doubtless not of his own accord, but by
the counsels of wicked men, and to his own and the kingdoms detriment. For,
then discord, nothing is more pernicious in kingdoms, (especially) if it
proceed so far that by one faction he thinks to oppress that which (but
undeservedly) he conceives to be another. But thus in destroying one by
another, he ruins the kingdom, even his Country.

The examples of France and the Netherlands alleged by the Lords Ambassadors,
serve here very fitly: For the French fell not into so many Calamities by any
National disobedience toward their King, but by the quotidian, violent subtle
snares set for expulsion of the Protestant Religion; whence that kingdom was
so many years afflicted with mutual Slaughters, Rapines, Rapes,
Incendiarismes, Sacriledges, and men's minds so exasperated, that a Civil War
seemed to be rendered perpetual: And whilst one Party endeavored a
Propagation, the other a defense of Religion, no room for Religion appeared to
be left by either; the blood of their Kings and Princes partly extirpated: And
they thus tearing out each others bowels, a third invades, pretending indeed
Religion, yet perhaps more gaping after the Gallican Dominion, as being
accustomed to have kingdoms fall to his share for reimbursement of Costs:

But return we to Flemingius who in time of peace, enrolls, assembles,
entertaines Forces; to what end? merely to consume what the Enemies have left,
to destroy those Subjects whom the Wars had spared: Infinites of them
complaining that their marrow, blood, and bones are sucked. Let his Majesty be
moved with the miseries of Finland, which bordering on the Russian was made the
Seat of War mostly by our own, and likewise exposed to the Enemies incursions
and depredations, but now more calamitously exhausted by waging and entertaing
a not necessary Soldiery: The King is obliged by Oath to protect and vindicate
the Innocent and the Needy from all Injuries whatsoever, and to preserve the
public peace.

How much more prudently may his Majesty abolish, not nourish discord by the
misery of the Subject, wherewith doubtless God is offended? Let his Majesty
command a deposing of Arms, and that all Controversies may be judicially
desided: To restrain Compatriotall hands from mutual Massacres is the part of
a most Excellent, Pious, and Christian King: Let his Majesty write and command
things honorable for himself and the kingdom, Obedience shall follow: for
such as are other let a suspension be permitted: And as Mahetas appealed from
the sentence of Philip of Macedon to the same King better informed; even so the
Suethes: His Highness and the Senators do moreover beseech that during his
Majesty's Reign and his Highness Vice-gerency assisted with the Senatoriall
Counsels, the kingdoms Laws may not suffer subvertion.

When Charles the fifth, after Royal Entertainment in France by Francis then
there Reigning, had at the request of the said King created some Knights and
Barons, their Honors were afterward disputed and concluded invalid, because
conferred in another Dominion, wherein he had not Right of Majesty, the
Dignity of each Realm salved. For those Rights are no where preserved but in
the kingdom where they are legitimate; transported abroad they are easily
obscured. Suethland has written Laws and famous Constitutions from the times
of Queen Margaret Ericke the 13th. Albert and other Kings, not abolished nor
antiquated, wherein is expressly provided, that the Kingdoms Affairs shall in
the Regal absence, be administered by the Native Counselors, Peers, and great
Officers of the same: Neither are the Royal Commands, when given without the
Kingdom, to be obeyed further then they shall by the Counsel be approved, and
this is ratified by evident Laws, Regal Oaths, and Hereditary Covenants.
Writings are extant between King Gustavus and Ericke the 14th. his Son, whereby
(upon his intended Voyage for England, to have matched with Elizabeth that
Nations Queen) he was expressly bound to refer all the Affairs of Suethland
unto the King his Father, or he being dead, to the Vicegerent and the
Senators: And when afterward he should the second time have undertaken the
like, to commit them to John Duke of Finland, Governor (afterward King) of
Suethland, together with the Senators.

Let it be moreover considered, how fully and sufficiently either Realm was
provided for at the marriage of Philip of Spain with Queen Mary of England,
that the Pre-eminency and Dignity of each might be preserved entire, and not
wander with the Kings Person into a strange Kingdom: Yet both are hereditary;
but the Argument expressed in our Laws, is much more forcible; for the King is
obliged, even here remaining, to govern Suethland by the counsel of the native
Senators, not strangers; how much more therefore when remote and necessitated
to use the Eyes and Ears of others? the Senators also of this Kingdom are tied
by Oath to admonish the king seriously and frequently to preserve the kingdoms
Laws and Royalty unviolate, which albeit it be no easy task: yea, for the most
part undeservedly dangerous, yet they have willingly undergone it, and
discharged their parts at his Majesty's being here; so as the Ambassadors
present trouble might have been spared, if time had been then improved; for the
kingdoms affairs were begun to be treated with fidelity and due diligence;
but hardly could the Inauguration be proceeded unto without great difficulty
and longer contest then was meet about things not ambiguous, formerly sworn
unto and confirmed. The form of Government, by diverse counsels and
alterations was protracted even to the time of departure, no consent of the
Senate concurring; and it was manifestly purposely so done by advice of persons
not well affected to this Kingdom, or ignorant of affairs, or fit to be
ejected from the Results of Suethland: or lastly, such as had secretly
concluded, the Kingdom should be Governed by the rule of Succession, but the
Suethes by that of Servitude: This they detest, the other they submit unto, and
will maintain unviolably, as the bond of their Liberties preservation and
increase, not of obtrusion of slavery, which the hereditary Covenants do
clearly demonstrate.

No Tax or Tribute was commanded in that Parliament, but a voluntary supply
tendered according to the Legal form for causes in the Law expressed; Viz.
Repairing the charges of War.

The matter of money, as of no great concernment, was almost forgotten; for the
privilege of coining has been conceded to several Princes and Cities without
violation of Majesty: At Vastena money is coined with the conjoined names of
his Majesty and the Prince his brother, with which impression the King his
Father had coined, in sign of Concord, at the beginning of his Reign, and
soon after voluntarily conferred the said privilege upon the Duke his brother
during life.

This is the answer thought meet to be given to the Lords Ambassadors, and it
is most earnestly desired that the same may be accepted without offense to his
Majesty, whom the State and Orders of the Kingdom do honor and reverence with
all integrity and fidelity, and albeit the same be at length, yet is it not
that the Suethes are obliged to render account to any but his Majesty, and
(he) within the Kingdom, but that their cleerness from the treason tacitly
implied may appear to all the World. Sundry other Stigma's are cast upon that
Sudercopian Transaction, which by this Kingdoms Laws and Statutes will be
easily evinced: Albeit they acknowledge the States and Orders of Poland and
Lithuania for fellow Subjects under the most just Empire of one and the same
King, yet not for Judges: The said Orders may understand that his Highness and
those of Suethen dissent not from them in any thing; but least in the love of
concord, and hatred of dissension; nor can ought be more acceptable to them
then a composure of all differences by an equal and mutual moderation. It may
be effected if the Council of whom it behooves may be admitted, waving threats
from the threatened who fear them not. Otherwise if the controversy (which God
forbid) must be decided by Arms, not only the King and Prince themselves, but
the neighbor Princes and Territories also may be disturbed, perhaps with great
prejudice to the Regal Family, for what side soever should win, it would be to
him detrimentall, as many times in Civil War both Parties, being weakened, do
easily become a prey to any third.

The Orders therefore of Poland and Lithuania are in loving and brotherly
manner desired by his Highness and the Senators of Suethland, as a thing
worthy of their prudence, equity, and mutual society, becoming fellows and
friends, the Ambassadors likewise intervening to endeavor the eradicating of
this suspicion from the mind of his Majesty who is King and Lord of both the
Peoples: And that themselves also will eject it, and will entreat, admonish,
and conjure his Majesty not to be induced by the Counsel of wicked persons to
the meditating of any hurt to this kingdom, nor suffer his Royal mind to be
alienated from his Paternall Soil; And that they will consider not in what way
of Religion the Suethes worship God, but with what fidelity and sincerity they
reverence their King.

The Ambassadors desire an abrogation of things contrary to the Laws, and the
same is instantly sought by his Highness and the Senators. Let the heads of
the Suethish Law, whereby the King and Subjects are mutually bound by Oath, be
scrutinized, so as the least deviation may easily be found, and the general
Conclusion follows in these words: We (viz.) The Subjects are obliged to our
Sovereign in true obedience; That is, to obey his command in all things
feasible, which before God and man he ought to command, and we to obey, saving
his Rights and our own. At Sudercopia nothing was concluded repugnant to the
Laws and Statutes of this Kingdom confirmed by Oath. If any think otherwise
let those be Judges and Arbitrators; they are not obscure, ambiguous, nor
abrogated, but sometimes Sacramentally Corroborated. No Article is annulled by
Hereditary Succession, only the Election altered into a right of Devolution.
To this Scale those Transactions are submitted: The Duke and Senate refuse not
to render an account to a most mild and gracious King. Let the Suethes adhaere
to and without blame enjoy the Laws and Privileges acquired by their own and
their Ancestors great Merits, which his Majesty has sworn to preserve; and
let him then (as we desire and hope he will) with the same patience that a
Macedonian King reviewed a private cause, examine that of his most ancient and
now Hereditary kingdom within the Paternall Soil: And so lend an ear to
Accusers as not to refuse another to them unpossessed of Calumny: And they do
hope that the Orders of Poland and Lithuania are so equal toward all men, as
themselves will not only forbear suspicion in the future, but evidence the
innocence of the Suethes to others also. If otherewise, and that for private
profit and favor they will have no regard unto their innocence, it may produce
danger; one man's damage being sometimes hurtful to his Neighbor. Poland is a
flourishing kingdom, and may it ever flourish: Neither does this want
Monuments of having flourished: If now it appear wasted by a continued War,
what wonder? What Kingdom or Commonweal has waged War full thirty six years
with its own Forces and charge and is not wasted, so as it may seem fit for
any obtrusion? Nevertheless the said Orders are persuaded that as a rapid
overflowing River, incountring some of the largest Trees, felled in the
neighbor grounds, hurries them into the same precipice: So the fall or least
mutation of the ancient State or Government of potent kingdoms, draws others
with it into ruin.

The Prince and Senate do therefore heartily desire the States and Orders of
Poland, to interpose their power with his Majesty, that regard may be had to
this defense, and that they will employ their Wealth and Fortunes and what else
is dear unto them, for the preservation, not the subversion of Laws and
Privileges, then which there cannot be a stronger confirmation of the Royal
Scepter; or way more durable for retention and increase of the Royal Dignity
of a twofold Crown, nor ought more worthy of the Polish Nation, for the
Vindicators of liberty and the maintainers of privileges, have ever been in
laudable estimation: And therefore it is not feared that they will go about to
obtrude upon others, what they would account to be unjust if done unto
themselves. The Suethes have always much esteemed the Polanders, and will with
them, if need shall be, defend his Royal Majesty with the hazards of their
lives and fortunes, and fixed upon the Regal Oath, will, with the Polanders
remain constantly faithful and obedient toward their King, and willingly on
their part preserve the ancient Concord between the two Kingdoms, saving to
each their right: And do return offers of readiness and propensity to all
Offices of love unto the Senate and Orders of Poland, and the great Dukedom of
Lithuania, to whom they desire to be in most respective manner remembered, and
do entreat that this answer may be received in good part, according to the
time, as being wholly necessary for their own defense, no way intended for
reproaching or inveighing. To conclude, a quiet Navigation with prosperous
winds and happy return unto their Principalls and Friends is wished to the
Lords Ambassadors, by his Highness and the Senate.

This was the substance of the Polish Ambassadoriall Oration, and of the
replies made thereunto by Duke Charles and the Senators of Suethland; Who
nevertheless do say, that this Legation was instituted to no other end then
the abrogation of the Sudercopian Conclusions, those Ambassadors divulging that
the said Assembly was much derogatory to the Royal Majesty and Authority, and
by their perverse contention procured the sudden breaking forth of formerly
buried dissentions, which brought many to their last end with incomparable
mischiefs upon Suethland, Finland, and Leisland: When the Duke therefore saw
that, for his labor and love toward his Country and Nephew, he was requited
with such ingratitude, and that the Embassy forementioned, was accompanied
with so many prejudices to the Nation, not without a Charge of high Treason, he
was constrained to call another Parliament at Arbogia against the fifth of
March, Parliament at Arbogia.
1597.

To this Comitiall Convention all the Orders of the kingdom, according to the
custom and necessity, were invited; and by King Sigismundus, the repair
thereunto, strictly prohibited, hoping by his Mandates dispersed through the
kingdom, to deterr the Natives therefrom, as he had by his late Legation
gained the adhaerency of several Senators, of whom the chief were Ericke
Sparre, Hogenschieldus Bielke, Claudius, and Turo Bielke, Gustavus, and Steno
^aner; Georgius Posse the Son of Canutus, with the more eminent of the
Equestriall Order, who were imbued, by those Counselors of the kingdom, that
what the Senators should do the said Order was to subscribe unto and follow,
whereby many of the chief Nobility, Military Commanders, Clergy and Burgesses
through the wicked persuasions of those Senators, declined their appearance, as
did those Senators themselves, none reparing to the same, Count Axell of
Rasborg excepted, albeit the generality of the Equestriall Order, Counts,
Barons, Gentry, Prelates, Military Officers, Burgesses, and common people,
flocked thereunto without regard to the example or Malignant inducements of the
Senators.

The particular transactions in that Parliament I omit, referring (as before)
the curious to the Acts themselves, the most material being an exclusion of
all mixed religions as displeasing to God, pernicious to Souls, tending to
persecutions, mutual hatred and dissentions, with an asseveration or assurance
of remaining constant, God assisting, in the Doctrine received, and that they
would not permit the exercise of any other Religion to be received in any part
of that Kingdom, (the Kings private Chapel, when he should be within the
kingdom, only excepted) and whosoever should secretly or openly transgress
this decree and general agreement, by acting contrary to their Subscriptions
and Signatures, they were to be reputed as perfidious persons, and to be
shunned by all honest and ingenious people.

The reiteration of their assurances of fidelity to their King followed next in
order according to the Union of Hereditary Succession, the Testament of King
Gustavus, or his last Parliament, An. 1560. celebrated at Stocholme, as also
conform to their own late conclusions at Sudercopia; for the confirmation
whereof this convention was chiefly instituted, wherein was further enacted,
that all Dissenters from their and the Sudercopian Decrees, who should not
declare themselves within six weeks (excepting those of the remoter Provinces,
to whom longer time was allotted) should be reputed as Disturbers of the
Commonwealth, and to be cut off from the body Politic. On whom (after due
information and exhortation) fit punishment was by his Highness, with consent
of the Senatoriall (and other) Orders to be inflicted: The like for all of
whatsoever condition or degree, who should for any respect desert or fall off
therefrom. The Commotions in Finland were also resented, and the sufferings of
the people there, in order whereunto it was decreed that some persons of good
repute should be sent thither with severe Injunctions to all parties to depose
their Arms, and demean themselves peaceably, and where any just cause of
complaint was, the same to be legally discussed and decided, and that his
Majesty should be humbly moved by those who should be deputed toward him, that
by his Royal Authority there might be a ceasing of these disturbances and
provincial devastations; but if it should be certainly found by faithful
Messengers, that those tumults did not end but rather increase, and that
counsel nor admonition would not take place, that then other proceedings
corresponding to the Regal Oath and to the Sudercopian Constitutions should be
made, whereby the Kingdom might not be further damnified. Provision was
likewise made for the ease of the Subject in certain particulars, until a
total alleviation might ensue.

They also bound themselves to Unity and mutual defense with lives and
fortunes, against all persons who should offer or attempt any violence toward
the observers of those things which were in that Convention established: yet
still with reservation of the fidelity due to their Supreme Majestrate, and the
concord wherein they were by Law and right bound unto each other. This
Transaction was (as aforesaid) at Arbogia the fifth of March, 1597.

But this Parliament was not more pleasing to King Sigismundus Displeasing to
King Sigismund.
then that of Sudercopia. Dissentions (say the Suethes) being raised up in each
corner of the Kingdom, the Orders thereof declined by troops the conventional
Conclusions; That brood of Senators (not to digress from their own words)
persuading the several States not to adhaere unto or repute the Arbogian
decrees for legal, albeit concurring with those of Sudercopia, and feeding all
degrees of people with hopes of the speedy return of King Sigismundus, to the
great emolument of the Country and Inhabitants thereof; and that the Arbogian
Constitutions were to be the less esteemed, in regard the Senators with
certain chiefs of the other Orders, did not assist at or subscribe unto them.

With the like allurements and fucatious persuasions (say the Suethes) they
seduced many of the several Orders: which done, they with their Wives and
Children abandoned the Kingdom, maliciously pretending they neither could nor
would assent unto the Arbogian results: But chiefly as understanding that the
Plenipotentiary for Government with the Defensoriall Letters obtained from King
Sigismundus, that they (six or seven Senators, Duke Charles in a manner
excluded) should manage the Government in the Regal absence, would not attain
that Authority hoped for; the same importing that if Duke Charles were not
therewith contented, those Senators, assisted by the Malitia of the Kingdom
should prosecute him and his partakers as open Enemies; their Goods to become a
prey as the more curious may see in the said Plenipotentiary, dated at Warsaw
the thirteenth of January, 1597. and the Defensorialls likewise of the twenty
third of May next following. Neither contented only to have sowed seeds of
dissension between the Inhabitants of Suethland, Poland and Lithuania, they
persuaded the States of Poland, without cause or praemonition to undertake with
their King a Military expedition against his Native Country, to oppress
contrary to right, the Duke and his Assistants, without admitting those
equitable conditions sundry times tendered by himself and followers conducing to
his Majesty's and the kingdoms good: Nor were they without succesfull hopes if
the king had gained the Finlandian forces he daily expected thence.

The miserable condition of the Inhabitants there, may be Inconveniences
ensuing,
conceived (say they) by the butchery of many thousands of innocent persons;
which mischief beginning in Finland did extend even to Suethland also; the face
of things being such in that Province, as that many Colonies, with their Wives
and Children, abondoning their Habitations, were constrained to fly unto the
Duke for relief, which also turned to the greater hurt of some: For the
forenamed Governor of Finland with his Accomplices, diligently watched to
hinder them from informing the Duke of their condition: some, for the like
complaints, being cruelly put to death, infringing thereby the Protectiorall
Letters, which the Duke, as Governor of the Kingdom had, by the Laws of
Suethland, full power to give in the Regal absence: Neither was the King
unacquainted with the afflictions of Finland; those, with other grievances
having been signified unto him by the Duke by Letters at large from Nycopia,
the twenty second of May, 1597. yet no redress was granted, but the same
rather approved, and the said Governor reputed and saluted by the name of his
most faithful Subject and Counselor.

The King remained (as the Suethes assert) not only unmoved with those
miseries of his people, but by Letters from Warsaw, of the twenty eight of
April preceding, had incited the Finlandians with their Governor thereunto,
so as the Duke was necessitated to make an expedition into Finland; where,
assisted by Divine providence, he freed that suffering Province from
oppression, the (...)osers neither daring to try it in the Field, nor to defend
(...) Forts they were possessed of, whereby the Tumults in Finland were so
appeased in the year 1597. as they needed not any more to apprehend the like.

Notwithstanding all these things, with others forementioned, K. Sigismund
invited by the Duke and Senators to return in peaceable manner.
perpetrated (as the Suethes allege) by King Sigismundus and his evil
Counselors: The Duke with the Senators of the Kingdom, by Letters, he of the
fourteenth, they of the twentieth of February, 1598. dated from Vbsall,
seriously invited his Majesty's return, in quiet and peaceable manner to
settle the Affairs of his Native Kingdom. But contrary Comes with an Army.
hereunto (say they) he repaired thither with an Army of eight thousand horse
and foot, and a hundred Sail of Ships, to which extraneous forces no small
number of Suethish Soldiers, with sundry of the Nobility and Military
Commanders (hoping thereby to gain great Stipends) joined themselves through
the crafty allurings and seducements of those unfaithful Counselors, as
themselves found when too late, for things not succeeding to the Kings desire,
he deserted them without refuge or comfort.

King Sigismundus landing at Calmar with his Army, Duke D. Charles raises
Forces.
Charles likewise raised forces and approached toward Stegeburg, and desired
(by several Letters and Messengers) to be certified of the cause inducing his
Majesty to return into his Native Country with such a numerous armed
attendance, and withal that he might be admitted to a conference with his
Majesty, but the King also marching toward Stegeburg soon gave notice (say
they) of the ends he came for, by a sudden onset, wherein some hundreds were
slain on either side: Which hostile Act the Duke would not revenge (albeit
power was not wanting) but showed himself willing to embrace a friendly
composure and pacification with the King and those unfaithful Counselors.

There were at the same time present with the King, several Pacification
mediated by Foreign Ambassadors in vain.
Ambassadors from the Prince Elector of Brandenburg; the Marquess of Ansbach,
and Duke Vlricke of Mecklenburg, with whom those Counselors were earnest (at
least in pretense) to endeavor a pacifying of the differences between the King
and Duke Charles, which they did to their utmost, but seeing their labors
fruitless they departed, and were by his Highness Order honorably conveyed
unto the borders of Denmark: The Duke also made offer of answering before
equitable and competent Arbitrators to whatsoever could be objected against
him, and desired that the King would make choice of six persons of the Nobility
and so many of the Military Officers to meet with an equal number to be
elected by himself for a friendly compos(...) of all differences: but the King
(as they) forthwith permitted the Marquess of Baden and Wejerus to discharge
his Ordinance against the Dukes Forces, and gave order to the General of his
Army Georgius Farensbecius to charge into the Dukes Camp in the silence of
night, with his whole Forces, and to slaughter all he should meet with, and
albeit the Duke and those of his side attempted nothing that was not lawful
and consentaneous to their Oath, yet they reap no other reward then open
enmity, secret hatred, and treacherous machinations; for by deferring all
amicable transactions, they only waited the approach of Auxiliary Forces from
Finland, for the more commodious execution of their tyranous intentions.

At last, King Sigismundus perceiving that assistance from Finland was in vain
expected, and that a gallant Navy of the Dukes approached, his Army was
therewith so terrified, as that, not daring to make longer stay, he with his
whole power withdrew, secretly under night, from Stegeburg toward Lincopia,
abandoning his Ships and Ordinance, with other things of great moment: yet for
the better understanding of the History, let us view the heads of the whole
passage before (he left). Stegeburg, beginning at the time of the rendition of
Calmar: And first we will premise the instructions given by Duke Charles unto
Prince Gustavus Duke of Saxony and Westphalia, Instructions by D. Charles to
the Governors of Calmar
with George Claudius, and Olaus Hard, for the Government of Calmar, the same
dated the tenth of June, 1597. in the several Articles whereof is contained.

1. THat they preserve the said Fort for his Majesty and the good of the
Commonweal, and that they admit not of any Person, of what degree soever, to
enter the Castle without Letters from his Highness to that effect, nor suffer
any dissipation to be made of the Ammunition, or other necessaries to the
Castle appertaining.

2. That they contain the Inhabitants in due obedience to his Majesty and his
Heirs, and to his Highness during his Majesty's absence.

3. That they maintain the Subjects (there) in their former Liberties and
Privileges without violence, injustice, or extortion by bribery.

4. That they endeavor the preservation of the Crown rights from diminution,
and that all things imbezelled may be restored.

5. That his Majesty coming to Calmer in peaceable manner, like a gracious
King, conform to his Coronation Oath, and the Laws of Suethland, the Gates of
the Castle be open to receive him with all due reverence and honor. But that,
if his Majesty should approach with armed Bands in a way of violence, to devast
and destroy his native Soil, contrary to his said Oath, the Laws of Suethland
and of Nature, they should not then permit his Majesty, or any in his Name, to
enter the said City or Castle, but should defend the same with all their might,
until (upon advertisement) they received answer from his Highness, that the
King and he were reconciled: And that in the mean time they admonish his
Majesty to desist from violence, and if any extraneous force should attempt the
place, they were to oppose the same to the utmost of their power.

6. That they repair the Walls and Towers, etc. according to their abilities,
and the necessities emerging, not permitting the Baths or Stoves to perish.

7. That as need should require, they order the Soldiers commanded by Abraham
Nicolas, John Gustavus, and Nicolas Finno, to keep the City watch carefully,
that no sudden irruption or other violence happen therein.

8. That by the help of the Citizens and Soldiers, the Fabrics begun should
be continued and finished, and that the Money by his Highness thereunto
ordained, be employed about the same.

9. That they behave themselves friendlike, and peaceably toward the neighbor
Nations. Viz. the Dane, according to the agreements between those flourishing
Kingdoms.

10 That they pacify all quarrels and contentions, and that they speedily
certify his Highness of those difficulties which of themselves they could not
reconcile; and that they extend not punishment of death unto any without first
acquainting him therewith.

THat they should adhere to their former Instructions; to Further Instructions.
wit, that if the King should come to Calmar in a peaceable way, according to
his Oath made at his Coronation in conformity to the Laws of the Land, and
would assure them by Letters Patents to make no violent attempt against the
Duke or any other faithful Subject of high or low degree, but to act in all
things according to his said Oath, literal security, and the Laws of
Suethland, and thereof secure his Highness, and should withal promise and
engage, not to admit the Polanders, or any other of his extraneous Attendants
(but only Natives of Suethland, adhering to his Majesty) into that Fort and
place, that then the gates both of the City and Castle should be set open, and
his Majesty be received according to their ability, as was meet for their Lord
and King.

But if his Majesty should refuse to give such security, pretending the same to
be needless, they were then to reply, that they had received command from his
Highness not to permit the entrance unto any without it: And that if his
Majesty should persist in such refusal, and offer any violent attempt, whereby
Conjecture might be made of his further intentions in a hostile way, they
should not then open the gates to his Majesty, or to any other in his name, and
that if any strangers arriving there, should endeavor a forcible entry, they
were not to make any agreement or transaction with them, but manfully (even to
the last) resist force with force.

These Instructions sent to the persons before named, Duke Charles, when he
heard of the arrival of King Sigismundus at Calmar with a foreign Army, wrote
unto him by Lindormius Ribbing, to this effect.

THat the Relation of his Majesty's safe arrival at Calmar Letter of D. Charles
to the King.
was most accptable unto him, but that he was troubled at the burthening of his
hereditary kingdom with foreign forces: that this strange manner of return
gave him cause of suspicion, as having been most maliciously traduced unto his
Majesty by wicked and perverse persons, as appeared by several Letters
dispersed through the Kingdom, which the Finlanders also (who were then
repulsed) had not concealed: That he besought his Majesty not to be moved by
false suggestions to attempt ought against him, or others his Majesty's true
Subjects, in prejudice of his Oath and assecuration given to him with the
Suethish Nation in general: that for his own part, he had and would keep his
engagement unviolably and would receive his Majesty, as it became him to do,
his Nephew and his King: That he desired to be advertised whether any
forraigners or seditious Natives came to bereave him of his Patriall or
domestic Peace: That if any would accuse him, he would stand to a legal
trial.

He likewise desired to be informed, when, and by what ways his Majesty would
proceed to his Regal City, that he might be attended according to his Dignity:
Lastly, that if his advice were of any value, his Majesty would dismiss that
extraneous Army, the introduction whereof might have been better spared, and
desiring an answer by the bearer, he commended his Majesty to the Divine
Providence, these were dated at Stockholme the fifth. of August, 1598.

DUke Charles, soon after, sent a second Letter by Christ(...)r The Dukes
second Letter^,
Saptrodius, importing that understanding his Majesty had imprisoned those, to
whom in his absence he had committed the Government of Calmar, albeit they
behaved themselves not otherwise, than as became faithful Subjects, by opening
the gates to his Majesty, according to their Order, and that his Majesty
detained certain Messengers, as Tieo Laurentius and others: That his Majesty
likewise taxed him for not sending a Navy, according to reiterated desires; He
much wondered what these things should mean; and did therefore entreat his
Majesty seriously to ponder the matter, and weigh how he had carried himself in
his Majesty's absence, whereby he would undoubtedly find, how untruly he had
been reported of. He also earnestly desired, that His Majesty would dismiss
those strangers whom he had brought in, to the scorn and prejudice of the
Nation, and that he might understand by the bearer, whether he would (as a
gracious and peaceable King) observe his Royal Oath and assecuration, as he
(on his part) did assure his Majesty of Sincerity and fidelity. These were from
Nicopia the 8. August, 1598.

A Schedule of the 27, of that Month, was likewise delivered to certain of the
chief Ostrogothian Rusticks, then going to the King, who were enjoined by his
Highness to insinuate and crave answer (if admitted to the Royal presence)
upon his Desire of a Personal Conference with his Majesty in place convenient;
and that if the same were granted) his Highness might obtain Pledges for his
own person, with a List of the names of those that should accompany his
Majesty, as well Natives as Aliens: That his Highness would give the like, and
that afterward there might be further Treaty, partly of the Persons of the
Pledges, partly of other things.

AT last, the Kings Answer came, containing that he had Answer to K. Sigis^und.
received the two Letters sent by his Dilection, in the first of which, albeit
Gladness for his Arrival was signified, yet no signs thereof had appeared:
That in reference thereunto, he did mutually congratulate, partly by reason of
Consanguinity; partly as conceiving, that the Suethes in general were not
unwilling to see their lawful King in his herereditary Kingdom: That as to
the complaint of burden by a foreign Army, he had been moved thereto by
weighty Considerations, his Dilection detaining his proper Subjects and Ships
contrary to expectation and promise; and that, instead of an honorable
reception, his Dilection kept from him his own Servants and Soldiers; had
pitched his Camp, threatening an irruption into his Army. That he left to
Consideration, whether those exhaustings of the Kingdom and Subjects were
corresponding to his Letters and promises, himself being forced to live like a
stranger upon his private purse, whilst the Suethes contributed more to the
Ducall Army, than his reception and maintenance would have amounted unto.

That he hoped, as he also desired, willed and commanded his Dilection to cease
those troubles: That those Forces were not brought thither to begin a War, but
to attend his Person, partly for security, wherever he might happen to arrive,
partly granted by the Orders of Poland, as a train befitting his State, and
could not therefore be any Scorn, but rather an honor to his Country, which
had been wanting in the like duty, a thing no way honorable for himself or
them: That whereas his Dilection suspected the same to be intended for his
prejudice by the persuasions of perverse and troublesome people, he was
ignorant of any such persons or practices: That his Army did live upon their
Monthly Pay, and should be disbanded upon the repair of his Native Subjects
unto him: That he had resolved to leave all persons to the vigor of the Laws,
and that the desirers of Domestic Peace might enjoy the same, The Regal
Jurisdiction reserved entire, as he had not long before, and lately by Tico
Laurentius signified unto him.

That he wished the promises of observing unblamedly what had been sworn unto,
and of a reception corresponding to the Regal Dignity (which he willingly
received) might be seconded by effects, which hitherto they had not been, and
but small hopes for the future, according to the reports made of the
unnecessary Military expedition undertaken by his Dilection, the decision and
disposing whereof he committed to God.

That as to the imprisonment of those found in the Fort of Calmar which in his
second Letter he argued to be contrary to Justice and to promise; it was
evident that no injury was done unto them, and wished that more hard measure
were not offered to his own Servants in the like case, and of greater
authority: That he hoped and was persuaded his Dilection would not fall into
extremities, by giving beginning or cause of effusion of blood, which himself
would by all fair means decline and shun; so as if things should fall out
otherwise, hs might have a clear conscience before God and the World: herewith
he committed his Dilection to the Divine goodness. These were given from the
Camp at Stegeburg, the 24th August 1598.

I have only recited the heads of these Letters, the whole being overlong to
insert, and shall use the like abbreviation in those that follow, referring the
curious, for further satisfaction, unto the things themselves.

TO these Letters the Duke returned answer by Lindormius. The Dukes reply.
Robbing, desiring a positive Declaration of what might be expected from his
Majestys return into the Kingdom with such extraneous armed Bands, besides
his raising of Horse and Foot in each Province, concerning which his Majesty's
Letter gave no satisfaction. That unless an absolute and wished answer were
obtained, he should be compeled, albeit un willingly (whereof he called God to
witness) to renounce the Oath of fidelity made to his Majesty, as his Majesty
(on the other part) had not observed his promises. But that, if his Majesty
would grant to him and his followers such Letters of security, as had been by
him lately tendered to the Electorall and Ducall Ambassadors for the Regal
confirmation, and would dismiss his foreign Forces, refering all
Controversies to a fair decision in free Parliament, in the presence of
Electorall and other Princely public Ministers; he likewise would then disband
his Army, and render to his Majesty that duty and obedience whereunto he was
bound by Oath: his desires being only that himself with the Orders of the
Kingdom might enjoy their Habitations peaceably, and that his Majesty would
not permit those perfidious Counselors to seduce him any longer to the ruin
of his Majesty, his Subjects and the Realm: These were dated at Lincopia the
twenty seventh of August, 1598.

This was seconded by an other of the thirtieth of the said S^conded.
Month, wherein the Duke showed that he never intended to receive his majesty
otherwise than as became his lawful King, which he had personally demonstrated
at his Majesty's arrival, if the conclusions, made with Samuel Lasky his
Majesty's Ambasador had been observed, and that the Finlanders had not
rebellously fallen down in multitudes, with Ships, Ordinance, Fireballs and
other military furniture to the very skirts of Stockholme, threatening rapine,
slaughter and devastation to his Dukedomes when he should be gone to meet his
Majesty. He therefore in friendly and brotherly manner besought his Majesty to
be mindful of his Regal promises; To dismiss those Aliens; to secure him and
his followers, and to remit all matter of dissension to a legal inquisition
and discussion in free Parliament, before equal un-interessed Arbitrators:
These Letters (wherein several objections of the Kings were answered, but here
for avoiding of prolix repetitions omitted) were dated as abovesaid from the
Memmian fields, whether the Duke was then come with a strong Army:

TO these the King returned answer, that the transaction The Regal answer.
with Laskie (of the breach whereof he was taxed) was also un-observed on the
other part: That the Finlanders by his Command had approached toward Stocholme
to attend his coming: That they were not to be accounted Rebels who did not
appose their lawful Lord, nor obtrude upon him intolerable Conditions, but
sought to protect the Regal Jurisdiction and Authority according to the Laws
of Suethland.

That the Army of Aliens, whereof his Dilection complained so much, should be
discharged in time convenient: especially when his Dominion, Subjects, Forts,
Army, Navy, Ordinance, and other things rightly belonging unto him were
restored. But it was evident that his Dilection, with a numerous power, raised
in his own Dukedomes, was come against him, exhausting his Subjects with
exactions and payments, so as, in his own Kingdom he could not enjoy his
peculiar Revenues: And that all things might be wanting to him and his Regal
Train in his Progress; his own Soldiers were invited, seduced, and
entertained by the adverse party, by all which things it was evident by whose
default the Countries substance was consumed.

That concerning his Dilections desire of security from violence and Injustice,
and the leaving of all discords to the examination of sincere Neutrall
Arbitrators, he had formerly answered that, having attained the years of
discretion, he understood what the Municipall Law advised in that case,
whereunto he resolved to adhere, and accordingly to protect his Dilection and
Followers, as also his other Subjects. But that, as things were, himself was
not permitted to enjoy a peaceable Habitation, nor the Revenues of his
Kingdom, or any other thing that by the Law of Suethland belonged unto him.

That he therefore required his dilection to retire into his dukedom, and there
quietly to remain, restoring all things he had taken from him, as also his
faithful Subjects and Servants in former years, and lately (even at his doors)
surprised and hurried into Prison: That as to further security, it was
convenient and practicable, according to the best constituted Christian Laws,
even amongst equals, that whatsoever were unjustly detained should be first
restored, with sufficient security for all matters of further demand: That his
Dilection should likewise abstain from the Title of Governor, usurped without
the Royal consent: Himself being now of full age, and able by the Divine
assistance, to rule alone without a Tutor; It being contrary to Justice and
reason, yea a thing unheard of, that a King being of lawful years, there
should be any other Governor in Suethland besides himself. And was therefore
resolved not to expose himself to derision, or to a diminution of his Honor by
a longer sufferance of such Injuries: That when his Dilection should perform
all these things, his Actions would then be answerable to his words, and would
give a clear testimony that he began to have a due regard unto the Royal
Dignity, and to the prosperity, peace, and emolument of the Nation: That by
such means all things might (not only) come to a right examination, but also
attain the wished end. These dated from Stegeburg the third of September, 1598.

The Duke by a reply of the same date, reiterated his desire for Letter from
the Duke.
an examination of all differences before equal Arbitrators, and complained
that his former Letters had not attained the wished answer. That by these
delays he could not but conjecture that no good was intended toward him: That
having hitherto tried (albeit in vain) all means conducible to the welfare,
peace, and concord of his Majesty and the Kingdom, he should be forced to seek
other means whereby to provide for the security of his person, Wife, and
Children, Possessions, and People. That as he had ever been most faithful to
his Majesty, and had procured his prosperity to his utmost power, so he should
be grieved (whereof he called God to record) that ought contrary thereunto did
befall his Majesty, to whom he wished long life, with a happy, a healthful and
peaceable Reign.

That things being so, he did faithfully advise and diligently admonish his
Majesty not to appear abroad in the Field, nor to betake himself any whither
by water, but contain himself within the Castle, least that, if any tumult
should happen between the two Armies, or his Majesty chance into the Navy
approaching, some danger, contrary to his desire, might befall him; and that if
ought thereof did accrue to his Majesty's person, Army, or Fleet, himself was
blameless before God and the World, as having given timely warning whereby to
prevent any such misfortune, if credit had been attributed to his Counsel
rather then to the pernicious instigations and seducements of wicked men;
herewith he commended his Majesty to the Divine protection. Dated from the
Memmian Feilds the third of September, 1598.

Duke Charles approaching by night nearer to the Royal Duke Charles
approaching with his Army writes to the King.
Camp, gave the King notice thereof by Letter of the eighth of the said month,
sent by two Trumpeters; importing that, seeing it appeared sufficiently his
Majesty was not returned into the Kingdom to govern them according to the
Municipall Laws, but rather by force and violence, in burthening and molesting
his Native Soil with foreign and homebred Forces; in reproaching and
prescribing him throughout the Realm, seizing and imprisoning his Servants; as
also in that he had not hitherto obtained satisfactory answer to his former
Letters, but that new calumnies were daily imposed upon him in public and
private, he had drawn nearer, not to use any hostility unless provoked, but to
discover whether his Majesty would not desist from such courses, and permit him
and his followers to enjoy their rights according to equity, by securing their
Goods and Possessions unto them, as the condition of the times then required:
All which if his Majesty would do without delay (as he did most earnestly and
humbly desire) he was ready with all his Train, to attend, advice, and render
to his Majesty all manner of duty according to his Obligations of Oath and
blood: But if otherwise, that he was resolved not to dismiss his Troops nor
depose his Arms until their desires were confirmed in most sure and ample
manner, which he hoped could not be forbidden either by Law or reason. Herewith
he protested that unless the same were granted within the space of two hours,
and that any tumult should break forth between the two Armies to the detriment
of his Majesty and his followers, his Kingdom or people, he was innocent
thereof before God and the world; these, as aforesaid were dated from his Camp
the eighth of September, 1598.

About four days after, King Sigismundus sent Letters of King Sigismund. his
answer assecutoriall.
Assecuration, containing that whereas the most Illustrious Duke Charles had
divulged rumors of his arrival into the Land with an extraneous Army to the
spoiling of the Kingdom, and the offering of violence to his Highness and
followers, and by those rumors had drawn unto his party many of his Servants
and Subjects, who daily flocked unto him, into whose minds the Duke had
injected and spread a great terror of his approach, albeit he had declared by
many former Letters that he was returned into his Native Kingdom and Country,
not to wage War, but as a rightful King, who neither deserved nor apprehended
any Rebellion, in peaceable manner, according to their joint desires and
requests, as might be testified by several Letters, which intention of his
might have given them sufficient satisfaction: Nevertheless to the end his
candor and sincerity might appear, and his averseness to intestine discord
by a Civil War: If the Duke would forth with resign up and restore unto him
his Servants, Soldiers, Kingdom, Houses, Territories, Navy, and Ammunition,
with all other things belonging to him and the Commonwealth, as also the
Captives and Servants of his Subjects, would in like manner disband his Troops,
retire and remain quiet in his Dukedomes, appear readily (when cited) in
Judgment, with such of his followers as were obnoxious to blame, and thereof
give present assecuration: He also would (as by these his Letters Patents he
now did) promise and ensure the dismission of his alien forces, and would not
attempt any violence against his Highness, his people, or Servants, but permit
every one to enjoy the benefit of the Laws of Suethland conform to reason and
Justice, and that all persons adhering to himself, against whom his Highness
might have any cause of complaint should reciprocally appear in Judgment. In
confirmation whereof these were given under his hand and Seal at the Castle of
Stegeburg, the twelfth of September, 1598.

This Assecuration seeming to the Duke unsatisfactory; he Not excepted; by Duke
Charles his Letter admonitory.
wrote back to the King within two days; saying, That his Majesty having
sufficiently understood by the Electorall and Ducall Ambassadors what had
hitherto past between them, it was needless to use repititions: and therefore
he diligently and faithfully admonished his Majesty not to suffer evil
Counselors to draw him into any inconveniences. That the dispute was not
about Pears or Apples, but that the welfare of his Majesty and himself, of
the Realm and people were therein concerned. He further advertised that having
resolved to send some of his faithful Servants to see whether any hopes of
better things were yet remaining, he desired that Letters of safe conduct might
be granted for them freely and without molestation to repair to his Majesty,
and (having delivered what they had in charge) to return without hurt or
disturbance. These were dated at the Camp the fourteenth of September, 1598.

THe Kings answer was returned by the same Messenger, Regal answer.
wherein recapitalating things fore specified, and taxing the Duke of continued
propounding new and less tolerable conditions, as also of imputing the same
to him, albeit he had offered none but such as were lawful and fitting: He
said further, that he very well perceived his well being, the Kingdom and
people was now the point in question, and not Pears or Apples as his Dilection
had rightly hinted; but that he had never expected nor deserved that any such
measure should be meted unto him, the examination whereof he referred to God
and to Divine Justice.

Lastly, that he was contented to admit of such as his Dilection would depute
unto him, not exceeding the number of eight persons, to whom he thereby granted
safe conduct and security. Dated as before.

The Duke upon this answer, desired a more exact form of safe conduct, for
secure return from, as well as repair unto his Safe conduct interchangable
granted.
Majesty, which was accordingly granted at Stegeburg, the fifteenth of
September, 1598.

Hereupon Duke Charles delegated (the same day) three Noble men of his
Counsel, Maurice Steno Earl of Rasburg, etc. Ludbert Duke Charles sends
Commissioners to the King.
Caverus, and John Ericke, unto whom he committed sundry things to be
communicated to his Majesty, in the name of himself and the Orders of
Suethland, earnestly desiring (by his Letter of the same date) that his Majesty
would afford them private audience and give credit to what they should
deliver, and return such answer as might be for the Kingdoms good; and
concluded with assurance of fidelity and brotherly affection from himself.

Their Instructions imported, that his Majesty would graciously Contentsof
Instructions.
ponder the present miserable condition of his Native Country, and not suffer
himself to be induced to ought that might be prejudicial to his Royal Person,
to the Duke, the Regal Family, and the whole Kingdom: That as the resolution
lately given at his Majesty's instance (to the Electorall and Ducall
Ambassadors) was not less Christian then Legal, so as his Highness and the
Orders of Suethland could not enlarge themselves any further: they therefore
earnestly desired his Majesty to rest therewith satisfied, and to grant them
the security they had submissively demanded: That otherwise, and if their
humble suit could not find place, they desired to be excused before God and the
Christian world, as having sought after those things that pertained to peace
and concord: Yet that the brotherly and friendly inclination of his Highness
toward his Majesty might further appear, he humbly desired (as formerly) that
securely and in place convenient, he might be admitted to Speech with His
Majesty, which if granted, his Majesty would surely know, that many things were
imputed to his Highness, whereof he was altogether free.

The said Commissioners were likewise to insinuate, that his Highness and the
States of the Kingdom were (seve(...) and jointly) most willing and ready to
render to his (...)jesty all possible respect and obedience, according to their
Oath of Fidelity, and the written Laws of the Land: neither should his Majesty
find ought by his Higness, other then tended to the welfare of himand his
heirs, for whom they would esteem nothing overmuch, that was within their
power, as on the other side, they hoped that his Majesty would show himself a
meek, gracious, and peaceable Prince. Given as aforesaid.

King Sigismundus returned Answer that he had received what by the
Commissioners of his Highness had been delivered, but that they having left
their Instructions with him, and desired an Answer unto them in writing, he did
by these Letters return his answer and desire, That twelve of the Equestrial,
and six of the Military Order of his part, might meet an equal number of the
Dukes, to consult of, and compound the whole matter: And wished that his
Dilection would have the same regard to the Patriall, Regal, and Ducal
prosperity, which he exhorted him unto, not doubting but so all dissension
would have a speedy wished end: These were of the sixteenth of the said Month,
and accordingly ample Letteers of safe conduct (of the same date) were
alternatively given by the King, and Duke for the forementioned number of the
said Orders respectively.

THe Royal Answer to the Dukes Legation contained, that the amiable
salutations and tenders of obedience, The Kings Answer.
were most welcome, especially if deeds did correspond with words: That albeit,
he had neither deserved nor expected such a reception into his hereditary
Kingdom, as well by intolerable conditions, as by inconvenient propositions,
he had nevertheless concluded upon the assecuration more fully (as well in
reference to his Highness as his followers) then of Right ought to have been
demanded; the Act it self witnessing the same to all that desired peace and
unity: But that the Duke had no way consented to the Kings desires, the
Declaration delivered to the Ducall and Electorall Ambassadors, not having
regard unto, nor any promising performance thereof, but rather adding certain
unsufferable conditions: the resolution it self lately exhibited to those
Germane Ambassadors, and tendered to his Majesty did evidently testify.

That his Highness Admonition might have been spared, in regard the King had
offered no violence to him, his Army, or partakers, nor had demanded ought,
save what was his own, whereas his Highness had compelled the Regal Subjects
and Servants to take up arms; had appointed Military Stations within the Royal
Territory, exhausted his Majesty's Subjects; detained and consumed the annual,
R(...) Revenue; imposed Taxes and auxiliary exactions on the (...) habitants,
prohibited provisions from being brought unto the Royal Camp for money, and
after several Marches had pitched his Tents, his Army, and Canon, before the
Regal gates; had in the Ranensian fields and elsewhere seized as prisoners
sundry of the Regal Servants and domestics; commanded the goods and movables
of them that repaired unto their lawful King to be made Prey; and unto this
very day used the Title and Authority of Governor of the Kingdom, albeit the
King were present, a thing never before practiced: from all which things,
collection might easily be made who had first administered matter to these
mischiefs.

He therefore admonished his Highness to sur-cease these courses, and to
permit unto him the free enjoyment of his own: that otherwise he should have
cause to protest if so manifest unjustice produced any misfortune; That he
desired never thelesse to understand what his Highness intended by his
protesting, and whereat the same aimed, that so he might accommodate his
Interest thereunto. That he was not averse to the desired enterview, and when
his Highness should give a resolution condign to his desires and peaceable
demands, he would in due place and time consent to the Colloquie required.

That the many professions of fidelity and obedience to his Majesty and his
Heirs were most acceptable from his Highness, and that a correspondency of
effects was wished, whereby this dissension might be the better, sooner, and
more peaceably composed. That he thought not the hurt of any person, but was
willing to give clear testimony to all men of his Kingly clemency and favor.
He therefore desired his Highness to weigh the whole matter seriously, and not
to make intolerable and dishonorable overtures, which would not conduce to
peace and concord, but afford more ample cause of strife, which he prayed God
to divert, and professed he for his part would decline.

The Dukes reply hereunto, by Nicolas Nicolai, Mauritius Georgij, The Dukes
reply.
and Nicolas Rask the Kings Commissioners, was to this effect.
THat touching the exprobations used, as if his actions were not corresponding
to his words, he holds his Majesty excused, as not being ignorant from what
Fountain they flowed; that nevertheless in regard it beseemed not an honest
man to fit his Cap with such a Crest, he returned this answer.

That they who so upbraided and objected, were to be blackt with the same Coal
of calumny, until they had really proved that his actions were dissenting from
his professions: And that his performances should ever be such toward his
Majesty and all other men, as might become an honest Prince whose words and
deeds were consentaneous. That whereas his Majesty charged the Declaration by
him delivered to the Electorall and Ducall Ambassadors (who had interposed in
that transaction) of containing intolerable conditions, he referred unto the
Acts themselves, which he was persuaded would testify otherwise: That as to
the Crimi nations couched in the answer, he pretermits them, as not being here
competently urged, but when things should come to be rightly discussed, he
would then make such reply as every honest man should acknowledge his
allegations to be just.

That his Protest had no other meaning then that, if the means for peace that
had been, should be tendered did not take effect, and that Waves of discord
should arise thence, he desired to be excused before God and the World, as
being innocent thereof; and that those only who sowed and nourished the seeds
of this dissension, might be reputed guilty of its effects.

That the fidelity and obedience tendered by him to the King and his Heirs,
never had been nor could be violated, but preserved entire, provided he might
securely enjoy what of right he does and ought to possess.

Lastly, that nothing on his part might be wanting, as if equitable conditions
for Peace and Concord were by him rejected, he willingly consented to the
meeting of so many honest men, of the Equestriall and Military Order, as his
Majesty required, with those that his Majesty should assign, for a full
decision of all matters; and that he wished for nothing more, then to be
admitted to a personal conference with his Majesty, whereby he hoped to clear
himself to his Majesty's satisfaction.

Duke Charles by his Commissioners sent also the Declaration ensuing, whereunto
he resolved to adhere constantly.

THat forasmuch as the Electorall and Ducall Ambassadors The Dukes Propositions.
were departed, whose subscriptions he had desired to the Letters of
Assecuration of King Sigismund. he thought not meet to trust to Paper and Ink
only; but as a Pledge demanded the Fort of Elfenburg and the Vastenan Castle,
wherein he might place, not his own, but his Majesty's sworn Servants, not
disaffected to himself and the Orders of the Kingdom, who should there remain
unto the end of the next ensuing Parliament. If this were denied, he desired he
might retain the Navy with the Ammunition reserved in the Castle of Gripsholme
until the conclusion of that Assembly; but if this also should not be
consented unto, then the Ships of War only were to be insisted on: And if that
proposition were likewise rejected by the King, those Senatorial persons
formerly by him desired, or three of them at least; Viz. Ericke Sparre,
Gustavus Baner, and Turo Bielke, were to be required as pledges.

Lastly, that his Majesty might understand his Highness had no other
intentions then were conducing to Peace and Unity, he would rest contented with
his Majesty's particular assecuration, conditionally that therein were expressly
inserted, That the States of the Kingdom should be obliged to oppose and
resist that side who attempted ought in prejudice of the Premises.

BUt to the assecuration (required by the Duke the seventeenth Not consented
unto. The Regal Declaration.
of September) the King would not consent, and in lieu thereof declared: That
whereas his beloved Uncle Duke Charles had promised obedience to him and his
Heirs, and was by writing bound to remit into his hands his Kingdom, Castles,
Towns, Houses; etc. his Navy, with all the Marine Provisions and Stores, and
all other things to him and the Crown of Suethland belonging, and to restore
to liberty his Subjects, with such of his Domestics as he detained, who should
be nevertheless obliged to answer all Objections in full and free Parliament;
as also to disband his Forces and retire into his Dukedom, there to remain
quietly and be ready (with his Domestics and Subjects against whom there
should be cause of complaint) to appear in Judgment, when all causes and
controversies should be examined and decided in free Parliament, before equal
and sincere Arbitrators, according to the assecutoriall Letters of his
Highness given in that behalf.

He also had (on the other part) promised and secured and did by these his
Leters Patents, and on his Kingly faith and truth promise and secure that he
would govern his Hereditary Kingdom according to his Oath and assecuration:
That he would dismiss his alien forces, and not permit the intromission of any
other, except necessity did urge, and the Duke and the States of the Kingdom
were thereunto consenting: Finally that all his sworn Servants, whom the Duke
had any way preferred in his absence, should enjoy their former condition, with
all the Goods and Possessions committed unto them, until in the said
Parliament the greivances his Majesty had against them were examined.

That moreover he would release all the Dukes Servants, or his own, who, in the
Dukes name and behalf were in detention either within or without the Kingdom,
to be forthcoming as aforesaid: To which end, and that all Controversies and
causes of complaint might be legally and justly heard and decided; he would
speedily indict a Parliament to be held within the space of four months, in
which all things should be examined and judged before equal Arbitrators, and
Electorall and Ducall Ambassadors, who should be thereunto invited. In the
mean time, he promised not to permit violence or injustice to be offered to
any of the Dukes Subjects, Servants, or followers of what condition soever; nor
to impeach or sentence any one for ought, which by general advice and consent
had been concluded and enacted, nor to forbid the defense thereof, or to reject
or persecute any who had adhered to his Highness, nor permit any hinderance or
stop to be given to his Highness, or others whom he should send into any parts
of the Kingdom, until that all things were decided in Parliament, and that no
further proceedings should be made then was in Parliament justly and legally
pronounced. That for the further security of the Premises he had with his own
hand signed and sealed the same: And consented, that if beyond expectation it
should happen that himself or his said Uncle should recede from, or violate
this agreement in the least: The States of the Kingdom were empowered to resist
and oppose the party violating: Dated from Stegeburg the seventeenth of
September, 1598.

Duke Charles, not satisfied with this literary assecuration, Unsatisfactory to
the Duke.
wrote back unto the King, to the effect that, notwithstanding all ways of
application made by him for Peace, indignation and a sinister construction of
his actions increased daily, by instigation and counsel of perverse and
turbulent men, who had given beginning and continuance to this Tragedy, so as
he found, that whilst his Majesty used their counsel, the present difference
would never have a prosperous issue: He therefore as a friend and brother
desired, advised, and admonished his Majesty to relinquish that band of
treacherous and tumultuous Counselors (who for their peculiar and wicked ends
did draw his Majesty into evil courses) and to repair to Stocholme, or where
otherwise he pleased. He assured that, he would not only secure his Majesty
from all hurt and danger, but also engage that himself and his followers should
attend and conduct him whithersoever he desired, with all due fidelity,
obedience, and promptitude: That as to others, they would proceed according to
Justice, having hither to forborne them for his Majesty's sake, least he with
them might have undergone some misfortune, which (notwithstanding any
suggestions of him to the contrary) he took God to record, he desired not, but
would always be ready to avert such evil from his person, if he would have
regard to himself, and rest persuaded of him as of his most affectionate Uncle.

But that if his Majesty (contrary to this faithful advice) would still
retain those turbulent Counselors, he should be careful least with them he
might rush into some danger: That if the same should happen (which he besought
God to forbid) he was innocent thereof before God and the Christian World, and
willing to have prevented the same, if his Majesty would have adhered to his
advice rather then to the pernicious persuasions and wills of wicked men;
hereupon desiring an answer he committed his Majesty to Celestial protection:
Dated from his Camp as above said:

King Sigismundus, the day before he moved his Tents from Stegeburg toward
Lincopia, sent a Letter of assecuration, which Regal assecuration.
(omitting the repetitions therein inserted) contained that, if the Illustrious
Duke Charles would release his Servants, and restore his Army, Kingdom,
Towns, Houses, Forts, and Territories: his Navy, Stores, Ammunition, with all
other things to him and the Crown of Suethland appertaining, set free his
Subjects and Domestics, cease from hostile Actions, retire into his Dukedom,
there quietly remain, ready (with his party who were any way guilty) to appear
and answer in Judgment upon legal citation, and would thereof give security.

That he also did thereby then pomise and ensure the dismission of his foreign
Forces, his ordinary Train and Guard of his body excepted, and that neither
toward his Highness, his Army, Subjects, or any other of whatsoever condition,
any violence should be offered, but each one permitted to enjoy the benefit of
the Laws, until the whole matter were tried before competent Judges: That all
Persons adhering to the Regal Party (whosoever the Duke or any other would
appeach) should also appear in Judgment; and that all his Highness Servants
who were under any restraint by reason of this Tumult, should be released: All
which things he would observe and do upon his Regal Faith and Honor; in
confirmation whereof he had thereunto set his Hand and Seal, adding (as
before) that if, beyond expectation, himself or the Duke should, before the
controversy were legally decided: infringe or attempt ought contrary to what
that Instrument contained, the Orders of the Kingdom should be obliged to
resist the Party so doing. These were given at the Camp at Stegeburg the
twentieth of September, 1598.

Upon receipt hereof, Duke Charles, without delay, returned these Propositions
of Peace.
1. THat his Majesty would repair to Stocholme Propositions made by Duke
Chalres.
without stronger Guards then the King his Father had used, in progressing
through the Kingdom.

2. That the Foreign Forces should speedily depart the Land.

3. That the Counselors of the Kingdom should repair and quietly remain at
home until the Parliament, and then appear in Judgment.

4. That the Parliament be called and kept within six months.

5. That Ambassadors of Germane Electors and Princes should be invited by
Letters against the time, to examine the dissension, and that each side should
name those whom they intended to choose: In the interim, nothing to be done
secretly or openly within or without the Kingdom to the prejudice of each
other, but all persons to enjoy their Mansions peaceably until the time of
Legal decision.

6. That each one retain what he is at present possessed of, until the time of
the Comitiall Assembly.

7. That nothing of the Kingdoms affairs be decided or treated of unwitting
to his Highness.

8. That the Finlandian Soldiers should be prohibited from entering the bounds
of Suethland, but contain themselves quietly within the Province, and therein
stand to trial: That in the mean time there be a cessation of all pernicious
Plots, and that Law and Justice be there administered to all persons.

9. That no distribution of Lands be made until the Parliament.

10. That foreign Soldiers be removed out of the Castles and Forts, and that
they be committed to the faithful Guard of the Suethes.

11. That the foreign Ships which had brought Alien Forces into the Kingdom
might remain under Arrest.

Upon these Articles the Duke desired security from his Majesty, with addition
of the clause, that if any of the said Articles were infringed, the States of
Suethland should freely adhere to his Highness, whereupon he offered to
disband his Forces, to retire and remain quietly in his Dukedom.

But King Sigismundus slighting (say they) these conditions, King Sigismund
retires to Lincopia.
retired in a calm and still night toward Lincopia, leaving with the Commander
of Stegeburg certain instructions, dated the twentieth of September, 1598.
Importing,

1. THat they should continue faithful to his Majesty in each respect,
procuring his good, according to their duty and Oath.

2. That if Duke Charles should enquire the reason of his Majesty's sudden
remove, they should answer, that perceiving the sparks of this dissension could
not be extinguished by equal conditions, but that less tolerable were daily
obtruded, he had withdrawn to avoid the effusion of blood, and to see whether
his Highness would take better counsel, and cease those courses that tended
to the Countries ruin.

3. That if the Duke should forceably assault the Castle, they should oppose
him to their utmost power, and resist force with force.

KIng Sigismundus (as has been said) being gone to Lincopia, Duke Charles by
letter of the 22 Sept. expostulated, that Letter of Duke Charles.
instead of Answer to his former, his Majesty was departed from Stegeburg, and
might be induced by those evil Counselors, authors of the present dissension,
to abandon the Kingdom, or repair where a larger field for tumult might be
offered: That he admonished and besought him (by the passion of Christ) not to
be seduced by them to a further remove, until he had concluded the whole
matter to the good of the Country, protesting, on the salvation of his soul,
before God and the world, his innocence and averseness to any prejudice might
thereby arise: And desired his Majesty to believe that all things belonging to
the Castle or Shipping, which after his Majesty's departure had been rendered
unto him, should be faithfully preserved for his Majesty.

HEreunto King Sigismundus returned Answer the day following, Answer.
that he had received his M(...)tory Letters touching assecuration: That he
wondered why his Dilection would so long time varnish over his unjust cause
before the promiscuous ignorant multitude, seeing he could not prove, but that
fit assecuration had been offered, but not accepted, and that whilst one
demand was granted, others were made far different, as the last Articles might
testify: That he followed him with a strong Army, having seized the Castle of
Stegeburg, his Ships and several other things, which notwithstanding his
promised preservation of them, would have been more safe in his own custody:
That in Answer to his Letter, he desired that his Dilection would rest
satisfied with that assecuration, which (as consentaneous to reason and his
dignity) he had already offered: But if not, that he might proceed to do what
it seemed he would not leave undone; yet with what fame, he left to the
Judgment of all honest and unbyassed minds: That himself committed the
decision of the whole matter to the Justice of God. Lincopia 23. September 1598.

DUke Charles replied, That there being no remedy, but that Reply.
all Admonitions proved vain through the prevalency of perverse and wicked
Counselors, he also committed the matter to God, before whom he protested,
that he was not the cause of these troubles, nor of the effusion of blood like
to ensue; wherefore he desired to know whether his Majesty would absolve him of
his Oath of fidelity; which done, he would endeavor to repel unjustice and
violence by fit ways and means: But that if possible, he besought his Majesty
by the love of God, to weigh the matter more seriously, and not permit this
mischief to spread further, to his own and the Kingdoms prejudice, and that
nothing might be by him be omitted, he had sent a draught of the assecuration
desired by him and his followers, wherein he hoped, nothing unjust would be
found, Camp 24. September, 1598.

TWo days after, Duke Charles writes again to the Another Letter from the
Duke.
King, that seeing the conditions tendered were not admitted and that he could
not conveniently propound any other, as also that he hoped his Majesty would so
resolve, as might be honorable for both sides: He therefore desired that his
Majesty would transmit a draught of the assecurations he would give and
receive, whereupon he would so declare himself, as might be satisfactory to his
Majesty; these were dated the 26. of the said Month.

THe day following, King Sigismundus sent Letters of safe Safe conduct
interchangable granted.
Conduct for such of the Nobility with their Servants, as the Duke sh^^ld send
to treat with him, importing Security in coming, ^elivering what they had in
Commission, and sa^e return: Duke Charles also did the like for his Nephew
Prince Edward Marquess of Baden with other Lords to be sent to him from the
King.

BY all that has been said, it may be easily discerned (say Assertions of the
Suethes.
the Suethes) whether Duke Charles received from King Sigismundus answers
condign to his Letters, wherein he desired nothing but the good of the King
and Kingdom, and that if he would have listened to the Dukes faithful advice
and counsel, he needed not to have fled when none pursued: Or that if he had
loved Justice he might judicially have prevented those evils by a decision by
equal Arbitrators, before whom the Duke and Orders of Suethland were willing
to answer to whatsoever could rightly be objected against them: They say
further, that they had oftentimes just occasion given them of renouncing all
fidelity and obedience toward him, in regard he came not unto them as a good
and peaceable King, but as an Enemy and Persecuter, offering violence and
injustice to those that would not submit to his wicked intentions, nor admit of
his perverse Religion: and that he had absolved them from their Oath of
fidelity, in the former Letters, whereby they had just cause to have tried the
utmost, which yet they did not; his Highness and they having desired that
twelve of the Nobility of each side, men qualified, prudent, judicious, and
lovers of peace, should meet, examine, and decide the whole controversy, and
restore and settle peace, concord, and brotherly love; whereunto King
Sigismundus did likewise consent, but that the same was by him observed as
other things had formerly been, and according to the ancient manner of keeping
faith in promises by Jesuits and Romish Priests: For the night following the
Royal Army conducted by Wejerus made an onset upon the Ducall Camp, dispersed
the night guards, killing some and seizing others Prisoners, as was done not
only at Lincopia but at Stegeburg also, but seeing their attempt prove
unsuccesfull, both Polanders and Suethes who fought under the Kings Ensigns,
began to cry and ingeminate Peace, Peace; which the King (say they) with his
followers might have enjoyed if the Officers thereof had been timely embraced,
but that it was then overlate to treat when many thousands of men lay slain on
both sides, each intending on his Enemy the revenge of his fellow Soldier.

Duke Charles and the Suethes (as themselves assert) had Further assertions.
then both cause and advantage sufficient to have utterly ruined their
Advarsaries, yet they suffered themselves to be entreated, to show more mercy
and mildness then they had deserved, by abstaining from that revenge was then
in their power to have taken, upon King Sigismundus with his whole Vide Exegis
Historiaca Sueciae, page 233, 234.
Army, to the great detriment and misfortune (I use their own words) of
themselves and the Kingdom of Suethland, as hoping for better things in the
future from King Sigismundus, from whom they found worse by an ensuing cruel
War with the Polanders and Lithuanians, touching a final end, whereof no
certain conjecture could be made: But that, if they had (as then they affirm
they might) destroyed him and his Forces, those tumults had happily sooner
ceased, and many gallant men, who afterward perished in those Wars, had
survived: Nor had his Highness and themselves been defamed by so many unjust
aspersory Libells as were spread in all parts, which nevertheless they hoped
to confute: All which things happened by suffering King Sigismundus then (say
they) to escape, to the further prosecution of his Country, contrary to the
practice of all Magnanimous Potentates, who expose their lives to defend theirs
from Spoil and Rapine.

The cruel fight being over, King Sigismundus entered into agreement with the
Duke for the restoring and confirming of mutual friendship, brotherly
confidence, with administration of right and justice between his Majesty and
his Highness, whereof I give here the heads only, referring (as in all
Narations of Acts) the more curious to the Instrument it self, dated at
Lincopia the twenty eighth of September, 1598. And first,

THat whereas the Duke his most dear Uncle, and all Treaty of Pacification at
Lincopia between the King and Duke
those of his party had religiously promised unto him and his Heirs, due
obedience, fidelity, and brotherly affection, according to their respective
Oaths and the obligations of blood, proximity, and their ties of duty and
subjection: He likewise did by his Kingly faith and dignity, Sanctimoniously
promise and ensure, that neither in the present or future time, he would
require or take revenue of ought done or happened during the late dissension, nor
prosecute his Highness or his followers with hatred or inclemency, nor any of
the Ducall Ministers for obeying his Commands; nor that he would animadvert
into the Anthors of what had past, or punish any person for the same, but would
bear and extend unto the Duke and those aforesaid, all Royal benignity and
favor, and would neither by force or fraud, by himself or others, openly or
secretly, within or without the Kingdom, act, move, or give way to any
deceitful practices which might procure hurt or damage, either in bodies or
Estates unto the said Prince, his Wife, Children, Ministers, Subjects, or
pertakers, nor to any of the Regal Subjects who had sided with his Highness,
of whatsoever dignity, degree, or condition they were.

He likewise professed and promised to govern (the Kingdom) according to the
Laws of Suethland; his Regal Oath, and Manual security given at his
Inauguration, and to remit the deciding and composing of all differences until
the ensuing Parliament, the same to be celebrated within four months, before
neutrall Arbitrators, such as Imperial, Regal, Electorall, and Ducall
Ambassadors, who were to be invited by Letters: Those differences especially to
be then determined, as could not otherwise be well ended between the Native
Suethes: But that no decision Legal or other should be instituted, nor was
needful, between himself and the Duke, all controversies between them being
buried by a perpetual Amnestia. That whatsoever had been generally concluded,
transacted, and agreed upon, should not be separately answered for by any
particular person, but the generality be admitted to render a reason thereof.
That whatsoever in future Parliaments should be established, was to be allowed
and accepted of, and each one permitted to use and enjoy the same without
prejudice or molestation.

That all Prisoners and others of either party, should be obliged to appear
and answer in Parliament when called thereunto: Foreign Forces whether in
Field or Fort, should be forth with dismissed, the Regal Court and personal
Guard excepted, which should not exceed the number formerly used in the
Kingdom: All the Natives, Horse and Foot, waged by the King, should be paid
and disbanded, each to return home; the Duke to do the like to those of his
side. He also promised and consented, that all Castles or other places
committed by his said Uncle unto any one in his absence, should so remain
until the said Parliament: As also that those five Senatoriall persons
demanded by his Uncle should remain in his power until the decision of the
whole Affair; yet so, as to enjoy all necessary provisions, without hurt
offered to their bodies or Estates.

He further graciously promised, that publication of this agreement, and
declarations for the clearing of his Uncle from all Crimes whereof he had been
aspersed, with serious Injunctions for all men to lay down their Arms and to
embrace Peace and Concord, should be made in all Provinces and parts of the
Kingdom: It was also granted that the Dukes Ministers and Subjects might
securely pass and repasse through all the parts thereof, about their Masters
or their own lawful Affairs, they behaving themselves peaceably, not raising
sedition; the like liberty and security was to be enjoyed by the Regal
Subjects and Ministers within the Ducall Territories. That all things
pre-mentioned being thus effected, his Uncle did in like manner confirm to
restore unto him, upon his repair to Stocholme (whither he speedily intended)
and to remit into his possession his Forts, Navy, Ordinance, with all other
things belonging unto him and the Crown of Suethland, which had been committed
unto his Dilection, and were until then in his possession, the same to be no
way abused to the ruin of his Dilection or the Country. All which the
Premises he confirmed under his hand and Seal, concluding that, if ought
contrary thereunto should be acted, or any recesse therefrom made, either by
himself or his Uncle, the Orders of the Kingdom had thereby power and right
to oppose and resist the party violating. Given as aforesaid at Lincopia the
eighteenth of September, 1598.

These Covenants thus ratified, Duke Charles gave order to Shipping restored.
the Admiral and Commanders of the Fleet, to deliver up the Ships and
Ordinance to the King (no man doubting of the unviolable observation of this
Treaty) that so he might be transported from Stegeburg, according to the Regal
Honor and Dignity. But, what (say they) happened? When the Orders The King
steers to Calmar in stead of Stocholme.
of Suethland expected that the King had been upon his course toward
Stocholme, to administer Justice to every one, in conformity to this Lincopian
Transaction, and there to summon the Parliament; they understood that he had
steered first toward Calmar, and thence into Poland with the Ships and Guns,
and contrary to his Oath had furnished Calmar with a Garrison of Aliens: this
being his third dicession from the Kingdom.

King Sigismundus (say they) having thus transgressed against the Lincopian
Treaty, as he had also broken all his former Oaths and promises, the Orders of
Suethland did thereby conceive themselves to be absolved from their Oath of
Fidelity, as being bound by the said Treaty to prosecute the Violater of that
agreement; and the rather because the Strangers garrisoned in Calmar demeaned
themselves in hostile manner: as also for that King Sigismundus designed those
Ships and Ordinance upon a Naval expedition from Dantzig toward Elsenburg, for
the subduction of that place from the Crown of Suethland, and the more
commodious annoyance thereof from thence with cruel War (if his intention had
succeeded) thereby to obtrude his perverse Religion upon them, and to remit
that Fort into the hands of strangers, as he had done by Calmar; and that the
Finlanders then quiet, were again by him stirred up, so as the Suethes were
necessitated to resume their Arms, whereby floods of blood ensued, in which
many of the Natives perished: And albeit King Sigismundus had many times
promised those Finlanders, aid from Poland, yet he only deceived and brought
them to ruin: But ere we proceed, let us return to see what entercourses did
pass between King Sigismundus and Duke Charles after the fore-specified
Lincopian Treaty.

KIng Sigismundus by a most friendly Letter of the thirtieth Friendly Letter
from King Sigismundus to Duke Charles.
of September, made request unto Duke Charles in behalf of the Captive
Counselors, that their condition might be rendered more tolerable, and that
neither themselves nor their Ladies might be subject to scorns or reproaches,
the rather because some of those Ladies were near in blood both to himself and
the Duke, putting the Duke in mind of his promise to that effect at their
discourse together; and desired that (those Senators giving security for their
appearance) their own houses might be their Prison, or at least that they
might remain together, not separated nor hurryed from one place to another: In
a Schedue annexed, he prayed the Duke to hasten the provisions promised, for
the more speedy transporting of his Extraneous Forces: These as aforesaid, were
the thirtieth of September, 1598.

DUke Charles returned answer the same day, That as to The Dukes answer.
those of the Senatoriall Order whom he had under detention, they should be
maintained according to their respective dignities, but to live at their
peculiar Houses could not he granted; the Army and Commonalty having Petitioned
against it, and that the same would not only displease the Orders of the
Kingdom, but be likewise unsafe for those Senators, their Wives and Children:
And that, unless he had lately (since they came into his power) severely
prohibited the same, they had perished by the Popular fury: Wherefore he
desired to be excused in that point, and entreated that his Majesty would not
in the future dignifie them with the undeserved Title of his Counselors and
of honest Men, in regard they had been the causers of a vast expense to his
Majesty by that foreign Army, and the Authors of cruel effusion of blood, as
of other evil to his Hereditary Kingdom: And that they had expressed, but the
day before, that if they had served him as faithfully as they had done his
Majesty, they should have been better rewarded. That he had ordered the
Provisions demanded, to be conveyed to Stegeburg, and to be delivered to his
Majesty upon payment.

KIng Sigismundus, by Letter of the first of October following, Second Letter.
desired restitution of the Assecutoriall obligation of the States of Poland
granted to himself, with several other things which had fallen into the hands
of the Duke or his Servants. These were from his Court at Lincopia.

DUKE Charles replied the fourth of the said month, Ducall reply.
therein desiring that Claudius Bielke might be dismissed from being Castellan
of Stocholme, as being equally guilty (with those in detention) of the
Kingdoms miseries; and that Samuel Laskie might like wise be removed from his
Rule there; as also John Bilefeild, with certain of the City Consuls who had
reviled him: That he would not (in like manner) lend an ear to Seducers, who
might suggest ought in prejudice of the fidelity he had protested to his
Majesty and his Heirs, which he would unviolably preserve, to the honor, good
liking, and advantage of his Majesty.

He further desired his Majesty to name those Caesarian, Electorall, and Ducall
Ministers, whom he intended to invite on his part as Umpires for the deciding
of all differences at the ensuing Parliament, himself offering to do the like:
He likewise deprecated the dismission of the Aliens, if not already done, and
complained of the Countries sufferings by this Military tumult, especially in
Ostrogothia and Vplandia: And earnestly requested the liberty of certain
Persons detained by the King, to whom in his Majesty's name and absence he had
committed the keeping of certain places: He promised restitution of the Polish
assecutoriall Instrument desired, so soon as he should come to Stocholme: And
lastly, entreated that his Majesty would publish the Declarations promised for
his vindication from former undeserved aspersions.

KIng Sigismundus, by Letters of the same date sent by Nicolaus King
Sigismundus requires more Ships for the transporting of his Army and sundry
things to be restored.
Rask, required more Shipping, for the more convenient and speedy transporting
of his Army, and that the Duke would afford a friendly audience and answer to
those things the said Rask (his Secretary) should deliver; as also to cause a
restitution to be made of some things belonging to the Vice Chancellor of
Poland: And in a memorial of instructions given to the said Nicolas Rask,
commanded him to insist upon the particulars inserted in the fore-specified
Letters, as also upon the restoration of certain Music books and others,
with certain Kitchen Furniture, and a restitution of such things as had been
by several Commanders taken out of his own Ship the White-Eagle, as also on
the re-delivery of such things belonging to his Sister the Princess Anna, as
had been taken out of the Closet where the Prince Edvardus Fortunatus lodged:
He gave also express Injunctions to his said Secretary, The Prince was born in
England, An. 1565 whose Mother the Lady Cecily, Daughter to King Gustavus
Erickson, and Sister to Erick, John, and Charles, all Kings of Suethland, Wife
to Christ. Marquess of Baden, came then into England to visit Queen
Elizabeth, and by the Queen his God-mother named Edvardus Fortunatus.
to be instant with the Duke for ceasing of Depredations which were still
practiced contrary to the agreement lately made, and to insist upon the
enlargement of the Captived Counselors and others (not convicted of notorious
Crimes) upon bond or other security, as being consentaneous to the Laws of
Suethland; the rather in tender consideration of their Ladies, of whom some
were pregnant, others valetudinary: That thereby his Highness would much
oblige him, and that he would upon all occasions be ready to make compensation
of like Friendly Offices. Dated as aforesaid.

To these particulars the Duke returned a satisfactory answer; That touching
the Senators (under custody) only excepted, concerning whom he desired his
Majesty not to insist any further, they having been the cause of all the
troubles, and had conspired the ruin and destruction of the Regal Family, not
for one year or two, but during the whole course of their lives, and that the
Imperial, Regal, Electorall, and Ducall Ambassadors might be speedily invited
and entreated to examine and decide the cause. Withal, to the said Nicolaus
Rask he delivered a Memorial consisting of certain heads, to this effect.

1. THat the Finlanders and Vplandian Horse should be ordered by his Majesty to
return to their homes, and nor raise any more Tumults.

2. That his Majesty, conform to his promise, would publish his Letters
declaratory for clearing the Duke from former aspersions: Next that Letters
might be issued for the Parliaments Indiction and Celebration within four
months, according to the promise at Lincopia, and that the foreign
Ambassadors might speedily be invited into Suethland.

3. That his Majesty (in regard of the Season) would be pleased to repair to
Stocholme by land, offering to meet and attend him with all love and respect,
and to contribute what was in his power for the accommodation of himself and
his Train, and gave a List of the Gistes or most commodious nightly Stations.

Last, That all Farms, Offices of Territoriall Judicatories, with their
Profits might be suspended until the Parliament, wherein each one to render
account of his Stewardship. These were dated at Orobrogia the eighth of
October, 1598.

The twenty fourth of that month the Duke (by Letter) The Duke complains of the
Kings going to Calmar.
complained of the Kings steering his course to Calmar in stead of repairing to
Stocholme according to his promise, and of the rumor of his departing the
Kingdom: Signifying also that he hoped the miseries thereof, which were not
unknown to his Majesty, might have found some redress, if his presence had
been for some time enjoyed; but that the same in this sudden discession could
not be hoped for, all things being thereby left in an unsettled condition. That
as he was ignorant what had moved his Majesty thereunto; so it had been
necessary that himself and the Senators of Suethland, should have been
informed of the cause, and that directions had been given how all Affairs
should be ordered in his Majesty's absence, desiring an answer by the bearer
what might be expected from his Majesty by himself and the Orders of the
Kingdom. Dated at Nycopia as before expressed.

DUke Charles, about two days after received a Letter from King Sigism.
excuses his going to Calmar.
King Sigismundus, dated from Calmar the seventeenth of the said month,
intimating that by a violent Storm he had been put from his course intended
for Stocholme, and driven to that Port after two nights of tempestuous tossing
on the Sea: That the Ship which transported his Sister the Princess Anna, with
sundry other Vessels were missing; That nevertheless Promises a repair to
Stocholme.
he intended to repair to Stocholme by land with the first opportunity: That
to his Dilections demands concerning the nomination of Princes whose
intervention by their Ambassadors he did purpose to entreat against the ensuing
Parliament, they were the Emperor; the Kings of Denmark and Scotland, the
Dukes of Brandenburg and Mecklenburg, with the Marquess of Ansbach; and
desired to be in like manner informed of the names of those Princes whom his
Dilection had concluded to invite against the said time: He likewise renewed
his requests in behalf of the fore-specified imprisoned Counselors that they
might remain safely under the Royal Protection until they should appear in
judgment and trial:

But (say the Suether) King Sigismundus observed these promises no otherwise
then those formerly by him given, for instead Promise not kept, the King
returned to Dantzig.
of repairing to Stocholme from Calmar, whither (as pretended) he had been
driven by tempest; after he had garrisoned the said Castle with strangers, he
turned his Prow directly toward Dantzig: So as no remedy being left but the
celebration of a Parliament in place convenient, therein to consult of the
urgent Affairs and Necessities of the Kingdom: the Parliament at Ienecopis.
same was by his Highness, with approbation of the Orders of the Kingdom,
convened at Jenecopia in February, 1599. wherein was treated of the
concernments of the Nation; The particulars less necessary to be here
inserted, I shall omit and only touch some heads more pertinent to the present
matter, referring the further curious to the Act it self.

They therein declare that they will supplicate the King by Letters to
commiserate and administer help to the Kingdoms afflicted condition, and that
he suffer not the same to fall to utter ruin: That they hope his Majesty will
make a favorable construction of this their counsel, and so resolve as the
necessity of the cause requires: That if contrary to expectation, their
admonition shall take no effect, whether by Suggestions of those of the Romish
Creed, or Apostates of their own, they profess their innocence before God and
all Christian Potentates, and that they are constrained to renounce the
obedience they had until then borne toward his Majesty, etc. This is in the
fourth Section or Pause of that Act:

In the seventh, they express, that whereas in the late Lincopian Treaty it
was promised that Imperial, Regal, Electorall, and Ducall Ambassadors should
be of both sides invited, to examine and decide all differences, which was not
yet done; that therefore, unless his Majesty should make good his promise
within four months, they did consent and conclude to meet at Stocholme, the
24th of May ensuing, in full Parliament, and conform to the Gustauian
Testament, and the written Laws of Suethland, the other Orders of the Kingdom
being thither called and appearing, would examine the whole matter in reference
to those perverse and turbulent persons who had been Authors of the Nations
troubles, whereby the guilty might receive condign punishment, etc. These
things with protestations of fidelity to his Highness as their governor, and
the resisting and diverting (with their lives and fortunes) all prejudice that
might be intended against his person, his Consort and Children, were concluded
at Jenecopia as aforesaid.

DUke Charles having received two letters from the King of The Dukes Letter and
Objections to King Sigismund.
one and the same date from Warsonia, after a prolix repetition of the heads of
each, he answered the several objections they contained, and retorted back
with a recapitulation of things past, taxing likewise his departure, which, he
affirmed, his Majesty had not been forced unto by tempest, as had been
pretended; And that, in the Port of Baresund, Order was given to all those that
attended his Majesty to steer toward Calmar and not to Stocholme: He desired
to be certified (the time prefixed at Lincopia for the celebrating of the
promised Parliament being almost elapsed) whether his Majesty were still of the
same mind, and that a certain time and place might be appointed: He taxed the
King of stirring up tumults in Finland; Of protesting by his Ministers in
Denmark and elsewhere, that he was not obliged to stand to the agreement made
between them; Of designs against himself and the Kingdom of Suethland, as
was evident by the Letters of Sparre, and Bechus sent to his Majesty, but
intercepted and brought to him; And by the secret Plottings of the Princess
Anna with Count Axell, by her Servant Ericke George, showing that his Majesty
no way intended that these unfaithful Counselors should be brought to
trial, but to procure their safety some other way: That in the mean time
those Counselors, with others of their faction, should be kept in convenient
custody, but that if his Majesty did use further protraction he should be
compelled to proceed against them according to the Laws of Suethland. These
were dated from Jenecopia the first of February: 1599.

THis letter was accompanied by one of the same date Letter to King Sigismundus
from the Parliament of Suethland.
from the Orders of the Kingdom of Suethland, wherein, after a rememoration of
all things that had past since the Coronation, they desired his Majesty to
suppress his tumults sprung up in Finland and Leifland; to commit the Offices
of the Kingdom to Natives not to Strangers; to bring the Authors of those
troubles to punishment; To govern the Kingdom according to his Regal Oath,
the Laws of Suethland, the Sudercopian decrees, and other laudable
transactions, and that (in all cases) the written Laws might be observed; To
secure them that neither for the present nor the future he would attempt any
Mutation of Religion, as had been formerly done contrary to their opinion of
his Majesty: That he would return to them as beseemed a meek and gracious
Prince, not attended by foreign Forces: That his abode amongst them would be
an assured argument of his yielding to these their just requests; And that the
speedy effecting thereof was their most earnest desire: But that, if his
Majesty's condition were such as he could not be resident with them, and that
frequent returns into the Kingdom would be more troublesome then the State
thereof could bear, they humbly besought him that in regard his most dear Son
was (according The Prince his Son invited to be there educated, and to receive
the Crown.
to the hereditary union, from which they were resolved not to vary) the next
Heir to the Crown, he would be pleased to send the said Prince his Son to
receive his Education within that Kingdom, in the true Christian Religion and
other Princely virtues, under the tuition of his nearest of blood, and other
faithful persons, whereby he might in time become capable of the government
and so manage the same as might tend chiefly to the honor of God and the good
and welfare of their most dear Country: Promising that if he would so do they
would continue, even to the death, his Majesty's most faithful and obedient
Subjects; And (as their duty did in like manner oblige) to the young Prince,
as to their hereditary King: And that as they hoped his Majesty would grant
this their just and sincere Petition, so they with equal humility and
observancie entreated that his Majesty would release and send back certain
innocent persons, viz. George Claudius, Olaus Hard, Andreas Sweno and others,
who, contrary to his Regal Oath, right, and Justice, had been imprisoned and
conveyed out of the Country. But that, if his Majesty (contrary to their
expectation) should refuse to grant these desires, which contained nothing but
what was consentaneous to Christianity; to the Laws, to Concord and the Regal
Oath, they, with all the Orders of the Kingdom, would then protest before God
and claer their innocence toward all Christian Monarchs and the whole world,
that they were compelled to renounce their former obedience to his Majesty, as
seeing evidently that their longer continuance under his Sovereignty tended to
the rejecting of the Divine word; To the persecution of Subjects, the abolition
of legally acquired privileges and prerogatives, and the bringing of them
under the yoke and Servitude of strange Lords. Thus far (omitting the
Criminations at the beginning) out of the letter it self.

Hereunto King Sigismundus returned no answer, but more No answer returned.
then ever (say they) by open force and secret practices stirred up discord and
dissension within the Kingdom; For Parliament at Stocholme.
which cause, with unanimous consent, a Parliament was appointed to be held at
Stocholme the month of July next following, to consult upon these and other
important affairs of State.

In that assembly, the Senators and Orders of the Kingdom of Suethland, the
Earls, Barons, Bishops, Gentry, Clergy, Burgesses, and Corporations there
convened, declared that forasmuch as their Ancestors the Orders of Suethland
had at Arosia An. 1544. Framed certain constitutions for that Commonweals
future government, which were afterward confirmed by each particular condition
of the inhabitants, (importing) that whereas in former times many discords,
mischeifes and inconveniences had sprung up in the Land, partly because
stranger Princes had been preferred to the Crown of Suethland, who exercised
much violence and tyranny toward the Suethes; partly also because concord could
seldom flourish among the Kingdoms native Colonies, whilst the choice and
election of Kings rested in the Swethish Patriall Families, according to the
customary Laws of the Kingdom, and that the Royal Diadem did not descend to
any certain race; wherefore it had been thought necessary to pitch upon the
lineage of some certain Family, whereon the Regal Dignity might be settled for
ever, so long as it should please God that any one of the Male issue thereof
should remain, whereby the entrance into such dissensions (in Suethland) might
be for ever closed; and that they had not found any more worthy of that Regal
eminency, nor who had better deserved the Diadem, both for himself and his
Successors, then their then present King Gustavus (Erikson) as who through
Divine assistance, had with exceeding diligence, toil, and care, and many
hazards of his Person, freed their Country from the servitude, it groaned
under, of foreign Kings, and had restored all the Orders of the Kingdom, from
the highest to the lowest, to their ancient condition and liberty; and not that
alone, but had likewise delivered the same from the unsupportable yoke of
Romish Superstition, and in stead of that false worship, had restored the true
Evangelicall Doctrine, conform to the Divine Word, whereunto he had also
commanded his Successors to adhere, as they would avoid the eternal loss of
their Souls: The present Parliament did confess themselves obliged to observe
the same, as they had hitherto done by the Crowning of Ericke his eldest Son
after his decease, and he, for most cruel tyranny and unworthy Government,
being with his Successors worthily deprived of the Scepter, the same had been
conferred upon Duke John the second Son of King Gustavus with his Male issue,
and he deceasing, upon the present King Sigismundus, notwithstanding the just
objections they had for his embracing the Romish Superstition (contrary to the
Godly admonitions left by his Grandfather) as also for his accepting a
foreign Crown without the knowledge and consent of the Orders of Suethland,
with conditions so prejudicall to his native Conntrey as the same would never
have admitted, and his departure therfrom without their privity.

But not to insist here upon all their criminations, consisting Rejection of
King Sigism.
mostly of things formerly mentioned, that Parliament further declared that,
for the said reasons, and for that King Sigismundus had not daigned to return
any answer to their desires signified unto him from Jenecopia the preceding
Winter, they had unanimously and with one consent concluded not to acknowledge
him any longer for their King, or to be thenceforward obedient or subject to
his government, but renounced him, and resumed and dissolved their Oath of
fidelity and obedience wherein they had been hitherto bound by Law and the Acts
of Hereditary union. That albeit they had just cause to remove in like manner
his Heirs Males from the Crown, yet would not they impute the faults of the
Father to the Son, but had and did thereby decree to accept and receive Prince
Vladislaus (his Majesty's Son for their Lord and King, conditionally that
within the space of one half year his Majesty His Son Uladislaus accepted of
conditionally.
would declare whether or not he would send his said Son into the Kingdom, and
commit him to the tutory of Duke Charles, as his nearest in blood, with other
honest faithful Men; to the end he might be educated in the true Evangelicall
Profession, whereunto they, in that Kingdom, had bound themselves, as also in
the language and custom of the Country, and would accordingly transmit him
thither within six months next ensuing the half year fore-specified: That this
being thus done, they would admit of and receive the said Prince, before all
others, for their lawful Lord and King, when he should have attained those
years wherein, according to Law, the ancient Jurisdiction and laudable custom
of the Kingdom, he might secure and govern them and it; and that in the mean
time they would acknowledge Duke Charles for their Hereditary Governor until
the Prince should attain to lawful age.

But that if his Majesty should not do what before expressed within the
prefixed times, they would then also reject him, so as neither he nor his Heirs
should ever be admitted to sway the Scepter of Suethland, but as the Father, so
the Son to be forever deprived thereof, themselves being the causers of their
prescription from the Royal Throne, and their own dispoylers of all Authority
and Dignity in Suethland, whereof the said Orders were innocent before God and
the World, as not having administered the least occasion thereunto. That
thereafter they would choose such a King and Lord, as should, maintain and
govern them according to the pure word of God and the Suethish Laws.

Thus much out of the Act it self concluded the twenty fourth of July, 1599.
whereunto the further curious are referred. I shall only adding as a
preparatory to the next ensuing Parliament, that in this it was degreed that
when his Highness the Duke should return from Finland, whether the troubles
there did call him, they would again convene in place convenient for the trial
of those Counselors and others then Prisoners, and on the guilty inflict
deserved punishment, and that the Duke and they had resolved (for the clearing
of themselves before all Christian Monarchs and the whole World, that they
proceeded not otherwise in that Affair then right and justice required) to
entreat certain Electors and Princes of Germany to send some men of probity and
integrity into Suethland, not as Judges of controversies but as Auditors only:
But if those Ambassadors did defer their coming that themselves would then
proceed.

This Parliament ended, they (without delay) by Letters Parliamentary Letters
to King Sigismundus not answered.
of the thirtieth of the said month advertised King Sigismundus of what had
been therein concluded, and humbly desired his Majesty to declare himself
within the time limited: But to these Letters (say they) he returned no answer;
Whereupon Parliament at Lincopia.
another Parliament was indicted at Lincopia against the month of March in the
year, 1600.

In this Convention the whole Orders of Suethland (as in the former they had
done) did expressly and absolutely renounce King Sigismundus and his Government,
as also his Son for himself and Posterity in case of his not being sent into
Suethland, within the time specified in the former; They thereupon do likewise
clear his Highness from affecting the Sovereignty or its Title,
notwithstanding the tender thereof unto him, and confirmed him for their
Governor during the absence, as also the minority of the Prince, if he should
come within the time, five months whereof were yet unexpired: And albeit (as
they in the nineth Section or Pause of that Act, do acknowledge) Duke John the
Brother of King Sigismundus was the next in Dnke John declined.
right unto the Crown according to the several (times forementioned)
hereditary Unions yet did they decline him, fearing least when he had attained
the Regal Chair, he might, moved thereunto by natural affection to his
Brother or his Heirs enter into such Covenants and make such transactions, as
might be destructive to themselves and to the Country, by joining with them to
revenge, upon Duke Charles or his Successors, those things which in those
turbulent times had been acted in reference to King Sigismundus and his Family,
and so the latter evil might be worse then the former: And therefore Dukedom
of Ostrogothes conferred on Duke John.
they unanimously decreed that the said Prince John should have the Dukedom of
Ostrogothia (formerly designed for his Uncle Duke Magnus) conferred upon him
with certain reservations, and equal compensations for the same, therein
expressed: The said Prince to rest therewith contented, without pretending to
any other part in the Kingdom, Hereditary Goods expected, which by paternall
or maternall Inheritance might be devolved unto him, yet with certain
restrictions therein contained.

And as in the eight Section or Pause of the said Act they repeat the Motives
of their defection from King Sigismundus, as his deserting the Evangelicall and
embracing the Papal erroneous Profession: his endeavoring to obtrude the same
upon that Kingdom, his departure from thence several times without their
privity, after he had brought a numerous foreign Army into the bowels of the
Country, against all right, natural affection, and the Laws of that Nation,
and had by several other ways acted contrary to his Oath and assecutoriall
Letters, as also had not daigned to answer one sylable to their humble desires
and assurance of committing the Sovereign rule of Suethland, unto his Son if
transmitted for due Education within the prefixed time: For which causes they
likewise renounced his Son and all other his Heirs and Successors, depriving
them of all Jurisdiction, otherwise (by the Hereditary King Sigism. with his
Heirs rejected.
Union) rightly belonging unto them (so as neither his Majesty nor any of his
Progeny should thereafter obtain any right unto the Suethish Diadem)
withdrawing themselves from all Obligations wherein they were tied to his
Majesty and his Heirs, as also renouncing all fidelity, security, and
assistance formerly exhibited to his Majesty. So in the twelfth Pause or
Section of the same, they approve of and confirm Duke Charles for their future
King, promising unto him thereby, Duke Charles designed King of Suethland.
unanimously and with one assent, obedience, fidelity, security, and their
utmost assistance, as to their natural and beloved Lord and King: yea, that
albeit he should refuse to accept the Crown, and whether the Coronation
Ceremonies should be performed or not, they would nevertheless acknowledge and
observe him as their lawful Lord and King.

They likewise bound themselves (in that Act) that after Gustavus Adolphus to
succeed.
the death of Duke Charles they would render and perform the like obedience
unto his Son the Prince Gustavus Adolphus, and to his Heirs Males so long as
any of them should survive: But they sailing, the Royal Scepter to come to
Duke John aforementioned; Provided that he and his Successors were obliged After
him Duke John conditionally
not to enter into any Union or confederacy with King Sigismundus or his Heirs,
especially relating to any share or government in that Kingdom, and that he
nor they should in no sort adhere unto the Romish erroneous Doctrine.

Concerning their establishment of Church Service, as also their Treaties to be
had with the Russian and those of Lubecke, the curious are referred to the Act,
wherein also provision was made for dispatch of Juridicall Suites: Scrutenies
into the public Revenues of the Crown: Settling of certain numbers of Horse and
Foot in each Province to be ready upon emergent occasions, their constant
Salaries and Sustentation, whilst remaining at home, to be out of the Crown
Revenues only; but when the whole Forces of each Province or any part thereof,
should move in Military expedition against the Kingdoms Enemies, each Province
to furnish their proper Soldiers with Provision or Maintenance during the
expedition, that so each might be assessed for their own Militia, and not
burdened with that of any other: And that forasmuch as each Province had not
equal number of Soldiers, no more then equal frequency of subsidiary
Inhabitants; it was ordained that the Assesments for the maintenance of the
Army should be equal in each Province, whereby the Inhabitant of one Province
might not be liable to a larger Military contribution then one of another
Province, and if the Military number in one Province were greater then its
proper contribution could maintain during the expedition, the defect was to be
supplied out of the Crown Revenues of that Province, whereby the Soldier might
out of the same Province be provided of necessaries during the expedition: This
Decree to be perpetually observed, whether the Military bands should remain at
home, or march (under the Ensigns) against the Enemy.

Care was likewise taken for the regulating of Decimations or Tithes in field
provisions, whereof the Minister was to have a third for his peculiar use, and
the residue to be carried into the Granary of the Church; the Minister to make
Oath of what by him received, and upon prevarication found, either by the
Minister, or by the Husbendman to the Minister, or to the Granary of the
Church, the party offending to be cited into Judgment and fined. During this
Session, the Trial of Captivated Senators:
Captivated Senators, and such as upon their account had been sent for from
Finland, were brought to trial, concerning whom it was concluded, that
forasmuch as those Counselors, who in this present Parliament had appeared in
Judgment, and were by Duke Charles personally, in presence of the Lords Clement
Gadderdorf, and Gerhard Stedding, Ambassadors from the Prince John Adolph Duke
of Holstein, accused and convicted that they were not only the first who
causelessly deserted the Acts enacted and decreed by themselves as well as
others, at Sudercopia and elsewhere, and like Malefactors fled out of the
Kingdom, thereby deserving the punishment which the said Acts and other
laudable transactions of the Kingdom enjoined to perjured persons, and
violaters (such as these were) of their own Snbscriptions, but also derogating
from their Oath and all natural (Patriall) affection, had persuaded King
Sigismundus, themselves accompanying him, to bring an Alien Army to devast and
destroy his Native Soil, and not as became a gracious King, to visit and
defend his Subjects according to equity and the Laws: Of all which Crimes they
were convicted by their own Letters, besides many other wicked conspiracies by
them formerly and of late malignantly practiced against his Highness and their
Country, for which they had been, by most equal Judges condemned in loss of
life and Goods, as by the Sentence it self, the tenor whereof follows, does
appear in these words.

BY the particular Letters and Writings of these Traiterous and unfaithful
men, Gustavus Baner, Ericke Sparre, Steno Sentence of execution.
Baner, and Thuro Bielke of the Senatoriall Order, it is manifest that they
have not adhered to their written Obligatory Engagements sent at several times
to his Highness, but have shamefully digressed from their own Acts under their
hands and Seals, and from the laudable Decree ratified by them at Sudercopia.
We therefore who by the universal Orders of the Kingdom are deputed for the
pronouncing of this Sentence, cannot acquit nor free them from that punishment
whereunto persons perjured, and transgressors of their own Acts, are subject
according to the Laws, in regard the Sentence following, inserted by
themselves in the Sudercopian Decree, does condemn them in these words.

All persons who shall swarve from this our Universal Union, for favor of
great Ones, peculiar profit, or other causes, under what name or notion soever,
or shall lend assistance, that violence be used by any person openly or
privately, against this Decree, or those things whereof his Majesty has
secured the Kingdom of Suethland, whereupon this our Constitution is founded;
We shall repute those men for such as are unfaithful to his Majesty, to the
Kingdom turbulent, treacherous persons, and to the Country Traitors, whom We
will endeavor by all means to suppress.

Moreover they have most wickedly slandered his Highness unto his Majesty,
whereby many Calumnies have been divulged in Print and otherwise; themselves
having in their Letters spread very many things, much tending to blemish the
Honor, good Name, and Princely repute of his Highness, which neither
themselves nor any other can prove. Wherefore in as much as by their Writings
they have so ignominiously depraved his Highness, the Uncle to the King, and
Hereditary Prince and Governor of the Kingdom, to which Dignity he was by
themselves elected, they are to undergo the punishment assigned them by the
Laws of Suethen in the ninth Chapter of the Title De Regallibus, which is,
Whosoever shall speak ought derogatory to the honor and fame of the Royal
Majesty, or of one or more of his Counselors, and cannot rationally and
legally prove the same, let him lose his head.

Furthermore, forasmuch as they have sowed hatred and discord between King
Sigismundus and his Highness, instigating his Majesty to wage War against his
Highness, contrary to the Laws of the Land, and all regard of natural
affection, thereby bringing desolation and devastation to the Country: Therefore
we cannot judge otherwise but that they are obnoxious to the punishment, which
the eighth Chapter in the Title of the most high Capital Crimes, according to
the Laws of Suethen, ordains to be inflicted on them in this form of words.
Whosoever shall raise an Army against the King or the Governor of the
Kingdom, to surprise them at unawares, or to slay them, or shall attempt any
violence or unjustice by Letters, Writings, Counsel, Endeavors, or
Assistance, if taken in the Fact, shall undergo the loss of life and goods:
Whereunto is added in the same place, a Chapter of the Tenor ensuing. If any one
shall bring a foreign Army into his Native Soil, and wage unlawful War
against his lawful Lord, by devasting the Country, unless in company of him
who is legally promoted to the Government of the Kingdom, he with all his
partakers are to be deprived of life, and their Estates to be for ever
consiscated. But whereas they and others of the same faction will happily
imagine that the said recited Chapter of the Suethish Law, may be a help and
excuse unto them, because it says, unless they shall accompany the King
lawfully advanced to the Throne of the Kingdom: It is therefore to be considered
on the otherside, that themselves were the causers of all the troubles and
effusions of blood, (which to our grief) has for some time overflowed the
Country, and it is to be feared that the same wound of dissension may again
fester, unless by the divine goodness it be in mercy salved. For in the first
place, if his Majesty would attempt ought against his Oath, his Covenants, and
the Laws, they were not bound to adhere unto him in that point, as the fifth
Chapter in the Title De Regalibus, concerning the duty of Senators does express
in these words. We shall yield unto the King lawful obedience, and shall
perform his commands in all things which he shall enjoin us rationally and
legally, and so as We may before God and man justly maintain and answer for, as
well our obedience, as the things which he commands: Therefore according to
their Oath of Office they were bound to persuade the King to such things as
they knew to be advantageous to his Majesty and the Natives, and ought to have
exhorted him to preserve, not violate the Regal Rule, that so he might not
have transgressed the Oath made to the universal orders of the Kingdom: and
should have put in execution the things which they had promised to the King and
Kingdom: but they have gone not only clearly directly Contrary thereunto, and to
the Sudercopian Decree in like manner, but have also induced his Majesty to the
breach of his Oath (as they had broken theirs) and to oppress his Country by
cruel War contrary to Law and Justice, whereby they have caused many thousands
of men to lose their lives; procured much hurt and detriment to the country,
depriving the King of his Kingdom, and people, and by their plots precipitated
themselves into the present misfortune.

It is hereby manifest that the pre-alledged Chapter of the Laws of Suethen,
does no way cover or defend their Crime; but that we by vigor of the same text
have legally pronounced them to be deprived of their lives, their lands, their
goods, and good names.

And we accordingly profess, that we all, jointly and severally, willingly and
legally, by virtue of those obligatorial letters which the most illustrious
Duke Charles and we have given to each other interchangably, without hatred,
envy, fear, or respect of any person, nor offering further then deserved
violence, have pronounced this Judgment and capital Sentence, and that we
will constantly adhere thereunto both for the present and the future, and will
acknowledge and maintain the same before God and the Christian World. For the
more assurance hereof we have ratified and confirmed this present Judgment
with our hands and Seals. At Lincopia, Others pardoned.
the sevententh of March. 1600:

In this manner was the Sentence pronounced on those aforenamed; but as for
Claudius Bielke, Christierne the Son of Claudius, Ericke the Son of Abraham,
and George Posse the Son of Knute, they having publicly acknowledged their
offenses, his Highness at the request of the Foreign Ambassadors and the
Orders of the Kingdom had pardoned them, upon their humble suit for remission
of the facts whereby they had offended, partly against those Orders, partly
against the Country: yet so as to remain prisoners until his Highness had
taken further Some but repreived.
deliberation, and the bettering of their condition to be at his Highness
pleasure. Hogenscheild Bielke affirming he could rationally refute the
imputation of his siding with the other unfaithful Counselors by assistance
and advice in persuading King Sigismundus to bring a foreign Army into his
native Soil, he was to clear himself at the next ensuing Parliament, or
otherwise to be liable to the crime objected. Concerning Carolus Gustavus and
the Homicide charged upon him, but no absolute conclusion made of the time, he
was ordered to acquit himself thereof in the next Parliament, in which also
the particulars his Highness had against the Sentence in Finland against
Arvidus Gustavus and Axell Kurck confirmed by Parliament.
foresaid Persons were to be examined.

In reference to Finland, the Parliament decreed that Arvidus Gustavus and
Axelius Kurck, who for effusion of blood and other abominable and wicked
actions, in that Province, perpetrated by them, had been there legally
sentenced, which was here confirmed, should undergo the deserved punishment:
That others of the Nobility and of the Military Order, not equally guilty, as
having been seduced by those traiterous Counselors, their Leaders, should
have their lives spared; Other offenders for smaller Offenses gradually
punished by loss of goods or Fine.
but that a third of their Immovables, whether by Inheritance or Donation from
Kings of Suethland; should accrue unto the Crown for ever, with all their
Fee-Farmes, whether for term of life or years. It was further decreed, that the
Clergy, and all others in that Province, who by their Sons, their Kindred, or
others of the Military Bands, had contributed or maintained Horses, or that had
by Letters and Plots endeavored against his Highness and the Kingdom in
general; but chiefly for deserting the Sudercopian Constitutions they had
formerly approved of, and opposing themselves to their laudable transactions,
should be punished; the Clergy to be for ever deprived of their Parishes and
Ministerial dignities: Others who had furnished Horses or assistance to the
Enemies, were to be fined in a third part of their Goods; and such as were any
way accountable to be called to a strict account; the residue of the Clergy who
had only dissented, by not assisting the Orders and the Kingdom, in
prosecution of the Regal Oath and Assecuration, with other most ancient
jurisdictions, should be fined in five Dollars for every ten Boores (or
Ploughmen) within their Parishes, and so to retain their functions and livings
so long as they should behave themselves as became faithful Subjects. These
are partly the heads of the Parliamentary transactions at Lincopia, the
ninteenth of March. 1600. For more full satisfaction reference is had to the
Acts.

The same things were confirmed in the Comitiall Convention Second Parliament
at Stocholme.
at Stocholme An. 1602 with sundry others enacted more relating to that
country in particular then to the matter we have in hand, and therefore here
omitted: Therein the Duke was again desired to accept of the Crown, which he
nevertheless refused until he had once more, by letters, sounded the mind of
his Nephew King of Sigismundus, whether he would yet send his Son, upon the
conditions before expressed, to receive his education in Suethen, and the
Crown thereof when he should attain unto full years. In this Parliament also
the succession was confirmed (Duke Charles deceasing) upon his Son Gustavus
Adolphus and his heirs males; and those not surviving, upon his second Son the
Prince Carolus Philippus and his Male Issue, which likewise failing, the
forenamed Prince John with his posterity masculine should succeed; and did
associate each with other for the opposing of any, whether Native or stranger,
who should contradict these Statutes by endeavoring to obtrude any other upon
the Regal Throne. This Parliamentary Act consisting of eighteen heads sealed
with their respective hands, and Seals, was concluded at Stocholme the
seventeenth of July, 1602.

DUKE Charles upon the twentieth of the said Month sent Duke Charles again
solicites King Sigism, to send his Son into Suethen.
letters to King Sigismundus commemorating those, several times formerly sent,
as well by the Orders of the Kingdom of Suethland as himself, for the
transmission of his Son to be educated in the Evangelicall Christian profession
and the customs there used, and so to be received and admitted for their Liege
Lord and King, when he should attain to years fit to manage the affairs of
Suethen, and to grant them due assecuration: Withal taxing him that hitherto
he had not only not answered but slighted and contemned their faithful
admonition, but had calumniated him, and was intentive toward his ruin and
that of the Kingdoms respective Orders, as appeared by his Majesty's Letters
divulged in Suethland, partly before, partly after the late cruel War, and
particularly in those by him sent to Revell from Vilna of the sixteenth of May,
stuffed with contumelies unnatural, as being published against an Uncle, who had
always studied his Majesty's and his Fathers good, and had endeavored to
place the Crown upon the head of his said Father by the deprivation of Ericke
who ruled amiss, as also safe-guarded his Majesty then an Infant, in requital
whereof he was now by him aspersed with infamous titles; and further showed
that Copies of certain Letters were dilated unto him, written by his Majesty
to the King of Denmark from Vilna the five and twentieth of February; wherein
he had endeavored to spot his honor. and had unadvisedly given away the right
which the Crown of Suethland does justly vindicate as the peculiar badge
thereof, Viz. The three Crowns, for which a long and cruel War had been waged
with the Danes, wherein many brave Men had perished; and whereas the Danes
formerly had earnestly entreated from the Suethes, a protraction (as to them)
for composing the difference, his Majesty contrarily had now desired the like
from the Danes, conceding needlessly the right of the Suethes to the adverse
party, contrary to his Oath and promise, which his Majesty and his unfaithful
Counselors ought not to have done: That nevertheless he regarded not those
exorbitancies, neither was willing to recompense evil with evil, but would
attribute those excesses to his Majesty's weakness, and the perverseness of
that Religion wherein he had been educated, and would return good even to his
Enemies, if his Majesty and his partakers would accept of his brotherly
affection: That therefore, albeit the Orders of Suethland, in the last
Stocholmian Parliament (as they had often before done) had now again humbly
desired him to assume the Sovereign Government, and had wholly renounced his
Majesty, as he well knew, he had not hitherto directly condescended unto them:
But that his Majesty and all the World might know, he sought not his Majesty's
or his Successors prejudice, but should gladly see his Majesty's Posterity
perpetually sitting at the Helm of that Kingdom; He again earnestly and
faithfully desired his Majesty to assent to his request, and send his Son
speedily into Suethland; that otherwise, and unless that before the ensuing
month of August expired, he received a satisfactory answer, his Majesty would
not impute it to him for a Crime, that he had at length accepted of the tender
which by the whole Orders of the Kingdom had been so frequently made unto him.
Dated as aforesaid from Stocholme; neither do we find any future intercourse by
Letters between King Sigismundus and his Uncle Duke Charles.

But (say the Suethes) in stead of answer to those Letters, No answer returned,
but new broiles raised.
new broiles were set on foot, by all the Forces could suddenly be raised in
Poland, Lithuania, and Liefland, albeit the Leiflanders did more adhere to the
Suethes, as not brooking the Polish Government: Libels were dispersed into all
parts against Duke Charles, and he with the Orders of Suethland were publicly
proclaimed Enemies: Sundry (but unsuccesfull) attempts made upon Huitenstein
and Revell, Caspar Tisenhusen that Rebel, with his Troops of Horse admitted
into Viburg, by Axell Kurck appointed Camp-Master by King Sigismundus, contrary
to his Oath and Obligation, which prohibited the Command of Castles unto
strangers: Hereupon Duke Charles was compelled unto a new expedition into
Leifland, where before he attempted ought against his Adversaries, he made
sundry overtures (for a Composure) to Leo Sapia, and others, to whom the King
of Poland had committed the Command of Leifland, but was not only delayed with
various Letters, and deluded with vain hopes, but his Messengers likewise by
them imprisoned contrary to the custom of Nations; so as all his endeavors
for ending that cruel War proved but vain, as appeared in the year 1602. when
Axell Kurck and Henricus Horn, with others, upon request made by the
Polanders, were sent with certain Instructions positive, to try whether any
agreement could be made: but coming to Leifland they found no man to treat
withal; King Sigismundus and the Polanders having no other intent then to
continue the War, and to procure them what Enemies he could both in Denmark and
Further Objections.
Russia, which gave beginning to the so long continued broiles between the
famous Kingdom of Suethland, that of Poland and Lithuania: Moreover the said
Duke Charles, in the year 1608. (he being then King) sent his Ambassadors
Magnus Brake Earl of Visinsborg, Nicolaus Bielke, Baron of Salstad, Peter
Kenicius Bishop of Scharen, Lawrence Paulinus Bishop of Stregnen, Ottone Helmer
de Tuna, Castellan of Aboen, and Philip Skeding, Castellan of the Narue to
treat with the Polanders, but as formerly, so then King Sigismundus refused to
cease this bloody War by equal and laudable transactions.

Neither (as they allege) is that to be slipped over in silence The same
continued.
which Jonas Hendrickson, Meldorpius Ditmarsus writes in his Oration,
entitled, The means and way of reducing the Septentrionall Regions to the
Romish Worship; Whose words are, that, when the Collar of the Golden Fleece was
presented to King Sigismundus, at the Warsovian Parliament, by the Count of
Ligny, in the name of the King of Spain his Master; King Sigismundus made
Oath, that he would preserve sincere Friendship and Brotherhood with the
Prince of that Order, and would propagate that Catholic Religion by
endeavoring to his power the extirpation of Heretics: What therefore might be
expected by the Duke and themselves who had abjured the Roman Profession?
Surely King Sigismundus swearing, at the reception of that Order, to propagate
the Papal Creed, by extirpating the Heretics, was injurious and perjured as
to his Coronation Oath taken in Suethland.

In the year 1604. Duke Charles and the Orders of Suethland Parliament at
Norcopia.
assembled again in Parliament at Norcopia, upon the sixth of February, wherein
they ordained several things tending to that Nations Emolument; As,

1. Concerning the revising, correcting, reprinting, republishing of the Laws
and Constitutions of the Kingdom of Suehtland in all Provinces thereto
belonging, those to whom the same was committed to have allowance from the
Crown for their subsistence, until it were perfected.

2. The grievances of the Subject (with their redress) from and by Missionary
and Military Quarterings.

3. The valuation of their Coin.

4. The Tolls or Customs. Heads of what therein transacted.


5. Against imposition of Taxes by Deputies or Officials, without the chief
Superiors Command.

6. The power of Provincial Lawmakers, or of great Rulers.

7. The Measures, Weights, and Balances, measuring of Lands, lustration of
Regal Goods.

8. Marriage of the Royal Progeny.

9. The placing of Crafts-men in every Territory, and Warehouses in each City,
wherinto all Cloth to be brought and viewed, before the fame were vended.

10. Against the detention of Tenths, Contributions, and emergent Exactions, by
such as hold any Copyhold profits from the Crown.

11. Concerning the payment of Subsidies or customary Tributes, and by whom.

12. The Provincial Statutes of the late King Gustavus (Erickson) to be
reviewed, corrected according to the present occasions, by the Supervisors of
the Laws of Suethland, and together with them to be published and observed.

13. Against undue and fraudulent exportation of Iron; the punishment of
Offenders.

14. Touching the Grants of immovable Goods unto any person, made by Kings or
Princes.

15. That the Moiety of Territoriall Fines should accrue to the Provincial
Judge; the other Moiety to be reserved in the Territoriall Chamber.

Lastly, That Emergencies requiring the absence for some time of the King or
Kingdoms Governor, the stay not to be beyond the day of Bartholomew-tide: For
the better satisfaction in all which particulars, the curious are referred to
the Acts; as also the Proceedings made in order to Hogenschield and Claudius
Bielke, with the other Prisoners and Fugitives, their Children and Posterity.
In like manner their Ordinance for the leavy and maintenance of nine thousand
Foot and Horse for three years against the Polander, the Military Salary to be
monthly paid, besides the other Soldiers to be maintained by his Highness out
of the Crown Revenues, are therein more fully to be seen; the present intention
being only to mention the Parliamentary conclusious relating to the former
differences, between the King his Nephew, and the Kingdom.

In Order hereunto they show that Duke Charles for sundry considerations by him
alleged, was willing to decline the Sovereign Rule, and had made unto them
these two ensuing Propositions: That either they would be reconciled to King
Sigismundus, or otherwise accept of his Brother Prince John for their King:
Whereunto they had answered that they utterly rejected the first, as being
willing to run any hazard rather then to return under his obedience: And as for
Duke John, albeit he was nearest in blood according to the Hereditary Union,
yet forasmuch as he was of under age, and had likewise upon the sixth of that
present month, in presence of sundry of the States of the Kingdom, renounced
his right thereunto, resolving to adhere to the Lincopian Constitutions, Duke
John renounceth his pretense to the Crown of Suethland.
and had entreated Duke Charles to accept of the Scepter, and had likewise
sealed this Norcopian Decree, religiously promising never to act in prejudice
thereof, under the penalty of loss of his successive right unto the Crown of
Suethland, as also of his Dukedom and those Hereditary Goods which he
possessed in Suethland: In like manner, that he would never make any
Transactions with King Sigismundus, his Sons or Successors, but to resist them
vigorously, protecting, preserving, and defending Duke Charles, his Consort,
Children, and Successors, in the Jurisdiction at that present designed unto
them: And therefore for those and other lawful causes, some of which were
mentioned in the Lincopian Decrees, they could not admit of Prince John unto
the Kingdoms rule: for which cause they had most humbly and earnestly
reiterated their desires to his Highness not to reject the Sovereignty; Duke
Charles contented to accept of the Crown.
which his Highness at last, moved with their assiduall and unanimous Suit had
assented unto: And that forasmuch as in consideration of the causes
fore-specified in the renunciation, and others elsewhere mentioned, the Male
Line of King John was wholly deprived of the Suethish Diadem, and the same
designed and conferred upon Duke Charles and his lawful Heirs; they had
therefore now renewed their ancient Hereditary Union, and had framed and fitted
the same unto the condition of the time present: They further decreed, that if
any person at any time thereafter, should secretly or openly act contrary to the
Union and constitution then made, by endeavoring to translate the Crown unto
any other Family, so long as any of the Progeny of their designed King, or of
Duke John should survive; or to render it (as formerly) Elective, by which
State many mischiefs (as their Annals made mention) had sprung up: Or finally,
excluding the Gustavian Race, should himself surprise the Regal Chair, they
would with joint Forces endeavor that he or they should incur the punishment
of Traitors to their Country, and their Goods to be confiscated: And if their
Children were of years to be knowing and conscious of those Treasons, and did
not discover them, they were to undergo like punishment: But upon discovery of
their Parents Nefarious practices, they should undesputably enjoy their Parents
Estate, the Parent punished as aforesaid. But if they had not attained the
years of discretion, so as not to be guilty of those treacherous Devices, they
should not (by their Fathers act or suffering loss of life and goods) be
defamed, yet should enjoy only the goods of their Maternall, not their
Paternall Inheritance: If the Mothers were in like manner conscious of the
Conspiracy and Treason with their Husbands, the Inheritance of the Wife as well
as of the Husband, should be confiscated and accrue to the Crown, without any
regard had to the Children. This was the substance of the Norcopian Parliament,
confirmed by the hands and Seals of Prince John, Duke of Ostrogothia and
Hereditary Prince of Suethland, together with the several Orders thereof
respectively, the twenty second of March, 1604. The same likewise Coroborated
with the Seals of the Towns and Provinces, from whence any of them had been
delegated:

The Reformed hereditary union forementioned was of the Hereditary union
renewed, reformed.
same date equally subscribed and Sealed by the Senators and Orders of
Suethland, Earls, Barons, Prelates, Gentry, Clergy, Commanders, Burgesses,
and others, who were present at the Norcopian Convention, as well in the names
of their respective Provinces as in their own; and imported that from the time
of the Arosian Convention An. 1544. the Kingdom of Suethland, formerly
Elective, had been, under Gustavus Erickson (of excellent memory) rendered
hereditary to him; his heirs Males and their line Masculine, so long as any
one of them should survive, in consideration of the desolations, intestine
Seditions, Sanguinolent profusions, multiferous destructive detriments
sustained by that Kingdom, whilst Elective, without regard to a lawful
regal succession: One Person or Party preferring one Prince, the other Party
another, to the Royal throne; from whence multiplicious discords and
pernicious dissensions had overflowed the inhabitants, to the almost ruin of
the whole Kingdom.

That the motives inducing thereunto had been, his vindicating them from the
immanity of Christierne the second of Denmark: That before his migration hence
he had composed a certain last Will and Testament, for the regulating of his
children toward each other and toward their Subjects; Upon which Testament the
Orders of the Kingdom had grounded their hereditary union, and as a mark, had
made it their aim; not obscurely insinuating that unless the Gustavian
succession made that their rule, they could not thereby pretend any advantage,
nor any right unto the Crown more then that Testament conveyed unto them: The
close whereof contained that his Children and Successors should cherish and
maintain divine worship, and the precious word of God, without any
superstition, or traditions of men, according as himself had endeavored to
promote and publish the same: Next, that they should embrace each other with
continued mutual affection, governing and protecting their Subjects rightly
and justly, and according to their legally acquired privileges.

That according to the hereditary Union (grounded as aforesaid) they had
crowned Ericke the Eldest of that line; But in regard his rule was not
corresponding to the Paternall Testament and Laws of Suethland, they had
deprived him and his heirs of the Crown of Suethland, and substituted in his
Stead the late King John (of laudable memory) as the nearest in Order to that
Covenant of hereditary Union: That he albeit retarded by the impulsions of
perverse persons, who suggested unto him the pernicious change of religion,
which was mostly intended during his reign, had been vigilant toward those
things that were consentaneous to Christianity and right, and intended a just
Government so long as his thread of life remained: To which change of Religion,
as also sundry other things, were to be imputed to the suggestions of evil
Counselors, as the primary causers of that want of brotherly confidence, which
of right ought to have been between him and his Brother Duke Charles.

They also affirm, that contrary to his Fathers said Testament, and his own
Oath for true observation thereof, Sigismundus his Son (afterward King of
Poland) had been by him permitted to be educated in the Pontificiall Religion,
and that by the fore-specified impulsions and persuasions of perverse
Counselors, he had sent his said Son out of the Kingdom, to receive the
Crown of Poland; from whence, as from an overflowing stream, all those
innundations of evils, which had covered their Country, proceeded.

It would be over long here to repeat, their formerly so often reiterated
Criminations against King Sigismundus, nor the forementioned Resignation by
Duke John of his Hereditary Duke Charles pronounced King, and his eldest to
succed. The younger to enjoy his Fathers Dukedomes.
right to the Kingdom: They therefore proceed to pronounce Duke Charles (by
them formerly designed) for their present absolute and lawful Sovereign, with
whom and for whose safety, they would live and dye; and that after him they
would receive his eldest Son, the Prince Gustavus Adolphus for their immediate
and confirmed King: Upon the younger Prince, Carolus Philippus, they thereby
settled the Paternall Dukedomes of Sudermannia, Nericia, and Wermelandia,
Vosbogia, and the Valensian Territory, with the other Jurisdictions then
possessed by his Father: But that Duke John should enjoy the Dukedom formerly
granted unto Duke Magnus, with other large emoluments conceded unto him by the
present Parliament, as the Letters of Donation did testify.

That if their designed King, the present Prince Gustavus Adolphus Male issue
of the eldest failing the second to succeed.
should leave behind him any lawful Regal or Ducall Heirs Males, the eldest
should succeed; and he deceasing sonlesse, the one after the other from Line to
Line, should sway the Scepter, and so his Highness Sons that should be borne
unto him, should be by them and their Successors designed and accepted for
lawful and Hereditary Kings of Suethland. But if the Prince Gustavus Adolphus
should depart this life, not leaving any lawful Heirs Males, the second Son
Prince Carolus Philippus should obtain the Crown as their designed, elected,
and confirmed King of Suethland; and after him, his lawful Heirs Males, in
like manner should succeed, as has been expressed toward the Line of Prince
Gustavus. That also failing in him, Duke John to inherit the Crown.


Lastly, That if Prince Carolus Philippus should change this mortal State
without any lawful Male Issue to rule the rains of the Kingdom, the Royal
dignity should then devolve unto the illustrious Duke John, in the same manner
word for word as it had been decreed and confirmed unto the forenamed Princes
Gustavus Adolphus and Carolus Philippus. He also dying, his eldest lawful Son
should obtain the Regal Wreath, and so each from Line to Line as had been
designed and concluded unto the Heirs of the two Princes before named in the
foregoing Articles: And that, forasmuch as Histories give ample testimony of
tumults, dissentions, and multiferous detriments, which over-fruitfully flock
into a Commonwealth, when the Line of a lawful Family is not regarded; the
Kingdom and the Government thereof being in jeopardy by a perilous election
of Governors, this Inhabitant voting for one (Candidate or) pretender, that
man for another: And that on the other side it may be collected out of
Histories, that much Concord and Tranquillity has ever flourished in a
Commonwealth, when according to Divine providence, the States or Orders of a
Kingdom have not swarved from the right and lawful Line of a Regal Family.
If therefore The Female Regal and Ducall issue adopted into the succession.
(which they besought God gracionsly to divert) the like inconvenient should
befall the Kingdom of Suethland, that the whole Masculine Gustavian Progeny
should be taken away, and none remaining of that Regal and Ducall Family but
Female Heirs, they did bind themselves by promise, and voluntarily and by
mature Counsel did thereby unanimously and concordially, universally and
singularly, for themselves in general and particular, and for all their
Successors engage and swear, that they would accept that Princess and Regal
This has reference to the forecited Parliamentary conclusions at Stocholme
the seventh of March 1590. but is here imperfect in the Original, as wanting
the words Eldest unmarried, as is there expressed.
Daughter (if such should be living) or of the Ducall Line, for Queen of
Suethland, and that they would not obtrude any Husband upon her without her
will and consent; and especially that they would not permit or procure her a
Husband of any People enemy to the Suethish Nation, or that had any way sought
after their ruin or hurt, nor yet any of a perverse Religion, or adhering to a
Doctrine differing from their Christian profession. That withal, the Queen
should be and thereby was prohibited from any manner of Matrimonial contract
with any person of such a Nation or Religion, under the penalty of deprivation
of Rule and Dignity; but that she should rather wed some one of the Suethish
Nation whom she could affect, and who might be useful to the Kingdom, or some
Prince of the Ducall Families in Germany descended from the illustrious
Gustavian Progeny of Suethland, and of the same Religion with them, except such
marriage were forbidden by propinquity of blood.

That the other Regal and Ducall Daughters of that Family then remaining
should be provided of Dowries and other necessaries befitting their condition
and dignity, according to the Gustavian Testament, and the conclusions of the
present Provision for younger, Regal, and Ducall daughters conditional.
Parliament: Yet with these conditions and cautions, that not any of the Regal
or Ducal Daughters should contract Matrimony with any person without the free
consent and approbation of the Orders of the Kingdom: But not intentending The
daughters and sister of King Sigismund. rejected.
hereby that the daughters of the King Sigismundus (if any were) or his Sister,
should be comprehended, they being rejected from ever obtaining any
jurisdiction in Suethland. And forasmuch as all the tumult, war, and
dissension, which of late times had molested them, had their maine Original
from the difference of religion between his Majesty of Poland and the Orders of
Suethland, he having contrary to his Grandfathers last Will and Testament
deserted their Christian profession and embraced the Papal erroneous doctrine;
they No Prince of a contrary religion to inherit.
therefore unanimously constituted and decreed that they would never prefer any
person unto the Royal Chair who should not be of the same Religion with them:
And that, if any of their Hereditary Princes should decline the pure word of
God, comprehended in the Prophetical and Apostolical Books, and depart from
the Augustane Confession presented to the Emperor Charles, An. 1530. grounded
upon the Word of God; as also from other former transactions and laudable
Constitutions, partly framed in the time of King Gustavus, partly since,
tending chiefly and above all things to the advancement of Christ's Church and
the propagation of Religion, and to the preservation of the best policy both in
Spiritualls and Temporalls; or whosoever should not do and promove Such, or
Apostates to be deprived.
whatsoever he shall know may tend to the honor of God, or should not attend
to those things which might concern the profit and emolument of the Country,
he should be (...)terly deprived of that Hereditary Jurisdiction which by the
Act of union was due unto him.

In like manner, under the penalty of like deprivation their Hereditary Princes
were prohibited Marriage with any Wife of an erroneous Religion, contrary to
that above specified, for avoiding those, dissentions might thereby grow
between Hereditary Princes prohibited marriage with an, wife of contrary
religigion. All seduce^s of Prince^ to a contrary religion to be punished as
(...)s.
the Subjects and their Lords, as had befallen with King Sigismundus; neither
should contract Matrimony without acquainting and thereupon advising with the
Orders of the Kingdom whether such Marriage would be commodious for themselves
and the Realm. All Inhabitants therein, at present or after times, who should
seduce, advise, or persuade any of their Hereditary Princes to embrace or be
brought up in any false Religion, or in other then that above mentioned, should
be accounted as Traitors to the Kingdom, and undergo punishment accordingly,
of what soever condition they were, high or low, Senators or others.

They likewise concluded and decreed that not any of their No hereditary Prince
to accept of another Kingdom, unless to live in the Patriall Soil.
Hereditary Princes should be raised to the Royal Throne who did accept of
another Kingdom; and that no Hereditary King had power to accept of any other
Realms or Territories, unless he would constantly remain in the native Soil;
they having by sad experience found by the transactions of former times and
modern tumults, what inconveniences had been derived unto them by their Kings
acceptance of Foreign Crowns: That in order to what before expressed, they
who were or had been present, did promise and swear according to the tenor of
this Hereditary Regal Inauguration and designation of the forenamed several
Princes and their respective Heirs from Line to Line, all fidelity, obedience,
and assistance to their utmost power and the hazard and expense of their
estates and lives, in confirmation whereof they engaged their Christian faith,
honesty, conscience, lives, and possessions, as they desired God to be
propitious unto them, and each for himself and his Successors after their
manual Subscription sealed the same, with their Capital, Civicall, and
Territoriall Seals; upon reciprocal engagement for their Government according
to the pure Word of Cod, the Laws and justly acquired Privileges of Suethland:
Norcopia the two and twentieth of March, 1604.

By the fore-specified Parliamentary Decree and Hereditary Union (it may
appear) they utterly renounced the Sovereignty of King Sigismundus, who had not
once only but several times first abondoned them; thereby (say they) adhering
nevertheless to the right Family according to the Tenor of the Laws of
Suethland, and the Acts of Hereditation, and concurring with those of Poland,
who had written to their King, then absent (for whose return they had prefixed
a peremptory day) that they could not long subsist without their King, by
reason of many incident dangers not to be obviated but by the Regal presence,
and that if he did not return unto them by the time prescribed, he should not
think strange if they did subrogate another in his place, it being impossible
for them to live without a King and head, to defend them by his Regal power
and authority: Which reasons (say they) the Suethes had often suggested and
tendered to King Sigismundus, notwithstanding that his several returns had not
been unaccompanied with various inconveniences apparent in the preceding
discourse: That all those things being by them passed over, they had frequently
written to advise and entreat him to return into his Hereditary Kingdom, it
being no less incommodious for them to live without a King and certain form of
Rule, then for the Polanders; to which Letters he had not daigned any answer,
and that they therefore had been deservedly moved to exclaim (with those of
Poland) shall Suethland be longer without a King? in no wise; A King we must
have, etc.

They further affirm, that as then, Princes, meet to be premoted to the Regal
Chair were not wanting unto them, they having the election of two, without
swarving from the Regal Family, to wit, Duke Charles (by them now elected) and
Prince John, who albeit they did ingeniously acknowledge him for the nearest,
as being the younger Son of King John (of famous memory) and unto whom in that
regard they had not once but often presented the Crown, yea, even at the
Solemnity of the Coronation of their present King, yet for so much as he was
not then of so ripe years as to undertake so troublesome a Government of the
Kingdom in such a season, and that at Norcopia before the renovation and
confirmation of the fore-specified hereditary Union, he had upon the sixth of
the same month of March, in presence (as has been already said) of sundry
Senators and other Members of that Parliament tendered his just excuses in form
as follows.

MOST High and Mighty Prince, Beloved Lord Oration of Duke John in Resignation
of his right.
and Uncle; When I silently revolve in my mind the benefits conferred upon me
by your Dilection, ever since that by (reason of) the decease of my Parents, I
came unto your Court, I certainly find your affection to have been so great as
I cannot sufficiently extol, much less deserve or recompense the same. I will
not, at present, speak of the Paternall care exhibited toward me by your
Dilection in my Instruction and Education in all Christian and Ducall Virtues:
But desire chiefly to be mindful of the care exercised by your Dilection,
least I should have fallen into the hands of Jesuits, and have been seduced
unto their most pernicious Religion. Wherefore seeing I can never be
sufficiently able to merit or requite that Fatherly care, diligence, and
trouble; I will first and above all things, with all earnestness, crave of the
most high God that he will please abundantly to return the same upon your
Dilection, your most loved Consort, and your Illustrious Children, both in this
life and that which is to come: In the mean time, I will diligently endeavor
by all manner of obedience and humility, to the utmost of my power, to make (at
least) some measure of requital of that faithfulness which your Dilection
frequently has and daily does declare unto me. But whereas your Dilection did
some days past, propound unto my deliberation certain Articles, and has
graciously required me to declare my resolution upon them, as the Orders of the
Kingdom have since done in like manner; I have therefore thought good to
answer your desires, humbly entreating your Dilection favorably to accept of,
and interpret this my serious Resolve, whereunto I have decreed to adhere
constantly.

The Universal Orders of the Kingdom, most mighty Prince, beloved Lord and
Uncle, in diverse Parliamentary Conventions, as also in this present Assembly,
have Unanimously and Concordially acknowledged and received your Dilection for
their Lord and Governor, unto whom henceforward, as to their natural and most
beloved King, they have promised all obedience, due fidelity, security, and
utmost assistance: In regard your Dilection, solely under God, has been their
Protector, who to the extreme hazard of your life, trouble, and charge, have
diligently endeavored to free them from the Papal darkness, and that
external Yoke and Servitude which was impending over our heads; And that you
have neither spared your Possessions nor life it self in watching for the
Welfare and Emolument of us all, as well in spiritual as in temporal Affairs:
And that you have preserved and protected all and singular Clergy and Laiety,
high and low, each according to his state and condition in the Christian
Religion; And have governed them wholly according to the Laws of Suethland and
each ones rightly acquired Privileges: The Orders therefore of this Kingdom
have (I say) for these and other weighty considerations, as also by the
Authority and Jurisdiction devolving unto them from their Ancestors, designed
and made choice of your Dilection for our King: Which Election certainly I
neither by my self nor others, openly or secretly, either now, or when I shall
have attained the full age of twenty four years, nor at any time afterward,
will never endeavor to annihilate or overthrow, but will always rest
contented with those things which have been at once and by all the Orders of
the Kingdom unanimously constituted and decreed, and do willingly consent that
the Renovation of the Hereditary Union have that success which your Dilection
has required from these Orders: In reference whereunto, if your Dilection
shall change his mortal life (which God be pleased to prolong for many years)
I will endeavor with all my might that no injury be done in any sort unto your
most beloved Consort, or to your most Illustrious Children; and moreover to my
power will procure that the most Illustrious Prince Gustavus Adolphus, my most
beloved Brother may enjoy the Crown of Suethland: And if he shall decease
without legitimate Heirs Males, I will in like manner endeavor that my most
dear Brother the Prince Charolus Philippus be preferred to the vacant
Government of the Kingdom; toward each of whom I will so demean my self as
becomes a most loving Brother. Wherefore I most humbly beseeeh your Dilection
to consent at length to the desires of the Orders of the Kingdom, and
compassionating the sad condition of our Country, speedily accept of the Crown
of Suethland; by means whereof your Dilection may easily free the Suethish
Commonwealth from Tumults, Discords, and intestine Dissentions, which
otherwise may increase unless our Requests be seasonably granted: Your
Dilection may likewise attend the Government more securely, and henceforward as
heretofore procure the Kingdoms good. Your Dilection so doing, I shall hope
that your Dilection, together with the Orders of the Kingdom, will permit that
I enjoy the Dukedom assigned unto me at Lincopia, with those Hereditary Goods
which may rightly accrue unto me when I shall attain unto full years; In the
mean time I neither will nor can prescribe to your Dilection how they are to be
ordered: I only humbly entreat, that as heretofore, so for the future, your
Dilection will so patronize and dispose of what is mine, as to your Dilection
shall seem good, and unto me commodious; herewith from the most inward of my
heart I wish unto your Dilection the happy success of your intentions, a long
and prosperous life, with a most happy and peaceable Reign: And in
confirmation of all things aforesaid, I here in presence of the Orders of the
Kingdom, do give you my hand.

For these (say they) and other forementioned reasons, as also in regard of
the transaction at Orobrogia, An. 1606. between their new King and Duke John,
that he would rest contented with the Dukedom of Ostrogothia, and not pretend
unto or seek, either for himself or his Heirs, any further Jurisdiction
before those Revolutions should happen which were couched in the Norcopian
renewed Hereditary Union; as also that he had now attained the age of nineteen
years, and therefore could rightly discern of those things that concerned his
good, they did hope that his Highness had no cause to impute any Injury unto
them, the rather for that they had chiefly and seriously considered what the
condition of those times in that Nation required; to wit, That the afflicted
State thereof did speedily require a Governor, who could prudently steer the
Kingdoms Helm, and that otherwise a total ruin would have over-flowed the
Realm: That they were likewise compelled by those dangerous and subite
Machinations whereby the Country was continually encompassed to choose him for
their King, their Lord and Governor, who was adorned with Prudence, Experience,
and ripeness of years.

THus Charles Duke of Sudermannia, Nericia, and Wermelandia, Duke Charles
Crowned King of Suethland.
was An. 1607. Crowned King of the Sueths, Goths, and Vandalls, being the
ninth of that name; and King Sigismundus, with his Heirs; for ever ejected and
deprived of his said hereditary Kingdom, for the causes and reasons by them
before alleged; which, to sum up all in brief (as themselves do) were first
and chiefly, For swarving from their Recapitulation made by the Sueths of their
criminations against King Sigismundus.
received Christian Religion, and from his Grandfathers last Will and
Testament, as also from his oath and promise, and likewise from the religious
engagement made unto his late Father King John, that he would no way diminish
the bounds of Suethland; nor when seated in another Kingdom, consent or
subscribe to any transactions concerning his Native country, without
acquainting and consulting the States of Suethland therewith: For departing the
Kingdom not once but sundry times unwitting to the Orders thereof, and
exporting several acts of great concernment out of the Suethish Cancellarie:
For attempting likewise and doing many things much prejudicial to his Native
country: For prosecuting by open hostility his Uncle and such as would not
embrace the Pontificiall Superstition: For alienating, in a manner, the Castle
of Kexholme before any treaty for a perpetual peace was instituted with the
Russian: For causing civil dissension and effusion of blood within his Native
Soil, and inflaming one Province against another: For contemning and
endeavoring to undermine those laudable transactions which were established in
his absence, tending to his and the Countries good and to the propagation of
Religion: For unworthily swarving from the Lincopian treaty, and a third
clandestine Flight out of the Kingdom: For placing foreign Forces in the
Fort of Calmar, which could not be recovered without much expense of blood and
treasure. For bereaving Suethland of so many Ships as he should get into his
power, and employing them against his Native country, by attempting to gain
from that Crown the Castle of Elseburg, and infesting and spoiling the Coast by
his Naval forces: For granting to the Danes, contrary to his promise and the
agreement made at Stetin, a Dilation concerning the three Crowns, the lawful
and peculiar badge and cognizance of Suethland: For so sleighting his
compatriots as not to return a word of answer to their most officious Letters;
nor at their humble reiterated request, to send his Son into that Kingdom to
receive education, according to the Acts of Hereditary Union and Succession,
for his own and the Countries good, and in due time to have been designed
King; and that notwithstanding these tenders to him and to his Son, he had by
all possible means endeavored the detriment Charles the 9th Crowned Ao. 1607.
King of Suethes Goths and Vandalls, Great Prince of Finland etc. etc./
portrait of King Carl IX of Sweden of the Kingdom, and violently persecuted
his Uncle and all those who refused to subscribe to the Papal profession:
Otherwise Demetrius affirming himself Son to John Basilides late great Duke of
Muscovia.
Moreover, for rasing up what enemies he could against his native Country,
thereby to involve his Subjects in a deluge of blood, which he intended; and
had almost effected (by the help of that Renegado Monk, tyrant and deflowrer
of Virgins Grischa Otrepia) for the Subduing of Suethland to his will, to which
end he assisted him in the gaining the Russian Empire, and persuaded him to
violate the League between the Suethes and Russians: and to the same purpose
(that Tyrant being taken away) he substituted another in his place, by whose
means he likewise hoped to bring that Kingdom under his yoke: And likewise
by other Monarchs had endeavored the destruction of his Country.

Lastly, Albeit formerly touched in their History, they cannot (say they) but
here also rememorate his most inhumane design of murdering his Uncle at the
time of his Coronation, in which, by instigation of the Papal Legate and other
depraved Counselors, he decreed violently to deprive his Uncle of life, on
the first day of the Solemnity, by the ministry of certain treacherous
Villains, as was evident out of the History of James Tipotius, and by the
confession of Jeronimo Strozzi, and that to the same end, he caused Christopher
Clabon, one of his Musicians, to compose a Song, ending with, and repeating Non
curo, non curo, etc. During the singing whereof, the watchword being privily
given, the Murderers should have rushed forth and most wickedly murder his
Highness and his Train, but that God by his singular providence, prevented the
mischief intended.

For these causes and reasons, do the Suethes (ubmitting the same to the
judgment of all sincere and candid Arbitrators) justify their abdication for
ever of King Sigismundus and his Heirs from the Crown of the Suethes, Goths,
and Vandals, and their election to the same of the often forenamed Charles Duke
of Sudermannia, Nericia, and Wermelandia, whom, as aforesaid, they Crowned in
the year 1607. by the name of Charles the ninth: For conclusion to the whole
(wherewith we also conclude this Epitomized Narrative) they earnestly entreat
all Christian Monarchs, Emperors, Kings, Princes, and Electors, to make a
candid and sincere construction, a benign and favourall acceptance of this
their legitimate defense, and to vindicate them and their most equal cause
against all calumny.

During the Reign of this King Charles (which continued Wars between King
Sigismundus and King Charles.
sundry years) there were almost continued Wars between the Polanders (who with
the Lithuanians embraced the quarrel of their Prince) and the Suethes, who
resolutely maintained their own Acts in favor of their new election: Neither
were they intermitted by his death, for his Son Gustavus Adolphus, Succeeding
to the Crown of Suethland An. 1617. did so vigorously Continued by his Son
Gustavus Adolphus.
prosecute, the same, as, the Polanders lost not only the greater part of
their interest in Leifland, but likewise the best (as well Maritime as inland)
Towns, with most of the territory of that part of Prussia belonging to the
Crown of Poland, Dantzig excepted with it is neighboring bounds, which kept
firm thereunto, and would not admit of a Newtrality with the Suethes, albeit
they had been once (if report err not) upon a Treaty: For which their
fidelity, they have since obtained no small privileges from that Crown,
prejudicial not only to the Neighbor Cities, as that of Elbing, where
formerly the English Merchants of the Eastland Company had a flourishing
residence, but also to those Merchants and their Nation in the point of trade,
by their Stample, upon all woollen clothes imported to be dispersed through
Poland, which Monopoly has been and is no small greivance unto that Society:
Neither has that yoke been taken off notwithstanding Englands merits toward
that Crown, and the intervention and earnest Solicitation of Englands
Ambassadors and other Ministers, as will hereafter further appear. But return
we now to what is yet remaining, that so we may proceed unto the promised
Treaty.

The Polanders (as has been said) being wholly on the losing hand, and having
other ancient constant enemies, as the Turk and Tartar (and the Russian no
assured friend) to cope withal besides the Sueths; a Peace, or (if that could
not be) a truce was mediated: Neither was King Gustavus reluctant thereunto, as
having then a design upon the main body of the Roman Empire, as well to
revenge the Injuries he pretended to have received from the Austrian Family for
aiding the Polander against him, as to assist and succor the all-most totally
oppressed Protestant Princes of Germany (sundry of whom were his Allaies and)
who had secretly re clamed his power for their Protection.

THus, both parties, howbeit upon different grounds, A Truce between them
concluded.
being unwilling to continue the War, Mediators were invited of each side: The
late King of great Britain sent for his Ambassador to that treaty, Sir
Thomas Roe Knight; a Gentleman every way qualified for that honorable
employment, as having successefully undergone the like, for several years not
only at the great Sultans Port, but likewise with the great Mogull and other
Eastern Monarchs, neither did that Negotiation, so replenished with knotty
difficulties, require a Personage of meaner endowments: but his more perfect
Character GVSTAVVS ADOLPHVS D. G. SVECORVM GOTHORVM ET VANDALORVM REX MAGNUS
PRINCEPS FINLANDIAE etc. The Most Illustrious Puisant, and Victorious Prince.
GVSTAVVS ADOLPHVS, by the grace of GOD. King of the Swethens, Goths, and
Vandals. great Prince of Finland. Duke of Esthonia. and Carelia. Lord of Ingria
etc
sold by P: Stent

Tho: Cecill sculp.
portrait of King Gustav II Adolf (Gustavus Adolphus) of Sweden is referred
unto the able Pen of them that having attended him in those employments, have
had the greater opportunity to discern his worth, which was deservedly known
to all men.

The King of France deputed the Baron of Charnace; The Elector of Brandenburg
also had his Ambassadors there, and by the Mediation of those public
Ministers, interposing the Authority of their Potent Principalls, a Truce was
upon the sixteenth of September, 1629. concluded between those jarring Crowns
upon the terms that the Curious may see in the Articles themselves, long
since exposed to public view, and not necessary to be here inserted.

Before the expiration of this Truce, King Sigismundus paying Death of
Sigismundus.
the Debt that all men owe to Nature, left the Polanders free to a new
Election, and three Sons, the Princes Vladislaus and Casimir (the name of the
third Brother I remember not) to the hopes thereof; Also one Daughter: Which
three, besides their mutual relations of Brothers and Sister by the same
Father, might also be said to have been Cousin Germans to each other by their
respective Mothers, who both were Sisters to the then Germane Emperor; King
Sigismundus after the decease of the elder (whom he had first married)
Espousing also the younger by Papal dispensation.

The more Superstitious and Jesuited Faction, which there is very powerful (in
prejudice of the accustomed way of Elective Succession to that Crown) would
have baulked Vladislaus the elder, howbeit not for want of merit, but (as by
Uladislaus his Eldest, Elected and Crowned
them) conceived to be more favorable toward Protestanisme then they desired;
and would have chosen Casimirus the younger (at present their King by his
Brothers decease) whom they thought, as having amongst them received his
Education, would prove more inclining toward them, but were vigorously opposed
by the Illustrious Prince Christopher Radzivill, Duke of Bierze and Dubinskie,
Palatine of Vilnen, and great General of Lithuania (who is said to have
brought five thousand Horse to that Parliament, a prevaling Argument) by whose
means the elder Prince obtained his Elective Right, and was Crowned by the
name of Vladislaus the fourth.

He was a Prince of great Courage and Vigor both of mind and body, and
inherited not only his Fathers pretensions unto his Hereditary Crown of
Suethland, but the fame desires for its recovery, and hatred against the
Detainer thereof: Nor is it likely but that (upon the terminating of the truce
current) he would willingly have entered into a War for the re-gaining of the
Right devolved unto him from his Paternall Ancestors, had not the States of
Poland showed themselves more willing to a Treaty, as having been but late
before engaged against the Russian, from whom he had gained the City and
Dukedom of Smolensko, with other Territories, as also against the Turk and
Tartar, whom (by the loss of two set Battles) he had forced unto terms of
accommodation, by means whereof the Crown of Poland had sustained a vast
Charge, with other Inconveniences incident, and might therefore require a time
of breathing; Yet not withstanding they also raised a powerful Army to
countenance the Cause; and not without resolution for a vigorous Engagement, in
case the means used for obtaining a Peace, or longer Truce, should have proved
uneffectuall.

It is certainly much to be lamented, that the Spirit of Discord has so much
power over the minds of Christian Princes, as that their Emulations and
Dissentions (which are the steps whereby the Othoman Empire has mounted unto
its present formidable height) should be rendered perpetual, to the prejudice
of Christendom, the reproach of the Christian Profession and the advantage of
insulting Infidells, as then it did; for the Polish Army at that time had the
Turkish Forces at such a bay, as that the great General of Poland,
Kaenigspolskie (in the hearing of this Relator) afterward told the Ambassador
of Great Britain, that, but for the difference like to ensue between the two
Crowns of Poland and Suethland, by reason of the then near expiring Truce, he
would have convoyed those Miscreants unto the Gates of Constantinople: but
leaving this digression.

As the Crown of Poland might be not unwilling (for the reasons pre-alledged)
to admit of Peace, so likewise may the Suethes be conceived not to have been
averse thereunto (as having lost their Coesar in that famous Field of Lutzen,
and) being still engaged in the Germane War, their Forces were (then in
decadence) constrained to retire toward Pomerania, and to keep a long the Sea
Coast: So as both parties being apparently willing, a second Treaty was
consented unto, A second treaty instituted.
and those Princes who had assisted at the former, as also the States of
Holland,, were by the interessed Crowns invited to resume the Mediatoriall
Office, whereunto none of them being backward, no more then to contribute their
endeavors for a Work so pious and beseeming Christians; Sir George Duglass
Knight, Ambassador from the late King of Great Britain: Claudius de Mesme,
Baron D'Avaux, from the King of France; the Prince Sigismundus of Brandenborg,
Uncle to that Elector (from his said Nephew) with others of the Electorall
Counsel, as also Ambassadors from the States General of the united
Provinces, did accordingly (howbeit at several times, as opportunity by reason
of distance of places would permit) meet in Prussia the Province designed for
the Treaty, with the Commissioners from the forementioned Crowns, where each
unfolded his utmost abilities for the composure of all differences by most
powerful and rational arguments; and as formerly, interposed the Authority of
their respective Princes and Principalls, to bring the gauled minds of the
parties, whom a long continued Enmity had rendered in a manner implacable, to a
condescension for a final peace, or at least a Truce for so long a term as
might indeed give some considerable ease to those Countries already so much
exhausted by former Wars, which is the Treaty formerly promised, then which
none, at least in those parts, did ever produce difficulties more numerous,
knotty, or frequently tending to absolute rupture: The Succinct and true
relation whereof is next to be proceeded unto.

The Pourtraicture of the most renowned Vladislaus Sigismundus King of Poland
Great Duke of Lithuaniae etc: etc:
sold by P. Stent

R E scul
portrait of King Ladislaus IV of Poland

THE TREATY OF PACIFICATION (Upon the fore-related TROUBLES) Concluded in the
year, 1635.

BETWEEN The Most Illustrious and Puisant PRINCES, ULADISLAUS the fourth, KING
OF POLAND, Great Duke of LITHUANIA, etc. etc.

AND CHRISTINA AUGUSTA QUEEN OF SUETHES, GOTHS, and VANDALS, Great Princess
of FINALND, etc. etc.

Faithfully related by J. F. an Eyewitness of the daily Passages.

LONDON, Printed for Hen: Twyford, and Tho: Dring, 1656.

Christina Queen of Swethland Goths and Vandalls:
portrait of Christina (Maria Christina Alexandra), queen regnant of Sweden
sold by P: Stent

R Gaumond fecit.


A BRIEF RELATION Of the Passages at the Treaty OF PACIFICATION Between the
CROWNS of POLAND AND SUETHEN, Concluded at Stumbsdorff in Pruissia, in the
Month of September, 1635.
The Sueo-Polonian Treaty of Pacification.
HAVING already showed the Alliance Preface to the treaty.
and ensuing Controversy between the jarring Crowns and Kingdoms of Poland
and Suethland, and hinted at the mischiefs following, the same (as also at the
six years Truce concluded An. 1629. and expiring in July 1635) for the
preventing whereof a second Treaty for a final Peace, or longer Truce was set
on foot, the particular passages thereof (as formerly promised) we now enter
upon.

The mediating Princes and States were, the late King of The Mediators.
Great Britain, the King of France, the Elector of Brandenburg, with the
States General of the united Provinces, by their respective Ambassadors. But
here, before we enter upon the main difference, it will not be amiss to mention
those things which (to Some) may seem of lesser moment, as the Procuratoriall
Letters of the Commissioners from the interessed Crowns, the reciprocal
Instruments of security, Acts usual in Treaties of that nature, which
nevertheless took not up less of time, but caused even more trouble to the
Mediators, then the business it self, in reconciling the differences about
Titles, mutual suspicions of advantage, or prejudice between the interessed
parties; afterward the main business in order, according to the several
meetings and conferences, shall be faithfully and briefly related.

The first of the (more remote) Mediating Ministers (the Englands Ambassador
arrives at Dantzig.
Electorals being but near Neighbors comparatively) who arrived at Dantzig,
was Sir George Duglas Knight, Ambassador from the late King of England, his
repair thither, after a long and tedious Winter Journey from Franckfort on the
Main, accompanied with all the inconveniences of ways and weather incident to
that Season, besides the almost daily passing through one or other part of
those opposite Armies, which then miserably infested Germany, was about the
ninth of January, 1634.

His Lordship understanding that the Commissioners for the Crown of Poland, had
their residence at a little Town called Morung (in Prussia) forthwith
dispatched Letters to the Lord Chancellor Zadzicke (chief in the Commission)
to certify his arrival (as he also did to the Commissioners for Suethen at
Elbing) and to crave their opinion whether it would be more Writes to the
Commissioners of the Crowns interessed.
necessary first to go and salute the King of Poland (then) at Warsaw, or to
hasten toward the place nominated for the Treaty, being a Town in that
Province named Holland.

The Chancellours answer was congratulatory, as well in Answer of the Polanders.
regard of his wished safe arrival, as in consideration that his Master the
King of Great Britain, out of his sincere affection to their King and State,
had delegated him to this Treaty, (which he wished might prove auspicious) for
the diversion of the Tempest then likely to fall between them and the Crown of
Suethland. He likewise wished that his Lordship had arrived during the King of
Polands late being at Dantzig, where he might, without further trouble to his
person, have acquitted himself of what his Master had committed unto him, and
accordingly have received a Princely answer; but that, forasmuch as the trouble
and distance of the ways had hindered his sooner coming into those parts, he
believed there was no necessity of undergoing the like molestation by a new
journey to his Majesty; to whom it would be most grateful if his Lordship
should first repair to the place appointed for the Treaty, there (by his
Masters authority and his own endeavors) to effect those things that might be
conducing to the matter in hand, and to their Princes dignity.

Lastly, He wished that his Lordship having refreshed himself some time, might
come in safety to the place of meeting; concluding with offers of Service and
Courtesies in such cases accustomed. By way of Postcript, he added, that at the
instant of signing those Letters, he was certified by their Subdelegates, that
the adverse party had altered some things formerly agreed upon, complaining
that almost daily, from the 12th. of that present month, whereon they began to
handle the The Suethes complained of.
Preparatories, the other side had done nothing but protracted time by
propounding new conditions, which course if they should longer persist in,
themselves should be constrained (having first solemnly protested before the
Mediators) to depart thence, and commit their King and Countries cause to the
Divine Justice.

I have given this Letter at length to show in what state the business was,
and how far advanced, when his Lordship arrived in those parts, but shall not
(in the course of this relation) insist so particularly on each of the several
Letters that passed between his Lordship and the respective parties: The
Suethes answer with reciprocal complaints.
My intention being to use as much brevity as the necessary circumstances of
the Treaty will permit. And here, by the way, is to be noted, that the answer
from the Commissionners of Suethland to his Lordships Letters, was not less
courteous nor less stuffed with complaints then the other:

The treaty had already taken commencement from the Alternal The Treaties
commencement,
Security, as the Basis and ground work of the maine affair, to which end the
Commissionners of Poland and Suethen had sent their Subdelegates; those,
Christopher Lode and Daniell Nawarousky Secretaries; these, John Necodemie of
Ahausen Commissarie for Prussia, to Holland, a small Town nominated to be the
Mansion of the Mediators, and the place of meeting for the parties, to settle
and draw up a particular instrument of the security aforesaid: between whom,
after much debate and many mutations (on the twelfth of January, 1635.) there
being then present the Ambassadors of the Elector of Brandenburg Elector of
Brandenburgs Ambassadors.
only, viz. Andreas a Kreytzen Governor of the Province; Joannes Georgius a
Saucken, Chancellor; Bernhardus a Konigseck Counselor of the Province and
Captain of Angerburgen; Georgius a Rauschke Counselor of the juridicall
Court, and Petrus Bergmannus (one of the Electorall Council) it was concluded
that the Lords Commissioners on each side, attended with a hundredth horse or
dragoones, and so many foot, without Colors or military ensigns, their
train in like manner not exceeding the number of one hundredth should repair
thither, and be brought by the Mediators into the Church of the said Town, by
the doors nearest to their respective lodgings: and placed at a trianguler
Table without the least of precedencie or advantage to either party, and the
former instrument of security for the six years truce (ending the of 1/11 July
ensuing) retaining its full force, they should confer together about the
Principal affairs. This agreement was signed by the said Subdelegates and the
Electoriall Ambassadors.

By virtue of this instrument, upon the day appointed, Commissioners of Poland.
the Lords Commissioners of Poland, who were (to give them their used titles)
the most Reverend Jacobus Zadzick Bishop of Culmen and Pomesania, Elect of
Gracovia, Lords High Chancellor of the Kingdom of Poland; the most Illustrious
Christopher Radzivill Duke of Bierzie and Dubinskie, Palatine of Vilnen, Lord
General of all the Forces of the great Duchy of Lithuania, Governor of
Bistrycen and Qiznorcen; Raphael de Lesno Leszozyuskie Palatine of Belzes,
Rubiesoviensis; Magnus Ernest Danhoff Castellan of Pernaw and Derpaten,
Captain of Herbipolen: Remigius de Ostole Zaleskie, Refendary of the Kingdom:
as also the Lords Commissioners for the Kingdom of Suethland, Viz. the most
Illustrious Peter Brake Earl of Wisingeborg, Free Baron in Redboholm and
Lindholm, Commissioners of Suethland.
Provincial Judge of Wesmannia, Montenia, and Dalria: Herman Wrangle Knight,
Hereditary in Ahlo and Skogloster, Marshall of the Field and Governor General
in Prussia: Achatius Axell, Hereditary in G^xsholme and Kinkesta; Adsessor
Supremi dicasterij, and Provincial Judge of Nericia (Senators of the Kingdom
of Suethland) and John Nicodemus Secretary and Commissarie Ordinary in
Prussia: These from Elbing; Those from Morung, set forth toward Holland, being
of equal distance, where they entered with their Train in such equipage as
might set forth their greatness.

They were brought soon after, conform to the forementioned instrument, into
the Church of that town, by the Meet at Holland town in Prussia.
forenamed Electorall Ambassadors, (as then only present) and being placed in
their Seats, the forenamed Chancellor of Brandenburg, George Sauske (in a long
Oration) set forth the fervent desires of his Prince for the settling of a
perpetual peace, congratulating also the happy arrival of the Commissioners
into that Province, designed for this so important and weighty business, and
concluded with Precations for the prosperous Success and issue of this so much
desired Treaty. Whereunto, of the one side the Chancellor of Poland; and of
the other, Earl Brake replied, equally conjoying and conjoyning wishes with
wishes.

These Civil Courtships thus performed, the Electorall Ambassadors, to lose no
time, and to show their authority and sincerity, Exhibited their Credentialls
to the Commissioners of both sides: preallubly desiring the like sight of
theirs, which the Poles would have declined, as not necessary, alleging it
was not to be imagined that Persons of their quality would present themselves
in so public a cause without sufficient power and authority from their
Principalls.

The Sueths, on the contrary, insisted mainely that the Interchangably exhibit
their respective Plenipotentiaries, and agree upon a second meeting.
Procuratorialls might be produced, to which end they showed theirs, affirming
that until the clearing of those, they could proceed no further, which being
at last agreed unto, the Parties interchangably delivered up their Commissions
to each other; but, the days being then short, they could not, in that inch of
time take so particular view of them as they desired, wherefore they consented
that each Party, taking with them the others Plenipotentiary, should within two
or three days return the same back, and a second meeting was appointed the 26
th. following.

But forasmuch as many and great difficulties began to appear, even at this
first entrance into the Treaty: The Ambassadors of Great Britain (who during
the space of ten days he had stayed to refresh himself in Dantzig, had
delivered the King his Masters Letters, and his verbal injunctions to the
Senate of that City) was desirous to be present for the more easy composure of
differences at their very beginning: He, with Mr. Francis Gordon (the Kings
Agent there) came to Holland His Lordship came to Holland.
the one and twentieth of January, where having received and returned visits to
the Electorall Ambassadors, and learned of them in what terms the matter
stood, he expected the time appointed for the meeting, which, together with the
Commissioned Parties, being come, and the usual ceremonial salutes received
and rendered; his Lordship taking with him the Electorall Ministers, endeavored
to temper and molifie the gauled minds of the Parties, by conciliating and
extenuating the difficulties like to increase by debating the Procuratoriall
Letters.

The Commissioners of Poland appeared not as then so stiff nor scrupulous in
those things of lesser moment; for when his Lordship propounded the sequestring
of the Plenipotentiaries into the hands of the Mediators during the Treaty,
they forthwith assented: Whereas the Suethes vehemently repugned; but because
the present altercation proceeded from defects, which each party pretended to
find in the others Letters of procuration, it will not be amiss to say
something of them.

Whilst the Commissioners of both sides scrutenize each others Desects in the
Suethish Procuratories.
Plenipotentiarie, sundry errors are found in either. In that of Suethland,
the Polonians object,

1. That they begin with a new unused style; the title of designed Queen, and
end with that (or the subscription) of the Tutors.

2. That they detract from his Majesty of Poland the title of Hereditary King
of Suethen, and defer the same to the Daughter of King Gustavus.

3. That they intermix the Provinces belonging to the Crown of Poland with the
titles in their Commission.

4. That albeit the Princess Christina were designed Queen, as is alleged;
it may yet be questioned whence she derives to her self the power of
determining of the Commonwealth, and of alliances, which is not permitted to
other designed Princes.

5. By what right the Tutors strain to vindicate to themselves a power
(chiefly Regal) over their designed Queen, as themselves call her?

6. Whether the designed Queen is bound to stand to conditions made by her
Tutors, forasmuch as a Tutor cannot prejudice his Pupil in ought, and chiefly
a Subject his Prince, especially in a Kingdom Hereditary.

7. What assurance is there, that the Orders of the Crown of Suethen will allow
of that which by the said Tutors (or in their name) is transacted, seeing that
in the Procuratorialls no mention is made of those Orders?

8. Forasmuch as the Chancellor of Suethen Axelius Oxenstiern, is now the
chiefest in repute in that Kingdom, and that a Law lately there enacted,
remits to him the whole matter of the Treaty with Poland, whether he may not
nullify all the Acts that shall be done, in as much as himself has not
signed the said Commission? And albeit he may have consented that some other
sign the same for him, yet is this of less force, in regard that one Tutor
cannot substitute another.

On the other side (to pass by smaller ones) the Suethes The like in those of
Poland.
complained of these maine errors in the Polish Procuratorials, which they
affirm must necessarily be corrected before any meeting could be granted.

1. That the King of Poland did usurp the Title of King of Suethland, not
only in the beginning but in the end also of his Procuratory.

2. That the name (say they) of their gracious Lady and Queen is wholly
omitted, and in lieu thereof the Suethish Commissioners (which phrase amongst
the Polanders, by reason of their Kings pretensions is of a double sense) and
the like, are intermingled.

3. In either of the Procuratorialls, as well that of the King as of the
Commonwealth, the Commissioners of her Majesty are not obscurely (albeit by
way of Amphibologie or doubtfully) called the Commissioners of the King of
Poland; as in the peculiar Commission of the King it is said, We do also
promise that whatsoever by Ours and the Commissioners of the Kingdoms, etc. As
also in the Procuratoriall of the Commonwealth it is expressed thus,
Promising, that whatsoever by the Commissioners of both Parties shall be
concluded, We and the Commonwealth shall most willingly approve and ratify
the same: Which notwithstanding they may by the adverse party be smoothed over
in a contrary sense, are yet so clear as they admit of no palliation.

Whilst thus, each side, insisting on their own reasons, argue and dispute
these errors, and show their zeal in maintaining the rights and titles of
their Principalls, they appear so strict in the observation of their
Instructions, that at this very beginning a present rupture rather then a
continuance Rupture appearing; the parties depart.
was to be expected; insomuch as the Suethes, that same day, retired to Elbing;
and the Polanders being about to depart on the morrow, his Lordship after a
long conference with them severally, and in company of the Brandenburgers
jointly, concluded that he would go thence to Elbing, and there employ his
utmost endeavor to persuade the Suethes to more conformity; as he, with the
Electoralls, did the day following, where he was honorably received. The next
morning the The Mediators repair to the Suethes at Elbing.
Commissioners of Suethen, with the Electorall Ministers, came to his Lordship,
to find out (if possible) some way of reconciling the differences arising from
the Alternall Procuratories.

It would be overmuch to particularize the arguments used to that effect,
seeing they could not be prevalent, the Commissioners protesting, as they had
formerly, that, bound by the strictness of their Instructions, they could not
admit of those mediate ways propounded by his Lordship; and (at last) only
condescended to send to their Principalls for Instructions Condescension of the
Suethes, conditional.
more complying then those they then had, and thought that, at least, six weeks
would overpasse before they could receive an answer, by reason of the Winter
season, cross Winds, and the passage, in many places, stopped with Ice: And this
they agreed unto conditionally that the Polish Commissioners would in the mean
time procure other Procuratories from their King, and therein not only
abstain, at least during the Treaty, from all title to the Kingdom of
Suethland, but also (in the same) give their Queen her full and due titles, it
being otherwise in vain to hope for any further meeting.

These things being by his Lordships Letters signified to the Polish
Commissioners, they would not listen to any mutation of their Procuratorials,
affirming that they dared not so much as once motion the same to their King,
much less offer to persuade him thereunto: for which cause necessity so
requiring, and rather then a work so profitable for the State of Christendom,
should remain unperfected for the mere scrupulosity of Titles; his Lordship
hoping by his Solicitations, in the name and Authority of his Master, to
dispose the King of Poland to some milder strain, offered himself to undertake
a journey with them to Warsovia, and to that end commended to them his Letters
for his Majesty of Poland, in which (with due respect) he acquainted the King
with his arrival and intention for his Court.

His Lordship the day following, returned to Dantzig; the Commissioners of
Poland having remained still at Morung, waiting for milder resolutions from the
adverse party, or imagining that at length they would accept of those Mediate
ways, which by the Ambassadors of great Britain and Brandenburg had been
propounded unto them, or at least that some such thing should, by the
Subdelegates, have been proposed, whereby an inclination to peace might have
appeared: But seeing that none of these things were done, all hopes of peace
excluded, they resolved upon their return, so to be present at the Parliament
to be held at Warsaw, and therein to give the King, the States of Poland, and
great Duchy of Lithuania, an account of Commissioners of Poland return to
Warsaw.
their actings according to their Commission, and of the pains, prudence, and
industry his Lordship had used to promove the Treaty, and as before, so now
again, they solemnly by Letters protest their sincere and real inclination
unto the desired Peace, and that they were not the causers of the Treaties
dissolution, not doubting but that his Lordship would signify unto the King
his Master, the readiness of their King and State unto the so much wished
accord; and on the other side the refractorinesse of the adverse Party.

The Declaration, often urged by the Subdelegates, for the renewing of the
Treaty, they suspend until their Kings intention be known; yet so, that they
are content to remit the same to the authority and intervention of Great
Britains Ambassador, conditionally that the contrary Party, leaving aside
differences of smaller moment, will return to the Treaty, observe the former
Articles of the Truce, and abstain from unjust Marine exactions: All which,
they signified unto his Lordship, and that they expected an answer from their
King, and so to proceed toward Warsaw.

His Lordship was certified, within few days, that his Letters were most
acceptable to the King of Poland, as well in regard of the assurance he thereby
had of his safe arrival, as of His Lordships receives invitation to come to
Warsaw.
the King his Masters sincere affection testified in lending his helping hand
to this Pacification, which real friendship, as he had ever promised to
himself so, he could not but take his Lordships endeavors in good part:
Wishing withal that they might be so effectual as to break the contumacious
perverseness (as he termed it) of the adverse Party, and to vindicate his
injuries now manifest to all the World; concluding that, as the notice of his
Lordships arrival was most welcome, so to see him at Warsaw would be no less
grateful. To this effect were the Kings Letters, dated the eleventh of
February, 1635.

His Lordship began his journey, and the twentieth of February was received
some miles without the City of Warsaw by the most illustrious Prince Janus of
Radzivill, with many of the Nobility, and brought, in the Kings Coach, to his
lodging, which was fair and richly furnished of all things (Beds excepted)
with other entertainment answerable. We There was but one (and that) for his
Lordship.
found there sundry Ambassadors, as the Russian, the Turk, and the Tartar, for
ratification of the peace concluded with their Princes. His Lordship had
public audience, which, according to custom, was at first only ceremonial:
within few days he had several in private, in which he endeavored to move
the King to give unto the designed Queen of Suethen, the Title so vehemently
insisted on, and to make a timely composure of those controversies that took
their rise from the Procuratoriall Letters.

The King, at length, seemed not averse, yet would give no immediate nor
absolute consent, but only hopes thereof, after deliberation to be taken. His
Lordship, having remained there three weeks, took his leave of the King and of
the Commissioners, who were to follow with the Regal resolution, and began his
journey toward Dantzig, where he He contracts sickness.
arrived the twenty eighth of March, sick of a violent burning Fever which
seized on him in his return, and left but small hopes of his recovery to his
Friends and Servants for the space of three weeks: Yet upon the intermission of
its violence he was, no less then in perfect health, solicitous of the
business committed to his trust, and accordingly took care for settling a time
and place of meeting, Holland (the former) being incommodious: The
Commissioners of Suethland thereupon named an Island in the River Vistula,
commonly called Sperlings Camp for the place of congression; for the Mediators
residence a Village named Pisterfeldt, for the Polish Commissioners, a Town
called Dirshaw, and for themselves the Village Lusson: The day they prefixed to
be the first of May following.

Here upon his Lordship sent Letters to the Polish Commissioners (as yet) at
Warsaw, and soon after received an excusatory answer from the Chancellor,
showing that being ready to take journey, he had been suddenly seized by
grievous pangs of the Colic and Stone, which had confined him to his bed, and
so hindered his journey, whereat he grieved, fearing least this delay might prove
prejudicial to the public affair: he hoped nevertheless that his Lordship
and those who wished his appearance, would make the best construction of his
Stay, sickness being in it self a lawful excuse: promising that so soon as a
mitigation of his pains would permit, he would hasten to communicate with his
Lordship of things necessary and pertinent to the matter in hand. That as
touching the place of meeting and the Mansions designed by the Adverse party,
he had referred them to the King, who disapproved thereof, as himself also did,
the same being too far distant from his Majesty, to whom frequent recourse
would be necessary, for obtaining his Declaration in points that would fall out
in the course of the Treaty.

He thought it also unfit to commit their Meetings and Difficulties about the
place of treaty.
Consultations, in so weighty a business, to Winds which move that River to
impetuosity, seeing they were all alike concerned in the gaining of time, and
that the least stirring of the Vistula would be no small hinderance to all
parties. Wherefore seeing that Marien werder was more commodious for necessary
Provisions, and that the adverse party might, in the neighboring places, have
their abode, and the general meetings might be made with more facility; he saw
no cause, why they should reject the same, nor doubted but that his Lordships
Authority, interposed therein, would be prevalent; that he would attend the
resolution, persuading and assuring himself of submission to his Lordships
reasons touching the place forementioned: That in regard of his infirmity, the
resuming of the Treaty might be, by his Lordships intervention, deferred until
the tenth of May: He did signify to his Lordship, that he hoped to remove the
Controversy depending about the Plenipotentiary, having already procured of
his Majesty to afford the Title of designed Queen of Suethen, with this clause
inserted, that it might be without prejudice to his right, which being
equitable, and no way prejudicial to the adverse party, he doubted not but his
Lordship might easily persuade the Commissioners of the contrary side to accept
of.

Hereof his Lordship (forth with) certified the Commissioners Mariemburg
appointed to be the Mediators residence.
of Suethland, resolving with them that Marien werder should be the Polish
Mansion; Mariemburg the Mediators residence: Jonas Dorff their own. This being
agreed upon, his Lordship departed from Dantzig toward Mariemburg, as more
convenient, the same being one of the places sequestered at the last Truce, of
An. 1629. into the hands of the Elector of Brandenburg, whose Uncle Prince
Sigismundus was lately come thither (with the forenamed Electorall
Ambassadors) to be assistant at the Treaty.

The parties arrived within few days after, at their several Stations
before-named, and the Mediators so soon as they were certified that the Polish
Commissioners were come The Mediators meet and consult.
to their designed Quarters, convened in the Castle of Mariemburg, to
deliberate what was to be first propounded, whereupon it was resolved that the
first address should be made toward those of Suethland (then likewise at
their Rendezvous) to see what Resolution they had received from their
Principalls concerning their Procuratories, by reason whereof the maine Treaty
had been hitherto deferred, that so the same might be signified to those of
Poland, who were no less desirous to know it.

His Lordship undertook that Journey with Mr. Gordon the Repair to the Suethes.
Kings Agent, and Georgius a Rauske, one of the Electorall Ministers, to whose
propositions Count Brahe in the name of his Colleagues (into which number the
Lord John Oxenstierne Son to the Great Chancellor Axelius Oxenstierne was
lately entered) made answer, That he had received new Procuratoralls, but to
the same effect and nothing changed, which ought not to be demanded of them
but from the Commissioners of Poland, as without which no further meeting could
be hoped for: That this was their resolution, this was a Law and a Command laid
upon them, the limits whereof they might not exceed: That they would send their
Subdelegate to Mariemburg, the day following, with their Procuratoriall
Letters, whereof the adverse Party being advertised, theirs might likewise be
produced. Concerning the other circumstances about the time and place of
meeting, and the renewing of the instrument of security, The conclusion
certified to the Polanders.
which might be done by changing a few words only, those might be afterward
agreed upon. This was signified to the Commissioners of Poland the same day.

That ensuing, the Subdelegates of each side came to Mariemburg; from the
Polanders, Secretary Lode and Nabarowskie The Subdelegates meet.
beforenamed; from those of Suethen, Secretary Lording: the last, produced the
Suethish Procuratories, and required that the Polanders might do the like: he
retyring, Lode succeeded, showing a new Procuratorial, but finding that of
Suethen to be the former old one, and taking the same as done in scorn,
withdrawes discontented. Lording being again called in, was sharply taxed by
the Mediators, the blame whereof he declyned from himself as happening through
some mistake, offering to return and show the Error to his Principals.
Secretary Lode, is persuaded to stay until the day following. Lording returns
accordingly, and brings with him a new Procuratory from the Commissioners of
Suethland, with Letters excusatory for the former mistake which had proceeded
from the Commissary Nicodemie, who had over-hastily given him the one for the
other: Showing withal that his Principalls conceived Conrads-waldt, or
Altenmarck (where the last six years Truce had been concluded) to be a place
fit and convenient for the general meeting. He again withdrawing, the
Procuratory he brought, was showed to Secretary Lode, who having perused the
same, finds it to be of like effect as the former, excepting only that the name
of King Vladislaus was expressed: As touching that which he had brought, he
referred unto the Mediators, whether they would communicate the same unto the
Adverse Party, and that if it contained ought which was not satisfactory, they
were to treat with his Principals thereupon.

That as to Conrads-Waldt or Altenmarck, they were not any way convenient for
the general meeting, as having nothing Difficulties about the place for the
general meeting.
but the ruins of a Church, scarce any mark of Village or house to be seen,
which was neither corresponding to the Dignity of so great Ambassadors, nor to
the security of the Parties: But to him the Town of Stume, being aequi-distant
from the residence of the Parties, seemed more convenient. Lording, made
acquainted with the arguments used by the Polish Subdelegate, left the decision
of any scruples to his Principalls; but declined Stume for the same reason
alleged by the Polanders, that Town being a Garrison. The conference ending,
hereupon the Mediators, as also the Subdelegates descended from the Castle.

The same afternoon, his Lordship, with Agent Gordon and The Mediators return
to the Suethes:
the forenamed Rauske, returned to the Commissioners of Suethen (then at Jonas
Dorff (to conclude about the place and day of meeting, whereby more time might
not be wasted in frivolous delays. Their Proposition had two heads.

1. Whether they would accept of the Polish Procuratory Their propositions.
and sequester it into the hands of the Mediators.

2. To settle the place and day of meeting about which they were now come
thither, to the end that now at length the main Treaty might be entered upon.

To these things Count Brahe answered briefly, that as then he had not read
over the Polish Procuratory, and the same being of moment, he desired that
days respite to consider thereof, promising to send Commissary Nicodemie with a
speedy answer to Mariemburg: That to the Sequestration of the Procuratories, he
had never consented; in stead of Stume, as being incommodious for them, he
propounded Gorgendorff or Peterswaldt, both discernable from thence: These
things concluded, the day of convention would be soon agreed on.

Commissary Nicodemie came to Marienburg according to promise, and after a
recapitulation of the preceding days Propositions, in answer thereunto, he
showed, that neither did his Principals accept of the Plenipotentiary produced
by those of Not admitted.
Poland, nor could they admit of the propounded Medium of Sequestration: That
sundry defects and errors impeded the first, the same being derogatory from
the honor and right of their Queen, as they had formerly affirmed: Neither was
that Protestation (saving our Royal Right) satisfactory, seeing Objections.
that, what the King gave thereby with the one hand, he took away with the
other. As to the Sequestration, in regard that interposing Medium did not
remove the defects, and that the Procuratories would by that means be esteemed
but as private papers, it could not be admitted.

That nevertheless, if the Titles entire were conceded to their Queen, as the
foundation whereon the Treaty might be built, and without which it would come to
nothing; that then at the meeting, the Sequester might be taken into
deliberation; which thus moderated, he believed they would not refuse. For the
rest, that his Principalls would think themselves much gratified if the time of
convention were speedily appointed at either of the places Gorgendorff or
Petersmaldt above named, whereunto (as he supposed) they were, even then, ready.

Hereupon, his Lordship repaired (the day following) to His Lordship repaires
to the Polanders.
Marienwerder and related these particulars to the Commissioners of Poland;
who, after long consultation, concluded that they could not any way diminish
the Kings Title and Right, as things appertaining to him only: That they would
make report thereof to his Majesty, and earnestly solicit for new
Procuratorialls, for the obtention whereof they gave some hopes upon the two
conditions following:

1. That the Sequestration of the Procuratories might be Their conditional
conclusions.
accepted.

2. That in the title, the Principality of Esthonia, whereto the King could
never be induced to consent, were omitted, and promised to signify the Regal
answer to his Lordship the day ensuing, at Mariemburg.

With these Resolves his Lordship deputed Agent Gordon Englands Agent sent to
the Suethes.
to the Commissioners of the other side, which having heard, they replied, that
now at last they perceived, how that those of Poland did show themselves in
some measure, enclining toward a Peace, but it was in words only, and that in
effect, and in the very matter they were averse unto it, which the conditions
by them added (and that could not possibly be accepted) did sufficiently
demonstrate, forasmuch as the Province of Esthonia had been time out of mind,
and without all controversy possessed by the Kings of Suethland; by reason
whereof, and until the absolute and entire Titles and rights belonging to their
Queen were granted, they could by no means condescend to the sequestring of the
Procutatories.

At last, after much persuasion and many arguments used, Their final
resolution.
they thus declare their final resolution: That the full Title should be given
to their Queen, as it had been in the year, 1629. Viz. Queen of Suethes,
Goths, and Vandalls, Great Princess of Finland, etc. and albeit Esthonia were
omitted, the possession whereof was most certainly theirs, they would not insist
thereon so stiffly, provided that now at length the meeting might be appointed,
wherein the Sequester of the Procuratories might be considered: And that if his
Lordship would engage his word for those of Poland in order to the Premises,
and that the convention were concluded to be on the Thursday following, the
14/14 of May at Stumbs-dorff, they would be ready against that time.

His Lordship gave speedy notice hereof to the Polish Commissioners Intimated
to the Polanders who promise compliance.
at Marien werder, desiring their resolutions thereupon: the next morning he
received an answer to this effect; That they willingly assented to the place
and time of meeting, and entreated the Mediators not to admit of the least
protraction thereof: that as to the Procuratories, there needed no scruple to be
made, and that they would do therein what was right and needful. So soon as his
Lordship had received this answer, he certified the same by Letters to the
Suethish Commissioners, engaging his word that other Procuratorials should be
exhibited by those of Poland, either at the first meeting or within few days
after.

The Commissioners of Suethland returned a thankful answer for his Lordships
engaged word, upon the trust whereof they would meet at the time appointed; they
only desired that his Lordship would intimate unto the Commissioners of Poland
the necessity of signing (a new) the Instrument of Instrument o^ Security
renewed.
Security formerly drawn at Holland by their Subdelegates, as an inducement to
the rest of the Treaty, which his Lordship deferred not, and the next day all
parties being agreed, the said former Instrument was renewed, with this clause
added; That it should remain in full force in all points, except the places of
abode and meeting, which by the consent of all parties were changed: hereunto
the Subdelegates, Christopher Lode, and Daniell Nab arowskie on the one side,
George Lording on the other, signing, his Lordship and the Marquess Sigismund
of Brandenburg were Witnesses:

The same night (late) there arrived at Mariemburg the The Ambassadors of
France and Holland come to Mariemburg,
French Ambassador, Claudius de Mesne Baron D' Avaux, who came from Stocholme,
where (by extremity of Weather and the Ice) he had been detained six months.
From the States General came likewise Rochus van Honart, chief Counselor in
the high Courts of Holland, Zeland, and West Freizeland, Andreas Bicker
Burg-Master of Amsterdam, and Joackim And re chief Counselor in the high
Court of Frieze; who were all invited hy the Suethes, as also by Berkeman (one
of the Electorals) from the Marquess Sigismund, unto the next days general
Convention at Stumbsdorff.

The next morning early, his Lordship and the Marquess The Mediators
intervisite, and jointly repair to Stumbsdorff the place of Treaty. The
parties arrive.
Sigismund, according to the usual custom, severally visited the before named
Ambassadors, congratulating their safe arrival, and then repaired to
Stumbsdorff the place of meeting: The French Ambassador (with those from the
States) following soon after; and whilst they take up Quarters as the poverty
of a devasted Villiage would permit; the Commissioners, Parties, being equally
distant from the place, measure out their way and steps with such exact
slownesse, fearing even thereby to give each other the least pre-eminency, that
at one and the same time they enter their Tents, which were placed at the two
entries into the said Villiage.

Their Train was according to the dignity of the Parties, and as has been set
down at their entry into Holland. The accustomed visits and civilities,
performed between the Mediators and the Parties, took up the time until four
in the afternoon. At length, all the Mediators met in the quarter of the
Marquis of Brandenburg, as the more spacious and the more equal, so to make
way into the maine business, having consumed already so much time in the
Preparatories only: and night hastening on, lest the day and this first meeting
should be without fruit, the Mediators agreed to propound the present
Sequestration of the Procuratories, which had been hitherto delayed, that so
they might enter upon the things of more moment: And that there might be a
timely Mean used for avoiding competitions.
obviatingof competitions that might arise between the Ambassadors of great
Britain and France, as also between the Electorall Ministers and those of the
States General: it was thought good that his Lordship with the Electoralls,
and the French Ambassador with the others (the Marquis Sigismund remaining
still in the Mediatoriall Tent, which for the reception and consultation of the
Mediators was placed in the midst of the Village) should repair by course, as
occasion required to the Parties Commissioners of each side. Proposition.


Accordingly, his Lordship, with the Brandenburgers, going to the Suethes, the
others went to the Polanders, and conform to agreement, the Sequestration was
propounded to both. The Polanders made no exception: the Suethes affirmed that
in regard the promised Procuratories were Not consented unto.
not yet come, they could not consent thereunto: But yet, that time might not be
unprofitably trifled, they were contented to lay aside the point of the
Procuratories for that day, and were desirous to make entrance into the
Principal Treaty, whereunto that a way might be opened; it behoved them
Demand made by the Suethes.
(said they) first to know whether or not the King of Poland would absolutely
renounce the right he pretended unto Suethen, which they believed to be the
chief and only mean to perfect the Treaty of Pacification.

This was by the Mediators related to the Commissioners Answer and demand of
the Polanders.
of Poland, who without further deliberation replied, that it was expedient for
them also to understand, whether (a resignation supposed, but not granted) the
others would restore the Kingdom of Suethland, with all other things whereof
the King had been deprived; seeing that, where the same right is, it may be by
the same reasons disputed.

The Mediators perceiving the difficulties, wherein by these extremes, the
parties did involve themselves at this first beginning, from which they could
not be freed, unless some mediate ways were found out, and it being their
part and office to propound such ways unto the parties disagreeing, they
concluded (the better to stop these beginnings, which in things of weight and
moment are wont to increase) to demand from Result of the Mediators.
the parties three days respite, within which time they might happily conceive
some ways and reasons for bringing the business nearer to a composition.

This was agreed unto, howbeit unwillingly by the Suethes, Accepted by all.
because the Poles hereby deferred the producing of their promised
Procuratorie; and the Mediators for that first days conclusion, thought meet
that as a good Omen to the happy issue of the Treaty in agitation, the parties
should meet and salute each other, whereby their minds as yet alienated, might
by degrees and mutual civilities be prepared to Peace and Amity, and that (to
the end the same might be without prejudice or pre-eminence to either side)
they should issue forth of their respective Tents at one and the same instant,
and accompanied by the Mediators, meet in the midway of the Village, without
any mention of the business in question, which might sound harshly to either
side. This was grateful to both parties, they professing themselves most
willingly ready That days conclusion.
to any act of courtesy and humanity: Whereupon they met in most friendly
manner, and having so greeted and congratulated each other, each party returned
to their residence; those of Poland to Marienwerder, the Mediators to
Marienburg, the Suethes to Jonas Dorff.

The next day the Mediators convene in the Castle of Marienburg, The Mediators
meet.
to consult and to return prepared with some mediate means of reconciling the
differences touching the resignation or restitution of the Kingdom of Suethen.
But that there might arise no dispute competitionary between the Ambassadors of
Great Britain and France, a Table was so equally placed as the Session could
give no precedence to either. They being set, and having discoursed some time
of several means for compounding the matter in question, his Lordship
exhibited his mind in writing, which imported,

That he saw no better way for reconciling the extremes of His Lordships
proposition in Order to the whole matter.
resignation and restitution, then by having an equal regard to the Honor and
Dignity of his Majesty of Poland, and to the security of the State of Suethen.

In reference to the King, it would be necessary that the Laws made in
Suethland, whereby King Sigismundus and his Posterity had been deprived of the
Inheritance and Succession to that Crown, should be repealed and nullified, and
as violent Edicts, to be razed out of the public Records.

Concerning the State and Kingdom of Suethland, it would be sufficiently
secured if his Majesty of Poland in regard of the neernesse of consanguinity,
between him and the Princess Christina, did remit to her during her life the
right he had to that Crown, conditionally that the lawful Heirs of his body
might enjoy their right of Succession in the future, or those failing Heirs;
And in case such Issue should fail on both sides, that then the right of
Election should return to the States of the Kingdom. Hereunto it would also be
requisite, that in the point of the Queens future Marriage, the King of Polands
consent should be in friendly manner required, and in case of doubts or
scruples arising, the approbation of his Electorall Highness of Brandenburg
might be desired: That it would be conducing hereunto, if King Vladislaus
should join in marriage with a Family allied to the Kingdom of Suethen by
friendship or confederacy, the consent of the States of Suethland concurring:
Neither could there be a better way to remove all doubts and jealousies, then
if the young Queen of Suethland were joined in marriage with Prince Casimirus,
brother to his Majesty of Poland.

Concerning the restitution of the other Lands and Provinces taken in War,
which those of Poland demanded, the main question of the Kingdom being
decided, that would follow of it self, Quoniam sublata causa tollitur effectus:
those pretenses having been the cause of that War: Neither could the Suethes in
lieu of the said restitution, demand any re-imbursment of charges, for then the
Polanders, and his Electorall Highness of Brandenburg and others, might with
far more reason require reparation of their losses, and restitution of the
Tolls extorted beyond measure, even contrary to the Articles, in the late six
years Truce: that it was now time to cease and abrogate those unjust
oppressions and exactions upon foreign Trade, and to reduce commerce to its
former freedom. That in like manner it was consentaneous to reason, that the
Elector of Brandenburg having sustained damages so great as not equal
compensation could be hoped for, should now (at least) have a full restitution
of all his Ports, Fortresses, Towns, Lands, and Possessions.

Lastly, that regard was to be had also of the Duke of Curland, who having, by
means of the War, received infinite prejudice, ought in reason to share in the
benefit of the Peace.

His Lordships Proposition being read in presen(...) of the The other Mediators
deliver theirs.
Mediators; Berkman (heretofore named) in the name of Marquess Sigismund and
the rest of the Electoralls exhibited one, somewhat more breife, but in effect
the same. The French, and States Ambassadors delivered theirs by word of mouth,
these (later named) varying little (if any thing) from what the others had
delivered in writing.

The French Ambassador (a Cavelier of admirable endowments and singular
Eloquence) at first, opposed his Lordship, representing that it would be of no
advantage, and would be inconvenient likewise, to bring again upon the Stage,
and to determine that unrellishing and odious question of the Kingdom: that it
were otherwise if this were a case which could be easily decided, or that might
be tried before a Tribunal. On the other side, it was mainely insisted on, as
notoriously injurious and prejudicial to other like Governments.

At last, it was unanimously consented, that the day ensuing, a proposition
should be made to the respective Parties, by way of question only, Whether his
Majesty of Poland would be pleased (as also the young Queen Christina) to
renounce, both for himself and his Relations their right in Suethen, under
these two Conditions.

I. That the young Queen Christina and her Issue failing, The result.
King Vladislaus and his lawful Heirs might obtain the right of succession
unto the Crown of Suethen.

II. That restitution be made of all such places and Territories as (during the
War) had been taken, either in Leifland or Prussia, from the King and Crown of
Poland.

Hereupon, the consultation ending, all the Mediators, the Electoralls
excepted, retired, from the Castle, to their several lodgings in the Town.

The several mediating Ministers, and Parties interessed, meet the second time
at Stumbsdorff, where (as at first) they divide themselves, his Lordship with
the Brandenburgers repair to the Suethes, the French and States Ambassadors to
the Poles, and urge the Sequestration of the Procuratories, that so they may
more confidently proceed in the maine business. The Polanders affirmed they
had new Procuratories, but refused to consigne them, unless their acceptance
were secured by attestation, as also their restorement in case of Peace or
War. On the other side, the Suethes delivered up theirs with a protestation in
writing, and the draught of an attestation; which his Lordship, with the
Electorall Ministers, rejected; not permitting any prescription of their Acts
to be made to them by any but their own attestation to be sufficient.

The Commissioners of Poland, understanding that the Suethes had delivered up
their procuratoriall Letters, sent theirs to the French Ambassador, then in the
Mediatoriall Tent, but committed their protestation to the Ambassador of great
Britain, and intimated their expectancie of an attestation with the first
opportunity. Hereupon the Mediators exhibit to each of the Parties the
Procuratories received from the other. Those of Poland would not once overlooke
that of the Suethes, saying that, without seeing, they gave credit thereunto,
as not being incredulous; and would not so much as take notice of their
Protestation.

But on the other side, the Suethes did deliberately Supervise The new
Procuratories interchangably communicated new difficulty about the Title.
and ponder the Polish Procuratories, and again complained that their Queens
titles were imperfectly couched, the word Great; (relating to) Princess of
Finland being omitted, neither would accept thereof, notwithstanding all the
persuasions the French Ambassador could use. He, with the Hollanders, made
relation of this unthought of difficulty to the Commissioners of Poland, who
(hearing it) were somewhat troubled, imputing the error to the ignorance or
heedlesness of the writer, affirming that they were free therefrom: but to
remove that rubb, the Lord Chancellor Zadzick did offer to supply the defect
with his own hand, in presence of the Mediators, there being no other means
to rectify the same, nor any possibility of recovering other Procuratories.

This offer of his was excepted against by those of Suethland, who alleged
that the Chancellor had no power or authority to change or correct ought, after
the King had once signed the same; as also that the Procuratory would be thereby
imperfect and blemished, in regard nothing could be added without interlining.
At last, through the entreaties of the French and States Ambassadors, and the
persuasions of his Lordship, they yielded thus far, that they would accept of
the foresaid correction of that defect, conditionally that, forasmuch as new
Procuratories from the States of Poland could not be obtained without a
Parliament first called, others were procured from the King within ten days
space; that otherwise, and save only to gratify the Mediators, they would not
have so easily accepted the same.

This sharp answer exceedingly irritated the Commissioners of Poland, who
spared not to say that they had made peace with sundry Nations, even Barbarous
and Infidels, and had not found so much difficulty with them as with the
Suethes: affirming withal that they were not less ready for a War (in case of
rupture) then the adverse party; with which constancy of theirs, or rather by
the endeavors of the Mediators, the Suethes, somewhat mollified, accepted of
the interlyning before offered; the Mediatoriall attestations Reconciled.
being deferred until their return to Marienburg.

The disputes and differences about the Procuratories being thus determined, it
will not be amiss to show (briefly) in what form they with the Acts relating
to them were couched; the scope of the said Letters Procuratoriall being (to
either party) That whatsoever they or the greater part of Scope of the
Procuratories.
them, the absence of one or more notwithstanding shall each with other agree
or conclude upon, either touching perpetual peace or longer Truce, the same
should be fully accepted of and ratified with all due and requisite forms. The
full Titles of either of the Princes interessed were abreviated with an etc.
etc. as no way derogatory.

The Protestation of the Polish Commissioners was to this effect; That the King
of Poland, etc. albeit his Hereditary Polish Protest.
right to the Crown of Suethland, for the maintaining whereof there had been so
long and bloody Wars, was no less clear then the Sun, and could not be
impaired by any arguments to the contrary; had notwithstanding, at the instant
requests of the mediating Ministers of so many and potent Princes, and to
manifest his a version to the effusion of Christian blood condescended so far,
as in his Procuratoriall Letters to his Commissioners to permit that, to the
most illustrious Christina, the Title of Designed Queen of Suethes, Goths, and
Vandalls, Great Princess of Finland. etc. etc. should be inserted, and the
said Title, in the adverse Procuratorialls, to be by his Commissioners accepted
of, yet without prejudice to his Hereditary right: and therefore they (the said
Commissioners of Poland) did, in his Majesty's name, make this solemn protest
in the most ample and usual form in such cases accustomed and required, in
presence of the Ambassadors of the Princes mediating, for the indemnity of his
said Majesty's Hereditary right of succession to the Crown of Suethland; in
evidence and testimony whereof, as well for the present as future they desired
attestation from the said mediating Ministers under their hands and seals.

The Protest of the Suethish Commissioners imported; The Suethes Protest.
That they having observed that the King and Re-publike of Poland in their
several Procuratoriall Letters, had omitted certain Titles due to their Queen,
as Esthonia, Carelia, and Ingria, which hither to they could not be induced to
give, no more then to raze out of their own the Title of Suethland ascribed to
the King of Poland, for the effecting whereof they had long and earnestly
endeavored, yet now at length, and at the earnest requests and intervention of
the mediating Ambassadors, to show their propensity to Peace, as also that the
adverse party might be more equitably complying in the future, they had
assented to the acceptance thereof; With this solemn Protest interposed. and
consigned into the hands of the Mediators, and by them fully accepted, as
appeared by their attestation thereupon: That the same should not either in
present or future time, any way prejudice or diminish the Right and Dignity of
their Queen and of the Kingdom of Suethen: much less that any Title or Right
was thereby conceded or given to his Majesty of Poland, either directly or
indirectly, expressed or implied. And thus ended the second meeting at
Stumbsdorff.

The Mediators and the Parties being assembled now the third time, in the
foresaid place, the former according to promise, delivered their respective
attestations; that of his Lordship and the Electorals containing: That
forasmuch as it had pleased the parties to commit their Plenipotentiaries into
the hands of the Mediators, until the Negotiation being brought to a happy
Peace (if it should so please God) the same might be framed to the satisfaction
of both parties, and accordingly re-delivered: They had received the
Plenipotentiary of the Lords Commissioners of Suethland, with a Protest, and
this Caution therein inserted; That in case the Treaty should not have the
wished end, the said Plenipotentiary should be restored and the Mediators
receive back their present attestation: That they had also accepted of the said
Protest, the same to be referred to the public Acts. The French with the
States Ambassadors gave the like to the Commissioners of Poland.

Thus at last these difficulties about the Procuratorials were Procuratoriall
difficulties removed.
(after the consumption of four months) by the Mediatoriall endeavors
removed, and a proceed unto the Principal and more weighty business of the
main Treaty intended. To which end, the Mediators, dividing themselves,
remonstrated to the several parties what had been three days before concluded
Former result communicated to the parties.
at Marienburg. The Suethes at the first overture, answered Negatively to both
the Conditions, whereby the Kingof Poland, as had been conceived, might be moved
to a resignation, affirming, that as to the Succession and Hereditary Right
pretended by King Vladislaus and his Heirs unto the Suethes answer Negatively.
Crown of Suethland, there was a decree of the States of that Kingdom expressly
against the same, which they might no way contradict; and added withal, that
of future contingencies, to which sense the Posterity to ensue might be
referred, there could be no certainty determined: And to the other, Viz. the
restitution, they would not once treat thereof unless they were first assured
of an absolute and entire resignation, that being the groundwork of the whole
Affair, which being obtained, they would declare themselves in most effectual
and friendly manner. This was all that his Lordship could obtain by way of
answer, notwithstanding many arguments used to have gained further, which he
with the Electorals referred to the judgment of the Mediators in general: And
from the Polish Commissioners, by the Ambassadors of France and Holland, was
delivered an answer, in almost the same terms by way of conversion; to wit,
that the mere The like given by the Polanders.
motion of a renunciation was no less odious to them, and that they were as
far from consenting thereto, unless a restitution were first conceded.

The Mediators, pondring these extremes, feared least the relating of them
might further exasperate the parties, who appeared already more prone to War
then Peace, and therefore resolved to return and desire of them, that forasmuch
as they had hitherto answered far from the matter, they would come nearer and
declare themselves more clearly. The Suethes did still insist upon an absolute
resignation, in reference whereunto, they declare for their Cathegoricall
resolution; that the same being granted by the Polanders, they, to show their
Offer made by the Suethes.
good inclination toward Peace, would restore the rich Country of Prussia,
conditionally that they might be re-imbursed of their Charges: which offer of
theirs, not being in any sort satisfactory to his Lordship and the
Brandenburgers, they insisted (by way of anticipation) upon the restoring of
Leifland also, but finding the Suethes utterly averse thereunto, they without
obtaining further, returned to the Mediatoriall College.

In the mean time the Commissioners of Poland, urged by The Poles desire
respite.
the other Mediators, upon the two foresaid Conditions, desired to have them in
writing, with time of deliberation until the day following, wherein they would
further declare themselves touching the same. The Mediators (upon consultation)
agreed to satisfy the request of the Polanders, conditionally The same granted.
that there should be no further treating by writ, as being both slow and
dangerous; this being given as a help to memory only: On the other side, the
Suethes understanding that the adverse party had required that days respite to
consider of The Suethes therewith offended.
the conditions propounded, and the grant thereof by the Mediators, they were
exceedingly incensed with that delatory answer, in regard that they having
sincerely discovered themselves as far as they could, in a manner; the
Polanders had not daigned to make any equal return; for which cause they saw
no reason (said they) to condescend to another meeting, before they had some
resolution in the point of resignation: His Lordship endeavored to moderate
their violence tending to a Rupture, but in vain, insomuch as he left them
discontented. He was but newly entered into the Tent of the Polish
Commissioners, but that Secretary Lording followed, to tell him that his Lords
the Suethes had consented to the next days meeting.

All parties hereupon convening the fourth time; the first point was to learn
how those of Poland would declare themselves upon the former conditions; to
them the French and The former offer waved by the Poles as insufficient.
States Ambassadors repaired, and received this answer; That they did not
reject the foresaid conditions, but that they found them not to be sufficient,
whereby the King might be induced to make a resignation: They therefore requested
the Mediators to consider of some other more equal terms. These words (when
related) seemed very strange to the other Mediators, and not fit to be
communicated to those of Suethen, except they were accompanied with other
circumstances.

After a serious debate amongst themselves, they pitch upon five other Articles.

1. That the harsh Laws enacted against King Sigismundus Five other mediate
means propounded.
and his house, might be abolished, so as the Suethes might freely elect Kings
to themselves out of that Family.

2. That satisfaction should be made to the King and his Brethren out of the
Territory of Leifland, as the King and the States should agree.

3. That there should be firm friendship between the two Kingdoms, and the
Queen Christina to be married into a Family, not Enemy to the King and State of
Poland: King Vladislaus also to match in like manner.

4. The Children lawfully proceeding from Vladislaus and his Wife on the one
side, and Christina and her Husband on the other side, to be joined in marriage.

5. To be mutually assisting against the Enemies of each other.

With these, his Lordship and the Electorall Ministers went Taken by the Poles
into deliberation.
to those of Poland: The French and Hollanders at the same time acquainting the
Suethes with the said Articles: the Polanders required that they might
transcribe and have time until the Monday ensuing to deliberate; that then they
would declare their final resolution: But in the mean time, the Suethes
absolutely rejected these new Conditions as being worse then Rejected by the
Suethes.
the former, and derogatory from the Dignity of their Queen and the Kingdom of
Suethen, and again insisted upon an entire renunciation, without which no Peace
to be hoped for. The answer of either party being rehearsed in the Mediatoriall
College, it was thought good that the Poles informed of the perseverance of
the Suethes in the point of resignation, should be pressed to open their minds
more freely, and that the Sueths should be persuaded to meet upon the Monday
following, against which time the Polanders were to deliberate upon the five
Conditions newly propounded by the Mediators.

Hereupon the French and Hollanders return to those of Poland, Reply of the
Poles in point of resignation.
who no sooner heard that odious word of Resignation again repeated, but they
became exceedingly enraged, chiefly Duke Radzivill, who replied, Let not your
Lordships suffer your selves to be thus mocked by the Suethes, neither will we
any longer; if they desire yet any further declaration upon that point, this is
our resolution, we will rather dye then Resign.

During this, the Agent, Master Gordon had, in his Lordships name, endeavored
to move the Suethes to meet again The Suethes refuse to meet.
the Monday following; to whom, before he could end his speech, they answered
peremptorily, That they would not meet any more: That they were deluded, the
time protracted, and nothing hitherto effected, except the meetings, worthy of
the Mediators pains: That at Jonas Dorff they would expect the resolution of
the Polanders touching the point in question.

The Mediators, very solicitous how to wade out of those difficulties, at last,
prevailed so far with the Polanders, as to meet whenever they should by
Letters appoint the same.

The day following, his Lordship, with Master Gordon and His Lordship goes to
the Suethes.
the States Ambassadors repaired to Jonas-Dorff to visit and persuade the
Suethes to a future meeting on the 23. May, / 2. June, as also to treat with
them particularly, about what they had further in Commission, touching the
Tolls, exacted from the Subjects of their Principalls, Trading in those parts.
And here in the first place, the Suethes consented without difficulty, to the
meeting they had refused the day before, excusing They consent to meet.
the same by their mistake, as having conceived it had been chiefly desired by
the adverse party, not by the Mediators, and professed they would meet at their
instance whenever it pleased them. Certain greivances complained of by his
Lordship and the Hollanders to the Suethes.


From this purpose, his Lordship and the Hollanders converted to that of the
Tolls, remonstrating to the Commissioners of Suethen, that sundry unjust and
intolerable exactions had been practiced in their Tolls and Customs. Yea so
far as it was affirmed that, upon due computation, proof would be made that
one Shipp, passing and repassing, had paid sixty Rexdollars upon the Last,
notwithstanding that in the late Treaty six years past, a far less sum, even
the third part had been allowed. They affirmed also, that over and above the
same, sundry other extraordinary exactions, as Anchor-gelt, Mast-gelt,
Passeport, Seale-gelt, Clerks Fees, and others of the like kind had been
extorted: all which things, introduced against the wonted custom, were now
grown common. The Ambassadors therefore, by virtue of their Commissions and
Instructions, required, of the said Commissioners, that with all convenience,
those excesses might be abstained from; the things being in themselves unjust,
and derogating from their Masters Dignities to be practiced, they present, and
not able to relieve the injured Plaintiff:

Count Brahe, in the name of the rest, made auswer, that Their answer.
indeed sundry complaints had been made unto him about the Tolls; but, so far
as he knew, none had ever proved that any new exaction or burden had been
introduced contrary to the agreement: that moreover they had no Commission to
treat of this matter until the business of the Pacification were ended, which
done, they would conform themselves strictly unto their Instructions in that
point: That in the mean time, they would send Peter Speiring (their
Toll-Master) to inform their Lordships of all things, and that they would
enjoyne him to cease all extraordinary burdens, if any had crept in: Thus
ended that conference. The same night his Lordship certified the Polish
Commissioners of the meeting to be as formerly appointed.

The time being come, their first work was to see what the The Polanders
persist as before.
Polanders would declare upon the Mediatoriall conditions last propounded, who,
to his Lordship and the Electoralls, returned the same answer as to the former:
Viz. That they rejected them not, but found them not such as might move their
King to renounce a Kingdom, which was no small matter; and therefore desired
the Mediators either to supply the defects of those or to propound others.

This answer being repeated in the Mediatoriall College, The Parties willed to
propound.
what before seemed strange was now judged wholly impossible, none knowing what
to propound of new that might be acceptable to both Parties, whom therefore
they resolved not to smooth any longer; but that, if themselves had ought to
propound, they might do it. Hereupon they part, his Lordship to the Suethes,
the French to the Polanders, each accompanied as before; but when the Suethes
found themselves again frustrated of the promised resolve from them of Poland,
The Suethes enter into passion.
they began, not without passion, to rehearse how much they had already granted
to the adverse party: Whereas we (said they) desire nothing from the King of
Poland but an empty Title, we are content to surrender the most noble and rich
Province of Prussia; which compared together, was but as a Feather to a Wedge
of Gold. That they were sorry they had declared themselves so far, and assured
that so soon as their Army should arrive from Suethen, they would not only
retract Prussia, but likewise treat in terms much more difficult. That as
touching Leifland, they would not part with the least ^lod thereof, neither was
it once so much as mentioned in their Instructions.

The Commissioners of Poland were no less stiff toward the French and
Hollanders, repeating what they had formerly spoken: but being somewhat
pacified, they yielded so far as to deliver to the Mediators those things under
trust, which as a supplement they thought fit to be added to the five
forementioned Conditions.

1. That the young Queen dying, King Vladislaus might be Those of Poland add
ten other Articles for a supplement to the former.
chosen King of Suethland. 2. That the Suethes should consider how compensation
should be made to the Kings Brothers and Sisters. 3. That it might be free for
them to Elect the Posterity of Vladislaus. 4. That Prince Casimir the Kings
Brother might Reign in the Regal absence. 5. That the young Queen Christina
might be married with the Kings advice. 6. That Esthonia should be surrendered
as a part of Leifland. 7. That all the Ordinance taken away in the great Duchy
of Lithuania should be restored. 8. That the Ships detained in Wismar and else
where should be set free. 9. That they should abstain from Extortions hitherto
practiced in the Customs. 10. That reparation should be made for the losses
sustained by particular persons in their Possessions and Privileges, and
Exiles to be restored to their former Estates.
The Mediators conferring hereupon, and finding the answer Things tending to a
breach the Mediators desire respite.
of both sides tending to a breach, they conclude to tell the Suethes that
those of Poland seemed to give some hopes of a renunciation, seeing they had
not hitherto absolutely denied the same: That in order thereunto they had added
some supplies to the Conditions last propounded, about which the Mediators
being willing to consult seriously, desired the next general meeting might be
deferred for four days; whereunto the Sueshes (yet not without reluctance)
consenting, the others did so likewise.

The said day (being the 29/8 May, / June.) they congregated the sixth time,
and the Mediators pains were the greater, by how much the parties, dissenting
in extremes, seemed to breath nothing but present War. No new Counsel
remained, no mediate means could be more found out; neither was it doubted by
the Mediators, but that the supplements added by the Polanders (as aforesaid)
would cause a certain breach. Yet that they might not be wanting to their
Mediatoriall Office, they agreed, setting the Polish conditions aside, to
demand of each party (as for the last time) their final Declarations, and how
far their Commissions extended. From the Suethes, whether by their Instructions
they had not power to treat of Final declarations demanded by the Mediators
from the Parties.
an entire restitution of all things taken away; that if they had ought in
reserve, they should produce it, if otherwise, that they would do well to have
recourse to their Principals the States of Suethland by Letters, whereby they
might happily be moved to send them instructions more complying.

Unto the Commissioners of Poland it was remonstrated, that albeit the
Mediators had duly considered the Supplements delivered unto them, they could
not conceive that any good would be effected by them, and therefore if they had
ought remaining touching the resignation, that they would entrust them with it,
for otherwise there would never be an end of going to and from, which being
tedious in it self, they also began to grow weary thereof.

The Suethes to whom the French Ambassador had repaired, replied that seeing
nothing had been, hitherto, offered unto them from the contrary party, they had
already enlarged themselves too far by a tender of the restitution of Prussia,
whereunto they could add nothing: That they wondered much The Suethes decline to
declare further.
that these and the like things were almost daily required of them, whereas they
could not hear of ought from the other side tending toward a Peace: That they
sufficiently knew the States of Suethen would not be induced to grant any other
Commission or Instructions then what they had already: That Parliament could
not be called in less then four months, and that some time would be wasted in
making a journey into Suethen; but that it might so happen, as that their
General Jacobu^ de la Guard (whom they ere long expected with a Navy) might
bring them some further power.

The Commissiones of Poland complained, that the Mediators had relinquished the
conditions they had tendered; affirming that their King would never be persuaded
to a resignation for the restitution of Prussia and Leifland merely, neither
had they ought in their Commission more then what they had already The
Polanders likewise, and give their reasons.
declared. To confirm this, they instanced recent examples drawn from the Turks
and Russians. For, said they, albeit their King had in the late Treaty of Peace
with the Muscovite, renounced his right of former Election to that Empire,
which nevertheless was much weaker then the Hereditary Right he had to
Suethen, yet he did it not but upon very advantageous conditions, they giving
him for the same three great and large Provinces extending to above five
hundred miles. That in his late Wars also against the Turk, he had showed
himself so resolute as not to yield to the least disadvantage: that when,
beside the Peace, they desired of him some small Gift, not by way of
Superiority or Tribute, but in token of Friendship only, he would not
condescend thereto, but chose rather to wage most cruel Battle; Wherein, to his
eternal Fame, being twice Victor, he made Peace with them according to his own
desire.

That they might easily therefore conclude, the King of Poland would never be
induced to renounce his Hereditary right to the Crown and Kingdom of
Suethland, for Prussia and Leifland only, by the restitution whereof no
Emolument or compensation was derived to the King and his Family, but only some
satisfaction to the Commonwealth of Poland. At last, overcome with the earnest
persuasions of his Lordship and the Ministers of the States General, they did
promise to write once more to the King about the resignation; saying, that they
expected him to be suddenly at Thorn, from whence they might (within three
days) obtain a Cathegorick answer.

All these things, with the resolution of the other party being thoroughly
scanned by the Mediators, conclusion was taken, that the Commissioners of
Suethland, should be persuaded to meet on the Wednesday next following, against
which time the Polanders expected a final answer from the King in point of
resignation, no other means appearing to hinder a present dissolution of the
Treaty, and yet it was feared the event would not answer their desires.
Nevertheless, his Lordship and the Hollanders undertake the Work, relating to
the Suethes the answer The Suethes again incensed.
of the contrary party as sparingly and mincingly as they could: As they had
presaged so it fell out, for so soon as these understood that they were again
delayed, they interpreted all to be but mere delusions; calling God to witness
with what candor and sincerity they had hitherto treated. Whereas quite
contrary, the adverse party (said they) had used nothing but Subterfuges, not
once daigning them an answer which might be so termed.

They complained of perverseness and arrogance in their Adversaries, which they
affirmed, should not pass unrevenged: saying, that of a certain, they should
never obtain that Province of Prussia which they had over officiously offered;
and concluded that they could not be (in reason) required or desired to meet
any more at these Conferences, before the King had declared concerning the
point in question: To this their tartness, his Lordship and the Ambassadors of
Holland At end the final resolution at their quarters.
replied as became Mediators, by whose dexterous arguments and persuasions the
Suethes became so tractable, as that they promised (without dissolving the
Treaty) to attend the final resolution, touching the resignation, at Jonas
Dorff their place of residence.

The Commissioners of Poland, understanding the impatiency of the Suethes, were
moved with indignation, rememorating their humanity and moderation used toward
them, by waiting a far longer time for their Procuratorials, and entreated the
Mediators to afford them a meeting and conference on the 6/16 of that month, at
a Village called Newendorff. Hereunto A meeting with the Mediators desired by
the Poles.
the Mediators consented, as having ever showed themselves ready to contribute
their utmost endeavors to advance the public Interest, which by the six
general meetings past may evidently appear.

The Mediators (almost tired with daily journeys) enjoyed now some days of
rest, in which time his Lordship and the Hollanders, spent part thereof in
giving several audiences to Speiring (forenamed) about the Tolls, much
alteration and dispute being had about the same, albeit to small effect.

The day prefixed being come, all the Mediators (the Fench excepted) went to
Newenaorff, each being desirous of the Treaties happy progress whereby the so
much desired Pacification might be attained. Being met, they began their
conference at the point of the renunciation, that so they might have whereof to
certify the Suethes Commissioners, who impatiently expected the same: thereto
they added, that the present Truce being near expired, and but little of the
Treaty as yet concluded, Prolongation of the Truce desired.
they thought good to advice a prolongation thereof until the ensuing first of
August, September, November, and for the more assurance, a new Instrument to be
made; all hostility to be (during the same) forborne on both sides, whereby the
Treaty might have a longer course, and (if God so pleased) be brought to a
wished Period.

The Lords of Poland made answer that they had (at length) prevailed so far
with their King, in the point of resignation, as he would be content to do it
upon certain honorable conditions; Result of the Polanders conditional.
whereof the first and chief was, that the Suethes should entirely restore all
things formerly taken away: that the others might be more easily agreed upon,
and that they would refer them to the arbitration of the Mediators: concerning
the prorogation of the Truce they left it to them also: this declaration was so
much the more grateful as it gave hopes of a successful renovation of the
Treaty.

The French Ambassador with the Hollanders repaired to Jonas dorff the day
following, acquainting the Suethes Commissioners with the declaration made by
the Polanders, and remonstrated the necessity, of prorogating the Truce; yet
albeit nothing could have come more welcome unto them they would not give any
answer as then, but promised to send their Subdelegate unto Marienburg the next
day. And (though not material to the present purpose) I shall hear insert,
that Mr. Gordon the Agent forenamed, took leave of his Lorship and repaired for
England upon great and weighty occasions.

Secretary Lording, Subdelegate to the Suethes, being sent to the Mediators,
according to promise, told them in the name of his Principalls, that they
having heard what the Polanders had declared, in reference to the point in
question, to the end the Treaty, the greater part whereof was yet unperfect
might not be scanted by time, the Truce being near expired, had consented to
the prorogation thereof until the time motioned, provided that the
Commissioners of Poland Prorogation of the Truce assented unto.
would treat more really in the future. Herewith the Hollanders charged
themselves to acquaint those of Poland, and in the name of all the Mediators to
require their consent: Their answer imported, that notwithstanding the
prorogation desired would be to their prejudice, yet to show their desire of a
happy end of the matter in agitation and to gratify the Mediators, whose care
for the public appeared in this as in all other passages, they would not
refuse the same, but there expect him that should be sent to perfect the
instrument thereof.

Hereupon two Copies were accordingly, to the Mediators, drawn up, in Substance
as follows. That whereas the late truce for six years; between, the high and
mighty Princes and States, the Kings and Kingdoms of Poland and Suethen (or
Viceversa) was now almost expired; and that the Treaty of Pacification,
happily begun, could not in that scantness of time, attain a wished issue; the
Ambassadors of the Mediating Princes and States had thought good to propound to
each of the Parties a Prorogation of the said Truce: Whereupon, the foresaid
Truce for six years remaining in full Purport of the Prorogation.
force and virtue, in all the circumstances and clauses thereof, the
Commissioners of either Party had consented, as they do by these presents
consent and agree, unto a prorogation of the said Truce until the first day of
August, September, November next ensuing, that in the mean time, by the
intervention and industry of the Mediators, the present Treaty for an entire
and perfect Peace might by Gods assistance be happily finished. And it was also
hereby enacted that, during the said Prorogation, no acts of hostility should
by either of the Parties be used, or permitted to be used, toward the other:
for the greater assurance and better observation whereof, the Commissioners
deputed from either of the Parties, together with the Mediating Ambassadors,
had signed and sealed the same the eighteenth day of June, 1635. The
Ambassadors, of the States General undertook the care of sending this
instrument to the Suethes (by their Secritary) for Signature; they being still
at Jonas dorff, who promised to return it the next day by their Subdelegate in
perfect mannner.

Here (by the way) we may touch, that the end of the Sequestrations
approaching, certain places of Prussia, as Marienburg, Stume, Lochstadt, etc.
which had been (during the six years Truce) entrusted by way of Sequestration
into the hands of the Elector of Brandenburg, were to be restored unto the
Suethes the 12/23 June as also the Memeln and Brunsberge, by them, to his
Electorall Highness, within three days after: the Marquess Sigismund with
the other Electorall Ministers, as also the rest of the Mediators began to
consider of some new residence. Risenberg a little Town in Prussia (the
Ducall) was pitched upon; whereupon the Marquess Sigismund, taking leave, went
thither the same day. Yet here may not be omitted that the Commissioners of
Poland Continuation of Sequestrations insisted on by the Poles; but refused by
the Suethes.
insisted earnestly against the exchange of Sequestrations, affirming the same
to be (Ipso facto) a breach of the Treaty, and (as it were) a Summons to the
War, if made before the Treaty were finished; and in their favor the
Mediators, chiefly his Lordship endeavored what they could, yet could not
persuade the Suethes to hearken thereunto. But let us return to that from whence
we have digressed.

Whilst the Mediators expect the Subdelegate from the Suethes, they send the
other Copy of the Instrument of Prorogation by the foresaid Secretary unto the
Commissiones of Poland, to be by them signed and sealed, which was done without
delay: In the Interim, Secretary Lording came to Marienburg with a new form of
Prorogation, which not being (conform to the other Copy) drawn in manner of a
Patent; nor the full time of the Prorogation unto the first of August
inserserted; as also that the Subscription of Count Brahe alone did not
correspond to the plural number of Commissioners mentioned in the beginning
and middle of the said Instrument; it was rejected, and the foresaid Secretary
of the Hollanders, returning with full satisfaction from those of Poland, who
were to begin their journey toward their King (then at Thorn) the next day
early, he was sent to Elbing, to acquaint the Suethes The Prorogation signed.
therewith, and to move them to subscribe the Instrument drawn by the
Mediators, which at last they did.

This Remora removed, the Mediators also repaired toward Thoronia, a fair
City belonging to the French, and the States Ambassadors not having as yet
saluted his Majesty. They with the Electorals were honorably and magnificently
received, each severally, according to their Dignities, his Lordship also, The
Mediators vepair to the King.
by young Prince Radzivill, great Chamberlain of Lithuania, and Baron
Gildenstierne, was received in the Kings Coach; many others attending with a
great Troop of the Polish Nobility on Hors-back, and so conveyed to his lodging
not far from that where the King then lay.

The Mediators in their particular audiances declared the true State of the
Treaty, and that without absolute resignation, Their overtures uneffectuall.
all hopes of Peace were desperate, neither was any argument left unused,
whereby something might be gathered from the Kings own mouth, or be moved to
afford his Commissioners more ample Instructions: But to a Courageous and a
Victorious Prince, such Solicitations being disrellishing, they were also
ineffectuall Wherefore the usual Visites and Complements being added, the main
conclusion was, that the meetings, at the fore-specified place and time, should
be again resumed.

His Lordship having taken leave of the King by a private Audiance, set
forwards with the Hollanders toward Risenberg. The French Ambassador doing the
like, as also the Brandenburgers about two days after. The Mediators being now
altogether, and understanding that the Commissioners of Poland were likewise
returned to Marienwerder, the Marquess Sigismund, as nearest concerned,
undertook to invite (by Letters) the Suethes to meet again, on Monday the 29.
June, 9. July, at a Villagenamed Honigsfeldt, equi-distant from Mar(...)nburg,
Risenberg, and Jonas Dorff: but sundry of those Commissioners being gone to the
Pillaw to receive the General Jacobus de la Guard, who was newly arrived from
Suethland with a Navy and an Army, the meeting was thereby retarded: The French
Ambassador signified the same to those of Poland, who to gain time, Duke
Radzivill The Poles desire a meeting with the Mediators.
now hastening his journey toward Littaw, to make provision for the War in case
it should so fall out, desired a conference at a Village named Leutznaw, where
a Polish Gentleman had a house fit to receive them. Being met, the Polanders
were urged (by the Mediators jointly) by all fair persuasions, Declaration
ur(...).
to declare in a word their Kings sinall resolution, touching the resignation,
it being to be feared that if the last former condition, which mentioned the
restitution entire of Prussia and Leifland, for the said resignation, were
still insisted on, the first meeting would be the last.

The Commissioners of Poland having retired themselves about an hour, returned
and said, they wondered much to Ultimate result of the Polanders.
hear the Mediators desire of them a more full Declaration: that themselves
stood firm to the former, and that Prussia and Liefland should not only be
absolutely restored, but that the Laws also made in Suethen against King
Sigismund and his Heirs should be utterly abolished, and satisfaction made to
the King out of the Provinces of Suethland, all which things they urged, as
Sine quibus non: The other conditions, as restoring of Ships, Ordnance, and
exiled persons, would be Treaty for final Peace in terms desperate.
more easily reconciled: Whereunto the French Ambassador made answer, in the
name of his Colleagues, that apparently (upon these terms) Peace was rather to
be despaired of, then hoped for, and to use his own words, Se de pace perpetua
tantum desperare, quantum hodie Caelum cum terra coiturum videatur; That things
being so, they should do well to convert their thoughts to the sole remaining
refuge, to wit, a longer Truce.

This reply was but little to the Commissioners of Poland, who affirmed they
had no Commission to treat of longer Truce, which was not to be mentioned
until hopes of Peace were utterly extinct, and that albeit such a Treaty
should follow, yet could not they condescend to any other conditions. Yet (said
they) it will not be amiss to sound the Suethes once more before things were
quite despaired of: which was concluded on by all parties.

After the general conference ended, the Chancellor Zadzick Complaints of the
Poles.
complained, that the former six years Truce had been sundry times broken by
the Suethes, but that, unwilling to trouble the Mediators with repetition of
particulars, they would only insist upon one, which being of late might prove
their allegation; and that was, the taking of a Shipp but the day before
(wherein was a public Minister, named Forbas, sent by their King to the King of
Denmark) by the Ships of Suethen, guarding the Tools, which had seized the
same coming out of the Port of Dantzig; and had not only examined, but
contrary to the Law of Nations (that allows to such free egresse and regresse)
had also detained the same, which was not only injurious to them, but likewise
a disrespect to the authority due to the Mediators and their Principalls, in
whose favor the prorogation had been granted. That he therefore earnestly
desired them to put the adverse party in mind of their articles and promised
faith, and that they would forbear such hostilities, unless they would
constrain them to a requital and repulsion of injury with injury, as
consonant to the rules and law of Nature. Herein, the Mediators D. Radzivils
departure for Littaw.
promised their utmost favor and assistance, and so, taking leave of them all,
but particularly of Duke Radzivill, who was to begin his journey (for Littaw)
the day following, they returned to Risenberg.

About two days after, his Lorship being informed of the return of the
Suethes to Marienburg, went thither, and during three hours stay, used all the
arguments he could for concluding the Peace: but at the naming of Leistand the
Commissioners of Suethen became more fierce than at any time formerly, and the
Treaty appeared plainly to be in Terminis Desperatis. Neither could the other
Ambassadors prevail any further with them; so as nothing now remained save the
hopes the Mediators had of effecting a longer Truce: to which end the
Ambassador of great Britain sent unto them the day following showing that no
other refuge being left, he desired A longer Truce insisted on.
they would freely communicate with him about a longer Truce, that he might
accordingly deal with the Polanders, whom he intended to visit about the
same, at Marien Werder that afternoon: that, unless they had rather make
choice of war, this was the best advice he could now give them, whereunto (if
they so pleased) he would contribute his best endeavors: but if otherwise, and
that they did not approve thereof, he should be forced (by taking leave) to put
a period to the Treaty.

They after long deliberation, sent Lording their Secretary The Suethes
Declaration in point of longer Truce.
to his Lordship with their resolution, which imported, That the King of
Polands Titles pretended to the Crown of Suethen, as also to Leisland,
remaining in the same state they were at present, they would admit of a Truce
so it might be for a long time, to wit, an hundred years, and that they would
thereupon restore Prussia entirely; with which Declaration his Lordship repaired
to Marien werder, informing the Chancellor thereof the same night, as the next
day he did the other Polanders, who albeit they showed by many reasons that a
Truce was much The Poles re(...) to the King.
prejudicial unto them, said nevertheless that they would write to their King
touching the same.

It is not to be here omitted that amongst other arguments used by his
Lordship, showing the difficulty of regaining Prussia by War; One was, that so
long as the Suethes were strongest by Sea, they would be hardly beaten out of
it, and that they suspected nor feared none but the King his Master: but what
(said he) if he should be otherwise engaged, all his Neighbor Princes being
then in Arms: or if that were not, and that they might assure themselves of
any assistance they should desire, he then demanded, where they would assign a
Argument ^^^d by his Lordship.
Port capable of receiving our Ships, in case the Adverse Party (as was
suspected) would not restore Memeln, for (said he) to send a Fleet without
assurance of convenient harbor, which those parts scarcely afforded for Ships
of the burden of ours, would endanger both Ships and men, and yet not avail
those in whose assistance they were sent: and certain of their Cavaliers
making great vaunts, his Lordship instanced the example of the Low Countries,
and how difficult a matter it was to overcome and expel an enemy who kept
himself only upon the defensive.

I have set down this discourse, because these arguments used by his Lordship
to mollify the minds of the Parties, proved the seed-plot of those future
discontents which happened between his Lordship and them of Poland; for some,
there present, did relate those arguments to his Majesty of Poland, but in far
other sense (as appeared afterward by a Letter from a great Personage amongst
them who taxed his Misconstrued.
Lordship) as if he had deprived them of hope of any assistance from England,
albeit need should require; and had affirmed that the King his Master had
particular occasion for his Ships and Forces; and that he had also detracted
from their Arms, which so moved the King as he sent one of trust about his
Person to the Commissioners, for certain information: what satisfaction be
received is uncertain, but his Lordship (having notice thereof) endeavored,
not long after, in a conference with the King, to clear himself of those
imputations, where with his Majesty seemed satisfied; howbeit more coldness
was afterward seen in the countenance of his Commissioners; which, as he knew
no cause for, so, he could not but resent, as he did in his answer to the
forespecified Letter, wherein he touched that the sincerity of his proceedings
had not found deserved acceptance, and that the adverse Party, albeit more
often and vehemently contradicted (yea menaced with the displeasure of the King
his Master if they should not condeseend to equal conditions, the argument of
assistance with his Fleet having been a more powerful one to them then all the
consideration of the Polish Forces) yet they were so generously respective
toward the truth as (...) that what he so urged, proceeded only from his
earnest desire of effecting that whereunto he was there employed, for the
advancement whereof, he spared not to use to to either side, the most forcible
arguments that his judgment could suggest unto him. But I return to that from
which I have digressed.

The p(...)d delatory answer had so moved the Sueths The Suethes again in heat.
as they talked of nothing save a present departure, and a most just War
whereby to requite the contempts and delusions (as they called them) of the
Polanders, committing their cause to the Divine Justice; his Lordship who had
imparted the same, having lost his labor, certified those of Poland thereof by
an express, who in their answer protested their own sincerity, and accused the
obstinacy and arrogance of their Adversaries, alleging that in duty it behoved
them to acquaint their King with this new proposition of a Truce, whose mind
therein they expected by Saturday following, the 11/21 July, which having
received, they would immediately communicate unto the Mediators, and that done,
they would also be ready to depart. They likewise recommended again to his
Lordship their Ship detained (as aforesaid) in the Rode of Dantzig. These
things being showed to the Suethes they (changing their minds) were contented
to expect the Kings answer, until the Sunday Yet ca(...)ed and contented to
meet.
next, saying withal, that if any of them should go to Elbing in the interim,
they would return by the day prefixed.

The 12/12 July, the electoral Ministers, whom the Marquis Sigismund had
employed to Marien werder came to Marienburg (whither the Mediators were now
returned) bringing the Kings Declaration concerning the Truce propounded, which
was to this effect,

That albeit he rather inclined to a perpetual Peace, yet to The Kings conde
scention to a Treaty for Truce.
show his desire to Concord he would condescend to a Truce, so it were for ten,
at most for fifteen years, reserving unto himself a part of Leifland by the
River Dyna. Hereunto the Suethes would not consent, nor to any Truce, but with
these three inseparble Conditions.

1: The time to be for fifty years. Conditions of Truce propounded by the
Suethes.


2. The King of Poland to forbear (during the same) the Title of King of
Suethland.

3. A sum of money to be given unto them for the transporting of their Army.
These Conditions seeming intolerable, the Mediators vehemently contradicted
them, but finding the Suethes unmovable, they judged this Treaty for a longer
Truce to be likewise in desperate terms, and the rather because the Suethes,
taking leave at the same instant, retired to Elbing.

About three days after, his Lordship with the States Ambassadors repaired to
Elbing to salute the (newly arrived) General, Jacobus de la Guard, as also to
confer about the Treaty and about the Tolls: They met with the French
Ambassador returning thence, who showed them what new, and not small difficulty
he foresaw about the Title of Suethen, which was wholly to be omitted of the
Polish side, or that otherwise there New difficulty.
could be no Treaty, and that he was then meditating upon a journey to the King
about the same.

Herein his Lordship gave a short but very sound advice, saying, that the King
of Polands Title in things relating to Obviated.
Suethland might be concealed under an etc. etc. whereby the same was neither
totally excluded nor included. This counsel was pleasing both to the French
and Hollanders, wherewith they parted.

Being entered the Town, his Lordship visited the General, Conserence with the
General de la Guard.
and ceremonials being ended, they had a long conference about the fore-passed
Negotiation of perpetual Peace, and of the longer Truce in present agitation,
as also about the disorders and exactions used in the Tolls. The States
Ambassadors then (also) entering, they unanimously require a longer prorogation
of the Truce current: Afterward his Lordship propounded the Mean of
abbreviation about the Title by an etc. etc. as abovesaid, and as the main of
all, he desired that the number of years might be reduced to thirty, which yet
he thought that those of Poland would not, or hardly consent unto; neither
within the memory of man, could the example of any Truce be produced, exceeding
thirty years.

With exceeding humanity and courtesy did the General De la Guard reply to
the Mediators, assuring them that so far as His reply.
his authority or power could extend, he would endeavor and employ the same
for Peace and the public good, and said, that to the same end he would confer
with the Commissioners that very day, and certify the Mediators of their
resolution, early the next morning by the Commissary Nicodemie. Whilst there,
his Lordship received Letters by an express from the Commissioners of Poland,
containing that moved with the arrogance of the Adverse Party, who (as they
understood) were retired to Elbing, they were now ready to depart likewise, The
Poles retire discontented.
committing their cause to the Supreme Judge who abaseth the proud, not
doubting withal but that his Majesty of Poland, who desired but could not
obtain an equal Peace, being forced to take up just Arms, should prosper
victoriously: Withal they rendered thanks to the Mediators for their unwearied
pains, whereby they had obliged the King, the Commonwealth, and themselves in
particular; and (by way of Postcript) desired that their Procuratorials might
be restored unto them.

The French Ambassador received the like Letters at Marienburg, wherewith he
(being troubled) acquainted De la Guard by an express, that so the Suethes
informed of the resolution The Suethes more complying.
of the Polanders might obviate the same in time. The communication thereof
served (probably) to bring the Suethes to milder terms, for the next day, they
declared to his Lordship and the Hollanders, that they were contented to make
Truce for forty years, and absolutely to restore Prussia: Leifland they Their
conditions for treaty of Truce.
would wholly retain, as having won it by the Sword; withal, that the King
of Poland must forbear the Title of Suethen, that in order thereunto they would
prolong the cessation of Cessation of Arms prolonged.
Arms until the fifth of August, in which time the Mediators might, if they
thought good, repair to, and return from Thorn.

Herewith his Lordship and the Hollanders returning to Marienburg, set forth
the day ensuing for Thoronia, whither the French Ambassador was gone before;
the day of their arrival all the Mediators had successive audience, and jointly
pressing and obtaining the Suspention accorded by the Snethes, they certify
them thereof by Letters, referring the rest to relation. Consent^h unto by the
(...)ders. The Mediators consult with the King and ^enators of Poland upon
fifteen heads.


The next day all the Mediators, together with the Commissioners and certain of
the principal Senators of Poland, assembled before the King, to receive the
last resolve, which after long dispute the Parties and Mediators concurring,
was dilated unto these heads.

1. That the Truce should continue for twenty years.

2. That entire restitution should be made to the King and Kingdom of Poland,
as also to the Elector of Brandenburg, Duke in Prussia, of all places that had
been taken in Prussia by the Suethes, in the same State they now are, with the
Ordnance, and all other things belonging to the Crown of Poland, as Church
Ornaments, Bells, etc.

3. That neither at nor before departure ought should be exacted or taken away
from the Inhabitants, nor they to be burdened publicly, or privately.

4. That during the Truce the Suethes should possess all the places they now
hold in Leifland; yet so, that the River Evest should separate what belonged to
Poland and to Suethen, and should include one Castle (now not inhabited) named
Marien haus.

5. That all Rights and Privileges appertaining to Cities, Colleges, or
private persons, should remain entire.

6. That the Titles of either party should be couched in all Instruments,
Vladislaus 4. Rex Polinae, Magnus Dux Lith. etc. etc. and Christina Regina
Sueciae, Magna Princeps Finlandiae, etc.

7. The Customs and commerce in Prussia should return to the same state they
were in before the War.

8. A general Amestia.

9. The Ship lately detained in the road of Dantzig should be restored.

10. Exercise of Religion to remain in the state it was before.

11. That during the Truce, and within two or three years at the furthest, a
perpetual Peace should in the Parliament of either side be treated of, the
Truce remaining still unviolate.

12. That a time and manner should be settled for deduction of the Armies.

13. That the Tolls in Leifland should be moderated and reduced to what they
formerly had been.

14. That the administration of Justice in the Confines of Lithuania and
Leifland, and of those parts of Leifland belonging to Poland, to be as before.

15. That Security should be given as well by the King as by the States of
Poland and great Duchy of Lithuania, as also by the Elector of Brandenburg,
with the Cities of Dantzig and Conigsberg, that during the Truce they should
not permit any Ships to issue out of those Ports to prejudice or endamage the
Kingdom of Suethen, neither should they either by themselves or others attempt
ought in prejudice of the present Treaty.

Almost to this effect were the Conditions propounded by Addition made by the
Hollanders.
the Halianders, with addition, that for the better settling of firm friendship
and confidence between the two Kingdoms, and for a sure groundwork to a
perpetual Peace, an equal and honorable Marriage should be thought of sor
the King of Poland, which in their opinion could not be in a more Illustrious
and Royal Family, then if contracted with the eldest Daughter of the late
Prince Frederick King of Bohemia, Elector Palatine of Rhyne; that Family being
so Illustrated by Antiquity, Dignity, Nobility, and Princelyalliances within
and without the Roman Empire, as none other could be preferred before it: From
which and the Marriage of Queen Christina with some Prince of the same Family,
Children might proceed, by whose future Conjunctions the two Kingdoms might be
joined in assured friendship as before, and the said Marriage might likewise
produce other great advantages by reason of the affinity and alliance with
other Kings and Princes, by whom the differences and difficulties occurring
from either or both the Kingdoms internally or externally might be in time
remedied.

With the conditions, aforesaid, which were admitted by the King of Poland, the
Mediators made their repair to Marienburg; his Lordship reparing withal to
Elbing, whence after several conferences upon the said heads with General De
la Guard and the Commissioners, they all determined to return to Marienburg,
where the Mediators and the said Commissioners being assembled, the fifteen
conditions forementioned (whereby the King of Poland might probably be
persuaded to a truce) were produced, whereupon they being many, the Suethes
desired respite for consultation until the day following, which was granted:
the hour being come, and all parties convened, the Suethes exceptions to those
Articles were.

1. That touching the term of Truce they could not accept The result of the
Suethes upon the former heads.
thereof for less then thirty five years, and that by their Instructions they
were precisely tied to forty, that nevertheless they retracted five by the
approbation and permission of the General, whose authority, chiefly in
Military affairs, was of great consideration in the Kingdom of Suethland.

2. That the title of the Queen of Suethen should be expressed in manner
following, Suecorum, Gothorum, Vandalorumque Regina and Princeps haereditaria,
Magna Princeps Finlandiae, forasmuch as they could by no means give way, that
the Hereditary right of their Queen, most justly acquired, should be obscured
or overslipt, much less be taken away.

3. That a considerable sum of money was to be given for the deduction of their
Forces: That these three points being consented unto, the others might be
treated on, and happily concluded; withal that if the prorogation of the
Truce, which the Mediators desired, were to be continued for eight Cessation
conditional.
days longer, these three Articles by them expressed, were first to be agreed
unto by the Polanders.

The Mediators upon this answer take journey for Crowdentz (a Town of Prussia)
where the King with his Army had (as then) pitched his Tents. The next morning
early, at the Chancellours lodging, the Commissioners being present, with
several Palatines and Senators, consultation was held concerning the
particulars propounded from the Suethes: in the afternoon, all the Mediators
had audience together in the Castle of Crowdentz, the chief of the Nobility
being present, The Kings result.
the dispute continued from three until ten at night. The term of years,
after long controverting, was specified to be twenty five; but the Title of
Hereditary Princess, and the money demanded for deduction of the Army were
absolutely denied; the first, as prejudicial to the King; the other, as
dishonorable to them.

These things being afterward delivered to the Commissioners of Suethen, they
crave liberty of deliberation until the next day, and promise a timely answer,
which to hasten the more, the Mediators repair to them into Marienburg Castle,
where they declare that they could not admit of less then The Suethes reply,
more mild then expected.
thirty years, and that they would not abate a day, that in due regard to the
advice of the Mediators, they were contented that the title of Hereditary
Princess should be included under an etc. That concerning the Money demanded,
they sought it not directly from the King, but to them it was alike whether it
came from the Tolls or otherwise.

With this resolution, indeed more mild then was expected, The Mediators return
to the King: Audience appointed in the Camp.
the Mediators returned toward Croudentz; where the King being busied about
wighty affairs, their Audience was deferred until the next day, and appointed
to be in the Camp, the King having resolved to take a general view of his
Army, and was not unwilling that the Mediators should have a sight thereof.

The Army (Horse and Foot) being drawn into order, the A view of the Polish
Army.
first that presented was the Infantry, the greater part whereof was Natives,
commonly called Heyduckes, a people inured to hardship, strong and able bodies,
but not much accustomed to Discipline, some companies of strangers, various but
not many. The Horse consisted for the most part of Lanciers, Its constitution.
known there by the appellation of Hussars; braver men for personage, better
Horsed, nor more superbly Armed, can hardly be seen elsewhere: consisting
wholly of their Gentry, yet their Vassals not more to them then they to their
Captains obedient, Discipline.
howbeit elsewhere they account themselves their equals: Their Armor rich and
glistering with Gold and Silver, the Habiliments.
better sort wearing over it loose Mantles of Sables, black Foxes, Banthers,
and Leopards Skins; the Furniture of their Horses answerable and garnished with
rich Stones, which by the Horses motion make a pleasant terror. They are a
Courageous people, most violent in a charge, but once broken not easily
rallying, yet against the Turk and Tartarian, the Bulwark of Christendom on
that side, over whom (as formerly alleged by the Chancellor) King Vladislaus
had lately gained two famous Battles, and had it not been for the difference
ready to break out between them and the Suethes (as their General himself at a
Conference delivered to his Lordship) they might have driven the Turk back to
the very Gates of Constantinople.

A sadness it is, and sorely to be lamented, that the discords between
Christian Princes, who profess one God one Christ, should make them more
intensive against each other then against the professed Enemy of that blessed
name, whereunto they all profess their Baptization.

They were esteemed to be fifteen thousand Horse Effective, Number.
but by themselves reputed more, their Foot in all not exceeding six thousand.
After this (and indeed delectable) show ended, the King gave audience to all
the Mediators jointly: concerning the years, he would not add a day to the
term he had formerly prefixed: Nor did the other particulars propounded The
King inclining to War.
give him any satisfaction, so as he seemed enclining rather to War then Peace.

The day following his Lordship remained behind, the other Mediators returned
to Marienburg, and related the Kings resolution to the Suethes, who replied,
that for so small a matter as five years of time, they did not conceive that
either their principals, or the Adversaries, who stuck mainly thereat, did
intend to broach a bloody War; for the prevention whereof The Suethes not verse
to Peace.
they would by several ways dispatch two expresses into Suethen, and that
they might expect an answer within three weeks, during which time the Truce
might be continued, and in the interim, the other Articles might be discussed:
but if this were not approved, they (having no power to exceed their
Instructions) could not proceed, unless that being by the Mediators secured of
the concession of the other Articles by the Polanders. and the Truce continued
for eight days longer, they might thereby take the point into further
consideration.

These being related to the King in his Camp were not unpleasing; Cessation
prorogued eigh(...)s
and besides the eight days of Prorogation, a meeting was granted at Stumes
Dorff the 4. 14. August, provided the Garrison of Suethes (then at Stume) were
removed.

The Mediators, except the French who remained in the Leagure, returning back
to Marienburg, acquainted the Suethes, (who by a visit prevented his Lordship)
with what they had concluded: they willingly assented to the Prorogation and to
A meeting consented unto.
the pre-appointed meeting which was to be the day ensuing, as also they
restrained the Garrison at S^ume, by shutting up the Gates without any tumult
or disorder.

Thus, by the unwearied endeavors, and not without the Competition between the
Hollanders and those of Brandenburg.
exceeding toil of the Mediators by frequent journey's between the Parties,
the long intermitted meetings were resumed the 4/14 August at Stumbsdorff
forenamed; where, at the first, a new difference arose, between the States
Ambassadors and those of Brandenburg, the former (not willing to give the
others the least precedencie) refusing to come into the tent of the Marquess
Sigismund, which in all former meetings had been the place of the Mediators
joint resort and consultation.

The other Mediators, unwilling to make this competitionarie controversy
theirs; than which, nothing could be more impeding to the present affair, and
desirous to make the best use of time, proceeded unto the matter before them,
concluding that the fore-specified conditions should be indifferently
propounded to either of the Parties, whereby each might the better explain
themselves by adding or diminishing what they should think meet: his Lordship
went to the Sueths; the French and Brandenburgers to the Commissioners Articles
of the whole treaty exhibited by the Suethes.
of Poland: the former consented to most of the propositions tendered unto them,
but thought them to be over-breife and succinctly drawn; and therefore, for
the more plain understanding, they delivered to his Lordship the whole matter
of the Treaty comprehended in sundry Articles, wherewith he presently repaired
to the Polanders; and which, the French Ambassador and the Electoralls being
present, were instantly quoted with Marginall notes of such things as they
either rejected or added, or substituted in the place of others: and having
done, they referred the whole Referred to the King by the Poles.
to the Kings pleasure, consenting to meet again upon the second day ensuing.
and the Marginall Annotations being communicated to the Sueths, and overlong
to be then examined, were also by them deferred to the said meeting. One
particular was, by the last named, recommended to the Mediators in especial
manner, to be insinuated unto the other Party; to wit, that a Parliamentarie
ractification of what should be finally concluded, might be procured from
Necessary caution.
the Republike of Poland, as without which the Treaty would be invalid.
Hereupon the Mediators and the Parties returned to their several quarters.

Upon the day of intervall his Lordship visited the Sueths, and consulted with
them how to compound the competition between the Electorall and States
Ambassadors, that the public Treaty might thereby receive no let nor
hinderance; at last it was concluded that besides the Prince his Tent, an
Former competition removed.
other should be pitched, the choice whereof should be given to the Hollanders,
whereunto, his Lordship and the Commissioners of Suethland, by an express
visit that afternoon, persuaded them to condescend.

The Mediators and the Parties assembled now the second Parliaments
ratification insisted upon by the Suethes.
time, and the most urgent point of the Treaty consisting in the desired
ratification, the Mediators conceived it meet to clear that rub, the rather,
in that the Sueths mainely insisted, that without the same all the Treaty and
labor employed therein would be of no avail, because a means of retracting
there from would be remaining to the Polanders; These, on the other side
demonstrated the impossibility thereof, in as much as a Parliament could not be
called and held in less than four months; affirming withal, that the Kings
Polishreply.
ratification, with theirs and that of the Senators placed by Parliament about
the King, in the name of the Republike, would be sufficient, they having from
the same a full and absolute power of treating and concluding. That in the mean
time Prussia should be restored; and then a Parliament, for obtaining the
ratification from the States of the Kingdom, might be held in convenient time:
But the Suethes being herwith not satisfied, and it being unpossible for the
Polanders to give any other present security, the Mediators endeavored by all
means to remove this obstacle also, and propounded, that first, the forces of
each side should be dismissed; and next, that such places as the parties of
either side should agree Sequestration of places propounded by the Mediators.
upon might be, by way of Sequestration, consigned into the Mediators hands
until the ratification were procured; as also, that Pledges might be given,
and the like: Which propositions, Sequestration of places propounded by the
Mediators.
albeit they sounded harsh to either party, yet no other Medium being found for
the present, the Polanders, at their general desire, condescended to referr
all unto the King and to meet there again upon the third day following,
whereunto the Suethes did in like manner give their consent.

The day following, the French Ambassador, solicitous of his Masters particular
affairs, and how to divert a greater War from themselves, visited the Suethes
with whom he labored from noon until night by arguments, exhortations, and
entreaties, to yield either to a Sequestration of places, or to the giving and
accepting of Pledges, but in vain, and in stead of a simple denial received
an answer of a harsher strain, Viz. That they retaining Elbing and the Pillaw,
with the Fort on the The Suethes persist.
River Vistula, until the ratification should be gotten, would restore
Marienburg and Stume to the Polander, conditionally that something equivalent
alluding to the Memeln, were delivered unto them.

The appointed day for the third Congresse being come, and all parties being
met, at Stumbs-dorff, his Lordship went with the Hollanders toward the
Suethes, the French Ambassador, and Brandenburgers doing the like to them of
Poland. The Suethes Their reasons.
constantly urged and maintained the necessity of the Parliamentary
ratification; for (said they) if so be that one only City, Town, or Castle, is
not wont to be delivered over by a Commander without sufficient preceding
Provision for his Honor and the Garrisons safety, much more was the Honor and
Dignity of their Queen to be regarded in the restoration of an entire Province:
and if so be the Polanders before the said ratification, would have ought, as
Marienburg and Stume delivered unto them, something equi-polent thereunto, as
the Memeln they also expected.

On the other side, the Polish Commissioners swarve not one Impossibility
alleged by the Poles.
jot from their former allegation, to wit, impossibility, whereunto (said they)
none can be bound: neither would they consent to the division of places made by
the Suethes, much less leave the Pillaw in their hands, which as a most
commodious Port, would be no less prejudicial to them then advantageous to
the other side, as from whence a departure might be feigned, and a return made
at pleasure to their detriment and dishonor; and that it stood with reason and
equity, that seeing the Suethes would neither trust them nor their King,
themselves also were not to be trusted.

The Mediators hereupon deliberated amongst themselves of the means of
preventing a Rupture by this dissonance of the parties, but could not find any
on the sudden, and the Polanders were said to be preparing to be gone, when his
Lordship, very opportunely propounded that the parties should be moved
Seasonable proposition.
to refer unto the arbitration of the Mediators, the two main points in
question; to wit, the Parliamentary ratification, and the number of years, and
concerning those to stand to their decission: this was generally approved, and
the French Ambassador with the Electoralls repaired therewith to the Suethes,
his Lordship and the Hollanders doing the like to them of Poland, who were upon
the point of taking horse: The Commissioners of Poland, the Chancellor chiefly
made no difficulty of assenting to the Medium of Arbitration, but for one
scruple, which was, that their King having limited the number of years, they
had no further power of concession thereof, and that it must be referred to
himself, of whose consent they were not diffident, and so they only agreed to
a prorogation of the Truce for two days longer: The French Ambassador and the
Brandenburgers returning from the Suethes, related that Assented unto by the
Suethes
their consent unto the arbitration was (in a manner) obtained, and urged them
to assent thereto likewise, they having ofttimes formerly proffered the same in
things of greater moment: but more then has been already said could not be
gained from them; they only entreated that the Mediators Waved by the Poles.
would be pleased to repair to the King the day following (he being then in his
Camp at Rottenhoff near the Wistle) and use their joint persuasions. This, the
Mediators agreed unto.

They being come thither had audience altogether in the Regal Tent, but found
themselves far short of their conceived hopes, of gaining the prementioned
differences, about the ratification and term of years to be referred to the
Mediatoriall arbitration, whereto the Suethes had already accorded: for the King
of Poland would not (by any reasons alleged) be induced thereunto, and but
with difficulty consented to the The King of Poland averse to the proposition.
continuance of the cessation agreed upon, so stiff did he then show himself:
His Lordship argued the matter so far as his Legatoriall Office would permit,
and seemed to wonder that his Majesty of Poland should now reject the Medium of
Arbitration, when the Suethes, who before had always refused the same, were
brought thereunto, it having been frequently offered by his Commissioners; but
the King would give no ear, neither to these nor any other persuasions, used
either by his Lordship or the Hollanders to that effect; so as in the space of
four hours of the conference, nothing was obtained save that the King would
put the whole Treaty to be compounded by just and equitable means, at the
meeting (to be) the day following; whereunto the French Ambassador invited the
Suethes by Letter, his Lordship having refused that Office, as foreseeing they
would not come.

All the Mediators, with the Commissioners of Poland, were convened at the
accustomed place, and waited for the Suethes until two in the afternoon, about
which hour, Baron D' Avacourt (the French Resident in those parts) who by that
The Suethes excuse their not appearing.
Ambassador had been sent to hasten them, came with their Letters excusatory,
that the shortness of the time and absence of some of their Colleagues
permitted them not to be present at that meeting, but that they would not fail
to be there the day following, if it would so please the Mediators and the
adverse Party. The Commissioners of Poland being Complain of the Polanders.
advertised hereof would not (after long consultation) consent unto the
meeting, unless they were secured that two large Boats taken from them,
contrary to the cessation of arms current, by the adverse Party who kept the
Fort in the Wistle, should be restored unto them; and the other Mediators
staying still at Stumbsdorff, his Lordship and the Hollanders, taking that
business upon them, returned to Marienburg, where they urged the matter, and
as relative thereunto, moved in behalf of those that were sick in the Ship
detained in the Road of Dantzig, and last, propounded the next days meeting:
to The Suethes reply, and
these particulars, the Suethes made answer, That touching the Boats then
mentioned, they had purposely intercepted them, to hinder the laying of a
Bridge before their eyes to their exceeding prejudice; Natural reason allowing
to repay acts of hostility with the like: that nevertheless to gratify the
Mediators they would return them as also recommend to the Officers in their
Navy, the free egresse of them that were sick in the said Ship, that so the
Treaty, for things of so small moment, might not by them be hindered; and that
Compliance.
albeit they had not received hitherto from the Commissioners of Poland any
certain resolution, and therefore could not expect much good by the next days
meeting, they would nevertheless be present thereat. This his Lordship
signified in writing to the Commissioners of Poland, and requested from the
Palatine of Belzes, a larger Tent, wherein the parties and the Mediators might
assemble together.

His Lordship with the Hollanders prepared for the fourth meeting, so much the
more early, to take order for placing the Mediatoriall Tent in equal distance
from those of the several parties, and for the bringing of theirs nearer to
ease the Mediators of part of their trouble. These things set in order, the
Mediators concluded that to either party should be reiterated the Arbitration
of the aforesaid differences by the Mediators. Those of Poland, to whom his
Lordship and the Hollanders had Both parties stiff.
applied themselves, absolutely refused the same, and the Suethes appeared to
the French, and the Electorals less inclining thereto then before, and thus the
Treaty seemed to hang by a small twist: which caused the Mediators to labor so
much the more earnestly with the several parties. The Polanders professed
themselves willing to hearken to equal conditions if they were propounded;
neither was there any means left for compounding the difference of the
Parliamentary ratification, save only an equal division of the places that
were to be restored or kept: and at last not without the uncessant trouble of
the Mediators in goings between, they condescended unto these Conditions.

1. That the Truce should be for twenty six years; the Suethes requiring that
one year should be added by way of compensation for their consent to the
restoring of one half of Prussia, without the strickt necessary form of
Parliamentary ratification, whereof the Polanders gave no positive assurance,
but promised their endeavors for its procurement, the French Ambassador
offering also to repair to the King about the same.

2. That upon the Regal and Senatoriall Commissioners ratification Mutual
concessions.
only (until that of the Republike might be had) the Suethes should forth
with restore Marienburg, Stume, Braunsberge and Tolkemyth, with the greater
Island and the Territories to each of them belonging; and that Elbing, the
Pillaw, with the lesser Island and their Territories should still be retained
by them.

3. That the Fort made in the Wistle by the Suethes, and the Fortifications
made on the board thereof by those of Dantzig Cessation for four days.
should be demolished; hereupon the cessation was prolonged for four days.

Thus at last the averseness of the parties admitted of shows of reconcilement,
and by how much the Treaty had seemed near to vanish into nothing, by so much
the hopes of its happy issue began to beam forth more bright; whereunto the
Mediators thought it might be conducible that the parties accompanied by them
as at the first, should re-salute each other in the midst of the Village; that
so by a public contest for Peace and Concord by mutual interviews, the wished
end might be the more easily attained: neither was the motion unpleasing to
either of the parties, who now seemed equally desirous of Peace: This Ceremony
being performed, the Mediators Second interview of the Parties.
and the parties take leave of each other; and the vulgar not containing their
contentment, published the Peace as if already concluded.

In the mean time, the French Ambassador obtained of the King the grant of the
year demanded, whilst his Lordship and the Hollanders at Marienburg employ
themselves with the Sueths about those things which might further the
Pacification: Exhibition of Articles by the Suethes.
These promising to exhibit (at the next meeting) certain Articles of the
whole Treaty whereon the agreement might be perfected.

The time appointed for the fifth meeting, and all the parties being come, the
Mediators thought good that the Conditions (then exhibited by the Suethes as
fore-promised) should be communicated to the Commissioners of Poland: touching
the Substance, they were all one with the former, some only altered and some
added for their own avail, all the Mediators being present, they were
accurately discussed by the Polanders, not a word or title which might be
wrested to their prejudice left unexamined or corrected? The French Ambassador
quoting (in the Mergent) the several exceptions made by them. Therewith they
also tendered to the Mediators such things as they would have to be inserted:
importing, that forasmuch as the present Truce was chiefly ordained and
concluded, to Additions by the Polanders.
the end that during the same a perpetual Peace might be the more commodiously
treated and effected, therefore, within the space of two years next ensuing the
date of the said Truce, Commissioners should be appointed of both sides with
full power and instructions, to meet, treat and conclude the said general and
assured Peace, by the intervention of those Kings and Princes whom the Parties
should make choice of. And if the said Peace should not be then effected, the
same to be resumed within the next two years; and if not then, the like within
the two years ensuing, and so consequently, the Truce still continuing firm,
until the expiration of the twenty six years. Also that no Taxes or Customs
should be exacted upon The Truce to be for 26. years.
the River Dyna from the Inhabitants of the great Duchy of Lithuania, or the
Dukedom of Curland. That likewise, the Rights and Possessions of the Duke of
Curland should remain in the same state they were before the War. That in
like manner it should be lawful for those that had been exiled out of
Suethland or Leifland to return into their Country, and to recover their goods
and Inheritance; and that; if they should not like to abide there, it should be
free for them to sell or otherway dispose of their said Goods. That
Ambassadors, or Messengers, of either side, should have free egresse and
regresse. That the Fugitives of the great Duchy of Lithuania, the Dukedom of
Curland, and the Pilten Territory, or so many of them as should be found in
Leifland, should be restored, and so reciprocally. That four Ships
appertaining to his Electorall Highness of Brandenburg should be restored.
That there should be also freedom of Navigation from the Duchy of Curland.

These Conditions were showed to the Commissioners of Suethland by the French
Ambassador, and the Brandenburgers followed (soon after) by his Lordship and
the Hollanders; the Polish Emendations and additions (night now approaching)
are cursorily by them run over; and those appearing to be things but of small
moment, are referred until the next day, so as all things seemed to go forward
according to the general Hopes of amicable conclusion.
desire. One thing only bred some hesitation; the French Ambassador reasoning
(by way of discourse) about the restitution of the Roman Religion in Prussia,
urged by consequence, as from the Commissioners of Poland, the free exercise A
rub cast in.
thereof in behalf of those of that Religion remaining in Leifland: but that
also was remitted to be handled the day following; neither was it then
conceived that so much trouble would have ensued as that particular did
afterward produce. The Mediators and the Commissioners of Poland remained that
night in Stumbsdorff, the Suethes retired to Stume, the same being near
adjoining, that so they might begin the more early the next morning.

To this sixth meeting (if not rather a continuance of the French Ambassador
stickling for the Romish Religion in Leifland.
fifth) all Parties assembled, and the French Ambassador, the sole of all the
Mediators addicted to the Romish profession, took upon him the patronizing
thereof in Leifland, and growing zealous therein, earnestly pleaded that cause
with the Commissioners of Suethland; who, observing with what fervency he
pressed it, answered positively in the Negative, and gave these reasons: First,
that in their Instructions they had not one word touching the same, neither, as
they conceived, had their Principalls so much as once thought of it. Next, that
they knew not that there were any of the Romish Creed Positively refused by the
Suethes. and why.
in that Province, and therefore it was but a needless trouble to faigne things
that were not in being.

And lastly, that albeit some of that profession might be found there, yet they
could not for their consideration grant a free exercise of that Religion, the
Statutes and fundamental Laws of their Kingdom being expressly against it.

These passages were by the French Ambassador related to the Commissioners of
Poland, all of whom (but chiefly the Chancellor) took the matter hainously,
affirming, that The Poles insist
unless provision were made for the free exercise of Religion to those poor
Souls, whose Salvation (said they) they tendered more then the loss of all
Leifland, all the Treaty and the labor that had been employed therein would
turn to nothing. His Lordship and the other Mediators would not (at first)
intermeddle in that business, as not appertaining unto them; but finding the
same to grow so difficult as not to be easily composed, but rather likely to
overthrow whatsoever had been done before, they also thought good to interpose
their Authority, and the whole day being almost spent in arguments and hot
dispute about the same, they propounded unto the Polanders a draught for the
reconcilement thereof; if so be The other Mediators propounded a Medium.
that accepted by them, the Suethes could be drawn to give consent thereunto.

But here, because in the whole Treaty no one point was contested with more
sharpness on both sides, as also that none was more likely to have caused an
absolute dissolution thereof, and that the greatest difference in the several
means propounded for reconcilement, consisted for the most part in the
distinction of words and phrases.

I have thought good to couch the several forms, placing in the Mergent the
Latin wherein they were word for word then conceived, whereby the Reader may
with more satisfaction to himself settle his judgment thereupon.

The first therefore administered by the Mediators was in these words.

The Suethes shall permit unto the (Roman) Sueci, hominibus Catholicis in
Livonia toto induciarum tempore, cultum and ritum in privato permissuri,
nullamque in eos inquisitionem ut hactenus facturi, neminique qui Religionem
Catholicam professus fuerit, id ipsi noxae futurum.
Catholic in Leifland their Worship and Ceremony in private during the whole
time of the Truce, and no enquiry shall be made upon them as formerly, had
been, neither shall the professing of (that) Catholic Religion be a Crime or
prejudice to any person there for the future.

This form written in a Scroll, was by the Mediators delivered to the
Commissioners of Suethland, each of them adding persuasions thereunto, yet all
proved in vain, for the Draught was rejected, and night drawing on, an end was
made for that time.

The next day being the seventh, all parties assembling, the Arguments used by
the French Ambassador.
former dispute about the point of Religion in Leifland was continued, wherein
the French Ambassador employed his whole endeavors, sharply checking the
Suethes for this their cruel, and (as he termed it) unheard of way of
proceeding; setting before them how that the King his Master, at their late
Kings consideration, had granted to the Lutherans, even in Paris, the free
exercise of their Religion; which if they should obstinately persevere, and
that the matter so required, he doubted not but he might (by Letters) easily
disturb: but the Suethes, nothing moved with these threats, yea, rather the
Rejected by the Suethes.
more exasperated, replied that they were not bound to conform themselves unto,
or to be judged by the examples or reasons of others, but by their own
fundamental Laws and Statutes, which (without indangering their heads) they
might not swarve from, as they should do mainly by condescending to the form
propounded, which included not only private but public exercise also, by those
captious words, Worship and Ceremony; yet they professed that they would not
be Cultus and Ritus. Exemption from enquiry granted by the Suethes.
so severe as to make inquisition upon, or trouble the Catholics; but as
heretofore would permit them to enjoy their private liberty of Conscience.

The Commissioners of Poland were no way contented with this Declaration, as
well in regard (said they) that Religion without Worship, Rights, and
Ceremonies, due at Divine Service, was but (in a manner) a dead Image; as also,
that the liberty of Conscience enjoyed until then, by the Catholics there,
was indeed none at all, but a mere bondage, fear and trembling; during which,
neither could those who were forced to conceal themselves, celebrate, or
partake of the Mass, nor would their Children who should be afterward borne,
become initiated into their Church by Baptism. That Referred by the Poles to
their King.
yet, not to break off the Treaty, they thought good to refer this something,
which they esteemed as nothing unto their King, in a smuch as until this point
were settled, they could not proceed unto the other Articles; only at the
instance of the Mediators, by mutual consent of parties, the cessation was
prorogued for three days.

During the time of respite, the French Ambassador endeavored French Amb.
Solicitations Uneffectuall.
to bring the Commissioners of Suethen to more complying terms, showing the
just cause their Adversaries had, relating to the point in question; that from
thence only a most cruel War was like to arise, and that they would thereby
procure the hatred and the enmity of others: but all in vain, for in the space
of four hours he gained nothing.

The day prefixed for the eighth meeting being come, the Parties and the
Mediators assembled at the wonted Village, where the Commissioners of Poland,
authorized by their King, The former form insisted on by the Poles.
insist more mainely then before, upon the foresaid form of Covenant, in the
point of the Romish Religion; and for the more assurance, desired that the same
might be ratified under the Hands and Seals of the Mediators, and affirmed
that unless it were granted, there remained nothing but War, which (they
said) they esteemed to be so much the more just, by how much it was more
glorious to contest to the last gasp, yea even to embrace an honorable death,
for the liberty of conscience and Religion.

These things, with other like, being by them delivered; the French Ambassador,
earnestly pleaded their cause with the Commissioners of Suethland, and as he
was endowed with singular Eloquence, so he endeavored to move them, by the
strongest and most dexterous arguments he could, to admit of the foresaid form
of Stipulation: Yet the Suethes (inflexible in Again by the Suethes rejected.
their resolve) reject the same as captious and including under a specious
form of words, a free exercise of the Romish Religion which they might not
assent unto; and added, that they also should have thereby a most just cause of
War in maintaining by force and arms the liberty of Religion, which by the
Divine goodness they had obtained, and in conserving the Laws of their
Kingdom without violation, which it would be more dishonorable for them to
forego then if they had never had the same.

With this repulse the French Ambassador at first astonished, afterward chafed,
began to expostulate and to blame their hard heartedness, as he termed it,
but being unable to obtain any further, he (though seeming thereto unwilling)
takes a hopeless farewell, departing from them to the Polanders, whom his
Lordship and the Hollanders had, in the interim, assayed to persuade: Whilst he
related the last and absolutely negative reply of the Suethes, some of them,
being moved with indignation, spoke aloud the words of (War Bellum Bellum.
War) which albeit uttered within the Tent, were heard without, and (in a
moment) spread among their attendants, and it so happening, this being about the
time of departure, that the Suethes Trumpeters then sounded to Horse, the
Polish Lanciers (commonly called Hussars, of whom the Commissioners had for
their ordinary Guard two Troops, as the Suethes the like Number of Finlanders)
waxing suddenly and over-rashly enraged, Sudden tumult.
did set upon some of the meaner unarmed Suethes, who (happily to gaze upon
their strange Equipage) had advanced into the Village, and pursuing, hurt and
wounded some of them with their Shables; nor therewith contented, began to
gather into a body, preparing, as it were, for a more forcible onset upon the
Suethish Foot, of whom two Companies guarded their Lords Tents.

The tumult being heard, General Wrangle, who had until then contained
himself, seeing the disorder like to increase, from whence danger might ensue,
came forth of their Tent with a Partizan in his hand, and began to act his part
of a resolute Commander, as well as of a Politic Commissioner, and having
placed the Hors-men in order, but with a charge not to advance, yet if pressed,
to repay blood with blood, he went immediately to draw up the foot, so to be
ready if the contrary party should assail them. This unexpected tumult, as it
was strange, so it might have proved equally dangerous Threatening danger.
to the Mediators, engaged between the parties; as to the parties themselves,
both sides suspecting Treachery: Wherefore the Hussars being ready to make an
irruption with their Lances; the Suethish foot (on the other side) presenting
their Muskets, their Matches ready cockt, and the two Finland Troops (clad in
hard Iron) with their Pistols in like manner expecting the charge, his Lordship
and the Hollanders hastened to the Suethes, the French and Brandenburgers doing
the like to the Polanders, exhorting each side to desist from further outrage,
and to retire to their several residences.

The Suethes were obedient not only to the words but to the becks of their
Commanders; the Poles neither regarding commands nor entreaties, and hardly
enduced to forbear by the persuasions of the grave Chancellor who called upon
themby Appeared.
the name of Brethren, albeit at other times he was of great repute, as being
next in authority to the King: yet at last this tumult was appeased; the
Suethes departing, environned with The Suethes exasperated.
their Guards, wroth, and resolving to abandon the Treaty complained of,
reviled, yea, cursed the injuriousnesse and perfidious proceeding (as they
termed it) of the Polanders.

The Commissioners of Poland having caused their Troops The Poles purge
themselves.
to withdraw, made their address to the Mediators to purge themselves from the
preceding accident, protesting their innocence, and ignorance by whose
rashness the same had fallen out, whom they would nevertheless endeavor to
discover and punish. They professed themselves exceedingly grieved for the
trouble, peril, and apprehension they had undergone, and entreated them to
clear their innocence toward the adverse party, who (they conjectured) might
harbor a prejudice against them by sinisterous Suspicions.

Lastly, they desired, that a meeting might be granted the next day.

The Mediators willingly condescended, but for preventing the like evils in the
future, they desired that the T(...)ps might be restrained, and a severe
punishment denounced against such as should exceed their bounds. Taking leave,
the Mediators returned toward Marienburg, and his Lordship first overtaking the
Suethes, met the General De la Guard, who upon notice of the tumult, had
issued with some forces to assist the Commissioners if need should have
required.

His Lordship persuaded them to a meeting the day following and slighted the
disorder that had happened, as being a casualty not worthy of mention, but as
this was a wayfaring discourse it received no resolution, they seeming rather
to decline any present meeting, least that the bitterness being still fresh in
memory, the minds of each side might be exasperated, and thought it would be
better to try by Missives what would be the conclusion about the point of
Religion in Leifland. Hereupon his Lordship and the Hollanders agree to appoint
A conference between his Lordship and the Poles.
a conference with the P(...)sh Commissioners at the place where they had met
once before called Newendorff, which his Lord did signify unto them by writing.

In the mean time, as formerly the rumor of a Peace had been divulged, so the
last disorder had spread the noise of War, whereupon from several parts) the
Canon began to play very thick on both sides: but the Mediators fearing least
such fiery Hostility began.
flashes might prove the incendiaries to an unextinguishable flame, his
Lordship meeting the Commissioners of Poland at the place appointed, desired
them to abstain from such praeludiums, which the Suethes interpreted as a
commencement of hostility, least by the breach of Truce, the Mediators
(traveling about the public) might incur danger.

The Chancellor replied with a long Oration, resuming The former tumult
excused.
the excuses of the former days tumult; from thence he descended to the matter
in question, and produced Letters from the Colonel Articentkie, which affirmed
that he had been provoked by the Suethes. Whilst they thus argue, the French
Ambassador came also from Marienburg, who being desirous to finish the dispute
about the forementioned point of Religion, first endeavored to refute the
rumor that was spread, as if he had hindered the Peace when it was in a manner
at the Apology by the French Ambassador.
point of concluding; next he professed, that according to the zeal wherewith
God had endowed him toward his Religion, he had ever maintained the same, his
mere conscience not permitting him to abandon so just a cause; and lastly, he
enquired what the Commissioners had determined touching that particular.

Neither was this Apology wholly unnecessary, or the vulgar Digression.
opinion altogether improbable, for by reason of the strickt confederacy
between the King his Master and the Crown of Suethen, (...)way of mutual
assistance against the Austrian Family, it was conceived that he would from the
beginning be obnoxious to the designs of the Polanders, for which cause he was
the less desired by them, as one who to coroborate the friendship of that
forenamed Crown the more firmly to his Master, would undoubtedly advance the
interest thereof, which indeed he did so far as he might, without evident
blemish to the Impartiality of a Mediatoriall Dignity: But now the Treaty being
in a fair way of conclusion, and howbeit not for an absolute Peace, yet for a
Truce of so long continuance as would see many changes over-passe before it
expired, and the Crown of Suethen being freed thereby of all apprehension of
hostility from that side, might prosecute the War in Germany the more
intensively, and so be the more concurring with the designs of the King his
Master, and afford him the greater assistance by a more powerful diversion, it
was neither contrary to reason or policy, that he should endeavor at the last
cast to ingratiate himself into the favor of the Polanders, and to remove the
jealousies, they might have conceived, of his averseness toward their affairs;
and the rather because sundry advantages might be thereby derived, to the
advancement of the King his Masters Service, by the entertaining of Officers
and Soldiers, especially the strangers in the Polish Army, into his Masters
Pay, which he afterward assayed to have done, but with small success, the
Emperors Ministers, who also gaped after the disbanding of that Army
preventing him therein, by drawing Colonel Butler (by them made General Major)
with several Commanders, as well English and Scots, as Irish and others, with
most of the Infantry, into the Imperial Service, so to recruit the old, or
frame a new Army in Silesia.

For these and other considerations it may be (and was) conceived, that he
might not unwillingly cast in that Bone, the rather for that the business
being almost ended, and the Parties by how much nearer to peace in their hopes,
by so much the more affected unto it, so as they would not break off upon
slight occasions, not doubting, but that either by the Parties, or the
Mediators, a mean would be found out to make all even again: and if he were
not the first mover of that point, then which he could never have picked out one
more specious, or that could carry more luster, nor render him more gracious
with the Polanders, especially with their Clergy who bear a great sway in that
Kingdom, yet it may be supposed that by his forwardness therein, he animated
the Polanders to a greater pertinacy, and obstinate perseverance in that
contest, which was longer and more hotly continued then any other, neither was
any one more likely to have caused a final rupture. As to his pretended
conscientious zeal, albeit there can be nothing better then to retain a good
conscience in all things, yet the conscience of one man cannot be obligatory to
that of another, much less to a generality, and especially to their prejudice;
the same consisting of a man's inward disposition toward God and Man wrought in
him by that spirit wherewith he is acted; and therefore a man's private
conscience ought not to be instanced as an inducement to a State, in matters of
Religion, and especially of a different Creed.

But notwithstanding all these designs, there wanted but little that the King
having gotten such an advantage, had not, made use thereof to thwart all their
hopes of a reconcilement and to advance his own ends; for the Warlike Prince,
fortunate in all his former undertakings against his Enemies, and breathing new
Conquests; had (as was conceived) no inclination to the Truce, but rather
desired to have vindicated his pretensions to the Crown and Kingdom of
Suethland, by the Sword, seeing very well that he should not obtain the same
by Treaty. And as the Commissioners for the Republike of Poland, observing they
could not get a restitution of Leisland, whereupon they insisted at the first
as well as for Prussia, would make no general Peace; choosing rather a Truce,
after the expiration whereof their pretenses to Leifland were still the same,
even so, King Vladislaus perceiving that, as well by the one as the other,
there was little appearance of his regaining the Crown of Suethen, did equally
distaste the Peace and Truce, and was induced to a condescension merely by the
Potency rather then the persuasions of the Polish Senators; who bending wholly
to what was for the present behoof of the Republike, had little regard to the
particular interest of their Prince, a thing usual in Elective Kingdoms;
whereas the King was desirous to have recovered his (pretended) right by force
of Arms, seeing it could not be otherwise gained, whereby he might have assured
his Posterity of a hereditary Kingdom, in case they should come to be
preter-mitted in the Elective, as himself had almost been, and where the eldest
would not (alone) be assured of a Crown, but the younger likewise would be
secured of Principalities and Dukedomes, answerarable to the Dignity of their
birth, which in Poland they were not by any Right or Title: for these reasons
it may be conjectured that the King was not un willing to embrace any occasion
of a rupture, and even of late, by standing stiff upon sundry points of smaller
consequence, he had not obscurely discovered his mind; neither could he have a
more glorious pretense (as to them) then that of Religion; whereby also he might
reap another (and no small) advantage: to wit, the razing out of his Subjects
minds, especially those of the Clergy, an opinion they had conceived, that he
favored the reformed Religion, more then they desired he should, albeit that
surmise of theirs had no other ground then that they knew, those of the
Reformation had deserved better of him, at the time of the Election, then
themselves had done; yet this might be a motive to the King to make a clear
demonstration of his zeal to the contrary, by sticking so fast to this
particular whereon (indeed) he insisted most earnestly, and so far that the
Chancellor who at his first pressing thereof, did not think that ever it would
have come to that height, was more puzzled therewith then with any other point
which (before or after the same) came to be discussed in the whole Treaty, as
well how to satisfy the King, as to salve their own honor and prevent a
breach the same being feared by many, and was not undesired by some; but I will
now leave this and return to the matter from which I have digressed further
then I intended.

The French Ambassador having ended his Apology (the inducement to the former
digression) and successively gained a good opinion with the Polanders, howbeit
not without irritating his old Friends the Suethes, and being therefore the more
desirous to see an end of that controversy which himself had first broached,
did earnestly require from the Commissioners of Poland their final resolution
upon the point in question; after two or three hours spent in debate, the
Polish Lords agreed that another form should be conceived in writing, whereby in
place of the words Ritus and Cultus, liberty of conscience, and exercise of
profession should be inserted, as follows.

The (Roman) Catholics in Leifland shall enjoy liberty of their consciences
all the time of the Truce, neither shall any enquiry or animadversion be made
into them, and if any one shall exercise that Catholic Religion in private,
it shall be no Crime unto him.

Homines Catholices in Livonia toto induciarum tempore liberate conscientiarum
gavisuros nullamque in eos inquisitionem and animadversionem factum iri, and si
quis Religionem Catholicam in privato exercuerit, id ipsi noxa non futurum.

Hereupon the Mediators urged a prorogation of the Truce, which the
Commissioners affirmed they had no power to grant, but that within an hour at
farthest, by six swift Horses which stood in a readiness between them and the
Camp, then two Dutch miles distant, they might acquaint the King with this last
draught and the cessation required, and thereupon receive his pleasure; that in
the interim, the other conditions of the Truce (which had been intermitted
almost a week) might be brought again upon the Carpet: they were taken into
examination, and the Cessation of Arms for a day only.
tenth was in handling, some being added, some expunged, others corrected, when
the Courier returned with the Kings Letters, containing a cessation for the
next day only; during which, the King on the one side, the Suethes on the
other, might consider of the form last expressed: With this answer his Lordship
and the Hollanders returned to Marienburg, the French Ambassador went to
Sumbsdorff near at hand, there to expect what the Suethes would declare.

Early the next morning the other Mediators visited the Suethes, exhibiting
that new form of draught, beyond which (they affirmed) nothing was to be
obtained from the Poles: The second form rejected by the Suethes.
but they, having observed the word Exercise, which they conceived to be more
prejudicial and of a larger extent then the former, did utterly reject it,
calling the treating of the Polanders a mere mockery, whereunto not only
themselves, but the Mediators also were exposed, and that they were not only
provoked but enforced unto a War: This first heat being somewhat allayed, they
were contented at his Lordships instance to draw up three other forms of
grant, each gradually milder then the other; the first was thus.

Homines Catholicos in Livonia toto induciarum tempore, eadem liberate
conscientiarum and religionis qua hactenus sub imperio and jurisdictione S. R.
Majestatis Regnique Suecia gavis: sunt, gavisuros, nullamque in eos
inquisitionem and animadversionem factum iri, sisese ita gesserint uti hactenus
gesserunt, neque si quis Catholicam religionem in privato professus fuerit,
idipsi noxae futurum.

The (Roman) Catholics in Leisland shall enjoy during the whole time of the
Truce, the same liberty of their Consciences and Relegion that hitherto they
have done under the Sovereignty and Jurisdiction of the Queen and Kingdom of
Suethland; neither shall any enquiry or animadversion be made into them if they
shall so demean themselves as they have done hitherunto, nor shall any one
incur blame or prejudice for professing that Catholic Religion in private.

The second was more brief as follows.
Homines Catholici in Livonia gaudeant eadem liberate conscientiarum and
Religionis qua hactenus sunt gavisi nullaque in eos inquisitio and animadversio
instituatur quatenus sub imperio and jurisdictionis S. R. Majestatis ac Regni
Sueciae factum est si sese ita gesserint uti hactenus gesserunt.

The (Roman) Catholics in Leisland shall enjoy the same liberty of Conscience
and Religion they have hitherto done, neither shall any enquiry or
animadversion be made into them as has been under the Reign and Jurisdiction
of her Majesty and the Kingdom of Suethen, provided they shall so behave
themselves as they have hitherto done.

The third was yet more favorable in these words.
Homines Catholicos qui jam sunt in Livonia toto induciarum tempore liberate
conscientiarum and Religionis gavisuros, nullamque in eos inquisitionem and
animadversionem factum iri, neque si quis Catholicam Religionem in privato
professus fuerit, id ipsi noxae futurum.

The (Roman) Catholics that now are in Leisland shall enjoy liberty of their
Consciences and Religion during the whole time of the Truce, without any
animadversion or enquiry to be made into them, neither if any one shall
profess that Catholic Religion in private, shall it be prejudicial unto him.

These several forms were by his Lordship sent by an express to the French
Ambassador, who therewith speedily repaired from Stumsdorff to the King (then in
his Camp) toward whom he employed himself with all the efficacy he Rejected by
the King.
could; notwithstanding which, the three Draughts aforesaid being rejected, he
obtained a continuation of the cessation for two days only, whereof he
certified his Lordship by writing, promising a speedy return to Marienburg,
which he performed the next evening, and (together with the other Mediators)
repairing to the Suethes, he expressed his endeavors and the repulses he had
sustained in a long and elegant Oration; and at length their minds and ears
attentively listening, he recreates them with this last resolution of the
Polanders; to wit, that they had consented to the form last mentioned, the
word Devotion only inserted, instead whereof those of exercise and indemnity
were omitted, as by the form ensuing appears.

The (Roman) Catholics in Leisland shall enjoy liberty of their Consciences,
Religion and Devotion during all the time of the Truce, neither shall any
enquiry or animadversion in that regard be made into them.

Homines Catholicos in Livonia toto induciarum tempore liberate conscientiarum
and Religionis Devotionisque gavisuros, nullamque in eos inquisitionem and anim
adversionem eo nomine factum iri.

At first the Suethes seemed rather to refuse then to admit of The last form
propounded by the Poles:
the same, because they thought that in the word Devotion, there was some other
thing included which might be to them prejudicial and advantageous to their
Adversaries; yet they were contented to take the same into consideration until
the day following, with promise that they would then declare thereupon:

The Mediators, taking leave, imagined their consent as good as granted, but it
appeared otherwise, for the Commissioners of Suethen did early the next
Morning, by Lording their Secretary, signify unto them, that upon due
consultation, and a review of the Extent of their Commission, they could not
condescend unto the form last propounded which (covertly) employed nothing but
a free exercise. The Mediators Disrelished by the Suethes.
took this change in evil part, and complained that they were put to an
endless work, in that whatsoever they concluded was annulled and illuded by
one exception or other, wherefore they jointly affirmed that they would take
their leave and abandon the Treaty, whereof they advertised them by the said
Secretary.

Neither (probably) would they have been wanting to their resolution, if the
Commissioners of Suethland, seeing the Mediators about to depart discontented,
and the French Ambassador affirming that the word (Devotion) was to be
understood At length admitted.
of private exercise only, had not declined from their obstinacy and accepted
of the form last specified: only they requested his Lordship and the
Ambassadors of Holland Attestation desired.
to afford them an attestation under their hands and seals, that they had
consented but to a private liberty of conscience without inquisition to be made
thereupon and not to the free exercise of Religion, which the said Mediators
consenting unto, this difficulty also was reconciled at last, and hereof the
French Ambassador certified the Commissioners of Poland, desiring their
appearance the next day at the accustomed place, which the Suethes had likewise
agreed unto.

Stumbs-dorff (after a long intermission) saw now the ninth congregating of the
Mediators and Parties, who having concluded satisfactorily about the point of
Religion, thought Particulars insisted on.
good to continue the examination of the Articles begun at Newendorff with
those of Poland. Certain slight scruples were moved, but the chief dispute was
about the burdens and exactions which the late war had Introduced, as the
fortifications at Mountispitz. the abrogation of the Dantzig stample upon
cloth: the return of the English society to Elbing, the restoring to that
City of the Prussian Land-seal, with their prerogative of Session. The razing
of Mountispitz was referred to the decision of the question depending. The
abrogation of the Dantzig stample and the freedom of the English Society, was
earnestly disputed and pressed by his Lordship, whose part it was, as also a
part of his Commission, who clearly showed that the said Stample, being no
other than a Monopoly, had been fraudulently procured by those of Dantzig to
the disturbance of free trade, and to the great prejudice and hinderance of the
Merchants of great- Britain, Subjects to the King his Master, the fourth part
of cloth not being then transported which formerly had been to the no small
loss even of the Polish Nobility and Gentry, who had been accustomed to buy
such commodities at easy rates, and now suffered exceedingly thereby as
themselves affirmed, but to the immense gain of the Dantzigers, contrary to
the freedom of commerce, and to common reason which forbids that one man
should be enriched by the detriment of another.

The Brandenburgers and the Hollanders pressed (each) their interest. The
French Ambassador pleaded, in some measure, the cause of the Elbingers,
touching the Prussian Land-Seale.

The Poland Commissioners answered his Lordships proposition, by an
acknowledgment that the Dantzig stample upon cloth, granted by King
Sigismundus, was unjust, and several ways prejudicial; and promised to
employ their endeavors at the next Parliament for the abrogation thereof,
Plausible answer.
conform to their Kings promise to his Lordship: but they affirmed, that for
the present, they neither had power neither that any out of Parliament, could
be given them against an Act thereof, such as the grant of the stample was: that
as all Nations were bounded by their proper laws, so it likewise behoved them
to govern themselves by their Statutes; his Lordship was not contented with
this plausible answer, and indeed it was no more, but replied that the like
words had been given to Sir Tho. Roe formerly Ambassador there from the King
his Master, and to sundry other Ministers, who had pressed the same freedom he
now urged, for the English Merchants, from that oppression, and therefore
again instanced even the Truce it self, now in a manner concluded, as a maine
argument for that liberation; in regard that the country being thereby freed
from the inconveniences, and miseries attending War, it was not reasonable
that strangers, dwelling peaceably amongst them, and by whose traffic they
reaped profit should still groan under the burden of a yoke which themselves
acknowledge to be unjust, and that the same having been introduced as a
calamity incident, to the prejudice of the public, ought to vanish and end
with it is original, and therefore he earnestly moved that not only a bare
endeavor might be promised, but that a real abrogation might be obtained, and
that the same might be inserted in the Acts and Articles of the present
Treaty: yet all this was fruitless, for the Commissioners of Poland betook
themselves Ineffectual.
to their former refuge, (impossibility) against which all reasons were
invaled. They only assented to continue Cessation for three days.
the cessation for three days longer and to a meeting the second following.

These Passages were communicated to the Suethes, and the Marginall notes were
by them cursorily run over; whereupon those Commissioners, thinking it would be
much to their dishonor to abandon the Elbingers and their interest, earnestly
commended to the Mediators the care of the points above mentioned concerning
the Town of Elbing, viz. The abrogation of the Dantzig stample cheifely, and
the restoration of the Prussian Seal from which they assured them they would
not shrink: but night drawing on they reserved the Polish corrections and
exceptions to be scanned at Marienburg, and so consented as well to the meeting
as to the prorogation: and the next day, the Commissioners of Suethland, being
demanded their resolution concerning the Articles, deferred the same to be
produced at the meeting.

The tenth congresse being come, the Suethes exhibited their Articles in
presence of the Mediators, which were examined, and scanned for almost six
hours; some things being added, others taken away: but all other difficulties
were shadows in comparison of that about the forementioned Stample, for the
cancelling whereof his Lordship again endeavored with all his might, evincing
the Justice and necessity thereof by most forcible reasons and arguments, yet
unsuccesfully; His Lordship: insists as bef^^e.
for after a long and harsh expostulation, the Senate of Dantzig, some of which
body were always present, and not less vigilant in things that concerned
their Weale-common, hindered the same by such ways and means as were facile
and easy to that Opulent City.

And notwithstanding that his Lordship (but whether then or formerly is not
remembered) had urged, that in regard the diffierence in question merely
concerned the Merchants, Subjects of the King his Master, and the City of
Dantzig under the jurisdiction of the King of Poland, the Parties interessed
might be free to right themselves upon each other in vindication of their
Privileges and freedom of commerce, without offense to be taken by either of
their Princes; to which ours would subscribe: answer was made by the
Commissioners of Poland that their King could not abandon his Subjects; so that
in conclusion he obtained nothing but a reiteration of their former promise to
contribute their endeavors for it is abolition at the next Parliament: which
his Lordship seeming to doubt of by reason of the liberty of opposing by each
one who has Session and vote in those general assemblies, which rendered the
issue uncertain, albeit he made himself confident of the real performance of
their promised endeavors, the said Commissioners for his further satisfaction
were willing The Poles promise future satisfaction.
to assure him that their votes and fuffrages preceding as guides, the rest
would follow: his Lordship seeing that more could not be then obtained, was
forced to desist from pressing the same any further: he only insisted earnestly
that the said point of abrogating the stample might be inserted in the Regal
Mandates for the calling of the next Parliament, to be (with the other heads)
considered of in their preparatoriall conventions, or Land-dayes (as t(...)y
call them) for choice of deputies that so the result might not be longer evaded
by a Plea of ignorance or want of instruction touching the matter in question,
a thing usual amongst them: and this also was largely promised.

The point which came to be discussed in the next place, was the restitution of
the Prussian Land-Seale to the City of Elbing: after which, the deduction of
the army of the Suethes was handled, Neither did it cause small contention, for
the Suethes required that their forces might have free passage into Pomerania
through the Polish territory, they promising a strict observation of Military
discipline: the Commissioners of Poland would have them (will they, will they)
to depart Transport of Forces.
as they came, by Sea: all arguments being used, and no mean of compounding
found, it was (by them) referred to their Kings determination, from whom they
might expect an answer of their letters the next day. The Mediators remained
in the village that night to ease themselves, their servants and horses of the
daily travel.

The next day being the eleventh Congresse, the Regal resolution was expected
until ten of the forenoon; and not to And other points discussed.
lose time, the foresaid difficulties being set apart, the other Conditions
were taken into discussion by either of the parties, by reason that the King
being gone to Dantzig, it was conceived his resolution would hardly be brought
in three days: The Articles for the free return of the exiled Suethes living
in Poland, into their native Country, as also the restitution of their Goods
movable and immovable were that day transacted, concerning which the Curious
are referred to the Articles of the Treaty.

Upon the day following which made the twelfth meeting, the Mediators proceeded
with the parties to the examination of the Conditions remaining, which caused a
new scruple with the Suethes, by reason of an uncertain rumor that Duke
Radzivill, great General of Lithuania, had lately upon the expiration New
Scruple of the Suethes.
of the first Truce made entrance into Leifland, and taken certain places and
Towns: The Suethes, who had concluded the Article about the retaining of
Leifland according to the form of the former Treaty; That each party should
possess the same during the Truce in the same manner he then possessed it,
desired of the Mediators that in regard the form aforesaid was in general and
obscure terms, whereby they Demand thereon.
might sustain prejudice, a clause might be added, that if any places in
Leisland had been taken of either side during the present Treaty, they should
be restored.

This restriction seemed strange unto the Poles, yet affected them rather with
laughter then anger, they solemnly affirming Answered by the Poles.
that they were ignorant of what was done in Leifland, and that they did not
believe the Duke to have emade a progress so advantageous as was vulgarly
reported: but alleged withal, that the Conventions ware wholly repugnant to
that clause, and that what had once been concluded by agreement ought not to be
altered; that for them, in case they had been so fortunate to restore those
things they had obtained by a favorable chance of War, would expose them to
the scorn of all men. The Mediators (that they might make a timely remove of
this rub) remonstrated, that forasmuch as the first prorogation of the Truce
had beeen continued from the month of July to that present of August from time
to time, by the consent of parties, it was no less to be understood for a
cessation of hostility in Leifland then in Prussia; and that they had ever
believed, according as it had been reported unto them, that Couriers had been
from time to time dispatched into Leifland to that effect. That if nothing but
the truth were affirmed, the request of the Suethes seemed unto them wholly
consentaneous to reason and to the public faith given, so oftentimes Judgment
of the Mediators.
reiterated; and that they therefore earnestly entreated them not to go upon
captious advantages, showing that they had been already enough and overmuch
troubled about the precedent differences.

The Commissioners of Poland being moved with these remonstrances, yet having
no power of themselves to dispose of Referred to the King.
the matter, they referred it also to the King, whose pleasure therein they
desired to receive: The other Articles were afterward from noon to night,
thoroughly discussed; and therein amongst other things, the Polish Lords
earnestly urged, that the first condition of their side concerning a Treaty for
perpetual Peace, during the present Truce, to be appointed at a certain time
and place (as has been before expressed) might be included in the Acts of this
Treaty, with sundry other things formerly by them exhibited. Lastly a
Prorogation of the cessation was agreed unto for four days.

The meeting was resumed the day following, being the 13th. and therein the
Commissioners of Suethland vigorously opposed the inserting of the foresaid
Article into those of the present Treaty for Truce; chiefly for this reason,
that the Treaty for a perpetual Peace having been already deserted, and in
lieu thereof this Negotiation of Truce undertaken, they could not as then say
ought thereto; and therefore seeing that their Commission of treating about the
same was expired, they could not admit of any particular mention thereof in the
Articles of the present Treaty, nor prefix any place or time; but added that
forasmuch as they certainly knew their Queen would never be averse to such a
Treaty, they consented to a general mention thereof, such as had been in the
former Truce for the six years now expired.

This distinction being intimated to the Polanders, they were Other
difficulties composed.
somewhat chafed, but his Lordship propounding that either the Duke of
Courland, or of Pomerania might be entreated to take the matter on them as
Sollicitors or Intermediators; their intervention was not unacceptable to those
of Poland, nor the addition made by the Suethes, that in case the Treaty of
perpetual Peace should not succeed according to the general wishes, either at
the first, or so often as it should be undertaken, the present Truce should
(notwithstanding) remain firm and unviolable until the end of the term
prefixed by these Articles.

The Kings answer concerning the three forespecified points; to wit, the
Prussian Land-seal, the way of Deduction for the Army of Suethes, and the
restitution of places (if any) taken in Leifland during the present Treaty, was
not yet come, so as the Mediators being enforced to patience, betook themselves
to their several Retreats.

The fourteenth meeting was now come, but not the Kings answer, in the mean
time the Mediators endeavored to agree that point of the deduction of the
Army, but could not. The Polanders refused the same for these two reasons
chiefly; First, that by granting it they should seem willing to give way to
the prejudice of those whose Lands they should pass through, perhaps even to
their ruin, through the insolency of Soldiers in their March,
notwithstanding any Order or command to the contrary: the promise of strickt
observation of Military discipline by Commissioners deputed thereunto, they
conceived to be a fair color but not a safeguard sufficient to prevent loss
or injury; much less any assurance thereby of competent satisfaction:
Secondly, that by this means they might offend other Princes, but mostly the
Emperor, to whose prejudice it would turn. The Suethes on the other side,
showed, that they had not half the Ships that would be needful to transport
by Sea so great an Army as theirs, which they computed to consist of (with
their Garrisons) two and twenty thousand Effective: but that if they were
supplied of Shipping, either by the Dantzigers or others, they would willingly
take that way.

After this dispute, whereby nothing was gained of either side; the Polanders,
at the Mediators request, sent other Messengers to hasten the Kings
declaration, which yet they could not expect that day, and therefore the
cessation now Cessation continued one day only.
near expiring, it was thought good to continue the same one day longer only;
so sparing of time were those of Poland, by reason of the great charge they
sustained in retaining the Army, whereupon each Party retired, and the meeting
was deferred until the second day following.

The fifteenth Congresse was now come, and with it the The Kings resolution.
Kings resolution, which was delivered to the Mediators by the Commissioners of
Poland in this manner. Touching the Prussian Land-seale, there should be
inserted in the seventh Article which made mention of conserving the rights,
privileges, and Customs of Elbing, that he would maintain the same as in
former times it had been, both as to the Seal and Session (but with this
clause) after they had tendered the due Oath of Fidelity to his Majesty.

Concerning the restitution of places in Leifland, if any had been taken during
the present Treaty, That one Article should be drawn up for each Party to
possess Leifland as they had done during the last Truce. For the removing of
the Concerning remove of the Army.
Army, it was consented that the forces of each side, except those Garrisons to
be retained until the Parliamentary ratification were procured, should be
deducted out of the Province by such a time as between the Generals should be
agreed, and that the Suethes were to return by Sea, unless that in the time
to be set for their departure, sufficient Shipping could not be found,
especially for the Horse, in which case a free (but speedy) undisturbed passage
by land into the Territories subject unto them, without damage of the
Inhabitants (mediatly or immediately) Subjects of the Kingdom of Poland, should
be permitted: the like to be observed if any of the Suethish foot should be
disbanded, conditionally that present justice should be administered by the
Officers for loss or injury any way sustained; which was nothing else but a
conniving at that Armies passage, wherein the Polonians carried themselves
circumspectly, not to suffer the same to march with Colors flying, but rolled
up: Not by whole Regiments but by Troops or Companies, so to remove suspicion
or envy from themselves.

To this, the Suethes, yet with some reluctance consented, as Accepted by the
Suethes.
also to certain other Articles touching the Polish interest, as the transport
of Merchandises down the River Dyna without molestation, the ancient customs
and payments observed; as also the restoring (when required) the Subjects of
the great Duchy of Littaw, and of the Dukedom of Courland, with those of
Poland that should be found in Leifland: and thus at last (not without the
indefatigable labor of the Mediators) the things of greatest concernment were
agreed upon between the parties: there only remained that in the next days
meeting the Articles should be reviewed, compared, and signed.

Upon the sixteenth resort all the morning was employed in reviewing and
transcribing the Articles, which being done, the Commissioners on both sides
being accompanied by the Mediating Ministers, were brought into the
Mediatoriall General meeting of Mediators and parties in the Mediators Tent.
Tent, and there (with the Mediators) took their Stations without prer^gative
of place, on each side of a Table that had been purposely prepared; where the
Articles and Conditions of the Treaty were read over from the beginning to the
end. Those of Poland urged the inserting of that ceremonial Article, that the
Emperor, the Duke of Bavaria, etc. might be included in the Treaty, as had been
done in the last six years Truce, the Suethes affirmed the same to be
altogether needless, yet (at last) consented to insert, That if any Christian
Potentate, or Prince, of either part, should desire to be comprehended within
the present Treaty, they might have admittance, provided that they did declare
themselves within five months, accounting from the signing of those presents.

His Lordship objected against the 14. Article, concerning the Objection made
by his Lordship.
restoring of the ancient commerce, as being over particular, and regarding the
free commerce and traffic between those two Crowns and Kingdoms only,
without any consideration of the public concernment of other Nations, which
nevertheless had no small interest therein, and insisted that (in the Latin)
the same might be corrected by interposing the conjunction (Et) which also had
been promised by the Sueths, but his Lordship finding their Copy likewise
defective in that particular, did not spare, even in that public convention,
to tell one of their Commissioners, that he had deceived his expectation and
trust. To his Lordships instance, the Commissioners Waved by the Poles.
of Poland replied, that the present Treaty was between them and the Suethes
only, and not with other Nations, who (if they had ought to negotiate) might
elsewhere discuss the same, and that it was not to be confusedly intermixed
with those Treaties. His Lordship made return, that the point in question was
not a confused intermixion in the Treaty, but a main dependent thereupon, in
regard that the disturbance of Traffic with other Nations had proceeded from
the dissension between those two Crowns, and ought therefore (of right) to be
restored to its ancient freedom by this League of Peace: yet this or what else
he could allege availed not; For the Parties were now bent to agree, and the
Conditions in a manner concluded; neither would they by insisting upon things,
extraneous to themselves, run into the hazard of a breach: and the rather,
because the Dantzigers, who were Potent on the Deserted by the Suethes.
Polish side, and saw how much this concerned their Stample, did mainly oppose
it. On the other side the Suethes deserted the same, albeit that (formerly) in
their care of the Town of Elbing, they had recommended it to be insisted on by
the Mediators, as an Article (Sine qua, Non:) Neither had the French Ambassador
any interest in this Article, or the Brandenburgers likewise, nor the
Hollanders not much in comparison of us: So that his Lordship, not able to
carry it alone, was constrained to desist.

It is here observable, that his Lordship discoursing with Precedence of
nomination challenged by his Lordship.
the Polanders in their own Tent, concerning the precedencie of nomination to
be inserted in the preface of the Articles, which, according to right of
intervening he challenged as due to the King his Master, by whom his first
repair had been directed toward their King; they declined the same on pretense
Declined by the Poles.
of its being contrary to the custom of their Cancellarie, which (said they)
always gave the precedence to the King of France, where from it was not
lawful for them to swarve. His Lordship taking this some what harshly, told
them (and briefly) that as to the couching of the preface he must leave the
care of it to them, yet he desired they would be cautious of discontenting a
Prince their friend, who had given proof thereof in sundry occasions, and
particularly in that before them.

Hereupon the parties according in all things, assembled in a confident and
friendly manner in the Mediatoriall Tent, to confer (even without them) of some
things more particularly: after which there remained nothing but that the two
Generals Conigspolskie, and Jacobus de la Guard, should meet and treat touching
the time of the restitution of places, as Marienburg, Stume, and Braunsburg, as
also about the deduction of the Army; whereupon the Treaty, when signed, would
at last be finally concluded: both which points were deferred unto the day
following, and concerning the attendants of the forenamed Generals, it was
agreed of either side, that each should not exceed the number of fifty
followers.

The seventeenth meeting ensued, or rather a continuation Contest for
precedence of subscription.
of the former, in which some contest happened between the Ambassadors of Great
Britain and France, about the Subscription, and the like campetition also
between the Electorals and the Hollanders, each party being willing to
vindicate the precedence in the right of his Prince or Principals, so as the
former Mediators did now seem to stand in need of the like. The dispute Meeting
of the Generals of each side.
about the same was not small, but whilst it was in hottest agitation, the
Generals of each side attended with the forespecified number, in great
Magnificence arrived at the place of treaty, and each accompanied with the
Mediators, did (soon after) salute each other in the open Village near unto the
Mediatoriall Tent; wherinto they entered with the Commissioners of the several
Crowns, by several ways, and therein consulted about the restitution of
places, and the deduction of the Army.

Between them it was agreed, that the Suethes, receiving the And accord.
Regal ratification of the Treaty forthwith, as also security from the
Commissioners of Poland authorized by Parliament, the same should be ratified
by the States at their next convention, should restore Marienburg with the
greater Island, Stume, Braunsberge, and Tolkemyth, with the Territories
belonging to them, into the hands of the Commissioners of the King and Kingdom
of Poland, the Garrisons being first removed: and that the Heught and
Junkertreill should be razed in the presence of certain Deputies of each side,
leaving the ground and goods to whom they belonged. That the Armies of either
side should be sent away within fourteen days, or therabouts: But that Elbing
with its ancient bounds; the lesser Island with the Fortifications raised
therein, as also the Pillaw and that part of the Nering thereto appertaining,
should remain in the possession of the Queen and Crown of Suethen, until they
should receive the ratification of the States of Poland, and thereupon to render
up the foresaid places within fourteen days after the receipt thereof; and that
the Garrisons should be removed without any damage to the Inhabitants; with
this condition also, that all the Fortifications made at Elbing should remain
in the same state they then were, and in the same custody as before the War.

The Commissioners of Poland having desired an attestation from the Mediators,
touching the form of concession, by the Sueths for the private permission of
the Roman Religion in Leifland, and the French Ambassador being unwilling to
sign the same in reference to the competition between him and the Ambassador
of Great Britain, the Polish Lords were contented to accept of a
testification from his Lordship and the Hollanders only, which they granted,
the same importing; That they Attestation granted to the Polanders by his
Lordship and the Hollanders.
did thereby testify and make known to all whom it might any way concern, that
the Lords Commissioners for the Queen and Kingdom of Suethland had really
covenanted and permitted that the Roman Catholics in Leifland, should, during
the whole time of the Truce, enjoy liberty of Conscience, the Roman Catholic
Religion, and Devotion in private, nor any inquisition to be made, or
punishment to be therefore inflicted: and that the present attestation was given
with the knowledge and express consent of the forementioned Commissioners, in
confirmation whereof they had thereunto affixed their hands and seals But in the
interim, no Medium being found whereby to compound the competitions of the
Mediators, that matter was referred until the day following.

The eighteenth meeting for the final conclusion being now come, the Lords
Ambassadors of Great Britain and France renewed their dispute about
precedence; which increasing in difficulty and intricacy seemed to hinder the
parties (who Competitions renewed between the Mediators.
were now reconciled and friends) from concluding and establishing the Treaty;
for the avoiding whereof his Lordship was pleased to declare himself in two
ways to the Commissioners of either side; first, that the difference might be
balanced by two Copies of the Conditions of the Treaty to each party,
reciprocally signed by the Mediators. Or secondly, that there should be no
Subscription or Signature by any of the Mediators, as had been done in the
former Treaty now six years past. That as to the Preface he committed the same
to them, but in discharge of his Legatoriall duty, he again admonished them to
beware of giving any offense unto the King his Master. By Mediatoriall
subscription concluded unnecessary.
the Commissioners of either side it was concluded that the Mediatoriall
Subscription was not necessary, and that the Signature of the parties would be
sufficient in this as well as in the former Treaty, but that the Mediators
might if they would so be pleased, give an Instrument in writing apart, for the
more ample verification thereof.

As to the preface, the Suethes declared in favor of the French, that it had
ever been the Custom of their Crown to give the precedence in nomination to
the Regal Ambassador who first addressed himself to them. With this answer
his Lordship: opposed the style (pretended) of the Polish Cancellarie; but was
by their Commissioners, answered rather with silence than by arguments.

The French Ambassador did mainely insist that he might The French insists on
subscription.
subscribe the Articles alone; but, that he might not (by contest) seem to be
the sole obstacle of the Treaties confirmation, he repaired to his Lordships
quarter, with whom, when no persuasions to that end would prevail, after a
long discourse of the dignity and precedencie of Kings, he consented to the
waving of all Mediatoriall subscription. Afterward declines it.


His Lordship nevertheless, to be secured of all sides, revisited each of the
Parties, and in friendly manner desired them that as themselves had declared,
and as he had newly concluded with the French Ambassador, no Subscription of No
subscription of Mediators promised.
the Mediators unless in the way by him propounded, might be admitted,
whereunto they all accorded and gave their word.

This difference about the subscription being removed, The parties meet to
conlude.
the Commissioners of each side convened in the Mediatoriall Tent to the
performance of the last act viz. the Signing of the Articles; whom the
Mediators followed to be present at the reviewing of the same; least ought
might be transacted wherein their Principalls might be concerned.

In the reading, the preface was ommitted whereby no The Articles signed.
offense might be taken, and that work being ended, the Mediators were in most
respective manner desired to retire and leave them to sign alone: which they
did; and upon their coming forth were by the Mediators congratulated, for that
happy conclusion.

Thus, at length, by the blessing of God upon the infatigable toil and
industry of the Mediators, this great and difficult work, after so many
desperate-seeming ruptures, was Public rejoycements.
brought to a happy issue in twenty and four several meetings (accounting ab
initio) and couched in so many several Articles, which having been for the
most part already touched, are forborne to be here inserted, and the curious
referred to the printed Acts.

The whole was read, allowed, signed, and confirmed by the respective
Commissioners of the interessed Parties the 2/12 of September, An. 1635. and
the joy thereof was conceived to be so great that public acclamations were
every where heard. At Marienburg the whole Ordnance (about the Town and Castle)
was discharged upon the return of the Mediators with the Commissioners of
Suethland. Only the French Ambassador remained in Stumbsdorff to (refresh
himself as pretended, but indeed to) send an account by express unto the King
his Master.

The remainder of that day was by his Lordship and the Hollanders, employed in
giving to the Commissioners of Suethen His Lordship and the Hollanders give to
the Suethes an attestation concerning Catholics in Leifland.
the attestation desired by them concerning those of the Roman Profession in
Leifland, which had formerly been so hotly disputed, and was by them given to
this effect.

That whereas there had been long and great dispvte concerning the Roman
Catholics in Leifland, at length, the Queen and Crown of Suethland, at the
instant urgencies of the Commissioners of Poland had condescended so far as to
permit to the Roman Catholics in Leifland, liberty of Conscience, Religion,
and Devotion in private; but least that from those words ought might be
inferred, contrary to their intention in that point, over and above the mere
liberty of conscience by them granted, or least that there might be pretended
any Priestly exercise either public or private, they the said Commissioners
had many times in their presence excepted (by protestation) against all the
forms including any word of exercise, either tacitly or expressed, and that
the Lord Ambassador of France, (who had most earnestly labored therein) had
propounded the same, and the Commissioners of Poland had assented thereunto; in
which Form (or Draught) no mention of exercise was made, that so they might by
some fair way explicate and free themselves from that contention: This, they
the said Mediators did witness and confirm to all whom it might concern,
under their hands and Seals.

Upon the day following the General of the Suethish Forces, His Lordship
invited by the Suethes.
Jacobus de la Guard, with the Commissioners of that Crown, did visit his
Lordship in a way of thankful acknowledgment for his great pains and
endeavors employed in the Treaty, and afterward did the like to the
Hollanders, concluding with a courteous invitation of them into the Castle that
evening, where their entertainment was answerable to their Dignities.

The next day, his Lordship went to the Polish Leager, and He takes leave of
the King of Poland in his Camp.
was soon after followed by the Hollanders to take leave of that King, of whom
he had public audience in his Tent, the great Chancellor and the other
forenamed Commissioners being present. That Ceremonial Complementive farewell
lasted not half an hour, wherein it was observed, that the King did not show
the same cheerful countenance to his Lordship that Coldness discovered.
he had formerly done, both at his first repair, and during the Treaty; and the
Commissioners likewise expressed less courteous respects then at former times,
which his Lordship took notice of, but knowing himself to be free from any
desert thereof was the less troubled thereat.

His Lordship (whilst in the Camp) was visited by the Wayvod (or Palatine) of
Belskie, whom, according to the Kings words at parting, he believed to have
been sent with something in Commission, but found it to be only a private
Complementall farewell.

In the interim, the States Ambassadors, as also the French French and
Hollanders take leave.
Ambassador who had repaired thither from Stumbsdorff, took likewise severally
their leave, but had each a longer audience according to information, and
returned the next day to see the Army, which then was to be reviewed and drawn
up into Battalia. His Lordship stayed that night in the Tent of Col. The
Armyreviewed.
(afterward General Major) Butler, as well to see the Army; as also, that he
might there be ready to receive any further expressions, which according to the
delivery at parting, he expected from the King.

In the manner forementioned, was transacted and concluded the Treaty for
Truce for twenty six years (commencing in September 1635) between the two
Crowns of Suethland and Poland. What passages did afterward befall, by reason
of Reference to what follows.
the French Ambassadors signing the Polanders Counterpane or Copy of those
Articles, at that Kings instance, by whom, contrary to former President,
forementioned agreement. and stipulation, they were to that end tendered unto
the said Ambassador, as himself afterward acknowledged, as also great
Britains Ambassadors expostulation, with some of the Polish Ministers in
reference thereunto, and the difference answering thereupon between that King and
his Lordship, are couched in the few subsequent Pages, wherein his Lordships
life and death are commemorated, which now follow for a conclusion to the whole
matter.

A BRIEF COMMEMORATION Of the LIFE and DEATH OF SIR GEORGE DUGLAS KNIGHT, LORD
Ambassador Extraordinary from the late KING of ENGLAND, For concluding of
PEACE or TRUCE BETWEEN SUETHLAND AND POLAND.

An. 1635.

By J. F.

LONDON, Printed for Hen: Twyford and Tho: Dring, 1656.

A brief COMMEMORATION OF SIR GEORGE DUGLAS Knight, Ambassador Extraordinary
from the late King of Great BRITAIN, in the year 1635. for the Treaty of
Peace, between the Crowns of POLAND, AND SVETHEN.
HAVING deduced the passages of the preceding Treaty of Pacification between
the two Crowns before mentioned, Preface concerning his Lordship.
it may be not improper to annex something concerning that late honorable
Person, by whose indefatigable endeavors that good work was, in great part, so
happily effected: And the rather, in regard his name (albeit both ancient and
honorable) denotes him to have been of a Neighbor Nation, and that there are
but few now living who can remember to have known (I may say, scarce seen) his
person appearing, in any way Considerable, in the Court of great Britain, by
reason of his travells in sundry years Militiating abroad, before his said
employment, and of his death immediately ensuing the same, which prevented his
return.

He was Native of Scotland, and descended from that branch His birth.
of the honorable house of the Duglasse entitled the Baronnie of Torthorrell,
being Son to Sir George Duglasse Knight, whose Father (whilst living) had
been, and whose brother then was Lord thereof. His Mother was of the house of
Dundass, a Family of good repute in that Nation, as being both Ancient and
Noble. His Father came into England either with, or soon after, King James,
bringing with him his Children (whether his Lady were then living I cannot say)
George, of whom the present mention is made; James, and Martha, Since married
to Sir James Lockhart of Leigh in Scotland, and then of the privy Chamber in
Ordinary to the late King.

His Education (after some years spent in the Schools) Education.
was at the Universitie of Oxford (if information err not) and he so much a
Scholar, as that the Latin tongue was familiar to him both by speech and pen,
not only for Ordinary but likewise for Elegant expressions; Neither was he
ignorant of the Greek: But, thinking the Schools an over soft course of
exercise, he left them and betook himself to Arms, as more Suitable both with
his Complexion and disposition. Entry into Military employment.


He began his apprentiship and continned his progress in that honorable
profession under that great and excelling Tutor in the art of war, the
Invincible Gustavus Adolphus, for whose service he first transported a Company
of Foot of his own Nation, into Suethland about the year, 1623.

Under the Banner of that great Warrior (whom I have rightly termed
invincible, as both living and dying such) he served sundry years: And that
Prince being no Prodigal of Military preferment, he attained only to the
degree of Lieutenant Colonel of a Regiment of Foot (by which Title we will now
call him until Providence give him another) whereof Sir James Ramsay, was
Colonel, the same Bamsay, who so gallantly afterward, for some years,
defended Hanaw against the whole Imperial Force in those parts, until
releived by the then General Major Lesley, now Earl of Leven, and the said
Colonel lying wounded of some hurt he had received at the Seige of the strong
Castle of Wirtzburg (if my relation fail not) his Lieutenant Colonel Commanded
the Regiment, and at the taking of Creutznach, (a strong Town in the
Palatinate) was by the King Ordered to secure the same from those insolences
that might arise from the Soldier, which he did with such celerity and
satisfaction, as that the King (who entered soon Designed to be Governor of
Creutznach.
after) did in his own breast, design him to be Governor of that important
place.

But before his Commission was issued, a reverse of fortune, of a Commander
rendered him a Captive; For his Royal Sac: Mis. Regnor Sveciae etcor: Senator
et Cancellarius ad Exerc: et per German: Sum^a cum potest: Legatus ibidq
foederis Evang: Director Ill mus Dn. D nus. Axelivs Oxenstierna Lib: Baro in
Kymitho D nus. in Fiholmen et Tydoen etc: Eques.
portrait of Axel Oxenstierna, chancellor and regent of Sweden General, upon
some mistake in an address of his, gave Order, for his restraint, which
nevertheless continued long: for that Prince, who was wont some times to take
provocations before the bound, understanding the Error, commanded Falls into
the Kings displasure.
to release Duglass, and to deliver him a Commission for the foresaid
Government, which Order he left with that great States man (the Nestor of
Suethland) Axelius Oxenstierne Knight, free Baron of Kymitho, Lord of Fiholmen
and Tidoen etc. his Chancellor, whom he, at his hasty departure toward
Noremberg, whither the necessity of that place, and his engagement, both by
honor and promise invited him, had deputed to abide at Francfort on the Maine,
for the regulating, by his great Prudence, of the affairs in those parts of
Germany.

It may be thought that our Lieutenant Colonel had cause Seldom subject to
passion.
to rest contented, having received ample satisfaction, by a preferment so
honorable, which also might have proved but a step to greater: But he, who
likewise was not exempt from the boy lings of passion, was resolved to admit of
no reparation as not enduring ought which he conceived to be an affront, from
what hand soever it came. Or rather, we may (more Christian like) conclude,
that God, who had numbered his days, having decreed that before his Exit hence,
he should quit those Courses that impelled to the effusion of blood, and enter
upon such as were more acceptable to himself, by being isntrumental in
preventing the same in others; and that having been sundry years useful in
Wars, which the spirit of discention raises between Princes; he should close
up the remainder by being actually instrumentary for peace between jarring
Kingdoms: The same God, (I say) who creates the fruit of the lips, Peace, and
is the Lover and Author of Peace and Concord, had otherwise disposed of him.

The Commission for the foresaid Government was tendered Refuses the foresaid
Government.
unto him, but (the means being appointed to the end by providence designed)
was by him refused and a pass demanded, which the Chancellor enquired into the
cause of, telling him withal he could not grant it: yet, Duglass still
persisting, the Chancellor (who loving him, had used both reasons and
persuasions to divert him from his purpose, and could not prevail) afforded
him a Foreloff, being a concession of vacancy for some time from his charge,
during which he might repair to the King and obtain his pass if it should be
thought fit.

About the same time Sir Henry Vane Knight, Comptrollor of the household to the
late King, and one of his privy Counsel, being by him sent his Ambassador
Extraordinary to the King of Suethen, and then upon his journey toward that
Prince, came to Erancfort aforesaid: To him our Lieutenant Colonel makes his
address, desiring that under his protection Takes shelter under Englands
Ambassador.
he might repair unto the King, from whom (his Judgment might suggest unto
him) he could not but expect a frown, which favor was not denied by his
Lordship, who, having refreshed himself and his Train there for some days, set
forward, accompanied by our Lieutenant Colonel, and in short time arrived at
Noremberg, where the King of Suethland Presents himself to the King at
Noremberg.
(with his Army) then lay.

The first presentment Duglass made of himself, was at the instant of his
Arrival, in the Tennis-Court of Noremberg, wherein the two Kings of Suethland
and Bohemia were then exercising themselves: And here it may be conceived not
unlikely, but that the Chancellor had given his great Master notice, as well
of the arrival of the Ambassador of great Britain, as of the defection of
the Lieutenant Colonel, yet merely out of his duty of acquainting the King with
all passages, even of the least concernment, and not intentionally, as may be
judged, to procure the Gentleman any prejudice, to whom he had always showed
such fair, and more then common respects, as he was by his Camarades in Arms
frequently called (either in jest or envy) the Chancellours Favorite.

The King had no sooner eyed him but he was affected with Again committed.
Choler, and after he had demanded of him why he was not at his Charge, and by
the other answered that he had none, or to that effect, with some other brief
passages; He ordered the Lieutenant Colonel to be forthwith committed, which
was immediately done.

It may be conceived that great Britains Ambassador was herewith but little
pleased, and might think not only himself, but his Master likewise concerned,
that one of his Subjects intending for his Country, and to that and coming to
crave his dismission, under the Protection of his own Prince in the person of
his Representative, should therefore be restrained: Yet from our Lieutenant
Colonel, the Relator (who had it from himself) heard not that he suddenly
moved therein, whether willing to let the first heat over-passe; or that his
main and much of business, for such an inch of time, at his first interviews
diverted him.

That King understanding within few days, that some of the Enemies Forces
intended an On-slaught into his Quarters, or bound upon some other private, if
not the like design, gave order for two thousand Horse to be in a readiness
the next morning (a sure sign that himself would command that party) which was
done accordingly, and himself already in His release moved by the Ambassador.
Coach, the Lord Ambassador then present (who had discoursed with him of other
Affairs) being about to take leave, moved the release of our Lieutenant
Colonel, but the King suddenly passionate, gave him an answer so lofty and
trenching upon his Master, as might have been better spared, and shall therefore
be here omitted: Nor was his Lordship wanting to reply in such a manner as
became his Courage, and like a person of honor representing his Prince.

As the great Gustavus was subject to flashes of passion which were the only
Clouds in his Hemisphere, and thereby would (not seldom) give offense, so, had
he those speedy recollections; the best badge of a good disposition, as
permitted him not to retain them, but that present acknowledgment and
satisfaction ensued, as indeed it did here, and so fully as was not little,
from a Prince, succesfull and great in Arms and Renown, which usually elate
even most equally tempered Spirits: But as the expressions that were
distasteful, so likewise, the acknowledgment shall be here forborne, there
being the same reason for the one as the other: Only this may be said, Duglass
released.
that before he left the City he commanded our Duglass to be in larged.

The King being gone whither the Emergencies of his Affairs called him, and no
expectation of his return, his Lordship, who had (as may be conceived) improved
his time for the delivery of what he had in charge, resolved neither to follow
nor expect him back, but to repair for England, as he did soon after,
accompanied by the Lieutenant Colonel, who for some time whilst at Englands
Court, was by his honorable Returns for England.
Patron made known and recommended, not only to the great Ones, but to the King
likewise.

The King of Suethen returning back to Noremberg, and after several accidents
incident to War, by the accession of a gallant Army, consisting of six and
twenty thousand fresh men, conducted by the Reicks Chansellor Oxienstierne, the
two Brothers of Saxon Weymar; the Landtgrave Will of Hessen and General Banier,
having reinforced his own, before Coopt up (in a manner) by the numerous
powers of the Imperiallists, did now range more at large, and the Forces of
both sides came so near each other, as they could not part without a Battle,
which was (soon after) fought near unto a Town called Lutzen, where the
Imperial Army commanded by the most Imperious Wallesteyn Lutzen ^^ild:
Duke of Friedland, had the advantage of the ground, which the Sueths were
constrained to gain from them at push of Pike and had the better: The Sun
befriended neither party, being all the morning (as unwilling to behold that
days effusion of blood) obscured by a Mist, when (...)omenie, another of the
Austrian Generals, brought to the imperialists relief two thousand fresh Horse,
the Riders all clad in hard Iron, which the Royal Sueth perceiving, taking
with him a strong party, he called to the Duke of Saxon Lawenburg, saying,
Cousin let us charge those black men home, for those are they will otherwise
ruin us, which himself did in person so vigorously (by leading on his own
Troops to the hottest dispute of that whole day) as he brought Victory to his
own side, but purchased at a sad and dear rate, even the life of that great
Hero. The King of Suethland stain.
On the Imperial side (beside many others) was Felt Marshall Pappenheim
Slain, one of the most esteemed Commanders amongst the Imperial Generals; and
of the most honorable deportment toward those whom the chance of War did cast
into his hands: who is also said, to have been foretold that the King of
Suethen and himself should fall both in one day.

Thus died the Renowed Gustavus of Suethen, in the bed of Honor; if he may be
said to die, whose Fame cannot: His loss was for the present prudently
concealed by the Cheiftains who were nearest to his fall; amongst whom was Duke
Bernard of Saxon Weymar, who that day gave a fair increase to The Suethes win
the Field.
the glorious repute he afterward constantly maintained; and the Kings death
by the great courage and gallant conduct of himself and the other Commanders
who were then next unto the King, was so well revenged, as that the Suethes
remained not only Masters of the Field, and of the dead bodies, but likewise so
dissipated the Forces of the Enemy, as they could not in a long time recollect
such another Army.

This Prince being thus taken away in his flower and Some months dead er'e so
believed.
strength of years, it was a good space of time, ere the neighbor Nations
would believe he was not still in the number of the living, as if so great a
person could not have moved hence, but that like an universal Earthquake he
must have borne a whole World before him. Reports were various, according to
the affections and disaffections of men to his Person and Greatness, and it is
truly affirmed, that at the Court of England, Wagers were laid of his being
alive, sundry months after the first news of his death.

But ere long it was confirmed that his great Soul, having quitted the
enclosure of his body, had changed his Militancy here below, for a Mansion more
peaceable and Glorious above, and had verified that saying of the Divine Spirit
by the Kingly Prophet, who having recorded that the great Ones of the World are
Gods, has nevertheless pronounced that they shall dye like men, and that
Princes shall fall as others.

The King of Bohemia did not long overlive the loss of this second King of
Bohemia deceased soon after.
Alexander, but deceased soon after at Mentz: His eldest Son, Charles Lodowicke
Prince Elector Palatine, being then in Minority, his Uncle, the Duke of
Simmern; was, by consent, constituted Administrator of his right in the
Palatinate.

The death of King Gustavus, who (whilst living) had been the Head and
Director General of the Protestant League in Germany and so entitled,
notwithstanding that his loss was alleuiated by Victory, caused a great
alteration in the affairs of that confedracy, and in the Counsels of the
Princes thereof; so that it behoved them to call a Diet or General Assembly,
as they did soon after at Heylbrun in the Dukedom of Wertenberg, consisting
of four Principal Circles of the Empire, viz. the Franconian, Suevian, with
the upper and lower Circles of Protestant Diet or assembly.
the Rhyne; there were personally present the Duke and the Administrator of
Wirtenberg, the Marquess of Baden, the Count of Hanaw, with most of the
seventeen Earls of the Wetteraw: Lodowich Phillip Duke of Simmern,
Administrator of the Palatinate, for his Nephew the Prince Elector Palatine,
then of under years, had there four Commissioners; of whom, Colonel Peblitz
(being chief) sat above all the Princes, at the upper end of the Table; all
the Propositions were directed to him; and he, in right of the Elector
Palatine, had the opening of all Letters, which was an absolute concession of
the Electorall Title and Dignity, and as great an Exauthorization of the
Bavarian and his pretenses as that Assembly could give.

For the effecting hereof, the prudent intervention of Sir Countenanced by
Englands Ambassador.
Robert Anstruther, Lord Ambassador Extraordinary from great Britain to that
Diet, who had with good approbation discharged the like high trust under King
James and the late King to several Princes of Germany, to the King of
Denmark, as also to the Emperor (Intervallatim) by the space of thirteen
years was not meanly prevalent. There were present besides, the Ambassadors of
other Princes, and the Deputies of the Imperial Cities in the forenamed four
Circles, as Noremberg, Strasburg, Francefort, Auspurg and others: the Lord
Chancellor Oxenstierne also, whose Title in this Diet was, Councellor,
Chancellor, and Extraordinary Ambassador for the most Illustrious and High
borne; the Hereditarie Heir and Princess of the Crown of Suethen: The
restitution of the Palatinate (ad integrum) was decreed in this Diet, and for
the regaining of some places, as yet possessed by the Enemy, the Chancellor
engaged his word, as General of all the Forces; which charge he having modestly
refused at the first offer, accepted at the second: Whereupon the direction of
the whole War and affairs of State was committed unto him, in the name of the
Imperial States and the Crown of Suethen.

Neither did this Union receive small luster by the conjunction And by the
French and Brandenburg.
of the French King, represented by the Marshall de Feuquier's there present;
As also by the Declaration o^ the Duke Elector of Brandenburg, which followed
soon after, in favor of what there transacted: Account of the whole passages
of that Assembly, but especially of that restitutionary decree, was by his
Lordship (upon his return to Francfort) sent into England by Mr. Richard
Hurst; One and the First of his Secretaries.

His Lordships Negotiation with the Landtgrave of Darmestadt, Landt-grave of
Darmestadt solicited in vain.
to whom he soon after repaired for the gaining of his concurrence with that
Assembly, was uneffectuall, albeit he left no stone unmoved; But interest and
ambition are maine obstacles to the attaining of just desires: That Landtgrave
had been much entrusted by the house of Austria, and in recompense of his
affection was (by the same) invested with the spoils of his Neighbors. Two
Mannours (or Lordships) belonging to the House Palatine had been committed into
his of his Fathers hands, by the late King of Bohemia, they being then good
friends; but disputes, arising afterward between them, grew to a quarrel;
whereupon Count Mansfeldt invading the Landtgraves Country, took him prisoner,
and so detained him certain days; but his liberty being regained, and the
Emperors affairs prospering, he procured, as a recompense for his sufferings,
a grant from the Emperor, not only of those two Mannours, but of several
other Lands likewise, belonging to the Counts of Solmes, Isenberg, Lewensteyne,
and others, followers and domestics of the Prince Elector Palatine.

The Elector Duke of Saxony, one of whose Daughters the foresaid Land-Grave had
Married, was next Solicited by great Britains Ambassador; yet, neither would
he join in the Transactions of Heylbrun, or in the attribution of the Electoral
Saxons Elector likewise waves the conjuncture.
Title, Dignity, or Possessions to the young Prince Palatine, nor afford the
Title of Administrator to his Uncle the Duke of Simmern: Albeit, as he
professed to his Lordship, he did not ommit the same out of any want of respect
to the King his Master, or of affection to the House Palatine, but as not
having (then) consulted the States of his Country, which (he said) it was
necessary for him to do, before he could perform so public an Act, and that
he hoped to obtain the same by Treaty. Whereby the Troubles of Germany (as he
conceived) would sooner be ended. Hereupon Replies were reiterated, but nothing
(save words) gained.

The King of Suethens death seemed to have much altered that Elector from his
former professed intentions: But it was indeed conceived that he the rather
declined those rights to the house Palatine, to work a concession, from the
young Prince, unto his said Son in Law, of the two forementioned Manno(...)s:
Next, that himself might enjoy the Chief direction of Affairs amongst the
Protestant Princes of Germany, which of right belonged to the house Palatine;
As also to thwart what the Circles had done in the Assembly at Heylbrun, with
the particular account of the Electorall and Land-gravian Treaties, the Relator
was by his Lordship sent for England from Dresden that Electors Chief and
Residentiall City.

In the mean time the Confederate Princes and Cities, having constituted
amongst themselves a Directorium, or settled Counsel, for the better carrying
on of the Work, gave the Oxenstierne director of the Protestant Affairs in
Germany.
Presidency thereof as aforesaid to the Great Chancellor of Suethen Axelius
Oxenstierne, as well in contemplation of the merits of that late Great Monarch,
as of the necessity they still had to retain the assistance of the Suethes,
until the interest of the Princes and Cities of that Union, and of the House
Palatine, together with that of the whole body of the Germane Protestants,
might be settled, either by Treaty or otherwise, and not the least, in regard
of the great Sagacity and deep insight in the managing of Affairs, acquired by
a long experimented practice, and grounded upon the Rock of a most sound and
well fortified judgment, wherewith that great, Personage was endowed.

The various success of the Armies and their continuance, The Palatinate
exhausted.
drawing upon the associated Princes Circles and Cities, a vast expense of
Treasure, whereby those Countries became exhausted, and the Palatinate being
upon its restitution assessed at a monthly Contribution; which (howbeit less
in proportion then the other Contributary Countries were rated at) that
devasted Principality was not able to furnish; the late King was solicited in
deficiency of his Nephews Estate, yet no way thereto obliged by any Stipulation
or other Act public or private, so cautiously had his forenamed Minister
managed his Masters Interest. Hereupon, by the Privy Counsel of England, it
was thought meet that some one should be sent over to scrutinize into the
condition of the Palatinate, as also into the Deportments of the Suethes;
concerning whom, I may say, upon certain knowledge that during the Assembly at
Heylbrun (as also before and after) the Chancellor made great expressions of
respect to his Majesty and his Relations in Germany, the reality whereof was not
meanly testified by the free restitution of the Palatinate, after their King
had recovered the same from the Spaniard, and by his promise that the Forces
then before Frankendale (if I mistake not) and Recovered and entirely restored
to the Electoral Administrator.
Heidelberg should not be withdrawn, but reinforced, until those two strong
Pieces were likewise regained, which he performed at his return to Francfort,
by sending the Prince Birkenfeldt with six thousand Foot and Horse to their
recruit, whereby those places being surrendered by the Enemy, were by him, as the
rest had been, delivered into the hands of the Electorall Administrator.

But to return from whence I have not unnecessarily digressed; Confederates
defeated at Ratisbo(...).
the Suethes and the Confederate Princes fell, not long after into a decadence
of fortune; for the Cardinal Infanta with an Army of old tried Soldiers,
though bent for Flanders, taking Germany in his way, and joining with the
Imperiallists near the City of Norglingen, the Associates by this Conjunction
received a great defeat, wherein most of their Ensigns were seized, their
Commanders either slain or taken, of which latter Calamity their brave General
Gustavus Horn was partaker.

The scattered relics found no sure retreat, until they recovered the
formerly wasted Palatinate, under Duke Bernard Their retreat into the
Palatinate.
of Weymar, where deprived of Colors and Commanders, they continued (in a
manner) without Discipline, so as that Country was in a most sad condition, and
England thereupon solicited as aforesaid the Counsel, whereof judging it
expedient to send an Agent thither, the forenamed Lieutenant Colonel Duglass
was made choice of, as one who in his reports would Duglass Knighted and sent
Agent into Germany.
not be over partial; and he being first dignified with the Honor of
Knighthood, accordingly received Credentials and Instructions.

The forementioned Ambassador, Sir Robert Anstruther, who Digression
concerning Sir Robert Anstruthar.
after his departure from Saxony, had been with the Elector of Brandenburg at
Berlin, and from thence with the Queen of Suethen at Wolgast, to condole the
death of the King her Husband, whose body was then to be transported into
Suethland, and had likewise been with the Duke of Holstein, and the Duchess
Dowager his Mother, as also with the King of Denmark: Treating with sundry of
that Kings Counsel, who were thereunto appointed; he intimated unto them
(omitting particulars not so necessary to be here inserted) that their Masters
Conjunction with the Protestant Princes of Germany, would much conduce to the
general tranquillity, as without which the Emperor and his adherents would
hardly be moved to a constant and universal Peace in the Empire, but rather
hope that the Divisions and Separations of those Princes and States would be
apt to produce unto him new advantages. They (after much reasoning)
acknowledged it was most necessary, but prayed him to consider the hazards
their King, their Country, and themselves had in the last Wars been exposed
unto; so as had they not made a peace with the Emperor, they might by that
time have gone a begging with their Wives and Children: And that having thus
made their Peace, they ought not in equity to be the breakers of it; the rather
for that their Master was now acting the Mediators part: They wished that
Saxony were really (as Brandenburg was) united in the Alliance of Heylbrun, the
better to Balance the Affairs there, whereby a good Peace (which their Master
was still ambitious to be an Instrument of) might more probably be expected.

His Lordship urged no less to their King himself, upon occasion of some
discourse (soon after) of the then present state That Kings eldest Son had then
lately married a Daughter of that Duke:
of Germany; and the King expressing how much he longed to see a good Peace
established; He replied, that his Majesty's Authority and Power (if interposed)
with the Duke of Saxony, might be very useful for obtaining of the wished end
in that Conjuncture; and that if the three Protestant Electors and their Houses
were firmly linked together, by a perfect friendship and sense of common
Interest, they would soon grow so Considerable, as that other Princes would be
glad of their Association: And then Caesar himself would (in all likelihood)
the better hearken to reasonable Conditions of Peace, besides many other good
effects which (he inferred) might ensue so happy a Conjunction: The King
professed to concur with his Lordship in opinion, yet not without objecting
some impediments. But I shall wave further insisting hereupon; This, as not
material to the Subject mainly here intended, being only to show how far
England did then interess it self in the Protestant cause of Germany, and the
concernments of its Allies there. His Lordship returning to Hamburg to expect
further Orders, was soon after re-manded back to Francfort on the Main, to
interpose his Masters Authority as cause should be offered.

Return We now to Sir George Duglass, who (there met with Duglass acquits
himself satisfactorily.
his Lordship, and) during his Agency in the Palatinate, had given an account
so satisfactory, as well in order to that Electorall Principality and its
condition, with the whole state of Affairs relative to that concernment, as of
the Associated Princes and Cities, and likewise of the Suethes, as was well
rellished at home, and thereby gained to himself the opinion of one capable of a
greater and more weighty Negotiation: And as, if all things should conduce to
his advancement; it so fell out that the expiration of a six years Truce,
concluded (as has been said) by the intervention of Sir Thomas Roe, Ambassador
from the late King, An. 1629. between the Crowns and Kings of Poland and
Suethen, was then drawing near; and the late King was by the Polander again
solicited, to the same effect, with intimation of a desire of nearer
conjunction by Alliance.

This motion was plausible, and the more credulous of Englands Court, were
thereby wrought to cry up that Kings Cause; albeit the same (his Turn once
served) proved but a Fucus, and like an Apparition vanished into Air. For this
And is designed Ambassador into Poland.
employment of no mean moment, Sir George Duglass, then Agent in Germany as
aforesaid, was thought a fit Minister; and the rather, because haying formerly
served the late King of Suethland, in those parts he was not unacquainted with
their interests in Prussia and Leifland, and might accordingly make use of
arguments to induce them to a moderate and equitable compliance, it being
conjectured that they would not easily be won to restore either (much less
both) of those rich and fertile Provinces; but as to any resignation of the
Crown of Suethland, which the Polander claimed as his Hereditary Right, it was
foreseen, that however the same might be brought upon the Carpet, it could not
be with any hope of condeseension.

Credentials and Instructions were then drawn up, and sent Credentials and
Instructions sent to Duglals.
enclosed within a dispatch to the forenamed Ambassador Sir Robert
Anstruther, to beby him delivered (as was forthwith done) unto Sir George
Duglass, whereby the Title of Lord Ambassador Extraordinary from the King of
Great Britain, to the Kings and Crowns of Poland and Suethland became due
unto him. In this new Condition, his first work was to furnish himself with
Necessaries and Attendants suitable to that high Employment, into the number
whereof he was pleased to desire the Relator from Sir Robert Anstruther, of
whose Secretaries he then was; and in the same capacity, entertained him for
that Embassy, which is only mentioned to show the ground he had; for the
present and precedent Narrative.

Whilst some weeks of time were spent in such like preparations, Letters of
safe conduct and Convoyes were desired from the Generals of the opposite
Armies, through part of which we were necessitated to pass: His Lordship (in
the interim) made entry upon his Commission, by visiting the great Chancellor
of Suethen, Axelius Oxenstierne, at Mentz, and by delivering to him the Letters
he had from his Master, directed Enters upon his commission by visiting the
Chancellor of Suethen.
to the said Chancellor, and to his Son John Oxenstierne, (who sometime before
had been employed as Ambassador into England, from himself as President, and
in the name of the forementioned Directorium, or great Counsel of the
Protestant Associated Princes and Cities of Germany) which Letters he received
with great testimony of respect and thankfulness, for the honor thereby done
unto him, expressing the same at length and with great Eloquence: And as
concerning his Son, he much rejoiced at his Majesty's expressions of favor
toward him, both in this and at the time of his being in England; albeit it
were over long to tell the Condoleances he used for the frigidnesse (as he
termed it) his Son then found in relation to his Employment; but this, having
proceeded partly from things already glanced at, I forheare to insist upon: He
further insinuated how glad he was of his Lordships being employed in a
business that so much concerned their Prince and Country, of whose integrity
they had formerly received so good proof.

Yet it is not improbable, and his Lordship did so conceive, that they would
not unwillingly, have declined our intervention, if it had been in their power,
knowing that Englands interest in the point of Trade and Commerce (on which
their Toll in the Balthick Sea lay so heavy) would bring him in to cross their
designs, and pull from them a Bit which they had found so sweet, as they were
loath to part with.

The Chancellor began (then) to discourse of the Treaty that The Chancellors
discourse.
was to ensue, wherein he demonstrated, at length, the difficulties that would
occur, even at the first meetings, touching Ceremonies and Titles, as has
plentifully appeared in that Treaties Narration. He afterward insisted upon
the trouble the main business would produce, being no less then the question
of a Kingdom, and of the strangest nature that had been disputed in many Ages,
whereby those that were strangers and not vers't in the fundamental Rights, the
ancient Privileges, and Jus Suecorum, would (he said) come in a manner with
prejudicate minds, sympathizing with their own Governments, which, as they
would not presume to judge of, but leave every one to their own, so he hoped
that others would do the like to them, and not expect that they should let fall
a Controversy which had cost them so much treasure and blood, for any
arguments drawn from the opinions and example of others, which concerned not
them, they being to take their own way, and to follow their particular grounds
to the last drop of blood.

What he set forth of the wrongs they had suffered under King Sigismundus,
which had constrained them to the extremest courses, may be ghessed by such as
shall have read the first part of this Treatise, and therefore needs here no
repetition. As to King Vladislaus then Reigning (in Poland) he having, he said,
no right but from his Father, had lost all in him, and with what arguments he
alleged that his pretensions were less valid, at that present, then his
Fathers in his lifetime, were over tedious here to relate.

His Lordship (on the other side) was not wanting in His Lordships reply.
replies, but showed that extreme Counsels have extreme Events; that
Obstinate Wars were ever accompanied with troubles and Calamities; and always
heavy, even to the prevailing side, that as their issues were uncertain, so
their vicistitudes many, whereof themselves had already received sufficient
proofs: That as the virtues of the present King Vladislaus were to be
respected, so his Forces and that great Success which had (but late before)
attended him against most potent Enemies, was no less to be feared, besides
many other respects which might induce them to steer (at least) a middle course.

The restitution of such Territories as they had wone by their Arms, was
likewise touched upon in their discourse; which his Lordship found to be by
them taken for so good a Title as they were not like to give back for a Song.
They parted with great fairness; the one professing much thankfulness,
affection, and all other respects to the King of great Britain and his
Allies: the other assuring him of all reciprocal Their farewell.
and respective offices, to the young Queen and Crown of Suethen, from his
Master and every Minister of his. Herewith his Lordship returned to Francfort.

His train and equipage being in a readiness; his Lordship His Lordship takes
journey from Francfort.
began his journey from Francfort in December, 1634; having taken leave of the
Ambassador Sir Robert Anstruther, with all possible expresions of mutual
respect and affection, and was met before he came to Hanaw (a great and strong
City about three Leagues distant) by Sir James Ramsay (before-named) Governor
thereof, attended with four Troops of Is entertained at Hanaw.
Horse; the whole Garrison in Arms (the great Ordnance upon the walls also
going off) from the Gate to the Governors Quarter, where his Lordship was
lodged, during four days of his abode there, to dispatch an Express for
England. The Governor, howbeit but late before his Commander, as has been
touched, not disdayning to hold the Towell to his Lordship at washing before
meals, as to the Representer of his Prince; which office he would perforce and
did perform, his Lordship in vain opposing it.

Departing from Hanaw, He made no Halt until he arrived Entertained by the
Elector of Brandenburg.
at Berlin, the Electorall Court of Brandenburg; where, by that Prince, he was
lodged in the Palace, and, for eight days that that he stayed there, was
entertained with all the Magnificencie that might testify an entire respect to
the King his Master.

Between his Electoral Highness and his Lordship, there passed some
Communication upon the points like to occur in the Prussian Treaty, between the
principal Parties, as also what concerned his own Interest, which suffered but
overmuch every where: After the Curialia by word of mouth, the Elector returned
a large Memorial in writing, in answer of some heads propounded by his
Lordship, by all which it was easy to perceive, what the Chancellor had
before intimated, that there would not want difficulties to bring the business
to an equal accord: for they who had been hitherto on the losing hand, would
be loath to sit by it still; nor the adverse party less unwilling (as was
conceived) to quit ought already gotten, but on terms not much to the others
honor: for which cause the King of Poland, having a good Army in readiness,
was then personally at Danizig, to take order for all provisions necessary,
giving out, that he would either have a perpetual Peace, or else declare the
War: And here his Lordship received information, that he was by that King
expected with much longing.

From Berlin his Lordship came to Stettin in Pomerania, the Comes to Stettin in
Pomerania.
old Duke whereof (being sick) he visited him not, but sent a civil Message to
his Counsel by Monsieur Philip Freherr, his Secretary for the Dutch and Latin
Tongues, whom he also sent from thence into Suethland, with the King his
Masters Letters to the designed Queen Christina, and one from himself likewise,
wherein he excused his not attending her Majesty in person, by reason of the
Winter already advanced, and the time for the commencing of the Treaty near
approaching: the like he also did to certain of the Grandees there, with whom
he had been formerly acquainted.

Leaving Stettin he arrived at Danizig the ninth of January, To Dantzig.
1634, 5. and after some days of refreshment for himself and Train, having
sustained so tedious a Winter journey, his Lordship buckled himself to the
Treaty already begun at a Town in that Province of Prussia named Holland, the
passages of which Treaty, having been deduced at large in the preceding
Narrative, shall be here passed over, and those things proceeded unto which
afterward fell out.

In the close of that Treaties Narration, it was showed that his Lordship (at
his taking leave of the King of Poland in his Camp) had observed some
alteration in the countenance of that King, and those about him; but that,
knowing no cause to have been given by himself, he was the less troubled
thereat, thinking it only to be some little Cloud which would soon vanish: yet
staying that night in the Camp, he (for the more speedy removing thereof) sent
the next morning to the Lord Casinowskie, great Chamberlain of Poland, to
desire a private Audience of the King, which was promised, and that notice
should be given him of the time, but performance did not ensue; whereupon having
seen the Army drawn into Battalia, he retired to Marienburg.

The French Ambassador, who had received (as has been French Ambassador
Signs the Articles of the Treaty.
touched) a more friendly farewell, came likewise to Marienburg the day
following, and his Lordship having heard, that contrary to the public
agreement of the Commissioners and the Mediating Ministers, he had (in the
Regal Tent) under Signed that Copy of the Articles given by the Suethes to
those of Poland; did send the Relator with his Dutch Secretary forenamed, to
know of himself whether it were so or not: which he acknowledged to have done,
at the instance of that King, who (he said) presented the Copy unto him,
Propria manu: Our Ambassador understanding it, was not a little moved at the
indignity offered to his Master thereby, but rather to themselves, His Lordship
offended.
as being done contrary to their public Stipulation, and thereupon visiting the
Suethish Commissioners, he desired they would not admit of the like, which they
assured him of, as having already dispatched their Instrument of the said
Articles into Suethland by an Express.

Before his Lordship removed from Marienburg, the Lord Zavatskie came to him,
pretending only a visit, but sent (as was conceived) of purpose to explore
whether he had any Expostulates sharply with Zavatzkie.
inckling of what had been done, and how he resented the same. To him our
Ambassador could not so well contain himself, but that he entered into
expostulations so high as gave no small distaste; taxing them of swarving from
things by themselves consented unto and agreed upon in public, and of silence
in others, which they (not We) had propounded, and (seemingly) sought after,
the particulars whereof, as not necessary to be here inserted, are forborne:
Adding withal, that after so unworthy a requital of his Masters affection and
respects testified to their King and Crown, he could do no less in duty then
to give those advertisements that were requisite.

Zavatzkie heard him with patience, and with fair words endeavored to pacify
and to confirm in his Lordship a belief of the King his Masters sincere and
real affection toward his Majesty of Great Britain, with his constant
persevering in his former intentions, of which the said Lord had from the King
of Poland, been the first Intimator and Propounder, telling him withal, that
undoubtedly there behoved to be some mistake in the report he had received, for
otherwise, he said, it could not be but that himself being usually so near the
King, and of his Secretaries, should have known somewhat thereof, desiring
withal, that his Lordship would not precipitate any advertisement unto the
King his Master, and assured him that he would forthwith post unto their Court,
where having understood By him smoothed with promise of satisfaction not
performed.
the matter fully, he would by Letters, or a speedy personal return, faithfully
certify his Lordship of the truth, either there or at Dantzig within few days.

Toward that City his Lordship retired soon after, daily expecting the
effects of the promises forementioned, but in vain: Nevertheless upon
Zavatzkie's persuasions, and his own unwillingnesse to render ill-offices by
the return of He returned to Dantzig.
any report, as being desirous that some Apology might have come, for clearing
those doubts which their late proceedings and coldness had given him cause to
harbor, whereby any distance or disaffection, between the two Kings, might be
Delays advertising.
prevented, he desisted for the space of three weeks to send home any account
of that Treaties issue, contrary to the faithful advice of some near about
him; who, as much as with fitting respect they might, urged a present dispatch
of that relation into England, as a thing most necessary, not only for
satisfaction to the State and the great Persons therein concerned, but likewise
for his own discharge; Instancing also the French Ambassador, who would not
stir from Stumbsdorff (the Village where the Treaty had been concluded) until
he had by an express into France, sent a Narrative of that whole affair; But
to all this he sent a deaf Ear. At Dantzig he received, soon after, a
Honorarium or Present from the Eastland Company, by the hand of Mr. Richard
Jinkes their Secretary, in acknowledgment of their gratitude for his Real
endeavors in behalf of that Societies restorement to their former freedom of
Trade.

Yet nothing less then was promised, was by the Polander intended; in stead
whereof (advantage of his Credulity being taken) a strong complaint against his
Lordship was sent into England; which, for the time, gave an evil relish of
him to Receives notice by letter of Polands distaste.
his Master: The First notice he had of their distaste was by a letter from the
Lord Andrea Rey, Starrost of Libonza, dated the twenty fourth of September
1635. who, repeating the very words of his Lordships expostulation with
Zavatzkie, closed them up, with this expression; viz. That if any such were
spoken, he wished they never had been: Whereunto his Lordship returned an
answer the sixth of October following, with so clear a vindication of himself,
but in such a style as beseemed his Ambassadoriall Office, as might have given
them (in reference to him) ample satisfaction; yet without sparing again to
represent his sense of their more unfaire then expected or deserved dealing.

About this time, or not long after, Mr. Richard Gordon, Great Britains Agent
for those parts (who, in June foregoing, Englands Agent returns to Dantzig.
had been by that King sent for England) returned to Dantzig and thence to the
Polish Parliament at Warsovia, held in November, 1635. his Lordship not
thinking fit to repair thither in Person, until the former misunderstandings
were removed. Yet would he not omit to write by him to the Lord Palatine of
Belzkie, as also to the forenamed Starrost de Libonza; intimating to each, the
continuance of his Masters good affection toward their King, as they would
perceive by his answers to all their propositions sent by Mr. Gordon, and that
the same merited a better acknowledgment then was given at the conclusion of
the late Treaty, whereby he professed Sent unto the Parliament at Warsaw.
himself to be discouraged from undertaking a journey to the present
Parliament, notwithstanding the Orders he had received, but was willing rather
to refer the whole matter to Mr. Gordon, until the jealousies he had reason to
conceive were cleared.

It has been said, that, persuaded by the Lord Zavatzkie, his Lordship had
forborne to advertise home for three weeks Space; and it is to be added, that
those letters being sent by Sea (Subject to the inconstancy of winds, and the
movings of that other uncertain Element) were above six weeks longer before
they came to the hands they were directed unto; Two Errors in ^ne.
Whereupon (confused rumors of things coming to those, who in England bore a
chief sway in managing of the late Kings Privy Counsel) Sir John Coke
principal Secretary of State, did by Letter tax his Lordship of remissness in
his dispatches, showing that from France, they understood the Treaty was
concluded, and that he had received some disgust, but the particulars they were
not acquainted with. Hereby he first perceived that in one and the same thing
he had committed two (not small) Errors.

But in time all grudges being either buried, or (seemingly) Grudges covered,
the King and his Lordship meet.
laid to sleep, and the King of Poland coming to Dantzig, his Lordship had
several Audiences, and was once in company of the King (with sundry of the
Polish Nobility) feasted by the forenamed Mr: Gordon: And from that King
obtained (albeit not without reluctance of his Lords, who complained that our
Ambassadors Remonstrances were over-tart) a A mandate obtained in behalf of
the Eastland Merchants.
Mandate Declaratory under the Royal hand and Signet, dated the sixth of
February, 1635. 6. whereby our Merchants of the Eastland Company were promised
relief against the molestation of the Stample or Seal upon their Cloth,
procured by the Dantzigers during the Wars, and the Suspension thereof until it
might be abrogated in the next ensuing Parliament, the last having been called
for the ratification (only) of the late Treaty, as was affirmed by their
Commissioners, who publicly gave their Faith (Stipulata manu) for the
disannulling thereof.

The King soon after departing from Dantzig, his Lordship took leave, not
without seeming fairness of each side; and the forenamed Lord Zavatzkie was
designed Ambassador for Zavatzkie sent Ambassador for England, and with him
Gordon.
England, pretentionally for proceeding upon the motions, formerly (albeit in a
more private way) by himself, in the name and by warrant from the Polander
propounded to the late King, with whom Agent Gordon was associated, and as
himself vainly believed, and spared not to give out, with more Trust from that
King, then the other.

But notwithstanding all these specious shows, his Lordship Their sincerity
distrusted by his Lordship.
was still doubtful of their true meaning, and advertised home accordingly,
yet could he not particularly conclude in whose breast the dissimulation lay:
For even they who professed the same Religion with us, and were (at first) most
earnest in the pursuance of those motions, were now become as cold as oothers,
albeit they were intimate with that King and of his nearest Counsels, so as it
might seem that their Masters intention, decreed especially in matters so
nearly concerning himself, should have been the point of the Compass by which
they were to steer.

Yet (by the way) it may be demanded whether our Ambassadors Suspicions were
not causeless, or whether by his jealousies he did not injure that Prince, and
so provoke him justly; whereunto is answered, that the Ambassador of Poland
Zavatzkie, when (with Gordon) he arrived in England, did not give that full and
particular satisfaction which was expected, albeit the Professions out wardly
and in general were as high as ever; so as doubtful conjectures began upon
his arrival, to be made at Englands Court; and his dismission was visibly
Suspected in England.
more cold then his reception had been: And considering it was with him that
his Lordship made the disrellishing forementioned expostulation, it may be
(and was then by sundry) conceived, that the maine part of his Errand was to
have boulstered out the former complaint, if he had not been prevented by his
Lordships death.

The same appeared more fully afterward, when it was certainly known that the
King of Poland had proceeded even to Made visible soon after, and
consummation of things directly contrary to his former propositions, without
previous advertisement of his reasons for declining them: in excuse whereof
(Post factum) he sent the forenamed Lord Andrea Rey, Starrosta de Libonza, as
Ambassador to the late King, who understanding (before his arrival) Polands
Ambassador not admitted to Audience.
what his Master had done in prejudice of his own proposalls, would not admit
him to his presence, so that he returned without Audience, not being permitted
to come higher then Greenwich, the Court being then at Winsor. Our Agent was
also soon after discharged from further Negotiating there, neither has England
(since that time) had any person publicly impolyed to that Prince or State: By
all which circumstances it may be gathered that his Lordship did dive more deep
into their intentions, then self-interest and avarice (two maine evils in
whomsoever they infect, but most pestilent in public Ministers) would permit
the over credulity of others.

His Lordship having received Order for his return, began His Lordship comes to
Damin.
his journey from Dantzig the first of March (Old Style) and on the thirteenth
thereof came to Damin, a Town in Pomerania, of which, Colonel Robert Cuningham
his Kinsman, was Governor for the Crown of Suethen, who came forth about two
English miles (accompanied with his Officers) to meet his Lordship, and they
alighting, he did the like, walking into the Town on foot, where, by the way,
his Lordship and the Governor discoursing together, the Officers made relation
to us of a certain accident which had happened in their Garrison the preceding
evening, and for the time had caused some disturbance to their thoughts. It was
thus.

Upon the Eve before, being Saturday, the twelfth of March 1635/6 for the space
of near two hours, between those of eight and ten at night, an unwonted sound
of Bells was heard, in the Steeple of that Towns Church (called Saint
Bartholomew) Portentuous accident.
and the Governor sending to enquire the cause thereof at an undue hour,
received answer, That the Church doors were shut: Hereupon the Magistrates were
sent for, and Order given that some of the Garrison, with others of the Town
Officers, with Torches lighted, should search the Church and Steeple, to see if
there were not some persons concealed, who by such means might attempt to give
a privy Signal to any Enemy near hand: But, return being made, that no Person
was to be found either in Church or Steeple, nor motion or sound perceived
(albeit in the Town the same was heard to continue without intermission during
the Search) the Governor caused the Guards to be doubled; kept his own
Soldiers and the Citizens all might in Arms; retained the Magistrates with
himself; whom (with the inhabitants) he caused to take (de novo) an Oath of
fidelity to the Crown of Suethen.

We of the Ambassadors Retinue, hearing this story, accounted it a fiction,
more worthy of laughter than of belief: Entering the Town, his Lordship was by
the Governor entertained at Supper; Colonel Robert Duglass, Commander of a
Regiment of Horse in the same service likewise (his Lordships Kinsman) arriving
at the same time: At Table, the Governor related the foresaid accident for a
most certain truth, recounting what distractions it had put them into on the
Sudden, whereunto his Lordship replied smiling, you needed not to have been
so much troubled, it was but a ceremony to entertain strangers, your Citizens
knew not so well as your Bells that great Britains Ambassador was to be here
this night, His Lordships Comment thereon.
that Solemnity was for my reception: At this discourse some mirth being made
and Supper ended, his Lordship, attended by the Governor, and Colonel Duglass,
with the other Officers, retired to the Quarter prepared for him, opposite to
that of the Governor.

Besides those forenamed there were others present, now living in England, who
heard this related with the discourse thereupon, and can attest the truth
hereof; viz. General Major Christopher Potley (late in the service of Englands
Parliament under Sir William Waller) then Lieutenant Colonel to the honorable
Sir George Fleetewood Knight, Colonel of a Regiment of English Infantrie;
Governor, under the Suethes, of the City of Elbing, and Commander of the
strong Fort in an Island of the River Vistula; now Lord Fleetewood, Baron of
Swanholme in Suethland: As also Mr. Phillip Freherr forenamed: Mr. John Baall
likewise (one of the Eastland Merchants) who first divulged the same in England
upon his repair thither soon after. This by way of digression may be admitted.

His Lordship, at his rising the next Morning, Complained he was not well; yet
went to the Governor (to whom he told so much) and at his instance walked
about the Walls to view the new fortifications the Governor had there caused
to be made, thinking thereby to have cleared the dullness which oppressed him,
but could not: At the hour of dinner he sat His sickning.
down with the Governor at Table, but could not eat: Upon serving of the
second course he rose up, saying, it behoved him to take some rest, but would
not suffer any (save his two Pages) to attend him, Commanding us to stay and
accompany the Governor.

About four in the afternoon, the Governor with his other friends and
servants went to see how he fared, he Complained much of his head and stomach;
whereupon (unknown to him) a Post was sent to Gripswaldt (about six Leagues
from Damin) for Doctor John Schaener (whose father had been one of the
Physicians to King James at his first coming into England, known by the name
of Doctor Martin) to Administer to his Lordship: whose distemper (being laid
in bed) continued all that night with various purgings.

His Servants entering his Chamber early the next morning, the Governor with
Colonel Duglass, Leivtenant Colonel Potley, and Mr. Baall forementioned,
repaired thither soon after: We found him in his night Gown sitting, and
leaning at the Table, yet cheerful in speech, saying, his former pains were
eased, and that his head and heart were well, neither did ought (he said)
trouble him, save only that his foot was benumbed, which he hoped would soon
return unto its self and feeling; adding, that after a little rest he intended
to proceed on his journey that afternoon, and to that end gave order his Coach
and Train should be ready.

Toward the recovery of his foot from its benummednesse, all means were used
that could be devised, the forenamed Commander Potley, having (out of his
affectionate desire of his Lordships recovery) taken great pains therein by
chasing of the part affected, but in vain: His Lordship assaying to have
removed to his Bed, which was near by (saying he would repose a little) could
not support himself, but (sinking) was by his Servants laid in bed about eight
in the morning.

We left him according to his desire, with some of his Chamber only to attend
him, and returning about two hours after, found him asleep, but drawing his
breath so short and high, as gave cause to apprehend it was worse with him then
we had imagined; whereupon the Governor with the other Commanders being sent
for, they came and found him (to the grief of all) struggling with Death: Being
awaked, (for awaked he was by the outcries of his young Nephew, William
Lockhart, then present) he would willingly have spoken and declared himself,
but could not; he grasped the Youth Agony.
then kneeling by his bed side, in his Arms, some words he uttered, but
brokenly, in various intermixed Language, out of which the most attentive
Listner could gather nothing. In this laboring condition he continued about
two hours; the fore named Physician arriving when he was even at the extremity
of life, which left him between the hours of twelve and one of the same day
(being Tuesday the fifteenth of March, Death.
1635/6. to give an account of his Legation here below, before, not his
Earthly, but his Heavenly King.

The sudden death of this great Person, for so it may be termed, struck all
that were present, but his Kindred and Servants especially, into great
consternation of spirits; not one having (for some space of time (a word to
utter: At last, necessity so enforcing, the Body was left to be decently laid
forth, and a retreat made by all (them of his Chamber excepted) to the
Governors Quarter, there to consider what was to be done: In this consultation
it was (by the Relator) showed, that whereas a scruteny into the things he had
there with him, was necessary to be made, whereby due Inventary might be taken
for the better satisfaction of those whom (as nearest interessed) it should
rightly concern: There were Papers relating to his public Negotiations, into
which, no inspection was to be made, but that they were to be locked up apart,
and to be delivered only into the hands of the principal Secretary of State
in England.

This was, by all, thought meet; and unto him, as having been entrusted with
the insight of them whilst he lived, and who had also brought him the
conferment of that honorable employment so happily effected; they alone were
not committed, but likewise the managing of what was there further to be done.
In reference hereunto, the Embalming of the body Embalming, advertisement and
was first concluded; next, that an Advertisement should be made into England
for Orders for the dispose thereof: And lastly, the putting of his Train into
an Equipage suitable to the sad occasion, in order whereunto, (as also for the
reasons pre-alledged) Inventary and Mournings concluded on.
the inventarying of what he had there about him was resolved, that so it might
be seen by what Hinges these motions were to be made.

Order for the speedy Embalming was forth with given to the Physician then
present, who by a prolix discourse in writing (under his hand) rendered his
death Apoplecticall, albeit by others not so believed; and the day following
the forenamed Master Baall was dispatched for England, with Letters of
information to the State, with others also to Mr. Joseph Avery then Agent for
the late King at Hamburg; To those likewise at the Hague, to whom it was meet,
and lastly to his honorable Friends and Relations (particularly to the Earl of
Ancram, to whom he was Brother by the same Venture) as well to give notice of
the sorrowful accident, as to obtain the more effectually, and speedily such
Orders as should be Orders for final dispose required.
thought requisite for a further proceed; intimation (in that dispatch) being
given, that the body (so soon as Embalmed) should by easy journeys be brought
down to Hamburg, there to expect the same.

Neither was it thought least worthy of care, how to provide a Convoy to secure
the body (with what else there) in such a journey, and so broken times: To
obtain the same, Letters were sent that great Senator the Chancellor of
Suethland, Axell Oxenstierne, who then was at a Town called Convoy for security
desired.
Wismar, not past two or three days journey from Damin, to whom the sad
relation was thereby given, and fit convoy desired: Others were likewise
dispatched to his Servants, remaining behind at Dantzig, and to the Agent
there, to inform them of his decease, and to desire their care over those
things left in their Custody, to be transported by Sea, that they might be
safely forthcoming, to whom they should rightly appertain.

These dispatches made, an Inventary was exactly taken in Inventary taken.
the view of those forenamed Commanders and others, as also of his own
Servants, and so much of money (there found) as was conceived might be
necessary, was delivered into the hands of Mr. George Ewin, Steward to his late
Lordship, to provide and defray the Mournings with the Domestic, and other
incident Charges, and to render account of the whole to whom the same should
belong.

Soon after we received Letters from the Lord Chancellor Oxenstierne, wherein
he condoled the death of a person whom he had loved living, and from whom his
Prince and Country had formerly received faithful Service, and of late fair
Offices; in them was likewise showed that he had appointed two Troops of Horse
of the Regiment of the forementioned Colonel Duglass, to safeguard the body
to Hamburg, with permission for the said Colonel to accompany the same
according to his desire.

The Body being Embalmed; the Servants clothed in Mourning; the Horses,
Coaches, and Wagons, Covered all over with black, we set forth from Damin; a
sad Solemn Remove commenced.
sight: The Garrison Officers with Sundry others; Several Commanders and
Colonels, as well of English as of his own Nation, who came thither on purpose
to do honor to the dead, attended the Body a good distance of way without the
Town, and then returned; the Governor with Colonel Duglass still accompanying
the same.

When we were come within a League or two of Wismar where the Chancellor of
Suethen then was, the Corpse was left to the Care of his other Servants and the
Convoy, whilst the forenamed Colonels Duglass, and Coningham, with this
Relator, and the Dutch fornamed Secretary went thither to Salute Due Thanks
tendered to the Chancellor of Suethen.
and render thanks to that great Senator for his continued respects to our late
Lord and Master, not only whilst living, but likewise being dead, which (was
acknowledged) he had amply testified by appointing such a Convoy to secure his
relickes and Sorrowful Servants, who, by his loss, were like Sheep without a
Shepherd, from the insolences and violences those distracted times might
otherwise afford, whereof a faithful Report, as by gratitude obliged, should
not fail to be made: And that, as it w(...)ot to be doubted, but the King his
Master would make a fair acceptance of that civil respect rendered to the
remains of one, who, in a matter of such concernment as the late Treaty, had
represented his Person; So, from the kindred and friends of the deceased; his
Exellency might expect a friendly retribution of respects in all such ways as
opportunity or his Exellencies Commands should enable them unto, for his great
humanity expressed to the Ashes of a Relation so near and dear unto them.

It was further showed, that it had been some sadness to our late Lord, when
upon his departure from Dantzig, he understood that he could not be permitted
to make a journey into Suethland, as having no desire more earnest nor more
prevalent with him, then, by word of mouth, to have assured her Majesty of
Suethen, that he still retained the same zealous intentions for her Service,
which he had formerly for Sundry years, with the hazard of his life and the
loss of some blood, testified to her late Royal Father; and that he had not
so laid aside his Arms, but that he would always have been willing, and had
hope to resume them one day by her Majesty's command, and to employ them under
her Standard: That not only those Gentlemen present of his kindred, but all
others likewise who knew ought of him, and particularly we his Servants, as
having had the honor to be near unto him in the course of his late
Negotiation, could subscribe to this truth; Concluding, that if on our parts,
who were but mean Persons, incapable of great undertakings, there were ought
wherein our Services might be acceptable, in acknowledgment of his great care
for our safety, we should account our selves highly honored by his
Excellencies Commands, which, as we would receive with all due respect, so, to
our powers, they should meet with a perfect obedience.

This Office of no more then fitting civility was well accepted by the Lord
Chancellor Oxenstierne, who returned a fair commemoration of the great
abilities and endowments of the deceased Ambassador; of his Courage,
Integrity, and discreet deportment whilst he lived in the Service of their
late King, and of his sincere and equitable carriage in the late weighty
affair: He condoled his so soon death, whose life His death condoled by the
Chancellor.
(he said) might have been of good use to the world; and that as they had
received formerly proof of his affection toward their Crown and State, so they
should no way have doubted its continuance if his life had been longer
continued: But that since it had seemed good to the supreme Moderator of al
things to translate him from this Vale of misery, to those Mansions into which
troubles nor sorrow have no admittance: all persons (how nearly soever
concerned in him) ought to make an entire submission of their Wills to that
All-wise Providence, upon which he exhorted us to rely for comfort in our so
great loss. That he honored his Majesty of Great Britain, and should be
glad if what he had done might find acceptance with him, and that he would
prosecute the Friends of the deceased (whom he had loved whilst living) with
all reciprocal friendly Offices, and concluded with wishing to us an
unmolested proceeding on our journey.

He was pleased afterward to enquire how we intended to dispose of the
body, whereunto answer was made, that having advertised into England by
express, we would expect Orders at Hamburg.

Upon our taking leave, his Excellency desired that at our arrival in England,
his most submissive respects might be tendered to the King, to whose many
favors, both to himself and his, he acknowledged an exceeding engagement, and
withal, desired (that when admitted to the Regal presence) The Chancellors
desire.
we would make mention of the present low condition of the Protestant Affairs
in Germany, wherein the interest of his Nephews was so deeply concerned, which
their King had Patronized to the loss of his life, and their Crown, the like
to the great exhausting both of their Treasure and Men: That the necessities of
those Parts now emplored his Majesty to rise up their Protector by a vigorous
assistance, whereby that which had with so much sweat and blood, been wrung out
of the hands of the common Enemy, might not again be lost.

The like discourse had been made to this Relator at Marienburg, above eight
months before by Baron D' Avaux the French Ambassador, who willed him to
represent the same unto his Lordship; and added that the King of Great
Britain sat then as Umpire over the two maine Interests of the Christian
World, and held in his hand the beam of the Balance, so as The like formerly
elsewhere intimated.
the side he inclined unto, must (of force) over-poise the other, whereof he
earnestly desired that his Lordship would advertise the King his Master: Of all
which a faithful relation was then made to his Lordship.

From Wismar we returned (Colonel Cuningham there leaving us) to the place
where the Corpse remained, and thence without disturbance, We came within a mile
or two of Hamburg, where (once more leaving the body under the same The Corpse
brought near Hamburg.
charge as before) Colonel Duglass, with the Dutch Secretary formerly named,
and this Relator, went into the City to take order for the sad Solemnity of the
Funeral Entry, and to see what place had been by Mr. Joseph Avery the late
Kings Resident there, provided for the Bodies Repositary, he having been
formerly by Letters solicited thereunto, and had accordingly procured a Room in
the English House there, with Lodgings for the more near related Servants.

By him it was also thought convenient to acquaint the Senate of that City
therewith, to prevent any mistake or opposition The Senate advertised and
Scruple about the entry.
of the entry of those armed Horse, as we intended: Notice thereof being given,
a scruple was made (as he had foreseen) of admitting the two Troops that
conveyed the Body, they affirming, that it was a thing never used, and
inconsistent with their Cities Customs, that any extraneous Forces should
enter Armed within their Gates, and that it might prove of dangerous
consequence: Reply was made, that such a handful, in so populous and well
guarded a City, could neither breed danger nor suspicion of any: That what
was desired was only in honor to the memory of the deceased, and to render
the Solemnity more celebrious in a remote Country, where confluence of friends
could not be made, as also for the more satisfaction to those Troops that had
attended the Corpse so far, who might think themselves slighted, if not
permitted to accompany the same unto the Repository prepared.

It was urged on the other side, that whatsoever came within the limits of
their jurisdiction needed no other guarde, but was by them (in point of honor)
to be protected, neither could they admit of such a President: Thereunto was
rereplyed, that their Entry might be permitted under the name of his Meniall
attendants (for the more fulness of the Ceremony) which could be no way
derogatorie to their City, wherein (for ought yet known to us) the last
obsequies might be performed: That otherwise we would divert to Attenaw, a
village thereby near the Sea, but without their Yet consented unto as desired.
precinct, and there retain the same guard: The Senate at last consented to
what was desired, conditionally that the Corpse being once lodged, the two
Troops should immdiately retire without the Gates, which also was our desire.

In Order to the Entry, direction was sent to those without to move toward the
City next afternoon, but to make halt within half an English mile thereof,
whither the Eastland Company of Merchant Adventures, with their Deputy and the
forenamed Resident, all in long Mourning cloakes, made their repair, as also
the honorable Lord Fleetwood forementioned, with his said Lieutenant Colonel,
and sundry other Commanders of quality then in that City, who being all come
to the place where the Body remained, the Advance began; First, the Manner of
Entry,
two Troops moved; next them his Lordships four sadle Horses, led; covered to
the ground with black: after those the Body in a Chariot (purposely made)
covered with mourning, drawn with six Horses, likewise so clothed to the
ground, attended on each side by his Footmen and other inferior Servants: The
Resident, Master Joseph Avery forenamed, followed the Hearse as chief mourner
(being a public Minister from the same Prince) on his right hand the Deputy of
the English Company, Colonel Duglass before named on his left; his Lordships
Nephew William Lockhart, then aged about fifteen years, son to Sir James
Lockhart by the only Sister of the deceased Ambassador (since Colonel, and a
Member for his Native Country in the two late Parliaments in England, and at
present one of the Council of State for Scotland) came next to them, Single;
He was followed by the Ambassadors Gentlemen two and two, and next to them his
other domestics, after whom the Merchants in mourning Cloaks, one by one, and
each accompanied by a Commander or other Officer; his own Coach covered, as
also the six Horses, with black unto the ground, next came his Callosh or
Wagon, which usually carried his meaner Menie, and last his Baggage, or Rust,
Wagon, both covered in like manner, each drawn with four Horses likewise
clothed with black, closed up the Train.

Thus was the Body, by Torch-light, brought through the City to the English
House, and there placed in the Room appointed: The Horse immediately retired,
and a Banquet prepared for those Commanders and Gentlemen, as well of the Civil
as Military function ended the sad Ceremony.

About two days after, for avoiding of trouble to his Servants, as also to the
house, by the curiosity of people who hourly flocked to see the visage of the
deceased, there being in the Coffin a Casement, through which his face might be
discerned, with part of his body, lying in a close Gown of black damask, on
his head a cap of the same over one of plain linen, silk stockings, plain
band and cuffes with white gloves: His Heart and Tongue (well preserved) within
a damask cover, lying under his head, which rested on a damask covered
pillow; the body was removed into a close Chapel of the great Church in that
City, where it remained The Corpse disposed of by Order.
until Orders came from England, whereupon it was embarked for Scotland,
attended by his Steward the forenamed Master Ewin, with one page and a Footeman
all of that Nation.

All the Dutch Servants (except the forementioned Secretary, Servants strangers
rewarded, dismissed.
who came for England) were dismissed, with payment of arreares where any was
due, and a gratuity to each according to his place. The Relator was commanded
for England with the papers that concerned the late Negotiation, which he
delivered to Sir John Coke Principal Secretary of State.

The Body was (as since informed) received on Shore at the Port of Leith
(notice over Land having been sent before) by such Friends as there
accidentally occurred; and, the rest being invited soon after to the last of
civil humane duties, was by a great concourse of honorable company attended,
not long after, to the Tomb of his Ancestors; where we will leave him sleeping
in his honorable Urne, until with the society of all Saints he arise to
receive his Euge bone serve, etc.

He was, certainly, a Man endowed with so worthy Parts as deservedly gained
him a good esteem from three great Eis Character.
Kings: In the acquisition thereof he was esteemed fortunate, and the contrary
in not being Courtier enough to preserve it; for he dyed under some cloud of
his Princes displeasure, by reason of the Polish complaint fore-specified;
notwithstanding which, had his life been of longer continuance, he had
(probably) risen up, a fixed Starr in the firmament of his great Masters
favor: And yet from what has been already said it may be confidently
conjectured, he would never have proved a perfect Courtier according to those
times; for his spirit, free in reprehensions, and sometimes over tart, would
have uneasily complied with the ways of flattery, falsely styled Courtship,
over usually practiced, and consequently have been unacceptable to the Court
Cringers of that time: He was neither prodigal nor greedy of getting; So that
his generous mind, void of self-seeking (howbeit not always free from Passion)
would never have admitted of the Soil of avirice or adulation, two Plagues over
frequent in the Courts of Princes.

A Period should here be put to this relation, but that it is thought not
unmeet to touch (once more) the accident mentioned to have happened in Daman
the night before his The portent aforesaid enquired into and asserted.
Lordships arrival there, which was related unto him by the Governor at
Table, and albeit, that as then no farther notice was taken thereof, yet his
death ensuing so unexpectedly and suddenly, gave occasion of more serious
animadvertion therinto afterward; and upon diligent enquiry, the truth of the
thing was asserted, not by the Garrison Officers, and the Governor only, but
by the Inhabitants also: In confirmation whereof, the Relator received, from the
Magistrates and Senate of Damin, an attestation in writing under the Seal of
that Town, the Tenor whereof was in English as follows.

WE the Consuls and Senate of the Town of Attestation from the Senate of Damin.
Damin, do testify by this present Writing, that on Saturday the twelfth of
March, the Eve of the Sabbath Reminiscere, in which the most Illustrious Lord
Ambassador of Great Britain, George Duglass of honorable memory arrived in
our City the year under mentioned, about the Even-tide, from the hour of eight
until within a quarter of ten, a certain pleasing, unwonted, continued, and
never before observed sound of the Bells was heard in the Parish Church of S.
Bartholmew, the night being calm; Whereupon the Noble and Worthy Governor of
our Town, Colonel Robert Cuningham, as also the generality of the Citizens and
Inhabitants therein, were wonderfully astonished and amazed, and the forenamed
Governor, according to his care, caused the three Consuls to be called unto
him without delay, to know of them whether any such sound had been formerly
observed, and commanded the Guards to be doubled: Then, that as into a new
thing, more accurate enquiry might be made; it was ordered that the Steeple
should be ascended, and a Scrutiny made with Torches lighted, to see if any one
were there hidden, who by such a Signal might privily intend some Treachery,
yet no man was found in the said Tower, but the Bells hanging without motion,
the sound nevertheless was still heard by the Citizens below in the City. The
interpretation whereof We leave to the Divine Power, whom We beseech to avert
all misfortune from us. In the interim, in confirmation hereof We have hereunto
set the Seal of our Town: Given at Damin in the Dukedom of Pomerania, the
ninth of March, 1636.

This Novelty was by Master John Baall forenamed (who had been dispatched
into England the day following the Ambassadors decease) divulged both in Court
and City; so as at the return of his Servants into England, enquiry concerning
the truth thereof was made by many of greatest quality: yea, even the late
King, after an account rendered of the manner of his Ambassadors death, as also
of what had been desired (as formerly couched) by the Lord Chancellor
Oxenstierne, demanded whether that report of the Bells were certainly so, and
upon sight of the forespecified attestation commanded Mr. Secretary Coke that
it should be by Master Weckerlin turned into English, for his further
satisfaction therein, which was accordingly done.

It is now time to dravv tovvard a conclusion, this discourse having enlarged
it self further than was at first intended, but could hardly have been more
restrained amongst so many changes and relative circumstances as may be
observed throughout the Triple Narrative.

In the first, we see Poland, from a Dukedom or Principality, Observations
upon the whole
erected into a Kingdom, but soon after reverting unto the former Ducall
Government, and weary thereof, remounts unto a continued Elective Regality,
neither is at present of small consideration, as being the Bulwark of
Christendom, on that side, against the incroaching Turk and Tartar. Suethland
also (for avoiding the many mischeifs and inconveniences they had sustained,
by parties within themselves, differing about the Election of their Princes)
changed into a Hereditary Kingdom in the time of Magnus Smeeke; and the right
Channel failing, remoter streams are either taken or violently thrust in, and
upon prejudices flowing thence, are again as fast sluiced out. By public and
general consent and act of that State, a more direct Succession, in the person
and Male Issue of Gustavus Erickson, the Vindicator of their liberties from
Danish bondage, is then entered into; yet that not of long perfect continuance
in a descent immediately consecutive of his three Sons (all there Crowned)
Ericke the eldest succeeds, but for misgovernment is not many years after
dethroned, and during life incarcerated by his next Brother John Duke of
Finland, who assumes the Scepter.

And here the profoundest Contemplatist may find a large field for his thoughts
to expatiate in, to consider and admire the instability of humane greatness;
the sandy bottom of the solidest seeming Acts of the most flourishing States:
the facility of blasting the wisest and best consentred counsels of the Sons of
men, and overturning the Rock-like appearances of their strongest cemented
Constitutions, by that Omnipotent and ever-Adorable Power, through whose Divine
permission, things conducing to the un-erring ends by him preordained in the
Decrees of his Eternal Providence, are brought to pass here below, for the
pulling down and setting up of Princes: Sundry examples whereof are set before
our eyes even of late years, and particularly in this royal Gustavian Line.

To John and his Heirs the States of Suethland by a most solemn Act in the year
1590. confirm the Succession; but has this ought more of stability?

Sigismundus his eldest Son (albeit Crowned in Suethland, An. 1593.) enjoyes it
not, but with his Seed is for ever expelled from that Kingdoms Regal Chair
by Parliamentary Act, in the year 1600. and that expulsion confirmed, An. 1504.
by a like Act and a renewed reformed Hereditary Union, whereby his Seat and
Dignity is conferred upon the Person and Heirs of Charles, Duke of
Sudermannia, Nericia, and Wermelandia, who was Crowned, An. 1607. being the
youngest Son of Gustavus Erickson, and younger Brother to John forenamed: But
here it may be demanded, albeit Sigismundus had forfeited the Crown of
Suethland both for himself and his Posterity, yet what offense had the Prince
his Brother John (the younger Son of King John aforesaid) committed, to be
pretermitted in that Elective Hereditary Succession (seeing themselves
acknowledge him to be the nearest; as he was, by how much a Son is nearer then
a Brother, or a Brother then an Uncle) and to be induced to rest so contented
with the Dukedom of Ostrogothia, as to resign for ever his whole right unto
that Crown, unless the same should chance to drop upon the head of some one of
his Posterity, by the decease of the total lawful Male Issue of the new King
Charles (according to the forecited Entail, 1604.) whose second Daughter the
Princess Mary Elizabeth, he married, An. 1612. Howbeit of him or of any Issue
by them we read not: Hereunto for answer is offered, what themselves allege,
and which has been already touched in their Parliamentary Acts, An. 1600. and
1604. Viz. His Minority by some years, and that Kingdoms necessity of a Prince
of ripe and experienced Judgment, with their apprehension of his entering
(through prevalency of natural affection) into such Covenants with his Brother
King Sigismundus, or his Heirs, as might be destructive (to their present King)
his Uncle Charles and his Family; as also his own voluntary resignation of his
Interest in the Suethish Crown unto his said Uncle (as forecited) An. 1604.
which again confirmed and fully concluded at Orobrogia, An. 1606. Vide
Exegesis Historica, page 350.
We may lastly add what themselves do there likewise assert; That forasmuch as
the most Illustrious Prince Duke John, had at the time of the Regal Coronation
(of his Uncle) attained unto the nineteenth year of his age, and so might well
discern of those things which concerned his Interest; they were therefore
confident that his Highness could not (deservedly) impute ought unto them, and
the rather, if he should with them duly animadvert into such examples as might,
in like case, be derived from other Kingdoms and Kingly Families, which do
abundantly testify, that sundry have been ejected from their Hereditary
Jurisdiction, and others of the same Family surrogated in their stead, for
causes less weighty then those whereby they had been thereunto moved.

That they had seriously considered what that conjuncture of time, chiefly in
that most afflicted state of their Country required: Viz. Such a Governor, as
could with prudence steer the Kingdoms Helm, which unless speedily provided
for, utter ruin would have thence overflowed the whole Kingdom. Moreover,
that they had been compelled by those dangerous and subite (Plots, or)
Machinations which on every side threatened their Country, to choose him for
their Lord, their King, and Governor, who was endowed with Prudence,
Experience, and maturity of years meet for so weighty a charge.

King Charles, after ten years of a laudable Reign, paying the debt that all
men owe to nature, whereunto by the Eternal decree of the Almighty, the most
Potent Princes, as well as the poorest Peasants are equally subject; his Son
Gustavus Adolphus succeeded and was Crowned King of the Suethes; Goths, and
Vandals, etc. An. 1617. He was, as aforesaid, cut off in the strength of his
years, being about the eight and thirtieth of his age, An. 1632. at that fatal
field of Lutzen: yet a day so glorious to his Fame, as all Military men may (in
like case) desire.

The year ensuing his translation from the toiles of this to the Joys of a
better world, a Parliament convened at Stockholme, the heads whereof (as by them
couched in seven Articles) I shall here touch at and referr the further
curious unto the Act it self.

In that Assembly, the Senators, Peers, Earls, Lords, Bishops, Gentry,
Clergy, Military, Officers, Citizens and Commonalty, After a sad Commemoration
of their unrecoverable loss, by the death of their late Sovereign, whom they
rearme their head, their King, their Father, and Pater Patriae, under whose
most excellent Reign, they, above other Nations, had lived in safety and
tranquillity: And that, to the aggravation of their misery, they were destitute
of Heirs-Male proceeding from his loins to possess his Fathers Seat, whereby
their and the Kingdoms care and danger was the greater; upon due consultation
of the best conducement to the Kingdoms good; They declare, that, by the help
of their Almighty, and in the Name of the blessed Trinity, they had decreed,
confirmed, and established.

IMprimis, That his late Majesty having left no Heir Male, 1. Article.
nor any Children of any Hereditary Prince which might succeed according to the
Laws and Constitution of the Realm: They did approve of and confirm the Act
formerly concluded at Norcopia, An. 1604. concerning the Daughters of their
Kings and Heir-Princes, at the renovation of their Hereditary Union: In
reference whereunto, as also to the Act concluded at Stocholme the fourth of
December, An. 1627. in case his Majesty should happen to decease; They did
thereby unanimouly establish and confirm, as also advisedly, freely, and
without constraint, declare and pronounce, The High and Mighty Princess
Christina, Daughter of his renouned Majesty Gustavus Adolphus, the Second and
Great King; Queen of the Suethes, Goths, and Vandalls; lawfully chosen: as also
Hereditary Princess, Great Duchess of Finland, Duchess of Esthonia, and
Carelia, their most deer and gracious Queen: And did by these presents oblige
themselves, etc. with all the Inhabitants of the Kingdom, and Subjects
thereof, to render to her Majesty all true and due Service and Obedience; and
did Inaugurate and establish her said Majesty in whatsoever in righteousness
they might be answerable for before God and Man; so that she had full power and
authority to command them in all things. They likewise confirmed and ratified
the Laws of the Realm for her Majesty: And further obliged themselves to stand
for her Majesty's safety, her good and welfare, as well as for that of the
Kingdom, even to the danger of their lives and loss of their goods. Provided
that her Majesty, when she should attain to perfect years and full possession
of the Government of the Kingdom, did secure unto them and the whole State,
whatsoever might concern the maintaining of all their Laws, Liberties, and
Privileges, etc. as the like had been done by former Kings, especially by her
late Royal Father, and had by the State of the Kingdom been approved.

Secondly, that if any Suethe or other, subject to the Crown 2. Article.
thereof, of what degree, dignity, or quality soever, should refuse to subscribe
and submit to this establishment, or dare to oppose their present Act, or seek
to advance any other, whether native or forraigner: They did esteem and declare
that party to be a member separated from their body; an Enemy, yea, Traitor to
the Kingdom, and upon conviction of a Crime of that nature, to be punished
without mercy.

Thirdly, They confirmed and ratified the Acts formerly concluded against King
Sigismundus with his Children and Discendants; 3. Article.
and declared them to have no right or interest in the Crown of Suethland, or
any part of the Dominions or Jurisdictions thereto belonging: and that all their
right and pretensions were lost, void, forfeit, and in the lapse for ever: And
that if any Sueth or other person under that Crown, should endeavor the
admittance of any of the aforesaids into the Kingdom, or to yield them any
footing within the Jurisdictions, or upon the Frontiers thereof: They would hold
that person (of what quality soever he were) for a pernicious and heinous
Traitor to them and to the whole State: And upon perseverance therein should
meet with the merciless punishment due to such a one: And that whosoever
should listen unto, or harbor, or lodge, any such person without timely
discovery unto Authority, should be liable to the like punishment: As also that
the Orobrogian Acts of February, 1617. against all such, should remain as
inviolable, as if they were here (Verbatim) expressed: And all Lords, Judges,
and other Officers, were to see execution and performance of the same, as he
would otherwise answer it at his peril.

Fourthly, That they unanimously and deliberatly confirmed and renewed what had
been formerly enacted concerning 4. Article.
the Service of God and his Church by other Assemblies and Diets, and did
generally oblige themselves to remain in the same Form, Truth, and Discipline
of Religion, according to the Revealed truth of Gods holy Word, and the
Articles of Christian Faith contained in the Apostolical, Nicene, and
Athanasian Creed, together with the Confession of Auspurg, and as formerly
concluded in the Counsel of Vssall.

Fifthly, That in regard of the Queens under age and insufficiency thereby to
defend and govern the Realm by her own 5. Article.
self and ability: They did unanimously desire and ordain, that his Majesty's
Decree and Ordinance concerning this matter (formerly committed to the Counsel
and Lords of the State, for their judgment and the conceiving of a right Order
thereupon, which had been also by them tendered unto, and approved of by his
Majesty, but by reason of his sudden ^eath and other occasions impeding, had
not had its full effect, notwithstanding their want of sundry necessary
instructions and appurtenances, which through straitness of time could not be
inserted) should be put in execution, and performed for the good of the Realm,
by the five chief States and Officers thereof; Viz.

1. The Lord high Steward. 2. Marshall. 3. Admiral. 4. Chancellor. 5.
Treasurer.
And in the absence of one, or other, or of any, the eldest of the Counsel of
State, to supply the place: And these five to govern the Kingdom of Suethen
for her Majesty, until she should have attained perfect years. And they five,
or (as aforesaid) the eldest of the Counsel of Stockholme, being of the same
College and Assembly, supplying the place of any of them absent, should have
the Tuition of the Queen, and should bear rule during her Minority and Nonage,
only in her name and stead, without prejudice to the Realm or State, or
violation or breach of the Laws, Rights, and Privileges thereof: And should
for her Majesty powerfully maintain the five Brotherly Offices and State Ranks:
That is, Court-right Counsel, Counsel of War, Admiralty, Chancery, and
Treasury, or Exchecquer, according to the institution and establishment of
former Kings, and especially of their late King Gustavus the second: And should
to their power uphold and maintain the Rights, Laws, Justice, and Policy of
Suethen; Defend and protect the Realm with all the depencies thereon; so as they
might conscientiously answer before God, the Queen, and the State, when
thereunto called, as those by Oath were thereunto obliged: So, on the other side,
the Lords and Peers of the Realm did promise to yield and perform unto those
persons Selected, as aforesaid, all due respect, honor, obedience, and
submissive Subjection, in whatsoever they should require and command, tending
to the Glory of Almighty God, the good and welfare of the Queen, of the State,
and Commonweal: And that in case any person, or persons, should either in
word or deed thwart and oppose the present proceeding and government; They
would withal their powers endeavor to suppress such Insolences, punish the
parties, and constrain them to better obedience.

Sixthly, They would to their utmost prosecute the War against 6. Article.
the Emperor and Popish League in Germany, which their King had sealed with his
blood, until it should please Almighty God to settle a happy and desired Peace
for the good of his Church: As also the Kingdoms necessity so requiring,
whether by reason of their present Wars, or of any new Enemies against their
Queen and State, they would with their lives and Fortunes maintain their Rights
and Liberties, and with their utmost abilities oppose all such as should
confront or withstand their proceedings.

Seventhly, That forasmuch as no Kingdom could subsist without means, or War
be rightly managed without great 7. Article.
charges, They did likewise think good that the

Tolls and Customs should be continued for the good of the Kingdom, in the
same manner as then raised and received etc.

Moreover; If the Germane War should continue; Or if their Kingdom and
Country should fasten upon some other War or trouble: They did promise and
oblige themselves, that whenever required by the Peers, States, and Lords of
the Realm. They would with all their power and means stand and fight, for the
Religion, Queen, Kingdom and Liberties.

That, in all the particulars before specified, they were resolved, and had
unanimously, generally, and particularly, in their own, and in the behalf of
their brethren, present and absent: as well unborne as borne, freely and
willingly consented, agreed, approved, and concluded, and therein sufficiently
accorded, and did promise as faithful, religious, and true sincere meaning
Subjects, to perform the same: They the Council, State, etc. of Sueden, did
underwrite and seal the premises at Stockholme the fourteenth of March 1633.

Thus was the young Princess Christiana, then aged about seven years,
designed Queen of Suethes, Goths and Vandalls etc. as before fully expressed;
conform to what had been decreed in her Fathers time, at the forespecified
Stockholmian Parliament, An. 1627. Her Person and Kingdom was governed by the
Tutors until the year. 1650. in which she was Crowned, and has since (in a
continued single condition) swayed that Scepter more absolutely: the Surname of
Augusta may be (not unduely) attributed unto her, for certainly that
Princess, happy in a wise Council and valiant Commanders, has done great
things, and for many years (since her Fathers death) has held up the
Bucklers, against the Imperial and Austrian Forces, even in the heart of the
Empire, and left it unconstrained with honorable conditions both for her self
and her Allies.

And albeit, from what has been showed in the late Treaty, it may be gathered
that She could not from the Successors of King Vladislaus, her contemporary in
Poland, expect any assured Peace, notwithstanding a due observation on her
part, of what had been at Stumbsdorff transacted; by reason of their
pretensions to the Suethish Crown, which they were not willing Casimirus King
of Poland Great Duke of Lithuaniae. etc / etc. Ao. 1649
portrait of John III Casimir, King of Poland at any hand to relinquish: Yet,
upon that Kings death, and solicitation by the two younger Princes, John
Casimir, and Charles Ferdinand his Brothers, made unto her, She out of a
magnanimous mind (toward Princes of the same blood) did recommend unto the
States of Poland and the Great Dukedom of Lithuania, that regard might be had
unto them in their Election of a new King, but pressed more particularly the
promotion of John Casimir, as being the Elder, who accordingly was Crowned; yet
did he not afterward render (as the Suethes assert) the hoped for return of
those fair Offices; for further satisfaction wherein, the Reader is referred
to the Manifesto by them lately published.

But this Princess, borne, bred, and habituated to reign, has in one late
action outstript all her former; by resigning, uncompelled that the World has
heard of, that Crown and Kingdom unto her Kinsman, the present King: A
concession to be admired, and which after Ages will (perhaps) account rather
fictitious than true: Examples of such great voluntary renounciations seldom
happening amongst men: nor do we read of more than two; Dioclesian a Heathen
divested himself of the Imperial Wreath: Charles the fifth likewise, after a
forty years Regal, and thirty six years Imperial Domination, in the fifty and
sixth of his age, surrendered his Kingdoms to his Son Phillip, and the Empire
to his Brother Ferdinand: But from the weaker Sex, which by how much it is so,
is the more avidously tenacious of Power, by what means soever acquired, as
Histories Divine and humane do testify, none to be excepted, nor any equal
President to be produced.

Neither had this Lady those motives which may be conceived to have induced
that great Emperor last named, to quit his several Soveraigneties, thereby to
live eternally in the memories of men; As the neernesse of Relations mentioned,
his advance into years, under the burden of such occasions as could not but
render him sensible of having received (as he had caused unto others) infinite
toiles and troubles, having undergone nine Voyages into Germany, six into
Spain, seven into Italy, four into France, ten into the Low Countries, two
into England, two into Africa, besides eleven times traversing the maine
Ocean. Certainly, He having been mostly Successful in continued Wars, might be
apprehensive of a Reverse of fortune, and therefore not unwilling to prevent it,
as he did, by a Monastical Retirement.

But this Princess never exposed to personal hazards, has denuded her self
of a Royalty, and therewith invested her nearest Kinsman, yet more remote then
either a Son or a Brother, What Women do we read of that ever refused ought of
Glorious? Much less does History record any Princess, who in the prime of her
years has freely relinquished a long continued, hereditary devolved Possession
of a Diadem, this Lady excepted, who by this Conquest over her self, has
achieved a greater then by all her Commanders she ever could, which happily
may incite some accurate Pen to afford the World an Elogium befitting the
Magnanimity of that Act in one of the fairer Sex; then which former Ages have
not preduced a more lofty Subject whereon to ground the Gallantry of a Discourse.

That Queen has (all along) demonstrated a good inclination to preserve a
fair correspondency with England, even in the heat and height of its late
troubles; In An. 1644. She sent Mr Hugh Mowet her Agent to the Parliament then
sitting, in which public Ministry he was employed about two years: Neither
did he make (in all that time) the least address or application elsewhere:
Several subsequent entercourses have (since) continued the Amity between this
and that Nation: Neither have her respects, as well to our present Government,
as to the Person of his Highness the LORD PROTECTOR, been obscurely testified
by her solemn Reception and honorable Entertainment of the Right Honorable
the Lord Whitlock, late Ambassador Extraordinary in Suethland, and by her
fair compliance with what desired for the good of both Nations, which having
concluded, and as witnessing to the World that She would Dignifie that Act by
rendering it the last of her Reign, she soon after resigned her Kingdom,
Crown, and Scepter, unto

CAROLVS GVSTAVVS the present King of Suethes, Goths, and Vandals, Great
Prince of Finland, Duke of Esthonia and Carelia, Lord of Ingria, who has
ratified the same, and settled a future good understanding between the Realms
of England, and Suethland, by a most Solemn and Magnificent Embassy: He was
borne in Ostrogothia about the year, 1620. if information err not: Son to the
most Illustrious Prince John Casimir, Duke of Zwey Bruchie (descended from the
Electorall House Palatine) and of the most Illustrious Princess Catherina,
eldest Daughter to the often forenamed Charles the ninth, King of Suethland,
and half Sister to the Great Gustavus Adolphus: He was in England, An. 1640.
since which time he has been Generalissimo of all the Suethish Forces in
Germany, and there gave beginning to those great expectations of himself,
which have rendered him the desire of the Suethes, who have Crowned him their
King, in An. 1654: He was (as I have been informed) entitled to that Kingdom
by Act of that Nations Parliament, in the year 1650. if the then Queen
Christina should decease without lawful Male Issue.

His early great Commencements, as well before as since his This Act has not
come to my hands, otherwise the Heads thereof had been particularized.
Exaltation to that Crown, do promise an equal progress and the addition of
Semper to his sur-name of Gustavus, which (literis transpositis) is Augustus,
for a perpetuating of the Glory of that Gustavian Line, unto whose name and
Scepter he has so happily succeeded, as his late Armed Entry into Poland, and
Success hitherto may seem to witness. The Motives that induced him thereunto,
the Curious may read in his Letter to the present Emperor Ferdinand the third,
dated from Wolgast in the month of July, of the year current, 1655.

But leaving this Digression. In the Treaty of Pacification, Observations on
the Treaty.
continued Vicissitudes may be seen; sometimes hopes of accommodation, other
whiles nothing but present rupture to be expected, about empty Airey Titles, or
not much more: And when things seem most desperate, and without mediate means
of reconcilement, the stiffer Party comes fairly to hand by a gentle
compliance. We may observe, the Mediators turn Parties for precedencie and
formalities, which, in a just valuation, what amount they unto? thereby
necessitating (in a manner) the Parties to become Mediators and so make
compensation for Offices received: In its Signature how little trustis to be
imputed to the assurances of great ones, do they not measure observation of
promises by the rule of Interest or self pleasing.

In the Ambassadors life we may see one nobly descended, On the Ambassador.
sprung from a race of Ancestors honored by Illustrious Antiquity, yet not
unnecessitated to pursue the advance of his Fortunes amidst those dangers that
attend the honorable Military Profession; and having in some degree attained
to the favor of his Royal General, falls twice under the displeasure Great
beginnings,
of that Greatness, the frown whereof, according to the wisest of men brings
Death: And yet, the same Person again buyed up by a hand equally powerful,
Ascends to be what he expected not, an Umpire between Kings and Crowns; But
what Merit can there be toward Princes? their turns once served, their ends
compassed; do they stick to kick up the heels of those, whose assistance (they
but a little before) Have not always equal endings.
thought advantageous unto them? He falls at last under the undeserved
displeasure of two mighty Monarchs, into his Grave; and, as having no more to
do here below, removes to render an account of the whole Negotiation of his
life above.

What shall We conclude upon the whole? What shall We Mutual Greatness,
glittering Misery.
call these Greatnesses so subject to mutability? Splendida Miseria? Such
indeed they are: And We may shut up all with that Ingemination of the Wise man;
Vanity of Vanities, Vanity of Vanities; All is but Vanity and Vexation of
Spirit.

As to that Honorable Person deceased, who acted in that Treaty, and whom this
present Narrative does particularly concern, We are not without warrant to
gather a Christian confidence of his Residence in those Mansions of durable
Blessedness, which admit of no more change; seeing he died not only in the
pursuance, but in the effecting and preserving of Peace. For we have it
asserted by the Divine Word, God-Man; That blessed are the Peacemakers, for
they shall be called the Children of God. If such be not, who can be eternally
happy? Happy closure.


The Memory of the Just shall remain for ever. The Righteous shall be had in
everlasting remembrance.
FINIS.
The Courteous Reader is desired, for what rendered amiss in the Book and her
expressed, to have regard to the present emendation; other errors of less
moment (not contradicting the sense) are remitted to the favorable correction
of the Ingenious Inspector.
P. 4. l 25. two, p. 12. l. 24. which, 31. failed, p. 17: l. 44. joining, p.
19. l: 37. Maritime, p. 29. l. 25. meetly. p. 30. l. 24. neither, p. 33. l. 21.
the foresaid Claudius, p. 39. l. 40. Ambiguous, p. 38. l. 12. and, 35. Alloy,
p. 49. l. 13. were not so, p. 50. l. 2. from his Majesty's, p. 51. l. 4. from,
p. 5, 2. l. 10. is not the, p 56. l 45. contrarily, the p. 76. l. 9. Militia,
p. 78. l. 4. as they assert, p. 86. l. 19. Proscribing, p. 89. l. 46. promising
any, p. 90 l. 40. Sought, p. 91. l. 33. should be, p. 93. l. 33. prosecute, p.
99. l. 45. revenge, p. 102. l. 26. Schedule, p. 107. l. 29. for his, r. the, p.
108. l. 25. clear, p. 1 10. l. 41. add, and 42. decreed, p. 111. l. 5. of their
controversies, p. 124. l. 3. for to, r. the, p. 129. l. 37. devolved, p, 142,
l. 10. less of, p. 145. l. 6. praeallably. p. 155. l. 9. for by, r. by p. 157.
l. 26. Here Is, p. 167, l. 39. a Parliament, p 169. l. 25. altercation, and l.
36. Stilo Novo. p. 170. l. 46. Stilo Novo, p. 172 l. 5. belonging to Poland, p.
173. l. 21. not pleasing to, p. 212. l. 26. arising, p. 217. l. 28. dissension,
p. 224. l. 4. Nordlingen, p. 231. l. 9. lent, p. 241. l. 5. Altenaw, p. 249. l.
28. dependencies p. 251. l. 31. expected, 252. l. 4. hereditarily.


