Christ's Light THE ONLY ANTIDOTE TO OVERCOME and EXPEL the Poison of Satan's
greatest TEMPTATIONS.

ALSO, A Measuring-Rule CONCERNING LIBERTY AND PERSECUTION.

And who have been the PERSECUTORS, and who have been the SUFFERERS from the
beginning.

Printed in the Year, 1662.

Christ's Light the only Antidote to Overcome and Expel the Poison of Satan's
greatest Temptations.
THe ground of Desperation is out of the Light, Genesis 4.8.
for Cain when he Despaired went from the Light, that killed the just; he that
killed the just within, killed the just without: And Esau who despised his
birthright, who was a profane person, did seek to kill the just; and he that
rose up against the beloved of God, David, 2 Samuel 28.15. and 31.4 Mat. 27.5.
who despaired, there he rose up against the just: And the Jews did despair,
and doubted, they did not believe in the Light, and were against the just,
though they professed all the Scriptures; and Judas which despaired, turned
from Christ the Light to the changeable Priest; so the cause of desparation is
going from the Light, for that which will presume will despair, which rises up
in that nature which acts contrary to the Light, and that is it which wanders
to and fro, up and down, and hunts abroad, and builds that which God confounds.
I am the light of the world, Genesis 25 27.
and does enlighten every one that comes into the World, says Christ, he by
whom the world was made: Now every one being enlightened with the Light that
comes from him who is not of the world, who was tempted in the world to make
himself away, who was tempted to lust after the Creatures, who was tempted to
worship the Devil, who is out of the Truth, but overcame all: Luke 4.9. and 6,
5, 8.
Now every one of you that come into the world, having a Light from him that is
not of this world, that was thus tempted, who entered not into the temptation;
it is not a sin to be tempted, for he was tempted, but to enter into the
temptation: So if you see temptations with the Light that comes from Christ,
the Light, the Truth, and the Life; look at him who was tempted, who overcame
the temptations, Heb. 4.15.
who was not of the world; having a Light from him whose name is called The
Word of God, who says, If thou keep my word, Rev. 3.10.
I will keep ^^ee in the hour of temptation, which shall come upon all the
world, and it shall not come near thee, which shall come to try all that dwell
upon the earth: For having a Light from the Word by which all things was made,
and keeping the Word, the power is received against all temptations, and they
shall not come nigh. Art thou tempted to make away thy self? Rev. 3.8.
so was Christ. Look not at the temptations, but look at Christ, and there thou will receive power. Luke 4.3.
Art thou tempted to the Creatures? does the Devil, he that is out of the
Truth, who is a destroyer, tempt thee to the Creatures? Luke 4.7.
so was Christ, he by whom all things was made. Art thou tempted to worship the
Devil? Does the Devil who is out of the Truth tempt thee to worship him, Heb.
2.10.
look to Christ, he was tempted, who overcame: Look to him who overcame, Joh.
14.6.
he is the Captain of our Salvation: So every one having a Light from Christ
Jesus, which is given to him to watch, and to pray, and to seek, and to knock
after Christ, who is the Door, the Way, the Life, the Covenant of Peace: So
look not at the temptations, but at Christ, neither be troubled at them; but
look to him from whom your strength comes, Isa. 45.22.
that lets you see them, and there stand still, for there Salvation is
received, and your strength. Have you made a Covenant with death, Isa. 28.16,
17, 18.
who contrary to the Light in your Consciences, have acted? Have you made
Covenants with Hell, and the Grave, and Satan, which is out of the Light, Isa.
42.6.
out of the Truth; and that is the Devil that is out of the Truth, the
destroyer, the devourer. Therefore being turned to the Light which comes from
Christ, the Covenant of God, Isa. 49.9.
God's Covenant of Light, there waiting, the Covenant of death is broken, and
in it believe, for there Gods mercy is received, against which Covenant Hell
gates cannot prevail, let her open her mouth never so wide; and all the bonds
of iniquity, promises which you have made with the fleshly mind, and the lusts
being turned to the Light, the Covenant of Life breaks all the bonds and the
promises of the fleshly mind: Therefore in patience wait in the Light which
comes from Christ, the Covenant of peace which ye may receive, Lam. 3.26.
to have peace with God; and never look at the temptations, but at the Light
which shows them, and there stand still to receive power from him, from whom
all power is received; for that which is out of the Truth, that tempts to draw
from the Light, and from the Truth, and out of it; therefore every one having
the Light from Christ, who is not of the world, which is come into the world,
that will let you see the temptations. Thou that keep my word, John 17 16.
they shall not come nigh thee, but power shall be received to trample upon
all. And the worship in the Spirit and Truth will be known, Rev. 5.10.
and the wisdom by which all the Creatures were created, will be received, with
it to use them to the glory of God, John 8.44.
to which end they were created; and that which is out of the Truth, which
tempts to murder, Mat. 11 29.
for that is the murderer which is out of the Truth, and out of the Light,
will with the Light be seen, judged, and condemned; but before he will lift up,
and exalt, and the same will bring to despair: But learn of Christ the Light,
who is meek and lowly, and he is kept out and down, who is out of the Light:
But before this he will tempt into the creatures, to get into the creatures, he
who from the Light, and from the Life, and so a devourer of them, and so out of
the wisdom by which they were created; therefore as I said before, wait in the
Light which comes from Christ the Life, that with it ye may come to receive
refreshing from the Lord; and to know the wisdom of the Creation, with which it
must be used to the glory of the Creator. So having a Light from him by whom
the world was made, to whom all power in Heaven and Earth is given; wait in the
Light, from him to receive power, which brings out of the worlds lusts and
defilements, John 9.51.
which the Light which comes from him will show you all the temptations to the
creatures, or obeying the will of him that is out of the Truth, but you will
come to know the right use of the creatures, waiting in the Light; so wait for
power from the Lord in the Light (which shows you all temptations) which comes
from the Lord, for power to stand against all temptations; Mat. 13 33.
and so that all may be condemned with the Light, that is contrary to it; and
so you may come to witness the leaven that leavens into the new lump, and see
him that makes intercession, Heb. 7.25.
who is able to save to the utmost; 1 Cor. 10.13.
and so with the Light you will see there is no temptation you are taken with,
but which is common to man. So if you mind the Light, and in it stand, you will
see the Lord giving issue, whereby you will find deliverance standing in the
Light, which comes from the word, which is as a fire, and a hammer, and a
sword, which beats down that which is contrary to the Truth, Jer. 23.29.
divides and burns up, which keeping the word the temptations will not come
nigh, but the word of reconciliation be witnessed, and the word of faith which
makes clean and purifies, 2 Cor. 5.10.
and sanctifies: Where the old Garment is put off, and the knowledge in the
flesh denied, and the knowing in the Life in the Spirit, where nothing comes to
reign but Life and Power, where all is overturned, and with the power of the
Lord comprehended, the dread and life of the living God, to whom be all honor
and glory forever.

A Measuring-Rule concerning Liberty and Persecution.
CHristians should love one another, that is the Command of Christ, and is a
mark by which they are known to be his disciples. Secondly, they should love
their very enemies; and by this they differ from the Jews and Heathens, and all
other people.

Now as for the late Act concerning the people of God called Quakers, there is
no penalty laid upon any man for the not breaking up of their Meetings, or not
putting the Oath to them; therefore it will try and manifest what spirit men
are of, and that which is in people will be made manifest now, because the Act
is lest to the Executor of it, without any penalty: Which Act had it been in
the days of the Apostles, would have taken hold of Christ and his Apostles;
for he had Twelve that often met together; and by this he might have but three,
for if there were five, it had been in the transgression; who also had seventy
Disciples more. Now I say, if it had been in the days of Christ, it would have
taken hold of him and his Disciples. Would Christ (and his Disciples) the
Wisdom of God, do you think, have obeyed this Act, and not met with his
Disciples? Or if the Jews should have made Laws to limit him but to four, do
you think that Christ the Wisdom of God would have obeyed it, or his Disciples?
And also Christ said to his Disciples, that they should wait together at
Jerusalem and not depart; and they did meet together, and you know that their
meetings were different from the Jews and heathen; and they were to wait
together at Jerusalem until they received power from on high, before they were
to go to gather the Churches: And this was according to the wisdom of God;
Which if the Jews now had spoken to them that they should not meet, do you
think the disciples would have obeyed them, or the command of Christ? And when
the Apostles had gathered Churches out of the Jews and the Gentiles, and settled
them, to whom they wrote their Epistles, and builded up one another in the holy
Faith, and not to forsake the assembling of themselves together: For if we sin
wilfully after we have received the knowledge of the Truth, then consider what
is to be looked for: [So now mark] if the Jews or the Heathen out of whom the
Hebrews, the Galatians, the Colossians, the Thessalonians and the Corinthians,
were gathered into several Churches; if the Heathen and Jews had made Laws
against them, that they should not meet saving four, do you think they would
have obeyed it? Therefore consider of these things, and do as you would be done
by, that is the Law and the Prophets: Did not many suffer in the ten
Persecutions for meeting together, in the time about 650 years, before there
was a Pope? And has not many suffered for meeting together, by the Papists
since; as look through the Book of Martyrs, how they suffered by the Papists,
and called them Conventicles; and also in the time of the Martyrs sufferings in
the ten Persecutions, and since the ten Persecutions, did they not make Laws
they should not meet? And did they not call them Conventicles? And yet did they
not meet in Barns or Houses, Woods and Fields? as you may read in the Book of
Martyrs? Were these Martyrs disobedient in the ten Persecutions, and since to
the Papists, in which so many thousands suffered for meeting together, for not
paying Tithes, and for not swearing, and not yielding to their Principles and
practice that persecuted them: Was it evil in them that persecuted them? And is
it good now in you that make us to suffer for the same things? So are the
Martyrs, and Persecutors, and you one, or the Martyrs and we one, who have
suffered all along? Whether they have not the nature of the Heathen that make
to suffer, and not the nature of the Apostles? Likewise, have not many suffered
here, as we now, for meeting together, and not swearing now in these days? As
consider, in Oliver's days above three thousand suffered Imprisonment, and some
to death, who suffered for not Swearing, and for Conscience Sake, as many of
the Martyrs in the Time of the ten Persecutions did, and by the Papists, and as
we do now.

Therefore consider these things, for it is Christ's command that we do obey,
and the Apostles Doctrine which says, Swear not at all: Consider now, would
not they in the ten Persecutions, and the Papists, have punished Christ for
preaching this Doctrine, and made him to suffer, (as we do now that own it)
which says, Swear not at all, but let your yea be yea, and your nay, nay, etc.
and the Apostles for holding it forth; for we do not these things in contempt
or rebellion to any man; for our love and tenderness is, that all Magistrates
and People would live in God's fear, and receive his Wisdom, by which all
things were made and created, that by that they might be ordered to God's
glory, and order that which God has given them under their hands, to his
honor, that to God they may be a blessing in their generation.

And consider, Daniel and the three children met, and disobeyed the King's
command; and Mordecai, who would not bow, disobeyed the Kings command; and the
Midwives disobeyed Pharaoh's command for not putting the Children to death: And
the Woman who had seven sons which suffered by the Kings Law, because they
would not eat Swins flesh, and one of her sons spoke to his Mother, I will not
obey the Kings command, I will obey the Law of Moses, which our forefathers
obeyed. And Daniel disobeyed Darius his command, which was, that Daniel should
not pray; and he prayed, and did not obey his command. And the Apostles
disobeyed the High Priests and Counsels command, when they charged them that
they should speak no more in that Name: Yet in the thing that is good, just and
righteous, the righteous always have been, and are ever subject to every
Ordinance of man for the Lord's sake, to such as were for the punishment of
evildoers, and for the praise of them that do well, that they might live a
godly and peaceable life, [Mark] a peaceable life; for this cause they both
prayed, and paid tribute, not that they should bring them into an ungodly life,
and an unpeaceable life, but that they should punish the evildoers, that went
into an ungodly life, and unpeaceable; for to that end were the higher Powers
ordained over the ungodly, that went into the ungodly and unpeaceable life; for
the ungodly are unpeaceable; and this is for the praise of them that do well:
for the Law was made for transgressors, and not for the righteous. So they that
be in the higher power, are to distinguish the precious from the vile; for not
doing so, the Prophet often cried against them; and when they turned against
the righteous, peaceable and godly, then is the saying known which the
Scripture speaks of, What shall separate us from the love of God? Shall
Principalities, or Powers, or Thrones, or Dominions? Showing, that there are
Principalities and Powers that would separate from the Love of God which they
had in Christ Jesus, and that is from a godly and peaceable Life; and so there
is a distinction, to be subject to that which punishes the Evil, and there is
a suffering by that which would separate from the love of God: Now that which
would separate, turns the Sword backwards against the righteous; and
Persecutors were always blind, and could never see, but run upon their friends
in stead of their foes: And therefore these things consider and distinguish.
God let Adam have liberty in the earth, into which he was driven when he
disobeyed his command; and God let Cain have liberty in the earth, after he had
killed his Brother about Religion; and God let wild Ishmael have liberty in the
wilderness, after he was put out of Abraham's Family, the Father of the
faithful; and the Serpent he had his Liberty to feed upon the dust of the
earth. Now I say, consider, who are they who would not have Christ the just to
live upon the earth; were not they them that Christ called Serpents, the Jews,
the great professors? It was not God's mind that people should be put out of
the earth: God let Adam and Eve have liberty in the earth, after they had
transgressed, though they were not to have liberty in the Garden. And Ishmael
though he had not liberty in Abraham's family, yet he had liberty in the
wilderness. And Cain though he had not liberty in the presence of God, yet he
had liberty to be a wanderer in the land of Nod. Therefore consider what mind
that is that would not let men have liberty in the Earth, though he be not of
your assembly, yet he should have liberty in the Earth. Therefore consider
whether that be the mind of God or against it, yea or nay, though the just
comes over all these things, and are redeemed from the earth.

And if we must not meet together, how must we stir up one another, and edify
one another, and provoke one another unto love and to good works, if we must
not meet together to speak one to another. Consider this with understanding.

The world says, Kiss the Book; The Book says, Kiss the Son lest he be angry:
And the Son says, Swear not at all, but keep to yea and nay in all your
communications; for whatsoever is more than this, comes of evil.

The world says, Lay your hand on the Book; the Book says, Handle the Word;
and the Word says, Handle not the traditions, inventions, nor the rudiments of
the world; and, this is my beloved Son, hear ye him, says God, who is the
Life, and the Truth, and the Light, and the way to God, who says, Swear not at
all.

Therefore cumber not the ground you adulterers, cumber not the earth you
drunkards, cumber not the ground you swearers, cumber not the ground you proud
vain persons, cumber not the earth you earthworms, covetous persons, cumber not
the ground you oppressors and exactors, and grinders of the poor; cumber not
the ground thou persecutor of the children of the Most High, cumber not the
ground ye rich gluttons, cumber not the earth you idle persons, that live in
fullness of pleasure, and abundance of idleness, as the stalled Ox, so as he
lies in the mire and dirt; and as the full-fed horse that must be breathed,
with pleasures and sports, and your games of all sorts, and call it recreation
for your idleness, out of the service of the Lord; for thou who art so full,
thou need not work thy self down by pleasures, nor go to pleasures to get
thee a stomach, if thou will work it down with labor; work and chastity keeps
all sweet, and laboring in the fear of the Lord.

Cain, the first birth, a persecutor, the first birth, a false worshipper; and
Cain the first birth, that false worshipper, turned and turns against Abel;
and Cain the first birth, out of his stock came up the false worshipper, who
was the inventer of Harps and Organs.

Nimrods stock, false worshippers, and out of Ham's stock he came, whose spirit
was not covered with truth, but with that which was from the truth; and so that
spirit which runs from the truth, is not like Shem nor Japhet, and such worship
not God in the spirit.

And they of the old world, that went from the spirit of the Lord, and grieved
his spirit, they could not worship God in the spirit.

And the Philistines grieved the spirit of the Lord, and they were the
persecutors, and they turned against the just.

And the Sodomites were the persecutors of the just, and the Sodomites were
such as lived in abundance of idleness and fullness, and those that were idle
and full, persecuted the righteous and the just, and the true worshippers; and
they that did, and do so, are the false worshippers.

And Ishmael and his stock, the first birth, who scoffed at the just, and
turns against the just, a persecutor; and so are all wild men now.

And Esau the first birth, the profane person, a false worshipper, a
persecutor of Jacob; as many Esaus now, persecute them whom God loves, who
hate the first birth, (being persecutors, profane, false worshippers) whom God
loves not.

And the Egyptians were, and are persecutors, and of the first birth.

And Balaam was a persecutor of the just, and Balaam loved the wages of
unrighteousness; and such Balaams are now the lovers of the wages of
unrighteousness, and the persecutors.

And the Jews that professed the Law, the words of God, and did live out of the
life of the Law of God, such did and do persecute the just; and such professors
were always, and now are persecutors.

And always such as preached for hire, and devined for money, and taught for
filty lucre, and such Shepherds, Bishops and Priests that taught for the fleece
and the wool, and for handfuls of barley, and for pieces of bread, and were
covetous; such were and are persecutors and false worshippers, and persecutors
of the just, and the true worshippers of God in the spirit, and they that did
so, grieved it.

And the Scribes, Pharisees and chief Priests, that had the Prophets and the
Saints words, and were not in the life of the Law and the Prophets and Saints,
and yet did profess their words, such did and do persecute the just, them that
be in the life of the Saints.

And also, likewise all Christians that do profess the Prophets and Christ, and
the Apostles, and Moses, and the Saints words, and be out of their life and
spirit, are the false worshippers, and are the persecutors of the just, and
that is the end of all the profession without the Life and the Spirit of God
that the Saints dwell and walk in, who are the true worshippers of God in the
Spirit and Truth; and such as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the sons
of God; and the false worshippers are such as grieve the Spirit of God, and yet
will get the Saints words, and the sheeps clothing, and not live in their life.

The first birth lives in the kingdom of the world, in strife, a Persecutor:
The first birth is a birth of strife, and the second birth is heir of the
Kingdom of the Lord; and the fruits of this birth is love, etc. Therefore come
out of the first birth, to the second.

Cain, Ham, Nimrod, Ishmael, Esau, Balaam, Sadomites, Philistines, Pharisees,
chief Priests, Babylon; were not these envious, wild, profane, idle, covetous,
oppressors, persecutors, false worshippers; and so you that be of the same
nature, and of the same birth, was it not, and is it not the first birth? If it
be so, know your own Kindred, and come out of this Kindred.

Scoffers, Scorners, Mockers, Reproachers, Revilers, Brawlers, Railers, envious
Men, Do you profess God and Christ? These be all evil weeds, and cumbers God's
ground. The Babylonites were, and are persecutors of the Just, and the true
Worshippers of God; and the Babylonites build up, and throw down, who be out of
the standing Power, Life and Spirit of God, which the Apostles and we are in;
and so are not upon the Rock Christ Jesus upon which we are, that changes not.

GEO. FOX.

THE END.

