AN EXHORTATION To all them that Profess Themselves CHRISTIANS, AND SAY, The
Scripture is their Rule for their Life, Doctrine and Practice.

By George Fox.

Christ is become of none effect unto you. Whosoever of you are justified by
the Law, are fallen from Grace, Gal. 5.4.

How turn you again to the Weak beggarly Elements, whereunto you desire again
to be in Bondage! ye observe Days, and Months, and Times and Years; I am
afraid of you, lest I have bestowed upon you Labor in vain, Gal. 4.9, 10, 11.

The Bereans were Noble, and searched the Scriptures daily, to see whether
those things were so, as the Apostles preached, Acts 17.11.

Let no man judge you therefore in Meats, or Drinks, or in Respect of an Holy
Day, or of New Moons, or of the Sabbath-dayes, which are a Shadow of things to
come; but the Body is of Christ, Col. 2.16, 17.

Printed in the Year 1680.

Here you may see in this little Book as follows:
First, THat none of the Holy Men of God in the Old Covenant did call an
Outward Tabernacle, or Temple, or Synagogue after the Name of any Saint. 2dly,
And that also in the New Covenant Christ and the Apostles did not call any of
their Meeting Houses or Meeting-places after their Own Names or other Saints
Names. 3dly, That Christ and the Apostles did not set up Holy Days, and their
own Birth-Dayes, and other Saints Days; and set up Courts, and compelled
people to keep them. 4thly, And likewise, How Christ and his Apostles did not
call an Outward House a Church and Congregation. 5thly, How that neither Christ
nor the Apostles, nor the Holy Men of God, did give the many Names to the
Months and Days, as them called Christians do now. 6thly, And also, How that
a Curse was pronounced upon them that did not bring their Tithes to the
Storehouse in the Old Covenant. And how the Priests and Teachers, that call
themselves Christians, have exceeded that Curse in the Old Covenant, in casting
many into Prison, and keeping some therein till Death, because they could not
give them Tithes and Maintenance in the New Covenant, knowing that Christ has
changed the Priesthood, and the Law and Commandment, that gave Tithes and took
Tithes; and said to his Disciples, Freely you have received, Freely give.
7thly, And likewise concerning such as say, The Scripture is their Rule to walk
by; but how contrary to Scripture they have walked.
An Exhortation to all them that Profess themselves Christians, and say, The
Scripture is their Rule for their Life, Doctrine and Practice.
First, WHERE did ever any in the old World, before the Flood, or from Noah's
time to Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, keep and observe the Days of their Birth, or
the Days of the Death of their Progenitors, and call them Holy Days? Or where
did any in the days of the old Covenant, or the old Testament, unto the days
of Christ, throughout all the Fathers, and Prophets, and Holy Men of God, keep
either the days of the Birth or Death of any of the Patriarchs, Fathers or
Prophets, and call them Holy Days? or had their Courts or Paritors to trouble
People for working upon the days of the Birth, or days of the Death of any of
the Patriarchs or Fathers, and call them Holy days? But on the contrary, is it
not said and commanded by the Lord, Six Days shall thou labor, and do all thy
Work that thou have to do? Ex. 20.9. And in Ex. 23. it is said, Six Days shall
thou do thy Work. And does not the Scripture say in many other places, There
are six days wherein men ought to work, etc?

And now, if you do profess the new Covenant, and that you are Christians, and
though there was no such Practice of Observing the days of the Birth or Death
of any of the Fathers or Prophets, either in the old World before the Flood, or
after, in the days of the old Covenant, nor in the days of Christ and the
Apostles in the new Covenant; then how can you, that profess the Scriptures to
be your Rule for Life and Doctrine, prove your Practice for these things by the
Scriptures? etc.

For where did ever Christ or the Apostles command, that their Followers should
observe and keep the days of their Birth, or the days of their Death, or bid to
call them Holy Days; and set up Courts, or Paritors to summon people into
their Courts, and fine them, or imprison them for working upon any of the days
of their Birth, or of their Death? Or did Christ ever give a Command, that any
should keep the day of his Birth, or Ascension, or the day of the Purification
of Mary his Mother? Or did Christ give a Command, that any should observe and
keep the day of John Baptist's Birth or Death? Or did the Apostles ever give a
Command, that any should keep the days of Steven or James's Birth or Death,
who were Martyred in their days, before their decease? Or did ever Peter, and
John, and Matthew, and Luke, and Mark, and the rest of the Apostles give a
Command, that the Christians after their decease should observe their days of
Birth or Death? Or did ever Paul write to Timothy or Titus, which were Elders
or Bishops, and the rest of the Apostles and Elders in all their Councels,
which gave out their Decrees to the Churches; in all their Decrees and
Councils, did they give forth any such Order, Command or Decree in all their
Epistles and Writings in the Bible, that any should observe and keep the days
of the Birth or Death of any of the Apostles, or Disciples, or Evangelists, or
Pastors and Teachers? and to call them Holy Days, and set up Courts, and cite
all that should work on those days? and that they should be called after the
Names of the Saints, or Prophets, and Apostles? and that they should be
summoned to their Courts, and there fined for not observing and keeping the
days of their Birth or Death? Nay, is not God and Christ more dishonored upon
those days, which you call Holy Days, than any other days of the Week, by
Looseness, Drunkenness, Vain Sports, Plays, Pleasures, Wantonness, and almost
all manner of Evil committed upon those days, which you call Holy Days?

And the Apostle says to the Galatians, But now after that ye have known God,
or rather are known of God; how turn you again to the Weak and Beggarly
Elements, whereunto ye desire again to be in Bondage? ye observe Days, and
Months, and Times, and Years; I am afraid lest I have bestowed upon you Labor
in vain, etc.

Now is not the Labor of the Apostles bestowed in vain upon you, who run into
the Observation of Days, Times, Months and Years; and not only so, but set up
your Courts, and Paritors to cite and summon People to them, that do not
observe your Holy Days, as you call them, and trouble and fine people about
it, rather to get Money from them, than to ^ring them into Truth?

And you say, and set forth upon your Steeple house-Walls, and print, that Six
days men must Labor, as in the Ten Commandments the Lord commands; and yet do
not you in the same places (your Steeple Houses) give notice or warn all
people, to keep and observe the Day of the Birth, or the Day of the Death of
such a Saint? And tell people, that they must keep Christ's Nativity-Day, or
St. John's Day, and Peter, and Paul, and Steven's Days? etc. and yet say, Six
Days you must Labor: Is not this Contradiction, and contrary to the Command
of God, and no Command of Christ, nor his Apostles?

And this your Practice you cannot make good, neither out of the old nor new
Testament, etc.

And therefore be not offended with us, if we search the Scriptures, which you
say is your Rule for your Life, Doctrine and Practice; for therein we cannot
find, that they do maintain or hold forth either your Life, Doctrine or
Practice in these things.

Therefore be not offended at us, because we cannot follow you in the
Observation of those things, which you have no Warrant for in the Scriptures of
the old or new Testament.

2dly, Where did ever any of the Patriarchs, Fathers, Prophets or Apostles, in
the old Testament, either before the Flood, or before the Law, or in the time
of the old Law and Covenant, call any of their Meeting Houses Synagogues,
Tabernacles, Sanctuaries, Temple, after any of the Patriarchs, Fathers,
Prophets, or the Holy Men or Women's Names? You that say, the Scripture is your
Rule for your Practice and Life, show one Example for your so doing in all the
old Testament, where ever they called any of their Meeting Houses, Synagogues,
Tabernacles, Temple, Sanctuaries, after any of the Patriarchs or Prophets
Names, who say, the Scripture is your Rule for Life, Doctrine and Practice, as
is before said?

Or in the days of the new Testament, where did ever Christ or any of the
Apostles or Disciples call any of their Meeting Houses, or Places where Christ
and his Disciples met in, whilst he was with them in the days of his Flesh; or
after, when he was risen, as long as the Apostles and Disciples of Christ lived
upon the Earth, where did they call any of the Houses they met in, by Christ's
Name, or the Virgin Mary's Name, or any of the Apostles or Saints Names?

For it is said, Paul dwelt two whole years in his own hired House, and
received all that came unto him, teaching those things that concerned the Lord
Jesus Christ.

Now here Paul made his own hired House a Meeting House to preach in; he does
not call his Meeting House by the Name of St. Peter or St. Paul's House, or St.
John's, or St. James, or St. Bartholomew, or St. Thomas, or the like.

And the Apostle Paul in Romans 16. greeteth his Follow-helpers in Christ Jesus,
Priscilla and Aquila, and the Church that was in their House.

Now the Apostle does not call their House the Church; but the People, that
were in it, he calls the Church: neither does he call their House St. Peter or
St. Paul's Church, or St. Priscilla or Aquila's Church.

Likewise in the 1 Cor. 16. the Apostle salutes the Church which is in their
House: he does not call it St. Andrew's, or St. Margaret's, or St. Katherines,
or St. Mary's, or the like.

And Paul writes to the Colossians, and says, Luke the beloved Physician
greeteth you; salute the Brethren in Laodicea, and Nymphas, and the Church
which is in his House. Here he gives it not the Title of St. Matthew's, or St.
Mark's, or St. Luke's, or St. Andrew's, or the like.

And the Apostle writes to Philemon, and to Aphia, and to Archippus, and to the
Church in his House. Here he does not call the House the Church; but the Church
was the People, which were in their House. And the Apostle does not give the
Title of St. Thomas, or St. Peter, or St. Paul to the House.

And John writes to the seven Churches in Asia; and he does not name them by
St. Peter, or St. Andrew, or St. Paul, or St. Mary, or St. Margrets; but to the
Seven Churches, or Seven Congregations of the Saints.

And now you say, the Scripture is your Rule for your Life, Practice and
Doctrine; and have been offended at us the People of God in Scorn called
Quakers, because we cannot give those Titles to Houses which you have builded,
as you and your Forefathers have done. For we, like the Noble Bereans, have
searched the Scriptures, and cannot find neither in the old nor new Testament,
that ever the Patriarchs, Prophets, Christ, the Apostles or Disciples did ever
give such Titles to their Meeting Houses, as beforementioned, as you have done
to yours. And therefore be not angry with us, because we cannot follow you in
your Practices, which you cannot make good by the Scripture of the old and new
Testament.

And you that call your selves Christians, had you not better mind the Lives of
the Saints, and the Life of Christ Jesus in his Grace and Truth, Light, Power
and Spirit in your Hearts, and teach all your People to do the same, rather
than to observe the Days of their Birth or Death; and to give such Titles to
Houses, which Christ nor his Apostles never did. So that they and you may come
to Christ's Eternal Day, and in him to know the Rest and Sabbath, and to keep
that Holy Eternal Day in his Eternal Light and Spirit, to the Glory of the
Eternal God, and his Son Christ Jesus, Amen.

3dly, And in Malachy 3. he says, Will a Man Rob God? yet ye have robbed me,
says the Lord. But ye say, Wherein have we robbed thee? In Tithes and
Offerings; ye are cursed with a Curse: For ye have robbed me, even this whole
Nation. Bring ye therefore all the Tithes into the Storehouse, that there may
be Meat in my House; and prove me now therewith, says the Lord of Hosts, if I
will not open to you the Windows of Heaven, and pour you out a Blessing, etc.

Now mark; this was in the old Covenant, and old Testament, when Tithes and
Offerings were commanded; for here they were both joined together: These Tithes
and Offerings were to be carried into the Storehouse, that there might be Meat
in the House for the Priests, and Levites, and Widows, and Fatherless: For the
Priests and Levites had no Lot of the Land; but the Tithes and part of the
Offerings, was their Portion: for the Tithes were the Lord's, and the Levites
were the Lord's; and he gave the Tithes or Tenths of the other Tribes to them;
and the Tenths of the Tenths were to be offered up to the High Priest. So it
was reckoned a Robbing of God, by such as did not bring in their Tithes, which
were the Lord's, which he gave unto the Levites and Priests; yea, the whole
Nation of the Jews robbed God, because they did not bring in their Tithes and
Offerings into the Storehouse; and therefore they were cursed with a Curse,
and that was their Punishment, and Punishment it was enough in the time of the
Law and old Covenant.

Now the Priests did not go, and take this whole Nation, the Eleaven Tribes,
and cast them into Prison, and spoil their Goods, and take Treble Damage of
them; you do not read they did so in the old Testament, that any of the
Patriarchs, or any of the Prophets, Kings, Magistrates or Priests, did cast any
into Prison, and there keep them until Death, because they would not bring in
their Tithes in the time of the Law, and according to the Law into the
Storehouse; which if they did not do it, they were cursed with a Curse, as
Malachy says. And if they did bring their Tithes into the Store house, that
there might be Meat enough for the Priests, and Levites, and Widows, and
Fatherless; then the Lord opened the Windows of Heaven, and poured out a
Blessing upon them.

And did not this Law serve till the Seed Christ came? who has changed this
Priesthood, that was made by the Law, and had a Commandment to take Tithes,
according to the Law, which Commandment Christ has disannulled, and by the one
offering up of himself, once for all the Offerings, has put down the Priests
that offered, and their Offerings and Maintenance, and has taken away the
first Covenant, and established the second, who became a Curse, to take away
the Curse; and made under the Law, to redeem us from under the Law of Works:
And were not Tithes and Offerings under the Law of Works, Do this, and Live? if
not, they were Robbers, and Cursed. And does not Christ in his Gospel and new
Covenant say, Believe, and be saved?

And Christ, when he sent forth his Twelve and Seventy Disciples without a Bag
or Staff, said, Freely you have Received, Freely Give: And therefore Christ
putting down the Priesthood, with his Offerings, and other Ceremonies, which
the Law commanded, and Tithes and Offerings, which were his Maintenance or
Salary, and commanded under the old Covenant by the Law, under the Penalty of a
Curse, where did ever Christ alter his Command? or the Apostles go about to
alter his Command, which was, Freely you have Received, Freely Give, in his new
Covenant? And where did ever Christ to his Apostles, or his Apostles to others,
command or direct, that they should take or demand Tithes, or the peoples
Tenths for preaching the Gospel? as you called Christians have done, since the
Apostles days, which say, The Seripture is your Rule for your Life, Doctrine
and Practice.

Therefore show us out of the Scripture of the new Testament, where ever they
did cast any into Prison, for not giving them Tithes and Offerings, as you have
done; and hale them into Courts, Assizes and Sessions: show one Example in all
the Scripture, and be not Angry at us, because we search the Scriptures, as
those Noble Bereans did, to see whether these things be so in the Scriptures of
Truth, which you preach up for Doctrine and Practice. And because we cannot
find them in the Scripture, and follow you, and uphold you in these things,
which you cannot prove by Scripture for your Doctrine and Practice, therefore
are you Angry, and persecute us, because we do not follow you in your Doctrine
and Practice, which we cannot find in Scripture, that you have said is your
Rule.

And why cannot the Curse of the old Covenant serve your turns? but you must
exceed the old Law, to hale people before your Courts, and cast them in to
Prison, and there keep some unto Death, and spoil their Goods, that cannot give
you Tithes according to the old Law, such who are the true Christians, and
Children of the new Covenant, and are the faithful Witnesses of Jesus Christ,
who has redeemed them from under the Law, and has taken away the Curse of the
Law, and now do not seek to be justified by the Works of the Law, but by Faith
in Christ Jesus. I say, why is not the Curse in the old Law sufficient for all
the Priests and Bishops in Christendom, if they will be Priests of the old Law,
and Teachers of the old Law, and do the Works of the old Law of Moses, which he
that thinks to be justified by the Law, is justified by that, by which no Flesh
shall be saved, as the Apostle says, and is fallen from Grace. And therefore,
if ye will have the Law of Commandments, that commands Tithes to the Priests,
and their Offerings, I say again, Why is not the Curse sufficient for you, to
pour out your Curses upon the People, which do not bring in their Tithes and
Offerings (not into the Priests Barn, but) into the Storehouse, as God
commands, and not for the Priests only, but for the Widows and Fatherless also?
Surely your Curse should be sufficient, and not to spoil their Goods, and
imprison them to Death too: this is more than the Law commands in the old
Covenant.

And is it not contrary to the Law of the old Covenant, that the Priests and
Levites, that were to receive the Tithes, for them to have any Lot of the Land?
And do not they that pay Tithes and Offerings to the Priests, come under the
Law, and so under the Curse; and so come from under the Blessing of the Gospel,
to under the Curse of the Law? For is it not written, Cursed is every one that
continues not in all things that is written in the Book of the Law, to do
them? Gal. 3. But no man is justified by the Works of the Law in the sight of
God, it is evident: For the Just shall live by his Faith: And the Law is not of
Faith. And Christ has redeemed us from under the Curse of the Law, being made
a Curse for us, that the Blessing of Abraham might come upon the Gentiles
through Jesus Christ, and that we might receive the Promise of the Spirit
through Faith. So in these your Practices, though you say, The Scripture is
your Rule for your Life, Doctrine and Practice; but in this the Scripture of
the new Testament is not your Rule for these things: Let all the Children of
the new Covenant, and true Christians, search the Scriptures, according to the
Practice of the noble Bereans, and see whether the Scripture has been your
Rule in these your Practices and Doctrine in the new Covenant? But if you did
not cast any into Prison, or spoil the Goods of such as did not pay you Tithes
and Offerings, nor hale them before your Courts; but only stood up, and poured
out your Curses upon such, according to the Law, that did not bring in your
Tithes and Offerings into the Storehouse, according to the Law, and that you
had no other Portion in the Land but Tithes and Offerings, etc? We do tell you,
that Christ has ended the Law, and has redeemed us from under the Law, and
became a Curse, and has redeemed us out of the Curse of the Law, and has ended
that Priesthood with all his Ceremonies. And Christ Jesus says in his new
Covenant, Bless, and Curse not; and the Apostle says the same. So we do preach
the free Gospel and free Grace to you, and turn you from the Darkness to the
Light, and from the Power of Satan unto God, that you may see the new Covenant
of Light, Life and Grace, and practice it.

And Christ in his new Covenant says, and commands his Ministers, Freely you
have received, freely give. And the Apostle's Glory was, To keep the Gospel
without Charge, who coveted no man's Silver, nor Gold, nor Apparel, etc. And he
said, He had declared unto the Church the whole Counsel of God. And yet he
never declared to any in all his Writings, Decrees or Epistles, or any other of
the Apostles, That the Ministers of the Gospel should take Tithes and
Offerings, and hale them into Courts, and spoil their Goods, and cast them into
Prison until Death, if they would not give them Tithes and Offerings, or Curse
them them that did not bring in their Tithes into the Storehouse, according to
the old Law of Moses in the old Covenant; for they were redeemed from under the
Law and the Curse.

And likewise, he never declared in his whole Counsel of God, That they should
keep the Days of the Birth or Death of any of the Saints, and call them Holy
Days.

And he never declared in all his Counsel of God, That they should name their
Meeting Houses after the Saints Names.

Also, he never declared in his whole Counsel of God, That Children should have
Godfathers and Godmothers; and that Priests should sprinkle them with outward
Water, and sign them with the Sign of the Gross: But said, There was one Faith,
and one Baptism; and that they were baptized into one Body with one Spirit, and
so made to drink into one Spiris; and they that were baptized into Christ, had
put him on.

Likewise, the Apostle never declared in his whole Counsel of God, That the
Saints should observe a Time of Lent, and abstain from Flesh, and eat Fish; or
that the Saints should observe the Time of Easter, which was the time of the
Jews Passover; or that they should observe the Time of Whitsuntide, called
Pentecost; or that they should observe and keep Christ's Birth Day, and call it
Christmass-day, etc.

Now if you say, The Apostles in their Decrees or Epistles did command the
Church to do and observe such things; then, I pray you, tell us where it is
written, that we, like the noble Bereans, may search for it; And be not Angry
nor Offended with us, because we do not follow you in these things, who say,
The Scripture is your Rule for Life, Doctrine and Practice, and yet cannot make
these your Practices and Doctrine good by Scripture.

And now if Christ and the Apostle and Apostles, who declared the whole Counsel
of God to the Church in their days; if they declared none of these things
beforementioned, which you practice, to be the Counsel of God: then have not
you set them up in that spirit, that is apostatized from the Power and Spirit
the Apostles were in? and have compelled others to follow your Practices, which
you have commanded and taught for Doctrine, which Christ and the Apostles did
not; which Practices you cannot make good by Christ and the Apostles Doctrine,
in the Scriptures of Truth of the new Testament. And therefore, how can you
expect, that we should follow you: For the Apostle says, Follow us as we
follow Christ. So according to the Apostle's teaching, we are to follow you no
farther than you follow Christ; you cannot expect it, if you own Christ and the
Apostles, and their Doctrine; for Christ says, Freely you have received,
freely give; and this is his Command, which is to be obeyed; and it is obeyed
by all them, that receive their Gifts for the Work of their Ministry, which is
for the perfecting of the Saints, from him that is ascended up on high.

But they that have received their Natural Gifts below, cannot endure to hear
of Christ's Doctrine, who ascended up on high, who gave Gifts unto men for the
Work of the Ministry, and commanded them, Freely they had received, freely they
should give it again.

And where did the Apostle, who said, He had declared unto the Church the whole
Counsel of God, declare, That the Saints and Christians should call the Days
of the Week by the Names of Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday,
Saturday and Sunday, and the like? which were the Names of the Heathens Gods,
after whom the Heathens called the Days.

Or where did the Apostle declare, that the Christians should call the Months
by the Names of January, May, June, July and August, etc? which were Names
given by the Heathens and Emperors.

And where did the Apostle, that said, He had declared unto the Church the
whole Counsel of God, declare or direct, that they should call any of the days
Candlemass, Michaelmass-day, Martinmass-day, Christmass-day, and Lammas^day,
and the like?

You that say, The Scripture is your Rule for your Life, Doctrine and Practice,
bring it forth, and be not Angry with us, who cannot follow you in these
things, who never yet produced any Scripture for these your Practices.

From him who loves the Ancient Primitive Truth, and True Christianity, that
Christ taught, and the Apostles and Primitive Church lived in; and desires that
all may come into it, and live and walk in it. G. Fox.
The 18th of the 9th Month, 1679.
Postscript.
THE Apostle says in Romans 16. Greet Priscilla and Aquila, my Fellow-Helpers in
Christ-Jesus, which have for my Life laid down their own Necks; unto whom not I
only give Thanks, but also all the Congregations of the Gentiles. Likewise
greet the Congregation, that is in their House. Here the old Translation calls
the Church a Congregation, that was in their House; and not the outward House a
Church or Congregation; for it is not proper to call an outward House a
Congregation.

And in 1 Cor. 16. The Congregation in their House.

And Phebe was a Minister of the Congregation at Cenchrea. So she was a
Minister of a People, and not of an outward House, which Paul commends, and
sent his Epistle by Phebe, a Minister, from Corinth to Rome; see Romans 16.

And the Apostle Paul, when he writes to Philemon, and to the Congregation that
was in his House: So the outward House was not the Congregation; see Philemon.

And John writes to the Seven Congregations in Asta. Now he does not write to
the Seven Houses that were in Asia, and call them Churches; but he writes to
the People, that were the Congregations or Churches. And John says seven times
over, He that has an Ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the
Congregations; that is, the Congregations or Churches of People gathered
together: For outward Houses have no Ears to hear, which you call Churches: And
therefore he does not write to Houses, and call them Congregations or Churches,
as you may see in Rev. 1, 2. and 3. Chapters, in the Old Tranflation.

And again, the Apostle Paul says in Ephesians. 5. For the Husband is the Wife's
Head, even as Christ is the Head of the Congregation; and the same is he that
ministers Salvation unto the Body; therefore as the Congregation is in
subjection to Christ, etc. Here the Apostle does not say, an outward House is
in Subjection to Christ.

And Paul says in Col. 1. He (to wit, Christ) is the Head of the Body, even of
the Congregation, etc. So the Apostle does not say, Christ is the Head of an
outward House, but of the Congregation or Church, his People.

And therefore people, read the Scriptures, and search and try; and blessed is
he that reads and understands.

G. F.

THE END.

