A DISTINCTION between the New Covenant and the Old;
And how that in the Old Covenant The Jews Priests Lips were to Preserve the
Jews Peoples Knowledge: But in the New and Everlasting Covenant CHRIST the
High Priest, is the Treasure of Wisdom and Knowledge, and he fills the Earth
with the Knowledge of the Lord God; and the Earth being Full of the Knowledge
of the Lord God, then there is no want of it in the Earth. And Christ the
High Priest, he does not only fill the Earth with the Knowledge of the Lord
God, but Covers the Earth with the Knowledge of the Lord, as the Waters do
the Sea; so the Earth shall not be seen. So then it may be seen, that the
Substance in the New Covenant is far beyond the Figure in the Old Covenant.

Read, Hear, See, Perceive and Understand, Receive and Possess.
IT is written in the Prophecies of Isaiah (the 11th Chapter) where speaking of
the peaceable Kingdom of Christ, that was to come, he says, They shall not
hurt, nor destroy in all my holy Mountain; for the Earth shall be full of the
Knowledge of the Lord, as the Waters cover the Sea. So this was a Prophecy of
that Day to come; it was not in the Days of Isaiah.

But Mark, In THAT Day (when the Earth shall be full of the Knowledge of the
Lord, as the Waters cover the Sea) In that Day there shall be a Root of Jesse,
which shall stand for an Ensign of the people, to it (to wit, this Ensign)
shall the Gentiles seek, and their Rest shall be Glorious. Now many of the
Gentiles have found this Glorious Rest, and this Ensign; and to this Ensign do
the people gather, and cannot forsake it; and all the Warryers in the World
cannot pluck down this Ensign, nor take it from the people with their Carnal
Weapons.

Now this is the day of Christ in his New Covenant of Light, Life and Grace, in
which the Earth shall be full of the Knowledge of the Lord, as the Waters do
cover the Sea [Mark] The Earth shall be full of the Knowledge of the Lord. So
then the Earth is not Empty, when it is full of the Knowledge of the Lord. And
the Knowledge of the Lord shall COVER the Earth; it shall not only be Full of
it, but it shall cover the Earth, so as the Earth shall not be seen. As the
Waters do cover the Sea, that when you are in the Sea, you cannot see any Land
or Earth; so shall the Knowledge of the Lord be in the New Covenant.

For the Lord says, I will write my Laws in their Hearts, and put them in
their Minds, that they shall not need to say unto one another, know the Lord,
for all shall know Me from the greatest unto the least. And they shall not need
every man to teach his Neighbor, saying, know the Lord.

Now Mark, If there be no need to say one unto another, or unto their
Neighbor, know the Lord (for the Earth shall be full of the Knowledge of the
Lord; and the Knowledge of the Lord shall cover the Earth, as the Waters do the
Sea, in the New Covenant of Light, Life and Grace; so that the Earth cannot be
seen) then there is no need of the Priests, or Teachers Lips to preserve the
Peoples Knowledge; for that was only used in the Old Covenant under Moses; and
whilst he was read the people was under the Vail. And therefore Christ
abolished the first Priesthood with his Vail, who had his Tithes for his Work
and Service, whose Lips were to preserve the Peoples Knowledge; that was the
People of the Jews, that particular Nation. But Christ in the New Covenant is
the Treasure of Wisdom and Knowledge; so that in this Day of Christ, the Root
of Jesse shall stand up as an Ensign for the people; and the Gentiles shall
seek to it, to wit, the Nations, which many have found.

And God has given Christ for a New Covenant to the Jews, not according to the
Old, and for a Covenant of Light, to enlighten the Gentiles also, who is God's
Salvation to the Ends of the Earth: That so in this Day of Christ (and
Salvation) who is a High Priest, Holy and Harmless, and Separate from Sinners,
made higher then the Heavens, who is the Treasure of Wisdom and Knowledge; he
takes away the Vail of Moses, and takes away the Vail and Covering, that has
been spread over all Nations. So it is Christ that fills the Earth with
Knowledge, and that the Knowledge of the Lord shall cover the Earth, as the
Waters do the Sea; so that in this Knowledge, to know God and Christ Jesus whom
he has sent, is Eternal Life.

So this High Priest, Christ Jesus his Work is beyond the Jews Highpriests,
whose Lips were to preserve the Jewish Nation's Knowledge; for Christ the
Treasure of Wisdom and Knowledge fills the whole Earth with Knowledge; and
covers the Earth with the Knowledge of God, as the Waters cover the Sea, in
his Day of the New Covenant. And are not these the Days of the New Covenant,
and the Gospel, which is not according to the Old? And then what will all you
Priests (that are made at Schools and Colleges) and Bishops do in this Day,
with all your fat Bishoprics and Parsonages, when that people need not be
taught by you the Knowledge of the Lord? Nor need the people send their
Children to Schools and Colleges, to learn there the Arts, and how to teach
people the Knowledge of the Lord, when the Earth shall be full of the knowledge
of the Lord, and covered with it, as the Waters do cover the Sea, in the Days
of this New Covenant: so then there will be no need of your Teachings. And if
you come to receive this Day in your Time, then would not you forsake your Fat
Benefices and Personages, and return unto people their Tithes, and confess,
that Christ, who is the Treasure of Wisdom and Knowledge, in the new covenant
says, Freely you have received, freely give; and this Commandment of the Lord
of Lords is not to be broken; and say, there is no need in the new covenant to
teach people to know the Lord; no, not from the least to the greatest of them.
For God has written his Law in their Hearts and put it in their Minds, in the
Days of this new covenant; and they are God's people, and he is their God, and
they all know him from the greatest to the least of them: So that this new
covenant is not according to the Jews old covenant, amongst that particular
Nation of the Jews, who had a Tribe of Priests and Levites, whose Lips were to
preserve the peoples Knowledge, for which they had their Tithes. But Christ is
come in his New Covenant, and has taken away the First Covenant, and abolished
it, and dissannulled the Commandment that gave him his Tithes; and establishes
the Second and Everlasting Covenant, where all shall be taught of God, and
says to them that declared this New Covenant, and preached his Gospel, freely
you have received, freely give; and they were to go and declare this without
Bag or Staff.

So in the New Covenant they had no need of Purse, Silver, Bag or Staff; for
they that preached the Gospel lived of the Gospel. So the Gospel of Life and
Salvation is Good News and Glad Tidings, being preached to and in every
Creature under Heaven; and the Grace of God which brings Salvation, has
appeared unto all men to teach them: And Christ does enlighten every Man that
comes into the World, with the Life in him, the Word, by which all things were
made to believe in, and to give them Knowledge. So this High Priest is he, that
fills and covers the Earth with the Knowledge of the Lord, as the Waters
cover the Sea, so that the Earth shall not be seen; and so he both gives and
preserves the peoples knowledge. And in these Days of Christ, in his New
Covenant, God pours out his Spirit upon all Flesh, to Instruct, Teach and
Lead them, by which Spirit Sons and Daughters way Prophecy, and the Old Men
may dream Dreams, and the Young Men and Handmaids and Servants may see Visions
by the Spirit which God has poured upon them, and has given them a Spiritual
Knowledge, and which Spirit reveals the Things of God unto them, and leads them
into all Truth. For in the old covenant the Lord poured out his Spirit upon the
House of Israel, and gave them of his good Spirit to Instruct them, though they
rebelled against it; but in his New Covenant, which is not according to the
Old, he pours out of his Spirit not only upon the Jews, but upon all Flesh of
other Nations, as well as the Jews, that all Flesh may see the Glory of God,
and see their Salvation. For the Lord says, in Isa. 49.26. All flesh shall
know, that I the Lord am thy Savior and Redeemer, the Mighty One of Jacob. And
again, in Isa. 40.5. the Lord says, Every Valley shall be exalted, and every
Mountain and Hill shall be made low, and the crooked shall be made straight,
and the Rough plain; and the Glory of the Lord shall be revealed, all flesh
shall see it together, for the Mouth of the Lord has spoken it. And is not
this the Gospel Day of Christ in his New Covenant? and must it not be
fulfilled? but your Mountains and Hills must be laid down, and your crooked
Ways and Natures must be made straight, smooth and plain, before this Glory of
the Lord be revealed, and that all Flesh come to see it.

And in Luke 3.6. its said, all Flesh, where he speaks of the fulfilling of
Isa. 40. how All flesh shall see the Salvation of God. Again, Isa. 66. 18, 26.
the Lord says, All flesh shall come to Worship before me: And the Lord says,
It shall come to pass, that I will gather all Nations and Tongues, and they
shall come and see my Glory, and I will set him for a Sign among them, speaking
of Christ. And the Lord says, his Peoples Wilderness shall be like Eden, and
their Desert as the Garden of the Lord, Isa. 51.3. And are not these the Days
of the New Covenant, and to be fulfilled?

Swarthmore, the 4th Month, 1679. G. F.


