Carmen Pastorale Lugubre.

A Pastoral ELEGY Upon the most Lamented DEATH OF His ROYAL HIGHNESS, WILLIAM
Duke of Gloucester.

PALIDA mors; aequo pulsat pede pauperum tabernas,
Regumque turres. -- --
Durum, SED levius fit patientia;
Quicquid corrigere est nefas.
Hor. By J. F. Gent.

LONDON: Printed by W. O. for the Author, and sold by Bennet Banbury, in the
Lower-walk of the New-Exchange; and J. Nutt, near Stationers' Hall, MDCC.

A Pastoral ELEGY, etc.
Menalcas, Damon, Albania. Menalcas. WHat sudden Cloud with Sable Wings
o're-spreads
The Firmament! and hides the blooming Heads
Of Albion's brightest Stars? My trembling Breast,
Chilled with a piercing Damp, refuses Rest;
Leaving my Fold, to Damon's Flock I Will go,
And ask the Sage, what means this dismal Woe.

Dam.] What Grief resides in dear Menalca's Soul?
Tell me, that I may with my Friend condole?
What means this Horror? These amazing Eyes,
Somewhat extr'ord'nary does my Soul surprise;
Tell me at once whence these sad Omens flow?
For I am told, "'It Is Ease the Worst to know.

Men.] This Morn as to the Flocks my Course I bent,
Before the Sun its gilded Beams had lent,
A sudden Prodigy struck with Surprise
My trembling Soul, and filled my wondering Eyes;
I saw the Skies in all their Luster clad,
Each dazzling Light displayed its radient Head,
When toward the North I turned my eager Sight,
A Sable Pyramid obscured the Light
Of some Britannick Star, where Empire sat,
Seeming to Challenge it with Laws of Fate:
Then saw its crystal yielding Rays remove,
Twinkle its last, obey the Powers above;
Then strait the Cloud removed its Sable Tower,
Which to obscure had but one Moment's Power;
When lo! the Star, before deprived of Light,
Moved in a crystal Heaven far more bright,
Cut the Empyreal Air and yielding Sky,
Until it reached a Sapphire Throne on high;
And thence a double Luster seemed to send
To the Orbs, over which it lately did intend.

Dam.] What this strange Sight portends I cannot tell,
I wish the Heavens mean us all Things well;
But lo! Albania, Mistress of the Plains,
That Entertain the fair Britannick Swains;
See she comes Weeping with dischevell'd Hair,
Meager her Looks, all discomposed her Air,
And Sorrow overwhelms the lovely Fair.
Bearing a Prince's Ensign on her Head,
Over which the baleful Cyprus Leaves are spread;
Look how her Eyes with crystal Tears overflow,
Her wringed Hands are certain Signs of Woe.

Alb.] Arise ye British Swains, prepare, prepare,
Your Voices with a Mournful Funeral Air,
Tear off your Verdent Chaplets, and instead
Of them, with Sable Cyprus dress your Head,
Undo your tressed Hair, and role in Dust
Your milky Locks; such Rites alone are Just
To the Memory of Him, you go to mourn,
Who all the Plains with Luster did adorn.

Mourn, Mourn, ye British Swains, your Loss deplore,
Pollio is gone, the Royal Youth's no more.

See the sad Scene all in a Moment turns!
See, see, our Mother Tellus, how she Mourns!
For want of Moisture, gasping lies and burns.
See how each Tree, the sad Disaster grieves,
Instead of Tears, they shed their fading Leaves;
The gentle Zephirs Mourn with hallow Noise,
The watery Billows in rough Murmurs rise,
And all the warbling Choiristers of the Air,
To lonely Shades, and silent Groves repair,
Changing their Notes, They all at once Conspire,
To make a mournful melancholy Choir;
Instead of tuneful Airs, are seized with Dread,
They droop the Wing, panting they lean the Head,
And faintly Sing by turns, POLLIO, alas! is Dead.
The Flocks too all amazed are filled with Grief,
Complaining to each other for Relief;
Refuse the Meads, their wonted pleasant Seat,
And on the Rocks in mournful Sighings bleat,
Young Pollio 's Dead: Thus are the Flocks Dismayed
For Pollio's Loss, to whom they Homage paid:
Behold the Nymphs, how with Concern they come,
To pay their Tears to Pollio's sacred Tomb;
Their careless Dress, their bright entangled Hair,
Their sad retorted Looks, their clouded Air,
Are saddest Signs of Grief: See how they beat
Their snowy Breasts, bemoaning of their Fate.
See how they Weep in flowing Streams of Tears,
Their downcast Looks, sad Sorrows Emblem bears;
Each Nymph with Flowers, just Cropped before their Bloom,
To Strew before their darling Pollio's Tomb;
With Tapers too, they Entertain the Sight,
Extinguished in the Infancy of Light.

Mourn, Mourn, ye British Swains, your Loss deplore,
Pollio is gone, the Royal Youth's no more.

Alb.] Pollio, the Royal Youth, derived from Pan,
Virtue in Him her early Course began,
And Wisdom in his Youth declared him Man.
To him the Beauteous Graces did Resort,
And all the Virtues kept with him their Court;
These lovely Rays shined in his Noble Mind,
Nothing but Goodness there did Entrance find;
Born to be Great, Heir to the happiest Crown,
The happiest Constitution that is known,
Yet Fate decreed he should not Mount the Throne.
Pollio, the Glory of the British Plains,
The Darling Hope of all the Admiring Swains,
Whose great Capacious Soul, whose Noble Mind,
And Pious Innocence at once combined,
With Prudence his Companion, and began
To raise his Head above the Sphere of Man;
Pollio, the Princely Youth, whom all desired,
The more they saw of him, the more admired;
Religion, Wisdom, Love, and Courage shined
In every Motion of his tender Mind:
Virtue his Soul, Beauty his Body Crowned,
Nothing of Vice was in his Converse found.
Pollio, the Princely Youth's deprived of Breath,
And Lodged within the Sable Courts of Death.

Mourn, Mourn, ye British Swains, your Loss deplore,
Pollio is gone, the Royal Youth's no more.

Alb.] Ye Nymphs and Swains in Sobs and Tears declare
Britannia's Loss, and strive to Ease her Care;
Under that Sable Tree he sits and Mourns,
Each flowing Tear (though shed) again Returns;
Murmuring at the cruel Stroke of Death,
That thus deprived her Pollio of his Breath:
Careless her Lance she lays, her 'Chiev'ment too
Falls from her Lap, as if the Ensign knew
Britannia's Loss: Thus she Laments her Fate,
As having lost the Bloom of all her State:
She who expected from his Courtly Rays,
That she should see sometime his Halcyon Days;
Now sees him, Oh her Grief! deprived of Charms,
And Lodged in grizly Deaths all frozen Arms;
Her Grief is great, and more than she can bear,
Look how she beats her Breast, and tears her Hair!
Her lofty Towers, with mourning Banners spread,
All sadly Represent, Her Pollio Dead.

Mourn, Mourn, ye British Swains, your Loss deplore,
Pollio is gone, the Royal Youth's no more.

Men.] But stay, your Grief, although your Grief is Just,
Pollio has but shook of his Clothes of Dust:
It Is Heaven's high Will, that he should Cease to Live
On Earth, that so he might above receive
A Starry Crown, not laden with Alloy,
Where free's his Court, and undisturbed his Joy:
I saw the Star direct its airy Flight,
Until it reached a Sapphire Heaven, all bright;
In splendid Luster, moved its spotless Wings,
Received with welcome by the King of Kings.

Cease, Cease, ye British Swains, Cease to deplore,
For Pollio's blessed above, though He Is to us no more.

Dam.] To see the sad Inconstancy of Fate;
How Subject to Vicissitude the State!
What Confidence did All in Pollio place!
How did the Youth adorn the Royal Race!
What Griefs accompany the Royal Pair!
None can express the loss of such an Heir!
Mourning alone is Form; but when we see
Sorrow affecting State, and Majesty!
How are we struck with chilling Dread and Fear!
And Love, as well as Duty, sheds a Tear.

Men.] In this sad mournful State, let us not strive
To search the Cause, why Heaven thus make us Grieve;
For know, It Is Heaven's unalterable Will,
And Executed wholly to fulfill
His great Decrees: Let Us therefore be content,
Submissively expecting the Event
Of his great Providence, who all Things sways,
When he commands, Death his great Will obeys:
Princes are Men, Mortals must yield to Death,
It Is to the Will of Heaven, not Chance, we owe our Breath.

FINIS.

