AN EPISTLE TO THE HOUSEHOLD OF THE SEED OF ABRAHAM, AND To every Family in
particular TO READ and PRACTICE.

The Lord says, I know Abraham, that he will Command his Children, and his
Household after him, and they shall keep the way of the Lord, to do Justice and
Judgment, that the Lord may bring upon Abraham that he has spoken of him.

Genesis 18.19. LONDON, Printed and Sold by John Bringhurst, at the Sign of the
Book in Grace Church Street. 1682.

AN EPISTLE TO THE HOUSEHOLD, etc.
FRiends,
consider how the Blessing of the Lord came upon the Obedient and Faithful to
the Lord, and rested upon them. The Lord said to Abraham, Get thee out of thy
Country, and from thy Kindred, and from thy Fathers House, etc. And I will make
of thee a great Nation, and I will Bless thee, etc. And thou shall be a
Blessing, and I will Bless them that Bless thee, and Curse them that Curse
thee, and in thee and in thy Seed, shall all the Families of the Earth be
Blessed. Abraham obeyed the Lord, and went forth from Vr of the Caldees, and so
he left all the Religions and Worships, and Teachers of the Country of the
Caldees behind him, and followed the Lord; And the Lord said unto Abraham, Walk
before me, and be thou perfect, Genesis 17.1. And again, The Lord said unto
Abraham, Seeing that Abraham shall surely become a great and mighty Nation, and
all the Nations of the Earth shall he Blessed in him, Genesis 12.1, 2, 3. and
18.18. And again, The Lord said unto Abraham, That in Blessing I will Bless
thee, and in Multiplying I will Multiply thy seed as the Stars of Heaven, and
as the Sand which is upon the Seashore, and thy Seed shall possess the Gates
of his Enemies, and in thy Seed shall all the Nations of the Earth be Blessed,
because thou have Obeyed my Voice. Abraham Obeying Gods Voice, brought this
Blessing upon him, as in Genesis 22. And the Lord said, I know Abraham that he
will Command his Children and his Household after him, That they shall keep the
way of the Lord, to do Justice and Judgment, that the Lord may bring upon
Abraham all that which he has spoken of him. Now you may see here what it is
that brings the Blessing, and kept the Blessing upon Abraham and his seed, etc.
Now if you be of the true Faith, you are of Abraham, and are Blessed with
faithful Abraham, Gal. 3.9. And in this seed and faith of Abraham, you will
Command your Children and your household after you, to keep the way of the Lord,
to do Justice and Judgment, that the Lord may bring the Blessing upon you and
your Household, and Children, keeping in the same Faith and Seed of Abraham, and
you and your Children and your Household, keeping in the way of the Lord to do
Justice and Judgment, then I say the Blessing which came upon Abraham will come
upon you, and upon your Children and your Household, and then you will know the
Promise of God fullfiled; Cursed is he that Curses thee, and Blessed his he
that Blesses thee; and therefore live and walk in the seed, which bruses the
Head of the Serpent, in which seed all Nations are Blessed, yea all Families,
Households and Children, in which faith and seed you Command. (Mark Command)
your Children and your Household after you, to keep the way of the Lord as
Abraham did, to do Justice and Judgment. Genesis 18. and 19. Now you that have not
this authority to Command over your Children and Households, you are not in the
same faith and seed of Abraham to wit, To Command your Children and Household
after you, to keep the way of the Lord, and to do Justice and Judgment. Now the
Lord had a Confidence in Abraham, and so he has in all them that be of his
seed and faith now, that they will Command their Children and Household to keep
the way of the Lord, as he did, and walk before the Lord and to do Justice and
Judgment; and that Abraham's Family and Children should not go back again into
those Country Religions, or Ways which the Seed and Faith of Abraham has and
had led them out of: for they that are commanded to come out of them, into Gods
Way, into the Way of the Lord, are commanded to keep in the Way of the Lord,
and they are to command their Children and their Household to keep the Way of
the Lord, and to keep out of all the Ways of the World, and out of all the
Ungodly, Unjust Ways, in the Seed, which bruises the head of the Serpent. And
the Lord said to Isaac, I will make thy Seed to Multiply as the Stars of
Heaven, etc. And in thy Seed shall all the Nations of the Earth be Blessed,
Genesis 26.4. Now here you may see that Isaac inherited his Fathers Inheritance in
the Seed, and in the Faith and Way of the Lord, in which Seed all Nations are
Blessed, and so do all they that be of the Faith and Seed of Abraham, that walk
in the steps of Faithful Abraham, in the Way of the Lord, and obey his Voice,
etc. Inherit the Blessing of Abraham, for so you may see it was not the only
Care that their Children might inherit a little Earth after them, but that they
might inherit the Seed and the Faith, which had the Blessing.

And Isaac said to Jacob, God Almighty Bless thee and give thee the Blessing of
Abraham, to thee and to thy Seed with thee, Genesis 28. And this Isaac spoke to
Jacob before Jacob had any Children; and here you may see Isaac's Care that
Jacob and his Seed might inherit the Faith and Blessing of Abraham and Isaac,
and this should be their first inheritance, and then they should inherit the
outward Land, and this should be the care of all them that walk in the steps of
the Faith of Abraham, to see that their Children and Household do inherit that
Faith, Seed, and Blessing of Abraham in the first place, by keeping in the way
of the Lord, etc. And they are to Command their Children to walk in the way of
the Lord, etc. that they may and you may see, that Jacob did inherit the
Blessing of Abraham and Isaac, in Abraham's and Isaac's Seed and Faith.

When the Lord said unto Jacob, Thy Seed shall be as the dust of the Earth, and
thou shall spread abroad to the West and to the East, and to the North, and to
the South, and in thee and in thy seed shall all the Families of the Earth be
blessed. So here you may see Jacob's Possession who did inherit the blessing of
Abraham, and Isaac, etc. And they that are of his Seed and Faith, which keep
the Way of the Lord, etc. They do inherit this blessing in the Seed, in which
all Nations are blessed. And this is according to Christ's Doctrine, Seek ye
first the Kingdom of God and his Righteousness, and all these things shall be
added unto you, to wit, What ye shall Eat, or what ye shall drink, or wherewith
you shall be Clothed, for after all these things that are below do the
Gentiles seek: for your Heavenly Father knows that you have need of all these
things. And here Christ which was of the Seed of Abraham, and of David
according to the Flesh, would have People to seek their Inheritance in the
Kingdom of Heaven, and its Righteousness, before they seek after outward
things, and they were to lay up for themselves Treasure in Heaven, etc. And to
know that Portion for them and their Children, Matthew 6. And the Apostle
says, The Children of the Promise are counted for the Seed, Romans 9.8. For in
Isaac shall thy Seed be called, Genesis 21.12. And Christ says, the good Seed are
the Children of the Kingdom. Mat. 13.38. and this is the Seed in which all
Nations are blessed, who keep the way of the Lord, and Justice and Judgment, such
the Almighty has blessed with the blessings from above, the blessings of the
deep, the blessings of the breast, and of the womb. Genesis 49. And he will also
bless the fruit of the Land, thy corn, and thy wine, and thy oil, and the
increase of thy kine, and the flocks of thy sheep, Deuteronomy, 7. And they
that serve the Lord their God, he will bless their bread and their water, Exodus
23. And a faithful man shall abound with blessings, Proverbs. 28, 20. So you
may see they that are in the Faith and in the Holy Seed, which keeps in the way
of the Lord, and commands their Children and their Household to do the same,
they have the blessings from Heaven above, and the blessings below, yea the
blessings of the Eternal Inheritance, and of the Kingdom of God, and that was
their Chief Inheritance, That all the Faithful Seed of Abraham sought to
possess their Household and their Children in, who did Command their Children
and Household to keep the way of God, That they might Inherit the Blessing.
David says, Blessed is the Man that walks not in the Council of the ungodly,
nor Stands in the way of Sinners, nor sits in the seat of the scornful.
But his Delight is in the law of the Lord, and in his law does be meditate day
and night. Now here is the condition of them that do enjoy the Blessing, they
must keep from the Counsel of the ungodly, and the way of Sinners, and the seat
of the Scornful. Now here you may see David's Instruction how People might
inherit the Blessing.

Levit. 10. That you may put a difference betwixt the holy and unholy, and
between the clean and unclean, and that you may teach your Children all the
Statutes, which the Lord has spoken unto them by the hand of Moses. And if it
was so in the Old Testament that they might Learn the Statutes there, surely
much more they are to Learn the Commands of Christ in his New Testament.

And in Deuteronomy. 4.9, 10. They were to Teach their Sons, and their Sons Sons; and
again they were to Teach their Children, that they might Learn to fear God, all
the days they lived upon the earth, etc. This they were to teach their
Children; and again in Deuteronomy. 11. It was the Command of God, that they were to
teach their Children the Commandments of God, and they were to speak of them,
When they sat in their House, and when they walked by the Way, when they lay
down, and when they rose up, and in Deuteronomy. 30. Moses told them, that the Word
was nigh them in their Mouths, and in their hearts, that they might do it. And
David said, come you Children, hearken to me, and I will Teach you the fear of
the Lord. Oh fear the Lord you Saints, there is no want to them that fear him,
Psalm. 34.9, 11.

Ye that fear the Lord, Trust in the Lord, he is their Help and their Shield.
Psalm. 115.11. And you may see all along, in the Old Testament, they that feared
the Lord, were Commanded to teach and Instruct their Children the way of the
Lord, that they might walk in it, and inherit the Blessing, which was a better
Portion, then outward Riches, which will pass away, for they make themselves
Wings and Fly away. Solomon says, Train up a Child in the Way he should go,
and when he is Old, he will not depart from it: Foolishness is bound up in the
Heart of a Child, but the rod of Correction shall drive it far from him, Prove.
22.15. He that spares the rod, hates his Son; But he that loves him,
Chastises him betimes. By mercy and truth Iniquity is purged, and by the fear
of the Lord, they depart from evil Prove. 13.24. and 16.6. And the Apostles
Command is, Children to obey their Parents in the Lord for this is Right. Ephesians.
6.1. and Colos. 1.3, 20.

It is well Pleasing to the Lord, Children to Obey their Parents; and the
Bishops or Elders, were to rule well their own Houses, and to have their
Children in Subjection, with all gravity; and likewise, The Deacons were to
rule their own Children and their own Houses well, Tim. 1.3. And likewise you
may see the good report of the Widows bringing up Children, which followed
every good work, etc. And in Titus, such as were Elders or Overseers, their
Children were to be faithful, not accused of riot or unruly; and the aged Women
were to be of good Behavior as becomes Holiness, etc. and Teachers of good
things, and that they teach the younger Women to be Sober, etc. And that the
word of God he not Blasphemed. And Titus was to Exhort Youngmen, to be sober
Minded; for the Grace of God which brings Salvation has appeared unto all Men,
Teaching, us that denying ungodliness and Worldy Lusts, we should live Soberly,
Righteously, and Godlily in this present World, that being Justified by his
Grace, we should be made heirs according to the Hope of Eternal Life. And Peter
says, as obedient Children, not Fashioning your selves according to your
former Lusts, in your Ignorance, but as he which has called you is Holy so be
you Holy, in all manner of Conversation; and be not like them, Feeding
themselves without fear, which are the Clouds without Rain, and Wells without
Water, and Trees without fruit, whom Jude declares against, such cannot Eat
and Drink, to the Praise and Glory of God, etc. So you see what care, both in
the Old and New Testament, the faithful Parents had to teach their Children the
way of the Lord; and the Lord has a Confidence in all them that fear him, and
are of the faith and seed of Abram, that they will not only Admonish their
Children and Household but Command their Children and their Household after them,
to keep the way of the Lord, etc. Genesis 18. And to keep out of the Wicked Ways
of the World. The Apostle says, they which be of faith are blessed with
faithful Abraham, And so are all the Children of God by faith in Christ Jesus,
and if you be Christ's, then are you Abraham's seed and heirs according to the
Promise. Gall. 3. And so the Children of God are counted for the seed, which
good seed Christ says, are the Children of the Kingdom.

And the Apostle spoke to the Romans that they should walk in the steps of the
faith of Abraham. Again the Apostle says to the Corinthians, concerning Titus,
Walked not we in the same spirit, Walked not we in the same steps. And in the
first Epistle of Peter, Christ has Suffered for us, leaving us an Example that
we should follow his steps, who did not sin, neither was guile found in his
Mouth. So these were Holy steps, and are a Religious Holy People, that walk in
the steps of faithful Abraham, and of Christ and the Apostles, and these have
the pure Religion and do visit the Fatherless and Widows in their affliction,
and keep themselves unspotted from the World: and these are they that are
Circumcised with the Spirit, and Baptized with the Holy Ghost, and serve God
Night and Day, and Worship him in Spirit and truth; and these are the Religious
Families, which are of the Holy, Divine, Pure and Precious faith, which Christ
is the Author and Finisher of, which faith Purifieth their heart, and is their
victory, by which they have access to God, in which they Please him, in that
which Chirst is the Author and Finisher of, which is called the Gift of God;
and they that are of this Faith, the same are the Children of Abraham, and are
Blessed with faithful Abraham; and Abraham was called the friend of God, and so
are all his Children that be of his seed and faith, they are not friends of the
devil, the wicked and unrighteous one, but him and his works they forsake, who
are Friends of God, they are Friends of Righteousness and Holiness, etc. And
such the Blessings of God rest upon, them that are of the seed and walk in the
seed, Christ, that bruises the Serpent's head, and in that seed are all Nations
blessed, and out of the mouth of the Seeds seed, shall not Gods word depart; but
it shall abide in the Mouth of the Seeds seed (this Living word of God) but the
Word of God does not abide in them, who make a Profession of the Scriptures,
but live not in the Power and Spirit or the Holy Ghost, that gave forth the
Scriptures; such are like the Jews, John 5. and such think to have Life in the
Scriptures, but they will not come unto Christ that they may have life; for
none come to Christ but by believeing in the light, which is the life in him
the Word.

Now dear Friends and Brethren in Christ Jesus, if you keep in the seed and
Faith of Abraham, in it Command your Children and Families to walk in the way
of the Lord, for in it you have Authority that they may keep the Pure Holy and
Righteous way of the Lord after you, when you are gone, that they may succeed
you in the Faith and seed, and way of the Lord, and in the Blessings of God, as
Isaac and Jacob did Abram. Amen.

G. F.

THE END.

