AN EPISTLE TO ALL CHRISTIANS To keep to YEA, YEA, and NAY, NAY, And to fulfill
their WORDS AND PROMISES.

By G. F.

LONDON, Printed for Benjamin Clark in George-Yard in Lonbard-street,
Bookseller, 1682.

An Epistle to all Christians to keep to Yea, Yea, and Nay, Nay, and to fulfill
their Words and Promises.
All my Dearly Beloved Friends and Brethren, every where.
THE Lord God Almighty with his holy Power and Spirit has gathered and kept,
and preserved you to this Day a People to himself; And now Dear Friends and
Brethren, In all your Words, in all your Business and Employments, Have a care
of breaking your Words and Promises to any People; but that you may before you
make any Promises to any Man or Woman, consider beforehand that you may be
able to perform and fulfill both your Words and Promises to all People, that
you make your Promises, or give your word unto. And that your Yea be Yea, and
Nay, Nay, in all things, which Christ has set up in stead of an Oath; yea,
above an Oath and swearing in his New Covenant and Testament: And the Apostle
James holds forth the same Doctrine. And this Yea, Yea, and Nay, Nay, was set
up, when they forbad all Oaths and Swearing: And therefore every one's Yea
should be Yea, and every one's Nay should be Nay, and so to stand.

And therefore all are to Consider aforehand before they speak their Yea, Yea,
and before they speak their Nay, Nay, in the New Covenant of Grace, Light and
Life, that with the Light they may see safely when they speak their Yea, Yea,
and their Nay, Nay, which is the practice of the Children of Light in the New
Covenant of Light; by and in which Light they see and Consider, what they are
able to perform what they speak at Yea, Yea, and what they are able to stand to
at Nay, Nay. So if you do walk in the Light, it will preserve you out of all
rash and hasty Words and Promises, which many runs into, that do neither
perform either their yea, yea, or their nay, nay.

Therefore in the New Covenant of Grace, Light and Life, all are to speak Yea,
Yea, to what they can do and perform; and what they say nay, nay to, that in
the Light and Life and Grace of God they may likewise stand to their Nay, what
they say Nay to.

So that none make any promise or speak Yea, Yea, or Nay, Nay rashly, which
they cannot perform; For such kind of inconsiderate and rash Speaking is not in
the Everlasting Covenant of Light, Life and Grace: Take heed lest you be
numbered among the Covenant-Breakers spoken of, Romans 1.31. and such
Truce Breakers which the Apostle speaks of, 2 Timothy 3. Which have a Form of
Godliness, but deny the power thereof; from such turn away, says the Apostle.
And therefore they that deny the power of Godliness, will not be faithful to
God nor Man: and such cannot exercise a good Conscience to God in Obedience to
him, nor to man to perform that which is Just, Righteous and Honest. Therefore
the Apostle exhorts the Christians in the New Testament to speak the Truth in
Love, and to put away Lying, and to speak every man the Truth with his
Neighbor, Ephesians. 4.15, 25. Psalm. 15.1, 2.
And David says, Who shall abide in thy Tabernacle, and who shall dwell in thy
holy Hill? He that walks uprightly and works Righteousness, and speaks
the Truth in his heart. Psalm. 12.
But they that speak Vanity every one to his Neighbor with flattering Lips and
a double Heart, the Lord shall Cut off. And Solomon speaking of Wisdom says; My
Mouth shall speak Truth, Prove. 8.7.
and Wickedness is an Abomination to my lips. And James says in his General
Epistle, so speak Ye and so do, etc. So see here how Certain and steadfast the
holy Men of God would have Gods people to be in their words and doings. Jam.
2.12.
And also James was Careful, that the Saints in their very outward Dealings
were to be Just, and reproved such for saying, To day or to morrow we will go
into such a City and continue there a Year, Jam. 4.
and Buy and sell and get gain; whereas they did not know what should be on the
morrow. But they ought to say, If the Lord will, we shall live, and do this or
that: Therefore you may see, how Careful the Apostle was, to keep all the true
Christians in the fear of the Lord, and in the sense of his will; God is true
and faithful to his people in all Generations; and so he would have his people
to be true and faithful to him, and to one another, and to all men in his
Spirit and Truth. And Christ says, Luke 16.10, 11
He that is faithful in that which is least, is faithful also in much; and he
that is Unjust in the least, is unjust also in much. And further he says, If
ye have not been faithful in the Unrighteous Mammon or Riches, who will Commit
unto you the true Riches? Therefore there must be a Justness, a Faithfulness in
the outward Riches betwixt Man and Man, if you will have a place in your hearts
for the true heavenly Riches. The Inward faithfulness to God, brings forth
faithfulness to men in outward things. And as the Apostle says to the Saints:
Finally Brethren, whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest,
whatsoever things are Just, Whatsoever things are pure, Whatsoever things are
lovely, Whatsoever things are of good Report; if there be any Virtue, and if
there be any praise, think on these things. Zach. 8.16.
Which are very good things to be minded, thought upon, and practiced by the
Church of Christ. The Lord says by Zachary, These are the things that ye shall
do, speak ye every man the Truth to his Neighbor, Execute the Judgment of
Truth and peace in your Gates: Again: Therefore says the Lord, I am returned
unto Zion, and will dwell in the midst of Jerusalem, and Jerusalem shall be
called a City of Truth, and the mountain of the Lord of Host an holy Mountain.
And if outward Jerusalem was called so in the days of the Old Testament surely
much more is heavenly Jerusalem in the New Covenant and Testament, called, The
City of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, Into which nothing that is
uncle an can enter, but all the Believers in the Light, and the Children of
Light enter into, whose names are Written in the Lambs book of Life and are to
Walk in Truth and Righteousness, and speak the Truth every man to his
Neighbor, according to the Apostle's Doctrine.

And so as every one has received Christ Jesus, who is the Truth, walk in him
the Truth, and speak the Truth as it is in Jesus; For you are bought with a
price, therefore glorify God in your bodies and in your Spirits, which are his.

And the Lord in mercy grant that all his people who profess his name may do so
to his praise to his Glory and to his honor over all for ever, Amen.

And do not slight the form of sound Words in Truth; You who have bought the
Truth, do not sell it. And he that orders his Conversation aright shall see the
salvation of God. And the Apostle says to the Philippians; Let your
Conversation be as it becomes the Gospel of Christ; For the Apostle says, Our
Conversation is in Heaven, where must be all the true Followers of Christ that
are built upon him the Rock and foundation, who is from above. And the Lord God
Establish all his people upon this Rock and foundation which stands sure,
that upon him they may stand fast with the Grace and Truth that comes from him.
Amen.

G. F.
Edmonton in the County of Middlesex 23 -- 11 Month, 1681.
THE END.

