AN EXHORTATION TO All People, TO Pureness, Cleanness, and Holiness, and
Faithfulness to the Lord.

By G. F.

LONDON, Printed by John Bringhurst, 1685.

Here you may see who they are that dwell with everlasting Burning, and in Gods
Tabernacle and Holy Mountain, and who not.
DAvid says, Who shall ascend into the Hill of the Lord? And who shall stand
in his holy place? David answers, and says, He that has clean Hands, and a
pure Heart; who has not lift up his Soul unto Vanity, nor sworn deceitfully;
he shall receive the Blessing from the Lord, and righteousness from the God of
his Salvation, and this is the Generation of them that seek the Lord, Psalm. 24.
So here is a Generation of clean Hands, and a pure Heart that ascends into the
Hill of the Lord, and stands in his holy place.

And Isaiah says, Who amongst us shall dwell with devouring Fire? Who among us
shall dwell with everlasting Burnings? And Isaiah answers his Questions, and
says, He that walks righteously, and speaks Uprightly; he that despises
the Gain of Oppression, that shakeeth his Hands from holding of Bribes; that
stops his Ears from hearing of Blood, and shuts his eyes from seeing
evil; he shall dwell on high, his place of Defense shall be the Munition of
Rocks; Bread shall be given him, his Water shall be sure; thine Eyes shall see
the King in his Beauty, etc. and thine Eyes shall see a Tabernacle that shall
not be taken down, not one of the Stakes thereof shall ever be removed, etc.
Isai. 33.

Here you may see who they are that can dwell with devouring Fire and
everlasting Burning, and yet shall not be Burned nor Devoured.

David says, Lord, who shall abide in thy Tabernacle? And who shall dwell in
thy holy Hill? David answers his Questions, and says, He that walks
Uprightly, and works Righteousness, and speaks the Truth in his Heart: he
that backbiteth not with his Tongue, nor does evil to his Neighbor, nor takes
up a reproach against his Neighbor, in whose eyes a vile Person is condemned,
but he Honors them that fear the Lord, etc. He that takes not a reward
against the Innocent; he that does these things shall never be removed, but
shall abide in the Tabernacle of the Lord, and dwell in his holy Hill, Psalm.
15. But the Ungodly are not so, but are like the Chaff which the wind drives
away; therefore the Ungodly shall not stand in Judgment, (namely, Righteous
Judgment) and Sinners shall not stand in the Congregation of the Righteous.

The Mountain of the house of the Lord, shall be established above all the
Mountains, and exhalted above all the Hills; and does not the Lord here teach
his People his Righteous and Holy Ways and Paths to walk in? as in Isai. 2.
Micah 4. And the Stone that smote the Great Image of Gold, of Silver, of Brass,
and Iron, and Clay, that they became like Chaff of the Summer Threshing Floors,
and the Wind carried them away, that no place was found for them, and the Stone
that smote this Great Image, became a Great Mountain, and filled the whole
Earth, Dan. 2.45.

Is not this Stone, that becomes a Great Mountain, that fills the whole
Earth, Christ Jesus? and so through him the Kingdoms of the World become the
Kingdoms of Christ.

Here you may see this Stone or Mountain that fills the whole Earth, will
dash to Pieces, and grind to Powder all that is not of it is Holy and Pure
Nature, and with its Holy Divine Nature fill the whole Earth.

The Lord says, They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my Holy Mountain, Isai.
11. and is not this Holy Mountain Christ, who destroys the Devil and his
Works, the Destroyer? And them that take hold of my Covenant, says the Lord,
even them will I bring to my Holy Mountain, etc. Isai. 56.6, 7. and Chap. 2.2.

And he that puts his trust in me, says the Lord, shall inherit my Holy
Mountain, Isa. 57.13. For thus says the High and Lofty One that inhabits
Eternity, whose Name is Holy, I dwell in the High and Holy Place, with him also
that is of a Contrite and Humble Spirit, to revive the Spirit of the Humble,
and to revive the Heart of the Contrite Ones, Isa. 57.15. Therefore is it not
good to wait upon the Lord, and trust in him?

Concerning such as eat up Gods people like Bread, and such as make Idols and
Images, and worship them, are without the true Understanding, and are Fools
that hate Knowledge; and such as go into Adultry and Uncleanness, are void of
the Wisdom of God and true Understanding; and Gods Fury is upon all such as do
not call upon his Name.
DAvid says, Have all the workers of Iniquity no knowledge, who eat up my
People as they eat Bread? Psalm. 14.4. Here the workers of Iniquity as they eat
Bread, they eat up Gods People, that is, they devour them; are not these
Devourers, Men-eaters?

And again in Psalm. 53.4. the Lord says, The workers of Iniquity eat up my
People like Bread. But God did give his People Corn from Heaven, and Man did
eat Angels Food, Psalm. 78.24, 25. And David said, The Wicked even mine Enemies
and my Foes came upon me to eat up my Flesh, they stumbled and fell, Psalm. 27.2.

Here you may see these Wicked Men-eaters and Enemies of the Righteous stumbled
and fell, when they came to eat up the Flesh of the Righteous, so they fell
short of their devouring Prey, Psalm. 27.2.

Solomon says, Whosoever commits Adultery with a Woman, lacks Understanding;
he that does it, destroys his own Soul; a wound and a dishonor shall he get,
and his reproach shall not be wiped away, Prove. 6.32, 33. And they that want
Understanding the Wicked Woman draws in; but he knows not that the Dead are
there, and that her Guests are in the Chambers of Hell, Prove. 9.16. to the end.

And therefore Job says, The fear of the Lord that is Wisdom, and to depart
from Evil is Understanding, Job 28.28. And Solomon says, He that is slow to
Wrath, is of a great Understanding; but he that is hasly of Spirit, exhalteth
Folly, Prove. 14.29. And Understanding is a well spring of Life to him that has
it, Prove. 16.22. But the Man that wandereth out of the way of Understanding,
shall remain in the Congregation of the Dead, Prove. 21.16. Evil Men understand
not Judgment, Prove. 28.5. And the strange Woman deceives the simple Ones and
Youth who are void of Understanding, her house is the way to Hell, going down
to the Chambers of Death, Prove. 7. And therefore it is good to keep and walk in
the Spirit of Understanding by which you may depart from Evil, and keep out of
the Snare of the Whore, and the Congregation of the Dead.

And the Lord said concerning the Jews that had rebelled against his Spirit, My
People are foolish, they have not known me, they are sottish Children, they
have no Understanding, they are wise to do Evil, but to do good they have no
Knowledge, Jer. 4.22. Is not this the condition of many Christians as well as
the Jews?

The Prophet says, Pour out thy Wrath upon the Heathen that know thee not, and
upon the Families that call not upon thy Name; for they have eaten up Jacob,
and devoured him, and consumed him, and have made his Habitation desolate: Must
not Gods Fury come upon these Men-eaters, that eat Jacob the beloved of God,
and devoured him, and make his Habitation dolate, Jerem. 10.25. And David
says, Pour out thy Wrath upon the Heathen that have not known thee, and upon
the Kingdoms that have not called upon thy Name, for they have devoured Jacob,
and laid wast his dewlling place, Psalm. 79.6, 7. Gods Fury will be poured upon
such that devoureth the Righteous, and lay wast his dewlling place.

And you may see in Jer. 51. They that are founders of Graven Images, or Molten
Images (are brutish by their Knowledge) which are the works of error, and
shall perish. And the Lord says, A draught is upon her Waters, namely Babylon,
and they shall be dried up, for it is a Land of Graven Images, and they are Mad
upon their Idols, Jer. 50.38. Upon such God brings Draughts and Famine, who
disobey and forsake the Living God, and dote upon their Idols and Images which
they make, And the Lord frustrateth the tokens of Liars, and makes the
Diviners Mad, and turns Wisemen backward, and makes their Knowledge Foolish,
and has not this been seen and fulfilled? Isai. 44.25. And the Lord says,
They eat up the Sins of my People, and they set their Hearts on their Iniquity,
and there shall be like Priest like People, and I will punish them for their
ways, and reward them for their Doings, Hosea 8.9. And the Lord says to
Daniel, The Wicked shall do wickedly, and none of the Wicked shall understand,
but the Wise shall understand, Daniel 12.10. The fear of the Lord is the
beginning of Wisdom, and the Secrets of the Lord are with them that fear him,
and the Lord takes care for them that fear him, as in Exodus 1.21. therefore it
is good to live in the fear of the Lord, which ye must if ye know his Secrets.

The cause of Draught and Barrenness, Famine and Plagues, for disobeying the
Lord, and grieving his Spirit.
THe cause of Draught, Barrenness and Famine, The Lord turns Rivers into a
Wilderness, and the Water Springs into Dry Ground, and turns a Fruitful Land
into Barrenness, for the Wickedness of them that dwell therein, (Mark) it is
for the Wickedness of them that dwell therein, Psalm. 107.33, 34.

And you may see them that disobeyed the Lord and forsook him, and because of
the Wickedness of their doings, the Lord will smite such with Consumptions, and
Feavors, and Botches, and Blastings, and Mill-dews, until they perish, I will
says the Lord smite them with Madness and Blindness, and astonishment of
Heart, and the Locust and the Worms shall consume and devour their Fruits, and
the Heavens that are over thy Head shall be as Brass, and the Earth that is
under thee shall be Iron, and the Lord will make the Rain of thy Land Powder
and Dust, and will smite thee with the Botches of Egypt, and with the Emrods,
Scab and Itch, that thou can not be healed; and this is the portion of them
that disobey the Lord and forsake him, as in Deuteronomy. 28. you may see more at
large, and how the Curse follows the Wicked and Disobedient, in City and
Field, and upon themselves and their Flocks, and the Fruits of their Land, yea,
the Plagues and Judgments that he poured upon Egypt, he pours upon them that
disobey him, and grieve and rebel against his Spirit.

And the Lord sent the Prophet Gad unto David, when he caused Joab to number
the People, and said unto him, Shall Seven Years of Famine come upon the Land,
or will thou fly Three Months before thine Enemies, whilst they pursue thee,
or that there be Three Days Pestilence in thy Land, 2 Samuel 24. And did not
this action of David bring Death and Destruction of Seventy Thousand of the
Jews, through David's harkening to the Temptation of Satan, as in the 1 Chro.
21. but David repented, and the Lord staid the hand of the destroying Angel;
that Jerusalem was not destroyed.

And did not the Lord call for a Famine, and it came upon the Land seven Years?
as in 2 Kings 8.1. and was not this because of their Wickedness?

And in Jer. 11.22. Does not the Lord there punish Judah for his Idolatry, and
said, That his Sons and Daughters should die by Famine. And in Jer. 14.12.
There the Lord said to the Jews that disobeyed him, When they Fast I will not
hear them, nor accept their Offerings, but said, I will consume them by Famine
and by Pestilence, etc. and likewise you may see in Jer. 15. how the Lord says
concerning the Rebellious and Disobedient jews, and the Wickedness of Manasses
he threateneth Death, Captivity and Famine, etc. against them, and likewise you
may see in Jer. 18.21. how the Lord threatens Famine and Judgments against the
Jews for their revolting from the Lord, and in Jer. 44.13. See how the Lord
threateneth the disobedient by Famine and Pestilence, and the Lord threateneth
his Plagues and Judgments concerning Babylon, and says, A draught is upon the
Waters, and they shall be dried up, for it is a Land of Graven Images, and they
are mad upon their Idols: And therefore let all that disobey the Lord, and make
Graven Images and Idols, and worship them, beware of these Judgments, Jer.
50.38. And Ezekiel, he declares the Judgments upon Jerusalem for their
rebelling against God, how that they should die and be consumed with Famine and
Pestilence, in Ezekiel. 5.12. and likewise in Ezekiel. 6. you may see the Judgments
upon Israel for their Idolatry, the Lord says, he would Pour his Fury upon
them, and they shall die by Pestilence and Famine: And the Lord says, he would
Leave a few of the Jews that should escape from the Pestilence and Famine, and
that these Jews that escaped might declare their own Abominations among the
Heathen, Ezekiel. 12.16. and in Isa. 14. you may see how the Lord threatened the
Assyrians with Famine and Pestilence, Thus says the Lord, because of mine
House that is wast, yea, every Man runs to his own house, therefore the
Heaven over you is stayed from Dew, and the Earth is stayed from her Fruit; and
I called for a draught upon the Land, and upon the Mountains, and upon the
Corn, and upon the New Wine, and upon the Oil, and upon this which the ground
brings forth, and upon Men, and upon Cattle, and upon all the Labor of their
Hands, Haggai 1.10, 11.

Here you may see the reason of the Judgments of God, because People mind their
own Houses and Business, and Wills more then the Lords.

And did not the Three Years Famine and Six Months come upon the Children of
Israel, because of their turning from the Lord, and Rebelling against his Law
and Spirit in the days of wicked Ahab and Jezabel, who set up their Idolatry,
and Persecuted and Killed the Lords People? and did not the Lord sh^t up
Heaven, that they had no Rain nor Dew for Three Years and Six Months in the
Land of Israel? as in Luke 4.25. 1 Kings 17.

And you may see in Rev. 18. what Plagues, and Famine, and Judgments the Lord
pours upon the False Church, Mystery Babylon, the Great Whore, that has
Whored from the Spirit of Christ, and killed the Lords Prophets, and drunk the
Blood of the Saints and Martyrs, who sat as a Queen; but Plagues, and
Judgments, and Famine, and Destruction is their end, with the Dragon, Beast,
and False Prophets, and their Followers. And therefore let all be warned that
rebel against the Spirit of God, and so turn from the Lord into Sin and
Wickedness, such cannot expect to escape these Plagues and Judgments that God
and his Prophets, Christ and his Apostles, have pronounced against them in the
Holy Scriptures of Truth.

Concerning such as overcome the Beast, and Dragon, and Whore, and False
Prophet.
Rev. 11.7. THe Beast shall overcome the Two Witnesses of God, and kill them.
Rev. 13.7. And the Beast shall make war with the Saints, and overcome them.
Rev. 17.17. But the Lamb shall overcome the Beast and his Followers.

Rev. 13.21. And Christ says to him that overcomes will I grant to sit with
me in my Throne, even as I also overcame, and am set down with my Father in his
Throne.

Rev. 12.11. And the Saints overcame the Dragon by the Blood of the Lamb, and
the Word of their Testimony, and they loved not their Lives to the Death.

Rev. 2.26, 27. And he that overcomes and keeps my words unto the end, to
him will I give power over the Nations, says Christ, and he shall rule them
with a Rod af Iron, as the Vessels of a Potter shall they be broken to shivers,
even as I received of my Father, and I will give him the Morning Star.

Rev. 2.7. To him that overcomes will I give to eat of the Tree of Life, which
is in the midst of the Paradise of God.

Rev. 2.10, 11. And be thou faithful unto Death, and I will give thee a Crown
of Life; and he that overcomes shall not be hurt with the second Death.

Rev. 3.5. And he that overcomes, the same shall be clothed in White Raiment,
and I will not blot his Name out of the Book of Life, but I will confess his
Name before my Father and before his Angels.

Rev. 3.21. And him that overcomes will I grant to sit with me in my Throne,
even as I also overcame, and am set down with my Father in his Throne.

Rev. 2.17. And him that overcomes will I give to eat of the hidden Manna, and
will give him a white Stone, and in the Stone a New Name written, which no Man
knows, saving he that receives it.

Rev. 3.10. And Christ says, thou have kept the word of my Patience, I will
keep thee from the Hour of Temptation, which shall come upon all the World, to
try them that dwell upon the Earth.

Rev. 3.13. And him that overcomes will I make a Pillar in the Temple of my
God, and he shall go no more out, and I will write upon him the name of my God,
and the Name of the City of my God, and I will write upon him my New Name.

Rev. 21.7. And he that overcomes shall inherit all things, and I will be his
God, and he shall be my Son.

But the Dragon and the Beast, the False Prophet and their Followers, and the
False Church that makes war with the Lamb and the Church of Christ the Saints;
these say, that there is no overcoming of them while they live upon the Earth,
but the Beast, False Prophets, and the Whore, and the Dragon, must have the
Victory, and the Lamb and the Saints must not have the Victory; and the
Kingdoms of the World must not become the Kingdoms of Christ; this is the
Beast, and the Whore, and the False Prophets, and the Old Dragons, the Devils,
and Satan's False Doctrine; but the Lamb and the Saints shall have the Victory
over them all.

Isaac said that when Esau had broken Jacobs Yoke from off his Neck, then Esau
should have the dominion, and this Isaac spoke by Prophecy in Genesis 27.40. and
was fulfilled in Jehorams days, 2 Chronicles. 21.4, 5, 8. For then the Edomites made
themselves a King, and this Jehoram compelled Judah to his False Worship, and
to forsake Gods Worship, 2. Chron. 21.11.

David says, O Lord preserve my Life from the fear of the Enemy, and hide me
from the secret Council of the Wicked, and from the Insurrection of the workers
of Iniquity, who whet their Tongue like a Sword, and bend their Bows to shoot
their Arrows, even bitter words, Psalm. 64.2, 3.

THE END.

