An Epistle to All Christians, Jews, and Gentiles. Showing how that GOD Dwells
not in their TEMPLES made with HANDS.
THus says the Lord, Heaven is my Throne, and Earth is my Footstool; Where is
the House that you will Build unto me, where is the Place of my Rest? This the
Lord said unto the Jews that built the Temple. Isaiah, 66.1.

And Solomon says, The Heaven of Heavens cannot contain God, how much less the
House that he Built? 1 Kings, 8.27. And the same in the 2 Chronicles 6.18.

And again, Steven says to the Jews High Priest, when he was examining him,
Though Solomon Built an House for the Lord, howbeit the Most High dwells not in
Temples made with Hands; for Heaven is Gods Throne, and Earth is his Footstool;
what House will ye Build Me, says the Lord, or where is the Place of my Rest?
Has not my Hands made all these Things? Ye Stiff-necked and Uncircumcised in
Hearts and Ears, ye do always resist the Holy Ghost, as your Forefathers did,
so do ye.

Now here all may see, that it was the Stiff-necked and Uncircumcised Hearts
and Ears, that were the Persecutors, as in the next Verse, that did resist the
Holy Ghost; and therefore their Bodies, in that State, were not like to be
Temples of the Holy Ghost: as in 1 Cor. 6.19. And therefore these Persecutors
that did resist the Holy Ghost, which comes from the Father and the Son, were
the Cryers up of the Outward Temple: they were not like to see God, as Steven
did, who dwells not in Temples made with Hands; and Heaven to be his Throne,
and Earth his Footstool, who resists his Holy Spirit that proceeds from him,
by which God is Seen and Known.

And the Apostle Paul says, God that made the World, and all Things therein,
seeing that he is Lord of Heaven and Earth, dwells not in Temples made with
Hands, neither is Worshipped with Men's hands, as though he needed any thing,
seeing he gives to all, Life, and Breath, and all things, and has made of one
Blood all Nations of Men, for to dwell on the Face of the Earth, etc. That they
should seek the Lord, if happily they might feel after him, and find him,
though he be not far from every one of us; for in him we live, and move, and
have our Being, etc. Acts 17.

So you may see here are many Witnesses before mentioned, that God that made
the World, and all things therein, who is Lord of Heaven and Earth, dwells
not in Temples made with Hands, but as the Prophets, Christ, and the Apostles
say, Heaven is Gods Throne, and Earth is his Footstool. Mat. 5.34, 35.

So all come to know God, who has made of one Blood all Nations of Men for to
dwell on the Face of the Earth; he gives to you all, Life, and Breath, and all
things; I say, all to know him by his Spirit which he pours upon all Flesh,
Heaven to be his Throne, and Earth to be his Footstool; yea, all that dwell
upon the Face of the Earth, know the Earth that you dwell upon, and walk upon,
to be Gods Footstool, and Heaven to be his Throne, who is Lord of Heaven and
Earth, who gives you Breath and Life, and pours his Spirit upon you, or in
you, Joel 2. and Acts 2. That with his Spirit you may know the Day is come that
Joel spoke of; and that with his Spirit you may all know, that God has poured
his Spirit upon you, or in you, that with it you live in God, and move in God,
and have your Being in God, who is Lord of Heaven and Earth, and Heaven is his
Throne, and Earth is his Footstool, upon which Face of the Earth you dwell,
and walk; and so all to see and know that ye are the Temples of the Living God,
as God has said, I will dwell in them, and walk in them, and I will be their
God, and they shall be my People, 2 Cor. 6.16. and Levit. 26.12.

And thus says the Lord who dwells not in Temples made with Hands, but the
Saints that are lead by the Holy Ghost, are the Temples of God and his
Holy Ghost; for the Lord says, The Children of Israel and Judah had provoked
him to anger with the Works of their hands. The Lord says, For this City (to
wit) Jerusalem, and the Temple, has been to me a Provocation of my anger, and
of my Fury, from the day that they built it, even unto this day (to wit)
Jerusalem and the Temple; that I should remove it from before my Face, (says
the Lord) and destroy it, etc. Jer. 32.

So you may see here, that such as resisted the Holy Ghost, were crying up
Outward Jerusalem, and the Outward Temple who were the Stiff-necked
Persecutors, and Uncircumcised in Hearts and Ears, as you may see in the
Prophets Time, and in Isaiah's Time, and in Christ's, Steven's, and the Apostle
Paul's Time; and such Uncircumcised in Hearts and Ears, that are Persecutors,
that did, and do resist the Holy Ghost now, are crying up Outward Temples, and
Imprisoning, and Persecuting, and spoiling the Goods of People now, because
they will not give Money to mend their Temples or Churches, of such as make no
use of them, and yet they say, The Gates of Hell shall not prevail against
their Church; and yet daily want Repairing, either by reason of Weather,
Storms, or Thunder. And though the Lord tells them by his Prophet, and Steven,
and his Apostles, That God that made the World, and all Things therein, dwells
not in Temples made with Hands, but Heaven is his Throne, and Earth is his
Footstool, and he is the Lord of Heaven and Earth. And says of his People in
these words, What? know you not that your Bodies are the Temples of the
Holy Ghost, which is in you, which you have of God. And again, For ye are the
Temples of the Living God (as God has said) I will dwell in them, and walk in
them, and I will be their God, and they shall be my People, and I will be a
Father to you, and ye shall be my Sons and Daughters, says God Almighty. Jer.
31.33. And therefore all that receive the Holy Ghost, know your Bodies to be
the Temples of the Living God, and his Holy Ghost and Heaven to be Gods Throne,
and Earth his Footstool, and that you dwell and walk upon his Footstool, and
that you do live and move, and have your everlasting Being in God, who dwells
not in Temples made with Hands, but God dwells and walks in you his Temple, and
he is your God and Father, and you are his People, and the Sons and Daughters
of God Almighty. So that every one may truly say, I live and move and have my
Being in God, and Heaven is his Throne, and Earth is his Footstool, which I
naturally dwell upon and walk upon; and Spiritually in God I live and move, and
have my Being to his Praise and Glory, Who is Lord of all, both in Heaven and
Earth, from Everlasting to Everlasting, blessed and Praised for ever, Amen.

One God and Father of all, who is above all, and through all, and in you all.
Ephesians. 4.6. All People know God the Father so to be.

The 4th. of 7th. Month, 1682. G. FOX.

LONDON, Printed for John Bringhurst, Printer and Stationer, at the Sign of the
Book in Grace Church Street, near Cornhil, 1682.


