CONCERNING MARRIAGE: How God made them Male and Female in the beginning, and
how he joined them together, before they were drove from God into the Earth,
and then the manner of Marriage before the Law, and then the Marriage in the
Law, and the Marriage amongst the Christians in the Primitive times; And the
Marriage of the Apostate Christians, and Jews and Gentiles, where hardness of
heart was, there men put a sunder: But where God joins together, let none put
a sunder, that is as it was in the beginning before man was driven from God
into the Earth, out of the defiled Bed in the Dominion, in the unity with all
Saints, so not to be hid from them.
NOw the reproveable Marriages are such as Herod's, that John Baptist reproved,
and such are spoken of in Genesis, when the Sons of God saw the Daughters of
men that they were fair, they took unto them Wives of all sorts, which was in
the coveting desires that grieved the Spirit of God, so their minds was rebuked
that run after all sorts, that grieved the Spirit of God, that went from Gods
joining; So this was the rebukable Marriage, Genesis 6.2. So let your Conversation
be without Coveteousnesse.

And the manner of Isaacks taking a wife, Chap. 24.67. and Chap. 38. People was
present when he took a wife, and Rebekahs friends blessed her and said, be thou
Mother of Thousands; and Isaac took her into his Mothers Tent, and there took
her to Wife. At the marriage of Jacob, Laban gathered together all the men of
the place (and so there was people) Genesis 29.22. So the manner of marrying in
the Law, Exodus 21. Thou shall not take thee a wife that is a whore, or a woman
that is put away from her Husband, that was the Law of the Priests, Levit. 21.
Ye shall not make Marriages with the Heathen, nor give your Daughters nor Sons
to them, nor serve their Gods, but shall follow me says the Lord, he that
joins together, Deuteronomy. 7.3. And Joshua said they should not make marriages with
the Heathen, least they were snares to them, and as traps, Joshua 23.12. And
the wife of the dead shall not marry a stranger, and the Elders of the City was
to speak to him that did marry the woman, the wife of him that was dead, and he
and she should come before the Elders, and so you see there were people
present, Deuteronomy. 25.9. At Boaz and Ruth all the People and Elders that were in
the Gates were witnesses, and said, we are witnesses; And there you may see
what was the words the man said, and the woman said to them, Ruth 4. The Lord
make the woman like Rachel and Leah, which two did build the House of Israel,
and the woman blessed the Lord likewise; And David sent his servants to
Abigail, and communed with her to take her to wife, and she came with five
Damsels, and became his wife, 1 Samuel 25.39.42.

A Virtuous Woman is a Crown to her Husband.
HEar is something also which was spoken concerning marrying in the Primitive
times, by the Saints and Servants of God, who were passed from death to life,
and so from the sin that defiles the Bed; Christ says, Mat. 19.9. Whosoever
shall put away his wife except it be for Fornication, and marries another,
commits Adultery, and whosoever marries her that is put away commits
Adultery. There was a marriage in Canaan, and Jesus his Mother and his
Disciples were called to it; So you may see there were people present as
witnesses; things were not done in a corner nor in a hole, John 2. While a
woman's Husband lives, if she marries she is called an Adulteress, but when her
Husband is dead, she is free from the Law if she marry to another man, Romans
7.3. And in 1 Cor. 7. The state of Marriage may be seen; Let not the wife
depart from the Husband, for the unbelieving Husband is sanctified through the
believing wife, and the unbelieving wife through the believing Husband, else
were your Children unholy, but now are they clean; for what do thou know but
thou may save thy wife, or the wife may save her husband? Therefore you may
see there was much in that; and this was spoken further then the Law, which
says in Nehemiah, they might depart if they were joined to the Heathens, Nehe.
13. The Apostle says, be not unequally yoaked with unbelievers, for what
fellowship has Believers with Infidels, 1 Cor. 6. And Husbands love your
Wives, and Wives submit to your Husbands as it is fit in the Lord, for no man
hates his own flesh, and in 1 Timothy 4.3. The Apostle speaks of them that are
gotten up in the Apostasy which did and have forbidden to marry, chap. 5. the
Apostle speaks of the state of right marriage, and Heb. 13.4. He says,
Marriage is honorable in all, and the Bed that is undefiled; But whoremongers
and adulterers God will judge, and in 1 Pet. 3.1.2.7. Wives be in subjection to
your own Husbands, that if any obey not the Word, they also may without the
Word, be won by the conversation of the Wives, while they behold your chaste
conversation coupled with fear; likewise Husbands dwell with your Wives
according to knowledge, giving honor unto the wife as to the weaker Vessel,
and as being heirs together of the grace of life, that your prayers be not
hindered; and husbands love your wives, and wives love your husbands, as Christ
loves the Church, and the Church loves Christ.

And if any friends go together in the Power of the Lord, or find a necessity
thereunto to join in marriage, that after the thing has been made known
between themselves, before any thing be concluded, it be declared to Friends
who are able, in the Wisdom and Power of God to see and feel into it: and if
they see the thing in the light and power to stand, it may be declared to
friends in the meeting or Meetings, to which the parties do belong, toward the
end thereof as they are moved, by the parties themselves, or some other friends
as they are moved, both of the parties being then present, that it may be by
friends felt and seen in the light, and inquiry may be made touching any other
engagement, to stop scandals, and things kept sweet, so that you take time in
it, and you may be clear, and feel it as it was in the beginning, that no
hardness of heart get up; But if the parties who are first acquainted with
such a marriage, or any friend or friends have any thing against it, and if any
thing be resolved otherwise, that then the matter be laid before friends the
next General meeting that may be appointed, to consider of things relating to
friends, and there to be seen into and ended; If in convenient time after the
thing is declared nothing appear against it by the parties who are first
acquainted with such a marriage, nor by any Friend or Friends; and after things
are all sweet and clear, and Friends have unity with it, they may as they are
moved, declare it in the end of the General Meeting to which the parties do
belong, before the departure of Friends, or as they are moved, they may declare
it in the mid-time of the Market, on the Market Day in the next Market Town, to
such parties outward dwelling as they are moved, or they may not as their
freedom is by the Parties themselves, or such other as the Parties do see fit
as they are moved; then after a convenient time, and the thing be seen, felt,
and had unity with, and an Assembly about twelve Friends met together, they may
speak their Testimony (that all may take notice who are the persons) as they
are moved, how the Lord has joined them together in Marriage, and then a
Certificate by Friends then present may be given of the Day, Month, and Year,
that it may be recorded, and as they are moved, they may declare it to the
Magistrate, and they will, or they may not; And that those things that cannot
be owned by all Friends, and have unity with all in the Power and Spirit of
God, may not be recorded, and Unrighteousness, and Filthiness, Fornication,
Whoredom, and Adultery may be shut out, that the witness of God in all Friends
may in that which is done be answered, and Righteousness, and Purity, and
Holiness, that all things may be done in the Power, Life, Truth, and Wisdom of
the Lord God, and in Unity, and you preserved in Unity, that you may serve God
in a New life, and one heart, and holy Seed, and glorify him in your Souls,
Bodies, and Spirit which are his, that your Conversation may be ordered a
right, that you may see the Salvation of God, and know the marriage that is
sanctified by the Word, that you may be the peculiar people, the holy Royal
Seed and Generation; And that nothing be recorded for Money in these things,
but freely, a free people and in love serve one another; For the Jews went
together after they came out of Egypt, that had been brought out by the Power
of God, after hardness of heart got up into them, then Moses gave them a bill
of Divorcement to put a sunder, and this was because of the hardness of their
hearts. And the Heathen went together like beasts, and the Apostate Christians
since the days of the Apostles, have done the same, whose hardness of heart
has showed it self each to other; But in the beginning it was not so before
man was drove into the Earth from God; So Friends that be redeemed out of the
Earth comes to know it as it was in the beginning again; and how God created
the Male and the Female, and joined together which no man can put a sunder (and
so are redeemed from the Jews marriages, and the Gentiles marriages, and the
Apostate Christians marriages) and whom God joins together let no man put a
sunder; But who comes together as it was in the beginning, comes over the Jews,
Gentiles, and Apostate Christians, and that is the Marriage that is honorable,
and there the Bed is that is undefiled; therefore whom God joins together,
that is with his Power which was before the fall which defiles the Bed, and
that is it that all should feel the thing in the Power: And you that go
together may tell it to them that be in the Power of God, that they may know it
before it be in the General Meeting, that Friends may have public notice of it
abroad, that all may witness the thing and have unity with it; and if any are
moved to publish it in the Market, to judge the Jews and the Gentiles, and
Apostate Christians, their marriages which be not in the Power of God, they
may, who know it to be as it was in the beginning, the true Marriage; God made
them Male and Female, the honorable Marriage, which is the Bed undefiled, which
was before the fall, whom God joins together let no man put a sunder; and that
you be a Royal seed, a peculiar people zealous of good works, and to know God
joining together, which is over and above men's putting a sunder.

In the beginning God made them Male and Female, not Males and Females, as it
was after in the fall where men had many wives, so who knows the Marriage in
the Restoration, knows it as it was in the beginning Male and Female, Gods
making, and Gods joining, and that is in the dominion an honorable state, and
renewed in the Image of God, out of the Whore mongers, Adulterers, and
Fornicators state, whom God does judge, which defiles the Bed, over which God
sets his Seed in judgment Seat, which has the honorable marriage and
undefiled Bed.

7th. Month 1659. G. F.

THE END.
LONDON. Printed, for Thomas Simmons, at the Sign of the Bull and Mouth, near
Aldersgate, 1661.


