THE SPIRIT OF Envy, Lying, and Persecution, MADE MANIFEST: FOR The sake of the
simple hearted, that they may not be deceived by it. BEING An Answer to a
scandalous paper of John Harwoods, who in words professes God, but in his
works does deny him, as may appear by what is herein written. G. F.

And there shall in no wise enter into the holy City any thing that defiles,
neither whatsoever works abomination, or makes a lie: but they that are
written in the Lambs Book of Life,

Rev. 21. 27. LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1663.

A Paper of lies and slanders I have lately seen of John Harwoods with his name
at it, which he calls A true and real Demonstration why he denied the Authority
of George Fox, which truly the lies and the slanders are so manifest false
reports, that he has gathered up, to all men that he has directed his Book
to, considering the unclean actions of the person, which are out of and below
civil men, may convince all what a kind of person he has been for several
years, which is not like that such an unclean spirit that runs into such
unclean actions that came into the open view of the world, when he would have
taken away a woman's life, and the woman his, about uncleanness, in the face of
a Country, and in the sight of the world; and they that believe such untrue
Narrations, are the same unclean spirits of his, whose actions, practice,
carriage, have been such which are a shame for modesty to mention, and he so
loathsome and unclean, not fit to come among sober people, and is not worth the
heeding what he says.

But something is written to his paper, that none of the simple might be
deceived that knows him not, nor his carriage, nor his practice, who has
dishonored God, and his people, and gone into those things, which are out of
the bounds of civil men, such an unclean spirit, the unclean spirits may cry up
such an unclean spirit to be their teacher.

JOHN HARWOOD, first, thou say The truth of God among friends thou never
did d^sown. Oh impudency that thou should be so impudent! did thou own
the truth of God amongst Friends when thou acted thy uncleanness? Thy word is
never, I never disowned, say thou, but in the fear of the pure God, I declare
it; wast thou in the fear of God, when thou runs into uncleanness? did not thy
fruits manifest quite contrary at the Sessions, that thy practice denied both
God and his people? Was it not time to turn thee out from the Assembly of the
righteous, when thou had turned thy self from the life and truth: the life
turned thee out; now thou makes a noise amongst some like unto thy self: And
did not thou dishonor God and his testimony, and Christ and his righteousness,
when thou went into such unrighteous actions? and then when thou had done
thou runs reviling and slandering, and scandaling and scribbling against
friends, when they could not own thee in thy unclean actions, who never went to
the Justice, nor to the Sessions, to clear truth; and confess to them thy
abominable actions, how thou had dishonored God and his truth, and owned thy
condemnation amongst them, and how thou had abused his truth.

And whereas thou charges G. F. of Capital offenses, which are offenses unto
death by thy unclean spirits judgment, and there thou pourests out thy envy and
malice, which no other fruit can be looked from thee, but it will fall upon
thine own head, and whoever joins with thee in this work, they will fall with
thee in the same pit.

And thou go about to clear thy self from prejudice and enmity, and fathers
thy lies and slanders upon God: Oh blasphemy, wickedness and impudency!

And thou say, G. F. has been searching after the failings and offenses of
others to publish them. This is one of thy lies. But where the offenses and
failings are, and a changing from them, and the people forsake their offenses
and failings, that is owned, and that no uncleanness might be amongst us, nor
enter into the Camp; if there be any, we search that we may find it out. But in
this thou have made thy self manifest, that would not have offenses and
failings judged, for he that sins openly is to be reproved openly.

And thou say The publication of these things (of thy lies and slanders and
false reports) is at the just hand of God and mine. Thus thou impudently and
blasphemously joins thy self with God in publishing thy lies and slanders.

And first thou say, G. F. calls himself the Son of God, etc. And this thou
calls a crime; thy actions and fruits has manifested whose son thou art, and
thy self to be ignorant of the Scriptures and the Spirit that gave them forth.
And as for the esteem of thee, it was never much valued, though G. F. and many
other friends, did exhort thee, that thou might have been preserved, as a civil
man, and been kept out of these things, which were below many of the World.

Another of thy lies, That G. F. should set up himself in the high place, and
throw down others. This is another of thy lies, for it is the Lord that set him
up, and not man, and such wicked unclean spirits as thine is, he does not own,
and such unclean spirits as thou art, are not Gods inheritance; for I do Judge
and am above all such, and ever was, and ever shall be. And so thou art one
fallen into the diverse temptations, and hurtful lusts, but thy heart is given
up to the same which is come up to open view.

And what ado have thou to talk of God, and his divine glory and his truth, and
his people, whose fruit has manifested the uncleanness of thy spirit. What
ado have thou to take Gods name in thy mouth, that hates to be reformed? For
Korah when he gainsayed Moses, he gainsayed the Law, when he went from truth;
and such instruments as thou art, have dishonored the Lord, more then ever
thou have honored him, and his people, and his truth and therefore thou ragest
against them that have lived in it, and have kept their garments clean. And
such as thou art said Christ was a Devil, though they could find no seam in his
Garment.

And what do thou talk of Israel who have gone from that which did convince
thee, and now become a railer, and false accuser, and impudent? and thou have
been led into open profaneness, which God brought to light, that the very earth
could not bear thee, but judge thee; and therefore do thou think that his
people would receive thee? Thou art far off from the fellowship of them; if
thou had intended to have got in amongst the fellowship of the Saints in
light, and the heirs of the Gospel whose Conversation is in Heaven, thy way had
been to have gone to the Magistrates, and the Sessions, and the Country, and
have preached thy Condemnation for such things, in which thou had run out
beyond modesty to speak of; and I know none but thee, and such as thy spirit
are, to usurp over the Consciences of people, and enthrone themselves with thy
unclean spirit, who has long burdened the righteous seed But it is risen and
will ease it self, and shake you off, like dust and chafe, and brambles for
the fire.

And whereas thou speak of Legal Prescriptions, and to enjoin to the
performance of external forms and practices. This is thy self, and I.P. that
man thou exalts so, which prescriptions and External Forms we judge, and
therefore ye rage, and God has abased, and will abase, and your end is seen
and manifested; and thou go and pretends to teach others, and cannot keep
thy self as a man, and thou pretends so much peace and love, and manifests so
much envy as thou utterest in thy paper.

And thou speaks of G. F. to clear himself if he can amongst friends, and he is
clear among true friends. Thou art denied amongst all true friends, thou have
nothing to do to come amongst them: and before thou said it was a true and
real demonstration. And so then if he can clear himself (thou say); here thou
questions my own work again.

Thou say that G. F. sent a paper with his own hand to it to several
Churches, into several Countries for friends to nominate and appoint such as
were esteemed, that they might sit in the place of Magistracy, and to send
their names to London to be presented to the present Power to be Comm^ssionated
by them. Thou say, This may truly signify that I had an end to my self, to
exalt my self in the Government of the Nation, in getting up them to sit in
Justice, and I would set my self over them, etc.

There is not a word of this true, for I was not in London when the paper was
sent, neither was it ordered by me, neither sent out by me, neither was I at
London till after it was sent forth, neither did I know of the paper till after
it was sent forth. And thus thou and all people may see thy wickedness and
envy; and the intent of the paper, as friends told me, which I believe and know
it was the time of great sufferings and persecution; when sufferings were laid
before the Parliament, they told they knew not how to remedy it, and they told
friends that they might nominate some sober men in the Country that would not
persecute them, and to have them sent up to the Parliament, and this was the
intent of friends sending down that paper which thou maliciously makes use of,
in rendering friends odious, and me to be the Author of it, who knew not that it
was forth, till it was forth.

And thou say, A Letter went forth in G. F's. name, with his hand at it, for
all that had been Soldiers and Officers in the Army, that had been put forth
upon the account of truth, they might send up their names to London, to be
presented to the present Power, that they might be restored into their
respective places, and there were many among them that could not take up a
carnal sword; and so see where this man would have led these people; if he had
accomplished this thing, friends had been found in actual Arms at this Powers
coming in, it might have caused ruin and destruction of many of the innocent:
and this is clearly evident of his usurping the external Government.

This is altogether false, and proceeds from an envious, malicious, lying
spirit, and a blood-thirsty spirit, the same that acted uncleanness with a
woman, and then would have hanged her, and her thee, for which cause thou wast
denied, and art denied.

But as for a Paper given forth for the soldiers giving in their names, which
we had many, and others we had not which were written to, to lay them with
others sufferings before the Parliament, but not for them to go into their
places again, and to take Government, that was utterly denied, and to bear arms
again, that was never in my heart, neither do I believe it was in their hearts,
when that, that thing was laid upon many of them, and was invited to go to take
up arms again into their places, but never intended by me nor them, as I said
before; and this lie and slander thou have uttered forth to manifest thy
wickedness, and further thy malicious spirit.

And as for John Hall, what was writ unto him in a private paper, it was from
the woman's own mouth; and therefore thou should have judged thine own
wickedness, for that concerned thee, and so it was not report: and this is
another of thy lies, who art raging in Hell, and art there digging deep.

And as for Jane Stoaks, she is sufficiently known, and what her actions have
been; and thou say, G. F. would not suffer her to be assisted in going to
Rome, this is another of thy lies, for I was not at London at that time,
neither did I speak to her when she went, but was in Lancaster Prison, for thou
would not suffer her to be assisted in her journey, say thou; and for this
lie and slander of thine, thou scoffingly says, G. F. must come down upon his
knees, which was in a Goal near 200 miles off when she went, neither did I
here of her going till a great while afterward; and thus thy envy is made
manifest: And thou say, G. F. sent George Bailiff into France, who dyed in
Prison, who confessed no command from God to go in hisservice, neither did he
know any particular place to go to into France; and this is another of thy
slanders and lies, for he had spoken to Gerrard Roberts of it before, and
Gerrard has told me of it since, who afterward came to me in Kent, where we
spoke of it together: And thou say, that G. F. contrary to the principle of
truth, vindicated and justified the practice of Water Baptism in Humphrey
Wooldridge, who baptized a woman, and because I would not utterly deny
Humphrey's wrong, and deny him, and judge him out from amongst Friends, as thou
did, who made a discord amongst Friends, who simply did such a thing once,
and no more, and here thou think thou have spyed a great fault, but do
not look into thine own house, who art before finding fault, and judging others
for seeking into failings, and here thou have condemned thy self out of thine
own mouth again, to the grief of many Friends, who so impudently made a strife
amongst them in judging him.

And thou say, G. F. when he was at London, takes upon him the place of God,
and orders those he accounts Ministers in his will, and sends them to the
several meetings about London, and thither they must go, whether they have a
command or motion of God to go or no, and in his absence leaves one to order
the rest in his place the first days, who orders either by word of mouth, or
by a piece of paper.

Answ. And this is wickedness and lies again, and because thou wast judged
out, and has been often judged, and few or none could ever hardly own thy
going to any meeting, for when thou wast at the best state, tender Friends
could scarce bear thy spirit, many complained to me of thee, and because thou
would run up and down in thy will I crossed thee, and several were moved so
to do, as being a man hardly to be trusted, which since thy actions have
manifested themselves; and therefore like Ham, thou seek for nakedness if
thou could find any, nay worse than Ham, for he laid open that which was, and
thou layest open thy lies, that thou may further make manifest thy self,
that all may judge of thee, for we do meet together its known, and every one
takes their motion, and that has been long that meetings was not set up by me,
neither do I allow any in my absence, neither do I send papers to them, for by
the power of God in themselves and the Spirit they and I do know what order is;
but thou disorderly man has gone out of that, and grieved the Spirit by which
thou art eternally judged, and judged by it out of the fellowship of it.

And thou say, G. F. sent Milburey Smith into the ministry, and bid her go
and be a Mother in Israel, when she was with a bastard-child, and after brought
it forth.

Answ. This is a lie, for I never bid her be a mother in Israel, neither did I
bid her go into the ministry; for the first time I saw her I found her in Kent,
and when I saw her and I enquired of her, and told Edward Borough, I did not
like her, and spoke of her turning back to her place, and I do not believe she
was with (...)

And as for I. P. Unity and amity, that which was written to it will stand,
whether thou or whoever opposes, and they which judges it knows not the eternal
power, and the life of God, and none does it but such as are puffed up like thy
self, and sows this in their ranting up and down, and like the untimely Figs,
and like the corn upon the house top; and thus against the anointed of the Lord
do you bend your tongues, and who said the Seed is fallen; therefore ye cast up
the mire and dirt; and if I. P. have no better proselites nor disciples than
thou, and if thou be the mouth of them, and the maintainer of his cause, it is
sufficient for all the sober and temperate that fear God to manifest his end
and thine.

And G. F's Book to the Jews (the Title of which is, The honor amongst the
Jews) does not speak of the hat in prayer, which thou and others have perverted
my words from that intent to which they were spoken, who wilfully and wickedly
would make that which is written to them to another intent, to be for you to
pray with the hat on, for them to hold up the rotten Principle of the Ranters,
for my Book speaks of putting off the hats to Magistrates.

And so you would bring all men to sit like a company of women, and so you
would bring all into a form under the penalty of a curse; for J.P's. law was
never called in, which many observes, like a company of women sits covered, of
whom thou learned it, of the woman not of the man, and so it is your law and
your curse that we oppose, who stands in our liberty in the power of God before
hats was; it is not the hat that will cover thy adulterous spirit, which thou
have taken up from J. P. which I have no unity withal, for my unity stands in
the power of God before hats was; but what is to be said to such a one, that
casts all reverence, and fear, and virtue behind thee, and gone into scandals,
slande^s, and lies, and makes them thy refuge? and my practice manifests that I
am as I was, and in that which will never change the Seed it self, he that can
read it may: and the fellowship which stands in hats, and thy unclean actions,
and carnal things, and your forms you set up, and would thrust it in among
Friends, with the power of God before hats was, is denied; and these are more
of thy lies, in saying I would impose and set up external practices amongst the
Lords free people, that is your own conditions, that would th^ust in your
venomous and idolatrous practices amongst us for as I said before our practice
was in the power of God before your outward things were, and thy unclean
actions and practices, and thy unclean things which has been related in papers.

And for saying that I said the power of God had remitted thy adulterous
practice, I bid thee wait in that which did condemn it, that the power of God
might arise for to remit, and instead of waiting, thou takes up all the lies
and slanders that thou can, and so publishes thy spirit, but I am known to
God (whom thou have dishonored) and manifested in the hearts of his people,
whom thou have disgraced.

And what testimony have thou but lies and slanders, and strengthens thy self
in thy wickedness, and so thou covers over thy lies with God, and Christ, and
Testimony, and now thy wickedness boyls in thy heart.

And as for thy scornings and scoffs, saying, He is shifting from place to
place, from City to City, and Country to Country, to shun a Prison and
persecution. This is more of thy lies and slanders, for I am known to the Lord,
and am in his power, and do as I am moved in it, and the shifting and shrinking
is thy own state from place to place, who has run into these intolerable
wickednesses, and prophanenesses, and to cowardlynesse when thou wentest from
truth into thy immodest carriages and practices. And others they went where
they were moved. But that evil spirits like thy self watches for evil, and
feeds upon lies and evil thoughts, thy judgemen^, which will fall heavy upon
thy head, and theirs in the end, and what thou sowest, that thou shall reap to
thy self a heavy burden.

And thou saying I sent Thomas Richardson to Ely, and refused to go my self,
and friends desired it. This is false, for Thomas Richardson was not with me,
he was 100 miles off me, for Thomas Richardson would go as he was moved;
neither did I know that he was there, till he was in Prison, and he had been
there, and I sent to him, if he were moved he might go, but I did not know that
he was there, till he was in Prison. And as for Ely friends, there were many of
them with me at a Meeting, and I had places to go to, and this is thy envy and
wickedness, and there are no friends that did ever desire me; when I came to
answer them, when they (...) satisfied. And as for saying T. R. burdens the
Seed of God, thou may for shame stop thy mouth, for the light of salvation
is thy condemnation; so its the savor of death unto death to thee, which is
the savor of life to another, and that I believe Thomas Richardson will never
deny; and thou that have lied and slandered me, I do not believe thou will
speak truth of him.

And here are more of thy lies in saying I sent papers to Virginia, to slander
John Parrot, and Jane Stoakes, in a reviling manner, setting his servants at
work, and this is a Judas-like spirit and work, mark his end.

The like same spirit said, I had sent papers to Thomas Thurston against Jane
Stoaks, and Elizabeth Harris, and when Thomas Thurston came, he manifested
their lying spirits, who said he had not received any Letter from me; but where
deceitful spirits run up and down among friends, their tongues preaching one
thing, and their lives another, I deny them and shall write after them, as I am
moved of the Lord God, and deny them if they do not return by repentance.

And whereas thou say G. F. caused John Fritwell and Christopher Gilbourn,
and James Nailor and others, to go down upon their knees before him, and to make
their Confession, and to own Judgment upon that which was charged against
them. All people can tell in the Bull and Mouth, whether I spoke to James
Nailer to fall down upon his knees there; by that they may judge of Fritwel and
Gilbourn: for if James Nailer, or any else did, or do condemn upon their knees
before the Lord, that which they have done against him, in dishonouring of him
and his people, I shall never deny it, not call it idolatry, for if John
Harwood had done so, gone among the Justices, and in the Country, and amongst
the Lords People whom he had grieved, and condemned what he had done and acted,
and scandalized the truth, it had showed a penitent heart, and tenderness, and
something like the truth, and that would have preserved truth, and not have
dishonored. But instead of doing so, he is grieved at them that did do so; far
off of acknowledging, far off of such an humble mind, as kneels down, sits upon
his breech with his Hat on his head in prayer, and so like a numb thing without
sense and feeling of the Spirit. In this Capital crime thou speaks of, which
thou must judge and condemn, thy actions and practice, and all these things
thou had wickedly acted, thou had better have judged and condemned, but Esau
could not find repentance, though he sought it with tears.

And the Seed of God does condemn all that is contrary to it, and such actions
and practices as thine, its set atop of the head of them.

An ^as so^ thy envy, and malice, and raging, because I have written against
the high places and Pulpits, and says I allow of such like places in our
meetings; there are no such things like a Pulpit in our meeting, let all
Friends judge of this, if there be any such thing like unto a Pulpit, for where
Friends stands, other Friends stands and sits upon them, and this is one of the
capital crimes as thou calls it.

And because when Friends go to marry, they were to publish it sometimes before
in their meetings, and because it was to be laid before the men Friends, and
women Friends to have there approbation before they take one another, this
shows a changable spirit and a fallable.

Oh the adulterous spirit cannot abide to come to the light, what if it be
declared at the market place, for thou art afraid of the light who art out of
truth. And Friends, who are moved of the Lord God to go together, whom the Lord
joins in the honorable marriage, in the undefiled bed, this we do according
to the practice of the Saints of the most High, publish it to them that be in
the Power, and Spirit, in which Power and Spirit there is order, which power of
God and Spirit of God is before thy defiled bed was; and as for the speaking of
it in meetings, and and laying it before men's meetings, and women's meetings in
London, who loves wholsomness, this is no contradiction, but it is one with the
former, which thou scoffingly calls order; but thou would do what thou do in
the dark, where thou art and can not abide the light; and therefore declare
it in men's meetings, and women's meetings, that is to stop unclean spirits like
thine, who declared it in the meeting at the Peel, and the woman declaring
nothing, and then runs into the country, and committing adultery with another
woman is thy order and form thou gets disciples into; and therefore to speak
it in men and women's meetings amongst Friends in the truth, this we own to keep
down such evil spirits as thine, they being in the truth, that the thing be
done in the light, but thou that hates the light have loved the darkness, and
so thou have fellowship in it. And as for John Moon, he is owned, and thou
wast never to be compared to him nor his ministry, and that which thou have
spoken of him I believe is like the rest, for I have not spoken to him about
that thing, but I believe its like the rest of thy lies.

And as for M. F. thou a^t not worthy to take her name in thy mouth, a virtuous
woman, when thou say, being shut up in a room near Newgate several hours;
this is thy malitiousness, wickedness, for there was her Son in law, and her
Daughter was passing to beyond the Seas, where they had something to speak
together, where several Friends desired to come in and could not, because I had
some business to speak with them before they went beyond the Seas, which was
the occasion of stopping of some Friends; and this is like thy reports at
Elizabeth Trotts house, thy false reports: And as for her being weary of my
company, or questioning any such thing, or questioning me or she, this is like
thy rest, and I believe she will tell it thee to thy face, for what is to be
looked for from thee, and what thou have acted, with that same line thou
measurest others, an innocent people, and a righteous people, and thou that
have no other stuff to feed people, but such stuff as this is, with thy
surmising and evil jealousies, to judge others to be like thy self; but truth
is clear and is over all, who art like Cumberland and Purseval in thy words,
but worse in thy practice, but the Seed is atop of all your heads, and they
that will feed upon such things will sink themselves.

And as for G.F. going up and down to reproach and revile the innocent, and to
warn Friends not to receive him, these are all lies, or any where else have
done the same, these are all lies, but deceit I judge wherever I find it, and
ever did, and ever shall, but in the will of the Lord I do it, and his honor
and glory I seek, but these have been thy words, to envy, hate, slander, rail
and accuse these many years, but I am in the Spirit and Life, and in the Life
that ever was that never falls, nor never will fall, that never changes, nor
will change; and what do thou talk of Israel, and Saints, and meekness, and
love, when thou art in thy lies and slanders, and false reports, and
uncleanness? but thou and such as thou art have cast off meekness, and
trampled upon love, and cast away pity, whose fruits declare thy profaneness,
for G.F's. spirit has showed the restoring the lost sheep of Israel, but such
spirits as thine and yours have driven many back to the world, with your
fierceness in the devouring nature; and as for thy denying G.F's. authority,
and others, thou say, which is like thy self, they should have set down
their hands to a paper, that they might have come to light, thy denying is
nothing worth, for when thou wentest in to the adulterous spirit, and into the
uncleanness, who never was redeemed out of it, but gets it in the hypocrisy,
what thou professes of God, but denied by the power and life, and so thy
testimony is dead, and thy works for the fire, and the power which I have
received is from the Lord, and not usurped, by which I deny all unclean spirits
and actions, and the power that I am in, is owned with the Spirit of God in
every man; and this is to satisfy all people of your testimony, because I
judge thy uncleanness, and unclean spirit, and unclean actions, and then they
will cry they have no great honor of thee, neither the Lord nor his People,
nor sober men; and G.F. never struck at the life of God, but always struck at
the unclean spirits, and thy unclean actions; nay, there are other things that
I judge besides the Hat, thy nasty, dirty paper, which is a shame to modesty to
mention. And I. P's, has sufficiently manifested it self, and the end of it
where it is run, and his paper which is not for modesty to mention, forth in
writing; and we know what life he had, the fruits of it has manifested it self
discovered, and these thou calls virtuous, but is one of the seven sins which
Solomon speaks of, for that which is excellent, and virtuous, and glorious,
G.F. always loved, and self honor he always denied, there are thousands in
the life can witness it; but thy self honor which thou and others seeks and
speaks of so much, and the spirit of Saul is entered into many of you, and a
worse, and G.F. is in the Spirit of God, the Seed that never fell, nor
changes, and all your Briars and Thorns, and slanders, and scandals, and lying
reports, the Seed that he is in and of, was before they were, and will stand
when they are gone, and he is in his strength, and the glory of the Lord, by
which the Lord has clothed him withal, and his eye is opened, and his ear is
opened; and all who hear God, and fear God, their ears and eyes are over your
lying tales and wonders* And when thou have raked up all thy lies together,
thou say this is a true and faithful Testimony, which is as false as can be;
and G.F. sought to preserve the life in I. P. but that thou and he kicked
against it; and surely I.P. may be ashamed of thee, he is sad and gross
indeed, if he set up thee to be his Factor. For did not he pretend to go to
preach the Gospel at Barbados, and did not he go into the earth.

And the son and the heir G.F. ever owned, but immodesty and undiscreetnesse
his soul, and heart, and mind, and spirit was ever against, and denied
self-interest, and the glory that fades, who exalts the Lord, and the Lord of
Life and Glory is risen, which comprehends all such dirty spirits as thine
is, and the zeal of the Lord shines over them, and will stain all your glory of
your fleshly spirits, and utterly overturn them, for the Lords Government is
set up, and the Heavenly Authority over you all, in the hearts and consciences
of his people, and such spirits as thine are, cannot bring them into
traditions, nor into the beggarly and outward rudiments. And is not you that
exalts both Hat and Man, and his outward traditions, that is thy exalting, and
so justify thy own unclean actions in Essex, which are not fit to be
mentioned. Who neither thee, nor thy practices, which are so bad, nor hardly
fit to be mentioned; who by the Truth and the Spirit of the Lord God, are
judged for ever out of the Assembly of the Righteous; but this is written that
no simple ones might take thy lies and slanders for truth, and for tru^hs sake
(who art unfit to be taken notice of) for Truth clears it self, and the Seed
is over all what any can speak against it. And it seems there are some others
thou have with thee, that watches for evil, and goes from the spiritual food,
and are watching for evil to feed upon, but they have got none here, but have
invented much thou have for them to seed upon, and thou have no true guide in
thee, no^ these that holds thee up, nor testimony of God, nor power to call thy
self to account for thy actions, who has sold thy self to work wickedness,
which all will fall upon thy own head, and there are no friends in the truth of
God, will give any credit to thee in what thou writes or speaks, that are
modest, o^ are in the wisdom of God.

And as for Gilbert Laity and Gerrard Roberts and John Bolton, they are men of
more moderation, and gravity, and virtue, and fidelity, as seeing thy practice,
and knowing thy spirit and conversation; and if they see any of thy papers,
they are able to judge of them, without any further examination or trial, as
knowing what an evil person thou have been, of an evil life and conversation:
And Gerrard Roberts says he knows nothing of it, though this paper was
answered long ago to that, what I had of it, most of thy lies and slanders
before thou published it in print, who by this thinks to vilisie with thy
slanders and lies; but this is but to manifest thy self, and to sink thee more
into the pit of darkness; for truth is over thy head and all these things, and
clears it self, and the Seed reigns, Christ ever was, of which I am in the one
Light, before the world began, and does not matter what any slanderous spirit
can say or do of me.

And all Friends, Keep your habitation in the Seed of God before these things
was, for lying, slanderous, unclean spirits, I do and ever did judge, and can
do no otherwise, I have unity with none of them, take them who will, for that I
ever denied them, and do, and shall have a witness in every man's conscience
that is pure, and in the day of their downfall and condemnation, of the liar,
and the slanderer, and false accuser.

And a great deal of lies and slanders are in thy paper, which are not worth
the mentioning nor writing over, which the Seed runs over them all; for though
there be Judases and false Brethren, and such as causes the truth to be evil
spoken of, and seeks to sow discord amongst Brethren, and to cast slanders and
false reports, and lies to vilify the righteous, the innocent, and the pure,
and the spotless, whose garments are pure, and clear, and lives an undefiled
life. This is no new thing to see such appear now, for they were of old for
condemnation; and so it stands upon them, though they rise up against the
righteous, and mount up to Heaven among the Stars, and so fall down to the
earth into Hell; this condemnation of them was ordained of old. The Light is
gone over them, in which is our fellowship.

G. F.

Dear Friends.
THE Life and Power of God, in which ye are raised, and by which ye are
nourished and refreshed, is the (...) Foundation which shall never be rased
our, for it is laid of God, and no man can lay another; and ye that feel the
Life and Power of God in your selves, ye feel Christ the Salvation,
Righteousness and Wisdom of God, and so ye by the power of God are kept and
preserved in sincerity and integrity to God, and thereby comes to be
established upon the Rock, which the Gates of Hell cannot prevail against, nor
all the fiery darts of the wicked touch; and in the Power of God ye being
gathered and established, ye stand and live in that which scatters the clouds,
and keeps your eye clear to the Lord God, by which Power ye see in a good
understanding through all the spirits and powers which works in the
darkness, and by the Power are preserved out of the^, and set above them,
where ye reign as Kings in the immortal Seed of God, by which the Serpents head
is broken and his Seed destroyed; and this is the true freedom in the Son, who
dyed and suffered, and is risen again in life, and brought Life and Immortality
to light, in which Life and Light ye are the children of the most High God, and
heirs of the everlasting Kingdom of God, where ye have a sure portion in the
Joy, and Peace, and Blessing of God, in which sit ye down and keep your
habitation, and the God of life and peace, and endless love, be with you all,
and cloth you with the Garment of everlasting praise, that in all things ye
may give him the Glory, who lives for evermore.

And Dear Friends, Be ye all watchful in the Light by which ye were and are
convinced, for the Times are perilous Times, yea, and that amongst such as
profess to one Truth, and by declaration speak the same words; and such there
are crept in amongst Friends in the truth, who by fair words and seeming
appearances seeks to subvert the simple minded, and to beguile the unstable
souls, and so would beget a dislike in the hearts of Friends, against such as
Godhath raised and exalted in his heavenly Power, Life, and Wisdom; and such
Papers there are in Print, which are published by John Harwood against G.F.
wherein he has slanderously reported of him, and falsely accused him; and if
any such papers come amongst you, or that ye may hear a report of them, let not
your minds be hasty to believe, that what is so reported is truth, but weigh
the matter in the savoury life, and you will feel that it came from a very bad
spirit, and not worthy of any acceptance amongst Friends that live in the
savor of truth, but is to be judged, condemn^d, and cast out. And all that
live in the truth and the savor of it, will find a sufficient answer in
themselves, by which they may receive their satisfaction. And this is signified
unto Friends, that no lies nor slanderous reports may rest upon the truth, nor
remain upon the innocence of Gods anointed, but with the true spirit of
Judgment they may all be cleansed out from amongst the heritage of God.

And Friends, All that abides in the truth does certainly know that G.F. was
raised by the mighty power of God, and has not preached himself, but Christ
Jesus the Lord, and himself a Servant for Jesus sake; he is a living witness of
the Resurrection of the Just, not handling the Word of God deceitfully, nor
using flattering speech at any time, but in simplicity and godly sincerity he
has spoken in Christ the everlasting Seed; and his word has not been yea and
nay, but from the beginning his word and his preaching has been unchangeable,
and he the same in the truth, without any variableness, and he is grown up in
Israel in the mighty power of God, and is clothed with the heavenly wisdom of
God, where his life is hid from the eyes of his accusers; and they that love
the truth, and abide in it, do know that he has ever been dear and tender over
the good in all, and has judged the evil with righteous judgment; and though
there be many risen, which would weaken his testimony, as if it was not what it
had been, yet all that have received his testimony, and continue in his
doctrine, have a more sure evidence concerning his life, then to be shaken or
moved at the report of false accusers, which in the Light is seen to be that
spirit which strikes at the Life it self, and so would kill and take
possession, which spirit is to be judged by all Friends in the truth, and the
souls of such pitied who with it are ensnared; for the day of the Lord is to
pass upon it, and it shall suddenly with^r and perish, and come to naught; and
all that give up their belief unto it, and therein does abide, they shall fall
as leaves from the Tree, when the virtue retires into its Root. But as for G.F.
the Lord God has exalted him, and the Glory of the Lord rests upon him, and
all that have received his Testimony in the love of it, and the Testimony of
such as preaches the same Word, and therein does abide, even the same glory in
their measures does rest upon them, and a sure defense is stretched over it,
and the Storms of restless Clouds shall never blast it, nor the waves of the
troubled Sea slow over it, the Lord has spoken it. And this is manifested unto
Friends in love to the everlasting truth of God, not setting up a man, or
throwing down a man, but in all things giving the power pre-eminence, and in
dearness to the Vessel that is filled with the excellency of that treasure, and
also beating down the Prince of the Power of the Air, the spirit that works
in the children of disobedience; knowing in the Counsel of the Lord God, that
whatsoever such spirits pretend to, or in what likeness soever they do appear,
yet the deceivablenesse of unrighteousness is lodged in the Root: And therefore
my dear Friends, of all such beware, and love the word of truth, and live in
it, that in love, meekness, and peaceableness, ye may feel your rest in the
bosom of the Lamb; and the blessing of the Lord God be upon you for ever.

William Smith.

THE END.
Let this go only among Friends.

