SOME QUERIES To all the Teachers and Professors of Christianity TO ANSWER.
QUERY I. WHere did ever the Christians in the primitive times set up
Dancing-Schools and Fencing-Schools, and send their Youth to learn to Dance and
Fence, as those called Christians have done since the primitive Times; let us
see where such things were practiced in the Scriptures by the True Christians?

QUERY II. Where was any Instruments of Music allowed of God to be invented
and used by the Jews to themselves, but unto the Lord? Indeed David used them
as unto the Lord, and Danced before the Ark of the Lord? But what is the Use and
End of all the Music and Dancing in Christendom? Was not the Melody the true
Christians made in their Hearts to the Lord?

QUERY III. Where did the primitive Christians invent Plays and Shows, as
those called Christians have done since the Apostles days?

QUERY IV. Whether any of the Jews under the Old Testament ever invented Plays
and Shows to get Money by them, as those called Christians do now? We desire
you will produce your Rule and Example out of the Old or New Testament, among
Jews or Christians, for these things?

QUERY V. Where did the Jews or Christians in the Apostles days set up or use
Bear-Baitings, Bull-Baitings, Cock-Fightings, Nine-pins and Bowls, and Cards
and Dice, and such like Sports and Games, as those called Christians do now, to
make themselves Merry withal, and to spend their Precious Time away, and call
it Pastime, and Rejoice, and stir up Wantonness in People? Show Scripture for
these things, seeing you profess it your Rule? Are not those that live Wantonly
upon Earth, and in Pleasure, dead while they live? Are not those that Rejoice
to Rejoice in the Lord?

QUERY VI. Where did the Christians in the Apostles days make and use Matches
at Football, and Wrestling, and appoint Horse-Races, and Hunting for Pleasure,
and such like, and so glory in their own Strength, and abuse the Creatures? Are
not these things contrary to the Practice of the Holy Men, who rejoiced and
gloried in the Lord? Show us your Rule in the Holy Scriptures for these things?

QUERY VII. Whether all these Plays, Games, Shows, Sports, and other vain
Exercises, countenanced in Christendom, do not Spoil and Corrupt Youth and Men,
and Ruin them in Person and Estate?

And does not Amos say, Woe to such that chant to the Sound of the Vial, and
invent to themselves Instruments of Music, like David? Amos 6.

G. F*


