Instructions FOR RIGHT-SPELLING, AND PLAIN DIRECTIONS FOR Reading and Writing
TRUE ENGLISH.

With several delightful things very Useful and Necessary, both for Young and
Old, to Read and Learn.

By G. Fox.

London, Printed for Benjamin Clark in George-Yard in Lombard Street, 1683.

THE TABLE.
1. The several sorts of Letters. 2. Letters joined. 3. Words divided into
Syllables. 4. The Child's Lesson. 5. Proper Names in Scriptures divided into
Syllables, and the Signification of them in English; together with other
memorable Passages, mentioned in Scripture. 6. The Reason of the Names of the
Books of Moses, and other Books. 7. The Signification of the seven Arts. 8.
Weights, Measures and Coyns, mentioned in Scripture, reduced into our English
Valuation. 9. The Marks of a true Christian. 10. The Names which the Devil in
Scripture are called by. 11. The Names which the Children of God are called by.
12. What Christ is called. 13. The Catechism. 14. Proverbs, and shortwise
Sentences. 15. Directions to Spell and read truly. 16. The seven Points
observed in Reading for keeping the Sense; with Directions for Notes. 17. How
to spell such Words which are alike in Sound, yet unlike in Signification. 18.
Hard Words used in our English Tongue, explained. 19. Proper Names in
Scripture, with their Signification in English. 20. The Seven Numeral Letters.
21. How any Number may be expressed by Letters. 22. The Table of Numeration,
whereby any Number may be expressed, in Letters or Figures. 23. The Table of
Multiplication. 24. Concerning Weights and Measures. 25. A ready way to reckon,
what ones daily Expenses come unto in the whole Year. 26. To know the Value of
any Sum, and how to set it down.
The Roman small Letters.
a b c d e f g h i k l m n o p q r s s t u v w x y z etc.
The Roman Capitals.
A B C D E F G H I K L M N O P Q R S T V U W X Y Z.
The Italick small Letters and Capitals.
a b c d e f g h i k l m n o p q r s s tu v w x y z etc.
A B C D E F G H I K L M N O P Q R S T V W X Y Z.
English small Letters and Capitals.
a b c d e f g h i k l m n o p q r r s s t u v w x y z.
A B C D E F G H I K L M N O P Q R S T V W X Y Z.
Double Letters and Consonants:
ct ff fi ffi fl ffl ll sh si ssi sl ss st, etc.
fi fs si ss ff ss sf.
Vowels.
a e i o u.
Words of one Syllable.
AB ac ad af ag ak al am an ap ar at ax az.

Ba ca da fa ga ha ja ka la ma na pa ra sa ta va qua wa ya xa za.

Bab bac bad baf bag bak bal bam ban bap bar bas bat bay baz.

Ab abs bab gab hab habs jab kab chab lab mab nab rab sab zab shab sheb eb deb
keb reb zeb leb lebs lib lyb ib bid dib gib jib kib mib nib rib phib.

Words of many Syllables Divided.
A
A -- bo -- li -- shed a -- bo -- mi -- na -- ti -- on ab -- sense ab -- sti --
nence a -- bun -- dance ac -- cep -- ta -- ti -- on ac -- com -- pa -- ny ac --
com -- plish -- ed ac -- cor -- ding -- ly ac -- cu -- sto -- med ac -- know --
ledge ac -- quaint -- ed ad -- mi -- ni -- stred -- ad -- ver -- si -- ty a --
dull -- te -- ry ad -- vo -- cate ad -- ver -- tise af -- fright a -- li -- e --
nate al -- migh -- ty a -- maze -- meant Am -- bas -- sage Am -- bas -- sa --
dor an -- swer -- eth appre -- hend -- eth.

B
Babe ba -- nish -- meant bap -- tism bap -- tized back -- ward bat -- tell --
meant be -- lieve be -- moan be -- wail -- eth bit -- ter -- ness blade blas --
pheme blas -- phe -- my blas -- phe -- mous blos -- some bo -- some bot -- tell
boun -- ti -- full -- ness bread -- corn break breath breeding brink bro -- there
-- ly bur -- den -- some bursting.

C
Ca -- la -- mi -- ty Call -- dron Can -- dle -- stick Cap -- ti -- vi -- ty Cap
-- tain Car -- ri -- er Car -- pen -- ter Cart -- wheel Case -- meant Ca -- ter
-- pil -- lar ce -- le -- sti -- al Cen -- tu ri -- on ce -- re -- mo -- nies
cer -- tain -- ly Chaff chain chal -- lenge cham -- ber chan -- nel cha -- ri
-- ta -- ble cha -- stize -- meant check Chro -- ni -- cles cir -- cuits cir --
cum -- cise col -- lec -- tion co -- lo -- ny co -- lour com -- mo -- di -- ous
con -- course com -- pas -- sion.

D
Dam -- age de -- cease deem -- ed de fraud -- ed de -- nounce de -- scribe
devote de -- vo -- ted dif -- fe -- rence dis -- ap -- pointed di -- scern dis
-- charge dis -- ci -- pline dis -- dain -- ed dis -- honor dis -- plea --
sure dis -- pos -- sess dis -- solve di -- stinct -- ly dis -- tract -- ed dis
-- tri -- bu -- ti -- on di -- vine do -- mi -- ni -- on dou -- ble draught Dro
-- me -- da -- ry drop -- sie drought drow -- si -- ness Dwarf:

E
Each -- Ea -- gle ear -- nest -- ly eighth -- ly e -- di -- fi -- ca -- ti --
on em -- bold -- ned Em -- rald Em -- rods Em -- pire E -- ne -- my er -- ror
es -- chew es -- pe -- ci -- al -- ly es -- pi -- ed es -- pou -- sals e --
stablish e -- stran -- ged e -- ven -- ing e -- ver -- last -- ing e -- vil Eu
-- nuch Ewe ex -- cess ex -- ce -- cra -- tion Ex -- or -- cists Ex -- tor --
ti -- o -- ners ex -- tree -- mi -- ty.

F
Faith -- full fall -- low fall -- si -- fie -- ing fa -- shi -- oned fa -- thom fa
-- vour -- a -- ble fea -- there -- ed fellow -- ship fer -- vent -- ly few --
el fierce -- ness fill -- thy ness fi -- nish Fir -- ma -- meant flat -- ter --
eth for -- bear -- ance for -- ci -- ble.

G
Gad -- dest gar nissi -- ed ga -- there -- ed gazeing ge -- ne -- a -- lo --
gies ge -- ne -- ra -- ti -- on gli -- stering gloo -- mi -- ness glo -- ri --
ous go -- vern -- men gor -- ge -- ous Grand -- mo -- there grant gree -- diness
grieve griev -- ous -- ness gush -- ed.

H
Ha -- by -- ta -- ble have haste hail hand -- ker -- chief haugh -- ti -- ness
ha -- vock Hawk hark -- ned Hea -- then He -- brew Hei -- fer height Heirs
helve Herb He -- re -- ticks He -- ritage hew -- ed Hymn Hy -- sop.

I
I -- dle -- ness I -- do -- la -- try jea -- lou -- sie jeo -- par -- die Ig --
no -- mi -- ny il -- sa -- vour -- ed il -- lu -- mi -- na -- ted i -- ma --
gine im -- po -- ve -- rish -- ed in -- cou -- rage in -- con -- ti -- nen --
cy in -- dea -- vour in -- dig -- na -- ti -- on in -- dict -- ing in -- ter --
med -- dle.

K
Kin -- dled Kin -- dred Kins -- man kned kneel Knife knit Knives knock know --
ledge Key kill Kit -- tle ker -- chiefs kikneys kind -- ness.

L
La -- bour -- ing lurk -- ing lance lanch -- ed lan -- guage lan -- guish lant
-- horns la -- sci -- vi -- ous -- ness la -- tin lat -- tess laugh -- ed la --
vish leaves league ledg -- es lea -- sure leo -- pard lewd -- ness Lieu -- te
-- nant li -- quor let -- ters loath -- some lodge loss lost.

M
Ma -- gi -- ci -- an Ma -- gi -- strate May -- den maim -- ed man -- ger main
-- te -- nance mar -- ri -- age mer -- chan -- dize mar -- ve -- lous -- ly Mer
-- chant men -- stru -- ous mil -- li -- ons mis -- chief mis -- chie -- vous
Mar -- ri -- ners Moon mor -- ga -- ged Mouls mu -- ni -- ti -- on Myrrh.

N
Nail -- ing naught Na -- vy ne -- ces -- sa -- ry ne -- ces -- si -- ty near
-- er neg -- lect -- ed Neigh -- bour neigh -- ing nei -- there Ne -- phew Net
-- tles Noise not with -- stan -- ding nou -- rish -- ed nur -- ture.

O
O -- ce -- an Oar Oak ob -- scure ob -- scu -- ri -- ty ob -- ser -- va -- ti
-- on ob -- sti -- nate off -- scour -- ing off -- spring op por -- tu -- nity
op -- pose Or -- phans Oint -- meant.

P
Pa -- ci -- fi -- eth pain -- full -- ness pale -- ness par -- ta -- ker par --
ti -- a -- li -- ty par -- ti -- cu -- lar -- ly par -- ti -- ti -- on Par --
tridge pas -- sage Pastor pa -- sture pat -- tern pa -- ti -- ence pa -- tri --
mo -- ny peace -- a -- bly pe -- de -- grees pen -- knife pe -- nu -- ry pe --
ril -- ous pe rish -- ed per -- ni -- ci -- ous per -- pe -- tu -- al pe -- sti
-- lent Phy -- lo -- so -- phers Phy -- si -- ci -- an Pi -- ge -- ons Pil --
grims Plague Plai -- ster plea -- sant -- ness Plough plow -- ed plunge po --
pu -- lous pos -- sess pos -- ses -- sor potsherd pot -- tage pre -- de -- sti
-- na -- ted pre -- he -- mi -- nence.

Q
Quails quan -- ti -- ty quar -- rel quar -- ries quen -- ched quick -- ned que
-- sti -- on -- ed.

R
Rai -- meant Rain -- bow rai -- ny ra -- vished rea -- di -- ness rec -- kon --
ed re -- con -- ci -- li -- a -- ti -- on re -- new -- ing re -- noun -- ced
renown -- ed re -- pair -- er re -- pe -- ti -- ti -- on re -- ple -- nish re
-- pro -- bate re -- proof re -- qui -- red re -- ward re -- ceive re -- sem --
blance re -- veal re -- ve -- nue re -- vive re -- volt roof rough -- ly.

S
Sab -- bath Sa -- vi -- our sa -- vour -- est Scar -- let scat -- ter -- ed
Scep -- ter Schism Scho -- lar School -- master Sci -- ence scoff Scorch Scorn
Scor -- pi -- on Scourge Scour -- ing Scrip -- ture Scribe Scur -- vy scum seam
seize se -- cure -- ly sees -- ing seize sell -- vedge Se -- pull -- chre lew --
ed sheaf sheaves sheath She -- kel shield shi -- ning shod Shoes siege sic --
kle sieve sifted sigh sight sign sin -- gle -- ness sleep slight slaugh -- ter
slight -- ly slug -- guard slum ber sojourn journ so -- lid so -- lemn so -- lem
-- ni -- ty so -- li -- ta -- ri -- ly South -- say -- er Sor -- ce -- rer Soul
-- di -- er sprung spun square Sto -- ma -- cher strait -- way strai -- ten --
ed stroke slur -- die sub -- ject suc -- ceed suc -- cour -- ed suc -- ked su --
ste -- nance swol -- len swoon -- ed.

T
Tack -- ling Tail Tale -- bear -- er Tan -- ner tar -- ry tar -- ry -- ing
taste taught te -- di -- ous Teeth temp -- ta -- ti -- on te -- nour ter -- re
-- stri -- al ter -- ri -- fie ter -- ror Thief Thy -- stle through -- out
throw -- ing tongs tongues took -- est tooth torn tos -- sing traf -- fick
trans -- pa -- rent trea -- che -- rous trea -- su -- ry tri -- umph -- ing
trouble trough troughs twelfth twelve.

V
Value Va lour Va -- pour va -- ri -- a -- ble ness vaunt eth ve -- no -- mous
ven -- ge -- ance ve -- ni -- son ve -- nom ver -- tue ver -- tu -- ous vex --
a -- ti -- on vic -- tu -- al view -- ed vi -- gi -- lant Un -- be -- lief un
-- change -- able un -- cir cum -- ci -- sed sed Un -- cle un -- cloth -- ed
Un -- cti -- on un -- feign -- ed.

W
Wa -- ges Wag -- gons wall -- low -- ing wan -- ton -- ness War -- ri -- our
weigh -- ed weight whore -- mon -- ger, whore -- dom, wick -- ed -- ness Willow
-- tree win -- now -- ed Witch -- crafts with -- draw wi -- thies wi -- there --
eth Wolf Wolves won -- de -- rous worcester -- thies woe -- ven would wrath wreath
wrea -- then wre -- stle wretch -- ed wrong -- full -- ly wrong wrote wrought.

Y
Yarn yield year -- ly ye -- ster -- day yo -- ked yon -- der young youth.

Z
Zea -- lous zea -- lous -- ly.

The Child's Lesson.
CHRIST is the Truth. Christ is the Light. Christ is my Way. Christ is my Life.
Christ is my Savior. Christ is my hope of Glory.

Christ is my Redeemer. Christ is my Rock. Christ is the Door. Christ is my
King, and Lord of Lords. Christ is the Cornerstone. Christ is the Lanth of God
that takes away my Sin.

Christ is the Power of God. Christ is my Wisdom, Christ is my Righteousness.
Christ is my Sanctification. Christ is my Justification. Christ is the Seed.
Christ is the Resurrection.

Christ destroys the Devil and his Works, which leads Man and Woman from
God; and so Christ is the Way to God again.

Sarah was a good Woman.

Jezebel was a bad Woman, who killed the Just, and turned against the Lord's
Prophets, with her attired Head and painted Face, peeping out of the Window.

Christ I must feel within me, who is my Life and my Light, and the Truth; and
that is God that shows me my Thoughts and Imaginations of my Heart; and that
is the Lord God that dath search my Heart.

It is the Spirit of Truth that does lead into all Truth.

It is the Spirit of Truth that reproves the World of Sin.

And that is the good Spirit which reproves the bad and his Works.

And the Light manifests and reproves; and that which does make manifest and
reprove, is the Light.

And that which gives the Light of the Knowledge of the glory of God, in the
Frace of Jesus Christ, is the Light which shines in the Heart.

And that which may be known of God is manifest within, which God has shown
unto you; that is that which shows you Sin and Evil.

The Gospel is the Power of God.

The Cross of Christ is the Power of God, which crucifieth from the State of
Adam and Eve in the Fall; in that Power is the Glorying, an Everlasting
Glorying: And this is above the Fleshly Glorying of Adam and Eve in the Fair,
with his Sons and Daughters.

The Church is in God the Father of Christ, and not a Steeple-house; and that
is the Spirit that morrifies from my Sin.

And they that are led by the Spirit of God are the Sons of God; and that is
the Spirit of God, that does instruct me in God's ways, which are good, and
that is the had Spirit which leads into bad ways.

And if I be a Child of God, I must not grieve him, but must be meek, and
sober, and gentle, and loving and quiet, righteous and humble, and live in the
Fear of God; and live godly, and not Lie, nor do any wrong to any one.

So if I be wild, froward, micked, heady, high-minded, wilful, stubborn, proud,
envious, disdainful, scornful, unrighteous, ungodly, and lie, and do not the
Truth, and forget God, such God turns into Hell, that grieveth him.

In the beginning was the Word.

Since the beginning were the Words; and since the beginning was Babel, which
is the beginning of Tongues, which is the Priests Original, but the Saints
Original is the Word before Babel was, and that is the Original, and make
Divine, and not the Tongues that began at Babel.

And it cost the second Adam his Blood, to purchase me out of the state of Adam
and Eve in the Fall, to set me in the state that he was in before he fell, to
that which is a blessed state, out of the cursed state, and not only to the
blessed state that Adam and Eve were in before they fell; but to Christ that
never fell, to his Stature.

A Child being fallen from the Image of God, he has not Peace.

A Child being in the Image of God, he has Peace.

A Child being fallen from the Holiness, he does not see God: but being in the
Holiness he does see God.

And the Image of God is Righteousness and true Holiness.

In six Days the Lord made the Heavens and the Earth, and all things therein;
and the sixth Day made Man and Woman, and bad him have Dominion over the Works
of his Hands.

Christ is my Foundation.

And Christ is the first and the last.

And Christ is a quickening Spirit.

Abel was a good Man.

Cain was a bad man, full of Envy and Wrath, who killed his Brother about
Religion.

Isaac was a good man, and sober.

Ishmael was a wild Mocker and a scorning Archer, and turned into the
Wilderness.

Jacob was a good man; Esau was a profane man (who turned against Jacob) who
bore the Sword.

The Spirit of Truth is my Leader into all Truth, and shows methings to come.

And the Power of God is my Keeper from Sin and Evil.

And the Worship of God is in the Spirit and in the Truth.

Proper Names in Scripture divided into Syllables, and the Significations of
them in English; together with other memorable Passages mentioned in Scripture,
necessary and delightful for Children to Read and Learn.
ADam signifies, Man Earthly red. The World was created in six days. Adam was
the first Man in the Likeness of God, and according to his Image; but he lost
his Image through Disobedience, in eating of the Fruit that God had forbid him
to eat of. And Adam gave a Name to the Woman which was made of his Rib (while
he was asleep) and called her Eve* and he gave names to all other Creatures;
after that Adam and Eve had Transgressed, God drove them out of Paradise (where
they were at first placed) and set a fiery two -- edged Sword to keep the Way
of the Tree of Life. Adam lived till he was nine hundred and thirty year old,
and begat many Sons and Daughters After Adam's Transgression the Earth was
cursed, and brought forth Thistles and Thorns, and man got his Bread by the
Sweat of his Brow. Cain and Abel were Adam's Sons.

Cain was a Husband -- man, and being displeased that his Offerings were
reproved, and not his Brother Abel's (although he was rebuked of God for his
Envy) slew his Brother, and offended seven -- fold thereby; after that, he was
made a Fugitive, and a Vagabond upon the Earth, for he was accursed of God; his
Sin was sevenfold; for first, He did not rightly divide; secondly, He envied
his Brother; thirdly, He dealt subtly; fourthly, He killed him; fifthly, He
stubbornly denied it; sixthly, He despaired; seventhly, Being Condemned, he
Repented not.

This Cain was the first builder of the earthly City, in the which he bestowed
his Children for fear, because he used Violence, Ravine and Spoil.

A -- bell, he was a Keeper of Sheep, his Offering was accepted of the Lord,
because he was Righteous; he was the first Martyr.

Enoch, Taught or Dedicate, the Father of Me -- thu -- sa -- lah; Methusalah
lived till he was nine hundred sixty and nine years, Enoch walked with God, and
was not, for God took him.

La -- mech, Poor, Humbled, or Smitten; after he had lived one hundred eighty
and two years, he begat a Son, and called him No -- ah, which signifies a
Ceasing or Rest; and Lamech said, This same shall comfort us concerning our
Work, and Toil of our Hands, because of the Ground the Lord has cursed. Noah
was a just man; and perfect in his Generation, and walked with God, and was a
Preacher of Righteousness; he was commanded of God to make an Ark, that he and
his Family should enter into it, for their preservation, Genesis 6.

Noah, with two of a sort of every Creature, Male and Female, were shut into
the Ark, and the World was drowned, Genesis 7.

And when the Waters had prevailed on the Earth fifteen Cubits upwards; after
one hundred and fifty days the Waters were abated; Noah opened a Window of the
Ark, and sent forth a Raven and a Dove; the Dove found no rest for the Sole of
her Foot, but returned to the Ark, and Noah took her into the Ark; Genesis 8.

The Rain -- bow, a Token of the Covenant of God, Genesis 9.

Ba -- bell signifies, Confusion; at the building of Babel Languages were
confounded, Genesis 11.

A -- bram signifies, an high Father: his name was changed ( Genesis 17.) from
Abram to A -- bra -- ham, which signifies, a Father of a great Multitude, he
was the Son of Terah; Sarah was his Wife: He went out of his Native Country at
God's Commandment; God promised him and his Seed the Land of Canaan; he
traveled into Egypt, and when he returned from thence he was very Rich; to
avoid strife he parted company with Lot, his Nephew; he delivered Lot out of
Captivity; refused to be enriched by the King of Sodom, he instructed his
Family in Righteousness; God tried his Faith by willing him to offer up his
only Son Isaac.

Sa -- rah, a Lady or Dame, Daughter of Asher; the Lord promised her a Child
when she was old, and she had one accordingly, she would not have Ishmael, who
was born of Hagar (the bond Woman) to be Heir with her Son Isaac, she was
called the free Woman. When she died, Abraham bewailed her greatly, and bought
a plat of Ground of the Sons o^ Heth to bury her in; after his death h^ also
was buried in the Cave of Match -- pelah. God remembered his promise made unto
Abraham, and comforted Ifrael in their Afflictions; God was with Abraham in all
that he did; for he was a righteou^ man, and faithful to the Lord.

And for the wickedness in So -- dom an^ Go -- mo -- rah the Lord rained upon
it Brimstone and Fire; and Abraham looke^ toward So -- dom and Go -- mo --
rah, an^ lo the smoke of the Country went up a^ the Smoke of a Furnace, Genesis 19.

As Lot was entering into Zo -- ar, his Wi^^ looked back, from behind him, and
she became a Pillar of Salt.

I -- sa -- ac signifies, Laughter, Abraham^ Son by Sarah.

Re -- be -- kah signifies, fed; she was Daughter to Be -- thu -- el, was given
in Marria^^ to I -- sa -- ac: The Lord blessed I -- sa -- ac, (...) that when
he sowed he received an hundred fold, Genesis 26.

Ja -- cob signifies, a Supplanter; he was the Son of I -- sa -- ac; he was a
plain man, and dwelt in Tents, he bought E -- sau's Birth -- right for red
Pottage: I -- sa -- ac blessed him* at which E -- fau was troubled; Jacob fled to
(...), and as soon as he saw Rachel the Daughter of Laban, his Mothers Brother,
he wept, he served Laban seven years for Rachel, and they seemed unto him but a
few days, because he loved her; the years being ended, he asked his Wife of
Laban, but Leah was given unto him; he served other seven years for Rachel, he
loved her more than Leah, he came but with a Staff to Laban, but after the Lord
blessed him, so that he became very Rich; the Lord said unto him by an Angel,
Thy name shall be called Jacob no more, but Is -- ra -- el, because thou have
had power with God, thou shall also prevail with men.

E -- sau signifies doing or working; he was the Son of I -- sa -- ac, E -- sau
was a cunning Hunter, he sold his Birth -- right for a mess of Pottage; against
his Fathers will he took him Wives of the Posterity of Ish -- ma -- el which
was a grief to Isaac and Re -- be -- kah his Mother.

Is -- ra -- el signifies, a Prince of God, or prevailing with God.

Jo -- seph signifies increasing; one of the Sons of Jacob; he was beloved of
his Father and hated of his Brethren; he was casting to a Pit by his Brethren,
and afterward sold to the Ishmaelites, and afterward to Potiphar, whose house
was blessed for Joseph's sake; Joseph was made Ruler thereof; he was fair and
well favored, and he interpreted Pharaoh's Dreams, and was made Ruler over all
Egypt under Pharaoh. He sold Corn into all Countries in the Famine -- time; he
spoke roughly to his Brethren at first when they came to buy Corn, and put them
in Ward, but after disclosed himself to them, and comforted them, and sent for
his Father into Egypt.

Jacob blessed Joseph's two Sons, and died, Genesis c. 48. etc. 49.

Joseph died, Genesis 50.

A new King arose over Egypt that knew not Joseph, Ex. 1.

Pharaoh oppressed the Israelites.

Moses, signifies, drawn forth; at his Birth he was hid in Bulrushes in a
River, and was found by Pharaoh's Daughter, Ex. 2.

God appeared unto Moses in a Burning Bush, Ex. 3.

Moses and Aaron told PHaraoh, saying, Thus says the Lord God of Israel, Let
my People go; and Pharaoh said, Who is the Lord, that I should obey his Voice?

God plagued Pharaoh with 10 Plagues because he would not let the Children of
Israel go free; 1. Of Bloody -- waters. 2. of Frogs. 3. Of Lice. 4. Of Flies.
5. Of Murrain. 6. Of Scabs. 7. Of Hail. 8. Of Grasshoppers. 9. Of Darkness. 10.
Death of their Firstborn, Ex. 7, 8, 9, 10.

The Israelites departed out of Egypt and spoiled the Egyptians, Ex. 12.

The Israelites were led by a fiery and cloudy Pillar, Ex. 13.

Pharaoh and his Host pursued after them.

The Sea parted, that the Children of Israel went upon Dry -- land in the midst
of the Sea, and the Waters were a Wall unto them on both hands; but Pharaoh's
Host was drowned in the Sea, Ex. 14.

Then Moses and the Children of Israel sung a Song unto the Lord, Ex. 15.

Moses made bitter waters sweet, Ex. 15.

God sent Quails and Manna in the Wilderness, Ex. 16.

Moses brought water out of the Rock.

Aa -- ron signifies, a Teacher; when Aaron went in before the Lord, he was to
put on the Breast -- plate of Judgment, the Vrim and the Thummim. Vrim
signifies, Light, and Thummim signifies, Truth and Perfection; so Light, Truth,
and Perfection were to be upon his heart.

Jo -- shu -- ah signifies, the same with Jesus, which is a Savior; he
succeeded Moses, he humbled himself before God, Josh. 7. he overcame many Kings
and Countries, he left nothing undone that Moses had commanded; he and all his
House served the Lord.

Samp -- son slew a thousand of the Philistines with a Jaw -- bone of an Ass;
he also killed a Lion.

Sampson carried away the Gates and Posts and Bars of the City Gaza on his
Shoulders to the top of the Hill Hebron, Judge. 16.

The Philistines put out Sampson's eyes, Sampson was avenged on them at once
and pulled down the House upon them, Judge. 19.

Ruth signifies, watered or filled, she found favor in the eyes of Boaz, and
was married to him, and bare him a son named O -- bed, he was the Father of
Jesse, the Father of David.

Sa -- mu -- el signifies, heard of God; he was offered to God by his Mother,
he was in favor both with the Lord, and also with Men; God called him thrice,
and revealed his Will to him, and made him a Prophet; he Judged Israel with
diligence; all his days the Philistines were brought under; when he died he
was bewailed greatly.

E -- li -- jah signifies, God the Lord; he was a Prophet, who foretold the
Famine to come among the Israelites; he was fed by Ravens; the Lord sent him to
A -- hab, whom he boldly reproved for following Ba -- a -- lim; by Prayer he
obtained Rain; he was persecuted by Jezabel, he fled from her, and being almost
famished, he was fed by an Angel, in the strength of which Meat he traveled
forty days and forty nights; he afterward took courage against Jezebel, and
foretold Ahab's and Jezebels death; at his Prayer Fire came down from Heaven
and destroyed two Captains with their Men; He was an Hairy man, and girdeded
with a Girdle of Leather; he was taken up into Heaven by a Whirl -- wind.

E -- li -- sha signifies, My God saves; E -- li -- jah anointed him Prophet
in his room; he was called to be a Prophet from the Plough -- tail, 1 Kings
9.19. he craved of Elijah to have his Spirit doubled upon him; forty two
Children that mocked him were devoured by two Bears; he healed Na -- a -- man
of a Leprosy, of whom he would take no reward, because he would not sell the
Gift of God; he raised the Shunamites dead Son, he healed the deadly Pottage, 2
Kings 4. Elisha weeping showed unto Hazael the evil that he should do unto
Israel.

Da -- vid signifies, beloved, he was a ruddy man, and withal of a beautiful
Countenance, and goodly to look to, Samuel anointed him King, yet afterward he
fed his Fathers Sheep, slew the Giant Goliath, and brought two hundred of the
fore -- skins of the Philistims to Saul: God was with David, and therefore Saul
feared him, and commanded that he should be slain; It was said of David, His
Kingdom abides for ever; he followed the Lord with all his heart, save only in
the matter of Vriah.

Job signifies, Sorrowful, he was a man Upright and Just, fearing God; he was
bereaved of his Substance and Children, yet he praised God in his Affliction.

Je -- re -- mi -- ah signifies, my Height or Fearing; he was a Prophet, to
whom the Lord gave his Word to preach; he cried against the Priests that bore
rule by their Means, which he said was a horrible and filthy thing committed in
the Land; he was persecuted and mocked for publishing the Truth and Word of
God; and Pasher the Son of Imner the Priest, when he heard what he Prophesied,
he smote Jeremiah, and put him into the Stocks; he was at another time taken by
the Priests, and accused before the Governors; and as he was going from
Jerusalem into the Land of Benjamin, he was taken by an Officer, and had before
the Princes, who smote him, and committed him to Prison, where he lay in a
Dungeon a long time, but at last was delivered by Zedekiah the King, out of
that place; and the King commanded they should put him into the Court of the
Prison, and daily to give him a piece of Bread; but the Princes desired the
King that he might be put to death, for that he prophesied, That the City
should surely be given into the hands of the King of Babel 's Army: Then the
King said, He is in your hands, for the King can deny you nothing: So they took
Jeremiah and let him down with Cords into a Dungeon, where there was no water
but mire, till Jeremiah stuck fast into the mire; but in this Dungeon the Lord
preserved him, and at last delivered him out.

E -- ze -- ki -- el signifies, The strength of God; he was a Prophet; he was
fed with the Word of God, and made bold with his Spirit; he cried, Woe to the
Shepherds that fought after the Fleece, and clothed themselves with the Wool,
and fed with the Fat, and made a Prey upon the People; he said, The Lord would
gather his Sheep from their Mouths, and that they should be a Prey unto them no
longer.

Ba -- la -- am, signifies, the Antiquity or the Devourer, or Destruction of
the People, he was called a Prophet, Balak King of Moab hired him to curse the
People of God; he was slain among the Midianites, he was one that loved the
Wages of Unrighteousness, and therefore was rebuked of a dumb Ass; he taught
Balak to lay a stumbling block before the Children of Israel.

Da -- ni -- el, sinifies, Judgment of God, a Prophets Name; he would not
defile himself with the Kings Meat; he declared to Ne -- bu -- cad -- ne -- zer
his Dream, wherefore he was advanced by the King unto great dignity; he
foretold Bell -- sha -- zer, That he should be deprived of his Kingdom: Daniel
was made the third Ruler of the Kingdom, because the Spirit of the Lord was
excellent in him; wherefore the Rulers and Governors sought occasions against
him, but they could find no fault; for he was faithful to the Lord; so they
consulted together, and got Darius the King to make a Decree, That whosoever
should ask a Petition of any (God or Man) for thirty days, save of the King he
should be cast into the Den of Lions; but Daniel kneeled on his Knees, and
prayed to, and praised his God in his Chamber, his Window being open, as he
used to do aforetime, wherefore they accused him to the King, for breaking the
Decree for which he was cast into the Lions Den, and a Stone was laid thereon,
and the King sealed it with his Signet, that the purpose might not be changed
concerning Daniel; then the King went unto his Palace, and remained fasting,
neither were the Instruments of Music brought before him, and his sleep went
from him: Then the King arose early, and went in all haste unto the Den of
Lions, and when he came to the Den, he cried with a Lamentable voice unto
Daniel; and the King spoke and said to Daniel, O Daniel, the Servant of the
Living God, Is not thy God (whom thou always servest) able to deliver thee
from the Lions? Then said Daniel unto the King, O King, live for ever, My God
has sent his Angel, and has shut the Lions Mouths, that they have not hurt
me; for my Justice was found out before him, and unto thee, O King, have I done
no hurt: then was the King exceeding glad for him, and commanded that they
should take Daniel out of the Den, so Daniel was brought out of the Den, and no
manner of hurt was found upon him, because he believed in his God: And by the
Commandment of the King, those Men that had accused Daniel, were brought, and
were cast into the Den of Lions, even they, their Children and Wives; and the
Lions had the master of them, and brake their Bones in pieces before they came
at the ground of the Den. This Daniel also delivered Susanna from the two
wicked Judges; he destroyed Bell and his Temple, and slew the Dragon which they
Worshipped.

Ne -- bu -- chad -- ne -- zer, signifies, the mourning of the Generation, or
wailing of Judgment; he was King of Babel; he conquered Egypt, and destroyed
Jerusalem: he erected an Image of Gold, and commanded it should be honored;
and decreed, That whosoever refused to fall down to the said Imag, should be
cast into a hot fiery Furnace he dwelt seven years amongst wild Beasts.

The three Children were cast into the fiery Furnace, for not worshipping the
Image; but God delivered them out of the Furnace.

Jo -- si -- ah, signifies the Fire or burning of the Lord; the son of
Zephaniah; Iddo prophesied of him, That he should destroy the Idolatry of
Jeroboam; he was made King of Judah, and he put down Idols and caused Baals
Priests to be put to death.

I -- sai -- ah, signifies, the Health or Salvation of the Lord, he was a
Prophet of the Lord.

Za -- cha -- ri -- ah, signifies, Mindful of the Lord.

Mat -- thew, signifies, Given, or a Reward; he was an Apostle called by Christ.

Je -- sus, signifies, A Savior, or The Lord a Savior, the son of God; a
Voice from Heaven said unto him, Thou art my beloved Son, in whom I am well
pleased; he came of the Seed of David, whose Kingdom endures forever: Christ
signifies Anointed; at the Age of twelve years, Jesus disputed with the
Doctors, and the People were astonished at his Wisdom; yet many would not
believe he was the Christ, because he descended of so low Parentage, and said,
Is not this the Carpenter's Son? Great Multitudes followed him, and he healed
many diseases; his coming and Preaching was in great humility; he was Mocked,
Persecuted, and put to Death by the Jews; the chief Priests persuaded the
Multitude to ask of Pilate, that Christ might be put to Death; after his death
they persecuted his Apostles, and Imprisoned Peter and John, and commanded they
should preach no more in the Name of Jesus; and also Stoned Stephen to death.
And King Herod persecuted the Christians, Killed James, the Brother of John
with the Sword, and because he saw it pleased the Jews he Imprisoned Peter also.

Paul, signifies, Marvel or marvelously, he was an Apostle of Christ; he was
marvelously converted from being a Persecutor of the Church of Christ to be an
Apostle, and an elect Vessel of God.

Pe -- ter, signifies, a Stone, or Rock, an Apostle of Christ.

John, signifies The Grace of God, or Gift, or Mercy of the Lord, the Son of
Zebedee, he and his Brother James were called by Christ, as they were mending
their Nets, to be Apostles! John was Banished into the Isle of Pathmos.

Ti -- mo -- thy signifies, The honor of God, or the honoring of God, or
precious to God.

Titus signifies, Honorable.

Thomas signifies, a Twin.

Philip signifies, a Warrier, or lover of Horses.

Sa -- ma -- ri -- tans signifies, Keepers, marvelous hard thorny places, or
Dreggs.

The reason of the Names of the Books of Moses, and other Books.
THE Hebrews usually named their Books from some of the first Words in the
beginning of each: As the first they called Be -- re -- shith, that is, In the
Beginning, the first word of that Book.

The second they called Ve -- le -- she -- meth, which signifies, Now these are
the Names.

The third they called Va -- ji -- kra, which signifies, And called, for so it
begins in the Hebrew.

The fourth Bam -- mid -- bar, which signifies, In the Wilderness: The Lord
spoke to Moses in the Wilderness.

The fifth, El -- le -- ha -- dab -- ba -- rim, which signifies, These the
Words.

The Greek Interpreters, and others from them, called the first Genesis, that
is, Generation; because it declares the Creation and Generation of the World
and of Men.

The second Exodus, which signifies, A passing out; because in it is declared
the passing out of the Children of Israel out of Egypt, in the beginning of
that Book.

The third Liviticus, because in it is declared the Laws and Order of the
Levites.

The fourth Numbers, because in the beginning thereof is the sum of the
Children of Israel,

The fifth Deuterenomy, which is, Second Law, the Law repeated the second time.

Judges is called from the Declaration of Judges, that judged Israel before the
Kings.

Kings, from the Declaration of the Kings that reigned in Israel after the
Judges.

Chronicles signifies, a declaration of the things that were done in their
several times.

Ecclesiastes signifies, the Preacher, because so it begins, The words of the
Preaher.

The rest are named from the names of the Writers, or things easy to be
understood: As,

Colossians signifies, punished.

Corinthians signifies, filled.

Ephesus signifies, desirable.

Thessalonica signifies, the other Victory of God.

The Signification of the seven Arts.
THE word Grammar comes of a Word that fignifies to write.

Rhetoric, of a Word that signifies, to speak fluently.

Logic, of a Word that signifies, to speak and reason.

Astronomy signifies, the Law or Distribution of the Stars.

Geometry signifies, measuring of the Earth.

Music signifies, the Muses Art, or Authors of Songs, or Poetry.

Arithmetic comes of a Word that signifies, Number.

Weights, Measures, and Coyns mentioned in Scriptures, reduced into our English
valuation,
Of Shekels there were three sorts.

A Common Shekel, which weighed a quarter of an ounce, and was worth fifteen
pence.

The Kings Shekel weighed three Drachms, that is in our Money twenty two pence
Halfpenny.

The Shekel of the Temple weighed directly half an ounce, and was worth two
shillings six pence.

The Jews had three sorts of Talents.

The Common Talent, which weighed three thousand quarters of an ounce, or
common Shekel, amounts to six thousand Drachms, which is one hundred eighty
seven pound ten shillings.

The Kings Talent weighed three thousand of the Kings Shekels, which amounted
to nine thousand Drachms, which is two hundred eighty one pound five shillings.

The Talent of the Temple or Sanctuary, weighed three thousand Shekels of the
Temple, which is precisely so many half-ounces, which amounts to three
hundred seventy five pounds.

A Silverling is often in Scripture used for a Shekel, which is half an ounce,
and worth two shillings six pence; for thirty of these Silverlings of the
Sanctuary, Christ was sold, Mat. 26. which amounts to three pound fifteen
shillings English Money.

The common Shekel of Gold weighed two Drachms, and was worth fifteen shillings.

The Talent of Gold of the Temple, weighed twelve thousand Drachms, or
Hungarian Ducats, which is of our Money forty five thousand pounds.

Abimelech King of Gerar, said to Sarah, I have given thy Brother an hundred
Silverlings, which were common Shekels, which amounted to sixty two pounds
sixteen shillings, Genesis 20.

Abraham bought a burying-place for his Wife Sarah, for four hundred Shekels of
Silver, which are common Shekels, that is twenty five pounds.

A Shekel of the Sanctury, which is twenty Gerahs, and a Shekel is twenty
shillings, and a Gerah is twelve pence.

There are four kind of Cubits mentioned in Scripture.

1. The common Cubit, this was the measure from the Elbovv to the Fingersend,
it contained a Foot and a half, or half a Yard.

2. A holy Cubit, this was a full Yard: containing two of the common Cubits.

3. The King's Cubit, which is three Fingers longer than the common Cubit.

4. A Geometrical Cubit, it contained six common Cubits, which is three Yards:
according to this Cubit it is thought Noah's Ark was built.

The Reed spoken of in Ezekel or Exodus, was six cubits and a hand breadth,
which were called the King's cubits.

A Furlong is an hundred twenty five paces, which is the eighth part of our
mile: A mile contains with us a thousand paces; but in the Hebrew it was
accounted as much as a man could go in half a day, betvveen meal and meal.

A Kab is our Quart.

A Omer is a Quart and a half.

A Seah is a Gallon and a half.

An Epha is half a Bushel and a Pottle.

An Homer is so called from Chamer, an Ass, because this Measure contains so
much as an Ass could well bear, which is five Bushels and five Gallons.

A Log is half a Pint.

A Bath is half a Bushel and a Pottle.

A Mite weighs half a Barly-corn.

A Farthing of the Roman Coin is two Mites.

Keshita signifies a Lamb, and was also a name the Hebrews gave to a piece of
Money in value one penny halfpenny.

The Marks of a true Christian.
TO love one another, and to add to your Faith Virtue, to your Virtue
Knowledge, which knowledge is to know God, and Jesus Christ whom he has sent,
which is Life eternal; and to your knowledge add Temperance, and to your
Temperance add Patience; for that runs the Race, and obtains the Crown of Life;
and unto Patience, Godliness, in that brotherly kindness is known.

The Names which the Devil in Scripture is called by:
The Serpent, and Adversary: An Encmy to Man: The Devil, who is a Destroyer;
the old Dragon: Belial: The God of the World, who rules the World in
wickedness: The Prince of this World, who gives forth his Law of death and Sin,
and rules in wickedness and unrighteousness, which got into Adam and Eve by his
lies and subtilty, and their disobedience, and rules in the hearts of the
disobedient: the Spirit and Prince of Darkness which fills people with
darkness, and makes them hate the Light of Christ, and blinds all his Subjects,
that they call the Light of Christ natural, and Created, and Conscience: And
the Devil is called Beelzebub Prince of Devils: the Accuser of the Brethren:
And this Devil, Satan, and Serpent made all his Subjects call the people of
God Bablers, pestilent Fellows, Movers of Sedition, Ringleaders of Sects, Acts
24. Turners of the World upside down, a people that are cursed and unlearned,
ignorant, Schismatics, Heretics, Phanaticks; and these are them that rage so
against the Light within, which does give the Light of the knowledge of the
glory of God in the Face of Christ Jesus, and are so mad against the heavenly
Treasure in the earthen Vessels, 2 Cor. 4. And these be of the same Spirit that
the Jews were in, that said, Christ the Light had a Devil, and by the Prince of
Devils, cast out Devils.

The Names of the Children of God are called by.
The Children of God are called the Children of the Light, and the Seed of
Abraham: and the Lot of God's Inheritance, and his Servants, and Hand maids,
Sons and Daughters, and the Elect of God before the Foundation of the World,
and the Children of God, then Heirs of God, 1 Peter, And they are called the
Saints of God, the Church of God, Temple of God, Sheep and Lambs of Christ,
Brethren of Christ, Spouse and Wife of Christ, a chosen Generation, a royal
Priesthood, offering up spiritual Sacrifices to God, who is a Spirit, a holy
Nation, a peculiar People, the Children of the Light, and of the Day; which
makes all the Children of the Night and of Darkness, to rage against them: They
are called the Light of the World, and the Salt of the Earth, and a City set on
a Hill, that cannot be hid, and against this City does Mystery Babylon the
great City fight, with her Children; but they cannot prevail, for the lamb and
the Saints shall have the Victory.

What Christ is called.
Christ our Lord and Master, crucified in spiritual Sodom and Egypt, is called
The Wonderful Counselor, who does counsel people of the possession of their
Salvation, and of a Kingdom, and of a Life, and of a World that has no end;
and how to walk that they may honor God through him: He is called The mighty
God, and the Everlasting Father, the Prince of peace, who rules in
Righteousness and Peace amongst his Children, Christ Jesus the Savior, and
Christ the Light of the World, the anointed of God, the Emmanuel, that is God
with us, THE LORD OUR RIGHTEOUSNESS, Justification and Sanctification, the Way,
the Truth, and the Life, the Word of God, that hammers down and cuts down sin,
and burns it up, who is the Elect and precious laid in Sion, to all the Sons
and Daughters of Sion, the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, who rends to pieces the
old Dragon, and bruises the Serpent's Head, and Jesus Christ our Lord; a Lord
is a Ruler, so Christ is a Lord to rule and order, and govern, and dispose his
People, and so he has the reverence and honor: for he rules, and orders, and
governs, in Righteousness, Holiness, Virtue, Purity, and Equity, and Godliness
and Truth, and in Wisdom, Power, light and life.

The CATECHISM.
Scholar. HOw many Offices has Christ in his Church. The Baptists and Teachers
of the World tell us Christ has but three.


Master. Yes Child, he has many more than three.

1. His Priestly Office, when he offered up himself for the People in the whole
World; and sprinkles the hearts and consciences of his People with his Blood,
to cleanse them from dead Works, to serve the living God, and to offer up and
present his Church without spot or wrinkle to God.

2. The Kingly Office is to subdue all the Enemies of man, the Devil and his
Works, and to subdue all his Enemies under his Feet, and to give forth the law
of love, law of life, law of Spirit, law of Faith; and he to reign whose right
it is, and to rule in the hearts of his people by Faith; who is King of Kings,
and Lord of Lords.

3. His Prophetical Office; Christ is a Prophet raised up like unto Moses, who
is to be heard in all things, who speaks to you by his light, Power, and
Spirit; and opens unto you by his power, spirit and light, things to come.

4. Christ has the Office of a Bishop, to over-see thy Soul, Spirit, and Mind,
that thou do not go astray from him, who is light and Salvation,

5. He has the Office of a Shephard, who puts his Sheep forth out of the
Prison and Captivity of old Adam and the Serpent, out of the Jaws of Death and
the Pit, wherein there is no Water, and the Graves, of old Adam, and out of his
Briars and, Thorns, and Christ goes before them as a Shepherd, and they know
his Voice, and a stranger they will not follow, and he brings them to the
Pasture of life, and to the Waters and Springs of life, where he feeds them and
fills them abundantly; Christ does, who is the life.

6. And he has the Office of a Minister, to minister Grace and Truth unto
thee, and Glory, and Faith, and the heavenly Riches, and light, and Power, and
Strength.

7. He has the Office of a teacher, whom God has anointed to preach (the
Spirit of the Lord is upon him) to bind up the Brokenhearted, to open the eyes
of the Blind, to set the Captive at liberty, and the Prisoner free, and to
teach thee the way of life, Salvation, Holiness, and Godliness, the way of
the Redeemed, and the way of the Lord which is perfect, and the way of the
Just, which is a shining Light, distinct from the way of Unjust, which is
Darkness.

8. He has the Office of a Phisician, to heal thee of thy Sicknesses and
Infirmities, thy Deasness and blindness, who is a Physician of value, Christ
Jesus.

9. He has the Office of a Mediator and Interceder, who mediates and makes
intercession for thee to God, that thou may pass to God through him, who is
able to save to the utmost.

10. He has the Office of a Captain of thy Salvation, who conquers the Devil
and his Works, Hell, Death, and the Grave; who trains up and disciplines his
Soldiers with the heavenly Armor, the Brestplate of Righteousness, and the
Helmet of Salvation, and the Armor of Light, and shoes the Feet with the
preparation of the Gospel; and this Armor is proof being tried; and the Arms
are, the Shield of Faith, the Sword of the Spirit, the Word of God; and Christ
trains up his Soldiers to keep their Ranks in Righteousness, in Godliness, in
Holiness, in Truth, in Life, that they may stand against Death, and stand
against Darkness, Unrighteousness, Unholiness, and the Power and Prince of it,
but does not wrestle nor war with flesh and blood, but with spiritual
wickedness, and Rulers of Darkness in High places, etc. And many more Offices,
as thou read the Scriptures, thou will see Child, as thou growest in Truth,
that Christ has; for Christ is the Way, the Truth and the Life, and the Leader
of people to God, whom old Adam and the Serpent has led from God.


Schol. What is it that gives the knowledge of God? and where is it?


Mast. The Light which shines in the heart, it gives the knowledge of the Glory
of God in the Face of Christ Jesus 2 Cor. 4.


Schol. What brings Salvation?


Mast. The Grace of God which has appeared to all men, brings Salvation, Titus
2.11. which Grace teaches us to deny ungodliness and worldly Lusts, that we
should live soberly, and righteously, and godly in this present World.


Schol. What is the true Hope, from the Hypocrites?


Mast. The true hope is Christ, in you the hope of Glory, Col. 1.27.


Sch. Who are them which seek that which comes down from above?


Mast. Them that be risen with Christ and dead with him, their affections are
set on things above, and not on things on the Earth.


Sch. What makes a man a Believer? and how comes a man or woman to be a
Believer?


Mast. Christ Jesus' teaches thee how to believe, and what to believe in, John.
12.36. While you have the Light believe in the Light; so there are no true
Believers, but who believe in the Light; so Christ teaches people to believe in
the Light, which Light manifests all things; it manifests Christ to be its
Savior, its way, its Light, and to be its Mediator; for the light comes from
Christ, who is the Light that enlightens every man that comes into the World,
that all through him might believe, John 1.


Sch. What makes a Child of Light, and to come to have that honorable Name
after God, who is Light?


Mast. By believing in the Light he becomes a Child of Light, and so Children
of the day; and so there are no Children of the light, nor Children of the Day;
but first they believe in the light.


Sch. What is that which shall lead into all Truth?


Mast. It is the Spirit of Truth which must lead into all Truth.


Sch. Where is the Spirit?


Mast. Within.


Sch. What shall reprove the World of sin, of their righteousness; and of their
Judgment?


Mast. It is the Spirit of Truth that leads the Saints into all Truth.


Sch. In what is God worshipped?


Mast. He is worshipped in Spirit and in the Truth.


Sch. Where is the Spirit, and where is this Truth?


Mast. The Spirit is within, and the Truth is within, in the inward parts, by
which Spirit God is known; and by the Truth the God of Truth is known.


Sch. What is God?


Mast. God is a Spirit.


Sch. Where is the Church?


Mast. The Church is in God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, 2 These. 1.1.


Sch. What is the Church?


Mast. The people of God, which he has purchased with his own Blood.


Sch. Was Christ's blood shed for all? and did he take death for every man? and
was he an offering for the sins of the whole World?


Mast. Yes, his blood was shed for all men, and he tasted Death for every man,
etc. tho some trample the blood of the New Covenant under their feet, and deny
the Lord Jesus that bought them.


Sch. Who is he that must instruct people?


Mast. Neh. 9. Thou may see how God gave his people his good Spirit to
instruct them in the ways of righteousness and holiness, and in the way of the
Lord, which is perfect.


Sch. What is the just man's Path? and what the unjust man's Path?


Mast. The path of the Just is a shining light, which shines more and more till
the perfect day; but the path of the wicked is Darkness.


Sch. Wherewith shall a young man cleanse his ways?


Mast. By taking heed to the Word.


Sch. Where is the word?


Mast. In the heart and the mouth, to obey it, and do it, Romans 10.


Sch. What is the good old way? and which is the new and living way, and which
is of these ways must we walk in?


Mast. The good old way was the way among the outward Jews which they were to
walk in; but the new and living way is Christ Jesus, which thou and all true
Christians must walk in.


Sch. What was that Image of God that Adam was made in? was it from below or
from above?


Mast. It was from above, from God, of his Image and Righteousness, likeness
and holiness; the Image of God was not of the Earth from below.


Sch. What is meant of that Rib Eve was made of?


Mast. A Rib is a beam or a side-piece, which was part of the building of the
whole Creation, so she was called Woman because she was taken from man; for Eve
signifies Living; and she was the Mother of all living, Genesis 1.


Sch. How many Faiths are there? and which is the true one?


Mast. There is one Faith; and the true Faith is that which works by love, and
purifies the heart, and justifies thee, and saves thee, and gives thee Victory
over that which separates thee from God, through which Faith thou have access
to God, in which Faith thou please God, and have unity with him, and them
that please God.


Sch. How many Baptisms are there?


Mast. One.


Sch. Who is the Baptizer?


Mast. Christ; for John is decreased, and Christ is increased that is the one
Baptism that saves: he baptizeth with the Holy Ghost and with Fire, and burns
up the Chaff with unquenchable fire, who comes with his Fan, and thoroughly
purges his Floor, and gathers his Wheat into the Garner.


Sch. What is the Wheat?


Mast. The Wheat is the Seed of God.


Sch. What is the Chaff?


Mast. The body of Death, and the body of the sins of the flesh, and the
corruptions that must be all plunged down to the Fire.


Sch. What is that Jordan that John baptized in?


Mast. Jor. is a River, and dan is Judgment; he dipped them in the River of
Judgment.


Sch. What is the Ministers of Christ's Work?


Mast. Christ gave Gifts unto men for the Work of the Ministry, and their work
was for the perfecting the Saints; and for the edifying the body of Christ,
till we be all come to the unity of the Faith, the knowledge of the Son of God,
[Mark] and unto a perfect man, and unto the measure of the stature of the
Fullness of Christ.


Sch. And are these Christ's Ministers?


Mast. Yes.


Sch. And what are the rest that do not bring People to this stature, such as
tosses People to and fro, and carries them with their cunning slights and
craftiness of men, and lies in wait to deceive them?


Mast. Yes, they are them that bring people to no stability, Ephesians. 4.


Sch. What is the Scripture: Are they the word of God?


Mast. The Scriptures signifies writings; the Scriptures of Truth are the Words
of God; Christ's Name is called the Word in the Revelations, In the beginning
was the Word, and the Word was with God, and God was the Word, John. 1.


Schol. What is the Original of Sin?


Mast. Original is the beginning; the beginning of sin was the Devil.


Sch. And who destroys him?


Mast. Christ Jesus destroys the Devil and his Works, and through Death
destroys Death, and the Devil who has the power of Death; and the Seed of the
Woman shall bruise the Serpents Head.


Sch. What Seed was that?


Mast. Christ Jesus.


Sch. To bruise, how is that?


Mast. It is to break to pieces, to crush, to break into pieces and into powder
his strength and power.


Sch. Master, the Star-gazers tell me, all Light comes from the Sun.


Mast. Read Genesis 1. there thou will see, there was Light and Day, and there
was three days before the Sun was made:


Sch. What is the Church Fellowship?


Mast. It is the Gospel Fellowship.


Sch. What is the Gospel.


Mast. The Gospel, it is the power of God unto Salvation to every one that
believes; so the Power of God (the Gospel) is everlasting.


Sch. What is the Cross of Christ.


Mast. The Cross of Christ is the Power of God, and this is foolishness to them
that perish, and set up a wooden or a stone or iron Cross, or any other outward
Cross.


Sch. What is the ministration of condemnation, which was glorious? And what is
that administration that exceeds it in glory?


Mast. The Ministration of Condemnation was the Law that took hold upon the
outward Actions of Men and Women; but the Ministration of Restoration that
exceeds it in Glory is Christ, that takes away the Root of sin, which the
Fruits of sin proceeded from, and the Law took hold upon the outward Action,
which Christ takes away the Root of, and so makes the Root and the Branches
holy, who destroys the Devil and his works, and bruiseth the Serpent's head,
Christ does, by whom all things were made and created, who was glorified with
the Father before the World began, and set up from everlasting to everlasting,
the beginning and ending, the first and last.


Sch. Who is the Christian Sabbath or Rest?


Mast. Christ Jesus; he that believes has entered into his Rest, and ceased
from his own Works, as God did from his; and so Christ is the Rest by whom all
things are made and Created, and there is Rest and Peace in him, but not in old
Adam.


Sch. Is the Light sufficient for Salvation?


Mast. Yes, by believing in the Light, thou shall be a Child of Light.


Sch. Who are true Christians?


Mast. Such as believe in the Light of Christ, and are led and guided by Christ
Jesus.


Sch. Why are the true Christians called Quakers in this Age?


Mast. It is in scorn and derifion that they are so called, to render them and
the Truth odious to the People, that so they, might not receive the Truth and
be saved: Yet quaking and trembling is no new thing; for thou may read of
Quakers in the Scriptures, as in Heb. 12.21. Moses said, I exceedingly fear and
quake. And it is said, Son of man, eat thy Bread with Quaking, and drink thy
Water with Trembling. And when Damel saw a Vision, a great quaking fell upon
the men that were with him: And Habakkuk his Belly trembled, and his Lips
quivered, Hab. 3.16.


Sch. Sure those that scoffingly call the true Christians Quakers, never read
these Scriptures; for they prove very plain, that there were Quakers in the
Primitive times: But why do the people called Quakers say Thee and Thou to a
single person? Is that according to the Scriptures?


Mast. Yes, it is the proper Language to a single person, and according to the
Scripture; God said Thee and Thou to Adam, and Adam said Thou to God; and
people say Thee and Thou in their Prayers; and it is the Pride in peoples
Hearts that cannot take that Language themselves which they give to God, And
God said Thee and Thou to Moses, and Moses said Thee and Thou to God again:
Jacab said Thee and Thou to Laban, and Laban said Thee and Thou to him again;
and Jacob and his Sons said Thee and Thou to each other, Genesis 43. to Chap. 49.
And Jeptha, who was a Judge in Israel, did Thee and Thou his Daughter, and she
did Thee and Thou her Father the Judge again, Judge. 11. And when Daniel and the
3 Children were before the King, upon Examination, they said Thou to the King;
and the Caldeans did Thou the King, Dan. 3. And Paul did Thou King Agrippa: And
many other Examples there be in Scriptures; but these are sufficient; And Thee
and Thou is the singular Number, and to be spoken to one, and You or Ye the
plural Number, and to be spoken unto more than one.


Sch. I am very well satisfied that Thee and Thou is the proper Languge to a
single Person, and You to more than one; but the People called Quakers will not
put off their Hats, nor bow, nor give flattering Titles to People; what
Scriptures have they for that?


Mast. With God there is no respect of perfons; and James said, If you have
respect of persons you commit sin, and are convinced of the Law as
transgressors; and in Job Elihu said, Let me not, I pray you, accept any man's
person, neither let me give flattering Titles unto Man; for I know not to give
flattering Titles, in so doing my Maker would soon take me away, Job. 32.21, 22.


Sch. They say the people called Quakers deny the Scriptures.


Mast. No, they own the Scriptures more than any people, for they walk in the
Light of Christ Jesus, and by following him do witness the Scriptures fulfilled
in them, and people that live in sin, and that are guided by the evil Spirit,
they are contrary to the Scriptures, and it is a Book sealed to them; and they
who hate to be reformed, have nothing to do to speak of the Saints and holy men
of Gods conditions mentioned in Scripture.


Sch. The People called Quakers do not call their Days and Months as other
Professors do.


Mast. No, Professors and People are so far degenerated from Truth that they
have lost the very form of sound Words used by the Primitive Christians.


Sch. How did the Primitive Saints call their days and months?


Mast. God made the World in six Days, and rested the seventh Day, and he
called the Evening and the Morning the first Day, and the Evening and the
Morning the second Day, and the third Day, etc. And Christ rose on the first
day of the Week; and they came to the Sepulcher when the Jews Sabbath was
ended, on the first Day of the Week, and upon the first Day of the Week the
Disciples met together: And in Ex. 12.2. This month shall be unto you the
beginning of months, it shall be the first month of the year to you: And in Ex.
16. Moses writes, the fifteenth day of the second Month, and the Scriptures
say, the third Month, and fourth month, etc.


Schol. Who invented these Names of Sunday, Monday, etc. and calling the month
March, April, May, etc.


Mast. The old Pagan Saxons in their Idolatry were the first that brought in
the names of the Days after that manner, and these called Christians, have
retained them to this day. The first Day of the week they worshipped the Idol
of the Sun, from whence came Sunday; The second Day of the Week they worshipped
the Moon, from whence came Moonday or Monday; the third day they worshipped the
Idol of the Planets, which they called Tuisco, from whence came Tuesday; and
from the Idol Woden came Wednesday; and from the Idol Thor came Thursday; and
from the Idol Friga came Friday; and from the Idol Seater came Saturday. And
the Heathen called Mars the God of Battle, and from thence they called the
first Month March: And Venus they called the Goddess of Love and beauty, and
from thence they called the second Month April; And Maja a heathen Goddess
called Flora; Flora and Gloris were called the Gooddesses of Flowers; Unto Maja
the heathen Idolaters used to sacrifice, from thence was the third Month called
May; and upon the first day of the same Month they used to keep Floralia Feasts
to the two Goddesses of Flowers (viz.) Flora and Cloris, and Flora was a
Strumpet in Rome, that used on the first Day of that Month, to set up a
May Pole before her Door, to entice her Lovers, from whence came May-poles to
be first observed: And from the heathens Goddess Juno is the fourth Month
called June: And in honor to Julius Caesar a Roman Emperor, is the fifth Month
called July: and the sixth Month took its Name August, in honor of Augustus
Caesar; and September, October, November and December are called from the
Latins: And one Janus a King of Italy, was for his Wisdom pictured with two
Faces, whom they honored as a God: and from this name Janus was the eleventh
Month called January: And Saturnus, Pluto Februs, were called the Gods of Hell,
whom the heathen said, had the rule of the evil Spirits there, and from Pluto
Februs, was the twelfth Month called February.


Sch. Who have been the Ministers and Instructers of these people, that they
are erred so from Scripture-Example? Let me have some marks and signs by which
I may know the Deceivers and false Prophets?


Mast. The marks the Scriptures give of Deceivers and false Prophets are these:
I shall set them down in short, that thou may remember them the better.

1. They are such as bear rule by their Means, Jer. 30.31. Mat. 10.19, 20.

2. They are such as seek for their Gain from their Quarters, Isa. 56.

3. They seek for the Fleece, and make a prey upon the People, Ezekiel. 34.1, 2, 3.

4. They are such as preach for Hire, and Divine for Money, Mic. 2.11.

5. They cry Peace so long as People put into their Mouths; but when any come
to see them to be Deceivers, and cannot put into their Mouths; nor give them
Gifts, then they prepare War against them, Mic. 3.5. Hos. 6.9.

6. They run when the Lord never sent them, and prophecy Lies in his Name,
Jer. 14.4.

7. They stand praying in the Synagogues: They love the uppermost Rooms at
Feasts, and the chief Seats in the Synagogues, and love Greetings in the
Markets, and to be called of men Master, and they make them broad Philacteries
on their Garments, that they may be taken notice of; for they do that they do
to be seen of men, and are proud and covetous, and they come of Cain's Stock,
for they are full of Envy and are in Balaam's way, who was erred from the
Spirit of God, and received the Wages of Unrighteousness, and so do they, 2
Peter 2. Judge 11.

8. They are such as sprinkle Infants, for which they have no rule in
Scripture; and tell people it is an Ordinance of Christ; when it is but one of
their own Inventions, and so are Liars and Deceivers.

9. They tell people they shall never be free from Sin whilst they live here.

10. They are made Ministers by the Will of man, and men uphold them: If thou
meetest with them and see those Fruits brought forth by them, then beware of
them; for they have got on sheeps Clothing, but inwardly they are ravening
Wolves.


Sch. How may I know the true Ministers?


Mast. I may give thee some Marks how to know them.

1. The true Ministers of Christ, as they have received the Gift of God freely,
so they minister freely from the same, as good Stewards of the manifold Grace
of God, and they do unto all Men as they would have all Men do unto them.

2. They do not strive for Mastership, like the false Prophets; but are gentle
unto all men, and apt to teach, patient, in meekness instructing those that
oppose themselves, 2 Timothy 2.22. that so the Church may be edified.

3. The true Ministers have no man's person in admiration because of advantage,
but are men of sorrows, despised and rejected of men, as Christ was; and they
are not made Ministers by the Will of man but by Christ Jesus, and are
blameless as the Stewards of God, not self-willed, nor soon angry, nor given to
Wine, no Strikers, nor greedy of filthy Lucre, Tit. 1.7.

4. And the true Ministers work was, for the perfecting of the Saints, for the
edifying of the Body of Christ: and the true Ministers were not bred up seven
years at the Colleges, as the Deceivers are now; but the Lord called Tradesmen
to be Ministers; Moses was a Keeper of Sheep, and Jacob and David were Keepers
of Sheep, and Elisha was a Ploughman, and Amos a Herdsman, and Peter and John
Fishermen, and Paul a Tent Maker.


Sch. The people called Quakers are mocked, hated, persecuted, and imprisoned;
was it so with the people of God in in former Ages


Mast, Yes, the people of God were in all Ages mocked, persecuted, imprisoned
and sufferers. Elisha the Prophet was mocked, and called Bald-head. And the
Lord sent his Messengers, rising up betimes and sending, because he had
compassion on his People; but they mocked the messengers of God, and despised
his Words, and misused his Prophets, where the Wrath of the Lord was against
them, 2 Chronicles. 36.15. And David was despised of the people, they laughed him to
scorn, they shot out their Lips and shaked their Heads at him: And in Psalm.
69.12. David said, Sackcloth is my Garment, and I am become a Proverb to them,
and I am the Song of the Drunkards. And Jer. 20.7. Jeremiah said, I am in
derision daily, every ^ne mocketh me. And thou may read before, how he was
persecuted, and put in the Dungeon. And David said, The wicked have waited for
me, to destroy me, and they have laid a Snare for me. And Job said, I am as one
mocked of his Neighbor: and said, The just and upright man is laughed to
scorn, Job 12.4. and said, Now I am their Song; yea, I am their Byword; they
abhor me, and spare not to spit in my Face. And in Acts thou may read, how
Herod the King stretched forth his hand to vex some of the Church of Christ; and
how he killed James and imprisoned Peter; and how Paul and Silas had their
Clothes torn off, and after they had received many stripes, they cast them into
Prison, and a strict charge was given to the Jailer to keep them safely, who
thrust them into the inner Prison, and made their Feet fast in the Stocks: and
above forty of the Jews bound themselves under a Curse, that they would neither
eat nor drink till they had killed Paul. And in Acts 22. when Paul spoke to the
people, some of them cried, Away with such a Fellow from the Earth; for it is
not fit that he should live. And in Acts 24. For we have found this man a
pestilent Fellow, and a mover of Sedition, and a Ringleader of the Sect of the
Nazarens: And Christ himself was derided by the Pharisees, Luke 16. And Paul
said, Whosoever will live Godly in Christ Jesus, must suffer Persecution, for
it is through many Tribulations we must enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.


Proverbs, which are short wise Sentences, very necessary for children to Read
and Learn.
CHasten thy Son whilst there is hope, and let not thy Soul spare for his
crying, Prove. 19.18.

He that spares his Rod hates his Son; but he that loves him chasteneth him
betimes.

Every Child is known by his doing, whether his Work be pure, and whether it be
right, Prove. 20.11.

Foolishness is bound in the heart of a Child, but the Rod of correction shall
drive it far from him.

Withold not Correction from thy Child, for if thou beatest him with the Rod
he shall not die.

A Child left to himself brings his Mother to shame.

The Father of the Righteous shall greatly rejoice; and he that begets a
wise Child shall have joy of him.

Better is a poor and wise Child, than an old and foolish King, who will no
more be admonished.

Confidence in an unfaithful man in time of trouble, is like a broken Tooth,
and a Foot out of joint.

A wise Son makes a glad Father, but a foollish Son is the heaviness of his
Mother.

Apply thy Heart to Instruction, and thine Ears to the Words of Knowledge.

Whosoever loves Instruction loves Knowledge; but he that hates Reproof is
brutish.

He is in the way of Life that keeps Instruction; but he that refuses
Reproof erreth.

The Commandment is a Lamb, and the Law is Light, and Reprooss of Instruction
are the ways of Life.

He that refuses Instruction, despises his own Soul; but he that hears
Reproof gets Understanding.

A proud Look and a lying. Tongue the Lord hates, Pro. 6.17.

Wisdom is the principle thing, therefore get Wisdom; and with all thy getting
get Understanding.

Walk in the way of good men, and keep the Paths of the Righteous, Pro. 2.20.

Directions to Read and Spell truly.
OBserve, that the first Letter of all proper Names and beginning of Sentences
are to be greater Letters.

A Dipthong is the sounding of any two or more Vowels together, without any
Consonant between them; they be commonly used in Words of one Syllable, there
are nine Dipthongs.

ai, or ay, as in maid, may. au, or aw, as Laud, Law. ea, as earth: ee, as
seed. ei, as heir. eu, or ew, as feud, grew. oi, or oy, as coi, boy, joy. oo,
as good. ou, or ow, as loud, low.
A Consonant is a Letter that makes a sound with a Vowel.

A Syllable is a perfect sound, made sometimes of Vowels only, and sometimes of
Vowels and Consonants; no Syllable has above eight Letters in it, as Strength;
neither has any Word above seven Syllables in the English Tongue, as
Re-con-ci-lia-ti-on.

Observe how many Vowels there are in a Word so many Syllables it has in it,
as in Re-con-ci-li-a-ti-on, except the Word end in e or es, as in have and
James; or if there be a Dipthong in it, as in may or your: after q is always u
with another Vowel, as in quick.

After true Spelling, these seven Points are to be observed in Reading, for
keeping the Sense.
(,) A Comma is a little stop or breathing; as, Behold O Lord,

(;) A Semi-colon is a longer stop or breathing; as, for I am in distress;

(:) A Colon is commonly put in the middle of a Sentence; as, my Bowels are
troubled: my Heart is turned within me, for I have grievously rebelled.

(.) A Period is a full stop, and is put after a full Sentence; as, Abroad the
Sword, bereaveth, at home there is a Dearth.

() a Parenthesis is when some Words may be left out, and yet the Sentence
perfect; as, For I know that in me (that is, in my Flesh) dwells no good
Thing -- or his Letters (say they) are weighty and powerful, etc.

(?) An Interrogation is put always after Question asked? as, Is Christ
divided? Was Paul crucified for you? or, Were you ^aptized in the Name of Paul?

(!) An Admiration is a Note of Won^ering or crying out; as, O the depth of ^he
Riches both of the Wisdom and Know^edge of God! How unsearchable are his ^ays
and his judgments past finding out!

Directions for Notes.
An Asterism * A Section A Paragraph A Note for extraordinary Passages " The
Crotchets [ ]
Hard Words used in our English Tongue explained.
ABba, an Hebrew Word, signifying Father.

Abreviate, to make short, to abridge.

Abnegation, a stiff denying.

Abortive, that which is untimely born.

Absolve, to pardon or acquit.

Abruptly, by piecemeal, out of order, without observing of due Circumstance.

Absolution, Pardon.

Accurate, curious, exact, studiously done.

Accent, the raising or letting fall of the Voice in Pronunciation.

Acerbity, sowerness.

Atchieve, to perform or bring to pass.

Adopt, to choose or take for his Child.

Alienate, to estrange.

Alien, a stranger.

Allegory, a Sentence which must be understood otherwise than the literal
Interpretation shows.

Alpha, the first Letter in the Greek, wherefore it is sometimes taken for the
first or chief in any thing.

Amplify, to enlarge.

Anathema, cursed.

Animate, to encourage.

Affinity, kin by marriage.

Antichrist, an adversary to Christ; it is compounded of the Greek Preposition,
Anti and Christus, which signifies, contrary or against Christ.

Antidote, a Medicine against Poison.

Antipathy, a contrariety or great Disagreement of Qualities.

Antiquary, one studious in matters of Antiquity.

Aphorism, a short Sentence briefly expressing the Properties of a thing.

Apocalypse, Revelation.

Apocrypha, That which is hidden, and not known, doubtful or not of Authority.

Apostasy, a revolting or falling away from the true Religion.

Apostle, one sent in Message, an Ambassador.

Ambassador, a Messenger.

Apparent, clear or manifest.

Atheist, One that believes there is no God.

Autumn, Harvest-time, one of the four Quarters of the Year.

B.
Beelzebub, an Hebrew Word compounded of Bell, which in that Language signifies
an Idol, and Zebub a Fly; so that Beelzebub signifies, the Idol of Flies:
commonly the Devil is called by that Name.

Balance, a pair of Scales.

Baptism, dipping or plunging.

Blasphemy, Evil speaking.

Bishop, Overseer.

C
Calumniate, to slander, to accuse one falsely.

Canonical, approved by common or exact Rule.

Chorography, the Description of a Country.

Chronologer, one skilful in Chronicles.

Chemist, a Physician following the method of Paracelsus.

Circumcise, to cut off the Foreskin.

Circumvent, to compass in, to deceive one craftily, or to prevent.

Commiserate, to take Piety or Compassion upon any.

Concise, brief, short cut off.

Condign, worthy, due, deserved.

Captivate, make subject.

Catholic,, universal.

Conscience, the testimony or witness of one mind or knowledge.

Center, the midst.

Celestial, Heavenly.

Circumference, round circuit.

Commodious, profitable.

Compendious, short.

Confiscate, forfeiture of Goods.

Conjunction, joining together.

Consecrate, to make holy.

Contemplation, Meditation.

Corporal, bodily.

Congruity, good agreement.

Consanguinity, Kindred by Blood and Birth.

Consolatory, comforting.

Consolidate, to make firm or strong.

Contribute, to give with others, to allow as others do.

Cosmography, an Art touching the Description of the whole World.

Critic or Critical, one that takes upon him to censure other men's Acts or
Works written.

D
Deacon, one overseeing the Poor.

Decline, fall away.

Deity, the Godhead, divine Nature.

Derivation, taking from another.

Delusion, deceiving or mockery.

Desist, leave off.

Diabolical, Devilish.

Disciple, a Scholar, one that learneth.

Discomfit, put to flight.

Digression, going from the matter.

Derogate, to diminish or disable.

Deplore, to bewail.

Domestical, at home.

Divine, Heavenly.

Disconsolate, uncomfortable, sorrowful, comfortless.

E
Ecclesiastical, belongs to the Church.

Edi ct, Commandment.

Edify, building up.

Education, bringing up.

Effusion, pouring forth.

Egress, going forth.

Election, choice.

Elevate, lift up.

Effigies, an Image.

Emnity, hatred.

Essence, substance or being.

Evangelist, bringer of good News.

Eunuch, gelded.

Exclaim, cry out.

Etymology, the true derivation of a Word.

Exile, banish.

F
Fallacy, Deceit.

Fervent, hot.

Finally, lastly.

Fragility, brittleness.

Fraternity, brotherhood.

Function, calling.

Future, time to come.

Frustrate, make void.

Furious, raging.

Fugitive, Runagate.

G
Genitor, a Father or Begetter.

Geographer, a Describer of the Earth.

Gospel, glad Tidings, good News.

Gradually, by degrees.

Gratify, to pleasure.

Gratis, freely.

H
Habitable, able to dwell in.

Hallelujah, Praise to the Lord.

Helmet, Headpiece.

Homage, Worship.

Hypocrite, a Dissembler.

Hymn, a Song.

I
Jesus, a Savior.

Ignominy, Reproach.

Illegitimate, unlawful born.

Illusion, Mockery.

Immortal, Everlasting.

Impediment, let or hinderance.

Infinite, without Number.

Institute, appoint.

Insolent, Proud.

Intermission, ceasing.

Immediate, next or presently following.

Interrogation, Question asking.

Instigation, provoking.

Introduction, entrance.

Invincible, not to be overcome.

Jubilee, Year of Joy.

L
Laud, Praises.

Latitude, breadth or wideness.

Legible, easy to be read.

Lascivious, wanton.

Laxative, loose.

Longitude, length of a place.

Loyal, Obedient.

Luxurious, riotous, excessive.

M
Magician, using Witchcraft.

Magnanimity, of a great mind.

Magnificence, Sumptuousness.

Maranatha, accursed.

Moral, pertaining to Manners or Civility.

Moralize, to give the moral sense and interpretation of any thing.

Mortal, deadly, brings in death.

Minister, a Servant.

Ministry, Service or Charge in any Employment.

Magnitude, Greatness.

Major, the greater.

Melody, harmony, sweet singing.

Method, Order.

Meritorious, that deserves.

Modern, of our times.

Modest, sober.

Moment, weight or sudden.

Morality, civil behavior.

Motive, cause moving.

Mortify, kill.

Munition, defense.

Mutable, changeable.

Mystical, secret hidden.

N
Narration, declaration.

Native, born.

Negromancy, black Art.

Neuter, of neither side.

Notify, give knowledge.

Negative, that denies, or gainsays.

Novice, a young Scholar.

Nominal, of or belonging to a Name.

Notion, knowledge.

Nutriment, nourishment.

Novelty, newness.

Numeration, numbering.

O
Oblation, offering.

Obscure, dark.

Obdurate, harden.

Obstruction, stopping.

Oblivious, forgetful:

Omnipotent, almighty.

Original, beginning.

Ostentation, boasting.

Oracle, a Speech from God.

Overplus, more then needful.

P
Paradise, a place of Pleasure.

Paadphrase, Exposition.

Parable, similitude.

Patriarch, chief Father.

Page, the side of a Leaf.

Parabolical, belonging to a Parable.

Perpetuity, Eternity.

Pervert, subvert, or destroy.

Phanatick, a madman.

Philosopher, a lover of Wisdom.

Premeditate, to muse and think on a thing beforehand.

Permission, a sending forth.

Predestination, fore-appointment.

Procreate, to engender, to beget.

Prodigy, a Wonder.

Prohibition, a forbidding.

Proposition, a Sentence.

R
Radical, of or belonging to a Root.

Rational, reasonable.

Regeneration, new Birth.

Reprobate, Wicked, cast out of God's Favor.

Repugnant, contrary.

Repute, account.

Rudiment, first Instruction.

Retrograde, to go backward.

Reverential, that does revenge.

Rhetoric, the Art of Eloquence.

Rupture, Breach.

S
Sabbath, Rest.

Sanctification, holiness.

Schism, a breach.

Schismatic, one that makes a Schism.

Scholastic, Scholar-like.

Scripture, Writing.

Sovereign, chief.

Subscribe, write under.

Substract, take from.

Superior, higher.

Superlative, highest degree.

T
Tabernacle, a Pavilion, or Tent.

Temporary, for a time.

Terrestrial, earthly.

Tenure, hold.

Termination, ending.

Timorous, fearful.

Theology, Divinity.

Tautology, repeating the same things.

Transcendent, surpasses.

Transfiguration, a turning into another shape.

Typical, mystical.

V
Vacant, empty, void.

Verbatim, Word by Word.

Vilify, to make of no Reputation.

Vital, lively.

Unanimous, of one Mind and Heart.

Voluntary, of his one Accord and Will.

Directions for true spelling and writing English Words, which are alike in
sound, yet unlike in their signification.
A
ASK the Carpenter for his Ax.

Since I learned my Accidence, there have been strange Accidents.

Give your Advice, and advise me for the best.

The Ant is a wise Creature; his Uncle and Aunt.

Who were his Assistants, I crave your Assistance.

Assent not thereto, at the Ascent of the Hill.

A sure Friend, who was a suer for.

Take a Loan for your Money, when you are alone.

The Air was clear, where his Heir lived.

You are to appear before a Peer of the Realm.

A Piece to shoot withal, a Piece of Bread, two Loaves apiece.

B
To drink in a Boul; to trundle a Bowl.

A Baron of the Realm; a barren Field.

A Wheel- Barrow; to lend and borrow.

The Borough of Southwark; a Cony Burrow.

He spent so much upon Barley, he went but barely.

A Bath to bathe in.

The Child did begin to put off his Biggin.

The Bile brake, the Pot did boil.

A Band of men, he is bound in a Bond.

They both went into a Booth.

It was the best Beast.

He boasted his Book was so well bost.

The Dog did bark, that lay in the Barque.

When he went into Barbary, he lest his Maid Barbara.

The Bird which was bill'd like an Hawk, did build her Nest.

A bald Head; his Dog baul'd.

Good and bad; who bade him do it?

By whose means did you buy it?

Bolt the Door before you boult the Meal.

To bow the Knee, the bough of a Tree.

The hole which I did bore; the Sow and the Boar.

He bored a hole in a Oaken board.

The sweat of his Brows the Bullock did browz.

The Wind blew away the blue Cloth.

A brute Beast; a bruit or report.

He was bred up to eat brown bread.

A bare Common, which did bear no Grass.

C
Write thy Copies, and go into the Copice.

If he leave not Coughing, he will soon be put in a Coffin.

When he cough'd I caught him by his Coat.

His Chaps were full of Chops.

It was a good Chare, to set him in the Chair, and to give him good Cheer.

Currents to carry away the Water; Raisins and Currants.

Spare no Cost to travel into every coust.

What were the Causes, that the Causeys were no better?

He quoteth a place of Scripture, coateth his Child.

He cooled his Milk, because he could not eat it so hot.

The Butcher did call for the Caul of the Liver.

A Cousin will sometimes cuzen his near Kindred.

The Kings Council, gave him good Counsel.

A Cruel Master; a Cup wrought with Crewel.

A wicked Crew came in when the Cock crew.

D
The Do was caught; the Pie was Dough baked.

A fallow Deer, a dear Friend.

The dun color was well done.

Bucks and Does; let him take but one Dose.

Such a Device, as none could devise a better.

Before his disease, he was sick of a dangerous Disease.

It was not without desert that he was robbed in the Desert.

E
In looking toward the East, she spilt her Yeist.

She did earn her living by spinning of Yarn, her Bowels did yern.

I eat my bread this day, better than I are it yesterday.

The most Eminent man was in the most Imminent danger.

F
The Cook had more skill in a Froise than in a Phrase.

The Waterman had a good Fare, when he went to the Fair.

His house in the Fens was without a Fence.

A Gown lined with Fur, a Fir Tree.

A form of Words; a Fourm to sit upon.

A small Fly may flee into a narrow place.

He did feign himself sick; I would fain finish my Work.

The Cattle did feed; his Attorney was fee'd.

I find that they were fined very much.

Put the Sheep into the Fold, when the Mare has foal'd.

To set forth a Man's Praise to the fourth Degree.

Heat the Oven with Furz; he furreth his Gown with rich Furs.

The Cloth is foul; Fish and Fowl.

His Son Francis, and his Daughter Frances.

If it freez put on a freese Jerkin.

A sweet smelling Flower, Wheat flowr.

G
The Child found his Guardian in the Garden.

I guess that you will have many Guests

A Ghost or Spirit; thou go but lamely.

Ox Galls, the Gauls upon Horses backs

A gilt Cup, the Guilt of sin.

To glister like Gold; the Physician has prescribed a Glyster.

H
A Hare to eat; the Hair of the Head.

Holy men will wholly apply themselves to do good.

A hole in the Ground, a part for the whole.

Thou have made great haste.

To hoop a Tubb; to whoop and hollow.

She shall have her Heir, in a higher degree, if she hy her about her Work.

Stand here, that thou may hear.

It is a homely Religion, to read a Homily.

Drive away the Hens form hence.

Holly and Ivy; holy Men and Women.

I Vowel.
An Idle Person; an Idol maker.

Thy Eyes may plainly see the Ice.

Let him eye us with his eye, while thou and I are doing it.

In his Ire or Anger, he was an Eyer of it.

To incite or stir up one to be always in sight, and to have an insight in it.

J Consonant
She loved to jet up and down; a jeat Stone.

A Joynter, or Tool to work with, a VVomans Jointure.

The Car-man left not jerking his Horse, in his leather Jerkin.

K
A Kennel for Dogs; sweep the Channel clean.

The Knots are fast tied; the Gnats are very busy in hot weather.

L
I wrote the Lines, with my Loins girded.

The Lane was lain over with Stones.

A man of a low stature, the Ox did low.

He laughed when he went into the Loft.

When the Lead was laid, he led me by the hand.

When the Leases are made, give them to the Leasers.

I did loath to do it, and therefore I was loath to do it.

He was full of Lies, and full of Lice.

Light and see, whether it be light or heavy

The Latin Tongue; a Lattin Ladle.

The Cow lowed after her Calf very loud.

Take the least, lest he be angry.

Teach him his Lesson well, lest he lesen thy Wages.

Leapers that can leap; Lepers full of ^eprosie.

Lo, he is in a low condition.

If he loose not the Knot, he will lose his about.

M
To meet and eat Meat; a Yard to mete measure withal.

He sent a Message concerning the Messu^e.

Things were in a good manner, at the ^anour house.

A Mote in the Eye; a Moate or Ditch.

He had no cause to moan, when his Corn ^^s mown.

The Cat will mouse well, among the ^rn Mows.

The Widows Mite; we have no might ^r power.

The one Mower did more then the other.

The Mantle hangs on the Mantil Three.

Thousands and Millions; Musk- melons.

It was the Day on which Mary did marry.

Moles that cast up the Earth; moulds wherein Metals are cast.

N
His Niece did neese very much.

He did needless work with his Needles.

It is neither thee nor I can lift the nether Millstone.

Yea and nay; the Horse did neigh.

The Figs were so naught, they were good for naught.

O
Gold Ore; the Watermans Oar; the Ower of a Debt.

Neither ours nor yours will be done i^ three hours.

I will speak of it, before I cut it off.

He did own but one of them.

You ought to have done it very often.

P
He took great Pains to mend the Panes that were broken.

He had laid a Plot to take away a Plat of Ground.

The Principal man taught the first Principle.

As he fate in his Place he eat Plaice.

The time was past before he made the Paste.

He sold that at a good Price which he had taken as a Prize.

To pare the Pear; a pair of Gloves.

The Palate of the Mouth; a Pallet Bed.

A Parson or Priest; a third Person.

Kings and Princes; a Princess.

Praise is not seemly for a Fool; the Preys of Beasts.

Pillars of a House; Cater- pillars.

It was his Pride, that he pryed into it.

There is no Profit may be received from a false Prophet.

He has no Power to pour it out.

R
The Rain refreshes the Earth; the Reign of a King; the Rein of a Bridle; my
Reyns were sore.

Raise up my self to behold the Rays of the Sun.

Rancour and Malice, ranker than other.

A red Rose; have thou read it.

To rear it up; the Rere-ward.

He gave a Reason why a Fig is better than a Raisin.

A Rite or Ceremony; Right or wrong.

To Write and Read; a Wheel- wright.

The Rind of a Pomgranate; the River Rhine.

A Roe Buck; a row of Trees.

She rose and took a red Rose.

The Roes of a Fish; the rows of Trees.

A Rower of the Boat-head; the Lion roar.

He wrote that there was a rot among the Sheep.

He rapt him on the Head, and wrapped it up.

The Roads or Highways; the Isle of Rhodes, or Rhode Island.

The highest Room in the House; the (...) Rome.

(...) ng the Mortar; and she wrung her Tiffinie Ruff, and put on her rough
Garment.

A Cheese- rack; Ship- wrack.

A broken Reed; to read and write;

He wrought hard when he wrote his Copy, and learned by rote.

To raze the Walls; to raise a Siege.

A Barbers Rasour; a raiser of Sedition.

He would not rest, till he did wrest my Words.

S
Savers and Losers; sweet Savours.

The Ocean or Seas; to seize upon his Goods.

Ceasing from Strife; sessing or taxing him.

The Buyer and Seller; a Wine- Cellar.

The third Senturie; the Herb Centory.

He did sheer his Sheep in Hamp-shire.

Cite him to appear; the Sight of the Eye.

The Sole of a Shoe; the Soul and Body.

A sound Body may fall into a Swoon.

He was in a strait to make the crooked stick straight.

He made slight of it, having a Slight in doing it.

To succor a Man from a Blood- sucker.

A Sum of Money was paid to some of them.

The Sun and Moon; a Son and Daughter.

He shoots 3 Arrows; he has 3 Suits of Apparel, and 3 Suits in Law.

Sivs for Corn; Onions and Sives, Sythes to mow with; Sighs and Groans.

A Sower of Seeds; sour Grapes.

The weaker Sex, diverse Sects.

The Steed being stolen, stands in no stead.

He went a slow pace, and fell in a Slough.

The Seas will not cease from raging.

It is a vain thing to wear out Shoes to see Shows.

The Town of Stanes; Stains in Cloth.

All the Sheep were carried into the Ship.

T
A Tax or Tribute; Iron Tacks.

The Herb Thyme; the Time of the day.

A Tide Table; the Horse is tied.

A Foot and Toe; Flax and Towe.

A Frog and Foad; Stockins toed; he towed his Boat.

It is too much for two men to do.

A small Treatise concerning diverse Treaties.

He had then no more than he could do.

He was thrown from his Throne.

It was through help he came thorough.

There was one of their own Kindred.

Fire-shovel and Tongs; Neats Tongues.

He did set on his Tail, and told a Tale.

A Tomb or Sepulcher; the first Tome of a Book.

V
Let the Vein bleed, but not in vain.

The base Viol; to fill a Vial.

In the Vale of Esham, she put a Vail on her Face.

In the long Vacation, he followed his Vocation.

For want of Victuals, the Vitals will saint.

W
To weigh a Wey of Cheese in the highway.

To wait upon a man; sold by weight.

If he were wise, he would wear warmer Clothes; the Ware in a Shop.

Thou wast unwise to make so much waste.

He did wrest his wrist.

I wist not that he was there, but I wished that he might be there.

Y
The Yew Trees belong to you men.

Put the Basin and Ewer in Ure.

Ye that are wise, use Yea and Nay.

She did earn her Bread with spinning Yarn.

Proper Names in Scripture, with their Signification in English.
Aaron, a Teacher. Abda, a Servant. Abdiel, a Servant of God. Abdi, my Servant.
Abdiah, a Servant of the Lord. Abednigo, Servant of shining. Abyl, Mourning.
Abagtha, Father of the Wine Press. Abiah, the Will of the Lord. Abijam, Father
of the Sea. Abiasaph, a gathering Father. Abiathar, Father of the Remnant, or
excellent Father. Abida, father of Knowledge. Abidan, father of Judgment.
Abiel, my Father is God. Abiezer, the Fathers Help. Abigail, the Fathers Joy,
she was Wise to ungodly Mabal. Abihail, the Father of Strength. Abihu, he is a
Father. Abihud, the Father of Praise. Abilene, lamentable. Abimael, a Father
from God. Abimelech, the Kings Father, or a Father of Counsel. Abinadab, a
Father of a Vow. Abinoam, Father of Beauty. Abiram, an high Father. Abishag;
the Fathers Ignorance. Abishai, the Fathers Reward. Abishalom, the Father of
Peace, or the Peace of the Father. Abishuah, the Father of Salvation. Abishur,
the Father of a Song. Abital, the Father of the Dew. Abitob, the Father of
Goodness. Abner, the Fathers Candle. Abshalom, the Fathers Peace, or Reward.
Achan, troubling. Adadezer, beautiful Help. Adaliab, Poverty. Adajah, the
Witness of the Lord. Adiel, the Witness of God. Adonijah, the Lord is the
Ruler. Adonizedeck, the Lords Justice. Agabus, a Grasshopper. Agar, a Stranger.
Ahaz, taking, or possessing. Ahasuerus, a Prince, or Head. Ahban, a Brother of
Understanding. Ahijah, Brother of the Lord. Ahimaaz, Brother of Counsel.
Ahiman, Brother of the right hand. Ahimelech, a Kings Brother. Ahimoth, a
Brother of Death. Ahinoam, the Brothers Beauty. Ahier, the Brothers Light.
Ahilab, a hearty Brother. Arah, a sweet savouring Meadow. Ahikam, a Brother
arising. Ahiezer, the Brothers help. Aholah, a Mansion, or dwelling in her
self. Aholiab, my Mansion in her. Ahud, praising or confessing. Alian, high
Amaleck, a licking People. Amarjah, the Lord said, or the Lamb of the Lord.
Amasa, sparing the People. Amashai, the Gift of the People. Amaziah, the Burden
of the Lord. Amatha, a Cloud, or Vapor of Death. Amihud; People of praise.
Aminadab, a free People. Amittai, true or fearing. Ammi, my People. Ammiel, the
people of God. Ammihur, people of Liberty. Ammeshadai, the people of the
Almighty. Ammon, a people. Ammonites, populous, or a Multitude. Amon, faithful,
or true. Amorites, bitter people, or cruel Bebels. Amos, a Burden. Amoz,
strong, or mighty, the Father of Isaiah the Prophet. Amphibolis, a City
compassed. Anab, a Grape. Anah, answering, or singing. Anaharath, Dryness, or
burning, or Wrath. Anak, a Giant. Anahim, a Fountain, or the Eye of Waters.
Anauiah, the Cloud of the Lord, or the Deliverance of the Lord. Andrew,
verystrong and manly Andronicus, a victorious Man. Anna, merciful, or taking
rest, or gracious. Apollo, leesing, or a Destroyer; a Jew born in Alexandria,
who being both eloquent and mighty in the Scriptures, disdained not to be
further instructed in the Way of the Lord; by a poor Crafts man, named Aouilla,
and Priscilla his Wife. Ariel, the Altar, or Light of God. Arimathea, a Lion,
dead unto God. Arphaxad, healing. Arphad, the light of Redemption. Athaliah,
time for the Lord. Aza, strength. Azariah, Help of the Lord. Azubah, forsaken.

B
Baal, the Idol. Baalgad, the Idol of Fortune. Baalhazer, a possessor of Grace.
Baalhermon, a Possessor of Destruction. Baalperazim, the Idol of Division.
Baalshalisha, the threefold, or principal Idol. Baalzebub, the Idol, or
Possessor of Flies. Babylon, Confusion. Balak, Covering, or Destroying.
Barrabas, the son of Confusion. Barachel, blessing, or speaking well of God, or
bowing the Knee to God. Baruch, blessed. Bathsheba, the seventh Daughter.
Bathshua, the Daughter of Salvation. Becher, the first begotten, or first
Fruits. Ben, a Son, or Building. Benajath, the Lords Building. Benjamin, the
Son of my right hand; Jacob 's youngest Son, called Benoni; that is, the son of
Sorrow; Jacob loved him. Berachiah. speaking well of the Lord. Berajah, the
choosing of the Lord. Besodaiah, the Counsel of the Lord. Bethamath, the House
of affliction. Bethaven, the house of Vanity and Grief. Bethazmaveth, the House
of Deaths Strength. Bethpirei, the house of my Maker. Bethcar, the house of
Knowledge. Betheden, the house of Pleasure. Bethel, the house of God.
Bethemeck, the house of Deepness. Bethesda, the house of Effusion. Bethanan,
the house of Grace, or Mercy. Bethhathshittah, the house of going out of the
way, or the house of Thorus. Bethlehem, the house of Bread, or the house of
War; a City in the Tribe of Zebulon, also a City in the Tribe of Juda, called
Ephrath, near unto which Rachel was buried, and unto which Joseph traveled
with Mary, the Mother of Jesus, where she was delivered of Jesus Christ; where
the wise Men went and honored him. Bathmarcaboth, the house of bitterness
wiped out. Bethnimrah, the house of Rebellion. Bethuel, the Measure of God, the
Father of Rebekah. Bethulia, the Virgin of the Lord. Bezaleel, in the shadow of
God, he was a man mightily endued with the Spirit of God. Boaz, in strength or
Power. Boochim, the place of weeping. Boanerges, the Sons of Thunder.

C
Caleb, as an heart. Caiphas, a Searcher. Canaan, a Merchant. Chilcab, the
restraint of the Father. Christ, anointed. Clement, Gentle, or Meek. Cleophas,
all Glory. Cleopatra, the glory of the Country. Conaniah, the strength or
stability of the Lord.

D
Dalajah, the Poor of the Lord. Deborah, a Word, or Be; a Prophetess, who
judged Israel. Dina, Judgment. Dositheus, giving to God.

E
Eden, Pleasure. Egypt, anguish, or tribulation. Elchanan, the mercy of God.
Eldaah, the love of God. Eleadah, witness of God. Eleazer, the help of God.
Eliab, my God the Father. Eliakim, God arises. Eliam, the people of God.
Eliasaph, the Lord increases. Eliaship, the Lord returns. Eliatl a, thou art
my God. Elihoenai, the Lord mine Eye. Elidad, the Beloved of God. Elihu, he is
my God. Elimelech, my God the King, or the Counsel of God. Eliphal, a Miracle
of God. Eliphaleh, the God of deliverance. Elisha, the Lamb of God. Elishaphat,
my God judges. Elisheba, the Oath of God; or the fullness of God. Elizur, the
strength of God. Elkanah, the Zeal of God. Elmoded, God measures. Elnathan,
God's Gift. Eliphaal, God's Work. Ezrie, the Help of God.

G
Gabriel, a man of God. Gamaliel, God's. Reward.

H
Habbakkuk, a Wrestler. Habiah, the hiding of the Lord. Habazzanjah, a hiding
of the Shield of the Lord. Hacaljah, wanting, of the Lord. Hadad, Joy, or
Rejoicing. Hagar, a Stranger. Haggiah; the Lords Feast. Hamul, godly, or
merciful. Hanan, full of Grace. Hannah, merciful, or taking Rest. Hanameel, the
mercy of God. Hananeel, the grace of God. Hanani, gracious or merciful.
Hananiah, the Grace of the Lord. Hatim, dedicate to God. Hasadiah, the mercy of
the Lord. Hattil, an howling for sin. Hazael, seeing God. Helkiah, the Portion
of the Lord. Hiel, the Lord lives. Hezekiah, Strength of the Lord. Hohab,
beloved:

I
Jaasiel, the Work of God. Jaasoniah, the hear^ening of the Lord. Jabal,
bringing or budding. Jabesh, drought. Jabiz, Sorrow. Jabin, Understanding.
Jachim, Stability. Jadiah, knowing the Lord. Jahallel, praising God. Jabohel,
waiting for God, or beseeching God, or hope in God, or beginning in God.
Jamuel, God in his day. Jasher, Righteous. Jatter, a remnant, or excellent.
Ichabod, Where is glory? Jeconiah, stability of the Lord. Jedaiah, the hand of
the Lord, or confessing the Lord. Jedidah, beloved. Jediel, Knowledge of God.
Jehiah, the Lord lives. Jehiel, God lives. Jehoadan, the Lords Pleasure.
Jehoahas, the Possession of the Lord. Jehoash, the fire of the Lord. Jehohanan,
Grace or mercy of the Lord. Jehoiakim, the rising or avenging of the Lord.
Jehoshaphat, the Lord is the Judge. Jehoshuah, the Lords Salvation. Jehozadak,
the Justice of the Lord. Jekannah, the Lord shall arise, establish or avenge.
Jerameel, the mercy of God. Jeriel the fear of God. Jerimoth, fearing Death.
Jeroboam, increasing the People. Igdaliah, the greatness of the Lord. Joel,
willing, or beginning. Jonah, a Dove. Jonathan, the gift of the Lord.
Joshabeth, the fullness of the Lord. Ishmael, God has heard.

K
Kabzeel, the Congregation of God. Kain, a Possession. Kelaiah, the voice of
the Lord. Kelita, succor, a gathering together. Kirithaim, a City of Cities.

L
Laadah, to gather, to assemble together. Laban, white, shining, gentle,
Brother to Rebekah. Lazarus, the help of God. Leah, painful or wearied; the
Name of Laban's eldest Daughter.

M
Maadiah, Pleasantness, or decking of the Lord, or Testimony, or Covenant of
the Lord. Mahseiah, the Protection of the Lord Maaziah, the strength of the
Lord. Machbanai, my poor Son. Madan, Strife. Magdalen, magnified or exalted.
Magdiel, preaching God. Mahalah, infirmity or weakness. Magog, covering or
melting. Malachi, my Messenger. Mahaleel, praising God. Menahem, a Comforter.
Manoach, Rest. Maon, dwelling place. Martha, bitter or provoking. Mattan, a
gift. Maeteni, Mattaniah, Matthaniah, Mattharah, his gift. Mattathiah, a gift
of the Lord. Malchiel, God is my King. Malchiah, the Lord is my King.
Melchizedeck, King of Righteousness. Malchishuah, my King the Savior.
Mehetabel, how good is God. Mehuman, troubled. Melatiah, Deliverance of the
Lord. Menelaus, Strength of the People. Merajath, Bitterness. Mered,
Rebellious. Mesha, Salvation. Meshelemjah, the Peace of the Lord. Meshullam,
peaceable. Mephibosheth, Shame of Mouth. Milchah, a Woman of Counsel. Michah,
poor or smitten. Michajah, who is like the Lord. Michael, who is like God.
Michal, who is perfect. Mordecai, bitter Contrition; he brought up Esther, and
bewailed the Jews Destruction.

N
Naam, fair or pleasant. Naamah, fair, beautiful, or comely, or greatly moving.
Naariah, a Child of the Lord. Nabatoth, Buds, or Fruits, or Prophecies. Nabal,
a Fool. Naboth, a Speech, Prophecy, or budding forth; he refused to sell Ahab
his Vincyard, and therefore was stoned by Jezebels wicked practice. Nadab, a
Prince, or liberal. Nahas, a Shake or Serpent Nahoi, very secret; or hid, my
beloved, or wrestling with me. Najah, Fairness, Beauty, Comeliness. Nathan,
given or rewarded Naphtali, my wrestling. Nathaniel, the gift of God. Nazareth,
separated, crowned, or sanctified; the City where Christ was brought up.
Nehalamite, a Dreamer. Nehemiah, Comfort, or the Rest of the Lord, or Direction
of the Lord. Nerias, the Light, or Candle of the Lord. Nicodemus, innocent
Blood; he was a Ruler among the Jews, and one that came to Christ by Night to
be taught of him. Nicholas, a Victor, or Overcomer. Nineveh, fair, beautiful,
or a dwelling place: the name of a City, the Desolation whereof was Pro(...)
but they repented after Jonas preached to them. Noah, a ceasing or rest; he was
Son to Lamech, he was a Preacher of Righteousness; he was commanded of God to
make an Ark, that he and his Family should enter in it, for their Preservation.

O
Obadiah, Servant of the Lord, he was a Prophet. Obed, a Servant or Workman
Obededom, the Servant of Edom. Obil, born or brought. Onam, Sorrow. Ophel, a
Tower, or Darkness. Othni, my Time Othoniel, the Time of God. Ozaziah, the
Strength of the Lord. Oziel, the help of God.

P
Pagiel, God has met. Pashor, increasing liberty. Pedhel, the Redemption of
God Pedahzur, a mighty Redeemer. Pedajah, the Lords Redeeming. Pekajah, the
Lords opening. Pelajah, the Miracle of the Lord. Pelatiah, Deliverance of the
Lord: Peleg, Division. Penuel, seeing God. Pethajah, the Lord opens. Phicol,
the Mouth of all. Phineas, a Countenance.

R
Raamjah, Thunder of the Lord. Rabboni, Master. Raham, Mercy or Compassion,
Rachel, a Sheep; Daughter of Laban, she kept her Fathers Sheep; when she met
with Jacob, he wept; Jacob served twice seven years for her; she hid away her
Fathers Idols: The People at Boaz's marriage prayed to God to make Ruth as
fruitful as Rachel and Leah: Rachel wept for her Children, and would not be
comforted: she died at the birth of Benjamin. Reuben, the Son of Vision, so
named because the Lord did see his Mothers Affliction; he was Jacob's Son by
Leah.

S
Sabboath, Rest. Sabdi, a Dowry. Sarai, my Dame or Mistress; the Name of
Abraham's Wife before it was changed. Seled, Affliction. Semachiah, cleaving to
the Lord. Shalmon, peaceable. Shammah, Desolation or Destruction. Shelathiel,
asked of God. Shearjah, the gate of the Lord. Shebarim, Hope. Shecanjah, the
Habitation of the Lord. Shechem, a Part, or Portion. Shedur, a Field of Fire,
or the light of the Almighty. Shebarjah, the Morning of the Lord. Shelemjah,
Peace of the Lord. Shelumiel, the peace of God. Shemajah, hearing the Lord.
Shemarjah, the keeping of the Lord. Shemuel, appointed of God. Sherajah, a
Prince of the Lord. Sheva, Vanity. Sichiah, the Protection of the Lord.
Shubael, the returning of the Lord.

T
Tanchumeth, Consolation. Taphath, a little one. Tehinuah, merciful or prayer.
Tirhanah, a Searcher of Mercy. Tobiah, the Lord is good. Togarmath, strong or
bonny. Tubal, born or worldly. Tubalkain, worldly possession.

V
Vanjah, Nourishment of the Lord. Ure, my Light. Unjah, the light of the Lord.
Uriel, Light or Fire of God. Uzzah, strength. Uzziel, the strength of God.
Urim, Light.

Z
Zaven, Trembling. Zadad, a Dowry Zabadjay, a Dowry of the Lord. Zachai, pure.
Zachariah, mindful of the Lord. Zebulum, a dwelling. Zelophehad, a shadow of
fear. Zephaniah, the hiding of the Lord. Zephi, a Honeycomb. Zerah, Clearness,
or rising up. Zerajah, the Lord arising. Zedekiah, the Justice of the Lord.
Zuriel, the Rock of God. Zurishidai, the Rock of the Almighty.

Independency (Latin) a not depending upon another, absoluteness, of ones self:
But it is commonly taken for that Profession, or Sect of men, who manage all
things belonging to Church Dircipline, within their own Congregations, and
allow not of a Dependence on a National Church.

Anabaptists, a sort of Professors of Religion, who it is said, first began in
Germany, in the year 1521. Their chief Principle by which they separate from
Independents, and other Professors, is, that they do not hold it lawful to
sprinkle Children, and call it Baptism; but that they ought first to be able to
give an account of their Faith before they are Baptized.

Socinians, a sort of People that deny the Divinity of Christ; first spread by
one Faustus Socinus of Siena.

Presbytery, (Latin) signifies Priesthood, Eldership, or Government of the
Church by Elders; there is a great People in this Nation go under the Name of
Presbyterians, who, when they had power in their hands, were great Persecutors.

Quakers, They are in derision so called by the scorners of this Age: but their
proper Name is, Children of the Light; and though they are accounted a Sect of
Heretics newly sprung up, by some who have rashly passed Judgment upon them,
yet upon a serious and diligent search into their Principles and Examples, they
will appear to be led by a Christian Spirit.

Seven Numeral Letters.
One -- I Five -- V Ten -- X Fifty -- L One hundred -- C Five hundred -- D One
thousand -- M


Numbers expressed by Letters.
M C X I MM CC XX II MMM CCC XXX III CD XL IV D L V DC LX VI DCC LXX VII DCCC
LXXX VIII CM XC IX

Eleven XI. Twelve XII. Thirteen XIII. Fourteen XIV. Fifteen XV. Sixteen XVI.
Seventeen XVII. Eighteen XVIII. Nineteen XIX.

The Table of Numeration, whereby any Number may be expressed.
I One 1 X Ten 10 C an Hundred 100 I Thousand 1000 X Thousand 10000 C Thousand
100000 I Million 1000000 X of Millions 10000000 C of Millions 100000000


CXI Millions CXI Thousand CXI.

III. III. III. Mil. Thou. Unites. 222. 222. 222. 333. 333. 333. 444. 444. 444.
555. 555. 555. 666. 666. 666. 777. 777. 777. 888. 888. 888. 999. 999. 999. 999
Millions 999 Thousand 999 Nine.

The Table of Multiplication.
2 times 2 is 4 2 times 3 is 6 2 times 4 is 8 2 times 5 is 10 2 times 6 is 12 2
times 7 is 14 2 times 8 is 16 2 times 9 is 18 2 times 10 is 20 3 times 3 is 9 3
times 4 is 12 3 times 5 is 15 3 times 6 is 18 3 times 7 is 21 3 times 8 is 24 3
times 9 is 27 3 times 10 is 20 4 times 4 is 16 4 times 5 is 20 4 times 6 is 24
4 times 7 is 28 4 times 8 is 32 4 times 9 is 36 4 times 10 is 40 5 times 5 is
25 5 times 6 is 30 5 times 7 is 35 5 times 8 is 40 5 times 9 is 45 5 times 10
is 50 6 times 6 is 36 6 times 7 is 42 6 times 8 is 48 6 times 9 is 54 6 times
10 is 60 7 times 7 is 49 7 times 8 is 56 7 times 9 is 63 7 times 10 is 70 8
times 8 is 64 8 times 9 is 72 8 times 10 is 80 9 times 9 is 81 10 times 10 is
100 10 times 100 is 1000
Concerning Weights, Measures, etc.
THere are two kinds of Weights used in England, as, Troy and Averdupois; By
Troy Weight Gold and Silver is weighed; Troy Weight contains in every Pound
twelve Ounces, in every Ounce twenty Peny-weight, every Peny-weight twenty four
Grains.

By Averdupois Weight is weighed all Grocery Ware, all Drugs and Iron, Lead and
Tin, etc. and it contains sixteen Ounces to the Pound, twenty eight Pound make
one quarter of a Hundred, fifty six Pound make two quarters, eighty four Pound
three quarters, a hundred and twelve Pound make one Hundred weight, and twenty
Hundred make one Tun.

In dry Measure, sixteen Pints make one Peck, and four Pecks make one Bushel.

In Cloth Measure, four Nails is one quarter of a Yard, and one yard is four
quarters, one Ell Flemish is three quarters of a Yard, one Ell English is five
quarters of a Yard.

In reckoning Time, sixty Minutes make one Hour, twenty four Hours make one
Day, and three hundred sixty five Days make one Year.

In measuring Wine, two Pints make one Quart, two Quarts one Pottle, two
Pottles one Gallon, sixty three Gallons one Hogshead, and four Hogsheads one:
Tun; one Gallon of Wine contains eight: Pound of Troy weight.

In long Measure, three Barly-corns make one Inch, twelve Inches a Foot, three
Foot a Yard, five Yards and a half a Perch; forty Pearches in length and four
in breadth make an Acre, four in breadth and ten in leagth make a Rood, which
is a quarter of an Acre, so that an Acre haths forty three thousand five
hundred and sixty square Feet, four thousand eight hundred and forty square
Yards. Eight Furlongs is an English Mile, forty Poles is a Furlong, sixteen
Foot and a half make one Pole, three Feet make one Yard. The compass of the
Earth is supposed to be three hundred and sixty degrees, or one and twenty
thousand and seven hundred Italian Miles.

A ready Way to Reckon what ones daily Expenses come unto in a whole Year.
IF thou spendest six pence a day, and would know how much it comes to in the
year; which to know say thus, six pence the Day, is six Pound, six Half Pounds,
six Groats and six Pence; which makes nine Pound two shillings and six Pence.
Again, seven Pence the Day, is seven Pounds, seven half pounds, seven Groats
and seven pence in the Year; which makes ten Pounds, twelve Shillings and
eleven Pence; the like reckon of any other Sum:

To know the Value of any Sum, and how to set it down.
l. s. d. q. For a Farthing write 000 00 00 1 For a Halfpenny 000 00 00 2 For
three Farthings 000 00 00 3 For a Penny 000 00 01 0 For a Groat 000 00 04 0 For
4 Pence Halfpenny 000 00 04 2 For 6 pence halfpenny 000 00 06 2 For two
Groats 000 00 08 0 For a Shilling 000 01 00 0 For 13 pence halfpenny 000 01 01
2 For half a Crown 000 02 06 0 For half a Noble 000 03 04 0 For a Crown 000 05
00 0 For a Noble 000 06 08 0 For an Angel 000 10 00 0 For a Mark 000 13 04 0
For twenty Shillings 001 00 00 0 For four Nobles 001 06 08 0 For five Nobles
001 13 04 0 For four Marks 002 13 04 0 For five Marks 003 06 08 0 For twenty
Nobles 006 13 04 0 For twenty Marks 013 06 08 0 For an hundred Marks 066 13 04
0 For a thousand Marks 666 13 04 0 The whole Sum is 765 11 09 1

Note that l. stands over Pounds, s. over Shillings, d. over Pence, and q. over
Farthings.

The Significations of diverse Words commonly used, but hard to be understood.
ACcent, (Latin word) due sound, or an insisting particularly upon one Syllable
of any Word more than another, and is threefold, Acute, Grave, and Circumflex;
the Circumflex insisteth very long upon a Syllable, and is thus charactered (^)
the Grave very little, and is thus charactered (`) the Acute insisteth upon a
Syllable, but not with so full a Sound as the Circumflex, and is thus
charactered ().

Bible, (Greek) containing several Books.

Evangelist, (Greek) a bringer of glad Tidings, a Preacher of the Gospel.

Ephemerides, (Greek) Journals, or Books wherein daily Actions are registered,
also Astronomical Calculation.

Epact, A certain number of days, by which the Solary Year exceeds the
Lunary, which number of Excess is eleven, in regard the Lunary consisting but
of 29 days, and one and a half makes but 354 days in a year, whereas the
Solary Year has 365 days and a quarter: For the Equation of which Years
differing thus eleven days, certain days are yearly supplied by the Epact,
never exceeding 30 (because the days between change and change of the Moon
never exceed that number) until a thirteenth Month beadded, whereby every third
year becomes Embolismal, being a Lunary Leapyear.

Embolism, (Greek) signifies a casting in of the day which is added to the
Leapyear.

To find out the Epact of each year, do thus; To the Epact of the last year add
11. and the sum of these two make the Epact, if it surmount 30 then take 30
out, and that which rests above 30 is the Epact for that year.

To know the age of the Moon by the Epact without an Almanac; add the days of
the Month wherein thou would know the Epact; and as many days; more as are
Months from the first Month called March, to that Month, including both Months,
out of the which substract 30 as often as may be the age remains; if nothing
remain, the Moon changes that day.

The Golden Number, so called because it was written in the Calendar with
Letters of Gold, right at the day whereon the Moon changed; and it is the space
of 19 Years in which the Moon returns to the self-same day of the Year of the
Sun, and therefore is called the Circle of the Moon, in the which the Solstices
and Equinoctials return to all one point in the Zodiask.

To find it every Year, add one Year to the Year of Christ, then divide the
whole by 19. and that which rests is the Golden Number for that Year, if
there be no Surplusage, it is then 19.

Note, That the Golden Number and Dominical Letter does change every year the
first day of the eleventh Month, and the Epact the first day of the first Month
for ever; and the Year always begins the twenty fifth of the first Month.

A perpetual Almanac.
1 Dom. LETTER Years of the Lord 2 7 4 9 6 3 11 5 10 21 8 D 1674 1 2 3 4 5 6 7
C 5 B A 6 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 G 7 F 8 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 E 9 DC 1680 22 23 24
25 26 27 28 B 1 A 2 29 30 31 G 3 FE 4 G F E D C B A D 5 C 6 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 B 7

THE EXPLANATION.
IN the three upper Columns are the 12 Months, and under them the Figures for
the days of the Month, from 1 till 31 under them the Dominieal Letters; and in
the lower part the figures for the Days of the Week, from the first day to
theseventh, and on the two Columns on the left Hand, first has the Dominical
Letters, and the other the Year of the Lord.

Now to know the Day, first find out the Year, next see what Dominical Letter
is against that Year, which Letter find in the lower part of the Almanac, and
the Figure under that is the Day of the Week for thy Observation for the whole
Year, only every Leap-year has two Dominical Letters; the first gives the
Observation for the eleventh and twelfth Month, and and the next for all the
Year after.

In the Year 1675. C is the Dominical Letter for that Year, which directs to
the fifth Day, being under it, which is the Observation for that Year: So that
the first fifth Day of the first Month, is the fourth day of the Month; the
first fifth Day of the second Month, is the first Day of the Month, and so
reckon forward.

THE END.

