Something in ANSWER To a BOOK called, Fiat LUX, BEING A Discourse between a
Papist and a Protestant, etc. who writes at the bottom of the Title Page, J.V.C.

ALSO Something in Answer to the Papists QUERIES.

London, Printed in the Year, 1667.

Something in Answer to a BOOK CALLED FIAT LUX.
HE speaks in his 20th. Page, Of waging of War, Battle, and Contention, like
Boys, and Dogs in the Streets, who tear and devour one another; such as are
jumpt up together, unheard of, etc.

Answ. Has not this been your condition, who have started up after the
Apostles? Or, were ever the Papists heard of, with all your Body of Inventions
in the Apostles days, that be like Boys and Dogs, fighting and tearing to
pieces others that will not conform, to your trifling Traditions, and empty
Ceremonies? Yea and with such as follow the Apostles Doctrine, and do not
presume above what is written, according to the Apostles Doctrine, and because
such cannot submit to your Rudiments, which you have presumptuously set up,
Have you not burnt many to ashes? which is far worse than Boys and Dogs, etc.

And whereas thou queriest in Page 29. Whether the Word of God came to you
Quakers? etc. Or, Came it to you only? etc.

Answ. The Word of God came unto us before we preached it, which is the same
which was among the Apostles, and is the same which was yesterday, to day, and
for ever. But you Papists and Protestants, and others, are gone from this never
changable Word, as is manifest by your trifling Traditions, who hold them up by
carnal Weapons, contrary to the Apostles and the Quakers, which are spiritual.

And whereas thou queriest, Whether the Gospel came to the Pope and Papists
first?

We answer, No. For the Gospel of Christ (which is the Power of God) was
preached to Abraham: but the fruits of you Papists and others, have denied your
selves to be in this Gospel (to wit, the Power of God which brings Life and
Immortality to Light) by your dark Inventions and Traditions, Persecutions and
Oppressions, which is not, nor was not, the Gospel-Practice; as, look among the
Apostles writings in the Primitive Church, and see how far you are degenerated
from them.

And thou say, That the Spirit, the Word, the Lord, the Light, and such
like, are Motives of a new Fancy.

Answ. To the Papists, and others like unto them, that be out of the Spirit,
Light, Word, and the Lord, and have cast him and the Apostles behind their
backs, and followed their own Inventions, and have persecuted one another for
not observing them (who are in your fancies) the Spirit, Light, Word, and the
Lord, are new fancies to you (but to us they are substance) who set up and
tolerate your lies by your Laws, and prefer them before the Lord, his Spirit,
Word, Light and Truth, which were, and are the Guide of the Righteous to this
day; amongst whom, your Inventions were never heard off before your day, which
all are to beware of.

And, Them that be Heretics, thou say, are to be checked twice or thrice,
and then to be avoided.

To which we Answer, This has not been the Papists practice to them that you
suspect to be Heretics, that join not to your Popish ways, for you Burn and
Persecute them to Death; but if you had left them after you had admonished
them, ye had done something according to Scripture: but on the contrary, you
show thereby, that you have no Love to Enemies, no Sun to shine upon the
Unjust, not having the mind of Christ nor of his Apostles, nor no Sons of God,
but of the Pharisees brood.

And whereas thou speak of the Church Interpreting Scriptures. How can the
Papist Church Interpret Scriptures, when the Jesuits have said to our faces,
that they have not the same spirit that the Prophets and Apostles had. And
seeing Christ says, The Spirit of Truth shall lead you into all Truth; and the
Apostle says, That no man knows the things of God but the Spirit of God. And
John says, in the Revelationss to the Churches, Hear what the Spirit says.
There fore the Papist Church not having the same Spirit, they cannot interpret
Scriptures and so they are judged out of their own mouths. And the Spirit of
God does lead to hate the works of the Devil, who was a liar from the
beginning, and all his Children do his will; and who have done his will more
then the Papists? yea, worse than the Pharisees; for they never invented so
many Racks and Tortures as ye have done, and burnt so many to ashes since
Boneface the third, the Universal Pope, set up by Phocus the Emperor. And so
ye that scoff at the Light, etc. not having the same Spirit and Power as the
Apostles had, you will Rack, and Torture and Imprison, and Burn to ashes your
Friends; for, how can ye discern them, not having the same Spirit the Apostles
had? We think you Papists, Protestants, Presbyterians, Independants and
Baptists might agree, for they confess the same that you do, viz. That they
have not the same Spirit the Apostles had; then ye have another, for there is
but two Spirits; and it is much ye should make such a noise one against another,
and cannot agree. But your Inventions are old and theirs are new, and both
things in Gain to you, which maintains your Lusts, and that raises your war
one against another, which they that are in the Spirit the Apostles were in,
see over you all; and they that be in the Spirit, have both Visions and
Prophesies, and by it has Miracles been wrought, which some of your Generation
has said, as the Pharisees did to Christ, That they were wrought by the power
of the Devil.

And whereas thou say, Page 51. The Roman Catholics brought the news of
Christ and Christianity into the Land first.

Answ. We say No. Christ and Christianity was brought into this Land of
England, by Joseph of Arimathea, and twelve Disciples sent by Philip the
Apostle above 70 years after Christ, which was many hundred years before there
was any Universal Pope, and many years before any Mass was set up.

And whereas thou speak in Page 53, of such as say of Christ, Lo he is here,
Lo he is there.

We Answer, This is just your own condition; for do you not make a Christ of
Bread, which you call your God, and lift him up, and when you have eaten up
one, you make another, lift him up, and carry him about streets, crying, The
Host, and call it the Sacrament of the Altar; and when you have eaten him up
also, do you not make another, and cry, Lo here, lo there is Christ? But the
Quakers when they have received Christ, preach him (as the Aposties did) when
the Son of God is revealed in them, etc.

And Jobs words, now adays, are not so easy to answer as thou think; for
why have not you Papists answered all the Quakers Queries that have been put to
you? Thou may say, We want Queen Mary, and Bishop Bonner, who answered by
Fire and Faggot (to the destruction of the Righteous) for that has been your
way of answering; but this has never been the work of the Church of Christ,
nor of godly Rulers, as thou speak of.

And whereas thou say, in Page 93. The Holy Church has always, in all
Ages, forbidden her Children to Dispute the Principles of Religion in the sense
they had received them.

Answ. This is the Papists Church (not the Holy Church) and its Principles, and
it is false, as to the Holy Church; they were to be ready to give an account to
every man of the Hope that is in them, with meekness and fear; which Hope is
Christ. And the Apostle declared plainly when brought before the Magistrates,
how Christ appeared to him, and how he was sent to Preach. And the true Church
was to contend for the Faith which was delivered to the Saints; and they were
to speak in the same sense of Faith which they had received. For the Apostles
said, They were to warn every man, that they might present every man perfect in
Christ Jesus. And so it is plain that the Apostles and the Prophets spoke as
they were moved by the Holy Ghost, in the sense of what they received.

And whereas thou say, That all Christians are to acknowledge a new Pope,
etc.

To which we Answer, No. The Christians that now are, as also in the Primitive
times, are Brethren; and it is not among them as it was amongst the Apostates,
which are as the Gentiles, who exercise Lordship one over another; and those
that do so, are by you and them called Gracious Lords. But Christ says, It
shall not be so amongst you, meaning his Disciples, for ye are Brethren; and ye
have but one Master even Christ. And as the Apostle says, In the world there
are many Lords, but to us there is but one, even the Lord Jesus Christ, who is
Head of the Church: Yea, Head of that Church which the Saints upon the Earth
then, and which we now, are Members of, who is our Head, the same to day,
yesterday, and for ever; though he is not so to the Papists.

And whereas thou speak, That by reason of the great obscurity of things, we
are led into so many differences.

Answ. What is the reason indeed you with others are so dark and obscure, that
you are not in the same Spirit and Power that the Apostles were in, and being
out of it you go into so many Sects and Divisions.

And whereas thou speak, Of learning the Foundation upon which Faith is
built.

To which we Answer, Your works, and others do testify, that you have forsaken
both Foundation, good Conscience, and Faith that works by Love; for the
Historical or dead Faith, works by hatred, and the foundation of that is the
Adversary the Devil.

And whereas thou speak, In England, of some that pretend to a new Light.

To which we Answer, That Christ is the Light, who is the new and living Way.
It Is indeed a new way to you who are apostatized from the Light which the
Apostles were in, and the Life and Spirit, the fruits whereof are Love, etc.
But ye have manifested another spirit and fruits: As remember the Burning in
Smithfield, and Cruelties in other parts, as the Massacre in Ireland, and other
parts of the world; your putting to death for your Religion, which the Apostles
did not for their Religion; which Light of Christ was their Light, which is now
sprung up in England, is become a new Light unto you, who are workers of
Darkness.

And whereas thou say, The Quakers words are jumbled together, so that every
Line has no sense in it: and thou resemblest them to the Turks Alkaron.

To which we answer, To you the Prophets, Apostles, and Christ's words are not
sense, for if they were, then what need you thrust all these words of small
Letters, into the Books of the Old and New Testament, called the Itallick
Letter; signifying, that they are no more sense to you than the Quakers Books,
who make an addition to them. Therefore we do not strange at thy saying, That
our Writings are nonsense; but we can say to you as Solomon says, That our
words are all plain to him that is of Understanding.

And as for the Turkish Alkaron: Whose Writings are nearer unto them than the
Papists are? Set all your old Images aside, which you have neither out of the
Old Testament, nor of the New, but from your own dreaming conceit, that you
speak of.

And whereas thou speak, Of the Presbyterian falling out with the
Protestant, and calling him a Fanatic; the Catholic coming by and seeing
them, does hope that they may come to their Goods again, etc.

A. You want power to set up your Fire and Fagots again, and you long after
your Tithes, and great Monastries, and Gleab Land, etc. For if you had minded
the good of Peoples souls, why would so many thousands of you have turned from
your Religion, as your Priests and others in Queen Elizabeth's days did? And as
for Fanatickwrath, fury, rage and madness, who has manifested this spirit
since the Apostles days more then you, yea, upon such as have professed the
Name of Christ? And while you and other Sects are falling out, Truth will arise
over all your heads, as it was in England, and other parts, before the Pope and
his Mass Book, or you Papists were. And as for Catholic, your actions and
fruits have declared and testified against you, to deny the Catholic Faith
that works by Love, and the Catholic Gospel, and the Catholic Church with its
Catholic Head. And the Quakers have to war in the Spirit of God with you, and
also with all such as are in your Dreggs, and be out of the same Spirit that
the Prophets and Apostles were in.

And to the Querie in Page 188. We Answer, That neither Protestants nor you
have lived in Unity these several hundred years; for you have laid more
stumbling blocks to hinder the spreading of Christianity, then ever did Jezabel
by Baals Priests. And as for telling you of several hundred years, it was above
600 years after Christ before any Universal Bishop got up. And then the Turk
got up after the Pope, and he got from him near as much as all Christendom: and
then did not he lose Germany, England, Ireland, Scotland, Denmark, Sweden and
the Low-Coutries, yea and Egypt, Jerusalem and other parts that way, and part
of France, and yet will not the Pope tell us, that he is Head of the Church,
and that the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against him? And what strivings
were there in Italy and Spain, and other places, before you set up your
Inquisitions, about the time of the Council of Trent. And as for your Vaity,
let us tell you, if you have forgotten, Did the Waldenses ever join to you,
after the Pope got up? Nay, did not they gall him more then all? and did not he
send a Prince to destroy them, and did not the Lord turn him back again empty?
Read the Council of Trent. And whether or no do the Churches of the
Corinthians, Philippians and Thessalonians join to the Pope? or why has the
Pope made so many Orders to preserve the Unity by his Inquisitions?

And whereas thou Queriest, How came the Bible into England, was it not brought
up hither at the Lands Conversion by the Romans?

Answ. We say again, That many Christians came over into England, and preached
the Gospel many hundred years before any Universal Pope was; and do thou
think that there were no Books nor Epistles brought over before Boniface the
Pope was? whose time was 600 years after Christ, when that Joseph of Arimathea
with twelve more, as has been said, came over within seventy years after
Christ.

And whereas thou marvellest, Of the many ways of Rebellion in England not
reconciled, yet have not all this while appealed to the King as Supreme Head of
the Church; and you have secretly murmured against Queen Elizabeth, and King
James.

Answ. We know it, and also against the King now (its like) you are murmuring
as against King James, is sufficiently known to this day, and against Elizabeth
too. Do you not remember what striving there was in many parts of the Nation;
but what is this? you are troubled because the Pope is not Head. It seems the
Gates of Hell has prevailed against your Church; and if so, a Lie is found in
your right hand, and you not to be the true Church, according to yo^ur own
Doctrine; for proof whereof, you may look about you in Turkey, and Egypt, and
Jerusalem, and all over Europe.

And whereas thou say, The Pope easily managed the Peoples Consciences, and
kept them in order and peaceableness; and thou say, the Reason is because of
the multitude of People about him, and Priests, who shine like Stars. And thou
say, The Popes for the most part are very good, yet it may happen that some
of them are no better than they should be.

Answ. Here the Clamourous Woman pluck's down her own house; for how often have
you written, and told People that the Popes are Infallible, and could not err?

And as for the Pope and his Priests shining like Stars and keeping the People
in peace. Your own Council of Trent manifests that sufficiently, and also in
other parts of the World you may read your Order. But the Pope would be in the
Throne of God, and be Lord of the Consciences of People, and have power over
men's Faith, contrary to the Apostles, who had not power over any man's Faith.
And as for shining like Stars in the firmament; you have wandered up and down,
till you have darkened the Air, as Jude speaks. But the Everlasting Gospel is
again preached, which shines over you all.

And whereas thou say, That none of your Ecclesiastical benefits were given
by Princes and People to maintain Wife and Children, but only for such as were
single, and had consecrated themselves, etc.

Answ. Is it not better to Marry then to be called Concubinary Priests, as you
were called in the Council of Trent? And did not your Benefits maintain the
Poor as well as the Priests? And how long after Christ was it before Priests
were forbidden to Marry? Nay, did not some of your own Popes allow Priests to
Marry, and afterward denied it again? Truly a man had need have a great deal
of patience to read your Popes Lives, and Laws, and Decrees, and Councils,
they are so full of confusions and contradictions; though styled Unerring, and
Infallible, they have wholly erred from the Apostles, and the Scriptures of
Truth.

And whereas you say, You kneel at your Communion, and you drew a compendious
Common Prayer, and you keep up the Pulpits for Catholics who built them.

Answ. Of these things you and others have made a Trade of, and in, though none
of all these things you find among the Apostles. The Scripture says, They sat
when they received the Supper.

And whereas thou comparest the Quakers to Ishmael, whose hand is against every
man.

Answ. This is your own condition, as your actions declare, tho you can flatter
secretly for your own advantage; have you not destroyed Protestants of all
sorts to make them to bend to your Rudiments? But the Quakers have an Universal
Love to all mankind, and are of the Faith of Abraham, that works by Love, and
desire the everlasting good of all mankind, of the Turk and Pope too, as they
are Men; if they should come to our Houses, and want Bread or Drink, we can
freely give them some, but as for their Religion and ways we deny. And why
do thou contradict one of thy fellows sayings to us, the Infallibility of the
real Presence; which said, The Consecrated would wear away as the Unconsecrated.

And Page 196. thou say, Why does not the Bishop of Canterbury Summon a
Council to end the Differences about Religion?

Answ. Here thou seem to be a lover of Peace and Concord, but it is not the
Bishop of Canterbury, but it is the Popes Authority that thou would have up,
as in the former Page, where thou speak of Benefits, and of Single Life, and
of you Catholics to come to your right again (whilst others are fighting) thou
would set them together to hasten the end: but the Serpent is seen in his
hole and out of it.

And whereas thou mentionest four Sects, (viz.) Independants, Presbyterians,
Anabaptists and Quakers, of their disturbing the Peace; thou might have left
out the Quakers, and taken the rest to your selves, and been the head of them;
for who has disturbed the Peace of all Nations more then ye have done? Ye may
truly take the right hand of Fellowship there.

And whereas in Page 201. thou say, They are all Infallible, and will not be
moved so much as to moderation.

A. Thou might very well have kept in this, and have read the Council of
Trent, of the Pope who said, He would fire all the world but he would make them
obey him. And read in the Pagents of Popes, there thou may see, that your
Popes (which you say cannot err) are more like Beasts than Men: And so your
Immoderation and fallibility, and erring spirit has manifested it self
sufficiently in Europe. And we who are called Quakers, do seek the peace of all
men, whose Weapons are Spiritual and not Carnal, like yours, who have
degenerated from the Apostles.

And whereas thou say, The Reformers cut off and slashed the Ancient Faith.

Answ. Ye are out of that Faith that works by Love, which is the Ancient Faith,
and out of the Doctrine of Christ and his Apostles, and have slasht and cut
those that be in it. For where does he bid you run to Graves for Relics, and
set up Images, and dress your Popes more like to Stage Players than Peter? for
Peter and the Apostles had none of these Titles given unto them, as the Pope
has taken unto himself, but such things were forbidden by Christ, and he has
exalted himself above his brethren; but God is able to bring him down again,
for he is of the Image part Iron, part Clay, which I would have him to expound.
What good does your Confession do where there is not amendment? For what People
under the Sun are more Envious, Proud, Drink, Swear, Curse, and many unclean
Actions found in and amongst, as yours be?

And whereas thou say, Page 232. The Confession, nor any beginning thereof
cannot be found out.

Answ. Therefore you go upon a foundation which had (...) bottom; for in the
beginning in the Primitive times, the Apostles did not set up any Confessors,
therefore you are shut out of their Practice.

And whereas thou speak, Of inflicting penalties of Scourging or Death upon
Delinquents, though they be never so sorry for their Offense.

Answ. In this is much Ignorance; because that you and others have persecuted
one another to Death, because you would not conform to one another Religion;
which shows you are like Nebuchadnezzar, and worse then the Jews, (in some
respect) for did they Persecute any of the Heathen to death because they would
not join to their Religion? Though in one respect you are like unto the Jews,
who said, Come, let us kill the Heir, and the Inheritance shall be ours. And
were not they called Murderers? And have not you crucified Christ afresh and
put him to an open shame? As instance the Pope Eugenius, who caused the King of
Poland to break his Oath and League with the Turk, upon which he lost a great
part of Christendom; who seldom got any thing by fighting or plotting with his
Carnal weapon. But if the Papists had been true Christians, they would have
loved one another, and have loved Enemies. But there is no mercy from you,
although a man be never so sorry for his Offense, but Death and Scourging; but
thy thoughts and mind are not the Lords, who desires not the death of a
sinner, but would have him repent and live. And therefore, What have thou to do
to take the Name of the Lord into thy mouth, and hate to be reformed? And as
for the Apostle Paul's words which he spoke, as in the person of Christ, what
is that to your practice, who speak in the spirit of Satan? as ye may look over
your words and actions in Fox's Acts and Monuments, and the Council of Trent,
and other Books, who showed another spirit and life than Christ and the
Apostles: for Christ came to save men's lives, not to destroy them, as ye have
done, who do not know what spirit ye are off.

And whereas thou speak, Of some places where the People are on their knees
at Prayer all the week long: and our Churches are not so in England.

Answ. Ye were not at your Prayers all the week long when ye had power in
England, and were burning the Martyrs to ashes, up and down at Stakes. The Wolf
is seen though he has the Sheeps clothing on his back; thou can not be hid,
but the wise and prudent see and comprehend thee; and the prayers of the wicked
are an abomination to the Lord. For has it not been a Fist of wickedness that
ye have lifted up these many hundred years? Does not, and has not your actions
declared and spoken them abroad in the ears of sober People? Where is the House
of Prayer thou speak of? Is it the Temple at Jerusalem, which thou art
wandering to? That Is down, according to Christ's Prophecy. And the Apostles
say, Our Bodies are the Temples of the holy Ghost; and in the Holy Ghost we are
to pray. And is not that the Temple, set above all houses made with hands? and
so the Apostle says, we must pray in the Spirit, and so we must pray in the
Temple; but this I doubt thou can not read with thy Spectacles on.

And whereas thou say, Ye have kept your Mass and Bible in an unknown
Tongue, and yet you call your selves Catholic.

Answ. This is not Catholic from the Apostle, for he was against them that
spoke in an unknown tongue, that was not to edification, and he reproves it; so
ye are come under the reproof of the Apostle. And the Apostle sent Epistles to
be read to the Churches in their age: and now you that have put the Bible in an
unknown Tongue, and kept your people under teaching ever since Boniface the
third, are not your People capable yet to have the Scriptures read to them in
their own Tongue? This manifests your Popish Teachers bad, and your Peoples
ignorance, and your own deceit and fear of your selves, if the people should
have them in their own Tongue, they would see you. And whereas you make a
distinction of Lay people and Spiritual, and yet all Believers; if they were so
indeed, they would be all born of God. And the Apostles in the Primitive time
made no such distinction as Lay people and Spiritual among Believers, etc. as
ye do. But ye have been in the dark, and your works are all in the dark, and so
ye keep the Scripture from the people in their own Tongue, whereby they might
come to know the Truth. And the holy Scriptures are a better Book than any ye
can make, which stands over you and your Mass Book.

As for all your perverting Scriptures, thereby thinking to bend them to your
Traditions and Images, they that have a single eye fees it is to no purpose. And
as for calling upon Saints, Angels, and Martyrs to pray for you, to have mercy
upon you, for which you have neither Scripture nor Example from the Apostles.
And whereas thou ignorantly and pervertingly bring David's words, and Daniels,
for the praying to Angels, etc. and the Sun and Moon: David nor none of the
Saints nor Martyrs of old did call to the Sun, Moon, Angels, or Saints, but
they called for all things to praise the Lord; for whilst they were living, the
Saints prayed one for another, but to pray to Saints departed, is like Saul's
going to the Witch of Endor, to ask counsel of the Dead, which was forbidden by
the Law of God. So in this you are ignorant both of Law and Gospel. Many other
frivolous things thou have in thy Book not worth reading or answering.

But one thing further; whereas thou say, The Church of Rome is the Mother
Church. Was not the Church of Jerusalem before the Church of Rome was? Read the
Scriptures. And was not the Church at Constantinople preferred before the
Church of Rome? Read over the Histories again. And for the Church of Rome being
either Mother Church, Holy Church, or Church of God; her actions and deeds
testify against her, she is none of the Church of Christ; though she pretend
for Christ yet she is against Christ, his Faith, Spirit and Life, and so
Antichrist; her deeds and works have spoken it; which all that be in the Light,
Spirit and Life of Christ have seen and heard. And how can ignorant people but
smile at you, as thou say, who make Bread and Wine God, which will sour and
corrupt. Some Scriptures follow here, which ye may read your selves. Isa. 8.19.
Psalm. 115.17.

Something in Answer to the Papists Queries.
THou say in the 338 Page, Apostasy is not only a renouncing of the Faith of
Christ, but the very Name and Title of Christianity; and no man will say that
the Church of Rome had ever such a fall as this.

A. The Faith of Christ that works by Love, the Romish Church has renounced
and made shipwreck of, and then what remains but a Form of godliness, when the
Power is denied, and such are to be turned away from; and such a Church as deny
the Faith, deny the Power; and to profess Christ and Christianity in Words, and
deny him in Life and Power, is Antichrist, and this the Church of Rome is
fallen into. For many that kept the Title of Jews (as you have done the Title
of Christianity) were found of the Synagogue of Satan, so will you when you
come to be proved and tried by the faithful, as they that said, they were Jews
and were not, but liars, blasphemers, and Synagogues of Satan.

Querie 2. If the Church of Rome did ever adhere to any singular or new
Opinion, disagreeable to the common received Doctrine of the Christian World? I
pray you satisfy me as to these particulars.

A. The Church of Rome have set up new Opinions by which they force their
people to adhere to them contrary to all the Primitive Churches, as all may see
who will read but the Decrees, Orders, and Canons in your Church, and that read
the Epistles that were to the Churches in the Primitive times, to be contrary
to the Doctrine of the Primitive times; as your making your God and Christ in
your Bread and Wine, your Crosses, Crucifixes, Relics, making of Ministers,
Pilgrims, Popes, and all your Body of Clergy, together with their Orders and
Garments, that are nothing like the Way, Worship and Practice of the Primitive
Church, which was the first among the Apostles. And was not Rome degenerated
when the Bishop would excommunicate all the Eastern Churches, who was reproved
sharply for it?

Qu. 3. Thou say, By what General Council was the Church of Rome Condemned,
and by what Authority was she Reproved?

A. Three hundred and seven years after Christ, the Bishop of Rome denied
Christ and sacrificed to Idols, (mark) denied Christ, then he must deny
Christianity when he took up another Religion; then what did he bring the
People of Rome to, when he had sacrificed to Idols? The Bishops Name was
Mercelinus, and he was condemned by a Council of 300 Bishops. And here thou
may see the Authority that reproved him, before your Popish Religion, See
Eusebius in Page 36. Chronograp. Was not the Bishop of Rome the first that
Decreed, that Priests should not Marry, in the 399 year of Christ?

And then the first Council held at Toledo in Spain; in the year of Christ 401,
Decreed, That Priests should Marry, and so contradicted the Bishop of Rome. And
were they not once of the Sect of the Arrians, and Reproved? Look in Eusebius
and you will see Reproofs enough. Also you may read in Scripture, what work the
Apostle had with the Church of Rome, how they were in his day going (...) the
Works of the Law from the Faith. Also in the 423 year of Christ, how that the
Bishop of Rome passed the bounds of his Priestly Order, in his presumption, in
challenging to himself the Secular Power and Authority, who was reproved
sharply; and then a Council held in Africa, Decreed, That no Bishop should be
called, The Head of all Priests; That no Appeal should be made at Africa to
any other Bishop. And so the Church was Ruled by Councils till Boniface the
Third, who got up to be Universal Bishop of all the World, by the means of
Phocus that murdered Mauritius the Emperor, his Master, after the 600 year of
Christ: and then came in the Pope, the Turk, and the Devil, with all their
Body, and pelting Ceremonies.

Then did the Pope lose the greatest part of Christendom, and the Emperor the
greatest part of his Empire; and so in succeeding Ages in stead of the Bible,
you brought into the Church Legends of Lies, as you may read, Eusebius. Page 410.

Qu. 4. Thou Queriest, If ever the Church of Rome divided her self by Schism
from any other Body of faithful Christians, to break Communion, or went from
the Society of any Elder Church? what Company did she leave, from what Body did
she go forth, where was the true Church which she forsook?

Answ She went from the practice of the Church in the Primitive times, and from
the Body of their Elders in all their days, and has forsaken their Society
and Communion, and divided her self from Christ the Head, and has set up
another, and is divided from all the Apostles and Elders. Compare your own
Canons which you use in your own Church, with the Writings of the Apostles, and
you may quickly see from what Church, Body and Company of faithful Christians
and Elders you are all g^^^^^ and erred from, into another Faith, Worship,
Life, Power, Gospel and Practice, than Christ and the Apostles were in, in the
Primitive times. For what one thing is it that the Church of Rome practices,
that is agreeable to theirs in all your Worship and your Teachers that hold it
up, who are maintained by oppressing the People, and are upheld by carnal
weapons, and by them are all your dark Doctrines and Inventions set up, and by
Goals, and Prisons and Tortures. But the Elders, which you have forsaken, and
Ministers and Apostles, their Weapons were Spiritual, and not Carnal as yours
are; who are sold under the sin, far off the Redemption, therefore do you
destroy so many Lives, not knowing what Spirit ye be of, persecuting them that
have the mind of Christ, who came to save men's lives, and to love Enemies, and
one another, whose Doctrine ye deny.

THE END.

