Here you may see what was The True Honor Amongst the JEWS, To Magistrates,
Kings, Fathers, Mothers, Masters, Dames, and Old Men; which did not use the
putting off the Hat, nor scraping backwards the Foot; And what was the Honor
they Forbade; And what is the Honor Peter speaks of, To Honor all men, and to
them that Rule Well, that was worthy of Double Honor: among whom, the putting
off the Hat was not used: which honor of Christians, since the Apostles days,
have turned to putting off the Hat, and scraping Backwards; but putting off the
Hat, on Bonnet, or Covering, was not used among the Jews, nor in those parts
of the World, though they were to Honor and Esteem, and Respect all Men,
loving Enemies.

Which Practice, according to Scripture, we own and practice, Honoring all
men, and them that Rule Well double Honor, as Fathers, Mothers, Masters,
Dames, etc. 1 Pet. 4.1, 2.

London, Printed for Robert Wilson, at the Black-Spread-Eagle and Windmill in
Martin l'Grand, 1660.

Here you may See what was the True Honor amongst the Jews, to Magistrates,
Kings, Fathers, Mothers, Masters, Dames, and Old Men; who did not use the
putting off the Hat, nor Scraping Backwards the Foot; and what was the Honor
they Forbade, and what is the Honor Peter Spoke of, to Honor all Men, etc.
The Objections of the World, and the Professors, Teachers, and Magistrates,
against the QVAKERS, Answered.
FIrst, say They, You do not Honor all Men, which is according to the Apostles
Doctrine in the Scriptures, as in 1 Pet. 2.17. Honor all men, Love the
Brotherhood; Fear God, Honor the King: And them that Do Well, are Worthy of
Double Honor.

Answ. Now to Honor all men, is to have all men in Esteem, or to Regard them,
as the word (...) ^^nifies: And to Honor the King, and them that Rule Well,
who are Worthy of Double Honor; That is, They should have Double Esteem, more
than they that are Ruled; yet they that are Ruled, are to be had in Esteem, if
all men be Honored, Though they that Rule Well, have Double Esteem; for
Honor, is Esteem; Now they that do esteem all men, will not hurt them, will do
no man hurt: Now they that do esteem Governors, and Rulers with double esteem,
more than common people; they will never hurt their Governors, nor those
Rulers, nor people they do esteem: So if all Christendom had esteemed their
Governors and Rulers, or one another, they would never have hurt them; for if
they esteem them, they love them; And had the esteemed all men, and people,
they would never have hurt one another; for they that esteem one another, they
love one another; and they that love one another, will not hurt one another,
nor suffer others to hurt them, but esteem one another: For will a man hurt
that Magistrate he does esteem? And all men are to be esteemed, and them that
Rule Well are worthy of Double Esteem; and then will they hurt them? therefore,
if you esteem them, you will do no hurt to them; but this esteem that men
should have to one another, has been turned, and is turned to the putting off
the Hat, and scraping the Foot, and bowing the Knee; and he that do this, is
taken for an esteemer of men, and an honourer of Magistrates; but they that do
this, which is accounted the Honor in these days, yet will Kill and Slay one
another, and Slight and Dis-esteem one another, and Defraud, and Deceive, and
deal Traytously one with another, and Dis-esteeming one another; which cannot
properly be called the Honor, which the Scripture speaks of, Have one another
in esteem; men may have one another in esteem, and yet never put off hat, nor
scrape the foot; so you may see they are not the truest people, that do Cap and
Scrape, which is called a Worship, and an Honor, for all the Murderers of one
another, and of Kings and other Magistrate^, they have been such as Knee, put
off the Hat, and scrape; but had they had one another in esteem, and truly
regarded each others good, and the Rulers in double esteem, they would never
have hurt them, nor one another: And so according to the Scripture, to Honor
all men, is to esteem or regard all men, and they that are worthy of double,
they are worthy of double esteem, which we own; And this practice was, and is,
where there is no putting off Hats; and they that do Honor, which is Respect,
Regard, or Esteem, do beautify, and double beautify them that Rule Well, and
Adorn them, as you may read, you own words holds forth (...)

(...) Honoro, in Honor habeo, magni aestimo Interdum and earum babeo, Od.
(...). Iliad. (...), Tanto habuit in pretio, and tam delxit quam natos suos.

And this is with that Respect which men have from God who fear him; and who
fear him, have that with which he Beautifies and Adornes; and who fear God,
keeps the Commands of Christ Jesus, love enemies; and who love enemies, esteem
them; and who esteem them, Honor all men, and sees them that Rule Well, worthy
of Double Honor, Double Esteem; and these are they that come to keep brotherly
fellowship, which is in the Light; for if we walk in the Light, as he is in the
Light, we have fellowship one with another; and the fellowship is in the
Spirit, which is the bond of peace, which plungeth down the Corruptions, which
makes men Dishonorable, and makes men Dis-esteem one another; with which Spirit
he comes to give Honor to that part which is lacking; so we have those members
in esteem which are least; so that in the fellowship, if one Member be Honored
or Esteemed, as your Teaching Books holds forth in this place, also signifies
esteem, even according to your own Rules of Words, and Teaching Books, though
you render it honor: Now unto the King Everlasting, Immortal, Invisible; unto
God only wise be Honor and Glory, for Ever and Ever, 1 Timothy 17.

Now the Apostles, the Saints, amongst all the Courts, amongst all the Jews,
the people of God of Old, we do never Read that they ever fell out one with
another, or persecuted one another, or put any out of places, or Imprisoned or
fined any, or one another for not putting off their Hats, or for not bowing or
scraping; but the Prophets, and Christ, judged them that Honored with their
Lips; so there was a Lip Honor: And was not that Lip Honor beyond that of the
Hat? and are they not now to be judged, when the heart is far off, seeing it is
the heart satisfies? And who had all men in esteem, and gave double to them,
who are worthy of it? was not this in the reallity in the heart? and it is Read
in the Scriptures, that they did wear Hats, as in Dan. 3. yet never Forced,
Fined, nor Imprisoned, for not putting off their Hats; and say, they had not
men in esteem, except they did put off the Hat.

Now if men had men in esteem, that do put off the Hat, and had that been the
Estemation, then had all been preserved in Unity and Peace; and the Jews, and
other scattered people, which Peter wrote to, were to have one another in
esteem, and the Elders in double Esteem, which he does not say consists, or
stands in putting off the Hat; neither do we read that the Jews used it;
neither do they, who are Native true-Born Jews or Hebrews, at this day practice
putting off the Hat in honor one of another; And the Turks counts it an odious
or hateful practice to put off the Hat, (yet they are to Honor) so that it is
a Proverb, or Byword among them, that they had rather show their bare head.

Now those especially, which Labor in the Word and Doctrine are to be Double
Esteemed; for they are clothed with Honor; and them that Labor in the Word
and Doctrine they love enemies, and they must of necessity have all men in
esteem, that love them; and them that Rule Well, they cannot but have in double
Esteem, Joh. 12. He that Honors the Son, Honors the Father; and that all
men should Honor the Son, as they Honor the Father, and he that Honors not
the Son, Honors not the Father. Now Honor is as before, (...) to Esteem, or
Respect the Son; he that Esteems not the Son, Esteems not the Father; or he
that Esteems or Regards the Son, Esteems or Regards his Light wherewith
he is Lighted, who Enlightneth every man that comes into the world; and he
that Esteems not the Light, Esteems neither; for in that is the Fellowship.

Now there is an honor which is from below, which people, while they are
seeking, cannot Believe, which honor the Pharisees were seeking, which was the
esteem they sought from one another; but did not seek that which was from Above.

And there is an honoring with lips; there is an esteem, and there is an
honoring with the Hat, (called the honor now a days) and have left the
esteeming, and double esteeming according to Scripture, which is in Truth and
Righteousness in the Heart, which if men were in, they would never hurt one
another, nor fearing of being hurt one by another.

And Christ says, A Prophet is not without Honor, save in his own Country;
and there is an Honor to Father and Mother, and Servants to Honor their
Masters, where the Circumstance of putting off the Hat is not; therefore you
must know, and consider this, to have them in esteem, and to count them
estimable; and so honorable.

No man that takes this honor to himself, (Mat. 25.) but he that is called of
God as Aaron was, (Heb. 5.) Now the cry is, that none does, nor ever shall hear
Gods voice while upon earth; therefore how can they have that honor, or
esteem, or know that esteem which Aaron had? now the vessels of holiness are
vessels of honor, and are in esteem in Gods eyes; but such as deny the Spirit
of God within them, and the Light within them, deny that, whereby they should
have all men in esteem; and Rulers in double esteem, and to have God in esteem,
and his Son in esteem.

And so denying the Spirit of God within, and the Light of Christ within; they
put their Honor to the Hat, and Bowing, and Scraping, and are offended if they
have it not; so living out of the Will of God, which is Sanctification, by
which they should receive that Honor which is from above; and so are in a
Will Worship, and fained Humility, without any true Honor, neglecting the
body, for the satisfying of the flesh; honoring with their Lips, and people
with their Hats, when their Hearts are afar off. And putting off the Hat, is
but a Fashion of the World, and an outward thing, like unto the Lip Honor and
Tradition of men, which must not be touched, nor tasted, nor followed: The
Apostles were in Honor and Dishonor, where they preached up and down; so some
Esteemed them, and some Disesteemed them; now them that Disesteemed them,
Persecuted; if they had esteemed them, they would not have Persecuted them, nor
have Hurt them: now this you cannot put to the Hat, or to them That did not put
off their Hats to them; for do you not think all those that have Murdered and
Persecuted one another, would not put off their Hats to them, and to one
another; and all the Betrayers of one another, and Backbiters, and Evil
Speakers, and Underminers of one another, Will not these Honor the same person
with the Lip and Cap?

Now if these had one another in Esteem, which is to Love one another, then
Love would never hurt, nor plot, nor disturb, nor raise insurrections one
against another, if they honored all men.

2. Object. Let every Soul be subject to the Higher Power, Romans 13. And you do
not put off your Hats; And the Scripture says, he that Resists the Power,
resists the Ordinance of God; and they that do so, receive to themselves
Judgment.

Answ. Now the Soul, which is Immortal, must be subject to the Power; there is
no power but of God, and this power is over that Powers of Darkness, which are
called That are out of Truth.
Rulers and Power; now to this the Soul is subject, and he that resists this,
resists the Ordinance of God. Here you may see that Power is Gods Ordinance,
which the Soul must be subject to; and Honor, to whom Honor; and Custom, to
whom Custom; and Tribute, to whom Tribute; and Esteem, to whom Esteem.

And the Powers which be, are ordained of God, to which the Soul must be
subject; for there is no Power, but which is of God. That is, there is no
Supreme Authority, Rule, or Governments that are ordained by his Power, but are
of God; and the Powers, and Principalities, and Thrones, which the Apostles
wrestled withal with Spiritual Weapons, and the Rulers of Darkness in high
places, these were contrary to the power of God which went over them, unto
these their Souls were not subject, for they wrestled against them: Therefore
that power which the Soul must be subject to, is not that which is wrestlest
against with Spiritual Weapons, which is Christ the Power of God, which
Subjects all Powers, Rulers and Governments unto himself; but it is that which
minds the lip-honour, and the hat, and the honor below.

3. Object. Be kindly affectionated one to another, with brotherly love; Romans
12. In honor, preferring one before another.

Now here is esteeming one another in love; so as I said before, they do never
hurt one another, who prefer and esteem one another: Now the Christians were
to honor all men, that is, to have all men in esteem, even to love enemies,
and were not to hurt any Creature upon earth. Submit your selves to every
ordinance of man for the Lords sake, whether it be to the King, as Supreme, or
other Governors or Superiors, or Rulers, or Magistrates, who are for the
punishment of Evil Doers, and for the praise of them that do Well: So that
which keeps down the evil doer (the just) that is to be submitted to, which is
for the praise of them that do well; but evil doers getting up, that are not
for the praise of them that do well; The Apostles exhorts, That prayers be made
for Rulers that are in Authority, and Intercession, and giving of thanks be
made for all men, likewise as well as for those that are in Authority, Rulers,
etc. And that we might live a quiet and peaceable life, in all godliness and
honesty; That is, that the Lord may restrain them (who has them in his hand,
as he has the waters) that they may not lead us into ungodlyness and
dishonesty; for that leads out of a peaceable life and quietness, ungodliness
and dishonesty does: Therefore prayers are for them that are in Rule and
Authority; and intercession to the Lord for them, that we may live a peaceable
Life, and a godly Life, and when they are stopped from leading and forcing to
act things contrary to godlyness and honesty, and a pure conscience, there is
then cause of Thanksgiving and Praising, 1 Pet. 2.17. For the Apostles did
cross the Jews and Gentiles in their Ordinances, Statutes and Customs; Yet
wrote, that every soul should be subject to the higher power, and to every
ordinance of man for the Lords Sake, and Conscience Sake; even the pure
Conscience Sake.

Now all Fining and Imprisoning for not putting off the hat, has got up since
the Apostles days; seeing we never read amongst the Prophets, amongst the
Jews, amongst the Christians in the Primitive Times, that ever they did fine or
imprison any for not putting off their Hats: therefore is not this fining and
Imprisoning amongst the Christians, got up since the Apostles days? and is not
this Cap-Honour from below, and worshipping the Beast and Dragon, which has
killed, persecuted, murdered and betrayed one another, and yet have had the
Name of Christians, and have put off hats one to another fast enough; but if
they had had one another in esteem, and the Rulers that ruled well in double
esteem, then had never any of them been hurt nor wronged in the whole
Christendom, if they had esteemed one another; but now you may see what is
become with this lip-honour, and lip-worship, who are treacherous, and
murtherous in their hearts. Now that which is in esteem, is worshipful, and
comes to have the chiefest place, such are worthy of double esteem; but the
Ambitious, which seeks the honor before the humility, Luke 13.23. as Solomon
speaks of, are reproved; for before true honor, goes humility; the honor
and worship with the hat, and that humility (so called) is voluntary, and
voluntary humility, and not of command by Christ and the Apostles; and an
honor below, and not from above; and a fashion of the World, and the fashions
of the World are forbidden by God and his Servants. The Salutation which the
Scripture speaks of, was to speak one to another.
The Apostles say, the fashion of this world passes away, therefore the Saints
were not to mind them; A salutation, that mind that is in pride, is offended,
if to him it be not given; and it is a Custom of the World, and a thing below,
which they that are Earthly, or below, seek; which they that be Heavenly seek
not, and are from above, but seeks the things which be above, and these are not
troubled about that below, but are of a more Royal Seed; but they that be
Earthly are troubled, if they have it not given them, which are covered, but
not with the Spirit of the Lord; but they that are uncovered with the earthly,
and covered with the Spirit of the Lord, are untroubled if men do not give it
them, but stops them that do; and this seeks the honor above, and adorns and
beautifies people with that: And out Brother Paul, which came before King
Fe^ius, and Felix the Governor in their Court, and spoke and declared freely
for himself, they were not offended at him for Thou-ing of them, and for not
putting off his Hat or Covering, for that the Jews Custom was not to put off
their Hats or Coverings.

And they that have all men in esteem, and they that rule well are worthy of
double esteem; this is not to respect persons, to the committing of sin, and
the transgressing the Law, and the putting off the Hat, the giving of honor
and esteem to the Rulers and Great men, the same is given to the Beggar; and
this does not discover men's hearts, but a discovering and manifesting flattery,
and hypocricy, and such as will crouch, and bow, and bend for a piece of bread,
for their own ends; and for that respect of bowing, are not men accepted, for
bowing with the hat off? that are covered, but not with the Spirit of the Lord,
they that have that covering taken off with the Spirit of God, and covered with
that, it gives them a Royaller understanding, to look beyond that honor below,
but at that honor which comes down bowing the Hat, is a will worship, and that
which discovers men's hearts, Which is not in the Hat.
is the Spirit of God, and leads their minds together, to be one, and their
Souls, and their Spirits; and to manifest their love to each other, and to have
one another in esteem; which is a more nobler thing than the Hat, for that
honor must into the dust: Where is any that sought more for the honor, which
is below; then the Great, and Rich, and Proud Pharisees did? as now the
Christians do for the hat-honour which is below, which is a figure, that they
are neither believers, nor seek not the honor which is from Above; and so will
people in our Nation, which they will both give, and seek, which God will lay
both in the dust: so we would have all men come to distinguish, and consider,
what that honor which is below, is, that God will lay in the dust; for that is
the honor for which men, if it be not given to them, will persecute: Daniel
came into the Great Court of Nebuchadnezzar, and the Three Children with their
hats, and they were cast into the Fire, for not worshipping their Image with
their Hats; Therefore it shows they had them on, and did not put them off,
they were cast into the Fire with them, as well as with their Cloaks; and
Nebuchadnezzar, and his Court, and his Company, were not Offended at their
Hats; for it was not the Jews Custom to put them off, and they were of the
Jews; neither do we read that Nebuchadnezzar was Offended at them; Daniel, and
the Three Children thee'd him, and thou would him; and we never Read that Hezekiah
was offended at Jeremiah, for thee-ing him, and thou-ing him; or the Judges and
Heads offended at Micah, when he spoke to them, or did make any question about
their Covering, or Hat; nor we never Read, that ever Moses, or David, or
Solomon, were offended at any for not putting their hats off, or coverings, or
for thee-ing, and thou-ing of them that came into the Courts before them, or
among them; or Sampson, or Joshua, or Jephthah, that these, or any other that
we Read of in the Scriptures, were offended at any that came into their Courts,
that did not put off their hats or coverings; or for saying thee, and thou to
them, though Jephthahs Daughter thou would her Father; for the Jews principle was,
that they did not put off their hats when they went into the Synagogues or
Temples that kept the Law of God; though many of the Vagabond Jews will do as
other Nations do, it may be some of them will put off their hats, but that is
not owned by them that are true Jews, as it is said by themselves.

And Steven he was Examined before the Council, Act. 7. We do not read they
were offended at his covering. Haman was offended at Mordecay, because he would
not obey the Kings Command, and Bow before him in his Court; and though he
broke the Kings Command, yet he had favor from him at the last; for he had the
King in esteem; so we would have men, to have all men in esteem, and the Rulers
that Rule Well, in double Esteem; for we have all men in esteem, and they that
Rule Well, in double Esteem, which is Honor according to your own
Interpretation.

And Christ the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, Who has all power in Heaven
and Earth given to him, we never Read of, that he set forth an example, or
command, that his Disciples, or any other, should put off their hats that came
before him, that had the chiefest Court upon all the Earth. Now there has been
an honor, and a worship given to the Beast, and the Dragon, since the Apostles
days, and a compelling thereunto.

Now men have been Fined, and Imprisoned, because they would not put off their
coverings, or their hats, among the apostate christians, since the Apostles
days; which we never Read was done among the Primitive Christians, in the
Apostles days; and we do never Read, that the Apostles, Timothy, Titus the
Bishops, did Fine, or Imprison any that did not put off their hats, or their
coverings, for they brought people to seek the things which were Above; and to
set their affections upon them, and not on things below, and not to mind
earthly things; for the hat is an earthly thing, and a thing below; and they
that Trouble, Fine, Imprison about it, cannot choose but mind earthly things,
and mind things below, and Circumstances, and Customs, and Fashions of the
World, and sained Humility, in which there is no Substance, which is below the
Royal Seed, and the Nobility, and Dignity of a man; and the honor Above, and
the worship of God, and the true Humility, which goes before True Honor, that
is Above.

And we never read among all the Jews Courts, Rulers, Kings, and Governors, or
among all the christians, Christ, and the Apostles, in the Primitive times,
that ever any were Fined, or Imprisoned, or Beat for not putting off their
coverings or their hats, or saying the word thou to a man; but this practice
has been, and is gotten up since the Apostles days; for which in the
Scriptures, we have never an Example; Moses said unto Aaron, and Eliazer, and
Ithamar his Sons, Uncover not your Heads, nor Rent not your Clothes, least you
Die, and Wrath come upon the people. This was a Time when the Burning of the
Lord was Kindled, and shows their heads were covered when they were before
Moses, and he was not offended; and their uncovering their heads showed the
Sorrow; and keeping their heads all covered, showed as if they were not moved,
whereby the wrath was not to come upon the people; and this showed that they
had their heads covered before Moses, and he bid them keep them on, and not
uncover them, Levit. 10 6. And the Priest was not to uncover his Head, nor rent
his clothes, Levit. 21.10. in the Sanctuary, which is contrary to the Priests
now in their Temples.

And David in the time of his sufferings, and as they went up by the assent of
the Mount of Olivet, wept; and as he went, his head was coverd, and all the
people that went with him, covered every man his head, and went weeping; which
signifies, that they used to have their heads covered before the King; for in
the time of suffering and mourning, they used to uncover their heads, and throw
dust on them; and David the King was not offended at the peoples heads being
covered, for his head was covered, and their heads was covered: And by this you
may know there was no respect, nor honor with the hat. Now the Jews used not
to honor their Kings, nor one another by uncovering their heads, though they
did honor their Kings, by having them in esteem and respect, and that was
their Honor; for he bowed the hearts of the people, he does not say, he bowed
the coverings of their heads, and was offended if they did not; for the Jews
never used to uncover their heads to the King, Ruler, Judge, nor Supreme, nor
one to another, 2 Samuel 15.3. But Jeremiah, Lament. 2. speaks of casting dust,
and ashes on their heads; this was the estate of the mourning.

And Ezekiel 27.30. They cast du^t and ashes on their heads, in the time of
weeping and mourning; and the Lord said unto Ezekiell, forbear to cry, make no
mourning for the dead; bind thy attire on thy head. Which showed in the time of
mourning, many did uncover their heads, which the Lord God forbade, as Moses
did formerly, though for the time they did not, For their heads were covered,
Chron. 24.17. And the Lord put on Righteousness, as a Breast Plate, and the
Helmet of Salvation upon his Head, and the Garments of Vengeance for Clothing,
and Clad with Zeal for a Cloak, Isaiah 59.17.

And Mordecai bowed not, nor reverenced Haman, though it was the Kings
Commandment. Now was this an Example Recorded, that proud men should be
reverenced and bowed unto, though it be to the breaking of the Commandment of
a King, or Ruler, which is to the hazarding the lives of so many thousands as
he did: I say, was this an Example Recorded to be followed yea, or nay? Hester
3.

The three Children which would not observe Nebuchadnezzars worship, Dan. 3.
nor bow to his Image, nor keep his Command, but were bold; you may say they
were Stubborn, for not doing so, they cast them in the Fiery Furnace, bound
them, their Coats, their Hosen, and their Hats, and other Garments, which
shows they had their Hats on: and they did not put off their Hats, but stood
with their Hats on before the King, and he was not offended with them for that,
and it was not the Jews custom to put off their Hats.

Now is not Christians worse than these, who make such a work, and a do about
putting off their hats, which are for the covering their nakedness? is not here
the Christians worse then Moses, then David, or Nebuchadnezzar, before whom the
Jews wore their hats without offense, which the Christians cannot bear, who
profess a State beyond the Jews? but the true Jews would not put off their
hats, for a thousand pounds to any one, they say themselves, not to King, nor
their own Kings, nor in the Synagogue, nor in the Temple, nor in the Streets to
any man; and their honoring men, is to have them in esteem in their hearts,
and the custom is, to take a man by the hand, though some of the portugal
Jews, and the Jews in England will put off their hats, and say your Servant,
Sir, who are judged by others of them for so doing.

Thou shall rise up before the Hoary Head, an Honor the face of the Old Man,
and Fear God. Now this honor was to have in esteem and respect, and give them
their place as Elders, but not put off the hat to them, not for a thousand
pounds, say the Jews, but honor them in their hearts, and have them in
respect, as being aged, Levit. 19.32.

Exodus 20. Thou shall Honor thy Father, and Mother, that thy Days may be long
in the Land which the Lord thy God gives thee; this was not to grieve them,
nor offend them; if they stroke, not to strike them again, but to be subject to
them, and have them in esteem, but never to put off their hats; no, not such a
thing for a thousand pounds, say the Jews; so this honor to Elders, Fathers,
Mothers, and Rulers, have people put to the hat, and scraping, and to the old
men, and Hoary Heads, and thrown away respect, and submissiveness, and the
practice of the Law; and so boldness, impudency, envy, threatening, malice,
fighting, disdain, derision, unsubmissiveness, no obedience, repining, and
strikings, dishonouring against Father, Mother, Rulers, yet scrape, and put off
the hat to them, and doing that, they think its sufficient, and in that loses
all the true obedience, and respect, and reverence, and esteem, and
submissiveness, which be done from the heart, without cap, and scrape like a
Bull that throws the dust backwards.

But honoring the Father and Mother, is a figure of honoring God, which was
to have them in esteem, and not to offend, not fin^ to grieve them; as not to
sin to grieve and offend God; but by their obedience they had them in esteem in
the Lord, as they had the Lord.

And likewise Servants honor their Masters, or Dames, which was not the
practice with the hat, but with respect and reverence, and submissive
obedience; not with the hat, Scrapings, Courtesies, and bending, and outside
fashions, but in the obedience of the heart, which does array, and beautify;
and if they were struck, not to strike again, knowing that they had a Master in
Heaven, wherein they were kept in their measures, whence arises all good
manners, and by which they were kept out of the Evil Words, which did corrupt
them.

G. F.

To be Courteous, Kind, Affectionate, Affable, Decent, that is, to be gracious,
which is not meant by putting off the Hat; for they that were so, did not use
it.


1 Pet. v. i. Forasmuch then; as Christ ^ath suffered for us in the flesh, Arm
your selves likewise (...) the same mind: For he that has suffered in the
flesh ha^^ ceased from sin.

Verse. 2. That he no longer should live the rest of his time in the flesh, to
the Lusts of men, but to the Will of God.


Page 2. line 36. read dilexit for delxit.

THE END.

