SEVERAL PAPERS; Some of them given forth by George Fox; others by Jame Nayler,
Minister of the Eternal word of God, raised up after the long night of Apostasy
to direct the world, to wait for the Revelation of Jesus Christ, and to turn
their minds to the true light, that they may be reconciled to God; of the world
is not worthy, and therefore does hate, persecute, and whom inprison them,
under the name of Quakers: Gathered together and Published by A.P. that the
Truth may be spread abroad, and deceit be discovered. Wherein the plain,
honest, and sober conversation of the Saints in fear and trembling, is
justified, against the idle bablings of formal Professors (the wicked fashions
and heathenish customs of this Nation) and of all sorts of persons, under
pretense of civility. Also the Priests of England, with their imaginary
Doctrines and Worships discovered to be the grand enemies of Jesus Christ; and
the true worship of God in spirit and truth made manifest. Also the occasion of
diverse scandals concerning the Scriptures, Baptism, Lords Supper, Resurrection,
Magistracy and Ministry, cast upon them by the Priests, removed. With a word to
the people of England, who in several Forms have long flattered themselves with
their Ministry; Churches, and Ordinances; but upon trial, are found to be the
Synagogues of Satan, Persecuters of the Truth, and enemies of the Gospel. And a
few Queries propounded to Tho. Ledgard of Newcastle, or any of those he ranks
with himself, under the notion of Anti-Quakers.

Printed in the year, as the world accounts, 1654.

To the Reader.
THere is a Paper for the Press, given forth by George Fox, wherein all may
see, That Forms of Religion, Ordinances, as they are called, and observations,
where into people are led by the searchings of Wisdom, and the light of their
Reasons and Understandings from the Letter of the Scripture, are nothing but
the worship of the first Nature, the Sacrifice of Caine, which God does not
accept: And that the worship of God in spirit, is not known to such, neither
indeed can be, for to that eye it is hid; and the Revelation of Jesus Christ,
and of the deep things of God by the spirit, is a Mystery to them not
understood) which is intended, if the Lord please) to be made public as soon
as this is finished.

P A.

To all who love the Lord Jesus Christ, Mercy and Peace be multiplied unto you.
WHo have been scattered abroad in the cloudy dark day from mountain to
mountain, Ezekiel. 34.12 Jer. 23.10. Ezekiel. 34.23.
and worshipping that which they know not, following the imaginations of
others, which they spoke from the divination of their own brain, and not from
the mouth of the Lord; shepherds that fed themselves, and clothed themselves
with the wool, and sought after the Fleece, and so made a prey upon us, and do
upon the people; but God, as he promised, says he, I will gather my sheep from
your mouths, and seek them which have been scattered in the cloudy dark day,
has gathered us, an does feed us upon the mountain in a good pasture; and so
we witness the Promise of the Lord fulfilled: and as the Lord said; I will seek
that which was lost, and bring again that which was driven away, who has one
shepherd Jesus Christ; herein do we witness the Lord fulfilling the Scriptures
in us; and I witness the lost sheep is found: and the Lord has brought back
again that which was driven away: and here do we deny all the Teachers of the
world, who speak a divination of their own brain, Jer. 23.16.
and not from the mouth of the Lord; Isa. 65.10*11, 12.
for who spoke from the mouth of the Lord, denied them then; so do we by the
same word: Isa. 55.4.2.2, 3.
and we deny all them that seek for gain from their Quarters, which are greedy
dumb dogs, as the Scripture says; and all those who take the peoples money,
and sell the Letter, which was spoken forth freely. For Isaiah that spoke from
the mouth of the Lord, he denied such things, and bid all come freely without
money, and without price, to hear the voice of the Lord, that their souls might
live, and to make with them an everlasting Covenant, even the sure mercies of
David: and this Covenant I do witness, therefore I deny; with the same word
wherewith they spoke, the same things the Scripture denies, and all those that
bear rule by their means, and hirelings which Preach for hire, Jer. 5.30, 31.
and Prophecy for money. For Jeremy, who had the eternal words, denies such
things. Micha denies such things; Mic. 3.11.
and Jesus Christ who was the Word, said, The hireling would fly, John. 10.13.
and 1.14
because he is an hireling: and this word the Lord has made manifest, which
gathers our hearts together up to God, 2 Cor. 5.19.
and opens to us the Scriptures, whereby we see the deceits of the Priests of
the world, now, of the same generation and nature, and acting those things
there is no Scripture for, which the holy men of God did not practice. And for
taking Tithes in the old time, Levi, which was to receive Tithes, the
strangers, Deuteronomy. 26.12.
the fatherless and widows, were to come and eat, and be filled within his
gate; but this was according to the Law; and here you see, the Priests of the
world do not act according to the Law, in which were Types and Figures of
Christ; and when Christ was come, Mat. 10.8.9, 10.
those he sent forth were not to have a bagg, nor a stick to defend them, nor
two coats, nor brass, nor silver; but freely ye have received, 2 Cor. 11.24.
freely give: The workman is worthy of his meat; so they neither walk according
to the Law, nor the Gospel, Act. 4.23.
therefore we deny them: and the Ministers of Jesus Christ, which went into the
world, they had no portion of the world, but whipping, stocking, prisoning; But
them that were gathered out of the world in the eternal word, which met
together, and were of one heart, one mind, one soul, to such they say, 1 Cor.
9.10.11
If we minister unto you spiritual things, is it a great thing if you minister
to us carnal things? But this was spoken to them upon whom the end of the
world was come; and this I do witness, 1 Cor. 9.10, 11.
what the Scripture does say: God commanded an outward Temple, Genesis 17.11.
Circumcision, the Sabbath, given as Figures and Types, and Shadows of Jesus
Christ; so when Jesus Christ, 1 Chronicles 22.12.
the substance was come, and when he was crucified and risen, Exodus ^^.13,
14.17. 18.
who believed in him, Preached his Resurrection, and so went up and down in the
Synagogues, and into the Temple, Reasoning and Disputing with them that held
them up, Acts. 21.^7
to bring them out of the Figure, up to Jesus Christ, who was the substance; so
all which were gathered together in the substance, Acts 4.2.
met together, and then the Church was in God, and they denied the outward
Temple, which God commanded, 1. These. 1.1.^
being made the Temples of God; Romans 2.23.29.
and denied Circumcision outwardly, being circumcised with the Spirit; 2 Cor.
6.16, 17.
and denied the Jewish Sabbath outwardly, and observing days; For he that
believes is entered into his rest, Col. 2.16.17.
and has ceased from his own work, even as God did from his. And all those
now, who have received Jesus Christ the substance, Gal. 4.10.
who is the Head of the Church, Heb. 4.10.
deny all Types and Figures of him, and do witness the Scriptures fulfilled.
And Jesus Christ who is the chief Shepherd, the Bishop of their souls: And
Jesus Christ who is the Mediator between God and Man, 2 Pet. 2.25
being made manifest in them, makes them all of one mind, and one heart, 1 Timothy
2.25
and to deny the priests of the world, who profess him in words, and act those
things he forbids. First, for sprinkling of infants, and telling people they
baptize them into the Faith, into the Church, which there is no Scripture for;
Col. 1.26.29.
but the baptism by one spirit into one body, this we own: and the Church is in
God, 1 Cor. 12.13.
as Paul and Silvanus, and Timotheus write to the Church of the Thessalonians,
which was in God. 1 These. 1.1.
And they tell people of a Sacrament, for which there is no Scripture; that we
do deny, 1 Cor. 10.15, 17.
and them; but the Supper of the Lord we own, The Bread that we break is the
body of Christ, Psalm. 6.6. and 131.1.
the Cup we drink is the Blood of Christ, all made to drink into one spirit.
And the singing of Psalms, after their manner, we deny; for they sing David's
tremblings, quakings and roarings; this they have turned into meeter, as if we
should see one of you lying roaring, crying, till your eyes should grow dim,
and watering your bed with your tears, and we should turn it into meeter, and
make a Rhyme of it, and take it, and go among a company of ignorant people, and
say, let us sing to the praise and glory of God, O Lord, I am not puffed in mind,
I have no scornful eye, when they are puffed in minds, and have scornful eyes:
and when they read the Psames, they keep on their hats; and when they sing
them, they keep off their hats; here they worship the work of their own hands:
all such practices we deny: but we will sing with the spirit, we will sing with
grace, we will sing with understanding, Praises, 1 Cor. 14.15.
praises unto the Lord God on high. Col. 3.1^.
And they speak a divination of their own brain, and not from the mouth of the
Lord; and such the Lord sent his Prophets to cry out against; all these now who
study a divination of their own brain, and speak not from the mouth of the
Lord, we do deny: and all who are made Ministers by Oxford and Cambrige, 1 Cor.
2.14.
bred up with Learning, and so made Mininsters by the will of men, and speak
natural Languages, as Hebrew and Greek, Gal. 1.14. and 1.1.
and say that is the Original, which a natural man may learn, and the natural
man knows not the things of God, and all such we do deny; for Paul was brought
up at the feet of Gamaliel, in the Jewish Religion, but that did not make him a
Minister of Jesus Christ; for he declares, that he was not made a Minister by
the will of man, nor of man, neither by man, but by the will of God, and all
such I own, who stand out of the will of man, denying all carnal ends: for this
ministry draws up to God out of the world, and does not respect any man's
person, but ministers to that which is in prison. 1 Pet. 3.19.
But those Teachers which are made by man, say, The Letter is the Light, the
Letter is the Word, the four Books, Matthew, Mark, Luk, and John, is the
Gospel, when the Letter says, Christ is the light, and God is the World, and
Jesus Christ is the glad tidings which was promised, John. 1.9.
the Lamb of God which takes away the sins of the world, and this we witness
to be fulfilled; all they that are in the light are in unity; for the light is
but one, John. 1.1.
and who know the light are in unity; all who know the word, which is a
mystery, are come to the beginning, Genesis 3.15.
are sanctified by the word, and clean through the word; Luke. 2.10.11.
for this word is a Fire, burning up all corruption, as an Hammer beats down
all high minds, high nature, that the pure seed may be raised up, Jhon 1.29.
as a sword cuts to pieces, and divides asunder the precious from the evil,
John 15.3.
and makes a separation inwardly and outwardly from uncleanness; Jer. 33.29.
and this is the word of reconciliation, Heb. 4.12. 2 Cor. 5.^9.
that reconcileth together to God, and gathers the hearts of his together, Ephesians.
2.12.
to live in love and unity, one with another, and lets them see how they have
been strangers and aliens from the life of God; the light does, and the word
draws from under the occasion of all Laws outwardly, working out that silthy
nature which the outward Law takes hold on; so walking in the spirit, there is
not a fulfilling the lusts of the flesh; and the spirit is but one, Gal. 5.15.
which baptizeth into one body, which we do witness, praise be to the Lord, to
be fulfilled. And whereas we are a people accused to raise up a new War, it is
false: for dwelling in the word, it takes away the occasion of Wars, and
gathers our hearts together to God, and unto one another, and brings to the
beginning, before War ^ was; for the Ministers of God, which had the word of
reconciliation to draw them from the occasion of all wars, working out that
nature that occasions war, said, whence do wars arise? Jam. 4.1.2
even from the lusts, Therefore all dear people, who love the Lord Jesus
Christ, Mat. 23.16
and the appearance of Jesus Christ in your souls, be not talkers of the truth,
Joh. 20.21.
nor followers of the blind guides, but mind the pure light of God in you, 1 John 2.10.
which shows your sin and evil, and how you have spent your time, and shows you
how your minds go forth, and every carnal thought; and if you love that
light, you love Christ, and walking in the light in measure, there will be no
occasion of stumbling, for all stumbling is being disobedient, and wait to
find the word in you, as the Scripture says; Romans 1^ 8.10.
Not to fetch it from above, nor from beneath; but what says it? It is nigh
thee, in thy heart, for with the heart man believes, and with the tongue
confession is made unto salvation: and abiding inwardly in the light, it will
let you see one another, and have unity one with another, and the Teachers of
the world to be the Ministers of the letter. And whereas we are accused for
going into Steeple Houses, It was the practice of the Apostles to go into the
Synagogues, Acts. 7.47, 48, 49.
reasoning and disputing about the Scriptures showing them the substance, and
told them that God did not dwell in Temples made with hands, neither was he
worshipped with men's hands: Stephen says, the most high dwells not in Temples
made with hands, and for witnessing forth the substance, was stoned to death;
but these were types of Jesus Christ and the Saints, and who were made the
Temples of God, denied all outward Temples. But the Ministry now which does
profess Jesus Christ, holds up these outward Synagoguess as Moses which was a
type of Christ, which was a servant, ann faithful in his house; the deceit
after him got into his place and was called of men, masters, Heb. ^ 5.
which sat in his seat, which pretended justice; (...) 27.
and did not; and that was the time before Christ was sacrificed up, he came to
fulfill the Law, Mat 23.^.
and not to break it: but he cried, Woe unto them that were called of men
Masters, and had the chiefest place in the assemblies, and laid heavy burdens
upon the people, and paint themselves with the Prophets words. But when Jesus
Christ was sacrificed and risen, his Ministers Preached his Resurrection; they
did not hold up the Types and Figures then, but held forth the substance, Acts.
4, 32.
Jesus Christ; and all who were gathered together in the substance, were of one
heart, one mind, one soul, and met together, Jude. 20.
and exhorted one another, and builded up one another in the most holy Faith,
Ephesians. 4.5.
and all building is in that which is holy; and this Faith I witness, which is
but one, and all are one that are in it, Mat. 23.8.
if ten thousand, which purifies the heart, stands in God, glory and honor to
the highest; and whom Jesus Christ made Ministers, he made them not Masters;
but said, Be ye not called Masters, neither call any man upon earth Master,
Met. 23.6, 7.
for ye have one Masters, even Jesus Christ. But the Teachers of the world, who
in words profess the Lord Jesus Christ, are called of men Masters, and lay
heavy burdens upon the people, go in long Robes, having the chiefest place in
the Assemblies, standing praying in the Synagogues; and them that did so,
Christ Jesus said, Their prayers were Heathenish; which shows they were never
taught of him, for they abide not in his Doctrine; and he that abides not in
the truth is of the Devil: 1 John. 3.8.
and here they show themselves neither to follow Jesus Christ the example, nor
the Apostles as an example, but take the Scriptures to trade withal. And all
those which Jesus Christ, the Prophets and Apostles do deny, we deny. When the
Apostles spoke to the Saints, 2 Pet. 1.1.12.
he bade them, Take heed to the light that shined in a dark place, till the day
dawned, and the day star arose in their hearts: and as the light appeared, so
they exhorted one another; for there were false Prophets, and false Teachers
among the people, 1 Pet. 2.1, 2, 3.
which with feigned words and covetousness, made merchandise of them, who had
forsaken the right way, following the ways of Balaam, going in the way of
Caine, Jude 11.
whose Sacrifi^e God did not accept. Now all people that love the Lord Jesus
Christ, you may see all the Teachers of the world there going after the ways
of Balaam; for then that Doctrine crept in, which is scattered over the world,
and the Apostles saw certain creeping into house:, 2 Timothy 3.3 to 9.
leading silly Women Captive, laden with sin, and diverse lusts, which were ever
learning, and never able to come to the knowledge of the truth, which he
describes; they were lovers of their own selves, covetous, proud, heady,
high-minded, selfe-willed, incontinent, truce breakers, false accusers, fierce,
despisers of those that are good; lovers of pleasures more then lovers of God;
having a form of godliness but denying the power thereof: as Jannes and Jambres
withstood Moses, so do these; men of corrupt minds, reprobates concerning the
Faith; but they shall proceed no further, their folly shall appear to all men.
Now the Apostle bids, from such turn away; Phil. 1.^.
though once he said, some Preach Christ of envy, some of strife and
contention, some of good will, though their intention was but to add
affliction to his bonds; yet he rejoiced in it. and 3.2.
And that was a time when few did believe that that was the Christ, so that his
name was spread abroad, he did not matter what they were; but when his name was
spread abroad, and many got the Form, and had not the Power; such were
Antichrists, and were denied by them who had the power, and so they are now.
Heb. 6.1
And all people consider (you have been long hearers and learners) if you be
yet come to the first Principle of Religion, to that which turns the mind to
God. All whose faith does not purify, 2 Timothy 3.2
they are reprobates concerning the Faith. So ask any Priest or people, 1 Ioh.
3.3 1 Ioh. 5.4
whether they shall overcome the body of sin, Col. 2.11.
as long as they are upon the Earth? they will say, No. Therefore their seeming
Faith I deny, for Faith purifies the heart, and gives the Victory over the
World; and this I own, and you have put off the body of sin, by the
Circumcision made without hands; and whilst we were servants of sin, we were
free from righteousness, but God be thanked, who has made us free from sin,
Rom 6.22, Romans 7 6.
to serve God in righteousness, in the newness of the spirit, and not in the
oldness of the Letter.

And whereas we are accused for not owning Magistracy; justice we own for
conscience fake; for that which is in the conscience, loves equity, and
righteousness, and justice, and leads out of all evil, and uncleanness: Romans
13.1.
For let every soul be subject to the higher power, for all power is of God,
and the powers of God our souls are subject unto; for he that resists that
resists the Ordinance of God; but who lives in drunkenness, in pride, in
covetousness, murder, lust and uncleanness, their souls are not subject to the
higher power, but resist it, and that nature we do deny, and justify that
which cuts it down: we own, honor, and sut up, and honor all men in the Lord,
but as for respecting persons we deny, for he that respects persons, commits
sin, and is a transgressor of the Law, For to respect a proud man, because he
has a Gold Ring on his finger, James 2.9. and 5.2.
and fine Apparel, such respects we deny, for the Scriptures deny the same;
and to set up a great man which has abundance of Earth, Isa. 5.8.
joining field to field, and land to land, and respect such above the poor,
this is an evil eye; Acts. 17.25.
for God cries woe unto such, for God has made all of one mould, and one blood,
to dwell upon the face of the Earth, and he is no respecter of persons; and who
are in the Faith of the Lord Jesus Christ, James 2.5.
it is without respect of Persons, for it is but one, and makes all one, one
seed, one soul, one heart, one mind, in one God, Father of all, over all,
blessed for ever: and this we do witness praised be the Lord, to be fulfilled,
Heb. 12.1.
which all the holy men of God did witness forth, a good conscience, and
therefore we have a cloud of witnesses which are recorded in the Scriptures.
And whereas we are accused for our uncivil speeches, which the world calls
uncivil and railing, as because we thou people, and say thou to the
particular, and you to a number. Acts. 26.2.27.
The Scriptures witness, that all the holy men of God evermore practiced the
same, thoued one, and yeaed many, thoued Kings, thoued God, thoued Christ, and
thou O Lord of Heaven and Earth; Psalm 25.1.
and therefore who art thou, O proud Flesh, that thou art exalted? 2 These. 2.3.
Do not thou, thou God, and thou Christ, in thy Prayers? And would thou be
yeed? here shows the son of perdition himself, John 21.^^.
and is exalted above all that is called God in thee; and the Language of God
is not kown with thee. And as for the customs and fashions of the world,
bowing and making obeisance with cap and knee, Job 32.21.
which man and women have done one to another, which lived without the fear of
the Lord, we deny; but we honor all men in the Lord with our soul, Exodus 20.5
and with our hearts, and who look for these things outwardly, there is a
fleshly principle, Act. 10.34.
for these things may be done and are practiced, and the heart full of envy;
Romans 12.2.
therefore all these fashions we deny. Ier. 10.3.
And touching good-Even an Good Morrow, which are customs of the world, spoken
without fear of the Lord we do deny: but good to all men we wish, and the good
day, that they may be brought into it, and that they may see the happy day: but
the fashion and customs which the fleshly and heathenish nature holds up, and
when it is crossed in its ways and customs, rages, and is mad, we deny; and
that nature which holds all these things, John. 14.6.
we deny.

For the God of Power, Light, and Glory, Romans 7.6.
has raised up a light in his people, and gathered their hearts together to
himself, John 6.35.
and has discovered unto them the vanity of all things wherein they have lived
and showed them his way and truth, where they should walk and gloryfie him,
and serve him in holiness and newness of life; and with eternal food, and
bread of life, does he feed us, whereby we become wonders to the world, as he
has raised his seed to his praise and glory, and is adding daily to his
Church, Act. 247. Eccl. 12.3.
and the strong man bows himself, and the keepers of the house tremble, and
the powers of the earth shake, and the glory of the Lord is rising, Isa.
2.21.20.
and is risen, which terribly shakes the earth, that the Idols of Gold and
Silver are cast away, and God alone loved, Dan. 10.7.
who is Lord of Heaven and Earth; and the works of the Lord are strange and
wondrous, as ever was, as the Scriptures witness. When Daniel heard the Voice,
he fell down and trembled, Acts. 9.6.
and his strength and breath was gone. And Paul, when he heard the voice, Hab.
3.10.
he fell down, and trembled: And Habakkuk, when he heard the voice, his lips
quivered, his belly shook, rottenness entered into his bones, that he might
rest in the day of trouble. Psalm. 119.120.
And David when he heard the voice of God in the holy Temple, and his Prayers
came before him, the Earth shook, and David his flesh trembled. Eccl. 12.3.
And work out your salvation with fear and trembling. Now these workings are
strange to them, where the strong man keeps the house, and who are in the
Earth; but who are rising up out of the Earth, Heb. 12.1.
witness the power of the Earth to be shaken; and who are raised up out of the
Earth, John. 10.1.2.
witness these things, and have a cloud of witnesses to witness them, passing
through the same door, to the same rest, and so we witness the Scriptures, and
the power of them, and them to be fulfilled, and fulfilling; praises, praises
be unto the Lord God Almighty for ever. We witness the happy day of the Lord is
come, Luke. 2.10, 11.
the good and happy day, and glad tidings to souls; the day of Christ,
praises, praises be unto him for ever, All ye Children of the Lord, praise the
Lord for ever, sing praises unto the Lord for evermore. and 19.9. 1 John 8.9.
This is the day of salvation, and the everlasting Gospel, glad tidings is come
into souls, free pardon of sin by Jesus Christ, who is come to take away sin,
and to destroy the works of the Devil, 1 Cor. 3.6.
this do we witness, the Scriptures fulfilled by God alone, therefore deny all
the Ministers of the letter.

G F.

Can thou prove in all the Scripture, that God commanded any of his to salute
any by the way, or to take his name in vain, or to use any other heathenish
customs, but God, Christ, the Prophets and Apostles commands? Exodus 20.5, 7.
The contrary God says, Thou shall not take my name in vain, nor bow to any
creature. Christ says, Luke. 10.4.
Salute no man by the way. The Prophet says, Salute no man by the way, 2
Kings. 4.24.
and if any salute you, answer him not again. And the Apostle says, 2 John
9.10, 11.
Bid Godspeed to none, but such as abide in the Doctrine of Christ, and have
both the Father and the Son: for he that bids him Godspeed, is partaker of his
evil deeds. God says, Thou shall not do after the manner of the heathen. Ier.
10.2.
And Christ says, Every idle word shall be accounted for at the day of
judgment; and by thy words thou shall be condemned. Mat. 12.36, 37.
Now thou that art offended at any for obeying the commands of God, Christ, the
Prophets and Apostles, shewst thy self to be no Christian, but a Heathen, and
wilt neither obey the commands of God thy self, nor suffer them that would,
but strives to uphold such costomes, as God never commanded, but are set up by
the World, and used without the fear of God. Now how art thou exalted, thou
man of sin, who wilt both dishonor God thy self, and would compel thy brother
also, to act contrary to his Conscience? What place would thou leave for the
Throne of Christ?

I. N.

Truth cleared from Scandalls.
HAving heard of diverse untruths cast upon me by some of the Priests in their
high places, though I stand only to the Lord in the respect of my self; yet
least any that love the truth should be led on to speak evil of the things
they know not, I shall lay open the truth, as it is in me revealed: Iud. 10.
Rev. 19.13. 1 John. 1.1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
touching those things whereof I have bin falsely accused.

1. Concerning Jesus Christ, who is the eternal Word of God, by whom all
things were made and are upholden, 1 Pet. 1.25.
which was before all time, but manifested in time, John 1.14.
for the recovery of lost man; which Word became Flesh and dwelt amongst the
Saints, Ephesians. 5.30 and 1.21, 22.
who is the same yesterday, and to day, and for ever; who did, John 8.12
and does dwell in the Saints; who suffered and rose agine, 2 These. 2.8.
and ascended into Heaven, and is set at the right hand of God, 2 Cor. 6.16.
to whom all power is given in Heaven and in Earth; 1 Cor. 3.16, 17.
who fills all places; is the light of the World, but known to none, but
those who receive and follow him, and those he leads up to God, out of all the
ways, works and worships of the world, by his pure light in them, whereby he
reveals the man of sin and by his power casts him out, and so prepares the
bodies of the Saints a fit Temple for the pure God to dwell in, with whom
dwells no unclean thing; and thus he reconciles God and man, 2 Cor. 5.18, 19.
and the Image of God, which in purity and holiness is renewed, and the Image
of Satan, which is all sin and uncleanness, is defaced; and none can witness
redemption, Col. 3.10.
further then Christ is thus revealed in them, to set them free from sin: Which
Christ I witness to he revealed in me in measure, John 8 34, 36.
Gal. 1.16. 2 Cor. 13.5. Col. 1.27.

2. Concerning the Scriptures, 1 John 1.3, 5.
That they are true declaration of that word which was in them, that gave or
spoke them forth, and are of no private interpretation; 2 Pet. 1.21.22.
but were given forth to be read and fulfilled in the Saints, as they were
given forth by the holy Ghost, without adding or diminishing, Deuteronomy. 4.2. Rev.
22.18.
and was not given forth for men to make a Trade upon. to get money by; Tim.
3.16, 17.
but as they are; they are profitable for Doctrine, for reproof, for
correction, for instruction in righteousness, that the man of God may be
perfect; thoroughly furnished unto every good work: but they who tread in the
Letter, and are ignorant of the Mystery, deny all perfection, and none can
rightly understand the Scriptures, 1 Cor. 1.14.15.
but they who read them with the same spirit that gave them forth, For the
natural man receives not the things of the spirit of God; John 3.11.
for they spiritually discerned.

3. Concerning Baptism, the true Baptism is that of the spirit, Acts 1.5. 1
Cor. 12.13.
with the holy Ghost, and with Fire, Baptized by one spirit into one body, 1
Pet. 3.2.
not the washing away the filth of the flesh, but the answer of a good
conscience toward God, Col. 2.12.
by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ; Gal. 3.27.
without which, no other Baptism can save us, they being but Figures or
shadows, Romans 6.3.
but this Baptism of Christ is the substance, Mat. 26.26, 28.
whereby we are Baptized into his death; and those who are Baptized into
Christ, John. 6.51.53, 54, 55, 56.
have put on Christ.

4. Concerning the Lords Supper; the true Supper of the Lord is the Spiritual
eating and drinking of the Flesh and Blood of Christ, 1 Cor. 10.16.
which the spiritual man only eats, and is thereby nourished up unto
eternal life; 1 Cor. 11.24, 25.
without which eating, there can be no life in the creature, profess what you
will; and all who eat of this Bread, Col. 2.10. Acts. 4.32.
and drink of this Cup, have real communion with Christ the Head, 1 Cor.
11.27, 28, 29.
and also one with another, as members, and are all of one heart, and one mind,
a complete body in Christ. John. 5.20.
Now the world who take only the outward Signs, and are not brought into a
discerning of the Lords Body, eat and drink damnation to themselves, and so
become guilty of the Body and Blood of Christ; and calls this a Communion, but
lives in envy, strife and debate, fighting, and going to Law one with another
for Earthly things.

5. Concerning the Resurrection. That all shall arise to give account, 1 Cor.
15.38.
and receive at the last day according to their works done in the flesh,
whether good or evil; these bodies that are dust, shall turn to dust, but God
shall give a body as pleases him; 1 Cor. 15.42, 43, 44.
that which is sown in curruption shall be raised in incorruption; 1 Cor.
15.46, 50, 51.
it is sown a natural body, it is raised a spiritual body: and as we have
borne the Image of the earthly, so we shall bear the Image of the heavenly.
But flesh and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of Heaven; Rev. 20.6.
neither does corruption inherit incorruption, Phil. 3.21.
for we shall all be changed: but they who cannot witness the first
Resurrection, 1 Cor. 15.20.
within themselves, know nothing of the second, but by hearsay: And therefore
say some of your Teachers that Christ is in Heaven with a carnal body; now
that Christ, 1 Cor. 15.47
who is the first fruits shall be there with a carnal body, and the Saints
with a spiritual body, Col. 1.15.
is not proportionable.

6. Concerning Magistracy, that it is an Ordinance of God, ordained for the
punishment of evil doers, Romans 13.3.
and an encouragement of them that do well. Where justice and righteousness is
the head, and rules without partiality, that Land is kept in peace; and those
who judge for the Lord, Jude. 16.
I honor as my own life; not with a flattering honor of putting off the Hat,
and bowing the Knee, which is the honor of the world, having men's persons in
admiration, because of advantage, for selfe-ends, but from my heart, for
conscience sake, Romans 13.5.
as to the power which is of God, and not to men's persons: For the Scripture
says, He that respects persons, commits sin. And the Apostle commands the
Saints, James. 2.5.
not to have the Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Lord of Glory with respect
of persons: and says, James. 2.1, 2, 3, 4.
such are partial in themselves, and become judges of evil thoughts. And says
Paul, Let every soul be subject to the higher Powers: for, says he, there is
no power but of God: Romans 13.1, 5.
the Powers that be are of God, not of man; and whosoever resists, resists
the Ordinance of God; and therefore subject for conscience sake. And therefore,
though the Prophets and Saints were often sent to pronounce judgment against
unjust men, who had the power committed to them, and did not judge for God, but
for selfe-ends; yet they never attempted to raise any violence against them,
but used all means to persuade them to do justice, love mercy, and walk humbly
with God, Micah, 6.8.
that they might be established, and the wrath of God turned away from them:
for those that be of God, cannot rejoice in the destruction of any, 1 Pet.
1.12. Ephesians. 4.11, 12.
but would have all to turn to God and find mercy.

7. Concerning Ministry, the true Ministry of Jesus Christ has always been,
and are still such as came not by the will of man, but by the will of God:
neither are they fitted for that work by any thing of man, but by God alone;
for the true Ministry is the gift of Jesus Christ, given for the perfecting of
the Saints, and need no addition of humane helps and learning, 1 Cor. 12.7.
but as the work is spiritual, and of the Lord, so they are spiritually fiued
only by the Lord. Pet 4.10.11.
And therefore he chose Heardsmen, Fishermen, and Plowmen, and suchlike: and
as he gave them an immediate call, Gal. 11.11, 12, 16.
without the leave of man; so he fitted them immediately without the help of
man; and as they received the gift freely, so they were to give freely: And
when ever they found any of the false Ministry, that taught for hire, they
cried out against them, and pronounced woes against them, and showed them that
they lay in iniquity, because they thought that the gift of God could be bought
and sold for money. And Christ calls them Hirelings, Mat. 10.8.
and says they care not for the sheep. And Micah cries out against the Priests
that taught for Hire, Acts. 8.20.
and says They build up Sion with blood, John 10.13.
and Jerusalem with iniquity. Micah 3.10.
And Jeremy cries out against the Priests in his days, That bare rule by their
means, and calls it an horrible thing, and says, Ier. 5.30. and 6.13.
That from the least to the greatest, they are all given to covetousness. Isa.
56.10, 11.
Esaias cries out of such in his days, and calls them greedy Dogs, that can
never have enough; and says he they all look for their gain from their
quarter. 2 Pet. 2.14, 15.
And Peter says of such in his days, that they through covetousness make
merchandise of the people, 2 Cor. 11.15.
who have hearts exercised with covetous practices who have forsaken the right
way, Jude 11.
and have followed the way of Balaam, who loved the wages of unrighteousness.
And Jude cries, woe unto them for they go one in the ways of Cain, and run
greedily after the error of Balaam for reward: but those that were sent out by
Christ, counted it their reward to the Gospel without charge; 1 Cor. 9.16, 17,
18.
neither ever had any set means, but went about having no certain dweling
place; 1 Cor. 4.11.
never was Masters, but servants to all for Christ's sake: Never went to Law for
Tithes, Gal. 4.19.
or any other earthly thing, but suffered persecution; and as always he that
was after the flesh persecuted him that was after the spirit; even so it is
now. All people, try your Priests by the Scriptures, and never think to hear
the Word of the Lord from their mouths, who walk contary to the Scriptures;
for such were never sent of God: 1 John. 2.3, 4, 5.6.
for had they been sent of God, they would abide in his Doctrine. And John
says, such has not God but he that abides in the doctrine of Christ, John
9.10.
has both the Father and the Son: 2 John 9.10, 11.
And if there comes any to you, and bring not this Doctrine, you are forbidden
to receive them into your houses, or bid them God speed, for if you do, you are
partakers of their evil deeds. And unto the wicked, says God, What have thou
to do to declare my Statutes, Psalm. 50.16, 17.
or that thou should take my Covenant into thy mouth, seeing thou hate to
be reformed.

J. N.

The Worship of the Saints and of the world, how they differ.
YOu selfe-willed Professors and you conceited hypocrites, Gal. 6.11.
lament, for your woe and misery is coming; Phil 3.18.19.
you who dissemble with God and Man, 2. Cor. 3.5.6.
and deceive both your selves and others, away with all your curious minds,
which feeds on the air, and are so light, Genesis 3.15.
and which feeds upon your dainty dishes, and novelties; you are above the
Cross, Romans 8.6.
and so the earthly will is sed and fleshly desires. Isa. 65.25.
Woe unto you self-conceited ones, which gaddeth abroad to change your ways; 2
Cor. 4.18.
death does feed upon death, and death does speak death, and all is death; the
letter is death, and the carnal mind is death. Jam. 5.23.
The Lord has said, the Seed of Woman shall bruise the Head of the Serpent;
and people will talk of it without them. But O Man and Woman, does not death
reign in thee? while the carnal mind reigns, death reigns; and the seed of
the Serpent is head in thee, it God have not bruised him in thee; and dust is
the Serpents meat: you must all see it in your selves. Whatsoever is seen is
dust, all your outside profession is dust, which you have got out of Books and
Sermons; and your Latin, Greek and Hebrew, and all which is outward is dust,
and all your glorious Gospel-notions is dust, and your gold and silver is dust,
and fine Apparel is dust, and all the worlds glory the mind feeds on is dust,
all the worlds profession and worship, which is not in spirit and truth is
dust. If the head of the Serpent be not bruised in thee by the seed of the
Woman, thou will see these to be so, for the pure worship is not without, but
within.

The worlds Church is without them, carnal lime and stone, Heb. 4.1.
and their call is outward, a carnal Bell, and a carnal man speaking the
carnal letter, to carnal minds, for carnal money, and carnal ends.

The Saints Church is in God, 1 These. 1.1.
and the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.

The worlds assembly is without them; a company of earthly minds meet in a
Steeple-house.

The Saints are brought to the general assembly of the firstborn, and to the
innumerable company of Angels, Heb. 12.22, 23, 24.
and to the spirits of just men made perfect, and to God the Judge of all.

The worlds Teachers are of the letter without, 2 Cor. 3.6.
a proud man, called of men Master, Mat. 23.6.10.
and has the chiefest place in the assemblies, 1 John ^2.26, 27.
going in long Robes, loving greeting in Markets, the highest rooms at Feasts,
all which Christ forbid.

The Saints teacher is within them, ye need not that any man teach you, but as
the anointing that you have received teaches you of all things, and is true,
and is no lie, and even as it has taught you ye shall abide in it.

The worlds law is without them, 2 Cor. 3.^.
in the command of the letter, and they break the command, and so it is death.

The Saints Law is within them, Ier. 3^.23.
written in their hearts, and they are all taught of God, from the greatest to
the least; And shall no more teach every one is neighbor, Heb 8 10.11.
saying, Know the Lord, for they shall all know him.

The worlds light is without them, a Chapter, or a Verse which was other men's
light, left upon Record.

The Saints light is within them, 1 Pet. 1.19.
you have a light that shines in a dark place, to which you do well that you
take heed, until the day dawn and the day star arise in your hearts.

The worlds word is without them, and they take the letter for the word, when
as the word is invisible.

The Saints word is within them, the word is nigh thee, in thy heart, Deuteronomy.
30.14.
and in thy mouth, and does sanctify them, and is sharper then a two
edged-sword, dividing asunder, and is a discerner of the thoughts and intents
of the heart. Romans 10.8.


The worlds witness is without them, which is the letter, and it bears witness
against all the practice of the world.

The Saints witness is within then, he that believes has the witness within
himself.

The worlds Baptism is without them, sprinkling of infants, 1 John. ^.10.
for which is no command or example in Scripture.

The Saints Baptism is within, baptized with one spirit into one body, and are
made all to drink into one spirit. 1 Cor. 12.13.


The worlds communion is without them, taking a little bread and wine, which is
carnal, and calls that a Communion, but are separated in spirit, and are not of
one heart and one mind.

The Saints communion is within them, in spirit, written in one another
hearts, and though absent in flesh, Col. 25 1 Cor. 5.3. 2 Cor. 3.2.
yet present in spirit.

The worlds touchstone is without them, and they try the living by the dead,
the spirit by the letter.

The Saints touchstone is within, 1 John 4.2.
whereby they try the spirits whether they be of God or no; 1 John. 2.23.
every spirit that confesses Jesus Christ come in the flesh, is of God; and he
that confesses him in truth, has him, and the Father also.

The world is ruled by outward rules and all goes from the rule.

The Saints rule is within them, Christ who rules in them, Ephesians. 4.1.
and is the head of the body.

The worlds record is without them.

The Saints Record is, within them; 1 John 4.8, 9.10.
the spirit that God has given into them, is their record.

The worlds Sabbath is without them, and they have no rest but in a form
without.

The Saints Sabbath is within, Heb. 4.10, 11.
where Christ is come to give them rest, and they are ceased from their own
works.

The worlds Psalms are without them, and they sing David's quakings and
tremblings, wastings, Prophesies, Prayers and tears, weeping till his eyes grew
dim; he watered his couch with his tears, and they turn these into Meeter, and
say, Let us sing to the praise and glory of God; when it is altogether to his
dishonor.

The Saints Psalms are within, and they sing with the spirit, 1 Cor. 15.
and with the understanding also.

The worlds guide is without them, in the traditions and precepts of men, which
leads from God.

The Saints guide is within them, the spirit, Romans 8.14.
and they are the sons of God, who are guided by the spirit of God.

The worlds temple is without them, which was builded for the Idolatrous
worship.

The Saints Temple is within, 1 Cor. 3.16.
ye are the temple of the living God, and he does walk in them, and dwell in
them, and they know and can witness God dwelling in them. 2 Cor. 6.16.


The worlds Prayers are without them, and the power thereof stands in outward
words; Jam. 4.3.
and they ask and have not, because they ask amiss, that they may spend it on
their lusts.

The Saints Prayers are within, Romans 8.26.
by the spirit, which teaches in all conditions what to pray for, and helps
the infirmities, with sighs and groans which cannot be uttered; John. 14.13, 14.
and they ask in the name of the Son, and are heard in whatsoever they ask, and
thereby is the Father glorified, Jam. 1.6.
for they ask in Faith, nothing wavering.

All you who read these things, read your selves where you are, whether you be
within among the Saints, or without among the world.

The Condition and Portion of the People of England, who have long flattered
themselves with the Church, Ministry, and Ordinances, but upon trial are found
to be the Synagogues of Satan, Persecuters of the truth, and enemies of the
Gospel of Christ.
The Lion has roared, tremble all you beasts of the field. The Trumpet has
sounded, let the Beast prepare himself to battle, for the great day of Sions
recompense is at hand, and woe to all her enemies.

I Have heard a voice of Woe and Terror, to come upon all the Inhabitants of
the Earth; Repent all you inhabitants of the earth, the sword of the Lord is
furbished against you to make a grievous slaughter; houle, Woe and misery, all
sorts of People, who have preferred your own wills, lust pleasures, before the
pure Law of God: houle you Sodomites, and Bellygods of the earth, who have
given up your selves to fullness of gluttony, and all excess of riot: feeding
without the fear of God, sporting in the day time; living like fed horses,
spending the creatures upon your lusts, which were never made for that end: woe
unto you, you fat Swine, the Swine of Sodom are found among you: and the
Plagues of Sodom are nigh at hand. Woe unto you, for now is the Lord come to
require his Corn and his Wine which he gave to feed the poor and hungry, which
your lusts have devoured; the wants of all poor in the Nation cry out against
you, you have exceeded all that ever went before you, and you shall exceed in
misery. Woe unto you proud and lustful lofty ones that are lifted up in your
own eyes, and have set your selves above the fear of God, which teaches
humility, you plainly appear to be children of the Devil, who is the father of
all pride and self-exaltation; you bear the Image of the Serpent, you speckled
ones, who have painted your selves in the various colors to make your selves
seem glorious in the eyes of others, that they may bow and worship. Woe unto
thou, that have set thy self in the seat of God, thou art weighed and found
wanting, thy pride is for the fire, and thy Honor for the Dust, for now is the
Lord coming to enquire after his Wool and Flax, which he gave to cloth the
naked of all sorts, with which thou have decked the Serpent and spent upon thy
lusts, thereby to set thy self in the Seat of the Almighty, Woe, woe, woe unto
thee thou that art exalted as high as Heaven, yea into Gods Throne; but thou
shall be cast down to Hell, the Lamb is risen to Rule the Nations. Woe unto the
covetous cruel oppressers, who lives upon dust, you grind the face of the
poor, and oppress them that are fallen, your measures you have filled, and you
have heaped up abundance against this day of wrath. The Fire of the Almighty is
kindled, and it shall never be quenched till it has devoured and burnt up you
and your heaps, and made you a curse to the Generations that shall come after.
Woe unto the envious Serpents that seek to devour the Innocent, that make a
Prey upon them that depart from iniquity, you are the Head of the Serpent that
must fulfill what is spoken of you, and you now show the enmity that God has
put between the two Seeds, now thy rage is come, the seed is come whose heel
thou art bruising, who shall bruise thy head, thy time is as short as thy rage
is great. Rejoice all you that suffer it that the Scriptures may be fulfilled.
Woe unto you scorners, you sons of Hagar, you sons of bondage to the works of
the Devil, scorning, backsliding, false accusing, slandering and evil speaking;
you are brought forth by the Egyptian woman, and are in Egyptian darkness, and
you cannot see that your are in the works of the Devil, and by him you are put
on to act against Christ, in his Saints. But now is the son of the Freewoman
brought forth; to whom the Heritage belongs, and you shall be cast out among
the Heathen, and ungodly, and judgment is coming upon you, in which you shall
be not be able to stand: Woe unto you swearers and liars, under whose tongues
lies the poison of Aspes, which you vent out as you are moved by your Father
the Devil, against the holy and dreadful name of the Almighty, the Land is
filled with this Generation, and has long mourned because of you: Who can pass
in streets or Markets, that fear the Lord, and their hearts not be broken to
hear it? Do not all places abound with vain Oaths, and lying Idle words? never
was Nation like to this in these things, so that any who will not use these
Idle wonds and oaths, is known in the streets as they pass, and not esteemed
worthy to live in the Nation; and thus not only with all the common sort, but
also with many that are in place of Authority to punish such things, and yet
those are not afraid to call themselves Christians: shall not the Lord be
avenged on such a people as this? Woe unto you that live upon deceit in your
weights and measures, by your sleighty words arising from the serpents wisdom,
which makes a prey on the simple: and when you have got great estates, you say,
God has given you them; you are set up above them who are made poor by you;
now is the Lord come to search you out, and you shall restore for your theft
fourfold. Woe unto you that have had power in your hands to (...) these things
but instead of using the sword to scatter the works of iniquity, have turned
the edge of it against such as the Lord has called out of these things, and
sent them to call others out, left they partake of the Plagues that are to come
upon those who are found in them. Woe, woe unto the blind guides who have
called your selves Christ's Seedsmen, and now that the Lord of the Harvest is
come to look for fruits, here is no better fruit to reap but such as these; and
that among such as you call Saints, and the Churches of Christ: And now that
the Heir is appearing, you are stirring up the powers of the earth how to
destroy him, left you be called to account for your great care to feed your own
bodies, and heap up carnal things, and the little care for the souls of
Christ's Flock. Now shall you not escape, your day is near at hand. Who could
have believed that England would have brought forth no better fruits then
these, now after such deliverance, as no Notion else can witness? Oh tell it
not among the Heathen, left you strengthen the hands of the enemy, and occ^sion
the wicked to Blaspheme the name of the God of Hosts, who is reported to be
among us, and has subdued all our enemies, and has delivered us thus far.
Awake, awake, all sorts of people, can you say you have not had power in your
hands against these abominations? but now that you have not proved faithful in
the promises to the Lord, in the day of your fears; therefore is the Lord
coming to call to account all sorts of dissemblers and oppressers, and by his
own right hand to get himself the Victory. And now woe unto you that have known
to do well, and had it in your power, but have not done it, Woe unto you that
have taken counsel at your own wisdom, and multitudes, and not at the spirit
of the Lord, and have strengthened your selves by your Riches. Woe unto your
fruitless Trees, you have long been dug and pruned, but no fruits; you have
long cumbred the ground. Woe unto you that are at ease in Sion, houl, woe and
m^sery; tremble ye women that are at ease, strip you, make you bare, pu^ off
your pride, and pu^ on ashes, turn your Music into wayling your Feasts into
Fasting, and bitter lamentation, and (...) the Lord, if there may be hope for
your souls in the day of his fierce wrath that is coming upon the earth: while
you have time, improve it.

J. N.

Several Queries to be answered by Tho. Ledgard, or any of those he ranks with
himself, under the name of Anti-Quakers.
1. DId not God create man and woman perfect in his own Image without sin? Genesis
1.27.


2. Did not the first sin make a separation betwixt God and man?

3. Whether is there any other way to unite God and man into spiritual
Communion again, Genesis 3.23.24.
but by being separated from the works of the flesh, 1 John. 1.3.6, 7.
sin, and uncleanness, and being Redeemed into his first Estate?

4. Was not that the end for which Christ was manifest in the flesh, 1 John.
3.5.8.
that by taking away sin, he might restore man into his first Estate in which
he was created in the Image of God without sin?

5. Whether any can witness the work of Redemption perfected in them, John.
8.34.36.
while they commit sin?

6. Whether any unperfect, 1 Cor. 6.9.
unclean, and sinful one, shall enter into the Kingdom; yea or no?

7. Was not that the end for which the Scriptures were written, Gal. 5.21. 1
Cor. 10.6.11.
to warn all to turn from sin to holiness?

8. Shall not God justly judge every one as he finds them, Mat. 25.13. to the
end.
at the day of judgment; they that have done good, into life eternal, and they
that have lived in sin, into everlasting fire? And whether do you look for a
Purgatory to cleanse you from your sins, between the day of death and the day
of judgment?

9. Whether a Christian have ground to believe, 1 Cor. 15.22.
and ought to wait for it, that he shall be redeemed by the second Adam, into
that estate which he lost by sin in the first Adam?

10. Are not all that are servants of sin, Col. 1.13.
out of the Covenant, and under the power of darkness, and in the Kingdom of
the Devil?

11. Is there any promise in Scripture due to any, Prove. 28.13. and. 11.21.
who have not confessed and forsaken their sins; but all the Plagues written in
the Book, are to fall upon that generation of evil doers?

12. Was it not the only end why all the true Ministers of Christ, both now
and ever, Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13.
were begifted and sent into the world (to wit) to call people out of sin, Col.
1.28.
and to perfect the Saints in holiness, and to present them perfect to God?

13. Whether all those who both by Life and Doctrine, encourage people to abide
in that condition of sin, imperfection; and separation from God (which Christ
came to take away, and so to unite God and man again) do not oppose the work of
man's redemption, 2 These. 2.3. to the 11.
and withstand the only end of Christ coming, and so are Ministers of
Antichrist, and labor to uphold the Kingdom of the Devil?

Now all you who plead for sin in your selves or others, consider these things,
and see if you do not withstand the love of God, in giving Jesus Christ into
the world, to cleanse from all sin, Ephesians. 5.27.
all that believe in him, and so to present you to the Father without spot or
blemish, Mat. 23.27, 28.
and so you are the greatest enemies to your eternal salvation. How will you
stand before the Lord at that great day, who would have gathered you out of
your sin, but you would not, but have joined with the Devil to uphold the wall
of separation between God and you? Woe unto you, ye whited walls.

J. N.

ALL People and Professors consider where you are, and from whence you are
fallen, you that plead for sin, and say, None can be set free from sin while
they are in this world; you plead for a house for Satan in you, while you are
here, and where will you have him cast out, or what fellowship can you have
with God, while the Serpents head is in you? you are separated from God, and
know not, for what communion has light with darkness? God is light, and he
that dwells in God, dwells in light, and in him is no darkness at all; but
while you live in sin, you are in darkness, and the God of this world has
blinded your eyes that you cannot see, and having blinded your eyes that you
cannot see, he leads you captive at his will, and you are willing to be so, and
you do not believe that ever you shall be otherwise; you are servants to sin,
and you take pleasure in it; you are in the flesh and sin, and have made a
covenant with hell and death: you are resolved to serve the Devil, and please
your selves while you live, and you will repent at your death: you have forgot
that your times are in the hand of the Lord, and that this is the day of grace
and repentance, which you turn into lasciviousness, and wantonness; you make it
plainly appear, that you love your lustful pleasures and filthiness more then
God: you that are friends of the world, are the enemies of God, you that love
the world, and the things of the world, the love of the Father is not in you.
How can you say you love God, and follow the lusts of your flesh? for whom you
love, him you follow. Christ says, if you love me, follow me, keep my
Commandments: and those who follow him, he leads them out of all the ways of
sin, into the ways of purity and holiness, and so he is the way to the Father,
For without holiness none can see God, for he is of purer eyes then to behold
iniquity, and no unclean thing can stand in his sight. Where will you, where
will you appear, you blind creatures, whom the Devil has deceived, you that
follow the Prince of the air, who rules in the children of disobedience,
bringing forth fruits of sin and unrighteousness, having your conversation in
the earth, and earthly things, following your corrupt wills and pleasures: and
yet you will profess you love God, draw near him with your lips, own him in
words, but the Devil in practice. O horrible hypocrisy, Can thou deceive
God? shall not the righteous Judge find thee out, and reward thee according to
thy works? Thou are deceived, who think to be heir of two Kingdoms: thou will
have pleasure of sin here, and thou say thou hopest to be heir of the
Kingdom of Heaven too: but the hope of the hypocrite shall perish. Remember thy
father Dives in whose steps thou walk, and the same way leads the same end.
The Lord says, the wicked shall be turned into hell, and all than forget God.
But the Devil in thee says, Thou may live in sin, and have thy thoughts in
the world, and may enter into the Kingdom of Heaven too. Now, who must be
liar, whether God or thee? O vain man, was it not sin that separated God and
man at the first? and think thou to be restored again as long as sin stands
in thee? Man was not created in sin, but pure and holy in the Image of God, and
while he stood here, he had communion with God, and had the pure wisdom of God
communicated to him, by which he was able to see into the wonders of God, and
to give names unto all living creatures: but as soon as he had sinned, he was
stripped of all, that he became naked, and was thrust out of Paradise, and was
cursed from the Lord; yea the ground was cursed for his sake, and all this
because of sin, which thou think so light of, and art so loath to part with,
so odions is sin in the pure eyes of God who is holy; and did thou but know
thy condition, as thou lie in sin, in the first birth, a child of wrath, and
one to whom all the curses in the Book of God are due, thou should tremble
at sin, and not plead for it, wherein thou show thy self plainly a servant
of the Devil, and plead'st for his Image and Kingdom, and were it not that he
had blinded thine eyes, thou might see where thou art, when thou abusest the
goodness of God, that because he has left the sins and fallings of others upon
Record, to the end they should be warnings to all that come after, not to do
the like, and these thou may muse on to encourage thee on in thy sin and
filthiness: and because God is merciful to pardon sins, at what time soever
they repent, therefore thou art encouraged to live in thy sins the longer
unrepented of: Now all who are not plainly blind, may see whose child thou art,
for the Apostle says, Know ye not that the long suffering of God leads to
repentance? it does so to the children of God. But whose child art thou? that
Scripture is fulfilled in thee, which says because judgment is not specily
executed upon evil doers, therefore their heart is set in them to work
wickedness? and thus, thou make the mercies of God a cloak for thy
unrighteous actions: and yet thou will talk of a Redeemer, and of Faith in
Christ: But O Friend, where is this Redeemer witnessed, whilst thou art yet in
thy sin, what art thou Redeemed from, who art in bondage to thy lusts? and what
is thy liberty thou art Redeemed into, while thou art a slave to Satan, and at
his command; those who are Redeemed, are see free from sin, and the servitude
of sin; but thou servest sin, while tho u obeyest the motions of sin: Then
where is thy freedom? can thou witness Christ died for thee, and thy sin
still alive? How will thou witness his death in thee, or thy self dead with
him? How have thou put on Christ, who art clad with sin, the Saints who was
dead with Christ? and says Paul, How can you that are dead to sin, live any
longer therein? and says, Those that are dead with Christ, are free from sin;
and become servants of righteousness: and says he, Now being made free from
sin, and become servants of God, ye have your fruit unto holiness, and the end
everlasting life: but while thou live in sin, thy fruit is unholy, and the
end is death; who are Redeemed by Christ, are Redeemed from the earth and
earthly things, up to God again, from whence they are fallen; out of every
kindred tongue and people, and Nation, are made unto God Kings and Priests, to
reign above sin on earth, and are made conformable unto his Image again, which
they had lost by sin; but what conformity is there in thee, while thou live
in sin? thou art not like him, but like the Devil; for every sin is the Image
of the Devil, who sinned from the beginning; and while thou committest sin,
thou hold out his Image in thee, who is thy Father, and thou his son,
begotten in his own likeness. And Christ told the Scribes and Pharisees, who
professed themselves the children of God, but lived in sin, That they were of
their father the Devil; for his work they will do, for every sin is the work
of the Devil. And says John, He that commits sin as of the Devil; and says,
for this purpose was the Son of God manifested, to destroy the works of the
Devil: whosoever can witness the Son of God manifested in them, can witness sin
Destroyed; but if thou say thou can witness Christ manifested in thee, and
yet commit sin, thou art a liar: For, says John, whosoever abides in him,
sins not; whosoever sins, has not seen him, neither known him; For he
that says, I know him, and keeps not his Commandments, is a liar, and the
truth is not in him. And faith the holy Ghost, Whosoever is born of God,
sins not, for his seed remains in him; for he that is begotten of God
keeps himself, that the wicked one touches him not: and says plainly, In
this are the children of God made manifest, and the children of the Devil;
whosoever does not righteousness, is not of God, neither he that loves not his
brother. God in all ages has known his by their obedience, but thou say,
thou must live in disobedience, or else thou can not live in the world, and
yet thou would he accounted one of his too. But where is thy mark by which
thou art known, from the world? those which are God's, are marked, and known
from the world, and therefore hated of the world, but thou art in friendship
with the world, and whosoever is a friend of the world, is the enemy of God.
Now thou that can conform to the worlds ways, words, and worship, and yet
would be accounted one of God's too; O thou deceiver, thou deceiver, thou
deceivest but thy self, and men like thee; thou can not deceive the Lord.
Take heed, repent, halt no longer between God and the world; if thou will own
God, thou must disowne the world, and the world will disowne thee; thou can
not have both, for whilst thou art striving with both, thou have right to
neither; for all things were made for the Son, both in Heaven and Earth, and he
is Heir of all, even the fullness of all, and in him are the treasures of
wisdom laid up, and there is no receiving any thing without him; witness the
Son, and witness all; but no further then thou can witness him, no further
can thou witness real possession, but seedeth on wind, words, shows, and
shadows, and art deceived by the Devil, that old Serpent, who makes large
promises, but has nothing to perform, but deceit: for all the promises are yea
and amen in Christ, they are all to the seed which is the Son, and to him are
all the Promises in the Scriptures; For he that has the Son has the Father
also, and such are made Free by the Son: but while thou art a servant to thy
lusts, tho art in sin, and art far from a Free man. Now search the
Scriptures, and see if ever thou find one Promise to thee, whilst thou art in
this condition, but that the Devil deceives thee, and leads thee to steal the
Promises that were given to the Saints, who was risen out of thy condition: but
thou have no right to them, but all the plagues and woe written, are thy
portion: As thou lie in sin* thou shall drink the dregs thereof, and wring
them out, except thou repent.

Queries.
1. Whether Jesus Christ be not that Covenant of light spoken on in the
Scriptures, promised by the Father to enlighten and lead all that will own and
follow him out of the dark world, up to God, the Father of lights, yea or no?

2. Whether that be not the light of Christ which enlightens the conscience,
witnessing there against all sin and unrighteousness, which convinces and
shows the deeds of darkness, and exercises the conscience in purity and
holiness of all that will follow and obey it, or no?

3. If you say that be not the lig ht of Christ, then how is Christ the light
of the world? and how does he lighten every one that comes into the world? and
how do you distinguish between the light of Christ, and that which you call a
natural light? and does the light of Christ enlighten the creature any other
way then by shining into the conscience, yea or no?

4. Whether the light of Christ be not a sufficient guide to all who receive
and follow it, to bring out of darkness unto the Father, and reveal him to the
creature, without adding to it any other humane helps, and was not he given to
all the ends of the earth for this very end, yea or no?

5. Whether those that are in Scripture called the children of light, be not
only such as are gathered out of darkness by this light, and into it, walking
in it in measure; and those which are called the children of darkness, be not
such as whose understandings are darkened, by following the Prince of darkness,
to seek out other lights from their imaginations, setting up Persons, Forms,
Customs, Times, Days, Places, Letter and other visible carnal things to get
light from, which are not the spirit of Christ, yea or no?

6. Whether it was not by the same light of the spirit of Christ, that all the
holy men of God in all ages were inspired, had their Revelations, and by which
they spoke forth what is written in Scriptures, in a mystery to all the
children of darkness: and whether the light of Christ be not the same now, that
ever it was, to every one that have received in their serveral measures, yea or
no?

7. Whether all those who are not only ignorant of this light, but also
enemies to it, rendering it, under odious terms, as unable to lead out of
darkness, be not Ministers for the Prince of darkness, and against Christ the
true light, and so are Ministers of Antichrist, and upholders of the Kingdom
of darkness, which Christ came to destroy, yea or no?

More Queries.
1. Whether can the Scriptures be read and understood by any other spirit then
that which gave them forth, yea or no?

2. Whether that spirit be excluded from manifesting it self in the Saints now,
in the same power and manner as formerly it has done, yea or no?

3. Whether that spirit where it is, be not infallible, and Judge of all truth,
and all deceits in its measure, as it is manifested, yea or no?

4. Whether those who have not the spirit, which is the infallible judge, have
any true ground to pass the censure of ex-communication, or to judge of
Blasphemy in others, yea or no?

5. Whether that which is spoken by that spirit where it is, be not the very
word of God, yea or no?

6. Whether the spirit of the world, by their carnal laws, grounded upon humane
wisdom and reason, have any power from God to Judge that spirit where it is?
and have they not in all ages, when they have attempted it, passed the censure
of, Blasphemy upon it, and so it has suffered, yea or no?

7. Whether that spirit be not at unity in it self, all that speak by it,
speaking one and the same things, each in their measure; and does it not speak
the same things now, that ever it spoke in the holy men of God? and whether all
that are guided by it, be not brought into one and the same way to the Father,
and his worship in spirit, yea or no?

8. Whether giving heed to any other spirits, whatever they pretend, be no: the
way to delusion, and to lie open to be seduced into rent, Schism, and Heresy,
yea or no?

9. Whether any who have not this infallible spirit in themselves, which is the
only light, and guide, and judge, be fit and able to teach others? or did the
Lord ever send out any to teach who has not this spirit, yea or no?

Certain Queries to all you Prophets that Prophecy for hire, and all you
Priests that teach for money and bear rule by your means; and all you Shepherds
that seek for your gain from your quarter: answer these, for they are given
forth for the general good of all people.
1. Q. Whether you will own Jeremiah to be a true Prophet, which cried against
the Priests that bare Rule by their means: and whether you will justify these
that bear rule by their means which Jeremiah cried against?

2. Whether you will own the Prophet I say to be a true Prophet of the Lord,
which the Lord sent to cry against them that sought for their gain from their
quarter: and whether you will hold up these shepherds which seek for their gain
from their quarter now, as he cried against them?

3. Whether you will own Ezekiel to be a true Prophet of the Lord, which the
Lord sent to cry against the shepherds, which fed themselves with the fat, and
clothed with the wool, and made a prey upon the people: and whether you will
justify these shepherds that seek for the fleece now, and for the Woll, and
the Fat, and make Prey upon the people, which Ezekiel cried woe against?

4. Whether you will own Micha to be a true Prophet of the Lord, which the
Lord sent to cry against the hireling Priests and Prophets, that Preached and
Prophesied for money, and whether you will justify these things now, which the
Lord sent him to cry woe against then?

5. Whether you will justify such as Jesus Christ cried woe against, which was
called of men Master, and had the chiefest places in the assemblies, and stood
praying in the Synagogues, and laid heavy burdens upon the people, and loved
salutations in the Markets; and whether you will justify these things which he
cried woe against?

6. Whether you will justify sprinkling infants, seeing there is not a word of
Scripture to prove it?

7. Whether you will justify singing David's Psalms, his quakings, prayers, and
tears; and his condition turned in Rhyme and Meeter, and sung in the world, yea
or no?

8. Whether ever any of the Apostles or Ministers of God did receive Tithes
after Christ was risen, yea or no?

9. Whether ever any of the Disciples of Jesus Christ, or believers that
believed in him, after he was risen, did pay Tithes according to the old time,
after the substance was come, yea or no?

10. Whether these be not the Teachers spoken of, which stand railing in the
Pulpit, and are in envy, and sue men at the Law, and are proud and covetous, be
not them which go in the way of Caine; and through covetousness make
merchandise of the people? and are they not to be cried against now, as Paul
and Peter did then?

11. Whether these be not the Teachers that seek for great augmentations, and
great Benefits and Tithes, be not as they which the Scripture speaks of, which
run greedily after the error of Balaam, who perished in the gainsaying of
Cora, seeing the Apostle said, He covered no man's silver nor gold, nor apparel,
but wrought with his hands, that he might be example to all that followed him?

12. Whether they do abide in the Doctrine of Christ which compels people to
swear, or the Doctrine of the Devil? when Christ says, Swear not at all, but
let your yea be yea, and nay, nay, whatsoever is more, is evil.

13. Whether the outward Temple was to be held up after Christ was risen, yea
or no? seeing Stephen was stoned to death for witnessing against it?

14. Whether a man shall be made free from the body of sin, while he is upon
the earth, yea or no?

15. Whether you will own that Christ which said, be not ye called of men,
Master? or whether you will be called of men, Master, and so deny that Christ?

16. Whether that was the true Christ that forbid these things? and whether you
will own that Christ as an Example to follow him, who is the way, the light,
and the truth?

An Exhortation to all people that have a desire to know the Truth, that the
Truth may make them free.
EVery one that has a desire to know the truth, that the truth may set you
free, mind the light of God in you, that shows you sin and evil, that which
checks you when you do amiss, either when you lie or swear, or are proud or
covetous, or oppress, or envy, or hate, or backbite one another, or use any
deceit, there is something in you that will check you, and tell you that you
should not do so, if you hearken to it, that which shows you your vain
thoughts, and wandering desire, and wicked imaginations, if you hearken to that,
and let it guide your minds, It will turn them within, and show you how you
have spent your time, and bring you to consider of your ways and your doings,
that you may forsake that which is evil, and turn to the Lord, that he may have
mercy upon you: this light within, if you hearken to it, it will not suffer you
to do any wrong to any man, but to do to all as you would be done by; and
obeying it, it will teach you to deny your selves of pride and covetousness,
and oppression, and drunkenness, and lying, and swearing, and vain talk, and
foolish jesting and all vain delights and pleasures whatsoever: and minding
this light within, to be obedient to it, it will cross your earthly will, and
turn you out of the lust and filth of the flesh, and lead you out of all the
worlds ways, and words, and customs, and fashions, and worships, and delights,
and vanities whatsoever, and bring you to delight in the Lord, to do his will,
in yielding obedience to his commands, in what the light does require of you to
be done, that you may cast off the works of darkness, as this light within
makes them manifest to you, this light within you will not suffer you to eat
and drink, to make your selves wanton; if you harken to it, and let it guide
your minds, this light within will not let you wear apparel to make your selves
proud, and burden and oppress poor creatures, if you hearken to it: and here
is your teacher* this light, obeying it; and here is your condemnation, this
light disobeying it, this light is not without you, a chapter or a verse, but
the light is within, as it was in them that spoke forth the chapters: Ye have a
light, to the which you do well to take heed, as unto a light that shines in a
dark place, until the day dawn, and the day star arise in your hearts. Take
heed to that light, left ye be condemned by it: obeying it, it will show you
the way to salvation; disobeying this light, it will condemn you.

Now you have time, prize it, and take heed of rejecting the counsel and
admonition of the Lord to your souls, as you will answer it before the Lord,
consider of it, and lay it to heart, this is the day of your visitation.

Friend, D. W.
MY love salutes that which is pure of God in thee, mind that light of God in
thy conscience which checks and reproves thee for sin and evil; and it will
turn thy mind within, and show thee the evil of thy doings, and tell thee
plainly thou ought not to act in that which is evil, this is the light which
Christ Jesus has enlightened every one that comes into the world withal, and
this light will not only show thee thy evil deeds, but it will show thee the
good way which thou ought to walk in; yiedling obedience to this light, which
discovers unto thee sin and evil, it will teach thee to deny that which is
evil, as the light makes it manifest unto thee in measure, and this light which
Christ has given to every one to enlighten thee withal, it will not only
teach thee to deny, that which is evil, but it will teach thee to act in
righteousness, and to do unto all as thou would be done by; Loving this light,
thou will bring thy deeds to the light, that the light may prove them, and here
is thy teacher present with thee, obeying it the light, and hating this light
which makes manifest sin and evil, here is thy condemnation eternally. Now thou
have time prize it, and put not the day of the Lord afarr off, for the time
past is unrecoverable, the time to come is uncertain, the time present is
thine, now while time is, improve thy talent, which the Lord has given thee,
that thou may receive the Blessing, which is, Well done, thou good and
faithful servant, thou shall be made Ruler over much: but on the contrary, if
thou be negligent and sloathfull, and slight the mercies of the Lord to thy
soul, and hide thy talent in the earth, then thou art that sloathfull servant
who said Christ was an austere man; for the Lord has given every one a measure
to Profit withal, then thou must receive thy portion, Go ye cursed into hell
prepared for the Devil and his Angels. Now it is called to day, arise and put
off the old man with his deeds, for the old man must be put off with his deeds
in measure, before the new man can be put on with his deeds, which is after God
created in righteousness, and true holiness, therefore in the fear of God
work while it is day, for the night comes when none can work, it is said,
Rejoice O young man in thy youth; But know for all this thou must come to
Judgment. Now friend consider what thou art a doing, and take heed of spending
thy time carelessly without the fear of God, and the Lord give thee
understanding that thou may see what thou art doing, that thou may choose
the good and refuse the evil.

From a friend to thy soul, and to all that love the Lord Jesus Christ in
sincerity, and in truth. This was I moved to write to thee, who am a prisoner
of the Lord in York Castle, whose name in the flesh is

John Killam.

ALL friends in your several measures, dwell and abide in that which is
immortal of God in you, which is begotten by the ministry of the word, which
is not of the world but leads out of the world, and crucifies the world, who in
it dwells this does witness, so all to the witness keep your minds, and upon it
wait, and be attentive, that you all in the tenderness may be kept, and the
witness preserved, waking and alive in you, that which witnesses with the Just
and righteous pure God in you, against all deceits, hypocrisy, or self ends in
you, that herein you may be preserved every one in your measures faithful to
God, who has called you, that herein you may grow out of the world, self,
flesh, and the knowledge thereof, which all defiles and perishes, into purity,
righteousness and holiness, which condemns the world, that in the true favor
and discerning you may grow to sever between the precious and the use, the
clean, and the unclean, the pure, and the unpure, that you may know and own
the pure life in one another, the pure language, and the pure voice, that true
Judgment may pass upon that which is contrary, least for want of favor and
true Judgment, you join with the unclean spirit which spots and defiles,
stains and darkens the understanding, and then slothfulness gets up, and
earthly mindedness, and self-endedness, and self takes its liberty, which all
stains and dishonours the truth of God, the father of truth, from whence all
truth proceeds. But woe from the Lord will follow the careless slothful
disobedient, rebellious one, who causes offenses, so all in the presence of the
living God, to the witness of God in you I speak, to fear the living God of
life and Power, and in it dwell, that in it you may be preserved; low and
tender your minds to the measure of light; which manifests darkness, and what
out of it arises, which is contrary to the light, draws from the light, and
so draws from God, that in the light this may be seen, Judged, and condemned:
and here you are kept in your measures and daily growth, out of the world,
self, flesh, or whatsoever is of the same, that all things may be given up into
his will who is God over all, and creator of all, whose own all is, and here
you are kept single and free, Just upright and pure every one in your measures,
in the continual exercise in a growing condition, the witness being kept
waking: but I do you all warn to take heed of setting up a false rest out of
light in the carnality, in the form, without the life and power, painted with
the word of truth; catched in the comprehension and talked of, such feeds death
in whom death reign, and such with the light which they are turned from, are
seen Judged and condemned, Ignorance not to be pleaded. So all tender ones, who
fear the living God, and abide to the light which opens, manifests, and
discovers within, that upon it you may wait for teaching, and direction,
looking out at any, but every one in particular, mind the light of the Lord
Jesus; which has convniced you to be your guide and teacher in all things,
bringing all your thoughts, words, and actions, to the light, by it to be tried
and proved, at it to ask council and direction, and here God alone is teacher,
orderer, and mighty counceller, who is the everlasting Father and Prince of
peace and joy; and here true Judgment is set up, which keeps in the watch and
the cross, and here true peace is preserved, which stands in obedience through
the Cross; and herein true favor you grow, and in the discerning and the pure
wisdom you grow, in your measures, received from the fountain which orders
all, and distinguishes between the precious, and the vile, and the two seeds,
and what is of the one, and what is of the other, and what to own, and join
with, and what to deny and cross, as in particular, so in general, and here
self is kept out, and Judged out, and the false voice and false Language; or
any thing which separates and leads out of the obedience, out of the cross, and
out of the oneness; so here in the cross you all are kept watching over one
another, and building up one another, in that which stands out of the will, and
out of words; and puts an end to words, and here is the Blessing, and in your
meetings the Lord will be seen present, manifesting himself by his Power, and
so you will know of a truth he is among you; so all as tender your eternal
happiness, and prise the love of God, take heed of setting up a rest or peace
out of the cross, out of the obedience, for there you settle upon the lees, and
crucifies the Just one in you; and all this is but in time, and will be
destroyed by that which is out of time and done away, take heed of giving way
to the earthly spirit, or hearking to the earthly voice which draws the mind
from the pure eternal into the earth and earthly things; and visible fading
created objects which adulterates the heart from God, and leads away the mind
and affections from the eternal, and cumbers the same, begetting earthly care
for store of fading things, which are in time and which time perishes; which
keeps out of the obedience, smothers the light, and involves in darkness,
darkning the understanding, and inslaves the creature, and brings into bondage
to the earth and earthly things, and captivates and covers the seed in the
earth, and here is the curse and wrath and Plagues which to Egypt and to Egypt
King is due, and all this comes by carelessness, not obeying in the measure of
light, which leads the affections from below out of time to God the beginning
and end of all time: in whom is fullness the living fountain of all goodness,
eternal Riches and treasures, and here is the liberty of the children of God,
who from the earth are redeemed, and this liberty you come to know every one in
your measures abiding in the cross, so that which is not eternal, but leads
into the snares of death, which in darkness lies, which by the light is
discovered by the word, which is a Lamp to the feet, and a light unto the
Paths; but take heed of using your liberty as an occasion to the flesh, for
that stains, and the flesh is apt to catch its liberty by that eye and ear
which is outward and leads out into the motion out of the life, and this by the
light is seen and Judged and condemned, so all friends to that which is
eternal of God I speak, that it you may mind, and in it dwell, the light which
comes from God, who is eternal, that by it your minds may be kept out of the
carnal, least while you embrace the carnal you loose the eternal; and so in
the end loose both, for time ends all things that in time is. So God almighty
of wisdom and power keep you in the pure fear and awe of himself the powerful
Father, all of you tender and faithful in your measures your minds up to him,
he to be your guide in all things, who leads out of the way of error, that he
in all things may be glorified praised and honored, to whom all is due, even
God over all Blessed for ever. I rest a friend to your souls, whose joy and
delight is in your souls eternal welfare, which was the cause of now
writing: one with the life in all which comes from the Father.

James Parnell.
19. day of the 11 month. 1654.
FINIS.

