THE PAPISTS STRENGTH, Principles, and Doctrines (which they are sworn to
Preach, from the Council of TRENT, by the Popes Authority, and after confirmed
by the last General Assembly at ROVEN, 1571. All which they have sworn to
perform) Answered and confuted. Furthermore their Principles and Doctrines
Answered and Confuted, as they were laid down in two or three several Papers,
by R. W. Papist, lately sent from HOLLAND. Also a challenge to the Pope and all
his Adherents to choose out of all his Dominions some Cardinals, Friars, or
Jesuits to try their Bread and Wine, after Consecration (by watching on their
side and on our side) to prove that if afterward they have consecrated it,
whether the Bread and Wine does not loose its taste and savor, and so not the
Body and Blood of CHRIST. Also a paper to all them that fast and afflict
themselves who are in the will worship and voluntary humility. Also some
Quaeries to all the Papists upon Earth to be answered in writing and sent to
them, which all Sects upon the Earth call QUAKERS.

By GEORGE FOX.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Simmons, at the Bull and Mouth near Aldersgate,
1658.

The Papists Principles as follows, whose name subscribed thereunto, is R. W.
Priest. HE says, He cannot but admire to see what a power Satan has over the
sons of Adam, and especially ^ver Schismatics, and Apostates, from the union
of the Roman Catholic Church.

Answ. The^ that be in the true Light Chr^^^ Jesus, that fathoms the world,
(...) not admire to see the great power of Satan over the sons of Adam in the
fall, and over all the Schismatics and Apostates; for Schismatics and
Apostates, and the sons of Adam in the transgression be all ^n the Devils
power, where he is in the transgression out of the truth, in one power
murderers; for the Devil a murthe^er, sons of Adam m^r^herers, in the fall out
of the truth, Schismatics and Apostates out of the truth, murderers, and will
all murder, and no^ ^dmired at with the children of Light, who has tried their
spirits: So Devil, sons of Adam in the fall, and Papists, and Protestants, that
will all murder; for Religion and worship be all in the Devils power,
Murderers, out of the truth, that Christ and the Apostles was in: so the Roman
Catholic Church which will murder, is Satan's synagogue, for he is the
murderer, and there he has his seat: And all the Protestants that be
murderers about Religion and worship, are Satan's synagogue, are Apostates and
Schismat^cks as well as you; they were the first great synagogue of Satan, and
the first Apostates and Schismatics from the life of the Apostles, and Christ,
though since the days of the Apostles you have apostatized from the life,
others has professed against you, and so are broken into heaps, and names;
Satan has got up many synagogues in many parts of the world, and gotten the
sheeps clothing, and cried up himself to be the name of Ch^^stian, which is
mere Antichrist quite against him, compelling all by sword, or faggot, or
prison, or stocks, or whips, or houses of Correction, or Gaols, or
Inquisitions, to worship him. This is quite against Christ and the Apostles
spirit; in the apostasy from them apostatized: So you may strange to see the
Devils power over the sons of Adam, Apostates and Schismatics, and not see
your selves swallowed up in the Devils power, doing his work; Thus judging
others, not seeing your selves, for the Devil, sons of Adam in the fall from
the truth, and you who are apostatized from Christ and the Apostles Doctrine,
and the Schismatics that be from you in words, and sects, and names, that be
called Protestants, that will murder for Religion and Worship, they be all in
the same power which the Devil is in; for the Devil is out of the truth, the
sons of Adam out of the truth, and the church of Rome out of the truth,
apostatized Protestants and all others that be out of the spirit, that gave
forth the Scriptures, be out of the truth, such are murdering one another
about words, and are Satan's synagogues wre^^ling against flesh and blood.
Striking at creatures, in stead of striking at the power that captivates
creatures, to the intent that creatures might come into the liberty of the Sons
of God, which was the work of the Apostles and Christ.

Pr. No man can discern head or foot of the Quakers method, or order; yet there
is some show of reason in their Quaeries.

Answ. Thus he confounds himself, Babylon: And we do believe that neither the
Papists, Apostates, Protestants, nor sons of Adam, nor D^vill out of the truth,
can know either head or foot of the Quakers principles, with all their
thinkings; for the Quakers is come into that which the Devil is out of, sons of
Adam is out of, the Papists are out of, and the Protestants, that which
overwhelmes them all, Devil, sons of Adam, Papists, Protestants out of the
life of God, with it are they all judged, which Life the Quakers are in.

Pr. He says, not one Papist that he knows does call himself a defender of
the Faith: yet he says in a sense, in writing against our principles, he might
call himself a Defender of the Catholic Church and Faith, and yet
notwithstanding he could not defend himself from the Devil.

Answ. In this thou have showed thy faith, and the faith of the Catholic
Church, which will not defend you from the D^vill; so ye are the reprobates
from the faith of the Elect, that quenches the fiery darts of the Devil, and
gives victory over the world and the Devil, and is their shield, and with that
faith is his Kingdom subdued: And we do believe that the faith will not defend
you from the Devil; and if thou know never a Papist that is a Defender of
the Catholic Faith, what have you done with all the fires and faggots, and
inquisitions and killings and slayings, and writing of your great Volumns
against them that have protested against you all this time? but now your faith
fails, and your wheel is gone off, and the confusion of Babylon is confounded,
and the faith of Gods Elect contended for, witnessed amongst them called
Quakers, whose weapons are not carnal, but spiritual. And your wicked
Priests, and such as be in the reprobate sense like Judas, betraying the just,
have been the Preachers and Teachers which has gotten the form of godliness,
but are out of the power, and the life, and these are them that have risen
against the Saints and overcome them, which are now warring against the Lamb
and the Saints, but the Lamb and the Saints shall have the victory.

Pr. And whereas you say you give the title of holiness to the Pope after the
same manner as was given to the high Priest in the Old Testament, and wicked
Magistrates was called gods, and the Priests wear their titles upon their
breasts, and Jacob called his wicked brother Esau Lord, and there is Scriptures
enough to give honorable titles to wicked men.

Answ. These are suitable proofs for the Pope, and suitable examples. First, the
Priesthood is ended; they were never in that latitude, neither are you to be
measured with them, neither do any true Christians. As for Esau and wicked
Magistrates, the fruits of this amongst you has appeared, and the wicked must
bow before the just, and Esau the elder must be a servant to the younger; and
salvation is come out of Sion, who judges the mount of Esau, and is gathering
the elect Jacob, who rides over the high places of the earth, which have set up
your Images; but you have showed the fruits of Esau, who are slaying and
killing the just; But who be in the power of Christ, who has all power in
heaven and earth given unto him, be out of Esau's, and be o'th top on his
mount, and answers the Elect.

Pr. He says that Purgatory is a temporal punishment to faithful persons
after death, who have not done due penance for their sins in their life time,
so must do penance after death.

Answ. The faithful persons that be in the true faith of Gods Elect, which is
the mystery held in a pure conscience, which gives victory over the world,
purifies the heart, by which men are justified, and please God. This gives them
victory over death, sin, hell, and all that which you do penance for. Now they
that be reprobate concerning this faith, are doing penance all their lifetime,
and say they must have a Purgatory to do penance, when their life is ended;
and so all poor people you have a pitiful thing to pass through, a fire,
before you be purified: And as for Christ's, and the Apostles, and Saints
sufferings, you are found in that nature that caused the just always to suffer;
and as for your Doctrine of Purgatory, it is come up since the days of the
Apostles amongst the Apostates, the Devil has set it up, who is out of the
truth, by his power, since he set up his Synagogue; but who be in the faith, be
over his Purgatory and synagogues, and the Doctrine of it which is come up
since the days of the Apostles, for which there is no Scripture; for the
Saints which believed had passed from death to life, and so from the Purgatory.
For purgatory is in the death, he that passes from it comes over Purgatory and
death both, to reign with Christ; here you show your selves, you are not
believers.

Pr. The receiving of the Sacrament thou say is not for the cleansing of you
from sin, but for the nourishment of your souls, the body and blood of Christ
being in it.

Answ. Why do you and the Protestants kill one another about such things,
seeing that you say the body and blood of Christ is in the Sacrament, the bread
and wine: And the Protestants say, in it is the spirit of Christ, as you may
look in a book called the Scotch Principles, and in their Catechisms, and is it
not the same blood that cleanses, which nourishes? How are you confused in
this, and put to your shifts. I have heard talk of Papists and Jesuits were
witty men; but I see it is at an end, and that which nourishes the immortal
soul is not the mortal creatures, ye are deceived in thinking so, and the
Protestants both; that which nourishes the soul is Christ the power of God, who
is the Bishop of it, the life, the truth, the power of God, which is the
immortal souls food, and not the bread that will perish, and things that will
perish, which those looked after that followed Christ for a time, which was in
the perishing mind, which labored after the perishing things, and labored
not for the bread which comes down from above, which indures to eternal life,
which who eats of it hungers no more. And so that is the Devils doctrine and
the apostates, which is got up since the days of the Apostles, which tells
people, after they have consecrated the bread and wine, it is the body and
blood of Christ; which Christ said bread would perish, for his flesh saw no
corruption. Nor his body would not perish, nor his blood that cleanses from
the dead works, through which blood they overcome death: and the word and power
gives every creature its being without the consecration; but that which
nourishes the immortal soul is the mortal; and man lives not by bread alone,
but by every word that proceeds out of the mouth of God; and this is Christ's
doctrine, and the others is the Devils, and apostates out of the life and power
of Christ, that says, men must live by bread alone.

Pr. Christ uses the Priest in the hands of a workman to make the Sacrament,
which is the body and blood of Christ, he says, that the forms of bread and
wine which will corrupt cannot take away sin, And after consecration it is not
bread and wine, but the very body and blood of Christ.

Answ. In this you have showed your confusion and unestablished state, was it
the very body and blood of Christ that made the Corinthians drunk? and in this
thou have confounded thy self in saying, that the forms of bread and wine
which is the very body and blood of Christ will corrupt after consecration,
then the Ministers work in this thou have spoiled, who are the consecraters,
for the body and blood of Christ will not corrupt, nor perish, which bread and
wine will, but that which gives bread and wine their being, will never corrupt;
for bread and wine is a thing that is seen, and though the Apostle said what he
had received of the Lord, that did he deliver to the Corinthians, how that the
same night the Lord Jesus was betrayed, he took the cup and the bread when he
had given thanks, saying, as often as they did eat that bread and drink that cup
they showed the Lords death till he came, and the Apostles delivered this to
the Corinthians; then in the second Epistle he brings them off from the things
that are seen, to the things which are not seen which were eternal; for bread
and wine were things seen, and temporal, and bids them prove and examine
themselves whether or no Christ was come, know you not your own selves how that
Jesus Christ is in you except you be reprobates? and he is the living bread
that came down from above, who gives life unto the world, and he that eats of
this bread lives and abides for ever. And as for thy word Sacrament, we do not
find that word expressed in Scripture, nor where the Apostles spoke by Mary, as
you do, who adore your own words, that are Apostatized from the life and them
that witness Christ the substance in them, they see the end of all things is
come, Christ Jesus, him by whom all things was made, who is the end of all
things, him is possessed, Such are not reprobates, but reprobates and Judas may
stick in the outward things, as the Jews did, whose table was a trap, and eyes
blinded, as you do, who are inwardly ravened from the Spirit of God, And are
the wolves in sheeps clothing worrying the Lambs that comes to witness Christ
in them the substance, and has proved and examined themselves and found him,
and so there people sticking in that they call the sign, and keeping people
from the substance, receiving Christ Jesus in them, for these things was to be
done in remembrance of Christ until he came, now if bread and wine be the body
of Christ and his blood, then he is come, how do you that in remembrance of him
until he come, was they to eat his body and drink his blood till he come? did
he go away in the Spirit, and leave his body behind, answer this, whether or no
his body did not rise, and whether his body be elementary? there was a
Protestant against you that said the body of Christ was corruptible, and you
said the bread and wine is the body and blood of Christ, and that will corrupt,
and so we see you all in the error.

Pr. He says the bare form of bread and wine does change, And though the light
lead up to Christ, they see nothing but that which does change, namely bread
and wine.

Answ. Hear thou have confounded thy self, and all the Papists, the whole body
of them, and confounded your own wisdom and knowledge, and your own faith in
things you do profess; for the body of Christ, and his blood does not change,
and yet you say that bread and wine after consecration is the very body and
blood of Christ, and hear you say does change, which is not comparable to the
body and blood of Christ that corrupts not nor changes not; in this you have
confounded your selves and blinded your souls in looking at things which are
seen, which the Devil and wicked ones out of the light do run into, which you
poor Creatures are captivated under his power* things that are not seen are
invisible, but things that are seen, as bread and wine, are visible.

Pr. Our faith and doctrine is that Jesus Christ has but one body, and that
the same body which is in that Sacrament shall come at last to judge us all.

Answ. The body of Christ which you call the bread after consecration, which
thou have confessed is a changeable thing, the ^orm of bread, that which is
changeable is not a judge, Christ and his body is not changeable, so therefore
to judge, and shall remain his body when bread and wine ceases; So in this thou
have overthrown your own doctrine, and faith and foundation, and proved your
selves to be stones of Babylon, who with them builds up and throws down again.

Pr. Whereas thou Queriest whether God is able to make one body to be in two,
or two thousand places at once.

Answ. The body of Christ is his flesh which he gives for the life of the
world, which they that eat it, and feed upon it, are of his flesh and lives for
ever, and are in more places then one, and comes to be of his flesh and of his
bone, and at this ^he Jews stumbled that followed him for temporal bread, and
if temporal bread had been the body of Christ, why would he bid them labor not
for the meat that perishes? and that he said well in saying this is may body,
this is my blood, and except ye eat my flesh and drink my b^^ud ye have no life
in you, but he did not tell the people after they had consecrated bread and
wine that it was his body and blood, and he would drink with them in the
Kingdom, and did Christ eat his own body and drink his own blood? answer these
Queries, we see that the body of Christ is hid from you all Papists and
Protestants, and his flesh and his blood, and his word^ are spirit and life,
and that remains, and bread and wine it is the elements; did it come down from
above, from heaven? after you have consecrated it, is it not the wine that came
of the grapes, and the bread which was baked? Christ's body which is the bread
is above the Manna which is given from heaven, much more far above the bread of
man; Christ the true bread, far above Angles-food, is the body of Christ, which
who eats it lives for ever; they that eated the Manna the Angels-food perished
in the wilderness, many of them, and far above man's bread that's temporal, and
drink, which they may eat and drink and hunger and thurst again, and perish,
and which will perish. Which they that decernes the Lords body decernes him
that gives every creature its being, the word of God by which all things was
made, and none of the figures nor shadows nor types are the body of Christ;
but that which ends them all; to you that is the word of the Lord, which body
was before they were, which body is the Church, the Pillar and ground of truth,
and bread is not the Church after consecration, for the Apostles never told us
of that doctrine no where in the Scriptures, but you that of the body of
Christ be ignorant, the Top-stone is laid on your heads, and the body of Christ
makes us free from the Law.

Pr. We do not teach that bread after the consecration is the flesh of Christ
but we say that after Christ had uttered these words, this is my body, or after
the Priests according to Christ's command, do this in remembrance of me, do
utter the same words which we call consecration, then the substance of bread
vanishes and is no more there, but the body of Christ comes in its place.

Answ. This again is confusion, and you are confused and confounded in your own
principles, if the bread and wine, which you say is not the flesh of Christ
after consecration, how is his body there, and how can you say it is his body?
And thus you confound your selves.

Pr. Thou say thou do not find any express command of the Apostle in
Scripture for observing of days, nor meats, nor none of these things, as
meats, or crosses, but what the Church shall command, and says, but the Church
has commanded us to observe days and meats, and that a cross should be made
in remembrance of Christ's passion, and the Images of Christ and his Saints may
be set up and honored, and that we should invoke the Saints, etc. and
whatsoever the Church commands us; And this is the sure and unmovable ground
upon which our Catholic faith even to the very least circumstance and
ceremony is built, etc. And the contrary ground is the ground of all Heretics.

Answ. We do believe you that all these observing of meats, days and crosses
is set up by your Churches command, and all your Tithes, Priests, Pulpits and
Temples, amongst you and the Protestants which has been set up by your Church
command, which is offended if they be not observed, which is set up since the
days of the Apostles, which is Apostatized from the Apostles and the true
Church, in the Apostasy, and are fallen into schisms and heresies and lying
signs, which is your cross, who are gone from the power of God, which is the
cross of Christ, who are them which the Spirit spoke of expressly before the
Apostles decease that should depart from the faith, forbidding eating of meats,
and marriage, which is the Devils doctrine, who has given heed to seducing
spirits, now you may see it is your Mother which you call the Church which is
the Mother of Harlots, which your Mother harlotted from the true Church, the
Apostles doctrine, for the true Church of the Apostles did never command that
men should abstayn from meats, or set up a cross of wood or stone, or worship
Images, or Saints, or names, or bow down to them, but worship God, and worship
not the Angels. Now these things has been set up since the days of the
Apostles, in the Apostasy from the true Church, which has made war against the
Saints and overcome them, but now is the Saints and the Lamb come to have
victory, and now the Lamb and Saints will have victory, who is come to reign
and the holy Prophets and the Saints shall rejoice over you: sing and rejoice
ye heavens, and rejoice ye Saints and holy Prophets over her That's your Church
which is inwardly ravened from the spirit of God, and has reigned over the
Kings of the earth, and all other that has had the name of Christianity, and
out of the life of Christ, found in your skirts; the Lamb will tread you
together in the press without the City of the living God, and the Church which
is the Pillar and ground of truth, against which the gates of hell cannot
prevail, though they may fall all on heaps one among another about their
worships: And we say that your Mother the Church, so called, has commanded and
laid the foundation of tithes amongst the Protestants, and all their observing
of Saints days, holy days, and you have been them that has taught them to
give the names, yea to their Schools, Colleges, Steeple Houses, which were
your mass-houses, which the Protestants has made their Churches of them, you
were the first root and layer of the ground and Author of them, you and they
are all judged with the Spirit, which is not Apostasy, which was before
Apostasy was.

Pr. I say again, that Christ is not without a body, and the same body which is
in the Sacrament, is that which was born of the Virgin Mary, which dyed for us,
and now sits at the right hand of God, and none other.

Answ. Heaven is above, and earth is beneath, there is an earthly body, and
there is a heavenly body, a natural and a spiritual; and if that which was
born of the Virgin Mary be your bread after consecration, which body saw no
corruption, though put in the grave. Now see if your bread which you call the
body of Christ, will not corrupt after it lie a while, though you have
consecrated it; then how can you say that is the body of Christ at the right
hand of God? and outward bread which will corrupt, which the body of Christ saw
none, which was born of the Virgin, the Lamb slain from the foundation of the
world; yet he did not corrupt, nor saw no corruption.

Pr. And to say, is Christ to be looked for in the Saints, is so profound that
he cannot reach the depth of the meaning, the Roman Catholics use no such
manner of speech.

Answ. I do believe you; Since the days of the Apostles amongst you that are
got up in your likenesses and Images, that says its so profound you cannot
reach the meaning of it to ask you whether Christ be in the Saints, and amongst
the Roman Catholics, you have no such manner of speech, I do believe you; And
so you put him in the Sacrament without you, and call the bread and wine his
body and blood; so this is to prove your selves to be reprobates, so are judged
by the Apostles doctrine, and the Scripture. Know you not in your own selves,
how that Jesus Christ is in you except ye be reprobates?

Priest. The more honor we give to Saints, the more honor we give to Christ.
Indeed to give godly honor to Saints, is to commit idolatry.

Answ. If that you do not give godly honor to the Saints, it is ungodly; and
here in this you have again confounded your selves, and that honor which
belongs to the Saints is of God, and godly, and not idolatry; but that honor
which you give, which is not godly, is given to such which are not Saints,
which is idolatry; and so that honor which you should give to God, you give to
Images, in kneeling to them; and so in that you are as the heathen, and are
found idolaters, which never did any of the Apostles kneel before an Image; but
you that inwardly ravened from the Spirit of God, and so lost the image of God,
and fallen down to Images.

Pr. A Cross, a Crucifix, or an Image of Chirst or any Saint, whether they be
made of silver, stone, or wood, are according to our doctrine but dead
creatures; nevertheless are profitable and honorable memorials of them, and
do much help our devotion, and demonstrate our love and affection to them, and
they are not Idols, but they represent unto us Christ and his Saints.

Answ. So then they being but dead things, and you bowing to dead things, is to
Idols; for bowing to a dead stock or a stone is a bowing to Idols, as says the
Prophet, and dead images. Now you having them as you say, to represent unto you
Christ, and to put you in mind of him and the Saints, shows that you have not
Christ's spirit in you, nor him in you, nor his mind in you, so are reprobates,
and are none of his; for those that have Christ in them, and his mind in them,
need no such representations as to put them in mind of Christ, or to fall down
before Crosses, Crucifixes, Images, dead things, to stir up the love toward
Christ; which the blood of Christ purge^h the conscience from dead works, and
not to bow down to dead Images; but thi^ shows the love of God is not in you.
Dead things do not stir up the love of God in people, but the faith which
works by love, this stirs up the love toward Christ who is the Author of it,
and the Saints, to make Images of the Saints, and observing of days, shows
that you are not come to just men's spirits; which who are, need no other thing
to put them in mind, nor observe days; for they see over days, and so in
these principles, I see ye are reprobates concerning the faith which works by
love; for the love of God is not in you, you are not come to the j^st men's
spirits, so not to the Church of the living God, the mind of Christ you have
not, his spirit ye have not, and Christ is not in you, and so in the
reprobation in the apostasy, and are fain to have dead Images and pictures, and
crosses, dead representations to put you in mind of Christ, and to stir up your
love, otherwise it would grow cold; and that is the nature that will murder,
and all those things, Images, Crosses, are held up by the spirit of murder,
and not by the power of God, the cross of Christ.

Pr. In some particulars he says, there is no difference between them and the
heathens; as first I confess their Idols are made of silver, wood, and stone,
and so are our Images; their Idols were but dead creatures which had eyes and
see not, and so are our Images; they bow to their Idols, and we bow to our
Images: so far the resemblance is good, and the heathens do believe that their
Idols were able to help them, and we say our Images and Idols stirs up our love
to Christ.

Answ. So therein the Images helps you as the Heathens do, and you may see that
all those things are got up since the days of the Apostles, and you that be
inwardly ravened from the spiri of God, and gotten the sheeps clothing as the
Jews and the Gentiles which was astray from the spirit of God, worshipping
Images and Idols, which when the Jews was in the spirit of God they kept above
them all: So you being gone from the spirit of the Lord, are fallen under
Images and dead Idols since the days of the Apostles, and bows down to them as
the heathens, and they are dead a^ the Heathens, and so you are aposta^ized
from the spirit of God, in which God is worshipped, and apostatized from the
true Church, who said, Keep your selves from Idols, for there was never any
talk of worshipping of Images, and bowing to Images amongst them; but the Jews
while they lived in the law of God, they broke down the Images of the Heathens:
so all that be in the life of God will break down the founder of the Images
amongst you Apostates, which sees not and hears not: And Jeremiah saying to
them that worshipped Images, who said unto a stone, thou art my father, and to
the wood thou have brought me forth. So say you to your Images, Pictures, and
Crosses, thou putst us in mind, thou art our similitude, and puts us in mind
of Christ, of Mary, and showing that you have not the mind of Christ in you;
but dead stocks and stones must put you in mind, so this (of yours) is a
higher mystery of iniquity then that of the heathen.

Pr. You say you account of the pictures no more then we account of any picture
or pictures in our houses.

Answ. That is not so, thou do not speak with the bit in thy mouth, we do not
fall down to them, but deny them.

Pr. And the heathens did all kind of godly honor directly to their Idols;
but the small honor which we do to the Images or pictures of the Saints, is no
more then an outward complement as I may say, just as it was the fashion in
England to put off ones hat, or bow to the Kings Throne in honor of the King:
Neither do we this honor to the pictures simply considered as pictures, but as
they are representations of Christ and his Saints.

Answ. That honor which the heathen did to their Idols, was not godly honor;
for that which gave the honor to the Idols, might be confounded before that
came up that gave the godly honor (to God) though they worshipped the
creatures and served idols, who should have worshipped the Creator, who is God
blessed for ever, and served him; and your bowing and kneeling down to Images,
and before them, it is the worship of the Beast, and that is more then a
complement to kneel down and bow down to Images which you call representations,
and this is come up and got up amongst you since the power of God has been
lost, which should have brought you to have bowed down to the Lord, and to have
prayed in the spirit, and to have had him in your minds, and not an Idol to
put him in your minds: And the bowing before the Kings Throne in the Kings
absence; and the hat in England, that is but the dead mind that bows the dead
hat to the dead throne, and a dead honor, and so all the honor that is given
to Images is but a dead honor given from the dead principle, and not from the
living principle of God within, which brings to worship God who never accepts
the other; and that bowing the hat before the Kings Throne in the Kings absence
is denied by all that fears God, and judged, and worships him, and bows to him,
for that is sup^rstition (your bowing before images, and pictures, and crosses)
as bad and worse (then that prof^sse Christ and have him not in your minds)
then the heathens bowing to Molock, Baal, Jupiter, Bac^hus, Venus, etc* whose
spirits are as unclean as theirs, who have set up Images and Crosses to bow
down to them. You are the unclean spirits as the heathen, and a higher mystery
of iniquity then the heathen; but now is discovered by that which has long
been hid by the light Christ Jesus, and the seed of God which has discovered
the mystery of iniquity, which is the mystery of godlin^sse, and all these
pictures, and crosses, and bowings is come up since the days of the Apostles,
for amongst them there was no such things. Amongst you who have lost the power
of God, the Cross of Christ, and the image of God, and has not the mind of
Christ in you, so are fain to have dead images, crosses, and pictures, which
you call representations, to put your dead minds in remembrance of Christ, and
to stir it up which kills and slayes the just, all that be contrary to it; and
the heathen and you do not differ, for they bow to Images, and so do you; but
yours (as I have said) is a greater mystery of iniquity, who has fled from the
true foundation of the true Church, which is the pillar and ground of truth,
and so since have got up your images and idols.

Pr. Now because the main thing which you do carp at is at our bowing before
Images or pictures of the Saints, to the end that all your mouths may eternally
be stopped, I will show you out of the Scripture, that notwithstanding the bowing
down to Idols is most strictly forbidden in the second command^ment and other
places of Scripture; yet was it lawful both to make, honor and bow down to
other images, and other representations, although they were but dead creatures,
and the work of men's hands. The Arc of the Covenant you must confess was but
a dead creature made of wood and other materials, by the hands of men; and upon
this Arc were placed two Images, or representations of Cherubims, read the 7
of Joshua, verse. 6. and you will find that he and all Israel did worship and
fall down before this Ark and these Images, after the same manner that we fall
down before a Cross or a Crucifix, or the Images of the Saints.

Answ. Joshua and Israel falling down before the Ark, which was in prayer to
the Lord, and the Lord heard him, and spoke to him, and answered him. Now he
does not say that he fell down to the Ark or to the Images, or bowed down to
them; for the Law was contrary, which says, thou shall not bow down, etc. But
he and Israel fell down before the Ark to the Lord; and this is nothing to the
bowing now to Images, and pictures, and crosses, for that was the time of the
Figure, there was a Temple made, and many things, Tabernacle and Sanctuary,
which was all in the types and figures, before the substance was come; But now
the substance is come, Christ Jesus, who ends all types and figures, and
similitudes, and the patterns, for he is the substance of those things that
figured him forth, who has opened their mouths. So now your crosses, and your
images, and your pictures, and your bowings before them which you have made and
set up is Antichristian, without any command of God, against Christ who is the
substance. And if Joshua had bowed to the outward Arc, or Altar, or Temple, or
any of the Figures, etc. But it was not so, and the command of God was the
contrary; and we say Christ is come, the everlasting covenant, the everlasting
Priesthood; for in the first Covenant and priesthood was the Figures, and there
was singings, etc. But now they that sing must sing in the spirit, and they
that pray must pray in the spirit, and they that worship must worship in the
spirit; so it was the work of the Apostles to bring people off the shadows and
changeable things, to Christ the substance, where there was no shadow not
change, nor variableness, and to keep them from Idols, and so all your idols,
images, crosses, crucifixes, representations, are set up since the Apostasy,
from the Apostles, and so our mouths are eternally opened; and that Scripture
in Joshua the 7. brings nothing for you, for the Jews Ark is gone, and down
now, and their Altar and Temple is down and gone, and denied by them that be
true Christians in the life; but them that have a name, but be dead, are
setting up imitations and likenesses that has lost the life of Christ, and his
mind, and the image of God, are falling down before dead Idols; but Christ is
risen, and those that be risen with him are seeking those things that be above;
for crosses, crucifixes, images, idols, be below among the dirty mud where the
Devil is, in the earth, the murderer, and murdering one another about their
Idols and these dead things which are all out of the truth.

Pr. And even as Joshua and the Israelites made their prayers to God after this
manner and Ceremony, so do we make our prayer unto Christ and the blessed
Trinity; and because we have, or at least ought to have a sense of our own
baseness, and of the just indignation of Christ against us, we turn our
selves to his Saints and blessed Mother, who are likewise represented unto us
by these pictures, and do humbly beseech them to mediate between us and Christ.

Answ. Joshua his falling down before the Arc to pray to the Lord; your
falling down and praying before your Images and Idols, and Crosses, to put you
in mind of Christ is not measurable nor comparable with Joshua's; but for the
Ark which Joshua fell down before, it is ended, which Arc was a command of
God, but yours God never commanded, but have been invented by you that have
apostatized from the Apostles, who says, Little children, keep your selves
from idols; so that which God commanded being denied which they fell before,
much more ought yours to be denied which God never commanded, and both are
judged with the spirit of truth in which the Saints pray to God the Father of
spirits, who can pray without Images, or representations, or Idols; and the
Saints, and the Apostles, Christ bade them pray in his name, not in the name of
Mary, and not in the name of the Saints, nor in the name of his Mother, but ask
in his own name; for says he, Who is my mother, sister, and brother, but those
that do the will of my father: So this I say, though people be never so vile,
they are not to ask in the name of the Apostles, nor of the Saints, nor in the
name of Mary, but in the name of Christ; and he hears such who asks in his
name, for there is no other name under heaven given by which any can be saved,
then by the name of Jesus.

Pr. He says, when ye shall see the sign of the Son of man, which is the
sign of the Cross in the air, etc. then shall all the mockers of this sign
of the Cross seek to hide themselves in the clifts of the Rocks.

Answ. Who be in the Cross of Christ which is the power of God, they are in
Christ, and are made free from the wrath that is to come, and are in Christ,
which was before the hills, rocks, and mountains was settled; but your rocks,
and your mountains, and hills in the Apostasy has covered you, and to them you
have cried, and under them you have sheltered, who has drunk the blood of the
Martyrs, and Prophets, and Saints since the days of the Apostles; and your
Cross is in the Air set up by the prince thereof (who have inwardly ravened
from the spirit of God) which is the lying sign and the wonder, and not the
sign of the Son of Man; so spiritual Sodom and spiritual Egypt, which is
darkness, mystery Babylon the great mother of harlots which inwardly ravened
from the spirit of God, which has reigned over the Kings of the Earth, which
have set up her inventions, and turned against them that was in the spirit of
God, who be in the lying signs and wonders: And the Son of man is coming upon
you like a Thief in the night, the same to day, yesterday, and for ever. And
all schisms and heresies in the whole Christendom (so called) is amongst you
and such that profess the Scriptures, but be out of the life that gave it
forth, which with it, the life, we comprehend you all, which life was before
the Scriptures was given forth, and who be in it be of the Church.

Pr. He says, If you will look upon others, then draw your eyes from the bad
and worser sort, and look upon the better sort, whose lives and conversations
are without reproof, whose godliness, innocence, love and charity to all men,
etc. more then any other sort, and the very best amongst you in true real
worth and weight may no more compare then lead or dirt may be compared with
gold.

Answ. Your works and fruits should praise you (that is the counsel of a wise
man) and not thy own tongue, and your own tongues; but how can you speak of
innocence, or godliness, or humility, when that Fires, Inquisitions, and
Gaols, and killing of such as be contrary to your minds, which was not the work
of the Apostles, nor of them that kept the faith of Gods elect, that gives
victory over the world; and so those whom you call bad, and those whom you call
good, are all found one here, having drank the whores cup, found in the
fornication, without husband, out of the true humility, which is Christ the
seed that bears the sin and iniquity.

Pr. You take offense because the Roman faith does teach it lawful to punish
Schismatics and Heretics with the sword; but if you will be mad, and say that
those which seduce men's souls, and cause schisms and heresies in the Church,
and disturb the peace thereof, must be let alone, and may in no wise be
punished, who can help it.

Answ. The faith of the true Church did not teach any such doctrine to punish
Schismatics and Heretics, or Seducers with an outward sword, but said on the
contrary, their weapons was not carnal, but spiritual. Now the carnal
weapons who punish them you call Heretics and Schismatics, whose Church is
disturbed by such. You show you have not the power to convince gainsayers, and
stop the mouths of them and make them to confess that God is in you of a truth;
and this does show that you are reprobated from the true faith which the
Apostles were in, and of Christ, who said love your enemies, and if any one
smite thee on the one cheek, turn the other, now the beast and false Prophets
and the Antichrists, Mother of Harlots, should drink the blood of the Saints,
Martyrs and Prophets, and kill them, which the faith and patience of the Saints
did not rise against; now again the Lamb and the Saints should have the victory
which should slay with the sword, which are the words of his mouth, not
wrestle against flesh and blood, killing creatures, but over-comming with the
blood of the Lamb, And here is the faith and patience of the Saints whose
Kingdom is not of this world, but you that are killing with the sword, fire and
fagots, and inquisition, bowing before Images, Idols, Pictures and crosses,
these be all of this world and Kingdoms of it, carnal weapons and carnal
things, held up by the carnal and not spiritual. Now of your speaking of the
Magistrates, of the higher power, which is higher then all Image-makers, and
Idols, which gave them to see before transgression was, which Transgresser set
up Idols and Images which they in the higher power broke down, that was the
work of the Magistrates, and they had the wisdom to make the true figure, and
shadow, which Christ came to put an end to. And they that set up Images, Idols,
since the days of the Apostles, and Pictures, and crosses, and holds them up
by an outward power, and Magistrates, and compels others to bow down to them,
is the worship of the beast, and not the worship of God, and this I declare, in
the presence of the Lord God, and all the Magistrates that be in Gods fear,
they will break down your Idols and Images, and cross^s and crucifixes, and
masse-houses, Schools and Colleges, which you make Priests and Ministers in,
which they that know the Ministers made by the will of God will do this; and
the exposition of the Scriptures by your Church we cannot own, which is
Apostatized from the true Church, which bid the Saints keep from Idols, which
all that be of the true Church are so to do; And your Church which is run into
Idols, Pictures, and Likenesses, is run into error, and is not infallible, and
so you are gone from the life which gave forth the Scriptures, which Peter was
in, and so run into Idols, and must have Images and likenesses to put you in
mind of Christ and the Saints, And you are gone from the Spirit and the holy
Ghost which they was in, which over-saw the Churches, who watched for the Souls
and had the rule over the Saints, so from this Church are you apostatized and
its peace, which Church is the Pillar and ground of truth, the Devil is out of
the Pillar and ground of truth, he abode not in it, and all schisms and
heresies they cannot disturb the peace of this Church, here comes no swordmen
here* nor carnal weapons, nor inquisitions, fire nor fagget, stocks and
prisons, nor Idols, all such are without that deceives Nations, and tells them
they are a Church, which slayes the S^ints, P^ophets and Martyrs, the same
nature slew Christ and his A^ostles, and Abel with their carnal weapons, for
all are one out of the life and power of God, striking at creatures, wrestling
against flesh and blood in stead of striking at the power that captivates the
creatures, to the intent that creatures might come to the liberty of the sons
of God, now you h^ving not continued in the Apos^l^s faith, mind and spirit,
but Apostatized from them, you have all lost the guide and rule as they were
in, both Protestants and your selves that be out of the life and faith that the
Apostles was in that led them to give forth the Scriptures, so you have been
the wolves in the Sheeps clothing, destroying one another about outward things
and powers, but with the power of God, and life of God, by them that are in the
wisdom of God are you all judged to be out of the Kingdom of peace, which is
the Kingdom of Christ fighting with carnal weapons hailing to the Goals
Inquisitions, whips, stocks, houses, of correction, faggots, fires, either
Protestants or Papists are you here like the Kingdom of Christ his subjects,
but like Pharisees, Jews, and Cain, apostatized from the Apostles, lost the
faith, lost the unity, lost the Spirit of God which the Saints was in, which
led them to give forth the Scriptures, in which is the unity which is the bond
of peace, into which all that is called Christendom must come before they be
one, and all the names blotted out that is amongst them given to them in the
apostasy, since the days of the Apostles, and all their prayers is abomination
that be out of that unity; and to you that is the word of the Lord, and the
Quaeries thou have not answered, and your prayers is denied and your peace
also, for you have not abided in that which the Apostles and the Saints was in,
which did oversee the Churches, but you are turned strikers, which the Apostle
says they should not be so, And the Apostle saw the coming in of the man of
sin, and Christ speaks of Antichrist and the false Prophets coming in, with
their signs and lying wonders, which if it were possible, would deceive the
very Elect, which John saw was come and went forth from them, and bid the
Saints keep themselves from Idols, for they were them that got up Idols which
went forth from the Apostles, which Apostles bid the Saints keep to the
anointing in them, and they need not that any man should teach them, but as the
same anointing teaches them which is truth and no lie, and even as it had
taught them, so they should continue in the Father and in the Son, and they
that went forth from the Apostles, went forth from this; and in the Revelations
it is declared that all the world went after them who had the lying signs,
wonders and the miracles and deceived them that dwelt upon the earth, and that
has been the worship of the beast, and this has been since the days of the
Apostles, who said some should depart from the faith which is the shield, and
so made war against the Saints which was in the faith and over-came them; but
now the Devil shall be taken, and with him the beast and the false Prophets,
and cast alive into the lake of fire, and Babylon the great whore confounded,
and the Lamb and the Saints shall have the victory; and the everlasting Gospel
shall be preached to them that dwell upon the face of the earth, which is the
power of God, and strike down all those that has got the words but not the
power, and reach to the life and immortality, that that may come to light
through the Gospel which is the power of God, and to you that is the word of
God.

The Profession of the Catholic Faith, of the last Council of Rouen, holden
in the year 1571. according to the Council of Trent, holden the year 1360.
which they have taken upon oath and sworn to perform.
Answ. WHich Faith and profession, and Catholic, which is held up and
performed by an oath; a company of swearers, which are sworn to perform the
Catholic Faith and Profession, is got up since the days of the Apostles, and
since the days of Jesus Christ in the flesh, and separate from them: for
Christ says swear not at all, though they had sworn in the old time, Christ
who was the oath of God, and the Apostle says, above all things my brethren
swear not (who was in the covenant of God the oath of God,) not by heaven nor
by earth, nor any other oath, least ye fall into condemnation; so all swearers
whatsoever Papists or other that are called Christians, are fallen under the
condemnation; And the Apostles contended for the Faith, and was in the Faith
till death, and true brethren, which was held up without an oath; so all
that hold up, or perform their Profession of Faith, with an oath, are
apostatized from the true Church, Faith and Profession, from it reprobated, and
are under condemnation, from the Apostles, Saints and Christ, which was never
svvorn to perform the Profession of their Church, though the first Priesthood
swore, and the Angel, and men in strife, and Abraham, and Solomon, and Moses
and the Prophets, yet Christ the second Priesthood, the covenant of God, and
the oath of God, is that which ends all o^ths and denied swearing; and the
Apostl^s that were in the faith of him denied swearing, and these was of the
true Church, and pure Religion: And though the Angel swore, the Angels must
bow down to the Son of God, that says, Swear not at all; who is the end of the
Prophets, greater then Solomon, the end of Moses, reigns over the household of
Jacob and Joseph, and before Abraham, who said, swear not. Christ Jesus, him by
whom all things was made before it was made, the Master of the family of Heaven
and Earth, who is the Author of the true faith, which is held without an oath;
which Author of Faith denies oaths and swearing, and ends them, and they deny
swearing that be in his faith.

1. and 2. Prin^iples. IN. N. believe of firm faith, and profess all and
every of the things contained in the symball of the Faith, which the holy Roman
Church uses, viz.

1 I believe in God the Father all powerful, Creator of heaven, and of the
earth, and of all things visible and invisible.

2 And in one Lord Jesus Christ the only Son of God, and begotten of the
Father before all the worlds, God of God, Light of Light, true God of true God,
begotten and not made, consubstantial with the Father, by whom all things have
been made, who for all men, for our salvation is descended from heaven, and
has been incarnated by the holy spirit, of the Virgin Mary, and has been made
man, has been also crucified for us under Pontius Pilate; has suffered, and
has been entombed, and is risen again the third day according to the
Scriptures, and is ascended into heaven, is set at the right hand of the
Father, and again shall come in his glory to judge the living and the dead, the
Kingdom of whom shall have no end.

Answ. You are not in the true faith of the Son of God, nor know him not to be
come in the flesh that be swearers; and you that be not in the faith of the Son
of God, you know not God; but swearers are under the condemnation, and knows
not him that was crucified, that said, swear not at all. And knows not him that
dyed, and rose again, and him that is the Light of the world, and the Judge of
the world, Christ Jesus the Savior, by whom all things was made; made of a
woman, born of a Virgin, who is one with the Father, him ye know not, that be
out of the faith of him (and the Apostles) who said, Swear not at all, whose
profession, Church, Faith, and Religion is held up by swearing and oaths, with
all your stuff and invented words, apostatized from Christ and the Apostles
Church, profession, and faith, and Religion, under the condemnation; and all
professions besides upon the earth, which is held up by oaths and swearing, are
under the condemnation, in the reprobacy concerning the faith which is in
Christ Jesus, which gives the victory, and is the shield, and in which men
please God without an oath; you cannot please men, nor worship without an oath.

3 Prin. And in the holy Spirit, Lord and quickening power, who proceeds from
the Father and the Son* who with the Father and the Son is worshipped and
glorified, who has spoken by the Prophets.

Ans. You talk of believing in the Spirit that proceeds from the Father and the
Son, or God that spoke by his Prophets, which Christ is the end of the
Prophets; and you talk of true worship, as speaks in spirit and truth, which
the Devil and enmity is out of; you talk of these things, who holds up your
Church, profession, and Religion with oaths, a company of Apostates from the
true faith, which the Apostles were in, which Christ is the Author of; which
faith hearing, the spirit is received, which denies oaths, and then in that
spirit is God worshipped, and the Scripture known, given forth from it, and the
Son and the Father known, the Spirit received, and the spirit of the Prophets,
and the end of their words Christ Jesus, these are all known by the hearing of
faith, wherein the spirit is received.

4 Prin. And one holy Church Catholic and Apostolic.

5 Prin. I confess one baptism for the remission of sins, and wait for the
resurrection of the dead, and for the life of the world to come.

6 Prin. I admit and embrace most firmly the traditions Apostolic and
Ecclesiastic, and all the other observations and ordinances of the same Church.

Answ. Your traditions, your word Catholic, your sprinkling Infants, which
you call your baptism, does not remit your sins, for there is no Scripture for
it; so Church, traditions, sprinkling Infants, all have got up since the days
of the Apostles; and so the unholy Catholic and Apostolic Church,
traditions, is got up since the days of the Apostles, and your fruits declare
it in the Apostasy, from the true Church of the Saints and Apostles, and the
resurrection Christ, you be ignorant of, and the power of the world to come,
that be gone out of the faith that the Apostles were in.

7 Prin. I admit also the holy Scripture, according to the sense that has been
given by the holy mother Church, to the which it appertains, to judge of the
true sense and interpretations of the holy Scripture, and shall never take in
hand to interpret them, then according to the common consent of the Fathers.

Answ. Your mother which you call the holy Church, which gives the sense, is
the whore, from the spirit of God, which the Apostles was in, and Christ and
the Prophets; for that is it that knows the Scripture, and that was in the
Saints that gave it forth, and all must have it in them before they know the
words again, and come into unity with God again, of whom they learned that gave
it forth; and unity with the Scripture, and one with another, and this both
Papists and Protestants are out of; the spirit, and falling out about the sense
of Scripture, and your Father and Mother, sons which ravened from the spirit of
God, and so thou and you all teachers from others inventions; and your teaching
is traditions for Doctrine, which are the commands of men; but now to the Lord
be glory, ye are all discovered by his life.

8 Prin. More I profess that there is seven (truly and properly said)
Sacraments of the new Law, instituted by our Lord Jesus Christ, and necessary
for the salvation of humane people, but not all to every one, viz. Baptism,
Confirmation, Eucharist, penitence, the extreme unction, the Order and
Marriage, and that they confirm the grace, and that among them the baptism,
the confirmation, and the order cannot be rejected without sacrilege.

Answ. In this you have showed your Apostasy again, from the Apostles and
Christ's doctrine, which says, Go preach the Gospel to all nations, baptizing
them, without any limit; and Marriage they that forbid, that is the doctrine of
Devils, which is honorable, the Bed undefiled in all; And the Apostles does
not call them Sacraments, neither Baptism nor Marriage, nor the visiting of
the sick, nor the Lords Supper: Your confirmation and order, and your
penitence, whipping and beating your selves for your sins, is your own
invention, a sacrament of your own making, which the Apostle does not call
repentance, a sacrament, or confessing of sin, or sorrowing for sin, the nature
within should be afflicted, and circumcised in the spirit, which puts off the
body of sin, and that brought down; and not to strike the creature, and beat
the creature, that is as you wrestle with flesh and blood; the power of
darkness causes you to do that which guides you within, that strikes at the
creature; which power of darkness should be struck at, that the creature might
come into the liberty of the sons of God.

9 Prin. I receive also and admit the Ceremonies of the Church Catholic,
receive and approve in the administration solemnly, of all the abovesaid
sacraments.

10 Prin. I embrace and receive all and every of the things which has been
defined and declared by the sacred holy Council of Trent, touching the sin
original, and the justification.

11 Prin. I protest likewise, that in the mass is offered to God true, proper,
and propitiatory sacrifice for the living and for the dead, and that in the
most holy Sacrament of the Eucharist is truly, really, and substantially the
body, the blood, with the soul, and the divinity of our Lord Jesus Christ; and
that there is made a conversion of all the substance of the bread into the
body, and of all the substance of the wine into the blood, and the which
conversion the Church Catholic calls Transubstantiation.

12 Prin. I confess also, that under one of these, one receives Jesus Christ
all entire, and one true sacrament.

Answ. In these four Principles which ye teach for Doctrine, is but your own
traditions and commandments which are learned of one another, of men at the
Council of T^ent, and at your Fathers, which is your sin, in the apostasy from
the Apostles, who was not of man nor by man: And as concerning Justification,
ye are ignorant of; for where that is known, the sin is done away which came by
the first Adam; And they that believe are passed from death to life. And there
are some children of believers which is holy, yet all by nature children of
wrath in the unbelief; and your Church is held up by tradition, and traditions,
and vows, and oaths, which is all in the Apostasy, from the spirit where it
seems the root of the word protesting is come from your selves who are
Apostates, and not ftom the Scriptures; but you have thrust it in, and your
offering and mass it is but a dead thing, it is neither good for the dead nor
the living, the living do not accept of it but as Cains sacrifice; for are not
you murderers and destroyers of one another about Religion, sacrifice and
traditions, as Cain did, whom God did not accept his sacrifice? And as the
Jews did (without the life which gave forth the Scriptures) turn against the
just, and all the Apostates since the days of the Apostles, which are inwardly
ravened from the spirit of God, who set up all your lying signs and wonders,
and traditions, and deceive people with them that dwell upon the earth, who be
from the spirit of God, inwardly ravened from it, in which spirit God is
worshipped, which spirit brings to offer living sacrifice: And the bread and
wine after they have consecrated it, which you say is the very body and blood
of Christ, and soul, and it is divine, and that ye call Transubstantiation; and
he that receives either bread or wine, receives Christ. Now seeing that this
Doctrine and Principle is laid down by you the Council of Trent, and tolerated
by the great Bishop of Rome, the Pope, and taught by the Jesuits, I shall
demand one thing of you out of every Nation, and from every Dominion and Island
belonging to the Bishop of Rome, the Pope. Let there come forth a Bishop and a
Jesuit, and consecrate bread and wine, and after consecration and conversion,
which you call transubstantiation, which you say then is the very body, blood,
and soul of Christ, which is divine: Let that then be set by and kept; and let
us take of the same bread and the same wine, of the which you have consecrated
part, and set them both together, and let us have a watch over them, seven of
our side, and seven of your side, and see if that bread and wine do not corrupt
and perish which ye have consecrated, as well as the other which is not
consecrated, and prove not divine, and prove not immortal, but mortal as the
other; and if the bread and wine change not its taste, then we will say it is
the body of Christ, if it do not; and ye will not prove deceivers: But if it
prove bread and wine, and loose its taste, and alter its property, then
acknowledge your selves to be deceivers; but if it corrupt not, but prove the
body of Christ, then the Protestants may acknowledge they have wronged you, and
be of your religion, but if that prove to be bread, and prove to be wine; and
mortal, and not divine, then shall you deny all your religion and acknowledge
that you have wronged the Protestants, and turn to the Truth: So if you dare
adventure to try your Christ openly, and bring him out to the Light, and see
whether he will stand, and whether he will not corrupt, for the flesh of Christ
(which the Scripture speaks of) saw no corruption. So now if you will take a
public consideration, and give a public meeting after, send to any of them
in England called Quakers, and let there be a public trial; and his word
that comes to pass shall be the true Prophet, and his word that does not shall
be the false Prophet; which ye are if the bread and wine corrupt, and prove not
divine and immortal. These things have been taught for Doctrines, about which
there has been fightings, slaying and killing, and much blood spilt: so that
your weapons are but carnal and not spi^ituall, and there has been a great
deal of profession of these things, and a great denial. Now if you will try
them publicly, if they stand, you will come off with honor, and give over
fighting and killing one another about Religion; but in patience and meekness
let it be tried, and this will bring truth to light, and honor to God. If you
dare not come to the light, to a public trial, and ye being so many Nations
and Dominions, acknowledge your selves to be Apostates, and Deceivers, and so
fall under the truth, and let the white horse go over you.

13 Prin. I hold most constantly that there is one Purgatory, and that the
souls that are therein retained are helped by the supplications of the faithful.

14 Prin. Likewise that one ought to honor and invoke (or pray to) the Saints
which reign with Jesus Christ, and that they offer to God their supplication
for us, and that one ought to honor their Relics.

Answ. The Scripture speaks of no purgatory; and he that believes has passed
from death unto life, and shall never dye, nor come into condemnation. And the
wicked shall be turned into hell, and all that forget God; and death and hell
must go into the lake of fire, and God who breathed the breath of life into
man, by which man became a living soul; he has all souls in his hand, and the
honor which the Scripture speaks of it is owned; but the honor which is given
to the Saints, from that are you apostatized; and so your praying to Saints and
for the dead is in the purgatory already, your souls in the death; so your
souls are lean, who feeds your fleshly minds with similitudes, images,
Crosses, Crucifixes, old Relics, pieces of cloth, or old bones, which you
call relics of Saints, so are full of dead men's bones; a generation of
murderers, whose souls stands lean, and bound and captivated, and wants the
virtue of the immortal food.

15 Prin. I assure most firmly that one ought to have and to hold the Image of
Jesus Christ, and of the Mother of God, always Virgin and of the other Saints,
and render to them the honor and the veneration which appertains to them.

16 Prin. I affirm yet that Jesus Christ has left in the Church the power of
Indulgences, and that the use thereof is extremely healing unto the people
christian.

Answ. The power which ye have set up in your Church, which gives the honor to
the Image of Mary, the Image of Christ, and the other Saints; that I do believe
you, that which you should give to Christ, you give to Images; but this does
but show and make you manifest to be apostatiz^d from the Apostles, who had the
mind of Christ, and the image of the Son of God in them; so this Church and
its power is apostatized from the true Church and its power, who are giving
honor to the image of Christ, Mary, and the Saints, which was not the work of
the Apostles; and Mary their saying ever a Virgin, had not she children after
to Joseph? and when they said, behold thy mother and thy brethren stand without
desiring to speak with thee? etc. Is this the rise and ground of this word,
Godfather and God-mother, when your children are sprinkled Papists and
Protestants?

17 Prin. I know the holy Church Catholic, Apostolic, and Roman, to be the
Mother and Mistress of all the Churches, and promise and swear true obedience to
the Bishop of Rome, successor of St. Peter, Prince of the Apostles, and Vicar
of Jesus Christ.

Answ. I do believe you, your Church as you call it Catholic, is the
Mistress, and has been the Mother of all Churches false of Babylon, and the
mother of the harlots; from the true Church the Apostles and Saints was in; in
the Apostasy, which has been held up by the Sword, Fires, Faggots,
Inquisitions of the Popes, and quite out of the faith of Peter, who said,
render to no man evil for evil; but if any man offend you, ye will render
evil again. And for saying Peter was the Prince, will ye give Paul the lie,
who said, he came behind none of the Apostles? And Christ said, He that would
be greatest, should be least; and that there should be no Lordship exercised
amongst them one over another: And every man should have but his penny that
went into the Vineyard.

18 Prin. I receive also and profess without any doubt, all other things which
have been taught, defined and declared, by the sacred Canons, and Councels
universal, and principally by the sacred holy Council of Trent; and together,
all things contrary, and all the heresies condemned, rejected, and
anathematized by the Church, I them condemn, reject, and anathematize likewise.

Answ. I do believe you, who are bound up in the Apostasy from the true Church
of the Apostles, to that which your Council has set up without doubt; but
your trial is not yet come, and your selves you do not know, as for that,
because your Council, Pope, and Bishop, their traditions of their own
inventions, and profession and Church, and all things belonging to it has been
held up by an outward Sword, Fires, Faggots, Inquisitions, and this has been
held up by the same nature, and the same weapons, by which the Heathens held up
their Idol gods, and the apostate Jews, as the apostate Christians, from the
true faith, and from the true Christians of the true Church, whose weapons were
not carnal, but spiritual, by whose faith they overcame the world, the
kingdoms, and subdued mountains, and quenched the fiery darts of Satan. So
your overcoming, and all other Apostates, has been with outward weapons,
Gaols, Inquisitions, and death, bound with oaths, out of the Covenant of God,
whose Religion is built upon that, who are all the Wolves ravening, devourers,
and so doubts; the ground of them in your selves you feel not yet, your pasture
and fields has been so large for the Beast to raven up and down in; but now
the Lord God Almighty with his power will hedge you up, and bring you into a
narrower compass: And anathematized and heretics are ye all, from the
Apostles, as the Gentiles from the Jews; but Jews and Gentiles all come to be
one out of the life which gave forth the Scriptures: So Christians that be
apostatized, and anathematized from the life that the Apostles were in, be as
the Jews and Gentiles from the life of God, and with the life all
comprehended, amongst the Jews and Gentiles from the life of the Apostles, and
true Christians, and with the life of God are all judged, who be out of the
life of the Saints. So it is not the professors of the words of the Saints, but
they that be in the life that are justified; they are they who have unity with
God, and one with another.

19 Prin. And this faith Catholic, out of which any cannot be saved, the
which presently I profess of my good mind, and hold truly. I say, promise,
vow, and swear for to retain and confess, God helping, most constantly,
entirely, and inviolately until the last, teach and preach as much as shall be
possible for me, through them that shall be subject to me, or shall be in my
charge; so God me help, and these holy Evangelists of God.

Answ. All swearers are out of the faith of Christ Jesus, who said, swear not
at all; and the faith the Ministers of Christ, and the Apostles were in, who
said, swear not at all; and the Ministers of Christ was not made by oaths, nor
sworn to preach; but you are apostatized from their faith and life that gives
victory: And the Evangelists all of them was against swearing, there is not one
example among them all, not among the Apostles, that they broke the doctrine of
Christ in swearing, and was made Ministers by oaths, but by the will of God,
which you all are apostatized from them, and are held under with the Life, and
from their faith reprobated; and your faith and Catholic is out of that which
saves, and Church, and so come under the condemnation, which was the false
brethren went out from the Apostles, and since the world have gone after them,
which have had the Scripture, and your own traditions and ceremonies, the
sheeps clothing, which have been fain to bind one another, and tie one
another by oaths to uphold what you profess, which is all out of the Covenant
of God; and the saving faith you are ignorant of* and from it apostatized, which
gives victory over the world: and your teaching and preaching has been out of
the true faith, who multitudes has gathered after you, and so deceived the
souls of people, telling of a Purgatory, and your souls be in it; and this is
all judged with the true Judge of the world, the Bishop of the soul.

20 Prin. Ye say that ye ought to honor the Relics of Saints, and that God
has not forbidden Images, and that ye ought to honor Images of Saints,
because their bodies has been the organs and temple of the holy spirit, and
that God does by virtue of their holy Relics many miracles: and because that
the honor redounds to themselves, that they represent unto us: and when one
worships the Cross, the honor of the worship redounds to Jesus Christ. But
the Idols ye say are forbidded, which does represent the false gods which the
heathen worship.

Answ. God has forbidden to make Representations and Images of Saints and
Relics; and the Images of Christ and the Cross is set up by you who are
apostatized from the spirit of God, in which spirit God is to be worshpiped,
and not the Images of Christ nor the Saints, nor Crosses, for those be all out
of the power of God; and the cross of Christ which is the power of God, which
all must bend to; and the Crosses and Images of Male and Female whatsoever,
they that worship and honor them are as the heathen; for Relics, Images, and
Crosses are set up since the days of the Apostles, by you who are inwardly
ravened from the spirit of God by the same nature which went astray from the
life in the Jews and Gentiles; which when they went astray from the spirit of
God, they set up Images which displeased God, as you that w^nt forth from the
spirit of God since the days of the Apostles, inwardly ravened from that; who
say that after bread and wine is consecrated i^'s Christ, so are the Antichrist
that has set up the false Christ, who cries, Lo here, lo there, and so put
him in your chambers, deserts, and secrets, and yet you say he was crucified,
and rose again, and at the right hand o^ God, and say he was before all time,
and that by him all things was made; And yet ye likewise say, after ye have
consecrated bread and wine, which you call Transubstantiation, it is Christ,
and thus you confound your selves: And the lying signs and wonders which ye
call miracles, which ye say are wrought by the Relics of the Saints, is that
which John speaks of in his Revelation: The beast shall deceive because of his
miracles: And the Apostle speaks of, concerning the man of sin, which shall
deceive with his lying signs and wonders; and to the Relics ye have given
the honor and worship, and not to God, and so lives in the outward.

Now Jannes and Jambres could do miracles by the power of witchcraft, by the
same power the Beast and the false Prophets, the mother of harlots, Babylon,
and man of Sin, acted to deceive the Nations, since the days of the Apostles,
with all which is the mystery of Iniquity; she has sat as a Queen, Lady of
Kingdoms, and has seen no sorrow, but now she will come to l^sse of children;
for the Lord God of heaven and earth will be honored and worshipped, who will
not give his glory to any other, and not to Images, Relics, nor Crosses: And
the Apostles, you are all got up since, from them apostatized; for when they
was adoring of Paul, or adoring of Apollo, the Corinthians came under rebuke by
the Apostles, who said, Who is Paul, or who is Apollo? It Is Christ that dyed
and was crucified; and bid them prove and examine themselves if Christ were not
in them. Know ye not that Jesus Christ is in you except ye be reprobates? And
all these things are got up since the days of the Apostles; Representations,
Images, Crosses, and Relics, amongst you that are apostatized from them, that
bid the Saints keep from Idols, that had a sight of your coming up before their
decease, which you Papists and Professors has since reigned and drunk the
blood of the Saints, and the Saints blood drunk, and has been Satan's
synagogue, and out from the Saints. This should be, that the word of God might
be fulfilled, and are fulfilling. But now the Lamb and the Saints, the Topstone
is over your heads, and Christ is come to reign, Glory to the highest for ever,
who kills with the sword, which are the words of his mouth, conquering and to
conquer. And the seed is risen and rising in males and females, the sons and
daughters of men.

From them that be of the seed which the Beast makes war against.

The Answer to R.W. his Paper, wherein he vindicates the doctrine and practice
of the Roman Church so called, to be the Church of Christ.
In the dark night of ignorance when men has been as in a deep sleep, and
their eyes closed in security, and a spirit of slumber has seized upon many
Nations, the God of this World having blinded their eyes, then the ravinous
beasts, have come out of their dens, and has ranged abroad in the earth,
seeking to destroy and to devour the sheep of the Lords pasture, and to kill
them that the shepherd has fed, and to lead them astray as into a great
Wilderness from the fold, that they might worry them and destroy them, and
make a prey upon them, and that which Christ prophesied of which Math. has
recorded Chapter the 7. verse. 15. and in the 24. of Math. 9.10. and the 11. the
false Prophets, the Wolves, which should come and devour, and to the intent,
that they may not be so easily descovered by the Sheep, they shall come in the
sheeps clothing, but inwardly are ravining Wolves, and these John and Peter and
Paul saw come in their days, and fortold that they should more increase after,
and should not spare to make havoc of the Church of Christ, and this was long
before the general apostasy, and they fortold that there should be a departure
from the faith, and likewise that many should make ship wrack of faith and a
good conscience, and the spirit spoke expressly, that in the latter time some
should depart from the Faith, and should give head to seducing spirits and
doctrines of Devils that should speak lies in hypocricy, forbidding to mary,
and commanding to abstain from meats which God has created, 1 Timothy 4.1, 2, 3.
and this doctrine of Devils is found in the Church of Rome, with many more
which hereafter may be mentioned which clearly demonstrates, that the Wolves
the false Prophets, the deceivers the Antichrists, the Seducers, and them that
taught the doctrines o^ Devils, and them that were seduced and believed this
doctrine, which was apostatized from the doctrine of Christ, and the Apostles,
here is your beginning, here is the cornerstone of your foundation, the
dead-stones of which your visible Church was made up of, which is none of Gods
Temple; but the synagogue of Satan, and a residence for the Devil, from whence
all these Devilish doctrines have proceeded, that has corrupted all nations,
and has unsetteled them that they are become like a sea, casting out all this
mire and dirt, swelling, raging, tossing, unstable, the Nations are waters,
tongues, languages, kindred, out of these waters, rose the beast with his heads
and horns that has prevailed and has overcome the Saints, and has shed
their blood, and filled them, and has made war against the Lamb (and yet does)
and his followers, so that none has escaped the rage of the beast; who had not
his mark, and upon these waters, kinreds, tongues Nations, and Peoples; the
whore sits which is none of the Lambs wife, and she has made all drunk with
the wine of her fornication, so that all Nations have been intoxicated, and
inflamed, and have reeled, and staggered, and fallen from the faith which
stands in the power of God, and so being erred from the faith that works by
love; you have set up another fained faith which works by* wrath and envy,
murder and cruelty, witness your bloodly mas^acring, torturing, racking,
tearing, rending, burning, destroying, killing and murdering many thousands
since the days of the Apostles; so that your faith is manifest to be reprobate
by the fruits you have brought forth before mentioned; I challenge all the body
of your visible Church (so called) to prove, that ever Christ, or his Apostles,
or the Churches which believed and received the everlasting Gospel, and were in
the faith that wrought by love, where they taught, or practiced any such
things, as burning, kiliing, destroying, racking, them that were Heretics, or
there was heresy at Jerusalem among the Jewish Church, some that held that
their was neither Angel, nor Spirit, nor resurrection which was heresy, and yet
their is no mention of burning, or killing of such, and (their was heresy in
the primitive times, before ever your ruinous heap of visible dead stones were
brought together, of which now so great a Babell is builded, or before you had
the name of a Church, and yet no mention is made of their burning, or racking,
or killing of them; for the faith which wrought by love endured all things, in
which the Apostle was in the charity that suffered long and endured all things;
but your fruits have made your reprobate faith manifest unto many, blessed be
the Lord.

But now the night is far spent, and the day is at hand, and is dawned upon
many, and the Antichrists is seen, and the Deceivers and false Prophets, and
the Wolves that has the sheeps clothing the Saints words, and now the table of
Devils is seen, and the doctrine of Devils, and they will not be partaked of,
nor harkened unto as they have been in years past; for now the heritage of God
that has laid wast, is coming to be tilled, and the threshing-instrument that
has teeth, is put into the hands of the Lambs followers, and now woe to the
hills they shall be threshed to dust, and shall be levelled, and woe to the
beast his horns shall be broken, which has risen out of the Sea, the Sea
shall be dried up out of which he had his rise, and the mother of Harlots shall
become desolate and her Flesh burnt with fire, and woe to her merchants, that
have traded by Sea, for it will be dried, the lamentation is heard which shall
speedly come when they shall cry alas! alas! and woe to the Kings of the earth
that have drunk of the whores cup, and woe to them that have admired the beast,
and have said who is able to make war with the beast: he is come who is able to
make war in righteousness, and has showed himself and has put on strength who
treads the wine press of the wrath; who travels in the greatness of his
strength, out of whose mouth goes a sharp two-eged Sword which shall dash all
to pieces. Consuming fire is before him, ten thousands of his Saints, is with
him, and he in them; they go on in his strength, Conquering and to Conquer,
Arm your selves, cast up your Batteries, come all to the battle of the great
day of God. and see if you be able to stand against the Lord; for he has
manifest his wisdom from above, which will confound all your deceit. For we
esteem no more of your Arguments then straw, nor of your devised Fables no more
then rotten wood: For you are all rounded as with a hoop, and measured as with
a line; your beginning is in the Apostasy, your rise in the night of darkness,
your strength lies in ignorance, and your end will be utter darkn^sse: and this
shall stand true, when your place shall be no more found, nor one stone left
upon another which shall not be thrown down.

And now I come to the answer of the substance of thy Arguments and Principles.

First, thou says, This is good Catholic Doctrine, that a man may have the
true faith, and yet lead a sinful life: And further, that a wicked man and a
godly has true faith, and it does not differ a whit in matter or substance in
the godly and ungodly. Now to say one has faith, and not the other, is against
all sense and reason thou says.

Answ. I do believe thee that this is thy Catholic doctrine, but I cannot
call it good, for then I should err like thy self; for this Doctrine is
contrary to the doctrine of the Gospel, for true faith is that which the just
lives by, Hab. 2.4. And that which the just lives by is pure; the matter of it,
by it he is cleansed, and the faith of the godly stands in the power of God,
and that is a pure thing: And he that has the true faith, has the faith of
Christ, who is truth from whence it comes, and it leads out of sin, and a
sinful life; gives victory over sin. This is the victory even your faith. By
faith the godly stands, 2 Cor. 1.24. And by faith the godly walks, 2 Cor. 5.7.

But on the contrary, a wicked man's faith, if thou call it faith, is called a
feigned faith, and a dead faith, and is centred in him who has the power of
death which is the D^vill; and this is another thing for matter and substance,
and is a distinct thing; and by the fruits and effects the true faith is ^nown
from the reprobates in the different operations; and so this is a devilish
doctrine thou have laid down, to wit, that they are one in matter; for this is
contrary to Scripture sense and reason, and is an unreasonable position laid
down and ^^^firmed, from thy unreasonable mind which is erred from the true
faith.

And again, the faith of the godly and ungodly differs in effe^ts, but not in
regard of the faith it self (thou says;) and here is thy confusion manifest,
and thou say all the five senses will teach you; That a man may be chaste in
his mind, and yet be angry; and he may be temperate, and yet want patience.
Thou that has no other thing to teach thee but the five S^nses, art sensual,
and knows not the spirit: For a man to be chaste, and yet angry, is a false
thing; he that is angry and intemperate, is not chaste, but joined to that which
adulterates, for these are the Devils conceptions and works; they and in whom
these are brought forth is not chaste, but is in Cains way, and in Dives way:
and thou say, if you can conceive this, that a man may have true faith, and
yet want godliness of life and conversation, thy conception is false:

For he that is temperate and chaste, and lives in that which makes him so,
wants not charity nor patience; for the true faith of Gods elect purges from
all sin, and that faith is reprobate where ungodliness is brought forth, and
contrariwise thou says, a man may be of an honest and godly conversation, and
yet want faith; utter darkness is thy dwelling place, and thou speaks out of
thick darkness; Is there a conversation godly, or like God lived in where
there is no faith or honesty? where there is no faith, that is utterly false,
for these are the fruits of faith, of a lively faith; for honesty and a godly
conversation is the works which proceeds from a true and living faith, as the
Scriptures witness, and these things thou says thou thought good to commend
to consideration. Thou that thought these things good, calls evil good, and
good evil, and art in blindness, and I have considered of the things, and I
never heard of so much blindness uttered by one who would seem to be a teacher
of others: And now I come to that which follows.

2 P^^n. That the people or Church of Christ has been always visible, not
only in the beginning, or in the Apostles days, But also since the Apostles
days, even until now, and shall be to the end of the world: And for this thou
say, Christ has promised, that the gates (...) shall not prevail against it,
but that he will be with them till (...) end of the world: and for this end
thou say the Apostle said, Ephesians. 4. That he has given some to be Apostles,
some Evangelists, for the work of the Ministry, till we all come to the unity
of faith, and unto the stature, and fullness of Christ.

Answ. The Church of God in the beginning, in the Prophets days, Christ's
days, the Apostles days, and since the Apostles has always been in God, and
has always been invisible, as to the eye of the world, which could never
discern them, nor wherein their communion stood with God; yet notwithstanding
there has always been men, and people, who feared God, and believed in the
invisible God, whom the world never knew to be such, but always did persecute:
and they that did persecute, have named themselves to be the Church of God. Yet
notwithstanding all this, there has been in all ages some that has born a
visible testimony against the world, that lies in wickedness, and against the
false Prophets, Seducers, Deceivers, and Antichrists; and these that bore their
testimony against all these before mentioned, they were in the faith of our
Lord Jesus Christ, and declared against their Idolatry in all ages, and these
Christ promised, that the gates of hell should not prevail against them. And
although the gates of Hell did not prevail against their bodies, or outward
man, yet never prevailed against the rock Christ upon which they were builded,
but has always been with them in the deepest suffering* and greatest
ffli^ction, and has preserved them faithful unto death, so that they have not
denied his testimony, nor the word of his patience; for they have not loved
their lives unto the death: And sometimes they have been more visible, and
sometimes less, yet two or three that know the name of Christ, and live in the
power of Christ, Christ is in the midst of them, and they may be truly said to
be a Church of Christ; and these God has promised to be with, who believes in
Christ the power of God, to the end of the world, and against these the gates
of hell shall never prevail. And whereas thou say, He gave some Apostles, and
some Evangelists, Pastors and Teachers, for the work of the Ministry, for the
perfecting of the Saints. This is granted, and it did, and does effect the same
end for which he gave it: But when ordained he the Popes, the Cardinals, the
Friars, the Monks, the Jesuits, and the Nun^, for the work of the Ministry? or
whether have any of all these effected the same things which the Apostles did
by their gifts: But rather on the contrary, They have perverted the straight
way of the Lord, and have made the word of God of none effect by their
traditions, and has introduced and brought in those things to be observed
amongst people, which God has neither commanded nor commended, but on the
contrary forbidden and condemned.

3 Prin. That all those people or Congregations, or meetings, or Churches,
which have not been constantly visible from Christ's time till now, are not, nor
cannot be the Church of Christ; and then thou makes this conclusion, that the
Roman Church can show its constant and successive visibility from Christ's time
till now; therefore the Roman Church must needs be the Church of Christ.

Answ. By thy own words thou have proved your Church to be no Church of Christ,
neither your officers and Ministers to be Ministers of Christ; for Matthew,
Mark, Luke and John, Peter, Paul, and the rest of the Apostles, makes no
mention of any such officers, as Po^es, Cardinals, Friars, Monks, nor Jesuits,
neither of any such doctrine did they allow of as you preach, to wit, the
doctrine of Devils, in forbidding to marry, and commanding to abstain from
meats which God has created; and also teac^ing to make Images, and set up Images
and Idols, and also teaching to burn and kill, and destroy them whom you call
Heretics, which Christ nor none of the Apostles ever did: So that it is
manifest from the Scripture of truth, that your visible Church was not always
since Christ's day; for Peter, Paul, and many of the Apostles lived after
Christ's day, and they make no mention of any such ministry, doctrine, or
practice, as is found amongst you, only foretells of you, and prophesies of
you, that Antichrist should come, Deceivers should come, and false prophets
should come; and Peter, whose successors you say you are, he foretold of you,
and has left his testimony against you, and against them who preach for filthy
lucre, those things the Apostles taught not. (Amongst many things this is one)
in teaching and making people believe a purgatory after they be dead, and this
was invented by you to get filthy lucre, and to get dishonest gain. Another
thing to give pardons, that you may get money, and filthy lucre, so that it is
manifest you are none of Peter's successors, but are apostatized from the faith,
from the doctrine, from the practice of Christ, of the Churches of Christ in
the days of the Apostles, and were not visible then, nor counted the Church of
Christ by any, in many years after the decease of the Apostles. But the false
Prophets that Christ spoke should come, which John, and Paul, and Peter saw
creeping in then, who erred from the faith, and apostatized from the truth, who
subverted whole households from the faith; there is your original, they that did
subvert, and they that were subverted, and held part of the form of godliness,
and denied the power, there is the beginning of your visible Church,
Antichrists, false Prophets, Seducers, and seduced, you are their succssors,
and from thence your visibility came to be seen in the world. So in that which
I have said does clearly evidence, that you have not constantly and visibly had
the name of a Church since Christ's time, although you call your selves the
ancient Church: And I say unto thee in thine own words, Except thou be
bewitched and possessed with a spirit of blindness, here is enough to convince
thee, and all thy visible members, that your Roman Church is not so ancient as
Christ nor the Apostles. But you are quite another thing, which has sprung up
since, and are apostatized from the Doctrine and from the Faith, which the
Churches which were before you were in, as the Church at Jerusalem, at Antioch,
and the rest of the Churches, which had received the faith of our Lord Jesus
Christ without respect of persons, from which faith you are now reprobated.

4 Principle. Thou say, that Luther, Calvin, Memno, Beza, and others were
first popish Priests, and those that followed them was first of the Church of
Rome, and these thou say fell from the Faith, and were accounted by you
Heretics, and says they ought to produce more evidence, for their faith which
they professed being separated from you, then you need to do from whom they
separated.

Answ. They are Heretics who denies the true foundation, and who err from the
true faith which the Saints possessed, and and lived in: But your visible
Church have left the true foundation, and have erred from the faith which
Christ and the Apostles declared and lived in; therefore you are the Heretics.
Therefore Luther, Calvin, Memno and Beza, and the rest, seeing your Doctrine,
Principles, and Faith to be contrary to the Doctrine of Christ, and the
Primitive Churches, God opening their eyes, and let them see that you had
innovated and brought in another Doctrine and other practices then had been
taught or practiced amongst the Apostles, therefore they denied yo^ in many
things, although they were not clearly come off your principles, nor did not
see clearly through your deceit; yet so far as they saw by the light of the
Lord, they bore testimony against you, and gave a clearer demonstration that
you were out of the faith then you ever did (or can do) that you were in the
Faith: But that is made manifest in this the day of the Lords power, which sees
over you, and beyond you, and comprehends your ground, and all the body of your
Religion which stands in imitations, imaginations, inventions, and traditions.
And further thou says; that you can bring more Scripture for your Catholic
doctrine then they that are separated from you; and thou brings two Scriptures
to prove some of your doctrine, and say, that the Church of Rome teaches,
that Christ's body is real in the Sacrament, for which thou brings the 11 Cor.
23, 24. verses, which proves nothing to the purpose; for the body of Christ is
incorruptible, and saw no corruption: But bread corrupt^, and will corrupt,
notwithstand^ng all your consecration; but as concerning this, I shall refer
the Reader to that which is written in answer to the former pap^r.

Again, Thou says, that the Apostles and their successors had power to remit
sins, according to John 20.23. The Apostles who believed in the Son of God,
unto whom all power is committed, and had received power from God, could do
nothing against the power, which was their life, and what they said and did
from that power, st^ndeth for the same power that Christ received of the
Father, the same he gave unto them; and the same that they did remit was
remitted.

But what is this to the Pope, who is out of the power of God, who follows his
Successors, the Antichrists, Deceivers, Apostates and vagabond Jews, and
Exorsists, who would have cast out Devils in the name that Paul preached, but
could not. When did Christ or any of his Apostles say to the Pope, or any of
the Cardinals, Friars, Monks, Jesuits, whose sins ever you remit are remitted.
Or when did he give the Pope, or any of his Cardinals, Friars, Jesuits, Monks,
power to sell Pardons for money; Is not this a doctrine of the Devil, which
Peter, whose successors you say you are, who declared against you, and such as
you, who said concerning you; that you taught those things for filthy lucre,
which you ought not to teach.

And further thou say, thou conf^sses that there are other points of Popish
Doctrine which you teach; that there is not such evident Scripture for; as for
those before mentioned, if thou had said there had bin none at all, thou had
spoke truth and this is the Popish doctrine, which thou say you have not
clear Scriptures for; for Purgatory, and praying to Saints, and baptizing of
Infants, etc. I say there is no Scripture at all, except it be your own devised
Fables, For the blood of Christ cleanses from all sin them that do believe;
and there is no need of any other thing to cleanse, and so your Purgatory is a
feigned fiction, and a lying invented thing, invented by the Pope to get money
by. And as for praying to the Saints, there is no Scripture for, but against
it: For it is written, thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him ONLY shall
thou serve; and call upon me in the day of trouble. It does not say, call upon
the Saints. And farthermore Christ said, Whatsoever ^e ask in my name, it
shall be given you. And farthermore Christ said to his Disciples, Whatsoever
you ask my father in my name, it shall be granted unto you. He exhorts them
not as the Pope does, to ask in the name of St. Mary, and St. Peter, and St.
Dominick.

And as for baptizing of Infants, that is an invention of your own, framed and
formed since the days of the Apostles. For the Apostles were commanded to
teach and preach before they baptized any; but you baptize those that are
unt^ught, and unlearned, and these they call members of you^ visible Church,
and so all this f^igned doctrine before mentioned is denied and and condemned
by the spirit o^ the Lord, which you are erred from.

5 Prin. That the Scripture does no where clearly teach, that we must do
nothing, nor believe nothing which is not written in the Scripture, so thou
says even by our own rule, the whole foundation of all our n^w faith falls to
pieces: For if I am bound to believe nothing but what stands in Scripture, then
thou say, thou art not bound to believe this maxim of Heretics, because
it stands not in Scripture.

Answ. Paul was no Heretic, and he said; If I or an Angel from heaven preach
any other Gospel, let him be accursed. And Moses he was no H^retick; and he said
to the Church of the Jews concerning the book of the Law given unto them, Thou
shall not add thereto, nor take therefrom. And John he was no H^retick, and he
said; If any man shall add unto these things written in the book, God shall add
unto him the plagues that are written in the book. (And yet all these were
H^reticks in thy account) and their faith stood in the power of God; and this
the Scripture bears witness of, and those things were written in the Scripture,
that they might be believed, and from the spirit of truth they were written:
And so if thou profess thou have the spirit of truth, thou art bound not to
believe any thing contrary to the Scripture; and here your foundation and
doctrine is dashed to pieces by the spirit of God who spoke for the Scripture.

And farther thou goes on in thy blindness and ignorance, and says, thou art
not bound to believe that the Bible is the word of God; because it stands not
in Scripture, is not the Scripture that which is written in the Bible? And do
thou not call the Scriptures the Word of God? and yet foolishly says, the
Bible stands not in the Scripture.

Thou goes on and says it is most clear, that we are bound to believe and
receive some things that are not written in the Scripture; they who know the
bond of the spirit are not bound by i^, to beli^ve any thing which is contrary
to the spirit, which speak forth the Scripture. Further thou brings 2 These. 2.
and 15. and 21 John and 25. to prove that we are bound to believe something
that is not ^ritten in the Scripture, because the Apostle exhorts the
Thess^lonians to stand fast, and to hold the traditions which they had been
taught, whether by word or writing. Now if thou can produce thou may, the words
that he taught to the Thessalonians, which was spoken by the same spirit which
he wrote the Epistle^ by: and that which he spoke, doubtless is not contrary
to that which he wrote, and so this proves nothing that every one is to believe
your vain traditions which you have invented in your carnal minds, being erred
from the faith, and having lost the spirit. And although John say, that there
were many other things that Christ did, which are not written: Yet what does
this prove, that your innovated stories and devised fables ought to be
believed? And I say unto thee, and unto all you, it is mere madness to aver,
or to believe that which is contrary to that which is written: And then thou
says, if any man ask thee what those things be which Christ and the Apostles
taught, and have not written, thou gives an answer thy self, that they taught
to baptize Infants, and that we must sanctify the Sundays, and other holy
days, and to fast in Lent, and acknowledge Sr. Peter's successors for the
governors of Christ-Church, and to say Mass, and with all other points of
Catholic doctrine; all which pack of lies, and foolish fopperies, and
invented imaginations, which is all contrary to that which Christ spoke, and
the Apostles wrote of him. For these are all invented stuff, some from the
Heathens you have by traditions, and the rest has been invented, both the words
and the things themselves since the Apostles days, wherein there has been a
great Apostasy, and all the world has wondered after the Beast.

And thou says, If any ask thee upon what ground thou believes that Christ and
the Apostl^s taught all these things before mentioned. Thy answer is, upon the
same ground thou believes they wrote the New Testament, even the testimony of
all Christians in all ages. Here thou have showed thy faith, that it is but
reprobate, and is but by hearsay, and is builded upon hearsay and tradition.
And for your testimony of Christians in all ages, let us have your testimony
from the Christians of Jerusalem, from Antioch, from Thessalonica, Colossia,
and Corinth, Philippia, and the rest of the Churches and Christians, which
lived in the age of the Apostles: And likewise let us have the testimony of the
Churches of Asia, which if thou do bring to prove these forementioned
things, then thou brings a testimony against Christ and the Apostles, to make
them transgressors, to build those things which they have destroyed: And thou
says, by that which thou have written, we may see the firmness of the Roman
faith: By that which thou have written, I see the blindness, and the
ignorance, and the rottenness, and the foundation of the Roman Church to be
but rubbish, and sandy, for it stands upon inventions, men's traditions, and
devised fables, and lying stories, and is not founded upon the Rock of ages,
and stands in the waters, which are moveable and unstable upon which the whore
sits, which has made all Nations drunk, which the great Kings thou speaks of,
which has been converted, have drunk of, and so came to be Protectors of the
Pope, and defenders of your Religion by carnal Swords, by Fires, Murders, and
Inquisitions, and killing them who keep the word of Gods patience, and deny all
your Idolatry, and this has been acted amongst you since the Apostles days, in
the Apostasy. But the Lord in his power has appeared, and has dried up some
of the waters out of which the B^ast had his rise, and has broken some of his
horns with which he has pushed; and all the Kings which have given their power
to the Beast, have made war against the Lamb and his followers: But the time is
coming when the Beast, and the Whore, and the false Prophets and Antichrists
shall be taken, and cast into the Lake, and the Lamb, and the Saints shall have
the victory.

6 Prin. Your Church, thou say, is proved to be the true Church, by the
great sanctity and power of godliness, and mortification, as has appeared in
the Roman Church in all ages, and how they have lived in pure and perfect
chastity, and how they have left their pride, and thou challenges to show thee
such among all those thou calls Heretics.

Answ. More ungodliness has not appeared, neither has been acted by any
heathens in the world, then has been acted amongst you, as blood shed,
murder, killing, burning, destroying them that would not worship your Idol;
and you have made the name of Christ which you profess in words, and
christianity to stink among Heathens by your barbarous cruel^y, and your
unhumane usage of them in many places of the world; and as for sanctity and
holiness you are altogether strangers unto. Is there not tolleration for
whoredom in the principal Cities of the Popes Dominions, and cruelty, the like
is not to be found in the whole world? Witness your devill^sh Inquisition, and
hellish devices, to torture, and kill, and destroy them which will not submit,
and follow your foolish imaginations, and deny the living God; and for pride,
he which you call your holy Father, has exceeded, many Kings has been made to
kiss his feet; and in most of the Nations where the Roman faith is professed,
no such pride appears in any Nation except them.

And furthermore thou says, the mighty power of God has appeared in
converting whole Kingdoms into the Christian faith; your conversion we know,
and your converts have been made manifest by their fruits, that they are
twofold more the children of the Devil, and have but only turned them from one
sort of Images to set up another; and that which you call conversion, more has
been turned for fear of your swords, faggots, and fires, being afraid of death,
then has been by any of your doctrine which has been taught. And as for your
fasting, thou boasts of, we know what it is, denying one sort of meat, and
taking another; and fasting one day, and riotous another: And as for your
voluntary humility and poverty which stands in your own wills, which is only
to deceive people, that thereby your Cloisters and your Cells might be enriched,
that your Friars and your Monks might live in pride, and idlen^sse. And thou
says by this doctrine which Austin the Monk taught, that is to say, to fast
from lawful meats, and to confess their odious and secret sins unto him, have
converted whole Nations by this Doctrine from the vanities and pleasures of the
world, as I said before, they are but turned to outward shows, and Images, and
the pleasures and vanities of the world are still standing in their hearts, and
shows themselves forth in their actions.

And as for thy Saints, Boniface, Wil^road, and Saint Patrick, their work is
yet to be seen; they which profess the same Doctrine in Ireland, the fruits
has made Patricks Doctrine, and their conversion manifest (which was
Rebellion) Treachery, Murder, and Bloodshed, and many thousand men, women and
children have been destroyed in that Nation within less then this twenty
years, which is manifested, that Patrick and his Converts was Cains
successors, and not the successors of the Apostles of Christ. And as for the
lying Wonders and Miracles thou speaks of, and of a Jesuit raising twenty dead
bodies to life again. It is like thou will prove this, as well as thou proved
that Christ taught to say Mass, and to fast in Lent, and keep holy days: But
all thy lies are seen, and your deceit found out, and with the life of God you
are all judged. And though you have deceived the Nations long, and kept people
in ignorance and blindness, and have maintained your deceit by Cains weapons,
and have upholden the kingdom of Antichrist by your bloody cruelty; yet he is
come, and coming to be revealed in the Nations, whose Dominion is everlasting,
who will subdue all his enemies under his feet, and take the wicked in their
own craftiness; and he himself alone rule, whose right it is, who will
confound you with all your Idols for ever, that his glory over all may be
advanced.

F. H.

THis is the word of the Lord God to you that fast and afflict your selves, and
observe days, and meats, which the Kingdom of God stands not in. You that fast,
you want the Bridegroom, you want Christ, and the bond of iniquity is amongst
you; and this fasting and afflicting of your selves for a day, and days, is not
the Fast that the Lord requires, which breaks the bond of iniquity; which fast
being known, that the Lord requires, the foundation of many generations is
raised up. You may fast from meats and drinks for days, and observe meats, and
afflict your selves; the envious man, the man-slayers do thus, which would kill
and murder, and slay in the heart. Now this is not the Fast which is required
of God, but of men, while the bond of iniquity is standing, whilst strife and
debate is, do you not make vows from the Marriage? Is not then the cause you
so do in the doctrine of the Devils, and the forbidding of meats, which ought
to be used with praise and thanksgiving? The Fast of the Lord is coming to be
known that he requires, which break^ the bond of iniquity, which is the
foundation of many generations, and the marriage of the Lamb many are come to
know, and enjoy the presence of the Bridegroom, where they do not fast; where
they come into the wisdom of God, by which all the creatures were created,
with which they come to use and order the creatures of God to his glory, and
sees the Kingdom out of meats, out of drinks, out of the observation of days,
above meats and drinks. Your leaders have caused you to err, envy and
wickedness has been in them strong, which is by the power of the Lord God
comprehended and judged, whose sacrifices God has no respect to, who be in
envy in Cains way, man-slayer^; therefore haste out of the old life, and come
to witness the chaste Virgin, which follows the Lamb, that to him you may be
married and joined all ye poor captivated ones; for the Lord is come, and
coming to exalt the kingdom of his Son, whose Standard shall stand over all
the earth, and Nations shall be ruled by his Rod of Iron; come to know strife
ceased, and envy ceased, and selfishnesse ceased, and pride ceased, and
wickedness and wilfulness ceased; and envy, and plots, and murder ceased, and
the bond of Iniquity; for this is that which will and does deceive the
simple-hearted, for the Lord God with his power is come to redeem, Who
inlightneth every one that comes into the world, that all men through the
light might believe, whose day is appearing, and glory is revealed. So now
every one of you that be come into the world, having a light from Christ the
Savior of your souls, from whence it comes. Now this, you that be enlightened
withal, it lets you see your sins you have done, as thoughts you think, and
words you speak, and actions you act, and ways you walk, with the same light
that lets you see this (which comes from Christ the Savior of your souls, who
has all power in heaven and in earth given to him) the same will give you
power to come out of your sins: And there you come to receive the Covenant of
God, Christ Jesus, who has given you the light to see sin, he it is that takes
away sin, and blots out sin and transgression.

And now every one of you, this is the word of the Lord God to you, all heed
^he light that you are enlightened withal, with that you will feel your
Savior, for the light lets you see sin, the same blots it out, the same is the
covenant of God, the same gives power, for all power in heaven and in earth is
given to the Son, who is to rule and subdue to himself all the powers of
darkness and wickedness. The light which you be enlightened withal lets you
see your deeds you have done, your words you have spoke, your ways you have
walked in, your actions you have acted, the same will give you power to stand
against your sin; and there is the teacher, and the same will condemn all of
you hating the light, which is Christ which has enlightened you withal; and if
you go on still in wickedness, the same will become your condemnation at the
last. Remember, when you are in your wickedness, and upon your death beds, you
were warned in your lifetime, and this light will let you see when evil
thoughts get up in you, and evil affections, and evil desires, and check you,
and reprove you, if you love it, and heed it; when you are walking up and down,
when you are fitting still by your selves, secretly it will bring you to think
upon God, and when you are walking up and down abroad, yet it is present with
you, there will be your teacher, there will be your condemnation if you hate
it: The light of Christ, who says, Learn of me, I am the way, the truth and
the life. This is my beloved son hear you him: And there is no way to the
Father but by him, who does enlighten every man that comes into the world, him
by whom it was made, all the sons of Adam drove from God in transgression,
Christ the second Adam, the way to God, who is the way and the life. But man
being drove from God, from life, and from truth, so Christ is the truth, man
being drove from God, from Gods righteousness; so Christ is Gods
righteousness, drove from God, from his wisdom: So in a wisdom that is
below, earthly, sensual, and devilish, drove from God, from his glory, there
is the first Adams state in the disobedience; but Christ the second Adam, the
obedience, the Lord from heaven, who does enlighten every man that comes into
the world. The light that shines in his heart which Christ enlightneth him
withal, it must give him the knowledge of the glory of God; and this brings
him from things that are seen, that are temporal, the light that shines in
his heart, that gives the light of the knowledge of the glory of God, with it
brings to know all things that be eternal: And the Lord is coming to teach his
people himself, and to bring them of all the worlds teachers and ways to Christ
the way: And the Lord is coming to break all in pieces that are gathered, and
are a gathering* but not with the power of his Son, and with the life of his
Prophets and his Apostles, such will he break to pieces, and dismiss the
assemblies, who is come and will gather his people with his spirit into the
life, the Prophets were in, Christ and the Apostles were in, they shall come to
live in the power of an endless life, and the world where there is no end is
known, where there is the hungring no more, and the thirsting no more; the
government of him is manifest where there is no end, and the Kingdom and the
Throne of Christ is exalted: So all that afflict your selves, and torment your
selves, and fast and observe days and meats by the commandment of men, and not
by the commands of God, and doctrines of men; and wills of men. Consider the
power of the Creator, and come to the witness of God in you, to the light
which Christ lights you withal, which is the covenant with you, A God which
breaks all other covenants when you come to the Light, all the covenants you
have made with men, with Death, must be broken, and will be broken, that is
contrary to the Light. Then you must know a shame, which is to be despised in
the sight of all the world in breaking covenants, who with them has made
covenants, and bound your selves in vows. Therefore come to feel the witness
of God in you, which gives you to feel and see that all the covenants upon
earth must be broken that is made from the light, the mind that is from it;
which if you come into the light, you will know the marriage of the Lamb, your
Fast shall cease, for God does not accept your extremes, your passions, your
fast, your afflicting your selves for a day, while there is prejudice and envy
seated among you, the man-sl^yer which shows that you be out of the light and
life of the Prophets, and of Christ and his Apostles, both Magistrates and
Ministers and Teachers. And the Pope which sits now on high, whose arms,
fingers, legs and head is brancht out; but with the power of the Lord is
compassed and seen, the end that he is in, and all is but earth, and the
worshippers but earth, and in the earthly things the threshing Instruments must
thresh; for you lie like a wilderness, for the Lord God of power is coming to
plow up, and so seed it; and that the truth over may pass, and Christ in power
come to reign, who is Lawgiver and Judge, and to break your wills, and bow
down your thoughts, who will subdue all things to himself. Who will reign, and
to exalt his kingdom, whose dread and terror is gone out into the earth: All
what is done in man's will which he pretends to God, he will be judged for it,
and all your observances, and fasts, and circumstances, and worships, who has
required this at your hands says the Lord? Come to truth, and singleness, and
innocence, then you will see Cain is a vagabond, the envious man, the
manslayer, a murderer, from God a vagabond and fugitive, though he built a
City: And he observed outward things, but comes not to witness the spiritual
Sacrifice; but it showed that you be in envy, and slayes men concerning
Religion, being another spirit then Christ and the Apostles, wherein as i^ is
declared in Scripture, with it ye are judged; and your reading over prayers,
cumbers and wearies the just with reading over prayers, and praying to names,
your observing of Images, and your earthly Crosses; and this keeps you from the
life and power of God, which is the Cross of Christ, and the Spirit in which
you should pray, which the Lord knows the mind of.

G. F.

This is to go abroad among the Papists in all the Earth.
Friend,
AS thou have spoke of giving a reason, which reason is fathomed and
comprehended to be earthly. Now there is a reason which flows from the faithful
that makes reasonable, and that gives dominion over the earthly; but this
reason is but earthly, and stands in the earthly, as hereafter will be made
appear, as thou art brought before the judgment, and weighed in the balance:
And as for the Church in the days of the Porphet, that was in the days of Baal,
that would not bow to him nor serve him. Now it seems there was some that did
bow to Baal, that had been of the Jews, and remained as in the outward name.

But those were of the Church that bowed not to Baal, to the earthly (mark
that) and those stood in the truth, and bowed to the Lord, and kissed not Baal;
and there is a distinction between the holy kiss, and the contrary. Now that
was invisible that kep^ them from bowing to Baal, and that was invisible that
they were gone from, viz. these Jews that did bow to Baal. As for the seven
Churches of Asia, that is agreeable to these words; for many got the words of
the Church, but the Life they fell from. Then as for the Church of Rome, as for
the dissolution of the Roman Catholic Faith, which was before Luther and
Calvin, which is as a dark puddle, the smoke of the bottomless pit, that has
not a foundation, but from the foundation Christ fled: And Luther and Calvin,
something there was stirring in them. Luther was true in his place, but it was
but a little, but so much as comprehended you; and as for their falling from
you before, Luther and Calvin, they were but in your outward Ceremonies; For
neither you, the Church of Rome, nor those you beget, nor Luther, nor Calvin,
was in the very life, that is infallible, the Apostles were in, and Christ,
that the Scriptures were given forth from. Therefore kill you, and slay you
that be contrary to you in your Religion, and it is the cause of all people
running into Sects and heaps upon earth; Calvinists and Lutherans, because they
are not in the Spirit that gave forth the Scriptures, that has been lost among
you all since the days of the Apostles, which is now found among them that are
called Quakers, whom all the Sects upon earth are against, that are got up
since the days of the Apostles; and with the spirit that the Apostles were in,
you are all fathomed as a span.

You that are the Church of Rome, came to be made up of all these rotten
members that fell away from the Apostles, before the Apostles deceased, that
got the form of godliness, but denied the power; that forbid meats and
marriage, that mind earthly things: So you have been the ancientest Apostates,
and all that have apostatized from you, you call Sectaries, which you Apostates
was the mother of all; And so I tell you, you are the most ancient in the form
of godliness, and that have denied the power, as your Gaols and Inquisitions
declares your fruits: And you lie like a barren field unplowed up; but now the
plough of the Lord is going, the servants of the Lord are driving on the
horses, which will tear your ground.

And the public worship that the Apostles were in, who were led by the Spirit
of God, has been lost since the days of the Apostles amongst you; for Christ
said, false prophets should come, that were inwardly ravened, that were wolves,
that had the sheeps clothing, which John saw was come, and that the whole
world were gone after them; and so there you lost the infallible spirit, and
have held up part of the visible form, and run into some inventions of your own
making; and so is become the Mother of Harlots, and have brought them forth
that are harlots.

Now that which Christ said should come, which false Prophets John saw was
come, and the whole world was gone after them; they made war with the Saints
that kept the testimony of Jesus, them that had the form, the sheeps
clothing, and were ravened from the spirit, and so overcame the Saints, then
power was given to the beast over all kindreds, tongues, and nations, and all
that dwell upon the earth should worship him. Then the beast and his names, and
his images, and his mark, and horns, then the Vials and Thunders should come
again to be poured upon him and his seat: So the Author of all these sects and
names has been from you that first ravened from the spirit of God, all Sects
upon the earth would kill one another about their worship, which shows the
spirit of the Devil, and not the spirit of the Apostles: So when the Beast had
overcome the Saints, and killed them, and got power over all Kindreds, Tongues,
and Nations: And the woman fled into the wilderness, and the man-child caught
up to God; And the Dragon made war with the ^emnant of her seed that kept the
commands of God; and here by this you may see where the Church has been: And
the great Whore which went forth from the Apostles, and ravened from the spirit
of God, yet has had the sheeps clothing, which all Nations has drank her
cup. She has corrupted the earth, and made the Inhabitants of the earth drunk,
and the Kings of the earth has committed fornication with her, and all nations
have drunk her cup of fornication. She sits upon the waters, and the waters are
peoples, (not a people) and the waters are nations where the Whore sits, and
multitudes, and tongues. Now mark, if Nations be waters, and Peoples be waters,
and Multitude waters, and Tongues waters: And the earth is corrupted, and the
Inhabitants of the earth drunk, and all nations have drunk the cup of
fornication, and the Kings of the earth has committed fornication with her.
Now where is the Church and the Rock all this time? when nations, peoples,
multitudes and tongues are waters, and the Inhabitants of the earth drunk, and
the earth corrupted, and all nations have drunk the whores cup. And the whore
cannot be said to be the heathen; for the Whore goes from something, and there
is the ancient visible Church; And the Kings of the earth have committed
fornication with her, and all nations have drank the cup of fornication, and
fornication is before you be married: And these are them that have drank the
blood of the Prophets, Saints, and Martyrs that have kept the testimony of
Jesus.

But now again, the Lamb is brought forth to rule the Nations with a rod of
Iron, though the Beast, and false Prophet, and Kings of the earth, and the old
Dragon make war against the Lamb and the Saints, yet the Lamb and the Saints
shall get the victory, and the everlasting Gospel shall be preached to all
nations, kindreds, tongues and people, and life and immortality shall come to
light through the Gospel, which your old great Grandfather went from in the
days of the Apostles; and so to that that they went from, is people now come
and coming, and ^he Lambs wife is making her self ready; and the Saints do
sing, the Lord God omnipotent reigns; and you are all too immoderate spirits,
you and all other Sects, then to be like the Apostles and Christ, or to be like
the Church of Christ, your fallibility and your Idols, Inquisitions and
Cruelties makes it appear.

Two Queries being propounded to thee; In thy answer to the first Query thou
say, That all Churches or meetings of all sorts of men which have not the
spirit of God, they may err. In thy answer to the second Query thou say,
That the Church of Christ, or the meetings of those Christians that follow the
rule and law of Christ, and are always guided by them, cannot err in any truth.

Reply. Your Church, the Church of Rome have erred from the spirit of truth,
and the truth in which there is no error. As instance, you have set up Idols;
and the spirit of truth in the true Church said, Keep your selves from Idols,
as in John's Epistle: And you have made Ministers by men, and by the will of
man, and so gone into your own wills, which the Scripture came not by, nor
which Christ's Ministers were not made by; and you and all Apostates since are
of men, and made by men, and so you are erred from the spirit of truth, that
leads into all truth. You are erred from the Cross of Christ, the power of
God, and have set up outward Crosses, and falls down to that instead of falling
down to the power of God. You have erred from the true Image of God the Saints
were in, and have set up outward Images of wood and stone: You have erred from
the Saints life and spirit, and from the spirits of just men, and so from the
true Church, and so set up the Relics, as pieces of Cloth, and old bones: So
you know after the flesh, which the Apostles did not: And you are erred from
the Rock, and falln into the waters, as in Revelations: And your Idols,
Pictures, and Images have corrupted the earth; so you are erred from the true
Church, and the true Spirit, which cried against Idols in all ages, as Moses
said in his command to the people, and the Apostles. Your Church is commanded
to make Images and Idols, and the Church in Moses time, and the Apostles
Churches were commanded to keep from them. So no true Church you are, but
apostates, but fallible, and erred in matter of faith and doctrine, and praised
be the Lord who has brought you to the Light. And multitudes of instances may
be showed, who compares the Church with what the Churches of Christians were in
the days of the Apostles.

And thou say, the difficulty is where the Church of Christ is to be found;
for Papists, Lutherans, Calvinists, Anabaptists, Arminians, and all
schismatical meetings, they do claim the title of Christ's Church to themselves,
etc.

Answ. All these the Roman Church being the mother of the Apostates, and all
these beforementioned are started from her, her sturdy sons, and several
names still in the form, for the light within they are all against; and Christ
within to reign and teach; and the Law within in the heart, and in the mind,
whereby all comes to know the Lord, and the word in the heart and in the mouth
to obey and do; and the spirit of truth to lead into all truth, whereby the
Saints have unity one with another, and with the Scriptures, and with God. This
the Pap^sts are run from into Images and Idols, and this the Baptists,
Lutherans, and all other Sects are run from into other Images within, but with
the spirit of truth which leads the Saints into all truth are these
comprehended, and out of all these sects and sorts are people coming.

I Will break your names, and mar your Images with the spirit of truth, fence
your selves never so wisely: And so none of these nor you neither are of the
true Church, but the beast and his names; but some of these you cal^ S^cts are
nearer the true Church then you; for the world who lives in Images and Idols
wonder after you, who lives in Images and Idols, who are apostatized from them;
keep your selves from Idols. As for the Quakers who are risen in the Ancient of
days, in the end of the night of apostasy, among whom that is appeared that
cannot be shaken, against whom you and all the sects upon earth appears that
are come up since the days of the Apostles, whom they comprehend, and will
tread to dust and to powder: The seed of God is risen, and the top-stone is
laid, glory to God in the highest. Come out all Sects and S^ctaries to the
battle, and you are all in the vanity contenders and pretendeders, got up since
the days of the Apostles; the marks are appeared not to be the marks o^ the
S^ints, who has the Fathers name written in their foreheads; but you have the
mark of the Beast upon you, and without the true ground and the true reason of
the Apostl^s ^re you out of: For inst^nce, the true Church taught not to
persecute, and the true reasonable men that was in the faith; for faith gives
victory over that nature in particular that would persecute, and so does not
lead to kill the Creature for the sake of the nature in it in general: And
fafth teaches not this D^ct^ine, but denies it, and brings to suffer all
things, through which mountains are subdued.

Thou further say, They that are of a wicked life may have a right faith, and
reproves others that cannot believe it.

Answ. A wicked man he has not faith of the el^ct of God for faith gives
victory over wickedness; and faith purifies, and faith makes reasonable; and
who are of the faith, are of Abraham, and come out of all these adulterous
generations, the mystery of Faith is h^ld in a pure conscience.

Now, here you are in the error you Papists, and all Apostates from the
Apostles, like the Jews and the Devil that has a belief, but is out of the
truth, yet may get a belief in the Letter; as the Jews held a belief long in
^he Letter, but killed the Son: And you have had the Letter and form of
godliness long, but killed the Saints and Martyrs; who are reprobated, Devils,
Jews, Apostates, Papists, from the elect of God, for who are of faith, ^re of
Abraham; and who are of Abraham, are of the elect of Christ, which does not
pertain to Idols.

And here is the mystery of the Church known, the body of Christ, which is a
top of your flesh and Idols, both which is not of the flesh of Abraham, nor of
the Church.

All you are but the pretenders of the Spirit of Christ in the apostasy from it
since the days of the Apostles, as your fruits declare, your names and Images:
So I confess to you it is the ancientest form that has been since the days
of the Apostles; but had I never known the Papists nor none of these Sectaries,
we had know^ truth: We came not through the Popes channels, but are come to
that which all Apostates ravened from, and so you your selves must be put to
silence, and your mouths stopped, which are the evil beasts that tears one
another, worse then the common beasts which the Apostles speak of, which was
coming up before his decease.

How are you learning one another about your meat, and husks, and worships, and
images, and helps, and Teachers, and Scriptures, which was not the work of them
that gave it forth, with your horns: And how many Images have you upon you, and
names, and marks, and what are all these Images and marks, but the marks and
Images of the beast which is risen since the days of the Apostles?

Whereas thou Queriest, what be all these but sect,? as Independents,
Anabaptists, and other Sectaries, which say, thou was first of the Church of
Rome: and thou s^yest, the Church of Rome cannot be said to be sectaries,
because it has been constant since the days of the Apostles, and all
Sectaries springed from it, and not you from them:

Answ. The Roman Church was the first made up of Heretics, Schismatics, and
Apostates, and Reprobates, and Antichrists, and false Prophets, which Christ
said should come, Matthew. 7. and John said was come; and as you may read in
Timothy and Titus, Reprobate from the faith, and erred from the faith, and had
the form of godliness, and denied the power, and kept the form, and as John
said was come, and they went after Idols before his decease; and he writ to the
little children to keep themselves from Idols. And Jude saw them crept up
before they were aware, which went in Corah's, Balaams, and Cains way, that
were Murderers: And are not you Murderers, that murder one another, as Cain
about his sacrifice? And Jude saw they turned the grace of God into
wantonness, which should be their teacher and salvation: So all these
self-separations, Apostates, Reprobates, which went after the doctrine of
Devils, and forbid meats and marriages; and the spirit spoke expressly, should
depart from the faith, and ^ll these have made up the Church of Rome, and
there is your visible Church held up by Cains weapons. Then as for all these
Sectaries springed from you, you were like to beget no other children but
bastards, which is but a false conception brought forth by the will of man;
which is applied that God got it, and fathers it upon God. And as for all these
Sects which are sprung of you, are like no other ways but like to a Sea, and
burst into names, which went from the spirit of God; you are not like to be
kept in unity, who ravened from the spirit of God, the life of Christ, and the
Apostles was in; and to that which you ravened from, are people come and
coming, which stands a-top of you all.

They that worship God must worship him in spirit, which mortifies all sin and
corruptions; and they that worship God, must worship him in truth, in that the
Devil abode not in.

To all the Papists upon the Earth
TO come out and try their faith and strength, without Cains weapons; for there
was two that did sacrifice, and the one killed the other about the sacrifice,
and whether of these two was excepted can you read your selves? and which was
the vagabond? It Is said, that the Pope and the Church of Rome has the Key, and
it is left to them, and ye are the keepers of the Key. Now if you be keepers of
the Key, ye are to open to Nations about you, and to render a reason of the
hope that is in you; if the Lord be sanctified in your hearts, you will. Are
you according to the Scriptures? Is the practice of your Church according to
the Scriptures? Is the spirit of the Lord powered upon you, and all flesh? Does
your sons and your daughters prophecy? And if any thing be revealed to another
that sits by you, and bids another hold his peace that is speaking, for you may
all prophecy one by one.

Or are you not like others, and the rest of the Sects, that will put them in
prison, and say they have disturbed you, and so show your selves both
Reprobates and Heretics from the Church and the Spirit that the Apostles were
in? And can you say, Christ is in you male and female? Or are you not
reprobates, and say you have no such speech among you Catholics? But is
without, which is your bread and wine; and are not all Murderers, Persecutors,
Prisoners, Whippers, Burners, Inquisitioners, Sectaries and Apostates, from the
Apostles, and sacrificers from that nature Cain was in, and not from the divine
nature, and the faith of the Son of God, and the Apostles, and Abel? Have you
the spirit of Christ? Is any of the Church, but who are of Abraham? Is any of
the Church of Christ, but who are of the flesh of Christ? Is any of Faith but
who are of Abraham? And is not faith a myst^ry, a perfect gift of God? and is
not this faith held in a pure conscience? And can any ones conscience which is
not pure hold this faith of Gods elect (which is the mystery) and does not this
faith give victory over the nature in man and woman that does p^rtain to Idols
an^ Images made with man's hands, and in the wills of men, in Jews, Gentiles,
Apostates from the Apostles, since their days come up? And does not the faith
give victory over all the Jews changeable Types, Offerings, Temples, Tithes,
Priests, Covenant? Has the Lord put his law into your minds, that you need not
say unto your neighbor, and writ it in your heart, that you need not say unto
one another, Know the Lord; For from the greatest of you to the least of you,
ye all know the Lord? Has God commanded the light to shine out of darkness,
and does it shine in your hearts? And then (mark) dot^ that li^ht that shines
in your heart (mark again) give you the knowledge of the glory of God in the
face of Jesus Christ? Cor. 2.4.

Are you them that does take heed to the light that shines in the dark place?
Is the day star risen in your hearts that Peter speaks of? Is the ingrafted
word which is able to save the soul felt in you? And the hidden man of ^he
heart, which is with the Lord a great price? Are you them that are no wearers
of gold, or costly array? Are you them that exercise Lordship one over another
like unto the Gentiles? or are you like unto the Apostles which Christ said it
should not be so amongst them. Are you like to the Pharisees, called of men
M^ster? laying heavy burdens upon the people, and go in long Robes, chiefest
seats in the assemblies, and loves salutations, and uppermost rooms at Feasts,
which Christ said unto his, be ye not so.

And where do you read Mr. Paul, Mr. Titus, and Mr. Timothy, etc. Are you ^he
^rue believers that are ceased from their own works, as God did from his? Are
you come out of the law of works to the law of faith? Is your consciences
purged from dead works to serve the living God? Are you those Children that
needs no man to teach you, but as the same an^inting abides in you, and as it
does teach ye shall continue in the Son of God, and the father? Or are you the
Seducers, Sects, and Heretics (that draws people from the anointing within)
and so men teachers? Are you them that keep your selves from Idols that John
speaks of? Are you of the seed of the woman that keeps the commands of God? Are
you the children of the Lord that are taught of him, that are far from
oppression? Are you ceased from men whose breath is in their nostrils, that the
Prophet speaks of? Are ye them that tremble at the Word of God? Are you them
that obey the word of faith in your hearts, in your mouths; and that says, the
righteousness of faith speaks on this wise? you need not say, you need not
fetch it from above, or from beneath; but what says it? The word is nigh thee,
in thy heart, and in thy mouth, to obey it and do it. Is this a sectary, or out
of sectaries? Are ye of them that make images or likenesses of Males and
Females, things in heaven above, and earth beneath, and bows down unto them,
which corrupts themselves with them, and corrupts the earth? Are you of them that
says, The kingdom of heaven is within you? Have you found it in you? Or are
you like unto the Pharisees, gazing for it abroad without you? Is God the
author of your faith? and is it in your hearts, and does it purify you? Are
the professors the greater persecutors, that has the form out of the faith,
out of the life of them that be of the faith and life, then the Gentiles?
whether have been greater in all ages, judge ye. Have you found the pearl hid
in the field? Are you the Merchant man that has made an exchange, and
purchased it? Do you speak only as the Holy Ghost moves you? as they that gave
forth Scriptures?

Are you led by the same spirit and power that the A^ostles were? Do you speak
but as the spirit gives you utterance? and are you them that do not quench the
spirit? Are you them that owns prophesies immediately as the Apostles? and
Revelation, and Inspiration from God as they had? Have you heard Gods voice,
and Christ's voice immediately from heaven as the Prophets and A^ostles did?
What is the tree of Knowledge? and what is the flaming Sword that keeps the
tree of Life?

And what are the inwardly raveners? and what is it they ravened from? And what
are the false Prophets and Antichrists that have got the sheeps clothing,
which Christ said should come, and John saw they were come? And in the
Revelation, The world went after them? And what is the Sea the Beast rose out
of? and what is the Beast? and what is the second Beast that rose out of the
earth? and what is the earth he should deceive with his miracles? and what are
his miracles? And all that dwell upon the earth should worship him because of
his miracles? And what are his names, marks, horns, and heads, crowns and
images? and what is the woman that fled into the wilderness? and what is the
Whore that has corrupted the Earth? and what did she whore from, which has
made the Inhabitants of the earth drunk? And what are these Kings that have
committed fornication with her? And what is the cup of fornication that all
Nations have drunk of? And what is mystery-Babylon, that reigns over the Kings
of the earth? and what is the Whore, the false Prophets weapons, Antichrists,
the Dragons that fight against the Saints withal?

And what are the Lambs weapons, and the Saints that they fight withal? and
what Peoples, Nations, Multitudes, Tongues are those that John says are waters
that the Whore sits upon? and what are those Saints that the Beast overcame?
and who are they which then the Beast had the power over all Kindreds, Tongues,
and Nations? and are not these things got up since the days of the Apostles?
And whether or no the Lamb and the Saints shall not have the victory over them
all again? and whether or no the Saints must not come to that which they
ravened from, before they have victory over all that which has reigned since
the days of the Apostles? and whether or no the spirits of people has not
separated from, since the days of the Apostles, which they were in? and is not
that the cause that all Nations are brought into Sects and heaps, and lost
their unity with God and the Scriptures? (with which spirit they learned of God
the Father of spirits that gave forth Scripture) are you come unto the spirits
of just men made perfect, to the Church in God the Father the Judge of all?

What Scripture have you for taking Tithes? and where did the Apostles take
tithes so, that denied the first Priesthood, and witnessed Christ the (sum)
the change of the Law by which the Priesthood was made: And the disannulling of
the commandment that gave tithes? and are not you transgressors, and made your
selves transgressors that have set up these things the Apostles threw down. And
where did the Apostle take tithes? and what is the first principle of pure
Religion? and what is the soul of man? And have you not lost the Cross of
Christ, which the Scripture says is the power of God? and has set up Crosse^
of wood and stone on the end of your Steeple Houses; and do take bread and wine
on the daytime, which Christ took at night. What is the light? what is the
word? what is the Gospel? what Scripture have you for sprinkling Infants? Are
you them that have heard, and learned of God, which Christ says, them that
have heard and learned of God comes to the Son: Have you seen the shape of God?
are you them that God speaks to by his Son, who is heir of all things,
upholding all things by his word and power? Is your Church the Church that is
in God? have you heard of the Father, seeing it is written ye shall all be
taught of God? Are you not them that looks at things that are seen; for things
that are seen are temporal, the things that are not seen are eternal.

Are not Images, Idols, Pictures, Relics, Bones, pieces of Cloth, things
that are ^een, and temporal? Answer these Queries in writing, and send them to
the people who are scornfully called Quakers in England, by all the sects of
the earth. Shall a man whiles he is upon the earth be made free from sin, and
be made perfect, and the body of sin put off? And what Scripture have you for
consecrating bread and wine? and where did the Apostles so? Will you try your
Church by the Scripture of truth, and measure your selves by the Apostles
Declaration, and venture your selves to be tried and judged by them that the
spirit of truth led them to speak forth?

And what is the Wine Press that was trodden without the City? and whether you
bid every man examine himself, whether Christ be in him, except he be a
reprobate? And whether or no you are as the Apostles, who preached Christ in
them the hope of glory, warning every man, that you may present every man
perfect in him in Christ Jesus?

To prove the Papists Church to be a false Church, contrary to the Apostles;
and that they are wolves, which Christ said should come, which are inwardly
ravening: Ye have the sheeps clothing, and are the false Prophets that should
arise, according to Christ's words; that should show lying signs and wonders,
which if it were possible should deceive the very elect; and should say, Lo
Christ is here, and lo Christ is there. Do not you tell people that he is in
the bread, and that he is in the wine; and tell them that he is in the chamber,
and that he is in the desert; where you put the bread and the wine is not there
Christ? cannot you put him in the cup-board, and in the chamber, and in the
desert? cannot you put, and tell people he is there? And have you not the
sheeps clothing, but are you not ravening wolves, inwardly ravening from the
spirit of God? So does not your fruits appear contrary to the Church of God?
For have not you fulfilled the Scriptures, having the sheeps clothing, but
inwardly are the ravening wolves? Have not you ravened, wearied, and destroyed
and killed many hundreds? and have you not your holes and Gaols, which you call
Inquisitions, which you put them in? are you like the Church in this? Did ever
Lambs and the sheep weary and tear them to pieces, and then carry them into
dens, and make wracks and tortures for poor creatures, or for the wolves
either? Did ever the sheep destroy the wolves? Now which does your fruits make
you appear to be, the sheep or the wolves, judge your selves by the Scriptures?

Now let all people judge you all that be in the wolvish nature, that are not
sheep no more then you: So Christ calls them wolves, inwardly ravening from the
spirit of God, these Christ said should come; and they have come up since the
days that Christ said they should come. And the Apostle says in Acts 20. That
after his departure grievous wolves should enter in among them, not sparing the
flock, which should arise from among themselves, speaking perverse things,
drawing many Disciples after them. Now have not you Papists risen since the
days of the Apostles: and you know the Apostles did not prison, persecute,
devour any, but the wolves should do it. Now these rise among the Saints that
should not spare the flock (mark) make havoc of the flock, to devour and
destroy the flock.

Now we remember that Christ told of you and of these things; and the Apostle
tells of these things, 1 John 2. said it was the last time then. Whereas they
had heard that Antichrist should come, even now there are many Antichrists and
false prophets come into the world, 2 Cor. 11.13, 14, 15. Paul speaking there
of cutting off occasion; For as much as false prophets, deceitful workers,
transforming themselves into the Apostles of Christ; no marvel, for Satan
himself transformed himself, and his Ministers transforming as the Ministers
of righteousness. Now this the Apostle saw come up among the Corinthians before
his decease: So now again you may see Satan's Ministers they are murderers, and
his Angels they are murderers. Now the Apostle said, he out off the occasion;
he did not cut off the outward bodies of people as you do; and the Apostles
were persecuted, whipped and beat; now you see that you are whippers,
persecutors, and beaters; and though you persecute one another which have the
name of Christians, yet are not the sheep, nor the Ministers, or true Apostles,
nor the true Church: And when the true Ministers and Apostles saw that these
false Apostles should come, and Ministers of Satan should tran^form themselves
into Angels of light, he brings them to the light that shined in their hearts
and them that would give them the knowledge of God in the face of Jesus Christ,
2 Cor. 4. And are not you as bad as the Jews, who killed the Lord Jesus Christ,
and their own Prophets, who kill the Prophets that are sent among you, 2 These.
2. And are you not in the fornication. and set up places for fornication among
you? and no fornicator or idolater must enter into the kingdom of God. For are
you not worshipping of Images? and do you not trust in them? and does not the
Lord say, Cursed be all them that trust in graven Images? Now the Apostle
faith, The mystery of iniquity does already work, and there should be a
falling away before the man of sin should be revealed, who exalts himself
above all that is called God, or is worshipped, and sits in the Temple of God,
and shows himself that he is God. The Apostle bid remember that he told these
things, and that he might be revealed in due time; and now he is revealed, is
not the man of sin a devourer? and was the Apostles so? and are not you
devourers, who worships the names of Saints, and Images, and Relics; and so
contrary to John, who was not to worship the Angel, but God. How are you
fallen from the truth, and from the state of John, how are you revealed, 2
These. 2. And this man of sin, whose coming is after the workings of Satan,
destroying with his power. Now have not you a great power, and lying signs and
wonders? have you not your lying signs and great wonders among you, and the
deceiveableness of unrighteousness; who have not believed the truth, but are
given up to believe the lying signs and wonders? so God has sent strong
delusions among you. And was it not the Apostles charge to Timothy, that he
should teach no other Doctrine, neither give heed to fables? Now are not you
run into the fables, run into Images, and relics, and purgatory, and idols,
beads, and jewels, and so puts them in your Inquisitions that denies your
fables, and witnesses the contrary, that which is the sound doctrine? so are
you not contrary to the sound Church here, and given up to them that believe
fables? 1 Timothy 1. and are not your Ministers made of men, and by men, so gone
forth from the power the Apostles was in, which was not of man, nor by man, so
no true Ministers. And did not the Apostle say in his charge, Tim. 3. to prove
Ministers and Bishops, they might not be brawlers, they must not be given to
filthy lucre, they must not be given to wine, they must not be covetous, they
must not be strikers. Are not you strikers, killing and slaying in Cains way
them that be contrary minded to you? so not of the true faith, not of the true
Church, not of the true stock^ nor of the true Ministry. This I have proved by
the Apostles, separated from them out of their way; are not you covetous? would
you not sell pardons for money? are you not ashamed of your christianity, to
the very heathen about you? has not God here brought the very man of sin to
light, and revealed him? Now the Apostle said, The spirit spoke expressly; at
the latter times some should depart from the faith, giving heed to seducing
spirits, and doctrines of Devils, speaking lies in hypocrisy, having their
consciences seared with a hot iron; forbidding to marry, and commanding to
abstain from meats. Are you not departed from the faith that purifies, and the
word that sanctifies? and so the Church made up of such as the spirit spoke
should come; that forbids to marry commands to abstain from meats; and so your
Church made up with the seducing spirits, and doctrines of Devils. Does not the
fruits declare this to all the Nations about you? so are not you gone from the
example of the Apostles, who bids, follow us, as you have us for an example,
both Church and Ministers. You have forsaken the example of the Apostle, both
your Church and Ministers. The Apostle commanded Timothy to keep his
commandment without spot, unrebukeable until the appearing of our Lord Jesus
Christ. And do not your fruits make you manifest that you are fallen into all
these things that the Apostle saw should come, and the Spirit said should come?
And moreover the Apostle said; If you be dead with Christ from the rudiments of
the world, as living in the world, why are you subject to ordinances? And if
you be risen with Christ, seek those things which are above; Set your
affections on things that be above, and not on things that be on the earth; as
your Images, Relics, Idols, Pictures, Beads, Jewels, earthly Crosses,
Crucifixes; are not all these things below? and does not these make up your
Church? and is not this the voluntary humility that beguiles people? Such does
not hold the head, which are in the outward shows, which are not to be tasted,
and handled; which things perish with the using, after the commandments and
doctrines o^ men, which shows you are not risen with Christ, not seeking the
things that are above, but your affections are on things on the earth, Col. 2.

Again, the Apostle says, In the last days perilous times should come, that
men should be lovers of themselves, blasphemers, covetous, proud, boasters,
heady, traitors, high minded, despisers of them that are good; of this sort are
them that creep into houses, leading silly women captive, laden with diverse
sins and lusts, always learning, and never able to come to the knowledge of the
truth; like Jannes and Jambres which with-stood the faith, to keep people in
Egypt, keeping people in bondage and spiritual Egypt, having the form, but
denying the power. And has not the Church been made up of such since the days
of the Apostles? and evil men and seducers should wax worse and worse,
deceiving and being deceived; And the time will come, says the Apostles, that
they would not endure sound doctrine; they heap to themselves teachers that
would not endure the truth, running into fables. Now these things being come up
before the Apostles decease, of which your Church is is made up of, which are
turned from the truth, that have itching ears, and seducers, are reprobate
concerning the faith, that keep to the fables: And this to the view of all
people may be seen has made up your Church, for these things has come up
since the days of the Apostles, which were coming up before their decease; and
the Apostle speaks to Titus of the unruly talkers, whose mouths must be
stopped, who taught for filthy lucre, which were evil beasts, slow bellies,
which followed fables made by the will of men; and of these your Church is made
up of, which to every good work are reprobates, being reprobate to the good,
and disobedient, Tit. 1. And the grace of God which brings salvation has
appeared to all men, teaching us to live righteously, sob^rly, and godly. Are
not you run into the worlds lusts, and from the soberness, and from the grace
of God which brings salvation, by which people are saved? into the foolish
questions and strivings about the law, unprofitable and vain, which are the
heretics which went forth from among the Apostles, Tit. 3. and so from the
grace by which men are justified: Are not you gone into the lusts, and so into
the wars that brought forth sin, and so death, and fighting, and wars, that
has brought forth among you, and so out of that which takes away the occasion
of wars; and out of the faith that works by love, and so in the dead faith
which is Cains, which will murder and kill them that sacrifices, that are
contrary to you, so are not you stepped into Cains way from the true Church?

Moreover, are not you those that hold the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ with
respect of persons, and so are transgressors? committers of sin, who breaks in
that point as respecting of persons, is guilty of all; and drawing before your
judgment-seats, and killing. You great and rich men, whose time of weeping and
howling is come, and so are turned to be the blasphemers, your Church is made
up of blasphemers, respecters of persons, transgressors, committers of sin, and
convicted by the Law that goes out of Sion Now the fruit of your faith is not
the works of charity; for you will kill and murder like Cain, so that faith is
without the true works, and the true charity; but the belief is like the Devils
and Cains, who is not justified by that faith, though you pretend faith and
works to people; but the ^ruits thereof declares you to be wolves, and so erred
from the truth. Are not you swearers? which James says, Above all things my
brethren swear not at all, lest ye fall into condemnation. So are not you the
false brethren, the false Church, the false Ministers, fallen into the
condemnation, contrary to James, who taught in the true Church, and the true
brethren, that above all things they should not swear, neither by heaven, nor
by earth, nor by any other oath? So is not your Church made up of Heretics,
and apostates, that are given to fables and rudiments of the world, and things
below, forbidding meats and marriages, and reprobates concerning the true
faith, and belief, which are found in the dead, without the works; but in the
works of Cain and the Devil, murderers, doing his works, as the Jews did
against Christ, and the Apostles and Prophets.

Again, the Apostle Peter bids beware of false teachers, who said there are
false prophets among the people, even so there shall be false teachers among
you, who should bring in the damnable heresies, which should bring upon
themselves swift destruction even denying the Lord Jesus that bought them;
which are like to Sodom, which are in their filthiness and fullness, and like
unto Core, turing away from the truth, and Balaam and Cain. Now is not Corah's,
Cains, and Balaams marks found among you? and h^^h not these made up your
Church, these which went forth from the Apostles? Does not your Inquisitions*
your Gaols, and dens, and persecutions, and murders of the Saints show Cains
marks before mentioned? So let Corah's, Cains, and Balaams marks in your
forheads testifi^, which had the high words, and spoke them in hypocrisy, and
beguiled the unstable souls; who are the cursed children (and contrary to the
Apostles, and just Lot, and Noah, the 8th person) Who are the wells without the
water, trees without the fruit; who having escaped the pollutions of the world,
by whom many is again overcome, is brought in^o bondage by you: so ^r^th has
been lost, trodden under your feet, who ha^h born Corah's, Cains, Balaams image,
2 Pet. 2. But your damnation slumbers not, for you have denied the Lord in
turning from the light which he has lightened you withal, going from the
spirit, as Cain, Core, and Balaam did. And then John wrote to little children,
said, it was the last time, whereof Antichrist should come; even now there are
many Antichrists come into the world, whereby we know it is the last time which
Christ said should come, Matthew. 7. And told them again, Mat. 24. and said, he
had told them before concerning false Prophets and Antichrists should come,
inwardly ravening wolves, devourers, which John saw should come, and went forth
from them into the world; and in the Revelation, The whole world that dwelt
upon the earth went after them. So these that Christ said should come, John saw
was come, inwardly ravening Wolves, false Prophets, false Teachers, which the
world is gone after, has made up your Church, which went forth from the
Apostles; and Christ he said, they should come, bid them they should not go^
after them; and John who saw they was come, bids them keep to the anointing in
them; They need no man to teach them, but as the same anointing teaches them,
and as they continue in this, they continue in the Son, and in the Father. And
from this are you all gone: so that which Christ said should come, John saw was
come, even the Antichrist and the false Prophets, and how they should try the
spirits that was gone forth into the world.

Again, they should love one another, and not as Cain slew his brother. Why did
he slay him? because his sacrifice was accepted, and his was not; Cains was
not. Now does not the fruits of your Church show you to be Cains, and your
love, which the Apostle says not as Cains; so are you not apostatized from the
true Church? the true love into Cains love? so no true brethren: and your love
stands but in the word, not in the deed; and John says, Little children keep
your selves from Idols. He saw the false Prophets and Antichrists then come which
should run into those things. Now here are not you apostatized again from the
true Church, and run into Idols, who profess your selves to be men and
teachers, and so run in that, that John bids the elect keep from, 1 John. So
have proved your selves to be the false Apostles, that run after Idols, which
Christ said should come, and the Apostle saw was come, that should if it we^e
possible deceive the very elect with your Idols, which the elect before the
foundation of the world was made keeps from, which Idols your Church is full of.

Again, Jude saw it crept up before his decease at unawares; and he bids the
Saints contend for the faith once delivered to them, the common salvation. So
these that crept up in the days of Jude, has made up your Church again, and
separated themselves from the Apostle^ sensual, not having the spirit, speaking
the great high swelling words, admiring the persons of men for advantage, which
are as Sodom and Gomorah and Corah offering strange fire, you are offering the
strange sacrifice who are like clouds, winds, raging waves of the Sea, speaking
great swelling words, having men's persons in admiration, going in the way of
Cain, Corah, Balaam: Now the marks of all these are found in your Church, and
found in your foreheads; Cains sword is among you, do not you rage, do not you
foam, do not you kill, do not you speak, the high swelling words? But Enochs
prophecy is come to pass; in ten thousands of his Saints is the Lord come to
judgment, and to convince you of your ungodly deeds, and of your hard speeches
against him, who be the filthy dreamers, defiling the flesh, speaking evil of
the dignities, of the dominions; that goes over all transgression (which lets
see the first transgression) that was before transgression was; this is dignity
and the higher power. Now are you not in Cains way, and lost the patience, that
kills, slays, and murders, let all the world bear witness that be in the fear
of God? Are not you fallen into the deeds of the Nicholaitans; and so like them
which said, they were Jews, and were not, but synagogues of Satan; and so does
not your fruit declare you, that you are synagogues of Satan, murdering,
killing? And was there not such before John's decease, which said they were
Jews, and were not? which John told should cast into prison, and try, and many
of the faithful Martyrs were slain. Have not you held the doctrine of Balaam?
your Idols, and do you not here commit fornication with them? and is not this
the stumbling block you here lay for all people, Balaam-like? and is not the
fruits of your Church made up of such? And was not the woman Jezebel beginning
to teach before John's decease; and teaching to seduce the servants of God, and
to commit fornication, and to eat things sacrificed to Idols? and was not all
this separated from the true Church, these Idols, Balaam, this Prophetess? And
has not these made up your Church, which has the stumbling block? the word of
the Lord does try all this; Has not he promised, and the Church does know that
he was the Lord that tries the reigns, and searches the heart? For is not
Jezebels mark upon your foreheads, and your Idols? your Church is full of them
which defiles the land; And do you not kill and slay, Jezebel-like, and betray,
and after fast, your hands full of blood, your heart full of deceit, strife and
murder? Is not this Jezebels teachings? Jezebels fast? and your Idols Balaams
stumbling block? And was not this coming up before John's decease, creeping up
among the true Church? If a true Church fall into these things, God removes his
Candlestick from them; so are you them the Candlestick is not among: Therefore
you set up great outward Candlesticks among all your Idols, and so you have a
name of Christians, but are dead. Thou have a name of a Christian to live, but
art dead, and so deceives Nations by your name; but now you are proved, your
Church, your Ministers all, Jezebels mark, Balaams stumbling block, your Idols,
you have not repented of your fornications, all your Idols, God will cast you
into your bed of sorrows. And now your day of trial is come; and he that
overcomes shall be a pillar in the house of God: And so you have lost the key,
and are shut up in darkness; for was not Jezebel a murderer, a slayer? and
yet did she not fast? Did not the Apostles fast, and yet were no murderers,
nor slayers?

And at the opening of the 5th Seal, was not the cry of the souls heard; How
long Lord, how long wilt not thou be avenged on them that are put to death for
the testimony of Jesus; and do not thou avenge our cause O Lord? And was not
the answer again, They should rest a season till the rest of their brethren
were killed? Now who are the killers? who are the murderers? have you not been
the killers and murderers one of another? and so out of the true Church, and
all along apostatized from the true Church, Revel. 6. And so are not you them
that are brought to poverty among all the earth for want of the virtue of God
among all people, and choaks them with your Idols? and so the bottomless pit
has been opened which has no foundation; and your smoke and your locusts has
swarmed abroad; so are you not them that fell? the Star that fell? that fell
from the Apostles, that fell from the truth? Is not your Church made up of
locust? and have not you worshipped Devils and Idols, and gold and silver,
brass, wood, iron, and stone, that can neither see nor hear? And does not John
speak of this in the Revelations, which was distinct from the true Church? And
is not your Church here found your Idols of brass, of silver, of stone, and
can neither see nor walk, Revel. 9. And has not the two Witnesses been killed
which was called the two Olive trees, and Candlesticks; the Olive trees fruits
is the oil, and what does oil do? Has not this been killed, and the
Candlestick which stands before the God of the earth? and the great City Sodom
and Gomorrha where Christ was crucified, and them that crucified him was the
professors of Scriptures, and you the professors of Scriptures, where is the
Olive tree now? where is the Candlestick? How is spiritual Sodom full of your
Idols and Images now? there is none turns from the Olive tree and the
Candlestick; but who are become spiritual Sodom and Egypt in themselves; and
consider was not the Dragon cast from Heaven to the Earth? and did not he
persecute the Wom^n? and is not all persecutors of him? did not the Woman flee
into the Wilderness? where has she been all this time of Idols? where has
been the Church? was not the man-child caught up to God? did not the Dragon
make war with the seed which keep the Commands of God? did not the Beast rise
out of the Sea, which had his power and authority from the Dragon? who have
been like Bears and Lions and Leopards? and all the world wondered after the
Beast, and they wondered after the Dragon which had power from the Beast: (Now
mark) where has the Church been now? who is like to the Beast which rose out
of the Sea, which all the World worshipped, which ravened from the Spirit of
God; which went out from the Apostles, in Corahs, Cains, Balaams way, erred
from the Spirit of God, they like a sea, out of truth; so here came in the
Dragons power which gave the Beast his authority, which all the World
worshipped, which dragon had made war, was that which persecuted the Woman; And
the Beast made war with the Saints, and had his power from the Dragon which all
that dwelt upon the Earth should worship and overcome the Saints, then power
was given to the Beast over all tongues, kindreds and Nations; over all
kindreds, your tongues, your Teachers, which says tongues is the original,
Orthodox men which have their learning from tongues has the Beast power over,
and all that dwelt upon the Earth should worship him, and he should deceive
them that dwelt upon the Earth by reason of his miracles; he should make Images
to the Beast, and they should worship the Beast; and they should neither buy
nor sell; but who had the mark of the Beast and his Image; now it is the Beast
that sets up the Image; now here is the Image, the Beast, here is your Church,
and here is the Beast that has his power over all kindreds, tongues and
Nations, and the Woman fled into the Wilderness, and the man-child caught up to
God, and the Dragon made war with the seed, and the Beast has power from the
Dragon which kills the Saints; now where is your Church? where has the true
Church been? now where is the faith and patience of the Saints? He which kills
with the sword, must be killed with the sword; him that has an ear let him
hear; the Dragon the Beast, out of the Sea; out of the Earth; these are
Scriptures, the Beast out of the Earth; his miracles, his Images; now here is
your Church apostatized from the Apostles, from John, from the Woman, from the
Saints, from the man-child caught up to God; so the Beast has had his
authority and power that killed the Saints, from the Dragon and the man-child
caught up to God, the Woman fled into the Wilderness, and has had his power
and authority over all tongues, People and Nations, who has deceived the
Nations because of your miracles, and yet the tongues, and your Orthodox men,
which you call the original, which the Beast has power over, will tell the
people that the false Prophets are come but now, the 7. Matthew, but now is the
seven vials coming upon the Beast, and his names, and them that worship him,
for all these names in the whole Christendom is the Beasts names, not the
Saints but by reproach, and now are the Reapers going forth with their sickle,
and are calling people from the worship of the Beast and his Image, who had
his seal to deceive them that dvvell upon the Earth, and the spirits of Devils
vvorking miracles, which goes forth to the Kings of the Earth in the whole
Earth to gather them to battle against the great day of the Lord God Almighty,
and blessed is he that keeps his garment clean: and the great Whore, (Mystery
Babylon) sits upon the Beast, whose power was from the Dragon, which all
the World should worship, but who has their names written in the Book of
life, and so she sits upon the beast in his several colors which all Nations
of the earth has drunk of her cup and committed fornication with her, there
the Woman is called the Church, now here is your Church, and she sits upon the
waters, and the waters are People, Nations, multitudes and tongues, and she
has corrupted the Earth, and made the inhabitants of the Earth drunk, and the
Kings of the Earth has drunk of her cup, and committed fornication with her;
but where has been your Church all this time? when the multitude are waters,
and Nations and tongues are waters, and the Whore has sat upon them all, and
the inhabitans of the Earth is drunk, and she has drunk the blood of the
Martyrs, and the blood of the Prophets and of the Saints; now if Prophets blood
be drunk, and the Saints and Martyrs blood be drunk, where is the true Church
now? and if the Prophets and Saints blood be drunk, and the Woman fled into the
Wilderness, now where has the true Church been? Now again the Lamb and the
Saints shall have victory, the fall of Babylon shall be known, the judgments
of the great Whore is come, and she shall be rewarded double as she has
rewarded: The Beast, the false Prophets, the Kings of the earth shall make war
with the Saints; but again the Lamb and the Saints shall get victory who shall
kill with the sword, slay with the sword, which is the words of his mouth, and
the Beast shall be taken with him, the false Prophet the old Dragon, and be
cast alive into the lake of fire. Now here was the Lambs weapons and Saints,
killing and slaying with the sword, which is the word of his mouth; but their
weapons is fire, faggot, inquisition, torturing, hanging, drawing, and
quartering, about your Religion, about your worship, that which your faith
stands in which is proved to be Cains and not Abels, the Keeper of Sheep; for
the Lamb and the Saints shall have the victory, and the holy Prophets shall
have power over you, whom the beast has had power over, whom you have
worshipped, and the Whore has set upon all tongues, and kindreds, and Nations,
and the everlasting Gospel shall be preached to them that dwell upon the earth,
to all tongues, people and Nations that dwell upon the earth, and so your
Church has been made up of false Prophets inwardly ravening Wolves, and the
grievous Wolves, not sparing the flock, and that come in after the Apostles
departure, that rose up among them, that had the Sheeps clothing, Math. 7. and
24. Acts 20. And your Church is made up of Heretics which the Apostle speaks
of that served not the Lord Jesus Christ, but their own bellies, which caused
devisions, which had the good words and fair speeches which deceived the hearts
of the simple, Romans 16. And your Church is made up of false Apostles, Satan's
Ministers, Satan's messengers, transforming themselves as the true messengers,
Ministers and Apostles, your Church is made up of such who forbids marriages
and meats, which the Apostle said should come, and so in the Devils doctrines
(as 1 Timoth. 4. and 2 Corinthians. 11. and so are not built upon the true
foundation of the Prophets and Apostles and Christ Jesus,) who being past
feeling, who are gone after the vanities of your own minds like Gentiles into
Idols, Ephesians. 5.4. who are the injurious Persons, as Paul was in his first
estate, before conversion, when he persecuted, who never after conversion did
persecute, for then he came into the life and substance of what he professed in
words before, and so your fruits do show your Church to be made up of injurious
Persons, persecuting like Saul, not converted, and yet you he doting about Law
and Gosple which you do not know what you affirm and speak of; so your Church
many of them through Philosophy, and rudements below are held up by the
Commandments and doctrines of men, and feigned and voluntary humility which is
your own, and usurped authority Jezabel-like, so has forsaken the command of
the Lord Jesus Christ and the true Church, who said keep from Idols, you have
made Idols and Images that can neither hear, nor see, nor go, so your Church is
to be confounded, which trusts in Idols and Images, so not in the true Church
of God, and your Church is made up of them that kill the Lord Jesus Christ, and
kill the Prophets, and kills the Saints, and so fills up the wrath to the
utmost which is to come upon you, and your Church is made up of such who for
the love of money has erred from the faith, and are covetous, and will sell
Pardons for money; your Church is made up of such who be given to blaspheme,
and so has lost the godliness in which the Saints increase; but you have
cankered the People with your images and pictures and idols of things below, so
out of the sober state, in the malice, hateful, out of the fruits of the true
Church, but made up of such which Peter speaks of to be in Corahs, Cains,
Balaams way; so your fruits declares, and thus you are contrary to Christ and
the Apostles, and true Church separated from them, and such as the Apostle
declares against has made up your Church.

Have not you been the first birth of the Devil since the days of the
Apostles, Murderers, and killers about forms and traditions, and Images, and
outward Churches and Ministers made by men's wills? is not Cains fruits the
vagabond from God appeared among you, murderers, destroyers? Did the Apostles
kill, slay and burn? had they their Inquisitions like you? and do not you all
wear Cains mark and Balaams mark on your foreheads, and the Devils colors the
murderer that is out of Truth? has not his flagge been hung out among you? All
that denies your Religion and worshipping your Images, Crosses, and all your
Ministers made by the will of men, and Temples made with men's hands, its death,
by fire, Inquisition or Wracks, and the devil is he that destroys the
creatures, but the power of God destroys him, lets up the soul, and brings the
creature into liberty. Christ says, My body I will give for the life of the
World. And Christ says, He is from above, and he is not earthly; The first man
is of the earth earthly. So after you have consecrated your bread and wine, if
you will come to an open trial and proof, that may openly be proved and seen
whether or no your bread and wine is not below after consecration, and will
waste and consume, which Christ his flesh sees no corruption, his body is the
Church; and is bread and wine after you have consecrated it the Church? or do
you call your selves the Church at Rome? or do you call your selves the body of
Christ? do you call the very bread and wine the very body and blood of Christ
after you have consecrated i^, and so the very Church? and then where are you
the Church? and have you not set bread and wine over you? and you s^y Christ's
body was humane, that is the first Adam earthly, the second is the Lord from
heaven; and after you have consecrated Bread and Wine, if it be humane, that
signifies earthly, and that shows the creatures as they were before your
consecration, and so not the body of Christ, and as often as you do eat this
bread, and drink this cup, y^ do show forth the Lords death till he come: That
signifies that he and his body was not present, for where his body is, there
needs no representation, for it was in the night in which he was betrayed, that
he gave them the cup for remembrance, and do you take it in the night, and
follow the practice of Christ and his Disciples? which is in remembrance of
him, which is the cup of the New Testament in his blood, This do as often as ye
do it in remembrance of me. This was in the night. Now the Apostle bid the
Corinthians (that the end of the world was come to) examine themselves, and
prove their own selves, that they might know their own selves, how that Jesus
Christ was in them except they were reprobates, and if Christ was in them what
need they to have bread and wine to put them in Remembrance of him?

Friend,
1 WHo was the first Author or setter forth of all your Pictures, your Crosses,
your Crucifixes, your Images? and what was their names, seeing that the
Apostles and Teachers and Ministers did not set forth such things in the
Church* but witnessed against Idols, and that they might keep themselves from
Idols, and that they were not to look at things that were seen, as in the
Epistles of John, and to the Corinthians; And are not images, pictures,
crucifixes, crosses, things that be seen? And the things that are seen are
temporal, but the things that are not seen are eternal; and is not it which
set up these things, that which denied the power of God?

2 How is it that you set up Tithes, seeing that the Apostle witnessed against
the Priesthood that took tithes, and said, the Law was changed, and the
commandment disannulled that gave them? And though Abraham gave tithes to
Melchisedeck, the similitude, the son of God is come, the end of the similitude
and likeness; and who was the first beginner of them amongst you?

3 Who was the first Author that gave ye the commands for the observing of
days, holy days, Saints days, seeing the Apopostle and the Saints which were
in the true Church, brought the Saints off days, yea the days which God had
commanded to Christ the substance, and said, there was not any name under
heaven by which a man should be saved, but his name; and what they were to do,
they were to do in the name of Christ. And when they cried Paul, Apollo, or
Cephas, he rebuked them; are not all you come under rebuke now, that are crying
up names, days, meats, drinks, which the Kingdom of Heaven stands not in, and
so has lost the power and the substance?

4 Where did Christ or the Apostles command in the Scripture, or the Church
practiced, that such things forementioned should be done, or come after them,
show me by Scripture. Now if you say that Solomon had a Temple, and there were
images and an Ark, and an Altar, those were but figures, they were not the
substance; and when the substance came, they ceased.

Now what does all your days, crosses, crucifixes, tithes type forth? and who
commanded them? show by Scripture where ever Christ or the Apostles commanded
any such thing as a Crucifix, as a Cross, as Tithes, as a Temple, as an Altar
outward, or to pray by Beads, show by the Scriptures, where ever the true
Apostles, true Church or Christians practiced any such things, or that any such
things were amongst them, or said that any such things should come after them;
answer me by plain Scriptures?

5 May not a man give all his goods away to the poor, and his body to be
burned? and what will that profit him if he have not love? yea, love to
enemies? And how can you love them when you bring them to your Inquisitions, or
burn or imprison them, kill or banish them? Now mark; are not you of that sect
that the Apostle speaks of, that may give all your goods away to the poor, and
your bodies to be burned, and yet nothing, not having love: And what differs
your love from that love, that may give your goods away, and bodies to be
burned, and yet not have true love? And do not you think that you gain by that
now, and do inherit some righteousness for it; and is not that all out of the
true righteousness, which is out of the true love? Now the love of God and
Christ which was in the Apostles, was to love enemies. Now if you love your
sect, and them that be of your worship, and observes your customs, and burn,
and prison, and kill others that be not of your sect and judgment, and
observes your customs? Is this the love of Christ? Is this the love of God? Is
this the love that was in the Apostles? Did the Apostles do so? did Christ do
so, that had all power, etc. to all that were not of their mind, yea or nay,
answer?

6 What differs your works from the works of the Pharisees? for that which they
did, they did to be seen of men. And the young man boasted of his works; yet
when it came that he should have sold all, and followed Jesus, the beloved of
God, there was ^he hard thing, whereby he might have had treasure in heaven:
And how differs your giving alms from the Pharisees, seeing the Pharisees were
in your state to murder, and murdered the just? and you give alms, and are
found in the same nature, that will and do murder them that be contrary minded
to you, wherein do you here differ from the Pharisees? And Christ says, love
enemies; and you have your Inquisitions and Fagots, here his love differed from
the Pharisees and yours. And says John, Let us love in deed, not in word, not
as Cain the wicked one who slew his brother, because his works were righteous,
and the others were evil: And says John, He that kills with the sword must
perish with the sword, here is the faith and patience of the Saints Now where
is your patience, that are killing and prisonin^? And we wrestle not against
flesh and blood, says the Apostle, but against principalities and powers, and
spiritual wickednesses in high places. How do you wrestle against
principalities and powers, and spiritual wickednesses in high places? Does it
not show that your weapons are carnal, and not spiritual, while you are
prisoning, burning, making inquisitions for the bodies of people that are
contrary to your mind? Do not you wrestle against flesh and blood? Is not this
to wrestle against flesh and blood to prison, to burn, to kill creatures? are
not you apostatized from the true Apostles, and true Church, which is the
pillar and ground of truth, who said, We wrestle not against flesh and blood?
answer these things by Scripture.

7 Do you own the Law and Prophets, which is to do as you would be done by?
would you have all that be contrary to your mind do unto you, as you do unto
others, to make Inquisition^, and to burn and to kill them that be contrary to
their mind, as you have your Inquisitions, Fagots, Fires, for such that be
contrary to your mind, not observing your customs? would you have others do
so unto you, and serve you so, that will not observe your customs? Is not to
do as you would be done by, the Law and the Prophets?

8 Did ever Christ or the Apostles give any command that any should be put to
death touching worship, touching Religion? show me a command in Scripture from
Christ's or the Apostles mouths? Are not they that murder, slay, and make war
the Beast and the false Prophets, under the dominion of the mother of Harlots,
and in the steps of Cain and Jezebel, out of the steps of Christ and the
Apostles?

9 What is will worship? Does any worship God in the spirit and truth, but who
be in that, which the Devil is out of? Can any being in the spirit and in the
truth which the Devil is out of the Murderer, slay any concerning Religion or
worship? but on the contrary; if they be in the evil overcome it with good; Now
if you kill, murder, slay, make Inquisitions and burn, where is patience,
where is long suffering, where is stopping the mouths of gainsayers,
concerning gain saying? if you cannot, you have a faggot for them, or a prison,
or an Inquisition, are you not here like unto them, that rose against Stephen,
that were not able to resist his spirit, but stoned him to death? wherein
differs your nature and spirits from these? did Stephen do so to others? the
Apostles were stoned, did they do so to others? Now this is Christ's command, he
sent them forth as sheep amongst Wolves, he sent out Prophets and Wisemen, and
said some they should kill, and some they should thrust out of their Synagogues
and some they should persecute from City to City, and said, they should be
hated of all men for his names sake, and they should speak all manner of evil
of them; and were these to do so again to others, kill, hate, hale out of
Synagogues, persecute? Nay did not Christ say, love enemies, bless them that
curse, now are not they that are contrary to this, out of this, Antichrists,
and false Apostles?

10. Has not the true Ministry, true Spirit, true Power, true Church, and the
true cross, been lost since the days of the Apostles? and the false
Ministry, false Prophets, false Apostles, Antichrists, Synagogues of Satan has
appeared, since which all your Crosses, your names, your pictures, your Images,
your praying by beads, has come up? have not you lost the true spirit, the
Image of the Father, and his name, by which men are saved; and so since run
into other names; run into Images, lost the true Image; run into Crosses, lost
the true Cross the power of God; run into praying by beads, and lost the true
praying in the spirit, and is not the Candle put out within, and so ye have set
up your lights burning without? you defiled the Temple of God within; and so
set up Temples without; are they not set up by that which defiles the inward
Temple? and is not that it which will murder, slay, prison, and bring before
Inquisitions, which defiles the Temple of God? seeing they that witnessed the
Temple of God, said love enemies, and does not it show, that the love of God
was there? if love enemies, which was a command of Christ, who are them that
are to be persecuted and hated, and who are they that you are to slay and kill?
answer.

11 Have you heard the voice of God immediately from heaven, as the Prophets
and Apostles did, have you the same spirit which Christ and the Apostles had,
which gave forth the Scriptures, which was before they were given forth, yea or
nay?

12. Is that the blood of Christ that is your wine, which was shed upon the
Cross when Christ was crucified, alter you have consecrated it?

13. Is that the body of Christ that is your bread, after you have consecrated,
that said, Lo a body have thou prepared me to do the will of God? and will not
your bread corrupt, and let it lie after you have consecrated it? and does the
body, the flesh of Christ see corruption? answer.

14. What is the ground and cause of all the destractions amongst the called
Christians? is it not because they have the words of Christ, the Prophets and
Apostles, but be cut of the life of them?

15. What is that thing which four men do carry on staves, that all men must bow
before it, when you carry it in the streets? and what do you do it for? and
where did Christ or the Apostels do any such thing?

16. Why do you when you sprinkle your children, put salt in their mouths, spit
in their ears, dip their heads in the water, and cross them over the faces?

17. What is the death that has passed over all men?

18. What is the tree of knowledge of good and evil?

19. What is Antichrist? is not it he, which sets up things which Christ has
not commanded?

20. What is the beast, the first and second?

21. What is the Dragon?

22. What is the Mother of Harlots, and her cup which all Nations and the Kings
of the earth has drunk of?

23 What is the bottomless pit?

24 What are the locusts?

25 What is the first principle of the pure Religion?

26 Does Christ Jesus enlighten every man that comes into the world, yea or nay?

27 What is it that gives the knowledge of the glory of God, and where is it?

28 What is the Word?

29 What is the Gospel?

30 What is the Record?

31 What is the Original?

32 What is the law and the testimony?

33 What is self-righteousnesse?

34 Shall a man while he is upon earth have the body of sin put off, and be
perfect, and come to that which is perfect, and have his transgressions and
sins blotted out, yea or nay?

35 What is conscience? and what is the soul?

36. Would you not destroy them that would break down your pictures, your
Images, your Crosses, your Crucifixes, and throw away your beads? would not
that lov^ in you destroy them that should destroy your pictures, Crosses*
Crucifixes, Images, and beads? would not the Heathen have done the same to the
Jews, that had destroyed their Images, Groves, pictures set up which God never
commanded? Would not the Jews have destroyed the Apostles for denying the
Temple, the Altar, Sanctuary, Tabernacle, days, Priests, offerings, the
outward things which God had formerly commanded, but denied by them that came
to witness, and preach up the body that God had prepared to put an end to
them? and was not that the love of God in the Apostles, and was not that the
sel^ish love that held up pictures, Temples, Images, Idols, which God never
commanded, and was not that the selfish love in the Jews, that held up Temple,
tithes, Priests, Images, similitudes, and are not you in the selfish love, and
is not this selfish love that holds up Temples, Tithes, Priests, Images,
Crucifixes, Pulpits, and is not all this in one nature, Jews, Gentiles, and you
since the days of the Apostles, and out of the love that the Apostles were in,
who witness against Jews, Priests, tithes, and Gentiles and Idols and bad the
Saints keep themselves from Idols, 1 John 5.21.

37. Are not they the false Apostles, Ministers and Teachers and Antichrist,
Beast and false Prophets who comes with lying signs wonders and miracles, since
the days of the Apostles and John? and who are these describe them that should
come with the lying signs and wonders, and the beast should work miracles since
the days of the Apostles?

38. Are not they the false Apostles, Ministers and Teachers, and in the night,
out of the true day, and have lost it since the days of the Apostles (the true
Christians, which were children of the day) that now observes days? is not
this a figure and sign to be in the night? was not the true Apostle afraid of
some, that observed days, that he had bestowed his labor in vain amongst
them, and was not this observing of days coming up amongst some before the
Apostles decease which the true Apostles rebuked, and since the days of the
Apostles, have they not spread over Nations, observers of days, and are they
not gone into the night and lost the true day?

39. Why do you whip your selves, with cords or ropes, or whips, where did the
Christians or Apostles do so? or did Christ or the Apostles give any such
command? will you be tried and have your practices tried by the Scriptures of
Christ and the Apostles?

40. Do you own the practice of the Church of the Saints and Christians which
the Apostle was amongst, that if any thing be revealed to another that sits by,
let the first hold his peace, for ye may all prophecy one by one, that all may
learn, and be edified and comforted, the Spirits of the Prophets are subject
to the Prophets, and God is the God of order, and not of confusion?

41. Do you own that Sons and Daughters shall prophecy in this age, and that
the spirit will be poured out upon them, yea or nay?

42. Do you own revelation and immediate inspiration as the Apostles had, the
same now in these days as was amongst them, yea or nay?

43. Do you own trembling and quaking as was amongst the Saints which the
Scriptures speak of, and the salvation which is to be wrought out with fear and
trembling, and does not this work out that nature, that beats and striks the
Creature?

44. What are all your names that you give to your Friars Monks, Jesuits given
to them for? where did Christ and the Prophets and Apostles do so, or give any
such names to any, as white Friars, black Friars, Jesuits, Abbots, Monks? has
not this been set up since the fall^ng away from the power and life that the
Saints were in, who were of one mind and heart and Spirit and Soul, and the
number of these names got up since?

45. From whence was the rise of your Pope, Cardin^ls, Abbots, Monks, Pryors,
Arch Bishops, Covents, Canons, Nunns, Jesuits, Franciscans, Dominicans,
Carth^sians, Capuchins, Benedictines, Mendicants, Carmelits, gray Friars, black
Friars, white Friars; your Regulers and Seculers; our Altar, Rayles, Organs,
Candlesticks, Tapers, Lights, Torches, holy Water, Myters, Vestments, Fonts,
Surplisses, Bendings before Images, bowings before the Altar; where do ye find
these names or things amongst the Apostles or the Saints and Churches which the
Apostles were amongst? or where did they do so, (show a proof of it) before
their decease, in all their Epistles, or in all the declaration of Christ or
the Apostles, for your practice to act or practice any such thing, or to give
any such names, or set up such Orders?

46. Where had the Apostles and Saints any Inquisition-Houses, to put them in
that were contrary to their minds?

47. Where had the Apostles and Saints any houses to put men and women into,
such as ye call Abbeys, Monasteries, Nunneries?

48. Where did the Apostles or Saints, set up a form, that some of them should
beg all their life times? is it not said, I have not seen the righteous
forsaken, nor his seed beging his bread?

49. Where did ever any in the Scriptures, wear sackcloth or hair-cloth,
except such as of the Lord God were commanded to wear them as a sign?

50. Where is it amongst the Apostles and true Churches that were amongst them,
that they should be distinguished one from another, by their habits, as every
name has their several habits amongst you? prove me this by Scripture, have
not you lost the true knowing one another in the Spirit, and so know one
another by habits and names?

51. Where did the Apostles and Saints that were amongst them, the true Church,
give any such Commands that there should be any days set apart for fish, to be
observed as you do, answer me these things out of the Doctrines of Christ or
the Apostles, or Disciples of the Apostles and the true Church?

52. Where was there any amongst the Apostles and Disciples which was the true
Church amongst the true Christians, that had the name of Pope before their
decease, or Fryeries, or Abbeys, or Nunneries or Monks, or any such names
amongst them, answer me by the Scriptures out of the practice of the true
Apostles, and true Christians, which the Apostles were amongst before their
decease?

53. Where did the Apostles and Disciples take a vow of any Christians, or make
them to give them a vow, that they should never possess any thing of their
own, or never marry, but put them into houses, where they should never come out
again, and is not that the Doctrine of Devils, which was coming in before the
Apostles decease, forbidding the eating of meats, and forbidding of marriage, 1 Timothy 4. and from what ground and root has this had its rise?

54. What were the false Prophets and Anti christ, that Christ said should come
in the 7. and 24. of Math. to his Disciples, and which the Disciples ^aw was
come, as in 1 John 2. and 4. which went forth from them which he says in his
revelations, all that dwelt upon the earth went after, and all Nations drunk
the cup of the fornication, and the Kings of the earth and all that dwelt upon
the earth worshipped the Beast, what Kings of the earth, were they that drunk
this cup of fornication? and all Nations, and what Nations were they? that cup
was this? was not it them that ravined from the life, which went forth from the
Apostles, which made war against the Saints, and should overcome them for a
season, that kept the testimony of Jesus the spirit of Prophesy, whose names
were written in the Lambs book of life, slain from the foundation of the world?

55. Where did the Apostles and the Church, that they were amongst before their
decease, set up Crosses, and did they fill their windows full of pictures and
Images of males and females? answer me this by Scripture, out of the Apostles
practice: Now if you say that Joshua bowed before the Arc, and Solomon made
Images, Joshua bowed to the Lord before the Arc, and Christ is come the
substance of all tipes, and figures and shadows, and to him must every knee
bow, who is a greater then Solomon that built the Temple, and Stephen that was
stoned to death for witnesing the substance and denying the figure?

56. And where did the Apostles and Disciples, or the Ministers of Christ Jesus
which was amongst the Apostles, before their decease, consecrate bread and
wine, or Christ give them any such Comm^nd to consecrate it? tell me out of the
Commands of Christ, or the Commands of the Apostles before their decease, that
they practiced any such thing amongst the Saints; And what Scripture have you,
or Command from Christ or the Apostles, or the Church that was amongst them,
that speaks of seven Sacraments, or any such names that they had amongst them,
or give forth any such thing to be practiced after them; let the practice of
Christ and his Apostles and the Saints then speak for it, or declare it, or
else you must acknowledge your selves to be besides them, and acknowledge it to
be, but an invention, and your own words?

57. If your Church be the Pillar and ground of Truth, the gates of Hell cannot
pervail against it, but if the gates of Hell have prevailed, and you swallowed
up in darkness and in inventions, and are fain to hold up your selves, with
Prisons and Inq^isitions and Goales, and outward Carnal weapons, does not this
show that your weapons are carnal and not spiritual, and that you are out of
the power of Truth, which the Apostles were in; I am none of those that you call
your sects, separated from you and drove you out of your houses, and taken them
and call them the Church, nor any of them that holds up Tithes, or Temple
outward which has your Crosses on the end of them, nor any of them that holds
up Priests, which have been made by Schools and Colleges, and has their
Temples and Pulpits imitating Ezra or Solomon, and not Christ who came to put
an end to them, nor any of them that are taught to call the days by the Saints
names, nor any of them that are taught to call the Colleges, by Jesus, by
Christ, by Immanuel, by Trinity, none of them that ever was learned to call
them by these names, nor any of them taught by the Heathen to call months by
the names of January, February, March, April, May, etc. and to name days, and
to call them, by such a Saint, or such a God, or Sun, or Moon, or Stars; But
am a witness against all the Priests made by Schools and Colleges by man's
will, and Tithes, and Temples, set up since the days of the Apostles in the
Apostasy, and a witness against all the Jews, Temples, Tithes, Pulpits,
Priests and offerings, one of them that are the Elect; that witness the
everlasting Priesthood and everlasting covenant.

58. Are not all these Pulpits, Temples, Tithes, Priests, Schools, Colleges
made by the will of man, and set up by the will of man in the apostasy since
the days of the Apostles? and are not you all in the Apostasy from Christ and
the Apostles, who said when they curse bless ye, and the Apostle says, my
brethren bless and curse not, Now you that do curse by your Bell, by your Book,
and by your Candle, are not you apostatized from the Apostles Doctrine here,
who says, bless and curse not; and ye curse; Did not the Apostle Peter see the
Cursers, cursed speakers, come up before his decease?

59. Did the Apostles give the names as Whitsontyde, or Easter, or Christmas,
the names of holy days, are not all these set up since the Apostles? seeing
the Apostle said he was afraid of them that observed days; Did not the Jews
dote upon the shadow more then the substance, dote upon the day more then they
did upon Christ? But show what your observing of Whitsontyde, Easter, or other
holy days does signify forth, and who was the first author of your Church, or
where the Apostles or the Church before their decease practiced or commanded
any such thing? if not, grant your selves Apostates.

60. Where did the Apostles or Ministers of Christ or the beleivers before
their decease, build great Abbeys, Monasteries, and set crosses on the ends of
them, Nunneries, Cloisters, build walks in the ground? show it by Scripture,
by that prove your practice, else acknowledge your selves to have set up these
things who be in the apostasy?

61 Where had the Apostles or the Saints, Bells jangling to call them together
like a company of Heathen, or like they that have a horn to call their hounds
together, or the Swine-heard for people to put forth Swine, or hower-glasses to
preach by the hour? prove it by scripture, else acknowledge your are in the
Apostasy, and have set up ^hese things by your own inventions, and are them
that limit the spirit.

62. Where did ever the Apostles consecrate any thing, or the scripture speak
of Sacraments, or where did the Apostles use that which you call holy Water, to
sprinkle people withal? if you cannot show it by scripture, where the Apostles
or Christ di^ practice any such thing, acknowledge your selves that you be in
the Apostasy that have set up such things since the days of the Apostles, and
erred from the true Church in your inventions.

63. Where did the Apostles when they went to preach or to pray, put on white
Hoods, Copes, Tippets, white Surplisses and cornered Caps, are not all these
things got up since the days of the Apostles amongst such as are apostat^z^d
from them?

64. Who are the inwardly Raveners that Christ said should come, which was the
false Prophets, which should have the Sheeps clothing, but inwardly ravening
Wolves, an inwardly ravening Wolf, worse then a dog, which got the sheeps
clothing, is not this it that has made war against the Saints, that kept the
testimony of Jesus the Spirit of prophesy, and has not the wolf been covered
with the sheeps clothing long, such as ravined from the spirit, such as has
inwardly ravened, and would ravine and destroy all that be contrary minded?

65. Have not men fallen into the flesh since the days of the Apostasy, and
ravined from the spirit, that went forth from the Apostles, are not they them
that has set up all these outward things, as Temples, Tithes, Priests, crosses,
crucifixes, Schools, Colleges, to make them Ministers, Images, Idols, Abbeys,
Nunneries, Candels, Altars, Holy waters, Praying by Beads, sprinkling children
with the sign of the cross, and have not you gone back who are ravened from
the spirit, and so lost the substance, and so imitating Aaron and his Sons, and
imitating Altars* and outward things that stood in Moses, which the Apostle
says, while Moses was read, the veil was over their hearts?

66. Was not the first Priesthood a true tipe, and the Temple a true tipe of
the inward, and the Sanctuary and Altar a tipe, and the outward things in the
Law, shadowing forth the good things that were to come, which were but to have
their times and seasons? and did not the Apostle witness the substance of all
tipes, figures and shadows, and signs and similitudes and likenesses, and
witnessed that which gave him to see where there was no shadow nor changing?
Now are not all your tithes, Temples, Priests, Altars, Crosses, Crucifixes,
Images, Similitudes, Beads, Cloisters, Abbeys, Nunneries, set up by your own
inventions, which men and people has been compelled to worship, are not all
these lying signs and wonders, and the worship of the beast, that which they
that inwardly ravened, set up, and is not this to give worship to them that
inwardly ravined from the spirit of God, who are the Wolves, that ^an make a
profession of Christ's and the Apostles words, the Beast and false Prophets
which the world has wondered after, and should deceive them with their lying
signs and wonders: Did not the Apostles give hints of such things before their
decease? did not John see such come as the whole world went after, and all that
dwelt upon the earth worshipped the Beast?

Now answer me these things, and clear me them by Scripture, where the Apostles
did practice or act any such things before mentioned: and if ye be not such
that John and the Apostles speaks of, and Christ, that should be the inward
ravening wolves, and go forth from the Apostles, which John saw all that dwelt
upon the earth worshipped and went after; and all that dwelt upon the earth
drunk the cup of fornication, and should deceive them that dwell upon the earth
with their lying signs and wonders, and miracles; and if you be not them, tell
me who they are?

67 What is the Beast, and the number of his names? and what are his names, and
what is his mark, that they that would not receive should be persecuted? And
what is his image? and what are his heads? and what are his crowns? and what is
the mother of the harlots? and what is the great whore which has corrupted the
earth? and what is the cup of fornication that all Nations has drunk of? and
who are the Beast and false Prophets? and what are they that are come up since
the days of the Apostles?

How to say you believe as the Church believes, and you will not trouble your
selves about the Scriptures, because they are hard to ^e understood; you are to
see that you be of the Church that the Apostles were of, which was the pillar
and ground of truth, which was without spot or wrinkle, or blemish, and so
their belief stood in Christ and God: And when any did wrong, yea Peter, Peter
was withstood, and not believed as he believed. And as for saying the
Scriptures are hard to be understood, that is to show you want the spirit as
was in them that gave them forth, in which is the unity and the bond of peace.
And none comes to be a member of the Church in God the pillar and ground of
truth without spot or wrinkle, or blemish, but who comes into the spirit that
they were in that gave forth the Scriptures, with which spirit every one in
particular has his particular satisfaction in the Scripture, it opens it to
them, with which spirit he has unity with God, unity with the Scriptures, of
whom they learned that gave them forth, and there is the bond of peace Now to
tie up men to believe as others believe, and to compel them by a law, or a
prison, or an inquisition, this was not in the true Church, but this is a mark
of the apostasy from it, and is a mark, that they that do so, are the wresters
of the Scriptures, and erred, ravened from the spirit that they were in that
gave them forth. For it was not their work to compel people by a Law, by a
prison, by an Inquisition to obey their faith, and to bring them into their
worship and doctrine, that was not the work of them that had the spirit that
gave forth the Scriptures; but this shows and signifies, and declares it self
forth, that you would have power over men's faith, which says the Apostles, we
have not, but bade them look at Jesus the author of the faith. And again, to
believe as others believe, which do call themselves a Church: Is not this
different from the Apostles doctrine, who says, he that believes has the
witness in himself; and have thou faith, have it to thy self?

68 Is your Church the body of Christ, and is your bread the body of Christ
after consecration? and is that bread after you have consecrated it, the
Church? Is that the body of Christ the Church? for the Apostle says, the body
of Christ which is the Church.

69 Is God worshipped in truth, but in the spirit that gave forth the
Scriptures, and in that which the Devil is out of? Now can any of you worship
God in the truth, unless you be in the spirit that gave forth the Scriptures?
then being in the spirit that gave forth the Scriptures, how can you say that
the Scripture is hard to be understood, or any that be in the Church, seeing
the true Church is made up of living stones; and the Scripture was given forth
from the spirit.

70 And whereas it is a general word to say you believe as the Church
believes, and the Scriptures are hard to be understood. Does not this show that
you be all afraid of your standing? and show that your Church is in the state
of apostasy, from the Apostles and Disciples of the Lord Jesus, that there is a
cry amongst you, the Scripture is hard to be understood? And we must believe as
the Church believes, and the Church is the Pope and his Council. Now if he or
his Council dare not venture to try their standing to meet the spirit of God,
and to answer these Q^eries, or all his train that be under him; then shall we
know, and then shall it be seen who is the true Church, and who are the
apostates, and set up a likeness, an Image: And if you do shelter your selves
in the darkness, and not come forth to the light, and dare not venture your
Principles, and is afraid of the heat, and for fear that your heads should be
cut or slashed, and your principles dashed to pieces; and see that your weapons
will not carry you out, and that your righteousness is but as rags, and you
have been but wolves covered with the sheeps clothing, and have been devourers
of the Lambs, and can do nothing without your swords and carnal weapons, and
your Inquisitions, then may the whole world see you: Therefore come out, I
challenge you all, and give an answer either in print or in writing, and bring
your deeds to light, that they may be manifested to the whole earth, and
declared on the housetop; our weapons are not carnal with which we shall
handle you; neither need you fear your persons; neither need you be afraid that
we will wrestle with flesh and blood; for that which was amongst the Apostles,
is come to, that which has been since the Apostles is seen: The arm of flesh
is not our weapons, but the Lord of hosts. Come thou Pope, with all thy
Jesuits and Cardinals, and see if thou can stand this day before the truth,
for these queries be to the whole body and thee, scattered up and down the face
of the whole earth, and the power of the Lord God of life, of heaven and earth
is gone over you, and has fathomed you.

71 Was it the work of the Christians to be beating D^ums up and down,
fighting, destroying one another? where has been loving enemies? where has been
overcoming evil with good, and rendering to no man evil for evil?

72 Does not Christ say, It has been said of old time, thou shall perform thy
oath unto the Lord? But does not he say, swear not at all? Now ye swearers,
have not you b^oken Christ's command, and have apostatized from his doctrine?
but if ye say the Prophets swore, or Abraham swore, or David swore, or Solomon
swore, or Moses swore, or the Priests swore; Christ is the end of the Prophets
and Priesthood, a greater then Solomon, then Joseph or Jacob. Before Abraham
was I am, who says, swear not at all. Now if you say, did not the Apostles
say, an oath was an end of controversy and strife amongst men, that men swore
by the greater, which the Apostle brings as an example, showing how God could
not find a greater, and therefore swore by himself concerning his covenant
that does not change betwixt God and man, in which covenant man comes to have
peace with God. Now if ye say, did not the Angel swear in the Revelations; I
bring forth my first begotten into the world, and let all the Angels worship
him; and this is the beloved Son, hear ye him says God. And above all things
my brethren, says the Apostle, swear not at all, neither by heaven nor by
earth, lest ye fall into condemnation: So are not all you swearers fallen under
condemnation, and out of the Apostles doctrine, and apostatized from it? Nay,
is not the power which you call your supreme, under the condemnation? and
Magistrates that are swearers, and giving oaths, no Christian Magistrates, but
they and their power is all under condemnation, all swearers upon the earth;
for says the Apostle, Above all things my brethren swear not at all left ye
fall into condemnation. So are not ye swearers, who calls your selves a Church,
Pope, Magistrates, all upon the earth under condemnation, and out of the
doctrine of the Apostles, false brethren, and out of the power of Christ, who
has all power in heaven and e^rth given unto him, who says, let your yea be
yea, and your nay nay, in all your communications, who is the end of oaths,
whose doctrine the Apostles preached and abode in. Now are not all Churches,
Teachers, powers, Magistrates under condemnation that be the swearers, and not
the help-government to Christ, out of the higher power, all Magistrates from
under the higher power that be swearers, and out of Christ's power, and help
Magistracy and government for him, who has all power in heaven and earth given
unto him, and out of the Apostles Doctrine, and Christ's Doctrine, who says,
Let all your communication be yea, yea, and nay, nay; for whatsoever is more is
evil. And so how can a company of swearers be a Church, or the supreme power,
which are the Beasts and false Prophets apostatized from the Apostles, and
Christ's Doctrine, and them that inwardly ravened from it, and has had the
sh^eps clothing, that tear and rend all in pieces, that will not come into the
wolves way, and bow down to that which he has set up; and so therefore is the
cry amongst you, the Scripture is hard to be understood; and you are tied to
believe as yo^^ Church believes; so by that means you have held the outside,
the sheeps clothing, and pretend to be saved by your works and merit^, when
the wolf has been in your hearts tearing to pieces, and rend and devour them
that will not believe as you believe: I cannot gainsay you in this, as for your
saying the Scriptures are hard to be understood, when you are all ravened from
the spirit that gave them forth.

73 Where did ever any of the Saints change their names, unless they had a
command for it, as ye do when ye are made Popes? Did Peter change his name?

74 Where was it amongst the Apostles that some might not marry, and they might
not at some times of the year marry; but at those times they might have a
license to marry for money, as it has been by them who be of you.

75 Where did the Apostles bear about candles for the purification of Mary as
you do? where was this practice in the Church? or how do you as the Church did?
or believe as the Church believes, when you fordid to marry? Did not the Church
say it was the doctrine of Devils? and how do you as the Church did, when you
forbid the eating of meats, when the Church said it was the doctrine of Devils.

76 Where did the Apostles consecrate swords, and send them to one another to
fight with their enemies? how do you here believe as the Church believes, who
said, we wrestle not against flesh and blood; and their weapons were not
carnal but spiritual.

77 Where did the Apostles sell Pardons and Indulgences for money; who said,
they were not redeemed with corruptible things? and how do you believe as the
Church believes, when you are redeeming one another with corruptible things?

78 How do you forgive one another freely as Christ has forgiven, when by your
Pardons, Indulgencies, and Bulls you get great sums of money of poor ignorant
people? are not you in this the covetous, that makes merchandise of the people,
that Peter saw coming in, who has the wages of unrighteousness, whose reward
must be according to your works; for every man must receive a reward according
to his deeds? And the Apostles said, they were not redeemed with corruptible
things as silver and gold: And how are you apostatized from the Apostles
doctrine, that are selling pardons for silver and gold corruptible? how do you
here undervalue the blood of Christ which does cleanse from all sin; and
believe as the Church believes, who said, By no other name under heaven shall
we be saved, but by him? And how is it that ye have set up another name to
pardon, the Pope, and sell pardons? Do not you in this show and discover you to
be in the apostasy from the Apostles and true Church, and not to do as they did?

79 Where did the Apostles set up Stews amongst them, the Christians before
their decease, give your example? but bade them flee fornication; and said, no
unrighteousness must enter into the kingdom of God; and he that defiled the
Temple of God, God would destroy. And do not you in this set up that which is
naught, and tolerate that which is wicked?

80 Where did ever the Apostles or the Saints say prayers by beads to the
Saints, or to Saint Mary, as you do, or compel any so to do, or set forth such
an order that should be after them. Where was any such things practiced among
the Apostles before their decease, that they must say so many prayers, numbered
by so many beads, before they had a pardon?

81 Where did the Apostles or Saints run up and down for Relics, or Bones of
dead men as you do? and why do you gather up the chips of Wood and Stone and
dust that flies from the door that you break open, after you have chosen a
Pope, and keep them as precious Relics? where did ever any of the Saints do
such things; and has not all these things come up since the days of the
Apostles amongst you who from them are apostatized?

The Protestant and Papist are fighting and striving about Works. Now because
the Apostle said, They were justified by faith without the works of the Law:
And James says, that faith without works is dead. And these are the Scriptures
they fight about, being both Protestant and Papist found out of the faith the
Apostle spoke of, and are found out of the works of the Law both, so neither in
the works of the faith, nor in the works of the Law, nor in seeing the intent
of the Apostles Paul and James, when they was speaking of justifying by faith
without the works of the Law, and Faith without the works was dead; Now the
Apostle when he speaks to the Romans of being justified by the faith without
the works of the Law for the Faith in the heart takes away the nature that has
the shadows, and tipes and figures which causes the obedience of the Law, and
which the fruits goes from that the Law takes hold upon, and through this Faith
and by it, that's removed, whereby man has access to God; now the Law, the
works of the Law and the obedience to that, made such a provision for a
command, being according to the Law, for the tenth to be offered up for the
widows, fatherless and Levite; that there might not be a beggar among them;
Now who comes into the faith of Christ Jesus, in which the Law ends; the nature
is removed that pertaines to the shadows, and figures which the fruits goes
from, which the occasion of the law comes upon them which the faith purifies,
and gives power and victory over the world, which has access to God, which is
justified in the sight of God, and pleases him; Now who are of this Faith are
of Abraham over all the Idolatrous Nations, Adulterers and Fornicators and all
such; Now this faith nourishes and cherishes and saves; which works does not;
but follows this, and they are wrought in God, and such cease from their own,
as God did from his, so if a brother or a sister be naked and destitute of
daily food, he feeds him and clothes him; so this Faith is in the Wisdom of
God, preserver of the Creation, which is the Son of Gods Faith, and the faith
of the Elect; but then the Devils faith that believes there is a God and
trembles, but are out of truth, that clothes not the naked brethren, and does
not give them victory, and sees them destitute of daily food, and does not feed
them, but lets them cry up and down for bread and cloa^hes about the streets,
this is like the Papist and Protestant, and Sectaries faith, and they are not
the Preservers of the Creation, but out of the living faith, and in the dead;
and when they have done all this, clothed and fed, and not a beggar among
them, it is not by their works that they are saved, but by their faith which
these works follows, which works by love; which is a preserver of the
creation, for it was a great work of the Apostle to bring them to the faith,
and to be justified by that alone, without the deeds of the Law, that the seed
of God might come up in them, the wisdom of the creation, with it to be
ordered and spread over it; for who are of faith, are of Abraham: Christ
according to the flesh was of Abraham, so who are of Abraham, are of the flesh
of Christ; Now when many had gotten the faith in a form, being justified by it
without the deeds of the Law, so they which had gotten the form of the law,
without the life, saw not Christ the substance and there rested; but when these
had gotten the form of being justified without the works, and their brothers
and their sisters were destitute of daily food, and was naked; These were like
unto your Christians, and Papists that has the name and talks of a faith, but
it is dead, therefore so many of their brethren and Sisters goes beging up and
down the streets, destitute of daily food; for mark, they all say, they are
Christians, and that they are baptized into the Church, and into the faith, and
so then they are all Brethren, and yet here is their Brethren up and down the
streets, destitute and naked, and yet they will say, depart in peace, and be
you warmed and filled, and yet give them not these things which is good for
them; but may be make houses of correction to whip them and beat them; is this
like unto Christians that was amongst the Apostles, or like unto the Law, who
had the Tithes for the service, that there need not be a beggar among them? is
not this the faith which James rebukes, which is dead; and all these are the
Christians that has a name but are dead from the life; and does not this dead
faith, carry you to believe that there is a God and a Christ? and so the Devil
does, that is the murderer, and you will murder one another about Religion and
faith, Church and Profession, and Idols and Ministry, like the Heathen, who
will destroy one another about their Images, and often envied the Jews, because
they broke down their Images, and that Faith which leads to murder the
creatures about Religion, Ministry, and Church, the same Faith will no^
preserve the creation, as to cloth the naked, and feed the hungry. Now though
the Apostle brought them out of the works of the Law, being justified by them,
into the faith of Christ Jesus, who brought them into the wisdom of the
creation; and the love of the creation, the love of God which faith works by,
which faith God is the Author of it, and this faith leads people to be
preservers of the Creation; feed the hungry, and cloth the naked, and these be
the least things ye can do; for these are but things that pertain to this life,
who are of faith (as I said before) are of Abraham, Christ according to the
flesh, heirs of salvation of the world that has no end. He that believes has
entered into his rest, and ceased from his own works as God did from his, and
shall not come into condemnation, but is passed from death to life, and so
loves the brethren: And he it is that abides in the house of God for ever, the
Son of God; the Son of God abides in the house for ever. Cains faith, and Cains
sacrifice is now made manifest out of the faith of Abraham and Abel, and Gods
elect, and the Son of God.

THE END.
ERRORS.
PAge 5. l. 20. for mortal r. immortal, p. 14. l. 10. for then that, r. then
you that. p. 34. l. 20. for filled r. killed. p. 38. l. 20. for did not r, did.
p. 43. l. 19. for for r. forth. p. 50. l. 20. for a God, r. and God. p. 57. l.
33. for learning, r. worrying. p. 62. l. 27* r. from that. p. 65. l. 18. for
them r. then. p. 82. l. 34. for cut, r. out. p. 85, l. 28. for our r. your. p.
87. l. 10. for that, r. what. p. 91. l. 21. for toe, r. to be.


