A TESTIMONY Concerning Our dear Friend and Brother George Watt.
WHo was a tender Man toward the Lord and his Truth, and upright in his Life
and Conversation; and had a care of Gods Glory, and showed forth an Example and
Testimony in plainness, against the Pride and Vanities of this World; and all
manner of Lasciviousness and Looseness: A Man of Integrity, Fervency and
Sincerity, for the Lord's Honor and the Truth, and would have all that profess
Truth, to walk in it; where any did not, it was to his Grief: He had a sincere
Testimony for the Lord, both in Life and Power these several years, both in
Meetings here in England, and in Holland, and in Friezland, who Traveled with
me; and I had a sincere Love for him, for his true and honest
upright-heartedness to the Lord, who strove to walk inoffensively, both to the
Church of Christ and to the World, in his tender Life and Conversation; and the
Lord had greatly blessed him in outward Riches, and he so lived above it, that
he did a great deal of good with it, setting many poor Widows, Fatherless and
Servants to Work, that they got a good Livelihood under him. And G. Watt said
to me, that he paid a Thousand Pounds a year to poor Widows, Fatherless and
Servants Wages, which was a great help to poor people, so that he has been the
helping and making of many; and he kept very good order in his Family, and
amongst his Servants and Work-People. And besides his Christian Charity, he was
always ready to help other poor Widows, Fatherless and Families of the Church
of Christ, that profess the same Truth of Christ with him; and not only so but
as the Apostle says, Do good unto all, but especially those that are of the
Household of Faith, for such poor Families or Widows as were not of his
Religion, and Faith, he has sought out, helped and relieved them in the cold
Winter season, with Coals and other Necessities.

And this he did not only to the poor Natives about London, but also handed
several Sums of Money to the poor French Protestants, that left their native
Country for their Conscience Sake, besides the relief he gave several of the
poor French weekly at his House. Much I could write of such things of the
fruits of his Christian Generous Spirit, whose Bowels were not straightened from
the good works of Faith, and practice of pure Religion. And I do not know that
any one can spot his clean Life; he was a Man compassed about with many
Infirmities, but exercised in the Word of Patience, in which Patience he run
his Race, to obtain the Life and Crown Immortal.

And also he was many times very much exercised in the Lords Power and Spirit,
by which he was sometimes moved to go to Steeple Houses, and other places, to
declare Gods Truth to the People, which Exercise few knew, but who had gone
through the same; and several times he had been taken, and carried before
Justices, and sometimes cast into Prison; but the Lord by his eternal Arm and
Power carried him over all, and over all gave him Dominion, for his Name and
Truths sake, and in it preserved him to the end of his days, a harmless
Innocent man, a Peacemaker, a true Believer in the Light of Christ, and a
Child of the same; a living Member of the Church of Christ, who is the holy and
heavenly Head of the same: And as Christ says, He that believes in me, though
he were dead, yet shall he live; and he that lives, and believes in me shall
never die; and in this Belief, and in this Life is our dear Brother George
Watt; I do see him and feel him; And so, Blessed are all they that die in the
Lord, they Rest from their Labors, as he has done, and their Works follow
them, as his do him.

And this was upon me to write concerning our dear Brother George Watt. Though
outwardly Weak, yet Strong in the Lord;

G. F.
London, the 6th of the 9th Month, 1688.
THE END.

