READINESS ERRAND TO DAMASCVS: With His Packet of Letters from the Highpriests
against the Disciples of the Lord.

OR A faithful Transcript of a PETITION contrived by some Persons in
Lancashier, who call themselves Ministers of the Gospel, breathing out
threatenings and slaughters against a peaceable and godly people there, by them
nicknamed QUAKERS.

Together with the Defense of the Persons thereby traduced against, the
slanderous and false suggestions of that Petition, and other untruths charged
upon them.

Published to no other end, but to draw out the bowels of tender compassion
from all that love the poor despised servants of Jesus Christ, who have been
the scorn of carnal men in all ages.

Mat. 5. 10. 11. 12. Blessed are they which are persecuted for righteousness
sake; for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven. Blessed are ye, when men shall
revile you, and persecute you, and shall say all manner of evil against you,
falsely for my sake. Rejoice and be exceeding glad, for great is your reward in
Heaven; for so persecuted they the Prophets which were bebefore you. London,
Printed for Giles Calvert, at the black Spread-Eagle, at the West End of Paul's,
1614.

To all that love the Lord Jesus Christ.
Dear Hearts,
YOu love the Lord Jesus Christ, and not him alone, but Christ with all his
Train. Great shall be your compensation: for your Love, you shall have Loves,
Can. 7. 12. Amores, a plurality, and infinity of Loves which none but God in
Christ has to bestow. The best of his relations upon earth, have but single
Love (and it is happy they have Love) to the Brethren; But Christ has Loves for
the meanest of you, the least of his. May you and all his (in whom there are
yet but buds, scarce visible appearances of Graces) prove fruitful Vines, grow
from Buds to Blossoms, from Blossoms to abundance of fruits; That when the Lord
shall get up early to visit his Vineyard, you may feast him with pleasant
fruits new and old, you may bless him for his Loves of former and latter days,
and be ever to him an humble, holy and thankful, and to his brethren a
comforting people. Glory in your habit; you wear the signal Favors of the King
of kings, and Lord of Hosts, the Great and Mighty Jehovah, Love: By which I
know to whom ye belong, because ye love the Brethren

To the Contrivers and Subscribers of the Petition.
Poor Hearts,
IS this a time to chide, and be angry, and pick quarrels? and (if you must
needs do so) can you find no other objects of your indignation, but the Lords
Disciples: but peaceable, holy, humble, self-denying men; Is not the work of
the Ministry to preach the Gospel: Is not the Sword of the Magistrate appointed
to the punishment of evil doers, and to the praise of them that do well. Are
you incumbent in your duties: Are you laying out your Talents to the end they
were given you, or are you mistaken in the thing. When did you proclaim war
against Drunkards, Swearers, common blasphemers, enemies to the Lord and his
people: Have you none of those amongst you? or are your high-flown contending
Spirits gone beyond such slender wrastlings, that you scorn to encounter with
any below the degree of a Saint: The Lord open your eyes, and let you see, and
give you hearts to consider your several duties. But tell me, ye sons of Levi
(as ye call your selves) ye that pretend a Ius Divinum to persecution; What
will ye say, when the Son of man shall come in his glory, and all the holy
Angels with him, and shall sit upon the Throne of his glory, and all Nations
shall be gathered before him: Mind ye what will be the great work of that great
day; your Petition will surely then be heard. I beseech you read the Paper of
Causes set down to be first heard at that Tribunal, in Mat. 25. 31. to the end
of the Chapter: And the Lord let it dwell upon your hearts for ever.

To the Christian READER.
THese are to let thee know, that the only wise God at this time has so by
his providence ordered it, in the North parts of Lancashier, that many precious
Christians (and so for many years accounted, before the nickname Quakers was
heard of) have, for some time past, forborne to concorporate in Parochial
Assemblies, wherein they profess themselves to have gained little of the
knowledge of Jesus Christ? And it is, and has been put upon their hearts to
meet often (and on the Lords Day constantly) at convenient places, to seek the
Lord their Redeemer, and to worship him in Spirit and in Truth, and to speak of
such things (tending to mutual edification) as the good Spirit of the Lord
shall teach them; demeaning themselves without any offense given to any that
truly fear the Lord.

But true it is, that some men and interests of those parts do take great
offense at them and their Christian and peaceable exercises: some because they
have witnessed against pride and luxuriant fullness, have therefore come armed
with Sword and Pistols (men that never drew a sword for the interest of the
Commo-wealth of ENGLAND, perhaps against it) into their Assemblies in time of
their Christian performances, and have taken him whom the Lord at that instant
had moved to speak to the rest, and others of their Assembly (after they had
haled and beaten them) and carried them bound hand and feet into the open
fields, in the cold of the night, and there left them to the hazard of their
lives, had not the Lord of life owned them, which he did in much mercy. Others
have had their houses broken in the night, and entered by men armed as aforesaid
(and disguised) when they have been peaceably waiting upon God with their own
and neighbor families: and yet these humble persecuted Christians would not
(even in these cases of gross and intolerable affronts acted equally against
the peace of the Nation, as against them) complain, but expressed how much (in
measure) of their Masters patience was given them in breathing out their
Masters gentle words; [Father forgive them, they know not what they do.] Who
have at any time born such unheard of persecution with so mild Spirits? only
they in whom persecuted Christ dwells: these poor Creatures know how their
Master fared, and rejoice to suffer with him, by whom alone they hope to be
glorified; and are as well content to suffer as to reign with Christ: but how
unwillingly do we deny ourselves, and take up our cross and follow Christ? and
yet a necessity lies upon us (if we will be the Lords Disciples) to take up our
cross daily, and follow him: How is it then that the Crown of Pride is so long
upon the head of persecutors? how is it that such men should dare to divide the
people of ENGLAND, to trouble the Council of State (in the throng of business
concerning the management and improvement of all the mighty Series of glorious
providence made out to this infant^ Common wealth with such abominable
misrepresentations of honest, pious, peaceable men, who desire nothing more
than to glorify their God in their generation, and are and have been more
faithful to the interest of Gods people in the Nation, than any of the
contrivers of the Petition, as will easily be made appear, if we may take for
evidence what they themselves have often said of the Parliament and Army, and
their Friends and Servants, publicly and privately; and it is well known their
judgments are the same; but that the publication thereof will not safely
consist with the enjoyment of their large Vicaredges, Parsonages, and
Augmentations, whereby they are lifted up above their Brethren, and exalt
themselves above all that are called God people in these parts.

However, Reader, we need not fear we hope the Lord will never suffer that
Monster Persecution again to enter within the Gates of ENGLANDS WHITE HALL:
They that sit in Council there, know well enough who it was that so often
assembled to consult how they might take Jesus by subtilty and kill him: they
were men of no lower Condition then Chief Priests, Scribes, and Elders of the
people: and if ever these Petitioners should but appear before them to whom
they have directed their Petition, my heart deceives me if they be not
accounted such.

Reader, I would not preface thee into a good opinion of these suffering
objects of such men's wrath: but read their Paper here put into thy hand, by
them written, upon the occasion of this Petition, and several snares and
temptations laid before them, on purpose to entrap them: and if by them thou
can find cause to pity these oppressed little ones, have them in thy
remembrance when thou go to the Throne of Grace, where my Prayers shall meet
thine for them.

To the Right Honorable The Conncil of State.
The humble Petition of several Gentlemen, Justices of Peace, Ministers of the
Gospel, and People, within the County of Lancaster, whose names are subscribed.
Shows,
THat George Fox and James Naylor, are persons disaffected to Religion, and the
wholesome Laws of this Nation; and that since their coming into this Country,
have broached Opinions tending to the destruction of the relation of Subjects
to their Magistrates, Wives to their Husbands, Children to their Parents,
Servants to their Masters, Congregations to their Ministers, and of a people to
their God: And have drawn much people after them; many whereof (men women, and
little children) at their meetings are strangely wrought upon in their bodies,
and brought to fall, foam at the mouth, roar, and swell in their bellies. And
that some of them affirmed themselves to be equal with God, contrary to the
late Act, as has been attested at a late Quarter Sessions holden at Lancaster
in October last past; and since that time, acknowledged before many Witnesses;
besides many other dangerous Opinions, and damnable Heresies, as appears by a
Schedule hereunto annexed; with the names of the Witnesses subscribed.

May it therefore please your Honors upon the consideration of the premises,
to provide (as your wisdoms shall think fit) that some speedy course may be
taken for the speedy suppressing of these evils. And your Petitioners shall
ever pray, as in duty bound.
1. George professed and auowed that he was equal with God, 2. He professed
himself to be the eternal Judge of the world. 3. He said he was the Judge of
the world. 4. He said he was the Christ, the way, the truth, the life. 5. He
said, Whosoever took a place of Scripture, and made a Sermon of it, and from
it, was a Conjurer, and his Preaching Conjuration. 6. He said that the
Scripture was carnal.
James Milner, a follower of the said Fox, professes himself to be God and
Christ; and gives out Prophecies.

1. That the day of Judgment so all be the 15. day of November. 2. That there
shall never Judge sit at Lancaster again. 3. That he must ere long shake the
foundations of the great Synagogue, meaning the Parliament.
Leonard Fell professes that Christ had never any body but his Church.

Richard Hubberthorn wrote, that Christ's coming in the flesh was but a figure.



The Answer of George Fox, to the Matters falsely charged upon him, by the
Petition and Schedule aforesaid.
THat George Fox and James Nayler, are Object.
Persons disaff^cted to Religion.

Answ. Whereas we are accused as Persons disaffected to Religion, it is false,
for pure Religion we own in our souls, which is, to visit the Fatherless, and
relieve the Widows, and to keep our selves unspotted from the world, and
dwelling in purity; this we own in our souls. But he that does seem to be
religions, and has not power over his own Jam. 1. 26. 27.
tongue, his Religion is vain; and that Religion we do deny; and all them that
do profess the Scriptures in words, and live Mat. 23. 27.
not the life of them, but live in drunkenness and uncleanness, envy and
maliciousness: and all they that do profess Religion, Jer. 5. 31.
and make a trade of the Scriptures, both Priests and People we do deny.

Object. Disuffected to the wholesome Laws of the Nation.

Answ. Justice (the wholesome Law of God) we own; and this is a terror to the
unjust, unwholesome, and unclean, and Romans 33. 4.
he that bears that Sword is a Minister of God: and who does Isa. 33. 2.
not obey the Law on God withie, then that takes hold upon him without, but who
does obey the Law of God within: it brings them from under the occasions of all
Laws without: for it will not let man lie, not-let him be drunk, nor proud, nor
follow oaths, nor cursed speaking, nor whore doms, quarrelling fighting,
wrangling, nor railing: and every one who walks in the Law of God, denies all
that which is unwholesome: and that which is according to the course of the
world: and they be all of one heart, and are all one in unity, if ten thousand:
and have all one law written in their hearts: which those that live in
uncleanness cast behind their back, and yet they prosess a law in words, but
are not subject to the power of God: and such are they who do accuse their
beethren which walk in the Law of God: and yet they pretend Justice: but there
souls are not subject; for that soul that is subject to the higher power which
is of God, denies all filthiness and corruption.

Object. That since their coming into this Country, they have breached Opinions
tending to the destruction of the relation of Subjects to their Magistrates,
Wives to their Husbands, (Children to their Parents, Servants to their Masters,
Congregations to their Ministers, and of a people to their God.

Answ. We were moved to come into this Country of the Lord, and the Lord did
let us see, that he had a people here before we came in it: But as for
braaching Opinions, We deny: but those that prosess truth, and walk in it up to
God, we own.

Opinions do tend to break the relation of Subjects to their Magistrates, Wives
to their Husbands, Children to their Parents, Servants to their Masters,
Congregations to their Ministers, and of a People to their God; But Opinions we
deny, for they are without God: and there you are: and justice and purity is
but one, and that we set up and own: purity and walking in the Spirit, does
make a separation from all uncleanness, and can have no fellowship with them
who are unfruitful workers of darkness; but there is a separation from them;
the Romans 1. 2.
one has fellowship with God, and the other has fellowship with darkness,
which be unfruitful: the one is separated to God, the other is separated from
God.

Object, Have drawn much poople after them many whereof, Men, Women, and little
Children, at their meetings, are strangely wrought upon in their bodies, and
brought to fall foam at the mouth, roar, and swell in their bellies.

Answ. The meetings of the people of God, were ever strange to the world; for
it was as though some strange thing had happened 1 Pet. 4. 12.
to the Saints: as ye read in the Scripture; which show Psalm. 71. 7.
ye are in the same generation, wondering and stranging at the work of the Lord,
despising and casting scandals, slanders, and false reports upon them: and
where the works of God are now, they think them strange things now, as was then
who Act. 13. 41.
are alive in the flesh. It would be a strange thing to see one now sall down,
as Paul fell down and trembled, and as Daniel fell down and trembled; and to
see one a Habakkuk his belly to tremble, and his lips to quiver and as David to
ly D o. 10. 9.
roaring all the day long, who cried i will his sight was grown dim, and hi^ flesh
sailed of fatnesss, and till he could number his bones; Hab. 3. 16.
and to see one as Isaiah, to rent his garment and his mantle and pluck his
hair off his head, and off his beard, and sit down astonished, and would it not
be strange to see such an Assembly as came to Isaiah, which had all trembling
hearts? Hear the Word Ifa. 66. 5.
of the Lord all ye that tremble at his Word Work out your salvation with fear
and trembling; Before their faces the people shall be much pained: all faces
shall gather blackness. The Prophets and Ministers of God have all one Spirit
(accodring to Joel 2. 6.
measure) and did encourage those that did tremble; wherein it shows that you
have not the same Spirit, but seek to persecute, and fix scandals, and accuse
them fa^^^. The Ministry of truth ever drew from all the Ministry of the
world, and from under all the laws of the world, up to God and from all the
Gods of the earth: and then they witnessed that the Lord was their Lawgiver,
the Lord was their King, the Lord was their Judge.

Ob. Geo. Fox professed and avowed that he was equal with God.

Ans It was not so spoken, as George Fox was equal with God: but the Father and
the Son is one: I and my Father are one; and where the same is revealed, this
is witnessed: but where the Joh. 14. 9. 16
sure is not made manifest and revealed, Christ is persecuted; for the world
knows him not. Let the same mind be in you Phil. 6. 7.
that was also in Christ Jesus, who being in the form of God, thought it not
robbery to be equal with God, and yet made himself of no reputation: and this
I witness to be fulfilled, for the same Spirit where it is equal with God:
for be that sanctifies and they that are sanctified are all of one; and it is
God that sanctifies; He that has the Word of God has God, for God is the
word; and our fellowship is with God. There is a natural man, and there is a
spirtual man: the first is of the earth earthly, Heb. 2. 1.
the second is the Lord from heaven: The new man, which is created Jude. 1.
after God in righteousness and true holiness; and he that John. 1.
does righteousness is righteous, even as be is righteous. 1 Cor. 47. 48.
And this I witness what the Scripure says, Let no man deceive you. 1. Joh. 3.


Object. He professes himself to be the eternal Judge of the world.

Answ. He that was a Minister of God said, that the Saints 1 Cor. 6. 2.
should judge the world, yea Angels: herein they do show themselves to be no
Ministers of God, who seek to persecute them who are judged of God, and
justified by him; where judgment Mat. 12. 2
is brought forth unto victory, and set in the earth and that which is eternal
has judged all the carnal nature in himself and where it is judged there is no
unity with it, where it is a live; and he (...) has not ^ue judgment, and
has not Sale Mat. 5. ^^
in himself to (...) withal, is good for nothing, and he cannot endure that
Christ should speak where he is made manifest. I am the nay, says Christ;
Christ; is but one in all his Saints, and he speaks in them; but he does not
say that George Fox is Christ: I am the way, the truth, and the life: Christ is
the 1 Cor. ^^
light, and ye are the light, and Christ lives in you, and Christ Mark. 1^.
is the head of the man; and it is the Spirit of the Father that speaks in
you, and spoke in Christ's, and he is but one in all his Saints, without are
many Christ; Lo here, and lo there; but know you not that Christ is in you
except ye be Reprobates and if Christ be in you, the body is dead because of
sin; and there Chirst Jesus speaks, the same Christ to day, yesterday and for
ever. And Isa. 5. 20
thy judgment which is not eternal, is carnal; and with-evill thoughts thou
judge: thou put darkness for light, and light for aarkness; and here thou
she west thy judgment to be carnal, and no Minister of God, but a Minister of
the Letter, and not of the Spirit; for the Ministers of the Spirit have true
judgment; and did imprison none, not persecute, as you do: but it is, that
fools may utter forth their folly.

Object He said be was the way, the truth, the life.

Answ. The old man cannot endure to hear the new man speak which is Christ, and
Christ is the way: and if Christ be in you, must not he say, I am the way, the
truth, and the life? John 14. 6.
Now if Antichrist speak, he is owned of the world; but he cannot witness it;
while the old man reigns, the voice of John 10. 4.
God is not known, nor Christ himself to speak in man, but Christ's sheep know
his voice.

Object. He said, whosoever took a place of Scripture, and made a Sermon of it,
or from it, was a Conjurer, and his preaching was Conjuration.

Ans. He that puts the Letter for the light, when the Letter says Christ is
the light, he is blind; and they that say the Letter John 8. 12.
and the Spirit are inseparable, when the Spirit says the Letter is death, and
kills, and all that do study to raise a living thing out of a dead, to raise
the Spirit out of the Letter, are Conjures, and draw points and reasons, and so
do Jer. 23. 16.
speak a divination of their own brain: they are Conjurers Jer. 27. 9. 10
and Diviners, and their teaching is from Conjuration, which is not spoken from
the mouth of the Lord, and the Lord is against all such, and who are of God are
against all such; for that Doctrine does not profit the people at al, for it
stands not in the council of God, but is a doctrine of the Devil, and draws
people from God, but he that speaks from the mouth of the Lord turns people
from their wickedness, but that Ministry which God has not sent, and that
assembly must be disaffected: for the Lord is coming to teach his people
himself by his Spirit, Heb. 8. 11.


Object. George Fox said the Soripure was carnay.

Ans. The Letter of the Scripture is carnal, and the Letter is death, and
kills, but the Spirit gives life, which was in them Heb. 7. 16.
that gave forth the Scriptures, and that I witness, which is eternal and not
carnal; for the Jews which had the Letter, persecuted Jesus Christ the
substance: and so do you now which have the Letter and not the Substance, there
were Ministers of the Letter then, and Ministers of the Spirit, so there is
now; the Col. 1. 27.
same Christ being made manifest, is unknown to the world: for the whole world
Lies in wickedness and Christ Jesus is a Mystery to the world, and is bid
though you may profeses him, because the Letter speaks of him; but ye
persecute him where 1 John 3. 8
be is made manifest, and where he is made manifest the works of the devil are
destroyed, and there be speaks and is King, 1 Ioh. 5. ^^
and is the way, and is the truth, and is the life; and he that has Romans 8, 11.
the Son has life and he that has not the Son has not life; and he 1 Cor. 6.
27.
that has the same spirit that raised up Jesus Christ, is equal 2 Cor. 6. 10.
with God: and the Scripture says, that God wildwel in man and walk in man: as
Jesus Christ which is the mystery, has passed before, so the same Spirit takes
upon it the same seed, and is the same where it is made manifest: according to
the flesh, I am the son of Abraham, according to the Spirit the Son of God
says Christ. All the plotting of the Priests, is, and ever was, against Christ
where he is made manifest: and the Boast shall Col. 1. 27
make rear with, the Saints, and with the Lamb; but the Heb. 2. 11.
Lamb shall get the victory: praises, praises be to our God for ever, for
evermore.

Obj. Richard Huberthorn writ, that Christ's coming in the flesh was but a
figure.

Ans. Christ in his people is the substance of all figures, tipes and shadows,
fulfilling them in them and setting them free from them: But as he is held
forth in the Scripture-Letter without them, and in the flesh without them, he
is their example or figure, which is both (...), that the same things might be
fulfilled in them, that was in Christ Jesus: for even her innto were 1 Pet. 2.
21.
ye called because Christ has suffered for us, leaving us an example 1 Pet. 4.
1.
that we should follow his steps: for as much as Christ has suffered 1 Pet. 1.
19.
for us arm yourselves likewise with the same mind, Christ was our example in
suffering and in holiness, and as he which has called you is holy, so be ye
holy in all manner of conversation, John 13. 15.
because it is written, Be ye holy as I am holy, he is our example in humility:
I have given you an example (says Christ) that ye should do even as I have
done unto you: And as he is so are we in this World: He is our forerunner,
Captain of our salvaton, and in all things our example. As they have done unto
me so shall they do unto you. But all they who have not Christ dwelling in
them, go about to persecute him in all them in whom he is made manifest, they
neither follow him as an example themselves, nor suffer others to follow him as
an example and walk in the same steps: but deny him both as the substance and
example, of his people: but they who are taught of him do confess him both as
he is the substance of all things; and their example in all things: for without
me ye can do nothing, says Christ: and it is so I witness it.

And as for James Milner, though his mind did run out from his condition, and
from minding that light of God which is in him, whereby the world takes
occasion to speak against the Truth, and many friends stumble at it: yet there
is a pure seed in him.

Object. Leonard Fell said that Christ had no body but his Church.

Answ. There is one body and one Spirit, even as ye are called (...). 4. 4.
into one hope of your calling: and Christ Jesus is the head of the (...). 1.
18.
Body the Church, and ye are made free from sin by the body of Cor. 5. 19.
Christ: and Christ came to redeem his Church: God was in Christ reconciling
the world to himself, for his bodies sake, which is (...). 1. 24.
his Church. For we are members of his Body of his flesh, and of (...). 5. 30.
his bones: this is a great Mystery: but I speak concerning Christ and his
Church. And has put all things under his feet, and gave (...) 22. 23.
him to be the head over all things to the Church, which is his body, The
fullness of him that fills al in all, in whom also we are builed up together,
for an habitation of God through the Spirit.

More Objections against George Fox charged upon him, by the Contrivers of the
foresaid Petition; and Answered by him, as follows.
Object. 1 THat he did affirm that he had the Divinity ossentiall in him.

Answ. For the word essential, it is an expression of their own: but that the
Saints are the Temples of God, and God does dwell 2 Cor. 6. 1.
in them, that the Scriptures do witness: and if God dwell in Ephesians. 4. 6.
them, then the Divinity dwells in them: and the Scripture says 2 Pet. 1. 4.
Ye shall be partakers of the Divine nature: and this I witness: but where
this is not, they cannot witness it.

Object. 2. That both Baptism and the Lords Supper are unlawful.

Answ. As for that word unlawful, it was not spoken by me: but, the Baptism of
Infants I deny and there is no Scripture that speaks of a Sacrament, but that
Baptism that is into Christ, with one Spirit into one body: that I confess
according to Scripture: and the Lords Supper I confess, and that the brend the
Saints Gal. 3. 27.
break is body of Christ: and that cup which they drink is the Ioh. 6. 53. 55.
blood of Christ, this I witness.

Object. 3. He did dissuade men from reading the Scriptures, telling them that
it is carnal.

Answ. For dissuading men from reading the Scriptures, that is false, for they
were given to be read as they are, but not to 1 Cor. 2. 10. 16.
make a Trade upon: the Letter is carnal, and kills: but that which gave it
forth is spiritual, eternal, and gives life: and this I witness.

Object. 4. That he was equal with God.

Answ. That was not so spoken: but that He that sanctifies, Heb. 2. 11.
and they that are sanctified, are of one, and the Saints are all (...) Ephesians. 5.
30.
this the Scripture does witness: And ye are the Sons of God; and the Father
and he Son are one; and they that are joined to the Lord, are one Spirit, and
they that are joined to an harlot are on flesh.

Object. That God taught deceit.

Answ. That is false, and was never spoken by me; God is pure.

Object. That the Scriptures are Antichrist.

Answ. That is false, but that they which prosess the Scriptures, and live not
in the life and power of them, as they did that gave them forth, that I witness
to be Antichrist.

Object. That he was the judge of the world.

Answ. That the Saints shall Judge the world, the Scripture witness it, whereof
I am one, and I witness the Scripture fulfilled. Cor. 6. 2. 3.


Object: That he was as upright as Christ.

Answ. Those were not so spoken by me; but that as he is, so are we in this
present world: That the Saints are made the 1 Ioh. 4. 17.
righteonsness of God: That the Saints are one in the Father and 2 Cor. 5. 21.
the Son, that we shall he like him, 1 John 3. 3. and that all Ioh. 17. 21. 22.
teaching which is given forth by Christ, is to bring the Saints to perfection*
even (...) the measure of the stature of the fastness Ephesians. 4. 11. 12. 13.
of Christ: This the Scripture does witness, and this I witness, Where Christ
dwells, must not ^e (...) Temple?

Queries propounded to George Fox. by some of the Contrivers of the Petition,
and by him Answered.
Query. WHether there be one individual God distinguished into the Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost, or not?

Answ. Herein thou would know, whether God be individual, yea or no, which is
but a busy mind: for had thou the witness in thy self thou would know
that he is: but the Heathen know not God, and all that know him not, are
Heathen living in the wicked imiginations of their own hearts; and that is thy
condition: For God is a Spirit, and none know him but the Son, and he to whom
the Son is revealed: the Son and the Word is one. He that has ears to bear let
him bear, what the Spirit says, for thou, natural man, thou know not the
things of God.

Qu. Whether a believer be justified by Christ's righteousness imputed, yea, or
no?

Answ. He that believes is born of God: and he that is born of God, is
justified by Christ alone without imputation.

Qu. Whether he that believes that Christ has taken away his sin, is clean
without sin in this life, as Christ himself, or not?

Answ. He that believes is born of God, and he that is born of God sins not,
neither can he sin, because his seed remains in him, as he is, so are we in
this present evil world.

Qu. Whether a Believer be without all sin in this life or not?

Answ. Christ being made manifest, is made manifest to take away sin, and in
him is no sin at all; he that abides in him, sins not; he that sins is of the
Devil, and bath not seen him, (...) in the true Church of God there is no talk
of such carnal things, Thou Sot, the Bread which the Saints break, is of the
body of Christ; he is the bread of life. The Church is not the Steeplehouse but
the Church is in God, and those that eat the bread of life, live for ever: the
Church is in God, and the bread of life is there, and it shall continue for
ever.

Qu. Whether Christ in the flesh be a figure or not; and if a figure, how and
in what?

Answ. Christ is the substance of all figures; and his flesh is a figure; for
every one passes through the same way as he did, who comes to know Christ in
the flesh: there must be a suffering with him, before there be a rejoicing with
him. Christ is an example for all to walk after; and if thou know what an
example is, thou would know what a figure is, to come up to the same fullness.

Qu. Weether there be any Heaven or Hell, for the Elect or Reprobute after
death, but in man in this life or not?

Answ. There is no knowledge of Heaven or Hell; but through death the wicked
shall be turned into bell, and all them that forget God, there to be tormented;
there is a hell, thou shall find it: Heaven is God Throne; and Heavenly
notions within shall be shaken: for God is pure, and nothing that is unclean
shall stand before him: and he has said he will dwell in man.

Qu. Whether the Ministration of the Ministory by man is to continue till the
end, or not?

Answ. The Ministration of the world is the Ministry of man, and does not lead
to an end, but keeps in time, and that must have on end; for it is not of God.
The Ministry of God is to draw people up to himself: but that is not of man,
nor by man nor according to man: or Paul was made a Minister according to the
will of God, who had not received it of man neither was it taught him of man,
and was a Minister of the Spint but the Ministers of the world receive their
learning as Oxford and Cambridge, and are taught of men, and speak a divination
of their own brain, which is conjuring: and bewitch the people with those
things which are carnal: as, to sprinkle Infants, and tell them of a Sacrament
which there is no Scripture for; and saying they are the Ministers of Christ,
and act those things which he forbids; as to have the chiefest place in the
assemblies, the uppermost room at feasts, the greeting in Markets, and to be
called of men Masters, and with pretense make long prayers, which Christ
forbids, and profess and say, they are the Ministers of Christ: wherein they
show themselves to be Antichrist. And see if thou do not uphold these
Antichrists, and say they are the Ministers of Christ.

Qu. Whether the written Word, I mean the Scriptures be the power of God unto
Salvrtion, to every one that believes, or not?

Answ. The written Word is not the power of God, not the Scriptures are not the
Salvation; but he that does believe has the life of them. Who is born of God,
shall never dye; as it is written, he that believes is born of God, and he
that is born of God has the witness in himself, that God is the cause of man's
Salvation, and not the Scripture nor the Letter.

James Naylers Answer, and Declaration, touching some things charged upon him,
by the men aforesaid.
HAving heard of diverse untruths cast upon me, by some of the Priests in their
high places, though I stand only to the Lord in respect of my self; yet left
any that love the truth, should be led on by these salfe reports to speak evil
of those things they know not; I shall lay open the truth, as it is revealed in
me, touching those things whereof I have be; falsely accused.

First, Concerning Jesus Christ, that he is the eternal word of God, by whom
all things were made, and are upholden; which Rev. 19. 13.
was before all time, but manifested to the world in time, for the 1 Ioh. 1. 2,
3, 4 5.
recovery of left man: which Word became flesh, and dwelt amongst the Saints,
who is the same, yesterday, to day, and for Ioh. 1. 14.
ever; who did and does dwell in the Saints; who suffered, and rose again, and
ascended into Heaven, and is set at the right hand o God, to whom all power is
given in heaven and in earth, Ephesians. 1. 20.
who fill all places; is the light of the world, but known to none but to those
that receive and follow him, and those he lead up to Ioh. 8, 12.
God, out of all the ways, works and worships of the world, by his pure light
in them, whereby he reveals the man of sin; 2 Thessalonians 2. 8.
and by his power casts him out. And so prepares the bodies of the Saints a fit
Temple for the pure God to dwell in with whom dwells no unclean thing? and thus
he reconciles God and man: 1 Cor. 3. 16, 17.
and the image of God which is in purity and holiness, is renewed: and the
image of S^^an, which is all sin and uncleanness, is defaced: and none can
witness Redemption, further then Christus thus revealed in them, to set them
free from sin: which 2 Cor. 5. 18. 19.
Christ I witness to be revealed in me in measure, Gal. 1. 16. 2 Cor. 13. 5
Col. 1. 27. Col. 3. 10.


2. Concerning the Scriptures, That they are a true Declaration of that word
which was in them that spoke them forth, and 2 Pet. 1. 20. 21.
are of no private interpretation, but were given forth to be read and
fulfilled in the Saints, as they were given forth by the Rev. 22. 18.
Holy Ghost, without adding or diminishing; and were not given forth for men to
make a Trade on to get money by: but as they are they are profitable for
Doctrine, for reproof, for correction, 2 Timothy 3. 16. 17.
for instruction in righteousness, that the may of God may be perfect thoroughly
furnished unto every good work But they who trade in the Letter, and are
ignorant of the M^^^^y* deny all perfection: and none can rightly understand
the Scriptures but they who read them with the same spirit that gave them
forth; 1 Cor, 2. 14, 15.
for the (...) man understands not the things of God, for they are spiritually
discerned.

3. Concerning Baptism: the true Baptism is that of the spirit, with the holy
Ghost, and with fire: Baptized by one spirit into onebody: not the washing away
the filth of the flesh, but the answer of a good conscience toward God by the
resurrection Acts 1. 5.
Jesus Christ; without which no other Baptism can save us, they being out
figures or shadows; but this Baptism of Christ Gal. 3. 27.
is the substance, whereby we are baptized into his death; and those that are
bapized into Christ have put on Christ.

4. Concerning the Lords Supper: The true Supper of the Lord is the spiritual
eating and drinking of the flesh and blood Mat. 26. 26. 28.
of Christ spiritually; which the Spiritual man only eats, and is thereby
nourished up unto carnal life: without which John 6. 51. 53, 54, 55; 56.
eating there can be no life in creature, profess what you will; and all who
eat of this bread, and drink of this cup have real communion in Christ the
head, and also one with 1 Cor. 11. 24. 25.
another, as members; and are of one heart, and one mind, a complete body in
Christ. Now the world who take only Col. 2. 10.
the outward fignes, and are not brought in discerning of the Lords body, eat
and drink domnation to themselves, become guilty 1 Cor. 11. 27, 28, 29.
of the body and blood of Christ; and calls this a Communion, but lives in envy,
strif, and debate, fighting, and going to Law one with another, for earthly
hings.

5. Concerning the Resurrection: That all shall arise to give an account and
receive at the last day according to their works, John 5. 29.
whether good or evil. These bodies that are dust, shall turn to 1 Cor. 15. 38.
dust, but God shall give a body as pleases him; that which is sown in
corruption, shall be raised in incorruption; it is sown a 1 Cor. 15. 42, 43, 44.
natural body, it is raised a spiritual body; and as we have borne the image
of the earthly, so we shall hear the image of the Rev. 2. 6.
heavenly: but flesh and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of heaven; neither
does corruption inherit incorruption; for we 1 Cor. 15. 20.
must be changed. But they who cannot witness the first Resurrection within
themselves, know nothing of the second, but by heatsay; and therefore, say some
of your Teachers, that Christ 1 Cor. 15. 47.
is in Heaven with a carnal body. Now that Christ who is the si si it fruits,
should be in Heaven with a carnal body, and the Saints with a spirtuall body,
is not proportionable.

6. Concerning Magistracy: It is an Ordinance of God, Ordained for the
punishment of evil doers, and an encouragement for them that do well; Where
Justice and righteousnesss is the head, and rules with out partiality, that
Land is kept in peace; and those that judge for the Lord, I honor as my own
life, not with a sluttering honor, putting off he hat and bowing of the knee,
which is the honor of the world, having men's persens Jude 16.
in admiration because of advantage for self ends; but from my heart, for
conscience sake, as to the power which is of God, not to men's persons, for the
Scripture says, he that respects persons commits sin, and is convinced of the
Law as a transgressor; and the Apostle James commands the Saints, not to have
the Jam. 2. 9.
faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Lord of glory, with respect of Iam. 2. 1,
2, 3, 4.
persons for says he such are partial in themselves, and become Judges of evil
thoughts: And says Paul, Let every soul be subject to the higher power; for
says he, there is no power but of God: the Romans 13. 1. 2.
powers that be are ordained of God: and that whosoever resistesh the power,
resists the Ordinance of God: and faith. We must needs be subject, for
conscicence sake: and therefore though the Romans 13. 5.
Prophets were often sent by the Lord, to pronounce judgment against unjust
men, who had the power committed to Hosea 5. 12.
them, and did not judge for God, but for self- ends; yet they never attempted
any violence against them but used ^^l means to persuade them to leve mercy, do
justice and walk humbly with Mica 6. 8.
God, that they might be established, (...) the wrath of God truned from them;
for those that be of Go, cannot rejoice in the sufferings of any, but would
have all to turn, and find mercy.

7. Concerning the Ministry: The true Ministers of Jesus Christ 2 Pet 1. 21.
have always been, and are still, such as come not by the will of Ephesians. 4. 7. 6.
11.
man, but by the will of God, neither are they fitted to the work by any thing
of man, but by God alone: for the true Ministry it the gift of Jesus Christ,
and needs no addtion of human help 1 Cor. 12. 7.
and learning; but as the work is spiritual, and of the Lord 1 Pet. 4. 10. 11.
so they are spiritually fitted only by the Lord, and therefore he chused
Herdsemen, Fishermen, and Plowmen, and such like: and as he gave them an
immediate Call, withon the leave of man: so he fitted them immediately without
the help of man: Mat, 10. 8.
and as they received the gift freely, so they were to give freely: And when
ever they found any of the false Ministry, that taught for hire, cried out
against them, and pronounced woes against them, and showed them that they lay
in iniquity, because Acts 8. 20
they thought that the gift of God could be bought and sold for Ioh. 10. 13.
money: and Christ calls them hirelings, and says they care Mica 3. 10
not for the sheep: and Micab cries out against the Priests that taught for
hire; and (says he) they build up Sion with blood, Ior. 5. 30, 31.
and Jerusalem with in quity: and Jeremiah cried out against Ior. 6. 13.
the Priests in his days, that hear rule by their means, and calls it a
horrible thing; and says that, from the least of them to the Isa. 56. 10. 11
greatest, they are all given to covetousness: And Isiah cries out against
those in his days, and calls them greedy Dogs, that can never have enough; and
says he, they all look for their gain from their quarter. And Peter says, of
such as should come, 2 Pet. 2. 3.
that they through covetousness should make merchandise of the people; and
says they have hearts exercised with covetous practices, 2 Pet. 2. 14. 15.
who have for saken the right way, and have followed the the way of Baalam, who
loved the wages of unrighteousness: And 2 Cor. 11. 15
Jude cries Woe unto them, for they go on in the way of Cain in his Jude 11.
murder, and run greeddy after the error of Balaam for reward But those that
were sent out by Christ, counted and their gain to make the Gospel without
charge; nei he ever had they any set 1 Cor. 9. 16. 17. 18.
means but went about, having no certain dwelling place; never were masters,
but servrnos to al for Christ, sake: nor ever 1 Cor. 4. 11.
went to Law for Ty^hes, or any other earthly thing.

Now all people try your Priests by the Scriptures, whether they be of God or
of the world, and never think to hear the 1 John 2. 3. 4, 5. 6.
Word of the Lord from their mou^hs, who walk con rary to the Scriptures: for
such were never sent of God: for had they 2 Ioh. 9. 10.
been sent of God, they would abide in his doctrine: and says John. Such have
not God, but he that abides in the Doctrine of 2 Ioh. 9. 10, 11.
Christ, has both the Father and the Son. And if there come any to you, and
bring not this doctrine, you are forbidden to receive them into your house, or
bid them God speed: her of you do, you are partakers of their evil deeds. And
unto the wicked says God, What ha^^ thou to do to declare my statuter, or that
thou should Psalm. 50. 16. 17.
take my Covenant into thy mouth? seeing thou hat st instruction, and castist
my Words behind thy back, and art a partaker with the Thief, the Adulterer,
E^^l-speaking, Slandering and Deceit; Psalm. 50. 21.
and such as these, think God to be like themselves.

Diverse particulars of the persecutions of James Nayler, by the Priests of
Westmerland.
James being at a meeting at Edward Briggs house on the first day, where many
people met, he was desired by diverse friend to meet the day following at Widow
Cooks house, about a mile from Kendal, whereof the priests having notice,
raised the Town of Kendal against him; but being long in gathering together,
the meeting was done; but spies being out upon the Steeple top, and other
places, notice was given what way James passed from thence: and coming down
toward Kendal, two Priests being accompanied with a Justice of peace, and some
other Magi rares of the Town, with an exceeding great multitude of people
following them, met him, saying, Nayler, I have a message from the Lord Jesus
Christ to thee, but that there is not a con eniens place. To which James
answered, The Lord Jesus Christ is no respecter of places. Them ssage that he
had to declare, was this: I conjure thet that thou tell me by what power thou
inflictest such punishment upon the bodies of creatures. James answered, Do
thou remember who it was that did adjure Christ to tell if he were the Son of
God, and asked by what authority he did those things? for Jemes saw him to be
one of that generation but the Priest still conjuring him to tell by what power
he did it; James answered, Do thou acknowledge is to be done by a power? Yea
(saint he) I have the Spirit of God, and thereby I know it is done by a power.
James said, If thou have the Spirit of God his say thou have, then thou
can tell by what power, it is done ^he ^riest said, When God comes, he comes
to torment the souls, and not the bodies. James said, He comes to redeem the
souls.

But after much jangling, the Priest began to accuse him before the Justice and
Magistrates of many things; As that he taught people to turn their Bibles,
Children to disobey their Parents, Wives their Husbands, People to disobey
their Magistrates and such like accusations. To which James answered, Thou art
a false accuser, prove one of these things if thou can, here, before the
Magistrates. But not being able to prove any one, he began to accuse James for
holding out a light that does convince of sin, Which, Says the Priest, all
have not. To which James said, Put out one in all this great multitude that
dare say he has it not. Says the Priest These are al Christians, but if a Turk
or Indian were here, he would deny it. James said, Thou go far for a proof,
but if a Turk were here, he would witness against thee.

The people beginning to fight, the Priest turned away, saying, Here will be a
disturbance. Said James, These are thy Christians, and this is the fruits of
thy Ministry. But the Justice with some other, did endeavor to keep the rude
people off him, so that they could not come to their purpose there: but he
being to pass over the Bridge, and throughth Town, they that were of the
Priests party ran before, sweaning they would throw him off the Bridge into the
water, but coming thither, and seeing heir purpose, he was encouraged in his
God, who gave him assurance of protection, and did wonderfully keep him, and
those that were with him: for when he came unto the Bridge, the word of the
Lord came unto him, and he was made to cry out against their rage, and the
power of the Lord was with him, so that he received no harm, though he was made
to speak all along, and in the Market place, and til he came out of the Town.
But the raging people continued shouting crying, and throwing of stones at him
a quarter of a mile out of the Town: But such was the power of the Lord, that
neither he nor any with him, received any harm. The work was wonderful, and we
were brought much to admire it, end praise the Lord, who is blessed for ever
and ever.

Another time James being desires of many Christian friends to be at a meeting
at Orton, there to wait upon the Lord for, what he would make known to his
people, did accordingly; and many friends and brethren accompanied him; but the
Priests having intelligence some days before, five of them were gathered
together, and many people from all quarters. A friend in the Town desired James
to come to his house; and being come into his house, a message was sent from
the Priests, desiring him to come into the field, under pretense for a more
convenient place for the great multitude. To which James answered, It is my
desire that all may be edified: and coming into the field, the Priests came
with a great multitude, and asked him by what authority he came thither, and
had gathered together so many people to break the peace; and tempting him, said
Will thou he bound that none here shall break the Peace? To which James
answered. We come not hither to create offenses, but if any break the Law, let
him suffer by the Law: for he perceived they intended violence, as it appeared
afterward.

But seeing they could not prevail in that, mother of them desired him to go
into the Church, as he called it, tempted him, saying, The people may all sit
and hear better: But James perceiving their deceit, said, All places were alike
to him: he would abide in the field. Wherein they pulled out an Ordinance of
Parliament, forbidding any to speak, but such as were authorized to speak
either in Church or Chapel, or an public place; and bade him speak at his
peril, as he would an wet the contempt of it. To which he answered, saying,
This is not a public place. No? said one of the Priest, Is not this a public
place the Town field? and charged the Constable of the Town to do his office,
and examined his authority: James answered, Those that are sent to declare the
things of God, have not their authority from men. But they bad him prove that.
He said, Paul received not his commission from man; nor by man: To which one of
(...) answered, That was his Gospel, but they would prove saint Paul had a call
from man to preach; and for that end (...) that place in Acts 13. 2. where the
Holy Ghost sad, Separate me Barnabas and Saul; and the Apostles laid their
hands upon them, which, said one of them (...) Presbytery; (...) was the laying
on of hands of the (...); But when he had found that place, James asked him it
that was Paul's call to the Ministry (three times) but he answared nothing. Then
said James, If that was his call he had preached long without a call before
that; and instanced to prove it Gal. 1.

Whereupon that business ended; But another Priest stood up, and said, Thou
ought to give an account of thy Faith to every one that a keth; whereupon he
asked diverse questions: whereunto James answered, in so much that some that
stood by cried out, Answer not all but ask him some, A while after James asked
him how he would proved himself a Minister of the Gospel, and live upon
Tithes? To which he would not answer. Then said James, Neither will I answer
thee if thou ask me twenty more.

The next question he asked was, Whether Christ was ascended or no? but James
said, I will not answer thee. Whereupon he cried out to the people and said he
denies the humanity of Christ; and made a great out cry among the people of it.
But the people cried out, saying, Let us hear him; you have often told us many
things against him: let him speak, and then if he speak not truth, you may then
reprove him, James hearing the desire of the people, began to speak, and the
people gave audience, and were very silent. But beginning to hold out Christ
alone to be the Teacher of his people in spirit and truth, one of the Priest
cried out, I cannot endure to hear this Seducer any longer. Upon which James
said, Prove me a Seducer before all this people, or else thou art a false
Accuser. But he had not one word to say against any thing that he had spoken:
But said, If thou will not answer me that Question I asked thee, I will call
thee a Seducer as long as I live.

Whereupon seeing there could be no peace there, nor liberty to speak, they
desired James to go into the house, and they kept closed about him, to keep
him from violence of some that came along with the Priest, but they raged so,
that he (...) other friends received stripes, and with much ad^ got to the
house: But the raging Sodomites waited about the door to do mischief, and kept
shouting about the house all the while he was speaking but the house being
filled with people, they could not come to their purpose: and the Lord so
ordered it in the Evening, we came away without any more harm: but not long
after, there came some of the Priests party about the house, and asked if
Nayler was gone: and when they heard he was gone, they said, He may thank God
of that. Thus by the wisdom of God he escaped their violence at that time.

But the Priests missing of their purpose there, the next first day after, they
prepared their Sermons suitable to what they intended, possessing the people
that he was a blisphemer, and denied the Resurrection, and the Humanity of
Christ, and all Authority: and that the Parliament had opened a gap for
blasph^my, and as it was said by some of their Hearers, they did God good
service that would knock him down. Thus having stirred up the ruder sort, the
next day they prevailed with one called a Justice of Peac^: the Priests son got
him to come twelve miles from his own house: he was one, as some say, that had
been in actual arms against the Parliament, for bringing in of the Scots: and
having armed a great multitude against the next morning, they came very early
to the house where he was, where many Christian friends would have met that
day, and asked for Nayler, threatening to knock out his brains against the
stones in the wall and that they would pull down the house, if he would not
come out: though the door was never shut against them. But some of them came
into the house, and commanded him to come forth, under pretense to dispute with
the Priest. But James (...) what they intended, answered, You did not use me so
civilly the last time I was amongst you; but if any have a mind they may come
in the doors are open. Which answer they told the Priests, whereupon they
rushed violently in, and took him by the throat, haled him out of the door into
a field, where was a man whom they called a Justice, and with a Pitchfork
struck of his Hat, and commanded him to answer to such Questions as the Priests
would ask him. Whereupon the Priest began to ask many Questions, as concerning
he Resurrection, the Humanity of Christ, the Scriptures, and diverse other
Questions, as the Sacrament, and such like, to which he answered, and proved by
Scripture, But at last being asked if Christ was in him, he said, he witnessed
him in him in measure. The Priest asked, if Christ was in him as man, James
said, Christ is not divided; But he urged him to tell whether Christ as man was
in him or no. He answered, Christ is not divided; for if he be, he is no more
Christ: but I witness that Christ is in me, who is God and man in measure. But
the Priest said, Christ is in Heaven with a cunnal body. To who said James,
Christ fills Heaven and Earth, and is not carnal but spiritual: for if Christ
be in Heaven with a carnal body, and the Saints with a spiritual body, that is
not proportionable; neither was that a carnal body which same in among the
Disciples, the doors being shut: for Christ is a Mystery and thou know him
not.

Then after much jangling and tempting, the Priest not having got the advantage
he waited for, he cried out unto the people not to receive him into their
houses: and alleged that in the second Epistle of John v. 10. Now how suitable
that place was for his purpose, all people may see, who have eyes: for there
they are forbidden to receive any into their houses, but such who abide in the
Doctrine of Christ, and confess themselves that they had both the Father and
the Son, and preach that Doctrine. But the Priests say that is blasphemy.

Theo the Priest turned away from him: upon which the armed multitude began to
be violen; against diverse friends that were there. James hearing friends and
cry out, said to the Justice, You will surely set us peaceably into the house
again: but seeing him to go away, and leave them in the hands of the rude
multitude, he gave himself up, saying, The will of the Lord be done.

Upon which the Justice turned again, saying, We will see him in the house
again: and going toward the house many friends kept close about James,
exposing their own bodies to the danger of their weapons, to fax him harmless;
and so with much ado we go into the house, not receiving much harm Which being
done, and as James was pray sing the Lord for his wondrous deliverance from
their malicious intants, some heard them say, If we let him go thus, all people
will run after him. Whereupon they agreed that he should be brought before the
Justice again, and came with violence, and holed him out again. Then the
Justice and the Priest getting a horseback, they caused him to run after them
to an Alehouse on the other side the water, where they went in, not suffering
one ^riend to go in with James; and when he came before the Justice he told
him, if he would not put off his hat, he would send him to prison, and also
because he Thoued him; for the Justice said, My Commission runs Ye. To which
James answered, I do it not in contempt, for I own Authority, and honor it
according to the Scriptures: But I find none such honor commanded in Scripture,
but for bidden. Then they concluded to commit him for that, and also as a
wandering person, and said none there knew him whence he came; for those who
knew him were kept out. Then said he to Arthur Scaife Thou knew me: I was in
the Army with thee eight or nine years. It is no matter, said the Justice, thou
art no Soldier now.

Then they writ a Mittimus to send him to prison, and carried him to Kirkby
Steven that night, and shut him up in a Chamber, and set a guard upon him; but
diverse of our friends following into the Town, where a great multitude was
gathered together for meeting, then did the people come from the Steeple-house,
where another had been preaching: for diverse of the Priests were gathered
together that day: some preaching, some plotting, and some persecuting.
Iezabels fast was a preparation for Naboths death. But friends not being
suffered to go into the house where James was, they abode in the streets: and
some of them being moved to speak to the people, the Priests perceiving the
people to give audience to what was spoken, made complaint: Whereupon some were
sent forth, and with violence fetched in one Francis How gill a friend, who was
speaking to the people, and brought him into the high Priests hall, where were
five Priests assembled, with many other of their party, but not one friend. And
bringing him before the Justice, he was commanded to put off his hat. He
answered, I know no such Law. The Priest said, He will tread both Ministry and
Magistracy under his feet. He said, Thou art a false Accuser, prove wherein.
But one that stood by, took off his hat, and cast it into the fire. Then said
the Justice What is this thou speak against the Ministers? He answered, What
have thou to accuse me of? Whereupon one affirmed that he said, All the
Ministers that taught for hire, and in Steeple houses, were enemies, and liars
against Jesus Christ, and no Ministers of Jesus Christ. Upon that the Justice
said, Thou speak against the Law; for the Law gives them their maintenance
He said, I me adle not with the Law, but with their practice. Then said Francis
to the Priest, Did thou ever know a Minister of Jesus Christ that was a
perfecutor, or did Labor to imprison any? And after some more discourse, he
said to the Priest, I have seen a great deal of tyranny and persecution in this
days actions. Then said the Justice to the people. Take notice, he says the
Law I act by is tyranny and persecution. To which the people asse^ted. Then
said Francis, Thou may give out to the people what thou wills, but I speak not
of the Law, but of you actions. Upon that, he was sent to prison, a guard of
eight men were set over them, who spent the night in drinking, swearing, and
filchy and unclean talking: and the more they weye desired by the people to
take heed of sin, the more filthy they did appear: but these are the sit
inst umenis so acting the Priests intentions, being members of their Churches.
The next day hey were guarded to Appleby: but some friends following, could not
be suffered to pass on the streets that way, so great was their envy against
all that set their sace that way. And the Prisoners being brought thuther, much
m ans was used that none should come at them but such as was sent to tempt
them. There they were kept until the Sessions, in which time they sent up and
down the country to seek for any wh would witness any thing against them and
improved their u most interest for then advantage. A July was chosen, diverse of
them were resolved on the business, (...) that it was told the Prisoners what
would become of them: before the day of examination came: and it was
accordingly: For the day came, and judgment passed: but the Prisoners (...)
saw their Accusers, not know who they are, but against the day, the Priests had
prepared three large Petitions, stufe we most filthy untruths and slanders;
raised out, of the botton la pit: but not one of them proves, though one of
the Justices sa^ to them. (...) is fit they should be proved, neither was there
any thing in them, which they could charge upon the Prisoners, save only
whenth power of the Lord had manifested at their meetings, in shaking proud
flesh, and pouring out his spirit upon many, especially, as they said, upon
little Children; which the Priests concluded was Sorc^ry and Witchery, and of
the Devil: hereby declaring themselves to be of that generation who called the
good man of the house Belzobub; and if they should not do the same to them of
his household, the words of Christ could not be fulfilled.

Likewise they had gathered up all reports, true or false of things done by
many that the Prisoners had not seen the faces of, nor ever know; thinking
thereby to make them odious to the people. They also brought two Priests our of
Laneashire, to swear things that another man had spoken in the presence of sour
Justices of the peace, and for which the man had been tried and cleared: And
these they brought, thinking to add afflictions to the Prisoners bonds. But he
is kept in great peace and joy, having not any comfort from man, but from God,
who has appeared to him in this condition, and has given him assurance of his
love, in whom he rests. To whom be praise, honor and glory, for ever

Amen.
The Examination of James Nayler, upon an Indictment of Blasphemy, at the
Sessions at Appleby, in January, 1652.
Justice Pearson, Put off your hats.


James. I do it not in contempt of Authority: for I honor the power as it is of
God, without respect of persons, it being forbidden in Scripture. He that
respects men's persons commits sin, and is convinced of the Law as a
Transgressor.


Just. Pears. That is meant of respecting persons in judgment.


Iam. If I see one in goodly apparel, and a Gold Ring, and (...) one in poor
and vile Raiment, and say to him in fine a parel, Sit thou in a higher place
then the poor, I am partial, and judged of evil thoughts.


Col. Brigs. If thou were in the Parliament house, would thou keep it on.


Iam. If God should keep me in the same mind I am in now I should.


Col. Brigs. I knew thou would contemn Authority.


Iam. I speak in the presence of God, I do not contemn Authority, but I am
subject to the power, as it is of God, for Conscience sake.


Just. Pears. Now Authority commands thee to put of thy hat, what s^y^st thou
to it?


Iam. Where God commands one thing, and man another, I am to obey God rather
then men.


Col. Benson. See whether the Law commands i^, or your own wills.


The Indi^^ment was read, wherein James was indicted for saying that Christ was
in him, and that there was but one word of God.

Col. Brigs Where wast thou born?


Iam. At Ardislaw, two miles from Wakefield.


Col. Brigs. How long livedst thou there?


Iam. Until I was married then I went unto Wake^^^ld Parish


Col. Brigs. What Profession was thou of?


Iam. A Husbandman.


Col. Brigs. Wast thou a Soldier?


Iam. Yea; I was a Soldier betwixt eight and nine years.


Col. Brigs. Wast thou not at Burford among the Levellers?


Iam. I was never there.


Col. Brigs. I charge thee by the Lord that thou tell me whether thou wast or
no?


Iam. I was then in the North, and was never taxed for any Mutiny, or any other
thing while I served the Parliament.


Col. Brigs. What was the cause of thy coming into these parts?


Iam. If I may have liberty I shall declare it. I was at the Plow, meditating
on the things of God, and suddenly I heard a voice, saying un^o me, Get thee
out from thy Kindred, and from thy Fathers house: and I had a promise given in
with it. Whereupon I did exceedingly rejoice, that I had heard the voice of
that God which I had professed from a Child* but had never known him.


Col. Brigs. Did thou hear that voice?


Iam. Yea, I did hear it, and when I came at home, I gave up my estate, c^st
out my money, but not being obedient in going forth, the wrath of God was on
me, so that I was made a wonder to all, and none though I would have lived: but
(after I was made willing) I began to make some preparation; as apparel, and
other necessaries, not knowing whither I should go. But shortly afterward going
agate-ward with a friend from my own house, having on an old Suit without any
money, having neither taken leave of Wife or Children, nor thinking then of any
journey, (...) I was commanded to go into the W^st, not knowing whither (...)
should go, not what I was to do there, but when I had been ^here a little
while, I had given me what I was to declare; and ^ver since I have remained,
not knowing to day what I was to ^o to morrow.


Col. Brigs What was the Promise thou had given?


Iam That God would be with me: which promise I find made ^ood every day.


Col. Brigs. I never heard such a call as this is, in our time?


Iam. I believe thee.


Just. Pears. Is Christ in thee?


Iam. I witness him in me: and if I should deny him before men, he would deny
me before my Father which is in heaven.


Just. Pears. Spiritual you mean.


Iam. Yea, Spiritual.


Just. Pears. By faith, or how?


Iam. By faith.


Just. Pears. What difference then between the Ministers and you?


Iam. The Ministers affirm Christ to be in heaven with a carnal body, but I
with a Spiritual body.


Just. Pears. Which of the Ministers say Christ is in heaven with a Carnal
body?


Iam. The Minister so called of Kirkby Steven.


Priest Higginson stood up, and affirmed it again openly before all the Court.

Iam. If Christ be in heaven with a carnal body, and the Saints with a
spiritual body, it is not proportionable; neither was that a carnal body which
appeared among the D^^ciples, the doors being shut, and appeared in diverse
shapes.


Quest. Was Christ man or no?


Iam. Yea, he was, and took upon him the se^d of Abraham, and was real flesh
and bone; but is a Mystery not known to the carnal man; for he is begotten of
the immortal seed, and those that know him, know him ^o be spiritual; for it
was the Word that became flesh, and dwelt amongst us: and if he had not been
Spiritual, he had not wrought by Redemption.


Just. Pears. Is Christ in thee as man?


Iam. Christ fills all places, and is not divided: Separate God and man, and
he is no more Christ.


Just. Pears. If we stand to dispute these things, we should have the
Ministers.


Iam. Perceiving Priest Higginson offended, because he had told of his saying
that Christ was in heaven with a carnal body, I ^^s said, Friend I had not
(...) thee, had I not been asked what was the difference between the Ministers
and me; for I am not come to accuse any, for I am against accusations.


Col. Brigs. Wast thou not of a Kirk about Saw^by?


Iam. I was a member of an Independent Church at (...) church.


Col. Brigs. Wast thou not excommunicated for thy blasphe-mous opinions?


Iam. I know not what they have done since I came forth; but before I was not
to my knowledge.


Col. Brigs. cal^ed of Mr. Coal, saying, Did you ere hear such a call as this?
did you hear it?

Coal. Yea, I heard part of it.


Col. Brig. Did not thou write a paper, wherein was mentioned, that if thou
think^st to be saved by that Christ which dyed (...) J^^us^l^m, thou art (...)?


Iam If (...) Christ nearer then Jerusalem, I shall have (...) by hi^: but I
own no other Christ but that who witnessed (...) go^d con^^^^ion before Pontius
P^late; which Christ I witn^^s in (...).


Col. Brigs. Will thou deny thy hand?


Iam I will not deny ^y hand, if I may see it; and I desire tha^ I may have so
much fa^our, that tha^ paper may be kept as an evidence either with or against
me.


(...) Petition being read, wherein was something against quaki^g and trembling.

Just. Pears. How comes it to pass that people quake and tremble.


Iam The Scriptures witness the same condition in the Saints formerly; as
David, Daniel, Habakkuk and diverse others.


Just. Pears. Did they fall down?


Iam. Yea some of them did so.


Coal. David said all his bones were broken, but they were whole.


Iam. So are these now.


Coal. Moses trembled; for he saw the face of God and all Israel.


Iam. Did all Israel see the face of God? that crosses the Scriptures.


Coal. They saw his glory. shall see the Lord with these eyes; putting his
fingers (...).


Iam. They (...) first be made spiritual. he cannot be seen with (...) eyes,
for (...) Spirit, and no flesh can see God, and live.


Coal. That light by which I am justified, is a created light.


Iam. That light by which I am justified, is not a created light.


Coal. That is true.


Just. Pears. To the Word. What say thou to the Scriptures? are they the
Word of God?


Iam. They are a true Dediration of the word that was in them who spoke them
forth.


Higginson. Is there not a written Word?


Iam. Where read thou in the Scriptures, of a written Word? The word is
spiritual, not seen with carnal eyes: but as for the Scriptures they are true,
and I witness them true, in measure fulfilled in me, as lar as I am grown up.


Just. Pears. Why do thou distrub the Ministers in their public worship?


Iam. I have not disturbed them in their public worships.


Just. Pears. Why do thou speak against Tiths, which are allowed by the
States.


Iam. I meddle not with the States: I speak against them that are hirelings, as
they are hirelings: those that are sent of Christ, never took Fiths, nor never
sued any for wages.


Just. Pears. Do thou think we are so beggarly as the Heathens, that we
cannot afford our Ministers maintenance? We give the us it freely.


Iam. They are the Ministers of Christ, who abide in the Doctrine of Christ.


Just. Pears. But who shall judge? how shall we know them?


Iam. By their fruits you shall know them they that abids not in the Doctrine
of Christ. make it appear they are not the Ministers of Christ.


Just. Pears. That is true.


Accusations against To. Lawson, by him answered.
THat Ioh. Lawson of Lancaster did affirm, December the fourth, 1652.

Object. That he was dead, and rose again.

Answ. Thou art a witness against him that is risen from the dead, whereof the
Apostles were witnesses. Here thou show thy self to be a witness against
the living, and show thy self to be in the death, and no Minister of Christ:
for the Ministers of Ephesians. 2. 1.
Chost justified them which were raised from the dead: Even when we were dead
in trespasses and finnes has he quickened us together with Christ, and has
raised us together, and has made us to fit in heavenly places in Christ Jesus.
Like wise reckon you also your selves to be dead indeed unto sin, but alive
unto God, through Jesus Christ: for in that he died, he died once unto sin:
in that he lives, be lives unto God. Here thou Romans 6. 10. 11.
show thy self to be no Minister of Jesus Christ. He that be lieveth, has
passed from death to life, because he lovet is his brotisren: Here thou show
thou do not believe, but art in the death and art in envy: so thou show
forth thy self to ^e (...), and hate thy brethren: We know that we are
translated from d ath unto life, because we love our brethren, be that loves
not his brother, abides in the death: and there thou art. Whosoever hates his
brother, is a man-stayer: and you know that no man stayer has eternal life
abiding in him, 1 Ioh. 3. And (...) is thy condition, and here thou art an
An^ichrist in the world; envying those who are raised from the dead: and thou
(...) to bring them to the death, whom God has raised from the death. Thou
have not seen thy self to be the Prodigal; ye Luk, 15. 24.
the Scripture faith, This my Son was dead, and is alive again but thou art
withput God in the world.

Object. 2. That the day of judgment was past.

Answ. Christ speaks. The bruted reed he will not break the Mat. 12. 20.
smoking flax he will not quench, till he bring forth judgment into victory.
Here thou show thy self to be ignorant of the Scripture: but only as a
near-sayer thou speak, and the outside of the Letter, and not Christ; and
can not witness him, who beings forth judgment into victory, but stand as
a witness against them who witness the Scriptures fulfilled in them, and Chri
beinging forth judgment into victory: and here thou show thy se^^e to be
unacquainted with Christ, and thy nakedness and ignorance thou make appear.

Object. 3. That he had been in Hell, and is now in Heaven.

Answ. Here thou show thy self to be a witness against the holy men of God.
Jonah says, Ou^ of the belly of He^l cried Jon. 2.
I, and thou heardest my voice, and the Lord delivered him out of Hell; and
might not (...) co^f^s^^? thou H^pocrit. For thou will not leave my soul in
Hell, neither will thou suffer thy Ps. 16. 10.
boly One to see corruption. Thou have delivered my son out of death: bless the
Lord, my soul, and all that is within me bless Ps. 103. 1, 2.
his holy name. How derest thou profess the Scriptures, and the holy men of
Gods conditions, which were raised and brought our of death; and witness the
holy me lot Gods condition, thou persecutest then? O thou blind my pocrite I
here thou show thou never lawest Holis mouth yet, therefore thou never
cryedst in Hell yet.

Object. 4. That he was came to the infinite company of the first born, and the
spirits of just men made perfect.

Answ. Paul said (who was a Minster of God) But ye are come to Mount Sion and
to the City of the living God, the Heavenly Heb. 12. 22.
Jerusalem, and to an innumerable company of Angels, to the general Assembly
and Church of the first born, which are written in heaven; unto God the Judge
of all, and to the spirits of just men made perfect. Paul was a Minister of
Jesus Christ by the will of God, who encouraged the Saints who were brought
hither: but thou new perseeutest them, and art a witness against them that
confess they are brought hither: here thou show thou have the spirit of
error, openly: and art no Minister of God, no not of the Letter; but art
against the Letter as it speaks, persecuting them that have the life of it.

Object. 5. That he had heard the last Trumpet sound, and seen the new
Jerusalem.

Answ. Here thou show forth thy spite and venom; If John was here, which
saw the great City and holy Jerusalem descend out of Heaven from God (John
said, I saw the holy City, New Jerusalem come down from God out of Heaven) thou
would be a witness against him; and thou show thy self in the generation
that was ever persecutors slandere's and opposers of the power of truth. Where
the same spirit is that was in John, he sees these things now, as he did then,
but where the same spirit is not, which thou show thou have not, but a
contrary spirit that pesecutes them which do see those things: but is as a dog
to bite and devour. John saw the last Trumpet sound, which shows thou art not
come to the first. Blow the trumpet in Sion, sound Joel 2. 1.
an allarum in my holy mountain: let all the inhabitants of the earth tremble.
Here be thou a witness against thy self, that thou art a witness against the
truth, and in the generation of them that ever slow the righteous ^eed.

Obj. 6. That John Lawson said he had seen God face to face.

Ans. Here thou show thy self to be a witness against them that know God,
and make thy self manifest to be a Heathen: (...) all are Heathens ^^at do
not know God; and no man knows God, saving he that is born of God; and who
ere born of God are owners of the Truth, and not against it, but against the
deceit. Jacob said, I have seen God face to face. Isaiah Gen 32. Isa. 6. 5.
and, Mine eyes have seen the King the Lord of Hasts. Job and, I have heard of
thee by the hearing of the care: but now Job. 42 5.
^^ne eyes have seen thee. And God spoke to Moses face to Exodus 33. 11.
(...). Here you may take your oaths, and swear against Jacob, against Isaiah,
against Job, and against Moses. Where the false spirit is made manifest: and
who are born of God, know God face to face, as they did: but they who are born
of the flesh, persecute them who are born of the spirit: and there you show
your selves to be taking oaths and swearing against them that know God, seeking
to bring them to prison or bondage: for you never read in all the Scriptures,
that the Prophets or the Apostles took their oaths against any which confessed
they had seen God, or put up a Petition to the Magistrates, or witnessed it
with oaths against any of them: the Ministers of God said, Swear not at all.
And here you show your selves to be no Ministers of God, but without God: for
the Ministers of God are to bring people to know God, and to the Church in God,
and to the heavenly Jerusalem, and to the innumerable company of Angels, and
Ministers to that which is in prison, and in death, but if any come to witness
these things fulfilled, you are witnesses against them with oaths and would
bring the bodies of such into prison, where the seed of God is raised out of
prison within: showing your selves to be Antichrists, persecuters of the power
of Truth, and beasts which shall make war against the Saints, and against the
Lamb: but the Lamb shall get the victory.

Job cried when the Lord hid his face: and David cried when the Lord hid his
face, and said, O Lord, I will seek thy face. And here you show, you neither
know his face, nor have seen it: but are persecuters of them who know it and
seek it.

Praises, praises be to the Lord for ever.

FINIS.

