Sir Thomas Fairfax's LETTER To the Honorable, William Lenthall Esquire Speaker of
the House of Commons; Concerning the taking of Sherborn Castle, with 16. Pieces
of Ordnance, one Mortar piece, and 344. Common Soldiers.

With another LETTER to the said Mr. Speaker, Of the Particulars of all the
proceedings against the Enemy at Sherborn Castle

Together with a List of the Prisoners of War, taken at Sherborn Castle, Aug.
15. 1645.

Also, the Oath taken by the Inhabitants of Exeter.

ORdered by the Commons in Parliament, That these Letters with the List, be
forthwith Printed and Published.

H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

London, Printed for Edward Husband, Printer to the Honorable House of Commons.
Aug. 19. 1645.

To the Honorable William Lenthall, Esquire, Speaker of the Honorable House
of Commons.
SIR,
IT has pleased God still to manifest his goodness to us, by delivering
Sherborn Castle into our hands; wherein we found sixteen pieces of Ordinance,
and one Mortar piece: Yesterday, after a breach was made in the wall, wherein
ten or twelve a breast might enter, I sent a second Summons to the Governor,
to Surrender the Castle, which being refused by him, we possessed our selves of
the breach, and beat the enemy from their works within, where they had planted
2. pieces of Ordnance, to oppose our entrance: And some of the Soldiers got
into two of their Towers, and beat them from all other places of advantage
within, which enforced the Governor this day about two in the morning to send
a Drum for a Parley, to whom Answer was returned, he must expect no other
condition but Quarter for his life, which (upon those terms) he being
unwilling to Surrender, I gave order that all things be made sit for a Storm:
(The Myoners having fully wrought the Mine through the Castle wall, and
foundation of the Tower:) The Enemy presently began to apprehend the danger,
and sent a Drum to crave Quarter; but before he could get out to deliver his
Message, the Soldiers were got into the Castle and works, and had the Plunder
of the Castle, which by reason of their so timely entrance, could not be
prevented: We took prisoners in the Castle, Sir Lewis Dives the Governor,
Colonel Giles Strangewayes, formerly a Member of the house, Sir John Walcoate,
Coll. Thornhill, and others of quality, and about four hundred Common
Soldiers. The reducing of this place, is of the greater concernment, in regard
of the influence it had upon the disaffected Clubmen in these parts, who
(having the countenance of this Garrison) were made so bold in their attempts
and meetings: I shall stay here not past a day, to settle this place, and then,
after we have met and consulted, what is next fittest to be done for the
public serviee, shall move hence with the Army accordingly. I remain, Sir,

Your assured friend to serve you, Sherborn Aug. 15. 1645. Tho: Fairfax.

To the Honorable William Lenthall Esqulre, Speaker of the Honorable House of
Commons.
SIR,
MY lines commonly are the Messengers of good News; if I might be spared hence,
none should have been more willing to have brought the News then my self: This
day I sent you a Copy of Sir Lewis Dives Message to have Honorable Conditions;
The answer the General returned, was in these words: SIR,

I Should have been as willing to gratify you with Honorable Conditions, as
any man, having expressed so much Gallantry in the defending of your self; But
the advantage I now have by being possessed of the Breach, and some of the
Towers, as it may with reaon induce you to Surrender the place; so it Obliges
me in Honor to agree to no other Conditions; then Quarter for your lives,
which I should be glad you would accept of, that so the Effusion of that blood,
which will inevitably follow upon a Refusal, might be prevented.

Sir, It is against my nature to threaten or insult over your Condition; but I
must tell you, (and I wish you have a heart to believe it) That if you refuse
this my offer, you and those with you must know, I will hear of no Terms for
the future.



This answer being returned, the Governor could not brook it: Great and small
shot played, our Soldiers rejoiced at the refusal: The General instantly gave
Order to fit all things for a Storm, the Mines being finished: But without any
Order to fall on, our Soldiers were in an instant both over the Castle walls
and works; they within took down their bloody Colors, cried for Quarter, and
sent a Drum out, and an endeavor was used, they had Quarter; but it was happy
for them; There was such plenty of Riches and Plunder within, which took up and
busied the Soldier: Otherwise, it would have been difficult to have got them
Quarter. At our first entrance, some of them were slain, but none afterward;
though it were to be wished, the Soldier had that in Money, which they took in
Plunder; yet five shillings gotten in way of Spoil from an Enemy, gives them
more content, then twenty shillings in a way of reward in an orderly manner;
besides, being not rewarded (ten shillings a man) according to promise, when
Bridgewater was stormed, made them now more zealous to be their own Carvers.
There was not a man but got Plunder, some two and three times over, as soon as
they had been at home, came back again, and returned loaded with booty in my
presence. My greatest care was to preserve Writings, but was glad to take the
Soldiers leavings, and missed things there present, of great concernment; yet
some was got, of the proceedings in Spain, when the Earl of Bristoll was there
with the Prince: The General intends to stay here but one day to settle their
Peace, and then to move with the Army, as it may be in his Judgment and the
opinion of the Council of War most for the Public Service: I believe we
shall go where we are not expected: The Army is Mustered, and most of it paid,
and I hope will give a good Account of what ever Service they undertake: This
business of Sherborn having tried the skill and Resolution of the Soldier,
more then in any things has yet fallen out; and indeed, the Comptroller of the
Ordnance, has been a diligent and active man in managing the approaches,
Bridges, Mines and Galleries. Once again, let me desire you to expidite all
things fitting for Sieges, with all the speed that may be; a day lost in it, is
of infinite dis-Service; above all, send Morter-peeces and Granado shells fit
for them: They are at Warwick, but sent for.

This being all time will give me leave to write, I rest, Sir,

Your most faithful and humble Servant.
Shorborn, 15. Aug. 12. at night. I send you enclosed the Exeter Oath.

I have sent you a List of the Persons of Note taken in Sherborn.



I A. B. Do freely and from my heart Swear, Vow, and Protest in the presence of
Almighty God, That I will use my best endeavor to Maintain and Defend this
City of Exeter, against all Forces raised or to be raised without his Majesty's
consent upon any pretense whatsoever, and particularly against the Forces now
under the command of Sir Tho: Fairfax or any other that shall command them, or
any other Forces against this City, and all forces which do or shall adhere to
them or their party, and I will neither directly nor indirectly give (or so far
as in me lies) suffer to be given any intelligence, advice or information to
the Army, or any of those forces now under the command of Sir Tho: Fairfax, nor
to any other forces (not raised by the Kings consent) which shall now, or at any
time hereafter come against, lie before, or attempt the taking, besieging, or
blocking up of this City of Exeter: But will from time to time discover to the
Governor or Lieut. Governor of this City, any one, and all such, as I shall know
or probably suspect to give any such intelligence or information. As likewise
that I will discover to the Governor or his Lieutenant Governor, all
treacheries, plots, designs, conspiracies, and attempts, which I shall know,
hear of, or probably suspect to be intended or plotted against His Majesty's
Person, or the said City, or any of His Majesty's Armies, Towns, or Forces.
Neither will I, or shall any other by my procurement, directly or indirectly,
by words or otherwise dissuade, or discourage any of the Soldiers or
Inhabitants of this City, from engaging themselves, or persisting in his
Majesty's Service, or the defense of this City against the Forces aforesaid.
And this I Vow and Protest according to the usual sense and meaning of the
words hereof, without any equivocation or mental reservation whatsoever; And
shall to the utmost of my power observe and perform the same; So help me God,
And by the contents of this Book.

A List of the Prisoners of War taken at Sherborn Castle the 15, of August 1645.
Sir Lewis Dives. Sir John Walcooth. Col. Strangwayes of Horse. Col. Thornhill.
Lieut. Col. Strangwayes of Horse. Major Balston. Capt. Hamon. Capt. Bright.
Capt. Chancee. Capt. Mullins. Capt. Creswell. Capt. Lieut. Norris. Capt.
Hoddinot. Capt. Speed. Capt. Srangwayes of Horse. Capt. Bond. Capt. Hoddar.
Capt. Brisco. Lieut. Ienings. Lieut. Tailor. Lieut. Mallet. Lieut. Rogers.
Lieut. Townsend. Lieut. Joliffe of Horse. Coronet Devonet Reformado. Ensign
Gale. Ensign Hoyes. Ensign Harris. Engsine Tool. Ensign Collins townsman.
Ensign Mullins. Ensign Tod. George Waller Provost Maarshall.
Chirurgions.
Mr. Stuckey. Mr. Paylee. Mr. Robinson.
Ministers.
Doctor Coockson. Mr. Wild. Mr. Wake. Mr. Townsend. Mr. Ford.
Gentlemen.
Mr. Chafine. Mr. Buckland. Mr. Barus. Mr. Brown. Mr. Grisley. Mr. Forsell.
Mr. Richards. Mr. Wiborne. Mr. Hutchins. Mr. Carleton.
344. Common Soldiers, besides Officers.


