General Fairfax's LETTER TO THE HONORABLE, William Lenthall Esquire, Speaker
of the Honorable House of COMMONS.

Concerning the storming and taking of Tiverton Castle and Church.

Together with a perfect List of the Commanders and Soldiers that were taken
Prisoners.

ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That this Letter and List be
forthwith printed and published:

H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

London, Printed for Edward Husband, Printer to the Honorable House of Commons,
October. 25. 1645.

General Fairfax's Letter to the Honorable William Lenthall Esquire Speaker of
the Honorable House of Commons.
Mr. SPEAKER,
SInce the Army came further West, I have not given you an account of the
motions thereof: The Treasure no sooner came to the Army, (of which there was
great want) but we marched toward the Enemy, whose intention was (as we
received Intelligence) to attempt to break thorough with Two thousand horse to
Oxford, to join with the Forces there; For prevention whereof, I sent Letters
to the several counties, to raise the power of the county, to give
interruption to his march, by making good the passes: That day that part of the
Army marched to Axminster, the Enemy with two thousand horse marched over
Blackdown, and through the darkness of the night, passed by our Guards, and
fel^ into the quarters of our Dragoons, and took about fifty prisoners, and
returned immediately, their intention then being to make their way through, as
some of their officers, who since came in unto me, do confess: The whole Army
marched that day after the Enemy to Hunniton, the horse quartering in the field
all night, to prevent a second attempt of the Enemy to march Eastward; and next
day the Army marched to Columpton, and the Enemy over the River Ex, whereupon I
caused part of the Army to be quartered along that River, within three or four
miles of Exeter, the better to prevent the Enemies return; and with the rest of
the Army I marched to Tiverton, whither Major General Massey was sent before
with the Regiments with Colonel Welden, who found the Governor resolved to
hold out; whereupon (after consultation) the storming of that place was agreed
on; (the season of the year not admitting of much time to be spent about it)
and yesterday being the Lords day, after forenoon Sermon, a Council of War
being called to order the manner of the Storm: The Canonier, with a great shot
broke the chain of the Drawbridge, whereby it fell down, and the Soldiers
immediately entered, and got over the works, with little opposition: The Enemy
fled into the Castle and Church for their security, where they had quarter for
their lives: Colonel Sir Gilbert Talbot, and about Two hundred more were taken
prisoners; we found four piece of Ordnance, and thirty Barrells of Powder; the
works were very strong and regular as I have seen: This Garrison will be of
great use, both in order to the straitning of Exeter, and of securing any thing
for this Army whilst it stays in the West.

This day the Army moves toward the Enemy westward, in order to the reducement
of these parts; desiring you that care may be taken the Army be seasonably
supplied with Moneys, being in a country that is much wasted and impoverished,
by the Enemies quartering so long upon them. I remain, Sir,

Tiverton, Octo. 20. 1645.Your humble Servant, T: Fairfax.

Prisoners of war, taken at Tiverton on Sunday, October. 19. 1645.
SIr Gilbert Talbot, govern: Major George Sadler. Major Cos: Moneuche. Major
Wilks. Major Pain. Captain William Sturgion. Mr. Thomas Whitby. Cap. Markas
Whitby. Cap. William Whitby. Cap. Edward Kemp. Cap. Richard Phillips. Cap.
Richard Mattock. Lieutenant Tho: Sadler. Lieut. Hanniball VVestcoat. Lieut.
Tho: VVhitby. Lieut. Tho: Sibley. Lieut. Fra: Moneuch. Lieut. Io: Hawks. Lieut.
Eveley. Nich: Kemp. Rich: Mutisin, servant. Will: Sharp, Letter carrier.
Ensign Fran: Skidmoore. Ensign John Martine. Ensign Fran: VVilks. Ensign
Pollard. Ensign Davis. Ensign Kerry. Sergeant Nich: Collins. Sergeant Rownsell.
Sergeant Tho: Nicholls. Sergeant Giles Ieffery. Sergeant Tobias Hickman. One
hundred sixty eight common Soldiers. Twenty came over the works. One Spy
taken with a Letter. One Mr. Kemp a Minister, a grand Malignant.
FINIS.

