THE ESCURIAL, Or, a DESCRIPTION of that VVonder of the world FOR ARCHITECTURE
and MAGNIFICENCE of STRVCTVRE: Built by K. PHILIP THE IID of Spain, and lately
Consumed by Fire.

Written in Spanish by Francisco de los Santos, a Friar of the Order of S.
Hierome, and an Inhabitant there

Translated into English by a Servant of the Earl of Sandwich in his
Extraordinary Embassy thither.

London, Printed for T. Collins and J. Ford, at the Middle-Temple-Gate in
Fleet Street, 1671.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
IT being the usual Fate of the greatest Works, as well as of the most eminent
Persons, to be then most desired and talked of, when the world is deprived of
them; and the generality of the most curious sort of Mankind loving even to
tread upon that Ground which has been most famous for any sort of renowned
Antiquity; I make no question, but though (by this Lamentable Accident of Fire,
which of (late has happened in Spain) the most Magnificent and August Pile of
Building on the face of the Earth has heen ruined and destroyed; yet that most
that ever heard of it, by this sad occasion, will talk more of it than ever
before; and many perchance as shall have opportunity of traveling into those
Parts, will view with no less astonishment, the Ruins of this Royal House,
than they would with curiosity survey the Place where old Rome or the famous
ancient Carthage stood. Judging therefore, that most of those who never had
opportunity of seeing this so renowned Fabric, may have some sort of liking to
hear a Description of it: It Is partly to satisfy them, and partly to gratify
some Friends that have desired it of me, I have translated and taken out of a
good Spanish Author as yet alive, and well known to the right Honorable the
Earl of Sandwich, in his late Embassy Extraordinary to the Present King
Charles the Second (which his Lordshhip executed with so much Honor, Industry
and Success) this brief ensuing Description: the which, being not so
sufficiently full as to contain diverse things, which are not unworthy of our
knowledge, I have thought good to premise some few Particulars in this Epistle;
as First, Touching the Name of this Extraordinary Edifice. 2. Who it was that
founded it. And 3. What moved the Founder, or gave him occasion to erect Royal
Fabric. As to the first; Though this Stately House it self be called the
Escurial, yet the true Name of it is the Royal Monastery of S. Lawrence, near
the Escorial: For the Escorial, or Escurial, as it is commonly called, is a
little Village close by it, which is said to take its Name a scoria ferri, from
iron dross; here having been in ancient time great store of Iron-works in this
place. The Founder of it was Philip the Second; who for the ensuing Reasons,
first built and dedicated it unto S. Lawrence, his own great Saint, Famous for
his Martyrdom upon a Gridiron in Spain; in fashion of which, this House is
made; and then gave it to the Jeronymites, or Friars of the Order of S.
Hierome. The reason of the first, was because on this Saints Day, being the
tenth of August, he obtained at the great Battle of S. Quintins, a memorable
Victory against the French; and there made his Vow to erect this House in
honor of him. The chief inducement to bestow it on the Hieronymites or Friars
of the Order of S. Hierome, rather than any other, was for his Father Charles
the Fifth's sake, who had a peculiar Affection to that Order, and made his
Retirement (when he had Surrendered the Empire to his Brother Ferdinand, and the
Crown of Spain to his Son) into a Monastery of theirs, called the Monastery of
San Geronimo de Just; where he likewise ended his Days in the Year 1558. How
the Dismal Fire (that as it is said, has totally destroyed this Royal and
Magnificent Palace, Convent and College (for such you will find it to be in
the following Discourse) first began, is something uncertain, though it is
generally believed it proceeded from a Rocket, or such like piece of Fire work,
which on a night of some great Solemnity (for then they commonly use them) did
accidentally fall amongst the Wood-work on the top of the Roof of the House,
which most of it being Pine, does quickly take, and is exceeding combustible;
but the beginnings of such Misfortunes are for the most part obscure, though
the sad Effects have too much light in them, as by woeful Experience we have
seen in the Dreadful Fire of our own Metropolis. How considerable a loss this
famous piece of Architecture is, let any man judge by the Subsequent
Description.

The Escurial; OR, A Description of the Wonder of the world for Architecture
and Magnificence of Structure, Built by King Philip the Second of Spain; and
lately Consumed by Fire.
ALthough in a former Discourse we have particularly showed the principal parts
of this prodigious Piece of Architecture, and the Ornamentals belonging to it;
having used the terms of Art, for the sake of those that are understanding of
it; and recounted all things as in reality they are, with all clearness
possible, with that disposition, distribution and measure which they bear; yet
notwithstanding all this, there are some persons which love not such tedious
Discourses; and especially in things of this nature, which although they are
pleasant in the seeing, yet they are troublesome in the reading: large
Descriptions of them, by reason of the obscurity of the terms, which in such
grand Fabrics repeated so often, always difficult, and ordinarily strange,
that even I my self am weary to write them, although I am never satisfied with
seeing this great Wonder, that occasions me to make use of them: There are
others, that at once desire to know the greatness and distinct parts of it, and
with this rest satisfied, being of opinion, that the goodness and rarity of it
lies in the quantity and extent, rather than in the quality or worth; and the
largeness of it is more pleasing to them, than its excellency, which they
understand not: Or if they do understand it, they desire to know whether there
be much of that kind which most pleases their Fancies; at coming to see this
Convent, encountering so many beautiful Cloisters, they desire to know the
number of them; they mind the beautiful disposition of the Lights; they are
very attentive on the Pictures and Statues; they have an infinite desire to
know the number of them all; and the great noise that that makes, pleases them
most, and fills them with admiration; neither is this any ill humor where every
thing is so good as here it is. For this reason I have resolved, in this
Discourse to satisfy those that are of this temper, reducing to an exact
number as near as I can, the parts of this Noble Fabric; not only those
mentioned in my former Description, but likewise such as were passed over in
silence, or were but in general mentioned, being not of principal Concern,
although every thing is worth taking notice of; and giving likewise a brief
account of the Ornaments and Furniture; together with which, making a summary
Rehearsal of what has been said before, for rubbing up the memories of such
Artists that shall read it; and for the delight of those that are not so; to
whom though they read it never so often, the Terms of Architecture are as
difficult as Arabic. I promise to be most faithful in this, as I have been in
all the rest; for it would be an infinite wrong to this Noble Edifice, not to
relate whatsoever it contains; or to think that it stands in need of any
Additions to heighten its greatness; no less than it would be to my own
Profession not to speak the Truth. It stands as a living Testimony, and will
for many Ages (here the Friar was no true Prophet) by which any man that shall
doubt, may confirm himself in the truth of the things we here relate; and may
in part see it in the very Print of the same. Passing by therefore (that which
I have related in the beginning of my former Description) the Motives which the
most Catholic King Philip the Second had to build this wonderful Structure,
and dedicate it to the Invincible Martyr of Spain, S. Lawrence, his Protector,
and Saint or Devoto; and to give it to the Order of S. Hierom; passing by
likewise the Election of the Situation of it, in the Kingdom of Toledo, seven
Leagues distant from Madrid Westward; the Platform of it, a large and vast
Square; the sides of which contain 2980 feet; and the Majestic enclosure of
the Noble Places and Gardens which compass it about, and the Materials of which
it is built, which is a white kind of Stone, with darkish gray spots in it,
which beautify it much; although in many parts of it there is Marble and
Jasper in abundance, and other Stones of most perspicuous politeness; as also
the form of the Fabric, which is all the good Orders of Architecture, Tuscan,
Dorick, Ionick, Corinthian, and Composite. Though indeed the most of it is
Dorick and Ionick; and passing also the four principal Fachadas or Sides, and
the three stately Gates which it has on the West side.

I proceed to tell you that within this large Quadrangle, Cloisters.
there are contained 13 Cloisters, of most Beautiful Architecture, and of great
extent; all which, except one, on the Backside of the great Chapel, and other
two within the principal Cloister of the Palace, may be counted from the
Draught or Print of the House, viz. 5 on the South, and 5 on the North, which,
with other 2, without the Quadrangle, make in all 15: the most of them of three
Orders of Arches and Walks, others of 2, and others of 1. In which are to be
seen so many Windows as amount to more than 680.

Courts 9.
Besides which, there are 9 Courts, amongst which, the Portico, or that which
you first enter into, is the most Royal and Stately one in Europe.

The Turrets which are raised upon the Corners of this Square, Tmrrets.
and on the Crossings of the Cloisters, and on the Church, which may obliterate
the memory of the ancient Pyramids, so celebrated by Antiquity, are in number
9. Amongst which, is reckoned that famous Cupula or Turret on the Church, 315
foot high from the Ground. The Globes or Balls that are placed on the top of
them, upon which the Fanes move, all of Gilt Metal, are of 5 foot diameter; and
that on the top of the Church of seven foot, insomuch that a man of good
Stature, may stand upright in it with both Arms extended out.

Windows and Doors.
The Windows which are seen on the outside, before you enter the house, are
1110; distributed with much Uniformity and Order; many of them with whole
Balconies, others with Breast high all of Iron, and well Glazed, which gives a
great Luster and Majesty to the Fabric. Those which are to be seen within in
the great Court or Portico, Cloisters, Courts, Towers, and other places, even
to the top of the House, are 1578. So that the whole number of them does come
unto 2688. with the Shuts of them, of a pleasing green color, both for the
preservation of them, and Beauty of the Edifice. If to these we add the Windows
of the Out-Offices, they amount unto few less than 4000. The Doors reckoned
after the same manner, are in number 8000. The outward Gates in the four sides
of the House are 16, entering through any of which, you seem to come into a
Labyrinth; especially in the Palace, where by the multiplicity of them, the
Multiplicity of them, the cunningest man alive may easily lose himself.

The Zaquanes or Portals at the entrance of the princicipal Gates, and some
others at the entrance of the noble Apartments are 14, all of very considerable
Architecture.

The Fountains in the Center of the Cloisters and Courts, for the refreshment
of the whole House, the water of which is carried through the vast extent of
it, together with those in the Church, Gardens, Offices, and all places where
there is occasion for them, come to about fourscore and six; together with
eleven Cisterns; that it is a doubt whether Madrid it self, Stairs.
though very plentifully watered, has so many or not.

The several Stairs to go up and down, and to pass to and again in the
Cloisters and other Apartments, are about 80. amongst which, there are some of
admirable Invention, and very many of a great number of Steps, very pleasant
and easy to ascend.

The Galleries, Halls, Chambers, Cells, Offices, and other Apartments, are so
many, that it seems impossible to count them; however, I shall do my endeavor
to give a sufficient account of them, reckoning for the easier proceeding by
the difference of Habitations in this Fabric, viz. it contains one Convent,
two Colleges, the one of Religious, the other of Seculars, and the Palace
Royal. All which are so capacious, and so well furnished within themselves,
both of common and particular Rooms, that the several sorts of Inhabitants,
though very numerous, find excellent accommodation in them.

The King with his whole House, the Queen, and all the Royal Family in the
Palace; and yet it is known that the Train which they ordinarily bring with
them gives care enough to the most populous Cities to entertain them.

There are about 150 Religious in the Convent, 50 more in the College, and as
many more Seculars in the Seminary, either Graduates or under Graduates, from
whence may be inferred what Chambers, Lodgings, Cells, etc. are required for so
great a number of inhabitants, but there are moreover and above in the Palace,
besides the Rooms of State for the Noble men and Ladies, in the Kings, Queens,
and Infanta's apartments, eight Galleries, Galleries in the Palace 8.
besides lodging rooms.

In the Convent and Colleges, there are likewise large stately Rooms of this
kind, but differenced by their names, occasioned either from business done in
them, or things that are there laid up. There are three Capitulos or Chapter
houses, three Libraries, five great Halls, In the convent and College.
six Dormitories, three Halls in the Hospital, and four others which serve for
diverse offices; all very large and equal as it were for length and breadth.
The which with diverse others for walks and entertainments make in all thirty.

The Oratories and Chapels which are (without the principal Church)
distributed through these several habitations, Oratories.
counting with them that of the old Church and that of the offices of the
palace, are seven of excellent Symmetry and Elegance.

The Refectories or Eating places in the Convent, College, Seminaries, etc.
are in all nine, very large and neat. Refectories 9. Infirmerias.


The Infirmerias or places to receive the Sick, are in all five, with great
variety of Chambers in them, placed with such respect to their Chapels, that
the Sick may hear Mass as they lie in their beds.

The Botica, or Apothecaries apartment has five or six admirable rooms,
besides others, which make of it a large house.

The Hospedarias or places for entertainment of Strangers are two, Hosped.
the one is within the house with large dining rooms, and decent Chambers for
entertainment of Strangers, the which are attended by young Youths that are
Students; the other is without, with all manner likewise of accommodation.

The Kitchins of the Palace Convent and Colleges are in all nine, Cocin.
and as many houses of Office.

The Rooms which are under the house, Cellars.
by whose strong Arches the whole is sustained, are above forty, large and
lightsome, and of very beautiful Architecture, and that serve for many offices,
as the Caterers, Plate-keepers, etc. There are others likewise for distribution
of the Fountain Pipes, which are divided up and down in these Cellars, where
there are likewise eleven Cisterns, the least of which holds 10000 quarts of
Water.

The Lofts and little rooms on the house top all covered with Slat, Lofts.
and joined in form of a Grid Iron.

All these parts are included in this prodigious building, Church.
besides the Church and Sacristia, or Repository of Relics and Sacredotal
Vestments, where there are many more of great extent and amplitude. For the
Church which is in length 374 feet, and 230 in breadth, includes the great
Chapel, the Quire, the under Quire, diverse other Chapels, the Antiquires, and
fortyeight Altars and other pieces, which of themselves alone are sufficient
objects of admiration.

It has seven extraordinary great and beautiful Isles, in the top of which are
seen twenty six Arches, and over them large empty spaces, in like manner, as
there is under the Floor of it.

The Sacristia being very large and capacious, consists of eight stately rooms,
besides diverse others very considerable and great, Sacristia.
for the us of those that minister about them, which are indeed but all
requisite for this wonder of the World.

These are the parts so far as I can reckon them of this miraculous Fabric;
the whole Machine contains these Rooms and apartments in it, and to tell in one
word the Multitude, and High grandeur of them, if one would go through all of
them, and the whole space contained in the House and Offices belonging to it,
it would take up four whole days to do it, it being a journey of thirty three
measured leagues, or ninety nine miles, so vast and large is this curious
piece. I come now to the number of the Ornaments of Furniture, which
exceedingly beautifies and enriches this stately Edifice.

I fay therefore that the statues which are in it which may well compare for
beauty and Grandeur with the most celebrated Colossus's, Statues.
of the Ancients are in all fifty and one, thirteen of Stone, and thirty eight
of metal, richly guilt, and almost all of them much bigger then the life, some
of them two or three times bigger, which give an exceeding great Majesty to the
Frontispiece, the Portico or first great Court, the Church and principal
Cloister, into which they are distributed, the names of the Masters which
wrought them are down in the annexed Catalogue.

Other less pieces, as Crucifixes, Pictures of St. Jerome of St. John Baptist,
and likewise of our Lady, which are placed in diverse Cells, and other parts of
the House of inestimable Sculpture (without taking notice now of those in the
Church) do amount unto fifty, wrought on diverse materials, even to Porphery it
self.

Pictures in Oil colors and Fresco.
The Pictures in Oil colors and in Fresco which ennoble and give a kind of
awful Majesty to the several places before mentioned, are very many, I shall
give you the sum of those that are of greatest worth and value, they are in
General 1622 Pictures of the life and History, all in oil colors, distributed
up and down the whole house; and although they be not all of them of the rarest
and greatest value, yet there is not one of them which is not very well worth
our admiration. I reckon not at all of the more ordinary sort which serve only
to cover the walls. The greater part of them are originalls, and many of them
of the most famous and celebrated Masters, as of Masacio, Rafaell, Sancio,
Vrbino, Leonardo de vinci, Titian, Masters.
Bordonan Sebastian del piombo, Andreas del Sarto, Paulo Veronese, and Carolos
Veronese, his Son, Jacobo Robusto or Tintoretto, Basan, Geronimo Muciano,
Parmesano, Antonio Acorego or Corregio. Federico Barrosi, Peregrin, Guido
Bolonese, Vandike, Ruben, Joseph de Ribera or Spannolette, Juan Fernandes Mudo,
Luqueto, Bosco, Albert Duter, Michael Cusin, Dominico Greco, Lavinia Fontana,
Romulo, Bartolomeos Carducho, and many other excellent hands which have made
themselves famous in History.

There are other Originals of Authors less known, or whose names are altogether
unknown, most of them very good, many excellent well, insomuch that they give
occasion to enquire of the Masters of them, whose names it is great pity that
they are not known.

There are others which are Copies of great pieces of the aforementioned
Masters, and also of Michael Angelo of very great value, which those that are
understanding or them, say, there is no want of Originals where those are
placed.

There are others that are Pictures of Popes and Kings, and persons famous in
all faculties and learning, in number 256.

There are other pieces of Landscape, Fruitery, etc. almost innumerable, which
give a great deal of beautiful and pleasant variety. It may suffice to tell you
that there is not a Cell, a Chamber, an ordinary Room, in which there is not
found of these delightful sorts of Ornaments, out of Italy, Germany, France,
Flanders, and many which were done in Spain incomparably well.

As to the Paint in Fresco, or upon the bare walls, there is very much of it,
and of the best in Europe of this sort of Paint. There are 12 great pieces in
the house, besides Histories 134. so large and great, that they include in them
diverse others. The Painting of the Clory of the Quire, and of the Principal
Cloister of the Library, contains at least 250, The workmanship of Peregrin de
Peregrini, Lucas Cauxioso or Luqueto, Granelo and Fabricio, Sons of Bergamasco,
Francisco Vrbina, Romulo, Caravajali, and Barroso. There are 14 apartments, the
Floors of which seem to be as it were painted with the variety of white and
colored Marble, of most splendid and curious work, as is to be seen in the
principal Cloister, both below and above stairs, in the Capitulos or
Chapter-houses, in the Priors Cell, in the Library, in the Church, in the
Quire, and Antequire, in the Sacristia, in the great Chapel, the first and
second Table within the Rejas or Grates, which are of diverse the purest
Jaspers, and in the Oratories of the Kings which all appear like Crystal, but
with a thousand varieties of color. There are other Ornaments of Furniture
which very much beautify and ennoble the several Apartments, as the Stations
for books, the books themselves, the Escritoios or Accommodations for writing,
Tables, and such like things as well in the Library as in the great rooms of
the palace, and the Friars Cells, all very well worth the taking notice of.

The Stands for the Books in the Grand Library are made of seven several sorts
of wood in-laid, Library.
of the Indies and of Spain, viz. the Caoba, Acana, Ebony, Cedar, Orange, Pine
and Wall-Nut-Tree. Those of the other Libraries, although they are not all out
so rich, yet are exceeding handsome.

In the divisions that are made for the books, Books.
there are 18000 Volumes, of all Subjects, nobly bound and guilt alike,
insomuch that the Libraries appear both Rich and Beautiful. In the Principal
Library are kept as Relics of great esteem, eight Manuscripts of Saints, and
another in which the Gospel was written in Letters of Gold, in the time of the
Emperor Conradus. As likewise diverse other works of great Veneration, many of
them Original Mannscripts if not all, for so they be for their great antiquity.

Three or four several sort of Paper used by several Nations in the very
infancy of Writing. Besides those Books we have already recounted, there are in
the Friars Cells and other places a very great number which were left by
Phillip II. or bought since, in all sixteen thousand, insomuch, that reckoning
these, together with those of the Libraries, they come unto thirty four
thousand in the whole house, amongst which there are to be found the best sort
of Writers both Ancient and Modern.

In the Church there are five noble Grates of Brass, Grates i^ the C^.
in the doors of it, and thirty seven divisions of Balconies, Corredores and
Niches distributed through the extent of the walks, and in other parts; all
with Ballausters, Globes, or Crosses of Brass, and exceeding beautiful on the
outside,

There is likewise another sort of Ornaments and Riches to be admired, which
would weary one to count, which surprise the sight, and move to devotion and
reverence, Altars.
astonishing and elevating the affections of those that see them; There are 48
Altars, and as many fair pieces of Imagery, very uniform, and covered with
Gold, placed in their Chapels and Niches, with Pictures of exceeding worth
reckoned in the number of those we before mentioned.

The High Altar is as Chieftain to all the rest, 93 feet in height, High Altar.
and forty nine in breadth, which fills all that Grand Chapel which it stands
in with the luster, of the Jaspers and Metal covered with Gold, with 4 Orders
of Pillars, which make in all 18. in which is to be seen the excellency of
Architecture, in the Dorick, Ionick, Corinthian and Composite Orders, with
fifteen Statues of extraordinary greatness, all of Metal laid over with Gold,
the work of Pompeo Leoni, and other 13 little ones in the Custodia, or the
place where the consecrated Host is kept, which with some others intombed on
the sides, makes the whole number in this great Chapel to amount unto thirty
eight, besides eight Noble pieces of Peregrin, and Federico Zucaro. The
Stupendous work of the Custodia done by Jacobo Trezo, all of it of the most
precious Stones of Spain, and Metals guilt, with eight Pillars worked and
polished with Diamonds, the nobleness of the material, being a blood colored
Jasper, admitting of no other instrument or tool to touch it. Every one of
these Pillars cost ten thousand Ducats, and in all fourscore thousand. But the
most precious Jewel of all, is, the lesser Custodia, within the other. The
doors of the Sagrario, or Sanctum Sanctorum, are of the finest Jasper, and
brightest Brass, and the place it self a most Heavenly piece. The two Royal
Escutcheons which are on the sides of the Chapel, over the Kings Tombs, are
all of Jasper, very rich and precious, with very significant devises. The 40
Altars which are dispersed up and down the Body of the Church, besides diverse
others, have several changes of Frontalls or Ornamental Coverings, for every
day if need require, and for the several Festivals and Holydays there are
several suits of Attirements uniform in color and fashion, and for this
purpose they are kept, some in the Sacristia, and others in Chests near unto
the Altars.

The high Altar, and the two Altars called the Altars de Reliquias or Relics,
are richest in this sort. Every one of them having fifty several changes of
exceeding great worth, of the richest Brocados and wrought Silks. The
Candlesticks which admirably grace all the Altars, are in number 250, some of
Brass gilded, others of Silver, and others of Crystal. Besides which every
Altar has one of a great number of branches, which are lighted immediately
before the Consecration at Mass, they are in all 40.

The Crosses which are placed upon these Altars, with their Crucifixes of Brass
and Silver are in number one hundred, and that which is the Grandeur of all
these Altars, is, that they are all consecrated, insomuch that all the Tables
of them are Altars, and every one of them has placed within it a Box of
Relics, of the same Saint to whom the Altar is Dedicated.

To denote that the whole Church is consecrated, there are twelve Crosses set
up in several places of it, where the Unction was made at Consecration, one of
which is of the most beautiful Jasper, upon a White Marble, which is a great
Ornament unto it. There ate six mighty Lamps all of Silver, hung up in the
large Isles of the Church, of most curious work, which give Light unto them
all; and in the principal Isle are placed fourteen great Stands for
Wax-Torches, of a Metal Silvered over, of great Magnificence and Luster. When
all these are lighted together with the Candles upon the Altars, and Luminaries
placed in all the more eminent parts of the Church, as they use to do at the
first Reception of Kings and Queens, and other Solemn Occasions and Festivals,
it looks like a very Heaven upon Earth.

The Organs throughout the whole Church are in number 8; Organs.
which both beautify it with their outward Luster, the Lofts being all gilt;
and enliven it with their Divine Melody. There is one all of Silver,
extraordinary rich, which is played upon every Corpus Christi Day.

The Bells of the Towers are in all 59. forty of which are in very tunable
Chimes, Bells.
and have their Keys like Organs, which makes a pleasant Music to play upon
them.

The Relics which arc kept in the several Relicarios, Relics.
or Places appointed for them, which are very Majestic and August, are so
many, that even from our Savior, and the Blessed Virgin, there are Relics of
all the Saints celebrated in the Church, except S. Joseph, and S. John the
Evangelist; yea, there are even to the very Prophets before the coming of
Christ into the world, the Boxes and Vessels in which with great veneration
they are kept in number 515, some of Gold, some of Silver, some of Crystal,
and other Precious Stones.

For Singing of Divine Praises in the Quire, the proper work of the Sons of S.
Hierom, in imitation of the most Noble Angelical Spirits, there are 216 Books,
in their proper Stands, placed in the Anti-Quire, of admirable proportion and
beauty: It is the best sort of Library for this Service, that has been seen
either in Spain, or any other place; the Stations for the Books are of the same
Wood as the Seats of the Quire; and those of the several richest sorts like
them we before mentioned in the principal Library. The number of the Seats is
128. in a double Row: The Divine Service which is here celebrated, is more
ravishing than whatever is to be seen in the House. The Facistor or great Desk
on which some Books are placed, is of all the rarest sorts of Wood, and of
Brass gilded, supported by four Pedestals of the same Metal, very admirable,
stately and beautiful, and in this kind, the very best in the World.

The Ornaments and Riches which are in the Sacristia or Vestry, Ornam. in the
Sacretta.
in order to Divine Service, are very numerons, kept in forty Divisions of
Chests and Drawers of the same Wood, as is aforementioned in the Quire, the
bottoms of which are all of them Cedar for the incorruptibility of it.

The Brocado-Vestments, and others of Silk, and Cloth of Gold and Silver,
Brocado- Vestments
are 213. of all varieties of Colors.

The Casulla's, Casullas.
or Vestments for the Priests to say Mass in, belonging to all the Altars, are
above twelve hundred; the Dalmaticks to be for the same use, are one hundred:
And when we mention here all the Altars, we mean, not only those of the Church,
but also all the rest generally through the House, which are in number 70.

The Mangas worn in representation of our Saviors Bonds, and used in
Processions, Mangas.
are seven and twenty. The sine Linen employed in Divine Services for
Surplices, Roquets, Altar-Cloaths, Towels, etc. though exceeding much, yet is
never more than what is spent on necessity for Sacred Uses; and still in plain
truth, there is not so rich and plentiful a Furniture to be found in any other
place besides this in the world.

The Utensils and pieces of Gold, employed on the same occasions, Vtensils for
the Celebration of Divine Service.
are not many, but of the richest, and most costly sort in Spain, as a Chalice,
a Custodia, a Breast Plate for the Prior, which he wears when he celebrates the
Mass; and two others of great worth. Of Silver there is a great Service, yet
nothing but what there is occasion for: Besides the Crosses and Candlesticks
before mentioned, there are fourscore Chalices, 2 Custodia's, 8 Incensrio's, or
Utensils to burn Incense in; several Fountains, perfuming Pans, and the like;
in all 24. The chief or the Grandeur of which, consists in the Rarity of the
Workmanship or Fashion. Besides, there are four great Cereales or Torch-bearers
which are used on the chief Holidays, and other four, which are used at the
Celebration of the Hours, or Commeration of the Kings and Queens; there are 24
which the Students in the Seminary carry in Procession on Corpus Day, and
Thursday and Friday in the Holy week; all which are worth admiration: And
together with the Riches which are seen in the Relicario's, or Repositories of
Relics of the same nature and quality, renders it a Treasure worthy this great
place, which being exactly and judiciously viewed, appears so plentifully and
Royally provided, that considering likewise the vast number and perfection of
the parts or this eminent Structure, together with the Ornaments and Riches it
contains; the Sum that the whole cost, being six Millions of Ducats, seems but
little. Here I had thought to have laid down the greatness of many other
Particulars, which occur in this Fabric, especially in the Materials of it,
which would be a work too tedious, and overcurious, as to count the quantity
of Lime, Mortar, the Millions of Loads of Wood, the infinite number of Slates,
Marble, etc. I shall only in general say, that if these things were but
particularly seen heaped up in their kinds and sorts, you would think there
were enough to build a fair City. In the Ironwork only, viz. in Locks and
Nails, without counting Balconies, I have found out there was spent one hundred
twenty nine thousand fourscore and three Arrobas, every Arroba containing five
and twenty pound. Of the very Keys there are 50 Arrobas, or more. Of other
Metals, as of Lead, Tin, Steel, Copper, there is a most vast quantity; for of
Lead only, there is found above Ninety nine thousand and thirty Arrobas, partly
on the Church, and partly on the principal Cloisters, which are covered with
Sheets of this Metal; as also in diverse other parts amongst the Slat-works. The
Wire for the Network of the Windows weighs above a thousand Arrobas, and if
here we should reckon the Glass-work of all the Windows, it would be a vast
Count; for the immensity of this is one of the grand Beauties of this House.

The number of people concerned in this great work, is very difficult to be
told; for besides the multitude of Masters, Overseers, Hirers of Workmen, other
Officers and Day-Labourers, which were employed upon the very Place and Work,
some in Cranes, some in Wheels, some on Scaffolds on high, to distribute and
place the Materials, as Stone, Wood, Mortar, etc. there being of all sorts used
at the same time: There was, I say, besides these, an infinite number of all
kinds of Artificers dispersed round about in the Fields; where you might see
Smiths, Carpenters, Stone-cutters, and all sorts imaginable, with their Huts
and Tents for their Lodgings, and defense from Weather, not unlike a very
numerous Army. Others that work's without doors, Limning, Painting, Gilding,
Embroidering, augmented, likewise the number, no less than those which were
employed in Door-work, Window-work, Chest-work, Seat-work, and fitting of
places for Books to stand in, and that wrought in all sort of In-laid Work;
besides those that wrought in Metals, as melting the Organs, casting the Bells,
Balconies, and running the Sheets of Lead, and the like; that by this may be
guessed how great a number were required to this Work. The Carters likewise,
and those that had the Conduct of the Carriages, that brought Stone ready
wrought, and Statues of that prodigious bigness, that could not be stirred with
less than twenty yoke of Oxen; yea, sometimes forty. In all the Offices and
Employments there were Proveditors and Overseers to hasten and encourage the
Workmen in their respective Tasks, that every thing went on without Noise or
Trouble. Others assisted at the management of the Wheels and Engines turned by
water, for Plaistering, Sawing and Polishing; others in Rope, Cable-making, and
such like work; and yet besides all these, there were employed in many other
places persons of diverse Nations.

In the Jasper-Quarries, not far from a place called Burgo de Osma, the
Spaniards and Italians hewed out, and wrought that sort of Stone for this
Building.

In Madrid the Custodia was made and part of the Retablo, whither there were
flocked together a great many Masters and famous Artificers.

In Guadalaarra, in Cuenca, and other parts, were made a great quantity of
Rejas or Grates, and Balconies; besides those that were wrought upon the place.

In Zaragosa were cast the principal Grates of Brass for the Church of the
Antepechos or Balcony-work that belongs to the same.

In the Mountains de Filabres was got the white Marble; as also in those de Las
Navas, and in Estremoz; and near unto Granada, on the Banks of the River Xenil,
in the Sierras, or Mountains of Arazena, and diverse other parts, the gray,
green, red, black, bloud-coloured, and of a thousand other sorts of Colors.

The Pinares, or Pine-woods of Cuenca, Balsaia, of Segovia, Quexegal de Avila,
and de Las Navas, were peopled with Workmen, who with Hatchets and Axes, were
continually felling the tallest Pine trees, and working of them, so that the
Woods did always echo with their Blows, and the noise of their Saws.

In Florence and Milan were cast the great Statues of Brass.

In Toledo were made the Lamps, Candlesticks, Stands for Torches, Crosses and
Censers. In Flanders were made other sorts of Candlesticks of Brass, some very
vast ones, others of a middling sort, and others less, and great store of fine
Linen curiously wrought for the Ornament of the Cells.

In the very Nunneries, throughout all parts, were found very many persons who
were daily employed in making all sorts of curious Needle Work, and a thousand
sorts of several Ornaments for the enriching of this Royal Fabric. So that a
great part of this work was scattered up and down throughout all Spain, Italy,
and Flanders; insomuch that it is impossible to reduce to certain number the
Laborers concerned in it.

This wonder of Architecture was thirty and eight years in Building, viz.
twenty four to the laying of the last stone, and fourteen in the furnishing and
enriching of it with all its Adornments, even to the death of King Philip the
Second, which happened in the Year 1598.

In this place it were proper to add something touching the Pantheon, or
Burying place of the Kings of Spain, situated under the High Altar of the great
Church; but in regard that has escaped the Fury of the Flames, and may still
invite Foreigners and Travelers as yet to visit it, there is less need at
present to give an exact Description of it. The Name of Pantheon was given unto
it in imitation of that which at Rome is called Il Templo di Santa Maria La
Rotunda; anciently dedicated to all the Heathen Gods, and with more reason now
(as being founded on the Holy Scripture) that name may be allowed to so stately
a Dormitory of Christian Princes. In this Magnificent Burying-place are
reposited 26 Marble Coffins, bound about with Gilt Brass, and supported on
Lions orderly disposed in the several sides of it; 8 of these contain the Royal
Corpse of the Kings and Queens hereafter mentioned, viz. In the first, is the
Body of Charles, the 5th. Emperor, and first King of that Name in Spain. In the
Second, is the Body of King Philip the Second, his Son. In the third, of Philip
the Third, Fifth Son, but Successor of of Philip the Second. In the Fourth, of
Philip the 4th. Eldest Son, and Successor Philip the Third. These lie all on
the Gospel side of the Altar. Opposite unto them on the Epistle-side, lie their
several Queens by whom they had Issue: For example, against Charles the Fifth,
is placed the Empress and Queen of Spain, Donna Isabella his only Wife,
Daughter to King Emanuel of Portugal; and the Queen Donna Maria, who was
Daughter to the Catholic Monarchs Ferdipando and Isabella. Over against Philip
the Second, lies the Queen Donna Anna his fourth Wife, Daughter to Maximilian
the Emperor, second of that Name, and of the Emperess Donna Maria, Sister to
the said King. Against Philip the Third is placed Donna Margarita, his only
Wife, and Daughter of Charles Archduke of Austria, and of Mary Daughter of the
Duke of Bavaria, and Niece of the Emperor Ferdinand, Brother of Charles the
Fifth. Against Philip the Fourth, Donna Isabel of Bourbon, his first Wife,
Daughter of Henry the Fourth, and of Madonna Maria Di Medici, King and Queen of
France. These eight Bodies only are as yet deposited in the Pantheon: For the
rest of the Blood Royal of the House of Austria, and the Queens that have had
no Issue, there is another Place over against the Sacristia of the Pantheon (a
very Noble Vault) and within the Portal or Entrance of the Pantheon it self,
where this Epitaph presents it self to the goers in.

D. O. M.

Locus Sacer Mortalitatis Exuviis
Catholicorum Regum,
A Restauratore Vitae, cujus Arae Max.
Austriaca adhuc pietate subjacent
Optatum Diem expectantium
Quam posthumam Sedem sibi, and suis
Carolus Caesarum Maximus in Votis habuit;

Philippus Secundus Regum prudentissimus clegit;

Philippus Tertius vere pius inchoavit;

Philippus IV.

Clementia, Constantia, Religione Magnus Auxil. Ornavit, absolvit

Anno Dom. 1654.

The chief Architects of this Incomparable Work, were, Don Juan Baptista
Creccucio Brother to the Cardinal Creccucio; and Pedro Lizargarate, a Biscayner.

The Catalogue that follows contains the Names of the Principal Masters for
Architecture, and Painting, etc. That were concerned about the whole work of
this so famed, but now unfortunate Escurial.
Fran. Antonio de villa Castine, Chief Architect. Michael Cusin, a Flemming.
Lavinia Fontana, Daughter of Prospero Fontana, of Bolonia. Frederico Zucaro.
Dominico Griego. Leonardo de Vinci. Luqueto, or Lucas Cangioso, an Italian.
Bergamasco. Peregrin de Peregrini of Milan excellent in Fresco. Luis de
Caravayal. Miguel Barroso. Juan Baptista Monegro. Don Joseph de Ribera, or
Spannolette. Frederico Barroso. Antonio Corregio or Acorezo. Raphael de Vrbino.
Famous in Grotesco and Brutesco. Juan de Andeus. Famous in Grotesco and
Brutesco. Jacobo de Parma. Paulo Veronese. Titian. Tintoretto. Antonio Vandike.
Pedro Paulo Ruben. Lucas Jordan. Guarchino. Andrea del Sarto. Michael Angelo
Bonarota. Anibal Caracio. Fran. Sebastian del piombo. Guido Bolonese. Jorjon de
Castle Franco. Bordonnon the Master of Titian. Andreas Chavon. Juan Fernandes
Mudo. Masasio the Master of Michael Angelo. Geronimo Bosco. Carlos Veronese.
Dario Ojonico. Guido Bolonese. Basan. Diego Velasques. Cavallero Maximo.
Antonio Campi of Cremona. Mario. Granelo and Fabricio sons of Bergamasco,
excellent in Brutesco. Joachimo Flamenco. Sebastian de Herrera. Francisco
Vrbino. Parmesano. Palma. Bartolomeo Carducho.
FINIS.

