A few Queries to the Teachers of the Episcopal Society, (so called.)
Query. 1.
Who was the first Institutor, (of a man to be Supreme Head of the Church next
and Immediate under Christ, and) of Archbishops, and Lord-Bishops, and from
whence had they their Original? Did not these things arise since the Apostasy;
and have they not been Practiced by the Apostatised Christians, since the
Antichrists went out from the true Apostles? Or were these things practiced by
the true Apostles? Or did they confess any more than one Head of the Church?
Or that to them there was any more than one Lord? And was not that Head and
Lord, Coll. 1.18.
Christ Jesus? And whether they that make, or confess other Lords, or another
Head of the Church than Christ, 2 Cor. 8, 5, 6.
do not walk according to the course of the Gentiles, which knows not God, and
contrary to the command of Christ, and the practice of the true Apostles?
seeing Christ said to his Disciples, the Gentiles exercise Lordship one over
another, Mat. 20.25, 26.27.
but it shall not be so with you (mark that) for he that will be greatest
amongst you, let him be servant unto all: And where was any of the true
Apostles or Ministers of Christ, called Lord-Bishops, or Archbishops? Or where
was there any King in their time, called the Supreme Head of the Church next
unto Christ? Or where did they prophecy that it should afterward be so among
the Saints? Or is not this rather a part of the Cup of Fornication, which the
Whore of Babylon, has caused the Kings of the Earth to drink in the night of
Apostasy, yea or nay?

Query. 2.
And who was the first Inventor of Surplices and Tippits (as they are called)
did the true Apostles and Ministers of Christ use any of them in their Worship?
Or had they Organs and Singing Boys dressed in White, going, and Singing in
their Worship? From whom had all these things their Original? And are any of
these things required of the true Worshippers, John 4.23.24.
which the Father seeks, who Worship him in the Spirit and in the Truth (if
they be, prove it by Scripture) Or are they not come up since the Apostasy? and
are they not practiced amongst the Will Worshippers, yea or nay?

Query. 3.
And who first invented this for a Baptism (viz.) that a Teacher should
Sprinkle a little water on a Child's face, and make a Cross on its forehead,
with his finger; and that there should be Godfathers and Godmothers (as they
are called) to name the Child; from whom had all these things their Original?
Did the true Apostles Practice these things? Or are they not come up, in the
night of Apostasy? And why do you call those that name the Children,
Godfathers, and Godmothers? Has God any Fathers or Mothers? Answer to every
particular in plain English according to the Scriptures, that poor people may
see your Ground, and Foundation, and Rule for all these things; And do you
believe that any can be free from sin in this life, and keep Gods holy Will and
Commandments? If not, then how dare you enjoin those that you call Godfathers,
and Godmothers, to promise and vow these things in the Child's name, (mark)
that it shall forsake the Devil and all his works, (mark that) the pompes and
vanities of this World; and all the sinful lusts of the flesh; and that it
should keep Gods Holy Will and Commandments? now if you say, they may forsake
all these things, and keep Gods holy Will, and Commandments; then will it not
overthrow what you Teach your selves at other times? and if people do not or
cannot forsake the Devil and all his works, the pomps, and vanities of this
wicked World, and the sinful lusts of the flesh, and keep Gods holy Will and
Commandments; then do you not cause them, you call Godfathers, and
Godmothers, to Promise and Vow lies and impossibilities in Childrens Names?

Now Answer these things in Plainness, and Moderation, without fleeing to your
carnal weapons; and be not like those, that instead of answering, have raged,
and persecuted those that have Queried them. There are many things more
appertaining to your Worship which I cannot own to be Right; but I would see,
how you will get through these things, and what satisfaction you are able to
give concerning these few, and then as the Lord moves, you may hear of many
things more which are to be Queried.

The 22 d. of the 4th. Month, 1660. From a Faithful Soldier of the Army of
the Lamb ( which must get the Victory,) for whose Testimony I suffer in
Lambeth-House. George Fox, the Younger.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Wilson, and are to be sold at his Shop, at the Sign
of the Black-spread Eagle and Windmill, in Martins Le Grand, 1660.


