KING JESUS Is the Believers Prince, Priest, and Lawgiver, in things
appertaining to the Conscience, Isai. 55. 4. Heb. 7. 17. Iam. 4. 12.

OR, The loyal SPOUSE of Christ has no Head, nor Husband, but Royal KING
JESUS.

Written by Francis Cornwell, a Minister of Jesus Christ, out of the learned
works of Mr. John Fox, in his book of Martyrs, excepting only some
explanations of his own, for the benefit of the Reader.

Romans 7. 4. Wherefore my brethren, ye are become dead to the Law by the body
of Christ, that ye should be married to another, even to him who is raised
from the dead, that we should bring forth fruit unto God.

Mat. 22. 21. Give unto Caesar the things that are Cesars, and unto God the
things that are Gods.

London, Printed by I. Dawson. 1645.

To the courteous Reader.
BEloved, my soul having tasted how gracious the Lord was to me, in making
known the riches of his free mercy, in acquitting me from sin, through faith
in the blood of my Christ; when I lay in doleful desertion, in the time of my
imprisonment, (for opposing that devised form of Worship (which the Prelates
had corrupted with their Popish innovations, by putting in, and leaving out,
what they pleased) contrary to the Statute made in the third year of Edward
the sixth, of happy memory) the first comfort that I received, for the
assurance of the pardon of my sin, and justification in the sight of God, was
from reading this excellent Treatise of Mr. Fox, in his Difference betwixt the
Law and the Gospel: Which I could not conceal; but for thy good (courteous
Reader) I was bound in conscience to put it forth, for the benefit of others;
and to show that I hold nothing for doctrine, but that which has been
publicly printed, by Authority, seven several times; excepting only some
explanations of the Author, that he has put forth on purpose, for to free
himself from the public scandal of the Antinomian heresy; by which many
Orthodoxe Teachers now lie veiled.

Thine in the service of King Jesus, Francis Cornwell
.
Difference between the LAW and the GOSPEL: Taken out of the First Part of the
book of Martyrs, written by Mr. Fox. Title, between The true Church of Rome
that then was, and the Church of Rome that now is, Page 24.
AS there is nothing more necessary and comfortable for troubled consciences,
than to be well instructed in the difference betwixt the Law and the Gospel: So
is the Church of Rome much to blame in this behalf; because it confounds
together those two, being in nature so diverse and contrary one from another:
As, threatenings and promises, things temporal with things eternal, sorrowful
things with glad tidings, death with life, bondage with freedom, etc. Teaching
the people, that whatsoever the Law says, the Gospel confirms; and
whatsoever the Gospel says, the same is agreeable to the Law; and so make they
no difference between Moses and Christ, save only that Moses (say they) was
the giver of the old Law, Christ is the giver of the new, and a more perfect
Law: And thus imagine they the Gospel to be nothing else but a new Law, given
by Christ, binding to the Promises thereof the condition of our doings and
deservings, no otherwise then unto the old Law; and so divide they the whole
Law, after this distinction, into three parts, (to wit) the Law of Nature, the
Law of Moses, and the Law of Christ: And as for the Gospel (say they) it is
revealed for no other cause, but to show to the world more perfect precepts and
counsels, than were in the old Law: to the fulfilling whereof, they attribute
Justification; and so leave the poor conscience of men in perpetual doubt,
and induce other manifold errors; bringing the people into a false opinion of
Christ, as though he were not a remedy against the Law, but came as another
Moses to give a new Law unto the world.

Furthermore, as they make no difference between the nature of the Law and the
nature of the Gospel, confounding Moses and Christ together; so neither do
they distinguish; or discern, the time of the Law and the time of the Gospel
asunder. For, whereas Saint Paul brings in the Law to be a Schoolmaster, and
limiteth him his time, unto Christ, Gal. 3. 24, 25. and says, that Christ is
the end of the Law, Romans 10. 4. that is, where the Law cease, there Christ
begins; and where Christ begins, there the Law ends. They,
contrariwise, make the Law to have no end, nor ceasing; but give to it
immortal life, and a Kingdom, equal with Christ: so that Christ, and the Law
together, do reign over the soul and conscience of man. Which is untrue.
For, either Christ must give place, and the Law stand; or the Law (the
condemnation and malediction of the Law, I mean) must end, and Christ reign;
for both these, Christ and the Law, Grace and Malediction, cannot reign and
govern together: But Christ the Son of God which once died, can die no more,
but must reign for ever: Wherefore the Law with his strength, sting, and curse,
must needs cease and have an end.

And this is it that St. Paul, speaking of the triumph of Christ, says, that
he ascending up led away captivity captive. Ephesians. 4.8. and has set man at
liberty (not at liberty to live as flesh lusts, neither has freed him from
the use and exercise of the Law, but from the dominion and power of the Law;)
so that now there is no condemnation to them that be in Christ Jesus, which
walk not after the flesh, Romans 8.1. And in another place St. Paul says,
speaking of the same power and dominion of the Law, that Christ has taken the
obligation written against us in decrees, and has nailed it upon the cross,
triumphing openly over all, etc. Col. 2.14, 15. So that as the Kingdom of
Christ first began upon the cross; even so upon the same cross, and at the
same time, the Kingdom of the Law expired, and the malediction of the Law was
so crucified upon the cross, that it shall never rise again to have any power
against them that be in Christ Jesus. For, like as if a woman be discharged
from her first husband, being dead, and has married another man, the first
husband has no more power over her; even so, we now being espoused to Christ
our second husband, are discharged utterly from our first husband the Law; Romans
7. 4.
and (as St. Paul in another place says) are no more under the Law, (that is,
under the dominion and malediction of the Law) but under grace; (that is, under
perpetual remission of sins, committed not only before our baptism, but as
well also after baptism, and during all our life long.) For therein properly
consists the grace of God, in not imputing sin unto us, so often as the
repenting sinner rises up by faith, flies unto Christ, and apprehends Gods
mercy and remission promised in him; according to the testimony both of the
Psalmist, Blessed is the man to whom the Lord imputes no sin, etc. Psalm. 31.
2. and also of all the Prophets, which (as St. Peter says) give record to him,
that through his Name all that believe in him shall receive remission of their
sins, etc. Acts 10.43. Which being so, (as it cannot be denied) then what
need these private and extraordinary remissions to be brought into the Church,
by ear confession, by meritorious deeds, and by Popes pardons? Or any other
act of humiliations? (which words are inserted by the Writer.) For, if there be
no condemnation but by the Law, and if the Law it self be captived, crucified,
abolished, and departed, (which was the first husband) what condemnation can
there be to them that be in Christ Jesus, the believers second husband, or by
whom shall it come? If there be no condemnation, but a free and general
deliverance for all men once gotten, by the victory of Christ, from the penalty
of the Law, what needs then any particular remission of sins, at sundry
times be sought for, at the Priests hands, or the Popes pardons?

He that has a general pardon, needs no particular: If remedy for sin be
general and perpetual, once gotten for ever to all them that be in Christ
Jesus, what needs any other remedy by auricular confession? If it be not
general and perpetual, how is it then true that Saint Paul says, The Law is
crucified, and condemnation abolished? Or, how stands Redemption perpetual
and general, if remission of sins be not general? For what is Redemption
else, but remission of sins, or sins bought out? Or what else, to kill the
Law, but to discharge us from condemnation for ever? He that delivers his
friend for a time out of his enemies hand, does him a pleasure; but he which
kills the enemy out of the way, gives perpetual safety: So if remison of
sins, by Christ, were for some sins, and not for all, the Law then must needs
live still; but now, the killing and crucifying of the Law, imports full
remission of sins to be absolutely granted, and our safety to be perpetual.

Object.
But here, percase, will be objected of some; How stands remission of sins
certain and perpetual, seeing new offenses being daily committed, do daily
require new remissions?

Hereunto I answer; Answ.
Albeit sins do daily grow, whereby we need daily to desire of God, to
forgive us our trespasses, etc. yet notwithstanding, the cause of our remission
stands ever one and perpetual; neither is the same to be repeated any more,
nor any other cause to be sought for besides that alone. This cause, is the
sacrificed body of Christ once upon the cross, Heb. 10.14. for all sins,
that either have been, or shall be committed: Besides this cause, there is
salvation in none other, Act. 4. 12. neither confession, nor Priests prayer,
nor men's pardon, nor any qualifications of ours, that remitteth sins.

Furthermore, as the cause is one, and ever perpetual, which works remission
of sins unto us; so is the promise of God ever one, once made and stands
perpetual, that offers the same to the faith of the repenting sinner. And
because the said promise of God is always sure, and cannot fail, which
offers remission to all that believe in Christ, being limited neither to time
nor number, therefore we may boldly conclude, that at what time soever a
repenting sinner believes, and by faith applies to himself the sacrifice of
Christ, he has, by Gods own free promise, remission of his sins, whether
they were done before or after Baptism.

And moreover, for so much as the said promise of God offers remission of
sin to the repentant sinner, by no other means nor condition but only one,
that is, by faith in Christ; therefore excluding all other means and
conditions of man's working: (Thus Fox: the Writer adds) yea, and marks, and
signs, and qualifications, as poverty of spirit, mourning for sins, or any
other acts of humiliation, to be joined with faith in Christ, in point of
Justification.

We (says Mr. Fox) say, that what repenting sinner soever believes in
Christ, has already in himself (and needs not to seek to any Priest)
perpetual assurance of remission of sins; not for this time, or that time
only, but for ever and a day: for the promise says not, He that believes in
Christ shall be pardoned this time, so he sin no more; neither does it say,
the Law is stayed, or the sentence reprived; but says plainly, that the Law,
with her condemnation and sentence, herself is condemned and hanged up, and
shall never rise again to condemn them that be in Christ Jesus, Romans 8. 1. and
promises indeterminately, without limitation, remission of sins to all that
believe in his Name, Acts 10.43. And in another place, the Scripture speaking
absolutely, says, Sin shall not prevail over you, and adds the reason why,
saying, because ye are not under the law, but under grace; Romans 6. 14. adding
this lesson withal, (as follows in the same place) Not that sinners should
sin more therefore, because they are under grace; but only, that weak
infirmity might be relieved, broken consciences comforted, and repenting
sinners helped from desperation, to the praise of Gods glory; for God forgiveth
not sinners because they should sin: So neither does infirmity of falling
diminish the grace of Christ, but does rather illustrate the same, as it is
written, My strength is made perfect in weakness, 2 Cor. 12.9. and again,
Where sin abounded, there super abounds also grace, Romans 5. 20.

In remission of sins therefore these four things must concur together:
First, the cause that works it, (which is, the sacrifice of Christ's body.)
Secondly, the promise that offers: Thirdly, Faith that apprehends:
Fourthly, the repenting sinner that receives it. Thus far Mr. Fox. The
Writer adds an Objection.

If faith only justify a poor sinner in the sight of God, Object.
why then is repentance added to faith in point of Justification, saying, The
repenting sinner receives it?

Answ.
If you demand of me, what it is that justifies a soul in the sight of God? I
answer, only faith; Romans 4. 22. but I add repentance, to declare what is the
nature of that faith which justifies a soul; it is repenting faith, working
faith: and this faith works by love, Gal. 5. 6.

And although sins do daily grow, which daily provoke us to crave remission of
our daily sins, yet, as touching the cause that works the pardon of our
daily sins, it is the sacrifice of Christ's body, once offered for all upon
the cross; and the means which apprehends the said cause unto us, is faith
only; and these remain always one and perpetual: besides which, there is
none other cause or means to be sought of man. So that to them that be
repenting sinners, and be in Christ Jesus, there is no Law to condemn them,
though they have deserved condemnation; but they are under a perpetual
kingdom, and a heaven full of grace and remission, to cover their sins, and
not to impute their iniquities, through the promise of God in Christ Jesus our
Lord.

Therefore, wicked and impious is the Doctrine of them, First, which seek any
other cause of remission of sins, save in the blood of Christ our Savior
only: 1 John 1. 7. Ephesians. 1.7. Heb. 9.14. and 10.4. Act. 4.12. Secondly, which
assign any other means to apply the bloud-shedding of Christ unto us besides
only faith: John 3. 16. God so loved the world, that he gave his only
begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have
everlasting life. Thirdly, and especially, which so limit and restrain the
eternal privileges of Christ's passion, as though it served but only for sins
done without and before faith, and that the rest, after baptism committed,
must be done away by confessions, pardons, and satisfactory deeds; or (as the
writer adds, but not Mr. Fox) some qualifications of our own. And all this
arises, because the true nature of the Law and the Gospel is not known, nor
the difference rightly considered, between the times of the one and of the
other, (as before has been by Mr. Fox largely discussed.)

Neither again do they make any distinction between the malediction of the
Law, and the true use of the Law; (thus far Mr. Fox; but the Writer inserteth
these words) as it is enjoined a believer by his Lawgiver King Jesus: Iam. 4.
12. There is but one Lawgiver, to the believer, (for to such St. James wrote
his Epistle) that is able to save and destroy, which is Jesus: who is become a
believers Head and Husband; who does not only show a believer what is his
will, but gives him strength to do his will; and in case there be defects, as
who transgresses not, his blood pardons all, and his love covers all, Romans
7.4. Phil. 4.13. 1 Ioh. 2. 1, 2.

Therefore, whenever they hear us speak of the Law of Moses, that whole rigid
yoke, that bound us over to death and damnation for every trespass and
transgression done against it, to be to a believer abolished, (though we hold
it in force at this day with all his strength, sting, and curses, to the
unbeleever, (to wit) to the lawless and disobedient, for the ungodly and for
sinners, for unholy and profane, for murderers of fathers, and murderers of
mothers, for manslayers: For whoremongers, for them that defile themselves with
mankind, for menstealers, for liars, for perjured persons, and if there be any
other thing that is contrary to sound doctrine, 1 Timothy 1. 9, 10.) they
maliciously slander us, as though we gave liberty to the flesh and carnal
men, to live as they list: whereas we teach, that though Christ by his death
has freed us from the first husband, the Law, Romans 7.4. Ye are my brethren
become dead to the Law; what Law was this, the Ceremonial Law? no; for that
was the remedy against the rigid yoke of the Law, in case there were sins of
ignorance committed, Numb. 15. from the 22. Verse to the 29. Verse; which
typified out a Christ, which is the only sacrifice for sin, Heb. 10. 14. but
the Moral Law, which only discovers to man his sin; Romans 3. 20. By the
deeds of the Law shall no flesh be justified in his sight; for by the Law
comes the knowledge of sin. That Law which binds the soul over to the
curse, for the transgressions against it, is the Moral Law; Gal. 3.10. For as
many as are of the works of the Law, are under the curse; for it is written,
Cursed is every one that continues not in all things which are written in the
book of the Law, to do them.

Quest. How are we freed from this curse, the Moral Law binds us over to?
Answ. By the body of Christ, Romans 7.4. (to wit) crucified. Quest. How prove you
it? Answ. Gal. 3. 13, 14. Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the Law,
being made a curse for us: for it is written, Cursed is every one that hangs
on the tree: That the blessing of Abraham might come on the Gentiles through
Jesus Christ; that we might receive the promise of the Spirit through faith.
Yet the end why Christ has freed us by his death from the first and our cruel
husband the Law, was not to live as flesh and nature lusts; but that we
should be married to another, even to the Lord Jesus, that was raised again
from the dead, that he should be our Head, Lord, and Husband; who has not
taken away the equity and true use of the Law, as it is a rule of holiness for
all his justified ones to walk in, so it remains in force to this day, and
shall for ever; as Christ testifies, Mat. 5. 21, 22. Ye have heard, that it
was said by them of old time, Thou shall not kill: But I say unto you, that
whosoever is angry with his brother without a cause, shall be in danger of the
judgment, etc. So that Christ shows, there are more ways to break the
sixth commandment, then by laying violent hands upon thy brother. And so
forward. Christ teaches his justified ones the spirituality of the Law, from
the 21. Verse to the latter end of the Chapter. As Christ now shows us what
is his Law and will we should walk in, so he commands us in love to do
them; Ioh. 14. 15. If ye love me, keep my commandments. and in case there be
defects, his blood pardons all our trespasses, and his love covers all. Tell
me then thou believing soul, do thou desire to live under thy first husband
the Law, which showed thee only what to do, and gave thee no strength to do
it (as thy second husband Christ Jesus does,) and in case thou failest but in
one title of thine obedience, in thought, word, or deed, thou must perish for
ever?

But by the Law comes the knowledge of sin; Object.
for Saint Paul says, I had not known lust to be sin, except the Law had said,
Thou shall not lust, Romans 7.7. therefore the Moral Law is not abrogated.

First, As the Law is the rule of holiness, Answ.
to discover to justified man how to walk holily toward God and man, the
equity of that Law remains; but the power (by which a believer walks
according to that rule of holiness) is Jesus Christ: Gal. 2.20. Nevertheless,
I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me. So that a believer does not now
work for life, and for heaven and salvation, as he did when he was under the
Law; but from life, (that is to say) from that principle of grace received;
Col. 2.6, 7. As ye have received Jesus Christ the Lord, so walk in him:
Rooted and built up in him, and established in the faith, as ye have been
taught, abounding therein with thanksgiving. Hence Paul says, 1 Cor. 15. 10. I
labored more abundantly than they all; yet not I, but the grace of God which
was with me.

Secondly, The rigidnesse of the yoke, that binds every observer of the Law
under the curse, is taken away by Christ, Gal. 3.13. so that the power and
penalty of the Law can bring his soul in bondage no more, Gal. 5. 1. seeing
Christ has set him free.

Thirdly, The Law it self did not discover to Paul his sin; (for he
boastingly said, in his natural condition, as he was a Jew, borne of the
stock of Abraham, and of the tribe of Benjamin, and circumcised the eighth day,
and by the Law a Pharisee; and concerning zeal, persecuting the Church; and
concerning the keeping of the Law, blameless; Phil. 3. 6.) but by the
knowledge of Christ he came to know himself a sinner; 1 Timothy 1. 15. This is a
faithful saying, and worthy of all men to be received, That Jesus Christ came
into the world to save sinners, of whom I am the chief. So that Saint Paul
never saw himself a sinner, till he had seen Christ; and the more he by
grace saw the beauty and excellency of Christ, the more he saw the corruption
of his own evil heart, burning in lust against the Law of God, Romans 7. from
the 14. to the 24. Verse: from which corruption, none could free him but a
Christ alone; therefore breaks out into praises, I thank my God through
Christ. Romans 7.25.
Thus though the Law be as a rule, to show a man his evils committed against
it, yet it is Christ must give thee eyes to see thy sin and transgression
thou have done against it, as justified Paul acknowledges; I had not known
lust to be sin, except the Law had said, Romans 7. 7.
Thou shall not lust. Christ must give the light, Ephesians. 5. 14. Acts 26. 17,
18. Christ sent Paul to the Gentiles, To open their blind eyes, and to turn
them from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God.

The fourth branch is taken out of the brief recapitulation of St. Paul's
doctrine delivered to the Gentiles, out of Mr. Fox, Tom. 1. page 19.

To teach and inform us (to whom the benefits of Christ's passion and victory
do appertain) by what means the same is applied, and redoundeth unto us;
which means is only one, (that is) only faith in Christ Jesus, and no other
thing; which faith, it pleases Almighty God to accept for righteousness: and
this righteousness it is which only stands before God, and none other, as
we are plainly taught by the Scriptures, and especially by the doctrine of St.
Paul: which righteousness, thus rising of faith in Christ, Saint Paul calls,
The righteousness of God; where he speaking of himself utterly refusing the
other righteousness, which is of the Law, that he may be found in him, not
having his own righteousness, which is of the Law, but the righteousness of
Christ, which is of faith, Phil. 3. 9. Again, the said Apostle writing of the
Jews, which sought for righteousness, but found it not; and also of the
Gentiles, which sought not for it, and yet found it, showed the reason why,
Because (says he) the one sought it as by works, and by Law, and came not to
it: Who not knowing the righteousness of God, and seeking to set up their own
righteousness, did not submit themselves to the righteousness which is of
God, Romans 9. 32. and 10. 3. The other, which were Gentiles, and sought not for
it, obtained righteousness, even that righteousness which is of faith, Romans
9. 30. Also, in another place, Saint Paul in the same Epistle writing of this
righteousness, which comes of faith, calls it the righteousness of God, in
these words, Whom God (says he) has set forth to be a propitiation, through
faith in his blood, to declare his righteousness for the remission of sins
that are past through the forbearance of God: To declare, I say, at that time
his righteousness; that he might be just, and the justifier of him that
believes in Jesus. Romans 3. 25, 26. By which righteousness, it is evident that
Saint Paul means the righteousness of faith, which Almighty God now
reveals, and makes manifest, by preaching of the Gospel.

Will thou see (gentle Reader) yet more plainly this righteousness of God, how
it is taken in Saint Paul's Epistles for the righteousness of faith, and
therefore is called the righteousness of God; because it is imputed only of
God to faith, and not deserved of man? But now the righteousness of God
without the Law is manifested, being witnessed by the Law and the Prophets:
Even the righteousness of God which is by faith of Jesus Christ unto all, and
upon all them that believe; for there is no difference: For all have sinned,
etc. Romans 3. 21, 22, 23.

Wherefore whosoever studieth to be accepted with God, and be found righteous
in his sight, let him learn diligently, by the doctrine of Saint Paul, to make
a difference and a separation, as far as from heaven and earth, between
these two; that is, between the righteousness of works, and the
righteousness of faith: and in any wise let him beware he bring no other
means for his justification, and remission of his sins, but only faith,
apprehending the body or person of Jesus Christ crucified. For as there is no
way into the house but by the door, so there is no coming to God the Father
but by Christ alone, which is by faith in him, Ioh. 14. 6. And as the mortal
body without bodily sustenance of bread and wine cannot but perish, so the
spiritual part of man has no other refreshing, but only by faith in the body
and blood of Christ, whereby he may be saved; Ioh. 3. 14, 16, 36. and 6. 53,
54. Acts 10. 43. and 26. 18. Gal. 2. 20. Thus apostatized Adam, that had broken
the Law by eating the forbidden fruit, and had the earth accursed for his sin,
was saved by faith in the free-promise, Genesis 3. 15. Thus Abraham, that was by
nature an Idolater, was saved by faith in a Gospel-promise, Genesis 12. 3. Thus
Mary Magdalen, the great sinner, was saved by faith in a free-promise, Luke
7.47. Daughter, be of good comfort, thy sins are forgiven thee: Thy faith
has saved thee, go in peace. Verse 50. Thus Cornelius the Captain of the
Italian band, with them that believed in his house with him, were saved by
faith; Acts 10.47. and 11. 17, 18. Yea, and thus the cruel Jailor (that beat
the Apostles) and his household, were saved by faith in the Lord Jesus Christ,
Acts 16. 30, 31, 32, 33, 34.

Thus thou may see (gentle Reader) that as the death of Jesus Christ on the
tree, 1 Pet. 2. 24. is the only meritorious cause of salvation, so is faith
the only isntrumental or maine cause that makes the merits of Christ to us
availeable; for as the sufferings of Christ on the accursed tree, Gal. 3. 13.
serves to the benefit of none but such as do believe; so neither does faith
(as it is only a bare quality or action in man's mind) it self justify,
unless it be directed to the body of Christ crucified, as to his object, of
whom it receives all his virtue. And therefore these two must always jointly
concur together, Faith and Christ Jesus crucified: As for example, When the
children of Israel were bid of Moses to look up to the brazen serpent, neither
could the serpent have helped them, except they had looked up, nor yet their
looking upward have profited them, unless they had directed their eye unto the
said brazen serpent, as the only object set up of God for the same purpose,
for them to behold; so all poor sinners are commanded in the Gospel to look up
to Jesus whom they have pierced, Zech. 12. 10. now a crucified Jesus cannot
help them, except they look up; nor yet their believing, or looking upward
cannot profit them, unless they direct the eye of their faith unto the said
crucified Jesus, as the only object, set up of Gods free grace for them to
behold, John 3. 14. Thus our faith, directed (by Gods own Spirit, Zech. 12.
10.) to the body of Jesus crucified, is the only means whereby Christ's merits
are applied to us, and we now justified before God; according to the doctrine
of Paul, who in express words defining what this faith is, and how it
justifies, says, If thou shall confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and
shall believe in thine heart, that God has raised him from the dead, thou
shall be saved. Romans 10. 9.

Besides this, what action or quality soever is in man, either hope, charity,
or any other kind of faith or believing, be it never so true, except it
apprehend this object, (which is) the body of Christ the Son of God, that
loved us, and gave himself for us, it serves not to justification: And that
is the cause why we add this particle [ onely] to faith, and say, that Faith
only in Christ justifies us; to exclude all other actions, qualities; (Thus
far Mr. Fox: the Writer adds,) qualifications, marks, signs, evidences of
sanctification, as poverty of spirit, mourning for sin, hungring and
thirsting after Christ, love to the brethren, universal obedience, or gifts,
or works of believers, as repentance for sin, or any other acts of
humiliation, fasting, praying, weeping, mourning, or reformation, or deed of
charity, from the cause of justifying.

But you destroy qualifications, marks, Object.
signs, and evidences of sanctification.

Do I destroy qualifications, Answ.
etc. because I will not make them causes of my justification? Marks, signs,
and evidences of sanctification flow from faith, and not faith from them; they
are the fruits (as I may so speak) of a justifying faith, and declare what
kind of faith it is that justifies; namely, repenting faith, working faith:
They shall look upon him whom they have pierced, and they shall mourn over
him, as one mourns for an only son, and shall be in bitterness for him,
as one that is in bitterness for his firstborn, Zech. 12.10. Because nothing
can expiate my sin, but the blood of my Christ, therefore I repent.

But, a good tree is known by his fruit. Object.
Mat. 7.17.

To others, not to it self; Answ.
for, if the good tree could speak, it would say, I am not a good tree because
I bear good fruit, but by virtue of my union with my good root, I bring forth
good fruit: So we are not good men, because we show forth to others these
marks, signs, qualifications, and evidences of our sanctification, as poverty
of spirit, mourning for sin, hungring and thirsting after Christ, etc. but by
virtue of our union with our good root, the Lord Jesus, we bring forth this
good fruit: John 15. 5. I am the Vine, and ye are the branches: he that
abides in me, and I in him, the same brings forth much fruit; for without
me ye can do nothing. These Objections and the Answers were inserted by the
Writer, to show, that though he deny marks, signs, qualifications, and
evidences of sanctification, as causes of justifying, yea, and he utterly
denies them to be the first evidence of Justification; for that were to rob
faith of his prerogative, Heb. 11. 1. Faith is the evidence of things not seen;
though he deny them a priori, yet he acknowledges them a posteriori, from
the effects, as a secondary witness, and as an evidence that the spirit of
Jesus dwells in you of a truth, which causes this life and fruit of
holiness so to abound in you. Thus far the Writer declares his judgment.
Now to Mr. Foxes words again. For so much as there is no other knowledge, nor
gifts of men, given of God to man, be it never so excellent, can stand before
the judgment of God, unto justification of a poor sinner, or whereunto any
promise of salvation is annexed, but only this faith, looking up to this
spiritual Brazen Serpent; that is, to the body of Christ Jesus for us
crucified: Zech. 12. 10. As for example,

When the Turk says, that he believes in one living God, that made heaven
and earth; his belief therein is true, yet it justifies him not; because it
lacks the right object, which is Christ Jesus crucified.

So when the Jew says, that he believes in one God, maker of heaven and
earth; and believes also the same God to be omnipotent, merciful, just, and
true of promise, and that he has elected the seed of Abraham: true it is that
he believes; and yet all this serves him not, because Jesus Christ
crucified, the Son of God, is not joined with all. And though the said Jew
should be never so devout in his prayers, or charitable in his alms, or
precise in keeping the Law, and believe never so steadfastly that he is elect
to be saved; yet he is never the nearer to salvation for all this, so long as
his faith is not grounded upon the head Cornerstone, which is the person and
body of Jesus Christ, the true Savior; seeing there is salvation in none
other: Acts 4. 12.

After like sort it may be said of the Papist, when he says that he is
baptized, and believes in the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, three Persons and
one God, and also confesses that Jesus is the Son of God, which died for our
sins, and rose again for our righteousness, etc. his belief therein is
true, and indeed would save him, if he did stay his salvation in this faith,
and upon Christ his Savior only, according to the promise and grace of God,
and go no further: but that he does not; for neither does he admit Christ
only to be his perfect Savior, without the help of Patrons, Deeds, Advocates
and Mediators, nor yet permits his faith in Christ only to be the means
of his justification; but sets up other by-meanes, as hope, charity,
Sacrifice of the Mass, confession, penance, satisfaction, merits, and
pardons, supposing thereby to work his justification before God; contrary to
the word of promise, John 3.16. and to the Gospel of grace, Gal. 3. 8. Thus
far Mr. Fox. Now the Writer inserteth a few words. Thus the Papists declare
from what stock they spring, even from Iezebel of Rome, the mother of all
fornication, that has the true character of an harlot, 1 King. 3. 26. that can
be content with a divided Christ: But, the true Spouse of Christ will have a
whole Christ or none in point of Justification, or Intercession; for Christ
will not give his glory to another: And Saint Paul tells us, that if we
bring circumcision to add to Christ, in point of Justification, (as without
which he were not a perfect Savior) Christ profits nothing: Gal. 5.2.

Now to Mr. Fox. And thus much of the true causes of our justification; after
the doctrine of Saint Paul: Concerning which causes, this distinction
furthermore by the way is to be added, that as touching the original causes of
our salvation, which be diverse and sundry, some are external, and without us;
some are internal, and within us. Of the external causes, which are without
us, the first and principal is, the mercy and grace of God: Of this follows
Predestination and Election, Romans 9. 11. 12. then Vocation, which is of free
grace, nothing in the creature is the cause of it; 1 Cor. 2. 26, 27, 28, 29,
30. 2 Timothy 1.9. The last, and next cause to this, is the death and
bloud-shedding of Christ; whereby we are redeemed: And all these be external
causes, because they are without us.

Of internal causes that be in man, through the gift of God, Ephesians. 2.8. there
is but one, and no more in Scripture appointed; that is, our faith in Christ;
which is the gift of God in us, Phil. 1.29. Besides this, there is no gift of
God given to man; virtue, work, merit, nor any thing else, that is any part or
cause of salvation, but only this gift of faith, to believe in Christ Jesus.
And this is the cause why we hold, that faith only justifies; meaning, that
amongst all the works, deeds; actions, labors, and operations whatsoever man
does or can do, there is nothing in man that works salvation, but only his
faith, given him of God, to believe in Christ Jesus his Son, that was
crucified for him. Following therein the trade of Saint Paul's teaching, who in
precise words so ascribes Justification to Faith, that he excludes all other
actions of man, and works of the Law: and therefore, in the Epistle to the
Romans, Saint Paul reasoning of the glory of justifying, asks this question,
How this glory is excluded? By what law? of works? Nay; but by the law of
faith: Therefore we conclude, that a man is justified by faith without the
deeds of the law. Romans 3.27, 28. Thus far Mr. Fox. Now the Writer will insert
a few words, in explanation of a Text of Scripture, in setting out the dignity
of faith, Ioh. 3. 16. To the saving knowledge of the promise of life rendered
to a believer in Jesus Christ, there is required these six particulars:

The first is, the freeness of grace offered: It requires nothing precedent
in any man; no qualifications, preparations, dispositions whatsoever; no
freedom from any sin, in one kind or other; no antecedent sorrow or remorse
for sin; but that it is freely and willingly tendered by the Lord, to be
embraced and believed by the most unworthiest of men, as by the worthiest of
all.

But is there no qualification in the soul precedent to faith? Object.


If there be any qualification in the soul precedent, Answ.
or going before faith, then there may be something pleasing to God in the
soul before faith received; But there is nothing pleasing unto God before
faith; the reason is, Heb. 11.6. Without faith it is impossible to please God.
Therefore I conclude, there is no qualification, preparation, disposition
whatsoever in the soul pleasing unto God before faith received; for, as for
poverty of spirit, and mourning for sin, Mat. 5.
and hungring and thirsting after Christ and his righteousness, Luke 6.
these flow from faith; and they are the effects and fruits of that faith that
justifies.

The second is, the fullness of this grace: which stands chiefly in two
things: 1. In the extent of it to all sins; so that no sins whatsoever, or
how many soever, or of what continuance soever, can make a man (in his natural
condition) incapable of this pardon and forgiveness of them there offered. As
for the sin against the holy Spirit, Mat. 12. 31. that is a sin against
light, and grace received, as appears, Heb. 6.6. 2. In the extent unto all
persons: thereof, of what rank or condition soever, or of what number soever;
instance, if ten or an hundred, or ten thousand of the greatest and foulest
sinners in the world accepting, (that is to say) believing the promise of life
in Christ, shall be as readily and certainly pardoned, as the smallest number
of the lightest offenders that ever were. These two things are in the note of
the universality, Whosoever believes in him shall not perish.


The third is, the knowledge of the Gospel; which requires the apprehension of
the way, and of the means of conveyance, and of the derivation of this grace to
the world; and that is, in and by Jesus Christ, as for his sake only.

The fourth is, the incommunicablenesse of this pardoning and saving grace,
either in whole or in part; in any other way, or by any other means
whatsoever, then by and through Christ alone. This third and fourth I conceive
to be expressed in these words [ in him,] that is, In Christ Jesus; and in
Christ Jesus so entirely, that he joyneth nothing with him to trust on or
confide in besides: Gal. 5. 2,3.

The fifth is, that act or condition in the creature, (by which God does
actually instate him in the possession of this grace) which is, faith, or
believing of the promise of life in Jesus Christ: In this word, [ believes.]

The sixth is, the infinite benefit in this grace received by faith, or
believing; that is, salvation: (clearly expressed in these words) shall not
perish, but have everlasting life. So much the Author or Writer inserteth.

The last part of this Treatise, that the Author has taken out of Mr. Foxes
writings, is out of the Summary collections of the errors, heresies,
absurdities, contained in the Popes doctrine; contrary to the rule of Gods
word, and the first institution of the Church of Rome. Tome 1. part. page 22.

This error and heresy of the Church of Rome, though it seem at the first
sight, to the natural reason of man, to be but of small importance; yet if it
be earnestly considered, it is in very deed the most pernicious heresy that
ever (almost) crept into the Church: upon which, as the only foundation, all,
or the most part of all the errors, absurdities, and inconveniences of the
Popes Church are grounded.

For, this being once admitted, that a man is not justified by his faith in
Christ alone, but other means (and qualifications, or evidences of
sanctification) must be sought, by our own working and merits, to apply the
merits of Christ's Passion unto us, then is there neither any certainty left of
our salvation, nor end in setting up new means (and marks and signs) and
merits of our own devising, for the getting of the assurance of the remission
of sins. Neither has there been any heresy, that has either rebelled more
presumptuously against the high Majesty of God the Father, nor more
perniciously has injured the soul of the simple, than this doctrine.

The first inconvenience.
It subverteth the Will and Testament of God: For, whereas Almighty God of his
mercy has given us his Son Jesus Christ to dye for us, and with him has
given out a full promise, That whosoever believes in him shall not perish, but
have everlasting life, Joh. 3. 16, 36. by their faith only; and assigns no
other condition, either of the Law, or any man's works, but only faith to be
the mean between his Son Jesus Christ and us; these men take upon them to
alter this Testament, that God has ratified in the blood of his Son, and
adjoyne other conditions, which the Lord in his word never appointed nor knew.
To whom the words of Jerome may be well applied, upon the Epistle to the
Galathians speaking of such, Qui de Evangelio Christi faciunt hominis, vel quod
pejus est, diaboli, etc. That is, Which make of the Gospel of Christ the Gospel
of men, or rather, the Gospel of the devil, etc.

The second inconvenience.
Whereas the Christian Reader, in the Gospel, reading of the great grace and
sweet promises of God given unto mankind in Christ Jesus his Son, might
thereby take much comfort of soul, Romans 5.1.
and be at rest and peace with the Lord his God, comes in the pestiferous
doctrine of these Heretics, wherewith they obscure this free grace of God, to
choke the sweet comforts of man in the Holy Spirit, Gal. 2.20.
and oppress Christian liberty, and bring us into spiritual bondage, which
Christ by his precious death has freed us from, Gal. 5.1.

The third inconvenience.
As in this their impious doctrine they show themselves manifest enemies to the
grace of God tendered to us in Christ, by interposing their own righteousness
of works with the righteousness of faith, and so make the death of Christ of
none effect; Gal. 2. 21. If righteousness come by the law, then Christ is dead
in vain: So are they no less injurious to Christian men, that believe in him
for life and salvation, whom they leave in a doubtful distrust of Gods favor,
and of their salvation; contrary to the word and will of God, and right
institution of the Apostolical doctrine.

Object.
Whereas our new Schoolmen of late, to maintain this said wicked point of
doctrine, do object unto us, that we rather leave men's consciences
uncertain; for as much as if life (say they) were not a due reward, it were
uncertain: And now for as much as a due debt is certain, and mercy and favor
is uncertain; therefore (say they) we leaving men's consciences to the mercy of
God, do leave them in a doubtful uncertainty of their salvation.

To this I answer, Answ.
that due debt, if it be proved by the Law duly deserved, it must be certain;
but if the Law shall prove it imperfect, or unsufficiently due, then it is not
certain, neither can there be any thing duly claimed. Now, as touching mercy,
so long as it remains secret in the Prince of life Christ Jesus, and not
known to his subjects that believe and obey him, so long it is uncertain; but
when this mercy shall be openly published by proclamation, Esaias 55. 1, 2,3.
Ioh. 7. 37. Revel. 22. 17. Let him that is athirst, come. And whosoever will,
let him take of the water of life freely: ratified by an oath and a promise,
That by two immutable things, in which it was impossible for God to lie, we
might have a strong consolation, Heb. 6. 17, 18. confirmed by his last Will and
Testament, established in blood, that the promise of pardon and forgiveness of
sin may be sure to all that believe; For a man's Testament is of force after a
man is dead, Heb. 9. 17. and sealed inwardly by the Spirit to the conscience,
Romans 8. 16. and outwardly by the Sacrament of Baptism, and the Lords Supper;
which are to us that believe, as the rainbow was to the old world, a token
that God will destroy the world with water no more, Genesis 9. 14, 15, 16, 17. so
God has sworn to us in his Son, that he will not be wroth with us, nor
rebuke us; For the mountains shall depart, and the hills be removed, but my
kindness shall not depart from thee, neither shall the covenant of my peace be
removed, says the Lord that has mercy on thee Esaias 54. 9, 10. For I will be
merciful to their unrighteousness, and their sins and their iniquities will
I remember no more, Heb. 8. 12. Then this mercy remains no more doubtful,
but ought firmly to be believed of every faithful subject to King Jesus.
Therefore Saint Paul, to establish our hearts in this assurance, and so to give
a full answer to this doubt, in his Epistle to the Romans does teach us,
saying, And therefore of faith, that it might be by grace, to the end the
promise might be sure to all the seed; not to that only which is of the law,
but to that also which is of the faith of Abraham, who is the father of us all,
Romans 4. 16. Now it was not written for his sake alone, that it was imputed to
him; but for us also, to whom it shall be imputed, if we believe on him that
raised up Jesus our Lord from the dead; who was delivered for our offenses, and
was raised again for our justification, Verse. 23, 24, 25. meaning hereby, that
works have nothing to do in this case of justifying; and notes the reason
why, for then our salvation should never be certain, but stand in a doubtful
wavering; because, in working, we are never certain whether our works and
deserts be perfect and sufficient in Gods judgment yea or no: and therefore
(says Saint Paul) to the intent our salvation should be out of doubt, and
certain, it stands not of works, in deserving; but of faith, in apprehending;
and of Gods free grace, in promising life and salvation through Jesus Christ
our Lord.

The fourth inconvenience.
As in this their sinister doctrine they break this Principle of Christian
Religion, which says, that a man is justified by faith without works, Romans
3.28. so again it breaks another Principle, namely, that to the word of God
neither must we add nor take from it, Deuteronomy. 4.2. For this rule being granted,
that nothing is to be added to Gods word nor taken from it, then have these men
done wickedly, in adding (as they do) to Gods word; for whereas Gods word
limiteth to our justification no condition but faith, (Saint Paul speaking to
the cruel Jailor that beat the Apostle, demanding of him in the bitterness of
his spirit, Sirs, good Sir, what must I do to be saved? replied, Believe
(says he) on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be saved, and thine house.
And they spoke unto him the word of the Lord, and to all that were in his
house. And he took them the same hour of the night, and washed their stripes,
and was baptized, he, and all his straightway. And when he had brought them
into his house, he set me at before them, and rejoiced, believing in God with
all his house. Act. 16. 30,31,32, 33,34.) these Justiciaries do add thereunto
diverse and sundry other conditions besides, and such as the word of God
precisely excludes, as hope, charity, works of mercy to the poor needy
brethren, the sacrifice of the Mass, the work of the Priest ex opere operato,
auricular confession, satisfactions, meritorious deeds, or any other qualities
or qualifications, or acts of humiliations, which are laid down as causes to be
annexed unto the blood of Christ in point of Justification: These things all
true believers now esteem them, with St. Paul, filth and dung, that they may
gain Christ, and be found in him, not having their own righteousness, which is
of the law, but that which is through the faith of Christ, the righteousness
which is of God by faith. Phil. 3. 8,9.

And thus much concerning the doctrine of Faith and Justification; whereby it
may appear, to what horrible blindness and blasphemy the Church of Rome is now
fallen, where this kind of doctrine is not only suffered, but also publicly
professed, with speaking against faith, thus blaspemously dare say, Fides illa,
qua quis firmiter credit, and certo statuit propter Christum sibi remissa esse
peccata, seseque possefsurum vitam aeternam, non fides est, sed temeritas; non
Spiritus sancti persuasio, sed humanae audaciae praesumptio: That is, That
faith whereby a man firmly believes, and certainly assures himself that for
Christ's sake his sins be forgiven him, and that he shall possess eternal
life, is not faith, but rashness; not the persuasion of the holy Spirit, but
presumption of man's boldness. Ex Lindano in epitome doctrinae Evangelicae.
This Relation, as far as it is Mr. Foxes, is truly word for word set down,
unless some doubtful phrase were explained by the Writer, for the benefit of
the courteous Reader, and has (excepting the explanations) been seven times
publicly Printed by Public Authority.

Mr. Foxes Touchstone, to know Truth from Error, by certain Principles and
general Verities, grounded upon the truth of Gods word.
The first Principle.

AS sin and death came originally by the disobedience of one, to all men of his
generation by nature; so righteousness and life comes originally by the
obedience of one, to all men regenerated of him by faith and baptism. Romans 5.
chap. Ioh. 3.5.

II. The Promise of God was freely given to our first Parents, without their
deserving, that, The seed of the woman should break the serpents head. Genesis
3.15.

III. The Promise was given freely to Abraham, before he deserved any thing,
that, In his seed all Nations should be blessed. Genesis 12.3. compared with Gal.
3.8.

IV. To the word of God neither must we add, nor take from it. Deuteronomy. 4.2.

V. He that does the works of the Law, shall live therein. Levit. 18. Gal.
3.12.

VI. Accursed is he which abides not in every thing that is written in the
book of the Law. Deuteronomy. 27. Gal. 3.10.

VII. God only is to be worshipped. Deuteronomy. 6. Luke 4.

VIII. All our righteousness is like the defiled or polluted rags. Esaias 64. 6.

IX. In all my holy hill they shall not kill nor slay, says the Lord. Esaias
11.9.

X. God loves mercy and obedience more than sacrifice. Hos. 6.6. 1 Samuel 15.22.

XI. The Law works anger, condemns, and opens sin. Romans 3.20.

XII. The end of the Law is Christ for righteousness to every one that
believes. Romans 10. 4.

XIII. Whosoever believes, and is baptized, shall be saved. Mar. 16.16.

XIV. A man is justified by faith, without works; freely, by grace, not of our
selves. Gal. 2.16. Ephesians. 2.8.

XV. There is no remission of sins without blood. Heb. 9.22.

XVI. Whatsoever is not of faith is sin. Romans 14.23. Without faith it is
impossible to please God. Heb. 11.6.

XVII. One Mediator between God and man, Christ Jesus. 1 Timothy 2. 5. And he is
the propitiation for our sins. 1 Ioh. 2.2.

XVIII. Whosoever seeks in the Law to be justified, is fallen from grace.
Gal. 5.4.

XIX. In Christ be all the promises of God Est and Amen. 2 Cor. 1.20.

XX. Let every soul be subject to superior Powers. Romans 13. 1. Giving to
Caesar that which is Cesars; and to God, that which is Gods. Mat. 22.21.

These Principles, and infallible rules of the Scripture, as no man can deny,
so if they be granted, the doctrine then of the Popes Church must needs be
found not to be Catholic, but rather full of Errors and Heresies. Fox, in the
book of Martyrs, Tom. 1: page 22 these are recorded, and have been seven times
publicly imprinted.

Soli Deo Gratia.

FINIS.

