A LOOKING-GLASS FOR PRINCES; OR KING FRANCIS His Admonition to his Son
Henry the second King of the house of Valois in France.

Also the bloody end of King Henry and all his Posterity, for neglecting his
Fathers will, in not doing justice upon all those that had their hand in
Massacreing the Protestants in Merindol.

London, Printed by W. Jones. 1642.

A Looking-glass for PRINCES OR King Francis his Admonition to his son Henry
the second King of the house of Valois in France.
KING Francis the first French King of the house of Valois, lying about some
two years of a Feavor, and in this weakness, one John Minors Lord of
Oppingdon; informed the King that those in Province were 12000 up in Arms,
with Drums struk up and Ensigns displayed intending to take in Marcellus;
whereupon the King gave him power to suppress them, but the said John M^n^res
having power, came upon those of Merindol etc. and put them all to the sword,
both men, weomen, and children, showing no mercy to those weomen that were with
child, these people of Merindol living peacably. Some half a year after, a
Noble man came to visit the King, and was glad to see the King so well
recovered, as to walk up and down his chamber: First the King demanded of
this Noble man, if they were all at quiet in Province, he desired of the King
that he might speak the truth, he declared to the King that there was not any
up i^ Arms, and how the said John Minors with his soldier put them all to the
sword. The King hearing of this cruelty, says he, was ever King thus abused by
Minors and others: with very grief he fell into a relapse and made his will,
charging his son to do justice upon all the chief Authors of this so bloody a
Massacre upon innocent Christians, besides he sends for his son, saying, see
thou do justice on those wicked persons, if no^ God will root out thee and thy
race for ever; his Father being departed, after 2 years his Son Henry, calls the
matter of Merindol into Question, a Lawyer who had least hand in that Massacre
was executed: but the Cardinal of Turnon the Archbishop of Arles, the Bishop
of Aix, and John Minors escaped.

The Emperor Charles the fifth deceased, King Philip and the French King
concluds a peace, thinking to root out those of the Religion in France, the
Low Countries, and Scotland, and then to fall upon England, and to settle the
Decree of the Council of Trent, and to tie it more sure the French King g^ve
his Daughter to King Philip; the day before the Marriage, the King sat in
Parliament, and Declared there openly, he would have but one Religion in his
Realm: An de Burge a Noble Counselor told the King, he might not do it, the
King Committed him to prison.

The next day in honor of the Marriage day, the King ran at tilt, Count
Montgomeries Lance ran him in his eye, whereupon he dyed.

Note how the Lord as upon a Thealter began with King Henry, that as he sought
blood, so the Lord gave him blood to drink.

Francis his eldest son succeeded his Father Henry, the Queen mother gets the
Regency, her two brothers, the Cardinal of Guise for the Church, and the Duke
of Guise for the Commonweal. So that Anthony King of Navarr and his brother
Lewis Prince of Condy, whose right that was in the minorities of the young
Kings, to rule the Common wealth under them were excluded.

The Nobility seeing the Princes of the blood so to be trodden under foot, and
so the Laws of the land: stirred up themselves against the Guisians that
misled the King. So the Nobles sat in Council, and determined to remove the
Guisians from the young King; whom they made believe that those Nobles did
purpose to destroy the Mass, and the Religion of his Fathers: but these plots
being discovered by a Captain that had sworn to be one of them to effect this
business, it failed.

After this, the King sent his Letters to the King of Navare, to send his
brother the Prince of Condy with a stiong Guard, or to come himself with the
Prince; the King promising upon his honor, they should safely come and go,
from Orleans: But these two brothers depending upon the Kings honor would go,
though they were desired not to go without a strong guard, all which they
refused. But being come to Orleans, and coming to the Kings presence the King
spoke roughly to them, but the Prince of Condy desired to cl^ere himself of
those points of high ^reason, but he was presently committed to the Captai^ of
the guard close prisoner, the King of Navare had his guard taken from him the
Prince of Condy had his process made against him by those of Guise, he cleared
himself of high treason, then they condemned him of Heresy.

While these things were doing against the P ince of Condy, they labored to
dispatch the King of Navare: 1. To poison him at a banquet, 2 to get him out a
hunting and so to kill him; 3. To give the young King a Dager to stab him, all
these failing the King of Navare had no hurt done to him. But the Duke of Guise
would presently have killed him, had not the Cardinal of Turnon stayed the Duke
of Guise, utill the Constable and his Sons were come that were sent for: so the
Admiral, and his Son Lord De Andelot were sent for, the Admiral would go
notwithstanding the advertisement of all his friends, who being come to the
Queen, she told him the Cardinal would speak a word or two with him touching
his faith, he answered, she and the Cardinal, knew his Religion which he would
not alter, they of the religion, were 3 days and nights in most ardent prayers
to God for themselves and Princes. The young King being at Mass was stricken
with a burning feavour, and with it the Phistola in his ear break, the Queen
mother sends for the King of Navare by a gentleman who whispered in the Kings
ear saying deny the Queen nothing that she shall demand, and coming to the
Queen there sat by her the Cardinal of Guise, and the Duke of Guise very
heavily, the Queen said to the King of Navare, I would desire you to resign
all the right you have in the minoretie of my sons, which he signed too; then
she made him shake hands with the Duke of Guise, and to forget all wrongs
formerly done: then ^^e brought him to the young King who departed his life
that Evening, having reigned 17 Months.

CHARLES the 9. being the 2 son of King Henry of Valois. In this Kings first
Parliament, the most Magnanimion, Prince of Condy was cleared of all things
that any could lay to his charg; the Edict of January is made, for the free
exercise of those of the Religion, the Counstable is drawn from the Prince, and
through the Queen Mother, and the Counstables wife, whose Priests sounded
still in her ears, that the Prince of Condie would put down the Mass in
France, the Counstables two eldest sons, seeing their Father ready to depart
from the Prince, humbly besought him not to leave the Prince, but could not
prevail. So they labored much with the King of Navare, to show himself
Neuter and by little and lit le he left his brother the Prince.

Not long after, the Duke of Guise passing by a Uillage Vassy having 300 armed
men entered the Church, where was assembled so^e 1200 hearing of a Sermon, he
caused his men to enter where many were slain, those of the Religion
compl^ined but could have no redress, which was the cause of the first Civil
War, and the King of Navare received his deaths wound warring against Roan.

The King of Spain solicits with the French King to break the Edict of
January; but could not. In this Kings Reign was slain, Francis Duke of Guise
Anthony King of Navare, the Counstable, that Noble Prince of Condy, besides
many Lords were slain in several battles, Cardinal Chastilian the Admirals
brother a Protestant poisoned, and diverse others murdered, this Kings reign
was most bloody especially in the year 1572. whom in the marriage of his
sister to the young King of Navare, he protested to the Admiral, that he gave
not his sister to the King of Navare only, but to all Protestants in the Land,
and to settle such a Peace that should never be dissolved; yet this King
contrary to his oath and promise, upon the 24 of August when the Admiral was
in his bed, and many Nobles the D. of Guise in the Kings name, murdered the
Admiral and all his friends; but 1574. God visited him with sickness, and lying
upon his death bed, blood issued out of his mouth, nose, eyes ears, fundament
and his yard, so rolling in blood he dyed most misrably in May. 1574.

HENRY, 3.
Henry the 3 of the house of Valois, did shed much blood by maintaining the
holy league; but the Bishops wanting treasure, came to the King desiring him to
raise money from the lay people, the King answered, oh you Bishops you made me
put down preaching as if you loved it not; 2. You made me odious to my people
by laying taxations on them, I have spent ten millions of treasure and you
promised me to maintain the war your selves, I will not tax my people,
maintain the wars yourselves if you will have wars.

But a plot being discovered that Henry Duke of Guise, had prepared a pair of
Cizers ^o shave the Kings head and put him into a Cloister, so the D. of Guise
should be made King by the Holy league: but the King departed from Parris to
Bloys, whether all those plotters were drawn where the Duke of Guise with the
Cardinal of Guise, were put to death. The Queen mother dyed for grief, and
some Months after the King himself was stabed be a lacobin Friar, who was
made a Saint by the Pope, for killing the Lords anointed.

Thus you see the saying of King Francis to his Son was fulfilled, that God
would root out him and his posterity if he did not justice on those who had
their hands in that Massacre.

FINIS.

