Errata.
IN the first Leaf Ben^adu, is printed for Benjamin in the second Leaf
coming; for conniving, and how the deserningly, for how deservingly, in the
third Mr. Vaughan pretends that Mr. Keekwich disburst 200. l. on the whereas
said pearl, for whereas Mr. Vaughan pretends that Mr. Keckwich disburst 200. l.
on the said pearl, in the fourth Leaf, by concealment, for by his concealment,
and aforehand, for aforesaid, in the fifth Leaf, close strict dealing, for
close dealing, not a penny, for not him a penny, and therewhich, for therewith,
in the six Leaf Sentiall for Senthill, joined Steward, for joint Steward,
Cranes for Craves, affecting, for perfecting, and 400. l. security, for took
security, in the seventh Leaf, soldiers half, for soldiers half, infinitem,
for infinita, use of 620. l. for use 620. l. easier account, for easier his
account, quality for quantity, you within, for then within, and he will
appear, for it will appear.

The answer of Philip Francis Merchant late Major of the borrough of Plymouth,
in the County of Devon, to the false and scandalous aspersion and accusation of
Charles Vaughan Gentleman.
IN July 1643. The said Philip Francis being then Major of Plymouth, and having
some jealousy of Sir Alexander Carewes fidelity, then Governor of the Island
near Plymouth, the said Philip presently by his Letters advertized the
Parliament thereof, and desired that the said Sir Alexander might be removed
from his Command, and (to take from him all cause of jelaousie) that Thomas
Arondell Esquire, a Member of the house of Commons then Governor of the Fort of
Plymouth (wherein he demeand himself with great honesty and integrity) might
likewise be called up with him, to attend the service of the house. And the
said Philip not satisfied therewith, by the means and assistance of Captain
Richard Evons of Plymouth merchant, who had good interrest and acquaintance
with Captain John Hancok then a Sergeant, Benianda, Fuge and others the
principal men in the Island, next the said Sir Alexander, and men very well
affected to the Parliament, and well affected of the common soldiers there,
sent privately for them, made known to them his said jealousy; and desired
them to persevere in their integrity and constancy to the cause, and to labor
what in them lay, to keep the common soldiers constant to the Parliament, and
to be very vigilant and observant of the said Sir Alexander, and of his
actions, and to be careful to secure the court of guard and Arms if cause
were, and on any discovery, to give him notice thereof, and promised to reward
them, and the soldiers, liberally for the same.

August the first 1643. Upon receipt of the said Philips letter it was thus
ordered by the Honorable the House of Commons assembled in Parliament, viz.
That Sir Alexander Carew, and Master Thomas Arundell do forth with attend the
service of the House, and that Master Roll, do signify so much unto them; but
before the receipt of the said order the jealousies of the said Sir Alexander
Carew increased, and the said Philip was Pressed by some of the said Town of
Plymouth (unacquanted with the said Philips proceedings therein) to secure the
person of the said Alexander, which the said Philip making known to the
Counsel of War then there, and there then appearing only matter of
jealousy, and no apparent cause of proof against him (as is otherwise but
most falsely alleged by Master Vaughan) and he being a Member of the House of
Commons, and the Parliament being advertized thereof as aforesaid, the said
Counsel advised the said Philip to forbear it until he should receive
directions from the Parliament in answer of his Letters, which the said Philip
made known likewise to the said Hancock, who assured the said Philip of the
integrity of the soldiers in the Island, and feared that the apprehension of
the said Sir Alexander then, without apparrent and good cause might give
distaste to them, which the Enemy lying then very near, viz. at mount Edgcombe,
might take advantage of, and therefore likewise wished the said Philip to
forbear it, the rather for that he alleged, the said Sir Alexander had ordered
some at the Island, that if he were detained one the shoore at Plymouth, to
make some sign toward the Cornish shore for assistance thence.

August 20. 1643. The said order and letter from Master Roll being delivered,
the said Sir Alexander he at first made show as if he intended to obey the
same, and promised to come on shore the next day, and perfect his accounts for
his pay, but intended nothing less, as was afterward apparent which the said
Philip perceiving, and hearing that he had been at Mount Edgcombe, sent one
Timothy Alsop merchant unto him, to acquaint him that his pay due, and accounts
were ready, desiring him to come on shore resolving to secure him if he came,
which he promised to do, but failed of, whereupon Francis Goodolphin a Member
of the House of Commons, and John Sentabin Esquire, were desired by, the said
Philip, to repair to the said Sir Alexander to the Island, and to persuade him
to conform to the said order of Parliament, and to repair to London, who not
prevailing with him.

August 26. 1643. Master Wills, and Master Randall two Ministers that used to
preach there, were sent to him to persuade with him, and to discover how the
soldiers of the said Island stood affected, who on their return made known,
that they found the soldiers very faithful, and that the said Hancock with
the rest of the said soldiers, had seized on the said Sir Alexander, and
secured the Arms in the Court of Guard, and that they desired the said Philip
speedily to come and take possession of the said Island, whereupon the said
Philip having thirty boats or thereabouts in readiness, well mand and Armed,
which he had promised the said Hancock, to have still in readiness to assist
him if need were, himself in person went, which the said boats to the Island
where the said soldiers delivered him, the said Sir Alexander, whom he brought
thence, and left the said Captain Richard Evons and others in his room;
displaced such soldiers as there was jealousieof, and satisfied the rest the
pay that was due to them, and promised them a gratuity answerable to their
desert.

August the 29. 1643. The said Philip Francis advised the Parliament of the
premises in answer whereof he received the letter, and order following.

Sir,
YOur letters of the 29. of August directed to your Burgesses here in
Parliament, had this day a public reading in the House, and upon a solemn and
serious consideration of the particular contents thereof, the House Voted the
several orders here enclosed sent you, they have always acknowledged and
taken notice of your great industry and circumspection, by which your town
has been preserved from the greedy and violent attempts of the open Enemies to
His Majesty, and the Kingdom; and now more partic^lerly from the secret and
mischievous treachery of a late Member of their own House, Sir Alexander
Carew* by whose persidious endeavors to betray his trust, the Kingdom in
general and your town in special was in apparent danger to have suffered
much in ury; the God that hates treason, and sees in secret, was pleased to
use you as his instrument to secure that place, for which, as this house does
give due praises to him, and authorizeth your town to set a part a public
day, in which to solemnize the same, so I am commanded by them to give and (by
you to) all that assisted you herein, their very hearty thanks, with which I
subscribe,

Your very loving friend* William Lenthall Speaker.
Westminster this fourth of September 1643.

Ordered that a letter be written to the Major of Plymouth to thank him for his
great pains and industry in securing of the Isle of Plymouth, mouth, and that
it be recommended unto the Major to take especial care of the security of that
place, and that it be recommended unto the Major, that a particular day may be
set for a public thanksgiving in the town of Plymouth and that Master Major
do reward such as he had promised reward unto, and that the house will see him
reimbursed and Sir John Young, and Master Waddon, are appointed to bring in an
order for the indemnity of the Major and the rest employed by him, all which
appeared plainly upon the evidence against the said Sir Alexander at his try
all, and which Sir Edmond Fowell Knight, Richard Erisie, the said Master Thomas
Arandell, and Master Waddon, Members of the House of Commons now in the town,
and privy to the aforesaid passages can testify; and therefore blush if you
can, Master Vaughan, to charge the said Francis so innocent herein, with so
false and scandalous an aspersion, of siding with the said Sir Alexander, and
coming at him, but the said Charles in this as in all other his f^its of
activity has a shift to excuse himself, viz. That Col. Gould and others sent
up Articles against the said Francis, by one Trottle whereof this was one; It Is
very true, that the said Colonel Gould, and Master Thomas Gewen (to color
their unjust imprisonment of the said Francis, for refusing to deliver to them
certain pearl of the Parliaments committed to his custody as hereafter is
expressed) sent up the said Articles which the said Trottle exhibited, and the
said Charles under hand presented, but mauger all their malice after
examination and report made thereof, to the Honorable house of Commons, by an
order of the said House of the thirty of May 1644. The said Philip Francis was
acquitted.

And whereas the said Charles alleges that after Sir William Wallers blow at
the vizes the said Philip fell off, from the right side to the said Sir
Alexander, and the knot of the Vtriusques. It Is well known to be as false as the
author of it, for the manifestation whereof to omit how the deservingly the
said Philip demeand himself in several seiges against the said town of
Plymouth during his Majoralty, in December last, the said Philip being out of
his Majoralty and eommanding then one of the towns of Plymouthes companies
consisting of 150. men or thereabouts, in two several assaults drew his
company out of the said town, and with the assistance of some others:
encountered the Enemy, and demeaned himself so resolutely, that he forced them
in one of the said encounters to fly shamefully, and to leave a great many of
their horse, men, and Ammunition behind them, and in the other to retreat
disorderly and had the^ lost their Ordnance had not they been drawn off that
did the service which in a pamphlet, is attributed to those that were never
guilty of it.

The further answer of the said Philip to the said VAUGHANS pretenses for the
detaining the Parliaments Pearl.
September 30. 1644.

THe said Vaughan, being by Warrant from the Honorable the House of Commons
committed and continuing so still, for desobeying an order of the said House,
and not delivering the said Philip, for the use of the Parliament a quantity of
Pearl of the Lord M^lbroroughes, in or about June 1643. Seized on by the Deputy
Lieutenants and Committee in Plymouth* which being of value and contained in
Cabinet was sealed up with seven of the seals of the said Deputy Lieutenants
and Commissioners, and by them delivered the said Francis then Major, to be
sent to the Parliament, which the said Philip making known to the Parliament,
he was directed to send it for London and being bound there, resolved to carry
it himself.

In February 1643. Colonel Gould, since deceased, John Champnes Esquire, and
Thomas Gewen, the said Vaughans brother in Law, and Deputy treasurer required
the said Philip to deliver them the said pearl which he refusing to do without
order, they committed him to prison detained him there two months or there
abouts, searched his house, examined his servants on oath, and having at last
got the said pearl, broke open the said Cabinet, and then convayed it to
London, by one Peter Keckwich, in close and secret manner directed to the said
Voughan, where he and the said Keckwich concealed it from the Parliament ten
weeks or there abouts, and in that time got it to be prized at a very low
value, and never intended to acquaint the Parliament therewith as the said
Vaughan in his reply acknowledges, had not the said Philip on his coming to
London, made it known, and Mr. Vaughan pretends that Mr. Keckwitch disburst 200
l. on the whereas said pearl to the Committee for sequestrations in Plymouth,
and that he gave Mr. Keckwich at his return for Plymouth in May 1644. areceipt
under his hand for the same, that is apparently untrue, for Keckwich came to
London in February 1643. and presently on his coming to London, delivered the
said pearl to the said Vaghan, and was by him advised to conceal it, as the
said Keckwich on his examination before the Lords and Commons Committee for
plymouth acknowledged and never made any pretense or claim there unto himself,
and it is probable that if he had deposited any money thereon, and were so wary
as to have a receipt for the said pearl, that he would have taken his receipt
at the time of the delivery of the said pearl, and not in May after at his
going away, but the truth is, the pearl was sent up to the said Vaughan; and
long after the delivery thereof, and before Keckwiches going for Plymouth, viz.
in Aperil 1644. the said Vaughan, and Keckwich being both questioned for the
same by the Committee of Lords and Commons for Plymouth, and the said Vaughan
fearing the said pearl would be taken from him, and there being an order to
view the same, first shifted himself out of the way, and then shifted
Keckwich, away, and then sets Keckwicks claim on foot and the said receipt* and
Colonel Goulds Letter to Master Nicholas Gould, vouched by him in his reply,
makes his pretense apparently false in several particulers; as first, that the
money (if any were) was taken up by Colonel Gould, and not by the Committee
for sequestrations; secondly that Colonel Gould gave Keckwich bills of
exchange for his security for the money, and not the pearl, and had the money
been taken up for the State, as is pretended, the bills of exchange would have
been charged on the Parliament or Committee for Plymouth, and not on Master
Nicholas Gould, as is evident by the said Letter; but the truth is that after
Master Keckwich his coming to London, and before his return Colonel Gould,
that took up the money died, and Keckwich being in danger thereby to loose his
money, Master Vaughan would excuse himself and salve, Keckwich with this shift,
whereas it is well known, that there is a great deal of money due from the Estate
of the said Colonel Gould, on account to the Parliament, who received diverse
great sums of money of the Parliaments, during his being in plymouth, and
elsewhere, yet after the said Philip Francis his Majoralty, paid not the
commons soldiers, but made the inhabitants of plymouth to maintain them, at
their own charge, and by the advice of the said Gewen, as is more then
probable, pressed the Committee in plymouth, and Deputy Lieutenants to search
every man's house in the town, and to take from them by force all such money
and plate as should be found in their houses, if they would not part with it
otherwise, and whereas Mr. Vaughan pretends that the proceed of the pearl the
200. l. deducted, should be returned to plymouth for to pay the soldiers it is
apparent that nothing less was intended for they prized it but at 273. l. for
which before it came to their fingers, there was 800. l. proffered in plymouth,
and in their inventory sent up, which Master Vaughan, showed the said Lords and
Commons Committee against diverse of the chains and bracelets mentioned
therein, the Letters W. G. were (...); which parcels it seems Colonel William
Gould was to have upon the per^istion for his part had he lived, and what is
become of the other parts, is proper for one of Master Vaughans queries, but it
is apparent the Garrison of Plymmouths part had been the least thereof.

But Master Vaughan would excuse his concealment of the pearl from the
Parliament ten weeks, for that Mr. Keckwich was absent in the North ten days
or thereabouts: and yet Mr. Vaughan had the pearl long before in his custody,
and it is apparent never intended the Parliament should know of it; but to have
sold it as he confesses in his reply, viz. that he held it not fit to trouble
the Committee with it, for that s^questrators have power to sell things
sequestered by them; but this was not sequestered by them, but seized, sealed up
and delivered to the said Francis, to be sent to the Parliament by the
Committee and Deputy Lieutenants in Plymmouth as aforesaid, four of which
Committee and Deputy Lieutenants were likewise Commissioners for
sequestrations, viz. Sir Edmond Fowell, Sir Shilston Calmady Knights, Robert
Savery Esquire, and the said Philip Francis; and none of them assented to the
taking of it from the said Francis.

But Master Vaughan says that the Lord Admiral claims an interest in the
pearl; that will not excuse Master Vaughans contempt to the Parliament
certainly, what part his Lordship has therein, the Parliament is so just, that
they will not detain; and his Honor is so Noble, that he will not demand any
thing that is not undoubtedly his, who is now in the town; and therefore
Master Vaughans pretense to keep the pearl until his Lordships coming to the
town fails, but it is evident by concealment and resolution to dispose of
it, that he intended to deceive his Lordship thereof, but it is alleged that
Mr. Francis gave out as if part of the pearl were imbezelled by Collonell
Gould.

It is most true (that the pearl being conceived to be better worth then 800.
l. in Plymmouth, before it came to Mr. Vaughan, Mr. Gewens, and Mr. Keckwiches
hands, and by their apprizement, val^ed but at -- 273. l. as aforesaid; and the
Inventory taken at Plymmouth by the Commissioners and Deputy Lieutenants before
hand being very briose, viz. so many strings, so many chains, and so many
brazelets, without mentioning the weight, quantity, quality, or number of
pearls in every string, chain, or braslet; which the pearl being sealed up as
aforesaid, was conceived sufficient: but being broken open, the said Philip
Francis said, and says still, that if half the pearl were taken away, viz.
half in every link, chain, and braslet, it would not appear by that
Inventory, and beleiveth that there has been juggling therein, but by whom he
cannot say; but as for Colonel Gould he never reported it, nor does he
believe it; and whereas Mr. Vaughan alleges that he was not acquainted with
the praizing of the pearl, until after he had the pearl in his custody, and
therefore it is apparent it could not be done on view, without his privity; and
whereas he suspects the said Francis intended to get the pearl for himself,
though there be more money due to the said Francis from the Parliament, then his
fortune and credit can well subsist with to forbear; and therefore in a fair
and honest way he has endeavored to be satisfied thereof (which the said
Vaughan labors to hinder, as is evident) yet in the prosecution of this
business, the chief aim and desire of the said Philip has been, that the
Parliament might not be deceived thereof, as it is apparent was intended; and
what is set forth in the said Francis his answer, touching the carriage of the
said Keckwich, will be made good; to use Mr. Vaughans own language with a
reserve.

The further answer of the said Philip, to the Reply of the said CHARLES
VAUGHAN, and the exceptions taken to the account of the said Philip.
MAster Vaughan at first took 14. exceptions to the account of the said Philip,
given to the accomptants of the Kingdom, and concludes that his aforesaid 14,
exceptions being all allowed, there rests due to the Parliament from the said
Francis 750 l. 2s.9d. which the said Francis having fully answered* Mr. Vaughan
replies only to the first and last exceptions, and waves all the rest, yet
makes the sum rest still, and gives reason for it, viz. that he has a
reserve, which is very true, and a very great one of the States money: or he is
very much belyed, unless he have transported or made it beyond Sea, as it is
said he has.

To avoid mis-recitall which he charge the said Francis with, but how
materially, sit liber Index.

The first exception is, that there is no mention made of 1700. l. at least,
(...) on Mr. Kell^nd Mr. yard Mr. Hody, and Mr. Gyles, for which he is liabl^,
they being in hi^ custody, and freed by him.

The answer is, that the said Mr. Kelland, Mr. yeard, Mr. Hody, and one Gyles
Luman, in or about September last was twelve-moneth, were sent prisoners from
Dartmouth to Plymmouth, and detained there in the Marshal^ey, and the town of
Plimmouth being then necessitated for money to pay the soldiers, and threatened
with a siege, which followed very shortly, and the Gentlemen being very sick^y,
and the prison infectious, it was conceived fit by the Council of war then
there, to compound with them, and take 800. l. of them for their liberty, which
was done accordingly, whereof 300. l. was sent by order to Dartmouth to pay the
Garrison there, and the other 500. l. was paid to Timothy Al*sop of Plymmouth
Merchant, then Treasurer there, to pay the Garrison in Plymmouth, for which he
is to be accomptable; and the said Philip Francis received not one penny
thereof, and therefore ought not to be ch^rged there withal.

Mr. Vaughan in his reply acknowledges the said 300. l. to be paid to
Dartmouth, and the 500. l. to Mr. Alsop, and denies not the clearing of them as
aforesaid^ though he make some queries thereon, which will be answered
her^^fter) yet he thinks it sit that the said Francis should be responsible,
for the full sum assest on them; (and why) because they were discharged
illegally; no, but because he and his dep^ty ^inge^ed no part of the money; But
he objects, that none have power to abate assessements but 3. of the
^ommissioners at least Sir Shilslon Colmady Knight, Robert Savery Esquire, and
the said Philip Francis, 3. of the said Coancell of War, were Commissioners
for assessements, and discharged them out of prison, but not of their
assessements; but took 800. l. in part for the reasons aforesaid, and the rest
they are liable to still.

Master Vaughans new objections not formerly answered, according to his own
method shall be drawn into queries, wherein Mr. Vaughan, since you desire to
have truth spoken, be not offended when you hear it. 1 Qu. Why the said Francis
refused to join with the Commissioners for assessements, they wanting money to
pay the soldiers?

1 An. The said Francis was then Major, and his multiplicity of business would
not give him leave to attend it constantly, and there were a sufficient number
of Commissioners to sit besides himself, yet diverse times he did fit with
them.

2 Master Gewen Mr. Vaughans deputy, carried himself so peremptorily, and
partially, not harkening to the advice of the rest of the Commissioners, but
easing his friends, and laying such immoderate rates on others, that diverse
miserably ended their days there in prison; which his harsh dealing, lost the
hearts of diverse that formerly stood well affected to the Parliament, and
dishartned the said Philip from accompanying him, so often as other ways he
should?

2 Qu. Why the said Francis was unwilling the said Mr. Kelland, Master yeard,
Mr. Hoddy, and Mr. Lowman, should be imprisoned in the marshally at Plymouth,
and why he would have had them removed thence.

Answ. The Calenture reigned much then in the said prison, and they were
sickly, and the said Philip feared they would die there, and then their whole
assessements had been lost, and therefore he would have had them imprisoned in
some place of safety not infected.

3 Qu. Why the said Francis moved the rest of the said Commissioners to take
500. l. of the said Gentlemen*

Answ. The said Francis hearing that the said Gewen had an intention to send
the said Gentlemen to Dartmouth which was taken within few days after by the
enemy, and hearing that Colonel Gould owed the said Mr. Kelland 1000. l. by
bond, and that the said Mr. Kelland was often proffered both at Dartmouth, and
Plymouth, that if he would deliver up his said bond, they should be all freed,
and then the soldiers at Plymouth who were in great want had not had any part
of the said money, true it is, he said he had rather take 500. l. of them then
suffer them so to be discharged, but pressed still to get as much of them as might
be, and conceives that what he and the other Commissioners did therein, was
very justifiable and fair, without any of Mr. Vaughans privy or close strickt
dealing, and more justifiable then Mr. Gowens taking of Sir John Speccet, and
others of great worth, near a quarter part of their assessements, and whereas
he pretends that the said Francis and Mr. John Cawes were indebted to the said
Mr. Kelland, the said Francis owes not a penny, and what the said Cawes owes
he knows not.

Qu. 4 Why the said Francis would not suffer the said Gewen to receive any part
of the said 800. l.

Answ. The said money was disposed of by order of the said Counsel of War,
that cleared the said Gentlemen, and the reasons that moved them not to trust
the said Gewen there, which were as the said Philip conceives these; 1 The
said Gewen is known to be a man of a low fortune and is much endebted to the
State as is believed, not only for the money he received in Plymouth for
assessements and sequestrations, but also for the prisage of wines, for the
which he has given no account at all, and being required by the Committee in
Plymouth, to account, refused the same; for that he was Master Vaughan Deputy
and ought to account to none but him, and Mr. Vaughan he being pressed to
account, he pretends he has lost his accounts, and it seems by his reply
would have the said Francis to favor him so much as to account for him, for
he, (it is apparent) never intends it himself. 2 For that the said Master Gewen,
having money in his hands and the soldiers wanting pay, refused to issue it
out according to order, on pretense that he kept it to discharge engagements at
Exon, seldom obeying any orders for payment alleging he would pay whom he
list, and when he list, and what he list, and was at last grown to the height
of pride that he slighted the Honorable William Lenthals the Speaker of the
House of Commons his Letter, that ordered him to make payment of moneys in his
hands. 3 The fidelity and integrity of the said Gewen to the Parliament, and
cause was questioned, it being known that without leave of the Governor he
held intelligence and intercourse by Letters with Peter Sentiall Esquire a
great Malignant, then with the enemy, one of them excepted in the Propositions
for Peace, who was joined Steward of the S^annery in Devon, with the said
Vaughan, and Master Gewen their Deputy, until the encroachments of the said
Court, and oppressions, vexations, and other abuses of the Subject therein,
were by act of this Parliament reformed, and then they that could not fish but
in foul water left it, and the said Philip is since much confirmed in his
opinion thereof, for that the said Gewens Eldest Son would have run from
Plymmouth to the enemy, and persuaded one Captain Stener to go with him,
promising him that he would procure him a ticket, and that his Fathers man
should bring him a horse without the works, and the said Philip has been
lately informed, that Nicholas Roe, Master Gewens Son in Law, is discovered
to have held intelligence by Letters, with Sir Richard Grenvils Secretary.


The other exception (viz.) the 14, is that Mr. Francis Cranes allowance for
11. several other men's accounts and for the use of the money 2023. l. 5. s.
11. d. whereas the several persons ought to give in their own accounts
themselves upon their oaths, to which and diverse other things not fit to be
allowed, he subscribes this Philip Francis errors excepted, and swears unto
it, so as he may swear truly, and yet his accounts be false.

The said Francis in his answer to the eight exception having set forth that
one the exhibiting of his accounts, he made known to the accomptants of the
Kingdom, that his accounts had dependancy on other men's accounts, and that he
had paid money to several persons, and promised payment to others, which they
had disbursed for the Parliaments service, and which they were to be
accomptable for, and that there upon the commission was ordered by the said
accomptants, to be sent to Plymouth, directed to a subcommittee to audit the
said accounts, before the affecting of the said Philips, which the said Philip
was informed by the said accomptants, was sent away accordingly, and which the
said Mr. Vaughan knew, and in his reply since acknowledges; he answers the
said fourteenth exception thus.

The said Philip charge 200. l. only for interest which he is to pay, and
much more, And a subcommittee is appointed to take the accounts of the said
accomptants as is aforesaid; and the truth is, there is but 200. l. charged for
interest, and the rest due on the other 14. men's accounts, make up the residue
of the said 2023. l. 5 s. 11. d. and the said Philip wonders that so noted a
usurer as the said Vaughan, who has grounded the faces and fortunes of so many
poo^e so^les, that have fallen into his hands by forfeitures, should take this
exception, unless he has left the memory of all his hard dealing in that
kind, with his accounts in the Country.

The subscription errors excepted, the said Francis answers this, that he
concludes his accounts as all Merchants do, and if Mr. Vaughan knew as well to
account for the money he receives as he does to receive it, he would not take
this exception: and whenever he will give in his account for 80000. l or
thereabouts, which he has received of the States money, and given no account
of the same, on pretense that he has look his accounts, it is wished that
there be no greater errors found therein the sai^ Philip is informed that
diverse of the account; delivered the said accomptants for the Kingdom,
especially by Merchants, are subscribed in the like kind, and no exception
taken to any, or by any, but by Mr. Vaughan: who sh^wes his teeth, and what he
would do had he power; but it is objected, that such a subscription in
Chancery or any other Court were not good, the said Francis acknowledges
himself to be a Merchant, and ignorant in the Law: and meant plainly and
honestly when he delivered in his accounts, and knows no error therein, and
took the oath without any equivocation or evasion; and c^nceives that the
clause errors excepted it is used by Merchants in their accounts, to avoid
wrong and injury which might otherwise befall either p^rty, and not introduce
deceit or knavery, as Mr. Vaughan would have it: and that it is to be
construed of errors, of ignorance, and misprision, and not of witting and
willing ones; And whereas he objects, that the said Francis had Arms of his
providing for the Parliament, which he has not accounted for, the said Francis
never received any Arms from him, but the Lord Admiral sent some to
Plymmouth, which were put in the Magazine there, some put whereof some of the
Town soldiers that wan^ed A^mes, had* which the Keepers of the Magazine are to
be accomptable for, the residue his deputy Mr. Gewen disposed of, and 400. l.
sec^ritie for, and is to be accomptable for, but the 80000. l. unaccompted for,
is that which sticks in Mr. Vaughans stomach, and has produced his reply with
an account, but it is only of his disbursements, for the Parliament, of which
he has a passing good memory, but of his Receipts a most treacherous one,
wherein not to take notice of what is detained from him, it being the common
calamity of the Parliaments friends in these times, nor what he stands engaged
for the Parliament, the said Francis were he vainglorious, being able to make
it appear that his engagements are far greater for the Parliament then his
now, which he has adventured on the Irish Land, he being so well secured for
it, save only that he set it down as so material and observeable that he paid
all the money, which it seems is rare with him, for it is said that in Exon he
paid the soldiers half, and took receipts for the whole that was due to him;
but his modesty in expresting his third disbursement is note worthy, for
whereas he might as well have charged all the principal money due to him,
which grown use upon use, in infinitem (unless he have left his old trade) as
what he does, yet he charge it thus (viz.) lent on the propositions and
freely, to several e^inent persons, to lend to the same use of 620. l. and
with such like accounts the Parliament may be made debted to Master Vaughan on
account, as he alleges, not otherwise.

Master Vaughans delatorie pleas to excuse himself from accompting, are two,
first, he denies that he has received half the sum of 80000l. for he received
none of the assessements in Dartmouth, Plymouth, and Barnesstaple, and Mr.
Leach the Commisary received likewise some assessements.

The less money Master Vaughan has received, the easier account i^ made; but
he in his reply to entitle himself to the pearl, styles himself treasurer for
sequestrations in the County of Devon, and Mr. Gewen his Deputy, and by the
Ordinance of the 17. of J^nuary 1642. the said Vaughan is appointed treasurer
for assessements for Devon, and Mr. Leach and they that received the
assessements and sequestrations in Dartmouth and Barnestaple, were likewise his
Deputies, and the p^incipall officer is answerable for his Deputy, and for such
money as he shall receive, which Mr. Gewen well understood (it seems) when he
refused to account, for that he was Mr. Vaughans deputy, and ought to account
only to him, so that, that shift will not serve Master Vaughans turn.

H^s other is, that he left his books of accounts behind him, which were taken
by the Enemy, after Excester was yielded, and that his man's horse and cloak-bag
and his money was taken away within a mile of ^xon, so that had he brought the
said accounts they had bin taken also. Mr. Vaughan and his man might have come
out of Exces^^r in company with the Earl of Stamford and then they had passed
very safely and secure as the rest of the said Earls company did, but Mr.
Vaughan did divine that his man would lose his cloak-bagge and therefore left
his accounts behind him, and he had reason, for thereby he did the Enemy and
himself a cur^esie, the Enemy in leaving not only his books of receipt with
them, but marginall notes thereon, if he be not belyed, what every one of the
Parliaments friends in those parts had any way done for them, which the
Ca^aliers make pernicious use of against those p^^ons he likewise pleasured
himself thereby not only ingratiating himself with the^, but excusing himself
thereby as he conceives, from ever accompting with the Parliament, for the
vaste sums of money he has received of theirs; and that this is more th^n
proprobable, take a passage or two of his being Treasurer, during the siege at
the City of Exon, which I have from very good hands; The Soldiers being much
arere of their pay, and by reason thereof diverse of them running to the Enemy,
and there being a great quatitie of Plate of the Parliaments in the said City,
in the Treasurers Custody, or his under Officers, sufficient to have satisfied
them, and there being one (...) of the Mint sent thither by the Parliamint to
Coin the said plate, the said Vaughan would not permit him to do it, but sent
the said (...) away, and left the said plate entire, in the said city, to the
Enemy on the surrender thereof, and in the beginning of the said siege on
pretense that there was not sufficient pay for the Soldiers, you within the
City kept out a great part of Sir Henry Russels Regiment, who would willingly
have adventured their lives for the Parliament, in the defense of the said
City, and who were afterward enforced to serve against the said City, and a
principal means of the loss thereof, and therefore it is not impossible he
should be guilty also of this good, or rather ill Office* of leaving his
accounts for them; But Mr. Vaughan must have some better shift to pallia^e his
Policy then this, or else he will appear naked and naught, for it is well
known, that all accountants of such considerable sums, receive and pay by
their servants, as he did, and have Copies, Transcripts, Breviates and
Abstracts of their Accounts, that their servants may not deceive them, which
are very portable, and by which Master Vaughan might account if he had a mind
to it, and it is apparent by his exceptions, and the Account of his
Disburstments, that he has such a coppie or abstract, for he can set down what
he has paid to any for the Parliament to a penny, as for instance, in his
fifth Exception he sets down what he had paid Colonel Harbert, and only
forgot to deduct 3. l. which his Servant, or rather setter, had of him, as the
Colonel affirms before he could get it.

But Master Vaughan alleges that three months since, to show his unfeigned
desire to have his accounts again (which he well knows will never be) by
petition he proposed to the Honorable Committee of Plimoth, some means to
have them again, and then, let Master Francis do his Worst; A fine fetch to
delude the world, delay his accounting, and to get (as it is said) some part of
some Malignants estate into his fingers, but it is hoped that he will not be
trusted further, that has no better discharged the trust already reposed in
him.

The Necessary vindication of his Credit, and Reputation, which no honest man
is so unnaturally Cruel to, as not to maintain, has enforced the said
Francis to this defense, which he hopes (as formerly) will give satisfaction to
all honest men, (notwitstanding any thing alleged by Master Vaughan to the
contrary) that his accounts are Just and true, and himself free from a
scandalous aspersion raised by him.

Philip Francis.

FINIS.

