A True Account OF THE Sensible, Thankful and Holy State OF God's People. AND
Of his speaking to them both in the Old and New COVENANT.

By the Servant of Christ G. F.

Printed in the Year 1686.

A true Account of the sensible, thankful and holy State of God's People, etc.
HEre you may see that all Gods People were a living and a sensible People, and
did always for all things give thanks to God the Father, in the Name of Jesus
Christ.

And such as were unholy, past feeling, and unsensible, having a form of
Godliness, but denying the power thereof, were unthankful, and to be turned
away from, and that such went in Cain's, Corah's and Baalam's way, who did feed
themselves without the fear of God, and were like the Idolatrous Jews who
forgot God, and did Eat and Drink, and rose up to Play; and how that God
destroyed such who were unthankful and unsensible of his Temporal and Spiritual
Mercies

The Lord said unto his People that were acquainted with him, and knew him,
That when they gathered together their Corn and their Wine, etc. They should
Eat it and Drink it in the Court of my Holiness, and praise the Lord, Isaiah
62.8, 9.

So here you may see, they that gathered together that which the Lord gave the
increase of, they were to Eat it and Drink it is the Court of the Lords
Holiness, and praise him, and they that gather the increase of the Lords
Fruits, and do eat them, they should be sensible of the holiness of his Courts,
who fills Heaven and Earth, who is worthy of all Praise and Glory for all his
Mercies; and they that Eat and Drink that which the Lord, who has made them,
has provided, are to be sensible in his Spirit that he is worthy of all Thanks
and Praises, and so are not to be like the Idolatrous Jews who forgot the Lord
and his great Power and Mercies, who had done such great things for them both
in Egypt, and in delivering them out of Egypt, who after Sat down to Eat and
Drink, and rose up to Play, 1 Cor. 10.7. Number. 25.9.

And there you may see what became of all those who did not Eat and Drink in
the Courts of Gods holiness, and praise the Lord; and the that did and do
forsake the right way of the Lord, and do go in the way of Cain, Corah and
Baalam, are they that do feed themselves without the fear of God, such are the
wandering Stars from the Firment of Gods power, and are Trees that do not bear
Fruit to God, and are Clouds, for people to stare at, without Water, and raging
waves of the Sea soaming out their own shame, as in Jude 12, 13. And such were
not, nor are not like to praise God in the Court of his holiness for his daily
Mercies they receive from him, such look not after their way, whether it be the
way of the Lord, or the way of Cain; and they which be in the way of Cain,
Corah and Baalam eat the bread of Idleness, and are in the destroying Spirit;
but they that be in the way of the Lord, praise him for his Blessings, Riches
and Mercies that he daily gives to them.

And you may see how the Christians when they were converted unto Christ, did
eat their Meat with gladness and singleness of heart, praising God, Acts, 2.46,
47.

And the Apostle says to the Church of Christ, Whatsoever ye do, do it
heartily as to the Lord. And again the Apostle says, Whatsoever ye do in Word
or Deed, do all in the Name of the Lord Jesus [Mark] in the Name of the Lord
Jesus, then ye must live in his Grace which gives a sense of the Lord Jesus,
giving thanks to God the Father by him, Col. 3.17, 23.

So here you may see there is nothing is to be done in Word or Deed, but all is
to be done in the Name of the Lord Jesus, and to give thanks to God the Father
by him.

And again the Apostle says to the Church of Christ, Whether ye do Eat, or
Drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all to the glory of God, 1 Cor. 10.31.

Now all that profess themselves Christians, and Members of the Church of
Christ, consider this, whether ye Eat or Drink, or whatsoever else ye do, that
ye do all to the Glory of God; so ye are neither to Eat nor Drink, nor do any
other thing but to the Glory of God, so that he may have the thanks, glory and
praise through Jesus Christ, who Created all things for his Glory by Jesus
Christ.

For the Apostle says, The unthankful, unholy, without natural affections,
truce breakers, false accusers, incontinent, fierce dispisers of them that are
good, having a form of Godliness, but denying the power thereof; from such the
Apostle commands the Church of Christ to turn away, 2 Timothy 3. So the Members of
Christ have no unity with such unthankful, unholy, and truce breakers.

And the Apostle says, Give thanks always for all things unto God the Father
in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 5.20.

So always, in all things, to give thanks to God the Father, in the Name of our
Lord Jesus Christ, showing forth, that you are a feeling, and a sensible People
of the mercies of the Lord through Christ Jesus, who is worthy of all Thanks,
Glory, Honor and Praise, for ever, Amen.

G. F.

How the Lord spoke unto Moses in the outward Tabernacle in the Old Testament,
and God speaks now by his Son in the New Testament, in the Tabernacle and
Hearts of his People.
THE Lord said unto Moses, when he and the Jews were to make the Tabernacle,
Thou shall put the Mercy-seat above the Ark, and in the Ark thou shall put the
Testimony that I shall give thee, and there I will meet with thee, and I will
Commune with thee from the Mercy-seat, from between the two Cherubins which are
upon the Ark of the Testimony of all things which I shall give thee in
Commandment unto the Children of Israel, Exodus 25.21, 22.

And when Moses was gone into the Tabernacle, etc. to speak with the Lord, then
he heard the voice of God speaking unto him from the Mercy-seat which was upon
the Arc of the Testimony, and here the Lord spoke to Moses in the Tabernacle,
as in Numb. 7.89.

And when the Cloud did abide upon the Tabernacle the Children of Israel abode
in their Tents; and when the Cloud was taken off the Tabernacle, then the
Children of Israel Journeyed; so at the Commandment of the Lord they Journeyed,
and kept their Tents, Numb. 9.20. And the Glory of the Lord filled the
Tabernacle, Exodus 40.34, 35.

Here you may see the Lord spoke to Moses in the Tabernacle, and communed with
him there, and what the Lord did spoke to him in the Tabernacle he was to spoke
it to the Children of Israel, and the Testimony which the Lord gave to Moses
was in the Tabernacle; and was not the Candle-stick put in the Tabernacle which
Moses was to make in the old Testament? and the Jews were not to go on their
Journey into the Land of Canaan but at the Commandment of God, and the Lord
said to Moses, I will meet with you in the Tabernacle, Numb. 17.4. And the
Stranger that comes nigh the Tabernacle shall be put to Death.

And the Lord bid Nathan go tell David, That Since the time that I brought the
Children out of Egypt, even unto this day, that he had walked in a Tent, and in
a Tabernacle, 2 Samuel 7.6. And Solomon built an outward Temple, ^ Chron. 3. In
which Temple the Lord appeared unto the Jews, in all those outward things which
the Lord did command Moses and his Servants to make, the Lord did appear in
them in the old Covenant and old Testament (which where Figures and Shadows of
Christ the Substance, and of his Spiritual House and Church in the new
Testament) and were commanded in the Law, and served till Christ the great
Prophet came in the new Covenant and new Testament, who is to be heard in all
things, and he the Substance puts an end to all those Figures and Shadows in
the Law and old Testament, as namely the outward Tabernacle, Ark, Sanctuary and
Temple, which were outward, and made with hands, where the Lord had formerly
spoke to the Jews in the old Testament and old Covenant; and in the new
Testament God speaks to his Believers by his Son, as in Heb. 1. And Christ
Jesus enlighteneth every Man and Woman that comes into the World, that is, he
enlighteneth the Spirit of Man and Woman, which is the Candle of the Lord in
every Man's and Woman's Tabernacle, that there they might here God speaking to
them by his Son, by his Light, Grace and Spirit from Heaven, at his Mercy-seat;
and whatever any Man or Woman receives from God through Christ, they receive
it in their Tabernacle, and there is a witness and a sense of it in their
Tabernacle or Temple, where the Glory of the Lord appears; and Christ Jesus
does rule in their hearts, in their Tabernacle, and the Lord pouring out of his
Spirit upon all Flesh, Men and Women, all that have received the Spirit of God,
they are sensible of it, and its motions in their Tabernacle; and they that are
led by the Spirit of God, they are sensible of Gods Spirit leading to the Land
of the Living, and in this every one knows the voice and command of God from
the Stranger and his voice, that must not come into the Tabernacle, but that
must be mortified and killed, and by the Spirit of God; and every one that
receives the Grace of God which brings Salvation, and has appeared unto all
men, they are sensible of this Grace and Favor of God in their Tabernacle, and
of their growing in Grace, and receiving more Grace from the throne of Grace;
and Christ being the Author and Finisher of the holy divine precious Faith in
Man and Woman, every one that receives it are sensible of it in their
Tabernacle, and of Christ the Author and Finisher of that Faith, and every one
that believes in the Light which Christ enlightens their Spirits withal, which
is the Candle of the Lord in their Tabernacle, and so become Children of the
Light, and in Christ's Light they see more Light, and it shines more and more
until the perfect day, and of this every Child of Light is sensible and has a
Testimony or Witness of this in their Temple or Tabernacle, in the new
Testament, and do know that their Bodies are the Temples of the holy Ghost, and
of God, and Christ; and the Gospel being preached to or in every Creature under
Heaven, every Man and Woman that receives this Gospel of Life and Salvation
are sensible, and have a Testimony or Witness of it in their Temple or
Tabernacle; and all that receive Gods Mercies and Blessings from above, and
Tenderness, and Kindness, and Gifts from God, and Christ that ascended on high,
and of the Love of God shed in their hearts, they have a sensible Witness or
Testimony of these things in their Tabernacle and Temple, and there is
ascending praises to God on high from the Spirit of God in their Tabernacle and
Temple, from whom they do receive infinite Mercies and Blessings; so if they do
Pray in Spirit, and Sing in the Spirit to God, who is a Spirit, it is in the
Tabernacle and Temple where the Spirit of God and Christ is within, and the
Word of Faith, Life and Patience is in the Heart and Mouth to obey it, and to
do it, and the anointing is within to teach God's People, and they need no man
to teach, but as it teaches, and this Teacher of God's People is within the
Temple and Tabernacle, in the new Testament and Covenant, so that they need not
run to the old Covenant and Testament, and to outward Sanctuaries and Temples
made with hands, and to those outward Teachers that may be removed into a
corner; and the holy Ghost that proceeds from the Father and Son, that leads
the true Believers into all Truth, this Leader is in the Tabernacle and Temple;
and in the new Covenant and Testament, God writes his Law in the hearts of
People, and puts it in their minds, whereby all may know the Lord, that they
need not teach every man his Neighbor, saying know the Lord, for all from the
greatest to the least shall know the Lord, and this knowledge of the Lord is
known in every man's Temple and Tabernacle, in the new Covenant; for there is no
Man nor Woman, from the highest to the lowest, that has any sense or
understanding, or knowledge of the Mercies and Goodness of the Lord, but it is
by his Light and Spirit in their Tabernacle or Temple, all who are sensible of
the heavenly Dew and the small Rain, and the showers of the Mercies of the
Lord, they are sensible of them by the tender plant in their Tabernacle or
Temple to his praise; and all those who are Ministers of Christ, and none can
be Ministers of Christ, or Preachers of Christ, and of his Word, Faith and
Gospel, or Word of Life, or of the Grace of God, or be made Ministers of the
Spirit, except they have received these things from God and Christ by his
Spirit in their Tabernacle and Temple; I say from God and Christ in their
Tabernacle and Temple, then they can declare what Spiritual things they have
received from the Lord in their Tabernacle and Temple, then such are Ministers
of the Spirit, and Sowers to the Spirit in others, in their Tabernacle, which
can apprehend the things of God, and discern them; so as every one has
received freely the gift from the Lord in their Tabernacle and Temple by his
Spirit, let them Minister it freely to others; and if they have not received it
from the Lord into their Tabernacle and Temple by his Spirit, and have no
Testimony and Witness of it in their Tabernacles, they are not Ministers of
Christ nor God, but are Ministers of the Letter, which others have spoken forth
from the Spirit of God in their Temple or Tabernacle, who was the Voice and
Mouth of God, as God spoke by the Mouth of all his holy Men and Women, in their
Tabernacle, such were and are the Ministers of God and Christ in all Ages and
Generations.

And Christ who does enlighten every Man and Woman that comes into the World
(that is) he does enlighten every Man and Woman's Spirit, which is the Candle of
the Lord in their Temple or Tabernacle, and how often do the Wicked, by turning
from the Light of Christ, which enlightens their Candles, by their hating the
Light of Christ, and going away from it into evil Deeds and Works, and loving
the Darkness more than the Light, put out their Candle, their Spirit, which
Christ has enlightened? and when the Candle is put out, their Houses are
Houses of Darkness, full of Darkness, Spiritual Egypt, and do Oppress and
Persecute the Jew inward; and such whose Candle is put out, they are gone from
the Light, and they seek to bring all others from the Light, and put out their
Candles, in drawing their Minds and Spirits from the Light of Christ that does
enlighten them, and call the Light of Christ, which enlightens their Spirits
(which are the Candles of the Lord, in their Temple and Tabernacle) a natural,
created and made Light, or a natural Conscience, which Light is the Life in
Christ by which all things were made and Created, and thus they go about in
their Error of Darkness, who have put out their own Candles, and seek to put
out the Candles of others, who seek to shut up the Kingdom of Heaven from men,
who are shut out of the Kingdom of Heaven themselves, and hate the Light, the
Kingdom of God and Christ, and the Light of the heavenly Jerusalem, and love
the Darkness, and the Kingdom of Darkness more then the Light and Kingdom of
Christ, and all those Teachers, or Preachers, or Professors, or Profain that
call the Light (which is the Life in Christ the Word, by which all things were
made and Created) a natural Light, and a created Light, and a made Light, or a
natural Conscience, or a Jack in the Wise, or a dark Lanthorn, they have put
out their Candle which Christ has lighted in their Tabernacle, and they seek
to put out the Candle of others in their Tabernacles, in drawing them from the
Light, which is the Life in Christ, which enlightened their Candle, the Spirit
of man in their Tabernacle, for it is the Light of Christ that shines in their
heart, which enlighteneth the Spirit of man, the Candle of the Lord in their
Tabernacle, that gives the Light of the knowledge of the Glory of God in the
Face of Christ Jesus, 2 Cor. 4.

And the Lord said to Abraham, I well Bless them that Bless thee, and Curse
them that Curse thee, and in thee and thy Seed shall all the Nations, or all
the Families of the Earth be Blessed, Genesis 12.3 and 18.18.

So here the World shall reco^e by the Seed, which is Christ, the Blessings
which they lost in fallen Adam, for Christ who bruises the Serpents Head, who
destroys the Devil and his Works, who making Peace, through the Blood of his
Cross, by him to reconcile all things unto himself, by him, (I say) whether
they be things in the Earth or things in Heaven, Colles. 1.20.

And Christ by the Grace of God tasted Death for every man, Heb. 2.9.

For as all men dyed in Adam, even so in Christ shall all be made alive; and so
by man came Death (namely Adam) and by man came also the Resurrection of the
Dead (namely Christ) 1 Cor. 15.21, 22.

So here you may see all dyed in Adam, then they are dead from eternal Life,
but Christ by the Grace and Favor of God to mankind (that is dead in Adam)
tasted Death for every man, so he has Ransomed them, and Purchased them by his
Death, out of the Death of Adam in the Fall, into the Life that Man and Woman
were in before they Fell, and into himself that never fell; and Christ does
enlighten every man that comes into the World, with his divine heavenly Light,
which is the Life in Christ the Word, by whom all things were made, that with
his Light in their hearts, all Men and Women may know Christ Jesus that has
Redeemed them, and dyed for them and their Sins and Trespasses, and is risen
for their Justification.

And God having poured out of his Spirit of Grace upon all Flesh, that by his
Spirit they might know and see the things of God, and his Glory, and with the
Spirit of Grace they might see Gods Love and Favor to them in Christ Jesus,
and how that they are dead in fallen Adam, and how that ^hey are made alive
again by Christ Jesus the second Adam, the Lord from Heaven, and how that
Christ is their Resurrection from the Dead, into the Life Everlasting in him,
and how Christ does a waken them out of the Sleep of Sin and Death in Adam, and
brings them into his everlasting Righteousness, that they may praise God
through Jesus Christ.

And in the old Covenant and old Testament, for the Sins and transgressions of
Man and Woman, the Clean Beasts and other Creatures were put to Death, and
their Blood was shed, and they were offered as a Sacrifice for the Sins and
Transgressions of the People, and their Blood was sprinkled upon the People and
the Tabernacle, and almost all things were by the Law purged with Blood, and
without shedding of Blood is no Remission of Sin; so here the Blood of the
clean Creatures were shed, and they offered up as a Sacrifice for Man and
Woman's Sins and Transgressions, the Lambs, Goats, Rams, Heifers, Pigeons, Doves
and Sparrows, etc. these were put to Death and their Blood shed and offered up
for Man and Woman, which were types of Christ Jesus the Lamb of God, in the new
Covenant and new Testament, who through the eternal Spirit offered up himself
without spot to God, and purges our Consciences from dead Works to serve the
living God; who said, I come, in the Volume of the Book that is written of me
to do the Will of God, namely, the Volume of the Book of Prophecies, Promises,
Types, Figures and Shadows, and that he might take away the first (namely)
Covenant and Testament, and establish the second (namely) Covenant and
Testament, by the which Will (namely) of God we are Sanctified through the
offering of the Body of Jesus Christ once for all, for by one offering he has
perfected for ever them that are Sanctified, Heb. 9, 10, chap.

Here all may see Christ the Lamb of God. (who is the Offering, and offered up
his Body by the eternal Spirit of God once for all) ends all the Offerings
and Sacrifices amongst the Jews; he the holy Lamb tasted Death for every man
that is dead in Adam, in their Sins and Transgressions; so he that tasted Death
for every man, has shed his Blrod for all men, and so his Blood is sprinkled
upon all men, that they might drink it, and have life through the
Sanctification of the Spirit, and Obedience, and Sprinkling of the Blood of
Jesus, Heb. 12.24. 1 Pet. 1.2.

So now all in the new Testament and new Covenant are to look to be cleansed
and purged by the Blood of the everlasting Covenant, Christ Jesus, which
sprinkleth their Consciences and Tabernacle, and in it to have Life, and to
know Christ that was Crucified, and dyed for their Sins, and so by the Grace or
Favor of God has tasted Death for every man, so he is the offering for the
Sins of the whole World, which Offering or Sacrifice God does well accept; who
is the Lamb of God that takes away the Sins of the World, so makes an end of
Sin and finisheth Transgressions, and destroys the Devil and his Works, and
brings in everlasting Righteousness, that all might walk in his Light and
Spirit of Grace, in the Truth, and in his everlasting Righteousness, to the
praise and glory of God through Christ Jesus, who is a propitiation for our
Sins, and not for our Sins only, but for the Sins of the whole World, And is
the one Mediator betwixt God and Man, the man Christ Jesus, who gave himself a
Ransom for all, to be testified of in due time, 1 Timothy 2.5, 6. 1 Pet. 1.18. So
we are Redeemed not with corruptible things, as Silver and Gold, from the
outward Figures and Traditions of the Jews, and from our vain Conversation, but
with the precious Blood of Christ as a Lamb slain, without Blemish and without
Spot, who was ordained before the Foundation of the World, but was manifest in
these last times for you, who by him do believe in God that raised him up from
the Dead, and gave him Glory, that your Faith and Hope might be in God through
Christ, as in 1 Pet 1.21.

Christ being Offered and Sacrificed for Sins and Transgressions of Men and
Women, he ends all the Offerings and Sacrifices of the Beasts, and other
Creatures in the old Testament.

And Christ being Slain and put to Death, and his Blood shed for the Sins and
Transgressions of Men and Women, he also made an end of the putting to Death,
and Killing, and Slaying, and Shedding the Blood of Rams, Lambs, Heifers, Goats
and other Creatures for the Sins and Transgressions of Men and Women in the old
Testament and Covenant, so the Offering, Sacrificing, putting to Death and
shedding the Blood of Christ (I say) puts an end to that Priesthood that
slew and put to Death, and shed the Blood, and Offered, and Sacrificed the
outward dumb clean Creatures for the Sins and Transgressions of Men and Women
in the old Testament, for the old Testament and Covenant was established by the
Blood of the outward clean Creatures, but the new Covenant and new Testament is
established by the Blood of Christ, the Blood of the everlasting Covenant, by
whose Blood we are Washed, and Cleansed, and Sanctified, and made Clean, and
presented to God.

So the clean Beasts were Killed and Slain, and put to Death in the old
Covenant, for the Sins of Men and Women.

But Christ in his new Covenant is the Lamb without Blemish, and was Killed,
Slain and put to Death for the Sins of the whole World, in the new Covenant.

G. F.

THE END.

