A Way to Prevent the Indignation and Judgments of God from coming on a
Kingdom, Nation or Family; Commended to the Consciences of all Concerned in the
Sight of God, for them to Read, Weigh and Consider in the Fear and Dread of the
Lord.
First, ALL you Vintners, that sell Wine, that keep Taverns, or such like
Houses; and all you Innkeepers, and you that keep Victualling-Houses,
Alehouses, Strong-water Shops, etc. see that you never let any Man or Woman
have any more Wine, 1 Pet. 4.3, 4, 7.
Ale, Strong Drink, Brandy, or Strong Water, or other strong Liquors, than
what is for their Health and their Good; in that they may praise God for his
Good Creatures. For every Creature of God is Good, and ought to be received
with Thanksgiving. 1 Timoth. 4.4.


But if you do give or let Men or Women have so much Wine, Brandy, strong
Liquors, strong Beer or Ale, till they be Drunk, or to make them Drunk; 1. You
destroy the good Creatures of God. 2. You Destroy them that have not Power over
their Lusts, no more than a Rat or a Swine, who will Drink till they are Drunk.
3. You are a great cause of Ruining them in their Healths and Estates (and
their Children and Families in their Livelihoods) in feeding of them in their
Lusts, by letting them have more than does them good Proverb. 23.20, 21.
; which tends to bring God's Judgments upon you, Deutronom. 29.19, 20.
to your own Destruction.


For many, when they are full of Wine, Beer or Strong Liquors, Romans 13.13.
Ephesians. 5.5.6.
then they will call for Music, Pipe and Harp, and it may be their Whores
also: And so in this, you that suffer or allow such things are Nursers of
Debauchery, and Corrupters of Them, Who has Woe? Who has Sorrow? Who has
Contentions? Who has Wounds without Cause? Who has Rednes of Eyes? -- They
that tarry long at the Wine; they that go to seek mixed Wine. -- At the last it
biteth like a Serpent, and stingeth like an Adder. See Prove. 23 27, 28, 29, 30,
31, 32.
and of your own Families also.

And also such Men, when they are full of Wine or Strong Liquors, and have
destroyed the Creatures, by taking more than does them good, then they are got
to that height that they are ready to Quarrel and Abuse, or Kill or Destroy one
another, and sometimes Kill other People (who do them no Harm) as they are
walking or traveling in the Streets or Highways. For when they are overcome
by strong liquors, then are they fit and do lie open to all manner of
Wickedness.

And though you think by selling or letting People have Wine or Strong Liquors
more than does them good, or is for Health, The more they Drink, the more Gain
you think it brings you; and the more you vend your Goods, the more Profit you
get: Ah poor Sellers! Do not you think, that God with his All-seeing Eye does
behold you and your Actions? And cannot the Lord soon bring a Blasting upon all
your Undertakings and such Ungodly Gain and Profits, Prove. 15.3.
and whatsoever you have gained by your Covetousness and from the Lusts of
others, Job 4.8, 9.
through which they do destroy their Estates, Children and Families? Will not
this bring Destruction upon you and your unrighteous Gain, which you have
gotten by feeding their Lusts? For that Spirit which feeds the Destroying
Lusts, must needs be the Destroyer; and the Profit of that will not be Gain to
You in the End.

For are not you sensible, how many, after they have spent their Estates or
part of them, they will Run into your Debts for Wine or strong Liquors, yea,
such as you let have more than did or does them good? For the Drunkard and the
Glutton shall come to Poverty, Prove. 23.20, 21.
And is not this the cause, that many break by trusting, and other ways, as
before mentioned? Trust should be with that which is Trusty, which does not
Wast or Destroy; and such God will bless. And therefore take heed of letting
any Man or Woman have any more Wine or strong Liquors, than what is for their
Nourishment, health and good. Isaiah 5.11.12, 22. Chapter 28.1, 3. Joel 1.5. See
also Deuteronomy. 29.19, 20. Whose heart turns away this day from the Lord our God
-- to add Drunkeness unto Thirst the Lord will not spare him but the Anger of
the Lord and his Jealousy shall smoke against that Man -- and the Lord shall
blot out his Name from under Heaven.


See what a dreadful Woe the Lord pronounced against them, That rise up early in
the morning, that they may follow strong Drink, that continue until night, till
Wine inflame them: then they call for the Harp and the Viol, the Tabret and the
Pipe, etc. But such regard not the work of the Lord, neither consider the
operation of his hands: A sad state! Woe unto them that are mighty to Drink
Wine, and are Men of strength to mingle strong Drink. And therefore all are to
shun such things, all are to be sober, and to mind and fear God, that they may
Escape these Woes; as you may see in Isaiah, chap. 5.

And therefore all Vintners, and such as sell Wine, with Alehouses, Inns and
Victualling-houses, who sell Ale, Brandy and strong Liquors, never let any one
have any more than does them good, and is for their Health (as is said before)
so that all may Eat and Drink the good Creatures of God to his Praise and
Glory; which Drunkards and Gluttons cannot, nor they who let them have the
Creatures of God in Excess or Immoderately, till they are drunk and surfeited;
1 Cor. 10.31. Ephesians. 5.18. Romans 13.13. Genesis 18.19. Prove. 22.6.
for such do feed themselves without the Fear of God.

Secondly, Let all who go under the Name of Christian Families, train up their
Children in the Fear of God, and keep themselves in the Fear of God, that they
may keep all their Servants and Families in the Fear of God; out of all
Looseness and Wantonness and Vanities and Excess, and from all Drunkenness,
Fornication, Whoredom or Uncleanness and Unrighteousness, and all Ungodliness;
that they may keep out of all those things that displease or dishonor the Lord
God. And do not nourish up the Lust of the Eye, nor the Pride of Life, nor the
Lust of the Flesh; for if you do, 1 John ^.16.
you nourish up that which is not of God the Father. And therefore to shun all
these Evils, and to depart from them, and keeping in the Fear of God; this is
the way to bring the Blessing of God upon a Land, Kingdom, Nation or Family.

G. F.

God will Destroy them which Destroy the Earth, Revel. 11.18. Drunkenness makes
a Man worse than a Beast,and makes a Strong Man Weak, and a Wise Man a Fool.
This Testimony and Warning was and is Owned and Subscribed to by (many)
Vintners and others, concerned in the Trades and Callings beforementioned, who
were present at the reading of the Manuscript.



LONDON, Printed by John Bringhurst, at the Sign of the Book in
Grace Church Street, 1683.


