POEMS BY BEN. FRANCIS.

Vivat in aeternum REX CAROLUS SECUNDUS; Quem Deus nunc and in saecula
saeculorum conservet, oro.

Entered according to Order.

LONDON, Printed by T. R. for the Author, 1660.

A Pastoral Elegy, upon the Barbarous decollation of King Charles the first,
of ever Glorious memory; written shortly after his death.
Palaemon. Chorus of Shepherds. PALAE. I From the Bloodyest Barbarous Act am
fled
That ever was by Monsters nourished;
And though my feet pursue an eager flight,
Yet still my soul retains that horrid sight,
Ah Cursed fate which me unwilling drew
To that sad place this Tragedy to view.

CHOR. What Luckless fate, what woeful accident
Has happ't that makes Palaemon to Lament?
What sad misfortune is it that can possess
Thy sprightly soul with so much heaviness?
Needs must the cause be great that moves thee now,
Since sorrow's seldom seen to Cloud thy brow.

PALAE. Ah dearest mates, mirth sounds a sad retreat;
The day is come our Ruins are complete:
Our miseries cast up in this most dread
and black prodigious Total, Charles is dead.

CHOR. What! Charles the Great, the Good, the Quintessence
Of all our earthly happiness; from whence
Our breath we draw; and by whose beams we live?
Ah! dear Palaemon, it is a cause to grieve:
Horror Confounds us; yet we pray thee tell
By what sad Chance this best of Princes fell.

PALAE. Should death and all Hells powers stand between,
And make Relation what mine eyes have seen,
To hear this execrable Act expressed,
Would Conjure Terror in each furies breast.
This Cursed Rout; this most prodigious band
Of Ravenous Tigers that infest this Land,
Great Charles surpised and dragged him to the Bar,
Where all his deadlyest foes his Judges were,
Peace is accused of War; Meekness of Pride;
Mercy of blood, and truth by Treason's tried:
Whose Royal soul their Arrogance Contemned,
Till Monstrous guilt pure innocence Condemned,
And sentence past of death: hut O! prepare
Your hearts of Steel, or bid my tongue forbear.

CHOR. O no, speak on, and let thy words redound
Such Terror to our souls that may Confound
Our vital Spirits, in such sort, whereby
We may obtain the benefit to dye.

PALAE. O 'twas a Crime past Satan's when he fell
A fact no age can yield it is parallel.
In deep Oblivion Mithridates sleep,
Nero and Tarquin with Tereus keep
A harmless squeaking; Cromwell and his Train
Outstrip your Rage and Tyrannyes retain.
From hence he is brought to that most woeful place
Glorious of late by his Illustrious face:
White Hall: whence he his Godlike Mandates gave,
And all the World his bountys did receive.
There whence his virtue through the earth was famed
There, there; those impious hands his Scaffold framed,
There like a Lamb he is to the Slaughter led,
There Hells stern brood smote off his Royal head.

CHOR. Was there no sign no miracle discry'd?
The Sun was darkened when our Savior died,
And could he view this Act so full of Dread
And not amazed shrink in his frighted Head?

PALAE. 'Twas not without a sign which did contract
A wonder to attend this monstrous Act,
Five Angels in the shapes of Fouls appeared,
And from the Air all Cloudy vapors Cleared,
These hovered over the Fatal place and spread
Their blessed wings just over his Sacred head,
Eager to catch his Soul before his breath
By that Dire stroke had yielded unto death.
For one which late above the rest appeared
With greater evidence the same declared,
As if struck dead by these most horrid sights,
Stoops down and almost on the Scaffold lights,
Then up retreats, and wings again assumes,
And to her former height directs her Plumes,
There stays a while and hovers in the skies,
Then with his Soul they vanished from our eyes.

CHOR. No more; no more; his falls a grief so high,
None can Lament unless a Jeremy:
Yet dear Palaemon we may justly turn
Our greefs from him and for our selves may mourn.
His Blessed Soul now sits above the spheres,
And there most happy Tryumphs ore the Stars,
Whilst we in's blood to our destruction swim,
'Twas us they murdered when they struck at him.

PALAE. Hold, Hold, forbear your Mourning and no more
His wrongs, nor your own injuryes deplore:
See; see; his Ashes move; his Blood revives
And there behold where Charles the Second lives:
Where Phaenix like he rises from his dust,
And Charles the great proceeds from Charles the just,
By whose great hand the potent Heaven decrees
A just revenge for these dire Butcheryes.
Mean time (my dear Associates) come, O come,
Let Us pay our Tribute to his Sacred Toome
And Beg from Heaven a charm unto our verse
That may for ever Guard his Royal Hearse.
Rebellious Traitors Tremble; come not near;
Hence with your Sacrilegious feet, forbear:
Touch not our dust we Charge ye; but be gone,
And Rue the Act your Cursed hands have done:
Nay rather mourn your miserable fate,
Since no Repentance this can expiate.
But you whose breasts this horrid act does move
With sad Resentments of a Loyal Love,
Draw nearer, and devoutly spend a tear,
It Is Charles the Great, the Good, the Just, lies here.

AN INTERLUDE Upon the sudden Extirpation of our late great Controlers.
Speakers. Philotheus. Philolethes, Fleetwood. Lambert. Vane. Lenthall.
Richard, late Protector.
Mutes. Berry. Hewson.

Enter Philotheus, Philolethes. PHILOTH. What! are our Glorious Plannets set
so soon?
Has Tardy Saturn quite outstript the Moon?
And made a quicker Revolution far,
Then Sol or Luna in our Hemisphere?
Is this great Fleetwood? that great Lambert? he!
These grand Corrivalls in the Sovereignty?
Is all their power defunct? their great Commands
dissolved and lost? --

PHILOLE. Yes see where Fleetwood stands,
A piteous object --

PHILOTH. Sure it cannot be
That Fleetwood! sure that sniv'ling Elef's not he.

PHILOLE. But it is the same --

PHILOTH. Truly if it be so
His Excellency's now exceeding low:
He Is Courting Lenthall, and for pardon sues,
His late absurd Transgressions to excuse.

PHILOLE. But hear him speak.

FLEETWOOD. Great Sir accept I pray;
The Sovereign power, and unbounded sway;
With all those great Exactions, and Commands,
We lately wrested from your sacred hands.
Acknowledging our error and offense,
Witness these humble tears of Penitence;
Alas it is true, cheered, with the late success,
We found performed with so much easiness,
Crying up Justice, and the good old Cause,
How right we either meant, the ancient Laws
In time may judge between us --

PHILOTH. Faith it is true,
Your fate's the same; when Tyburn claims his due,

FLEETWOOD. In overturning puny Richards powers,
We by his fatal fall, advanced yours;
And to your Pristin state, did you restore;
Whence your Protector kick't ye out before.
Thus we first raised, then Routed you, and I,
In Imitation of his subtilty,
Managed these great affairs: but he alas,
In greater favor with the Devil was;
Who him preserved in the Government
Until his soul to his Protection went.
When as upon the Contrary, when I
No sooner mounted on the Sovereignty,
As if my service had not equaled his
In Barbarous Treasons, and Impietys;
When first I seized the Government of State,
You my Commission voted out of date,
My Mushroome Majesty extinguish't, all
My hopes Conclude in this most shameful fall.
Exit Weeping.
PHILOLE. What is he gone? doubtless he more had spoke,
But that his tears his stammering words did Choke:
And now behold where Lambert does appear,
But not as Late onth' Northwick Theater:
When like a Tempest he came Thundering on
Poor timorous Booth and aged Middleton:
Whom by his looks he vanquished; and now
He looks so poorly, that he knows not how
For shame to appear; or show his graceless Face.

PHILOTH. " These Beagles hunted honor as their Chase:
" They made a fair pursuit and kept the Troyle,
" But now hunt Counter back upon the foil:
" The prize deserted with a shallow Cry,
" until they seize their former Beggary,
Now comes to make Confession of his sins:
Hark and observe the Brazen head begins.

PHILOLE. How well the Epithet befits the place:
" And properly; he is Aries head and Face,
" Nothing deficient, to complete it so,
" For Horns his Wife procured him long ago.

LAMBERT. Most mighty Sir! into whose powerful hands
Dominion's Crept, by those united bands,
We lately from your guard expuls'd and thought
By Clipping your long wings our own to have brought
To that aspiring pitch; this Land to steer,
And why not I, as well as Oliver?
I had the Sword alike, to assist my Claim:
And no man doubts, but that our right's the same,
Nor wanted fit associates, to my aid;
Until your envious General Monk betrayed
My rising fortunes; and my hope prevents
By his more gallant, honester intents.
No more let Fleetwood boast himself, 'twas I
That imitated Nolls old Policy,
And things at first to this distraction brought,
being tutored by the self same Spirit, wrought
The selfsame way; he purged them that withstood
The shedding of Great Charles his sacred blood,
And Fairfax from the Generalship expelled;
Whereby the rule he uncontrouled hel'd
As need required, reserving you withal
These few dependants, which the Rump we call,
Till time occasion gave, by scattering you,
The Government did to himself accure:
Whereby he Trampled on your yielding necks:
And unreprov'd securely played REX:
All England made observant to his eye:
Whilst none durst murmur at his Tyranny:
This my ambition aimed at; and went on
Traceing the very footsteps he had gone.
First as a Parliament I called you
(Being still Obsequious to the Sword I knew)
Which proved a fair beginning; for in have
Poor sneaking Richard to the ground we cast,
With all his Titles and his Honors down,
Even so by him Great Charles was overthrown.
Nor herein know I what I more could do
Then what I did unless I Would hanged him too:
But he poor Fool no further strove to try it,
But took his whipping kindly, and is quiet.

PHILOLE. Whereby 't appears he never was the Son
Of Oliver but only Maddam Jone.

LAMBERT. Then I the Cheshire Forces did oppose
With equal Terror, as his dreadful Nose
Brave Ormond and the Irish overcame,
So this I trusted would augment my fame,
Which raised my soul to such a height of pride,
When with a Thousand pounds you gratified
That rare Exploit, it seemed to express
A glad presage of a more great success.
Next, that I might his Scholar more appear,
And wisely hoping that the time drew near,
The Army (then my slaves) I hither drew,
And like my President supplanted you,
First having by my Patrons Policy,
Advanced Fleetwood to the Generalty,
Thereby the more to engage him to my aid,
But quickly would of him a Fairfax made.
And thus you see 'twas not my want of brains
That made the Dev'll so soon reward my pains.
Discourteous fate! can Richard now forbear
Having so fit a subject for to jeare
His Brother Fleetwood, and my self when we
With such disgrace quit our Authority?
O mortal shame! and what is worse 't appears
We Are subject to Politicus his jeares.
Much more a Devil, would 't not vex a Saint,
He who so lately with our names did paint
His weekly Pamphlets; raisd us to the Skies,
And all our Actions used to Canonize:
Can now employ his wanton scurrilous Pen
In making matches with Sir Henry Vane,
For Wimbletons Infanta and his Son.
O Hell! it is time or never to have done!
Such high disgrace the Boys will hoot that hear it!

VANE. O Brother it is our fate and we must bear it,
No Remedy remains our shame's so great,
Unless the Alderman of York's Receipt;
Though my ambition soared not all so high
As yours, who played on surer grounds then I?
I always temporiz'd, and where I saw
The Sword prevail, and Justice still withdraw;
I made the Sword my Load-starre; by it steered
And ever where it Ruled, there I appeared;
Until this fatal; this prodigious Rout;
Wherein the Sword did with the Hilt fall out,
And strange! when first against it self it bent
It Is horrid point; my Craft did still prevent
Approaching dangers; seeing both sides loath
To leave their rule; I took a part with both
Complied with you that first brought on the War,
And yet sat close with these at Westminster,
That whether side so ere prevaild, I thought
Mine own secure; but now alas I Am brought
To this untimely Ruin.

PHILOTH. It Is not so,
It Is more then time ye all had hanged ere now.

VANE. By this discovery and the Dyre event
That made my double dealings evident;
But O what mortal man conceived that ye
Would such revengers be of Treachery.

LENTHALL. Friends, it is your fortune, grudge not at our powers
Thieves have their Reign ye know, and you had yours:
If fates have paid ye what your work deserves
So soon (as Gusman learnedly observes)
You ought not blame them; for the fates are free
And 'twas not them but your simplicity
That wrought your bane; how many of the Trade
Prosper an age, ere their accounts be made?
When others contrary to these we see
(Being not so expert in the Mystery)
Perish upon their first Transgressions: so
Your indiscretions wrought your overthrowe:
What foolish madness was 't possessed your brain
To think of acting that old Scoene again,
Wherein as both affirm, you strove to appear
The perfect Scholars of old Oliver?
You did observe his Policies, it is true;
And trac't his steps as near as men could do:
But failed when your design you should have bent
Not the same way, but one equivalent:
O then yee'd gaind your wished ends; when now
The more ye did* the more ye made us know
How to prevent your Actions in the State;
Which draw on all a lamentable fate:
For know it is ordered that poor Richard he
(Over whom ye acted your first Tyranny)
Be made your Judge, and what his sole Command
Decrees; it must unalterably stand.

Enter RICHARD in a fools Coat. Lenthall removing, he takes his place and gives
judgment. RICHARD. What happy fates this Revolution wrought
That my desires to this perfection brought
Even past my hopes expectancy shall I
An Idiot Censure fools before I dye!
Where Is the Delinquents? Cause them to appear
Fleetwood come forth; and Lambert stand you there.
Enter FLEETWOOD. Brother your will. -- I yield unto your rule,
Not as the elder but the greater fool.

RICHARD. You speak too late friend, it is no thanks to yield
To our subjection when ye'r thus compelled:
Are these the men me from that power constrained
Which my late Fathers usurpation gained,
And me condemned incapable of Rule
My Father being a Knave and I a fool!
O horrid impudence! dos't not appear
That you as well as subtle Oliver,
Expulst these members from the Parliament,
Whose loud Remonstrance published your assent!
Speak damned Hypocrites, must Oliver
The sum of all your cursed Transgressions bear,
Condemned for all, when you alike as he
Were equal Actors in each Tragedy?
Wading through blood and Tyranny it is true
For which I doubt he is damned, and so will you:
Your guilt's so evident we shall not need
For further proof but sentence may proceed:
It Is vain to think that Justice so insenc't,
Can with your worthless lives be recompens't,
Besides our mercy some relief shall give
To your despairing souls; ye all shall live:
Fleetwood and Lambert it is to you decreed
That you stark naked shall to Rushia speed
And there remain in the Muscovian fields,
Which sometimes cold yet store of Honey yields.
You loved and had so sweet a time before
You still shall be with Honey noynted over.
And being you here are famous for your Arms,
Your office there shall be to guard the swarms
From Wasps invasion which the Hives assail
With the long feather of a Capons Tail.
And you because your impious name is Vane,
Shall to the Pigmies, and affront the Crane
Banished from hence to Earths remot^^^ ^^^nd
Your Valor try; your hands behind ^^und,
Whereby you will give us cause t'accomp^^^^^ wise,
If in those Conflicts you preserve your eyes.
Now Berry you so silent all this while
Whose dark extract came from a Charcole-pile,
Shall post to Aetna, there constrained to lie
Where the hottest showers of flaming Cinders fly
Expecting no relief, or ere come down
From that sad place till Hell shall claim its own.
But you, you Cobling Poliphemus; you
With that your squint Monoculus shall view
These Judgments put in execution,
And see each tittle be exactly done;
But least they grumble that we favor you
You must perform this Charge stark naked too,
Which being done, we doubt not it will appear,
Of all their sufferings you will not want a share.
Our Judgement's past! let this our grand report
Be ratify d, and so dissolve the Court.

Flourish. exeunt. Manent Philotheus. Philolethes. PHILOTH. O dearest
Philolethes have not we
A Cause to magnify the Deity?
These black prodigious Clouds dispers't and gone,
Confirms our hope to see the rising Sun.
Advance great Charles, thy storms are overblown,
And smiling Heaven presents thee with a Crown.

PHILOLE. But O my Philotheus when shall we
Be blessed with that complete felicity
Our souls so long desire (next Heaven alone)
To see him placed on his bles't Fathers Throne.

PHILOTH. O doubt not Philolethes, we shall see
A glad reward for all our misery.
Hells powers deposed, and Heaven's propitious eyes
Benignely look on our Calamities.
That happy time draws near that will produce
A glorious subject for our drooping Muse:
Then in a lofty strain we will chant and sing,
And echo forth our joy, a King a King!

Deo semper and ubique Gloria.
AN ELEGY
Upon the death of that most valorous and gallant Gentleman, Capt. Edward
Morgan, slain near Northwich in Cheshire, August 19. 1659.
MOst woeful fate! had we but only one
Right valiant noble soul? and is he gone!
O'twas to appease the offended Deities
That they chose out this richest sacrifice,
Whereby they might our errors expiate
And make our Adversaries sins complete.
Brave happy soul! whose spirit did defy
Subordination to the Tyranny
Of Earth-born Brats and Spawns of Hell; who thus
Most insolently Lord it over us.
How did thy rare unerring Judgment see,
The guilt of their abhorred Treachery,
Who like to self-condemning Traitors, fled
Before encountered; or scarce threatened:
Then forth most brave Heroic Morgan stood
And sealed our Causes justice with his blood.
That Hell-belch't flame, that winged the fatal Lead,
Which raised thy soul, and struck thy body dead.
Hells Instrument encounters and commands
A trembling terror in the Traitors hands,
And so each drop which from thy body fell
Condens't and press't a Rebels soul to hell.
Forbear ye Sons of darkness; you that boast
A happy fate by what our party lost,
Falsely accusing Heaven to patronize
Your horrid Treasons and cursed villainies;
Nor say that God your foul Rebellion owns,
Because success your damned Actions Crowns.
No, no, just Heaven a while its Arm recalls,
That it may prove the heavier when it falls.
And thus the Cursed Antichristian Crew
Of Mahomet are justly yoak't with you.
Mean while most blessed Soul, our Loyal eyes
Shall pay their Tribute to thy Obsequies:
Lament thy loss; and from the glorious Train
Of happy Martyrs, wish thee back again;
Forgive the Injury (great Saint) which we
Herein commit against thy felicity;
Where thou remain'st and from her starry Throne
Thy milk-white soul, on erring men looks down:
Yet still we wish thee here! O sad distress!
Our loss is great, which makes our Crime the less;
This palliates our presumption; and herein
Makes even Sacrilege a venial sin.
For though that thou amongst those bright Troops do shine,
Yet wanting thee our woeful Troops decline;
And in this sad distraction must abide;
Thus only laboring to be satisfied.
That thou endeavoring Charles a Crown to gain,
Did to thy self a glorious Crown attain.
A Relation of a mad merry Ramble, merrily begun, and as madly concluded.
When Pleasant Summer to the colder signs,
It Is flowery Meads and verdant Boughs resignes,
And Phoebus cast's on us a Feebler Ray
Cold Winter entering Clothes the fields in Gray,
Such was the Morn when by my Friend called on
I left the House of Noble Kinaston of Otley.
Kinaston,
And straight to Marbury steered our course from thence
There to compose 'twixt friends a difference,
Which hardly ended ere we fudd'led were,
And for repose returned to Combermere.
(But think not pray ye Gentlemen that here
I Will in my Journall turn Geographer,
Nay I beseech ye Sirs forbear to expect
That here I Speed, or Camden should Correct,
Although it is true I travailed late the bounds
Of a fair Country, which it self surrounds
In fruitful foil, and bless't with Ancient fame,
Till late Rebellion forfeited the same:
But I must needs averr it is gained again
By diverse Loyal souls that dwell therein,
Yet be it known it is not my task to prate
How Rivers run or Towns be scytuate.)
Being here refreshed with a moderate Rest,
Betimes next morning we our selves addrest't
Unto a place where we appointed were
To meet the Ancient Spurstowes gallant heir
Who us Conducted to that goodly seat
That Is honored with his name; a house repleat
With noble entertainment; sumptuous cheer,
Free Cordial welcome; high and mighty Beer:
O thou most terrible and Monstrous (b) Bear
That gav'st me first my entertainment there, (a) Birch Can with the rough bark
on it, that held about a quart.

I cannot forget how thou did me surprise,
Forcing sad tears to trickle from mine eyes,
Which as a preparation to our course
Of harder drinking must'red up our force,
Wilbraham, Spurstow, Griffiths, Allen, J:
Being at present all the Company,
For earnest business Fletcher had withdrawn,
And in his absence I remaind his Pawn.
Each man Charged Cup observed this Watchword -- now!
It Is bravely done Boys; what is here more to do:
Is all performed? the field we needs must win,
Faith we must Rally, Charge 'em up again:
Whilst thus we ranted and fell on pell mell,
If not the first, I was the next that fell
Where now I do entreat ye let me lie.
Disturb me not I Will waken by and by,
So! now I am revived; prepared to try
A fesh encounter with the Enemy
That did so lately foil me: but what is here,
Methinks a Thundering at the Gates I hear;
The word is brought us, Fletcher is returned,
Whose absence we so much in Beer bouls mourned,
A dreadful sight behind him did appear
As strange, as ugly, so that some did swear
If ere the Devil as famed that house assailed
He then had brought him like a Cloak-bagg mail'd:
But yet to be resolved we all drew near,
And that she is split up from the hipps did swear.
Faith Sir I had been so ere I came hither,
But that my C -- 's composed of stretching Leather,
We bad brave Fletcher Welcome with his guide,
His naked Hanger glittering by his side,
The Scabbert lost when Out of his Belt.
out the same he drew
And furiously a drinking-Can he slew.
This Scene performed we settled foot to foot,
The Cups go round, and we a fresh fell to it,
Each Cup contained a friends remembrance in it,
Till full four hours we of the night had spent:
Now Fletchers Luggage drunk denies to take
Cupps as before; nor yet would she forsake
Our Company, but evermore she Cried,
Do what ye will, I will not take it, 'twas tried:
Quoth I, thy face shall hav't, my breech cries she
Will better brook it, and more willingly
Shall take it for me; I who first begun't
At her entreaty dash't it in her C --.
Now time it was to part, the far spent night
Our wearied bodies did to rest invite.
A small repose suffis'd our laboring brains,
As if forgot our last nights taking pains,
Again we freely quaff the flowing juice
Which Tellus tortured bosom did produce;
And in the afternoon we went to see
A Town of Ancient note called Bunbury,
Where being sat we tipp'led there a space,
At night removing to another place,
The Habitation of one Badcock, where
We all encountered by our hostess were:
How Bad the Cock may be we nothing know,
But Allan's well assured the Hen was so:
For 'twas at first his sad and luckless chance,
Calling her Whore, to cause her to advaunce
Her deadly Tallons, grappling arms at length,
The Devil could hardly match her Mastiff strength,
We in our friends defense did all arise:
Away ye Drunken Puppyes she replies,
Have you been drinking elsewhere all the day,
And now at night come here your wreaks to play?
Her Husband stood and could not speak indeed,
But all the Children were the Mothers breed,
Whose trebble Throats so sharp a note did raise
As Challenged Hell to match them with a base.
Their tongues; his silence; was enough from whence
To prove her Whore* and quite dissolve suspense.
At length concluding peace from hence we went
Unto another house of more content,
Where being entered, I desired to know
If Allens strength had failed him yea or no,
So to it we fell; and whilst we struggling were,
By chance I stumbled over the Schoolmaster,
What Gentlemen crye's he forbear your speed,
I have a charge about me; pray take heed,
I trust you will not rob me: out he flies;
I to entreat him followed: whilst he cries
Hang out your lights, Good people, else these Rogues
Will rifle here the best of Pedagogues:
Good Sir refrain these ecstasies quoth I,
Nor thus abandon civell Company.
My charge, my charge cries he, my charge is lost,
A Mark or neer't: was ever man so cross't?
Thus I pursued him to the furies door,
The fatal House from whence we came before,
Where by the Candlelight we might perceive
His Eyeballs from their stations taking leave.
Thus did we leave him half dissolved with fear,
And back to Spurstow we that night repair.
Early next morning ere I could arise,
Thrice that prodigious Bear did me surprise,
Thrice was I forced to turn that substance over,
Till rest became as needful as before,
Yet not permitted me: enforced to leave
My sweet repose, full goblets to receive
Of flowing Liquor; Liquor that might raise
Strains more sublime to speak the founders praise,
Whose noble Breast so rare a soul inherits,
Mirrors of sweetness equal to his Merits,
And may a world of happiness pursue
His noble House which now we bid adue.
Still his oblieging presence we retain,
And back to Bunbury we march again,
Where long our wandering fancies could not bide,
But for a frollick in the evening tide,
Removed to Northwich nine miles distant, where
With lusty Sack we did our spirits cheer,
Our suppers ended, and our brains well tried,
A brace of Beds convenient did provide
Both in a Room; we hugged our needful rest
Whilst either Wine or weariness oppressed
Our Drowzy senses: but not long our eyes
We soon disclose, and make Obedience rise
To give attendance; stools instead of Drums
Struck up the Alarm; till at last she comes
Whereat we all our loathed Beds forsake,
And through the house a match of rambling make:
Room after Room we search resov'd to see
Our Landlord with his Wife in Geminy
As we supposed they were; thus in we go,
But she denied and Vowed it was not so:
Well he replies sweet heart be not afraid,
Thy due benev'lence shall be justly paid,
And shall it so? (then Fletcher cries) make room
Between ye both, there I to bed must come,
A weak resistance proveing vain he in
To bed did step, and 'twixt them did begin
A health to their performance on each side
His place resigned was by the next supplied,
Till all had pledged this jolly health, and then
We all agree to take our restsagen,
Betimes next morning with the Sun we rise
All deadly sick with last nights exercise,
With looks dejected every thirsty soul,
Does his afflicted Brothers Case Condole,
Till at the length we did our selves assure
What wrought the Malady would work the Cure,
Applauding what the Bishop Andrews in praise of Ale.
learned Father taught
The virtue of a plentuous mornings draught:
Now little Mallary did our Tribe Augment
With whom we sound the Cellers deep descent,
Health upon Health, Cup upon Cup we ply,
The Tavern rung with our confused joy,
Not overlong it being Market day,
We of the Town did take a short survay:
And thence to Daneham two miles off repair,
There drink, and what we left unfinisht there,
Perform at Middlewich, where we that night
Arrive, but how I could not here recite,
Were It not for two occasions which befell
In this days journey most remarkable: viz.
As hence we posted at a speedy rate,
I sadly troubled with the Poets fate,
Ill Horst, Lagg'd after, doubtful which to choose
For loosing them I needs my self must loose,
And piss I must: there have my stay forbid,
So I pursued them pissing as I rid:
A hansome Girl before me makes a stand,
As I rid on, my whynyard in my hand.
Now out, upon ye Sir: what is that I see?
O been't ashamed sweet heart? troth you may be.
Of what? it is posture. Mistress I presume
To serve you 'twould a better form assume:
Have now denies me time farewell; but yet
Your new acquaintance pray ye not forget:
He Is at your Service, and who knows but fate
Your familiarity may renovate?
Next (sad remembrance) was a fatal fall
Where Horse and man, and man and Horse and all
Fell to the ground, my Horse above the ears,
Above the Elbowes I in dirt appears,
Sadly bedabled, not at all ashamed,
Rather in me a haughty spirit it framed:
For entering the Town I forced a man to stand,
And with obeisance kiss my dirty hand.
Hence to our Inn: noise flies about the Town,
Gallants are come, among whom Ben Johnson's one,
(so Spurstow called me) how! a third replies,
If Ben be there it is time for us to rise,
He Will scare them from their wits where e're they go,
Then sure it is he; for they are already so.
Whilst Rumor thus reports our boon arive,
We overhead in monstrous Flaggons dive,
Till overcharged of sense and friends bereft,
Poor harmeless I upon a Bed was left.
What then worth notice past my brains so wet,
Must needs be pardoned if I do forget:
For some report that we a supper had,
Wherein I must confess, my memory's bad;
Yes, and that I thereon did freely feed:
Pardon, sweet Host, I knew not what I did;
Wakening, I assayed to stand; me thought with ease
My feet perambulate the Antipodes,
Seeking to go, I imitate the Sun,
When he in his diurnall course does run;
Whereat enraged, and amazed, I swear
That Fates had turned me perpendicular;
My head descends, and like a Meteor flies
Through fleeting Air, I foot the arched skies.
But stay, I am encompast with a roof,
I feel the walls, and come from bed for sooth,
And fain would find't again, but that alas,
I sought about and knew not where it was.
And still the more I search, the more I Am led
Through darksome entryes, black Enigma's thread,
Whereat I stamp't, and swore I was crept in
The Labyrinth where Minotaur had been,
Hopeless of restoration, crying, where
Is faithful Phaedra, Ariadne near?
When lo at last, most welcome one appears,
Take heed, your worship's tumbling down the stairs.
In fine, the rest, which I two hours had sought,
Obtained, again I to the bed was brought,
Whereon ere I could hardly close mine eyes,
We are informed again, it is time to rise;
For that most Noble Manwaring had then
Vouchsaf't a visit to the Gentlemen; Manwaring of Bostok,

Whose courteous favors, if my pen forget,
May I in shames black Catalogue be set.
For base Ingratitude, in which it is said
All Crimes and Vices are at once displayed.
No time delayed; but up they all arose,
I shortly after, mocked with a repose,
With all celerity forsook my rest,
And shook my ears, no sooner up but dressed.
And hence we went to please a various mind,
Where every Woodcock on a Woodcock dined.
What next we acted, few men understood,
Being half distracted, mad with foolish food;
Fletcher and Spurstowe, with young Mallery,
Maintain a combat against poor Jack and I,
And whilst brave Mallery on the table fought
Op'e stood the Casement, whilst I striving sought
To pull him down, he less himself amends;
For out the window he from them, descends.
I fearing's hurt, looked after him, and thought
To call for help, when by the heels I Am caught,
And after him sent; partaker of his fate,
To wish me back 'twas quickly grown too late,
Whilst both supposd we by our falls should dye,
But 'twas not so, we fell so dexterously,
Excelling Airey Hope, or Pudding's slight:
For like to Cats, on hands and feet we light,
Nor feared, nor hurt, insensible of pain,
We rise and breath, and to it we fall again.
Two hours this lasted, till in fine made friends
With Ale which Caesar's Coments so commends.
He whose great Pompy's Eagles did subdue, A word for Als.

He who but came and looked and overthrew
Yet still assirm, proceeding ages will,
His conquering sword was conquered by his Quill.
Ale, thy rare vertuses, and thy sacred use,
Is th'glorious subject of his crowned Muse.
I Will not relate what afterward besell;
But here we bid brave Manwaring farewell,
And little Mallery: hence we undertake
A three miles journey, for our Hoses sake,
For them no further we that night compel,
They did but little, but they did it well;
For on the Road an Inn we found, and there
A boon and bounteous Host, indifferent Beer,
Who us before our money did regard,
So he with us in every pottle shared:
For what for four pence they to others sold,
Afforded us for three, and swore 't should hold
Whilst we remained there; to it we sat that night,
Till bright Aurora put the stars to flight.
And then, as we prepared to go away,
Comes Erswick's Minshul, and procures our stay,
With him re-entring, there we drink again,
Till only one half barrel did remain,
Which we resolve at one health to drink up,
And for that purpose found a Posset cup,
environed with black handles round about,
Which held four Flagons justly measured ouu.
This monstrous dish we drink, of sable hue,
Horrendum dictu; but by -- it is true.
Now bound for Namptwich, without lets or stays,
Over hedge and ditch, to'voyd the fouler ways;
At length arriving near the place where late
The Kings Army being routed there
A thousand Gallant souls received their fate.
Here we alighted in the Towns survay,
And till their Preachment's past resolved to stay;
During which time, by chance there hapn'd to be
Two brethren of Saint Hugh's fraternity,
With me disposed to quarrel; till the one
Recants, and cries, to you I am unknown:
Brave 'squier Starky (thus for him mistook
He Spurstow) but were Spurstow here, he would look
More favorably, and him defend from harms;
He often had hugged the Booby in his arms:
And sure he was, he would free him from abuses.
Spurstow begins, and thus himself accuses:
Spurstow's an Ass, a base ignoble slave,
I long since lent him money; which to have
I now despair: how much was it, he requires;
But forty shillings; only my desires
Are these, to have thee beat him for it sometime,
And here behold the moiety is thine.
Sir, let me see him; I will do the deed,
Though he in strength, or stature should exceed
The great Golias; here is the man will do it,
I Will bring his neck beneath your worships foot.
Then here is thy money; now prepare thy hands,
And here, behold where little Spurstow stands:
Hereat the valiant young man's valor's quail'd,
Throws down the money, lest he be assayl'd
By us, and beaten; to a Chamber by
He quits the room, and there takes sanctu'ry,
There rests secure, when he that hold had gained,
Bolted within, without the key remained:
And that he might more safely there abide,
We locked him in, and thence with the key did ride.
Nearer the Town an Inn we sought; in fine,
We found a Reverend Host, more reverend Sign,
Which to the view in ample distance spreads,
Such as imaginarily the heads
Of many new-bred Nobles, often adorns,
And frequently in English, called The Horns.
Here we alighted, and resolved to sup,
There, though the lodgings were before taken up.
Much taken with our Host's boon merriment:
Bedless that night we rather are content
To stay, then enter the clamorous town, much more
We'd rest that night, as we the night before
Had done: the night we shorten, being long,
With wine and mirth; sometimes John Dory's song.
Thus till the travelers for their march prepared,
We drank and sung, and then their places shared.
Spurstow and I a little stayed behind,
The rest before unto a place designed
To take our parting tap-lash; for our way
Lay through the town where Spurstow bids me stay,
There at the Holy Lamb we 'lighted down,
Which might be styled the Emblem of the Town:
For what more proper simile may be,
Compared to painted outside sanctity:
Or who more fitly can such zeal define,
A house of riot, and a sacred Sign.
Here, to avoid prolixity of time,
Five pintes apiece of brisk Canary wine
We drank to friends, but chiefly he to one,
To me most dear, although to him unknown,
Which made the favor double; then came in
The Mistress pint, that drunk, we did begin,
To think of Fletcher, who by this, though t's long,
When lo a voice amidst the ruder throng
Called Spurstow, Spurstow; turn again, come hither,
He wanting second thoughts, turned, and went thither,
Where being come a Matron grave appears,
One who for beauty aged Sibils years,
Might well example; but for impudence,
and vicious acts, with Circe might commence,
Then with a complement, old as her self, she brought
A Jack with silver tipped, and at a draught
Over turned it, though the Jack contained a quart.
Then gives it him; here boy, observe my art.
Now heavens protect me, this upon our Wine!
She Will Circe-like transform us both to Swine.
And Beldam for thy favor take this curse;
The pox confound thee, or some plague that is worse.
Thus parted noble Spurstow with his train,
Fletcher and I to Marbury march again.
Some business of the first day's left undone,
Where we remember our companions gone,
Past Acts recount, as loath to part we fit,
And all that redious night we frolic it:
This my fourth night, and Fletchers third, since we
our clothes put off, or any sheets did see.
So in the morn appearing, you might then
Behold a brace of parboyl'd Gentlemen,
Like cattle standing at Avernus brink,
Even dead with thirst, yet daring not to drink.
Now farewell dearest Fletcher, let us give over,
It Is time to try, can we our sense recover,
And what my soul to Spurstow renders due,
Thrice noble Fletcher, must return to you;
And pray that heaven may ever let me see,
A bliss on you, and your Posterity;
So to his wishes fortune condescend,
Whose life's your servant, and whose faith's your friend.
BEN. FRANCIS.

Postscript.
Critics, excuse the rudeness of my style,
Perchance my Muse could better Verse compile.
But here my Penn presumes to be as free,
As was our noble Gallant Company;
Nor say I have your tired sense abused
Being over tedious, since it is thus excused.
The Ramble's long, and those that did it see,
Confess I have affected brevity.
Then howsoe'r my Verse by you's approved,
Doubt not, but it is by better Wits beloved.
A Recantation.
1.
YE false deluding Joys Terrestrial,
Your fond Temptations I despise;
My thoughs are soaring to a Caelestiall,
And never fading Paradise.
Wherefore farewell
Ye steps to Hell,
Your flattering paths I Will tread no more,
Nor your false vanities adore.
2.
Base world, amongst the worst I rank thee,
of ills that e're created were,
As yet I never had cause to thank thee.
Thy smiles but base delusions are,
Which since I scorned,
To frowns they turned;
But thus thy injuries I Will retort,
Detesting to be made thy sport.
3.
It Is true, I doated on thy pleasures,
And thy alluring treachery;
My soul betrayed in horrid measures
To honor thy impiety,
But now I see
Thy slavery,
I bid farewell to all thy joys,
And these my most loved vanities.
4.
Farewell my Dear, my Boon Companions,
Farewell, Eternally adue;
And for the favors which were many ones,
And loves I always gained from you,
I thanks return
To you, and mourn
The precious time we spent in vain,
Which now I Will labor to regain.
5.
By you my company was prized,
And far beyond its worth esteemed,
So I your joys have Idolized,
And equal to the blessed deemed;
But since our love
Did often prove
A lewd debauchery in the end,
I Will to diviner thoughts attend.
6.
And you, fair Virgins, who resemble
The brightness of the radiant skies,
With whom I often did thus dissemble,
And heavens created in your eyes;
A fairer now,
My thoughts pursue,
And pure devotions duly pay
To one whose splendors never decay.
7.
Yet pray mistake not lovely fair ones,
Your beauties I do still admire,
And bear due Reverence to the Rare ones
Of your most sweet selected quire;
For, when I view
Those forms in you,
My breast with admiration fills
Of your Creators heavenly skills.
8.
And now to you that are devoted,
Alone to serve the Deity;
And to that happiness promoted,
To wait upon the Trinity,
I come, I come,
Vouchsafe me room,
Where I with you my offerings may
Before the sacred Altar lay
9.
Where though this earth our feet retains,
Our souls surmount the starry skies,
And in that blessed estate remains,
Adoring of the Mysteries;
And though 't appear
We wander here,
And breath from this dull Air receive,
Yet Aliens to the world we live.
FINIS.

