THE POLITICIANS CATHECHISME, FOR HIS INSTRVCTION IN DIVINE FAITH, AND MORAL
HONESTY.

Written by N. N.

Printed at Antworp, in the year M.DC.LVIII.

Permissu Superiorum.

THE PREFACE TO THE IMPARTIAL READER.
THAT thou may enter with some light before thee into the ensuing Discourse,
I thought it convenient to let thee see the reason of the Title, and the drift,
or maine design of this Book. A Politician, according to the primitive
derivation, signifies a person richly endowed with those noble qualities,
whereby he is made capable to be trusted in the management of the greatest
affairs of a City, or Commonwealth: for, anciently the bounds of a Monarchy,
or Republike, that is, the dimensions of a body politic, were usually confined
within the walls, or at least the territory of one City. To such a person a
Cathechisme is no sit Book, as being a Book of Instructions for ignorant
people: But time has kept the name, and changed the notion of a Politician, as
it has of a Tyrant, which anciently signified a King, without that odious
caracter it puts us now in mind of. In these our days, when we hear a
Politician named in any language, we represent to our selves a man so ignorant,
that he knows no other God, nor good, but his own interest; a man that has
lost the memory of the fundamental articles of divine and humane Faith, and
thereby stands in need of a Cathechisme, as much as any of those, that for
their age, or education, are presented with Books of this nature for their
instruction.

As to the articles of divine Faith, he is taught, that there is a God, by an
argument suited to his capacity; and that this God, like an absolute Prince,
will be served his own way; and that we are to serve our selves of those marks
to find out this way, which he has set to lead us to it, and in it; and not
those we set to our selves, by our own fancy, humor, and interest; or have
been set for us by others, whom we have no more reason to trust then our
selves.

By looking upon all the visible marks which have misled so many into so
manifold errors, in opposition to the only true Catholic Apostolic Roman
Faith, he shall find them planted upon interest supported by policy, and
pointing out a way, which at length will be discovered to go cross to the
ancient high way not only of divine Faith, and eternal felicity, but even of
temporal interest and humane policy. By perusing the historical part of this
Book, he shall clearly discover, that all our new pretended Reformations have
so little signs of the right hand of God in their beginning, and progress,
that there will appear nothing in them, but the contrivings of a left handed
craft of a few suttle-licentious cavilling Sophisters, upheld by the power of
ambitious and coveteous Princes, and imposed upon, fearful, ignorant, and
godless Subjects, without foresight of the utter ruin, or great disturbance
it was to bring upon the heads both of Princes and Subjects. The Politician is
taught, that in case he have any pretense to divine Faith, he may as well
pretend to it by the help of the Turks Alcoran, and Jews Talmud, as by the
Bible, according to the new false Translations and Interpretations; and that
the principles of Protestancy, if they be drawn out at length, whither by
rules of good consequence they are proved to reach, will be of the same force
to secure a man's conscience brought up in Turcisme, or Iudaisme, as in
Lutheranisme, Calvinisme, or any other Sect that goes under the name and notion
of Protestancy, and furthermore open a wide gap for plain Atheism, besides
the inclining of Princes to tyranny, and Subjects to rebellion.

But in case it fall out, that our Politician is beyond all hope to be induced
to so much as to pretend to any matter of divine Faith, he shall find
instructions for humane faith, whereby to believe what is necessary to guide
him in the way of temporal policy, which above all requires that by true,
direct, and honest dealings, he gains so much credit to himself, as to be
believed by others, without which all his drifts and shifts will come to
nothing. If we cannot bring him to the perfection of Christian virtue, yet our
labor will not be lost, if we can persuade him, that the greatest engine to
work his own interest, is moral honesty; for, by seeking himself in this
way, he will be drawn to do good to others, and withdrawn from those
mischiefs and miseries, wherewith Politicians, following their ordinary course,
are used to disturb and ruin the state of mankind.

And thus much concerning the Title and drift of the Book. As to the style,
which some Protestant might wish were more gentle and courteous to his Clergy,
I must deal plainly with thee, and tell thee, that I am so naturally averse
from base and false cheating, which I discover so frequently and manifestly in
all the Protestant Writers which I ever had occasion to peruse, that out of
mere detestation of such unworthy unchristian proceeding, wherewith they
delude and destroy so many souls, which Christ valued at the rate of his own
Blood; that I can neither find in my heart, nor find any reason to court base
knavery with respectfull ceremony. I have a good warrant from the example of
ancient Fathers, who never took it for a point of charity, to treat
heretical Impostours with civility; neither could I ever find they had to do
with persons so shameless in their forgeries, and senseless in their
fopperies, as these monsters of men our last abortive age has produced,
Besides, their writings are so full not of rallery, for want of wit, but of
railing and raging, for want of matter, and store of malice, that it is charity
to make them both know themselves, and be known to others; and it is justice,
to pay them according to their deserts. What is there to be read in Jewel,
Horn, Fox, Barlow, Andrews, Morton, Potter, and Chillingworth, and the rest of
that rabble, but false and impudent calumnies, malicious and bitter invectives
against the Catholic Clergy, from the highest to the lowest; persons for
birth, learning, virtue, and wisdom, deserving far more respect, then any
descended of the Nags-head progeny.

And albeit of late, misery has taught them more civility, then they had
occasion to learn from their Ancestors, yet even their last Authors, who
thought it policy to condescend to some courtesy, cannot forbear from
traducing the innocence of those Priests that suffered in Queen Elizabeth's
time, and justifying the barbarous cruelty of her bloody practices; and
notwithstanding they grant the Pope to be the first Patriarch, and see, to
their grief, he is a powerful Monarch, and consequently deserving, as a
confessed Bishop and Prince, the respect of language, due in good breeding to
those respective qualities, yet they treat him and his Court in so villainous
and virulent terms, as if they were scoulding with their wives at home, or at
cuffs in a Tavern with their Camerades. With much ado we have brought them to
confess that the Pope is not Antichrist, yet you may be sure, they will easily
bring themselves to comply both in words and deeds better with Antichrist
himself, if he chance to come in their time, then they have hitherto done with
the Vicar of Christ: they will sooner go in pilgrimage to Babylon, to receive
there the caracter of Antichrist, then repair to Rome for the supply of that
other, which they undoubtedly want by the manifold and manifest defects of
their fond and feigned Ordination at Lambeth.

I will detain thee no longer in the entry of this work, but wish thee as
desirous to see the truth, as I have been solicitous to set it down, without
any disguise, or design of any thing but truth it self; knowing full well,
that the God of truth is not served his own way, not only by maintaining
falsehood, but even by pretending to maintain truth by forged arguments, or
false histories: neither can I hope that God should concur with such means,
without whose concurrence, all my endeavors are of no effect; neither can I
need for the proof of things so manifestly and visibly true, to suborne false
witnesses; and I should most absurdly contradict my own principles, if I
should ^old it the duty of a Christian, to support by falsehood true
Christianity, whereas I teach a Politician, that it is against the very rules
of mere humane policy, to go about the compassing his ends by untruths and
impostures. Lastly, I should too fondly forget my self, by laying that
imputation of false dealing upon the defense of Catholic Religion, whereof I
so frequently condemn the Authors and Abettors of heretical innovation;
against whom I inveigh not through any bitterness of passion toward their
persons, but through a tender compassion of others, misled by their lies, and
deceits, to their eternal perdition.

THE INDEX OF THE CHAPTERS.
Chap. 1. HOw men come to be Atheists; and whether it may be demonstrated by
reason, that there is a God, Providence, and another life? Chap. 2. Whether it
be a manifest foppery, not to believe that there is a God, though his existence
were not demonstrated: and whether Atheism alone, without any other sin, be
a reasonable and sufficient cause of damnation? Chap. 3. Whether God ought to
be served his own way, and in what manner? Chap. 4. That to believe God, and
consequently to serve him his own way, its necessary to repair to an
infallible guide, which is no other but the Roman Catholic Church. Chap. 5.
That all Religions pretending to reform the Roman Catholic, are but humane
inventions, grounded upon weak policy, strong fancy, and sensual pleasures.
Sect. 1. Of Lutheranisme. Sect. 2. Of Anabaptisme. Sect. 3. Of Zwinglianisme.
Sect 4. Of Calvinisme. Sect. 5. Of the Reformation in Holland, and the united
Provinces. Sect. 6. Of the Protestant Church of England in King Edward the VI.
his time. Sect. 7. Of the English Protestant Church in Queen Elizabeth's
reign. Sect. 8. Of the English Protestant Church in King James and his Sons
reign. Sect. 9. Of the Kirk of Scotland.
Chap. 6. That no Policy could heretofore, or can for the future give any
supernatural appearance to the reformed Churches, whereby any rational
persons may be mistaken in their way to heaven, by confounding them with the
true Catholic Church. Chap. 7. That Policy has destroyed it self by courting
Protestancy, as being near allied to Atheism, the greatest enemy of civil
government. Chap. 8. That Protestancy inclines the Prince to Tyranny, and the
Subjects to Rebellion. Chap. 9. That the Popes spiritual jurisdiction is
nothing dangerous to Sovereigns, but rather that the ground of fidelity and
obedience due to them, is utterly destroyed by denying the Popes supremacy; and
that it is a greater foppery in Protestants, then in Catholics, to deny his
infallibility. Chap. 10. That the foundation of Justice, and form of
Judicature, is wholly destroyed by penal Laws and oaths against any point of
the Roman Catholic Religion. Chap. 11. That it is impossible to be a wise
Statesman, and effect businesses, without moral honesty; and that it is most
dangerous for a Prince to have Counselors that are dishonest men. Chap. 12.
That it is impossible for a Politician to compass his designs by untruths and
impostures; and that nothing is more contrary to Policy, then vanity. Chap. 13.
How necessary it is for a Statesman to be a man of honor, and of his word; and
how great a difference there is between Policy and Craft? Chap 14. That
nothing is more dangerous to a Prince, or contrary to Policy, then to make use
of Ministers of State odious to his own Subjects, either for their vices or
misfortunes. Chap. 15. That it is great wisdom and policy in Princes, to make
use of Clergymen in State affairs.
THE POLITICIANS CATHECHISME.
CHAP. I.
How men come to be Atheists; and whether it may be demonstrated by reason,
that there is a God, Providence, and another life?

1 THERE is a generation of men half witted, and not so much as half learned,
but wholly vicious, who persuade themselves, that the soul is a blast of wind,
the other life an imaginary Vtopia, God a Chimaera which only has a being in
the weak brains of ignorant people; Heaven, and Hell, old wives tales,
invented by States men to keep the Subjects in awe, and pliable to the Prince
his will, and pleasure, by the dreadful notion of Eternity. The multitude (say
they) must be cheated into its own good, and consequently into peace, and
subjection; and no cheat is more plausible, or less suspected, then that
which men call Religion; provided, that such as have least, and govern the
Commonwealth, counterfeit most, and seem to be more zealous for the
establishment of the Church, then solicitous for themselves, or their posterity.

2 Men are not borne Atheists, neither are their minds possessed of these
extravagant fancies on a sudden; they fall by degrees, first from the love of
God, and then from his knowledge. From the love of God they fall by every
mortal sin; but from his knowledge, by a custom and excess of sinning, and
by drowning themselves in sensual pleasures, which divert their thoughts from
the consideration of spiritual things, and even from the best part of
themselves, the soul. Notwithstanding this distraction, and their being so
bewitched, and besotted with sense, now and then they feel a certain remorse,
and guilt of conscience; which remorse, and guilt of conscience strikes them
into a terror, or fear of divine justice; this fear degenerates into
despair of mercy: fear of justice, and despair of mercy do so trouble their
souls, and understandings, that they recurre to the will to be eased, which
endeavors to help them with a fond wish, or desire, that no such thing
there were as God, Providence, and another world: this desire creates a fancy
like unto it self, and that without any difficulty, because men are apt to
soothe themselves with fancying what they desire; and such a fancy transformed
into a real persuasion, is that which we call Atheism: whereof the seed is
vice; remorse, and guilt of conscience, the dispositions; despair of mercy,
the matter; a fond and perverse will, the agent; a wish of Gods impossibility,
the action; and the form, a fantastical opinion of his own existence.
Whereby it appears, that Atheism is no work of a sound judgment, but of a
depraved will, guided not by reason, but seduced by passion. Atheists in
denying God, Providence, and the next life, judge not by the understanding, but
by the will, not by reason, but by inclination; they believe that God does not
exist, because they wish he were impossible.

3 Seeing therefore I have to do with persons that measure the possibility, or
impossibility of things by wishes, and inclinations, I have thought of an
argument suitable to their humor, waving other convincing, and ordinary
demonstrations of Gods existence, grounded upon a series of causes, and
effects, and upon the disposition, beauty, and order of this great Universe. I
intend therefore to prove the possibility of God, by a wish, or desire of his
existence; against which method Atheists can have no exceptions, because it is
their own, with this difference only, that my wish, or desire shall follow
reason, whereas theirs goes before it, or rather against it; because they give
the will not only the precedence, but also turn it in opposition to reason.

4 To demonstrate that God is not impossible, is to demonstrate his existence;
because if he can be, he is; for, none but himself can withstand his being, as
his possibility of being is from none but himself. Now, I prove that he is not
impossible. The object of a wish, or desire, guided by evident reason, cannot
be impossible, unless we will say, that between evident reason, and manifest
foppery, there is no difference: for, what greater foppery, then to think,
that clear and evident reason should put us upon the wish, and desires, and
consequently upon the hopes, and endeavors toward the obtaining of an
impossibility? The distinction between evident, and obscure, or probable
reason, is, that evident reason cannot confound truth with falsehood,
possibility with impossibility; but obscure, or probable reason, may judge
probable what is impossible. So that if evident reason does solicit, and
incline us to wish, and desire that there were a God, Providence, and another
life, they must be real objects, and not fond impossibilities.

5 There is no wish, or desire more natural to man, nor more evidently
reasonable in it self, then an absolute inclination to just satisfaction for
injuries received. The more rational men are, the more troubled they are at
tyranny, and injustice; the desire of satisfaction in them, is greater then in
any others, because they have greater strength of reason; which absolutely
desires to be rid of that pain it feels, when we see in others poverty
oppressed, or innocence condemned. Every injustice of a Tyrant, or malefactor,
does occasion in us a most rational desire of satisfaction, not proceeding
from interest or passion, but from an evident dictamen of reason, which is
clearly proved, because we resent not only our own, but also the injuries
done to others of no relation to us, and wish they were punished, and
redressed: which desire is not grounded upon sense, that seeks no more then
its own good. But if there be not a God, Providence, and another life, all
these our rational desires, and good wishes, are but so many foolish
insinuations to impossibilities; for, sad experience does demonstrate, that
they who commit the greatest tyrannies, and injustices, are often most
powerful, not subject to any Law, but to their own will, and pleasure; they
are out of the reach of justice in this world. Therefore there must be another,
where those that suffer wrong, may be satisfied, and those that do it,
punished by a supreme Deity of infinite power, and wisdom, whom no force can
withstand, no policy deceive. If not, evident reason is a mere foppery,
because it sets us upon absolute desires of impossibilities, and gives us a
vain assurance of that we are not sure to obtain.

6 I do not see how Atheists can disprove this argument, without condemning
themselves, and all mankind, for following the dictamen of reason in any
business. If evident reason may lead men to impossibilities, when they think
of God, and the next life, what evidence, or assurance can they have in this
world of not being fooled in the most rational designs? Perhaps some man in
his dreams may please himself in this foolish fancy, that reason by the
mischief of wicked men is fallen into so great a misfortune, as to fall upon
desires of what is impossible to attain. A sad misfortune indeed, which makes
reason not only miserable, but unreasonable, which in effect is, not to be
reason. A change greater then God himself, in the opinion of any, can make,
who cannot alter essences, to make a thing be, and not be what it is in his
proper being. For, if reason, being reason, should absolutely incline us to
gape, and grasp at impossible Chimaeras, it would be so far from being
reason, that no greater foolery can be conceived.

7 Yet peradventure waking out of his dream, he may frame us yet another wiser
objection, saying, that our misfortune is only in this, not that reason
becomes no reason by being turned into nonsense, but that we mistake that for
reason, which is no reason, thinking that which seems evident to us, to be the
dictamen of true reason, whereas it may be, that our clearest thoughts are but
specious, and plausible errors. But if this be so, I must make bold to demand
of my witty adversary, whether he does not want both wit, and judgment? when
upon the dictamens of his seeming reason, he busies himself about the
compassing those designs which his said seeming reason inclines him unto. And
further press him, whethet he suspects any error in these following Tenets,
which all may think they have reason to hold? for example, That we ought to be
grateful to our friends, dutiful to our parents, Ioyall to our Sovereigns:
That we ought in general to fly evil, seek good, to enjoy what happiness we
can with reason hope to obtain. For, if reason be suspected of error, there
is no reason to rely upon it with assurance in these most commonly received as
rational Tenets. Wherefore if reason inclining us to the desire of a God, and
another life, may be suspected of error, as deluding us with a vain hope of
what is impossible, an Atheist will be obliged, to his shame, to call in
question the aforesaid principles, which no man not wholly devoyd of all shame,
honor, and honesty, dare either in the presence of others, or in his own
conscience offer to bring into disputation, or doubt. Now it follows in order
that we further inquire.

CHAP. II.
Whether it be a manifest foppery, not to believe that there is a God, though
his existence were not demonstrated? and whether Atheism alone, without any
other sin, be a reasonable and sufficient cause of damnation?

1 THe foppery of an ignorant and presumptuous person, does not consist so much
in his ignorance, as in his presumption. Wise men may be ignorant of many
things; but none can be wise, who presumes to know what he never could learn,
or is above his capacity. I do not call Atheists fools, because they do not
demonstrate the being of a God; but seeing they can have no reason to think
the contrary, and that wiser men then they, do confidently affirm, that God
is demonstrated, its want of judgment not to believe what they do not, or
will not comprehend, especially when they run the greatest of all hazards by
not believing. He that is resolved not to take any knowledge by trust, or
tradition, is rather a beast, then a rational creature he is not fit for
humane society, neither can he pretend any kindred, or inheritance, there being
no proof for either, if we reject the testimony of lawful witnesses. There is
not a more universal, or constant tradition, or testimony of lawful witnesses
for any thing, then for the being of a God, Providence, and another life;
though it were never demonstrated, it ought to be credited, especially by
Atheists, who are as ignorant, as presumptuous of knowledge. We never read that
any of the ancient Philosophers, or great wits of the world, contradicted the
tradition of Gods being: two, or three of the lowest bank, rather Philologers,
then Philosophers, as Diagoras, Lucian, and Pliny, looked that way, because
they declined from virtue, and never inclined their minds to solid learning,
and would feign have rid themselves of the remorse of conscience, the sour
sauce wherewith sensual delights are seasoned.

2 One of the greatest fooleries a man can commit, is, to cast himself into a
manifest danger without cause; for, danger is not only the forerunner of
evil, but is an evil it self. To expose a man to the hazard of loosing his
life, is an evil done him, though by good fortune he should escape. And albeit
Atheists fancy to themselves, that God is but a Chimaera, and the next world,
Vtopia, they cannot deny, that this fancy exposes them to a manifest danger of
damnation; because if the contrary prove true, as it may for all they know,
the evidence of torments will fools undeceive them, and drive them out of
their fools paradise, when repentance will be too late. The greater appearance
there is of any evil, the greater is the danger; and the appearance of a God
(though not the reality) being evident to Atheists, in the fabrike and order of
the Universe, as also in many supernatural signs, and prodigies: by denying
him, they must of necessity incur the danger of his indignation, in case he
does exist; from which they cannot rationally expect to be freed, by the
pretended probability of their erroneous opinion; because though it should be
as probable as they imagine, that there is not a God, yet the choice of an
opinion more dangerous in practice, then probable in speculation, as theirs is,
is so great a foppery, that only mad men can ground upon it their salvation,
and think it a sufficient satisfaction for divine Justice.

3 And though we should grant to Atheists, that its possible we may be mistaken
in our belief, and hopes of God, and another life; yet we suffer no great
prejudice by the mistake: to abstain from base and transitory pleasures,
cannot be any great loss. But if they will consider the much we have reason to
hope for, and the little advantage they have of virtuous men, by following
vice; and will also reflect upon the danger they run by denying and offending
God: they must conclude, that though our hopes should come to nothing, we
cannot be deprived of this satisfaction, and praise, that we did in our
belief, and actions, what rational men ought to have done, all circumstances
considered; whereas they, in this world, must be esteemed no better then
fools, for running so manifest a hazard of damnation: and if there be no other
life, we are no worse then they, because they cannot brag of their choice made
in this world, nor receive in the other any congratulations of friends, for the
good fortune they had, in preferring here vice before virtue, and Atheism
before Christianity.

4 But now let us prove, that though Atheists had no other sin but Atheism,
they can have no excuse to allege, for not believing and worshipping God; but
rather that they do him a positive injury, and therefore are justly condemned.
Men may have evidence of their own obligation to believe a truth that is not
evident.There is not any principle more evident then that which commands us, to
deal with others as our selves would be dealt withal: what Atheist is there,
that would not take it for an injury, to be treated like a clown, and a knave,
if he has the garb, habit, and attendance of a Prince, and all the outward
signs of moral honesty? If there be an evident obligation not to injure
others, and it be an injury not to treat persons according to their
appearance, its manifest that all men are obliged to believe, that there is a
God, who ought to be honored and adored, because there is greater appearance
of his infinite power and wisdom in what is visible to our eyes, then any
Atheist, or other man can show for his own nobility, or morality. If every
person may challenge a right to be treated according to his exterior
appearance, though his quality be not evident, its an injury to God, and a
damnable sin, to except his Divine Majesty from so general a rule. Whence it
does follow, that though men had no other sin to answer for, but Atheism,
that alone is a sufficient and just cause of their damnation.

5 The bare possibility of being mistaken in a man's quality, or dignity, is no
sufficient warrant to deny him that honor and respect, which is due to others
of his rank, and does sufficiently appear in himself by evident signs, and
authentike testimonies. Its very certain that Impostours have counterfeited,
and abused not only titles of Nobility, but also the dignity of Majesty. But
the fault of few ought not to prejudice the right of many, and its better to
run the hazard of being mistaken, then to abuse others. If the obligation of
paying the tribute of honor, and respect, where it seems to be due, be so
precise, that it must not be denied to any who may claim it, notwithstanding
the possibility of impostures, and mistakes; how much more precise is our
obligation not to deny respect, and honor to an appearance that cannot be
counterfeited? The fabrike, order, and beauty of the Universe, together with
the miracles, and supernatural prodigies, that are visible to such, and so
many, as make them credible to all, are things we may admire, but not imitate.
No Impostour will venture to counterfeit so rare a piece, as the great machine
of this world.

6 Seeing therefore that something there is, which seems by these effects to
be most powerful, most wise, and most perfect, we ought so to judge, and
believe, and give it due honor, and respect. The right to such duties,
acquired by outward appearance, and signs, does extend it self even to our
inward and most secret thoughts, which is the only reason why a rash judgment
is a sin, and why men may be as injurious in thinking ill of others, as in
backbiting. If we must not judge otherwise of men, then they seem to be, much
less of God. We must not be Christians in our words, and Atheists in our
thoughts. Therefore the obligation of believing, honoring, and loving God, is
evident, though the Deity it self were not as evident as it is, even to the
most vulgar understandings, that are not stupefied by vice, and besotted with
sensual pleasures. Now, supposing its demonstrated that there is a God, or at
least that we are convinced of our obligation to believe there is one, we may
proceed to inquire,

CHAP. III.
Whether God ought to be served his own way, and in what manner?

1 THere is not an absolute Prince, that does not pretend as his birthright, or
prerogative, to be served his owe way, that is, as himself thinks fit, and not
according to his Subjects discretion. If this be granted to Princes, our fellow
Creatures, how can it be denied to the Creator? Princes may err in the conduct
of affairs, God is infallible. Princes may employ unfit instruments, men not
valued, or hated by their people: God by employing men, does enable them, and
supply their defects. Princes may look more upon their own interest, then
upon the common good, in their projects, and designs: God can have no design
upon his Creatures, but their own good; his interest is their happiness. To
be brief, Princes are men, and though no Subjects, yet subject to all humane
frailties; but God is as free from any frailty, as from subjection. Therefore
if according the maxim of Politicians, Princes must be served their own way,
God must not be deprived of the like prerogative.

2 Whether Princes ought to be served their own Way, is not for my present
purpose to examine; yet I must presume to tell them, that its no part of their
prerogative, to define, or declare, what way God has appointed for his own
service: the politic ends are not always agreeable, or compatible with Gods
ordinations, and in such case we must serve Princes in Gods way, not in their
own: no humane Laws, or Kings pleasure ought to be preferred before Gods
commandments. Its as evident that God may choose his own way of being
worshipped, as it is manifest that worship is due to so great a Majesty. Some
Rites and ceremonies of divine Worship may be left to men's choice, and
discretion; but before they undertake it, they must show their commission for
so great a power, and eminent a charge. Every one must not presume to be Master
of ceremonies in Gods Church, and Court. If there were not a way settled for the
worship of God before we came into the world, perhaps every man might choose
his own; but to intrude new Rites, and Laws into a Commonwealth, contrary to
the government long established, has been always judged in the State,
dangerous, and in the Church, damnable. Master Hooker in his books of
Ecclesiastical Policy, is much admired, and cried up by some Protestants,
because he proves, by Catholic arguments, that the Church of God may command
the practice of Rites, and ceremonies: but he is far from proving, that the
new fangled English Protestant Church is the Church of God, and therefore could
never conclude, that Puritans, or any others, ought to suit themselves in the
new fashion of the Church of Englands formalities, because they must show their
authority, before they intrude their formalities, and take away realities.

3 Its as unwarrantable to reject ancient Rites, and ceremonies, as to impose
new ones, without authentike testimonies, and signs of divine authority. If
the Church that went before us, and upon whose relation we must depend for the
knowledge of times past, does testify, that such ceremonies as seem now to
fools, ridiculous, and to the ignorant, superfluous, were invented by God, or
by men, to whom he committed the care of our instruction; we must practice
them, and persuade our selves, that it is not in the power of any Nags-head
Convocation, The English Protestant Ministry descends from a few consecrated
at the Nags-head in Cheapside, invalidly for many reasons deduced in a late
Book of the Nature of Catholic Faith, and Heresy.
to frame a new Religion or 39. Articles, reject old ceremonies, pare, and
shave of the matter and form of Sacraments, and degrade the Order of
Priesthood of all Ecclesiastical ornaments, the cap, surplise, and black
scarf excepted. Puritans proceed more consequently, they retain no Popish
dregs, nor rags of Rome, (as they call them) and firmly believe, that God
cannot be served in spirit, if the Minister of his Word appears not before
him in cuerpo, rid of all Aaronicall ornaments. But with their good leave, to
serve and worship God in spirit, is not to reject or reform ancient Rites and
ceremonies, but rather by performing them, the spirit is raised to God with
reflection upon the mysteries in them contained. The ancient Fathers, and
Doctors of the Catholic Church, S. Ambr. lib. 1. de Sacerd. c. 1. and de iis
quae initiantur mysteriis c. 1.
practiced even that, which of all is most excepted against, in the
administration of Baptism, and is less undecent then the making a plaster of
spitle and dust; S. Greg. in Sacram. Tertull. lib. ad Scapulam. S. Aug. tract.
44. in Joan. Euangel. Alcum. lib. deliv. Offic. de Sabbatho S. Paschae. Beda in
0.7. Marc. Homil. 19.
a sign, that our Savior would not Have us so nice, and squeamish as
Protestants are. I am sure if we reflect upon the Israelits, we shall find the
chief worship they gave unto God in their sacrifices, accompanied with so
noisome circumstances in their fleaing, pulling out the bowels, and frying the
fat of beasts, that they would make a nice Proteshint stomach rise, although it
be able to digest a dish of as course stuff for a Fridays breakfast. As for
the dress wherein our S. Anacletus qui vixit temporibus Domitiani, Ep. 1. de
oppr. Episc. Steph. Papa, and Martyr, vixit an. 250 Ep. 1. ad Hilar. Origin
hom. 11. c. 20. Levi. S. Hieron. lib. 13. Comment. in cap. 44 Ezech.
Bishops, and Priests celebrate their functions, antiquity called it sacred,
though Novelists term it profane, or superfluous. There is not one ceremony
practiced in the Roman Catholic Church, which deriveth not its beginning from
God, or by his authority from primitive times; all relate to divine Mysteries,
as you may read in Durantius De ritibus Ecclesiae Catholicae, and in that
excellent Book, The Protestants Apology for the Church of Rome.

4 Whereas ceremonies be the object of phantasy, and ours are so decent, that
no phantasy can except more against them, then against those of the Law of
Moses, instituted by God himself, and approved by Protestants, the aversion
which they manifest against our Ceremonies, cannot proceed so much from their
fancy, as from their understanding, dissenting from that Doctrine to which the
Ceremonies relate. To kneel, is not an object ridiculous, or offensive to the
fancy: the most precise practice it out of Churches, and at Court; and yet all
Protestants cry abomination against kneeling to our Lord Jesus Christ in the
Sacrament, or worshipping himself, or his Saints in Images; these ceremonies
agree well enough with their fancy, but their understanding cannot brook them.
A weak understanding may occasion as great errors, as a strong fancy.

5 Some fantastical and fanaticall fellows, call the Roman Catholic
Religion, an Apith Keligion, because forsooth, it has so many odd ceremonies.
But the fault is not in the Roman Religion, or ceremonies, they have Apish
understandings, they look as Apes upon our ceremonies, without considering the
mysteries. All the ceremonies of the Mass, relate to Christ's Passion, others
to the mysteries of the Trinity and Incarnation. If it was lawful and laudable
in the old Law, to practice ceremonies representing things that were to come,
why should we Catholics be censured for ceremonies that put us in mind of
past mysteries, and mercies? We ought not to be unmindfull, or ungrateful, and
there is not a more efficacious way to preserve a grateful memory of past
benefits, then by representing them in ceremonies to the light.

6 I must confess that all Sectaries have as great cause to cry down
ceremonies, as we Catholics have to uphold them. Because the strongest pillar
of the true Church, is a continual tradition of Catholic Doctrine from the
primitive times to this present, and this pillar of Tradition is much
strengthened by the practice of ceremonies relating to that Doctrine delivered
from hand to hand, which we now maintain as Catholic, against Heresy, or
pretended Reformation. To adore the blessed Sacrament both in Church, and
Processions, is a strong argument of Christ's real presence, not only in the
act or use of Communion, but also before, and after. What mervaile therefore,
that they who deny Christ's real presence or grant it only in the actual use
of Communion, should oppose the adoration, whereby their false Doctrine is so
clearly condemned by the practice of the faith full; these, and other Catholic
ceremonies, are not odious to Protestants because they are ceremonies, but
because they put them in mind of the ancient Faith and Doctrine of Christ's
Church. To reject some of the ancient ceremonies, and retain others (as the
Nags-head Congregation does) is to furnish their adversaries (Catholics and
Puritans) with unanswerable arguments; their choice of ceremonies does prove
their choice of Doctrine, and their choice of Doctrine demonstrates them
Heretics; an Heretic being he, who chooses out of the Doctrine delivered by
the Church what he fancies, rejecting what he thinks not fit for his purpose.
Our Prelaticall Protestants must, with the rest, cast away their Bishops
bonnet, lawne sleeves, he white surplise, and black scarf; if not, they may
cast their cap, and despair of answering to Catholic or Puritan objections:
they must keep all, or nothing, unless they can produce better evidence for
their pretended Reformation, then the fancy of 7. or 12. men in King Edward the
Sixth his time, confirmed by the authority of a young head of the Church, and a
Parliament called by the Protector Seamour, to establish in England Zwinglian
fopperies, and reject the Christian Doctrine, and discipline of our Catholic
Ancestors; they must not rely upon Queen Elizabeth's she supremacy, or their
Nags-head Ordination, and Synod, with their London Assemblies, and
Hampton Court Conferences of lay Ministers. God must be served his own way,
and not by framing Religions ^o the humor of people, or interests of Kings,
Queens, Parliaments, and Protectors. But before we go further in censuring
these Protestant ways, let us prove

CHAP. IV.
That to believe God, and consequently to serve him his own way, its necessary
to repair to an infallible Guide, which is no other but the Roman Catholic
Church.

1 THe first step in the way of Gods service, is, to believe God; a step of no
less difficulty, then necessity. Suppose there were a man dropped down from the
heavens, graced with this singular privilege, that the sound of his words could
no sooner be at our ears, then the evidence of their truth before our eyes;
whatsoever he said, in the same instant we did see confirmed by the real
appearance of the objects, and our own experience. This singular privilege
would deprive him of another, common to all men of worth and integrity; it
would make him incapable or being believed; all who hear him, would assent to
what he said, but for their own evidence, not for his veracity. When any thing
is evident to our understanding, or to our eyes, we believe our selves, and not
others, though they should tell us the same we do experience. If God were
pleased to manifest himself to men in such a manner, that they had evidence it
is he who speaks to them, he had deprived us of the merit of Faith, and
himself of that duty which we are obliged to give every honest man: for,
though Divine Faith does exclude all doubts and fears of falsehood, yet it
supposes in the subject a possibility of doubting, if men will be obstinate
and imprudent; but there is none so obstinate, and imprudent, that can doubt of
the truth of Gods words, if it be evident to him that God spoke them. Though we
hear men speak, we do them a courtesy in believing them, because they are
fallible, and we do not read the truth in their words, though we believe them;
but if we had evidence that God uttered any words, the truth of them must be as
clear, as it is, that he can neither lie, nor be mistaken: and if the truth be
clear, and evident to our understandings, we believe our selves, and not God,
though he should speak it. To believe, is to trust, and he that has evidence
of any truth, does as little trust the speaker, as we rely upon another credit
for the money we have in our own coffers.

2 Seeing therefore that either God must not be believed by men, or that he
must disguise himself, and speak to them by others, who can be so impudent as
to deny, that we deserve damnation* if we do not believe and obey God in that
Church, which he has been pleased to institute as his own Interpreter, Quod
autem rogant unde persuadebimur, a Deo fluxisse Scripturam, nisi ad Eccleisae
decretum confugiamus perinde est, ac si quu roget unde discemus lucem
discernere a tenebris, album and nigro etc. lib. 1. Inst. Cap. 7. sect. 2.
Petenda est haec per suasio ab arcano spiritus testimonto etc sect. 2. Non
aliud loquor quam quod apud se expetitur fideltum unusquisque etc. sect. 5.
for our instruction? I cannot deny, there is great difficulty in believing,
that every thing which the Church proposes as revealed, is Gods revelation;
yet this pill must be swallowed, if we resolve to believe God, who cannot be
believed if he speaks in his own voice, and tone; because it is evidently
inseparable from truth; and we cannot believe what by force of clear evidence
we cannot deny. Hence (by the way) it follows, that no Protestant, or
Puritan, does believe God, if they ground their faith upon the evidence they
pretend to have of Scriptures being Gods Word or upon that of their private
spirit; both which (says Calvin) are discerned as clearly by himself, and his
brethren, to be Divine evidences, and not Diabolical, as white is discerned
from black, sweet from sour, and light from darkness. Its very improbable
that God deprived himself of his right, and was contented not to be believed,
that Calvin, and his Protestant crew, might be eased of a duty, which they
exact and receive from every person that has a good opinion of their honesty.

3 Supposing it is as evident that there is a Church of God upon earth, as it
is reasonable he ought to be believed by men, we must endeavor to find it
our. The Church is an infallible Guide to lead us to God: but who is the
infallible Guide to had us to the Church? Reason. But reason in obscurity may
be mistaken; and what is more obscure, then the way to the true Church
environed with so many false Sects? If our bell efe were limited to natural
verities, reason might make some shift, every man might pretend, that his own
wit would be a sufficient guide for himself: but seeing Christian Faith must
stretch further then humane capacity, there must be some supernatural help.
In obscure matters, says Aristotle, (with all wise men) reason must be
contented with clear signs, and not expect evidence of the truth And because
the Church or God does propose supernatural truths, the signs must be also
supernatural. And because there is so great difference between humane
understandings God has been pleased to make his Church discernable by
sensible and visible supernatural signs, that they who have least
understanding, may not have less faith then the most witty and learned, if
they will but open their eyes, and reflect upon what they see. This is the
reason why so few can pretend ignorance of the true Church if they have any
sense in them, they may easily distinguish it from all heretical
Congregations. The evident signs therefore whereby the true and Catholic
Church is known, consists not in exterior formalities, that may take their
beginning from humane policy, or from a natural inclination to decency, and
good order. The Protestant Church of England had as few signs of supernatural
grace, as any other pretending Reformation, yet in the eyes of some it looked
pretily, and was more decent in the service, then other Northern Churches of
Lutherans; and some of their Nags-bead Ministers affected a certain
Ecclesiastical gravity in their garb and habit; notwithstanding in my opinion
a secular dress would better become their mere secularity, and want of
ordination. The Ministers in Germany look more Protestantlike in their short
cloakes, spade beards, and blew starcht ruffs, then our English Common Prayer
Ministers do in their long cloakes, and surplises, which they wear more for
policy, then Religion

4 Seeing Reason must be contented with clear signs, when the truth is not
evident, and that no evident or clear supernatural signs appear in any
Congregation of men, but in the Roman Catholic; it must be concluded, that the
true Church is that only Congregation of men, which profess the Roman
Catholic Faith. That no signs of grace do appear in any Church pretending
Reformation, is as clear, as it is, that all the world is not blind; for, as
yet neither themselves, nor any other, could see in any of their Sects, one
miracle, or any other thing that looked like supernatural; though they tell us
of some Divine motions, and impulses of the private spirit, they are as
incredible, as it is impossible that God should oblige any man to take a
Protestants bare word, against the tradition and testimony of the Christian
world informer ages confirmed with undeniable miracles, and sanctity of life.
But some seeing the private spirit is ridiculous, would feign persuade us, that
we may read their Reformation in Scripture so evidently declared, that they
wonder how we can have the least doubt against it. We Catholics have been
above a hundred years turning and tossing the Bible, with as great care and
study, as the matter required, and yet we could never hit upon one Protestant
Tenet ^n Scripture, though we have reason to think that we understand it as
well as our neighbors; which is very strange, if their Doctrine be evidently
contained in it. But there is nothing more obscure, the evidence, wherein men
equally learned, and honest, do not agree. Nothing can make them disagree in
the interprettation, and sense of Scripture, but the obscurity thereof, or
obstinacy, or ignorance; if they be obstinate, they are not honest; if
ignorant, they are not as learned as their adversaries; and its certain* we do
Pro estants a favor in comparing or making them equal w th Catholic Doctors
in either: but when men dispute, he that has evident truth on his side, may
grace his adversary with any advantage, as I do at the present, supposing, not
granting, that Protestant Ministers were equal with Catholic Doctors in
learning and virtue, that thereby it may appear how obscure the Scripture is
wh re Protestants pretend it to be clear, and the sense most manifest.

5 I will not make a long Litanies of the supernatural and visible signs
which app are in the Roman Catholic Church. Miracles have been in all ages,
and are now so frequent amongst us, that there is not a Country, or Province,
wherein the Roman Religion is professed, which does not produce testimonies so
prudently credible of true and supernatural miracles, that to deny them, were
to destroy all human faith, and reduce men to credit nothing that is affirmed
by men, however so well qualified with sound judgment, great learning, and
known integrity Yet Protestants object, its strange themselves never see any
miracle, being so desirous, and miracles so frequent as we pretend. Herod was
also very desirous to see a miracle, but his curiosity excluded him from that
favor: men who belive nothing but what they see, deserve not to see miracles,
because they are obstinate. Yet there are few Protestants, who do not see
miracles: what greater miracle, then that all Catholics turn not Protestants?
If the continual victory over natural and vehement inclinations does require
a miracle of supernatural grace, we are as naturally and vehemently inclined
to their Religion, as we are to our own liberties and pleasures: what greater
miracle, then that sober and learned men should be persuaded, that their senses
are deceived in the Sacrament of the Altar, and that they should suffer death
for the mystery of Transubstantiation? These must be effects of supernatural
grace, and Not of ignorance, or obstinacy, which cannot be laid to our charge,
seeing we submit our judgments to every definition of the Roman Church, and
our very adversaries know we are learned.

6 Sanctity of life is a supernatural sign and effect of grace, and of the
true Church. This sanctity is evident in the Roman Church. Not to speak of
Antomes, Hilarions, or Stilluas lets draw nearer our times, and consider the
lives of Saint Bernard. Saint Dominike, Saint Francis, Saint Vincent Ferrer,
Saint Francis of Paula, Saint Charles Borromeus, Saint Teresa, Saint Francis
Xaverius, and many more, who were known Roman Catholics, professing the same
Tenets, and obedience to the Pope, which we now maintain against pretended
Reformation. And not to speak only of the dead, let any indifferent person
consider, how in all vocations of both Clergy and Layty, we have many persons
eminent in virtue, far above that degree of morality, to which some
Protestants may attain, as well as some Pagans and Philosophers, who were
far from Christian perfection, called sanctity of life. Let our English
Protestant be pleased to weigh with himself, whether young Ladies of as great
quality, fortunes, and gifts of nature as England does afford, could forsake
their native Country kindred, and friends, contemn all pleasures of the world
and themselves, by embracing a religious, poor, and penitent life in
perpetual end sure, submitting their wills to the obedience and humor of a
woman: could this, I say, be performed by so many, so continually, and with so
great alacrity and content of mind, without a miraculous and supernatural
grace of the Almighty? In my judgment its a greater miracle, that such persons
should resolve by a voluntary banishiment to dye to their Country, and
friends, and to the whole world by a religious profession, and to bury
themselves alive in a Cloister; then if they had restored life to others, and
banished death from graves and monuments.

7 Now after that our Protestant Gentleman has considered our Catholic
Monasteries, let him examine, whether in his own Church there has been, or
now is, any thing resembling so much Religion, and supernatural virtue, as
that which amongst us is not admired (though admirable) because so ordinary.
This kind of life is as far from Protestants practice and Doctrine, as it is
from natural inclination. Yet I have heard, that Master Laud of Canterbury,
was once inclined to erect some Protestant Nunneries in England. I believe it
would occasion as great stirs as his Reformation did in Scotland, because no
thing is more opposite to the Tenets of the reformed Ghospel, and first
Reformers, then to make vows of poverty, chastity, and obedience, Protestancy
begun, and is founded upon the dissolving of Monasteries and religions vows,
and is not compatible with their observance, if things must be carried on by
the same means that acquired them a being. Its very true that Cranmer of
Canterbury, the first Patriarch of Protestancy in England, caused an enclosure
of wood to be made, I mean a Chest, wherein he shut up his woman, and carried
her along with himself wheresoever he travailed; whereof ensued an odd
accident at Gravesend, where the Chest being much rccomended to those that
carried it to the Inn, as containing precious stuff belonging to my Lords
grace, they severed it from the rest, and put it up end-long against the wall
in my Lords chamber, with the woman's head downward, which putting her in
jeopardy to break her neck, she was forced at length to cry out, and so the
Chamberlins helped her out of her enclosure. This is amost certain story (says
my Author in his Examen of Fox his Calendar cap. 7. n. 27.) and testified at
this day by Cranmers sons widdowe yet living The Prelates of the Catholic
Church carry portable Altars: but the first Protestant Prelate, and reformed
Apostle of England, could not travail without his portable Monastery, far
more agreeable to the Religion he planted, then Matter Lauds intended plantation
of religious and chaste Nunneries.

8. The conversion of Nations to Christianity, is not only a sign of the true
Church, but also the end of its institution. This is so proper to the Roman
Catholic, even at this present, that none who heard the names of America,
Angola, China, Monomotappa, India, or Iaponia, can be ignorant of our pious
endeavors, and miraculous success, in preaching the Ghospel to so remote
Nations, where nothing that is coveted in this world, could be aimed at, or
expected by our Apostolical Preachers. I will not say any more concerning the
signs of the true Church, these being susficient to convince any person that
desires to be saved, that out or the Roman Church there is no salvation, seeing
it alone has supernatural and visible signs, whereby God does declare
sufficiently that it is an infallible guide, to inform men of his mysteries,
and direct them in the way he has prescribed for his Divine service,
commanding all mortals to hear and obey it, as they would hear and obey
himself. Whosoever does the contrary, injures God, and calls his Divine
veracity in question.

9 God is as much injured by Protestants, and all others who deny, or doubt of
what the Roman Catholic Church proposes in his name, as any man can be
injured, by not being believed when he speaks. The injury done to men when
they are not believed, consists in not trusting them, or in not taking their
word for the truth, though the truth does not appear. If we do not trust God,
and take his Word, as it is uttered by the Roman Catholic Church, for truth,
we are resolved not to trust him at all, because when any truth is evident to
us, we cannot receive it by trust from another; and if God should speak
immediately to us, and declare that himself speaks, the truth of his words is
as evident to us, as it is that he cannot lie; and by consequence there is no
room left for trust. Therefore either we must trust him, and take his Word for
truth, when he speaks by that Church which has supernatural signs, or not at
all; and that Church is only the Roman Catholic. That God does not speak to
us immediately by himself, as men do, but by the Church, does not diminish the
injury, but makes it possible. It does not diminish the injury clone to God,
because it does appear as clearly and suffiently, by the testimony and
supernatural signs of the Roman Catholic Church, that what is by it
proposed, is Gods Word, as it does appear by any man's own testimony and
signs of integrity and sincerity, that he speaks truth. To be solicitous to
know evidently who is the Author of any words, when he disguiseth himself,
and desires to be incognito, is too much curiosity, and ill manners. But a
resolution not to believe any words proposed as Divine revelation by the
Church, because it is not evident that God is the Author of them, is heretical
obstinacy. For, its unreasonable to exact a clearer knowledge of the Author,
then of the truth of the words: if we are bound to believe the truth, though it
be not evident, we can have no reason to exact evidence of the Author,
especially when the truth of his words must be evident, if he be known, and
consequently our resolution does extend it self to this, that we will not
believe, until the truth be evident, which is not only obstinacy, but
manifest foppery, because it is as much as to say, We will believe nothing at
all. Its therefore as evident an injury to God to deny the Doctrine of the
Roman Catholic Church, though it be not evident that God is the Author
thereof, as it is, to deny the truth of any men's words when they speak
themselves, though the truth be not evident; unless perhaps we think it
reasonable to exact of God what we cannot of men, to wit, whenever he
speaks, not to believe his words unless we have evidence of their truth: for,
if God be truth, and we are resolved not to believe his words unless he
manifests himself, we are resolved not to believe them, until their truth be
manifest, seeing God is the truth of his own words, because he is truth by
essence. Of men we exact not so much, we believe their words, though the truth
be obscure.

10 This injury which is done to God, consists in calling in question his
veracity, which is an inclination to speak truth. Gods veracity is called in
question whenever any thing is sufficiently proposed as his Word, and yet it
is not believed that it is his Word, or revelation. Whether the matter
sufficiently proposed by the Church as Gods Word, and consequently as truth, be
great or small, absolutely necessary or not, it matters not, as to the denial
or doubt of Gods veracity; because he is as necessarily inclined to speak
truth in a matter of little concernment, as in the greatest. Seeing therefore
that the denial or doubt of men's veracity, consists in questioning what is
sufficiently proposed as their sense and meaning; and that the Doctrine and
sense of Scripture, embraced by the Roman Catholic Church, is sufficiently
proposed by its testimony, and evident supernatural signs, to be the sense,
revelation, and meaning of God; his veracity must be as much questioned by
calling in question the least Doctrine of the Roman Church, as the veracity of
men is called in question, by doubting of their words, whereby their thoughts
and meaning are sufficiently proposed.

11 From what hitherto has been said, its as evidently concluded, that the
Roman Catholic Church is infallible in all matters, great and small, proposed
by it as Divine revelation, as it is clear, that God would have men believe
him, or that he has a regard to his own honor and veracity he is not
concerned in either, if he permits any one falihood in the least matter,
necessary for salvation, or not necessary, to be sufficiently proposed by the
Church, as his Word, or sense; seeing he may so easily prevent it, and not
permit the Roman Catholic Church to err in any proposal. How can God exact,
or expect from us an undoubted or infallible belief, when he speaks and
d^clareth his mind by men, if those very men be not infallible in declaring
his mind? What injury can it be to God, that we doubt of his veracity* if in
his own hearing and presence, his own Interpreter, the Church, is by himself
permitted to err, and abuse his name and authority? We may lawfully suspect
his sincerity in greater matters, seeing the least blemish is as much as the
greatest inconsistent with the infinite perfection of his Nature. Therefore
either God is contented not to be believed, and to forfeit his honor and the
esteem of his veracity, or that Church which has evident and supernatural
signs of being his Interpreter, (which is the Roman Catholic alone) is
infallible in all matters, great and small, proposed as Divine revelation.

12. Hence you may gather to what great fopperies heretical obstinacy does
lead some of the most learned Ministers of the English Church, when they print,
that God is satisfied with an exterior acquiescence to the definitions of a
general Council, and of that Church which alone has the signs and marks of
being the true Catholic, though there remains an inward doubt of the
controversy defined. This is as much as to say, that God is content you give
him the lie, or afront him in private, so you be pleased to say nothing of it
in public. God is as much injured by thoughts, as by words, and an exterior
acquiescence is no satisfaction to him, without interior submission of
judgment. Its true, some of these Heretics grant, that when all the
Patriarchs, and Christian Churches of the world confer notes, and are
assembled together in a Council, (which is not likely to be as far as the
present state of the world does promise, until we all meet in the Valley of
Iosaphat) then is the time to submit our judgments, which in plain terms, is
to put of all Christian belief, and obedience to God in his Church, and
remain obstinate in heresy, until the day of judgment. But of this more
when we speak in particular of the English Church in King James and his sons
reign. As for that other shame full shift of theirs, to make all Christians
the Catholic Church, and every reformed Sect, part thereof, and the same. with
us in fundamental articles; I remit my Reader to a Treatise lately printed
concernig the Nature of Catholic Faith and Heresy, with reflection upon the
nullity of the English Protestant Church, and Clergy; and will now show in
particular

CHAP. V.
That all Religions pretending to reform the Roman Catholic, are but human
inventions, grounded upon weak policy, strong fancy, and sensual pleasures.

1 PRotestancy, or Reformation in general, is a text of Scripture corrupted,
or fondly applied by the first Reformer to his own fancy, dreams, or
pleasure; by Princes and Politicians, to worldly interest; and by the vulgar
sort, to liberty of life, and rebellion against their Sovereigns. Let the most
zealous Protestant have so much patience as to read over this Chapter, and I am
confident, he will be convinced by the very history, without disputing, that
his Religion is not injured by this caracter, or definition. And as for our
Politician, he may learn in this historical part of his Cathechisme, as many
necessary precepts for his instruction, as there are examples of Divine
Providence against the Authors and Protectors of pretended Reformation. That
all may appear without confusion, I will divide this Chapter into Sections,
and in first place recount the beginning and progress

SECT. I.
Of Lutheranisme.

2 Martin Luther was a Saxon, borne in a Lordship of Count Mansfeld, Sur. in
Commentar. and alij.
I will not affirm that his father was an Incubus, though others seem to
doubt little of it; I believe their best proof was his intimacy with the
devil, which himself does acknowledge in his writings. The 22. year of his
age he was frighted into the Order of Saint Augustine by a thunderbolt, that
killed his Camerade, both being in the fields for recreation. He taught
Philosophy to his own Friars, and Divinity in the University of Wittemberg,
which Frederike Elector of Saxony, Luthers greatest Protector, had founded.
Pope Leo the Tenth, in the year 1517. granted Indulgences to all that would
voluntarily contribute money against the Turk, who threatened all Christendom;
and committed the charge of it to Albert Elector of Mentz, that had no good
correspondency with him of Saxonny; this coldness between the two Electors,
was that which made Frederike so hot in maintaining Luther, and his Doctrine,
against Indulgences; which first he preached, and afterward printed, because
he was not chosen to preach for them, having a good talent, and it being the
custom in Germany, to make use of Augustine Friars to publish Indulgences. But
the next year after, Luther writ to the Pope, excusing his Doctrine, and
submitting himself to his judgment, yet when he was certainly informed, that
his Holiness would condemn it, he appealed from the Pope to the next General
Councell^; which is the ordinary shift of Heretics, and Politicians; seeing at
length that the Universities of Paris, Lovaine, Cullen, and others, had
commanded his writings to be burnt; and that his errors did not take much with
the people, because he had not as yet broached any inelining to lust, and
liberty, he resolved to retire into Bohemia amongst the Hussits: this
resolution was stopped by the Elector or Saxony, and some of the prime Nobility
of Franconia, who doubted not to make good use of Luther against the Clergy,
(whose lands, and goods they coveted) promising him their protection. Whereupon
he, to gratify his benefactors, and strengthen himself by a popular faction,
printed a book, and dedicated the same to the German Nobility, exhorting them,
and all good people, to join with himself in reforming the Catholic Church,
so much neglected, and notoriously corrupted in Doctrine, by the present and
ancient Clergy.

Cochlaeus de act. Luth. Vlen. berg in vita Lutheri. Florim. de orig. haeres.
Prateol. de haeres. and alij.
3 And that they might not seem to intermedle in matter which did not belong to
their jurisdiction and function, he assured them in his book, that every
Christian was a Priest, because in the new Testament there was no distinction
between Baptism and Priesthood: from whence he concluded all that, which they
aimed at, to wit, that seculars had as much right to Church Livings by their
Baptism, as Bishops, or Priests by their Ordination. And to the end that the
Emperor, and Christian Princes might be engaged in his quarrel against the
Pope, and Bishops, he inculcated to them, that they were subject to none, even
in spiritual matters, but to God; that the Popes supremacy was an usurpation,
and that Episcopacy was against Gods Law, incompatible with true Religion: in
confirmation whereof he printed this Bull: the Preface was: Attendite Episcopi
etc. Attend ye, o Bishops, nay rather marks of the devil. Doctor Martin Luther
reads to ye a Bull, which will not be grateful.

Doctor Luthers Bull, and Reformation.
Whosoever do contribute their endeavors with body, goods, and fame, to
destroy Bishoprics, and abolish the government of Bishops, they are children
of God, and true Christians, observing the commandments, and resisting the
Devils ordinations; or if they cannot do this, at least they must condemn,
and shun that government. On the other side, whosoever do defend Bishops
government, or voluntarily obey them, they are the Devils proper Ministers, and
resist Gods Law, and Ordinations. dinations. Besides this Bull, he writ a book
entitled, Adversus falso nominatum Ecclesiasitcorum statum Papae, and
Episcoporum. Against the false Ecclesiastical state of Pope, and Bishops.

4 Now that he had fitted (as he imagined) the humor of Kings, and Princes,
and awakened their passions of coveteousnesse, and ambition against the
Church Livings, and dignity of the Clergy, he thought it necessary for the
carrying on of his design, to comply with the genius, and liberty of the
vulgar people, and make his Religion plausible amongst the ignorant multitude,
by assuring them that Faith alone, without good works, was sufficient to save
men, putting the word alone in the very text, and not in the margen of
Scripture. Not content with this, he resolved to draw many of the vicious and
ignorant Clergy to his side, by writing a book De vita conjugali, Of a married
life, wherein he condemns vows of chastity, exhorts Priests and Religious
to marriage, and married men to make use of the serving maid, in case the wife
be humorsome; if either party commit adultery, the innocent may immediately
choose another husband, or wife; and if there be no hopes of children by the
husband, his brother, or next kinsman may supply the defect. The ground of all
this Doctrine was Crescite and multiplicamini, Genesis 1.
Increase and multiply. So that by this text fondly applied, and by corrupting
another, and adding the word alone to Faith, honest Martin Luther framed his
new Protestant Religion, and cited Scripture for his Reformation, according to
the custom of Heretics.

5 And that men might be the more inclined to embrace, and more obstinate in
adhering to these heresies, Luther with the help of Philip Melanchton,
published the new Testament in high Dutch, rejecting, altering, and adding
whatsoever he thought fit for his purpose; by which device he engaged the
ignorant as much to their errors, as to their own proper judgments, making
themselves judges of Scripture and Controversies, and at length or their Lords;
for, taking themselves to be learned, and well versed in Gods written Word,
they raised an Army for defense of the Evangelical liberty of Luthers Ghospel,
which they conceived was not granted them by their Masters; and therefore the
Clownes drew their Remonstrance, Cothlae. de act. Luth. Sur in Comment. Erasm.
in Hyperasp.
and demands in twelve articles, which Luther approved of, and caused to be
proclaimed in Saxony, exhorting the Lords to grant all which the Clownes
desired, and laying to their charge the fault of all inconveniences which were
like to ensue, if they did oppose his Ghospel, and the Clownes designs: but
seeing that this failed, and that the Lords had the better, he writ against the
Clownes, upbraiding them for their rebellion, and exhorted their Masters to
punish their disobedience: the conclusion was, that he embroyled all Germany,
and that in Franconia alone, above two hundred Noblemens Castles and
Monasteries were destroyed: and in few months, more then a hundred and forty
thousand peasants lost their lives, in attempting an imagined liberty due to
them by Luthers reformed Dutch Ghospel. Whereby our Politician may learn, how,
ordinarily speaking, Gods providence does chastise wicked men by the same
instruments they employ against the Church and Clergy, in compassing their
politic ends. Luther was the occasion of the destruction of the Franconian
Nobility, which had made him an instrument to destroy the Clergy, and dissuaded
him from retiring into Bohemia, promising they would protect him. We may see
also how dangerous it is, not only to Religion, but to the interest of
Princes, that liberty which Protestants have of reading the Scripture without
any obligation of conscience to submit their judgments in the interpretation
thereof to any of their own Churches. When a Religion is made to comply with
as many contrary humors, and interests, as Luthers was, we must expect no
other fruit of it, but sedition and rebellion; it is the apple of discord, and
the occasion of all mischiefs in Christian Commonwealths.

6 From Germany this plague of Lutheranisme went into Swethland, Swethland
perverted Joan Magnus in Pontif. Psalm. lib. 6.
by means of one Olaus Peter's a Deacon, and Luthers Scholar; who in the year
1523. returning from Wittemberg to his own Country, became acquainted with
Laurence Andrews Archdeacon of Stronghen, an ambitious man; the Bishop of that
See dying, Laurence Andrews pretended, and failed of the Bishopric, which was
given to another, far inferior to him, in his own opinion. Olaus Peter's
took this occasion to make him a Lutheran, and declare to him, that all
Christians were Priests by Baptism, and that there was no difference between a
Priest, and a Bishop, but the revenues. Whereupon they both declared their
error to Gustavus King of Swethland, which he approved of as advantageous to
that poor Crown. Therefore he declared to all his Subjects, as a learned
Scholar of Luthers teaching, that Priesthood and Episcopacy were but
formalities, and privileges depending upon the Prince his will and favor; and
that it was his pleasure to take all their authority and lands into his own
hands: he did not only deprive the Bishops of their dignities and revenues,
but imprisoned them all, because they opposed the change of Religion, and their
own destruction. Whereby we may perceive, that poverty and coveteousnesse in a
King, and ambition in a Subject, was the ground of Swethlands Reformation.

7 In the year 1537. John Bugenhagius, who had been a religious Priest, put
Christierne the Third King of Oenmarke in mind, of what advantages his
Neighbor Gustavus had made of Luther Doctrine; and he upon the same grounds
followed so mean an example, deposing, and imprisoning all the Bishops of his
Kingdom, who were but seven; and made John Bugenhagius Pope of his Northern
climat, because he gave him authority to name seven Superintendents that
succeeded in the Bishops Seas, but not in their ordination, or revenues, which
were forfeited to the Crown, and was the greatest fault that the King found in
Catholick-Religion. Its great pity that so many millions of souls do perish
through the coveteousnesse of those two Northern Princes; but the people may
curse their Ancestors as much as their Kings, who did not attempt the
innovation of Religion, before they felt the pulse of their Subjects
consciences, and perceived their souls to be as full of vice, as their
Country is of pitch and tar, and as disposed for heresy and hell, as their
woods are for fire. Luther the Incendiary of all these Countries, lived until
the year 1546. and died at Isleb (where he was borne) the 18. of February
between two and three in the morning, after that he had feasted himself and
been very merry that same night: in the house of his death he pronounced these
words to his Disciples: Pray for our Lord God, and his Ghospel, that it may
have good sucesse, because the Council of Trent, and the abominable Pope are
great enemies. Whether this blasphemy proceeded from Atheism, or drunknesse,
let Protestants determine; my opinion is, that Luther was both Atheist and
Drunkard, though Lutherans call him the Saint and Prophet of Germany, Iustus
Jonas de morte Lutheri.
notwithstanding that they acknowledge his last prayer to be the aforesaid
blasphemy. But now let us go to the branches of his pretended Reformation.

SECT. II.
Of Anabaptisme.

1 IN the year 1523. Nicholas Stork, one of Luthers Scholars, saw no reason
why he might not invent a new Religion, as well as his Master; and at length
resolved to go to Switzerland, where by counterfeiting revelations
communicated to him by Saint Michael the Archangel, he gained much credit
amongst the simple people, and persuaded them what he pleased, confirming his
mad fancies with texts of Scripture fondly applied, and by the Sermons of one
Thomas Muntzer: from both these Apostles the Sect of Anabaptists had its
beginning: their principal error is grounded upon the words of our Savior
misinterpreted: Whosoever will believe, and be baptized, shall be saved.
Therefore (say they) children ought not to be baptized before they come to
years of discretion, and capacity of belief; or at least they ought to be
rebaptised: whereas it is clear by the Scripture, and not only by the
practice of the Church in all ages, that children ought to be baptized, seeing
they are reasonable Creatures, because Christ commanded his Disciples to
baptize all Creatures; but the continual tradition is that, whereby this
error has been, and must be confuted, which is the best explication of
doubtful texts of Scripture, as Oecolampadius (who formerly rejected Tradition
as Roman superstition) was forced to confess, Lindan. in Dubit. Prateol.
Methon. Hist. Anabap. lib. 5.
when he disputed with the Anabaptists at this very time in Switzerland; from
whence they were banished by proclamation, for their Doctrine against the
obedience due to civil Magistrates, and many other mad fancies, whereby they
practiced bloody practices upon others, and even upon themselves; they were
divided into many Countries and Sects, and in few years had more then 44.
different Religions, as Sebastian Francus does testify in his history; and is
very credible, because they are a people much given to believe dreams, and to
take fancies for revelations. None is more dangerous, then that assurance they
pretend to have of themselves alone being Saints, and the elect of God,
excluding all other men not only from heaven, but even from all right to lands
or inheritances here upon earth, according to the Doctrine of their book which
they entitle Restitution, composed at Munster, when their Prophets and Kings
did domineere in that City; John Mathews gave himself out sometimes for
Moses, sometimes metimes for Enoch, and celebrated a Synod at Amsterdam,
breathed the spirit upon his twelve Apostles, and sent them to preach his
Ghospel to the world; whereof some repented their madness, others were
punished, and himself was killed at Munster his royal Seat.

2 But after him succeeded for Prophet and King of the Anabaptists in the same
City, John Bowld a Tailor, or Botcher of Leyden in Holland; he assumed the
title of Rex justitiae hujus mundi, King of justice of this world; and because
he was found in adultery with a Queen, he made a law of Poligamy, and married
16. whom he called Queens: all this was pretended to be done by private
inspiration from heaven, as also his Mission of 28. Apostles with as great
power and authority, as his Predecessor had done in Amsterdam. But within a
short time the Bishop of Munster besieged the Town, and brought it to such
streights, that all persons were starving; and because one of his Queens told
him, that she did not believe God would have men starve, and that he ought to
distribute amongst them some of the abundant provision which he kept in store,
King Bowld beheaded her (by revelation also) in the market place with his own
hand, in presence of all his other Queens, whom he commanded to celebrate her
funerals with a set dance, which himself led about the corpse, inviting also
the spectators to go to it nimbly and merrily: but, alas, the poor people
being all starved, were not able to stir: at length the City was furrendred,
and the fanatic King with his Camerades received due punishment. But after his
death one John Cerdo took the name of King, and was hanged at Brussells; the
same doom had another at Mastrike, whose name was Cornelius Apleman. The last
King of this mad Tribe was one John Williams, who had at once 20. wives, and
wore by his side the great Gedeons sword, sent to him from heaven, as he gave
out: he exhorted his Subjects, and Brethren the Anabaptists, to look upon all
other Nations and Religious, as the Iraelits did upon the Chananeans, and
others of the land of promise: but at length he was burnt in Cleve an. 1580.

3 This Sect of Don Quixotes is not like to spread much, because their Tenets
are inconsistent with government. Their Kingdom at the present is said to be
Ireland, from whence they have driven the Nobility, and Gentry of that
miserable Country: they have not as yet any King of justice, but they erected
a Court of justice, wherein it is said, (how truly I know not) they were most
criminal that had greatest estates. This I hear credibly reported by many,
even by some moderate Protestants, that the first who suffered death by that
Court, Mr. Walter Bagnal.
was a man of as clear a conscience and courage, as any of the three Nations
ever afforded; his crime was, the signing of a warrant to hang a notorious and
confessed spy. The transplantation also is to be an effect and mark of the
Anabaptists Religion; but its thought that after they have extirpated the Irish
Catholics, they who govern in England, will take a course with those, whom
now they employ, or permit as instruments to civilize that Nation, by wholly
extirpating the Natives, whom they despair to make Heretics. But there is a
God, and providence.

SECT. III.
Of Zwinglianisme.

1 NO sooner were the Anabaptists banished from Switzerland, but that Country
was infected with the Sect of the Sacramentaries introduced by Zwinglius,
Carolstadius and Oecolampadius; who having gained some credit by disputing with
the Anabaptists, made use of it to plant another heresy, differing from that of
Luther in the point of Christ's real presence in the Sacrament, which he
always maintained, though he denied Transubstantiation. Zwinglius was borne in
Switzerland, and had been a Pastor, or Parish Priest, first in Glawne, and
afterward in Znrike: he was very luxurious, and to avoid many women, he tied
himself to one, after he was a Priest, merely out of his inclination to
continency, as he would make the world believe in his admonition to the
Helvetian Commonwealth fol. 119. We have proved that the weakness of our flesh
has been the cause of our often shameful falling etc. Some are of opinion
that he begun his Sect a year before Luther an. 1516. if so, his Church must
take place in the Devils procession and way to hell: but it was not embraced
until the year 1525. the 13. of April, on that very day that the Catholic
Church did solemnize the mystery of the real presence.

2 The ground of this heresy is acknowledged by Zwinglius himself to be no
other but a dream, which he relates in this manner: Zwingl. tom. 2. in lib. de
subsid. Euchar. fol. 294.
When the 13. of April drew near (I tell the truth, and my conscience
compels me to utter what the Lord bestowed upon me) me thought, as I was
asleep, that I was again disputing with the Scribe (he means one of the
Senate of Zurike that had shamefully confuted him in public) and my mouth so
stopped, that I was not able to speak, and suddenly there seemed an
admonisher to be present with me, (ater fuerit, an albus, nihil memini) whether
he were black, or white (that is, a good or bad spirit) I remember not, which
said, Why do thou not answer him that which is written Exodus 12. Bellarmine
answer this weak objection tom. 3. de Euchar. lib. 1. c. 11.
Estenim phase, id est, transitus. For it is the Paschal, which is the
passover of the Lord. Whereupon I afterward considered the place, and thereof
before the whole Congregation preached, which Sermon when it was heard, drew
away all mist. Because the Catholic Cantons did not embrace this distracted
brains dreams as the true sense of Ghospel, which the devil had dictated,
they were so vexed, and exasperated by the Protestants, that they were forced
to take arms, and in one of their victories Zwinglius was mortally wounded,
and burnt alive as an obstinate heretic, and perturber of the Commonwealth.
Some write as a great miracle, that his heart resisted the flames; it may pass
for a Protestant miracle, that the most hard, and massy part of man's flesh,
should not be as soon consumed as the rest. Such a miracle, to my knowledge,
happened of late to the heart of an infamous malefactor burnt at Gant; and such
another does Plutarch recount of Pyrrhus his toe, which was not consumed by the
fire that burnt his body. Yet none can deny it was a clear miracle, Harpsfeld.
Dialog. 6. cap. 44. Florim. Raym. de orig. haeres. and alij.
that Doctor John Traverse his three fingers (which he did show to the Judge at
the bar, when he asked him whether he writ the book for which he was
condemned, in defense or the Popes supremacy, answering that those three
fingers writ it) should not be burnt, when his hand was cut of, and all
consumed by the fire, the three fingers only excepted, notwithstanding that
they were often cast into the flames. This was a Catholic miracle.

3 Carolstadius was Archdeacon of Wittenberg, and had the honor to confer
the degree of Doctor upon Martin Luther, to whom he adhered in the beginning of
his Reformation; but afterward denying the real presence, he was so
persecuted by Luther, that he was forced to retire to a village, and gain his
living by cutting wood, and selling fagots, a dangerous occupation for an
Hererick, if it were in Spain, or Italy, where his fuel would be applied to
his own use. At length being weary of that life, he cast himself into
Zwinglius his hands, and opinions. He is said to be the first Priest that
married; to celebrate his Nuptials with greater solemnity, he writ to a
Nobleman his neighbor, desiring him to send him some venison, and the
Nobleman, very discreetly, sent him the head of an ass well dressed, and
baked, for a buck: the mistake was not perceived, until the young couple had
eaten so much of the supposed venison, that they fell to pick crummes, and at
length to pick the asses ears, to their great confusion, laughter of the
company, and extraordinary contentment of him that sent the present, good
enough for so sacrilegious a feast and solemnity. The Lutheran writers say,
that Carolstadius in his last Sermon did see the Devil, who came to applaude
his Doctrine; and three days after being sick, he came to fetch his person:
the Sacramentarians deny this story; but Catholics believe that he is gone to
the Devil, though they will not dispute whether the Devil came to see him in
his last Sermon or sickness.

4 Oecolampadius was a Priest, and a Monk of Saint Brigits order, infamous for
being convinced of so notorious lies in his writings. He married a woman that
was thought to have murdered him, but others write that his friends, injured
the woman by casting this aspersion upon her, and that he was strangled by the
Devil: its certain he was found unexpectedly dead in his bed at Basile, where
he is enterred with this Epitaph, Auctor Euangelicea doctrinae in hac urbe, and
Templi ejus verus Episcopus. These are the Apostles of all who deny the real
presence. They were so vain and ambitious of being esteemed Authors of new
Religions, that though all three agreed in the substance of their error, yet
every one would needs maintain it upon a different word and ground, from the
rest, Carolstadius denied the real presence, because he said, that the word,
Hoc, This, was not referred by Christ our Savior to what he had in his hands,
but only to himself as sitting at the table. Zwinglius laid hold of the word
Est, is, and interpreted it, significat, signifies my body, thrusting into the
very text signifies, and taking out is. Oecolampadius grounded his
fantastical error upon the word Corpus, Body, which he interpreted figura
corporis, a figure of the body, not according to the language of Tertullian,
but as if the figure did exclude the reality of a body, contrary to Tertullians
phrase and doctrine, as Pamelius in his Comments upon him, does plainly show
by many examples. Thus we see, how three Sycophants have rendered to their
followers the words of God not only inessicacious, but wholly unsignificant;
and how the most absurd dreams of a distempered brain work upon simple
people: and how apt Politicians are to work their ends with thief mad fancies,
my Reader may see in the Protector Seamour, who brought into England this
Zwinglian Religion, and I will declare, when I speak of the English Church in
Edward the Sixth his time.

SECT. IV.
Of Calvinisme.

1 THe Sect whereof Princes can make least advantage, is this which now I am to
describe; because it was invented by Calvin to make himself Prince of Geneva;
and not to humor Monarchs; he being confined to a town, where popular
government prevailed, and to which at length he accommodated his discipline,
contrary to his own inclination, and first design. John Calvin therefore,
meanly borne in Noyon of Picardy, hearing how many of his rank had made
fortunes by inventing new Religions, and how easy it was to apply texts of
Scripture to humane fancies, resolved to sollow the steps of Luther, Zwinglius,
and others, especially after that he despaired to satisfy his ambition amongst
the Catholic Clergy, being branded with an infamous mark for Sodomy in his
own Country; a truth so undeniable, that his great friend and champion
Whitaker, speaking in his defense against learned and eloquent Campian, who in
his ten Reasons termed Calvin, stigmaticus perfuga, a branded spirit, Whitak.
answ to Campians reasons, printed 1582. sol. 7^.
gives this witty* and pious answer, si stigimaticus fuit, fuit etiam Paulus,
fuerunt alij. It was never heard that Saint Paul was branded with an infamous
mark before; and if Whitaker means not to disfame Saint Paul by making him as
infamous as Calvin, but only compares the signs of Christ's wounds which he
had in his his body, to Calvin's mark, he gains nothing by his evasion, but
rather augments his malice and blasphemy. Calvin's first Master inheresy was
Melchior Wolmar a German Lutheran, though others attribute this honor to one
Robert, his own kinsman. Being suspected of heresy, he retired to Angolesme,
where he went by the name of Deparcan, and there remained three years,
studying heretical books, out of which he copi^^^ h^s Institutions, and the
greatest part out of the works of Melanchton, and Hyperius Sapoerius; yet
Westphalus the Lutheran says, he stole all from Oecolampudius* its certain he
never learnt Divinity in any School; such as it was, either he stole from
others, or had it by private inspiration from his Master the Devil. He
communicated his erroneous opinions to Lewis Tiluis a Canon of Angolesme, and
his singular benefactor; who liked well of them, but desired Calvin to
accompany him to Germany, and there they both would confer with the Authors
themselves of so new Doctrine. Tiluis was recalled from his way both to Germany
and to Hell, by a brother of his, called John, of no small account in the Court
of France; but Calvin went on his journey, and remained in Germany, waiting
upon one Rufus, his Countreyman, and a perverse heretic, by whose means he
became acquainted with all the German Reformers.

2 Having by his conference with many, dived into the ground of their errors,
and resolved to follow the Zwinglian Doctrine, though not altogether; his
thoughts now were busied to find out a place, where he might with security
divulge his heresy, without being subordinate to any other heretic, or
Reformation. He fixed upon Ferrara in Italy, but could not long remain,
notwithstanding that the Duchess (the French Kings sister) did incline to
protect him. At Liege he was refused entertainment, and so was forced to
return into France, and live privately at Poitiers. It happened that walking
there in a garden, he fell into discourse of the new Religions with some more
curious, then learned: the question was, whether Luther his opinion was more
tolerable in matter of the Sacrament, then that of Zwinglius. Calvin laid hold
of this opportunity to declare his own, condemning both the former. He
affirmed that Christ was not realy present in the Sacrament as Luther imagined*
neither was he realy absent, as Zwinglius pretended; that there was a mean
between both assertions, and that was, to be present by faith* or by a pledge;
a poor one, God knows, if it be only a morsel of bread, and a cup of wine.
Its better take Christ at his word, then rely upon Calvin's pledge. Neither
himself, nor any of his Disciples could hitherto speak sense, when they
declared their sense and Doctrine in this particular: and no mervaile, seeing
there can be no sense in a mean between two contradictions; for, either
Christ is realy present in the Sacrament, or he is not realy present; whether
the reality of his presence be after a spiritual, or corporal manner, is not
the question; a spiritual presence is as real, as a corporal. To say that
Christ's body and blood is not realy in the Sacrament by themselves, but only
by our faith, is as much as to say, that they are not there, though we believe
they are; which is not Catholic and true faith, because we are mistaken.
However this nonsense served Calvin's turn, because it was a new Chimaera, and
much applauded by his first four Disciples, Anthony Duguius, Philip Veronius,
Albert Babinot, and John Vernovius, to whom he infused his spirit, and sent
them to preach his Doctrine in diverse parts of France, and distribute his
fantastical communion. But when it came to his cares, that some who denied the
real presence, were cruelly tormented, and put to death in Paris, he thought
fit to retire to his old Master Rusus, and partake with him of the Queen of
Navars protection; resolved not to suffer that Martyrdom, to which he had so
devoutly and earnestly exhorted others.

3 After some time he parted with Rufus, and repaired to Basile, where he
published his Institutions in French, that at least the language might incline
ignorant people to believe that the work was his own. In the beginning of his
book he put a fiery sword with this Motto, Non veni pacem mittere, sed
gladium; I come not with peace, but with the sword. Never was the design or
effect of any book better expressed; there is not a Country where it was
received, that felt not the sad effects of war, fire, and sword, being as
inconsistent with peace and obedience to the Prince, or Magistrate, Calvin. in
5. Daniel.
as with Catholic Religion. It teaches Subjects not only to rebel, but also
to spit in the faces of their Sovereigns, in case they oppose Calvin's
Doctrine, or discipline.

4 In they care 1535. in the month of August, the City of Geneva revolted
from the Catholic Church, their lawful Prince, and Bishop, banishing him and
his Clergy. The Ringleader of all this mischief was one William Farellus, a
Frenchman by birth, a Jew by descent, and an Heretic by profession. The
instrument whereby he effected this work, was Amicus Perrinus, a man of great
power in Geneva, and Captain of the Militia, so bitter an enemy to Priests,
and the Mass, that he commanded the Altar stone of the Cathedral Church to be
carried out of Town, and laid in that infamous place where malefactors were
accustomed to be executed, that it might be stained with base blood of thieves
and murderers: but God permitted that Perrinus himself should be the first
diabolical sacrifice offered upon the Altar stone which he had prepared for
others; upon which he was beheaded at Calvin's instance, because he opposed his
discipline and ambition, though the pretext was a pretended conspiracy intended
by Perrinus (as Calvin said) against all the French fugitives that retired to
Geneva, to enjoy the liberty of their errors, and learn Calvin's new Doctrine,
who had been some time before called thither by some friends that lived in the
City. But being proud, and forcing his discipline upon the people, both he and
Farellus were banished from Geneva in the year 1538. Calvin retired to
Stratzburg, where first he taught a School, and afterward took upon him the
care of a Church, which the Magistrate granted to the French Heretics. Here he
took to wife an Anabaptists widdowe, and though I have nothing to say against
his marriage, because I do not read that ever he received holy Orders,
notwithstanding that he had two benefices conferred upon him when he was young;
yet much is writ by others of his dishonest life; the Lord of Fallarie his wife
was forced to go live at Lausanna, to be rid of Calvin's importunity, and
adulterous attempts: the Lady of Mong is was not so honest, she left her
husband at Lausanna, and lived incontinently with Calvin at Geneva.

5 During his banishment, his friends were very earnest with the Magistrate for
his return, which was not only permitted, but decreed, and he invited
solemnly by the Senate, not doubting by his means and credit amongst new
Sectaries, to strengthen much their petty Commonwealth of Geneva. Hooker in his
Preface of Eccles. Policy.
But Calvin knowing how much they imagined it was their interest to have him,
refused to come, if both Magistrate and Pastors would not be solemnly sworn to
observe that form of discipline which he would establish. The civil regiment
of that Towme was popular, and the spiritual government, at that time, was at
the discretion of their Pastors; it was not for his purpose to be at the mercy
of either Layty, or Clergy; neither could his ambition and pride brook any
such subjection. Wherefore after they had taken the oath which he exacted,
seeing it was impossible to make himself Bishop (the very name being odious,
and the reality much more in Geneva, having annexed to it an absolute dominion
over that State) he framed his discipline to the humor of the people in
outward show, making it plausible by composing his Ecclesiastical Court, or
Consistory of lay Elders, double in number to the Ministers; whereby all would
be at his own disposal; because the Elders, though more in number, were
changed every year, and would not dare to oppose the Ministers that continued
in office, and these were all his own Creatures; so that all served for
nothing in the Consistory, but to countenance and put in execution Calvin's
decreer. He sat in his Ecclesiastical Court more absolute then any Pope,
having no rule to be guided by, but his own fancy, and any text of Scripture
which he pleased to accommodate to it, the private spirit being sufficient
ground for the most impertinent and absurd application.

6 It is the opinion of many that Calvin was a more politic heretic then
Luther, and that he showed it in his Religion and discipline. It is certain
that Luther was more learned, and more resolute then Calvin; who, if the truth
were known, did but steal from Luther, even his private spirit, to which
Luther and all Protestants recurre, when they are pressed with evidence
contradicting their errors. His doctrine of denying the real presence, and
his making worship of Images idolatry, he took from Zwinglius, and his
Camerades; so that all considered, we find, that Calvin had but very little,
or nothing of his own in his Religion, but his discipline. The reason why
Calvin rejected all ceremonies in his Church, was Luthers ill success in
admitting and framing some. This mad fellow took upon himself the authority
which he denied to the Catholic Church, composing a Mass and ceremonies of
his own, but soon repented his folly, when he perused Iodocus Clictoveus his
book confuting his fond presumption, to which Luther could never answer. This
made Calvin so great an enemy of Ecclesiastical ceremonies.

7 Though he hated ceremonies, he coveted miracles, because they are necessary
to make a new sense of Scripture, and a new private spirit prudently credible:
his bare word was not a sufficient testimony of the truth, without some
supernatural and visible sign to confirm it. Calvin therefore persuaded one
Brullen a Frenchman of his own Sect in Geneva, to feign himself dead, and
when he would bid him rise in confirmation of his Religion, spirit, and
discipline, to obey, and tell the spectators news of the other world. The
agreement was made, Brullen was to have so much money, his wife gave her
consent, because she was poor, and they communicated the matter to her, it
being impossible to conceal it from her knowledge. To be brief, the supposed
death of Brullen was published, Bolsee c. 11. Lang c. 13.
and none lamented it more then Calvin, considering the distress of his wife,
and family. Out of mere compassion he repaires to the house, declaring the
affliction of his spirit to all who met him, but withal giving them hopes of a
miracle, whereby the sanctity of his own life, doctrine, and discipline might
be made evident. As soon as he fixed his eyes upon the supposed dead Corpse, he
lifted them up to the Lord, and desired his faithful brethren to join with
him in prayer, that God might command Brullen his soul return to his body,
and Calvin naming him, bid him rise, and declare to all present, Gods sense of
his doctrine and discipline. The wife seeing her husband did not rise, and that
really he had signs of death in his face, drew nearer, and by experience found
that Brullen was dead indeed. Whereupon she cried aloud, and declared to all
the people the story, accusing Calvin of being not only an Impostor, but a
murderer: both he and his friends sneakt away, and never afterward attempted
to work miracles, which now he hated as much as ceremonies. Such another
miracle do we read of Cyrola the Arrian, Greg. Tur. 2. hist. 3.
who by touching the eyes of one who feigned himself blind, was realy made
blind by that heretical hand; but Eugenius the Catholic Bishop of Carthage,
restored him his sight again, by making the sign of the cross upon his eyes.
These Heretics were rather Cheates, then Politicians; weak policy does betray
it self at length, and when it is applied to the discredit of the true
Religion, and establishment of heresy, God is so much concerned in the
discovery of these petty plots and tricks, that its impossible they should have
any effect. The Lutherans did so laugh at Calvin for this success, that
neither himself, nor his Disciples could abide to hear the word miracle
pronounced.

8 The Calvinists had no other way to stop their adversaries mouths, but by
casting in their teeth the only miracle, which Luther attempted to work. A
poor woman was brought to Wirtemberg, to be dispossessed by him; Staphylus in
prodro. apol. 2. Genebr. Chronol. lib. 4. in Paul. Sur. in Comment.
Martin refused to intermedle in the matter, being fearful of the success.
But perceiving that his backwardness made others for ward in censuring, and
contemning both in his person and doctrine, he resolved to venture and try what
his exorcismes, lately composed by himself, would be able to do. The man was
led to the Vestiary of the Parish Church; thither repaired Luther accompanied
with his disciple Staphylus, who writ this story: and begun in a grave and
severe tone, to command and threaten the Devil, who laughed at Martins folly
and impudence, seeming to say, How now friend? Are we not better acquainted
then so? Do thou imagine to conquer me with the arms I put into thy hands?
The Devil might lay claim to Luthers exorcismes, Luther. de Missa angulari,
and Sacerdotum consecrat.
as well as to his doctrine in other points, which himself acknowledges to
have learnt of the Devil, and to have eaten a bushel of salt in his company.
We may judge what a ridiculous object it is, to see a P^otestant Minister
exorcise, or pretend to perform any Ecclesiastical function, or ceremony,
when Martin Luther, the Apostle of Protestancy, looked so absurdly and
despicably in the Devils eyes, that instead of being exorcised, he did
exorcise Martin, and did so fright him, that he attempted to leap out at the
window, the door being made fast by the Devils art, until at length
Staphilus, who had more courage, broke open the door with a hatchet, but was
almost stifled fot his pains, with a most abominable sent, occasioned by
Luthers fear. Heretics may counterfeit miracles, but never work any in
confirmation of that doctrine wherein they differ from the Roman Catholic
Church: in confirmation of our Tenets against Heretics we have continual
miracles, and we read of Jews that escaped dangers, and Devils, by making the
sign of the Cross; and though Protestants should do the same in confirmation
of the Trinity, or any other* Tenet of Catholics, that would favor
Protestancy no more then Iudaisme. As for the Kings of Englands gift in curing
the Kings evil (if any such thing there be) every seventh son has the same
(as many say) or other as extraordinary privileges; and if it be a
supernatural miracle, they owe that grace to Saint Edward the Confessor, a
known Roman Catholic, to whom, and not to their own merits, or Protestant
Religion, they must attribute all their cures.

Calvin dyed in the year 1564. the 27. of May in Geneva, invoking the Devil,
Laing. Franc. Balduinus: Claudius Sancterius. Guiliel. Lindanus. Hosius.
Florim. Prateol. Rescius, and alij, de morte Calvini.
blaspheming God, cursing himself, his studies writings, doctrine, and
discipline, as Hierom Bolsee his own Scholar, and many more his domestics
and friends testify; though Beza, who never told truth, affirms, that he
delivered his soul in peace. I am sure his Sect (which is more violent, then
politic) has occasioned so many wars and rebellions, that Calvinist Princes
do not desire to make their Subjects of their own Religion.

SECT. V.
Of the Reformation in Holland, and the other united Provinces.

1 IN the year 1565. the Heretics of France solicited their brethren in the
Low Countries to a rebellion, and Reformation, for, these two sisters go
always together. The Prince of Orange took this opportunity, and advised the
malcontents to send Agents to King Philip the II. humbly desiring his Majesty
would be pleased, to recall his Fathers severe Laws against novelties in
Religion, and that Cardinal Granvile, and the Spanish garrisons might be
removed out of the Netherlands. The prudent King, not doubting that to grant
this, was to betray himself and his posterity, and bestow his inheritance
upon rebels* declared, that he would give as little encouragement to new
Religions, as Charles the V. his Father. Whereupon Henry Bredenrod, Lewis of
Nassau, Orange his brother, and others of the Nobility, headed the Heretics,
who profaned Churches, sacked Monasteries, abused the Clergy and Religious, and
trampled under their feet the Blessed Sacrament of the Altar. Lind. de fug.
idol.
Near Ruremond they were cutting in pieces Saint Authonies image, and going to
burn it, on a sudden all were touched with wild fire, and dyed the next day.
They took Antwerpe, then Orange declared himself for them, and with all
Governor of that famous and rich City.

2 Before the Heretics had committed these outrages, they made a procession in
Brussells, wherein every one carried a medall hanging upon his breast, with King
Philips image on the one side, and on the other, two hands joined, with a
beggars wallet, with this motto, Fidi Regi usque ad bisaccium. In this manner
they presented themselves to Margaret of Parma, that then governed the Low
Countries for her Brother; Surius in Comment. Schardius in reb. gest. sub
Maximil. Belear. lib. 30. and alij.
at which sight when her Highness seemed to be frighted, the Earl of
Barlamont, a zealous Catholic, told her, that nothing was to be feared from
such Geuses, which is a word of contempt in Walloun, and signifies, Vagabond
Beggars. This was the occasion whereby the Heretics of the Netherlands came to
have so honorable a denomination, as their brethren the Hugonots in France.
The Catholics, to be discerned from Heretics, or Geuses, wore also medalls
about their necks, or tied to their beads, with the Image of Christ our Savior
on the one side, and on the other, his blessed Mother. If Heretics thought it
was a profession of fidelity, and devotion in themselves to their King, to
wear and worship his image, I see no reason why they should find fault with
Catholics, for wearing medalls, or worshipping the images of Christ, his
Mother, and Saints. I am sure we mean better to God in doing it, then they did
to their King, when they were called Geuses. The King of Spain was not jealous
that they would rebel with his image, or make it King, there was no danger of
such a foppery. Its a foppery and madness in Heretics, to imagine, that God
is jealous of Catholics worshipping his own, or his servants images; and as
for the pretended danger of Idolatry, it is no greater, then that which the
Geuses did incur of setting up their medalls for their King, or Earl of
Flanders. The difference between our medalls, and theirs, is, that ours is a
profession of love, respect, and devotion, which we bear to God and his
Saints, because they are his servants: theirs was a pretext of treachery, and
rebellion against their Sovereign, who was as far from their hearts and
effections, as his image was near their breasts.

3 There was never any Prince that did more to humor his Subjects, then Philip
the Second did for his in the Low Countries. First, he removed from thence the
Duke of Alba, because he was thought to be over severe, and sent in his place
Requesens, one of a mild disposition. After whose death* he was content to
confirm the Governors, themselves had chosen, until he was advertised, that
the first act of their government, was a league made against the Spaniards at
the instance of Orange; whose ambition could be satisfied with nothing, but the
whole Country at his own disposal: to which end he caused himself to be
named Admiral of the Sea, turned Don John of Austria out of the Country, had
Brabant joined to his government of Holland and Zealand; imprisoned the Duke of
Arschor, and two Bishops, because they sent for Mathias the Archduke, who being
arrived, was but a cifer; Orange being named his Vicar, did govern all, and
obtained liberty of conscience for the Heretics in all the 17. Provinces, that
thereby his friends and faction might increase: after Mathias his departure, he
sends for the Duke of Anjou, a cifer also, but thinking by his means to engage
France in the quarrel, was content to let him have the title of Governor and
Master, keeping all the power in his own hands.

4 All those things were done by Orange with that ordinary and specious pretext
of rebellion, the liberty of the Subject, and of conscience, whereby many
Catholics were deceived* and joined with him and his Heretics. But they,
perceiving at lengthy; that nothing would satisfy Orange, and that he aimed at
making himself Master of his Confederats, and to that end promoted heresy,
thereby to engage the people more against their Catholic King and endeare them
to himself, and that many insolences were committed by the Geuses, and
countenanced by their Protector Orange; Hannonia, Artois, and some other
Provinces, declared against him, and his ambitious heretical proceedings. The
King also seeing that Orange would be contented with no less, then the
propriety and dominion of all the Low Countries, promised great rewards, by
proclamation, to any person that would kill him. Whereupon in the year 1584.
this Rebel was sent to the other world by one Gerard, a Burgundian. If he had
lived longer, perhaps the United Provinces had been a Kingdom, not a
Commonwealth: for its certain, his design and desire was not to make them a
free State, though he freed them from their obedience to the King of Spain.
And albeit by his policy he made them cast of one yoke, he oppressed them with
another, far more intolerable, that is, with heresy, whereby they became
slaves to the Devil, and rebels against God, and the Church. Thus we see how
the multitude has been misled by one politic head, that concealed his
ambition with the zeal of a new Religion, and the ancient liberties of his
Nation.

SECT. VI.
Of the Protestant Church of England in King Edward the VI. his time.

1 ITs now time to draw homeward, and examine whether the Protestant Church of
England be also a branch of Policy. That luxury and covetcousnesse was the
occasion of denying the Popes jurisdiction and supremacy, is evident by our
Chronicles in the life of Henry the VIII. who being weary of Queen Catharine
of Spain, and despairing or issue male by her, as also enamoured of Anne
Bullen, desired the Pope to declare null a marriage, that no person living
called in question for the space of 20. years: but now forsooth, it was
against Seripture, because Saint John Baptist told Herod, that it was not
lawful for him, to keep his brothers wife, in the lifetime of his brother,
and himself being also married. If Prince Arthur were living, the text had
made as much for Henry the VIII. as for Herod's brother. Yet King Henryes tender
conscience could not be quiet, until Anne Bullen were Queen of England,
therefore he bribed Universities abroad, and threatened those of his own
Kingdom, to the end they might subscribe to his wicked passion; Act of Parl.
an. 1. Mariae c. 1.
and because the Pope refused to do the same, Henry declared himself Pope in
his own Dominions, and all others to be Traitors that refused to swear his
supremacy. And because many refused to damn their souls by known perjury, he
took away their lives; amongst others that suffered death for refusing the
oath, were two Cardinals, three Bishops thirteen Abbots; Priors, David Camer.
Scot. lib. 4. c. 1.
Monks, and Priests, five hundred. Archdeacons, fourteen. Canons, threesoore.
Doctors, fifty. Dukes, Marqueses, and, Earls, with their children, twelve.
Barons; and Knights, twenty nine. Gentlemen, three hundred thirty six. Citizens
a hundred thirty four. Women of quality, a hundred and ten. In this Ocean of
innocent and noble blood, was laid the first stone and fundation of the English
Protestant Church; its no mervaile that it thrived no better.

2 Notwithstanding Henry the VIII. wickedness, he never permitted any new
Sects to be professed in England during his reign, though many crept in by
Cranmers negligence and connivance. In the latter end of his reign, he felt
the remorse of his guilty conscience, and did often resolve with himself to be
reconciled to the Church of Rome, but know not how it might be done with his
honor, which he preferred before that of God, and the salvation of his soul,
even in his last sickness; for, sending to Stephen Gardener Bishop of W^ester
(who was the only man that durst speak truth to the King) for his advice, he
exhort^d him to declare and recant his error in Parliament, if God would give
him life; if not, to testify repentance with his hand and seal; assuring him,
that God would accept his good will, if time were wanting to perform what he
desired. This was resolved upon, but as soon as Gardener departed, he fell of
from his pious resolution, and within a short time dyed, despairing of Gods
mercy, because (quoth he) I never spared man in my wrath, nor woman in my lust.
His last words were, All is lost. The greatest Policy and Majesty upon earth,
comes at length to be nothing; and repentance differed, does commonly end in
despair, and damnation.

3 To King Henry the VIII. succeeded in his Kingdom, and Headship of the
Church, his son Edward the VI. a child of 9. years old. His tender age was a
fair opportunity for heresy, and policy to conspire against Catholic Religion,
which had never been suppressed in England until that time. His Uncle and
Protector Seamor declared himself a Zwinglian, and established that Sect in
England by Act of Parliament; but could not exclude the name of Bishops, that
had been so much reverenced in the Nation since it was converted to
Christianity, though they looked upon the Ordination both of Priests, and
Bishops, as upon a superstition of Rome, and badge of Antichrist. Witness
their translating in the Bible, Ordination by imposition of hands, (as Saint
Hierome, D. Greg. Martin in his Discovery of the corruptions of holy Scriptures
by English Sectaries, chap. 6.
and all the Fathers do the word (...)) Ordination by election; and for the
word Priest, they always translated Elder; for Priesthood, Eldership. Cranmer
Archbishop of Canterbury, who ought to have opposed these wicked practices, did
accommodate himself to the times, and prevailing party: in King Henryes time
he writ a book in defense of the real presence, and now in King Edwards time,
he writ another against it; both which books Bishop Bonner of London produced
to his face, Fox page 1200. col. 1. number. 2. Persons cap. 7. number. 32.
when Cranmer and Ridley were sitting in judgment against him, to deprive him
of his Bishopric.

4 After that the Zwinglian Clergy of England had corrupted Scripture, and
wrested both words and sense to their own heretical and mad fancies, they
composed their book of Common prayer, and instituted a new form of making
Priest, and Bishops, which was rather a declaration and protestation against
holy Orders, then a manifestation or the Ordainers power and intention, or of
the effects of that Sacrament. Its a received principle amongst all men who
know any thing, that a Bishop or Priest cannot be validly consecrated without
words involving the name, or at least the particular power and authority of a
Bishop, or Priest; in the English form of Ordination the names are not
mentioned, and the power or authority is not so much as insinuated. The power,
and authority of a Priest, must involve power to make Christ's Body and Blond
really present, as our English Protestant Doctors now confess, (whether with
or without Transubstantiation, is not the controversy) let them examine whether
any such power be mentioned in their form, which is this: Receive the holy
Ghost, English Rituall printed at London 1607.
whofe sins thou do forgive, they are forgiven; and whofe sins thou
do retain, they are retained; and be thou a faithful Dispenser of the Word
of God, and his holy Sacraments, in the name of the Father, and of the Son,
and of the holy Ghost. To dispense, ot minister ^he Sacraments, come far
short of declaring power to consecrate the elements, or make present Christ's
Body. Deacons did minister and dispense the Body of Christ to the people in
ancient times, but were never thought to have power to consecrate, or make
present Christ's Body and Blood. They have no reason to cite Santa Clara in
their behalf, Franc. a S. Clara in exposit. paraphr. Confess. Anglic. artic. 36.
I know not his intention, but I am sure his words favor not their
Ordination, and much less these of Innocent the IV. Sussiceret Ordinatori
dicere, sis Sacerdos, vel, alia aequipollentia: Be thou a Priest, or some words
equivalent: but they who blotted the word Priest out of Scripture, never
thought to make use of it in the form of their Ordination; and they who denied
the real presence, were far from expressing in their form of making
Priests, any power to consecrate, or make present Christ's Body and Blood, in
the Sacrament and Sacrifice of the Altar.

5 Their form of making Bishops is no less deficient then the former. The
words are: Take the holy Ghost, and remember that thou stir up the grace of
God which is in thee by imposition of hands, for God has not given us the
spirit of fear, but of power, love, and soberness. This advertisement of
Saint Paul to Timothy, after he had made him Bishop, does suppose, 2. ad Tim. 1.
and not give the Order of Episcopacy; it is an admonition to exercise the
function, and not the ordination it self, because it does not declare in
particular the name or authority of a Bishop: Take the holy Ghost, is said to
Priests, as well as to Bishops; and the spirit of love, power, and soberness,
is communicated also by Priesthood. Here is nothing peculiar to Episcopal
Ordination. But the truth is, the Zwinglian Church of England that composed
these forms, made no difference between a Bishop, a Priest, and a Christian,
because that was the current Doctrine in all reformed Churches in those days,
and particularly in the Zwinglian; See the 23. of the 39. articles of the
Church of England.
a Priest, or a Bishop was he that was appointed by the Congregation to preach
their Ghospel; it was but an extrinsecall denomination, a mere formality taken
from the will of the faithful brethren, and from a square cap, and a linen
rochet. This is made evident by the example of John Hooper, who could never be
dispensed withal by Cranmer, and Ridley, in the cap and rochet, when he was to
be made Bishop of Gloucester, though they never troubled him with imposition of
hands, or ordination. Page 1366.
I cannot tell (faith Fox) what sinister and unlucky contention, concerning the
ordaining and consecration of Bishops, and of their apparel, with other like
trifles, began to disturb the good and lucky beginning of this godly Bishop
etc. In conclusion he was feign to agree to this condition, t at sometimes he
should in his sermons show himself apparailed as the other Bishops were. His
upper garment was a long scarlet shymar down to the foot: and under that a
white linen rochet, that covered all his shoulders. Upon his head he bad a
geometrical or mathematical cap, that is, a four squared cap, with four
angles, dividing the whole world into four parts, albeit his head was Round.
You may perceive by this, how little they valued Ordination in King Edwards
days; all their care was, that the appearance and exterior formality of a
Bishop, should be maintained, because that would maintain them, and keep them
in possession of the Bishops revenues, and of a place in the upper House of
Parliament. All was policy, there was nothing of Religion.

6 They took as little care of Priesthood, as of Episcopacy, which you may
gather also out of Fox his Calendar. Page 1456.
Doctor Ridley (says he) that worthy Bishop of London, called John Bradford to
take the degree of Deacon, according to the order that then was in the Church
of England; but for that this order was not without some such abuse, as to the
which Bradford would not consent, the Bishop then was content to order him
Deacon without any abuse, even as he desired. So that you may guess how all
Protestants were ordered not only in King Edwards reign, but also in his
Fathers Henry the VIII. seeing Ordination was not urged, but given to every man
in the form that he desired. And this is the reason why most Writers say, that
all who were Heretics in King Henry his time, and are pretended to be ordained
Bishops in the latter end of his reign, as Barlow, and some Suffragans were
really never ordained, because Ordination did not agree with their spirit, and
was contrary to their inclination, and to the Tenets and practice of all
Churches pretending Reformation. Fox also tells us of one Robert Drakes, made
Deacon by Doctor Tailor of Hadley, who was no Bishop, and afterward was
admitted Minister of Gods Words and Sacraments, by Cranmer and Ridley, not
after the order then in force, but after such order as was after established;
every one was ordained as he desired. And as for John Bradford, after his
Deaconship, he was immediately without any other orders, made Prebend and
Preacher of Saint Paul's, where sharply (says Fox) he opened and reproved
sin* sweetly he preached Christ crucified, pithily he impugned heresies and
errors, earnestly he persuaded to good life. And all this you must know was
performed with one only years study in Cambridge, Bradford having been all
his life before a serving man. None that will read what we have said of this
Zwinglian Clergy, can admire, Brooks novell cases. Placito, 463. sol. 101.
printed at London 1604.
that in Queen Mary's reign all King Edward the VI. Bishops were declared no
Bishops, both in the spiritual and temporal Courts; and therefore all Leases
made by them as Bishops were not available. Its very like the Judges informed
themselves of the matter of the fact, before they pronounced the sentence; and
if Protestants have no exceptions against the sentence of Queen Mary's Courts,
but the Catholic Religion of the Judges, how can themselves expect to be
heard, or credited in any matter of fact or faith, that concerns Roman
Catholics?

7 This politic Religion and lay Clergy was banished out of England by Queen
Mary, after the death of her brother King Edward; many of the chief pillars
thereof were burnt as obstinate Heretics, according to the ancient Laws of
Christian Emperors, and Kings of England; others to escape the sire, passed
over the Seas to Germany, the native soil of their errors. No sooner were
they arrived to Frankford, but Calvin pretended a right in them, as agreeing
with his Doctrine, though they would not admit his Discipline, and therefore he
writ to Knox and Whittingham: Calvin. ep. 200. ad Knox.
In Anglicana Liturgia, qualem describitis, multas video fuisse tolerabiles
ineptias. I see that in the English form of Service, as you describe it, there
were many tolerable fooleries. Many there were (says my Protestant Author) and
that of the learned of those that then departed the Realm, The survay of the
pretended holy Discipline, printed an 1593. page 46.
as Doctor Cox, Doctor Horn, Master Jewel, with sundry others, who perceiving
the tricks of that Discipline, did utterly dislike it. So as when they came
afterward to Frankford, they wholly insisted upon the platform of England; and
in short time obtaining of the Magistrates the use thereof, they did choose
either Doctor Cox, or Doctor Horn, (as I guess) or some such other as had
been of special account in King Edwards time, to be (as it were) their
Superintendent. Now we see clearly how the English Ordination was not in those
days by imposition of hands, but by election, according to their translation
of Scripture; and how the Congregation did make their Bishops; for they
translate also in their Bible Superintendent for Bishop. Why should any
rational man doubt, but that the very same men, who without any Episcopal
consecration made a Bishop in Frankford, would do the same in the Nags-head at
London? Jewel, Horn, Cox, and the rest at Frankford, were the first pretended
Bishops of England in Queen Elizabeth's reign. But of this more hereafter in
the ensuing Section.

SECT. VII.
Of the English Protestant Church in Queen Elizabeth's reign.

1 IF ever Policy was transformed into Religion, it was by Queen Elizabeth,
and those who favored her illegitimacy against the known right of Mary
Steward to the Crown of England. It was as evident that she was right heir,
as it was that Henry the VIII. could not have two lawful wives at once, and in
the first year of Queen Mary's reign, it was declared by Act of Parliament,
that Queen Catharine was lawful to King Henry, and consequently Anne Bullen
could not be, during her life, and Queen Elizabeth must needs be a bastard.
Cecil, and others, whose fortunes were to be built upon the ruin of the
ancient Religion and Nobility, persuaded the Queen, that her security was not
consistent with the Popes supremacy and authority in her Dominions; therefore
it was necessary to declare her self a Protestant and supreme Governesse of
Christ's Church. She followed his advice, and took the spiritual government so
vainly upon her, that she visited Diocesses, invented now Ceremonies, rejected
what she pleased of the old, reprehended Preachers in their very Sermons, and,
which is most ridiculous of all, consecrated with her fair hands Master
Whitgift pretended Archbishop of Canterbury, if they both be not very much
wronged by persons of integrity, that related the story as a most certain
truth to Fitz Herbert, a man well known for his profound judgment, great
learning, and solid virtue. We may believe without the least note of credulity,
what he printed an. 1612. after setting down this story of a reformed
Ordination, related by Scherer. A few years since, not far from Vienna,
Scherer. postilla de sanct. conc. ^. de S. Steph.
a certain noble woman did call the Master of her children to the office of a
Preacher, or Minister; and did order, and consecrate him by the imposition of
her hands, and of her apron, which she did use instead of a stole. Whether any
such imposition of hands, Fitz Herbert in the Preface to Persons discussion of
Master Barlowes answer, in sine.
aprons, or Kyrtles, were used to the first Prelates by Queen Elizabeth (says
Fitz Herbert) I know not; but I have been credibly informed, that Master
Whitgift would not be Bishop of Canterbury, until he had kneeled down, and
the Queen had laid her hands on his head, by which I suppose ex opere operato
he received no grace. According to Protestant principles Queen Elizabeth
might, and ought to ordain Bishops, seeing she was baptized, and Ordination is
but Baptism in their Religion. Let not our modern Protestants censure Master
Whifgift, he understood the grounds of Reformation, and their practice also in
those days, better then any that now will condemn his receiving Ordination by
imposition of Queen Elizabeth's gracious hands: if the was Pope, why could she
not give orders, and consecrate Archbishops?

2 The change of Religion which the Queen made in England, was by corrupting
most of the Nobility, though I belive more of them stood for the Catholic
Faith then the Earl of Shrewsbury, and Viscount Montacute: Camd. in Eliz.
I admire how Camden says, that only a Talbot, and a Brown, opposed the
intended Reformation; whereas all other Authors affirm, that Catholic
Religion was cast by one only voice, or three at most. Its certain that all
the Bishops did their duty in defending the true Faith, and that many of the
Nobility were perverted by the Duke of Norfolk, and the Earl of Arundell. One
of 14. Bishops that were in Parliament, of whom there was an opinion of
sanctity; when he perceived how flexible many of the Lords were to the Queens
desires in changing the ancient Faith, and establishing Protestancy, uttered
these terrible words: The curse of God, and of mine, fall upon your selves, and
your posterity, which will be destroyed by this very Religion that ye have
voted for this day. Whether this was a prophecy, or no, I will not dispute, but
what the Bishop foretold, is now visible to the whole world. There is not upon
the face of the earth a more contemptible generation of men, then the English
Nobility at this present. One simple Soldier, or Read-coate, is sufficient to
keep them all in awe, and three or four Troopers may disarme three hundred,
and be more uncivil if they please. If Catholic Religion had stood, the
Nobility had never fallen from their ancient splendor, they had been as
famous abroad, and beloved at home, as their renowned Ancestors, who were all
Roman Catholics. Policy never thrives long against Religion, and fortunes
built upon the ruins of the Church, seldom descend to the fourth generation,
and often vanish away from the first. The Duke of Norfolk, head of our
Parliament Politicians, that gathered votes for the Queen and Protestancy,
lost his head upon a block, when it was thought he was in hopes to have it
crowned, by marrying the Queen of Scotland. Many others of the English
Nobility, and Gentry, had ^he same unfortunate end, and their posterity is like
to continue that slavery, which for them has been purchased by their
Grandsires at so dear a rare, as the exchange of Catholic Faith for Heresy.
They may attribute their own misery, and captivity, to the liberty which they
gave in that fatal Parliament to the people, of interpreting Scripture as they
should think fit. It was no less want of Policy, then Religion, not to stick
to the old Roman infallibility, seeing they could not make their Enghlish
Church infallible. The Popes supremacy, and infallibility, is not so
prejudicial to the world, as Heretics pretend; it takes away all ryranny, and
rebellion, that may be covered with a cloak of Religion, if both Prince and
people will submit their judgments to his, who is an indifferent person. All
England has reason to curse Queen Elizabeth, and her first Parliament, for
depriving them of so necessary a support of the Sovereigns authority, and the
Nations liberty, as the Popes spiritual jurisdiction and authority.

3 After that the Catholic Religion was voted down in Parliament, the Queen
commanded that all the Catholic Bishops should be deposed, he of Landaffe
only excepted (an old and simple man) because he took the oath of supremacy,
as some of the rest had done in King Henry the VIII. his time; yet the
Heretics who were named to succeed in the other Bishops Seas, could not
prevail with Landaffe to consecrate them at the Nags-head in Cheapside, where
they appointed to meet him, and therefore they made use of Scory, who was
never ordained Bishop, though he bore the name in King Edwards reign; kneeling
before him, he laid the Bible upon their heads, or shoulders, and bid them rise
up, Sacrobosco, Fitz Simons, Constable, Champney, Fitz Herbert in his Preface
to F. Persons, and many others with Harding, and Stapleton.
and preach the Word of God sincearly. This is so evident a truth that for the
space of 50. years, no Protestant durst contradict it, nothing being more
common in England, as has been lately demonstrated in a book called A
Treatise of the Nature of Catholic Faith, and Heresy, to which I remit the
Reader; where he will see, how the Protestant Ministers abuse the world with
cheating tricks, and false records, to cry down this most certain story. The
Bishops named by the Queen, were Parker for Canterbury, Grindal for London,
Horn for Winchester, and Jewel for Salsbury, besides many others; who were
all, or most of them at Franckford in Queen Maryes time, and there named a
Superintendent, or Bishop of the English Church by election of the
Congregation, without consecration: perhaps instead of imposition of hands,
they touched his head, or shoulder, with the Bible, as Scory did to Parker, and
the rest, at their meeting or Congregation in the Nags-head Tavern.

4 And that the world may see how unnecessary they judged imposition of hands
in Ordination, it will not be amiss to set down the 23. of their 39.
Protestant articles of Religion, composed by those very men, that met at the
Nags head. It is not Lawful for any man to take upon him the office of public
preaching, 23. article of the English Religion.
or ministering the Sacraments in the Congregation, before he be lawfully
called, and sent to execute the same. And those we ought to judge lawfully
called and sent, which be chosen and called to his work by men, who have
public authority given unto them in the Congregation, to call and send
Ministers into the Lords vineyard. Here is not a word of Ordination, or
consecration, all is election and Congregation, Church is not named, because
their meeting was not in a Church, but in the Nags-head Tavern. And that there
may remain no doubt of their intention and meaning, to exclude all visible
signs and ceremonies, and consequently imposition of hands, as superfluous in
Ordination either of Bishops, or Priests, they explain themselves in the 25.
article or their Religion in these words: Those five commonly called
Sacraments, Article 25. of the 39. composed and agreed upon by the English
Protestant Church 1562.
that is to say, Confirmation, Penance, Orders, Matrimony, and Extreme
unction, are not to be counted for Sacraments of the Ghospel, being such as
have grown partly of the corrupt following of the Apostles, partly are states
of life allowed in the Scriptures: but yet have not like nature of Sacraments
with Baptism, and the Lords Supper, for that they have not any visible sign,
or ceremony ordained of God. If God has not ordained any visible sign, or
ceremony for Ordination, according to the belief of Parker, and his Nags-head
Congregation, you may be sure, they never troubled themselves with imposition
of Episcopal hands; and that a knock of the Bible upon their heads, or
shoulders, served their turn, especially being performed with so good a grace,
and so great gravity, as Scory did in the Tavern, when he made them Bishops by
giving them authority to preach the Word of God sincearly. This is the reason
why they interpreted Saint Paul's imposition of hands, and the Greek word
(...), See the Bible printed in London 1562. when the 39 articles were
published by the Nags-head Clergy.
Ordination by election, as it was in the profane Court or Athens, whereas
Saint Hierom, and all the Fathers declare it to be Ordination by imposition of
hands. So would they also, it Landaffe, or any other Bishop had laid hands upon
them.

5 They corrupted Scripture in their translations, not only to make good their
Nags-head Ordination, but also to justify their keeping women, though some of
them were Priests, and could not have wives, proving by Saint Paul's words,
that he had one himself. Have not we power to lead about a woman, a sister, as
also the rest of the Apostles? 1. Cor. 9. They translate, Have not we power to
lead about a wife? it being evident by the circumstances and the interpretation
of all the Fathers, that wife was not meant in that place by the Apostle, more
then 1. Cor. 7. v. 1. It is good for a man not to touch a woman, where they
also translate woman, and not wife, the Greek original using the same word in
both places. And to make us Catholics Idolaters, these very Nags-head
Ministers in the same year 1562. corrupt the Scripture 2. Cor. 6. How agrees
the Temple of God with Idols? they translated and printed in their English
Bible, How agrees the Temple of God with Images? The same sincerity they
practice in 1. Cor. 5. If any that is called a brother be a fornicator, or
coveteous, or a server of Idols, they print 1562. or a worshipper of Images.
But part of their wickedness has since been corrected by their Protestant
Brethren in later edition, being ashamed of so manifest knavery And yet we must
not think forsooth, that persons who wilfully corrupted Scripture, would forge
records, to maintain their Nags-head Consecration.

6 It were too tedious a business to specify all their false and absurd
translations, by which they brought the Word of God to be ridiculous amongst
themselves. Priest, in their language is Elder; Church, Synagogue; Holy Ghost,
holy wind; soul, Carcass; Christ, anointed; Lord, Baal; Eucharist,
Thanksgiving; Baptism, Washing; Hell, grave; Devil, Slanderer; Beelzebub,
Lord of a fly; Angels, Messengers. So that an exhortation to devotion in the
Protestant Scripture language, will move men more to laughter, then to piety;
whereas in the Catholic Translation, and phrase, it moves to compunction.
Suppose a Catholic Priest should exhort the people thus: I who am your Priest,
placed in the Church by the holy Ghost, for the feeding of your souls, do
denounce unto you in the name of Christ our Lord, that unless ye come to the
holy Eucharist with more devotion, and perform better your promises made to
God in Baptism, ye shall be condemned body and soul to hell, and your portion
shall be with the Devils, I say with Beclzebub, Doctor Reynolds reprehensions
of Whitaker.
and his Angels. This exhortation in the Protestant language of Scripture goes
very absurdly. Let us suppose therefore that a young spruce Ptotestant Minister
should step up to the pulpit, and repeat the Priests exhortation in his own
phrase, thus: I that am your Elder, placed in this Synagogue by ^he holy wind,
for the feeding of your carcasses, do denounce unto you in the name of the
anointed our Baal, that unless ye come to the holy thanksgiving with more
devotion, and perform better your promises made to God in washing, ye shall be
condemned body and carcass to the grave, and your portion shall be with the
Slanderers, I say with the Lord of a fly, and his Messengers.

7 These wicked men did not only corrupt the Scripture, but also the Counsels
and Fathers, as you may see objected to them in their own life time, and
evidently demonstrated by Doctor Harding in his Detection of sundry foul
errors against Master Jewel, and Doctor Stapletons Counterblast against
Horn. It is a very certain story, that one of Jewels Chaplins was converted
to the Catholic Faith, by overseeing the print of his books, and putting him
in mind of a notorious mistake, which Jewel laughed at, and would not have it
corrected, saying, that amongst a thousand Readers, not one would trouble
himself with examining the text of Saint Augustine which he had corrupted. An
ancient and learned man, yet living, has informed me of the manner of this
Master Jewels death, which he had from one that was present. Being preaching
false doctrine in the pulpit, on a sudden he became speechless; carried out
of the Church, he recovered strength, the use of his toungue; but returning to
the pulpit, his speech failed him the second time: returning the third time to
preach, he never spoke word more, and was carried into a Catholic Gentleman's
house, his great friend, and old acquaintance, who perceiving that Jewel had
not lost his senses with his speech, sent for pen, ink, and paper, put the
dying man in mind of Gods mercy, desired him not to despair of it, and to
recant his heresy, and his seducing of the simple people, contrary to his own
conscience. Jewel took the pen, and he writ these words: I am sorry for the
many falsifications I have made both of Scripture and Fathers: with that the
pen fell out of his hand, and he expired. These are our Protestant Evangelists
and Bishops.

8 As for their inferior Clergy, I will give you a brief Catalogue made by
that famous Doctor Stapleton, Counterblast lib 4. number. 481. printed an. 1567.
who lived in those times. And wherein I pray you (says he) rests a great
part of your new Clergy, but in butchers, cooks, catchpoules, and cobblers,
diers, and dawbers, fellons carrying their mark in their hand instead of a
shaven crown, fishermen, gunners, harpers, in keepers, merchants, and
mariners, netmakers, potters, potycaries, and porters of Belingsgate, pinners,
pedlers, ruffling ruffins, sadlers, sheermen, and sheaperds, tanners, tilers,
tinkers, trumpeters, weavers, Whenrymen etc. This rabble rout of mean and
infamous persons did cast so foul an aspersion upon our Protestant Clergy,
that, even to this day, the most ordinary Citizens think their family
disgraced, when any of their nearest kindred become Ministers, though they be
in a most certain way to the best preferments; an evident argument, that
either their function is but a mere mockery, or that their layty has no
Religion; I attibute this contempt to a malediction of God, that hangs over the
heads of false Preachers, unsent, uncalled, unconsecrated; as on the other side
it must be a blessing of God, that in the Roman Catholic Church, Priests, and
Religious, are more esteemed for their function and profession, then for their
abilities and quality, be they never so great; notwithstanding that in all
Countries, many of the best Nobility, and Gentry, consecrate themselves to God
in a religious and ecclesiastical state of life, a thing so rare amongst
Heretics, that when they come to Catholic Kingdoms, they are apt to mistake,
and talk of Priests and Friars, as they did at home of their own Nags-head
Ministers: but I hope they will learn good manners, how obstinate soever they
remain in their errors.

9 The triumphant Protestant Church does not a little resemble their militant
described by Stapleton. Whosoever will peruse Fox his Acts, Monuments, and
Calendar, with Persons his Annotations, may easily discern what great
difference there is between Protestant and Catholic Saints, their miracles
and ours. The Protestant Legend, and Martyrologe, is stuffed only with
tinkers, cobblers, butchers, tailors, and their prattling wives, put to death in
Queen Mary's reign, by virtue of the ancient Laws of Christian Emperors and
Kings of England, such as are yet in force against the Jews: but Queen
Elizabeth made new Laws against Catholics, and put them to death for not
embracing a new heresy, for which her self would have been burnt in any
Christian Country few years before, if she had professed the same doctrine
that now she imposed upon others. That you may guess at their Saints by their
miracles, I will give you a sight of Two prophetical and miraculous visions,
described by honest John Fox in this manner. Fox page 1843. See Persons his
third part of the three Conversions of England, cap. 7. n. 62.
The Friday night before Master Rough Minister of the Congregation in London
(who was a Dominican Friar in Scotland) was taken, being in his bed, he dreamed
that he saw two of the guard, leading to prison Cuthbert Simpson Deacon of the
said Congregation. Whereupon being sore troubled, he awaked, and called his
wife, saying, Kate strike light, for I am much troubled with my brother
Cuthbert this night. When she had so done, he gave himself to read on his
book. And then feeling sleep to come upon him, he put out the candle, and so
gave himself to rest again; but being a sleep, he dreamed the like dream;
and awaking therewith, said, 0 Kate, my brother Cuthbert is gone. And so they
lighted a candle, and rose. This is one miracle which Fox recounteth.

10 Now shall you hear another miracle of Simpson himself, set down also in
Fox his own words. Fox page 1844.
The day before Simpson was condemned (says he) Cloney the keeper of his
prison being gone forth, about eleven of the clock toward midnight, Cuthbert
Simpson (whether in a slumber, or being awaked I cannot say) heard one coming
in, first opening the outward door, then the second, after the third, and so
looking in to the said Cuthbert, having no candle, nor toarch that he could
see, but giving a brightness and light most comfortable and joyful to his
heart, saying Ha unto him, and so departed again. Who it was, he could not
tell, neither dare I define, says Fox. But I dare say it was Cloney the
keeper, that came to watch his prisoner with a light in his hand; or perhaps
the Protestant Deacon dreamed, or fancied in the dark that one came in, and
said Ha unto him, which may pass for a Protestant supernatural vision and
miracle. Fox makes a long discourse why the dream of a married Friar, and the
imagination of Simpson the Deacon, ought to be looked upon, and believed as
miraculous; and would have all Catholic visions mistrusted and rejected,
though never so authentically related, or recorded.

11 But the greatest miracle of the English Protestant Church, was Queen
Elizabeth her self, that embrued her cruel hands in the royal blood of Mary
Steward, lawful heir to the Crown of England: this English Iezabel not
content to usurp The Kingdom, deprived her also of her life, and put to death
many noble persons, that by their innocent blood she might color her supremacy
and bastardy. I will not relate what others write of her life and manners, for
honor of the English Nation: her miracles were, to have raised upstarts and
heretics from nothing, and annihilated the ancient Nobility, and Gentry, that
continued Catholics, contrary to her penal Laws and Statutes. In the
beginning of her reign was celebrated that venerable Synod or Nagshead
Ministers, and reverend cobblers, tinkers etc. wherein the Protestant Creed of
39. articles was coined, the greatest part whereof consists in not believing,
and declaring against the Catholic Religion. As her Majesty lived between
Maid and Wife, so did her Protestant Church flourish between hawk and buzard,
between Calvin and Luthers Reformation. Its strange to see, how even to this
day, Protestant Ministers do extol this Queen, as if she were the pattern
of Religion and chastity. They are beholding to her for their Ordination, which
she made good and valid by her supreme authority, notwithstanding any matter or
nullity of form to the contrary; as you may see by an Act of Parliament, Act
of Parliam. 8. Eliz. 1.
in the 8. year of her reign, which relates to the Records of her Letters
Patents, but not to any of her Bishops consecration at Lambeth, as our
Nags-head Ministers would feign make poor seduced souls believe, and cite for
a witness of the solemn Ordination of Parker at Lambeth, so honorable a
person as Charles Howard Earl of Nottingham, and Lord Admiral of England; but
they durst not name him in Masons first edition, because he was then living,
and would have contradicted so notorious an untruth: eight or nine years
after, in the second edition, they name this noble person, (When he was dead)
and yet not as an eye witness of the imaginary Ordination, but as a guest at
the banquet. I doubt not but Master Parker might invite the Earl of Nottingham
to dine with him at Lambeth many times, especially if he was his kinsman, as
Masons pretends; but its evident he never assisted at his consecration, if his
Lorship was not at the Nags-head in Cheapside, when Scory made him a Bishop
with a knock of his Protestant Bible, bidding him to take authority to preach
the Word of God sincearly.

SECT. VIII.
Of the English Protestant Church in King James and his Sons reign.

1 KIng James had too much wit to be of Calvin's Religion; though his education
was committed to Calvinists, he did perceive that it was not invented for the
good of Princes, but rather for their ruin, and that petty Ministers and poor
Elders might bear the sway in Christian Commonwealths. Being called by the
English Council and Nobility to the possession of that Crown which descended
to him by the evident right of his mother Mary Steward, his first thoughts in
England were bent against the Puritanicall discipline, as one who had been
sufficiently disciplined by the Kirk of Scotland. Therefore he commanded a
Synod to be celebrated in London, wherein himself was declared spiritual Head
of the Church, and 141. Canons made for the suppression of Puritanisme; the
Bible was corrected in such places only as seemed to condemn the Puritanicall
discipline and doctrine. Traditiones was translated Tradition, and not
Ordinances, or Documents, as in Queen Elizabeth's days; Idols were not
translated Images, nor their worshippers Idolaters, as formerly. (...) was not
interpreted now, Ordination by election, but by imposition of hands; because
all this was necessary to confute Puritans. Yet all other corruptions that
seemed to condemn Catholic Religion, were applauded as much as before in
Queen Elizabeth's reign. Though Hell was not translated grave, nor soul
carcass, yet other devices were found to divert men's thoughts from a third
place between heaven and hell; and therefore Saint Peter's words wherein he
declares that Christ's soul did descend to Limbus Patrum, 1. Pet. 3. v. 18.19.
were translated thus, Quickened by the spirits, by which also he went, and
preached unto the spirits in prison etc. whereas the true translation is,
Quickened, or alive in his spirit, or soul, in which spirit, or soul, he
coming preached to them also that were in prison.

2 The new translation which King James caused to be made, Knot in his
Protestancy condemned, page 89.
was overseene, corrected, and altered by Doctor Abbats of Canterbury, and
Smith of Gloucester, as Sir Henry Savill told Master Richard Montague,
afterward pretended Bishop of Chichester and of Norwich. For, Master Montague
wondering that Sir Henry (to whose care was committed the translating of Saint
Peter's Epistles) would pervert the sense of the Apostle about Christ's descent
into hell; Sir Henry answered, that the forenamed Bishops corrupted, and
altered the said Translation made by King James his order. This was to
transform the very Scripture into Policy, and slight both conscience and
Religion. Let any sober person judge, how scrupulous would Master Abbots be,
and the other pretended Bishops in his time, to forge and falsify Masons
Records, to the end they might make good imposition of hands at Lambeth, when
so impudently and wickedly they corrupted Gods Word, fearing that by force of
the text, they should be forced to admit of Limbus Patrum, and from thence be
lead into Purgatory; but none who dies in the Protestant Religion, needs fear
going thither. In the same Translation they have translated Gal. 5.17. The
flesh lusts against the spirit, so that ye cannot do the things ye would;
whereas the Greek and Latin is, Ye do not (de facto) the things ye would. And
to prove their heresy averring a necessity, and Divine precept for all persons
to receive both kinds 1. Cor. 11. v. 27. They falsely translate thus,
Whosoever shall eat this bread, (and) drink this cup of the Lord unworthily
etc. Whereas both in the Latin and Greek it is, Whosoever shall eat this
bread, (or) drink this chalice etc. which disjunctive, or, cannot infer the
necessity of both kinds, as the conjunctive (and) might seem to do both
here, and in other places, if by this they were not so clearly interpreted. And
because the Protestant Clergy, even in King James and his Sons reign, were
loath to depart with their wives, though they pretended to be as true Priests
as the Apostles, they did not correct the false translation of 1. Cor. 1. Have
not we power to lead about a wife? as if Saint Paul had one, and the rest of
the Apostles; they notwithstanding put in King James his Translation woman in
the margen, but wife remained in the text. They did not correct the corrupting
of 2. Pet. 1. Labor that by good works you make sure your vocation, and
election: they leave out good works, as they have done also in Queen
Elizabeth's translations, though it be in all the Latin and in the most
authentike Greek copies.

3 It were tedious to mention all the falsifications of the English
translations of Scripture, and these I hope are sufficient to prove, that in
King James and King Charles reign, there was as little Religion in the Church
of England, as in Queen Elizabeth's. Scripture was made speak whatsoever
Courtiors and Politicians fancied and desired. It was ridiculous to see how the
Church did on a sudden accommodate it self to the Court, and how Bancroft
pretended Bishop of London, after of Canterbury, did write and preach for
Episcopacy, as a distinct order of Priesthood, in King James his reign,
whereas a little before he answered Master William Alabuster (when he objected
that no Bishop laid hands, Holiwood lib. de investig Christi Ecclesia cap. 4.
or ordained Parker and his Camerades) that a single Priest might ordain
Bishops in case of necessity. Truly he was put to a necessity of giving this
answer, because the Nags-head Ordination could not be contradicted, nor Masons
forged Records produced.

4 Before King James was in possession of the Crown of England, he was engaged
to many Princes that he would ease Catholics by repealing the penal Laws,
and without doubt had performed, if he had not been diverted from it by Cecil,
and other upstarts and Politicians, whose interest was begun and grounded
upon heresy, and the destruction of the ancient Nobility and Gentry of the
Kingdom. There was a treaty of peace between him and the King of Spain,
whose Ambassador in London had in his Instructions, to insist upon liberty of
conscience for Catholics, and the King was resolved to grant it, rather then
to break of the treaty, and told Cecil so much; who undertook to the King,
that he would make peace with the Spaniard, without any obligation to favor
Catholics, advising his Majesty to oblige his own Subjects, and not to permit
them to owe so great an obligation to the King of Spain, or any other
foreign Prince. Cecil therefore deals with an Italian Politician, by whom
the Spanish Ambassador was to by advised in all his negotiation, and tells him
that King James, and himself also, were as willing to grant liberty of
conscience to Catholics, as the Catholic King was earnest in demanding it,
because it was not only just, but convenient for the State, Catholics being
the fittest instruments to oppose Puritanisme, which the King so much did fear
and hate; therefore they should have liberty of conscience; but it was not
convenient, or possible to article concerning any such thing; because the
Kingdom would be offended, and the Subjects would owe the favor to the King
of Spain, not to their own, who was resolved within a little time to repeal
all penal Laws. Whether the Italian believed Cecil, I Know not, but its
certain that these two Politicians resolved, no mention should be made of
Religion in the articles: notwithstanding King James, being of a gracious
disposition, told Cecil, he would not persecute for conscience the Catholics;
and I believe, would have been very moderate, if Cecil had not invented the
Gun-pouder treason plot. That Cecil was the contriver, or at least the fomenter
of it, was testified by one of his own domestic Gentlemen, who advertised a
certain Catholic his friend, by name Master Buck two months before, of a
wicked design his Master had against Catholics: one Master Tresham, and
another Catholic, who were thought to have been Cecils instruments in all
this business, having access to him even at midnight, were sent to the Tower,
and never seen afterward, least they should tell tales; and its very certain
that Percy, and Catesby might have been taken alive, when they were killed;
but Cecil knew full well, that these two unfortunate Gentlemen would have
related the story less to his own advantage, then himself caused it to be
published: therefore they were dispatched when they might have been made
prisoners, having no other weapons offensive, or defensive, but their swords.

5 This wicked plot of Cecil made the Catholics so odious, that it was not in
the Kings power to do them his intended favor; yet whether it was, that he
suspected Cecils knavery, or that he would not have the crime of few men
attributed to their Religion, and to the multitude, he declared he innocence of
both, and did not persecute Catholics as much as Protestants desired; yet the
barrells wherein the powder was, are kept as relics, and were often showed to
the King, and his posterity, that they might not entertain the least thought
of clemency toward Catholic Religion. There is not an ignorant Minister, or
Tub-preacher, who does not (when all other matter fails) remit his Auditors to
the Gun-pouder treason, and describe these tubs very pathetically the only
relics thought fit by them to be kept in memory. They might have kept other
monuments of far more barbarous, savage cruelty, whereunto none but
themselves can lay claim, practiced by the French and Scotch Hugonots, so
horridly foul and abominable, not only to the thoughts, but eyes of men, that
it is a shame to Christianity, to see it degenerate by heresy, to more ugly,
enormous outrages, then ever humane nature could be transported into by the
fury of Paganism. I forbear the bloody practices of England in Queen
Elizabeth time, as not so barbarous in appearance, though more wicked in
substance, as being exhibited by public Magistrates under the color of Law
and pretext of peace of the Land; the starving and racking of so many innocent,
worthy, learned persons; the tearing out of hearts and bowels in the public
view upon suborned testimonies of base, vagabond, perjured catchpoules, hired
to swear what they and their hirers knew to be false, and all the world saw
to be void of all signs of truth. But to return to Cecil, the mischief
contrived by him, was imputed to men that had no more hand in the plot, then to
dissuade their penitents from it in confession; the seal whereof is so sacred,
that it cannot be broken; which obligation of secrecy, is of greater advantage
to prevent treason, then if it were lawful to reveal the mischief imparted
in that Sacrament, because none will confess a treason, that he thinks may be
revealed; and by acquainting his Confessor with treacherous purposes, he may
be dissuaded from them, but not absolved, unless he does promise to desist,
and heartily repent. It was foretold to Cecil that the hand of God would fall
heavily upon him, and that he should dye in a ditch, and be burried in a
dunghill; a thing very unlikely to happen, all circumstances considered, and
yet it happened; for, being jealous of my Lord Henry Howards getting into the
Kings favor, Cecil made such have from the Bath to London, (notwithstanding a
troublesome disease) that going to ease himself in a ditch, there he dyed, and
was afterward burried in a Chapel, that himself had built upon a dunghill.
And thus a man raised from dirt, came to be dissolved into his own element,
and to rest in his native soil. Not only Catholics, but Protestants, have
reason To curse the memory of this man, and his gun-pouder plot; for, if
Catholics had been countenanced, as King James intended, Puritans, and other
Sectaries would never have had the power to bring his Sons head to the block,
and the Nation to so much bloudshead. Let Politicians say what they please,
there is no greater support of Monarchy, then Catholic Religion.

6 Though in King James his time, Religion was squared to his Majesty's
interest and inclination, but always with some regard to that which had been
formerly professed in Queen Elizabeth's days, for fear of causing a distemper
by a sudden alteration; yet in King Charles his reign, the Church of England
came to that perfection, that it professed no Religion at all. Protestants had
been so shamefully beaten from all their negative articles, and lurking holes,
by Catholic Divines, that they were forced to do what petty Princes are
accustomed, when they are oppressed, and overpowred by great Monarchs confining
with their Estates; now they side with France, now with Spain, because they
are not able to stand upon their own legs. When the petty Church of England
cannot defend it self against Catholic arguments, then they side with
Puritans, or any others, that will take them into protection; and when
Puritans, and other* Heretics reject them, then they pretend to be the same
thing with us, and go by the name of Catholics, which becomes them as ill,
and no less ridiculously, then Spanish attire does a Frenchman. The title of
supreme Head of the Church, so spiritualized in Queen Elizabeth's, that she
dispensed with all invalidities of Ordination, and in King James, that he
dispensed with Abbats of Canterbury his irregularity, (when shooting at a Buck,
he killed a man) was in King Charles his days limited only to temporal
affairs, and all spiritual functions declared to he out of the supremacies
reach and clement. But rather then it shall be restored back again to the
Pope, some of their chief Doctors bestow it upon the Sea of Saint David, or
some other Welsh Bishopric, by reason of their obstinacy against Saint
Augustine the Apostle of the Saxons, who commanded the ancient Brittans to
accommodate themselves to the Roman Church in celebrating Easter, wherein alone
they differed from it. And the maine argument now alleged for the old
Britains, or Welchmens independency of the Sea of Rome, is a Welsh proverb,
which for my ignorance of the language I cannot explain, but only assure you,
that it was no more then a Welsh proverb, and in all likelihood of late date
since the beginning of modern heresies.

7 Other Doctors of the English Church thinking it more for their honor and
interest, to have an independent Patriarch rather at Canterbury, then in Wales,
were eager to comply with Master Lauds ambition, by whom they might be exempted
from dependence of Rome, (whence for themselves they could expect no
preferment) and exalted above the despicable and miserable tribe of
Puritanicall pensionary Ministers. Whereupon they framed a new Idea of a
National Faith, as we see of National fashions, endeavoring To persuade the
ignorant, that a National Synod of England alone, was sussicient to frame a
Faith, and to show the way for English men to take, in their journey to heaven:
but this appearing ridiculous, that Faith being universal to mankind, should
be shaped to the several fashions, fancies, customs, and interests of
different Nations, they were forced, for mere shame, to appeal to
Oecumenicall or universal Counsels; yet finding themselves in many of them
plainly condemned, they appealed to the four first; not as discovering in
them any more ground of assurance, then in others following, b^t because they
treated of matters that are not disputed in these times or at least amongst
such as they regard For, in those time, there was no man so fond, or foolish,
as to call our present controversies in question. But upon further instance
made against them, that Christ had left means to confute errors emergent in
ages following, as well as in former; and consequently it being no less
possible that Luther, Calvin, Tindal, and Fox, might as well broach Heretic
doctrines, as Arrius, Eutyches, Eunomius, and Nestor, they were forced to admit
the necessity of general Counsels in these our present and future ages.
Whereupon seeing themselves engaged to fall under the Censure of the Counsels
of Lateran and Trent, which were as universal as by all humane industry could
possibly (considering the circumstances of time) be procured, and were as
universally accepted (as to points of doctrine) as can be required, and with
much less opposition, then some of the first four, which Protestants
themselves are pleased to accept of; there was no other remedy left to shuune
their returning to Rome, (where they knew there was more wit, then to trust men
of no Religion in Ecclesiastical government) but to frame a Chimaera of a
Council morally impossible, consisting of a joint Assembly of those
Patriarchs, and subordinate Churches, which for their long education in
confessed heresy, and strict subjection to the Turks tyranny, (a jealous enemy
of Christian Assemblies) were sure never to be got together; in the mean time
(which time they confided would serve their turn) they persuaded the people to
a superficial acquiescence in the public government, and thereby in
themselves, without any regard to the substance of interior intellectual
Faith and submission of judgment, whereupon the work of our salvation is
built.

8 They were no less cautious in avoiding the Censure of general Counsels,
then in determining that Doctrine which they pretended might only be censured,
being resolved to have two strings to their bow. Upon this score they admit,
and absurdly apply the distinction of articles of Christian Religion into
fundamental, and not fundamental; and to call that alone a fundamental
article of Faith, which no Heretic ever denied. Whosoever (say they) does
confess, that JESUS is the Son of God, is a Catholic, and has as much
Faith as is necessary for salvation, provided he does profess to believe the
Apostles and Athanasian Creed, which he may interpret as he thinks most for his
convenience. As for all other articles of Faith controverted between the Roman
Catholic Church, and Sectaries, they look upon them, as we Catholics do
upon some school speculations, rather impertinent then profitable, or
necessary. Hence you may gather, that the Protestant Church of England is more
beholding to their Neighbors for the little they yet retain of Christian
Religion, then to their own Doctors and Preachers; the multitude and consent
of believers in some general points of Christianity, is the motive of their
belief, and therefore its merely historical, grounded upon humane persuasion,
and not upon supernatural inspiration. If Protestants had conversed as
frequently and familiarly with Turks, and Jews, as with Christians, the
mysteries of the Trinity and Incarnation would be esteemed no more necessary,
or fundamental, then that of Transubstantiation. Truly Mahomets story of his
familiar commerce with the holy Ghost in the shape of a Dove, is every jot as
probable, as Luthers extraordinary vocation to reform the Doctrine of the
Church; or Calvin's fantastical private spirit; and would be no less credited
by Protestants, if to them it were as frequently and advantagiously recounted:
they would content themselves with believing, that there is but one God,
Creator, and Remunerator of mankind.

9 This want of supernatural Faith, and Christian Religion, was not discovered
by many, who were much taken with the exterior formalities and splendor of
the English Protestant Church, which looked as fresh and fair as the aples of
Sodom and Gomorrha, thougb in the inside all was trash and ashes; it was a
well adorned sepulcher of dead souls, without Faith, stuffed with stinking
Atheistical principles, and abominable corruptions; the Court seemed to be
zealous for the Church, and the Church for the Court, but neither for God and
true Religion; policy and ignorance had the greatest share in their designs
and decrees. Heresy being thus raised to its greatest height, and most part of
the English Protestant Doctors being of no Religion at all, it was time for
Gods vengeance to fall upon their Church, which in King Charles his reign was
but a fancy of Christianity, indifferent for all heresies, and in that sense
only, Catholic, or universal, it was an ^lla podrida of all errors, a
politic corporation of University men, that pretended a neutrality of
Religion, by applying absurdly their distinction of fundamental and not
fundamental articles of Faith. Finally it was a phantasma, or Ghost of
Reformation, that a distance seemed nothing, but when men drew near, and
examined its principles, it was found to be nothing but weak policy, and
obstinate heresy, almost degenerated into manifest Atheism.

SECT. IX.
Of the Kirk of Scotland.

1 OF all Princes none ought to be more lamented for the heresy they have
fallen into* then the Kings of Scotland; others perverted their Subjects by
policy, persecution, and ill example; but the Subjects of Scotland persecuted
their Sovereigns for Catholic Religion, and made their young King swear to
maintain heresy, before he had discretion to know what they imposed upon him
and his posterity. King James the V. of Scotland was so zealous a Catholic,
that in the year 1527. he commanded a kinsman of his own, Pathrick Hamilton
by name, to be burnt in Saint Andrews, for his obstinacy and heresy. And in the
year 1533. called a Parliament, Leslaus lib. 9.
wherein he declared his resolution to live and dye in the Roman Catholic
Faith, and obedience to the Sea Apostolic, as all his Ancestors had done,
since Christianity was professed in that Kingdom. The three States or Scotland
swore the same, Acts of Parliament were made against all novelties in Religion,
and to prevent them, it was commanded that none of the ignorant and vulgar sort
should read the Scripture falsely translated into English, but that all should
be contented to hear the Word of God from the mouth of their Doctors and
Pastors, according to the institution of Christ, and the continual practice of
his Church.

2 In the year 1539. a Canon regular, two Dominicans, one Franciscan, and some
seculars, were burnt for obstinate Heretics, some recanted their errors,
others were banished. But George Buchanan, a Franciscan Apostata, Buchan. lib.
14.
escaped out of prison, as himself relates, though he conceales the cause of
his imprisonment, which was not only for heresy, but for Iudaisme, and
celebrating the Jewish ceremony of eating a Paschall Lamb with great devotion
in Lent. This is that mercenary knave, who being bribed by James Steward the
bastard, writ so basely and falsely of that incomparable Queen Mary Steward,
and recounts so many fables and palpable lies in the history of his own
Nation, that the very truths are not believed. Beza epist. Theol. 78.
Beza the Heretic calls him an excellent and most worthy man, and Genebrardus
graceth him with the title of an Atheistical Poet, and a drunken Buffon.
Basil. Dorc. lib. 2.
King James had so good an opinion of him, that in his instructions to Prince
Henry, he forbid him the perusal of Buchanan and Knoxes writings.

3 Henry the VIII. of England (jealous to see his Nephew James the V. so
addicted to France, that after the death of Magdalen eldest daughter to Francis
King of France his first wife, he took for his second the Duke of Guises
sister) desired the said James King of Scots to give him a meeting at York. The
Nobility and Clergy of Scotland opposed this conference, as dangerous both to
the State and Religion, bringing to their Kings memory, how James the I. his
Ancestour, had been kept prisoner in England upon such an other occasion, as
also how Henry the VIII. who had been perfidious to God, and the Church, was
not to be trusted. Hereupon Henry declares war against Scotland, and James
the V. raises an Army to oppose and prevent Henry, by making England the Seat
of the war: But because he named a Favorite of his own to command the Army
under himself, that was not grateful to the Nobility and people, they would
not obey, nor concur with their Sovereign according to their duty. This put
the King into a fever, whereof he dyed the 13. of December 1542. in the 32.
year of his age; a most gallant and active Prince, whole greatest fault and
ruin was, not to distinguish between the duty and the humor of his Subjects:
a wise Prince must so contrive things, that the one be seconded by the other;
for, if they encounter, its twenty to one, but the humor of a multitude will
prevail against the duty they owe to their Sovereign, who must humor his
people, if he will be obeyed, and go their pace, if he will be served his own
way; but let him endeavor to make it appear, that he has away of his own,
and that he is not at the command of others, who are hated, or not regarded by
those that must do his business: when Subjects imagine that they are not
governed by their Prince, but by his Favorites, they often break out into open
rebellion, especially if the Favorites seem to be too imperious and uncivil.
It were to be wished that the people did accommodate themselves to the humor
or their Prince, and his Councillors; and not impossible, if the Prince will
choose persons of honor and integrity, to assist him that confound not their
Masters interest with their own ambition and passions. Whether the King of
Scots his Favorite was guilty of any such crime, I know not, but his case has
demonstrated to posterity, that nothing can be more fatal to a Prince, then to
strive against the humor of his Subjects for a Favorite, whose fidelities they
suspect, or contemn his person and abilities. And if Kings will think it
concerns their honor, not to part with hated or contemned Favorits, because
thereby they seem to condemn their own choice and judgments; let them
consider, whether it be more for their purpose to be deprived of their
Kingdoms, or to acknowledge that they are men, and may be mistaken in choosing
Counselors and Privados. Yet if the Counselors grew odious since they sat at
the helm, the case is altered, and the Prince his choice, or judgment cannot
be censured for removing from the management of affairs persons, whose
incapacity was not known to him, before he applied them to the government of
the Commonwealth.

4 But in case the unfitness of a Favorite for governing great affairs,
should be so evident, that the ill success must be attributed rather to his
want of wisdom and conduct, then to fortune: if the Prince be obstinate in his
resolution of not parting with him, he must run the hazard of being censured
not only void of judgment in his choice, but also incorrigible in his
errors; his first choice may be excused by affection to the person, or want of
experience; his persisting in that choice (notwithstanding the continual
miscarriage of businesses) must be attributed to an incapacity of learning
(even by experience) the art of governing. Therefore it concerns not only the
state, but also the honor of Princes, to condemn sometimes their own first
choice and judgments, by second thoughts and reflections, least the world
should think, that they are more wilful then understanding, more besotted
upon an unhappy Favorite, then attentive to the common good, their own
interest and reputation. This lesson was inculcated to the late King Charles by
his Father, when he charged him to beware of Master Laud, whom King James did
foresee to be as unfit for government, as afterward he proved, by treating the
English Nobility and Gentry with such scorn, as if they were borne to be no
less under his command, then de facto they were at his disposal, by reason of
the Kings favor and commission. Had his late Majesty been as fortunate in
taking his Fathers advice as his Father was prudent in giving it, their
posterity, and the poor Cavalleers, had been in a better condition. Princes
are not so frequently ruined by their own faults, as by their Favorits,
unless you will reckon amongst their own, whatsoever is owned by them to
excuse their Ministers. Yet politic Princes are more apt to father their own
oversights upon others, then adopt those of others to themselves; and are
seldom so constant in their affection to Favorits, as for their sakes to bring
their own judgments in question, either by owning their defects, or defending
their misgovernment.

5 Heresy, that could not get footing in Scotland, during James the V. his
reign, assaulted the same Kingdom in his daughter Queen Mary Stewards
infancy, borne but 8. days before her Father departed this world. James
Hamilton Earl of Aran taking upon him the government, was solicited by Henry
the VIII. to send the young Queen into England, that she might be married to
his Son Edward: Aran condescended, but the Queen Mother, and Cardinal Beton
Chancellor of Scotland opposed Henry the VIII. design, as destructive to
Catholic Religion; and by consent of the three States of the Realm, sent the
young Queen to France, to be espoused to the Delphin. But before her departure,
Henry the VIII. had gained some of the Nobility of Scotland to himself, who
preferring their private interests before Religion, encouraged one Friar
Williams a Dominican, to preach against the Popes supremacy, and to exhort all
people to read the English Bible, not doubting by these means, to embroyle the
Kingdom in such a manner, that Henry the VIII. sending an Army, might not
only have the young Queen, but the whole Kingdom at his command. Though the
Queen escaped, her Kingdom was all wasted with war; Paul the III. Bishop of
Rome sent the Patriarch of Venice to comfort the Scots in their affliction,
exhorting them to be constant in that Faith which they had inherited from their
Ancestors.

6 By the sermons of Friar William, and the liberty of reading the Bible, many
of the vulgar sort, and also of the Nobility, were perverted; and because
Cardinal Beton, being Archbishop of Saint Andrews and Chancellor of Scotland,
was an obstacle to their intended rebellion, and destruction of the Catholic
Religion, they did assassinate him in his own chamber, and hanged his body out
at the window in his Cardinals robes. Its certain that his blood could not be
washed of from the stone of the window, though great diligence was used to that
purpose. This murder was revenged by the King of France, whose forces took
the Castle to which the Heretics retired, punished them, and suppressed their
novelties. But in the year 1558. when the Queen of Scots married the Delphin
of France, the Heretics raised another rebellion. The Ringleaders were Paul
Meffinus a baker, Harlaus a tailor, and John Duglas, alias Grant, who had been
a Carmelite Friar. On the first of September the feast of Saint Giles had been
always celebrated very solemnly in Edinburg, as being Patron of that City. The
Saints Image being carried in procession, according to the ancient and
Catholic manner, the Heretics snatched it away, and committed many other
abuses and sacrileges, and spared not to exhort all sorts of people to rebel
against the present government.

7 John Knox an Apostata Religious Priest, being accused formerly of too much
familiarity with his mother in law, of witchcraft, and of many other crimes,
was fled from Scotland into England, and from thence to Geneva, where he learnt
Calvin's doctrine and discipline. This wicked man having by his Letters and
Emissaries perturbed all in Scotland, came in person in the year 1559. to
complete the work; he rallied all the dispersed Heretics, persuaded them to
profane all Churches and Altars, pull down Monasteries, banish all Bishops,
Priests, and Religious, deny obedience to the Queen Regent (to whom Knox gave
the lie diverse times) and to choose a new Council, whereof the chief was
James Steward base son to James the V. who afterward was Earl of Murray,
and liked well to see this confusion, not doubting that his ambition might fish
in the troubled water. Calvin. ep. 285.
Calvin writ to Knox, congratulating with him the good success and progress
of the Ghospel, exhorting him to carry on the work of the Lord, like a valiant
labourer in Christ's Church. But by succors from France the rebels were
quieted, and by the endeavors of Nicholas Pellevins, the Popes Nuntius,
(afterward a Cardinal) and of three Sorbon Doctors, their heresy did not
spread over the whole Nation, though every day their number increased. Knox
never omitted any opportunity afterward to plant his Genevian Ghospel in his
Country, which at length by the help of the Devil, and James Steward, and
other Politicians, he perfected. When King James came first into England, being
at dinner in a noble man's house, he said, Knot in his Protestancy condemned,
fol. 166. edit. 1654. at Doway.
that God thought fit to set a visible mark of reprobation upon Knox even in
this life before he went to the Devil; which was, that being sick in his bed
with a good fire of coals by him, and a candle light upon the table, a woman
or maid of his, sitting by him, he told her that he was extremely thirsty, and
therefore willed her to fetch him some drink. She went, and returned quickly,
but found the room all in darkness; for, not only the candle, but the cole
fire also was utterly extinct, and she by that light which her self brought in
immediately after, saw the body of Knox lying dead in the middle of the floor,
and with a most ghastly and horrid countenance, as if his body were to show the
condition of his soul. Let Politicians reflect upon this horrid spectacle, and
consider whether they can invent a plot whereby Gods just judgment may be
deluded? What did it avail Knox in his last hour, to have been as powerful
in Scotland, as Calvin was in Geneva? and what will it avail any Politician,
or Courtiour, to have embroyled Kingdoms, and made factions in this world, if
in the other he must for all eternity be but a coal to keep in and inflame
hell fire?

8 In the year 1564. Queen Mary Steward, after her return from France,
married the Lord Henry Steward, a Prince of the blood royal both of Scotland
and England; and though Murray the Queens base brother, advised her to marry
this same Prince, he joined in rebellion with the Heretics, and other
seditious men, against her Majesty for marrying; but they were soon quasht,
and the heads of the faction retired into England, where with Queen Elizabeth
they brewed a new rebellion; and to give it a better color and success, then
the former had, it was thought expedient to sow sedition and jealousies
between the Queen and her husband; who having but 22. years of age, and
being high minded, had not from her Majesty that unlimited power, which he
desired. This restriction of the young Prince his authority was thought to
proceed from the advice of David Rizius the Queens Secretary, a grave and
understanding man, and a severe observer of heretical designs. The Lord Henry
Steward being persuaded by the Heretics, that this old man was the only
obstacle of not having all the government in his own hands, resolved to
dispatch him out of the way, and to that end leads a company of armed Heretics
into the Queens chamber, she being at supper, and great with child of King
James: at her feet (whither he repaired for protection) was the poor
Secretary murdered, and the Queen so barbarously dealt withal, that it was
strange she did not dye in the place, or miscarry, which was all that the
Heretics aimed at. But her husband reflecting upon his passion and folly,
being also advertised by some of the company, that the Heretics made him but
an instrument of his own ruin, he entered to the Queens chamber, with
pretext of causing her to sign a paper in favor of the murderers; and there
acknowledging his fault, both got away privately to the Castle of Dumbar, raised
forces, dissipated the Army of their Enemies, some whereof were executed: but
Murray the bastard, that plotted all the mischief, was pardoned at the
instance of Queen Elizabeth, who was resolved by this Heretics means to
destroy his Sister the innocent Queen of Scots, as afterward happened.

9 Prince Henry Steward considering that Queen Elizabeth's kindness to the
bastard Murray, was grounded upon her hatred to his Queen and himself, was
resolved to prevent his own death, by permitting Justice have its right
against a man, who employed all his thoughts in rebellious designs: he
communicated his resolution with the Queen, but she being of a more merciful
and mild disposition then the times and troubles required, dissuaded her
husband from putting him to death, though, even after his last pardon, there
was proof enough of treason. He perceiving that the Prince looked upon him as
a Traitor, dealt with his confederats about murdering the Prince, and promised
to James Heburne Earl of Bothuel, that he should be married to the Queen, if
he would kill her husband; the rest of his heretical Cabale put their hands to
this engagement; whereupon Bothuel murdered Henry Steward in his bed, not
far from Edinburg at a Country house, whether he had gone for his
recreation; and afterward took the Queen prisoner, as she was returning from
visiting her child King James, who was nursed at Sterling. Bothuel forced his
prisoner to be his wife, assuring her, no other hopes were left for her self,
other son to survive Prince Henry, but his protection, who was of great power
amongst the heretics, as then he imagined: but the contrary was soon
discovered; for, the very same heretics that set him upon killing the Prince,
and marrying the Queen, raised an Army to ruin him, and professed to the
Queen, they had no other d^signe in raising forces, but to revenge the death
of her husband, whereof they knew Bothuel to be the Author, and humbly desired
her Majesty would be pleased to deliver him up to Justice, and receive them
into her grace, protesting to live and dye in her obedience. Bothuel was
delivered to their hands, whom they let escape; but the poor Queen, contrary
to their oath and engagement, was not only made prisoner, but reviled and
afronted in the highest degree, laying to her charge, that she had murdered
her husband; and to make her odious and infamous to the whole Kingdom, and
Christian world, they carried before her, all the way to Edinburg, the picture
of her husband dead with many wounds, and her little son painted by his
fathers corpse, praying to God for justice against his mother. This is the faith
and fruit of heresy, and policy. When Politicians heads direct Heretics hands,
we may expect nothing but such tragical stories, as this is. Queen Elizabeth
by destroying this poor Lady, aimed at the establishment of her own
usurpation, and security: Murray by her death, had hopes to govern Scotland:
Knox, Buchanan, and the rest of the heretical crew, looked upon the settling of
Calvin's Reformation and Discipline, and to that end advised that the innocent
Queen should be put to death; of the same opinion was her good brother, the
bastard Murray: but that glory was reserved for our Virgin Queen of England,
whose malice could not be satiated with afronts, afflictions, and many years
imprisonment, until at length upon a public stage the most virtuous and
renowned Queen of Scots lost her head, against the Law of Nature and Nations,
by the command of a Iezabel, that cruel head, heart, and darling of the
venerable Protestant Church of England.

10 Before it was resolved by the Assembly of Heretics, whether the Queen
should dye, it was decreed, the government of the Kingdom should be resigned
to her son, and in his minority (being then but 13. months old) to Murray,
and his Camerades. Hereupon the Infant was declared King, and in stead of the
Mass, honest John Knox made a sermon against that holy Sacrifice, and all
Catholic Tenets and ceremonies, recommending much to the people the observance
of his Calvinian Discipline. Morton and Humes swore in the young Kings name, to
set up the new Religion, and pull down the old, which was already brought so
low, that the Queen could scarce find one Catholic Priest to baptize her
son, the same did celebrate her husbands funeral, whom she commanded to be
buried in her fathers Tomb; wherewith these two Catholic Princes, King James
the V. and Prince Henry Steward, lies also enterred the Catholic Religion,
that for so many ages had flourished in Scotland. Duke Hamilton, and his brother
John, Archbishop of Saint Andrews, the Earls of Huntley and Argile, with many
others of the Nobility, protested against the oath that was taken in the Kings
name, of destroying that Faith which his Majesty, and themselves, had inherited
from their noble Progenitors: yet the Queen of Scots being made prisoner by
Queen Elizabeth, and most of the Catholic Nobility being killed in her
quarrel, Murray, Knox, and other Heretics, established their perfidious
Reformation, and brought up King James in their errors, the first Protestant
King, or Prince, that by heresy stained the royal blood and name of the
Stewards. There is not a family in the world, that ought to hate heresy, and
love Catholic Religion more then his posterity; none was so much persecuted by
our pretended Reformers (and in particular by the English Church) as theirs;
and no Subjects were more faithful to their Sovereign, then the Catholics of
Scotland were to their Queen Mary Steward. But the education of few and tender
years does destroy the obligation of many ages, and blot out of Princes minds
the memory of their most famous Ancestors.

CHAP. VI.
That no Policy could heretofore, or can for the future give any supernatural
appearance to the reformed Churches, whereby any rational persons may be
mistaken in their way to heaven, by confounding them with the true Catholic
Church.

1 WHat a great hand Policy had in destroying Religion, and setting up
Reformation, has been demonstrated in the former Chapter and Sections. I
doubt not but the most vulgar apprehensions that did see the change, might
easily perceive the difference which was between the old and new Religion. I
am also confident, all sober men of the last age did look upon Luther, Calvin,
Cranmer, Knox, and all their Reformados, just as we do upon James Naylor, and
his Quakers; though now many silly souls do reverence their memories, because
distance of time makes things look as unlike themselves, as distance of place.
A brute beast, at a distance, may be taken for a rational creature; and a
beastly reformation may, by the help of time and policy, gain the credit of a
rational Religion amongst misinformed and weak understandings; but it can
never look like supernatural Faith, to any rational person, that will
examine the grounds and fundation of it, notwithstanding that wicked Clergy and
Politicians have endeavored to dabe it over with the private spirit, and their
own interpretation of Scripture.

2 There is the same proportion between Catholic Religion and Reformation, as
is between ancient Gentry and upstarts. Kings, out of policy, or favor, may
bestow titles of honor; but all the policy upon earth, cannot make a man an
ancient Gentleman, if he be not one by descent. A Nobleman that derives his
pedigree from Citizens, cannot compare in quality with men, whose Ancestors
have been, time out of memory, known Gentlemen. Its just so in Religions. Men
may give to their Reformations very glorious titles, as Mount Sion, Assembly of
Saints, Beauteous discipline, and what they please; but all will not do. The
ancient name of Catholic comes by descent, and continual succession, not by
policy, to the Roman Church, and not to any other, pretending Reformation.
These new Religions may well become upstarts, and new families raised by
heresy: but methinks the ancient Nobility and Gentry look odly in this new
fashioned faith, and seem to stain their blood, by renouncing and persecuting
that Religion, which their noble Progenitors for so many ages did constantly
profess, and gloriously maintain, both at home and abroad.

3 Catholic Religion does not only sympathise with ancient Gentry in descent
and succession, but also in their Coats of arms. The arms of the Catholic
Religion, are the supernatural signs of the true Church, visible to the
world. Put case that a Cheat, or Mountebanck disguised like a Gentleman,
should intrude himself into the company of persons of quality in Whitehall,
and brag much of his Gentry; but when he is desired to prove it he should
ingenuously confess, that he has no other evidence for his extraction, but
certain interior motions and impulses to heroike actions; questionless this
Mountebank would be laughed at by the whole company. This is the case of all
reformed Churches, that pretend to be the true one, or part thereof, without
any further proof or evidence for their Religion, and interpretation of
Scripture, then their own word for a private spirit, as invisible in it self,
as in any effect that looks like supernatural. Its true, that many noble
families, whose Ancestors have been lions (as their Coats of arms testify
even to this day) have by degrees degenerated into lambs; yet they prove by
tradition and records, that they descend from warlike lions. Though the Roman
Catholic Church had no miracles, nor persons of eminent sanctity of life at
the present, to show for their Religion; that only of their Ancestors in
former ages, would be proof enough, that they profess the right Faith;
because they have evidence of tradition, and records, that it is the same with
the Faith of those, who worked miracles, and were Saints: but reformed Churches
want all such evidences; and though records may be forged by Master Mason, and
others of the English Church; neither they, nor any private spirit can, by all
their politic devises, counterfeit tradition, which must go further up into
antiquity, then they can reach by all humane industry. But (the Lord be praised
for it) the Roman Catholic Church has now, and had in every age evident
miracles, and eminent sanctity of life, much resembling that of the Apostles,
and our primitive Fathers, whereby our spirit and faith is confirmed to be
truly Catholic. These arms and signs of Gods Church cannot be counterfeited
by Reformers, because they are supernatural, and above the sphere of
hypocrisy and policy. A Puritan may show the white of his eyes, by lifting them
up to the Lord, and look very demurely and devoutly: a Nags-head Minister may
walk in roba longa, and wear his suplise, black scarf, and square cap: but
none of them can attain to an eminent degree of supernatural sanctity, or
work a miracle, until they forsake the Reformation, and become Roman
Catholics.

4 The pretended evidence of Scripture, in favor of Reformation, is not less
ridiculous then the private spirit. Let us track our Mountebank Gentleman, and
follow him to the Courts of Westminster, after his being repulsed, and laughed
at in Whitehall, for proving his Nobility only by interior impulses. Suppose
he should in the open Court lay claim to some ancient Gentleman's inheritance,
descended from father to son, for many ages; and should produce no other
evidence, or proof, for this pretended right, but his adversaries own patent,
in virtue whereof the ancient Gentleman's Ancestors and himself possessed the
estate; but because some words in the patent may be interpreted by the
Mountebanks ambition and coveteousnesse in a different sense, then ever they
were before that time understood by the learned Judges of the Land; our
Mountebank must needs be the right heir, and dispossess the Gentleman of his
ancient inheritance, by misinterpreting the words of the patent absurdly, and
contrary to their known sense, and to sentences and practice of the Court,
since ever Law was of force in England. This is the case of all Protestants,
who pretend that there are clear texts of Scripture against Catholic Tenets
and practices. The sense of Scripture which we Roman Catholics follow, either
for Transubstantiation, communion of the layty under one kind, worship of
images, etc. was never contradicted by any, that were not known, and judged
Heretics by the Catholic Church of those times wherein our Tenets were
questioned: this our sense of Scripture has miracles to confirm it, and other
supernatural signs; theirs is backed only by heretical obstinacy and
impudence, pretending evidence of Scripture in obscurity, and light in
darkness. If all Roman Catholics had been in times past, and were at this
present idiots, or natural fools, Protestants might persuade them, that they
do not see what is clear and evident in Scripture, in behalf of Protestancy:
but until Reformers prove, that we are all idiots, or resolved to be damned by
contradicting Gods clear Word, they cannot ground their Reformation upon the
clearness of Scripture, nor reject that sense of it, which Catholics were in
possession of, before their Sects were heard of in the world.

5 That Scripture is not clear for Protestants, is evident, because Catholics
who understand it as well as they, differ from them in the interpretation. And
in case it be obscure to both, its clear that the tradition and practice of
the ancient Catholic Church, is a better Interpreter of Gods meaning, then any
Protestant pleasure, policy, or fancy. Its as unreasonable therefore to
dispossess Catholics of their ancient Tenets, and sense of Scripture, upon
the score of a Protestant interpretation, as it is to dispossess a Gentleman
of his ancient inheritance, at the suite of a coveteous and impudent
Mountebank, that can produce no other evidence for his pretense, then his fond
interpretation of the very writings, in virtue whereof the Gentleman and his
Ancestors have been confirmed in the peaceable possession of their estate, by
the sentence of all Courts in former ages; and never opposed, but by such as
were convinced and condemned of manifest knavery. Here I need not mention, how
many times Protestant Judges condemn their Religion in their own Courts, by
just sentences: whenever they judge according to the Laws of the Land,
interpreted by the ancient and continual practice of the Courts, and contrary
to the fancy of ignorant and absurd pleaders, they give sentence against
Protestancy for the Roman Catholic Religion, though in a different subject;
whereby it is evident, how little beholding Protestancy is to that Policy,
which is not able to defend reformed Churches in the very Protestant Courts.
That Religion is far from supernatural appearance, which has not the least
color of natural equity. But now let us see, how little beholding Policy is
to Protestancy, and prove

CHAP. VII.
That Policy has destroyed it self by courting Protestancy, as being near
allied to Atheism, the greatest enemy of civil government.

1 POlicy without Religion is a body without a soul. The motions of a politic
body must have their beginning from Religion, because without it, the Princes
and Magistrates are too weak for the managing of so great a machine as a
Commonwealth. The power of the people must be employed against themselves, and
the multitude must be subdued, and kept in subjection by their own forces: all
the difficulty and policy consists in persuading men to a thing so much against
their natural inclinations. Some greater power must be inculcated; and because
that is not visible, the very Pagans thought it necessary, to create a belief
in their Subjects of invisible Deities, to which both Prince and Subjects
professed obedience; being convinced in their judgments, that all policy is
weak without power, either real or imagined, to back it, and that the best
Statesman is he, who can persuade the people, that he is more powerful then
themselves. This is the reason why Politicians, though Atheists, persecute
Atheism; because if the multitude think, that there is no such thing as God,
or another life, they will soon discover their own strength, and apply it
against Princes and Magistrates, without fear of being overpowerd by the
invisible hand of God in whom they do not believe, but fancy to be impossible.

2 Atheists and Protestants (being sworn brothers, and judging of others by
themselves) are of opinion, that the Roman Catholic Religion is but a politic
invention, to set up the Pope, and enrich the Roman Clergy, by Purgatory,
Indulgences, Mass, and pilgrimages to Images. If the Roman Catholic Laity
were as apt to be cheated, as Protestants think the Roman Clergy apt and
inclined to cheat, their opinion would be more plausible: but whosoever will
reflect upon the manifest miracles and supernatural signs, whereby these and
all Catholic Tenets have been in former ages, and even in this present,
confirmed; and moreover will consider, how maturely many Roman Catholics of
the Layty (most prudent and politic men) have examined the grounds of our
Religion, and how impossible it is, that so many former ages, different
interests, and opposite Nations and families, should all concur and conspire,
to maintain for Head of the Catholic Church a man they never knew nor expect
any benefit by: whosoever, I say, will reflect upon these things, will clearly
see, and be convinced, that no humane policy can reach so far, nor secrecy be
so well kept, that amongst so many millions of persons, the cheat and mystery
should not break out, and never hitherto be discovered to Protestants, that
are no less curious to know it, then vain in imagining so ridiculous a
foppery. But in case they are resolved to be as obstinate in this mad fancy, as
in their other heresies, they must grant, that we have better success in our
politic ends, then themselves; and if they will needs call us knaves, they
cannot think we are fools; whereas they may to their own first Reformers,
without injury, attribute both denominations; because they showed so little wit
in framing their new Religions, that they made them as inconsistent with
government, as inseparable from Atheism, destroying the very interest they
intended to promote by reformation.

5 Atheists and Protestants do agree in rebellion against God, and in being
refractory against supreme authority; but with this difference, that the
Atheist declares against God himself, the Protestant against his Church, which
is Gods Liutenant upon earth. He that rebels against the Kings Liutenant, will
soon declare against himself; and this is the reason we see so many
Protestants become Atheists, and of no Religion. As rebellions grow to a
height by degrees, first they point at evil Counselors, then at the
Favorite, at length at the Kings person; so Atheism possesses men's minds,
first by vice, then by Protestancy, and at last by no Religion. The ground of
all Religion, and of obedience both to God and men, is the appearance of a
lawful authority and sovereignty, adhearing to the person that pretends it. If
the signs of his superiority and jurisdiction be evident, he may challenge an
evident right to our obedience and belief; we are obliged to honor him
according to his appearance. This ground of Religion and obedience, is equally
destroyed by Atheism and Protestancy. Though the signs of a supreme Deity be
as evident and visible to the eyes of Atheists, as this world and all its
creatures, yet they deny obedience to that supreme Deity; and though
supernatural signs, as miracles and sanctity of life, be as evident to the
eyes of Protestants, in the Roman Church, and no other, as any thing can be,
yet they deny obedience to the said Church: both agree in destroying that
principle, upon which the obligation of belief and obedience is grounded.
Policy and civil government can as little stand without this principle, as a
house can without out a foundation. Atheists and Protestants do agree in
undermining not only Religion, but also the authority of Princes and
Commonwealths; and therefore both doctrines ought to be equally prohibited and
suppressed.

4 In one respect Protestancy is more dangerous to civil government, then
Atheism. An Atheist expects not any invisible power providence to support him,
because he believes none: a Protestant persuades himself, that God will
second his zeal for the Ghospel, and consequently is more resolute and daring;
if God (to punish the sins of others) permits a Protestant to have good
success in his first attempts, he thinks that success is a new engagement to
proceed further, looking upon himself as an instrument of providence, to carry
on the imaginary work or the Lord. The Atheist thinks of no such providence or
engagement, but attributes his success to his own industry, and is not so
fierce, constant, and dangerous an enemy to the civil government, as a
Protestant. Though all this had not been evident by reason as necessarily
following out of Protestant principles, yet its manifest by experience and
history, as we have seen in this Treatise Chap. 7. but because in the next I
am to treat of the tyranny and rebellions of Protestancy, I will end this with
only assuring my Reader, that Politicians were never more unhappy, or more
grosely mistaken, then in the beginning and promoting a pretended Reformation,
that does not only lead men to Atheism, but makes them incapable of being
governed, after they have shaken of the yoke of obedience to divine Authority,
appearing more sufficiently and evidently in the Roman Catholic Church, then
any Kings authority does appear in his Lieutenant, or subordinate Officers.
But now let us proceed, and descend to particulars by showing

CHAP. VIII.
That Protestancy inclines the Prince to Tyranny, and the Subjects to Rebellion.

1 PRinces may be Tyrants, though the Religion they profess be good; but that
Religion cannot be good which inclines Princes to tyranny. A Tyrant is he who
rules either without or against Law, making his own will and pleasure the
model of his government. To rule against the known and practiced sense of the
Law, is to rule against Law, because the essence of a Law consists in the
sense, not in the letter. The fundamental Laws of a Christian Commonwealth,
are the holy Scriptures: to rule against the known and practiced sense of
these Laws, is the greatest tyranny, because it is to rule without and against
Law: it is to rule without Law, because Gods sense is left out, and the
Reformers fancy, or the Prince his pleasure is thrust into its place; and
Scripture is not Gods Law without Gods sense. It is also to rule against Law,
because the Protestant sense of Scripture is contrary to the known and
practiced sense of Gods Word, whereby the Church has been governed since the
time of the Apostles. This proves nothing less then I supposed in the title of
the Chapter: it demonstrates clearly, that when Protestant Princes are not
Tyrants, we may thank themselves, and not their Religion, which is directly
opposite to the Law of God, and inconsistent with the duty Princes owe to
divine Majesty; whence also it followed, that it is an inclination to Tyranny
against the Laws and liberties of the Land; because he that governs without
and against the Law or God, is in a fair way (and at least inclined) to
govern without and against the Laws of men.

2 I hear, some Doctors of the English Protestant Church seem to be much
scandalized at Master Hobbes his Leriathan, because he attributes so much to a
Sovereign, and says that Christian Subjects may, in the exterior profession
of their Faith, accommodate themselves with the Prince, whether Turk or Jew. I
cannot answer for Master Hobbes his Christianity, but this much I will say in
his behalf, that I have not seen Protestancy better expressed, nor more
consequently deduced out of its principles, then in this Authors Leviathan: he
is a good Protestant, and an ill Christian. How can any Protestant sinde fault
with Master Hobbes, See the 39. articles of the Protestant Religion, confirmed
by K. Charles; an. 1642.
for making the Prince Head of the Church, and sole Interpreter of Scripture?
Why should 12. or 7. men in King Edward the VI. time, or a few Ministers in
Queen Elizabeth and King James his reign, assume to themselves a power of
framing a new Religion, and coining a new sense of Scripture, contrary to
antiquity and the known practice of all Christian Churches, and in particular
that of England? Why should they, I say, assume this unlimited power to
themselves, and deny it to their Sovereign, 3. Ed. 6.12. 5. Ed. 6.1.
and his Counsel? If they examine well, they will find Master Hobbes does no
more. And if they acknowledge this great power in spiritual affairs, to be
inherent to the Sovereigns person (as they do, 8. Eliz. 1.
even by their Acts of Parliament) how can they deny him in the temporal, as
absolute and unlimited a power, as Master Hobbes is forced to grant, by the
foundation and principles of Protestant Religion? Do not the Doctors of the
English Church aver, that from the Popes Primacy, and Headship of the Church,
must evidently follow an Antichristian Tyranny, inconsistent with the
prerogative, dominion, and security of Kings, and the liberty of Subjects; why
do they not infer die same consequence from the Sovereigns supremacy? I am
sure they attribute greater power to their Kings, Queens, and petty Doctors,
then Catholics do to the Pope, or general Counsels, who according to our
Tenets, cannot pare of any thing from the matter and form of Sacraments, nor
alter the ancient sense of Scripture, contrary to tradition and the practice of
the Catholics Church: but Protestancy acknowledges all this power to be
inseparable from the Kings and Queens of England, and yet does confess, that
both King and Protestant Church may err against Christian Faith in their
Reformations: no Subject notwithstanding must speak a word against those
errors, he must accommodate himself to them in all his exterior actions,
though he be convinced in judgment, that they are against Catholic Religion.
I would feign know in what does this doctrine of theirs differ from Master
Hobbes? Both agree in the substance, both grant that men may dissemble their
Faith, and deny Christianity, either altogether, or by half. Hobbes says,
Subjects may renounce all Christian Religion by words, so they believe in their
heart: our Doctors of the English Church say, Subjects may deny such points of
Christian Religion, as have been renounced by their Sovereigns. And when the
Sovereign will (if ever that should happen) deny all Christianity, and believe
no more then Turks, or Jews, it evidently follows out of their principles
(though hitherto they durst not say it) that the Subject may do the same by an
exterior acquiescence, until the contrary be decreed in an imaginary general
Council of their own making, and morally impossible to come together, as has
been said in the 7. Chapt. sect. 8. for, what reason can they have to
accommodate themselves to their Prince and Church, in denying some articles of
Christian Religion, and not all? They have none, I am sure, to be angry with
Master Hobbes, who says nothing, but what they also must say, if they will
stick and be consequent to Protestant principles, and particularly to the
doctrine of the Church of England.

3 That Protestancy does incline the Subject to rebellion against his law full
Prince, is more evident then I wish it were by so many woeful experiences.
Their Reformation begun in all places with rebellion, and is like so to
continue, notwithstanding the vigilant care of wise Princes and Counselors.
The reason is manifest, because its morally impossible that the convenience of
the Court should always agree with the interest of the people; and many times
the Laws of the Land (being made to favor both) are not so clear in the
behalf of either. The contrary being railed, who must decide it? Not the
people (says the Prince) because they are Subjects. Not the Prince (say the
people) because he is a part, and Subject to Gods Law. Both appeal to
Scripture, the sole Judge of Protestants controversies. If the Scripture could
speak, and pronounce the sentence without an Interpreter, all might end in
peace and quiet: but amongst Protestants, every Subject speaks for Scripture,
and consequently for himself. If every man be naturally inclined to favor
himself, and look with a partial eye upon his own interest, its more then
probable, that Scripture interpreted by the Subjects, will second their own
inclination and convenience against that of Prince, and Court; neither is it
less evident, that the Prince, and his adherents, will not submit their
judgments and wills to the final and scripturall sentence of every Subject;
so that the sword and rebellion must end the controversy in that Religion,
where all men are supreme Judges and Interpreters of Scripture.

4 And though the Prince may endeavor to incorporate the legistative power,
and the interpretation of the Laws of the Land, into his own prerogative; the
Protestant Subjects will oppose it, not only as unreasonable, but also as
Antichristian pride and tyranny, inconsistent with their Evangelical liberty.
They will infer this consequence. If God has made us Interpreters of his
divine Law, how can a Creature exclude us from interpreting the Laws of the
Land, wherein we are so much concerned, and which ought to be subordinate to
Scripture? Truly seeing no Protestant Prince, or Church, does pretend to be
infallible in declaring the true sense of Gods Word, they can hardly condemn
the Subjects private interpretation, as contrary to Gods meaning; all their
Synodicall Decrees, and legal Declarations against the Subjects fancy, or
pretended inspiration in favor of the Prince, will be looked upon by them who
oppose his designs, as suggestions of obsequious Courtiours and flattering
Clergy, and the people will stick to their own interpretation of Scripture,
backing it with the words of the Apostles Act. 5. God ought to be more obeyed
then men. And if the Prince should declare that their text is but a pretext of
rebellion, they will retort his argument, and say, that his texts are but
pretexts of tyranny, and proclaim him a Rebel against God: for, the meanest
of Protestant Subjects with a Bible in his hand, is as absolute as his King
with a Scepter, nay more, because he looks upon the Scepter as subordinate to
his Bible. Thus you see, how the liberty of interpreting Scripture is no less
the ground of rebellion, then of Protestant Faith; and how politic Princes by
undermining the ancient Catholic sense of Scripture with new fancies and
interpretations, have plotted their own ruin and their posterities
destruction. And that this may appear yet more evidently, I will endeavor to
prove

Chap. IX.
That the Popes spiritual jurisdiction is nothing dangerous to Sovereigns,
but rather that the ground of fidelity and obedience due to them, is utterly
destroyed by denying the Popes supremacy; and that it is a greater foppery in
Protestants, then in Catholics, to deny his infallibility.

1 PRotestant Princes look upon their Subjects with as jealous an eye, as
Spaniards or Italians do look to their wives. The word foreign jurisdiction
(though only spiritual) sounds to them as harshly, and troubles them no
less, then the most injurious term does a suspicious husband. This jealousy
of Protestant Princes is no less fomented by the stupidity of some of their
Writers, then by the ambition of others. Some (as Master Hobbes for one)
looks so dully upon man, Leviathan part. 3. chapter 39.
and government, that he makes no distinction between Spiritualists and
Temporalists, between the Church and State, between the sword of Justice and
the shield of Faith, between Christian and Man; and is of opinion, that out of
such distinctions must needs follow faction and civil war in the
Commonwealth. But other Protestant Writers admit these distinctions, because
they hope by them to reap some benefit, or benefice. Doctor Bramhall in his
replication page 163.
Nay of late some have printed, that the King (notwithstanding his supremacy)
is subject to the Archbishop of Canterbury in spiritual affairs, and under
the jurisdiction of his ordinary Ecclesiastical Pastors; but by no means
under that of the Pope, thinking it to be more for their Sovereigns honor, to
obey his Subjects, then Saint Peter's successor.

2 That God should commit the charge of souls, or any spiritual jurisdiction
to temporal Princes, is as incredible, as it is evident that he did foresee
what an ill account they would give of their Subjects Religion, if they had the
management of their own consciences. If they be so jealous of the Pope, that
notwithstanding he being a stranger* and so far of, yet they fear he may
reduce all temporal matters to his spiritual jurisdiction; how do they
think it possible, that God should not he jealous of trusting them with the
souls of their own Subjects, seeing they may reduce all spiritual matters to
temporal, and abuse their power with much more ease and success, then the
Pope can misapply his spiritual jurisdiction? I am sure they ought to be more
jealous of any of their own Subjects supremacy, then of the Popes spiritual
jurisdiction and authority, because it is more easy for an Archbishop of
Canterbury, or any other in the Realm, to make ill use of his supreme
spiritual jurisdiction in England, then it is for the Pope, at so great a
distance, and with so little acquaintance. Experience does demonstrate, that
the Popes spiritual jurisdiction over all Christendom, is not so dangerous as
Protestant Laws and petty Preachers do pretend. Histories do testify, that
Popes have restored twenty Kings for one that they are said to depose; neither
did they ever pretend to depose any King, until his own Subjects were weary
of his tyrannical government, or all the world scandalized at his wicked
heresies; and in those very cases, the Popes never took the Kingdom to
themselves: an evident argument, that Religion, not interest, moved them to
take so rigourous ways; whether warrantable, or not, let others dispute, I
cannot. Yet this much I can assure Protestant Princes, that Popes have exhorted
their Subjects to obedience and patience, when they were most persecuted. In
case any of his Ministers should be misinformed, indiscrete, or exceed his
commission, that fault cannot be attributed to his Master, nor to the Religion
of Catholic Subjects, but rather to the ignorance of Catholic Tenets, and of
Canonical Doctrine, which commands Subjects to obey, though their Sovereigns
be not of their own Religion.

3 Kings and Princes by denying obedience to the Pope, teach their Subjects to
rebel against themselves, and do dispense with oath of allegiance. The
ground of fidelity and obedience due to hereditary Sovereigns, is a constant
tradition, that he who actually resignes, is lawful successor to one, whose
right and jurisdiction was undoubtedly acknowledged; and indeed there cannot be
a more rational and secure ground of obedience, then tradition, and a
continual succession of lawful witnesses from one age to another. Writings
may be counterfeited, Tradition cannot, because its impossible to stop so many
mouths as deliver it to posterity, or to contradict: the testimony of whole
Provinces and Nations. This is the reason why Heretics cannot gainesay the
tradition of the Popes supremacy: though they deny the supremacy it self, and
the truth of that Doctrine; yet they are not so madly impudent, as to deny what
is evident to all Christendom* to wit, that there was a constant tradition
when Luther revolted from the Church, that the Bishop of Rome is Christ's Vicar
upon earth. They only pretend that this tradition is not a sufficient ground
to oblige men to believe what it delivered, or to acknowledge the Popes
supremacy. If it be not, how can the tradition of one only Nation be a
sufficient ground to oblige Subjects to believe, that their Sovereign is
lawful King of France, or Spain; or that they are bound in conscience to obey
him. There is not any King or Prince in Europe, that has so universal and
constant a tradition for his temporal sovereignty, as the Bishop of Rome has
to be Saint Peter's lawful successor, and of Saint Peter's being head of the
Church under Christ, by divine institution. Pasce oves meas, Feed my sheep,
Joan. 21.
and many other texts of Scripture, have never been otherwise understood in
the Church by any, but by declared Heretics, whose contradicting the tradition
and ancient sense of Gods Word, can as little prejudice the Popes right and
supremacy, as a declared Rebel can prejudice his Sovereigns right, by calling
in question his descent or royal authority. When Saint Peter's chair is shaken
by Protestant Princes, their own thrones must fall; because it is not only
the fundation of the Catholic Church, but the support of Christian Monarchy.

4 Here I cannot omit to advertise my Reader, what poor shifts some of the
most learned Protestants are brought to: they renew that so often and solidly
refuted error, of making the Pope Patriarch only of the West, by misapplying
the words of the Nicen Council, Baron an. 325. Sirmondus, and Guther. Card.
Perron* my r^sp. ad Object. Reg. Brit. lib. 1 c. 32. and 33.
and concealing the true translation of the Canon, as every man may see in the
Authors cited in the margen. The title of Patriarch of the West does no more
exclude the Popes supreme dignity of head of the Church under Christ, then the
title of Earl of Flanders does exclude that of King of Spain. If the Bishops
of Rome were not universal Patriarchs, but Patriarchs only of the West, why
did Saint Victor Pope, in the second age of Christianity, excommunicate all the
Churches of Asia, Eusebius. 5. hist. 24. and cap. 25. Spond. 198.
upon the difference of celebrating Easter, for not accommodating themselves to
the Roman Sea? And though Saint Iretaeus did not approve of so great severity,
yet neither he, nor any other, called in question his authority. They are also
pleased to make the Pope Speaker in the general Counsels, but not President;
they allow him the place of first Bishop, and call him exordium unitatis, with
Saint Cyprian; but by no means will they grant him the title of infallible and
supreme Pastor. These are but weak and pitiful shifts, whereunto Protestants
are driven, by the evidence of Counsels, Fathers, Tradition, and Catholic
arguments, contrary to the Tenets and Doctrine of their brethren of the late
Church of England. If the Pope be exordium unitatis, he must be infallible in
deciding the controversy proposed, otherwise he will be exordium divisionis,
because no learned persons will submit their judgments in matters of Faith to
a Judge that may be mistaken; they will be as far from his sentence and
thoughts, as from any other; and the unity of Faith (whereof Saint Cyprian
speaks) consists more in an unity of thoughts of judgments, then of speech,
or exterior acquiescence. Such a dumb unity of Faith has its beginning from
Policy, not Religion.

5 They excuse themselves from the guilt and crime of Schism, as ridiculously
as they impugn the Popes supremacy. They accuse us Catholics for the fault
themselves committed, because forsooth they left not our communion, until we
thrust them out of doors. It may be as well said, that the Judge, and not the
thief, is the malefactor, because the Judge pronounced sentence against the
thief. The Roman Catholic Church had no more part in the Schism of England,
then to declare Henry the VIII. and Queen Elizabeth Schismatics, and
Heretics. They committed the crime, and the Pope pronounced the sentence.
Therefore the Roman Church, or Court, is guilty of Schism, is an excellent
Protestant consequence! But such fopperies we must expect from obstinate
Heretics, that with a perverse will oppose no less their own understandings,
then Catholic verities. The Pope (say they) imposed new articles of Faith upon
their tender consciences, he made a new Creed, and declared it was necessary to
believe the same. Therefore he was cause of the Schism. The same argument that
the Arrians made against the Council of Nice, and Saint Athanasius his Creed,
do these Heretics now object against the Council of Trent, and Pope Pius V.
his profession of Faith. Declarations against new heresies, are no new Creeds;
they are but explanations of the old, not new articles of Faith. One article of
Faith may be divided into many branches: how many does Saint Athanasius set
down in his Symbol of the Trinity and Incarnation? The Catholic Church did
always practice this way, when it was necessary to confute heresies. If it was
lawful for the Church of the fourth age, to command all Christians to profess
and believe the Symbol of Saint Athanasius, which was but an explanation of
particulars contained in the mysteries of the Trinity and Incarnation; why
cannot the Church now explain more particularly the Apostles Creed, and any
part of Scripture, impugned by Heretics, and command all Christians to believe
the same? All the pretended new articles are contained in the Apostles Creed
implicitly, as in that of the Communion of Saints, Remission of sins,
Catholic Church, etc. or at least in some text of Scripture, as
Transubstantiation in Christ's words, This is my Body. The petty Ministers of
the English Nags-head Church presume to make a new Creed of 39. articles,
protesting against the ancient Faith of Christendom, and they admire that the
Vicar of Christ, and a general Council, should warn all Catholics to beware
of their heresies, and to that end declare in a Symbol of Faith more
particularly the received Doctrine of the Church of God. Away with these
shameful shifts of Heretics, whose last excuse for their Schism is, that
they who begun it, were Roman Catholics. So were Rebels once loyal
Subjects, and yet that does not excuse themselves, or their adherents, from the
guilt of rebellion. With these heretical devises are many poor idiots misled
by ungodly and wicked Preachers, who gain their living and credit by the
damnation of souls, that Christ our Savior purchased at so dear a rate.

6 The last thing I proposed in the title of this Chapter was, that its a
greater foppery in Protestants, then in Catholics, to deny the Popes
infallibily in deciding controversies of Christian Religion. That it is a
foppery in both, must be evident to all persons, that will reflect upon the
nature of Christian Faith, and the Books of holy Scripture. When men believe
as Christians, they must exclude all manner of doubts and fears of being
mistaken, from the act wherewith they believe; they cannot defend themselves
from a new heresy by only protesting against it by word of mouth, they must
detest it with their heart and understanding, and believe the quite contrary
truth. There was never Heretic so simple as to broach an error upon his own
score; he always pretends Gods Word for its fundation, and backs it with as
many texts of Scripture, as Catholics oppose against his heresy. This was the
practice of Arrians, Nestorians, and all other ancient Heretics, which
Protestants do now adays imitate. If the true meaning of Scripture were as
visible to us, as it is infallible in it self, no Heretic would make use of
the words of holy Writ, because his fancy or interpretation would be easily
discerned from the sense which God intended, at least by combining and
comparing one text with another: but experience demonstrates, that
notwithstanding all combinations of one place of Scripture with another, the
controversy remains, and cannot be decided by Scripture alone. To imagine that
all which cannot be decided by Scripture alone, is superfluous, and the belief
thereof not necessary for salvation, is to dispense with the mysteries of the
Trinity and Incarnation; seeing the Council of Nice, Soz. lib. 1. c. 16.
Athan. Apol. 2.
and Saint Athanasius that great Champion of the Catholic Church confuted and
condemned the Arrians, not by Scripture alone, but by tradition, and adhearing
not only to the words, but also to that sense of Scripture, which that present
Church had received from the former.

7 Seeing therefore that controversies of Christian Religion must be decided by
the sense, as well as by the words of Scripture; and that the said sense is
more clearly delivered to us by tradition, and the testimony of the Church,
then by the words themselves in controverted texts; and that Heretics may
endeavor to confound their own tradition with that of the true Catholic
Church (as the Quartadecimans did in the celebrating Easter;) and that they may
invent new heresies, never thought of in former ages: supposing, I say, that
all this is possible, the remedy of these evils in the Church, cannot be
impossible; and truly the remedy is impossible (at least at all times, to wit,
when general Counsels are not assembled) if the Pope be not infallible in
declaring what is heresy, divine Faith, and Catholic tradition. Such few
Catholics as called in question the Popes infallibity, excused their error
not only with the infallibility, but also with the moral possibility of a
general Council, whenever a new heresy would be invented: but they were
grossly mistaken, as experience does demonstrate; and a perpetual general
Council was never intended by God, who commands the Bishops and Prelates to
have a care of the particular Churches which he committed to their charge; a
thing not compatible with their continual assistance in Constantinople, Trent,
or any other one City, where the Council is assembled. But Protestants
hitherto have denied (even the English Church in the 21. of their 39. articles)
that general Counsels arc infallible, and consequently must say, that God
commanded an impossibility, bidding us beware of new heresies, Act. 20.
and not believe false Prophets, when he left us no infallible Judge, or
Pastor, to declare unto us what doctrine is heresy, and who are the false
Prophets. No Catholic was ever so unreasonable, as to defend such a foppery.

8 And though of late some of our Nags-head Doctors (contrary to the 21.
article of their Creed, and English Church) acknowledge that general Counsels
are infallible in deciding controversies of Faith, and (to their eternal
shame, and the infamy of their venerable Mother the Protestant Church of
England) are now forced to call the 39. Articles of their Religion by the name
of only probable opinions; yet such a definition or description they give in
their printed books of a general Council, with so many odd conditions, and
so insuperable difficulties, that only mad men may hope to see such a
Christian Assembly meet, and much less agree in condemning any heresy, or
declaring what is Catholic Doctrine. This new definition of a general
Council is but a mere put of, to gain time, that Nags-head errors may last
as long as their Ministers; but they are evidently convinced, and condemned by
the absurdity of their poor shift: its a greater foppery to admit of
infallibility in an impossible Council, then to admit of a possible Council
without infallibility. The first is an absolute Chimaera, contrary to the
evident light of natural reason: the second seems only impossible to
Christians, that grant there is a Church of God upon earth, and that be has
left means in it, to end controversies of Religion with peace and unity of
Catholic Faith.

9 There cannot be a greater foppery, then to think that God instituted his
Church without possibility of obtaining the end or its institution. The end of
the Catholic Church is our salvation by one, and the same supernatural and
undoubted Faith, communicated by preaching and hearing: Romans 10.
this one and undoubted Faith in this manner is impossible, If there be not at
least one infallible Pastor (when there are no general Counsels) who may by
his definition declare what is Catholic Faith, what heresy, whenever the
Church is troubled with diversity of opinions: its as evident therefore, that
the Popes infallibility is not superfluous, as it is clear that God did not
deprive his Church of means, without which its impossible to compass the end
he aimed at in its institution. If Profestants themselves judge it a most
absurd and destructive Tenet in any Commonwealth, See the late Kings answer to
the Remonstrance of the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament 26. May 1642.
in answer to the business of Hull.
that a murderer or felon cannot be apprehended, condemned, or punished by any
other authority, then that of Parliament, even when it actually sits; how much
more absurd and destructive must they grant it would be in the Church, that a
murderer of souls, and an Heretic, cannot be declared and condemned by any
other authority, or infallibility, then that of a general Council not
actually sitting, nor likely to be assembled in a long time? Do they imagine
that God would institute a Church more absurdly, then themselves would order a
Commonwealth? As in all well ordered Commonwealths there must be means to
suppress sedition at any time, before it comes to be rebellion; so in the
Church of God, there must be means to condemn dangerous opinions and growing
heresies, before they come to spread and infect Christian souls. If there be
no infallible and visible Judge of controversies besides a general Council,
none will alter his opinion until the general Council be gathered, and then
it will be too late to apply the remedy. An exterior acquiescence does not
change men's opinions, nor free their minds, and thoughts from heretical
errors: none thinks himself obliged to forsake his own opinion, for that of
other men, If theirs be noe more then probable. Therefore some infallible
authority there must be at all times in the Church, whereby men may be
obliged, to condemn even their own opinions, and errors; and none does as
much as pretend to it, but the Roman Bishop.

10 The infallibility of some visible Judge of Controversies always at hand,
especially when general Counsels can not meet conveniently, is so agreeable
to evident reason, and so necessary for the unity of Faith and peace, not
only of the Catholic Church, but also of the Christian Commonwealth, that the
Protestants who were most against it, are now most for it, and wish that the
Pope, if he be not, were as infallible as we pretend. If their wish be
rational (as without doubt it is) we are to presume, that God the Author of
reason, was as rational in this particular, as they can wish. And though it
be strange, how they can imagine, that God can be unreasonable in any matter
and in one that so much concerned his Church; yet they are convinced by woeful
experience, that our belief of the Popes infallibility is as beneficial to
Catholics, as their obstinacy against it, has been prejudicial to
Protestants, who make Scripture the ground, and warrant of all attempts, and
rebellions against their Sovereigns; whereas we submit our judgments to the
ancient, and settled interpretation of Gods Word, and when that is not clear,
we conform our selves to the sentence of the Pope, a very indifferent person,
and supreme Judge in matters of Christian Religion; at least he is more
unpartiall to Princes, then their own subjects interpreting Scripture by
fancy, interest, or passion.

Why should we Catholics believe, that the Bishop of Rome is infallible, and
Christ's Vicar, upon earth, rather then he of Constantinople, or any other; is
as much as to demand, why do we rather believe that Philip the 4. or Lewis
the 14. are lawful Kings of Spain, and France, then other men that never
could pretend right to those Kingdoms? See the Protestants Apology for the
Church of Rome tr. 1. see. 3. subd. 10. and see. 7. subd. 5. and 9. and tr. 2
see ^. and 3 subd: 10.
There is not any man upon earth who can pretend right be be infallible in
determining controversies of Religion, but the Bishop of Rome. He has a more
constant, and universal tradition for his spiritual jurisdiction, and
infallible authority, then any King has for his temporal superiority. Why
should we deny to the Pope, what all antiquity acknowledged, and all men must
grant, if it be not out of animosity against his person, or obstinacy against
his prerogative; which we ought not to measure by his personal merits, but by
Gods providence, and the public good, and necessity of the Catholic Church.
If we look upon the greatness of the prerogative, its more probable that one
man may deserve it better, and be more capable of it, then every one of them
who concur to the infallible definition of a general Council: neither ought
it to seem so strange, that God should be pleased to make one Pope
infallible in S Peter's chair, if we believe that every Bishop is infallible
in a Council, who concurres to a definition, when all Christendom is
assembled together in an universal Synod. Noe Catholic does believe that the
Pope is infallible in all his words and actions, or as a particular Doctor, but
only when he proposes or speaks any thing in Gods name, and as his
Interpreter, to the Catholic Church.

CHAP. X.
That the foundation of Justice, and form of Judicature, is wholly destroyed by
penal Laws and oaths against any point of the Roman Catholic Religion.

1 THe foundation of Justice and Judicature, is evidence of lawful witnesses,
against whose testimony the accused person can have no rational exception. As
the judge must have evidence of witnesses for the sentence he pronounces, so
must the witnesses have some evidence for the testimony they give. There is a
great difference between the evidence of witnesses, required against persons
accused for Religion, and for other crimes. Eyewitnesses have best evidence
against malefactors apprehended for civil crimes; but in matters of Faith,
and religion, all goes by hearsay; Romans 10.
he is the best witness, who relyes least upon his own knowledge; his best
evidence is the testimony of others dead before he was borne, and though their
bodies lie rotten in graves, their Faith and Doctrine must be fresh in the
memory and testimony of the present Catholic Church, and Christian posterity.

2 As the Judge must have evidence for his sentence, and the witness for his
testimony, so must the Legislatour have evidence that his Law or Statute does
not contradict the Law of God; his legislative power must be subordinate to
Christian Religion. Henry the VIII. Edward the VI. and Queen Elizabeth's penal
Statutes, are evidently against the Law of God and Christian Religion, if we
may credit antiquity, and stick to the Faith and practice of the Church, and
Catholic Princes, that went before them, not only in England, but in all
other Christian Kingdoms. No persons living have any other evidence for the
Law of God, and Catholic Religion, but the test money of the immediately
precedent age, confirmed with supernatural signs: all former ages speak to
us by the mouth of the last with which we conversed; we must cake their word
for all the rest, and for the sense, as well as for the letter of Scripture.
The 14. age delivered to the 15. the Roman Catholic Faith, which we now
profess; assuring that it was the true sense of Scripture, which they had
learned from the 13. age, and so forth to the Apostles. What evidence had Henry
the VIII. or his daughter Queen Elizabeth, to oppose against the testimony of
all former ages, confirmed with so many miracles, and to make Statutes against
the known and practiced Law of God and Christianity? His luxury, and his
daughters bastardy, are the only evidence which Protestants can produce for
the ground of penal Laws against the Popes supremacy, and other points of the
Roman Catholic Religion: an excellent foundation of Protestant Laws, Justice,
and Judicature.

3 To pronounce sentence of death, loss of goods, or banishment, against
persons without any proose, is rather tyranny then injustice. The greatest
crimes (even that of treason) require at least one lawful witness: let
Protestant produce but one lawful witness against the Religion of Catholics,
and their sense of Scripture, and we will not murmr against their penal
Laws, and rigourous proceedings: Antiquity affords them none, because, though
in diverse ages, some odd men did testify sometimes one error of theirs,
sometimes another; they were in those very times contradicted by the whole
Catholic Church, and declared infamous Impostours and Heretics. In this
present age no Protestants can be lawful witnesses for their own Religion, or
against ours, because their testimony cannot be valid against so constant and
universal a tradition, as we Catholics have for our Doctrine and sense of
Scripture. Its as ridiculous and unjust in a Judge, to pronounce sentence
against Roman Catholics for their Religion, upon the evidence and testimony of
Protestancy, as if he had in open Court condemned men to forfeit their estates,
and ancient inheritance, upon the word of a mad fellow, that produces no other
evidence to confirm his claim, but interior motions of the spirit of
coveteousnesse and ambition, or some obscure text of the Law appliable to all
cases and subjects; for, all the Protestant evidence is reduced to the private
spirit, and the pretended clearness of Scripture. If this be not to destroy
the foundation of Justice, and the form of Judicature. Protestants have a
different way of proceeding from all other Nations, and have altered the style
of natural reason, humane nature, and the practice of all antiquity.

4 They cannot excuse their persecution against Catholics, with the example of
Christian Emperors and Kings, that both for zeal of Religion and humane
Policy (to avoid the danger of rebellion) made Laws and Statutes against
Heretics, and Innovatours of the ancient Faith and sense of Scripture, which
descended to them by tradition from the Apostles. Protestants take the quite
contrary way; they make Laws and Statutes against: the ancient Religion, and
known sense of Gods Word, and persecute Catholics for professing it; whereas
their Predecessors, Emperors and Kings, punished new Religions and Novelists.
This last was lawful in secular Princes, but the practice of Protestants is
unjust and wicked, because it destroys Justice and the true Religion,
confirmed by the public testimony and practice of the Christian world, since
the Apostles time to this present. If the Roman Catholic Religion were not the
true Apostolical Faith, but as new as Protestants pretend, how is it possible
that in history there should be no mention made of any person that suffered as
an Heretic, for broaching or maintaining any one point which we now profess?
If any Doctrine of ours were judged an heresy, or a novelty by antiquity,
without doubt we had not all escaped the rigor of penal Laws made against
Heretics and Novelists. I am sure Protestants cannot brag, nor say so much for
their own Doctrine, many if not all the points whereof have been condemned as
heresy by the Church in ancient times, and punished as novelties by Christian
Kings and Emperors; which was the only reason that moved the first English
Protestants to cause the young child Edward the VI. (when he knew not what he
did) to repeal all the Laws and Statutes that any Christian King of England
and the Kingdom had made against Heretics, being convinced that themselves,
and not Catholics, were comprehended in that number. All who suffered
persecution or death for any point of the Roman Religion, were looked upon by
the Catholic Church in all ages, as glorious Confessors, and renowned
Martyrs. Amongst the most precious jewels of the Eastern Church were
accounted such as were put to death for defending the worship of Images against
the Iconuclasts, Baron. an. 723. Conc. Nicaen. 2. Act. 5.
who were the first that persecuted Christians for that Doctrine, at the
instance of one Serantapicus a Magician and a Jew, that promised to Gizedo
Prince of the Saracens, he should live 30. years, if he would command all
Images to be taken away, and not worshipped in his Dominions by the Catholics.
But Gizedo dying within a year and a half, his son Vlidus condemned the Jew
to death, as a perfidious lmpostour; and the Images were worshipped as formerly,
until three years afterward Leo Isaurus the heretic Emperor, at the
instance also of Jews, Council. Nicaen. 2. Baron. an. 726.
raised that most terrible persecution against the Catholic Church, for
practicing so pious a custom, which had continued amongst Christians, without
the least danger of idolatry, since the time of the Apostles to that present,
and twill not be interrupted until the day of judgment, not^ithstanding the
clamours, endeavors, and vain pretended fears of Protestant zealots, in
behalf of Serantapicus their Patriarch, and his Hebrew tribe their loving
brethren.

5 Their persecution against Catholics can be no more excused by the
proceedings of the Spanish and Italian Inquisition, Of the Inquisition.
then their penal Statutes have been by the Laws of ancient Kings and
Emperors against Heretics, 1. Because the Inquisition proceeds according to
the rules and form of Justice; none is declared an Heretic, or guilty by a
new Law, or oath, made only to the end that by them men may be intrapped both
in soul, body, and estate: it was no crime in England to be a Catholic,
before the penal Laws were enacted, but it was a crime to be an Heretic, or
Apostata, before the ancient Emperors and Kings made penal Laws against
heresy. The Law supposed, and did not make the crime, as penal Statutes do in
England, making a crime of Christian Religion. 2. Heretics are never condemned
by the Inquisition without the testimony of many lawful witnesses, both living
and dead: all the ancient Fathers, Counsels, and the whole Catholic Church of
former ages testify, that their errors are new, and contrary to the Doctrine
of Christ, and his Apostles. no Rebel was ever more evidently convicted of
rebellion against his Prince, then Heretics are by the Inquisition of heresy
against God and the Apostolical Church. We Catholics cannot obtain so fair
play at their hands; we are condemned by a new Law, because we are not
Heretics, and our Judges are convicted of the crime they lay to our charge.
Surely this is to turn upside down Justice and Judicature. 3. The Inquisition
medleth not with those who never were Catholics; but the penal Laws
comprehend them who never were of their Church, or communion. 4. The
Inquisition condemns no Heretics to death, but only declares their heresy, to
the end the faithful may avoid their conversation: its true the secular power
executes the secular against them, notwitstanding that the Inquisition does
protest against that rigor, and desires that Heretics may not be punished
with death, or effusion of blood: this protestation and petition is now, and
has always been the continual practice of the Roman Church; but the penal
Laws of Protestants are written with bloody caracters, all their Courts are
stained with the innocent and noble blood of many learned and loyal Subjects,
only because they would not take an oath against their conscience, and abjure
the Faith of their Christian Ancestors. 5. Though the Inquisition were as
unjust, and rigorous, as some of the ignorant Protestants pretend, it could be
no blemish to the Catholic Religion, because it is not an universal practice,
but limited to Spain and Italy, at the instance of secular Princes, who look
upon it as a necessary means to keep their Subjects of those Nations in the
fear of God, and in awe of their Sovereigns. But the penal Laws of England
are spread as far as their Protestant Church and communion. 6. The
Inquisition does seriously wish and endeavor the conversion amendment of
Heretics, employing learned Divines to convince them of their errors, and
instruct them in the way of salvation: but the penal Laws, and the oaths of
supremacy, allegiance, and abjuration, are like so many nets cast out by
Protestants, to fish estates in troubled consciences; a far different method
from that of the Apostles, who were fishers of men, and not of estates:
Protestants fish for estates, though not always with success. In King James
his reign, a Scot begged of his Majesty an English Catholics estate, to whom
he procured that the oath of supremacy might be tendered, never imagining that
the Gentleman would take it, or go to Church, and damn his soul to save his
estate: the Gentleman offered the Scot a fair composition, but nothing would
satisfy this beggar; if he had not made the Catholic also a beggar; who at
length resolved to show himself in the Church; whereupon the Scot made him a
most devout and learned exhortation, dissuading him from all Protestant
assemblies, often repeating and explaining the words of our Savior, What does
it avail a man, if he games all the world by the loss of his sale? Yet the
English man remained obstinate, and resolved rather to give his soul to the
Devil, then his estate to a Scot. I believe there are many such beggarly
Preachers now adays in England; if they consider well the text of the Scots
Sermon, they may apply it better to themselves, then to Roman Catholics.

6 The last pretext for persecuting of English Catholics, is the massacre and
murder of Protestants in Ireland, in the beginning of the late troubles; and
this must be a preamble to all Proclamations and Oaths of abjuration. What
has an English Catholic to do with an lrish massacre? I am sure he does not
thirst by nature after the blood of his own Nation; and his Religion does
neither incline him to murder, or rebellion. That is a privilege of
Protestancy: we have a settled sense of Scripture, which none can alter without
breach of Catholic Faith; and we are not Judges of our own Controversies, but
must submit to a third and indifferent person. But as for the murders and
massacres of Ireland, so much and so often exaggerated in Protestant Pamphlets
and Pulpits, I only say, that Protestancy had a greater hand in them, then
Catholic Religion, because our Tenets arc contrary to cruelty, and bloudshead;
and though Catholics may be as guilty of murder as other men, the Religion
cannot. Is it not notorious that the Protestants in Ireland signed a bloody
Petition, offered to the Parliament of England, that all Irish who would not
go to Church, might be extirpated, or banished? This was done before the Irish
Catholics did stir. But suppose that in Vlster some of the rascality or
kernes (being exasperated by so many and continual injuries done to them by
Protestants) had murdered some persons; must that reflect upon the English
Catholics, and all the Irish Nation? It is most certain and evident, that the
murders and massacres done in Ireland by Protestants, exceeded without
comparison those committed by Catholics, as well in respect of their
brutishness, as numerousnesse. Witness their marches about Dublin, where the
Inhabitants were all of English extraction, and spoke no other language but the
ancient Saxon. There are very few of that populous Country called Fingale left
alive, all perished, by fire and sword, being a most innocent people, and
having nothing I rishlike in them, but Catholic Religion. In the march of the
Protestant Army to the County of Wicklo, man, woman, and child was killed; a
Gentle woman big with child was hanged at an arch of a bridge, and the poor
Catholic that guided the Army, for reward of his service at parting, being
commanded to blow into a pistol, was shot therewith into the mouth, though
there had been no murder committed on the Protestants in that County. In
another march into the same shire, one Master Comain an aged Gentleman, who
never bore arms, was roasted alive by one Captain Gines; yea they murdered
all that came in their way from within two miles of Dublin.

In a march into the County of Kildare, in, or about February 1641. some of the
Officers going into Mrs. Eustate of Cradogstons house, a sister to Sir William
Talbot of eighty years of age, who being unable to shun, entertained them
with meat and drink; after dinner, her self and another old Gentlewoman, and
a girl of eight years of age, were murdered by the said Protestant Officers.

Walter Evers Esquire, aged and sickly, and of a long time before the war
bed-ridden, being carried by his servants in a litter to shun the fury of the
Army, was taken and hanged. In Westmeath Master Gauley a Gentleman of a good
estate, having a protection and showing it, hoping thereby to save his goods,
lost his life, having his protection laid on his breast, and was shot through
it, to try whether it was proof. Master Thomas Talbot a Gentleman of 90.
years of age, and a great serviture in Queen Elizabeth's wars in Ireland,
having a protection also, was murdered.

Seven or eight hundred women and children, ploughmen and laborers, were
burned and murdered in a day in the Kings land (a tract within seven miles or
Dublin) where neither murder, nor pillage had been committed on the
Protestants Whenever the Army went abroad, the poor Country people did
betake themselves to the firres, where the Protestant Officers did besiege
them, and set the firres on fire; such as shunned and escaped that element,
were killed by the besieging Army, and this they termed a ^unting, sporting
thenselves with the blood of innocents, These barbarous and savage cruelties
were ordinary not only near Dublin, but in all other parts of the Kingdom,
wheresoever the Protestants were, and may be read in diverse Remonstrances and
Relations published in the beginning of the late troubles.

But why do we detain our selves in particulars, when all the world sees how
the whole Irish Nation is murdered by the Transplantation into Conaght, and by
transporting them into the plantations of America? Not content to starve them
in those places, Protestants are resolved also to damn them, forcing them to
an oath of abjuration against their consciences, and the public Faith, given
not only by printed Declarations in the name of the English Parliament to the
Irish Catholics an. 1649 and 1652. That the oath of abjuration shall not be
administered to any in Ireland; but also by an express article granted in a
Treaty to the Catholics of Ireland at Kilkenny, the 12. of May 1652. in
confidence whereof, and of much more to the same effect, the Irish submitted,
and laid down their arms, being assured that they should enjoy the freedom
and liberty of their consciences, and not be molested for not going to Church,
or any Protestant worship of God, who in due time will comfort his people,
confound his enemies, destroy Protestancy the murderer of souls and Catholic
Nations.

Do not diverse in these very times prove their constant affection to the
Parliament, by showing their names subscribed to this cruel Petition? Does not
the Mayor, who then was of Londonderry, an Englishman and a Protestant, with
many others, testify, that there was not a drop of English blood drawn in the
North of Ireland (where the war begun) until the daughter of O Hara, an
Irish Lord, was most barbarously murdered by Protestants? But whosoever
desires to be satisfied in this particular of Ireland, let him read, amongst
all others, the printed Remonstrance of the Irish Confederate Catholics,
delivered by their Commissioners the Lord Viscount Preston, and Sir Robert
Talbot, the 17. of March 1642. to his Majesty's Commissioners at Trim, and
there he will see at large, how the Catholics desired that the murders on
both sides might be punished, and how they were forced to take arms by the
wicked practices of Sir Willium Persons, Sir Charles Coote, and other
Protestants, who then governed that Kingdom: the best news you could give the
Council at Dublin, was, that such a Gentleman, or Nobleman, had retired (for
fear of being murdered) from his house: this was evidence enough to declare
him a Rebel, and confiscate his estate; their phrase was, They had another
estate to divide amongst themselves and their friends; and seemed to rejoice
more at the taking arms of one estated man, then if all the Kingdom had laid
down arms and submitted. Whatsoever men may say in passion of the Irish
war, its evident that Protestancy had a greater influence upon it, then the
Roman Catholic Religion, and therefore ought not to be made the preface, or
pretext or persecution, or oaths of abjuration.

7 By what has been said in this Chapter, it appears, that penal Laws and
Oaths against the Catholic Roman Religion, destroy the ground of Justice, and
the form of Judicature, because the witnesses have no evidence for their
testimony, the Judges not any for their sentence, and the Legislatour as little
for the Law. They are blocks laid in the way for Catholics to stumble at, and
occasions of scandal, whereby they must damn their souls, or loose their
livelihood. How is it possible that any Christian men can drive others into
such streights and necessities? What Judge can find in his heart to condemn a
man to death and loss of goods, because he will not of his own accord forfeit
his share of happiness in the other life? But let them who pronounce sentences
against Catholics for conscience, remember, that a day will come, when
themselves must stand at the bar, and hear their dreadful doom without
hopes of reprivall. Gods Justice has fallen visibly upon some of them even in
this world, to the astonishment of many and repentance of very few. The memory
of Justice Glanviles strange wound and death, by an iuvisible hand, is yet
fresh in Lincoln, where in the end of Queen Elizabeth's reign, he condemned
two Priests, Sprat and Hunt, for refusing the oath of supremacy; and not long
after, was suddenly stricken from his horse, and killed by such another blow
as we read of Julian the Apostata. Spondanus an. 1579. Cambden in his Annals
relates the death of Drury, but not the occasion.
Drury Lord Deputy of Ireland was cited to appear before the throne of Gods
judgment within the space of 15. days, by the venerable Bishop and Marly Fr.
Pathrike Ochely of the order of Saint Francis, whom he commanded to be put to
death for not taking the oath of supremacy: and so it happened; for the 14. day
Drury dyed of so intolerable a disease, that he cried aloud, he was tormented
with all the pains of hell.

8 Many other remarkable things might be set down for the comfort of
Catholics, and terror of their persecutours; these may suffice to prove, that
God does not approve of penal Statutes and oaths against the Roman Catholic
Religion, and that the sword of divine Justice will always hang over the
English Nation, until they model their Laws to the Law of God, nature, and
equity. And though weak and coveteous Politicians be of a contrary opinion, I
am confident they will in time learn by experience, that malicious policy must
not give the Law to divine Providence, nor their injustice prevail against
Gods mercies; to whose divine Majesty we Catholics continual pray for the
conversion of our most cruel persecutors, and hope they will be reduced to the
way of reason and salvation, sooner then they deserve. But in case the Lord be
pleased to permit them carry on their barbarous persecution, Catholics must
not despair, but assure themselves, that then they are most favored by God,
when they are most oppressed by Heretics; and that even in this life, he will,
in due time, provide for those who suffer for his sake, and persevere
constantly in his Faith and service. But if they will, by taking the oath of
objuration, or dissembling the Catholic Religion, matriculate themselves in
the devils books, and blot their names out of the book of life, they may both
in this, and the next, expect to be dealt withal according to their perjury
and perfidious policy; whereby though they may thrive for few and uncertain
days, they may be sure that, even in this world, God will be revenged of their
posterity, and deprive them of that poor inheritance, which their fond and
damned parents purchased for them with the oath of abjuration, and the loss of
their souls for all eternity.

9 Hitherto I have spent much time and paper with Politicians, who are either
Atheists or Protestants by profession. Now I must in the following Chapters
instruct not only them, but others also of whatsoever Religion they seem to
be, and exhort them to moral honesty, without which there can be no solid
wisdom, or policy. Therefore that Princes may be persuaded how contrary it is,
even to their designs and interest, to countenance vice, and contemn virtue;
I will persume to put them in mind of some gross and dangerous errors,
mistaken in these later and abortive ages by Politicians. The salvation of
souls depends much upon Princes, whose greatest obligation is, to govern
their Subjects by men that have souls, and are not void of all truth, honesty,
and honor. My design is, either to convert Machiavilians, or at least to
persuade, that it is not their interest to pervert others by ill example and
unconscionable proceedings. And because Princes cannot treat all businesses
with their equals, or with their own Subjects, immediately by themselves, but
of necessicy must make use of Ambassadors, Ministers, and Councillors of
State, I will briefly treat of what vices such persons must shun, and
demonstrate that truth and moral honesty is the foundation and prop of Policy:
which Doctrine is no less true, then contrary to that definition of an
Ambassador, Homo peregre missus ad mentiondum Reipublicae causa, so much
applanded and practiced by men that understand not how prejudicial untruths
are, not only to their businesses, but to humane society. Therefore in first
place I will endeavor to prove

CHAP. XI.
That it is impossible for a Politician to compass his designs by untruths
and impostures; and that nothing is more contrary to Policy, then vanity.

1 THe principal part of Policy consists in wedding other men's interests to
our own, by making appear, that there is a necessity, or great convenience in
their conjunction. And because the interests of Princes are seldom so united,
but some contrariety may be discovered, there is great danger, that
Ambassadors, or Ministers of State, may endeavor to set forth their Masters
cause, not as it is, but as they wish it were, and supply with untruths what in
reality is wanting. There are some men who tell lies with so ill a grace, and
garb, that you may easily perceive how little their thoughts do agree with
their words, and how far themselves are from crediting what they would have
others believe; their language is so stuffed with affectation, that you may see
its rather a piece of artificial memory, then a sinceare and hearty
expression. Others are more cunning, and give so good a color to untruths,
that they may deceive the wisest men the first or second time. This cheating
art and eloquence is soon learnt, because it requires little wit, less
judgment, and no conscience; and this is the reason why it is so common. But
it cannot be long concealed, it will be very soon discovered either by the
incoherency of the Orators speech, or by some evidence contradicting his
relation, or not compatible with his vain undertaking. They must be very
simple men who are overreached by the faculty of lying; their first credulity
may be attributed to want of judgment, but the second argues want of memory,
with which even fools abound, and may serve their turn, by putting them in
mind of the former cheat, and defend them from being fooled the second time
by the same impostour.

2 If Politicians who make untruths the foundation of their businesses, were to
deal with the greatest fools, the most they might expect, would be to be
credited in their first or second audience; in the third they may with reason
fear an afront, or at least that all businesses will be at a stand: for, how
can a wise Prince, or prudent Minister of State, build a design upon a man's
information, whose custom and passetime is to cheat others. He that is given
to lies, regards not honor, or conscience, and consequently will make no
scruple to embarke his Masters interest in a rotten bottom, provided himself
may be assured to gain any thing by the naufrage or miscarriage of the
design. This at least will be the suspicion of those with whom he is in
treaty, and though they may hear with patience his harangues, they will
suspend their judgments until their doubts be taken away by some other
information, and confirmation. And though his intelligence should prove true,
it will not be judged sincere, neither will his credit be any thing increased
in their opinions, because cunning liars tell truth sometimes, that they may
seem to speak it always: therefore the maxim of great Statesmen is, rather
to delay businesses, and hazard the loss of opportunities, then undertake any
upon the word and relation of an impostour. Its as impossible to profit the
Prince or Commonwealth by untruths, as it is to fool the wisest men of the
world, with whom businesses are dealt: yet this caracter of Mentiri pro
Republica, has made the world so suspicious of Statesmens ingenuity, that few
of them are believed in ordinary discourse. Henry the IV. of France assured the
Hollanders, that Spinola would not besiege a certain Town of theirs that
campana, because Spinola told him he would, and was as good as his word,
contrary to the King and States expectation, and gained the Town more by
speaking truth, then by fighting. Ministers of State may conceal the truth,
and not speak it to curious and impertinent persons, but they ought not to
conceal it by speaking untruths.

3 Vain men are most given to lies of any, because they tell untruths not
only to others, but to themselves; to others by words, and to themselves by
their fond conceits of their own abilities and parts: whence it proceeds, that
they reflect not upon the incoherency of their words, because having deceived
themselves by an extraordinary opinion of themselves and of their own
judgment, they are confident of deceiving without out the least hazard of
being caught in a lie, the only thing that makes a liar circumspect. A vain
man does imagine, that wise and sober men are as much taken with flatteries, as
he is with flattering himself; and therefore in all occasions does practice his
parasiticall art so plainly and absurdly, that they who are least concerned,
cannot forbear to blush, and wish themselves far enough from so ungrateful
and injurious an Orator; yet he apprehends non injury done, because he does to
others, what he would have done to himself.

4 A man who mistakes himself so grossly, must needs be mistaken in others,
and in businesses, for which he is as unfit, as he imagines himself proper.
Designs upon others must be first applied to our selves; we must consider what
our selves would do to prevent or quash them, in case they had come to our
knowledge, and accordingly judge of our enemies; not contemn their wit, or
valor, as vain men do all others compared with themselves. The only way
therefore to effect a design, is to keep it secret, and a vain man is as
little master of his thoughts and of a secrecy, as of his tongue. He must
proclaim to all the world, how much he is trusted, and to the end none may
doubt of it, he will betray his trust, and reveal the secrecy (which is the
life of businesses) to any that will hear him, and seem to congratulate and
applaude his intimacy with his Prince, or others, to whom he is employed. But
if himself does undertake to set a design afoot, he will be so set upon vain
speculations, that there will be as little room for the practical part, as
there was for Archimedes to stand in, when he undertook to demonstrate, that
he could move the earth. Vain men are great undertakers, and promise to move
both heaven and earth, make stirs and revolutions upon Sea and Land; but when
it comes to the push, they are as far from performance, as Archimedes was
from turning the earth upside down.

5 By this it appears how necessary it is for Princes to make choice of
stayed, sober, and sincere men to do their businesses: the best letter of
credence is the employed persons, truth, and integrity; without which nothing
will be effected; nothing being more odious, then a presumptuous, lying, and
vain man; to cross him, his Masters business may be crossed; silence and
delays will be his answer, which is a significant language in wise and civil
Courts; though vain men are not capable of understanding any expression
however so clear that may seem to call in question their own favor and
success, and will rather strive against the Courts inclination, then
acknowledge that themselves can be ungrateful or mistrusted. Wise men will be
loath to tax the Minister of another Prince of any fault, though the proof
were evident: therefore the Prince who employed him, must not take for granted,
that others are satisfied of his truth and ingenuity, because they do not
declare their minds in words: there is no language better understood amongst
Statesmen, then the progress of the business you propose; if it goes on
roundly, they understand you; if there be rubs and stops, you may understand
them if you please, and may assure your self, that there is something amiss
either in the business, or in the person that follows it: and if the
business be as advantageous to the Court as is pretended, and yet is not
advanced; the person who treats it, cannot be grateful to the Ministers: and
this is the practice and language of wise Statesmen and civil Conrtiours, as
you may see in Antonio Perez his Letters, who after his escape into France,
became a Mediator in that Court for a Friend; but by the delays and civil
language of the Ministers, understood their meaning, as one who had practiced
the same art in the Court of Spain. Wherefore let Politicians persuade
thcmselves, that truth and plain dealing is not so contrary to policy and
businesses, as some Sir Politics would be, do vainly imagine. But from their
words let us pass to their deeds, and prove

CHAP. XII.
That it is impossible to be a wise Statesman, and effect businesses, without
moral honesty; and that it is most dangerous for a Prince to have Councillors
that are dishonest men.

1 KNavery now adays has gained so much credit in Courts, and amongst weak
Politicians, that you do a man an injury (in their opinion) if you call him an
honest man: they think that to be honest, or to be a fool, are synonimas, or
the same thing. A dishonest man can neither be trusted at home nor abroad, and
by consequence can be no Statesman; foreign Princes will have nothing to do
with him, and the Subjects less, if they can have access to their Prince
without him. Its impossible for him to counterfeit honesty; if he be not really
honest, it will be soon discovered, because honesty consists more in deeds,
then in words, and though wicked thoughts may be concealed by good language,
actions cannot, seeing they must appear and be censured by all the world
according to their merit. The best part of Policy consists in persuading others
to what you aim at; and eloquence of words will not do, when deeds are
contrary. So that it is as impossible for one to be a wise Politician without
moral honesty, as it is to conceal the wickedness of visible actions, that
admit of no good interpretation; or to persuade men that nothing is intended by
dishonest and destructive ways, but honest and plain dealing. If all the rest
of the world were blind fools, dishonest men might pass amongst them for
wise Politicians.

2 What prejudice such men draws upon Princes that follow their advice, though
not their example, is obvious to every Christian that will consider, how much
Gods Providence is engaged in crossing wicked counsels and designs. But
because we are to deal now with persons that laugh at God and his Providence,
as at skarcrowes, whereby simple folks are frighted out of their wits and
interest, we must wave that argument, and speak to fools in their own
language, that is, only of temporal motives and humane respects. A dishonest
man is always busied with wicked plots, and employes his creatures (who are as
pernicious as himself) in all places of gain, trust, and honor: all men of
parts and merits are excluded, because they scorn to be spies, pimps, or
slaves to dishonest Councillors, or to such as are raised from the dirt by
their favor, and govern the Commonwealth. There is nothing that the multitude
does more resent, then to see worthy and virtuous men neglected, because though
men hate virtue in themselves, they love it in others; besides, worth and
virtue are the two wings wherewith persons of low descent hope to be raised to
any height and preferment, which if they see clipped in others, they will
despair to be supported by them, and will declare to all men with whom they
converse, how little they are to expect from those, whose interest is grounded
upon vice, and dishonest proceedings. From this common discontent, managed by
some factious and politic head, the Subjects come many times to rebel against
his Prince, for not punishing or banishing his evil Councillors; and these,
who look more upon their own preservation, then the Prince his safety or
honor, engage him more and more in their quarrel, by persuading him, that to
Rebels nothing must be granted; who at length get all by force, with the ruin
of their Sovereign and his posterity. All this you may see verified in the
life of Edward the Second King of England.

3 But in case the quite contrary way be taken, and that the Subjects (to
comply with perverse inclinations, and those who are in power) strive who shall
be most wicked, from thence must greater danger arise to the Prince, then from
any other emulation, or discontent. Virtuous men are few, and consequently the
Prince may without great difficulty find them employments: but if vice be
rewarded, he will not find in his Kingdom wherewith to content half the
number of dishonest pretenders; and to satisfy some few of them, is to disgust
all the rest, who being men of as little honor as conscience, will make use of
their number and power, to obtain what they could not by favor, and will
clime up to the height of their ambition by force and wicked devices. This is
the reason why Princes ought to esteem and reward virtue, and discountenance
vice, and why none ought to be of his Council, whose integrity is not
notorious to his Subjects; for, how can a Prince discountenance vice, if his
Favorites be vicious and dishonest persons? Their ill example may be his ruin,
because all men who desire to be preferred, will prostitute their consciences
to the Favorites will and pleasure, and neglect his Master; and when the
Favourit has gained the greatest part of the Subjects to his own devotion,
perhaps he will plot something against the Sovereigns person, and promote to
the royal Throne some of his own relations. A Prince cannot be too suspicious
and jealous of dishonest Councillors; the greatest tie of fidelity being
conscience, they who have none must prove disloyal, whenever it stands with
their convenience. Therefore its most dangerous, and want of true Policy in
Princes, to trust themselves or their affairs in the hands of such men: for,
though it be their interest this day to be faithful to their King, it may be
the contrary to morrow; I am sure it can never be his interest to stick to
them, or own their dishonest proceedings. The interest of Kings lies in the
affection of his Subjects, and its impossible they should affect a King, who
not only protects, but ownes manifest injustices. Subjects are men, and as apt
to resent and revenge injuries, as the Sovereign. He must handle them very
gently, and not expose them to the contempt or tyranny of wicked Ministers;
for, though they may have patience for a time, at length they may grow
furious, and he will find himself mistaken in their temper, when it is too
late to dismiss or punish those who occasioned their distempers.

4 Amongst all Princes ruined by the wickedness of Ministers, none is more to
be pitied then Edward the VI. of England, because he could as little depose as
choose his Counselors, being always in his minority. It is the opinion of
most Writers, that Dudley Duque of Northumberland, after beheading Seamour the
Protector, did poison the King, to the end his son Guilford, who married the
Lady Jane Gray, might, in her right, be King, and himself in the right and
reign of his son, govern England, excluding Queen Mary, and the Queen of
Scots. I do not think that any history can give testimony of more dishonest
Counselors in one time, and in one Kingdom, then we read of in this poor
child's reign. Seamour himself violated his oath and promise given to Henry
the VIII. that no new Religion should be brought into England during the Kings
minority. Afterward he caused his own brother to be beheaded. The Duque of
Northumberland plotted the Kings death, dissembled his Faith, which at length
upon the scaffold he professed, dying a Roman Catholic, and exhorting the
Nation to stick to that Religion. But what I desire Princes should reflect
upon, is, how dangerous it is for them, to have Counselors void of all
Religion and conscience. A man would think that Dudley could have no other
interest, but that of King Edward, whom he ruled together with the Kingdom;
and yet we see how far he went to fetch a contrary interest, and by what
wicked and dishonest ways. There is no interest remote, or too far from one
of a large conscience, if he be persuaded its more for his purpose, then the
present which he manageth. Let Princes therefore countenance virtue, and banish
vice from their Courts and Counsels, if they have any care of their own
interest and security. But now let us see

CHAP. XIII.
How necessary it is for a Statesman to be a man of honor, and of his word;
and how great a difference there is between Policy and Craft?

1 ALl Statesmen must be Gentlemen in their actions. They must shun as much
mean ways in themselves, as they must seem not to dislike of them in other
mean persons, whom they employe or entertain as necessary and base
instruments. They must countenance spies, but scorn to be spies themselves.
The maxim of a Statesman must be, not to betray any man that confides in him;
for, the food of Policy is information and knowledge of businesses, which none
will give that is afraid of being betrayed. A man may be faithful to his
Prince, without being a Traitor to his Subjects, or any other; and the favor
of a Minister with his Prince, must not be grounded upon information of other
men's defects, but upon his own services, strength of judgment, and dexterity
of managing affairs. He who creeps into favor by telling tales, and such
mean ways, is rather a petty spy and informer, then a wise Statesman. I have
known a great Minister of State, who told a Gentleman that desired to be
advised by him, he would help him in what he could, but warned him before
hand, that he would make use of any thing he heard for his Masters service; and
therefore bid him consider, whether it was for his purpose to communicate unto
him any secrecy. This was honorable and plain dealing; he would serve his
King, and not betray others: and yet this Minister of State is known to be as
faithful to his Master, as ever Subject was to Prince, having lost for his
service as great an estate, as any Subject in our parts of Christendom does
possess.

2 There are some persons that place the essence of a Politician, in being a
Favorite of that faction which actually bears sway: they think it wisdom
(though not worth) to change their friends as often as these do their fortune,
and (which is worse) to become enemies or those who raised them from nothing,
because its so necessary to humor the present power. Such cut-purses and
cut-throates are the infamy of Courts, and the dregs of Commonwealths. No wise
Statesman can trust them, because if the Prince does but frown at him, he may
be sure to receive a kick from so mercenary and ungrateful fellows, who may
be called crafty companions, but no wise Politicians. Beasts may be crafty, but
not wise or politic: craft, even in men, requires but little wit, or policy:
there is a great difference between a crafty fool, and a wise Politician.
These crafty fools, or Court spies, have no less worth in them, then many
brute beasts, that preserve a grateful memory to their benefactours; and show
as little judgment as honor, in accommodating themselves to the times in so
shameless a manner. A man is not bound in conscience, or honor, to strive
obstinatly for his Friend against the torrent of a Court, and the violence of a
wilful Prince, but he is obliged not to side with his enemies. It is no rash
judgment to think, that he who becomes an enemy to his Friend only upon the
score of the present power, or prevailing faction, will do the same to his
Prince, if ever he be overpowerd by any that will admit of such infamous
Parasits into his favor. Such mean Creatures are more fit for goales then
Courts, for footmen then friends, for spies then servants, and for infamous
pimps, then for wise Statesmen.

3 Policy and Craft do not only differ by reason of the diversity of the
judgments and capacities of the persons, but also do require different
objects; policy being ordained for great and weighty affairs, and craft only
for petty tricks and poor devices. Its as absurd to see a Statesman busy
himself about mean and little matters as it is to see an Ape sit amongst
Counselors of State, or a crafty fool debate matters of great concernment.
Though the Lacedaemonians did pardon cutpurses and thieves, when they committed
the crime with exquisite craft, yet they never thought fit to make them
Counselors of the Commonwealth, knowing full well the difference that there
is between craft and Policy: a man may be wary and circumspect as to his own
particular concerns, and yet be very unfit to govern a Kingdom or
Commonwealth, the first proceeds from self-love; the second requires great
judgment; and though no man of great judgment hates himself, yet many love
themselves that have but little judgment, and consequently may be fit to have
a care of their own interest, but not to direct the affairs of Princes and
Kingdoms.

4 A Statesman must also be a man of his word, that is, he must perform
whatsoever he promised, either in public or private. To be a man of word, is
more then not to speak untruths, or tell lies; for, one may not perform what
he promised, and yet not tell a lie, because when he promised, he intended to
perform, and spoke not against his mind, which he afterward changed. But a
Statesman must stand as much upon punctual performance of his promise, as a
Merchant upon punctual payment of his bills; both live and traffike upon
credit, if that be lost, none will deal with either. The best way to keep a
man's word, is, not to engage it in any thing, which he is not sure to perform,
and consequently not to promise what depends upon the will and pleasure of the
Prince, without acquainting him not only with the matter, but also with the
circumstances, because one circumstance may alter the case, and give occasion
to dislike the whole business. It is a poor come of, in a Minister of State,
to say, Its true I promised such a thing, but I cannot command my Master, nor
perform without his allowance. This looks like a cheat, and must be far
from the mouth and thoughts of a Statesman, whose profession is to deal
warily, but not to cozen. He ought to have acquainted his Master with the
business, before it was concluded, and not bring his honor in question, by
concluding him a pupil, seeing his Minister durst conclude such matters
without his cons^nt and approbation. The Prince his word is engaged in the
promise of his chief Minister, at least his honor is tainted by the
nonperformance, he must either make good his Ministers word, or acknowledge
that himself was but a cifer when his Minister concluded the business; so
that not only for his own, but for for his Masters sake, the Statesman must
be a man of his word, and punctual in performing.

5 There is not any thing that puts a Prince or Minister of State in greater
danger and necessities, then nonperformance; because it is a resignation of the
right they have to be performed withal by others: it is the ground of a
confederacy against their credit and reputation, which is the greatest treasure
and best support of Princes, who cannot always be furnished with money for
their Armies, Navies, and other occasions; therefore they must borrowe it from
their Subjects or friends, who will look upon the greatest Monarch as upon a
Bankropt, if he be not punctual in making good his word and promise. And truly
when Princes do not perform, it is to be supposed they are not able, because
only an impossibility can force them to omit a thing so necessary for their
preservation and reputation, the loss of which is the greatest blow that a
Monarchy or Commonwealth can receive. But from this danger let us pass to
another, and prove

CHAP. XIV.
That nothing is more dangerous to a Prince, or contrary to Policy, then to
make use of Ministers of State odious to his own Subjects, either for their
vices or misfortunes.

1 Kingdoms and Commonwealths are ruined by civil wars, a foreign Enemy
may easi^y be kept of, if all be united at home; but if there be division
amongst themselves, a foreign Enemy is superfluous, the work will be done
and the Kingdom undone without him. A Prince that makes use of odious
Ministers of State, does declare war against his own Subjects, or at least
gives them occasion to declare war against himself. The greatest difficulty
that Subjects find in their subjection, is to obey the Kings Ministers: when
himself commands, they take it for an honor; but when a fellow Subject
commands, though he does it in the Kings name and by his authority, they can
hardly digest that pill, because that which should temper and sweeten it, makes
it more ungrateful, to wit, the Kings authority, which in a Subject is as
bitter as gale, though in himself it be most pleasing: the more Kingly a
Subject looks, the more are the people offended with his sight and commands;
he is an object of envy, not of love.

2 And the reason of this antipathy is, because he who represents the Kings
person, does not command with the Kings mouth, nor with the Kings will, but
with his own; in reality its he that commands, not the King, though he tells
you the contrary, and that his Majesty does morally speak and command in him:
few Subjects understand this distinction and morality; they see the King is not
present and that one of their own Camerades commands them as absolutely as
their Sovereign; this is all they see and feel: other formalities and
moralities are but fictions of the Law, whereby we are commanded to imagine
that the King speaks, when his Minister utters any thing in his Majesty's
name: men are slow in feigning or imagining any thing to their own
disadvantage, or contrary to their inclination; and nothing is more contrary to
humane nature, then to acknowledge superiority in our equals; wherefore there
is great difficulty in obeying a Subject, because we are evidently convinced
that he is our equal, and a Subject, though he commands like our King and
Superior; and we are more inclined to feign and imagine, that he is unworthy
of the Kings authority, then that he ought to be endowed with so great a
prerogative; at least we wish he were not, and our wishes are the best
interpreters of our inclinations. And though many times the person that
commands us be capable of the greatest trust, yet they who are commanded, are
apter to imagine, that he betrayeth it, or at least exceeds his commission or
instructions, then they are to obey or to imagine that the King has as great a
hand in the command as is pretended.

3 Men being so apt of their own nature to take fire of sedition, when they
are commanded of their equals, against whom they have no other aversion, or
quarrel, but his authority, and the Prince his favor; into what flames of
rebellion may we presume will they break forth, when their natural
inclinations are fomented by the passions of contempt and hatred against the
Prince his Officer or Counselor, for his vices or misfortunes? They will
imagine that he is as mindful, as themselves are fearful of revenge, and will
attribute his commands more to passion, then to any zeal of his Masters
service, or good of the Commonwealth. And in case it be evident that nothing is
done without the Prince his privity and warrant, they will persuade themselves
that the ground of the Prince his warrant, is their Enemies information, if not
his importunity to annihilate all those who are not his Creatures. When he
promotes any of his own relations, however so well deserving, he is looked
upon as partial, unjust, and unfit for the government. If he keeps a great
train, he is proud; if given to hospitality or civil conversation, he strives
to make himself popular, and is a dangerous man; all his words and actions are
misinterpreted, or not understood, because he is hated by the generality of the
people, who are the supreme Judges, or rather Creatours of a good and ill fame;
and good fame is as necessary for a Minister of State, as policy; the want of
it in a Counselor is more dangerous to the Prince, then the want of wisdom,
or experience: this may be supplied by the Prince his own judgment, and
application to businesses; but the ill name and reputation of a Minister cannot
be helped by the Prince his goodness, nay rather his own fame and judgment
will be called in question, for putting his affairs into the hands of a person
infamous in the opinion of his people, or at least unfortunate in his designs.

4 Sometimes it may happen, that really the Prince his Minister, or
Counselor, is injured by the opinion of the world, and that the people have
no other crime to lay to his charge, but their own hatred: therefore Princes
do often strive against the multitude, to maintain the innocence of their
Officers against so unreasonable a passion. This argues in the Prince a very
good nature and an inclination to Justice, and is much to be commended, if what
he desires can be effected: yet its a very hard task, because the greatest
innocence once condemned by the verdict of the people, will hardly have the
sentence recalled, though never so unjust: the same passion of hatred that
prevailed against so clear innocence, does make men obstinate in adhearing to
the false judgments they have once given of a good Ministers abilities or
actions. The multitude is compared to a beast, it may be tamed, but never by
reason persuaded to alter their fancy, or opinion once conceived and grounded
upon passion, whereby the major part are led. The wisdom of a politic Prince
does not consist in making the multitude wise, that being a thing impossible,
it consists in applying his own wisdom to direct their humors by reason,
in due times and occasions. The art of riding the great horse, requires wit and
judgment in the horseman, but not in the horse; it does not consist in
communicating wit or judgment to the horse, but in applying with dexterity his
own art to the beasts humor. A wise Prince must humor the multitude, as men
humor beasts which they teach or tame, he must not strive to make them wise
and reasonable, though they must be managed by wisdom and reason. They are as
incapable of altering a popular error and common hatred against a Counselor
or Minister of State, as old mules are of leaving of their jadish tricks. The
Prince must have patience, and dissemble with this humorsome beast, the
multitude, and govern them by Ministers that are not odious, but grateful to
them; if not, they may play him a jadish trick, and kick at him, for the hatred
they bear to his Minister. The only way for the Prince to he rid of this
danger and trouble, is, to make choice of so good and virtuous Ministers, that
no calumny can prejudice their fame, nor hatred find matter to carp at in
their actions. So that when all comes to all, we see that honesty and integrity
is the ground of policy, and that wisdom without virtue in a Minister of
State, is of most dangerous consequence to his Prince. Therefore in my opinion
its an evident proof of wisdom, and a laudable custom in Princes, to make
use of Bishops and Clergymen in their Counsels, because its presumed they are
more then ordinarily virtuous. But seeing many are of a contrary sense, I will
examine it, and prove

CHAP. XV.
That it is great wisdom and policy in Princes, to make use of Clergymen in
State affairs.

1 THat it has been the continual practice amongst the Jews, to let the
Priests share in the government of the Commonwealth, is evident by many
examples in Scripture* and amongst Christians, you will not read of one age,
wherein the Clergy have not had their heads and hands in politic affairs, by
order of their Princes, and consent of the people. To exclude them from this
custom and practice, because some of them made not as good use thereof as they
ought, is an argument more familiar to seculars, then advantageous; fewer
Churchmen then seculars have abused their power, or betrayed their trust; nay
it has been as rare amongst them, as ordinary amongst seculars, to make ill
use of their Kings favor and interest, and yet seculars do not think it
reasonable, that all themselves should be excluded by the Princes, or people,
from the government of the Commonwealth, though some of them have been more
mistaken, and are more subject to err in that art, then the Clergy: their
argument therefore may be with more force retorted against themselves.

3 Politicians are Joyners by their trade, their art consists in joining the
common good with the interest of the Prince. It must be a clear judgment that
will not confound these two things, and he must be no less virtuous, then
wary, that will not incline more to one side, then to the other. Seculars are
pleased to acknowledge more virtue in Churchmen, then in themselves, but they
doubt much of their judgments. If study of sciences and knowledge of what
passed in former ages, does perfect man's understanding, Churchmen have the
advantage of seculars in judging of affairs, who have not so much time to
spare from their passetimes, nor so great an inclination and obligation to
learn, as the Clergy. But seculars, though they were as learned as Churchmen,
cannot apply themselves so seriously to the study of the common good, because
they have much more to consider in particular and domestic affairs; they must
provide for their wife, and dispose of their children. Yet in case they should
spend but little time in so near a concernment, they cannot deny, that the
Prince and Commonwealth run a hazard in trusting them with public offices
and revenues, out of which they will be very apt to provide portions for their
daughters, and employments for their sons: Clergymen are neither troubled
themselves, nor trouble the Commonwealth with such burden, and consequently
are more fit then seculars to manage the public affairs. A Churchman perhaps
may endeavor to promote his Nephew, but there is great difference between the
affection of a Father and of an Uncle.

3 The obligation and custom which Churchmen have, to spend more hours in
their devotions then seculars, does give more advantage by perfecting their
minds, then it does prejudice by taking up their time; not ouely because with
God no time is lost, who recompenseth abundantly by his grace and
illustrations, other studies and thoughts; but also because true policy must
direct all things with subordination to Gods Law, and the more we meditate
therein, the better Politicians we are. Yet Churchmen after complying with
their devotions, have more time to consider of affairs, then seculars, who are
more in the Tavern then in the Church, and frequent other passetimes when
Churchmen are in their studies.

4 All mankind is so much concerned in the government of Commonwealths, that
it is not improper for the most retired of the Clergy sometimes to appear in
public affairs. We read of Monks that came along from Egypt to
Constantinople, to treat with Emperors about matters of great concernment:
Hermits have returned to the world from the deserts, when they judged it
necessary for the common good. Suppose a man were buried alive in a grot under
the walls of a Town, to the end he might shun humane conversation; if he
does hear the Enemy undermining the wall, he is bound in conscience to leave
his retirement, and give notice of the common danger. When a house is a fire,
they who are next, must run to quench it. There is no profession so retired,
or so contrary to the management of State affairs that can excuse men from
appearing in public, when they are concerned in the good of a Nation, or
Religion, especially if they be next in trust of a Treaty, or knowledge of a
danger. Much less^^^n men separated from the world, deny access to others, who
demand their advice in doubtful and intricate matters of State, wherein
conscience may run a hazard. Princes and Counselors consult their
Confessors in Cloisters, and think them more apt to judge of worldly
affairs, then others that live and negotiate in the world. It is no
disparagement for that grave and sage Counsel of Spain, that the Kings
Confessor has a place and vote amongst them; he may be a witness that
nothing is resolved, which is not agreeable to Christian and Catholic
principles; his profession is not contrary to an office out of which so much
good may be derived to others. Bishops are Counselors in France, and all
other Catholic Countries, and Abbots, who profess a most retired life, came
from their Cloisters and Cells to sit in Parliament, when Religion did flourish
most in England; and the same is practiced to this day in other Nations, with
as great satisfaction of the Prince, as benefit to the Commonwealth.

5 There is nothing more necessary for a Statesman, then secrecy, whereof
Churchmen give continually evident proofs in hearing Confessions. Seculars may
be secret, but the world has not so much reason to believe it, seeing so many
designs and great businesses miscarry for want of secrecy, which I never heard
laid to the charge of a Clergyman that was trusted in a business of State. Its
a received maxim amongst seculars, that women are best informers, and that
they are made acquainted with whatsoever is debated in Counsels or Assemblies.
Fond husbands think they do not love their wives, if they conceal any thing
from their knowledge, and consequently from that of their Gossips. Its thought
the English Nation is more inclined to be advised by women, then any other; but
without doubt it is of late, since women ruled the Church, and were made Popes,
dispensed with invalid Ordinations, and by imposition of hands made Archbishops
of Canterbury. But seeing no man will trust his wife with his own conscience
and confession, methinks he ought not to impart to her the secrecies of others.
At least the Catholic Clergy cannot be suspected to consult with their wives
the secrecy of Princes, because they have none: but for the Protestant
Ministers behavior in this particular, I will not swear, being (as I hear)
more fond of their wives, then any others, and having notoriously betrayed
secrets communicated to them in confession, as you may read of Scory the
Minister, who betrayed the Earl of Essex in Queen Elizabeth's time; and in our
days the case of poor Captain Hind was much lamented, who some few years
since being accused of murder, Captain Hindes lamentable case.
denied it confidently, there being no legal proof. But persuaded by a
Minister of the English Protestant Church, that the Judge was resolved to hang
him, and that he had abundant proof, he exhorted the poor man to confession,
according to the custom or Common Prayer men, and Church or England, whereof
both were Members. Master Hind told the Minister in confession, that he had
killed one of his own Camerades, and he promised to visit and comfort his
penitent the next day; but feigning himself sick, he sent another Minister of
the English Church also, and desired Master Hind to deal as confidently with
him, as he had done the day before with himself; which the poor Gentleman
did, imparting likewise to him in confession what he had told the day before to
his Brother in the Lord: and these two Ministers were the only witnesses that
proved Master Hindes murder, whereof they had no other knowledge, but what he
told them in cofession: whereupon sentence of death was pronounced against him
by Judge Nicholas, and executed at Worcester. He reflected upon the Religion of
his Confessors and witnesses, and resolved to change his own, concluding,
that it could not be the true one which allows such treacherous dealings, and
obliges men to reveal Sacramental confessions, making it Gunpouder treason,
not to betray God and the trust which he reposeth in the Ministers of his holy
Sacraments, as was declared in Garnets case. Master Hind therefore sent for a
Priest, and was reconciled to the Roman Catholic Church; and I hope is saved,
not by virtue, but by the occasion of his Protestant confession; whereof I
trust in God himself will not be the last that will make good use for the
salvation of souls, by forsaking so false a Church and so treacherous Clergy,
whereby men's lives are entrapt, and their sins not absolved. By this and
other examples its manifest, that Protestant Ministers are as unfit to be
Counselors as Confessors, and that the Catholic Priests, who will rather
dye then betray a secrecy, have a great advantage of seculars as to this so
necessary a part of a Statesman.

6 We see also how men besotted with drink, and bewitched by bribes, are
subject to betray their trust in greatest secrecies; and I believe it will not
be hard to find (at least in this our Northern Climat, where this kind of
debauch is taken not only for a remedy of melancholy, but a point of
gallantry) Lay Politicians proceed now and then to such excess, as to ease not
only their stomachs, but hearts, to the great distemper of the Commonwealth.
As for bribes, those who have most expenses, and most to provide for, and
suffer less infamy, if discovered, and ordinarily are less provided with
grace to resist, cannot choose but be more liable to the danger of this
temptation, as it appears by these circumstances, and much more by too
frequent and known experiences.

7 These, amongst many others, are the reasons why Catholic Princes make so
frequent use of the Roman Clergy. And though Heretics and Politicians should
misinterpret their good zeal, they must have patience, and not desist from
their godly endeavor, assuring themselves, that though bad Christians carp and
repine at the confidence and re^pect which Catholic Princes and Ministers of
State show to their Clergy, by trusting them with their consciences and
affairs, that will not diminish, but rather increase their credit. A Prince
may err in making choice of a Churchmans person, but he cannot be mistaken in
choosing one of that function, which has more advantages over a secular
vocation (as to the management and trust or businesses) then I have set down
in this Chapter; though I am confident enough is said to vindicate the State of
the Catholic Clergy from any incapacity in State affairs, and to commend the
judgment of the Princes by whom they are employed, with no less evidence of
their talents, then satisfaction of their services.

8 Now is it time to put an end to this Cathechisme, and exhort my Politician
1. to resolve upon some Religion, if he has none. 2. To consider how all
Religions pretending to reform the Roman, are but humane and fond inventions,
grounded upon false interest, transitory pleasure, and mad fancies, contrary to
the rules of sound Policy. 3. How the Roman Catholic Religion cannot be an
invention of men, having so many evidences of supernatural signs and power,
to confirm its Doctrine. 4. In case our Politician will neither believe in God
nor Catholic Church, let him consider, that the greatest and most effectual
engine to work his own interest, is truth, moral virtue, and honor. In the
last place I must desire my Reader not to be offended with me, if I am more
bitter against the Protestant Clergy, then by nature or custom I am inclined:
whosoever will reflect upon the prejudice and misery they have drawn upon the
three Nations, since they planted heresy, and how by mere impostures they
endeavor to maintain those errors which have been the cause of all our
misfortunes* will easily perceive, that our English Ministers ought to be
beaten, not courted out of their destructive Tenets and practices. I b seech
almighty God to convert them and others misled by their example and doctrine,
and grant to all Politicians light to see this manifest truth, that a man
without Religion is void of reason, and Policy without honesty is but a base,
wicked, and witless knavery.

FINIS.
LIbellus hic, cui titulus The Politicians Cathechisme, Anglico idiomate
conscriptus, a Theologo mihi noto lectus, altero praelo dignus est.

Datum 14. Martij 1658. GUIL. BOLOGNINO Can. Eccl. Cathed. and. Libr. Censor
Antuerp.


