AN ORDINANCE OR PROCLAMATION BY THE Prince of ORANGE and States OF Holland, In
Her Majesty's behalf, and at Her request.

Wherein is expressly commanded, that no Fugitive or Delinquent fled from the
Parliament in England, shall presume to come within ten miles of Her Majesty's
Court, upon peril of their apprehension, and being sent over into England to
answer their accusers.

Whereuuto is added the manner of situation and settling of Her Majesty's Court
at the Hage, the great and most sumptuous entertainment of the Lady Elizabeth
toward Her, with many other things of worthy note.

London, Printed for Andrew C. and Marmaduke B. 1641.

An Ordinance.
UPon Her Majesty's going over into Holland with the Princess Mary, to visit
the most noble Prince of Orange, in congratulation of those many and Honorable
favors, conferred upon this Kingdom, during his residence in England; Diverse
Delinquents that were fled from the English Parliament, upon accusation of
their injustice in the State, and abuse of the trust reposed in them, and
imposed upon them, for the administering of equity to the Subjects, made their
repeal into Holland: Whereof the Lord Finch, formerly Lord Keeper of the great
Seal of E^g^and, Secretary Windebank, chief Secretary o^ State to His Majesty,
and the Lord Digby, with diverse others. All of which humbly desired and
emplored Her Majesty's Favor toward them, for to entertain them into Her
Court; as those which would apply themselves in all obsequious duty to repair
their lost credit in England, by their good humble and diligent endeavors
toward Her Majesty: which Petition of theirs, Her Majesty taking into serious
and mature deliberation, considering with Her self what an ill aspersion it
might justly cast upon Her, if she should so much forget Her self if she should
encertain those into favor, who were formerly disfavourd for their
misdeamenours by her Parliament, she forthwith requested the Prince of Orange
who likewise moved the states therein for the publishing of a speedy severe
and authorized Ordinance or Proclamation therein to command the absence of all
delinquents to the Parliament in England from her Majesty's Court, which was
accordingly effected; The contents whereof follow.

The Proclamation or Ordinance by the Prince of Orange and the States of
Holland to command absence of Dilinquents from Her Majesty's Court.
WHereas we have connected and knit our selves in the bounds of Amity and a
most filial and reciprocal friendship with our most Royal Father the King of
England and his most Honorable Parliament now conjoined for removeall of
grievances in the said kingdom we are bound in all due respect, and more
especially, by the mutual duty I owe his most sacred Majesty, not to harbor
or detain any enemies to that state or his Royal person in this kingdom,
whereas therefore there are certain pernicious and ill meaning persons here
found with us, who have been and still are Delinquents to the said houses of
Parliament, who have boldly undertaken to intereede by Petition to Her Majesty,
to be entertained into her Majesty's service at her Court now holden at the
Hage, it being contrary to the respect she has and does continually owe to her
Majesty, and that honorable assembly, as also so far from her most real
intentions, as she has requested us, to show thus much by Proclamation and
Ordinance unto them as shall be contained in these ensuing particulars.

1. That her Majesty does not, nor will not by any means accept, no nor so
much as countenance their proffered service toward her until such time as
shall have satisfied the just and condign censure of of the Parliament by
clearing themselves of these misdemeanors whereof they are accused by that
honourahle assembly.

2. That She has not, nor cannot ascribe unto Her self, the power of
acceptance of any one into Her Majesty's service, without His Majesty's leave,
license, and condiscent.

3. That for these Reasons abovenamed, to show Her due obeisance to His
Majesty, and love to the Parliament; She commands that none of the Delinquents
to the said Parliament, whatsover shall presume to intrude himself within the
circute of ten miles of Her Court.

We therefore out of the love we bear unto that illustrious King our Father,
His Queen our Mother, and their famous Parliament our friends, Do declare that
if any of the Delinquents to the said Parliament should transgress this Her
Majesty's command ratified by us, by their coming within the aforementioned
bounds, they be forthwith apprehended for breach of our commands, contrary to
our Proclamation, and sent into England, to receive such censure as they have
deserved.

Given under our hands at Delph this seventh of March. 1461.
The manner of Her Majesty's Court now settled at the Hage in Holland.
HEr Majesty at Her landing at Flushing, took Her journey immediately toward
the Hage, passing through Dorte, Middleborough, and diverse other Town^: in
their way there was the Lady Elizabeth, and diverse of Her Carroches to give Her
the more honorable entertainment. Thus with great solemnity was she
transported to the Hage, where she took up a station for Her Court, at a place
called the new Palace, in the Star Street, with the Lady Elizabeth; the
Prince of Orange to show his most obsequious respect, gave especial order for
a most acurate guard of his best and most able men, to begirt the town for Her
Majesty's safety: There be infinites of the Dutch, that daily resort thither to
view Her Majesty's most royal Person; and nothing seems so welcome as Her
Majesty's presence amongst them* The eyes of both nobility and communalty
waiting with much fervency and advency of affection, to take a view of those
perfections by, and through which this Kingdom of England has been blessed by
the famous issue of such royal stock, and posterity. For the which our Land
before Her, longtime mourned, and which since has been graciously multiplied
by the blessing of God through the branches, proceeding from this Royal Vine.

FINIS.

