QVEREES, PROPOVNDED BY THE PROTESTANT PARTY, CONCERNING THE PEACE IN
GENERAL, Now treated of in Ireland, and the answers thereunto made in behalf
and name of the Irish Nation, by one well affected thereto, to the first copies
whereof many things are inserted, and much added.



QVEREES PROPOVNDED BY THE PROTESTANT PARTY, CONCERNING THE PEACE In General,
etc.
Quaer. 1.
WIll you Article, Covenant, and indent with your King? It becomes not
Subjects; it argues mistrust of his Majesty.

Respons.
This Nation says, it has been often deceived, and abused by some ministers
of state here for this kingdom, by whose practices they were frustrated of all
the Kings favors, and graces conferred to them, for which they granted and
paid about three hundred thousand pounds sterling, not very long since, and
soon after besides ten large Subsidies in the Earl of Strafords time, for all
which monyes, amounting near to a million of pounds sterling they obtained*
little or nothing. And the said graces are still suppressed and stopped. Next,
the state here takes all advantage of this Nation for their Religion, by
misrepresenting them to his Majesty, to suppress and keep them from the
government, thereby to possess all places of honor, trust and profit, either
in the Army, or Commonwealth, and so raise themselves by casting perpetual
clouds of disloyalty, and disaffection between the King and his people, as
lately they did when they forsook and betrayed the English* pale first, and
consequently the rest of the kingdom, to be overrun and ruined in the
beginning of these Commotions: and yet they misinformed his Majesty, and
procured what Commissions they pleased, to prosecute the said Pale with extreme
cruelties, and so by the Sword, and color of Law, to have their estates by
attaynders and forfeytures; whereat all other parts of the kingdom were
amazed and distracted. Therefore in this subordinate government so jealous and
irksome to the people, it is necessary to be on sure terms for the future,
and that Catholics have a hand in the government, to prevent the like
mischiefs. And on these grounds, it may well become Subjects to Article Add.
with their Sovereign, which argues no distrust of his Majesty, but of his
ministers, whose hands must still hold the helm, seeing the Kings own hand
cannot reach thereto.

Quaere. 2. Will you force the King, and work now on his necessities? He will
remember it to you hereafter, and he may recall what he shall now promise: nor
will he conceive himself bound to make good what he shall now grant you,
considering the condition he stands in.

Resp It is not in our thoughts, Only we propound motives to support his
Majesty, and to advance his service, a whole Nation to the last man, and the
revenue of a whole kingdom (if need be) to the last penny, to support his
Crown, on contentment now to be given this people, a hundred thousand loyal
Subjects, and good fighting men, to spend their blood in this quarrel for his
Majesty, and four or five hundred thousand pounds sterling by the year (as
shall appear by the particular heads of the revenue of this kingdom laid
down hereafter) is worth the acceptance, and may invite his Majesty to give
content to this people. He then that will hinder or oppose this, to loose the
King such a considerable party and assistance, can be no other then an enemy,
aiming at nothing else, but to weaken his Majesty, by diverting this Nation, as
it were by compulsion from Add.
his service. And this is not to force the King, and work his necessities, but
to help him, and relieve them, and to buy our Peace with the marrow of our
purses and blood of our veins, which his Majesty may (indeed) well remember
hereafter, not to recall our liberties, but to record our loyalties. Moreover,
his Majesty may as well in future say, that he is forced to the conditions of
peace proffered, as to those demanded: for neither the one, nor the other, would
ever have been granted in precedent times, though not by want of gracious
inclination in his Majesty's to favor us, but by the sinister characters which
his ministers here, ever gave him of us.

Quaere 3. Will you loose the King all his protestant party, which will fall
from him, and will you loose him all his protestant Subjects of England and
Scotland, and consequently his Crown of both kingdoms, which must follow, if
he give you content?

Resp. Can you imagine that any Subjects, which be true subjects, will forsake
their Prince, because we tender aid of men and monyes, and propound motives to
advance his service; nay rather the protestant party will advise his Majesty
considering the condition and necessity he stands in, to give content to this
Nation, thereby to gain so considerable a party, and assistance to support his
Crown, and themselves. Nor can they once suspect with reason (if they will not
put it on him of purpose, as a seeming occasion of their defection from him)
that his Majesty is not constant to the protestant Religion seeing they well
know he is by education, and in his belief and opinions as firm a protestant
as ever England bred, as is most manifest, by all his declarations and
proceedings, though it stands not with the policy of the Parliamentaries, to
make this an article of their belief; for they hold it a deep mystery of
state, to misbelieve the King, and not suffer him to be believed in this
particular, thereby to traduce his Majesty, and cause the Subjects still
conceive, he is inclined to Papistry, whereof they take their greatest
advantage, purposely to seduce and incense the people against him. Now if you
fear the protestant party will so lightly fall from his Majesty, (as you would
faigne persuade us, to lessen our conditions) you may as well pretend any
expression of favor which shall be granted us, were it but a connivence or
tolleration of our Religion, to be a cause sufficient, for the like defection,
but if the said protestant subjects be of resolution, to continue true and
constant to his Majesty, what can more powerfully encourage them thereto, or
hold them more steadfastly to so generous and just a resolve, then an ample
supply of men and moneys offered by us, on a good peace, to back and second
their party, the weakness whereof is not perhaps the least cause of all their
fears, Add.
and wavering between the King and Parliament? But suppose the King were
Catholickely affected, and would absolutely restore us our Religion, and the
public use thereof, in as full and ample manner, as ever we enjoyed it in the
times of his Majesty's predecessors from the Conquest to Henry the VIII, would
therefore (or rather should) all his protestant subjects fall from him, and
must he therefore forfeyte his Crown? Your Quaere answers they would, and he
must, it follows then, they are only conditionally Subjects, not absolutely,
and his Majesty holds his Crown by a conditional Tenure, not by an absolute:
both which are absurd. Why did not all the Catholic Subjects of England and
Ireland relinquish Henry the VIII. when he forsook his own and their
Religion? why did not he loose his Crown, when he lost his faith? Why might
not the Romish subjects of France, fall off from the late French King, and his
Father, when they gave tolleration of Religion, and liberty to build Churches
and Synagogues to the Huguenotes? Why lost not they* therefore their Crowns?
But to come nearer home: did not our dread Sovereign King Charles condescend
unto such propositions of the Scots, as stood not with their loyalty to demand,
nor in his power to grant, (to omit all other, witness the abrogation of
Episcopacie, or unmitering of Bishops, who be the first of the three states of
every Christian and Catholic kingdom) as appears by several his Majesty's
declarations yet extant. This his Majesty did, only to content that Nation,
and save that Crown; albeit the former followed not; heavens grant, the later
may? for they must have aliquid amplius, to wit; Kings un-Crowned and Monarchy
pulled down, how ever his Majesty's protestant party in England, Ireland, or
Scotland, fell not therefore from him, neither is he therefore discrowned: and
yet must both follow, if he give content to the Irish (in your opinions) or his
Royal assent to their propositions; albeit they contain nothing, but what may
modestly suite with their fidelity to propound, and justly with his Majesty,
power, and expediently with his gracious benignity to grant, and that which
has been their own for ten or twelve ages consequent, and what they enjoyed
in quiet possession, ever since the Conquest, during the happy Reign of
fifteen or sixteen Kings his Majesty's predecessors, before Henry the VIII.
and since then, violently wrested from them by tyranny, oppression, and
surreptitious Laws, fraudulently introduced by the bloud-sucking ministers of
this subordinate government. Moreover, what concerns it the protestant
Subjects of England and Scotland, whether we have content or not? How are they
any way impeached or improved thereby? or how therein interessed? What loose
they by our liberty, or gain* they by our restraint? Can not they go to
Church, though we go to Mass? the broad Sea is betwixt us, we will be no
eyesore to them. If it be for their brethren here, we seek not the abrogation
of their Religion, or abreviation of their lawful freedom, or ought else
derogating to their honor, security, or peaceable cohabitation, as appears
by our propositions now in Print to the eye of the world, As for his Majesty's
protestant party protestant party here in Ireland (not to undervalue them) they
are no way considerable: For, over all Munster, Vlster, and Connaght, such as
for a while did seemingly proclayme themselves for the King, do now absolutely
disclayme in him, and declare themselves for the Parliament, and consequently,
his enemies, so as his Majesty has no protestant party here, but only in
Leynster, and that but in a destroyed nooke thereof, to wit in the Counties of
Dublin, and Louth, and a part of Kildare and Mead, (for Doncanon is fallen
off) in all which they cannot make up one thousand five hundred protestants
fighting men, where among these shall hardly cull out two hundred, I might well
say two score heads well squared to the Kings rule, the rest (as also all the
protestant inhabitants of Dublin and their other Towns, far much more then
the most part) have their heads so Round, as they cannot hold rouling to the
Parliament, when the least occasion is offered, As for their hearts, they are
from the beginning in the bosom of their pure brethren in Westminster Hall;
and their heels are all as nimble and ready to dance a scottish-jigge, and a
parliamentall revolta, to Essex hornepipe, if execution were as easy, as
thought is free, and wishes facil; all which is manifest by their
Common Prayers, public discourses, and Commerce, and slocking to the
Parliament Ships, whenever they hover over our coasts, and thus are they all
affected and infected from head to foot, save a very few of the prime, whereof
some being strangers, can make no other party, then their household servants:
other some, though by birth or descent, Natives, and big in blood and
calling, and in precedent times vast in possessions, and powerful in command;
yet now as the wind blows, they bear but low and fagge sails, and can make
no more way, then the meanest vassals, by reason their numerous allies,
friends, and followers, are all Roman Catholics, and consequently adhering to
the Confederats, with whom, not being united, their power is as poor as that
of the Alyens: So as the premises maturely pondered, his Majesty's protestant
party disioyned from the Catholic, is no way here considerable. Will you
then, upon the only reason of an ungrounded Antipathy in Religion, advise his
Majesty to discontent a whole Nation, for complying soly with the wilful
malice of so fractious, frail, and feeble a party, as that of the protestants?
I say in Ireland, for those of England, they cannot allege rationably any
reason for opposing our peace, save also a mere hatred to our profession,
which is the reason of fiends, who, because their selves are in bale cannot
brook others should be in bliss: or their hearts are forsooth purified, and
their heads sphearified, and so in the behalf and behoof of their pure
brothers, they cunningly intend by this opposition to weaken his Majesty, by
fomenting a continual difference twixt him and his Catholic Subjects of
Ireland, whose party they know to be so powerful both at home, and abroad* as
(were matters fairly composed, and content given them) they might strongly
assist to quench the fiery fury of the Parliament, and reinthrone his Majesty,
as now de facto they begin to do in Scotland, by a small succor of two
thousand Irish sent thither, to join with the Kings party there, whereby it
appears, how highly an union betwixt his Majesty's Catholic and protestant
Subjects in his three kingdoms, conduces, for the quelling and quayling of
his enemies, and reestablishing of his Royal person in his full power,
prerogatives, and glory: For, if a poor aid of two thousand men only can so
much prevayle, what may a large contribution of a hundred thousand pounds in
Coin, or more, and ten thousand men, yea twenty; thirty it need be. I have
been over fuse (I confess) in my answer to this Quaere because it is the
objection most frequently and fervently obtruded.

Quaere 4. Will you loose the kingdom by going to a new war again? will you
utterly undo it, and your selves, by a new breach? You are not able for the
Scots, or my Lord of Insiquin, and the Parliament party that is in the
kingdom: much less for my Lord Lieutenant and his party, whom you will force
to join with the Scots and parliament, and so hold but with the longest and
^st.

Resp. I answer, these arguments of weakness m^ be retorted on your selves.
Will you, that pretend so much loyalty and zeal to serve his Majesty, loose
the King and kingdom, which every day you do, while you keep this distance
with the Catholic party, in giving the Scots, time to come to a head, and the
Round heads leisure to bring their secret plots to effect, and this, by taking
advantage of your weakness, in spreading themselves all over the kingdom?
witness the revolte of the Lord of Insiqum, and of the Forte of Doncanon,
which you have lost, unless we deem them politic alarums, and subtle
inventions to freight and work on the Confederates, to accept the easier
conditions now of peace from you. It is likewise apprehended on very good
grounds, that the City and Castle of Dublin, by the daily growing insolences
and infections of the Roundheads in the said City, may be in danger to be lost,
and (as I may boldly say) is daily a loosing. It is easy to fall from a
protestant to a puritant, and from the King to the Parliament. It is their
ordinary practice, to come and go daily, a victory or two does it: but the
Catholics cannot with such facility fall from their Religion, because the
differences are essential, and points of faith; nor from their obedience to
his Majesty, because it is apparent, there is no such affection in them to the
puritans, but rather an innated antipathy: So as to such extremes there is no
fear of fall. Now if you deem us so weak for the Scots and parliamentaries
in this kingdom, certainly you are much more, But say you? you may join with
the Scots, yes, to forsake the King, you may, and so do your best to secure
this kingdom for the Parliament and Scots. And had not the Catholic Army
been now in the Field, and in the way, it is very probable, you had not
escaped so scot-free, as you have done. And if we prosper not in this
expedition (for which you had need to pray) but that they shall chance to
overrun us; then I believe, you will find, they will not content themselves
with the North alone, but will resolve to venture for a greater and better
share of the kingdom. I see no reason, but you may fear your portion. You say
you may safely join with the Scots, to hold out the longer with them, because
you conceive them the stronger, and us the weaker, why should not you as well
apprehend, that we may join with some other forainer, or submit to such, whose
several Agents now in the kingdom, perhaps wait an opportunity in that
kind, and have their ears open ready to snatch up such a motion? Do not you
think but the Scots and Parliament of England will be glad to accept of us,
and our offers, which we make to his Majesty, and will permit us freely to
enjoy the benefit of our conditions, so we concuire with them in suppressing
Monarchy* which is the fair white whereat their wars do level? But say
you, you know there is no such sympathy betwixt us, that were, from the frieing
pan into the fire, and therefore you are confident we will not be so mad,
however, it behooveth you in commonpolicy, to be cautious, how you exasperate a
whole Nation, and force them to fly for safety to foreign protection, whereto,
doubtless, the late cruel plots and practices of Sir William Parsons, Sir
Adam Lofius, and other vipers of the state, had driven this Nation, had it not
been Add.
immovable from its loyalty to his Majesty, whereon you would feign it seems
force a breach, by hindering his Majesty's gracious favors from us, to make
way for your holy brothers the parliamentaries, to enter and possess the
kingdom: But, if you keep the gap too long open, beware our neighbors enter
not, before your brethren; for Ireland is a fair and fryant morsel, and your
Spaniards, Italians, and French have lushious teeth, which if they once fix in
it, I fear all the Pincers or Hammers in England will not draw or drive them
out. You ask us, will we loose the kingdom and our selves? No, but endeavor
to save both, and if we may not, a fair death is better then a specious
bondage, slavery, or servitude: Meluis est enim nobis moriin bello, quam videre
mala gentis nostrae, If therefore you will tie the Kings hands so fast, as he
may not grant us the freedom of Christians we must be compelled to endeavor to
cut the bands, to reinfranchise his Majesty, and disinthrall our selves, how
weak soever you would feign persuade us to be

Quare. 5. What if my Lord Lieutenant will publish his Commission, and will
issue forth Proclamations of mercy and pardon, with restitution of estates, and
all assurances of life, liberty and tolleration of Religion, and thereby
withdraw and divide all your party, and so pusle and weaken you, that you will
be glad of any conditions, and such as his excellency will be pleased to
propund?

Resp. No doubt, this was invented as a main Engine to crush, and bring our
party and whole Nation to division, and so to desolation. I confess this
Commission and Proclamation may perhaps work on the most necessitous, weak,
and discontented people within the verge and quarters of Dublin, whom extreme
necessity may force to go any whither for relief* but that have not you to
give them for you have neither meat, nor money to spare within your quarters,
nor strength enough to gain it from ours. You must come thirty miles now from
Dublin, to get any Corn or Cattle if you take not from one another, and so
starve your selves. Your parties of Horse that used to make their incursions
for prey into the remoter Counties, are broken and dispersed, and what service
may they be able to perform, going so far from their quarters, specially,
now that our Confederates are grown far stronger, then ever you or they have
been, both in Horse and Arms, so as little or no relief are you to expect by
pillage: and what small store remaynes within your own quarters, will hardly
maintain your great Towns, Garrisons, for any considerable time. Consider well
your own present state, condition, weakness, and necessities, and you cannot
with sans judgment imagine, that any of our party will fly unto you, whilst
they have the most part of the kingdom of their own side, plentifully able to
relieve them, without adventuring their lives, to go a pillaging with you,
against their country, friends, and conscience, specially, seeing there be
other ways to maintain them, to wit, by putting the meaner sort into pay of
the Armies, and the said banished Nobility and Gently into places and Offices
of Military and Civil employment, as is resolved by the late Assembly held at
Kilkenny. And what people do you think to draw and devide from us? Those of
the English-Pale, all destroyed, and made inconsiderable by your massacres and
cruelties, for having withstood the shocke, while Ammunition Arms, and
Commanders were a coming, who must be now rather a burden, then a help to
you, and no great loss to us, for what concerns their power, in the condition
they now stand in, though before, they were, for so many, the most considerable
part of the whole kingdom. Their Common sort are all for the most part,
murdered and starved; and such of the Nobility and Gentry as are remaining,
will not, for their estates (whereof they can make little benefit) hazard the
loss of their persons in your service, to be exposed to all dangers, for a
poor livelihood only, to be drawn out of prey and pillage, seeing you cannot
otherwise maintain them of any place of honor, trust, command, or benefit, by
your old crooked rules, they are incapable, at least so are they sure to be
made and in fine, if you be masters, let them not doubt to be slaves, if not
utterly extirpated, with the rest of their countrymen your opposits, for the
ancient spleen you bear to their Religion and Nation, and unquenchable thirst
to their estates, how ever now in your need you make use of their endeavors
and services. Can you then with reason imagine, that their reason is so fair
blinded, as not to foresee this Do you think they will be so effeminat, as
for a sufferance which cannot long continue, they will expose themselves to be
the perpetual object of their countries wrath, the abject of all Christian
Nations, yea and the obloquy of all the world, to advance your heathenish
designs, by enduring all present and future miseries, by fighting against
their friends, allies, themselves, and their consciences, by assisting to
extirpat their own Nation and Religion, which has now above foure-score
years withstood so many furious assaults of your tyrannous pressures and
persecutions, and betray their lives, liberties, and estates, to a never ending
slavery and infamy, being still exposed to your new pretended attaynders, and
corruptions of blood, which no pseudo-parliament of yours can wash away, nor
may their grievances be thereby redressed, but by a free and legal parliament,
such as they shall never have, by your consents, though you did promise,
swear, vow, protest, and proclayme a restitution of all freedom and favor.
Your words and Proclamations so often violated both before and since the
wars, and your wonted faithless proceedings, confirms them in this belief.
The violence of the storm is over-blowen, they hope, and I am confident, they
are resolved to bear out with their fellow-vassals, rather then strike
themselves aground, under your Lee. But suppose your proclamations brought in a
considerable party (as I cannot believe they will) you will make but a
perpetual War, in regard the rest of the kingdom is so possessed, and
swayed by the Catholic Bishops and Clergy, that in case no reasonable
accommodation be made, or content herein be given, the kingdom will be so
imbroyled and rent, that his Majesty will not be able to draw any assistance
thereout, to support his Crown: he will loose all his own revenue, and our
aid of men and monyes, which are (under favor) far transcending any his
Majesty may expect from his protestant party here, (if any such he has) and
more to be regarded, then the bare walls and empty carcasses of Churches,
whereto, for the most part, no protestants, save only the Ministers with their
wives, did ever resort, in regard the flock were all of the Catholic fold,
and all the labors, endeavors, and persecutions, being frustrat which since
the suppression, were employed to propagate the protestant Religion in this
kingdom, or fasten it on the body thereof, though the Court of wards has
wrought on a few degenerate members, and divided them from God and their
Country, I will not say, from their King, but I pray, it may not so prove. But
let it now be considered, whether the protestant or Catholic party here is
most powerful, and can bring the King most men and money? and if it be not as
necessary (or more) to give the Catholics content, as the protestants? His
Majesty (we are confident) is graciously inclined toward us, as appears by
his several favorable declarations made in our behalfes, before some persons
of worth and credit, now in this kingdom, ready to testify so much. To
conclude, can those of the Pale, or any other (to whom griping misery, or
raging jelousie of being vilipended by certain unnatural and ungrateful
patriots may suggest a thought of deviding or withdrawing themselves from our
party) be of so slavish an humor, as to join with you, when they shall
reflect, and call to mind, how their immediate predecessors, and some of
themselves perhaps yet living (by whose power and prowess in the late
precedent war you kept your footing in the kingdom) were by you rewarded,
disregarded, and abused. Was it not the usual taunt of the late Lord
Strafford, and all his fawning Sycophants in their private Colioquies to those
of the Pale, that they were the most refractory men of the whole kingdom, that
it was more necessary (yea for their crooked ends) they should be Planted and
supplanted, then any other thereof, that his Majesty would never be absolute
Sovereign, whilst there lived a Papist therein? These and the like were the
ordinary Cabbinet discourses of the state in general, whereinto sometimes in
public their malice would burst forth, and where plantations might not reach,
defective Titles should extend. Many Officers and Gentlemen, who had done very
good service in the said War, and lost their blood and limbs therein, for
which they had Annual pensions conferred on them were soon after deprived of
their said pensions, for only having refused to take the Oath of Supremacy,
or Allegiance, in such form as protestants use, some whereof I have seen
without hands, which they left at Kinsale, in defense of the Crown of England,
for which they remained also without thanks, without pension, for only being
faithful to God and their own souls. Many of the ancient Irish who stuck
steadfastly to the Queens quarrel, and lost therein their lives, had their
estates planted, with as little justice; favor, or reason, as those who
endeavored to take the Crown of her head, and kingdom out of her hands. I
knew my self a certain Gentleman, who being questioned before the state, for
matter of Recusancy, (as you term it) answered, it was not demanded of me the
day of Kinsale what Religion I was of, it is true, replied an ungrateful
statesman, I confess you did good service that day, but you do now, as the
Cow, that gives much milk, and spils it after with a kick of her heel, and
this kick (forsooth) was no other then kicking in spirit at their foresaid
execrable Oaths, and being a Roman Catholic. Who then reflecting on your
Tyranny, injustice, malice, ingratitude, faithless promises, and undeserved
persecutions will be so stupid or craven hearted as on your brittle
proclamations, to adhere to you, and put their heads like Asses, again into
the halter? Did not Tyrone and Tyre-conell come in, and submit on fair
conditions? Yet had not their heels saved their heads, the former had been
tripped up, and the later chopped off, and so may all heads be, which will be
so blockish as to lay themselves on the block, while the Hatched is in the
Butchers hand over them.

Quaere 6. What considerable good, is there to be expected, by your help of
men, or monyes, the kingdom being so exhausted and destroyed, as no pecuniary
aid may be thence collected, and so depopulated, as it has no men to spare,
and such as are, so cowarded, by our many victories, as they are not
regardable, or of any use or estimation?

Resp. You cannot deny, but on the beginning of these Commotions, you were
fearfully scared by a popular rout of disarmed Clowns not only in the
country, but even in your strongest walled Towns and Cities, in so much as you
durst scarce peep out at the gates of your great Garizons of Dublin, and
Drogbeda. I grant, when you had discovered those multitudes to be weapon-lesse,
and in no fit posture to defend themselves or offend you, then indeed you
took courage and rushing forth with horse and foot completely armed, you slew
man, woman, and child, as they came under your lash, as well those that held the
plough* as the pike, the goade as the gun, the suich as the sword, which brave
kind of service and swaye you continued, until some Commanders, Arms, and
ammunition, came to our succor, and then were you put to a stand. This is the
naked truth, without disparaging or undervaluing either Nation, as may be
observed, since the battle of Rosse, where, though you had the honor of the
field, by odds of the ground, and great advantage of your Artillery, yea, and
somewhat else, which were petty treason to touch; yet we had the honor to
have relieved and kept the Town, and taken your shipping, where you were so
stung, smarted, and amazed at the sharpness of the encounter, that ever since
you have for borne to meet our Troops. I will pass over the gayning of
Burrise, Bir, sort-Faulkland, Ballynikill, Ballylenan, and several other
places, and skirmishes about the time of concluding the Cessation in September
1643. specially at Loghleagh, where a few of ours routed and slew multitudes of
yours, and Portlester, where fell that busy nice warrier, full of his
countries blood and spoil, and zeal to serve the Parliament, Charles Lord
viscouut Moore, of unhappy memory. So as, though we run away, (as you object)
yet in each conflict you lost most men and that evermore of your chief
Commanders, in such a broken, disorderly, and disfurnished war as we were
compelled to make. And when you shall make an upcast of your accounts, you
shall find (if self conceit inveigle you not) that we have not had the least
or worst part of the victoryes. As for our retreat lately from Charlemount, to
refresh our horses and men, and to bring our Army out of such narrow straights,
where Horse could not freely play; (whereat you seem to rejoice, and slaken
the treaty of peace, as if you would side with the Scots, the Kings enemies) no
other construction can be made thereof, but that it was done to put the Army in
a better posture for service: And suppose our Army did retire or disbande, by
reason of some careless fayler or defect in the Country, Council, or
prime-Commanders, in falling short of provision, pay, or other requisites: Must
it therefore be inferred, that the kingdom is the less considerable, or
powerful to succor his Majesty? This consequence halts over pons Assinorum,
it follows not. For it is manifest, that if the whole kingdom had put their
strength to it, (though your party did sit still, and look on only, as in
this occasion you have remarkeably done, which argues in you infallibly, either
want of will, or power, if the former, you are no right Subjects, if the later,
you are less able to assist his Majesty then we) Little should the Scots be of
force to resist us, and much less (I am confident) will they be (the fire
being now kindled and increasing in their own country) when your party and
ours shall join unanimously against them. In the interim, if ought shall
happen amiss, you may have a share in the blame and mischief. And our
opposing the Scots deserves a grateful acknowledgement, being a service more
concerning your interests and safeties (if there be not some latent combination
betwixt you and them) then ours, in regard we are in a more able condition for
defense and offense, whereby, you cannot but judge us to be considerable,
having lately maintained in the field (besides all garrisoned Soldiers, and
trayn'd bands of horse and foot, settled in the several Counties) about seven
or eight thousand foot, and one thousands horse, for five Months, in a body.
I believe our enemies have found our Troops well able to break theirs, and to
trample under foot their Scottish hobbyes. You may not be over confident of
your past victories, or presume so much on a vain opinion of the
Scottish-Army, (whereof perhaps you make use to square and govern this Treaty)
you cannot deny, but we have multitudes of men, many thousand Soldiers, brave
Cavvalliers, and long experienced stout Commanders, most zealous and willing to
fight out this quarrel for his Majesty, who, on secure contentment given their
Nation, will prove themselves as valiant and hardy now and always, as they
have been ever hitherto, and still are, reputed in all foraine Countries. I
appeal to your own knowledge, whether any stands better of your side in the
field, then this country man? So that we may truly say, you fought with our
own men against us, as now the Scots do. And though the kingdom in many
parts be destroyed; yet are the revenues thereof still considerable: Whereas
this last year of Cessation, above a hundred thousand pounds have been levied
out of the very plough-lands, and the Counties at large, without scarce
touching our Cities or walled Towns, to wit, thirty thousand pounds to his
Majesty, on the Cessation, for transporting the English Army herehence to his
aid, fifty thousand pounds for the Army of Vlster at least, during the
expedition: twenty thousand pounds more have been paid this same year, in
satisfaction of arrears due to Officers and Commanders, besides diverse other
sums for our Agents at several times, which I omit, together, with the
intertaynement of all such as serve the Commonweal, whereof, though some
receive not much, yet some others do. I pass over all sums which lie hidden
in the hands of Collectors, Receivers, and such other Officers, which in all
amounts to above a hundred thousand pounds, this year, when the kingdom (I
suppose, and hope) is at the lowest ebb. What then will it be able to afford
when a happy peace shall begin to recover it, and bring a full tide of all
flourishing plenty, specially, when the English-pale shall be reinhabited,
which now lies wast in a manner and useless, and has been the best and
richest Colony of the land, and the chiefest and most abounding Granary
thereof, and prime support of the state? and if the ways we have fixed on,
the last Assembly at Kilkenny in July 1644. be condescended unto, and
effectually followed, during this grand necessity, they will (I say) bring into
the treasury, at least four hundred thousand pounds by the year, as by the
ensuing heads of a revenue agreed unto at Kilkenny as aforesaid, may plainly
appear. First, the excises laid in a moderate way over all our quarters,
suppose half as much, as it is in Dublin, will amount to a huge sum
throughout all our Cities and Corporations, as yet not touched in this kind.
Secondly, the fourth part of the yearly rent and value of every man's estate,
which likewise I leave to be considered. Thirdly, the Kings Rents,
Compositions, and Customs, which (though now in a manner during the wars,
lost, or of small value) will upon a peace soon improve, if there shall be no
VVentworths or Ratclifes, to cozen the King, or Catch poll the Subject.
Fourthly, two parts, or more, of all Church Livings belonging to the Clergy,
so much now insisted upon between the Catholic and protestant Clergy: and
this to assist his Majesty during the wars, All which particulars of a
revenue, must doubtless amount unto a vast sum, to be employed first, to
secure and clear this kingdom of all Roundheads, and other malignant or
ill-affected persons, be they English, Irish, or Scots, which by a perfect
union of the Protestant party (I mean such as sincerely adhere to the King)
and ours, may be speedily effectuated, through the happy and disinteressed
government, we then hope to enjoy, and the free and cheerful contribution of
all Add.
to advance the said service, which being achieved, then may all our Armies be
transported into England, and our forces be employed toward his Majesty's
succor which is the longing desire, and chiefest ambition of this loyal
Nation, how suspicious soever you may be of them, for your own sinister
intentions; all which really pondered, sans all jealous prejudication, our
helps both of men and monyes, are highly considerable* and yours very little
avaylable, for first, your party is in a manner no party, at least for the
King, by reason the most and strongest part thereof, if not all, consists of
Puritans and antimonarchists, such as would, if it lay in their power, rather
Conquer the kingdom for their holy brethren, the Parliamentaries, Scots, or
Hollanders, then for his Majesty. Next, if you had a considerable protestant
party, you have no provision if Come, victuals, men, or monyes, nor can you
expect any, but from his Majesty's enemies, who will send you none, to serve
against themselves, all which is before sufficiently demonstrated. How then are
you prepared for a new war, or how able to extirpate this Nation, if you
intend not to bring in the parliament, or some other of your anti-monarchicall
brethren, to win the kingdom for themselves, and weane it from his Majesty?
And what gets the King by that? mary, he shall gain an open enemy, and loose
a kingdom. And, if for this end, the parliament help you not, they have small
encouragement to send you any more, so little effect have they found of the
several aids hitherto transmitted, which does no way countervayle the blood
of so many thousand men, and charge of so many hundred thousand pounds,
employed; spent, and lost, by Sea and Land to subdue, and extinguish this
Nation, which must very much discourage them, and retard their further
adventures hither, having their heads and hands full of work at home. We know
their spleen to Ireland over-flowes, and their desire is transcendent, to
join it as a large Canton to their new intended state, framed after the
Holland cut: Yet, for the present, their ambition is first, to settle it in
England, and to secure themselves, much more prevalent, for charity begins at
home; and they conceive, they may come time enough to play the after game in
Ireland, for they assure themselves, to have always odd men lurking in our
after points, to keep the Tables open. It is hard then for you to trust to
their present supplies so uncertain, and if you do, it is more hard for his
Majesty to confide in you, for doubtless, they will not relieve you, that you
may succor him, whom they so violently oppose, and labor to depose. Now I
pray, give me leave a little further, to examine your vaunting victories, and
therein to manifest the valor of our men, so much by you undervalued. The
first encounter was (as you cannot but remember) between the bridge of
Gillianstone and Smithstone, where a few of ours, with Swords and Skines only,
without shot defeated four of five hundred of yours, armed as completely as
any, Soldiers in Holland, where among was a Troop of Horse which saved
themselves by their heels, and about three hundred of the foot were slain in
the place, without shot or stroke in defense of their lives were the Irish then
cowards? During the siege of Drogheda, (which though they were forced to raise,
for want of Commanders, Arms, and Ammunition) in the few encounters that were,
they showed their valor, even in standing, and defending themselves not being
provided for offense, yet was your loss still most. And did not our young
Gentlemen enter the Town, and therein sufficiently demonstrate their courage,
though compelled to retire, as you were at Rosse. At Swoards, Finglas, and
Santry, did not thirty or forty Musketires of ours, having not above three
shots of powder a piece, with three or four hundred Clubbetiers, confront a
body of eight hundred shot of yours, beside pike and horse, and slay your
Commanders, and six for one of your Soldiers, till want of powder did force
their retreat, and give you way to murder a company of old laboring men,
women, and children? At Kiljhalaghan, did not they the like, and kept the place
also, for that time in despite of you, to your excessive loss? At Trim,
Dundalke, and other petty skirmishes, you evermore lost your Commanders, and
most of your Soldiers, neither did you ever put ours to flight, while they had
a shot of powder left, though you had ten Arms, for one of ours. At Kilrush, I
confess we were as many men (I believe) as you, but your Artillery, Horse,
Arms, Ammunition, triply exceeded ours, which are very great advantages, yet
little got you by that day, but the field, which, with such odds, I hold for
no great victory, which you had not the courage to prosecute. All such Castles
as you got from us (for the most part) cost you dear, ten lives or more, for
one, though you laid formal sieges to them, with Artillery, plenty of
Ammunition, and all other requisites, against a few unarmed disfurnished men:
Witness Carrigmain, Baldugan, Sudden, Lynch his Knock, and several other,
where commonly, you most perfidiously broke your quarter given. All these were
before the arrival of any help of Commanders, Arms, or Ammunition in our
quarters, since when you have always lost ground, and recovered none; At
Raconell you confess our men fought valiantly, even with stones, when their
powder was spent, the want whereof (it is evident) was the sole cause of the
defeat. At Loghleagh, you were shamefully beaten. At Rosse we had our intent,
which was to defend the Town, though you got the field, by the advantage of
your Artillery, and somewhat else, must not be spoken off. At Keshenennan,
being in all, not a full thousand men, horse and foot, very slightly provided,
we kept the passage against your great Army of five or six thousand horse and
foot. At Clancurry, we had also our intent, which was to send you home,
without annoyance of us. At Portlester you got the worst, as is aforesaid. All
such Castles as we have gained from you, we won them (in a manner) without
difficulty, blows or loss; ( Ballinikill only excepted, which also held not
out much more then half a day, after the first shot of a Cannon, though you
vauntingly glorified it, with the name of invincible) yet in each of them, you
abounded with men, and all other Military provision. Now in all these battles,
encounters, skirmishes, and Castles won or lost, it is particularly to be
noted, that you never gained from us, without stiff and stout resistance,
sharp blows, and much loss, most commonly, and with much advantage, of
Artillery, Arms, Ammunition, and other warlike necessaries; whereas, whenever
we got from you, (I say for the most part) it was evermore without much
opposition, damage, or blood, with all kind of disadvantage of our side, which
evidently demonstrats whose men are most cowarded, or stood worst. If we still
run away, why did not you over-runne and conquer the kingdom? And if a man
armed only with a Club, or a Gunne without powder, should fly from another,
completely armed, and provided to his hearts desire, can any with reason
therefore call that man a coward? I should rather hold him for a Cullion, that
pursues such a man, or at least, cannot wrest his will, or win his wish from
him. If our men thus nakedly appointed, could hold play, for a whole year to
yours plentifully furnished, while succor was a coming, as it appears they
did, may they be nickenamed Cowards? rather the contrary: for all this proves
manifestly, that you were very cowards, or they very valiant fellows, and I
think you will rather aver the later, then avow the former. How ever, I am
certain all Christian Nations else will, and do proclayme them valiant, yea
England and Scotland their most spleenative enemies; Prince Rupert will
witness it. And out of these premises I deduce an infallible consequence,
two, or three, ergo our men and monyes are considerable; ergo it is dangerous
for you in a new war to hazard the loss of the kingdom, and utter
extirpation of the protestant party; Ergo, it is better and safer for you, his
Majesty should give content to this Nation, by giving his Royal assent to our
propositions. But you say, it is not in his Majesty's power to condescend to
our demands. If he shall, it will set popery again in jurisdiction, introduce
the Supremacy of Rome, and take away or endanger his Majesty's supreme
authority in causes Ecclesiastical, a diminution of honor and power not be
endured. I answer, we desire not the repealing of any ancient grounded laws,
but to be disburdened of certain grievous pressures laid on us, either by acts
of state, or parliament, or the lawless Law of Sic volo, sic jubeo
fraudulently or violently enacted and executed, by the unsupportable tyranny of
the ministers of this subordinat government, destructive to our Religion,
lives and liberties, which, a free parliament with his Majesty's Royal assent
can legally do: therefore it lies in his Majesty's power to grant our
propositions. Doubtless, you will acknowledge King Charles to be as lawful,
absolut, and powerful a King of England and Ireland, tam de jure, quam de
facto, as was Henry the VIII. or Edward the VI. Who (as it were at a blow) beat
down and suppressed a Religion of above eight hundred (or rather twelve
hundred) years standing, seized on JESUS CHRIST'S own patrimony, the
possessions of the Clergy, confiscated their goods, sacked and profaned their
Churches, and in What follows, are the words of an approved English Author.
fine, turned above ten thousand of them out of doors to seek their fortunes,
without being heard, or orderly convicted for any offense, contrary to all Law,
conscience, and common reason: For, the Abbeys hold their Lands in Frank
Almoine, and in Fee, they were possessed of them, by the donation of several
Saxon, English and Norman Kings, and Subjects, continued legally by
prescription, established by law, and confirmed by the Charters of Kings, as
that of Magna Charta 9. H. 3. and the confirmation thereof 28. Ed. 1. Where it
is granted, that the Church of England shall be free, and have its liberties
inviolable, and cap. 2. judgment given against them shall be held for naught:
Also, sententia lata super confirmatione Chartarum, by Ed. 1. or ^^. Ed. 3.
cap. 8. If any statute be made contrary to Magna Charta, it shall be void, or
the confirmation of all these, 1. 6. 7. 8. of Rich. 2. and 4. H 4. All which
were intended to prevent tyranny, and secure the Church then being, visibly
known, and generally reverenced: for to no other Church were they granted,
neither can any other enjoy them. Yet did Henry the eight, and Edward the sixth
assume the Hitherto the foresaid Author.
power to controvert and subvert all these, which you approve and applaud,
though they were acts surmounting the puisance of heaven; and you will not
allow King Charles the power of ordinary actions, and sublunary things in our
behalfes; albeit you avow his consent given to the Scots (as aforesaid) by act
of parliament to pull down Bishops, without whom a parliament is no
parliament, In equity and reason, whatsoever Common Law may pretend to the
contrary. His Majesty by a public Declaration in Print declared the late
Earl of Strafford innocent for matter of blood, yet was he compelled after to
subscribe to the condemnation and decollation of the said Earl to content the
parliament of England, as yet insatiably discontented. All these (I say) you
approve and commend, and yet must his Majesty's hands be bound, and his
gracious favors locked up from us, under pretext (forsooth) of impossibilities
in our demands, though they contain naught, but what legally lays in his
Majesty's Royal breast to grant. As for your wonted childish foppery, which you
call popery to be set again in jurisdiction, our propositions import (as you
mean it) no such thing; but that we may be allowed the freedom of the Roman
Catholic Religion, which has here continued in jurisdiction (if you know
what means jurisdiction) above a thousand years, maugre all your fiery
furies, and persecutions. And suppose it were in jurisdiction, as you
understand it, no disinteressed judgment can see what his Majesty should loose
thereby; his Rents and Customs would be still the same, if not much more, by
reason of the freedom of ingresse and egresse of traffic, and the fidelity
of Officers; he should gain a hundred hearts for one, both at home and abroad;
he should be obeyed and served, as Father of the Commonweal, for love and
filial fear, not as he has been hitherto by you, for lucre and interest,
as well appears by your now falling off from him, since the days of gain are
expired: for his protestant party here, is only (as aforesaid) in Dublin,
Drogheda, Dundalke, and in those quarters, where also now by a new treason
lately discovered, they manifest the old treachery lay hidden in their hearts;
and (to confirm what I have above laid down) on this discovery there were
found but only three Commanders in the whole Town of Drogheda who stood for
his Majesty: And, if all the protestant pulses in Dublin, or elsewhere in
Ireland were felt by a skillful Physician in that kind, I doubt, there would
hardly be found a hundred free from that frantic fever. As concerning the
introduction of the supremacy of Rome, which you object; it is well known, and
we care not who knows it, that all Ireland never believed other; how then can
that be intended to be introduced, that has never been taken out of it? I say
all Ireland; that is, all Irishmen, whereof if a very few believed otherwise
they were of a viperous brood, destructive to their mother, and considerable,
as none, in regard of the whole kingdom, as also such English as here
inhabited. With all, our propositions make no mention of any such intended
innovation. So as (suppose the Roman Catholic Religion were freely exercised
in Ireland, which is that we seek) the supremacy in causes Ecclesiastical,
and the honor and power thereof, should still as much as ever remain in his
Majesty. Yet reflect but a little, and you may perceive, that his Majesty has
lost that honor and power you so much esteem, in England and Scotland, (Oh
that that were all!) for the parliament and Scots (if any they admit) attribut
it to the Elders of their Kirk; but there is no corner in a Roundhead for
such a supreme belief; it has place then only in a few protestant heads (and
fewer hearts, if they were all profoundly sounded) in England and Ireland, and
as for the belief of Roman Catholics in that kind, it derogates not a single
hair from their faithful and fixed allegiance to his Majesty, as is evident
by their cleaving to him in his three kingdoms, now in these boisterous times
of his troubles, when all Sectaries flote in their fidelities, and flitt
according their fancies. Moreover, what great diminution of honor or power (to
use your own words) should his Majesty thereby sustain, suppose the supremacy
of Rome were introduced? The world knows (that knows the History of England)
that the Crown of England had more power, honor, fame and wealth, before it
assumed that seeming specious Title, then it could ever since then, purchase,
either at home or abroad. This needs no proof, the Legend of the lives of the
Monarchs thereof, does demonstrate it. Had not Henry the VIII. morerenowne, by
his Book written against Luther in defense of the seven Sacraments, for which
he received a Sword from the Pope, with the glorious Title of Defender of the
Faith, then he had after, when his lust lead him to arrogate the supremacy? and
more treasure had he in his Coffers, I am certain. For, notwithstanding the
spoil and pillage of the Church, whereof the value of the Lands only England,
at that time amounted to above three hundred and twenty thousand pounds ten
shillings sterling per annum, out of which the King took into his own
possession, and appropriated to the Crown, a hundred sixty one thousand one
hundred pounds per annum, besides their movables, which doubtless made up a
vast sum: yet died he without wealth, without honor, without friends,
without peace in his house, or heart, and with remorse of Conscience belcheth
forth his last breath in despair, with an Omnia perdidimus: and can boast of
no other Monument he has left to Record his memory, but such as he left, who
vaunted of burning Dianas Temple. Now since then, can any man show me the
effects of the supposed honor or power, England has enjoyed or acquired,
either foreign or domesticke, by the supremacy, other then pride, luxury,
epicurisme, blasphemy, effeminacy, and in a word, a licencious liberty to swim
in sin, and wallow in vice without control? It is true indeed, there was a
Duke went into Spain, Basta. And to the Isle of Ree, c'est ass. England has
assisted in this later age, Holland, Swedland, the Palatinate, and other rebels
against their natural and lawful Sovereigns, and has been, and still is
cowed by that Nation, which it most scorned and vilipended of the world, and
over which in former ages it was wont to domineere, crow, and conquer. It is
lately become the forge of novellisme and heresy, the nursery of Sects, and
now the stage of rebellion. These are the fruits of your gosling Gospel, and
the feats of honor and power, acted since the supremacy of Rome has been
expelled, and the inheritance of S. Peter intruded upon. France, Spain Italy,
Poland, and other Catholic countries, states and Provinces, who still
continue obedient children to the Church of Rome, esteem themseves either in
power, honor, wealth, or worldly splendor, no way inferior to England; yea
many of them far exceed it in all. They are adored, beloved, awed at home
and abroad; The Turks, Heathens, and Infidels fear and feel the force of
their arms; both ends of the world do them homage, are tributary to them, and
contribut to the farssing of their Coffers. Yet do they still acknowledge Rome
their superior in causes Ecclesiastical, neither have they any ambition to
spiritual jurisdiction, because they know they are incapable thereof, and they
deem it rather a diminution, then any addition of honor or power to arrogat a
Title which derogats from the power and jurisdiction essentially inhering in
that Title, which they are assured cannot be but in a Priest. So as this great
Colossus of honor and power, Supremacy, in spiritual causes in a secular
person, (the loss whereof you so much apprehend) is a mere ens rationis, and
consequently a thing not to be thought of by rational men. Yet, if you will
needs be so chymericall, as to contend de lanacaprina, take you it, so we may
have from the benignity of his gracious Majesty his Royal assent to our humble
propositions, which all good Subjects, and real patriots are bound to wish and
vote, it being the most efficacious mean to secure and succor his Majesty
against the malignant party, and to settle this tottering kingdom in a firm
and constant peace, whereto a raging malice to this Nation, with an undiscreete
antypathicall zeal to the extirpation of the Religion thereof may raise many
opposits. But let every man of both parties lay his hands on his heart, and
sadly consider the state of this kingdom, which lies pining in a violent
hecticke fever: Its veins have been superaboundantly vented. Too much
phlebotomy drives the body into a consumption. If the flames shall once again
burst forth, and the Sword be reunsheated betwixt us, without doubt nothing
shall ever quench the one, or put up the other but the utter eradication and
abolition of you and your Religion, or us and ours; and whether, no man but he
that is God and man can tell. Can any then so far deviate from the road of
reason, as to take their way where they are certain to be way laid, or in
eminent danger of the loss of their purses and persons, while they may
confidently walk other secure paths? Who can be so unwise, as to lay the
foundation of so weighty a structure, as is that of their Religion, lives, and
fortunes, on floating sands, while they may have firm and solid grounds to
build on? I know not what will and rage may do; but well, what wit and reason
should do. Let every man therefore (I say) wipe off from the eye of his heart,
all National animosities, all overweening conceits of proper might, all
unnatural antypathies, all jealous distrusts, and every atom of any other
passion, which may offuscat the visive powers from discerning what may most
conduce to the recovery of our infirm Country, whereunto, I wish each
undividuall would put his helping head, heart, and hand without morosity.

This is better policy, then to keep all in suspense forsooth, to avoid the
blame of concluding any thing, and to spin out time, to see for whom the
triumph will turn, or which way the game will go, either for the King or
Parliament* so to run with the good success, and to beat on the winners
hand, or upon a shuffling up of the game, and an accommodation to betray this
Nation, and take all advantages against it, as may well be collected and
feared, out of these long suspicious treaties, and frequent Cessations. But the
great God of heaven, and protector of the Innocent, who has hitherto
frustrated the grand plot of our adversaries, intended for the extirpation of
our Nation and Religion, by stirring up a war in England, to divert their
fiendly fury, and revenge the spilling of so much Innocent blood, as has been
here unhumanly shed, may (and doubtless will) convert their present
machinations on themselves. The Fox is often taken by his too much cunning and
wiliness, when one good plain way of leaping into the Tree, still saves the
Cat. Did not the state here cause all the Corn in the Pale to be destroyed and
burned, the poor laboring men to be murdered, and so tillage to be almost
quite banished, thereby to starve the Inhabitants? which, without doubt had
famished themselves were it not for the Cessation in September 1643. Via plana,
via sana* It Is to be feared, that these winding wyles and halting policies may
betray and loose his Majesty all his protestant party, so ready to slip after
good success, whilst the parliament shall win more steadfast footing in
North-VVales over against our Coasts and Harbors, whereby they may prevent the
timely transportation of our aid. It is dangerous to let a disease run too
far, and a patient to work and trust too much to the strength of his nature,
least all helps of Physic come too late. You say, it is good to bear the
Scots and other Roundheads in hand, till you be assured of the Confederates.
You hover then in your resolutions of adhering to his Majesty, and you falter
in your fidelity, seeing you hold correspondence with his professed enemies,
and oppose and reject those, who (you know in your Consciences, whereto I
appeal) are his Majesty's best and truest Subjects, though they may not yield
to such conditions of peace, as you would put on them, without perpetual
slavery, infamy, and danger of being one day massacred. You presume top much on
the friendship and alliance some of your great ones have amongst us, which you
are best beware how you squise and wier-drawe too far, least you force us to
forget all relations of blood, and ties of friendship, whereto Religion and
Country must be preferred. Unnatural suits and quarrels, prove still the most
dangerous, and least capable of reconciliation. Let not any think to raise or
endeere themselves to his Majesty by extraordinary services, in forcing the
harder conditions on their Country, for they shall thereby lose his Majesty
more hearts, then gain heads and hands for his assistance, while you press
too much their persons and Consciences, and grate too deeply on their estates
and purses, they having ever been and still are too free and willing of
themselves, to supply his Majesty's necessities, to support his glory and
prerogatives, and advance his service: though I may with a sigh, say, they have
been evermore most unfortunat* in sharing any part of the thanks of all their
benevolous actions and large contributions from time to time, which the
Governors of this kingdom did still snatch and arrogat to themselves, by
magnifying their own endeavors and labors, interposed between the King and
his people; as lately did the Lord of Strafford, who engrossed all the honor
and thanks of our profuse Subsidies, and ingenuous willingness to his
Majesty's service, to himself; which may be a sufficient precaution to us; and
his fall from the stage, by over-acting his part, a lively president to all
others, for eviting such a Tragical end, which is commonly the Epilogue of all
politic plays. Let therefore all such, as act those eminent parts of Kings
or Princes on the Theater of the Commonweal, enter into themselves, and
consider, that albeit they personat Princes, yet they are none, but
fellow-players of the Globe or Fortune, and consequently, both they and their
posterity, subject to such inconveniences and pressures, as they, by overmuch
affectation of applause, or other falter, shall have drawn on the rest of the
company. So as, when the play is done, those momentall glorious Kings, may
perhaps for ever after, be driven to act the Clown, exull or pilgrim, as well
as the meanest of their companions, which God avert from all well meaning
servitures, whose sincere intentions and radiant Candor, will in fine (I hope)
shine thorough the the thick est of these Egyptiacall clouds, which hang over
our Hemisphere, and disperse all malignant vapors and vipers, which will
vanish thoroughout the Kingdom, like false apparitions or specters, upon a
true union and understanding between the King and his people, whereto, may
propitious heaven say, Amen.

FINIS.

