A PACKET OF NEWS, Yea, True and Faithful News, of ISREAL'S and JUDAHS Call;
AND Of the Manner, Place, and Time of Christ's Coming and reign in glory among
his Saints upon the Earth.

As also, Judahs Past, with Englands Present Miseries Paralleled; With sundry
other Particulars, very profitable and necessary for Christians of all Degrees,
to know the Mysteries of God.

Collected out of the Scriptures this 22. of the 11th month (corruptly called
January) 1647. for the benefit of all, but chiefly for such, who hold the Truth
in Unrighteousness, Err in Vision, and stumble in Judgment.

By JAMES FRESE Merchant.

Ps. 96. 10. and 104. 5. Eccles. 1. 4. 1 Chronicles. 16. 30. The World shall be
Established that it shall not be moved for ever. Eze. 43. 7. Even the place of
the soals of my feet, where I will dwell for ever. Zach. 2. 12. For the Lord
shall inherit Judah in the holy land, and choose Jerusalem again. Ier. 31. 6.
8. And then shall they say, Arise Let us go up to Zion, unto the Lord our God.
Zac. 8. 7, 8, 23. And then shall ten Men (of all Nations) take hold of the
skirt of him that is a Jew, saying. We will go with you, for we have heard that
God is with you. LONDON, Printed for Matthew Simmons, 1651.

To the RIGHT HONORABLE Most Truly NOBLE, And VICTORIOUS, HIS EXCELLENCY,
Oliver Cromwell, Lord General of all the Forces raised in England and Ireland,
for Defense and Regainment of Englands Rights and Liberties.
MOst Noble and Victorious Sir, whose Name (by the Will of Divine Providence)
is become Englands Honor, Her Enemies Terror, and Europes Wonder. For the
Continuation, Increase, and Perfection whereof, to the Glory of God, your
Countries happiness, and Your own eternal Fame, he most heartily and earnestly
wishes, who in his greatest straits under the Iron yoke of Cruelties close
restraint many years, was sundry times made partaker of your truly Christian
bounty, to the preservation of his Life and Being, and (after many years
Imprisonment) of some breathings of Liberty. For which in way of due
thankfullness (as ever in his heart abhorring the grand sin of Ingratitude) he
returns unto Your Excellency most humbly and hearty thanks, and in assurance of
the continuation of your most noble Paternal favor toward him; he presumes
to shroud this ensuing treatise (of the Personal Reign of Christ upon the
earth) under the wing of your Execllencies favorable Protection: most humbly
presenting the same unto your Excellencies view, acceptance, and most noble
Boerean perusal; The glimpse of which favor extended, is the highest pitch of
his ambition, who in all true Christian humility to his God, and fidelity (in
the band of love) to his Country, and your Excellency, Subcribes himself.

Most Noble, Excellent, and Right Honorable, Your Honors most humble Servant to
be commanded James Frese.
London the 19th. of the 6th. Month, corruptly called August, 1651.
To all such true and faithful members of the Lord Jesus, as walk close to the
Sacred Truth, by the rule of Righteousness, and stand as firm as Nehemiah, for
the advance of the true honor of God, in true judgment, justice, and mercy,
and the speedy restoration of the fundamental Laws, Rights, and Liberties of
this their Native Country.
Excellent, Honorable, and truly Beloved in the Lord Jesus,
I Here present unto your favorable view and Christian perusal, this small
Treatise, containing some Collections of holy Scripture, clearly manifesting
the Personal Reign of the Lord Jesus among his Saints upon Earth in the Land
of Israel (it being the choicest Fruit of my Labors, in the time of my close
Imprisonment in the Tower-Chamber in the Fleet-Prison, for the space of almost
four years, by Henry Hopkins Warden of the Fleet, under locks and bolts, to the
apparent hazard of my life, without any just cause by him showed to this day
for his so doing) craving in all humility your favorable acceptance of these
my Labors, and a Berean perusal of them: In the reading whereof, the Lord Jesus
grant unto you his sacred Spirit of Wisdom, to be your Directer and Instructor,
bringing the Truth thereof home unto your souls, that so your hearts being
seasoned with the apprehension of the expressed joys and comforts contained in
it, you may live in expectation of the Lord Jesus his glorious Appearing with
all Saints, in the glory of God the Father, Psalm. 143. 10. Psalm. 142. 5. Exodus
15. 13, 17, 18. Isa. 8. 8. Ezekiel. 32. 25, 26, 27.
and of the holy Angels, and in his Kingdom; and of the enjoyment of eternal
life in glory with him, and* all the Saints, within his holy habitation, in the
land of the living, even, in the lot of his Inheritance, where he the Lord
Christ shall reign for ever and ever; even as he assuredly remains in
expectation of the same* who in all humility subscribes himself,

Excellent, Honorable, and truly Beloved in the Lord Jesus, Yours in all love
and Christian Charity, and his Countries Servant in all Fidelity, during the
short time of his continuance in this almost expired vanities world of misery,
James Frese.
London this 15th of the 10th month, 1650.
The Epistle,
To the Honest, Impartial Reader.
COurteous Reader, I do earnestly wish, and heartily desire of the Lord, that
thy perusal of these few Collections of holy Scripture (taken as a drop of
water out of the vast Ocean of Gods Word, and sent forth as a Lamb among
censorious Wolves) may be seasoned to thy soul by the Spirit of Truth, that so
the eyes of thy Understanding may thereby be enlightened, to Gods glory, and
thine own souls eternal comfort, and joy unexpressable in the glorious eternal
world to come.

And for the better help and inlightning of thy Understanding in the profitable
reading of this Treatise, I do earnestly desire thee to note well these
particulars following.

1. That the ten Tribes 1 Kin. 12. 16. 19, 20.
which fell from Rehoboam, and made Jeroboam their King, were then called, The
Kingdom of Israel, whose Kingly Seat or City was Samaria.

And the other two Tribes under Rehoboams government, were called the Kingdom
of Judah, and the People, Jews, whose Royal Seat was the Mount of the Lord God,
called Psalm. 48. 2, 8.
Zion, adjoining to the North side of Jerusalem. The City of the great King,
Matthew. 5. 35.
Christ Jesus.

2. That all the ten Tribes of Israel were 1 King. 17. 1, 3, 6.
carried away into captivity beyond the River of Aethiopia, called Euphrates
Zeph. 3. 10, to 17. 2 Esdras 13. 40, 41. 43, 44. Isa. 49. 11, 12. Jer. 24. 5.
Jer. 29. 10.
, by Shalmanazer King of Assyria, in the days of King Hoshea, into a far
Country, about eighteen months journey from the holy land of Palestina (called
in the Syriack Assareth, but in the Hebrew Sinin) three hundred twenty and six
years before Judah was carried captive into Babylon by Nebuchadnezzar King of
Babylon; from whence Judah returned to their own Land again within seventy
years: But the ten Tribes (called Israel) as yet never returned to this day: So
that Isreal's captivity has now continued about two thousand six hundred and
twelve years.

Therefore will the Lord make Israel (that was wholly cast out) a mighty Nation;
but Judah (or the Jews) that returned, and halted, Isa. 11. 12. Mic. 4. 6, 7,
^. Lu. 19. 14 27. John 19. 15.
ye rejected him, saying, We will not have this man to reign over us; for we
have no King but Caesar, is now dispers d among the Nations, and shall be only
a Remnant.

For as ye were a curse among the Heathen (says the Lord) O House of Israel,
and House of Judah, I^a. 66. 20.
so will I save you, and ye shall be a Blessing: For in those days, and at that
time, the children of Israel, and the children of Judah shall Ier. 5. 4, 5.
come together; They shall ask the way to Zion with their faces thitherward,
saying, Come, Let us join our selves to the Lord in a Perpetual Covenant that
shall never be forgotten.

Matthew. 24. 30.
Then shall the Tribes of Israel mourn (when they see him whom their
forefathers rejected) and shall Zach. 12. 10. Isa. 66. 19, Isa 60. 9. Isa. 66.
13. 20.
declare my glory among the Gentiles; and they (the Gentiles) shall bring your
brethren unto the Lord, out of all Nations, in their Ships, and upon Horses.
and in Litters, and in Chariots, and upon Mules, and upon swift Beasts (or
Dromedaries) to my holy In the New or Heavenly Jerusalem.
Mountain Jerusalem, and ye shall be comforted in Jerusalem, says the Lord.

For as the New Heaven and the New Earth which I will make* shall remain before
me, so shall your Seed and your Name remain (says the Lord.) And the Gentiles
Isa. 60. 3, 4, 5. Ezekiel. 37. 14. Luke 2. 32.
shall come to thy Light, and Kings to the brightness of thy rising; When I have
raised you out of your graves (then) thy sons shall come from far, and thy
daughters shall be nursed at thy side: And the forces of the Gentiles shall
come unto thee. Then will I return Zeph. 3. 9. 15, 16. Psalm. 5. 4.
to the people a pure language. They shall not see Evil any more, for Evil (the
Devil) shall not dwell with thee (Christ in glory) says David.

And because salvation is far from the wicked, for they search not Gods
statutes, yea, they are hid from their eyes, neither can they know them,
because they are By the Spirit of Truth.
spiritually discerned: Therefore ye that truly fear the Lord God of salvation,
eternal life, light, and glory (Christ Jesus) Search the Scriptures, John 5.
39. 2 Timothy 3 15. 16
for in them ye look to have Eternal Life, and they testify of me (says our
Savior.) For the Scriptures only (comparing spiritual things with spiritual
things) are able to make you wise unto salvation; Knowing this, that the
Scriptures are not of any private 2 Pet. 1. 20* 2 Cor. 4. 7.
Interpretation: For we have this Treasure (of Gods revealed Will by his Word)
in Earthen Vessels, that the Excellency of the Power may be of God, and not of
us; for none knows the things of God, but the Spirit of God. So that it
plainly appears, that all men's Interpretations (of what quality or degree of
Learning soever) or paraphrasing upon the Scriptures, is only a private
Interpretation, and so is uncertain; for, there is no man that can truly say
that he is immediately sent from God (as the Prophets were) and has an
infallible unerring spirit, and that his interpretations of the Scripture, and
his paraphrasing on them, are most infallibly true.

Therefore, Woe to them that are wise in their own Eyes, and prudent in their own
sight: Woe to them that put Darkness Isa. 5. 20, 21.
for Light, and Light for Darkness; That broach the Devils Doctrine of lies, for
a Truth; and force all men to obey and receive them as the Truth.

Lak. 16. 13, 14.
For no man can serve two masters, God and Mammon, Christ and the Devil: But
the learned Pharisees who were covetous, derided Christ (the Wisdom of God)
saying, Is not this the Carpenter, the Son of Joseph? And Jesus said Mark 6. 3.
unto them, Ye are they which justify your selves before men, (to have much
Learning, Wisdom, and Piety,) but God knows your hearts; for that which is
highly esteemed Matthew. 23 28.
among men, is abomination in the sight of God. Even so ye also outwardly appear
righteous unto men, but within ye are full of Hypocrisy, and Iniquity, and
devour Widows houses; Lu 20. 46, 47.
yet for a show (of feigned Piety) make long Prayers: (like most of our covetous
Priests) Therefore beware of the Scribes, which walk in long robes (or
garments) and make merchandise of the Word of Truth, by Sermons of all Prises,
Sacrament, Christnings, Churchings of Women, an burying I dare not speak of
Tithes, because so many Parliament. men are concerned in to em.
of the Dead at several Rates, Easter-book, New-yeers-gifts, and
Excommunications, with several other pecuniary offenses, at several Rates.

These several Truths, with the following matter contained in this Treatise, I
recommend to thy conscientious and diligent perusal, without a prejudicate
opinion; beseeching thee (as thou expectest eternal life in glory in the land
of the living) to search the Scriptures, and try the truth of this following
matter, even as the noble Bereans did: The happy issue whereof, I refer to the
blessing of the Almighty God, and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ; who only in
and by his Son, works in us both the Will and the Deed: Desiring thee also to
consider, that the Testimonies of the Lord are true, and wonderful, giving
light and understanding to the Number. 16. 22. Number. 27. 16. Hebr. 12. 9. 2 Peter
1. 17.
simple. For, by thy Word, thou (O Lord) have made me wiser then my Teachers,
says David. With which saying I also conclude, committing thee to the
Direction and Tuition of the Almighty Goodness of the great God and Father of
all Spirits (the Excellent Glory.)

Remaining thine (in the Lord Jesus the God of Salvation) to my Power, James
Frese.

Psalm. 29. 67, 71, 75, 76.
Being still in Bonds, which fain I would not be,
The man I was, I wish, I nere had bin;
Thy hands affliction, has drawn me home to thee;
Lord grant thy work may more on me be seen:
That Asia's seed, in Europ's Soil may spring,
And bear a Pleasing fruit to Isreal's King:
And Englands Sons and Daughters also may
Psalm. 58. 2. 1 King. 8. 1.
Bring thy People in that most happy day
To Sions hill; and there Present to thee
Themselves, with Judah, a most Pleasing Tree;
1 Cor. 1* 27.
Where they shall see thee, and thy Saints be known
To them, their friends, and children, which they own.
Lo, God has chosen the foolish and weak things of the world, to consound the
wise and mighty.

And having hid these things from the wise and prudent, has revealed Matthew
11. 25.
them unto Babes.

And thus you see it plainly does appear
To be a truth, most evident and clear,
That some Proficients are in natures schools,
And yet in Christ's, mere novices, yea fools.
Probatum est, 1647.
JUDAHS PAST, WITH ENGLANDS Present Miseries paralleld.
And the holy Land of PALESTINA with ENGLAND paralleld, the one being Asias,
the other Europes Canaan, or Land of Plenty.
SECT. I.
THUS says the Lord. smite with thine hand and with thy foot, and say, Alas
for the evil abominations of the Land; Behold, an evil, an only evil is
come, it watches for thee: I will shortly pour out my fury upon thee, and I
will judge thee according to thy ways, and all thy abominations, for violence
is risen up among them into a Rod of wickedness; The day of vengeance is near,
therefore let not the Buyer rejoice, nor the Seller mourn, for wrath is upon
all the multitude thereof; neither shall any (of them) strengthen themselves in
the iniquity of their life; for the Sword, Famine, and Pestilence shall devour
them; all hands shall become feeble, horror shall cover them, their silver and
their gold shall not be able to deliver them, but it shall be given into the
hands of the wicked for a spoil; their souls shall not be satisfied, nor their
bowels filled therewith, because it is the Stumbling Block of their iniquity: O
that they were wise to understand this, that they would consider their latter
end, and the thing that makes for their peace; even the free administration of
Justice, Judgment, and Mercy; but now it is hid from their eyes: Read Isa. 58.
3, ^, 5, 6, 7, 8, 12, 14.
For the Land is full of bloody crimes, and the City is full of violence;
Destruction comes, rumor upon rumor, the King shall mourn; and the Princes
shall be clothed with desolation, and the hands of all the people of the Land
shall be troubled, yea they shall seek Peace, and there shall be none.

SECT. II.
O Thou Sword of the Lord, how long will it be ere thou be quiet? put up thy
self into thy scabard, rest and be still Read le^. 6. 13, 14, 21, 22. le^. 7.
3, 4, 5, 6. At Judas did.
. How can it be quiet, seeing the Lord has given it a arge, and has set his
Face against us for evil, and not for good; because there is no Justice, nor
Mercy left in the Land? a deceived heart has drawn them aside, and
Covetousness (which is Idolatry) causes them to sell the great and dreadful
Lord God (of Justice and Mercy) daily for the abominable price of Iniquity, in
all their Courts of Oppression, falsely by them called Courts of Justice.

SECT. III.
(...) 2^. 26, 28.
ANd because they are thus departed from the Lord, the Lord is also departed
from them; and has poured out the cup of his Fury, even the spirit of division
upon them, and they shall drink and be moved, and be mad, because of the Sword
which he will send among them; for Is^. 1^. 14.
behold, the Lord ha^h mingled a perverse spirit in the midst of us; for thus
says the Lord, Lo, I bring (or brought) evil upon the City called by my Name
(and gave it the 2 (...) 15. Psalm. 4 8. Psalm. 76. 2. Genesis 14. 18. Baruch 4. 30.
name JERU-SALEM, and shall ye be unpunished? Ye shall not be unpunished; for I
will call for a sword upon all the Inhabitants of the earth; (says the Lord)
and will punish the Host of the high ones, and of all the Kings of the earth;
for, the Indignation of the Lord is upon all Nations, and his fury upon all
their Armies.

SECT. IV.
All Kings shall fall and rise no more, le^. 13. 18. Ezekiel. 21. 25, 26. 2 E^dr.
15. 22. 27.
ANd the Kings of the Isles, yea, all the Kings of the North far and near, one
with another, shall drink the Wine of the wrath of God, and be drunken, and
spue, and fall, and rise no more: But the dregs of it, shall all the wicked of
the world drink; for my hand and sword shall not spare them (says the Lord)
that shed Innocent* blood in the earth; for now are the Plagues upon the whole
earth, and ye shall not be delivered: Is^. 28. 3.
For the Crown of Pride, Oppression, and Drunkenness, shall be trodden under
foot.

SECT. V.
Queen Mary came to King Charles out of France, with the King of Spain and King
of France that love Idolatry, which is aly.

The Lawyers that rob the people of their Estates, Rights Liberties, and Lives.


ANd the Kings Daughter of the South shall come to the King of the North (whose
Tabernacle is between two Seas) that has intelligence with them that forsake
the holy Covenant, and do wickedly, and love a ly, (which is Idolatry) but she
shall not retain the power of the Arm, nor stand on his side with them that
brought her* and strengthened her in these times; neither shall he stand, nor
his Arm, but he shall stumble and fall, and not be found: (Also the robbers of
the people shall exalt themselves, but they shall fall) but out of the branch
of her root, shall one stand up in his estate which shall come with an Army,
and shall enter into the Fortress of the King of the North, and shall deal
against them, and shall pr^vail, for the thing Ecc^es. 1. 9, 10. The things
that have been acted on the Jews, shall be acted on the Gentiles.

Read Isal. 21. 5, 6, Isa. 49. 5, 6. Ioh. 17. 2, 5. Genesis 1, 1. Ioh. 1, 3.


that has been, is that which shall be; and that which has been done, is that
which shall be done, for there is no new thing under the Sun, and there is a
time and purpose to every thing under the Heavens; for, is there any thing
whereof it may be said, See this is n^w; for it has been already of old time
before us? and known unto God (or determined) are all his works from (or in)
the beginning; (Christ) in whom all things were created, and by whom all things
were made.

SECT. VI.
FOr in the first two days (or age of the world) before the Law, NIMROD was
the mighty hunter or warrior; and in the other two days (or age of the world)
under the Law the Kings of Judah were the great hunters, or warriors, to the
terror of many Nations: So in these two last days of the world under the
Gospel, have the Kings of England (or Gentiles land of Canaan, f^owing with all
good things) been the great hunters or warriors, to the terror of many
Nations far and near: And as Pal^stina was divided into two Kingdoms* and
they at mortal wars for many years* so is this Island divided into two
Kingdoms, and have been at mortal wars together for many years.

SECT. VII.
ANd as Judah was brought under the Latin or Roman Yoke; So has England been
brought under the N^rman or French Yoke. And as the Kings of Judah were
accounted Defenders of the Faith, and Law of Gods Truth; So are the Kings of
England entitled, by the Popes and Bishops (yea accounted) Defenders of the
Faith, and Gospel of Jesus Christ: Yet have most of them been great Idolaters
and Persecutors of the Truth, and of all true Professors thereof, as well as
the Kings of Israel.

And no marvel, for the Lord having shut up all in unbelief (or mis-belief)
does ^ift all Nations with the Sive of Vanity, as he did his own People the
Jews; putting the hook of Error into their chaws, causing them to err through
and by the delusion of the Spirit of Error: For a further proof of this Truth,
read Isa. 24. 5. Isa. 25. 7. and 30. 28. and 60. 2. Jer. 30. 23, 24. Mic. 5. 3.

SECT. VIII.
King Herod Idolized.

Acts 12 1, 2, 3. 21, 22. Dan. 11. 21, 22. 36, 37, 38.


ANd as that Fox, King Herod by his Flattery, and for his cruel work of
persecution against the Saints and Servants of Christ, was by the two High
Priests, Elders, Doctors, Lawyers, Scribes, Pharisees, Sadduces, Libertines,
and all the common People, Deified; crying out, it is the voice of God, and not
of man: So Henry the eighth King of England, and his Successors, have been by
their two Archbishops, Bishops, Deans, Doctors, Ministers, Judges,
Magistrates, Lawyers, and all the common people, honored with several Titles
proper only to God alone; in attributing to them the several Titles of Most
Sacred Majesty, Most High, Most Mighty, and Most Excellent Prince, in all
Divine Titles attributed to Kings.
their Prayers, in all their Petitions, and by all other their frequent
Addresses to them. Which several Titles are truly and only proper to the
Prince of Peace, being the Most Excellent Majesty of God the Father, who only
and alone is Most High, Most Mighty, Most Excellent, and Most Math. 19. 17.
Sacred; yea, there is none good but one, and that is God. Lam. 5. 7. 1 King.
14. 22, 23.
Behold, thus have our Fathers sinned, and are not; and we have (and still do*)
bear their iniquity, and delight in these their ways of Idolatry.

SECT. IX.
Mat. 23. 2, 3, 4. 8, 9, 10, 11. 1 Samuel 8. 2, 3.
ANd as the Jews (through Covetousness) by Money purchased of the heathen
Romans, the setting up of two high Priests, who also climed up (with the
Pharisees) into Moses chair, which was the Seat of Justice (for Moses was a
Princ^ and Judge, and not a Priest.) So had England two Offices o^ Minister and
Bishop bought for Money.
Archbishops, who by themselves, and their Ministers, and Agents, purchased
with money the Priestly and Episcopal Offices, and did clime into, and possess
the Seats of Justice for many years. And as the Jews embraced the manners 2 Samuel 23. 2, 3.
of the Latins (or Romans) to have their causes of controversy pleaded in
Courts of Justice, by Heathens, styled ^cts 24. 2. 26. This Profession is of
the Devil, and not of God.
Common Prators, such as Tertullus was, who for a mercenary Fee, accused Paul
falsely; So have we a very great number of the like persons, called common
Lawyers, or Praters.

And as the Jews then put Justice to sale for certain Fees and Rewards; So have
we done ever since the Conquest, From William the Nor^an.
for these five hundred and sixty years; whereby the Rich and Mighty have eaten
up the Rights of the Poor and Needy, and murdering thousands of them in the
several Goals and Prisons in this Kingdom.

Acts 6. 9. Acts 8. 1.
And as those High Priests, Elders, Pharisces, Sadduees, Libertines, and
Lawyers, for some forty years together persecuted Luke 11. 34, 35.
the Saints and Servants of Christ; stiling them Pestilent fellows, Raisers of
Sedition and Sectaries, Heretics, or the Sect of Nazarites: So did our
Archbishops, Bishops, Deans, Ministers, Lawyers, and Magistrates, from time to
time (and still do persecute) banished, imprisoned, pillored, whipped, hanged, and
destroyed diverse of the poor followers of Christ, and in like manner falsely
styling them P^stilent fellows, Sectaries, Heretics and raisers of sedition;
stiring up the common people against them; and thus I am. 4 13. 14.
like those Priests in the Lamentation, they have (by the spirit of error) been
led and wandered like blind men, and By their works ye may know what spirit they
are of.

Ezekiel. 13. 18, 19, 20. Luke 11. 46, 47. Zach 13. 4, 5. 2 Esdras 15. 52, 53.
Rev. 3. 1, 2. Isa. 5. 8, 11. 22, 23.


have shed the blood of the just, and have polluted themselves with the blood
of the innocent, whereby they have discovered their own nakedness and shame;
for the Lord had not thus proceeded against them in his jealousy, if they had
not exalted the stroke of their hand, and slain his chosen people; wherefore
the Lord has also made them contemptible among the people of the Land: for
they have a Name that they live, and yet are dead: By oppressing him that
reproves, and making a man an offender for a word; Thus they add sin to sin.

SECT. X.
ANd because O Lord God of Hosts, all they that thus forsake thee the God of
Justice and Mercy in thy primary Attributes (Justice and Mercy) shall be
written in the earth; Death shall swallow them: Therefore will I look unto
thee, yea, I will wait for the God of my salvation, Psalm. 119. 81.
for he will hear me. Rejoice not therefore against me O mine enemy, though I
sit in Darkness, in the bands of cruel affliction, and shut up close in prison
Seven years.
; yet the Lord shall be a light unto me, and I will bear the indignation of the
Psalm. 37. 23, 24. 2 These. 1. 8. 10.
Lord, Because I have sinned against him, until he plead my cause, and execute
Judgment for me upon all my Oppressors; for he will bring me forth in the
light, and I shall behold Psalm. 119. 78. 84, 85 87 92.
his Righteousness and Glory at his Appearing, when he shall come to be
glorified in his Saints and to be admired of all that believe; in that day, at
the resurrection of the Luke 14. 14. Phil. 3. 20. 2 These. 1. 7. 2 Fe^. 3. 7.
Just (and not of the wicked) from the Dead, and not with the Dead; taking
vengeance on them then living that know not God, nor obey the Gospel of Christ;
who himself shall then change our vild corruptible bodies, that they may be
fashioned like unto his glorious body, and shall then give us rest in glory ^or
ever.

Which shall be according to the time and number of days, or years, answering
the number of years from the Creation of this World, to the end of Noah's
Flood, which was 1657. years; and thus answerably from the second Adam's work
of Redemption, to the time of his coming in Glory, decked with eternal
salvation and royal Majesty, shall be the like number of years, or days of
time, 1657. Ma^th. 24.
as does plainly appear by Christ's own words in Mat. 24. where the Disciples
ask him of the time when his coming in Glory should be, and also the Manner of
his coming, and of the signs of the end of this world.

SECT. XI.
TO both which questions, he gives them a very full and satisfactory answer. 1.
His Resolve for the time when, Mat. 24. 3. 27. 37, 38.
follows in these words; For as the days of Noah were, so shall the coming of
the Son of man be. And then he tells them the very manner of his coming. and of
the end and sudden destruction of this World, in these words; For as I uke 17.
34, 35, 36. Zac. 14. 6, 7. M^l. 4 1, 2. 2 These. 2. 1.
in the days that were before the Flood, they were Eating, and Drinking, and
Marrying, etc. So shall also the coming of the Son of Man be: Even as Lightning
that comes ont of the East, and shines into the West, etc.

SECT. XII.
YEt of that natural day nor hour knows no man, no not the Angels (nor the
Son) but the Father only; therefore he charge all his Followers to pray, That
their flight (or ga^hering together unto him out of all Countries) may not be
on the Sabbath day* nor in the Winter season; for then shall be great
tribulation: when the Lord shall send Mal. 3. 2.
his Angels to gather together his Elect (not the Damned) from the four winds of
Heaven, into the Land of Palestina: H^s. 6. ^, 3. Isa. 18. 17.
For he will raise us up after two days, and the third day (of Rest and Glory)
we shall live in his sight. In that time shall a Present be brought unto the
Lord, of a people scattered Isa. 18* 7.
and peeled, To the Plac^ ^f the name of the Lord of hosts* The Mount Zion.

SECT. XIII.
Is^. 43. 2, 6. Typified by the thre^ Children in the fiery surnace, Dan. 3. 17
21, 22, 25, 26.
ANd then (in this their Journey) when they pass through the waters, the Lord
will be with them, and the Rive^s shall not overflow them; and when they pass
through the fire, (when the Elements shall be on fire) yet shall they not be
burnt; neither shall the flame kindle upon them: Then shall he (the Lord) say
to the North, Give up; and to the South, keep not back; bring my Sons from far,
and my Daughters from the Ends of the Earth; Even every one that is called by
my Name.

Christ shall fight for (...) Zion.

Isa 31. 4. o. Rev. 12. 7.


For the Lord shall come down* to fight for Mount Zion, and for the Hill
thereof; for his fire shall be in Zion, and his furnace in Jerusalem; For the
Lord will cleanse his Land, and thoroughly purge his floor, and gather his wheat
(or Elect) into his Barn (or Kingdom of Glory) but will burn up the Chaff (or
wicked,) when he shall appear upon Mount Zion. Then shall two be in the field,
the one shall be taken (or carried away by the Angels of Christ) and the other
lef^; (to Destruction, or for the Destroyer) two shall be in a bed, the one
shall be taken away, and the other lef^; (to Destruction) two shall be grinding
at a Mill, the one shall be taken away, and the other left to Destruction; (or
for the Destroyer.)

SECT. XIIII.
Christ is the Body and we the Branches.
THe Disciples then asked him, where all this should be? (or whither all these
should be gathered together?) He answered, where the body is (or Christ shall
appear thither will the eagles or elect) be gathered together even to Mount
Zion. For they shall ask the way to Zion, with their faces Ier. 50. 5. Zach. 8.
2^.
thitherward; saying, come let us join our selves unto the Lord in a perpetual
Covenant, that shall never be forgetten: Ier 31. 1, 6, 7, 8* 12.
and arise, let us go up to Zion, unto the Lord out God, and say, O Lord save
thy people, the Remnant of Israel.

Yea; many people and strong Nations shall come To the Lord of Hosts in
Jerusalem. At the same time will the Lord be The God of all the Families of
Israel, and they shall be his people. In Zion his dwelling place, the holy
Mountain.

SECT. XV.
ANd for a further proof of the time of this his glorious Coming* Compare
Daniel's vis^on which he had in Add ^43 years to 1657. years and it makes u^
2300. days or years.
Babylon* about the seventh year of his Captivity, which was about six hundred
forty three years before Christ's Nativity, with the expressions of our Savior
Christ in the aforesaid place of Matthew. 24. and y^u shall find them to agree
together in the number of years: And I heard on^ D^n. 8. 13, 14.
Saint say to the Wond^rful Nu^berer of Secrets (Christ) which spoke; How long
shall be the vision concerning the Transgression of making Desolate? And he
said unt^ me: Palestina ^lensed.
Un^o two thousand three hundred days, Then shall the Sanctuary (or holy land)
be cleansed* For after two days will he (the Lord) Revive us, and raise us up,
and we shall live in These two last days shall be shortened, as the first two
days before the flood.

Psalm. 50. 2. 3. Eternal li^e in Glory ^ here.

Psalm 133. 3. D^n. 7. 18.


his sight; Which two days, I understand to be these two la^t days under the
gospel; which days Christ has promised ^o shorten for the Elects sake, and
will as I find and believe) be shortened, answerable to the first two days of
this world which was destroyed by water, being at 1657. years of age: For so
our God shall come, and shall not keep silence, a fire shall devour before him,
and it shall be very temp^stuous round about him (says David) when he shall
come down upon the Mountains of Zion, as Rain upon the Morning grass for there
God has commanded the blessi^g (to man) even life in Glory f^r evermore.

SECT. XVI.
Luke 13. 43. Where Ad^m transgressed there Christ suffered, E^ek. 21. 30.
ANd in that very place where the first Adam was created, and transgressed,
there did the second Adam Christ Jesus, make full satisfaction for that
Transgression in Paradise, and there the old Serpent* (Satan) bruised his
heel, and there shall he break his head; when he shall be there placed by his
Father, As King of Eternal Glory, in Exodus 15 17. 18. 1 These. 3. 1^.
the lot of his Inheritance; where he (the Lord) shall Reign with all his
Saints gloriously for ever and ever.

Rev. 21. 3.
And I heard a voice saying, Behold the Tabernacle of God is with men; and he
(the Lord) will dwell with them: and then shall all the Kings of the Earth
praise and sing in the ways of the Lord; When they shall hear the words of his
Psalm. 138. 4. 5.
mo^th; Then the praises of God shall be in their mouths, and a two Edged Sword
in their hands, Terrible as an Cant. 6. 10. 13 Psalm. 149. 2, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9.
Army with banners, as it were the company of two Armies (Israel and Judah) to
execute vengeance upon the heathen; to bind their Kings with chains and their
robles with f^tters of Iron, to execute upon them the judgment written^; This
honor have all his S^ints. Then shall they Inherit the Earth, and delight
themselves in the abundance of Psalm. 37. 9. 11. 18.
peace, and (then) their Inheritance shall be for ever.

1 Cor 6. 2. D^n. 7. 22. Luke 12. 32. Ma^h. 6. 13.
For know ye not that the Saints shall judge the world? for, then judgment
shall be given to the Saints, and the saints shall then possess the Kingdom,
for it is their Fathers pleasure to give them the Kingdom; for his is the
Kingdom, the Power, and the Glory, for ever and ever; and the Saints shall
possess the Kingdom (of Glory) for ever, even for ever and ever. There where
God has commanded (or Dan. 7. 18. Psalm. 133. 3.
ordained for m^n) the blessing, Even life in Glory for evermore; Therefore let
the Children of Zion, be joyful in ^here glory is appointed for man and where
Judgment for the wicked.
their King (the Lord of life Christ Jesus) who shall also judge the dead men of
this world of Darkness* In the valie^ of Iehosaphat.

And I saw the dead, small and great, stand before God, ^eve. 20. 12. Matthew 23.
38, 39. ^sa. 24 22. Isa. 27. 1.
and the books were opened, and the dead were judged; Then shall they (The dead)
see him whom they have pierced, and shall know that he is the Lord God,
dwelling in Zion, his holy mountain; For the wicked shall be shut up in the
prison (of the grave) and after many days (even the sabbattical thousand years
rest in glory) shall they be visited, and in that day will the Lord punish
Leviathan that piercing crooked Serpent, the Dragon in the Sea, (or in the
^eve. 20. 10. The^^ great Powers of the East and West tormented.
multitud e of Nations in this world) and he shall be cast into the lake of fire
and Brimstore, where the Beast (or Imperial power) and the False Prophet
Mahomet are and shall be tormented for ever, and ever.

SECT. XVII.
ANd this Judgment day (of the dead) shall be after A^^. 1. 11. John 5. 20, 21
Christ has Reigned the thousand years (or day of rest) among the Saints Bodily
(yea, in that very body which he has carried up for that purpose) and has
raised all the Elect out of their Graves, From the dead or children of death
and Hell, called Satan; For Christ being the John 6. 57.
Resurrection, and the life, shall come down upon them that are his as the Rain
upon the Mown grass; For thus says the Ezekiel. 37. 13, 14, 22. 24*
Lord, I will open your graves, O my people, and bring you into the Land of
Israel; then shall ye know that I am the All in Christ shall rise at his coming
1 These. 4. 14, 17. Zac. 6. 13.
Lord your God, when I have opened your graves, and put my spirit in you, and ye
shall live, and I shall place you in your own land, then shall ye know that I
am the Lord that have performed it; For those which sleep in Jesus, will God
bring with him; For the council of peace (eternal life and glory) shall be
between them both (even Father and Son) and so Psalm. 102. 18.
shall they (the Saints) be ever with the Lord. This shall be written for the
Generations to come, and the people which shall be created shall praise the
Lord, In the Regen^r^tion Ma^h. 19. 28.
(or Resurrection when the Son of man shall sit on the throne of his Glory;
Then will he make them (even Israel and Judah) one Nation, in the holy land,
upon the Mountains of Israel, the land of his Inheritance; A Glorious high Ier.
1^. 12.
Throne is the Place (or land) of our Sanctuary from the beginning of the
Creation of God; for though all the earth be his, yet Zion has he chosen to be
the place of his habitation for ever, and will go in and out before his people
there even as a shepherd goes before his flo^k.

SECT, XVIII,
Ezekiel. 34. 2^.
ANd then one King shall be King over them all, even David, and they shall have
one shepherd, Christ: for my Tabernacle shall be with them, yea, I (the Lord)
will be their God; For I am the Resurection and the life, and blessed are they
that have their part in the first resurrection, Luke. 20. 35. 36 John 11 25.
Rev. 20. 5, 6. Luke 14. 14. Ioh. 5. 29.
Even the Resurrection of the Just; for they that have done good shall come
forth unto the Resurrection of life, and they that have done evil (or the works
of the devil) shall come forth unto (or not until) the Resurrection of
Damnation, (death eternal, or day of Judgment) for the Righteous, A twofold
resurrection after Christ his Glorious coming.
shall not come into condemnation, (or Judgment) but are passed (or pass here)
from this temporal death to life; being the children of the Resurrection,
Christ; and were reconciled to Christ before their departure out of this life;
For as the Tree here falls, so it lies.

SECT. XIX.
1 Cor. 6. 2. Psalm. 17. 14. Luke 6. 24, 25. The wicked have their happiness in
this world 1 Samuel 2. 8, 9. Isa. 26. 14, 19. Psalm. 5. 5, 11.
FOr, know ye not that the Saints shall Judge the world (or the dead men of
this world) who have their portion in this life, where they have, and do
receive their Consolation and Glory? But the Saints shall Reign with Christ a
thousand years before the day of Judgment, or Resurrection of the damned; for,
all that time the wicked shall be silent in darkness, they shall not live, they
shall not rise, the foolish shall not stand before thine eyes.

But thy dead (or the dead in Christ) shall live, with this ^ Pet 3. 8, 13, 16.
Ioh. 3 36. When the judgment day shall be.
my body shall they arise, yea they shall shout for joy; But the unbeleeving
shall not see life (or Christ the Prince of life in his Glory) because the
Wrath of God (death and hell) abides on them, till the day of Judgment; for
after the Sabbattical thousand years Reign, then the Trump shall blow, And the
Dead shall be Raised and brought to Judgment, and then shall the last Enemy
(called devil, death, hell, and darkness) be put under his feet (by the Father)
and shall then be cast into the bottomless pit of horror and perpetual
darkness.

Joel 3. 12. Where man was Created and Transfigurd, there shall he be judged.
See Ezekiel. 21. 30. Ezekiel. 28. 16, 18. Ezekiel. 31. 8* 9, 16. Ezekiel. 36. 8, 9* 10, 11,
12, 13, 14, 35. Genesis 2. 14, 15. Amo. ^. 14, 15. Palestina was, and shall be the
Garden of Christ, or Paradise of eternal Glory Isa. 49 9. 1^* 11. But Israel
has not as yet, been brought back into their land* Psalm. 37. 29. Luke 22. 1^,
18, 29, 30.
Yea all the wicked shall be gathered out of all parts of the world, and
brought into the Land of Palestina; for they must be judged in the same land
where the first Adam was Created, and Transgressed, and the second Adam (Christ
Jesus) was Renounced, Denied, Judged, Tormented, and Crucified, even in the
land of Israel s nativity, in the very Valley of Je^osap^a; being in the land
of Palestina, Eden, Paradise, the Mount of God, the Garden of God; etc.

SECT. XX.
THen shall they say, This Land that was desolate is become like the Garden of
Eden, for then the Mountains shall drop sweet wine they (the Saints) shall not
hunger nor thirst; but they shall feed in the ways, and he that has mercy on
them, shall lead them and guide them by the spring^ of waters and I will make
all my mountains a way (for them) And I will bring again the captivity of my
people Israel; and they shall plant Vinyards, and drink the wine thereof, and
make gardens, and eat the fruit thereof, and I will plant them upon their own
land, they shall no more be pulled (or taken) out of their Land: For the
righteous shall inherit the land (then) and dwell therein for ever; and they
shall eat and drink at Christ's table, in his kingdom of glory.

SECT. XXI.
THen shall five Cities of the land of Egypt speak the language of Canaan, and
Ethiopia shall also stretch forth Egypt, Assiria, and Ethiopia, shall be call d
wit^ Israel.
her hands unto the Lord-God of Israel.

In that day shall Israel be the third with Egypt and Assria, even a blessing
in the midst of the land, from the River of Egypt, to the River Euphrates;
Whom the Lord of Genesis 15 18. (...) 33. 17.
hosts shall bless saying, ^lessed be Egypt my people, and Assiria the work of
mine hands and Israel mine Inheritance: their eyes shall then see the King in
his glory, because Egypt and 2 Cor. 9. 1, 8. 1 Kin 1^. ^. They sought him first
yet shall be last called.

Matthew. 2. 2.


Ass^ria showed favor to Israel and Judah in time before, and Ethiophia's
Queen came to hear the wisdom of Sol^m^n; and after that, they sought after
Christ, saying, Where is he that is born King of the Jews? and had the favor
above all other Nations in the world, to see and know his Star, and were
directed by it to the place of his birth, Bethlehem.

And then the Mountains of Israel shall bring forth their fruit to the people
of Israel, for they are at hand to come; for he shall say to his Angels, Gather
my Saints together, Psalm* 50. 5.
those that have made a Covenant with me by Sacrifice, (even Israel and Judah)
and they shall come from the East, Luke. 13. 28. 29. Math. 8. 11. 1 Ezd^. 1.
38. Micha 5. 5. Oba. 21. Genesis 15. 18. Isa 19* 18, 24, 25.
and from the West, and from the North, and from the South, and shall sit down
with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and all the Prophets, in the Kingdom of God; to
whom the land was given, and the land shall be then dug and sown, and Israel
shall be multiplied upon it, and the Cities shall be built, and Inhabited by
Man and Beasts* and they shall be settled after their old Estate, yea, I will do
better unto you then at your beginning; yea, I will cause my people Israel to
walk upon thee, O Land, and thou shall be their Inheritance, and shall bereave
them of me^ no more.

Therefore thou Land (of Palestina) that have devoured Palestin^ shall be
Israel's In heritance, and shall devour men no more.

E^ek. 36. 24, 25, to 36. Heb. 2. 5. sa. 45. 17. No spirit of darkness shall b^
suffered to enter into the Kingdom of Christ.

Isa. 27. 6. E^ek. 37. 14. Cant. ^. 12. 13. Cant. 8. 9. 14.


men, and bereaved the Nation (Israel and Judah) shall devour men no more,
neither bereave the Nations any more, says the Lord God; For unto the Angels
of darkness has he not put in subjection the world (of eternal Glory) to
come, even that everlasting world that shall be without end; But this world of
sin, which was, and is given to darkness, is and ever has bin in subjection
unto Lucifer, the Devil, and his angels of darkness; but this evil, the devil,
shall not then dwell with goodness, light, and glory, Christ Jesus; and Israel
shall then fill the face of the world (of Glory) with fruit, when he has
raised them, and brought them into his vinyard, for there will he give them his
land, even upon the Mountains of spices.

SECT. XXII.
Genesis 13. 14, 15. Genesis 26 23. Genesis 28 13. Acts 7. 5. Heb. 11. 9, 10, 13, 16. 2
Ch10. 20. 7, 11. Genesis 33. 19. Abraham has had no i^heritance as ^et in
Palestina.

Heb. 11. 10, 13, 15, 16.


ANd when Israel and Judah shall be gathered out of all Countries and thus
brought to their own land, then shall they be cleansed from all their
filthiness, and a new heart, and a new spirit will the Lord give them, and they
shall dwell in the Land which he gave to their fathers, Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob, who as yet have had no inheritance in it, no not to set their foot upon
it, but died in faith, not having received the promises, but seeing them a far
off, embraced them, and confessed that they were strangers and Pilgrims on the
earth, desiring a better, even a heavenly (durable, glorious, and everlasting)
country and inheritance, given to them of God by promise, of which (Country)
God is not ashamed to be called their God.

SECT. XXIII.
E^he. 2. 19.
ANd he has also prepared for them a City, where we shall be all fellow
Citizens with the Saints, and of the Iet. 31. 28, 29, 40.
household of God; a City which has foundations, whose builder and maker is God
(the Lord) For, it shall be built to the Lord upon the hill Gareb, and shall
compass about to Ezak. 47. 15 to 20. Jerusalem shall never be destroyed any
more.
Goath; and the whole value of the dead, and all the fields, unto the Brook
Kidron, unto the Horse gate, shall be holy unto the Lord, yea, it shall not be
p^ucked up nor thrown down for ever.

Rev 3. 12. Rev. 21. Ezekiel 43. 4. Ezekiel. 45. 3, 6. Ezekiel 48. 30, to the end.

1 King. 6. 7. The fashion, Greatness, height, and Glory of the new Jerusalem.

Ezekiel. 47. 15, 17, 18, 19, 20, 22, 23 A furlong is half a quarter of a mi^^,
and thus (...) furlongs makes 1500. miles. the thick^es of the wa^l 864. foot.


Even this great City, the holy Jerusalem, descending out of heaven from my
God* ready ^^amed of material precious stones; Even as Solomon's Temple was
brought out of the wilderness ready framed, and so built and laid together
without knock of hammer or axe, or any other tool of Iron: The streets of
this City, shall be of pure transparent Gold, whose walls shall be great and
high, built of Jasper, and garnished with all manner of precious stones, having
twelve Gates, on the East side three Gates, and on the North side three Gates,
on the South side three Gates, and on the West side three gates; and the gates
of the City shall not be shut; and the fashion of the City shall be four
square, the length, breadth, and height of the walls of the City shall be of
equal measure; Twelve thousand furlongs broad, and twelve thousand long, and
twelve thousand furlongs high, and the thickness of the Wall shall be one
hundred forty and four cubits of a man (which is six foot) and makes up in
the whole thickness, eight hundred sixty and four foot.

SECT. XXIIII.
The Nations that are s^^ed, shall walk in this glorious City*

Rev. 3. 12. Rev. 4 1, 2, 3. Rev. 21. 2, 3. E^e. 43. 7, 12.


ANd the most high God the Father, and the Lord Christ, shall be the Temple in
it; and the glory of God the Father, and of (the Lord) Christ, shall be the
light thereof, and only those nations that are saved shall walk in it, and
Kings shall bring their glory and honor into it, and none shall enter into it
but they that are written in the Lambs Book: For (thus says the Lord) The
place of my throne (Palestina) and the place of the soals of my feet, where I
will dwell in the amidst of the children of Israel for ever, Christ will dwell
in Palestina for ever, and the land shall be then most holy.

Eze. 48. 35.


and my holy name, shall the house of Israel no more defile, neither they nor
their Kings; The whole limit thereof shall be round about most holy, And the
name of the City from that day shall be, The Lord is there. Then the heathen
(or Gentiles) shall know, that I the Lord build and plant the ruins and
desolate places (of the land of Israel) I the Lord have spoken it, and I will
do it.

SECT. XXV.
Psalm. 69. 35, 36.
FOr God will save Zion, and will build the Cities of Judah, that they may
dwell there; The seed of his servants shall inherit it, and they that love his
name shall dwell Rev. 5. 10. Psalm. 102. 16. Christ shall build Zion.
therein, and shall be Kings and Priests unto God, and reign on the earth. For
when the Lord Christ shall build up Zion, he shall appear in his glory, when
the people are gathered together, and the (Elect out of all) Kingdoms to serve
the Lord, to declare his name in Zion, and his praise in Jerusalem. John 14. 2,
23.
Then will he receive them unto himself, that where he is (in glory) there they
may be also; and they (the Father and Son) will love them, and will come unto
them, and make their Zath. 6. 13. Ephesians. 5. 5. Psalm. 68. 16.
abode with them; For, the Council of peace (and eternal glory) shall be
between them both in the Kingdom of Christ, and of God; and the people and
kingdoms shall be gathered together, to declare the name of the Lord in Zion,
and his praise in Jerusalem: For, unto the Father (incomprehensible) Ephe. ^.
21.
shall be glory given in the Church Triumphant, by Christ Jesus (and all his
Saints) world without end.

SECT. XXVI.
Heb. 1. 8. Heb. 2. ^. Psalm. 48. 2. Christ will dwell and reign in Zion for
ever.
FOr this Mount Zion situate on the North side of Jerusalem, is the Hill which
the Lord desires to dwell in, yea the Lord will dwell in it for ever, where
his Throne and Scepter of Righteousness shall be for ever and ever, even in the
World to come, whereof we speak; and he shall reign over the house of Jacob for
ever, and of his Luke 1. 33. Isa. 9. 7.
Kingdom there shall be no end, even upon the throne of David.

Psalm. 96. 10. When Christ shall reign. Psalm. 87. 2, 3, 5. Psa. 1^2. 13, 14. 2
Chro. 20. 11.
Then shall they say, The Lord reigns, The world also shall be established
that it shall not be moved; for the Lord loves the gates of Zion, more then
all the dwellings of Jacob; Glorious things are spoken of thee, thou City of
God; For the highest himself shall establish her: Yea, he has desired it for
his habitation, saying, This is my rest for ever, here Psalm. 76. 2. Genesis 14.
18. John 3. 23. Palestina shall be like Eden, and to abide for ever.

Isa. 51. 3. Psa. 125. 1. Heb. 12. 22, 27. Eccle. 1. 4. Eccle. 3. 14. 15. The
earth to be restored to perpetuity.

Acts 3. 21.


will I dwell, for I have desired it. For, in Salem is his Tabernacle, his
dwelling Place in Zion; For, the Lord will comfort Zion, he will make her
wilderness like Eden, and mount Zion shall never be removed, but abides for
ever; Being the City of the living God; the heavenly Jerusalem which cannot be
shaken, but shall remain like the earth which abides for ever: for, I know
(says Solomon) whatsoever God does, it shall abide for ever, and that which is
to be, has already been, and God requires that which is past, (even the world
to be restored) to its first Purity, Glory, Excellency and determined
perpetuity; Spiritual, (which is eternal) for the spirits of all men are
eternal, (whether for Light or Darkness) and the Saints continuance in glory,
shall be eternal; For, their bodies shall then be of the same eternal duration
as their spirits are; this being the true state of the things we call
Spiritual, which is eternal for there our mortal bodies shall put on
immortality, and this corruption shall put on incorruption, to and for which, a
true pious and charitable life in this world ^its us, by the sacred Spirit of
light, Christ Jesus.

SECT. XXVII.
Act. ^. 19, 21.
FOr God will establish the Earth for ever, when the time of refreshing shall
come, and Restitution of all things, which God has spoken by the mouth of all
his Prophets since the world began. For the Lord that has Psalm. 48. 8. Christ
will dwell in Jerusalem for ever Zach. 2. 10, 11, 12. Pro. 8. 4. Deuteronomy. 32. 9.
Zach. 3. 9, 10. Isa. 55. 5. Isa. 30* 9. Zach. 8. 3. Judah shall be first
gathered and led by David. Zach. 12. 7. Cant. 6. 10, 13. Judah and the faith^ul
Gentiles, shall be dreadful to all the ^icked.

Zach. 12. 6. Isa 5. 28, 29.


chosen Zion will dwell in the amidst of her; And inhorit. Judah his Portion,
in the holy land: and choose Jerusalem again. For heaven is the throne of God,
but the earth has he given to the Sons of men to be inhabited for ever, being
their proper Sphere.

For the Lords Portion is his people, Jacob is the Lot of his inheritance, For
he will remove the iniqui^y of that land in one day, and Jerusalem shall then
be called the City of Truth, when the sons of Zion are raised out of the pit
(or grave) wherein is no water, and shall save them as the flock of his people;
and the Lord (by David their leader) shall save the tents of Judah first; for,
David shall be their Prince, and Nations that know not Judah shall run unto
them, who shall then be terrible as an army with Banners, as it were the
Company of two armies (Judah, and Gentiles) whose arrows are sharp, and all
their bows bent, their horses hoofs shall be counted like flint, and their
wheels like a whirl-winde, their roaring (of their hos^e) shall be like the
roaring of a Lion, yea they shall roar and lay hold of the prey, and shall
carry it away safe, and none Isa 40. 31. The Turks and all the Idolatrous
people there, Christ will plead wi^^ Israel face to face, as he did at their
coming out of Egypt. ^en 15. 18. ^^^k. 10. 34, (...) 37. (...) ^. ^. 14, 15.
shall deliver it, (as it was at their coming out of Egypt) yea they shall mount
like Eagles, they shall run and not be weary, they shall walk and not be faint.

Then the sinners in Zion, shall be afraid, fear shall take hold on the (now)
inhabitants of Palestina, because of the Lord God (Christ) who also will then
plead with his people in the wilderness (of their own land) face to face, like
as he pleaded with their forefathers in the wilderness of the Land of Egypt;
thus will he cause them to pass under the Rod, and then will he bring them into
the bond of the Covenant (made with Abraham, Isaac and ^acob) and then will he
speak comfortably to them, and they shall then enjoy their vineyards, as in the
days of their coming out of the land of (...) 7 ^5.
E^^^p, so will he show unto them marvelious things.

SECT. XXVIII.
Rev. 16. 12. Isa. 11. 15, 16.
THen shall the great River Euphrates be dried up in the seven streams thereof,
and the Egyptian Sea utterly There shall be no more sea.
destroyed, that the way of the Kings of the East (the leaders of Israel) may be
prepared, even of the seven shepherds and eight principal Leaders, that they
(and all the people Mich. 5. 5. Oba. 21.
of Israel) may go over dry-shod, as when they came out of Egypt; and then will
he raise unto Israel S^viours The Prophets shall be Isreal's Leaders.
(called Kings, such as Ioshuah) for Leaders, even, Abraham* Isaac and Jacob,
Hesea, Amo^, Micha. Io^l, Obadiah, Jonah, Nahum, Habbakuk, Z^phany, Haggaiah,
Zachar^ah, and Malachy.

2 Ezdras 1. 39* Zach. 9. 11, 13.
For, these fifteen Saviors, Kings, or Leaders, shall come on Mount Zion, to
judge the Mount of Es^^, (or Kingdom of Edom, Gog and Mag^g) who are hated of
Christ, for they shall put all the wicked to shame, because God has despised
them, therefore shall they never see the Psalm. 53, 5, 6.
light (Christ Jesus in his Glory) then the Kingdom shall be the Lords, when he
brings back the Captivity of his people, then Jacob, (or Judah) shall
rejoice, and Israel shall be glad, when the Lord God of Israel, (Christ Jesus)
shall appear in his glory, even in the glory of God the 2 Cor. 4. 6.
Father, which is and shall be in the face and presence of Jesus Christ, being
that individual glory which he had John 1. 3.
with the Father before the world was made by him.

Col. 1. 19. ^ohn 17 5. ^ ^eter 1. 17. Ephesians. 3. 11.
For it pleased the father, that in him should all the fullness (of his glory)
dwell, even in that measure of unexpressible transcendent glory which the
sacred Excellen^ glory and incomprehensible Majesty, the Father, has
p^edetermined from all eternity, to be from him (by Christ the God of mercy)
conferred upon the Creature, according to the Creatures meted out capacity, or
predetermined ^ph. ^. 7. (...) 4. 4* (...)
Capabillity; then to be conferred on him by the invi^ible and incomprehensible
Majesty of God the Father, which shall be a fullness of joy, exceeding glory,
and unexpress^ble pleasures, in the Kingdom of glory for evermore.

SECT. XXIX.
John 14. 6, 9, 10. Col. 2. 9. Christ the Ordained visible God of Salvation.

Psalm. 24. 3. John 5. 37. John 6. 46. compared with.

Genesis 3. 8, to the 17. Genesis 18. 1, 3, 10. Exo. 24. 1, 9, 10, 11. Exo. 33. 11,
18, 19. Jud. 6 14, to the 25. Chap. 13. See Isa 40* 18. To whom will ye liken
God? or what likenes^ will ye compare unto him?

Ephesians. 3. 9. For there is (but) one Person or Body; and one spirit, see for this.

Ep^. 1. 4, 6, 7. Ephesians. 2. 16, 18. Rev. 3. 14. John 1. 1, 2. Genesis 1. 1. Co^. 3.
15.


ANd this excellent eternal life, joy, and glory, is to be manifested to the
creature, and conferred on them in and by his beloved Son Christ Jesus, the
visible God of Salvation, and in whom the invisible Godhead dwells bodily.
And thus is he the true Image of the most high invisible God* the Father, and
also his sacred comprehensible glorious presence, in the lot of his inheritance
Palestina, The holy land, The hill of the Lord, The holy place, The Moun^ Zion,
The glorious world to come, given unto him by the most high God and Father of
all Spirits, being the Excellent Glory.

To whose excellency and incomprehensibleness of most glorious being, man's
comprehensible and limited capacity cannot attain or reach unto, no more then
to pourtray a true shape to a voice, to the wind, or to hold the Sea in his
hand, for* no man has ever heard the Fathers voice at any time, nor never seen
his shape; Therefore what person, shape, or voice can the limited frail fancy
or wit of man prescribe, devise, imagine, or attribute to this. most High, most
Sacred, most Mighty, most Excellent, and most Incomprehensible Unrevealed
Deity, and primary Fountain and Cause of all Being, whom they never saw nor
heard at any time?

So that it is very plain, and most true, that Christ Jesus only and alone,
(being the beloved) and (from all eternity) the anointed visible God of
Salvation, light and eternal glory) is the only and alone true representative,
capable, apprehensive, visible personal presence of the Invisible,
Unapprehensive and Incomprehensible Father (and holy Spirit of God) The
beginning of the Creation of God (the Father.)

SECT. XXX.
FOr this God of salvation, the Lord of life and glory Christ Jesus, will yet
choose Zion, the place where his Psalm. ^6, 2.
Congregation has dwelt, and wherein he has dwelt; and Isa 14. 1. 2. Psalm.
74. 2. Genesis 14. 18
will set Israel in their own land: and the strangers (or Gentiles) shall join
themselves unto them, and cleave to the house of Jacob (or Judah) saying, we
will go with you, for we have heard that God is with you; and the Z^ch. 8. 13.
Israel shall possess the Gentiles in the land of the Lord.

Palestina.

Salvation is of the Jews.

John 4. 22. Romans 9. 4, 5.


people shall take them and bring them to their place (or land) and the house
of Israel shall possess them, In the land of the Lord, for servants and
handmaides; for, Salvation is of the Jews, to whom pertains the adoption, and
the Glory, and the Covenants, and the Promises (of eternal blessedness) whose
are the Fathers (to whom the promises were made) and of whom concerning the
^lesh Christ came, who is over all, God blessed for ever, (of or) by the Father.

SECT. XXXI.
THen shall this world of sin and grace be d^stroyed by fire, as the firstworld
of sin was by water; wherein it repented the Lord Christ that ever he made man;
but the third world of grace and eternal Glory shall continue for ever; then
shall they say, now is Salvation and the Kingdom The Kingdom and Power of
Christ, when.

Rev. 12. 10. Can. 2. 8, 11, 1^.

Affliction shall vanish when Glory appears


of our God, and the power of his Christ (the God of salvation,) The voice of
the beloved, behold he comes leaping upon the mountains, skipping upon the
hills, traveling in the greatness of his strength; for lo, the winter (of
affliction and misery) is past, the Rain (or storms of persecution) is over,
and gone, and the flowers (of glory and eternal excellency) appear on the
earth, and the time of singing of birds of Paradise (or Saints) is come, and
the (Glorious) voice of the Turtle Dove (Christ Jesus) is heard in our Land (of
Palestina) says Solomon; coming from Isa 63, 1, 3, 4.
Edom, from Bozra, (the chief City of Edom) Glorious in his apparel traveling
in the greatness of his strength, nughty to save.

SECT. XXXII.
FOr the hastening of which sacred Kingdom of glory, he Matthew. 6. 10, 13.
(the Lord) has taught us to pray continually, saying, Thy Kingdom come, and
thy will be done on Earth as it is (now) in heaven, and by faith to acknowledge
and believe, that his is the Kingdom, the Power and the Glory, for ever, Genesis
22. 14.
and ever.

For then, in the mount of the Lord it shall be seen (says Abraham) even in
Mount Zion, the Transcendent Glory and Excellent perpetuity of being.

Hag. 2. 9. 2 C^^ 3. 2.
And the glory of this latter house shall be greater then that of the former
(built ly Solomon) and when the Children The Saints sha^ b^ Removed no more
out of Palestina.

1 C^o. 16. 31. 1 Cro 17. 9, 10, 12, Luke 1. ^2, 33* Ezekiel 37. 27,


of Israel shall be thus planted and dwell in their own land and place (in
Glory Eternal) to be Removed no more* Nor the Children of wickedness, that is,
(of the Devil (to wast them any more, as at the beginning. Then the Lord will
build the house, and God the Father will establish his Throne and Ki^gdom for
ever, for of his Kingdom there shall be no end.

SECT. XXXIII,
ANd when his Tabernacle (or personal presence) shall be among them, Then shall
they say among the Nations, The Lord R^igneth, and the heathen (or Gentiles)
shall Ezekiel. 3^. ^7. 28, 25.
know that I the Lord do sanctify Israel, when my sanctuary shall be in the
midst of them for evermore; and my servant David shall be their Prince for
ever.

^en. 49. ^0.
And (then) the Scepter shall not depart from Judah, as Shilo (Christ) comes
(in Glory) for to him shall the gathering The Figure of the holy City
Jerusalem, with the proofs out of the Prophets and Apostles for the same.
Aeron^ Br st* plate was a figure of ^h^^ City Exo^, 8, 1^* (...) 21, 12,

North. East. South. West.
Ruben. Judo. Levy Josep^. Be^ian^. Dan. Simem. Jsocha^* Z^bvlou
Ezekiel. 48. 31. Rev. 21, 16. Isa. 26, 1, Rev. 3, 12, Isa. 33, 17, 20, 24, Isa.
66. 18, 19. Isa. 60. 11, 14, 15. Ier. 31. 38, 39, 40. Isa. 49. 16, 17. Heb. 11*
10, 14, 16. Ezekiel 47. 7, 12. Baruch 4. 30. Zach* 14. 10, 11* I^a. 54. 11, 12,
13. Is^. ^2. 18* 1^.


Matthew, 13, 40, 1^.
And they shall gather out of his kingdom all things that offend and work
iniquity.

Rev. 21. 27.
And there shall no unclean thing enter into it, nor any Rev. 22. 14. 15.
that works abomination; but only they that are written in the Lambs book.
(Therefore) Blessed are they that do his Commandments, that they may enter
through the gates into the City.

Psalm. 87, 3, Isa. 50, 18.
Glorious things are spoken of thee, thou City of God, Jerusalem the holy City,
from thenceforth shall no more come into thee the unclean.

Isa. 45. 13. Heb. 11. 10.
I have raised him up, and he shall build my City; for we look for a City,
whose Builder and maker is God; for I Psalm. 27* 13, Isa, 46, 13, Psalm, 102, 16,
had fainted unless I had believed, to see the goodness of God (Christ Jesus) in
the land of the living; I will place Salvation in Zion, for Israel my glory;
for when the Lord does build up Zion, he shall (then) appear in his glory.

Then Jerusalem shall be called the City of truth, and he Zach, 8, 3,
will dwell in the midst of Jerusalem. And the name of Ezekiel, 48, 35, Zach, 6, 12,
City from that day forth, shall be the Lord is there. Yea he shall build the
Temple of Jehovah.

Heb, 11. 16* Rev. 21, 14.
For he has prepared for them a City having twelve foundations.

Mich, 4. 8.
For he will glorify the house of his glory, and I will make he Place of feet
glorious.

of the people (of his blessing) be, and not of his curse, for he shall (at his
coming) send forth his Angels of light, to gather them together; and where the
body, Matthew. 24. 3^.
(Christ) is thither will the (elect) Eagles be gathered together.

Judah rejected Christ.
But the Scepter was departed from Judah about 640. years before Shilo
(Christ) came in the flesh; Neither were the people of Judah gathered unto him,
(but rejected him) and Israel heard not of him, being carried away by Israel
was carried away captive 964. years before Christ hi^ Incarnation, and so knew
him not.
Shalmanazar King of Assiria, about 964. years before Christ's coming in the
flesh.

For, Christ his coming in humility was, when Judah's Iniquities were fully
ripe; and thus he came in the fullness of time* to be a light to us Gentiles,
that had then fate almost 1800. years in Darkness, and under the bondage and
Luke 2. 32.
shadow of death and Hell.

But shall then (at his coming) be the glory of his people Israel who as yet
have not known him, nor shall not know Matthew. 23. 38, 39.
him, till they shall see him, and say, blessed is he that comes in the name of
the Lord, for so is God's decree.

Psalm. 102. 26. Haba. 2. 14 Isa 11. 9. Genesis 14. 18.
Then all things shall become new, for the Lord will renew the face of the
Earth; and then the whole earth shall be filled with the knowledge (of the
Glory) of the Lord, as the waters cover the sea (for he shall come in the glory
of God the Father) yet that which is to be, has already bin, Eccles. 3. 15.
Psalm. 37. 2. Psalm. 68. 10. Ier. 31. 34. Zach. 41. 4, 8, 9, 10. Christ shall
stand in Glory on the Mount of Olives.

The Land of Glory shall be all turned into a Plain.

Eze. 47. (...) to the 23.


and they shall all know the Lord,. from the least to the greatest of them
(from a child of a span long, to the man of full stature.)

And then will he Remember their sins no more; for the Lord shall then appear
in his glory, and shall stand upon the Mount of Olives, and the mount of Olives
shall cleave in the midst, toward the North, and toward the South, and it
shall become a very great valley, yea all the land (of Palestina) shall be turned
into a plain, from Gheba to Rimon, south of Jerusalem, and shall (again) be
meted out to the Tribes of Israel, as at their coming out of Egypt.

SECT. XXXIIII.
THen shall they say, arise, let us go up to Zion, to the Lord our God; and they
shall go from year to year, and from one Sabbath to another, to worship the King
the Lord Ier. 31. 6, 8, 9, 10, 12. Zac. 14. 16, 17. Isa. 66. 23. Isa. 65. 9,
17, 18, 19, 25.
of hosts at Jerusalem; for I will bring them from the north Country, and gather
them from the coasts of the earth; for he that scattered Israel will gather
them, even as a shepherd gathers his flock; and they shall come and sing in
the height of Zion, and flow together to the goodness of God Jerusalem shall
be a place of rejoicing.

Psalm, 133. 3.


(Christ,) a great company shall return thither, and mine Elect servants (only)
shall dwell there, and inherit it; for I will Create Jerusalem a Rejoicing, and
her People a joy: And I will rejoice in Jerusalem, and Joy in my people; for
there God the Father commanded the blessing, even life for evermore.

Every creature shall be restored to the state, it was created in.

Is^. 65. 25. Isa. 11. 6, 7, 8, 9. Romans 8. 19, 20, ^1. Genesis 3. 14. Hosea 2. 18,
19, 20, 21, 22.


And then all things shall become new, (or the natures of all creatures shall be
changed to the state and condition wherein they were first created,) for, the
wolf and the lamb shall feed together, the Lion shall (then) eat straw like a
Bullock, and dust shall be the Serpents meat. They shall not hurt nor destroy
(any) in all my holy mountains, (says the Lord) For, the very brute creature,
who was made subject to corruption through man's transgression, waits for the
(Time) of the manifestation of the Sons of God, and to be restored into the
glorious liberty of the Sons (or Saints) of God, even eternal incorruptible
being.

Psalm. 145. 10, 21. Ezekiel. 34. 25, 27.
For then shall the creature^ also be delivered from this bondage of corruption
(Death;) and then all his works shall praise him, and all flesh shall bless his
holy name for ever and ever; for in that day will the Lord make a Covenant for
his people with all the beasts of the field, with all the fowls of heaven* and
with all creeping things of the ground, and The Saints shall dwell safely.
al (evil) be^sts shall then cease out of the land, and his people shall dwell
safely in the wilderness, and sleep in the woods, and they shall be safe in their
land.

For he will sow the portion of Israel, and the portion of Judah, (even the
land of Palestina) with the seed of Ier. 31. 25.
man, and with the seed of beasts; for, he that has delivered them in these
six troubles (or these 6000. years or Job 5. 19, 231
days of labor, trouble, and sorrow) will not suffer evil (or the Devil) to
touch them in the seventh day of his glorious Rest, for the beasts of the
field shall be at peace with them, and Satan shall be shut up all that thousand
years or Rev. 20. ^.
seventh day of rest in glory; all which is typified unto us by Exo. 9. 4, 6.
Exo. 10. 23.

SECT. XXXV.
Isa. 18. 2, 3, 7. Isa. 66. 2. From the Turks territories; who holds the Jews
in Bondage.
IN that time shall the present be brought unto the Lord of hosts, (by the
faithful Gentiles) of a people scattered and peeled (from a people, terrible
from their beginning a nation meted out* and trodden under foot whose Land
(Palestina) the Rivers, (or Nations of the Gentiles) have spoiled, they shall
be brought to the place of the name of the Lord, to mount Zion.

In that day shall the branch of the Lord (Israel and Judah) and all the
saints, be beautiful and Glorious; for I John 15. 15.
am the vine (says the Lord) and ye are the branches, and the fruit of the
earth shall (then) be excellent; for I say Zach. 3. 10. Luke 22. 16, 18. There
shall be eating and drinking in the Kingdom of glory Psalm. 22. 26. Number. 14. 24.
unto you, I will no more (eat nor drink of the fruit of the vine, until the
Kingdom of God shall come,) and until I drink it new with you in my Fathers
Kingdom; and (then) the meek shall eat and be satisfied, and shall live for ever,
when the Lord has washed away the filth of the daughter of Zion, then shall we
see his glory, and live ever in his sight; For all the earth shall be filled
with the Glory of the Lord.

Then shall it be said to the Israel of God (by the Angels of Christ that shall
be sent forth to gather them together) Arise, for the light is come, and the
Glory of the Lord is Isa. 601. 13, 14, 15, 16, 19.
risen upon thee, the sons of them (the wicked) that afflicted thee shall come
bending, and bow themselves down to the soals of thy feet (even as Joseph's
Brethren did to Joseph) for thou shall suck the milk of the Gentiles, and the
breasts of Kings; then shall thou know that I the Lord am thy Savior, the
mighty one of Jacob.

The People that will not serve Israel shall perish.
For the Nation and Kingdom that will not serve thee shall perish, and shall be
utterly wasted, but the Lord shall be unto thee (O Israel) an everlasting light,
and thy God, thy Glory, the people also shall be all Righteous, they shall
Inherit the land for ever.

For thy maker (Christ Jesus the God of salvation, light, Isa. 54. 5.
and glory) is thy Husband, and thy Redeemer, the Lord of hosts is his Name.
The God of the whole Earth shall he John 1. 51. Genesis 28. 12, 13, 1^, 17.
be called; then shall we see heaven open, and the Angels of God ascending and
descending, as Jacob did: who in a vision was showed the glory of it, and by
the spirit of truth was forced to confess that the place was none other then
the Gate of heaven, the house of God, and that the Lord is in that Place.

SECT. XXXVI.
Isa. 49. 8. Exodus 10. 23. Moses and Elias.

Rev. 11. 3, to the 13. But the second of Esdras speaks of Isai^h and Ier^my by
name.

2 Ezdr. 2. 18. Exodus 8. 6, 17, 24. Exodus 9. 6, 10, 25. 1 Kin. 17. 1. 2 Kin. 1*
10, 12.


BUt darkness shall then cover the earth, (or the men of this part of the world
of darkness,) and gross darkness the people, such as shall be felt, typified
unto us by the several great plagues of darkness inflicted on Egypt, and shall
be acted in like manner on the now inhabitants of Palestina^ by the two
witnesses (conceived to be by their works, Moses, and Elias) at the time of
Judah's gathering together, for three years and six months: for they shall
have power to send forth fire, to turn the waters into blood, and to smite the
earth with all manner of plagues as often as they list, yea, they shall have
power to shut heaven all that time, that it rain not, even for three years and
six months, as Elias did before in Ahab's time, for three years and six
months.

SECT. XXXVII.
THen all the wicked of the land shall be as though they had never bin, because
Israel shall be a fire, and Judah shall be a flame, and the wicked shall be as
stubble, Israel and Judah shall destroy all the wicked in their Journs.

2 Samuel (...) 7. Naho. 1. 15. Rev. 9. 16, 17. Oba. 17. 18. Isa. 9. 5. 2 Samuel
23. 7. Psalm. 49. 14. Isa. 24. 23. Jerusalem s^all be i^hahited in his own Place
Gloriously*


and they (even Israel and Judah) shall kindle and devour them, for they shall
be utterly bur^t with fire in the same place of their abode, and all the wicked
shall become ashes under their feet, for this battle against the wicked shall
be with burning, and fuel of fire; for a fire shall devour his enemies before
them, death shall feed on them, and the upright shall have dominion over them
in the morning (or when the morning Christ Jesus appeare^h) upon mount Zion,
and before his ancients (Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and all the Prophets)
gloriously; for Jerusalem shall be inhabited again in his own place, and the
Lord shall save the tents of Judah first.

SECT. XXXVIII.
Gog and M^g^g shall come to fight agin^^ Judah then in Jerusalem.

Rev. 16. ^, ^o the 11. Dan. 11. 44. Exek. 38. 8.


THen all the nations of the world, even Gog and Magog, (East and West, Turk^
and Pope) shall be by the evil spirit (Satan) brought into the land of
Israel, to fight against Judah in Jerusalem, (that now is, where our Lord was
crucified) for tidings out of the East shall affright (Gog and Magog,) when
they shall hear of the gathering together of Judah, and all the saints, and
they (Gog and Magog) shall go forth with great fury to destroy, (when they
shall hear that Judah has taken Jerusalem) for Isa. 5. 30.
Gog and Magog, shall come roaring, like the roaring of the Sea, and shall come
in like a flood; but the Lord Isa. 59. 19, Zach. 14. 14. Ezekiel. 38. 21.
shall lift up a standard against him, and they shall come upon the mountains
of Israel, but then shall darkness, sorrow, and ^ear take hold of them, (as it
did on the Egyptians Gog and Magog shall destroy on^ another.
in the red sea) and a great tumult from the Lord shall be among them, and every
ones hand shall be against his This was fore told by Hanna the Mother of
^^^uel. And Declared by Ezekiel.

1 Samuel 2. 9. 10. Ezekiel. 38. 21, 22. Psalm. 53. 5. Rev. 6^* 2, 17. Rev. 14 19,
20, Psalm. 37. 34.


neighbor, and every man's Sword shall be against his brother; for, the Lord
shall cause his glorious voice to be heard, and shall show the lighting down of
his arm, with Indignation and anger, and with devouring fire, with scattering
tempest* and hayl stones, and then shall they be destroyed upon the mountains
of Israel, by the hand of the Lord; for God (in his Eternal decree) has
scattered the bands of him that incampeth against thee, (O Judah) who shall all
be buried in the valley of Hamon Gog* and they shall never see light; (or
Christ in his glory) and when the wicked are cut off, the Saints shall see it.

SECT. XXXIX.
Read Ezekiel. 38. and the 39. Chap. Isa. 17. 18, 13, 14. Isa. 59. 18, 19. Zach.
14. 1^, 13* 15. A City built called Hamona The weapons of Gogs host shall be
burrning 7. years and their Bones in burying 7. months.

^er. 30* 23. 24.


ANd with whose Innumerable carcasses will the Lord make a feast unto all the
beasts of the field, and fowls of the air, who shall eat the flesh of the
mighty* and drink the blood of the Princes of the Earth.

And for an eternal memorial of this great deliverance, there shall be a City
built in the valley of Hamon Gog, and it shall be called Hamona, and seven
years shall the Saints be burning of their weapons of war* and seven months
shall they be burying of the bones of G^g and Magog's mighty Host, that was as
the sand of the sea for Multitude; and the land shall be soaked with their
blood* and the dust made fat with the fatness (of their bodies) for it ^ the
day of the Lords vengeance, and the year of recompense for the controversy of
Zion; in the latter days ye shall consider it.

SECT. XL.
Mal 1. 4. 5. Isa. 24. 21, 2^. Psalm. 37. 34.
THus shall the Lord punish the host of the high ones, and of the Kings of the
earth upon the earth, and ^hey shall be gatheted together, as Prisoners into the
pit, or grave, and shall there) be shut up, and after many days (ever after
the thousand years of rest in Glory) shall they be visited*

And they shall be called the border of wickedness, against whom the Lord has
Indignation for ever; and your eyes shall see this, and you (the Saints) shall
then say, the Lord will be magnified from the border of Israel, when he shall
take them away as with a whirlewind, both living, Psalm 58. 9, 10.
and in his wrath; then shall the righteous rejoice, when he sees the
vengeance, for they shall wash their feet in the blood of the wicked.

The day of Judgment.
And when all the host of heaven shall be rolled together like a scroll, and
the trump shall blow, and the Judgment shall be set, and the dead raised (at
the end of the thousand years rest in glory) and Judged and cast into hell,
into the dry These parts of the earth shall be the Hell.

Isa. 34. 4, 9, 10.


land wherein is no water, even these parts of the earth (or lowest of the
Globe) whose streams shall be turned into pitch, and the dust thereof into
brimstone, and the land (or earth) shall become burning pitch, and it shall
never be quenched; for the smoke thereof shall go up for ever.

Isa. 33* 14.
O, who among us shall then dwell with everlasting burnings?

Then the saints shall go forth (to the border) and look upon them that have
transgressed, whose fire shall not be Isa* 66. 24.
quenched, and they (the wicked) shall be an abhorring unto all flesh, and
there shall be a great gulf fixed between the Kingdom of heaven, (or glory) and
the Kingdom of hell Luke 16* 23.
and darkness; Satan, and the wicked shall ^ee the glory and blessed state of
the Saints in Christ's Kingdom a far ost; And shall weep and howl, and gnash
their teeth.

SECT. XLI.
Ier. 3* 17. 18. Jerusalem shall be the T^rone of the Lord.
IN thosedayes Judah shall walk with Israel in the land given for an
inheritance unto their Fathers, and at that time they shall call Jerusalem the
throne of the Lord, and all the nations shall be gathered unto it, yea all
nations whom Psalm. 86. 9.
the Lord has made shall come and worship before him, and Israel shall sing
there (the new song) as in the days of their youth, when they came out of the
Land of Egypt.

Isa. 52. 1, 8.
Then shall the sword and the battle be broken out of the earth, for the Lord
Christ (the God of Salvation, light and Glory) will marry his people unto
himself in peace, and in righteousness, and in loving kindness, and in mercies,
for Isa. 12. 6. Ezod 24. 10, 11. Exodus 33. 11. Numb. 14. 14. Inhabitants of
Zion. Number. 14. 21. John. 16. 33. John. 18. 36. Act. 14. 22. Christ his Kingdom
is not of his world.
he will plant his people in the earth, and they shall see eye to eye, yea, face
to face, as Moses and the seventy Elders did, as also all Israel.

Then shall they say, cry out thou inhabitant of Zion, for great is the holy
one of Israel in the midst of thee, and his (place of) rest shall be
Glorious; for, then shall all the earth be fill^d with the Glory of the Lord;
(even the earth or place of Glory) for in this world ye (the Saints) shall have
tribulations, (because) my Kingdom is not of this world, but in me (or my
Kingdom of Glory) ye shall have rest, says our Savior; and we must through
many tribulations enter into the Kingdom of heaven (the land of Glory and The
earth shall be Glorious.
happiness) for he will make the place of his feet (the earth) Glorious.

Isa. 5. 26, 27. Non of the Saints shall be weary in their Journey to Jerusalem,
Isa. 11. 11, 12. Israel that was ca^t out, Judah dispersed.
And the Saints shall come with speed swiftly, none (of them) shall be weary
nor stumble, none shall slumber nor sleep, neither shall the girdle of their
loins be loosed, nor the latchet of their shoes be broken, for the Lord shall
set his hand again the second time to recover the remnant of his people, and
shall assemble the outcasts of Israel, and gather together the dispersed of
Judah, from the four corners of the earth.

SECT. XLII.
Then shall the waters fail from the sea, and the rivers shall be dried up; for
the Egyptian sea shall be utterly destroyed, that men may go over dry shod (or
in ^hooe^: then shall there be an high way for his people (the Saints) as it
was to Israel in the day when they came out of the Isa. (...) Ier. 23. 3, 4, 5,
6, 7, 8. Zach. 14. 9. Lo, the doctrine long taught u^ of our climing up into
the ^lements plainly disproved.
land of Egyyt, then shall the King of righteousness Reign and prosper, and
Execute Justice and Judgment in the earth.

In his days Judah shall be saved, and Israel (the ten tribes) shall dwell
safely, and this is the Kings name (that shall Reign in the earth of glory) the
Lord our Righteousness, for in that day there shall be (but) one Lord, and his
name one.

SECT. XLIII.
Rev. 5. 10,
ANd he that sat on the Throne shall dwell among them (the Sainto) and they
shall Reign (with; him) on Rev. 7. 15.
the earth, and he said unto me, write, for these words are true and faithful,
Blessed are they that do his Commandments, that they may have Right in the Tree
of life (Christ Jesus) and their parts in the first Resurrection, on such the
second death shall have no power, neither shall evil (the Psalm. 5. 4.
Devil dwell with him and his saints, as he does in this his John. 18. 36.
own world of sin; for Christ his Kingdom is not of this world, but of the
Glorious world to come.

Out of which world of Eternal glory, the Devil (called Evil, Satan, death
and Hell) shall be banished, and not suffered to molest, disturb or suggest
any of his evil disobedient thoughts into any of the children of the Kingdom
of glory, or to have any rule at all there, as he has in this his world.

Therefore is Christ said not to Reign in this world, but only to rule and to
carry the predominent power in the hearts of all his Elect who though through
Satan's suggestions they fall into sin daily yet Christ supports and holds
them up by his power, whom the father has Sealed and Psalm. 5. 4, 5. Psalm. 1^5.
3.
given unto him, out of this world of evil, (the Devil) who being the Prince
of this world, Rules in the hearts of all his, the Children of wickedness,
disobedience, darkness, Evil, Satan, Death, and Hell, for so is he called in
the holy Scriptures.

The Priests, Gods ordinance of mercy sell.
The Lawyers, by injustice them excel.
John 8. 44. ^
Thus one, The word of mercy sells for Gold,
The other, Justice, Impiously and bold.
An Exhortation to the conscientious Reader.
ALye therefore that truly love and fear the Lord God Romans 2. 7. Col. 1. 12.
13. Heb. 6. 5.
of salvation Christ Jesus, and by patient continuation in well doing, seek for
glory, Immortality, and eternal life, and have tasted of the good word of God,
(Christ) and of 1 Thessalonians 2. 12. 2 Thessalonians. ^. 1.
the power of the world to come, and look for the day of his glorious appearing;
When the time of refreshing shall Acts 3. 19, 21. 2 Timothy* 4. 1.
come, of the Restitution of all things, and our gathering together unto him,
at his appearing, and his Kingdom,

Comfort ye one another with these things, that ye may 2 Cor. 1. 8.
be blameless in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the Romans 8. 9, 10, 11.
Romans 15. 5.
Lord Jesus direct your hearts into the true love of God, and the patient
waiting for Christ; and grant you to be like minded one toward another in
love, (or in the God of love Christ Jesus) according to the commandment of
Jesus Christ, who has called us unto his Kingdom and John 13. 34. John 17. 5.
Matthew. 25. ^1.
Glory, (even the glory which he had with the father before the world was) when
he shall come in his glory.

For the time of this his glorious appearing is at hand, to the eternal
comfort and unexpressible joy of all the Saints of God, but to the
unsupportable horror, dread, and Matthew. 8. 2^. 2 Cor. 13. 5.
eternal confusion of all the dead men of this world (or men of death) Children
of death, hell and darkness, called Satan.

Prove. 16. 4:
For God has made all things for himself, even the wicked for the day of
wrath, Evil, Darkness, judgment, Death eternal; to whom it is not given to
know the truth, Romans 15* 4.
nor the mysteries of his Kingdom of glory and joys eternal, to be there
enjoyed by the Saints for ever.

And know this also that whatsoever things were written before time, were
written for our learning, that we through patience and comfort of the
Scriptures* might have hope of eternal life and Glory in the world to come.

^^t^h. 6. ^3. Luke 11. 35, 36. Psalm. 45. 7.
Therefore pray, that the light (or spirit) that is in you may not be of the
darkness, but of the true light Christ Jesus, which inlighteneth every man unto
Salvation, whom God his God has anointed with the oil of gladness above his
fellows (even above all Spirits) that so by that sacred Primary spirit of
truth and light Christ Jesus, (whom God the father has appointed heir of all
things, by whom Heb. 1. 2. John. 5. 25.
also he made the world, and who by him (the father) was sent in the flesh to
be a light to us gentiles, but shall be the Luke. 2. 32.
glory, yea a King of eternal glory to his people Israel) ye may be enabled to
hear his voice, and to be raised from the dead, at his appearing in glory with
all his saints.

Rev. 20. 5. Isa. 26. 14.
But the rest of the dead shall not rise or live, for they only that are his,
possessed by his spirit of life, shall hear his voice; verily, verily I say
unto you, the hour is coming John. 5. 24, 25. 26.
when the dead shall hear the voice of the son of God, and they that hear (his
voice) shall live: But they that hear not his voice being the children of
death, shall still remain in the bonds of death and hell, for they are dead,
they shall not rise, yea, they shall not live at the resurrection of the just,
Isa. 26. 14. Luke 14, 14, Job. 14. 12* Psalm. 1. 5. Psalm. 5. 5. Psalm. 88. 10.
they shall not awake, nor be raised out of their graves till the thousand years
of rest and glory be fulfilled, but they shall be gathered into one pit, and
shut up in the prison of the grave, and after (the thousand years) or many days
shall they be visited.

2 Cor. 4. ^, 4. Isa. 26. 19.
For the dead in Christ shall rise first, even they that are Christ's at his
coming; for thy dead men (Christ Jesus) shall live, with my body shall they
rise, yea, they which shall be accounted worthy of the worldtand tha,
resurrection from Luke ^0. 35, 36.
the dead, are (or shall be) equal to the Angels (of light) and are the
children of God, being the children of the resurrection The children of the
Resurrection shall die no more.
(Christ Jesus, who is the resurection and the life) neither can they die any
more, death has no more dominion over them.

O therefore love the Lord all ye his Saints, for the Psalm. 31. 23.
Lord preserves the faithful, and plentifully rewards the constant doer; be
of good courage therefore, for he shall strengthen your hearts, all ye that
trust in the Lord.

Now if this plain demonstration of the truth (of Christ's 1 Cor. 2. 7, 10, 11,
12.
glorious personal reign on the earth among his Saints in the land of Glory,
which God the Father has ordained before the world, unto our glory that we
might know the things that are freely given to us of God) be still hid, it is
hid to them whose minds are blinded by the God of this world, (the Devil)
that they should not see nor apprehend the excellency of the eternal Glorious
being, ordained of God for us before the world was, even, eternal life and
glory unexpressible, in the land of the living.

But God does reveal them to his poor servants by his spirit, for the spirit
searches all things, yea the deep things of God, that we might know the
excellency, and become partakers of the Majesty and unexpressible glory of
Christ, in the glorious world to come, at the appearing of our Lord Isa. 6. 1,
5. ^ccle. 1. 15. Job ^6* 2^.
and Savior Jesus Christ, the King of eternal life, Light, and Glory, (seen of
all his Prophets) who has built an everlasting foundation with men, and shall
continue with their Seed.

Isa, 49. 8. John ^0. 17.
And who also is (by God the Father) given for a covenant to the people, to
establish the earth, even he the beloved, who is ascended to his Father, and
our Father; to his Rev. 1. ^. Rev. ^. 12.
God, and our God; for thus says the Lord, I am Alpha, and Omega, which is,
which was, and is to come. The Almighty, him that overcomes will I make a
pillar in the temple of my God, and he shall go no more out, and I will write
upon him the name of my God, and the name of the City of my God, the new
Jerusalem which comes The Glorious new Jerusalem sh^l come down from heaven.

Deuteronomy. 6. 4.


down out of heaven from my God.

Hear therefore O Israel (or Elect) the Lord thy God is one Lord.

1 Cor. 8. (...).
For, to us (the Saints) there is but one God, even the Father, of whom are all
things (even spirit of light, and spirits of darkness) and we in him, and one
Lord Je^us Christ by whom are all things (formed and made into external
vi^ible shape and being; and we by him, by whom he (the Father) made the world,
that is, decreed what this present world of darkness should be, and what the
glory of the world to come should be.

Acts 15. 18,
For, known unto God the father, or determined are all his works, by, in, and
from the (or this sacred) beginning Christ Jesus.

1 Cor. 8. 7. Zach. 5. 13. Isa. 10 17. Mar. 5. 7. 1 John 1. 11. 1 John 3. 2.
Howbeit, there is not in every man that knowledge, for the Council of peace
shall be between them both, even between Father and Son of the most high God,
the light of Israel, and his holy one, or beloved one, by whom he has given
unto us eternal life, and this life is in his son, and when he shall appear the
second time unto salvation, we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he
is, and live ever in his sight, even in the presence of his son Christ Jesus,
the true God and eternal life, who is over all God, blessed for 1 John 5. 20.
Romans 9. 5.
ever of the Father.

Col. 3, 3* 4.
For our life (or eternal being) is hid with Christ in God (the Farher) but
when Christ which is our life shall appear, then shall we also appear with him
in his glory. For,

He that is Elect, and his name written in the book of life, or secret decree of
the most high (God the Father) shall Psalm. 91. 1.
ever abide under the shadow and guidance of the almighty Lord, the ordained
God of Salvation, Christ Jesus, and to whom belong the Issues of death, he
being the ordained Psalm. 68. 20*
resurrection, and the life of eternal rest and glory to the Creature, for he
is gone up to prepare a place for us, and John, 14. ^, 23,
then both he and the father will come and make their abode John. 20. 17. ^^hn
5. 20, 22, 2^. 27.
with us; for he is ascended to his father, and our father, to his God, and our
God, until his enemies be made his footstool by the father.

For as the Father has life in himself* so has he given to the son, to have
(the spirit of) life in himself, and has given him Authority to execute
Judgment also; for the Father judges no man, but has committed all judgment
to the Son.

John 6. 5^.
And as he lives (not of or by himself) but by the father, so do all the elect
live by him the Christ, and shall live for ever (in glory) with Christ, and
address all Glory and Ephesians. 3. 21.
praise unto the father, by Christ Jesus, in that world of glory which shall be
without end.

John 6. 4^.
For none can come to the Son except the father draw him, ^ohn 6. (...) 3^, ^0.
(that is, as I conceive) none but such as are predestined by him to glory,
and their names written in the book of life, having the fathers work, or Spirit
of truth and life in them, by which they are drawn or allotted to Christ, and
given to him by the father.

Ephesians. 4. 6.
Even that one God and Father of all, who is above all, and in all; ^or (says
Christ) the father is greater then all, therefore Greater then he, who after
God the father^ (likeness, Power, and Glory) is by him created, righteousness,
and trute holiness; and being created or made perfect H^b 5. 5. 5, 10.
(or perfection it self) he (thus) became the author of eternal Salvation (and
glory) to all them that (believe) and obey him (or his will).

But Beelzebub is created Darkness, unrighteousness, wick^dness* Ier. 17* 5, 6.
Romans 9. 22. Genesis 7. 22. Psalm. 68. 6. Ier. 50. 12. Isa 34. 8, 9, 10. Job 10. 22.
evil, vanity, unholiness, destruction (or the destroyer) hell, and perdition,
and to him are given or allotted the reprobate men of this world of darkness,
orchildren of perdition and disobedience, called vessels of dishonor, who are
predestined (by the father) to dwell in a dark and a drie^ land, with the
destroyer and all his angels, or spirits of darkness, for ever,

But the children of the world to come being vessels of honor, life, light
and glory, (Christ) are pr^destinated by Romans ^. 23, 24.
the father to dwell in the land of righteousness, life, light, Exodus 15. 17.
18. Psalm. 94. 12. 13.
and glory, the inheritance and land of glory which the father has allotted to
the Prince of Glory, light, and life, (Christ Jesus) and so is it called.

Matthew. 19. 28. Psalm. 105. 9. 10. 11, 12, 13. Psalm. 125. 3. Ier. ^. 17* Ier.
17. 12. Eze. 43. 7. Psalm. 56. 13. Col. 1. 27. Psa. 57. 11. Col. 2. 10.
The lot of his inheritance, where they shall walk before God the father, and
shall be led and guided in and by this sacred light of the living, which is
Christ the Lord (who is now in us the hope of this glory) to be enjoyed in the
land of life (or the living,) in due time, where God the Father shall be
exalted above the Heavens, and his Glory, (Christ) upon all the earth, whom he
has made (or ordained to be the head of all Principalities and powers in
heavenly places, even of all spirits of light, and spirits of darkness.

Heb. 5. 5, 9, 10.
Called of God the Father an high Priest, being the ordained righteousness of
God unto salvation.

Heb. 7. 16, 24.
Who (by the Father) is created, after the power of an endless life, and to save
them that come to God the Father. Therefoe is he styled,

Psalm. 68. 20.
The God of salvation, to whom belong the Issues from death.

Col. 1. 15, 17, 18, 19, 20,
Being the Ordained Resurrection? and the life, and the image (or visible
personal presence) of the invisible (and incomprehensible) God the Father, the
first Created (or born) of every creature.

Who being the beginning, has in all things the pre-eminence; for he is before
al things, for it pleased the Father, that in him should all fullness of Power,
Majesty, and Glory dwell; for all power is given unto him by the Father both
in heaven and earth, who has predestined to reconcile, all things unto
himself by Jesus Christ; for the council of Zach. 6. 13.
peace (is and) shall be (for ever) between them both* even between Father and
Son, (Christ) who of God the Father, is made unto us,

1 Cor. 1. 30. 1 Cor. 11. 3. ^eb. 5. 5, 9.
Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption.

For Christ has not (thus) glorified himself, but he the Father that said unto
him thou art my Son this day have I begotten (or created) thee, has glorified
him; in whom he is well pleased, and appointed him for the work of mercy and
eternal being to the creature in light and glory; and thus is he made by the
Father heir apparent of all things, in and by whom, man is come and admitted to
the knowledge of this great incomprehensible God the Father, 1 Cor. 1. 21. ^
Cor. 2. 9.
to salvation.

For the time was, that the wotld, by this sacred wisdom, (Christ) kn^w not God
the Father. For in this God of salvation (Christ Jesus) dwells the fullness of
the Godhead (Father and holy spirit) personally or bodily.

1 Timothy 6 15, 16. John 1 4. John. 1. 18. Job. 26. 13, 14. Job 11. 7. John 6.
27. John 5. 37. ^ol 2. 9.
Who is the beginning, Prince or head of and over all Principalities, and
Powers.

Being the blessed Prince and only ordained King and Lord (and Immortality)
dwelling in the Incomprehensible light of God the Father, that none can attain
to the knowledge of; whom no man did ever see nor can see.

For him has God the Father sealed, (or determined for the work of mercy and
glory to the Creature,) and in him he delights; in whom the fullness of his
power and spirit dwells Bodily, or in and by whose personal presence the
omnipotent power of God the Father, and holy spirit of God, is represented and
manifested unto us in all fullness, according to the creatures meted out or
allotted Capacity,

Who is the beginning of the creation of God; for in this Rev. 3* 14. Gen, 1.
1. John 1. 1, 3. ^^n. 2. 3* 4* ^ Cor. 4 5.
sacred beginning (the anointed God of salvation,) God the Father created (or
decreed) the heavens and the earth, and by which sacred beginning all things
were made into external visible shape and being.

And God (the Father) who commanded the light (of glory) Christ, to shine out
(or from) the darkness (B^lzebub) has (now) shined into our hearts the light,
even the knowledge of the Glory of God the Father in the face (or by the
personal visible apprehensive presence) of Jesus Christ.

2 Cor. 6. 14. 15.
For, this sacred light Christ, has no communion or agreement with darkness,
Beelzebub; neither shall Iniquity (Beelzebub) possess the just, but the wicked
are (or shall be) Prove. 12. 21.
full of evil, or the spirit of Beelzebub.

2 Cor. 5. 18, 1^, 21. 1 Cor. 1. 30.
And yet all things are of God the Father, who has reconciled us (and all the
elect of God in Christ) unto himself, by (this sacred light) Christ Jesus.

Ep^. 4. 7.
That we might be made Righteous to God in him, according to the measure of the
gift of Christ.

1 Cor. 8 7. Isa. 43. 10, 11. Isa 44. 6. ^sal. 59* 10. Psalm 68. 2^. Isa. 42. 6.
But there is not in every man that knowledge; for before him there is no God
created, neither shall there be after him; for he is the Lord, the God of mercy
and Salvation; for God the Father has given him for a covenant to the people,
for a light to the Gentiles.

1 Cor. 8. 6.
For to us (the elect in Christ) there is but one God (the Father) of whom are
all things (created) and we in him, and one Lord Jesus Christ, (the
ordained*God of salvation) by whom are all things (made into an external shape
and being) and we by him, even by Jesus Christ the Son of the Matthew. 5. 7. Ier.
51. 15, 19.
most high God the Father, the Portion of Jacob (or of the Elect) the former and
maker of all things, for God the Father decreed the earth to be made by this
his sacred power.

Isa. 49. 8.
Established the world by this his sacred wisdom, and stretched out the heaven
by his sacred understanding, the Lord of Hosts is his name, the God of Israel,
the God of Ier. 32. 27. 3^. Ier. 27. 5. Ier. 33. 2.
all flesh, who has made the ^arth, the man, and beast, the portion of Jacob
(Christ) is the former of all things, the Lord of hosts is his name.

Genesis 17. 5* Genesis 18. 17.
Thou art the Lord, the God who did choose Abraham.

Nehe. 9. 6, 7, 12, 13.
Thou ledst them in the day by a cloud, and in the night by a pillar of fire,
thou came down upon mount Zion, and spakest with them face to face).

Exodus 23, 10, 11, 16. Exodus 33. 28. Genesis 32. 28, 30. Exodus 16. 12. Psalm. 41.
13. Psalm, 68. 20.
For they saw him the God of Israel* and the Lord (even the God of Israel)
spoke to Moses face to face, as a man speaks to his friend; yea, Jacob did
see this God of Israel (or of the elect,) face to face; who testifies of
himself saying, and ye shall know that I am the Lord, your God, even the God of
Israel; he is the God of Salvation, he has made us.

Psalm. 100, 3.
And the world was also made by him the Word of God.

Heb. 11. 3. Rom 9. 5. John 11. 25.
And unto the God of (Christ) belong the Issues from death, being the ordained
resurrection and the life, and so is he God over all blessed for ever.

Rom 15. 13.
Being the God of hope, even (to the elect) the hope of glory, in eternal life.

Col. 1. 27. Col. 3. 10. 1 Cor 1. 24. ^ph* 4. 24. 2 Chion. 20. 21.
In the true Image of him that created him, Christ, the power of God, the
wisdom of God, Righteousness and true holiness, yea, the beauty of Holiness,
and glorious in holiness.

Psalm. 33. 12. Hab. 3. 18. Psalm. 144. 15.
Blessed is the nation whose God is the Lord, and the people whom he has
chosen for his own inheritance, for they shall rejoice for ever in the Lord God
of their salvation; happy are the people whose God is the Lord, for he shall
govern the nations upon the earth.

Psalm. 67. 4. Isa. 49. 8, 9.
He shall say to the prisoners, and them that are in darkness, go forth and
show your selves.

Heb. 1. 8, 9.
For God the Father his God has anointed him with the oil of gladness
(eternal light, life, and glory) above his sellowe, seven above all spirits
what ever.)

1 Cor. 11. 3. Acts ^. 15.
For God the Father is the head of Christ, even as man is the head of woman,
and has ordained him to be the Prince of life.

Genesis 1. 1, 4. John 1. ^. Psalm. 27. 8. John 8. 32. Exodus 33. 19. Exodus 34. 6,
14.
The beginning, the light, the day, the Person, the Presence, the face, the
Angel, the Name, the truth, the goodness, the power of God the Father, unto
Salvation, the Prince of peace and love, whose nature and property is even to
have mercy, to forgive, and to preserve.

For he the Lord God is the preserver of Isracl, yea, the preserver of men, The
God of Salvation. Psalm. 68. 20.


The Christ of God the Father, for the work of mercy and glory.

The devil. lob 5. 2. lob. 35. 8. Psalm. 125. 3. Psalm. 5. 4. Psalm. 45. 7. Prove.
13. 6. Eccle^. 8. 8. Isa. 9. 18. 19. 1 Cor. 5. 8. Ephesians. 6. 12. Exodus 15. 7. Heb
1. 2. Genesis 2. 4. John 1. 1. Job 35. 8. John 14. 8, ^.
But darkness (the devil) is the Prince of death and destruction, the
destroyer, the hater of man* the roaring Lion, the raging power evil,
wickedness, the merciless enemy, the unrighteousness the night.

The wrath of God, the star of the morning, (or the star darkness, separated
from the morning star, or bright star of righteousness, light, and glory.
Christ Jesus, the anointed God of salvation) whom God the Father has appointed
heir of all things, and by whom he made the worlds being the word and voice of
God the Father, the visible brigh^ness of his Fathers glory, and his express
Image in his person, for he that has seen him has seen the Father (or the
Fathers power to salvation) for he upholdeth all things by the sacred power.

Who is made heir of all things, and has obtained a more excellent name then
all other spirits what ever, for the Exodus 23, ^1. Isa. 12. 2.
name of the Father the Lord God, Ichovah, the God of salvation, is in him.

Heb. 1. 5, 8, 10. Psalm 2. 7. Isa. 43, 13. Prove. 8. 22, 23.
Who said, I will be to him a Father, and he to me a Son; yea, this day have I
begotten thee.

For before the natural day was, (in being) he was brought forth, yea before
the earth was formed.

Genesis 1.
For according to the Fathers decree;

The foundations of the earth were laid in or by this sacred beginning; yea,
the heavens are the work of his hand. Heb. 1. 2.


Heb. 2. 10, 11. Exodus 15. 11. 2 Ch^o. 20. 21.
For it pleased the Father, for whom are all things, and of whom are all
things, in bringing many Sons unto glory, to make the Captain or Prince of
their salvation (Christ) perfect, glorious in holiness yea, the beauty of
holiness, fearful in praises, doing wonders.

For he that sancti^ieth, and they who are sanctified are all Romans 11. 36.
of one, for which cause, he (the Christ) is not ashamed to call them brethren;
for of him, and through him, and to him are all things.

Acts. 17. 28.
For (he being the Resurrection and the life) in him we live, and move, and
have our being; being created (by God Genesis 1. 1. Ephesians 2. 10.
the Father) in Christ Jesus, who is the Beginning, the day, the life, the
light, and glory.

1 Thessa. 5. 4. 5* 8, 9, 10.
Therefore are the Children of the light no more in bondage to darkness, Hell
and death (the devil) being redeemed by the light (Jesus) they are all become
the Children of the light, and Children of the day; for God the Father has not
appointed (or determined) them unto (or for) wrath (the devil) but to obtain
or enjoy salvation (in glory) in Ephesians. 3 9. Luke. 9* 20. Rev. 3. 14. Phil. 2.
11. Ephesians. 3. 10, 11, 1^.
and by Jesus Christ; where we shall all live together with him, who is the
Christ of God the Father, by whom all things were made to the glory of God the
Father, according to the eternal purpose (of the Father) which he purposed in
Christ Jesus our Lord* that so unto Principalities and powers (of darkness) in
heavenly places might now be known (by the Church) the manifold wisdom of God
the Father (Christ) of whom the whole family in heaven and earth is named.

That is, the spirits of life in all things, named, appointed and disposed of
to their several functions and conditions Ephesians. 4. 24. Ephesians. 4. 67.
of being by him, who after God is created in righteousness and true holiness,
by that one God and Father of all, who is above all* through all, and in all,
and by whom is given Ier. 44. 11. Ier. 46. 18. Ier. 5^. 5, 19, 57. Isa. 49. 5,
6, 8, 9.
(or conferred) on the elect, grace according to the measure of the gift of
Christ, whose name is the Lord of Hosts, the God of Israel. (or elect) who
shall be Glorious in the sight of God the Father, and this his God shall be his
strength, and he shall be his servant, to raise up the tribes of Jacob, and to
restore the preserved of Israel.

And to be a light to us Gentiles, and the Fathers Instrument of salvation to
the ends of the earth.

And by the Covenant to establish the earth, that he may say to the Prisoners
(of death) go forth and show your Isa* 4.* 1, 5, 6, 7. Ezekiel. 37. 14, 15, 16.
Zach. o. 11. Isa 45. 11* 12, 15. Isa 52. 13. Isa. 43* 10, 11.
selves, when he shall put his spirit of life into them, and the* shall live.

For in the Lord (Christ) shall all the seed of Israel be Justified, and shall
glory; for he shall be exalted, and be very high.

For before him there was no God created, neither shall there be after him. He
is the Lord, and besides him there is no Savior. Ephesians. 1. 15, 19. John 10. 29.
John 14. 28. John 13. 17.


For, the Father is the God of our Lord Jesus Christ.

The Father is greater then all, yea, greater then he; if we know these things,
happy are we; for this is life eternal to know God the Father (aright) and
Jesus Christ whom he has sent; whose being in the Father, and the Father in
John 14. 10. Phil 2. 6. Exodus 23. 21. Exodus 33. 14. John 14. 13. John 10 30.
Christ is styled the mercy of God unto Salvation.

Exodus 34. 6.


him, thought it no* robbery to be one with him; because the fullness of the
Fathers spirit, Power, presence, and Name. (God) is in him, and so the Father*
is glorified in the same.

Thus he and the Father are one, because the Father acts nothing for the
work of mercy and glory to the Creature, but in and by Christ his beloved Son,
the ordained God of salvation, life, light, and eternal glory; the Lord God
merciful and gracious, the God of Israel.

John 15. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. John. 6. 38, 39, 40. Luke 9. 20.
For the most high incomprehensible God the Father, is said to be the
husbandman and the Lord God Christ Jesus, the God of salvation, is the true
fruitful pleasant vine, in whom God the Father delights; and all the elect
(saints by calling) are the branches of this sacred vine, the Christ of God the
Father.

1 Samuel 2. 2.
For there is none so holy as the Lord, neither is there any Rock like our God;
for God the Father has blessed him for ever.

Psalm* 45. 2.
Therefore O Israel (or elect) fear this Glorious and fearful name.

Dent. 28. 58. Psalm. 21. 6, 7.
The Lord the God (Christ Jesus) whose glory is great Dignity and Honor, has
the Father laid upon him, and has made him most blessed for ever.

Psalm 21. 7. Psalm ^2. 8. Wisd. 15, 1, 3.
And through the favor of the most high (God the Father) he shall not be
moved, for Jehovah is the most high God for evermore.

Who governs all things by his mercy, (Christ) through and by whom all
addresses must be made to the John 14. 6.
most high God the Father; and by and with whom eternal life in glory is
conferred on the creature; and therefore is he styled, the way, the truth, and
the life, the glory of God.

John 4. 7, 9, 10.
For he that has seen Christ, the God o^ salvation, has seen the personal,
visible, active, powerful presence of God the Father* and holy Spirit, yea the
word and work of the Father, John 17. 2, 3.
the first begotten of every creature; who has Power, given to him by the
Father over all flesh, that he should give eternal life (in glory) to as many
as the Father has given him.

Romans 9. 5. 1 Timothy 6. 15. 16.
And thus is he God over all blessed for ever (or for eternal being in glory
with his Saints the elect,) in whom (or in whose personal visible presence) the
Godhead Io^n 3. 34, 35. John 17. 9, 11, 21. John 3. 11. John 14. 23. Genesis 1.
26, 27. G^n. 3. 22. 2 Cor. 4 4. Isa. 63. 9. Psalm. 13^. 7.
dwells bodily, even in him whom the Father sent into the world to save
sinners as he himself says, that they may be one as we are, even as thou (O
Father) ar^ in me and I in thee; that they may be one in us, as we are; for we
speak that which we know, and testify that we have seen, and ye receive not our
testimony (even the Father and Sons) we will come and make our abode with him*
for man is become like one of us, like the Image of God Christ; for Christ is
the Image of God the Father, yea, the spirit or Psalm. 44. 24. Col. 1. 15. 1 Timothy
6. 16. John 15. 9, 10, 11. John 17. 22, 24,
Angel of his presence.

The face of God the Father, the image person, presence, or likeness of the
great Invisible God the Father, who is the light that none can approach unto,
whom no man can see, who only has loved the Son, as the Son loves his Saints*
and has ordained them to be partakers of his glory, Prove. 8. 12, 14, 22, 24,
30, 35, 36.
according to the predestinate decree of God his Father, who created him Christ,
Wisdom, counsel, understanding, strength, L^ve, mercy, Righteousness, yea, he
God the Father, possessed him in the beginning of his way, before his works had
any being, he was brought forth by the Father and was his delight. rejoicing
always before him, Isa. 43* 11.
He is the Lord God of salvation, and besides him there is no Savior, for he is
the ordained life and peace to the elect saints that love him. Mark 3. 22*


But all they that hate him, love death, Beelzebub, Luci^er, Satan, darkness,
the ordnaied God of Damnation, Psalm. 68. 20. Ier. 23. 6. Acts 10. 42. Acts 17.
31. Psalm. 8. 5, 9. Psalm. 110. 1.
called the destroyer; but the God of the elect to Glory, is the God of
salvation, even the Lord our righteousness, the ordained God of salvation by
the Father, who has crowned him with glory and honor, and has so decreed
that he the Christ shall sit on his right hand of power, until he make his
enemies his footstool. Isa 49. 6, 7, 8.


For thus says God the Father, the redeemer of Israel by Jesus Christ, and his
holy one, or of this his holy one Jesus.

Art thou lighter, then that thou should be my servant to raise up the
tribes of Jacob or Judah, and to restore the dissolutions of Israel, to
establish the earth for ever, that thou may be my glorious Instrument of
Salvation to the ends of the earth.

Romans 15. 8. Luke 1. 32, 33, Psalm. 45. 2, 3, 4. 7. John 13, 3, 16,
Even to confirm the promises made unto the Fathers; for God the Father, shall
give unto him the throne of his Father David, and he shall reign over the house
of Jacob for ever; because God the Father his God, has anointed or appointed
him for that work of mercy and glory to the creature above all other spirits
whatsoever: yet this sacred servant is not greatet then his Master, neither is
he the ambassador that is sent by the Father, greater then he that sent him,
and ordained him the l^fe, therefore because he is life.

We the elect shall live also for ever with him in Glory, John 14. 19. 1 Cor.
19, 2^, 27. Rom* 16. 2^.
for he shall bruise Satan shortly under our feet; for the Father has put all
things under our feet, even all Principalities and powers in heavenly places,
therefore it is most clear and manifest, that he the Father is excepted which
ha^h put all things under him.

1 Cor. 15. 28.
And when all things are subdued unto him, then shall he himself also be
subject unto God the Father, that put all John 14. 20. John 15. 1, 2.
things under him, and then shall we know that he is in the Father, and we in
him and he in us; for the Father is as the husbandman, Christ is as the vine,
and the elect are 1 Thessa. 1. 10, chap. 2, 12.
the fruitful branches of that vine; therefore let us wait for this his Son from
heaven, by whom he the Father has called or Elected us unto his Kingdom of
glory.

Psalm. 33. 12.
But, that was not first which is spiritual (or eternal) but that which is
natural, temporal or fading; and as is the earth (Adam) such are they (in the
Fathers decree) all that are earthly as is the heavenly; such are they also 1
Cor. 15. 4^, 4^.
that are heavenly or eternal, and as we have born the image of the earthly or
temporal Adam, so shall the elect also bear the Image of the heavenly or
spiritual Adam, Christ, which is eternal.

For as many as the Father has given or allotted to John 18 9. John 12. 46, 49.
Christ, he has lost none of them, neither can they be lest, because they are
spirits of light, decreed by the Father for glory, who changes not from his
eternal purpose in Christ Jesus, whereby he has made them heirs of glory,
yea, Romans 8. 16, 17.
joint heirs with Christ, to be glorified together with him.

Whose spirit bears witness to our spirits, that we are the Children of God
the Father, and heirs with Christ, Romans 9. 5.
who is the Ordained God and Lord over all, blessed for ever.

John 1. 5. Psalm. 33. 6. Ecles. 24 1* ^, ^, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 3^.
Ephesians. 4. 24. Heb. 1. 2. Gen 1. 1. Rev. 3. 14. Heb. 1. 3.
He came out of the mouth of the most high God the Father; and so is he the
word of God.

For the Creator of all things gave him a Commandment, and ordained his
tabernacle (or personal presence) to rest.

Saying to him, let there be a firmament, and let thy dwelling be in Jacob, and
thine inheritance in Israel.

Yea, he came forth as a brook from a river, for he the Father created him, the
beginning; and he shall never fail and thus is he established in Zion, in the
beloved City (Jerusalem) is his rest and power, being the portion of his
inheritance.

Where he the word, the life, the way, the truth, the righteo^sness* and the
l^ght is by the Father decreed to dwell in g^ory with all his saints for ever.

Eccles. 23. 12. Dan. 2* 22.
There is also a word which is called upon with death, who is called darkness,
hell, falsehood, vanity, unrighteousness, wrath, destroyer, Satan, wickedness,

Eccles. 39. 28, 31, 34.
God grant it be not found in the heritage of Jacob the Savior.

But this word was found in Jacob (or Judah) when they renounced the word of
life and glory, (Christ) saying* we have no King but Caesar, and his blood be
on us and our Children. Psalm. 17. 4.


Psalm. 2. 5. Exodus 15. 7. Psalm 9. 6. ^xod. 12. 23. Io^ 15. 21. John 8. 44. 1
Cor. 10. ^0, Psalm. 78. 31, 49. Psalm. 109. 6. Genesis 1. 4. Eccles 33. 14, 15.
Then spoke he unto them, in or by this word of darkness* his wrath, (the
devil) and vexed them in his sore displeasure; for they were given up by God
the Father to him, (the wrath) therefore said to be of their Father the devil,
the destroyer.

For, as God (or goodness) is set by the Father against evil, the devil;
light against darkness, mercy against wrath, life against death, the Savior
against the destroyer; even so is the Godly against the Sinner, and the Sinner
against the Godly.

Even so also look upon the works of the most high God the Father, and there
are ^wo (Christ and Belial, the accepted and the rejected) and their two works
are one Eccles. 39. 24, 25.
against the other.

The ways of Righteousness are plain and easy to the righte^us, but his
commands are stumbling blocks to the wicked.

And for the Children of Righteousness are good things created (or decreed by
the father) in the (or this) sacred beginning.

Even life eternal in glory, but for the sinners (or the Children of the
disobedient one) or evil things created (or decreed) even eternal being in
the land of horror, drought, Romans 1. 18.
and darkness, for ever with their Father the devil, for the wrath of God is
revealed now, but shall then be manifest.

Psalm. 103. 21. Psalm. 104. 4. Col. 1. 13. Psalm. 78. 31, 49.
Called Principalities, Powers, Hosts, Ministers, (that at the Almighty's
pleasure on his works) yea powers of darkness, Beelzebub, that act by fire,
famine, sword, and pestilence, punishing the wicked to destruction, and
boasting themselves in mischief and destruction; whose nature and property, is
cruelty and destruction; therefore styled a roaring Psalm. 52. 1. The wicked one.

See Psalm. 109. ^. Psalm. 28. 2.


Lion, the destroyer, but not the Savior, Christ; whose nature and property is
mercy and preservation; and, therefore is he styled the preserver of men, yea,
the Oracle or mouth of God the Father.

Thus you see that all things are double (or decreed for a Eccles. 42. 17, 23.
double use) one against the other; some for the light to abide in glory, and
some for the darkness, (Beelzebub) to abide for ever in darkness.

Psalm. 37. 9, 10, 11, 18, 29.
For all that obey or do his will shall reap perdition; but they that walk in
the light, and are Children of the light, shall inherit the land or earth of
glory, and shall delight themselves in the abundance of peace.

Romans 9. 19, 20, 21, 22, 23.
Thou will say, why does he then complain? for who has or does resist his
will? for can I do any other then I am lead forth unto, or made to do?

But O man, who art thou which pleads or speaks against God thy maker? for
shall the thing formed say Isa. 45. 9.
unto him that formed it, why have thou made me thus? has not thee Potter
power; of one lump to make one vessel, to honor (or for the acting of the
spirit of honor and glory, Christ Jesus,) and another to dishonor (or for the
acting of the spirit of dishonor and reprobation Beelzebub?) what and if God
will, (to manifest wrath, and to make his) the sdivels elotted or meated out
power known to the Creature, uffer the vessels of wrath prepared or decreed to
destruction, to act the will and works of wrath, and that he Luke 9. 20. Acts
2. 36. 1 Cor. 1, 24.
might also declare the riches and power of his glory, for Christ is the glory
and power of God unto salvation, upon the vessels of his mercy, Christ the
mercy of God, which he Act^ 7. 2.
has prepared or decreed unto glory, to act the works of mercy here, for glory
hereafter.

For if thou be determined for glory, and the vessel or body be filled at
present with the Spirit of glory, truth, and righteousness (Christ Jesus) then
shall thou act and be led forth to the works of glory, truth, and Righteousness.

For the means shall never be wanting, that drives on to the end of the
Fathers decree.

But if thou remain under the power and guidance of the spirit of darkness,
then can thou do none other works then the works of darkness; and then thou will apprehend the word, works, and actings of Christ in his vessels of honor
(called saints) to be ridiculous, and foolishness; for he that is not for
Christ is against him. Mat^h. 12. 03,


Isa. 49. 9. Isa. 54. 5.
But woe unto him that striveth with this his maker Christ Jesus, the Lord of
life and glory, for this maker the Lord our Righteousness, is the husband or
bridegroom to the Isa 46. 13.
Saints, and he will marry them unto himself in Righteousness and glory
everlasting; for he will give unto them salvation in Zion. Isa. 43. 24.


Eccles. 15. 11. 12. Wisd, 12, 12,
O therefore say not thou, it is through the Lord Christ my maker that I
perish, for he causes me to err, for who dare say unto him, what have thou
done? or who dare stand against his Judgment, to whom all power is given by
the Father both in heaven and earth? or who dare accuse him for the nations
that perish, whom he has made? Matthew, 28, 18, Mark 3, 22, 28, 29, 30,
or who dare stand against him to revenge the cause of the wicked, that are by
him cast off or rejected? therefore happy, yea, thrice happy are all they that
are possessed and Eccles, 1, 4, 9, 10, 19, 20, 22,
guided by this sacred spirit wisdom.

For she was created, or produced by the Father, before all things; she has
built her everlasting foundations Prove. 8. 14, 15, 20. 22, 23, 24, 30, 31.
Psalm. 2. 2, 5, 9.
with men, and is given by the rather to be with their seed in glory for ever.

For all such as band themselves against Jehovah, and against his anointed
power for (...) are described and known to be disobedient men of this earth, or
world of Psalm. 3. 8. Psalm. 5 4.
darkness, guided by the rebellious spirit of wrath* darkness, and enemies to
the obedient spirit of sight, life and determined glory, to the elect and
obedient.

Isa. 64, 4,
For since the beginning of this world ear has not heard, nor eye seen what is
prepared for them that love him, the obedient and beloved Son Righteou^^e^s and
are made 1 Cor. 2. 9. Phi^. 2. 9* 11.
to wait for Christ his appearing in glory, whom God the Father has exalted
highly above all and has given him a name above every name.

Ephesians. 3. 9. Ephesians. 2. 10* Genesis 1* 1. Iodn 1. 1.
In whom the father created or decreed all things, and by whom all things were
made into external shape and being, according to the fathers decree, or
production of spiri^s in this sacred beginning Christ; who is the beginni^g of
the Genesis 1. 26. 27. Ephesians 1. 17, 22. Rev. 3. 12, 14.
creation of God the father* the first created o^ every creature, to be the
immediate image, or visible personal presence of the father Incompre^en^ible.

Who is the God of ^ur Lord Jesus Christ who has Acts. 2. 36.
made (or decreed) that same Jesus, both Lord and Christ, saying by Jeremy,

This is his name whereby he shall be called and known, I^r. 23 6. Acts 10. 42.
The Lord our rig^=hteousness; the God of Salvation, the ordained Judge of
quick and dead.

Psalm. 68. 20. Psalm. 95. 3, 6, 7. Romans 5. 21, Romans 6. 22, 23. Act^ 10. ^0.
Even the power of God unto salvation, to reign in and among the elect (...) o^
unto eternal life.

For, the gift of God the Father to all the elect is eternal life in glory
through and by Jesus Christ, whom he has made both Lord and Christ. yea,

Ier. 10. 10. Prove. 8. 23. Heb 1. 12. John. 6. 27.
The only true God of salvation, the living God* or God of life and everlasting
King of glory* who proceed h from the father everlasting; for him hayh God the
Father sealed or decreed for the work of mercy and glory to the creature, and
conferred by the God of the Prince of Peace, and Father Psalm. 80. 17. Ro^. ^.
23. Rom 10. ^6. He^ 13. 22* 2 ^et. 1. 11.
of this our Lord Jesus Christ, on the elect Sain^s* who shall be inhabitants of
the everlasting Kingdom; For the Kingdoms of the world shall be the Kingdom of
our great incomprehensible God the father, and of his Christ; and ^e the Lord
God of salvation shall reign over the Saints in Mich. 4. 7.
Mount Zion for ever. O who can think upon these things wor^^^y: Or know the
ways of the most ^hgh God and father of all and his power* Christ?

Wisd 12* 1. Wis^. ^1. 23, P^al, 36, 5, Wi^^, 9, 13,
Whose incorruptible Spirit is in all things; for he is the ^oye of ^ou^s; and
by whom the heavens and all things were made into external visible form and
being. O therefore who can truly think what this our Lord God of salvation is?
much less to comprehend the infinite Majesty of God the father and Creator of
all Spirits of light and Spirits of W^sd, ^, ^4, ^0, 27, 28.
darkness; who loves none but this sacred Spirit of Wisdom, Light, and Glory
and all his Saints.

Psalm, 45, ^,
For God his God has anointed him the *Emanuel with the oil of gladness above
his fellows; above all Spirits and has made him most blessed for ever; Honor
and Majesty Psalm, 21, 4, 5, 6, 7,
has he laid upon him* and through the mercy of the most High shall he not be
moved; who has given him Power over all Flesh, that he should give eternal
life to as John 17. 2,
many as he (the Father) has given him.

Ia^es 1. 1^, 18, Re^, ^, 1^, R (...) 16 ^^^od, 24, 9, 10
Who of his own Will begot the Creatures with the Word of Truth, Christ Jesus;
and thus is he (...) Beginning of the Creation of God, The Word of God* The
King of kings, and Lord of lords, The God of Isr^el* or Elect; whose glorious
coming is at hand.

Even so come Lord Jesus the Beauty of Holiness the Christ of the most high God
the Father, ordained by him to be the God of our salvation, and the power of
^od ^o ^ohn ^, 3^,
eternal life and glory* determined for the creature; for this life eternal is
in his Son, and his Name is in him; The Exodus, 23, 21, I^a, 12. 2.
Lord Jehovah, the Truth, the Light, the Life, the Beginning of the works of the
most High God, and Father of all Number, 16, 22, Heb. 12, 9 Ephesians, 4, ^, 2 Timothy, 1,
16, Ephesians, 2, 10, John 1, 18, Col, 1, 16. 1 Cor, 1, 24, 30, Col, 1, 12, 13, 15,
Psalm, 27, 8, 9. Gen, 32. 24, 28, 29, 3^, Exodus, 24, 10, Exodus, 33, 11, 41, Number,
12, 8, Psalm, 6^, 20. Gen, 2, 19, 20,
Spirits, who is above all, and by his holy Spirit works through and in all,
being the Invisible or only wise God, or God of wisdom, Christ; whom no man
has ever seen, nor can see; for no man has seen God the Father at any time,
nor ever heard his voice; by whom all things invisible were created in Christ
Jesus (the Beginning) that are in heaven and earth; but only as he has been
pleased to manifest himself to the creature, in and by his Name, Face,
Presence, Power, Wisdom and Love, Christ, the visible God of salvation, the
Lord God of the elect; with whom Abraham Isaac, Jacob, Moses, Joshua, the 70.
Elders, and all the Prophets talked* face to face, and mouth to mouth, as one
friend talks with another; even with the Lords anointed, the Lord God of
Israel, merciful and gracious, whose Nature and Property is Mercy and Love; by
whom the whole family of Heaven and earth is named and to whom all power John
5, 26. Heb, 11, 3, Exodus 33, 14.
is given (from the Father) both in Heaven and Earth; who is the Image, Face,
and Presence of the great invisible God the Father, and in whom the invisible
and incomprehensible Godhead dwells personally, bodily, or representatively;
who of God the Father is made unto us (creatures) wisdom, righteousness,
sanctification, and Redemption.

1 Timothy, 6, 15, 16. 1 John 1, 1, 7.
Who also is the blessed Potentate, the King of Kings, and Lord of lords, and
who only has immortality; dweling in the light (^he Father) which no man can
approach unto, whom no man has seen nor can see; even the Christ, Rev, 3, 14.
Gen, 1, 1.
the Power of God, the Wisdom of God, the beginning of the Creation of God, in
whom all things were created (by the Father) the God of all Spirits.

John ^, ^, 2, Number. 16, 9, 22 1 Chronicles, 8, 6. Co^, 1, 1 ^, E^o^, 20, 11, Cen, ^,
4, ^, John, 1, 1, 3, 1 ^or, 12, 3, 5, 6,
For to us there is but one God, of whom are all things, and we in him; and one
Lord Jesus Christ, the God of Israel, (or Elect;) by whom are all things made,
and we by him; who is the Lord God, former and maker of all things. being the
express visible likeness (or Image) Face, Presence, Hand, and active Power of
the Invisible God the Father* for the work of mercy, salvation, and glory to
the creatur^; whose excellency of being is in no manner revealed 2 Cor, 4, 4,
6, 1 Cor, 2, 24, Heb, 1, 2, 4,
to the Sons of men, other then in and by his comprehensible beloved Son and
heir of all things, The visible God Christ Jesus; The Lord, the life, and hope
of glory, of (and Col, 4, 24.
by) whom we shall receive the reward of the inheritance; even eternal life.

Gen, 1, 3, 4,
For, the Father being the author and produce of all Spirits (even of light and
darkness) from himself, his glory must needs be far ecxeeding theirs; who is
pleased in special Pro, 8, 30* Psalm* 104, 24, Gen, 2, 4,
to delight, love, and dwell in Emanuel, the Anointed or Ordained God of love
and Salvation, light and eternal glory; by whom he made the worlds, and by
whom all things were made; yea, all things were made by him, and he is before
all things excepting him the Father; that 1 Cor, 25, 27,
has made him Lord of all things, and has put all things under him; to whom
all power is given (from the Father) Matthew, 28, 18,
both in heaven and earth, who is the beginning of the works of God, the first
begotten of every creature.

Ier, 14, 22, Ier, 10, 16,
O Lord our God (the God of salvation) thou have made al these things, the Lord
of hosts is his name, Behold I the Lord ma the God of all flesh, the former and
maker of all Ier, 32, 17, 19, 21, 26, 27, Ephesians, 5, 23, Gen, 2, 4, Isa, 54, 5,
Christ shall be called the God of the whole earth.
things, and the Savior of the body, yea the Lord God maker of heaven and
earth; for thy maker is thine husband, the Lord of host is his name, thy
redeemer, the holy one of Israel, the God of the whole earth shall he be
called; but he is not now so called by the men of this world, nor by his own
chosen people the Jews, who do now daily deride him, and call him the impostor,
and crucified God of the Gentiles;

Heb, 12, 9,
Lo, thus you see that the Father is the most high invisible and
incomprehensible God and Father of all spirits; Creator of all things* of whom
are all things, and Christ is the visible 1 Cor, 3, 23, Heb, 1, 9, Gal, 1, 3,
Lord God (the beloved Son) the former and maker of all things (into external
form, and shape* being) by whom are all things, and thus are we Christ's, and
Christ is Gods; Psalm, 68, 20.
For he that is our God, is the God of Salvation (Christ) or of the elect, and
not Lucifer the God of damnation (or of the reprobates, and unto God (the Lord
Christ) belong the Issues from death, Hell, and Damnation, Be^lzebub.

Rom, 11. 36,
O the depth and power of (Christ) the wisdom of God! how unsearchable are his
works, and his ways past ^in^^^g out? for of him* through him, and to him are
all things, and he is (the Fathers delight) before all things, in wh^m he is
well pleased.

To whom be ascribed (as due is) all honor, glory might, majesty, and dominion
eternal, from all his works in Psalm, 119, 71, 92,
general, and from him in particular; to whom the law of his mouth is become
better then thousands of Gold and silver; for unless his law had bin my
delight, I had perished in these mine afflictions, of more then ten years
continuance in these several places of man's Inhumane cruelty, but are to me
Schools of Gods correction and fatherly chastisement.

Where if Christ (the goodness mercy and power of Psalm, 132, 2, 3, 6,
God) had not bin on my side, mine enemies had swallowed me up, when their wrath
was kindled against me; yea, they had brought my life down to the ground
because they are too mighty and strong for me; but blessed be the Lord my God,
and Savior anointed, who has not given me over as a prey to their teeth,
though my soul has long bin under the power and among these cruel ones whose
teeth are spears and arrows, and their tongues a sharp sword.

Rom, 16, 17, 18,
I beseech you therefore brethren, mark them which cause divisions
(Persecutions, Oppressions, and Offenses) and avoid them; for such as they
serve not our Lord Jesus John* 8, 44, a Pet. 2, 14, 15, 17, 1^,
Christ, but (their father the Devil and) their own bellies, and by good words
and fair speeches, deceive the hearts of the simple: an he^rt they have,
exercised with covetous practices (of Oppression, gain, honor, and preferment)
following the way of Baalam, who loved the wages of unrighteousness. 1 Pet, 3,
2,


And know this, that there shall come in the (or these) last days, Scoffers,
walking after their own lusts (prescribing a service to God after their own
vain devises (as our Bishops did, and Priests still do) making a mercenary
trade of the Gospel of Christ, and his ordinances of the sacraments of
baptism, and the Lords supper, burying of the Col, 2, 8,
dead, and diverse other things; and by speaking great high words and vanity
(they) spoil many through Philosophy 2 Cor, 1, ^4, 2 Cor, 2, 17, Mar, 7, 6, 7,
and vain deceit* after the vain Traditions of men, after the (Idolatrous)
rudiments or wisdom of the world and not after Christ, nor the rule of his
word; challenging als o to have dominion over your faith, they compel men to
serve 1* Cor, 1, 20, 26, 27. 1 Cor, 3, 18, 19, 20,
Christ in their vain devised ways; and thus they lord it over Gods heritage,
but how can such hypocrites seek Gods honor truly, when they thus seek after
lordship, dominion, and honor, one of another, as wicked lawyers do? but where
is the wise? where is Scribes? where is the (Doctor or great) disputer of this
world? h^th not God made foolish the wisdom of this world? (or all worldly
wisdom) for not many wise*men (after the fle sh) not many mighty, not many
noble are called, but God has chosen the foolish and weak, to confound the
wise and mighty; for the wisdom of this world is foolishness with God, he
takes the wise in their own craftiness, and knows that their thoughts (and
^rts of subtle Sathanicall Sophistry) are vain.

Psalm, 32, 11*
But be glad and rejoice in the Lord, O ye righteous, and shout for joy all ye
that are (meek) and upright in heart, for ye shall receive the crown of glory
and these your (proud insulting) Oppressors shall be no more.

For what soever is not of Christ, is of Beelzebub; But Covetousness, Pride,
Injustice, Tyranny, Oppression, and Uncharitableness, is not of Christ,
Therefore of Beelzebub. And his children (or servants) ye are to whom ye obey.

Oxon. and Cantabr.
This real truth of Christ's eternal Reigns
With all his Saints in Judah land again.
Oxford and Cambridde with their Phi^o^^phy
Their subtle Logic, and cunning Sophistry,
Their learned quirks, and their Sch(...) (...).
Though back^ by Egypts Art, though f^^^^'d (...) Styx,
Shall nere this truth obscure, ^or now this light
Breaks forth most clear to many Christians sight.
Yea, though with blood they have long dampt this truth,
And many hundred years styled it (forsooth)
An heresy, yet now it flames again,
And will consume their learned glosses Fame,
Their Pride, Ambition, Covetous tything fee,
Their Romish Trumpery ere long you will see.
And in this way by them called heresy,
I Will worship still my God in verity;
Until the time he please to call me hence
At his appearing in great excellence;
His people Israel to attend, and praise
Matthew, 24, 36, 37, 38,
With them, Great Zions God in sight always.
None knows that natures day, nor hour, but yet
The time and year with his own words do fit,
For as the days of Noah, so shall be
His glorious coming then, in Majesty.
From Noah*s flood, unto this worlds Creation
Is sixteen hundred fifty seven, by computation:
But now the Priests the Lord of mercy sell;
And by Injustice, the Laywers them excel.
Thus one, the word of mercy sells for gold,
The other Justice, Impiously and bold.
FINIS.

