THE PROPOSALLS DELIVERED TO THE Earl of Nottingham, and the rest of the
Commissioners of Parliament, residing with the Army, from his Excellency Sir
Thomas Fairfax, and the Army. Resolved upon at a General Council of War
held at Reading July 17. 1647.

With a Message sent by the Lord Wharton to the Parliament: And a Letter to the
Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Common Council, concerning the Disposal of the
Militia of London into the former hands.

By the appointment of his Excel. Sir Thomas Fairfax, and the Council of War.

Signed John Rushworth Secre.

LONDON; Printed by Matthew Simmons for John Pounset, and are to be sold at his
Shop at the sign of the hand and Bible, at the lower end of Budge-row near
Dowgate. 1647.

These several ensuing particulars, being considered, debated, and resolved
upon at a General Council of War (his Excellency being present) we the
Commissioners of the Army were appointed (in the name and behalf of them) to
present the same to your Lordships, and the Commissioners to be tendered with
all speed to the Parliament; which we accordingly offer and desire your speedy
care therein; That so an Answer (according to the desire and expectation of the
Army) may be speedily returned to these Particulars.
1. THat there be an effectual Declaration forthwith published to the whole
Kingdom, against the inviting, bringing or coming in of any foreign Forces,
under any pretense whatsoever.

2. That the Army may be paid up equal with the Desertors thereof, according
to the late Votes of Parliament: And that the Army may forthwith be put into a
constant course of pay, that they may not be so burdensome and oppressive to
the Country; for the more speedy performance whereof; We desire, That the
House of Peers would be pleased to concur with the desires of the House of
Commons, (so often proposed to them) for the reviving of the Committee for the
Army, that so the Assessements and great sums in Arreares, both in the City
and eswhere, may be by their endeavor collected for the speedy and necessary
supply of the Army: And also, That the Treasurers, and the Committee of
Weavers-Hall, may be speedily called to Account, in what manner, and by what
Warrant the two hundred and thirty thousand pounds, lately entrusted in their
hands, have been in so short a time consumed.

3. That the Militia of the City of London, and the Committee of the same, may
consist of such persons, and speedily be returned into those hands, who
formerly during the worst of times, have therein given large Testimonies of
their fidelity to the Parliament and Kingdom: which besides the real
security, will be to the Parliament and Kingdom in preventing of dangers
repreparing toward a new war, would conduce so much to the remooving of
jealousies, and give such a ground of confidence to the Army, as that we might
the better dispose it to larger Quarters in several parts, for the ease of the
Country.

Reading 18. July 1647. By the Appointment of the Commissioners for the Army.
William Clarke.

According to and in pursuance of the particular mentioned under the fifth Head
of the Representation of the Army, we do earnestly desire:
THat all persons imprisoned in England, or Dominion of Wales, (not for
Delinquency in relation to the late War, but for other pretended
misdemeanors) and whose imprisonment is not by the Regulated Course of Law, but
by Order from either Houses of Parliament, (or of Committees flowing from them)
may be put into a speedy Regular and equitable way of trial, or (if the
necessity of settling the general affairs of the Kingdom admit not their
present trial) then they may have present liberty (upon reasonable security)
for their appearance at a certain day, to answer what shall be charged against
them in a legal way. And that when they shall be tried, if they appear
wrongfully, or unduly imprisoned, they may have reparation according to their
sufferings.

In particular, we desire this may be done in behalf of Lieutenant Colonel
John Lilbourne, Mr Musgrave, Mr Overton, and others (in their Condition)
imprisoned in and about London.

Reading July 18. 1647. By the Appointment of his Excellency Sir Thomas
Fairfax, and his Council of War. Signed, John Rushworth.

A Letter to the Lord Major, Court of Aldermen, and Common-Counsell, of the
City of LONDON.
My Lord and Gentlemen;
IN the carrying on of the great businesses of the Kingdom toward a general
and happy settlement, it has been a fixed principle with us to make it our
first endeavor with the Parliament, that all things which threaten an
engagement of the Kingdom in a second War, might be removed before we could
have a confident expectation of a good issue; upon a Treaty with their
Commissioners, which course of ours, although it might have some appearance of
delay: yet by men that are zealous of the Kingdoms good (we hope) no endeavor
will be judged unnecessary, that may secure the Kingdom from the danger of any
new imbroylements.

We are now come thus far, that the most material particulars which we have
in preparation to propose, for the general settlement of the affaries of the
Kingdom, have bin communicated to the Parliaments Commissioners; and we hope
they are satisfied, that they contain in them things tending to a general
good, and to lay an hopeful Foundation for common Right, and Freedom, to the
people of this Land for future; and for a lasting peace amongst us. But before
we can securely intend and without interruption apply our selves, unto the
proceedings and dispatch of the Treaty, there upon we have delivered into the
hands of their Comissioners, the Paper which consists of three particulars, in
the last whereof (which is the Militia of the City) you being most immediately
concerned, to the end you may see we would ask nothing which relates to you,
without giving you a just account thereof, and all possible satisfaction
therein; we have also given a Copy thereof to your Commissioners, to be here
with sent unto you. We should not desire this, or any thing else of that
nature, were we not persuaded, that what we desire is seasonable, and for
yours and the Kingdoms good and quiet. And we should willingly have been
silent (as to this:) but considering the just jealousies which lie against some
persons, now authorized in the exercise of that power amongst you, and those
attempts which have bin made by some, who would have engaged your City, to a
War, had not your Lordships and the Court of Aldermen and Common Council, by
your wisdom prevented it, by geting those Votes which were passed by the
Militia, made Null; We cannot in a case of this importance but deal freely
with you, in desiring your concurrence with ours to the Parliament; that the
Militia may be changed into those hands, out of which it was taken, of whose
care and fidelity to the Public, there has been so long and large
experience, as few ages have paralelled. And if the interest we have so long
sought for be still the same, let it not seem strange that we desire both of
the Parliament and City, that those may be in places of such a Trust, who have
given the best proof of their courage and constancy in profecution of the same.

Having thus far declared our selves with all freedom and clearness to you, as
we do not doubt of your good acceptance of our intention therein, so we desire
your forwardness in a work so much tending to mutual confidence; and to
prevent the designs of any who would beglad to put obstructions in the way to
a happy conclusion, and envy nothing more then the continuance of a right
understanding between you and us.

Reading July 19. 1647. By the appointment of his Excel. Sir Thomas Fairfax
and the Counsel of War. Signed Jo: Rushworth Secret.

May it please your Lordship;
WE made a dispatch unto you last night very late, by the Post, and gave you
then a general account of our proceedings.

And after the reading of the Proposals mentioned in that dispatch; had some
papers brought unto us, by Sir Hardres Waller, and other officers, containing
some desires of the Army, in order to their present security: which papers,
before they were transcribed, were sent for back again.

We expect the return of them this day, and shall thereupon transmit them to
your Lordship with all speed.

In the mean time, it was held fit to desire the L. Wharton to come up to you,
for your more perfect knowledge in any thing that may relate to our former
dispatches, and that nothing may be wanting on our parts in discharge of the
trust reposed in us. Who are

Redding July 19. 1647. Your Lordships humble servants NOTTINGHAM.
Since the writing of this Letter, these enclosed papers have been brought unto
us by some of the Officers of the Army, which we held our duty immediately to
send to you.



FINIS.

