THE Friendly Monitor, Laying open THE CRYING SINS OF Cursing, Swearing,
Drinking, Gaming, Detraction, and Luxury or Immodesty.

Piously intended for Correcting the Errors of this Vicious Age; in which,
under the Name of Christian, Men live like Heathens.

In Five Short Discourses, in which is shown the Unreasonableness and great
Mischiefs of these Vices, and some Means proposed for their Cure.

LONDON, Printed for Sam. Crouch, at the Corner of Popes-head-Alley, against
the Royal Exchange, 1692.

THE Friendly Monitor, Laying open the CRYING SINS OF Cursing and Swearing, And
proposing some REMEDIES For their, CURE.
HEar, O Earth, the words of my mouth, Deuteronomy. 32. It Is you was Created by the
Almighty, for the Son^ of Men to walk on; but, behold, they have set you over
their heads, admiring your Dust and Clay, enamored with your Filth and
Corruption, and willingly venturing their Souls for the purchase of your*
Dross; but Heaven they have brought under their feet, and trample most
profanely on the most Holy Name of God, while they show respect to you. For
are they not come to that impiety, that having little regard to the
Commandments, wherein they are strictly enjoined not to Take his (...) vain;
and taught, ^ot to speak of him, but with all the Respect and Reverence
possible, they lay aside all Religious Modesty and Shame, and not only make his
Name Common, but vilely prostitute it to all their own vain, idle and wicked
ends?

For where can a man turn, but his Ears are soon struck, too often on both
sides, with horrid Swearing, rash Oaths, frightful Cursing and abominable
Blasphemies; enough to make a man think, he is encompass's rather with wicked
Spirits and Fiends, than Men, who profess themselves Christians? Is it not with
these Prophanations they give a Relish to their Sports and Entertainments? With
these they set off their Jests and Narratives; these they mix with their Cups;
with these they sanctify their Debauches: With these they add terror to their
Passions, power to their Commands, authority to their Quarrels; and if the very
Horses and Dogs are not ready at the beck of their Humor, are not these made
use of for Spurs and Whips? Heaven and Hell are immediately stirred up, and
notwithstanding the Great Gulf that is betwixt them, they bring God and the
Devil together in one breath.

This is an excellent Character now of a People, that pretends to believe in
God and love him. He says expressly, Thou shall not profane the Name of thy
God, Deuteronomy. 19. 12. and they spare not his Name even in the worst of
prophanations; taking it often in their mouths, but to its dishonor; and
dragging it into the Streets, to serve as the Mockery of their Passions, of
their Excesses and Fury. Christ our Lord confirms this Command to all his
Followers: But I say unto you, Swear not at all, neither by Heaven, nor by
Earth; Matthew. 5. 34. neither by any other Oath, as his Apostle adds, Jam. 5.
12. And they, like perverse and rebellious Children, mix their Oaths with all
their discourses; swear by Heaven and Earth, and call in God, and all that is
Sacred, to witness the Truth of their impertinent, idle, and often Lying
Extravagancies.

And is not this a misery, that men should thus forget their Duty, contradict
their Profession and so grievously offend their God? their God, whom the Angels
adore, before whose Throne all the Heavenly Spirits fall down and worship,
giving glory, and honor, and praise, to his Holy Name for ever and ever: He it
is, these Men stand before without Reverence or awe, and so little think of
Praising, that they are continually belching out against him Injuries and
Contempts, under all the variety of Oaths and Swearing, that their Passion and
Folly can suggest to them. So that however the Holy Scripture recommends to us,
that we be ever mindful of our God, it were, in some manner, to be wished, that
these Scandalous Sinners would rather forget him, since they remember him so
often, for no other end, than to Swear by him and Profane his Name.

And how wretched an abuse is this of the Gifts of God! For why did he give man
a Tongue and Speech, but to be the Voice of all other creatures, for himself
and them to give Thanks and Praise, and in humble Prayers, to petition for
relief in all his Necessities? And instead of this, these men have degraded
themselves beneath all other creatures, taking part with the very Devils, and,
in their language, dishonoring their God, and blaspheming the hand that made
them.

Thus by their frequent Oaths and habitual Swearing they offend against the
Lord of Heaven, and in proportion to the Crime committed against him, are
likewise injurious to themselves. For first, is it not most evident, that by
this detestable Vice, they shut the hand of the divine Bounty, and deprive
themselves of that Fatherly Protection and those Heavenly Graces, with which
God is wont to assist and bless his Servants? For how can they expect his
Gifts, who thus, at every turn, are so affronting to the Giver? Have they not
rather reason to fear, they are cast off and forsaken by him, whom they have
first thus wretchedly forsaken?

2. They make themselves incapable of saying their Prayers. For, with what face
can they appear before the Lord, and ask him Favors, whom in their ordinary
discourses they so vilify and contemn? How can they say Our Father, and salute
him with that Title of love, whose Honor they trample under their feet, and to
whom they show no more respect, than is due to the worst of enemies? And when
they say, Hallowed be thy Name, must not their Consciences necessarily turn
upon them? For how can they seriously pray, that his Name may be Hallowed, that
is, Blessed and Praised by all Creatures, who make it their common practice to
dishonor and profane it? They, by their ungodly Speeches, are making it
contemptible to the world, and then in their Prayers say Hallowed be thy Name,
What greater Mockery can there be than this? Might not Belshazzar with as good
reason, in his impious Banquet, Dan. 5. 2. have Prayed for the hallowing the
Vessels of the Temple, when he brought them forth amongst his Wives and
Concubines, and drank in them Praises to his Gods of Silver and Gods of Gold?
Such a Prayer for Sanctifying those Vessels, whilst he was in the very act of
Profaning them, would have been the only way to outdo the devotions of our
Swearing Christians, who pray, if they pray at all, that the Name of God may be
hallowed, and with their next breath profane it amidst their Cups and
Concubines; and if it be for their advantage to have it brought forth on the
Counter, to gain credit to their false Protestations, scruple not by repeated
Oaths, to sacrifice it to their Interest, to their Gods of Silver and Gods of
Gold. Thus Belshazzar-like, with their impious lips they pollute that which is
most Holy, and have no other possible excuse for being thus profanely absurd
and ridiculous, but only the ill Custom of a Rash and Heedless Humor, by which
as they Swear, so they Pray they Know not what. But that Hand, which writ the
fate of that Unhappy Prince, writes, no question, their Crimes and Destiny on
every wall; and tho they, Blind and Obstinate Sinners, observe it not; yet it
will, one day, be produced against them; and then, when in the Severity of the
Punishment, they too late begin to see the weight of their Sins, what will
follow, but repeated Cries of Despair, instead of Repentance? But Heaven will
be then as Deaf to their Cries as they had been before to all its invitations
to amendment.

But let us suspend their Sentence a little, while we view another part of
their Crime, and that is the Sin of Cursing, which commonly hangs to the
former; for Swearing and Cursing for the most part go together; and have this
only difference, that Swearers, by dishonoring the Name of God, seem to disown
and abandon him; but Cursers take a step more back still, and call on the Devil
for help; so that, while, by the former Sin, they forsake God; by the other,
they go to the Devil. And this is most abominable in all its branches. For 1.
if we consider those, who on slight and trivial occasions throw out Curses
against themselves, at every turn calling for Plagues, the Devil and Damnation
on their own heads, what greater Madness can there possibly be than this? To
see men, who, besides being bound by the Law of Nature and of God, to preserve
themselves, are otherwise so tender and nice, even to a Vice, that they cannot
bear the least Inconvenience, the least Pain, Contradiction or Disappointment,
but they presently become uneasy, impatient and passionate; to see these, I
say, in their frequent Wishes, as it were, importunatly calling for the worst
of Torments on themselves, wishing for Hellfire and hourly Praying for what
they most fear, and for the destruction of that, which their whole concern is
to preserve: What shall I fay of them? but that the Outrages of Bedlam are
Reasonable in comparison of their Folly: And that if they would but lay down
this Madness, and take up theirs, 'twould be no ungrateful Exchange to such of
their True Friends, who would be more contented to see in them an Innocent,
than a Wicked Frenzy. And however they may, think it more Manly and Great to
play with Hellfire and Damnation, than with Straws, Paper or Ribbands; yet
certainly these are the more harmless, and I think no less becoming; since all
the Greatness, that is in the former, is only like the Swelling of Venomous
Creatures, which grow big indeed, but with nothing but Poison.

2. If we look on these Sinners in regard of their Neighbor, they are of all
the most Uncharitable; tho this indeed be no more than a Consequence of their
former Crime: for they that are thus their own enemies, as to pray for the
worst of evils on themselves, cannot be well expected to say better Prayers for
their Neighbors. And therefore it is, on the least Provocation, you may hear
them wishing for all the Plagues, Devils and Damnation on every one that stands
in their way, that thwarts their humor, or appears in the least injurious to
them. These are their Seconds called in, on all occasions to revenge every
affront offered to their Cravat-string, Perriwig or Toes: so that a man must
walk very cautiously to escape having the Devil let loose at him some time in
the day. For these men have him so ready in their mouths, that he seems to be
kennel'd there, and the least occasion makes him fly out.

And this is an excellent sort of Gospel Spirit now, which is as exact in
observing the Precepts of Christ, as the worst of Heathens could desire. He
says, Love your Enemies, Math. 5. 44. and a little thing serves to make them
Curse their Friends. He says, Bless them that Curse you, and their Blessing is
of Plagues and Devils. He says, Do good to them that hate you; and their good
is, to wish them confounded with Eternal Evils. He says, Pray for them which
despitefully use you, and their Prayer is a Hearty Dam ye. Thus they defeat the
most fundamental Maxims of Christianity, and make the enemies of the Gospel
blaspheme the Holy Name, which they profess.

And is not this a most abominable and scandalous Practice, for men thus to
trample on that Law, which they pretend to follow, and, upon every provocation,
to turn their anger against God? What mercy can they expect from him, whom they
thus unworthily offend? And with what confusion must they one day appear before
him, whose Name they have so wickedly profaned, whose Honor they have exposed
to Scorn and Contempt, whose Commandments they have broken without remorse?
Will not then all their vain and rash Oaths, their detestable Curses rise up in
Judgment against them, and that Damnation, they have so often wished to others,
fall to their own share?

This, there is too much reason to fear, will be their unhappy lot, if they take
not care to reform these Vices in time, and shake off these ill habits, before
Death summons them to appear before their Lord. Will it not therefore be a
labor well bestowed, if by sincere endeavors and a seasonable Repentance they
strive to prevent this doom of misery? For my part, the Zeal I have for God's
Honor, and the Compassion due to my Neighbors and Brethren in their Souls
distrefs, make me heartily desire they would turn their thoughts and endeavors
this way. I wish 'twere in my power to contribute to this Common good: I dare
not presume to direct; however, if I lay before them some Means, or Helps, I
hope Christian Charity will be sufficient to excuse me.

I am very sensible, how difficult it is to overcome an ill Habit; and yet I am
persuaded, there is no body, that sets himself seriously about this work, with
the application due to so great an affair, but, by the Blessing of Heaven, will
soon gain ground, and by degrees become entire Master of himself: But then,

1. He must not fail, in frequent and fervent Prayers, daily to beg the
assistance of the Divine Grace, which is the only Remedy of all our evils, and
without which all our endeavors will most certainly be fruitless. He must
often, with David, cry out, Make have, O God, to deliver me, make have to help
me, O Lord; Ps. 70. and as often beg, that the Seraphim, that touched the
unclean lips of Isaiah, Isa. 6. 6. will with a Coal from the same Altar of God,
touch his lips and mouth and purge them from all iniquity.

2. As for Persons of Quality, who know what Honor is, and are very sensible of
every thing that touches them in that point, ought not they to consider how
unbecoming and unworthy it is in them, frequently to dishonor him, from whom
all Honor proceeds, and in their daily discourses to cast out so many
indignities against the divine Majesty, which, if offered to their own Persons,
they could not bear without rage? And as for others of a lower rank, it is not
less unreasonable in them, since for Worms of the earth to be so often flying
at the Infinite Majesty of God, is most arrogant and Intolerable. And may not a
serious consideration of this be some check to this evil?

3. What if these Offenders would frame a lively Idea of those eternal flames,
which are prepared as the Punishment of their crimes? and that this may make a
due impression on their minds, what if they imagine, that for every Rash Oath
or Curse, that comes out of their mouths at present, they were to have a
burning Coal laid on their Tongues, though for five minutes only; would not this,
if 'twere to be really so, teach them to bridle their Tongues and soon fright
away their ill Custom? And why should not the thoughts of Hell, with Rational
men, work the same effect? They are generally careful to avoid and prevent
Mischief; and why not that above all, which is Eternal?

4. Why should not every man set up a Court of Justice within his own breast,
and as the Commonwealth has appointed certain Penalties for Public Offenders,
so every one assign certain Mulcts or Punishments for every Notorious or
Scandalous Sin, which they commit? And what if one, that is subject to Swearing
etc would, for every Sin of this kind, fine himself, according to his ability
twopence, a groat, sixpence, etc. to be given to the Poor, or employed in any
other Charitable use? Would not this, by degrees, make him more careful; and
for the saving his Money, oblige him to save his Soul?

Thus might every one, that is truly desirous to reform any ill Custom, find
out Means to effect it. And it is but necessary this in particular should be
seriously thought on, since, like a Contagious Distemper, it has overrun the
greatest part of mankind: it is this which is most Public and Scandalous, and
by offending all pious ears of Little and Great, must necessarily draw after it
the Punishment of many Millstones, and make it to have been better that such
men had never been born, than thus under the Name of Christians, to have taken
part with and lived like Heathens

FINIS.
The next Sheet shall be Of the Sin of Drunkenness.
Printed for Sam. Crouch at the Corner of Popes-head-Alley, over against the
Royal Exchange, 1692.

THE Friendly Monitor. OF THE SIN OF DRUNKENNESS.
Drunkards excluded the Company of God's People, and from the Number of the
Blessed. Sober Drunkards not much less Criminal than Sottish ones: Their Sins
laid open, and Pretexts for such Drinking showed Vnreareasonable.

AN Ancient Father says, Drunkenness is a Devil; how then can I. better go
about to lay this Evil Basil. Spirit, than with the Word of God in my Hand?
Awake therefore ye Drunkards, and weep and howl all ye Drinkers of Wine, Joel
1. 5. For, behold, the Lord of Hosts has pronounced Wo's: against you, declared
you miserable and wretched both here, and hereafter. He has set a Mark on you
like Cain, and commanded his People to run from you as from a Pestilential
Distemper: Be not amongst Wine-bibers, says he to them by Solomon; Prove. 23.
20. And by St. Paul, he enjoins them, not to keep Company with any Man that is
but called a Drunkard, 1 Cor. 5. 11. And he has expressly cut you off from the
Inheritance of Eternal Life: Be not therefore deceived, says he, for neither
Thieves, nor Covetous, nor Drunkards, shall inherit the Kingdom of God, 1 Cor.
6. 9, 10. Again he repeats this Decree, The works of the Flesh are manifest,
Envyings, Murders, Drunkenness, of the which I tell you, that they which do
these things, shall not inherit the Kingdom of God, Gal. 5. 19, 21.

Thus you see your selves in plain terms rejected by the Almighty, and a
Twofold Sentence passed against you: First, whereby you are Condemned as unfit
for the Company of his People. Secondly, whereby you are for ever excluded from
the number of the Blessed. Awake ye Drunkards, and weep and Howl all ye
Drinkers of Wine. We'll now enquire into the Reasons of these Two Decrees, and,
by this take a full view of the blackness of the Crime.

And First, why the Servants of God are forbid the Company of such as are
subject to this Vice. We read in Scripture of the Israelites having a strict
charge given them not to mix with the Canaanites, nor the Hittites, or other
People of the Land, but to 'avoid all Society with them; and the reason was,
that thus declining their Company, they might be out of danger of being
corrupted by them, and so continue Faithful to their God. The same without
doubt is the reason why all good People are enjoined not to company with
Drunkards, because their Vice as it is most Scandalous in it self, so it is
destructive of all Goodness; it takes off all Modesty and Shame, which are the
common Bars Nature has set up against Wickedness; it makes him that is
Insolent, Prouder; him that is Cruel, Fiercer; and irritates the Leacher, to
the laying aside all thoughts either in regard to Decency or Scandal. It Is this
which puts Families into Disorder, and draws on them Confusion and Ruin; it
drowns Devotion, overthrows Religion, and like a Deluge carries away before it
all Inclinations to Good. In fine, it extinguishes Reason in Man, and having
taken away this his Guide, leaves him to the conduct of Blindness and Passion;
so that as sometimes he becomes altogether Senseless, and like the Idols of the
Gentiles, has Eyes and Sees not, Ears, and Hears not; at other times he puts on
the Beast, and becomes more fierce and intractable than they; and if one should
say, that upon occasion, a Man might with as much security meet the most
furious Inhabitants of Africa, as with some sort of these Amphlbious Domestic
Animals; we have had too many sad Instances to confirm the Truth of it. History
affords us one most remarkable in Alexander, who having Two Friends, Clytus,
and Lysimachus, the one he exposed to a Lion, the other to his Drunken Self;
and while he that was turned loose to the Beast escaped, the other fell a
Sacrifice to the Fury of his Distempered Brain.

And while we see this Vice thus an open Enemy to Virtue, and wholly
inconsistent with the manifold Duties of a Christian Life, we can have no
reason to wonder why there is this strict charge given to Christians, of
avoiding the Company of all such as are unfortunately corrupted with it; for if
there be just reason to run from a Contagion, for fear of its Infection, there
is much more reason to fly such Company, who are little better than so many
Factors for Hell, who trade in Wickedness, and help to ruin Souls. For if the
Word of God expressly commands Christians to live Soberly, ought not they to be
avoided as Enemies to Christianity, whose Life is little better than a repeated
Intemperance, and whose Company is a most certain encouragement to Excess? If
the Word of God enjoins us to live Justly, that is, to discharge every Duty
incumbent us, either in regard to Family, in supporting it; to Children, in
seeing them duly Educated; to Creditors, in taking care that they be Satisfied;
to the Poor, in relieving them with what we can Spare; to every Neighbor, in
giving them good Example; ought not we to fly their Company, who for the
indulging their own Sottish Humor, teach us to neglect these Fundamental
Duties, who see their Family and Children wanting Necessaries, the Poor Bread,
and their Creditors struggling under the weight of many Miseries, whilst they
are playing the Good-Fellows amidst their Cups, and most wickedly throwing away
that Money with which they are bound to satisfy these Obligations belonging to
their Estate? Thus they Drink away the Comfort of their nearest Relations,
Swallow down the Bread of the Distressed, the Blood of Orphans and Widows, and
find a way by lifting up their Hands, to bring as certain Confusion to
themselves and Friends, as Moses did Destruction to his Enemies. And to it to
be wondered now, why these are to be avoided by Christians, these, who, help to
cast all Morality out of Doors, to make void all the Maxims of the Gospel, and
bring amongst Men all that can be extravagant either of Folly or Madness?

And if on these and many other weighty Considerations, these Wet Christians
are banished the Company of all that are Good, have we not much more reason to
conclude, they will be banished the Society of the Blessed for ever? For if their
Crimes render them so black and detestable, that they are unfit for the
Conversation of the Just on Earth, how can we think of their being admitted
into Heaven, where nothing that is Defiled can enter? St. Paul, (as you have
heard,) has said it expressly, that they shall not inherit the Kingdom of
Heaven: And S. Augustine declares them to be most detestable in the Sight of
God; and though some may think Drunkenness to be a light Sin, yet that whoever
lies under the guilt of it, and does not sincerely repent and amend, shall be
most certainly cast out with Adulterers, and Murderers, and have his Portion
with them in everlasting Flames.

And if we sriously consider this matter, what disposition can we find in them
for the Life of the Blessed, who live here like Swine? Is the Bottle and the
Pipe a Preparation for Happiness? or are their Drunken and Filthy Songs, the
way to tune their Souls for Allelujah's of Blifs? Christ commands his Followers
to Deny themselves, and is this Lesson soonest learnt in Alehouses and
Taverns? Is Excess the way to Temperance? Is the Losing their Senses and Reason
the means to put on Christ? Is the humouring their Corrupt Appetites, the way
to Crucify the Flesh with the Affections and Lusts? Is Christ thus to be
formed in them? Ah miserable mistaken Souls, that thus unhappily deceive
themselves, who live in the open practice of Sin, are a Scandal to their
Profession, neglect their manifold Duties, and are even Tutors in Evil! What
can they expect of Mercy, who have thus slighted all the means of Salvation? Or
how shall Heaven be given them, unless it be in reward of their Wickedness? No,
they shall not inherit the Kingdom of Heaven.

Now what has here been said, is not to be understood only of such, as by
excess of Drinking lose their Reason and Senses, but even of all those who give
themselves up to a Habit of Drinking, spending whole Days, or a considerable
part of them, amidst their Cups, though, through the strength of their Brain,
the Drink makes not the least change in them: And therefore I must desire these
stronger Heads, not to flatter themselves, as if Drinking were Innocent, as
long as they find their Brains not distempered; for certainly, notwithstanding
this keeping their Wits, their Consciences lie still open to the Guilt of most
grievous Sins, in the manifold breach of their Duty.

And therefore, not insisting on the baseness of this Brutal Entertainment,
which is only in the Service of the Senses, or to let them see how unmanly it
is, to be ever Sipping, and dwell among Drink; how poor an Hononr it is to
Drink the Company Dead; how unbecoming a Virtue, to Swallow more Wine than the
rest, that is, of the whole Company to be most like a Hogshead; I call their
Thoughts at present to more weighty Considerations, and wish them to reflect
how little better their case is, in regard to Christianity and Heaven, than the
worst of Drunkards.

1. Let them remember, that however harmless they think this their Drinking
Diversion to be, the Word of God gives it another Character, and shows its
abhorrence, by pronouncing Wo's against them them that follow it: Woe unto them
that are Mighty to drink Wine, and Men of Strength to mingle Strong Drink, Isa.
5. 22. Where it is not only those are condemned, who by their Intemperance
forfeit their Reason, but also such as preserve their Wits amidst their
Excesses; their showing their Strength, being here censured as a Weakness, and
their Ability marked out as a Folly: So that however they may pride themselves
as Men of Parts, and make sport of the Company that is fallen under the weight
of their Liquor, Heaven is here pronouncing Woes against them; sentences them
to Miseries, and declares them the object of its Wrath.

2. If they take an exact survey of their Consciences, and make a Catalogue of
their Sins, for which they must be accountable at the last day, I apprehend the
difference between them and the most Sottish Drunkards, will not be very
considerable: For 1. They must give an account of the waste of God's Creatures;
all that Drink which is beyond a Moderate Refreshment, being a most Certain
Abuse, and contrary to the End for. which 'twas intended by the Providence of
God. 2. Of the Waste of Time, whilst those Hours which ought to have been
employed in the discharge of the many Obligations annexed to every state, have
been misspent in Idleness; and when they should have been working out their
Salvation in the Pious Exercises of a Christian Life, have been indulging their
Passions, and taken as many Steps toward Hell, as they have drunk away Hours,
which were given them for a better end. 3. Of the Waste of Money, the expense of
their Intemperance; and this if we consider the many legions of Sins that
follow at the Heels of it, is in too many a Sin of the first Magnitude, and I
fear of a very Damning Complexion. For how can those Men answer it, who let
their Estates run out at the Tap? God has blessed them with a plentiful or at
least sufficient being, and they are set over it as Stewards, by a prudent
management, to Husband it for the good of their Family and poor Relations, or
for the benefit of the Public; and instead of this care to improve and dispose
of it for its due ends, they prodigally waste and destroy it to feed their own
corrupt Appetites and Vices. What will they say, when the Lord of all shall
summon them to appear, when he shall command them to give an account of all the
Money an account of all the Money they have thus spent, of the Estates they have
ruined, of the Family they have brought to misery, if not downright want and
beggary? These may go on thus Drinking, and call it by the soft Names of
Diversion, or spending an Hour with a Friend; but it is certain their employment
is nothing better than Sacrificing to Idols; and however they may call
themselves Christians, the Scripture says what Christians they are, a sort that
are worse than Heathens. 4. If they consider how much they impair their Health
by their Drinking, how many Distempers they bring on themselves, and often
become their own Murderers; if they add to this the many Sins of their
Companions, who by their Example are drawn into Drink; for though they escape
being Drunk themselves, are not they to answer for Criminal Excesses of all
those who by their Authority or Company, were encouraged thus to make Beasts of
themselves; as likewise for all the misfortunes of their Families, which from
hence often take their rise? And this Crime is much blacker again in such, as
knowing the strength of their own Brains, set purposely to make others Drunk,
accounting it their Victory to see others fall at their Feet: And is not this a
barbarous Triumph, to rejoice in the crimes of their Neighbors; first to
betray them to a most grievous Sin, and then to make Sport of their Weakness?
This is nothing better, than offering their Companions a Sacrifice to the
Devil; and whenever they go about it, they ought to change their Phrase, and
instead of the Invitation of Come, will you drink a Bottle? they ought to speak
plain, and say, Come, will you go Sacrifice to Hell?

Thus it is evident how their Sins will rise upon the enquiry; especially if we
add again to these, the many Lewd, Profane and Irreligious Discourses,
occasioned by this Drinking, and other Abominations too frequent in these
Entertainments, which if they were to be all writ on those Walls betwixt which
they are acted, would make too long and shameful a List. And what a poor
satisfaction must it then be to Men, tho they be not often Drunk themselves, to
find so many Crimes lie at their Door? Can they possibly think themselves
Innocent, who thus live almost buried in Sin? Or what favor can they expect
from him, who is the just Avenger of all Iniquity? Is it likely, that Life
Eternal will be their Inheritance; or with the worst of Drunkards to be cast
out into utter Darkness?

Neither can the one sort of Drinkers, or the other, be able to justify
themselves, notwithstanding all those specious pretexts with which they please
their own Fancies, and encourage themselves in this Sin. For 1. If the end they
pretend to Drink for, be Company or Good-Fellowship, is not this most
unchristian, while they see so many Sins before them? Is not this to leave God
for the sake of Men? Is it not to join with others in offending God? Might not
these, with as good reason Drink Poison, or go to Hell for Company? 2. If it be
to make Merry, is it not a great Madness to make a Pastime of that which is the
ruin of a Man's Reason, his Estate, Family and Soul? A Man in a Phrenzy might
make a Bonfire of all he is worth, and Merrily Drink it to Ashes: But for Men
of Reason to do it, unless they find a way to be Drunk before they Drink, is
not easily to be imagined. 3. If it be for the putting away Cares; this is
little better than renouncing all Religion and Gospel; for there Christ invites
all such to him; Come to me, all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I
will refresh you; but these Men turning their Back on Christ, seek this
refreshment in the Bottle, and expect that from a little Drink, which is to be
found no where truly but in God. Ah poor Christians! and what a Deceitful
Comfort is this, which only stifles your Cares, but does not cure them! It
heaps on you daily new Miseries, and by your abandoning God, makes your
Temporal Affliction become Eternal; that is, instead of giving Relief, makes it
to be without end. 4. If it be for the passing time away; this is a most
shameful Reproach to those that make this Plea, since there is no Man but what
has or ought to have something better then this vile Employment. How many
things are there, that may be done for the benefit of our selves or the
Public? How many sorts of Study that are both Profitable and Ornamental? How
great a work in the Mastering our Passions, and Regulating our Spiritual
affairs? So that whoever duly considers his own condition, need never complain
for want of business. And here I cannot but desire our City, but chiefly the
Country-Gentry, to reflect how unbecoming, nay, how scandalous a thing it is,
that Persons whom God has enabled with Riches, with Leisure and with Parts, and
given them the opportunity of doing good in their Generations, to become
eminent in their Families and Neighborhood, and an honor to their Country,
should so lay aside all thoughts of Honor and Goddness, as to give themselves
up to this unmanly entertainment of Drinking, pass their whole time in
adjourning from one Good House to another, and have little better Discourse,
than Where the best Wine is? How well they were entertained the other Day; and
where they shall meet to Morrow? So that whoever intends to live Soberly, must
necessarily avoid their Acquaintance; and for to ruin a good Estate, Family,
Health, Brain and Soul, a Man need seek no better Instructors than they. This
is a point worthy of their most serious consideration, and if every one would
undertake to reform one, they would deservedly be styled the true Fathers of
their Families, and Promoters of the Public Good. 5* As for such as pretend to
Drink upon the account of striking up a Bargain, there may be Circumstances as
the the World goes, that may plead for the Reasonableness of this Custom; but
then it must ever be with a due regard to Temperance; for when Men on this
pretext fall into Excess themselves, or design to overreach their Neighbor,
when softened with Drink, they will prove I fear at the end but ill Traders,
whilst for such petty Satisfaction or Gain, they evidently runt he hazard of
Eternity. Now if besides these, there are others who dare not live more Sober
than their Neighbors, for fear of being Reproached, these are a Cowardly sort
of Christians, who cannot bear a Reproach for Christ's sake: And how will they
bear one day, being denied by Christ, whom they have first denied? for he will
most certainly be ashamed of them, as they have been of him.

Here then I desire all Christians to reflect on the Unreasonableness and ill
consequence of this Swinish Vice, and for such as have been guilty of it, to
enter upon serious and firm Resolutions of amendment. They must expect no small
difficulties in this Undertaking; but however, if they once become so
Courageous as to reject all Temptations to this Sin in the beginning, and
permit not themselves to venture into the Company of Good Fellows, they will soon
be Masters of themselves, and remove that Bar which otherwise would have kept
them out of Heaven.

FINIS.
The next Sheet shall be of Gaming.
Printed for Sam. Crouch, at the Corner of Popes-headAlley, over against the
Royal Exchange, 1692.

THE Friendly Monitor. OF GAMING.
Recreation necessary, but easily abused, even by Good Men. Gamesters ought not
to make their Diversion a Business. The great Mischiefs of Immoderate Gaming.
Playing at Cards, etc. on Sundays, Scandalous.

IT would be very Unreasonable to pass the same Censure against Gaming, as we
have done in the Two former Papers against Cursing and Drunkenness; for these
are so Evil in themselves, that it is not easy to find such Circumstances as
can take off their Guilt, and excuse them from being highly Criminal: Whereas
Gaming in it self is Innocent, and the only Evil it has, is in the Abuse of it.
So that it cannot be our business at present, absolutely to Condemn it, but
rather to lay down such Cautions as may be necessary for the keeping it within
its due bounds, and preventing such Abuses into which Man's Weakness is too apt
to lead him, whilst it runs him beyond those Ends for which 'twas intended.

We need not doubt therefore in the first place to say, that Recreations are in
their kind necessary; for since neither our Minds nor Bodies are able to endure
a constant toil or application to Business, without some convenient intervals
of Diversion or Refreshment, we are hence obliged so far to give them breath
and ease, as may fit them for the carrying on their greater Duties with new
vigor and life. And because all sort of Lawful Games, are in their kind
serviceable for the giving us this Refreshment, hence they become not only
warrantable, but may be in some manner necessary, if attended with all their
due circumstances, as to Time, Place, Persons, Business, etc. But because Man
is too prone to abuse the best of things, and work Mischief to himself out of
that which was designed for his Good, and this being the case too frequently of
Recreation or Games, not only in respect of Ill Men, but of Persons otherwise
exemplar and good, 'twill be very justifiable, if I point at some Conditions
necessary to be observed by all those well inclined Persons who are desirous to
prevent these Mischiefs and Abuses in themselves or others.

Having therefore supposed, that no sort of Games ought to be used for
Recreation, but such as are Lawful, it being most unbecoming the Name of
Christian, for Men to take pleasure in that which is dishonorable to God, or
injurious to their Neighbor; and most unreasonable to place their Diversion in
what will one day prove their Rack and Torment: As to all Lawful Games, care
ought to be taken.

1. That they be used so far only, as they may reasonably serve to recreate and
divert the Mind, and fit it for Business, but not to make a Business of them.
Hence those are very much to blame, who set their Affections so much on any
sort of Game, as to be ever solicitous and contriving how they may enjoy this
Satisfaction, who put by other affairs of Concern, and make them yield to this;
and when any thing happens so obstinately cross to their Designs, that it will
not be put by, fail not to disturb and vex themselves, and are out of Humor
with all they Converse with. These I say, and all others of this kind, are very
much to blame, since they show their Affections to be misplaced, and their
Heart to be corrupt and disordered.

For as to that rank of Men in the first place, whose Livelihood depends on
their own Industry, and on the careful management of their affairs; is it not
evident, that by thus setting their Affections too earnestly on Gaming, they
become at length careless of their Business, lose many advantageous
Opportunities, commit their Concerns to the discretion and care of Servants,
who too often take after their Master, and cannot tell why they should be more
mindful of his Business, than he is of his own; till by degrees, Trade failing,
and the Expense increasing, all falls to ruin, and they who with moderate care
might have lived comfortably, are forced through their ill management, to take
a dishonorable shelter, help to undo their Creditors, live Viciously, and at
the end die Miserably; tho too often they live long enough to see their
Children reduced to an honorable Slavery, and some of them, it is likely, who
have not courage to submit to their Condition, exposing themselves, and taking
ill Courses, as their defense against Want and Misery, which seems too
evidently to threaten them. There are too many Families, God knows, that owe
their Ruin to this Intemperance of Gaming; and too many are brought to the
Highway and the Stews, to seek for that Bread, which Gaming took out of their
Mouths: And if Masters of Estates, and Fathers of Families could but take a
true Survey of but half the Mischiefs that are occasioned by this Vicious
Excess, they would be very jealous of giving themselves any liberty in this
kind, and careful not to let their Recreation become their Business.

Hence it may be easily concluded to be a thing of dangerous consequence, to
permit Gaming in Servants or Younger People of either Sex; for however innocent
it may be, to take the Diversion of an Hour at leisure time with a Friend; yet,
when under this pretext of Recreation, the love of any Game begins to steal
upon them, and they become fond and earnest for it, is it not to be feared,
that it will insensibly grow into a Custom? And then, how often happens it,
that what thus crept upon them in their tender Age, gains strength with their
Years; and what was their Pastime in their Youth, becomes their Business in
their Riper State? And is it not hence, that a great deal of irregularity and
ill Husbandry takes its rise; that having now Families and Concerns of their
own to manage, this ill Custom gets the better of all; Play is preferred before
Duty; those that have Estates, run them out by degrees, and those that have
none, having labored many Days for a little support for themselves and their
Family, upon a little Temptation, play it all away in an Hour? Is not this the
Misery and Madness we see too often in those of a meaner Condition, where the
Man fails not to take true pains all the Week, and when on Saturday Night the
Good Woman is waiting for the return of her Mate, to bring home a Supply to
keep the Pot going, behold he, Good Fellow, has called in by the way, and
resolving to take the refreshment of one Game and a Tankard, comes soon to the
end of his Pay, and then goes jogging Home with the end of an old Tune to his
Wife, and on this and her Credit she is to feed on all the Week, with the
slender hopes of next Saturdays bringing a better Return. From this III
Husbandry it is, those of this lower Sphere are overrun with Misery and Want;
hence arise many and lasting discontents within Doors, the Woman is fretful and
peevish, the Good Man seeks for Peace abroad, and spends amongst his
Companions, what should Feed his Family: And in the mean time the Children grow
up, but like so many little Bears, without Care or Education, and help to fill
the World not with Men but Brutes.

But 2dly, As to those of a higher rank, whose Fortune is made to their Hands,
they are likewise much to blame, if they give themselves the liberty of
excessive Gaming: For tho their plentiful Estate excuses them from laboring
for Bread, yet is it not an unpardonable Ingratitude in them, to make no better
Return to Heaven for this Blessing? God has encompassed them with Good things,
and whilst they behold others on every side toiling for necessaries, they sit
in the midst of Plenty and Ease; and should not that Leisure and Time he has
given them, be better employed then in Gaming? It ought to be their care
certainly to be able to give an account of the Talents entrusted with them, and
so to improve their Time, as to be as much above their Neighbors in Virtue and
all Christian accomplishments, as they are in Estate. But instead of thus
commendably advancing themselves, to see them sotting it over a Bottle, and
daily throwing away so many leisure Hours in no better employment than of Cards
and Dice, is so unbecoming a Crime, that as it little suits with their Quality,
and argues them to have but Narrow Souls, which are thus delighted in such
petty Diversions; so it is disagreeable to all the Maxims of Piety and
Religion; and no question but he whose daily toil has been at the Plow or the
Spade, shall at the last day be found to have been better employed than they.
Would it not therefore be much more becoming their Condition, to apply
themselves to some more Honorable Exercise than this, to take delight in
Beautifying their Minds with the Knowledge of such things as might benefit both
themselves and their Country; and, if they must divert themselves for an hour,
to take care they make not this Diversion their Business: Since these also,
like those of a lower degree, having their Thoughts thus ill taken up, are too
often brought to neglect their Concerns, cause great Discontents at home, play
away the Comfort and Support of their Families, and leaving their Children
without due Education, or Fortune answerable to their Quality, entail on them a
certain Inheritance of Confusion and Misery to many Generations.

Now whilst these are very often the dismal effects of this Excess, it is but
too evident how necessary it is, in all Gaming, to observe this Caution, of not
letting it seize on the Affections so much, as to grow into the Seriousness of
Business. But because there are many others, who keep that due guard on
themselves, as to be out of danger of drawing any of these extravagant Evils on
their Families, and therefore think themselves, in all their Gaming, to be
without Reproof. I must here put these in mind, that notwithstanding this their
Care and Command of themselves, they may yet incur a manifold Guilt, sufficient
to sully that Innocence, which, they think, accompanies them in all their
Diversions; and therefore, on their account, I here add another Condition they
ought to have regard to, that is,

2. That in all their Gaming they ought to have that Care and Moderation, as
not to occasion any Disorder in the Family where they play. To apprehend this
Caution aright, it is necessary to reflect, that every Regular Family has set
hours of Eating, of Praying, of Sleeping, etc. and that a considerable Good of
the Family depends on this Discipline, and due Observation of this Order; for
that every Family is a kind of little Republic within Doors; and that as he
must necessarily be looked on as an Enemy to the Commonwealth, who, to satisfy
his own privare Humor, brings Disorder and Confusion into the Government: So
can he be no other than the Overthrower or Enemy of a Family, who, to please
himself, takes no care what Disorders he occasions in it; and by this means
brings it in some manner to resemble Hell it self; one part of the Description
of which place is, that it is without Order.

But this is not the utmost extent of this Evil; for besides the discomposing a
Family, I apprehend it is often attended with very considerable Mischiefs, and
such as is seldom in their Power to remedy, who thus indiscreetly give the
occasion. And therefore, however these Persons, it may be otherwise Religious
and Just, scruple not at all the Practice of sitting at Friends Houses till
Ten, Eleven or Twelve a Clock at Night at Cards, etc. but go home after this,
slattering themselves, and saying, What Evil have we done? We have spent an
hour in diverting our selves and our Friends: We have hazarded nothing more
than we can well spare: We have wronged no body; We have not fallen into
Passion, neither cursed nor swore, nor committed any Excess; and where is the
harm of all this? Thus they may state their own Case, and please themselves
with the fair prospect of so much Innocence: Yet if the true state of their
Affairs were to be laid before them, I fear they must begin their reckoning
again, and will find, that instead of so much Innocence, they have often the
Guilt to answer for of transgressing all the Commandments.

I know they are ready to ask me, Where is the Theft, Murder and Adultery, etc.
in playing a Game at Cards? And I answer, If they find themselves clear in
their own Consciences, I have nothing to say against them, as to their own
Persons: But then let them tell me, whether they have none of these, or such
like Sins, to answer for, in their Servants? These see their Masters spend,
almost daily, so many hours in Gaming, and are not sensible of any harm in
their doing the like; hence by degrees they grow in love with Play, and having
so many opportunities of Practicing, become as they think, Masters of the Art;
so far, till at length they grow ill Husbands, Drinkers, Gamesters,
Extravagant, and fall into all sort of Vice: Now shall none of all this lie at
their Masters Door, who by their Ill Hours and Immodera^e Diversions, have
given their Servants such frequent Occasions of Idleness, and trained them up
in a method, fit for the learning all manner of Wickedness?

But these Evils, it may be, come behind at so great a distance, that they may
hope the Guilt falls not much on them: Let them look therefore on every Nights
Work, and see whether nothing of this happens, for which they must be, in part,
accountable. The Masters are engaged at their Game till late at Night; the
Servants, who it is likely were well employed at their usual Hours, now when
these are past, have nothing to do; they meet together, and, if there be but
one bad amongst them, he sets them on some idle Discourse, every one takes
their turn in telling their Masters Faults, they defame their Neighbors,
repeat wicked Passages; and often immodest Stories and filthy Songs here take
their place; here they teach and encourage one another in evil, and those who
brought with them pure and innocent Minds, soon find them corrupted: And who
now must answer for the Transgressions of this Assembly? They must every one,
it is true, hold up their Hands for themselves; but shall not the Masters too be
brought in as Promoters and Encouragers, who by their ill Honrs lay before
their Servants the occasions of these Evils? Of these, I say, and often more
than these: For when Servants have thus contracted a Familiarity, and finding
Sleep now draw on with the Night, they grow weary of this Entertainment, the
Meeting is broke up by degrees, one lies down on a Bench, others retire into
this Corner, others into that; and can any one tell me, whether the ill
consequences of this Privacy and Retirement, may not be much more pernicious
than what was acted in Public. Thus may this Innocent Gaming be easily
attended with the blackest of Crimes; and those Masters, who pass under the
Character of Just and Good, have Sins to answer for against all the
Commandments, for not keeping due Order in their Diversions.

Since therefore there will be some Gaming, let him be my Man, who considers
how much he may venture, and will play for no more; who thinks how much time
may be proper for a reasonable Diversion, without giving any Disturbance to the
Family of his Friend or his own; and when that is expired, whether Winner or
Loser, goes his way. And for the Master of a Family, let him be the Man, who,
Brave as a Christian ought to be, sees this Order duly kept in his House; who
is Civil to his Friends, but Just to his Family; lets them know his Hours, and
yields not from his Duty, in Complement to any ones Weakness; for this he cannot
do, without another Weakness as great as theirs.

3. A Third Condition to be observed by those that Game at Cards or Dice is,
That they Play not on Sundays: This is added for the sake of some Persons, who
I am told, scruple not thus to divert themselves on the Lord's Day, being of
Opinion, there is no more guilt in this, than in any other sort of Harmless
Diversion, such as Walking or Discoursing. I meddle not here with the
Lawfulness of the thing in it self, but one thing I with all assurance declare,
that this sort of Recreation of Cards, etc. on Sundays, is what gives great
Scandal to others: And I think every good Christian ought to have that
Tenderness toward his Neighbor, as not to give him occasion of Offense on
those days on which all things ought most particularly to be done to
Edification. I know their Plea is, That if their Neighbor be Scandalized at
this, it proceeds from his Weakness, and not from any just occasion given by
them; and therefore, if there be any Fault, it is his and not theirs. I answer,
were the case really thus, is it not still a great Christian Duty in matters of
this nature, which no Necessity or Obligation presses, to have regard to the
Weakness of our Brother? St. Paul was so cautious and tender in a case like
this, that he solemnly declares, If he saw his Brother through want of Knowledge
or Weakness, offended at his eating of such Meat, which he lawfully mightyet on
this consideration, I will eat no Flesh, says he, while the World stands, 1
Cor. 8. 13. For this reason, while he shows it to be no Sin to eat Meat offered
to Idols, at the same time he desires the Faithful to take heed lest by any
means they abuse this Liberty, and become a Stumbling Block to them that are
weak, v. 9. For that by sinning against the Brethren, and wounding their weak
Conscience, they sin against Christ, v. 12. If therefore Playing at Cards on
Sundays, were as lawful as these Men pretend, yet ought they to take heed, not
to abuse this Liberty, to the offense of those Brethren, whose weak Consciences
are wounded by this Diversion; and by this Moderation, prevent that Scandal,
which they otherwise bring on their Church and Religion.

Secondly, If they must have Diversion on these Days, why such an one as is so
dangerous and subject to so many Abuses, which even the Pious and Discreet have
difficulty enough to use with Moderation, but too often fall into Excess,
either as to the length of Time, or of Heat and Passion, Contesting, Swearing,
Covetousness, etc. And if there be any that can govern themselves as to these
Points, yet don't they by their Example encourage others at least to Play, who
cannot? And is this a good Sunday-work?

Thirdly, How does this Diversion agree with the Precept? God commands this Day
to be kept Holy; and these Men spend a considerable part of it at Cards. What
sort of Christian Holiness is there in this? This Game would be a Profanation
of a Holy Place, how comes it to be a means of Sanctifying a Holy Day? Methinks
since God has reserved but One Day of the Seven to himself, it might be much
better employed; especially too, since every Christian besides Praising and
Adoring his Maker, has the great works of his Soul and Eternity to be done on
that Day: The works of calling himself to an account, enquiring into the state
of his Soul, mastering his Passions, regulating his Affections, repenting of
his Sins, preparing for Death and Judgment, Reading, Instructing and
Catechizing those under his Charge, whether Children. Servants, etc. These may
very well serve for a full employment for One day in the Week; and those that
find then time to Play at Cards, I fear know not the great work they have to
do, or at least leave it undone.

There are some other Conditions I would have set down, but I think they may be
reduced to these; and I cannot but hope, if Christians would be exact in the
observance of these mentioned, Inconveniences and Evils might be avoided, which
are too common amongst Gamesters, and Men would find a way to give themselves a
just Diversion, without entrenching on their Greater Duties, and Playing away
all Religion and Christianity.

The next shall be Of the Sin of Detraction.
Printed for Sam. Crouch, at the Corner of Popes-head-Alley, over against the
Royal Exchange, 1692.

THE Friendly Monitor. Of the SIN of DETRACTION.
Speaking ill of our Neighbor a Sin against Charity, against the Law of
Nature, against Justice, Fidelity and Truth. Too frequent in the Conversation
of both Sexes. Some Directions on this Subject.

BY Detraction I understand that Sin, by which Men lessen and impair the Credit
of their Neighbor, either by Whisperings, by False Reports, Stories taken up
upon trust, weak Surmizes, and even the discovering of such Truths, as betray
his Infirmities, and evidently prejudice his Reputation. Now this being a Sin,
which has overrun the geatest part of Mankind, and invaded the Tongues even of
those, who amongst Men, bear the Character of Good, Pious and Just, I think
it is but reasonable, it should be exposed in its Colors, that so the Foulness
and Malignity of it being laid open, it may be detested by the Good, and
excluded the Conversation of all those, who look toward Heaven, and think of
having a part in the Resurrection of the Just.

For this end we need only consider, that Speaking to the discredit of others,
is a Sin, not levelled only against some Branch of the Commandments, but even
against one of those main Pillars, on which the whole Law depends, that is, the
Love we owe our Neighbors: And whilst it overthrows this, it likewise
undermines the other; since he that loves not his Neighbor, deceives himself,
if he thinks he loves God: So that, tho it be but a short, yet it is a clear
Case, that He that speaks evil of others, has neither the Love of God, nor of
his Neighbor in his Heart. And what a Christian must he be, who thus, in one
Act, tramples on the whole Law of God, and leaves his Soul void of all
Spiritual Life? The Life of Charity, I mean, which is the Bond of Perfectness,
and the end of the Commandments, and without which God can neither abide in us,
nor we in him.

It Is not therefore sufficient for a Christian to preserve himself from those
more notorious and infamous Crimes, of Idolatry, Drunkenness, Fornication,
Stealing, etc. but from this of Detraction and Backbiting too: For however this
be not altogether so scandalous, and of so black a Complexion in the Eyes of
Men, as the former; yet it is equally destructive in it self, of all Goodness,
as detestable in the sight of God, and as certainly damns those that are guilty
of it, as any of the rest; for it is the Spirit of God has said it by St. Paul,
That not only Fornicators, Idolaters, Adulterers, Drunkards, etc. but Revilers
also shall not inherit the Kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10.

Is it not therefore a Caution indispensably necessary for all that profess
Christianity, to look something beyond that narrow Scheme of Holiness, which
the Pharisee in the Gospel framed to himself, and went home contented? For what
if, like him, they are not Extortioners, nor Unjust, nor Adulterers? What if
they Fast and Pray, and give Alms? Will not all this come far short of Heaven,
if with him over-looking their own Faults, they severely censure and condemn
their Neighbor? Will Fasting and Praying take off the guilt from this
uncharitableness? Or will not being an Extortioner, or an Adulterer, make
Detraction Innocent? No, this one Sin is sufficient to pollute the purest Soul;
it renders even the best of Christian Exercises fruitless; and though there be
an exact compliance with all other Duties, yet is not all this sufficient to
prevent the dismal effects of this Vice. For though a Man should have all Faith,
so as to remove Mountains, and have no Charity, he is nothing: Tho he bestows
all his Goods, and feeds the Poor; tho he gives his Body to be burnt, and has
not Charity, it profits him nothing.

Thus stands it then with this Vice of Backbiting, Reviling, and speaking ill
of others, in regard of God and Eternity; for whilst it divests a Man of the
Wedding Garment of Charity, it certainly marks him out for one whose
unavoidable Fate will be, to be cast forth into utter Darkness. And if we
consider it now a little more particular in it self, we shall still discover
the unreasonableness of it, and other Motives to detest it.

For 1. Is not this a Sin directly opposite to that Principle of Nature, of
doing as we would be done by? Let but any one examine his own Heart, and see how
he is affected, when he hears of any that makes Reflections on his Words or
Actions, or reports such things, as any ways seem to prejudice his Reputation.
Does not this touch a Man to the quick, raise a disturbance within him, and
often stir up so much Gall and Bitterness, that with some Tempers, it is not in
the power of Time or Friends to make them think well of such Persons any more?
A Good Name, Credit and Reputation are tender things, and there is no touching
them so lightly, but we are presently sensible, and often think our selves
deeply wounded even with a Glance, that elsewhere would not be enough to race
the Skin.

And is it not then a strange sort of an unnatural Crime in Men, to make their
Neighbors Faults the common Subject of their Entertainment, to be sporting
with such Discourses as blemish and often wound their Reputation; whereas if
the Scale were but turned, and their Neighbors were but doing the like of
them, they would not bear it without Indignation; their present Smiles would be
changed into Frowns, and they that make it a Pastime in commenting on the
Failings of others, would find it to be quite otherwise, when their own Faults
were called over? Must not therefore those Persons, who accustom themselves to
this sort of Vice be of a very unthinking Temper, ill-natured, inconsiderate
and rash, who thus deal with their Neighbor, so far otherwise, than they would
be done by?

2ly. It Is a Vice contrary to Justice, Fidelity and Truth. For I think it is a
thing not to be denied, that such as are forward in meddling with their
Neighbors Concerns, and discoursing of their Oversights and Imperfections,
very often relate such things for Truths, which are not so. They take up
Passages upon Hear-says and Reports, and then tell them for Certainties;
whereas there is nothing more certain, than that the greatest parts of those
Reports are uncertain. Let but any Man reflecton what has happened to himself
in this kind, of the many Mistakes he has observed in himself and others; and
if his experience be any thing answerable to mine, I think he may, without
rashness, venture a considerable Wager, that of all the Stories he hears
relating to Third Persons, there is not One in Ten exactly according to Truth.
It Is but sounding a thing to the bottom, and we shall seldom fail of finding
more or less than what is told. Passion and Prejudice often creep in and
disguise the Truth; some make Additions out of a vicious Habit, and having
undertaken to relate a Passage, help it out with the laying on of such Colors
and Circumstances, as may make it grateful to the Company, and worth their
hearing; so that they scruple not to venture their Neighbors Credit, for the
gaining themselves a little Applause, or the raising a Smile or Surprise in
those they entertain. How often is it, that Men mix their own Constructions and
Comments with those matters of Fact they undertake to relate; and then another
that is not very discerning, runs away with the Whole, and tells it to the next
Company for the exact Truth, and nothing but the Truth? And are there not many,
who pretend to inform you of what such an one said at such a time; of what
happened betwixt such a Man and his Wife, Children, Servants, etc. And whilst
they give you the assurance of telling you nothing, upon their Words, but what
they heard and saw, leave out the particular Circumstances or Occasions of what
was said or done, and make the thing as unlike what it was in it self, as if
they had framed it all in their own Heads? Thus, whether by Mistake,
Inadvertency, or on purpose, there are but few Passages come to us, but they
are first disguised or corrupted some of these ways; especially if they come by
Second and Third Hands; for then certainly, like Waters that run through
Minerals, they receive a Tincture, according to the Affection, Vanity, Weakness
or Lightness of the Parties, that helped to convey them to us.

And while Matters stand thus, do not all those deal very unjustly with their
Neighbors, who freely discourse of their Imperfections, and help to hand down
Stories, which are to their Discredit; since it is a plain case, they often put
themselves on relating such things for certain, of which they are so far from
knowing, that they have rather reason to question the Truth? And though the
things were really true; yet whilst there is so much reason to doubt of it,
they are unjust and unfaithful to their Neighbors in as many cases as they
contribute to the lessening their Reputation by such Relations.

But lastly, tho it be more certain, that many Persons are really guilty, both
in Words and Actions, of things Rash, Foolish, Wicked, Profane, etc. Yet is it
not warrantable, even for those who most assuredly know the Truth, and were
Witnesses of such Extravagancies, to make relations of them to Third Persons;
because, notwithstanding all this Truth and Certainty, it is possible, nay,
often likely, they may be yet very unjust to the Parties concerned in so doing.
For how often happens it, if we may favorably judge of others by our selves,
that Men speak and do such things as are really very foolish and indiscreet,
and commit great Oversights and Errors; and it may be, the Words are no sooner
spoke, or the things done, but on the first Reflection, they are vexed, and,
within their own Breasts, reprehend themselves, and wonder as much at their
being thus overseen, and condemn it as severely as any of the Bystanders? Now
for a Third Person, in these cases, to go and whisper, or tell openly to
others, the Passages of such Follies or Indiscretions, is certainly most
unjust; since, by these Relations, they imprint such Characters and Idea's in
the Minds of the Hearers, that in reality belong not to the Persons of whom
they speak; but these are as certainly wronged in their Reputation, as a Man
would be in his Features, who by some Accident turning his Mouth awry, or
skrewing up his Nose, should have a Painter take him in that nick, and transmit
his Picture to Posterity under all those Deformities.

And in other cases, of Men that are notoriously scandalous, whose Follies are
as public as their Persons, it is many times not without trespassing against
Justice, that their Crimes are brought into common Discourses. For does not God
often touch the Hearts of such Sinners, and effectually withdraw them from all
their Errors, so that there is nothin^ they detest more, than the Disorders of
their past Life? And now, for such as have thus happily obeyed the Call of
Heaven, and by a sincere Repentance and Change of Life, made their Peace with
God, is it not very unreasonable and unjust, that their Crimes should be yet
kept alive among Men, and they exposed, to their reproach, at
Table-Entertainments and Visits? God has forgot and forgiven their Sins, but
not so their good Neighbors and Friends; but these still show them under all
the Horror of Filth and Pollution, when in the sight of God they are spotless,
innocent and pure. And can this be done without the Imputation of a great
Injustice, thus in fact, to reverse the Sentence of Heaven, and to make them
still Criminals here, who are discharged above? And if this be the case of all
those, who revive in Company the Extravagancies of such as are truly reclaimed;
is it not very dangerous at any time to enter upon this Subject of another's
Follies? For who can tell, but the Party, however formerly guilty, has since
repented? There may be Presumptions, but hardly an assurance of the contrary;
and may it not then easily be, that the Persons thus reproached, may
notwithstanding all their past Crimes, by an hearty Repentance, be received
into the Favor of God, and become Stars in Heaven; when those who speak Evil
of them, for their Incharitableness and Injustice may find themselves cast out
and be miserable for ever?

And now, since speaking of our Neighbor's Failings is in its self so
dangerous, that it cannot be easily separated from Sin: For if the Subject of
the Discourse be any thing that is False or Doubtful, it is a certain Offense
against Justice,, and if it be True, it may be Unjust still, but is unavoidably
a Breach of Christian Charity. Is it not a great Pity, that this sort of
Discourse should be so frequent amongst the Professors of Christianity, that
there cannot be two or three together one half hour, but ten to one this is
made a part of their Entertainment? And if this were the Weakness only of those
amongst them, who give themselves up to Liberty and Vice, and whose Life is a
Scandal to their Profession, it were not much to be admired: For what wonder is
it, for those who live ill, to speak ill too; and to find them both in Words
and Actions all of a piece? But the misery is, that even those who are of a
more regular Life, who have an Horror of whatsoever seems Criminal, who war
against Sin, and by the exercises of Piety seem seriously to pretend to Heaven,
are yet overtaken in this Snare, as freely begin and help on these Discourses,
as if there were nothing in them contrary to Piety and Religion. This is the
Complaint of an Ancient Father long ago: There are few, says he, that are free
from this Vice, and that live so without Reproof, as to scruple the laying open
their Neighbors Faults: So that even those, who have an Abhorrence of other
Sins, live in the open Practice of this. And is not this a great Oversight and
kind of Stupidity, that those well inclined Souls, whose Thoughts and Desires
seem to be so fixed on Heaven, as to be exact in almost every Duty, should sail
in this one? That their own Lives should be almost blameless, and out of an
itch of talking, to incur the Guilt of other Men's? To live in the way of
Heaven, and talk themselves to Hell, and be damned for their Neighbors Crimes,
is certainly very ill management, and an Indiscretion of a most fatal
consequence.

And while it is an Evil thus foul and impious, is it not again a matter both
of pity and wonder, that it should have insinuated its self so far into the
Favor of that more pious and tender Sex, as to become fashionable in their
most Friendly Visits, and to be one of the Topics of their daily Conversation?
To hear them discourse of Fashions and Dresses, of Jewels, Balls, Coaches,
Watches, Air, Weather, etc. is a suitable and becoming Entertainment; but when
they summon in absent Neighbors, and every one take their turn slinging at
them, in discovering their Imperfections, in calling over their Follies and
Vices, in telling their Hear-says and Guesses, in blackning their Reputation,
and even murdering them in Essigie; here, methinks, they seem to forget
themselves, and go beyond the Moderation reasonably to be expected from the
tenderness of their Sex, and Piety of their Education.

For my part, when I consider a Man's Imperfections and Failings, they seem to
me as so many Sores and Wounds in his Soul; and when I look on his Vices and
Sins, what are they, but so much Stench, Filth and Pollution? Now is it not
very unbecoming in this Sex, to be opening their Neighbors Wounds with their
Tongues; to be licking at his Sores; and when they take so much care in
perfuming themselves, to be so easy in turning up a Dunghill, to dwell in Sinks,
and be raking in them so long, till they send a Stench up to Heaven? It would
certainly be much more commendable in them, as likewise in all others, to take
more after the Good Samaritan in the Gospel, and as often as, like him, they
behold their Neighbor wounded in his Reputation, to express toward him a
Christian Tenderness and Compassion, and to strive by all the Lenitives and
healing methods, to close up his Wounds: To put in a Word to excuse his
Weakness; to take off something of the Guilt, by supposing some Mistake and
Uncertainty in the Relation; and if nothing else can be done, to divert the
Company's Eyes at least from so foul an Object, by starting a more charitable
Discourse. But in stead of this, to be diverted in adding to his Misfortunes,
to find sport in having a hand in his Sores, and taring open his Wounds, when,
it is likely, they were almost skinned over and healed, is a sort of Spiritual
Cruelty, not agreeable to any, but such whose Nature is almost Barbarous, and
who are near to Cannibals in Religion.

What then is to be done by those, who desire to avoid this Evil; for it seems
to be so common in all Conversation, that a Man must decline all Company that
desires to escape its Contagion? It Is necessary in the first place, for every
one to begin at home, and effectually to take care, to cut off all such vicious
Liberty in themselves, so as to resolve neither to begin, nor help on a
Discourse that reflects on any Neighbor. But because a Guilt may be here
contracted by Hearing, as well as Speaking, a diligent Care is to be used in
this point, tho something different according to the Quality and Circumstances
of the Persons in whose Company we are, and who carry on such Discourses.

If they are so far our Betters, that to reprove them would savor of Arrogance
or Rashness, we ought to be careful not to take any Delight, nor show any
Satisfaction in what they say, nor by Smiles to flatter them in their
Calumnies; but rather to quit their Company, if it may be; or express some
Dislike, at least, at their Unneighbourly Entertainments. But if they are such,
with whom we may freely take the liberty of speaking, what should a Christian
do, on these occasions, but become his Neighbors Advocate, make the Best Plea
for him the Cause will bear, question the Evidence, which however positive, is
very often accompanied with Mistakes or Passion? And if it be undeniable, bid
those who are Innocent fling the first Stone at him. Enquire who made us Judges
over our Brethren, who are too often in the same Condemnation; and if we are
not, by whose Favor is that? Turn the Discourse out of Doors, express a Zeal
for thy Absent Neighbor, as if it were thy own Concern, ever remembering how
good thy Cause is, whilst in this thou fightest the Battles of thy Lord; for it
is he has said it, Whatever is done to any of his little ones, is done to him.
Oh, how were it to be wished, that Men would be careful to follow this Rule,
Never to speak nor bear ill of their Neigbours! How many Blessings might we
expect upon such a Reformation! How many Souls would be made happy! It Is by
Charity we abide in God, and God in us. And as the Breach of Charity is a Sin
against the Greatest Precept, so it must certainly be the most Damning of all.

The next shall be Of Immodesty.
Printed for Sam. Crouch, at the Corner of Popes-head-Alley, over against the
Royal Exchange, 1692.

THE Friendly Monitor. Of the SIN of IMMODESTY.
It Is a dangerous Vice, and requires a strict Guard on all the Senses for its
Cure. The great Mischiefs of Immodest Gazing, of Immodest Books and Pictures,
of lewd Ballads, Plays and Romances. Immodest Discourse and Filthy Songs turn
Christians into Devils; the Mischiefs they do are irreparable, how difficult
then must their Repentance be!

THis Vice in its whole extent, is so foul and contagious, that there is no
Thinking of it without danger; Writing of it is much more pernicious; and
Reading it, would be accompanied with evils still worse, and more fatal to all
the designs of Christianity. And yet, whilst it is become so Epidemical, that
it has infected the greatest part of mankind, methinks, it ought not to be
passed by Uncensur'd, but rather deserves the severest Condemnation, in as much
as the Evils, it carries with it, are, above all Vices, more Dangerous and
Universal. Since therefore it seems just, I should oppose it, I think it safest
to follow the Method of War, in regard of those Strong Holds, which are
fortified by nature and are inaccessible, that is, block up all the Avenues and
Passes, and so bring them to distress, without exposing the Besiegers to that
hazard, which a nearer approach would necessarily oblige them to.

Thus, while I make War against this Vice, will I keep at a distance, for
selfpreservation, and make it my whole endeavor to possess my self of all it
Passes, that is, of all the Senses, which are so many Ways, by which all
Supplies and Succors are conveyed to it, for its Support and Strength; and if I
can but secure these, this Evil must be weakn'd by degrees, and will infallibly
fall of it self.

The first Pass or Sense I desire to secure, is that of the Eyes, which being
the most Active of all the rest, and conveying Poison into the Soul at the
greatest distance, is that which calls for our first care. And therefore as
Job, making a solemn Protestation of his Integrity in several Duties, sets the
regulation of his Eyes in the front, I have made a Covenant with my Eyes, Job.
31. 1. So is it necessary for every Christian, that sincerely desires to be
faithful to his Duty in this point, to set a guard upon his Eyes, and deny them
much of that liberty they are too prone to take, to satisfy themselves, and
that Corrupt Nature, which they serve. So that having duly considered the true
End, for which Our Creator desig'nd these Lights, to Guide, Direct, Inform,
Instruct us in all those Particulars, which are helpful toward our Spiritual
or Temporal Good, we are after this to reflect on the infinite ways they may be
abused, and made instrumental toward the bringing the Soul into disorder,
confusion and darkness; and here a short view will serve to inform us, how many
ways, and how often it is necessary to apply the first Maxim of our Lord, Of
denying our selves, to this one Sense of our Eyes, especially in regard of this
evil, which is our present Subject. For is not our Infirmity such, that
wherever we go, whether for Conversation, Company, Diversion, nay for
Business and Devotion too, wheresoever we walk, we ever stand exposed, and are
under a necessity of keeping a strict Watch upon this Sense, for the
preservation of that interior Peace, which is the life of the Soul? And is it
not the want of this care, that lays the Heart open to many dangerous Assaults
of the Enemy, whereby so much of the World and its vain Delights creep in, as
to leave but little room for Virtue and Religion, nay even to drive God quite
out from thence? So that as a small Neglect in this point seldom fails of
filling the Soul with Disturbance and Distraction, so it is most certain, the
indulging of any Liberty in this kind, cannot end but in Vice.

Hence they are severely to be condemned, who whether in Company, or Walking
the Streets, allow themselves the Liberty of fixing their Eyes on every one
they meet, that carries with them, either in their Face or Dress, any thing of
Comeliness or Beauty: And as many as they out-walk, that show any thing of
agreeableness in their Mien, cannot pass them by without turning back and
staring them in the Face, to their own Confusion, in the practice of such a
Licentious Confidence; and the Scandal of the ByStanders, who see them wilfully
exposing themselves to what St. Paul has marked out as Unbecoming and Infamous
in a Christian, that is, the Lust of the Eyes.

All these, I say, are severely to be condemned: For since the condition of
Man, in order to Eternity and Salvation, by the Divine appointment, is so
difficult, and the Way so narrow, that it requires all the Diligence and Care a
man can possibly use; and having done his best, is still to go on with Fear and
Trembling; is it not a strange Stupidity and Madness, to see Men making the Way
still narrower, industriously increasing to themselves new Difficulties,
wilfully putting themselves into innumerable Hazards, and taking pains to seek
still more Enemies, when, if the truth were known, they have already more than
they know how to master? Are not the Occasions of Evil, that are unavoidable,
too many, that Men should thus look for more? And is not the Devil busy enough
in his Snares, that Men should thus turn Devils to themselves, and become their
own Tempters? Well may Satan rest and not busy himself with these; for they are
forward enough to get his work done to his hand, and seem resolved to have it
all of their own doing: Why should they else take up this ill Custom, so often
stop and put themselves into those dangers, which otherwise are passing by
them? Whoever therefore desires seriously to secure himself against this Vice
or master it, must take care to keep such a strict Guard on his Eyes, as,
whether in Street or Company, to deny them this dangerous Liberty; it being,
for the most part, by these Windows that Sin and Death enter into the Soul.

There is still a farther care necessary for this Sense, and that is, the
avoiding all Immodest Books, Pictures or Shows; these being as so many Snares
of the Devil, by which Innocence is Corrupted, evil Inclinations are
strengthn'd and fed, and the heart of man inflamed with the fire of Hell: So
that this Enemy of mankind cannot desire to be securer of any prey, than to see
Men bite at any of these Baits. For is it not evident, that, whosoever
purposely reads any of these Books, is studying the black Art, is improving
himself in the Science of Wickedness, becomes the Devils Scholar, and, under
his Discipline, is learning to make war against Heaven? Is it not by such like
Pictures and Shows, the Thoughts are possessed with evil, the Heart's carried
into all that is foul and sinful, and takes delight in what it is strictly
bound to abominate and detest? And while they are thus pernicious, ought it not
to be every body's care that is in love with Virtue, wholly to avoid them, as
the Incentives to all sort of Uncleanness? And for this end, would not all
Masters of Families discharge a great Duty, in having a watchful Eye over all
under their care, and not to permit amongst them such Books or Pictures, but
severely to chastise those, who shall be found in this point delinquent? For
whilst they pretend to Christian Education, and to be the Children of God,
ought not they to be punished, as false to their Principles, who, by any of
these Ways, professedly hold a correspondence respondence with the Devil? And
were it not to be wished, that every Christian Government would so far take
notice of this Evil, as by Penalties, to endeavor the reforming of as much of
it as is Public? For is it not a shame, that filthy and immodest Prints and
Pictures should be permitted to be hung up on Walls, and there publicly
exposed for sale; where they are an Offense to the Good, corrupt the Innocent,
and are a Snare to the Unwary? where they serve to teach Children and Youth to
be Men in Wickedness betimes, and give them an early knowledge of what is ever
learned too soon? Is it not pity, that these sort of Books too should be
allowed which are thus instructive in Sin, and teach that Science, which every
Good Body desires to unlearn? Methinks, when I consider, that we are Subjects
of God, as well as of our King, these Books, which contain so much Treason
against Heaven, should be with as much care suppres'd, as Libels against the
Government; since Christianity ought no more to tolerate these designs against
Heaven, than Loyalty does against the State. And 'twere to be wished, that
those, who throughout Christendom, superintend the spiritual Affairs, would so
far stand up for Virtue, and maintain its Rights, as not to see it overthrown
by the permission of such Contraband Goods as these. But however this be, it is
certain, as many as trade in them, ought to look on themselves no better than
the Devil's Factors; for though they get so much per Cent in their Sale, yet the
Principal Gain is for Hell, whether they help to pack off more Souls it is
likely than they have Pence come to their share.

But of this kind of Merchandise, I think, there is none worse, than that, which
is Book and Picture all in one, lewd Ballads, I mean, which, being every body's
Money, seems contrived on purpose to convey filth into every Corner, to teach
Children to be Vicious, as soon as they can read, and furnish every Servant
that has but an Halfpenny to spare, with Wickedness enough to become
chargeable to their Masters, and in the end, to ruin themselves. And that none
may be deprived of this knowledge, for want of Money, it is but standing one half
hour under a Wall, and they may read half a dozen for nothing; nay, and for
those too that cannot read, they have ill luck if they meet not some of these
in their walks, set off with an excellent New Tune, where they have Music into
the bargain, to recommend and help down the Poison. Now to me it seems a thing
altogether unwarrantable, that when two or three debauched Rimers have, over a
Pot, botch'd up a filthy Song, which without Wit or Sense, is just fitted to
please nothing above the Beast in Man, they should be permitted to publish
these their Pestiferous Thoughts in Print and Picture, and have them pass for
Current, as if entered according to order; when they are fit to appear no
where, but in the region of Darkness, to feed that Fire, which will be their
Torment, who prepare such Fuel: And then for others of the same leaven, to go
about streets and tune out these infernal Lays in the midst of unthinking
Crowds and set up these Walking Bawdyhouses at every Corner, nay and under the
very Church Walls too, in defiance of that Gospel, which is there preached, as
if they meant nothing less than to undo all the Sunday Lectures with a Song, is
a thing intolerable, and so opposite to all Religion and Goodness, that till
the Public shall think fit to express its Zeal against it, it is but necessary
every private Person should decline all such Assemblies, where there is no
approaching but at the expense of Modesty and Shame, and the Scandal of all
that are Good, who know, that after all the Sport and Noise, there is nothing
else meant, but the Cheap Invitation of, Who Will learn to go to Hell for a
Halfpenny?

There Is too much of this sort of Infection too in Romances and Plays, though set
off here in a much better Dress, which renders them still the more dangerous in
as much as those Ingenious Covers of Wit, with which the Poison is there
gilded, helps to carry it down with more ease and delight, and to sink it so
deep in the Soul, that it is not in the power of time to work it out, or make it
be forgotten. And it is these Immodest Sprinklings, these Indecent Suggestions,
which makes these Entertainments, that would otherwise be in some sort
justifiable, to be many times prejudicial to Virtuous Inclinations, to be the
Corruption of Youth, and to cast such ill Seed in the Minds of the most
reserved, that the Fruit it brings forth, I fear is not so very Christian as it
should be, or as some pretend, who say, they go to those Diversions to be
instructed in Goodness and Virtue: For certainly their Eyes and Ears must be
very great Chemists, so entirely to separate the Good from the Evil, as to let
none of the Dross and Filth go down with what is pure and Spirit, and prevent
all the good Effects of it in the Soul. But however they may be skilled in
this, I cannot but think, if they sincerely desire their own Good, they might
learn much more of this at home, with a Good Book in a Corner, at a cheaper
rate, and with more security. But what, must no Diversion then of a Play be
allowed to Younger People, and others that have leisure? they must expect many
clamouring Adversaries, that answer this in the Negative. But this Caution then
I give, that they be careful to choose such as are Innocent, and go but seldom:
For, believe me, those that go to all Plays indifferently, and grow fond of
this Entertainment, must needs run a great hazard of defiling all that is good
within them, and betray in themselves a very Corrupt and Idle Inclination, who
can find no better Employment than living in a Playhouse. And I can think but
little better of those who delight in no other Books, but in reading Plays and
Romances; for besides this particular Mischief, we here speak of, they are apt
to make vain, airy and giddy Brains, put people upon extravagancies, keep Youth
from ever settling, and prepares them for Dreaming, as long as they live.

Hitherto as to the Eyes; but after this, there is still a great care to be
used in the Government of the Tongue, in order to preserve the Soul Pure and
Undefiled; so that whoever desires to make one of that Blessed Number of the
Clean of heart, must, with David, set a Guard over his Lips, and by no means
suffer any Indecent or Immodest Word to come out of his Mouth. This is the
Command of St. Paul, who enjoins all those, that think of learning Christ, To
let no Corrupt Communicacation proceed out of their Mouths, and that
Uncleanness be not once named amongst them, Ephesians. 4. 29. 8. 3. This he repeats
again Coloss. 3. 8. Where his Command is, Put off Anger, Wrath, Malice,
Blasphemy, Filthy Communication out of your Mouth. Is it not plain then, that
if this be one of the Conditions required for the laying aside Insidelity and
becoming a Christian, that whoever permits in himself, the habit of Corrupt
Communication, of Immodest Discourse, or even Naming what is Filthy, is so much
of an infidel still, so far an Enemy to Christ, instead of being a Christian?

And is it not most surprising then, to see how frequent this is amongst those,
that profess this Name; most abominable to hear them, without any respect to
God's Command or regard to their Souls, talking like Heathens, like Beasts, nay
like Evil Spirits; for what else is this, but the Language of Hell, the
Communication of Devils? And who art thou, Christian, that pretendest to serve
thy God, and art bound by his Law, to speak nothing but to Edification, and art
so often, amongst thy Companions, beginning and helping on these filthy
Discourses, as if thy business were, not to serve and honor, but to injure and
provoke thy God? For tell me, if thou were a Fiend, what could thou do more?
Thou art by this, a Contemner of thy Maker, an Enemy to thy own Soul, a
Promoter of Wickedness and a Tempter of the Brethren: And what beyond this,
can thou have more of a Devil, but his Punishment? And can thou want this
long, who art thus treasuring up to thy self Anger in the day of wrath? Deceive
nor therefore thy self with the Name of Religion, be not flattered with thy
Praying or good Designs; but either effectually take care to amend this evil,
or believe not thy self to be a Christian.

And is he any better, who, tho he will not talk smuttily, yet is ever ready
with a filthy Song, to make sport amongst his Friends? His Religion may be
Good, but he is certainly no better* than a Judas, who thus betrays the Cause of
his Master, who raises up the Devil in as many hearts as there are Hearers, and
turns a Friendly and Christian Entertainment into a Gnostick Meeting or Feast
of Priapus. And however this sort of men may please themselves, in the many
Smiles they raise and the Diversion they give the Company; yet if they would
but once seriously consider the part they act, and the severity of that
Judgment, which will one day put a long Period to all their Merriment, the
Scene, I think, would soon be changed, and they be willing to make choice of an
Innocent Sobriety, rather than go on in the delusion of this Brutish Mirth and
debauched Madness. For are not they the most miserable of all Sinners; their
Crime being such, as to render all the means of Reconciliation and Repentance
in some manner to them impossible? For suppose they endeavor to amend and
repent of this their Personal Fault, and now begin to hope all is well; what
will their condition be, when at the hour of Death shall be laid before them,
all the Sins they have caused, whether by Immodest Discourse or Songs, in
others; when they shall see many Souls, already in the Torments of Hell, that
have been condemned to those Pains, for Crimes which they have occasioned in
them? O God, what Confusion and Despair will begin to Seize at that time, when
they shall find their Repentance so far short of their Sins? How will they then
think themselves unfit for Heaven, by whom so many burn Hell? Deliver, O Lord,
all Christians from this detestable Vice, and teach those that are guilty of
it, not to trust to an imperfect Repentance.

Besides this, there is a Restraint to be had on the other Senses: On the
Hearing, so as not to bear with any sort of Immodest Talk or Songs; but either
openly to divert or silence it, or, at the least, withdraw from such wicked
Company: On the Hands, so as not to allow them the least Liberty of any thing
that has but the Show of Evil, or can possibly be suspected of Indecency. And
here, not to think of what is in private, is there not want of a great
Reformation as to the Public; this sort of Impudence being grown so Common,
that it is not safe for Modesty and Virtue to appear abroad without a Guard, to
defend them from the Insolences and Abuses of those Libertines, who walk the
Streets in the Spirits of the Devil, going about like him and seeking whom they
may devour?

Thus if all the Senses were kept in order, and the Fancy or Imagination not
permitted to entertain any thing of Evil, there might be some hopes of
triumphing over this Vice of Impurity, which at present, to the shame of
Christendom, has got such Possession, that it abounds both in Slaves and
Martyrs too; dragging some through infinite hardships, for its Support and
Maintenance; and drawing others into such Filthy Diseases and Torments, as, it
may be, exceed the Invention of the greatest Tyrants; and where can these
Torments end but in others Eternal? Thus dear pay some for Damnation. Oh, that
men would seriously think, and not lose their Souls, for the satisfaction of
living like Beasts!

FINIS.

