THE ART OF DISTILLATION OR, A TREATISE OF THE Choicest Spagiricall
PREPARATIONS Performed by way of DISTILLATION.

Together with the Description of the Chiefest FVRNACES and VESSELS Used by
Ancient and Modern CHEMISTS.

ALSO, A Discourse of diverse Spagiricall Experiments and Curiosities And the
Anatomy of GOLD and SILVER, with the Chiefest Preparations and Curiosities
thereof; together with their Virtues.

All which are contained in VI. BOOKS*

Composed by JOHN FRENCH Dr. of Physic.

THE SECOND EDITION*

To which is added, The LONDON-DISTILLER* Exactly and truly showing the way (in
words at length, and not in mysterious Characters and Figures) to DRAW all
Sorts of SPIRITS and STRONG WATER: To which is added their VIRTUES: With the
Additions of other Excellent Waters.

LONDON, Printed by E. Cotes, for Thomas Williams at the (...) of the BIBLE in
Little-britain without Aldersgate, 16^^

To my much honored friend TOBIAS GARBRAND, Doctor of Physic, and Principal
of Glocester-hall, in OXFORD.
SIR!
IT is my ambition to let the world know upon what score it is that I do
especially honor men. It is not Sir! as they are high born Heirs of the great
Potentates, for which most honor them (and upon which account I also shall not
deny them their due) but as they excel in honesty, and are friends to Art.
That poor Philosophers should take no delight in riches, and rich men should
take great delight in Philosophy, is to me an argument, that there is more
delight, honor, and satisfaction in the one then in the enjoyment of the other.
I once read of a Noble man's Porter that let in all that were rich apparelled,
but excluded a poor Philosopher: but I should, if I had been in his place, have
rather let in the Philosopher without the gay clothes, then the gay clothes
without the Philosopher. As long as I have sense or reason, I shall improve
them to the honor of Art, especially that of Alchymie. In the perfection
thereof there are riches, honor, health, and length of days: by it Artesius
lived 1000. years, Flammell built 28 Hospitalls with large revenues to them,
besides Churches and Chapels; for it; both they and diverse more were accounted
Philosophers, and wise men, which sounds more honorable in my ears then all
the rattling and empty titles of honor whatsoever besides. In the perfection of
this Art, I mean the accomplishing of the Elixir, is the Sulphur of
Philosophers set at liberty, which gratifies the releasers thereof with three
Kingdoms, viz. Vegetable, Animal, and Mineral, and what cannot they do, and
how honorable are they, that have the command of these? They may command Lead
into Gold, dying plants into fruitfulness, the sick into health, old age into
youth, darkness into light, and what not? A month would fail to give you an
account of their power and dominations. Now for the effecting of this I shall
besides what I have advised in the Epistle to the Reader, say only this; Court
the Mother, and you win the Daughter, prevail with Nature, and the fair Diana
of the Philosophers is at your service.

Now if you cannot prevail with Nature for the fairest of her daughters, viz.
the Mercury of Philosophers, yet she has other Daughters of wonderful beauty
also, as are the Essences and Magisteries of Philosophers, which also are
endowed with riches, honor, and health* and any of these you may more easily
prevail with their mother Nature for. This Art of Alchymie is that S^lary Art,
which is more noble then all the other six Arts, and Sciences, and if it did
once thoroughly shine forth out of the clouds whereby it is eclipsed, would
darken all the rest, (as the Sun does the other six planets) or at least
swallow up their light. This is that true natural Philosophy which most
accurately anatomizeth Nature and natural things, and ocularly demonstrates
the principles and operations of them. That empty natural philosophy which is
read in the Universities, is scarce the meanest handmaid to this Queen of
Arts. It is pity there is such great encouragement for many empty and
unprofitable Arts, and none for this, and such like ingenuities, which if
promoted would render an University far more flourishing then the former. I
once read or heard of a famous University beyond Sea, that was fallen into decay,
through what cause I know not: but there was a general council held by the
learned, how to restore it to its primitive glory. The Medium at last agreed
upon was the promoting of Alchymie, and encouraging the Artists themselves. But
I never expect to see such rational actings in this Nation, till shadows
vanish, substances flourish, and truth prevail: which time I hope is at hand
and desired by all true Artists, and to my knowledge, especially by your self,
upon which account I truly honor you. Now to your self therefore I crave
leave to adumbrate something of that Art which I know you will be willing for
the public good to promote. I dedicate this Treatise to you, not that it is
worthy your acceptance, but that it may receive worth by your accepting of it.
I present it to you (as men bring lead to Philosophers to be tinged into gold)
to receive the stamp of your favor, and approbation, that it may past current,
with acceptance amongst the sons of Art, whereby you will continue to oblige
him who is

London, Nove. 25. 1650. SIR, Your most obliged Servant, JOHN FRENCH.

To the Reader.
THere is a glut of Chymicall books, but a scarcity of Chymicall truths:
Nature and Art affords variety of Spagyricall preparations, but they are as yet
partly undis^overed, partly dispersed in many books and those of diverse
Languages, and partly reserved in private men's hands. When therefore I
considered what need there is of, and how acceptable a general treatise of
Distillations might be, especially to our English Nation (and the rather since
Baker upon Distillations is by reason of the description of a few furnaces, and
vessels therein, besides which there is small variety either of preparations,
or curiosities, sold at such a high rate) I thought I could do them no better
service then to present them with such a treatise of that subject, which should
contain in it the choicest preparations of the selectest Authors both ancient
and modern, and those of several languages, and which I have attained by my
own long, and manual experience, together with such as I have by way of
exchange purchased out of the hands of private men, which they had monopolized
as great secrets. But on the other hand when I considered what a multitude of
Artists there are in this Nation, from many of which more and better things
might be expected then from my self, I was at a nonplus in my resolutions,
fearing it might be accounted an unpardonable presumption in me to undertake
that which might be better performed by others. But for the avoiding of this
aspersion, be pleased to understand that I present not this to the world under
any other notion then of a rough draught (which indeed is the work of the more
unskilful, and therefore of my self, without exception) to be polished by the
more expert Artist. I rejoice as at the break of the day after a long tedious
night, to see how this solary art of Alchymie begins for to shine f^rth out of
the clouds of reproach which it has a long time undeservedly layen under.
There are two things which have a long time eclipsed it, viz. the mists of
ignorance, and the specious lunary body of deceit. Arise O Sun of truth, and
dispell these interposed fogs, that the Queen of Arts may triumph in splendor!
If men did believe what this Art could effect, and what variety there is in it,
they would be no longer straightned by, nor bound up to or jurare in verba
Galeni, vel Aristo^elis, but would now subscribe a new engagement to be true
and faithful to the principles of He^mes, and Parace^sus, as they stand
established without Aristo^le their prince, and Galen, and Hippocrates, their
lords and masters. They would no longer stand dreaming forth, Sic dicit
Galenus, but Ipse dixit Hermes. I desire not to be mistaken as if I did deny
Galen his due, or Hippocrates what is his right, for indeed they wrote
excellently in many things, and deserved well thereby; That which I cannot
allow of in them is their strict observation of the quadruplicity of humors
(which in the school of Paracelsus, and writings of Helmont, where the Anatomy
of humors has been most rationally and fully discussed, has been
sufficiently confuted) and their confining themselves to such crude medicines,
which are more fit to be put into Spagyricall vessels for a further digestion,
then into men's bodies to be fermented therein. Certainly if men were less
ignorant they would prefer cordial essences before crude juices, balsamicall
Elixirs before phlegmatic waters, the Mercury of philosophers before common
quicksilver. But many men have so little insight in this Art, that they scarce
believe any thing in it beyond the Distilling of Waters and Oils, and
extracting of Salts; nay many that pretend to Philosophy, and would be
accounted Philosophers, are so unbeleeving, that, as says Sandivogius,
although he would have intimated the true Art to them word by word, yet they
would by no means understand or believe that there was any water in the
Philosophers sea. And as he in this case, so I in another know diverse that will
not believe that common quicksilver can of it self be turned wholly into a
transparent water, or that glass can be reduced into sand and salt of which it
was made, saying that fusio vitrificatoria est ultima fusio; or that an herb
may be made to grow in two hours, and the Idea of a plant to appear in a
glass, as if the very plant it self were there, and this from the essence
thereof, and such like preparations as these: the two former whereof may be
done in half an hour, but the latter requires a longer time, but yet possible.
And for the possibility of the Elixir, you shall as soon persuade them to
believe they know nothing (which is very hard, nay an impossible thing to do)
then to believe the possibility thereof. If there be any such thing (say they)
why are not the possessors thereof infinitely rich, famous, do many miracles
and cures, and live long? These Objections, especially some of them, scarce
deserve an answer; yet I shall to show the vanity of them make some reply
thereunto. Did not Artesius by the help of this medicine live 1000. years? Did
not Flammell build fourteen Hospitals in Paris besides as many in Boleigne,
besides Churches, and Chapels with large revenews to them all? Did not Bacon
do many miracles? and Paracelsus many miraculous cures? Besides what says
Sandivogius? I have, says he, incurred more dangers, and difficulties by
discovering my self to have this secret, then ever I had profit by it, and
whenever I would discover my self to the great Ones, it always redounded to
my prejudice, and danger. Can a man that carries always about him 10000.
pounds worth of Jewels and gold, travel every where up and down, safe, and not
be robbed? Have not many rich moneymongers been tortured into a confession
where their money was concealed? Did you never hear of a vapouring fellow in
London, that portending to the knowledge of this Mystery was on a sudden
caught aside by money-thirsters, and by them tormented with tortures little
less then those of hell, being forced thereby (if he had known it) into a
discovery of it? To say nothing of being in danger of being subjected, and
enslaved to the pleasure of Princes, and of becoming isntrumental to their
luxury, and tyranny, as also being deprived of all liberty, as once Raimundus
Lullius. The truth is, the greatest matter that Philosophers aim at, is the
enjoyment of themselves, for which cause they have sequestered themselves from
the world, and become Hermites: Well therefore and like a Philosopher spoke
Sandivogius, when he said, Believe me, if I were not a man of that state and
condition that I ^m of, nothing would be more pleasant to me then a solatary
life, or with Diogenes to live hid under a tub; for I see all things in this
world to be but vanity, and that deceit, and covetousness prevail much, that
all things are vendible, and that vice does excel virtue. I see the better
things of the life to come before mine eyes, I rejoice in these: Now I do not
wonder, as before I did, why Philosophers when they have attained this
medicine, have not cared to have their days shortened, (although by the virtue
of their medicine they could have prolonged them) for every Philosopher has
the life to come so clearly set before his eyes, as thy face is seen in a
glass. Thus much by way of reply to the frivolous objections of those that
believe not the verity of this Art, and not only so, but will not believe it.
If you should discover to them the process of the Philosophers stone, they
would laugh at your simplicity, and I will warrant you never make use of it.
Nay if you should make projection before them, they would think that even in
that there were a fallacy, so unbeleeving are they: so I find them, and so I
leave them, and shall for ever find them the same.

There is another sort of men by whom this Art has been much scandalized, and
they indeed have brought a great Odium upon it by carrying about, and vending
their whites, and reds, their sophisticated oils, and salts, their dangerous
and ill prepared Turbithes, and Aurum vitae's. And indeed it were worth while,
and I might do good service for the Nation, to discover their cheats, as their
sophisticating of Chymicall oils with spirit of Turpentine, and salts with salt
extracted out of any wood-ashes and such like, but here is not place for so
large a discourse as this would amount to. I shall only at this time relate to
you how Penotus was cheated with a sophisticated Oil of gold: for, says he, I
gave 24. ducats for the process of an Aurum potabile which was much cried ^p
and magnified at Prague, but at last it proved to be nothing but a mixture of
oil of Camphire, Cloves, Fennel-seed, and of Vitriall tinged with the leaves of
Gold. I know I shall incur the displeasure of some, but they are
sophisticating, cheating mounteba^cks, who indeed deserve to be bound to the
peace, because many men, I dare swear, through their means go in danger of
their lives. Better it is that their knavery should be detected, then a noble
Art through their villainy be clouded, and aspersed.

Now we must consider that there are degrees in this Art; for there is the
accomplishing of the Elixir it self, and there is the discovering of many
excellent essences, magisteries, and spirits, etc. which abundantly recompense
the discoverers thereof with profit, health, and delight. Is not Paracelsus his
Ludus that dissolves the stone, and all tartarous matter in the body into a
liquor, worth finding out? Is not his Tinea Scatura a most noble medicine, that
extinguisheth all preternaturall heat in the body in a moment: Is not his
Altahest a famous dissolvent, that can in an instant dissolve all things into
their first principles, and withal is a specificum against all distempers of
the liver? who would not take pains to make the quintessence of honey* and the
Philosophical spirit of Wine, which are cordial and balsamicall even to
admiration? A whole day would fail to reckon up all the excellent, admirable
rar^ties that by this spagyricall Art might be brought to light, in the
searching out of which, why may not the Elixir it self at last be attained
unto? Is it not possible for them that pass through many Philosophical
preparations to unfold at last the riddles, and Hieroglyphics of the
Philosophers? or were they all mere Phantasmes? Is there no fundamentum in re
for this secret? Is there no sperme in gold? Is it not possible to exalt it for
multiplication? Is there no universal spirit in the world? Is it not possible
to find that collected in one thing, which is dispersed in all things? What is
that which makes gold incorruptible? What induced the Philosophers to examine
gold for the matter of their medicine? Was not all gold once living? Is there
none of this living gold, the matter of Philosophres, to be had? Did
Sandivogius the last of known Philosophers spend it all? Surely there is
matter enough for Philosophers, and also some Philosophers at this day for the
matter, although they are unknown to us. There are, says Sandivogius, without
doubt many men of a good conscience both of high and low degree (I speak
knowingly) that have this medicine, and keep it secretly. If so, let no man be
discouraged in the prosecution of it, especially if he take along with him the
five Keys* which Nollius sets down, which indeed all Philosophers with one
consent enjoyne the use and observation of.

1. Seeing it is a thing divine, and celestial, it must be sought for from
above, and that not without a full resolution for a pious, and charitable
improvement of it.

2. Before thou betakest thy self to the work, propound to thy self what
thou seek for, and enter not upon the practicke till thou art first well
versed in the theory, for it is much better to learn with thy brains, and
imagination, then with thy hands, and costs, and especially study nature well;
and see if thy proposals be agreeable to the possibility thereof.

3. Diligently read the sayings of true Philosophers, read them over again and
again, and meditate on them, and take heed thou do not read the writings of
Imposters in stead of the Books of the true Philosophers. Compare their sayings
with the possibility of Nature, and obscure places with clear, and where
Philosophers say they have erred do thou beware, and consider well the
general axioms of Philosophers, and read so long till thou see a sweet
Harmony, and consent in the sayings of them.

4. Imagine not high things, but in all things imitate nature, viz. in matter;
in removing what is Heterogeneous; in weight; in color; in fire; in working;
in slownesse of working; and let not thy operations be vulgar, neither thy
vessels; work diligently and constantly.

5. If it be possible, acquaint thy self thoroughly with some true Philosophers.
Although they will not directly discover themselves that they have this secret,
yet by one circumstance or another it may be concluded how near they are to it.
Would not any rational man that had been conversant with Bacon, and seeing him
do such miraculous things, or with Sandivogius who did intimate the Art to
some word by word, have concluded that they were not ignorant of it? There have
been Philosophers, and perhaps still are, that although they will not discover
how it is made, yet may certify you, to the saving of a great deal of cost,
pains, and time, how it is not made: and to be convinced of an error is a
great step to the truth. If Ripley had been by any Tutor convinced of those
many errors before he had bought his knowledge at so dear a rate, he had long
before, with less charges attained to his blessed desire.

And as a friendly Tutor in this, so in all spagyricall preparations
whatsoever, is of all things most necessary. A faithful well experienced
master will teach thee more in the mysteries of Alchymy in a quarter of a year,
then by thine own studies and chargeable operations thou shall learn in seven
years. In the first place therefore, and above all things apply thy self to
an expert, faithful, and comm^nicative Artist, and account it a great gain, if
thou can purchase his favor, though with a good gratuity, to lead thee
through the manual practice of the chiefest, and choicest preparations. I said
apply thy self to an Artist, for there is scarce any process in all Chemistry
so easy that he that never saw it done will be to seek, and commit some
errors in the doing of it. I said expert, that he may be able to instruct thee
aright; faithful, that as he is able, so may faithfully perform what he
promises; and communicative, that he may be free in discovering himself and
his Art to thee. The truth is, most Artists reserve that to themselves, which
they know, either out of a desire to be admired the more for their undiscovered
secrets, or out of envy to others knowledge. But how far this humor is
approvable in them, I leave it to others to judge; and as for my part I have
here communicated upon the account of a bare acceptance only what I have with
many years pains, much reading, and great costs known. There is but one thing
which I desire to be silent in as touching the process thereof; as for the
thing it self to be prepared, what it is I have elsewhere in this Treatise
expressed; and the preparing of that is indeed a thing worthy of any ones
knowing, and which perhaps hereafter I may make known to some. I am of the same
mind with Sandivogius, that that fourth Monarchy which is Northern, is
d^^^ning, in which (as the ancient Philosophers did divine) all Arts and
Sciences shall flourish, and greater and more things shall be discovered then
in the three former. These Monarchies the Philosophers reckon not according to
the more potent, but according to the corners of the world, whereof the
Northern is the last, and indeed is no other then the golden age, in which all
tyranny, oppression, envy, and covetousness shall cease, when there shall be
one prince and one people abounding with love and mercy, and flourishing in
peace: which day I earnestly expect.

In the mean time if what I know may add to thy experience, thou have it
freely. And if I shall see that this Treatise of Distillation pass with
acceptance umongst the Artists of this Nation, I shall hereafter gratify them
for their good will with two other parts of Chymistrie, viz. Sublimaton, and
Calcination; and I hope this will be an occasion to set the more expert Artists
on work, for the communicating their experiences to the world. One thing
(courteous Reader) let me desire thee to take notice of, viz. whereas every
process is set down plain, yet all of them must be proceeded in secundum Artem
Alchymistae, (which Art indeed is obtained by experience) and therefore many
that work according to the bare process effect not what they intend; and the
reason is, because there was some art of the Alchymist wanting. To conclude, if
thou know more or better things then these, be candid, and impart them;
(considering that I wrote these for them that know them not) if not, accept of
the endeavors of thy Friend

JOHN FRENCH.

What distillation is; and the kinds thereof.
I Shall not stand here to show whence the Art of Distillation had its
original, as being a thing not easily to be proved, and if known, yet little
conducing to our ensuing discourse. But let us understand what Distillation is,
of which there are three principal and chief definitions, or descriptions.

1 Distillation is a certain Art of extracting the Liquor, or the humid part of
things by virtue of heat (as the matter shall require) being first resolved
into a vapor, and then condensed again by cold.

2. Distillation is the art of extracting the spiritual and essential humidity
from the phlegmatic, or of the phlegmatic, from the spiritual.

3 Distillation is the changing of gross thick bodies into a thinner and
liquid substance, or separation of the pure liquor from the impure feces.

I shall treat of Distillation according to all these three acceptions, and no
otherwise; hence I shall exclude Sublimation, and Calcination, which are of dry
substances, unless I shall by the way make use of either in relation to the
perfecting of any kind of Distillation.

Now because all, or most of these distillations are to be performed by heat,
it will be necessary to understand how many degrees of heat there are, and
which are convenient for every operation, and they are principally four.

The first is only a warmth, as is that of horse dung, of the Sun, of warm
water, and the vapor thereof, which kind of heat serves for putrefaction, and
digestion.

2 The second is of s^ething water, and the vapor thereof, as also of ashes,
and serves to distill those things which are subtle, and moist, as also for
the rectifying of any spirit or oil.

3 The third is of sand and filings of iron, which serves to distill things
subtle, and dry, or gross and moist.

4 The fourth is of a naked fire, close, open, or with a blast, which serves to
distill Metalls and Minerals, and hard gummie things, as Amber, etc. I do not
say serves only to distill these, for many of the former distillations are
performed by this heat, as the distilling of Spirits and Oils, etc. in a copper
still over a naked fire; but these may be distilled by the two former degrees
of heat; but Mineralls and such like cannot but by this fourth degree alone.

Of the matter and form of Furnaces.
THe matter of Furnaces is various, for they may be made either of brick and
clay, or clay alone with whites of Eggs, hair, and filings of Iron, (and of
these if the clay be fat are made the best, and most durable Furnaces) or of
Iron, or Copper, cast or forged. The forms also of Furnaces are various.

The fittest form for Distillation is round; for so the heat of the fire being
carried up equally diffuseth it self every way* which happens not in a Furnace
of another figure, as four square or triangular, for the corners disperse and
separate the force of the fire. Their magnitude must be such as shall be fit for
the receiving of the vessel; their thickness so great as necessity shall seem
to require; only thus much observe, that if they be made of forged iron or
copper, they must be coated within side, especially if you intend to use them
for a strong fire. They must be madewith two bottomes, distinguished as it were,
into two forges* the one below which may receive the ashes, the other above to
contain the fire. The bottom of this upper must either be an iron grate, or
else an Iron plate perforated with many holes, that so the ashes may the more
easily fall down into the bottom, which otherwise would put^out the fire. Yet
some Furnaces have three partitions, as the Furnace for Reverberation, and the
Register Furnace. In the first and lowest the ashes are received, in the second
the fire is put, and in the third of the Furnace for Reverberation, the matter
which is to be reverberated. This third ought to have a semi-circular cover,
that so the heat may be reflected upon the contained matter. The bottom of the
third and uppermost partition of the Register Furnace must be either a plate of
iron, or a smooth stone perforated with holes, having stopples of stone fitted
thereunto, which you may take out or put in, as you would have the heat
increased or decreased. In the top or upper part of all these Furnaces where it
shall seem most fit, there must be two or three holes made, that by them the
smoke may more freely pass out, and the air let in to make the fire burn the
stronger if need require, or else which are to be shut with stopples made fit
to them. The mouths of the forementioned partitions must have shutters, just
like an Ovens mouth, with which you may shut them close, or leave them open if
you would have the fire burn stronger. But in defect of a Furnace, or fit
matter to make one, we may use a Kettle or a Pot set upon a Trevet, as we shall
show when we come to give you a description of the Furnace and Vessels. The
truth is, a good Artist will make any shift, yea and in half a days time make
a Furnace or something equivalent to it for any operations.

Of Vessels fit for distillation.
VEssels for Distillation are of various matter and form. For they may be
either of Lead, which I altogether disapprove of, for that they turn the
liquors into a white and milky substance, beside the malignity they give to
them; or they may be of Copper, Iron, or Tin, which are better then the former;
or of Jug-metall, or Potters-metall glazed, or Glass, which are the best of
all, where they may be used without fear of breaking or melting. Some make them
of silver, but they are very chargeable. They that are able and willing may
have the benefit of them.

Of Lutes for coating of glasses and for Closures, as also several ways of
stopping glasses.
THe best Lute is made thus, viz. Take of Loam and sand tempered with salt
water (which keeps it from cleaving) to these add the Caput Mortuum, of
Vitrioll, or Aqua fortis, and scaling of Iron, and temper them well together,
and this serves to coat Retorts or any glass vessels that must endure a most
strong fire, and will never fail if well made. Some add Flax, beaten Glass,
and Pots, and flint, etc.

Take unslaked Lime, and Linseed oil, mix them well together and make thereof a
Lute which will be so hard that no spirit will pierce it, and this serves for
the closure of Glasses.

Or,

Or,

Or, Caput mortuum of Aqua fortis, Linseed oil, and chalk mixed together.

If a Glass be cracked, then wet a linen cloth in the white of an egg beaten
to water, and lay upon it, and upon that presently whilst it is wet, sift some
unslaked Lime, and press it close with your hand, when that is dry lay on
another cloth thus wet as before, and on it sift more Lime.

A vessel may be stopped so close with Quicksilver that no spirit can breath
forth, by which means the glass will be preserved from breaking by the
enclosed spirits, (for the head will first yield before the glass breaks) the
Vessel must be made as the figure here-under shows. This also is a good way
to preserve spirits already distilled from the air.



A, Signifies the head or cover.

B, The body or vessel it self.

C, The little glass to take out the Liquor that is in the vessel because it
cannot well be poured out, as by reason of the Quicksilver which will be apt
to be lost, so by reason of the form of the Vessel it self.

D, A false bottom where the Quicksilver must lie, into which the head must be
set upon the Quicksilver that so the Quicksilver may come above the bottom
of the Head.

Also you may make stopples of Glasses ground so smooth that no vapor can get
forth by them, as you may see by this pattern.



A, Signifies the ^topple of glass ground very smooth and fit to the mouth of
the Vessel.

B, The glass body.

But the best way is to have a crooked pipe, which may have quicksilver in it,
and be well luted to the body that no spirit can get forth: and by this means
the glass will never break, for the quicksilver will first yield.



A, The crooked pipe.

B, The glass body.

Or upon the top of a glass stopple there may be fastened some lead, that if
the spirit be too strong it will only heave up the stopple and let it fall down
again.

C, The glass stopple with lead on the top.

D, The mouth of the vessel it self.

Now the way to nip up ^ glass, or seal it up Hermetically is after this
manner.
PUt what matter you please into a bolt head with a long neck or pipe, put this
pipe through a pan that has a little hole made in the bottom thereof, that the
top of it may be three or four inches above the pan, close up the hole round
about the pipe with clay, then put coals in the pan and kindle first those that
are furthest off from the pipe that the heat may come by degrees to the pipe
(for otherwise a sudden heat will break it) when the pipe is hot, blow the
coals about it till it melt, then with a pair of shears cut it off where it is
melted, and then with a pair of tongs close it together.

Note that after you have closed it you must put the burning coals upon the top
thereof, and let it thus stand till all be cold which must be done by degrees,
for otherwise the glass will certainly crack in the place where it is nipped.

Note that the pan must stand upon some frame, or some hollow place that there
may be a passage for the pipe to come through it

Also the bolt^head must stand upon a treefoot or some other firm place
according to this figure.

An Explanation of such hard words, and terms of Art, which are used in this
ensuing Treatise.
A Malgamation, is a calcining or corroding metals with quicksilver, and it is
done thus. Take any metal except iron, beaten into thin leafs, or very small
powder, mix it with about 8. parts of quicksilver (which may the better be
done if both be heated first) that they may become one uniform mass, evaporate
the quicksilver over the fire, and the metal will be left in the bottom as a
thin calx.

Calcination it a reducing any thing into a Calx, and making it fryable, and it
may be done two ways, By firing By reducing into ashes. By reverberating.
By Corosion By Amalgamation, Precipitation, Fumigation or vaporation,
Cementation or stratification.



Circulation, is when any liquor is so placed in digestion, that it shall rise
up and fall down, rise up and fall down, and so do continually, and thereby
become more digested and mature, for which use for the most part we use a
Pelican.

Clarification, is the separating of the gross feces from any decoction or
juice, and it is done three ways, By the white of an Egg, By digestion, By
filtration.


Coagulation, is the reducing of any liquid thing to a thicker substance by
evaporating the humidity.

Cohgbation, is the frequent abstraction of any Ilquor, po^^ed oft-times on the
feces from whence it was distilled, by distillation.

Congelation, is when any liquor being decocted to the height, is afterward by
settling into any cold place turned into a transparent substance like unto ice.

Corosion, is the Calcining of bodies by corrosive things.

D.
Decantation, is the pouring off of any liquor which has a settling, by
inclination.

Deliquium, is the dissolving of a hard body into a liquor, as salt, or the
powder of any calcined matter, etc. in a moist, cold place.

Descension, is when the essential juice dissolved from the matter to be
distilled does descend, or fall downward.

Despumation, is the taking off the froth that floats on the top with a spoone
or feather, or by percolation.

Distillation, is the extracting of the humid part of things by virtue of heat,
being first resolved into a vapor, and then condensed again by cold. Thus it
is generally taken, but how more particularly, I shall afterward show.

Digestion, is a concocting, or maturation of crude things by an easy and
gentle heat.

Dissolution, is the turning of bodies into a liquor by the addition of some
humidity.

Dulcoration, or Dulcification, is either the washing off the salt from any
matter that was calcined therewith, with warm water, in which the salt is
dissolved, and the matter dulcified: or it is sweetning of things with sugar,
or honey, or syrup.

E.
Elevation, is the rising of any matter in manner of fume, or vapor, by virtue
of heat.

Evaporation, or Exhalation, is the vapouring away of any moisture.

Exaltation, is when any matter does by digestion attain to a greater purity.

Expression, is the extracting of any liquor by the hand, or by a Press.

Extraction, is the drawing forth of an essence from a corporeal matter by
some fit liquor, as spirit of wine, the feces remaining in the bottom.

F.
Fermentation, is when any thing is resolved into it self, and is rarefied, and
ripened, whether it be done by any ferment added to it, or by digestion only.

Filtration, is the separation of any liquid matter from its feces by making it
run through a brown paper made like a tunnell, or a little bag of woollen
cloth, or through shreds.

Fixation, is the making of any volatile, spiritual body endure the fire, and
not fly away, whether it be done by often reiterated distillations, or
sublimations, or by the adding of some fixing thing to it.

Fumigation, is the calcining of bodies by the fume of sharp spirits, whether
vegetable or mineral, the bodies being laid over the mouth of the vessel
wherein the sharp spirits are.

H.
Hamectation, or Irrigation, is a sprinkling of moisture upon any thing.

I.
Imbibition, is when any dry body drinks in any moisture that is put upon it.

Impregnation, is when any dry body has drank in so much moisture that it will
admit of no more.

Incorporation, is a mixtion of a dry and moist body together, so as to make an
uniform mass of them.

Infusion, is the putting of any hard matter into liquor, for the virtue
thereof to be extracted.

Insolation, is the digesting of things in the Sun.

L.
Levigation, is the reducing of any hard matter into a most fine powder.

Liquation, is a melting or making any thing fluid.

Lutation, is either the stopping of the orifices of vessels, that no vapor
pass out, or the coating of any vessel to preserve it from breaking in the
fire.

M.
Maceration, is the same as Digestion.

Maturation, is the exalting of a substance that is immature and crude to be
ripened and concocted.

Menstruum, is any Liquor that serves for the extracting the essence of any
thing.

P.
Precipitation, is when bodies corroded by corrosive spirits either by the
evaporating of the spirits remain in the bottom, or by pouring something upon
the spirit, as oil of Tartar, or a good quantity of water, do fall to the
bottom.

Purification, is a separation of any Liquor from its ^eces whether it be done
by clarification, filtration, or digestion.

Putrefaction, is the resolution of a mixed body into it self, by a natural
gentle heat.

Q.
Quintessence, is an absolute, pure and well digested medicine, drawn from any
substance, either animal, vegetable or mineral.

R.
Rectification, is either the drawing of the phlegm from the spirit, or of the
spirit from the phlegm, or the exaltation of any Liquor by a reiterated
distillation.

Reverberation, is the reducing of bodies into a Calx, by a reflecting flame.

S.
Solution, is a dissolving or attenuating of bodies.

Stratification, is a strewing of corroding powder on plates of metal by
course.

Sublimation, is an elevating, or raising of the matter to the upper part of
the vessel by way of a subtle powder.

Subtiliation, is the turning of a body into a Liquor, or into a fine powder.

T.
Transmutation, is the changing of a thing in substance, color, and quality.

V.
Volatile, is that which flies the fire.

Rules to be considered in Distillation.
1.
Make choice of a fit place in your house for the furnace, so that it may
neither hinder any thing, nor be in danger of the falling of any thing into it
that shall lie over it: for a forcing Furnace it will be best to set it in a
chimney, because a strong heat is used to it, and many times there are used
brands which will smoke, and the fire being great the danger thereof may be
prevented, and of things of a malign and venenate quality being distilled in
such a Furnace, the fume or vapor, if the glass should break, may be carried
up into the chimney which otherwise will fly about the room to thy prejudice.

2.
In all kinds of Distillation the vessels are not to be filled too full, for if
you distill Liquors they will run over, if other solider things, the one part
will be burnt before the other part be at all worked upon, but fill the fourth
part of Gourds, the half of Retorts, the third part of copper vessels; and in
rectifying of spirits fill the vessel half full.

3.
Let those things which are flatulent, as wax, rosin, and such like, as also
those things which do easily boil up, as honey, be put in a lesser quantity,
and be distilled in greater vessels, with the addition of salt, sand, or such
like.

4.
There be some things which require a strong fire, yet you must have a care
that the fire be not too vehement for fear their nature should be destroyed.

5.
You must have a care that the lute with which vessels are closed, do not give
vent and alter the nature of the Liquor; especially when a strong fire is to be
used.

6.
Acid Liquors have this peculiar property, that the weaker part goes forth
first, and the stronger last; but in fermented and Liquors the spirit goes
first, then the phlegm.

7.
If the Liquor retain a certain Empyreuma, or smatch of the fire, thou shall
help it by putting it into a glass close stopped, and so exposing it to the heat
of the Sun, and now and then opening the glass that the fiery impression may
exhale, or else let the glass stand in a cold moist place.

8.
When you put water into a seething-Balneum wherein there are glasses, let it
be hot, or else thou will endanger the breaking of the glasses.

9.
When thou take an earthen or glass vessel from the fire, expose it not to
the cold air too suddenly for fear it should break.

10.
If thou would have a Balneum as hot as ashes, put sand or sawdust into it,
that the heat of the water may be therewith kept in, and made more intense.

11.
If you would make a heat with horse-dung, the manner is this, viz. make a hole
in the ground, then lay one course of horse dung a foot thick, then a course of
unslaked lime half a foot thick, then another of dung, as before, then set in
your vessel, and lay round it lime and horse dung mixed together; press it down
very hard; you must sprinkle it every other day with water, and when it cease
to be hot, then take it out and put in more.

12.
Note that always sand or ashes must be well sisted, for otherwise a coal or
stone therein may break your glass.

13.
The time for putrefaction of things is various, for if the thing to be
putrefied be vegetables and green, less time is required, if dry, a longer, if
Minerals, the longest of all. Thus much note, that t^^^gs are sooner putrefied
in cloudy weather then in fair.

14.
If thou would keep vegetables fresh and green all the year, gather them in a
dry day, and put them into an earthen vessel, which you must stop close, and
set in a cold place: and they will, as says Glauberus, keep fresh a whole year.

15.
Do not expect to extract the essence of any vegetable unless by making use of
the feces, left after distillation: for if you take those feces, as for example
of a nettle, and make a decoction thereof, and strain it and set it in the
frost, it will be congealed and in it will appear a thousand leaves of nettles
with their prickles which when the decoction is again resolved by heat, vanish
away, which shows that the essence of the vegetables lies in the salt thereof.

16.
In all your operations, diligently observe the processes which you read, and
vary not a tittle from them, for sometimes a small mistake or neglect spoils the
whole operation, and frustrates your expectation.

17.
Try not at first experiments of great cost, or great difficulty, for it will
be a great discouragement to thee, and thou will be very apt to mistake.

18.
If any would enter upon the practice of Chymistrie, let him apply himself to
some expert Artist for to be instructed in the manual operation of things, for
by this means he will learn more in two months, then he can by his practice and
study in 7 years, as also avoid much pains and cost, and redeem much time which
else of necessity he will lose.

19.
Enter not upon any operation, unless it be consistent with the possibility of
nature, which therefore thou must endeavor as much as possibly may be, to
understand well.

20.
Do not interpret all things thou read according to the literal sense, for
Philosophers when they wrote any thing too excellent for the vulgar to know,
expressed it enigmatically, that the sons of Art only might understand it.

21.
In all thy operations propose a good end to thy self, as not to use any
excellent experiment that thou shall discover, to any ill end, but for the
public good.

22.
It will be necessary that thou know all such instruments that thou shall use
about thy Furnace and Glasses, whereof some are already expressed, and some
more are shown in the following page.

A
B
C
D
E


A, Signifies an iron rod with two iron rings at the ends thereof, which must
be heated red hot, and applied to that part of the glass which thou would
break off. When thou have held it there so long till the glass be very hot,
then take it off, and drop some cold water where thou would have it break
off, and it will presently crack in sunder. These rings are for such glasses as
will go into them: Thou must have diverse of this sort, even of all sizes.

B, An iron hook which must be heated hot, and applied to any great glass that
will not go into a ring, this hook bath a wooden handle.

C, A pair of tongs which are for diverse uses.

D, A crooked iron to rake betwixt the grates to clear them.

E, An iron rake to rake the ashes out of the ash-hole.

A thread dipped in melted brimstone and tied about a glass, and then fired, may
serve in stead of the iron rings, and the hook.

Common distilled simple waters, are made thus.
TAke what herbs or flowers you please, put them into a common cold Still, and
let them distill gently.



This is the form of a common cold Still.

But note that this kind of water is but the phlegm of the vegetable which you
distill, and has very little virtue or odor in it; only roses and mints and
two or three more have an odor, but all besides, have as little virtue as
common distilled water.

I do not deny but that it may be so ordered, that these kinds of waters may
partake both of the smell and strength of their vegetables in a good measure,
and it is thus.

To make waters in a cold Still that shall have the full smell and virtue of
the vegetable.
TAke what herbs, flowers, or roots you please (so that they be green) bruise
them and mix with them some leaven, and let them stand close covered for four
or five days: then distill them after the manner aforesaid.

Another way to make Water taste and smell strong of its vegetable.
WHen you have distilled any vegetable in a cold Still after the usual manner
(so that you take heed you dry not the herb too much, which you may prevent by
putting a brown paper in the bottom of the Still, giving it a gentle fire, and
turning the cake before it be quite dried) take the cakes that remain in the
bottom of the Still, and the water that is distilled from thence (having a
good quantity thereof) and put them into a hot Still, and let them stand warm
for the space of 24 hours, then distill them. Then if you would have the water
strong, put the said water into more fresh cakes, casting away the other, and
do as before. This is the truest and best way to have the water of any
vegetables. Also thou shall by this way purchase some oil which is to be
separated and to be kept by it self.

To make water at any time of the year in a cold Still without green herbs, so
that the water shall smell strong of the herb.
PUt fair water into the body of the cold Still, then hang a bag full of that
herb that thou would have the water of, being first dried, or seed or root
thereof first bruised, then make a strong fire under the Still.

Note that those vegetables of which the water is made after this and the
former manner, must be of a fragrant smell, for such as have but little or no
smell cannot yield a water of any considerable odor.

Another way to make a water taste and smell strong of its vegetables.
TAke of the dry herb, or seed, or root bruised, to a pound of each, put 12,
pints of spring water, distill them in a hot Still or Alembick, and the water
that is distilled off put upon more of the fresh herbs, seeds, or roots; do
this three or four times, and thou shall have a water full of the virtue of the
vegetable, being almost as strong as a spirit.

To make the water of the flowers of Jasmin, Honey-suckles, or Woodbine,
Violets, Lillies, etc. retain the smell of their flowers.
The reason why these flowers in the common way of distillation yield a water
of no fragrancie at all, although they themselves are very odoriforous, are
either because if a stronger fire be made in the distilling of them, the
grosser and more earthy spirit comes out with the finer, and troubles it, as
it is in case the flowers be crushed or bruised (where the odor upon the same
account is lost) or because the odoriferous spirit thereof being thin and very
subtle, rises with a gentle heat, but for lack of body vapors away. The a^
^therefore that is here required, is to prevent the mixtion of the grosser
spirit with the finer, and to give such a body to the finer that shall not
embase it: and it is thus.

Take of either of the aforesaid flowers gathered fresh, and at noon in a fair
day, let them not at all be bruised. Infuse a handful of them in two quarts of
White Wind (which must be very good, or else you labor in vain) for the space
of half an hour, then take them forth, and infuse in the same wine the same
quantity of fresh flowers, this do eight or ten times, but still remember that
they be not infused above half an hour, (for according to the rule of infusion,
a short stay of the body that has a fine spirit in the liquor receives the
spirit; but a longer stay confounds it, because it draws forth the earthy
part withal, which destroys the finer:) then distill this liquor (all the
flowers being first taken out) in a glass gourd in a very gentle Balneo, or
over a vapor of hot water, the joints of the glass being very well closed, and
thou shall have a water of a most fragrant odor. By this means the spirit of
the wine which serves to body the fine odoriferous spirit of the flowers
arises as soon as the fine spirit it self, without any earthiness mixed with
it.

Note that in defect of Wine, Aqua vitae will serve; also strong beer, but not
altogether so well, because there is more gross earthiness in it then in wine.

The water of either of these flowers is a most fragrant perfume, and may be
used as a very delicate sweet water, and is no small secret.

A Furnace with his vessels to distill liquors with the steam of boiling water.


A, Shows the head of the Alembick.

B, The body thereof placed in a brass vessel made for that purpose.

C, A brass vessel perforated in many places to receive the vapor of the
water. This vessel shall contain the Alembick compassed about with sawdust, not
only that it may the better and longer retain the heat of the vapor, but also
lest it should be broken by the hard touch of the brazen vessel.

D, Shows the brass vessel containing the water as it is placed in the Furnace.

E, The Furnace containing the vessel.

F, A Funnel by which you may now and then pour in water in stead of that which
is vanished and dissipated by the heat of the fire.

G, The Receiver.

The delineation of a Baln. M^r. which may also serve to distill with ashes.


A, Shows the Furnace with the hole to take forth the ashes.

B, Shows another furnace, as it were set in the other: now it is of brass, and
runs through the midst of the kettle made also of brass, that so the contained
water or ashes may be the more easily ^eated.

C, The kettle wherein the water, ashes, or sand, are contained.

D, The Alembick set in the water, ashes, or sand, with the mouths of the
receivers.

E, The bottom of the second brass Furnace, whose top is marked with B, which
contains the fire.

A water out of Berries, is made thus.
TAke of what Berries you please being full ripe, put them into a gourd glass,
strewing upon them a good quantity of powdered sugar, cover them close, let
them stand three weeks or a month, then distill them in Balneo.

After this manner Strawberries, Raspberries, Elderberries, and black Cherries
may be distilled: But note that such as have stones, must first be bruised
together with their stones.

A sweating water made of Elderberries.
TAke of Elder berries as many as you please, press out the juice thereof, to
every gallon thereof put a pint of Whitewine vinegar, of the lees of Whitewine
a pint, let them stand in a wooden vessel, which thou must then set in some
warm place near the fire side for the space of a week, then distill them in a
hot Still, or Alembick.

The Furnace for a Balneum Mariae with the Alembicks and their re^eivers.


A, Shows the brass Kettle full of water.

B, The cover of the Kettle perforated in two places, to give passage forth to
the Vessels.

C, A Pipe or Chimney added to the Kettle, wherein the fire is contained to
heat the water.

D, The Alembick consisting of its body and head.

E, the Receiver whereinto the distilled liquor runs.

The effigies of another Baln. Mar. not so easy to be removed as the former.


A, Shows the vessel or Copper that contains the water.

B, The Alembick set in water.

But lest the bottom of the Alembick being half full, should float up and down
in the water, and so strike against the sides of the Kettle, I have thought
good to show you the way and means to prevent that danger.



A, Shows the vessel or glass Alembick.

B, A plate of lead whereon it stands.

C, Strings that bind the Alembick to the plate.

D, Rings through which thestrings are put to fasten the Alembick.

In defect of a Furnace for a Balneum, you may make use of a pot set upon a
trevet after this manner.
An ounce or two of this water of Elder berries is a very excellent sudorifick,
and is very good in all diseases that require sweat, as also in hydropicall
diseases.

Water out of rotten apples is made thus.
TAke as many rotten apples as you please, bruise them, and distill them either
in a common cold Still, or gourd glasses in Balneo.

This water is of greater use in fevers, and hot distempers then the common
distilled waters of any cold vegetables.

It is very good in any hot distemper of the reins, and sharpness of Urine.

It is very good in the inflammations of the eyes.

How to make Aqua vitae, and spirit of Wine out of Wine.
TAke of what wine you please, put it into a copper Still, two parts of three
being empty, distill it with a worm until no more spirit come off, then this
spirit will serve for the making of any spirits out of vegetables: but if thou
would have it stronger distill it again, and half will remain behind as an
insipid phlegm: and if thou would have it yet stronger, distill it again, for
every distillation will leave behind one moity of phlegm or thereabouts; So shall
thou have a most pure and strong spirit of wine.

A hot Still.


A, Shows the bottom which ought to be of Copper.

B, The head.

C, The barrel filled with cold water to refrigerate and condensate the water
and oil that runs through the pipe or worm that is put through it.

D, A pipe of brass or pewter, or rather a worm of Tin running, through the
barrel.

E, The Alembick set in the furnace with the fire under it.

How to make Aqua vitae out of beer.
TAke of stale strong-beer or rather the grounds thereof, pu it into a Copper
Still with a worm, distill it gently (or otherwise it will make the head of the
Still fly up) and there will come forth a weak spirit, which is called low wine:
of which when thou have a good quantity thou may distill it again of it
self, and there will come forth a good Aqua vitae. And if thou distillest it
two or three times more, thou shall have as strong a spirit as out of wine, and
indeed betwixt which and the spirit of wine, thou shall perceive none or very
little difference.

How to rectify spirit of Wine or Aqua vitae.
DIstill it in Balneo until the last drop that comes off be hot, and full of
spirit.

Note that every time there will remain in the bottom a quantity as weak as
water.

Note also that every time thou distillest it, when thou perceivest that a very
weak water comes over, thou shall then end that distillation.

To make the Magistery of Wine, which will be one of the greatest Cordials, and
most odoriferous Liquor in the world.
TAke good old rich Canary Wine, put it into a glass vessel that it may fill
the third part thereof, nip it up and set it in a continual heat of horse dung
for the space of four months: then in frosty weather set it forth into the
coldest place of the air you can, for the space of a month, that it may be
congealed: And so the cold will drive in the true spirit of the wine into the
Center thereof, and separate it perfectly from its phlegm. That which is
congealed cast away; but that which is not congealed esteem as the true spirit
of Wine. Circulate this in a Pelican with a moderate heat for the space of a
month, and thou shall have the true magistery or spirit of Wine, which as it is
most cordial, so also most balsamicall, exceeding all balsames for the cure of
Wounds.

The form of a Pelican.


The mattter must be put in at the top which afterward must be closed up.

To make another Magistery of Wine that a few drops thereof shall turn Water
into perfect Wine.
TAke of the best Canary Wine, as much as you please, let it stand in
putrefaction forty days, then distill it in B^lneo, and there will come forth
a spirit, and at last an oil, separate the one from the other, and rectify the
spirit. Set the oil again in putrefaction forty days, and then distill it. The
feces that are left after the first Distillation will yield a volatile salt,
which must be extracted without Calcination, with the phlegm of the spirit,
purify it well, then impregnate the salt with its spirit, and digest them,
then add the oil, and digest them together till they become a red powder,
which you may use as it is, or else set it in a cellar till it be dissolved
into a liquor, and a few drops thereof will do as above said.

To make an oil of Wine.
TAke weak spirit of Wine, distill it in a Vessel of a long neck, then pour on
this spirit again upon the phlegm, distill it again, do this several times, and
you shall see the oil of the Wine swim on the phlegm, which phlegm you must
separate from the oil by a tunnell.

If this oil be afterward circulated for a month, it will thereby become most
odoriferous, and of singular virtue, and good, being both very cordial and
balsamicall.

To extract the spirit out of Wine by the spirit of Wine.
PUt spirit of Wine well rectified upon Canary on Rhenish Wine, so cautiously
that it may not mix with, but swim upon the Wine, let them stand without
stirring the space of 48 hours. Then will the spirit that is in the Wine rise
up and join it self to the spirit that swims on the top, which you shall
perceive by the weakness of the phlegm, which you must let run out at a tap,
which must be made in the bottom of the vessel for that purpose, and so be
separated from the spirit.

To make a very subtle spirit of Wine at the first distilling.
TAke white, or wheaten bread as soon as it comes forth of the Oven, break it
in the middle, i. e. the upper side from the lower side, and hang it in a Glass
vessel over Canary Wine, but so that it touch not the wine; then cover the
vessel and let it so stand until the bread swell and be sufficiently
impregnated with the Spirit of Wine, which it will attract from the Wine: then
take out that bread and put in more, till you have a considerable quantity of
bread thus moistened. Then put this bread into a glass body, and distill it in
Balneo, and you shall have a a very subtle spirit, which you may yet rectify
by Circulation.

By Furnaces and Vessels made after this ensuing figure, there may be made four
Rectifications of any spirit at once.


These Vessels may either stand in ashes, or in Balneo.

The manner of Distilling in wooden Vessels.


A, Signifies the vessel wherein the copper vessel lies.

B, The copper vessel, part of which is in the Furnace, and part in the vessel
of wood.

C, The vessel of wood wherein the matter must be that is distilled.

D, The cooling vessel with the worm.

E, The Receiver.

F, The Trefoot whereon the vessel stands.

Note that the greater the Copper vessel is, and the less the wooden is, the
sooner will the liquor boil.

This Furnace shows how to draw forth spirits and waters out of vegetables and
animals with little cost and in short time.

A Balneum and a boiling Vessel made of Wood.
Note that on the right hand, these vessels have a copper vessel hanging forth
which must be set into a Furnace as is above showed; and on the left hand is a
cock or Tap to let out the water.

The vessel on the left hand is for a Balneum, the holes in the cover thereof
are either to set in vessels over the fume of the water, or for the necks of
the glasses set in the Balneo to pass through

The vessel on your right hand is to boil water in for any use, also to brew
in.

The Spirit of any Vegetable is made thus.
TAke of what vegetable you please, two pound, macerate it in six Gallons of
Aqua vitae or low Wines, or Sack, for the space of 24. hours, then let them be
distilled by an Alembick, or hot Still, putting to every pound of the spirit
two ounces of most pure sugar.

Note that the two first pints may be called the stronger spirit, and the rest
the weaker spirit, or indeed the water, but if they be both mixed together,
they will make an excellent midling spirit, for the former has more of the
spirit of wine, and the latter more of the virtue and odor of the vegetable.

After this manner may be made the spirit of Herbs, Flowers, the Roots of
Vegetables the Seeds of Vegetables Berries, Barks, Rinds, and Spices.


Note that the Herbs and Flowers must be cut small, the rest bruised.

If you would make it stronger, then take all the foresaid spirit, and as much
more Sack or low Wines, and put them upon the same quantity of fresh vegetables
and distill them; repeat this three or four times if thou please.

Note also that the Vegetable must be dried; because else the spirit will not
be so good, as if otherwise.

The form of an Alembick.


A, Signifies the vessel which must be of Copper, in which the m^^^ is
contained, and which o^ (...) be set over a naked fire.

B, Signifies the belly that is fastened to the Neck, that the Neck may the more
commodiously be applied to the large mouth of the vessel. But it may be so
ordered that the mouth of the upper vessel and lower vessel may be so fitted
that they shall not need this Belly.

C, The long Neck of the upper vessel whereby the spirit or water passing is
somewhat cooled.

D, The head.

E, The vessel that compasses the head, into which cold water is centinually
poured after the heating.

F, The long receiver.

G, The top or Cock letting out the water when it is hot.

The Spirit of any vegetable may suddenly, at any time of the year be made thus.
Take of what Herb, Flower, Seeds, or Roots you please. Fill the head of the
Still therewith, then cover the mouth thereof with a course Canvas, and set it
on the Still, having first put into it sack, or low Wines. Then give it fire.

If at any time thou would have the spirt be of the color of its vegetable,
then put of the flowers thereof dried a good quantity in the nose of the Still.

To make any vegetable yield its spirit quickly.
Take of what vegetables you please, whether it be the seed flower, root,
fruit, or leaves thereof, cut or bruise them small, then put them into warm
water, put yest or balm to them, and cover them warm, and let them work three
days as does Beer, then distill them and they will yield their spirit easily.

To reduce the whole (...) into a liquor which may well be called the Essence
thereof.
Take the whole Herb with flowers, and roots, make it very clean: then bruise
it in a stone Mortar, put it into a large glass vessel, so that two parts of
three may be empty: then cover it exceeding close, and let it stand in
putrefaction in a moderate heat the space of half a year, and it will be all
turned into a water.

To make an Essence of any Herb, which being put into a glass, and held over a
gentle fire, the lively form and Idea of the Herb will appear in the Glass.
Take the foregoing water and distill it in a gourd glass (the joints being
well closed) in ashes, and there will come forth a Water and an Oil, and in the
upper part of the vessel will hang a volatile salt. The oil separate from the
water, and keep by it self; with the water purify the volatile salt by
dissolving, filtring, and coagulating. The salt being thus purified imbibe with
the said oil, until it will imbibe no more, digest them well together for a
month in a vessel hermetically sealed. And by this means you shall have a most
subtle essence, which being held over a gentle heat will fly up into the
glass, and represent the perfect Idea of that vegetable whereof it is the
essence.

The true Essence or rather Quintessence of any Herb is made thus.
When thou have made the water and oil of any vegetable, first calcine, i. e.
burn to ashes the remainder of the Herb, with the ashes make a Lie by pouring
its own water thereon; when thou have drawn out all the strength of the ashes,
then take (...) the Lie, being first filtred; and vapor it away, and at the
bottom thou shall find a black salt: which thou must take and put into a
Crucible and melt it in a strong fire (covering the Crucible all the time it is
melting) after it is melted let it boil half an hour or more, then take it out:
and beat it small, and set it in a cellar on a Marble stone or in a broad
glass, and it will all be resolved into a Liquor; this Liquor filter, and vapor
away the humidity till it be very dry, and as white as snow. Then let this salt
imbibe as much of the oil of the same vegetable as it can, but no more lest
thou labor in vain. Then digest them together till the oil will not rise from
the Salt, but both become a fixed powder, melting with an easy heat.

To extract the Quintessence of all Vegetables.
Take of what spices flowers, seeds, herbs, woods you please, put them into
rectified spirit of Wine; let the spirit extract in digestion till no more
feces fall to the bottom, but all their essence is gone into the spirit of
Wine, upon which being thus impregnated pour a strong spirit of salt and digest
it in Balneo, till an oil swim above, which separate with a Tunnell, or draw
off the spirit of Wine in Balneo and the oil will remain clear at the bottom,
but before the spirit of Wine is abstracted, the oil is blood red, and a true
Quintessence.

An excellent Essence of any Vegetable may be made thus.
Take of the distilled oil of any vegetable, with it imbibe the best Manna
being very well depurated, until it will imbibe no more, then digest them a
month, and thou shall have the true balsome and excellent Essence of any
vegetable.

This has the virtues of the vegetable whereof it was made, but in a more
eminent manner.

The depuration of Manna for this use is a great secret.

Water or Spirit of Manna, is made thus.
Take of the best Manna one part, of Nitre two parts, put them into an Ox
bladder, and tying it close, put it into warm water to be dissolved. Distill
this water in an Alembick, and there will come forth an insipid water,
sudorificall and laxative.

The Chimicall Oil of the Herb or Flower of any Vegetable is made thus.
Take of the Herb or Flower dried one pound, of Spring water twenty four
pints, distill them in a great Alembick, with its cooler or Gopper Still, with a
worm passing through a vessel of cold water. Let the oil that is drawn with the
water be separated with a Tunnell or separating glass, and let the water that
is separated be kept for a new Distillation.

Note that if this water be used two or three times in the drawing of the oil,
it will be an excellent water of that vegetable from which it is distilled, and
as good as most that shall be drawn any other way.

After the same manner are made oil of the dry rinds of Orenges, Citrons,
Lemons,
But note that these Rinds must be fresh, and (the inward whiteness being
separated) be bruised.

The Oil commonly called the spirit of Roses.
Take of Damask or Red Roses, being fresh, as many as you please, infuse them
in as much warm water as is sufficient for the space of twenty four hours. Then
strain and press them, and repeat the infusion several times with pressing,
until the liquor become fully impregnated, which then must be distilled in an
Alembick with a refrigeratory or Copper Still with a worm; let the spirit which
swims on the water be separated, and the water kept for a new inf^sion.

This kind of spirit may be made by bruising the Roses with Salt, or laying a
lane of Roses and another of Salt, and so keeping them half a year or more,
which then must be distilled in as much common water, or Rose water as is
sufficient.

Oils are made out of seeds thus.
Take of what seeds you please, bruised, two pound, of spring water twenty
pints, let them be macerated for the space of 24. hours, and then be distilled
in a copper Still with a worm, or Alembick with its refrigerating. The oil
extracted with the water, being separated with a tunnell, keep the water for a
new Distillation.

This Water after three or four distillations is a very excellent water, and
better then is drawn any way out of that vegetable whereof these are seeds; I
mean for virtue, though not always for smell.

After the same manner are made oils out of spices, and aromaticall woods.

Oils are made out of Berries thus.
Take of what Berries you please, being fresh 25. pound, bruise them and put
them into a wooden vessel with 12 pints of spring water, and a pound of the
strongest leaven; let them be put in a cellar (the vessel being close stopped)
for the space of three months, then let them be distilled in an Alembick, or
copper Still with their refrigeratory, with as much spring water as is
sufficient. After the separation of the oil, let the water be kept for a new
distillation. Note that the water being used in two or three Distillations is a
very excellent water, and full of the virtue of the Berries.

Oil is made out of any solid Wood thus.
Take of what Wood you please, made into gross powder, as much as you will, let
it be put into a Retort, and distilled in sand. The oil which first distills, as
being the thinner and sweeter, must be kept apart; which with rectifying with
much water may yet be made more pleasant; the acid water or spirit, which in
distilling comes first forth, being separated; which also (being rectified from
the phlegm with the heat of a Balneum) may be kept for use, being full of the
virtue of the wood.

After the same manner are made the oil and spirit of Tartar; but thus much
note, that both are more pure and pleasant being made out of the Crystals, then
out of the crude Tartar.

To make a most excellent oil out of any Wood or Gummes in a short time,
without much cost.
Take of what Wood you please, or Gum bruised small, put it into a vessel fit
for it, then pour on so much of spirit of salt as will cover your matter, then
set it in sand with an Alembick, make the spirit boil, so all the oil flies
over with a little phlegm, for the spirit of salt by its sharpness freeth the
oil, so that it flies over very easily.

The spirit of salt being rectified may serve again.

To make vegetables yield their oil easily.
Distill them being first bruised, in salt water, for salt freeth the oil from
its body: Let them first be macerated three or four days in the said water.

Oil or Spirit of Turpentine is made thus.
Take of Venice Turpentine, as much as you please, of spring water four times
as much, let them be put into an Alembick, or copper Still with its
refrigeratory, then put fire under it: so there will distill a thin white oil
like water, and in the bottom of the vessel will remain a hard gum called
Colophonia, which is called boiled Turpentine: That white oil may be better and
freer from the smell of the fire if it be drawn in Balneo, with a gourd, and
glass head.

Common oil Olive may be distilled after this manner, and be made very pleasant
and sweet, also most unctious things, as Sperma ceti.

Oil of Gums, Refines, fat and oily things, may be drawn thus.
Take of either of these which you please, being melted, a pound, mix it with
three pound of the powder of tiles, or unslaked lime; put them into a Retort,
and extract an oil, which with plenty of water may be rectified.

Note that the water from whence the oil is separated, is of excellent virtue;
according to the nature of the matter from whence it is drawn.

Oil of Camphire is made thus.
Take of Camphire sliced thin, as much as you please, put it into a double
quantity of Aqua fortis or spirit of Wine, let the glass having a narrow neck,
be set by the fire, or on sand or ashes the space of five or six hours, shaking
the glass every half hour, and the Camphire will all be dissolved and swim on
the Aqua fortis, or spirit of Wine like an oil.

Note that if you separate it, it will all be hard ag^in presently, but not
otherwise.

Another way to make Oil of Camphire, that it shall not be reduced again.
Take of Camphire powdered, as much as you please, put it into a glass like a
Urinal, put upon it another Urinal-glass inverted, the joints being close shut
sublime it in ashes, inverting those Urinals so often till the Camphire be
turned into an oil, then circulate it for the space of a month, and it will be
so subtle that it will all presently vapor away in the air, if the glass be
open.

Another way to make oil of Camphire.
Take two ounces of Camphire, dissolve it in four ounces or pure oil olive,
then put them into four pints of fair water, disti^ them all together in a
glass gourd, either in ashes or Balneo, and there will distill both water and
oil, which separate and keep by it self.

All these kinds of oil of Camphire are very good against putrefaction, fits of
the Mother, passions of the heart, etc. A few drops thereof may be taken in any
liquor, or the breast be anointed therewith: Also the fume thereof may be taken
in at the mouth.

A true Oil of Sugar.
Take of the best white Sugar-candie, imbibe it with the best spirit of Wine
ten times, after every time drying it again, then hang it in a white silken bag
in a moist cellar over a glass vessel that it may dissolve, and drop into it.
Evaporate the water in Balneo, and in the bottom will the oil remain.

This is very excellent in all distempers of the Lungs.

Oil of Amber is made thus.
Take of yellow Amber one part, of the powder of flints calcined, or the powder
of tiles two parts; mingle them, and put them into a Retort, and distill them
in sand; The oil which is white, and clear, which first distilled off, keep by
it self, continuing the Distillation as long as any oil distills off, then let
both oils be rectified apart in a good quantity of water.

The salt of Amber, which adheres to the neck of the Retort within side, being
gathered let be purified by solution, filtration, and coagulation according to
art, and be kept for use.

After this manner may be made Oils out of any gums which may be powdered.

Oil of Myrrh is made thus.
Take of Myrrh bruised, of Bay Salt, of each six pound, let them be dissolved
in sixty pints of spring water and be distilled in an Alembick, or Copper Still
according to Art.

Oil of Myrrh per deliquium, or by dissolution, is made thus.
Take Hen-egs boiled hard, and cut in the middle length-ways, take out the
yelks, then fill up the hollow half way with powder of Myrrh, and join the
parts together again binding them with a thread, and so set them upon a grate
betwixt two platters in a cold moist place, so the liquor of the Myrrh
dissolved will distill into the lower platter.

Oil of Tartar per deliquium, i. e. by dissolution.
Take of the best Tartar calcined white according to Art, put it into a cotton
bag, hang it in the cellar or some moist place, putting under a Receiver.

Oils by Expression are made thus.
Take of what things you please, such as will afford an oil by expression,
bruise them, then put them into a bag, and press them strongly, putting a
vessel under to receive the oil.

Note that they must stand in the Press some hours, because the oil drops by
little and little.

Note also that if you warm them before you put them into the Press they will
yield more oil, but then it will not keep good so long as otherwise.

After this manner are made oils of Nutmegs, Mace, Almonds, Linseed, and such
like.


A vomiting and purging Oil made by expression.
Take of the Berries of Ebulus or Dwarf Elder, as many as you please, let them
be dried but not overmuch, then bruise them, and in bruising them moisten them
with the best spirit of Wine, until they begin to be oily; then warm them by
the fire, and press forth the oil, and set it in the sun to be purified.

Ten drops of this oil taken inwardly works upward and downward, and is very
good against the dropsy, and all waterish diseases.

The belly being therewith anointed, is made thereby soluble.

Any part that is much pained with the gout or any such grief, is presently
eased by being anointed with this oil.

Oil of Jasmine is made thus.
Take of flowers of Jasmine, as many as you please, put them into as much sweet
mature oil as you please, put them into a glass close stopped, and set them into
the Sun to be infused for the space of twenty days, then take them out and
strain the oil from the flowers: and if thou would have the oil yet stronger,
put in new flowers and do as before.

This is a pleasant perfume, and being mixed with oils and ointments, gives them
a grateful smell: It is also used in the perfuming of Leather.

After this manner may be made oil of any flowers, but because I shall keep my
self to the Art of Distillation only, I shall not so far digress as to speak of
these kinds of oils: only I thought good to set down the oil of Jasmine because
by reason of its fragrancy it has some analogy with Chymicall oils that are
made by Distillation.

To make any Oil or Water per descensum.
Take an earthen gourd, fill it full with wood or herbs, or what you please,
being cut small, then invert it, i e. turn it upside down, and set it in the
furnace, lute it well thereunto, then set another gourd of earth under it with
a wider mouth that the uppermost may go into it, before you put the one into
the other, you must have a little vessel or instrument of Tin with brims round
about on the top, by which it must hang into the lower gourd, the body thereof
being 2 or 3 inches deep, and full of holes, that the oil or water may drop
through, and not the vegetable it self. Into this Instrument being first set
into the lower gourd, put the mouth of the upper gourd, then make thy fire on
the top, and keep it burning as long as any liquor will drop.

Ths Figure of this furnace is thus.


A, Signifies the gourd containing the matter to be distilled.

B, The Furnace containing the Coals, so that they surround the upper gourd.

C, The lower gourd or recipient set upon straw-rings.

D, The vessel of Tin with holes and brims, which must be set in the Recipient.

How to make an Oil and Water out of Soot.
This may be distilled per descensum, or by retort, as thus, viz. Take of the
best Soot (which shines like Jet) fill with it a glass Retort coated, or
earthen Retort to the neck, distill it with a strong fire by degrees into a
large Receiver, and there will come forth a yellowish spirit with a black oil,
which thou may separate and digest.

How to rectify Spirits.
You must set them in the Sun in glasses well stopped, and half filled, being
set in sand to the third part of their eight that the water waxing hot by the
heat of the Sun may separate it self from the phlegm mixed therewith, which will
be performed in in twelve or fifteen days. There is another better way to do
this, which is to distill them again in Balneo with a gentle fire, or if you
will put them into a retort furnished with its receiver, and set them upon
crystal or iron bowls, or in an iron mortar directly opposite to the beams of
the Sun, as you may learn by these ensuing signs.

Retort with its Receiver standing upon Crystal bowls just opposite to the Sun
beams.

Another Retort with its Receiver standing in a Marble or Iron mortar, directly
opposite to the Sun.



A, Shows the Retort.

B, The Receiver.

C, The Crystal-Bowls.

A, Shows the Retort.

B, The Marble or Iron Mortar.

C, The Receiver.

How to rectify all stinking, thick black Oils that are made by a Retort, and
to take away their stink.
Take oil of Amber, or any such stinking oil, put it into a glass Retort, the
fourth part only being full, pour on it drop by drop the spirit of Salt, (or
any other acid spirit) and they will boil together; and when so much of the
spirit is poured on that it boileth no more, then cease and distill it. First
comes over a stinking water, then a clear white well smelling oil, and after
that a yellow oil which is indifferent good: but the spirit of Salt has lost
its sharpness: the volatile salt of the oil remains coagulated with the
spirit of Salt, and is black, and tastes like salt Armoniack, and has no
smell being sublimed from it. Now the reason of all this is, because the
volatile salt of the oil which is the ca^se of the stink thereof, is fixed by
the acid spirit of the Salt: for acid Spirits, and volatile Salts, are contrary
the one to the other; and spirit of Urine or any volatile Salt, will
precipitate any metal as well as salt of Tartar.

These oils will remain clear, and have far more virtue, then the ordinary sort
of oils have.

As for common ordinary distilled oils, they need not, if they be well
separated from the water with which they were distilled, any rectifying at all:
and if you go about to rectify them, you will lose good part of them, and
make that which remains not at all the better. But if there be any better then
another for rectifying of them it is by digestion, by which means there will be
a separation of what is phlegmatic which you may separate afterward, and by
this means you shall lose none of the oils.

Of Compound Waters and Spirits. BOOK II.
A Dissolving Menstruum.
TAke Cyprus, Turpentine, and the best spirit of wine, of each two pound,
distill them in a glass gourd either in Balneo or Ashes. Separate the oil from
the spirit with a tunnel or separating glass, distill the spirit agaim, and so
often until it favor no more of the oil of Turpentine, and then it is
sufficiently prepared.

This Menstruum dissolves any hard stones presently, and extracts the tincture
of Coral.

A Glass Gourd with its head.


Another dissolving Menstruum or acetum Philosophicum.
Take Honey, Salt melted, of each a pound, of the strongest spirit of Vinegar
two pound; digest them for the space of a fortnight, or more, then distill them
in ashes, Cohobate the Liquor upon the feces three or four times, then rectify
the spirit.

Note that they must be done in a large glass Gourd.

This is of the same virtue as the former, if not more powerful.

Another dissolving Menstruum.
Take of the best rectified Spirit of Wine, with which imbibe the strongest
unslaked lime, until they be made into a paste; then put them into a glass
gourd and distill off the spirit in ashes: This spirit pour on more fresh Lime,
and do as before, do this three or four times, and thou shall have a very
subtle spirit able to dissolve most things, and to extract the virtue out of
them.

Paracelsus his Elixir Subtilitatis.
Take oil Olive, Honey, rectified spirit of Wine, of each a pint, distill them
all together in ashes, then separate all the phlegm from the oils, which will be
distinguished by many colors, put all these colors into a Pelican, and add
to them the third part of the Essence of Balm, and Sallendine, digest them for
the space of a month. Then keep it for use.

This Liquor is so subtle that it penetrateth every thing.

Vsque-bath, or Irish Aqua vitae, is made thus.
Take a Gallon of small Aqua vitae, put it into a glass vessel; put thereto a
quart of Canary sack, two pound of Raisins of the Sun stoned, but not washed,
two ounces of Dates stoned, and the white skins thereof pulled out, two ounces
of Cinnamon grossly bruised, four good Nutmegs bruised, an ounce of the best
English Licorish sliced, and bruised, stop the vessels very close, and let them
infuse in a cold place six or eight days, then let the Liquor run through a bag
called Manica Hippoeratis, made of white cotton.

This Liquor is commonly used in surfets, being a good Stomach water.

Aqua Celestis is made thus.
Take of Cinnamon Cloves Nutmegs Ginger Zedoary Galingall Long-pepper
Citron-pill Spicknard Lignum-aloes Cububs Cardamums Calamus aromaticus
Germander Ground Pine Mace White Frankincense Tormentill Hermodactyls the pith
of Dwarf Elder Juniper Berries Bay Berries the seeds and flowers of Motherwort
the seeds of Smallage Fennel Annise
the leaves of Sorrel Sage Felwort
Rosemary Marjoram Mints Penny-royall Stechados the flowers of Elder Roses red
white

of the leaves of Scabious Rue the lesser Moonwort Egrimonie Centory Fumitary
Pimpernell Sowthistle Eyebright Maidenhair Endive Red Saunders Aloes, of each
two ounces Pure Amber the best Rhubarb, of each two Drams. dried Figs Raisins
of the Sun Dates, stoned Sweet-Almonds Grains of the Pine, of each an ounce.


Of the best Aqua vitae to the quantity of them all, of the best hard Sugar a
pound, of white Honey half a pound, then add the root of Gentian flowers of
Rosemary Pepper-wort, the root of Briony Sowbread Wormwood, of each half an
ounce.


Now before these are distilled, quench gold being made red hot oftentimes in
the foresaid water, put therein oriental Pearls beaten small an ounce, and then
distill it after 24 hours infusion.

This is a very Cordial water, good against faintings and infection.

Aqua imperialis is made thus.
Take of the rind of Citrons dried Take of the rind of Oranges. dried Nutmeg
Cloves Cinnamon, of each two ounces. the roots of Flower-de-luce Cyprus Calamus
aromaticus Zedoary Galingall Ginger, of each half a pound. of the tops of
Lavender Rosemary, of each two handful, the leaves of the Bay Tree Marjoram
Balm Mints Sage Thyme flower of Roses white Damask, of each half a handful
Rose Water four pints the best White Wind a gallon.
Bruise what must be bruised, then infuse them all 24* hours, after which
distill them.

This is of the same virtue as the former.

Aqua Mirabilis is made thus.
Take of Cloves Galingall Cubebs Mace Cardamums Nutmegs Ginger of each a dram
the juice of Salendine half a pint Spirit of Wine a pint White Wind three
pints.
Infuse all these 24 hours, and then distill off two pints by an Alembick.

This water is very good against wind in the stomach and head.

Dr. Stephens water is made thus.
Take a Gallon of Gascoign Wine Ginger Galingale Cinnamon Nutmegs Grains
Anniseeds Fennel seeds Carroway seeds, of each a dram. Sage Red Mints Red
Roses Thyme Pellitory Rosemary Wild Thyme Camomil Lavender, of each a handful.


Beat the spices small and bruife the Herbs, letting them macerate twelve
hours stirring them now and then, distill them by an Alembick or copper Still
with its refrigeratory, keep the first pint by it self, and the second by it
self.

Note that the first pint will be the hotter, but the second the stronger of
the ingredients.

This water is well known to comfort all the principal parts.

A famous Surfeit Water.
Take of red Poppie cakes (after the water has been distilled from them in a
cold Still) not over dried two pound, pour upon them of the water of red Poppie
a gallon and (...), Canary wine three pints; add to them of Coriander seeds
bruised four ounces, of Dill seed bruised two ounces, of cloves bruised half an
ounce, of Nutmegs sliced an ounce, of Rosemary a handful, three Orenges cut in
the middle, distill them in a hot Still; to the water put the juice of six
Orenges, and hang in it half an ounce of Nutmegs sliced, and as much Cinnamon
bruised, two drams of cloves, a handful of Rosemary cut small, sweet Fennel
seeds bruised an ounce, of Raisins in the Sun stoned, half a pound, being all
put into a bag which may be hanged in the Water (the vessel being close stopped)
the space of a month, and then be taken out, and cast away, the Liquor thereof
being first pressed out into the foresaid Water.

This Water is of wonderful virtue in Surfets and Pleurisies, composeth the
Spirits, causes rest, helps digestion if two or three or four ounces thereof
be drunk, and the patient compose himself to rest.

A Pectorall Water.
Distill green hysop in a cold Still till you have a gallon and half of the
Water, to this put four handful of dried Hysop, a handful of Rue, as much of
Rosemary, and Hore-hound, Elecampanie-root bruised, and of Horseradish root
bruised, of each four ounces, of Tobacco in the leaf three ounces, Anniseed
bruised two ounces, two^quarts of Canary wine, let them all stand in digestion
two days, then distill them, and in the water that is distilled put half a
pound of Raisins of the Sun stoned, of Licorish two ounces, sweet Fennel seeds
bruised two ounces and a half, Ginger sliced an ounce and a half, and let them
be infused in Frigido the space of ten days, then take them out.

This water sweetened with Sugar-candie and drunk to the quantity of three or
four ounces twice in a day, is very good for those that are ptificall, it
strengthens the Lungs, attenuates thick phlegm, opens obstructions, and is
very good to comfort the stomach.

A very excellent water against the worms.
Take of Wormseed bruised eight ounces, the shavings of Hearts horn two ounces,
of Peach flowers dried an ounce, of Aloes bruised half an ounce, pour on these
the water of Tansie, Rue, Peach flowers, and of Wormwood of each a pint and
half, let them being put into a glass vessel, be digested the space of three
days, then distill them; cohobate this water three times.

This water is very excellent against the worms; it may be given from half an
ounce to three ounces, according to the age of the patient.

A Water against the Convulsions.
Take of Ros vitrioli (which is that water that is distilled from Vitriall in
the calcining thereof) two quarts, in this put of Rue a handful, of Juniper
berries bruised an ounce, of Bay berries bruised half an ounce, Piony berries
bruised six drams, Camphire two drams, Rhubarb sliced an ounce; digest these
four days in a temperate Balneo, then distill them in a glass vessel in ashes,
and there will come over a water of no small virtue.

It cures convulsions in children especially, it helps also the Vertigo, the
Hystericall passion, and Epilepsie, it is very excellent against all offensive
vapors and wind that annoys the head and stomach.

It may be taken from two drams to two ounces.

An Hydropicall water.
Take of Wormwood, Broom blossoms, of each a like quantity, bruise them, and
mix with them some leaven, and let them stand in fermentation in a cold place
the space of a week, then distill them in a cold Still till they be very dry:
Take a gallon of this water, and half a gallon of the Spirit of Urine, pour
them upon two pound of dried Broom blossoms, half a pound of Horse Radish roots
dried, three ounces of the best Rhubarb sliced, two ounces of sweet Fennel
seed bruised, and an ounce and an half of Nutmegs: let them digest a week being
put into a glass vessel, in a temperate Balneo; then press the Liquor hard
from the feces, put this Liquor in the said vessel again, and to it put three
ounces of sweet Fennel seeds bruised, Licorish sliced two ounces, digest them
in a gentle heat the space of a week, then pour it off from the feces, and keep
it close stopped.

This water being drank from the quantity of an ounce to four ounces every
morning, and at four of the clock in the afternoon, does seldom fail in curing
the dropsy; it strengthens also the Liver, is very good against gravel in
the back, stone, cures the Scurvy, Gout, and such diseases as proceed from the
weakness and obstructions of the Liver.

A Water against the Colic.
Take of Aniseed three ounces. Cummin seed three drams. Cinnamon half an ounce.
Mace. Cloves. Nutmeg, of each a dram. Galingall, three drams. Calamus
Aromaticus dried, half an ounce. The dried rind of Orenges, two ounces. Bay
berries, half an ounce.

Let all these being bruised, be macerated in six pints of Mallago wine 48
hours, then be distilled in Balneo till all be dry.

This water being drank to the quantity of an ounce or two at a time does ease
the gripings of the belly and stomach, very much.

A Water against the Vertigo, and Convulsions.
Take of black cherries bruised with their kernels, a gallon, of the flowers of
Lavander three handful, half an ounce of white Mustard seed bruised, mix these
together, then put some ferment to them and let them stand close covered the
space of a week, then distill them in Balneo till all be dry.

This water being drank to the quantity of an ounce or two or three, does much
relieve the weakness of the head and helps the Vertigo thereof, as also
strengthen the sinews and expel windiness out of the head and stomach.

A compound Water of Burre root causing sweat.
Take the root of the great Burre, fresh, Swallow wort, fresh,
The middle rind of the root of the Ash tree, of each two pound; cut them
small, and infuse them 24 hours in the best White wine and Rue vinegar, of each
five pints, then distill them in Balneo til all be dry, put to the water as
much of the Spirit of Sulphur per Campanam, as will give it a pleasant acidity,
and to every pint of the water put a scruple and a half of Camphire cut small,
and tied up in a bag, which may continually hang in the water.

This was a famous water in Germany against the plague, pestilence and
Epidemical diseases: it causes sweat wonderfully if two or three ounces
thereof be drank and the patient compose himself to sweat.

Another excellent Sudorifick and plague water.
Take of the best spirit of Wine a gallon, Andromachus treacle, six ounces,
Myrrh two ounces, The roots of Coltsfoot, three ounces, Sperma Cett, Terra
Sigillata, of each half an ounce, The root of swallow wort, an ounce, Dittany,
Pimpernel, Valerian root, of each two drams, Camphire, a dram.

Mix all these together in a glass vessel, and let them stand close stopped the
space of eight days in the Sun.

Let the Patient drink of this a spoonful or two and compose himself to sweat.

Dr. Burges his plague water.
Take three pints of Muscadine, and boil in it Sage, and Rue of each a handful
till a pint be wasted, then strain it and set it over the fire again, put
thereto a dram of long Pepper, Ginger and Nutmeg of each half an ounce being all
bruised together: then boil them a little, and put thereto half an ounce of
Andromachus treacle, and three drams of Mithridate, and a quarter of a pint of
the best Angelica water.

This water (which, as says the Author, must be kept as your life, and above
all earthly treasure) must be taken to the quantity of a spoonful or two
morning and evening if you be already infected, and sweat thereupon: if you be
not infected, a spoonful is sufficient, half in the morning and half at night;
all the plague time under God (says the Author) trust to this, for there was
never man, woman, or child that failed of their expectation in taking of it:
This is also of the same efficacy not only against the plague, but pox,
measles, surfets, etc.

Crollius his Treacle water Camphorated.
Take of Andromachus his Treacle, five ounces, The best Myrrh, two ounces, and
half, The best Saffron half an ounce, Camphire two drams.

Mix them together, then pour upon them ten ounces of the best spirit of wine,
and let them stand 24 hours in a warm place, then distill them in Balneo with a
graduall fire, cohobate the spirit three times.

This spirit causes sweat wonderfully, and resists all manner of infection.

It may be taken from a dram to an ounce in some appropriate Liquor.

A distilled Treakle Vinegar.
Take of the roots of Bistort Gentian Angelica Tormentill of each ten drams.

Pimpernell -- Bay berries Juniper berries of each an ounce. Nutmeg, five drams
The shavings of Sassafras, two ounces, Zedoary half a dram, White Sanders,
three drams, The leaves of Rue Wormwood Scordium of each half a handful,

The flowers of Wall-flower Buglosse of each a handful and half,

Andromachus Treacle Mithridate of each six drams,


Infuse them all in three pints of the best White wine vinegar the space of
eight days in Frigido in glass vessels; then distill them in Balneo.

This Spirit is very good to prevent them that are free from infection, and
those that are already infected, from the danger thereof, if two or three
spoonful thereof be taken once in a day, with sweating after, for those that
are infected, but without sweating for others.

An excellent water against the Stone in the Kidneys.
Take of the middle rind of the root of Ash bruised, two pound.

Juniper berries bruised, three pound.

Venice turpentine that is very pure, 2 pound and a half Put these into twelve
pints of spring water in a glass vessel well closed, and there let them
putrify in horse dung for the space of three months, then distill them in
ashes, and there will come forth an oil and a water, separate the one from the
other.

Ten or twelve drops of this oil being taken every morning in four or six
spoonfuls of the said water dissolves the gravel and stone in the kidneys,
most wonderfully.

Another water for the same use.
Take the juice of Radish, Lemmons, of each a pound and half: Waters of Betony,
Tansey, Saxifrage, and Vervin, of each a pint. Hydromell, and Malmsey, of each
two pound. In these Liquors mixed together, infuse for the space of four or
five days in a gentle Balneo, Juniper berries ripe and newly gathered being
bruised, three ounces: the seed of Gromel, Bur-dock, Radish, Saxifrage,
Nettles, Onions, Anise, and Fennel, of each an ounce and half, the four cold
seeds, the seed of great Mallows, of each six drams, the Calx of Eg-shels,
Cinnamon, of each three drams, of Camphire two drams; let all be well strained
and distilled in ashes.

Two ounces of this water taken every morning, does wonderfully cleanse the
Kidneys, provoke Urine, and expel the Stone, especially if you calcine the
feces and extract the Salt thereof with the said Water.

To make an excellent Wound water.
Take Plantain, Rib-wort, Bone-wort, wild Angelica, Red-mints, Betony,
Egrimony, Sanacle, Blew-bottles, White-bottles, Scabius, Dandelion, Avens,
Honey-suckle leaves, Bramble buds, Hawthorn buds and leaves; Mugwort, Dasie
roots, leaves, and flowers; Wormwood, Southernwood, of each one handful: Boil
all these in a pottle of White wine, and as much Spring water, till one half be
wasted; and when it is thus boiled, strain it from the herbs, and put to it
half a pound of honey, and let it boil a little after: then put it into bottles,
and keep it for your use.

Note that these herbs must be gathered in May only, but you may keep them
dry, and make your water at any time.

This water is very famous in many Counties, and it has done such cures in
curing outward and inward Wounds, Imposthumes, and Ulcers, that you would
scarce believe it, if I should recite them to you: also it is very good to heal
a sore mouth.

The Patient must take three or four spoonfuls thereof morning and evening, and
in a short time he shall find ease and indeed a cure, unless he be so far
declined as nothing almost can recover him.

If the wound be outward it must be washed therewith, and linen cloths wet in
the same be applied thereto.

Dr. Matthias his Palsy water is made thus.
Take of Lavender flowers a gallon; pour upon them of the best spirit of wine
three gallons: the vessel being close stopped let them be macerated together
in the Sun for the space of six days, then distill them in an Alembick with its
refrigeratory, then take the flowers of Sage Rosemary Betony of each a handful.
Borage Bugloss Lilly of the valley Cowslips of each two handfuls,



Let all the flowers be fresh and seasonably gathered, and macerated in a
gallon of the best spirits of Wine, and mixed with the aforesaid spirit of
Lavender, adding then the leaves of Balm Motherwort Orange tree newly gathered

the flowers of Stechados Oranges Bay berries of each an ounce.




After a convenient digestion let them be distilled again, then add the
outward rinds of Citrons six drams, the seed of Piony husked, six drams
Cinnamon Nutmegs. Mace Cardamums Cububs of yellow Sanders of each half an ounce.
Lignum Aloes, one dram the best Jujubs, the kernels taken out, half a pound.



Let them be digested for the space of six week, then strain and filtre the
Liquor, to which add of prepared Pearl, two drams. prepared Emrald a scruple.
Amber Gryse Musk Saffron Red Roses Sanders of each an ounce.
Yellow Sanders Rinds of Citrons dried of each a dram.



Let all these species be tied in a silken bag and hanged in the foresaid
spirit.

A Scorbuticall water, or a compound water of Horse radish is made thus.
Take the leaves of both sorts of Scurvie-grass being made very clean, of each
six pound: let these be bruised, and the juice pressed forth: to which add the
Juice of Brook-lime Watercresses of each half a pound,

of the best White wine, eight pints. twelve whole Lemons cut. of the fresh
roots of Briony four pound. Horse Radish two pound.
of the bark of Winteran, half a pound. of Nutmegs four ounces.
Let them be macerated three days and distilled.

Three or four spoonfuls of this water taken twice in a day cures the Scurvy
presently.

Spirit of Castor is made thus.
Take of fresh Castoreum two ounces flowers of Lavender fresh, half an ounce
Sage Rosemary of each two drams,
Cinnamon three drams Mace Cloves of each a dram
the best rectified Spirit of Wine, three pints.

Let them be digested in a Glass (two parts of three being empty) stopped close
with a bladder and Cork two days in warm ashes; then distill the spirit in
Balneo, and keep it in a glass close stopped. If you would make it stronger take
a pint of this spirit, and an ounce of the powder of Castoreum, put them into a
glass and digest them into a cold place for the space of ten days, and then
strain out the Spirit.

This spirit is very good against fits of the Mother, passions of the heart
which arise from vapors, etc.

Bezoard water is made thus.
Take of the leaves of the greater Sallandine together with the roots thereof,
three handfuls and a half. Rue, two handfuls. Scordium, four handful. Dittany
of Crete Carduus of each a handful and half.
Root of Zedoary Angelica of each three drams.

The outward rind of Citrons Lemmons of each six drams.

The flower of Wall-gilly-flower, an ounce and half. Red Roses the lesser
Centory of each two drams.
Cinnamon Cloves of each three drams.
Andromachus his Treacle, three ounces. Mithridate, an ounce and half.
Camphire, two scruples. Trochisces of Vipers, two ounces. Mace, two drams.
Lignum aloes, half an ounce. Yellow Sanders, a dram and half. The seeds of
Carduus, an ounce. Citron, six drams.


Cut those things that are to be cut, and let them be macerated three days in
the best Spirit of Wine, and Muscadine, of each three pints and half, vinegar
of Wall gilly-flowers, and the juice of Lemmons, of each a pint, let them be
distilled in a glazed vessel in Balneo.

After half the Liquor is distilled off, let that which remains in the vessel
be strained through a linen cloth, and vapoured away to the thickness of
honey, which may be called

A Bezoard Extract.
This water is a great Cordial, and good against any infection.

To make a specificall Sudorifick.
Take of Ginger a pound, long Pepper, and black Pepper, of each half an ounce,
of Cardamums three drams, of Grains an ounce, powder them and put them into a
glass with half an ounce of the best Camphire, distilled vinegar two pound,
digest them a month, then separate the vinegar by expression, which must
putrefie a month, and then be circulated for the space of a week, then filter
it, and thou have as powerful a Sudorifick as ever was or can be made.

The dose is from a dram to half an ounce, and to be drank in a draught of
posset drink.

Treacle-water is made thus.
Take of the juice of the green shales of Walnuts four pound. the juice of Rue,
three pints. Carduus Marygold Balm of each two pints.
the root of Butter-burre fresh a pound and half. Burre Angelica Master-wort
fresh, of each half a pound.
the leaves of Scordium, four handful. old Andromachus treacle Mithridate of
each eight ounces.
the best Canary, twelve pints. the sharpest Vinegar, six pints. the juice of
Lemmons, two pints.

Digest them two days in horse dung, the vessel being close stopped; then
distill them in sand.

Aqua Mariae is made thus.
Take of Sugar candid, one pound. Canarie Wine, six ounces. Rose water, four
ounces.
Make of these a Syrup, and boil it well, to which add of Aqua Imperialis, two
pints. Amber gryse Musk of each eighteen grains.
Saffron, fifteen grains. yellow Sanders infused in Aqua Imperialis, two drams.

The Mother water, commonly called Hystericall water, is made thus.
Take of the juice of the root of Briony, four pound. the leaves of Rue Mugwort
of each two pound.
Savin dried, three handful. Mother-wort Nippe Penny-royall of each two
handful.
Garden basil Cretensian Dittany of each a handful and half.
the rind of yellow Oranges fresh, four ounces. Myrrh, two ounces. Castoreum,
an ounce. the best Canary wine, twelve pints.


Let them be digested four days in a fit vessel, then distill them in Balneo.

A vomiting water is made thus.
Take of the best Tobacco in leaves, cut small, four ounces, Squils two ounces,
Nutmegs sliced half an ounce; put these into three pints of spring water, a
pint of White wine vinegar, distill them in a hot Still or Alembick.

If thou would have it stronger thou may put this water on fresh
ingredients, and distill it again.

A little quantity of this water is a most safe and effectual vomit, and may
be taken from the eldest to the youngest, if so be you proportion the quantity
to the strength of the Patient.

You may dulcifie it with sugar or syrup if you please.

A vomiting Water made by Platerus.
Take green Walnuts gathered about Midsummer, Radish roots, of each bruised two
parts, of distilled Wine vinegar four parts, digest them five days, then
distill them in Balneo.

This being taken to the quantity of two spoonful or three causes easy
Vomiting.

A distilled water that purges without any pain or griping.
Take of Scammony an ounce, Hermodactyls two ounces, the seeds of Broom, of the
lesser Spurge, of Dwarf Elder, of each half an ounce, the juice of Dwarf Elder,
of wild Asses cucumber, of black Hellebore, the fresh flower of Elder, of each
an ounce and half, Polypodium 6 ounces, of Seen 3 ounces, Red sugar 8 ounces,
common distilled Water 6 pints.

Let all these be bruised, and infused in the water 24 hours, then be distilled
in Balneo.

This water may be given from 2 drams to 3 ounces and it purges all manner of
humors, opens all obstructions, and is pleasant to be taken, and they whose
stomachs loath all other physic may take this without any offense.

After it is distilled there may be hanged a little bag of Spices in it, as
also it may be sweetened with sugar, or any opening syrup.

A specificall Liquor against the toothache.
Take of oil of Cloves well rectified half an ounce, in it dissolve half a dram
of Camphire, add to them of the Spirit of Turpentine four times rectified, in
which half a dram of Opium has been infused, half an ounce.

A drop or two of this Liquor put into a hollow tooth with some lint eases the
toothache presently.

Of MINERALS. BOOK III.
Spirit of Salt is made thus.
TAke of the best Bay Salt as much as you please, let it be dissolved in spring
water, and filtred, mix with this brine in a Copper vessel, of the powder of
Bricks or Tiles twice or thrice as much as the Salt before its dissolution was
in weight; let the water vapor away over the fire (continually stirring of it)
until it be dry; Then put this powder into a glass Retort well luted, or an
earthen Retort, and put it into a Furnace (a large Receiver joined to it
according to art) then give fire to it by degrees until it will bear an open
fire, for the space of 12 hours. Thou shall have a very acid oil or spirit in
the Receiver. That Liquor being put into a little Retort in sand may be
rectified by the vapouring away of the phlegm; then keep it for use in a glass
very well stopped that no air go in.

Spirit of Salt is very good in Fevers putrid, also in Hydropicall.

A Retort and its Receiver before they be set on work.


A Retort with its Receiver, set on work.


Oil or Spirit of Salt may also be made after this manner.
Take one part of Salt, and three parts of powder of Bricks or Tiles, and mix
them together, and put them into a Retort either of glass or earth, to which
put fire as before.

After this manner you may make oil or spirit of Nitre Salt Gem Alum.


Note that these Salts must first be calcined, which is done by exhaling their
phlegm.

To turn Saltpeter into a water by a mere digestion.
Take of Saltpeter powdered very small, with it fill the fourth part of a
Bolt-head, close it well, and let it stand in the heat of ashes or sand the
space of six weeks, and you shall see good part of it turned into water,
continue it in the said heat til it be all dissolved.

This is of incomparable use in Fevers and against Worms or any putrefaction
in the body, and indeed a most rare secret.

Spirit of Salt-Armoniack.
Dissolve Salt-Armoniack in distilled spirit of Urine over a moderate heat, in
this spirit let Bricks beaten into small pieces and made red hot be quenched,
till they have imbibed all the water, then make Distillation in a Retort in
sand, or in a naked fire.

This spirit is of greater strength then that is of other Salts.

Oil or Spirit of Vitriall is made thus.
Take of Hungarian, or the best English Vitrial, as much as you please, let it
be melted in an earthen vessel glazed, with a soft fire, that all the moisture
may exhale, continually stirring of it, until it be brought into a yellow
powder, which must be put into a glass Retort well luted, or an earthen Retort
that will endure the fire: Fit a large Receiver to the Retort and close the
joints well together; then give it fire by degrees till the second day, then
make the strongest heat you can til the Receiver which before was dark with
fumes be clear again; let the Liquor that is distilled off be put into a little
Retort, and the phlegm be drawn off in sand, so will the oil be rectified, which
is most strong and ponderous, and must be kept by it self.

Many call that phlegm which is drawn off in rectifying the spirit of Vitriall.

This oil or spirit is very excellent in putrid Fevers, resisting
putrefaction, also it opens all obstructions, and is very diureticall.

A red and heavy oil of Vitrial.
Take of calcined Vitriall one part, flints grossly powdered two parts, of
these with spirit of wine make a Paste, distill it in a Retort, and there will
come forth a red heavy oil.

This is to be used rather about metals then in the body, only if the scurfe on
the head be anointed therewith two or three times in a week it will fall off,
and the head be cured.

To dulcifie the Spirit of Vitriall, and of Salt.
Take the spirit of Vitriall, or of Salt, the best spirit of wine, of each half
a pound, distill them in a Retort together three or four times, and they will
be united inseparably, and become sweet.

Some put 8 ounces of the best Sugar-candie to these Spirits before they be
thus distilled.

Ten or twenty drops of this compound spirit being taken in any appropriated
Liquor is very good in any putrid or Epidemicall disease.

Gilla Theophrasti, or a most-delicate vomiting Liquor made of Vitriall.
Take of Crystals made out of Copper, or Iron, dissolve them in the acid phlegm
that first comes forth in the distilling of common Vitriall; circulate them
eight days.

This Liquor must be taken in wine, and it causes vomiting instantly, and is
most excellent to cleanse and strengthen the stomach and to cure all such
distempers that arise from thence, as salt defluxions, Fevers, Worms,
Headache, and Vertigoes, the Hystericall passion, and such like.

The Dose is from a scruple to two scruples.

Oil of Sulphur per Campanam.
Take a large iron vessel like a platter, over it hang a glass bell that has a
nose like the head of a cold still, fill the lower vessel being narrower then the
compass of the bell, or head, with brim-stone, or sulphur, inflame it, so will
the fume which arises from thence be condensed in the bell into a Liquor which
will drop down through the nose into the Receiver.

Note that the bell must hang at such a distance from the other vessel that
the flame of the sulphur touch it not, according to this following example.

If in stead of this broad vessel, you take a large crucible and m^^t in it
Saltpeter, and cast Sulphur upon it thus meked, you shall make a great deal
quicker dispatch.

This spirit is of the same nature, and has the same operations as oil of
Vitriall.

The Oil of Sulphur is made after a more Philosophical manner thus.
Take of crude Sulphur as much as you please, put it into a melting vessel to
be dissolved over the fire: being dissolved, pour it forth into seething hot
water (this done ten or more times, remembering that the water must be always
seething hot) and thou shall see that the Sulphur will be like butter, then put
it into a Retort, pouring on it the best spirit of Wine, then distilling it
with a soft fire, and there will come forth an oil of a golden color, of a
good taste and smell, which is the true Balsome of Sulphur. The oil that swims
on the spirit must be separated.

This oil for the cure of all distempers of the Lungs, for all Fevers whether
putrid or pestilentiall, and the cure of wounds and Ulcers, is scarce to be
equalled.

The Essence of Sulphur.
Take of Sulphur vivum, as much as you please, dissolve it as well as you can
in Aqua fortis (made of Vitriall and Saltpeter;) then evaporate the Aqua
fortis, and then reverberate the matter till it become very red; Extract the
tincture with spirit of Wine, then digest them till the essence be separated
from the spirit like an oil, and sink to the bottom.

This Essence also is of wonderful virtue against all putrefaction both inward
and outward, a great preservative against the plague, and is wonderful
balsamicall, and cures all sores both old and new, even to admiration.

The oil of Arsenick is made thus.
Take of Crystalline Arsenick (being first sublimed with Colcothar alone as
much as you please, mix it with an equal weight of the salt of Tartar and
Saltpeter, and let them be betwixt two little pots or crucibles (whereof the
upper has a hole) calcined, until no fume ascend. The matter being thus
calcined dissolve in warm water that you may draw a salt from thence; the
powder which falls to the bottom imbibe with the liquor of Tartar, and dry it
by the fire, and this thou must do three times, then dissolve the matter in
warm water that thou may draw out the Salt thereof, and there will remain a
most white powder, and fixed, which in a moist place will be dissolved into a
liquid matter like oil or butter.

Aqua fortis or a strong Spirit (that will dissolve silver and baser metals) is
made thus.
Take of Vitriall calcined two parts, of Nitre one part, grind and mix them
well together, and put them into a glass Retort coated, or earthen Retort that
will endure the fire, and set them into the Furnace in an open fire, and then
having fitted a large Receiver distill it by degrees the space of 24 hours,
then rectify the water or spirit in sand.

Aqua Regia, or Stygia, or a strong Spirit that will dissolve Gold, is made
thus.
Take of Nitre two parts, Salt Armoniack one part, the powder of flints three
parts, put them into a glass Retort coated, or earthen Retort that will endure
the fire, distill them by degrees over a naked fire for the space of 12 hours,
take it out and rectify it.

This water will dissolve gold.

Another Aqua regia is made thus.
Take of spirit of Nitre, as much as you please, put a dram of crude Nitre to
every ounce of it, and it will be as strong as any Aqua regia.

This water will dissolve gold.

To make a most strong, and vehement Aqua fortis.
Take of the strongest Aqua fortis that you can get, and well rectified, a
pound, of Mercury sublimed four ounces, salt Armoniack twenty ounces, mix all
these together.

Oil or Butter of Antimony, is made thus.
Take of crude Antimony as much as you please, of sublimed Mercury a like
quality, make them both into a very fine powder and mix them, and put them into
a glass Retort, the neck whereof must be large. Give fire by degrees in a close
reverberatory, or let the Distillation be made in sand. There will distill into
the Receiver a fatness; part whereof sticking to the neck of the Retort will
melt by a light fire being put to it. That fatness may be rectified in a
Retort: and either be kept by it self as it is, or set in a cellar or moist
place and be resolved into a Liquor.

This oil might be washed in good store of water, and then there will settle to
the bottom a white powder, which being often washed in fair water till all the
sharpness is gone, is then called Mercurius vitae, six or seven grains whereof
is an excellent vomiting medicine.

A Furnace for a close Reverberation furnished with its Retort and Receiver.


A, Shows the Furnace.

B, The Retort.

C, The Receiver.

D, The Vessel filled with cold water.

How to make a water out of Antimony whereof a few drops shall purge, or sweat,
and which has neither smell or scarce any taste.
Take flowers of Antimony, sublime them with salt Armoniack six or seven times,
then wash away the Salt with warm water, and dry the powder, which then lay
thin on a Marble in a cellar till it be dissolved (which will be in six weeks
time.) This water if it be taken to the quantity of twenty drops will purge, if
in a lesser quantity it will sweat.

To make an oil or quintessence of Metals.
Dissolve what Metal, or Mineral you please, in a strong spirit of Salt
(except silver which must be dissolved in Aqua fortis) draw off the phlegm in
Balneo, pour on rectified spirit of Wine, digest them so long till a red oil
swim above, which is the quintessence of metals, and minerals, and is a very
great secret.

The true Spirit of Antimony is made thus.
Take of the subtle powder of the Regulus of Antimony as much as you please,
sublime it of it self til it will sublime no more (still putting what is sublimed
to that which remains at the bottom) or with salt Armoniack six or seven times
(remembering that then you must dulcifie it with warm water by dissolving
therewith the salt, and dry the Precipitate afterward.) Set this fixed powder
in a cellar, laying it very thin upon a marble stone and in about six weeks or
two months it will all be dissolved into water, which must be filtred. Then
evaporate part of this water and let it stand two or three days in the cellar
to crystallize. These Crystals purify, and dry. Mix them with three times the
quantity of the gross powder of Tiles, and distill them in a Retort, and there
will come forth first a white spirit, and then a red, which you may rectify in
Balneo.

The true Oil or Essence of Antimony is made thus.
Take of the foresaid Crystals, dissolve them in good rectified spirit of wine,
digest them two months in Balneo, or horse dung: then evaporate the spirit of
wine, and there will remain in the bottom the true oil or essence of Antimony.

Then take new Crystals of Antimony, and let them imbibe either this oil, or
the foresaid spirit, till they will imbibe no more, then digest them two months
in sand, and they will become a flowing fixed salt, and of excellent virtue.

The aforesaid spirit, this oil, and essence of Antimony may be equalized to
Aurum potabile to all intents and purposes, according to a Medicinal use,
especially the sixth Essence. The dose is five or six grains.

A burning Spirit made out of Lead, most fragrant and Balsamicall.
Take the Calx of Saturn, or else Minium, pour upon it so much spirit of
Vinegar that may cover it four fingers breadth, digest them in a warm place the
space of twenty four hours, often stirring them that the matter settle not too
thick in the bottom: then decant the Menstruum, and pour on more, digest it as
before, and this do so often until all the saltness be extracted. Filter and
clarify all the Menstruum being put together, then evaporate it half away, and
set the other part in a cold place till it crystallize. These Crystals dissolve
again in fresh spirit of Vinegar, filter and coagulate the Liquor again into
Crystals, and this do so often until they be sufficiently impregnated with
the salt Armoniack of the Vinegar as with their proper ferment. Digest them in
a temperate Balneo, that they may be resolved into a Liquor like oil. Then
distill this Liquor in sand in a Retort, with a large Receiver annexed to it,
and well closed that no spirits evaporate, together with the observation of the
degrees of the fire: then there will distill forth a spirit of such a fragrant
smell that the fragrancie of all flowers, and compounded perfumes are not to be
compared to it. After Distillation when all things are cold, take out, and cast
away the black feces which is of no use. Then separate the yellow oil, which
swims on the top of the spirit, and the blood red oil which sinks to the
bottom of it: Separate the phlegm from the spirit in Balneo. Thou shall by this
means have a most fragrant spirit that even ravisheth the senses; and so
balsamical, that it cures all old and new sores inward and outward, and so
cordial that the dying are with admiration revived with it.

They that have this medicine need scarce use any other either for inward or
outward griefs.

How to turn Quicksilver into a water without mixing any thing with it, and to
make thereof a good Purgative and Diaphoretick medicine.
Take an ounce of Quicksilver not purified, put it into a bolt head of glass,
which you must nip up, set it over a strong fire in sand for the space of two
months, and the Quicksilver will be turned into a red sparkling Precipitate.
Take this powder, and lay it thin on a Marble in a Cellar for the space of two
months, and it will be turned into a water, which may be safely taken inwardly,
it will work a little upward and downward, but chiefly by sweat.

Note that you may set diverse glasses with the same matter in the same Furnace,
that so you may make the greater quantity at a time.

I suppose it is the Sulphur which is in the Quicksilver, and makes it so
black, that being stirred up by the heat of the fire, fixes the Mercury.

A fragrant oil of Mercury.
Take of Mercury seven times sublimed, and as often revived with unslaked Lime,
as much as you please, dissolve it in spirit of Nitre in a moderate heat, then
abstract the spirit of salt, and edulcorate it very well by boiling it in
spirit of Vinegar: then abstract the spirit of Vinegar, and wash it again with
distilled rain water: then dry it, and digest it two months in a like quantity
of the best rectified spirit of Wine you can get. Distill them by Retort, making
your fire moderate at the beginning, afterward increasing it; then evaporate
the spirit of Wine in Balneo, and there will remain in the bottom a most
fragrant oil of Mercury.

This oil so purifies the blood by sweat and urine, that it cures all
distempers that arise from the impurity thereof, as the venereal disease, etc.

The truth is, they that have this medicine well made need but few other
medicines: the dose is four or five drops.

To turn Mercury into a water by it self.
Set this following vessel being made of iron into a Furnace, so that the
three bowls thereof be within the Furnace, and the Pipe and Receiver be
without. Make your Furnace so as that there be a great hole left open at the
top: where you must put in your coals, shutting it afterward with a cover of
stone made fit thereunto; on the top also must be holes to let in air.

The Vessel for this Operation.


First make your Iron vessel as red hot as possibly it can be made (or else you
do nothing) having first annexed an earthen well-glazed Receiver to the bottom
of it. Then put half an ounce of Quicksilver at a time in at the top (which
presently stop with clay) and presently the Mercury will come over, part in a
sharp Liquor, and part as crude a Mercury as it was before, which you may put
in again till it be all turned to water.

Note that unless the Quicksilver give a great crack presently after it is put
in, it is a sign that the vessel was not hot enough.

This operation being well prosecuted may produce a medicine with which none
under the Philosophers Elixir may compare.

How to distill Spirits, and Oils out of Minerals, Vegetables, Bones, Horns,
and faster, and in a greater quantity in one hour then in the common way in
twenty four. This must be done in such a Furnace as this.


A, Signifies the Furnace with its iron, or earthen distilling vessel walled
in, to which a very large Recipient is joined. B, the Distiller, who with his
left hand takes off the cover, and with his right casts in his prepared
matter with an iron lad^e. C, the form of the distilling vessel. D, the same,
as it appears inward, E, the form of the vessel not walled in but standing
on the coals for other uses.

This Furnace must be twice so high as wide, and the pipe must be a foot long
out of the Furnace.

The vessel walled in must be of earth for the distilling of Antimony,
Sulphur, and such things as will corode iron: but for other things iron is most
convenient.

Before you make any dist^llation, let the vessel which is walled in be red
hot, then by little and little cast in your matter, which must be cut or
powdered small, and clap down the cover into the false bottom above, which is
full of molten lead, and therefore suffers no fume to go forth.

When you see the fumes in the Receiver (which must be of glass) to cease; and
condensed into a Liquor, then put in more matter.

By this way you may make a far greater dispatch and distill a greater quantity
out of the same proportion of matter, then by the common way.

By this way there is no danger of breaking your Receiver, and you may end and
begin when you please, and try diverse experiments in one hour, and cannot make
the fire too strong, and may make the spirits of such things as can hardly or
not so well be made by a Retort, as the spirits of Salt, of Tartar, Hartshorn,
Antimony, etc.

Salt and such things as will flow must have a bole, or powder of brick mixed
with them before they be cast into the vessel, or if you please you may first
dissolve what salt you please, and with red hot gross powder of Brick, imbibe
the water, then cast in this powder by little and little into the distilling
vessel, and the Salt by this means will yield its spirit quickly and in
abundance. By either of these two ways you may make a pound of the spirit of
Nitre in an hour, and of salt in two hours.

Now whereas some things yield a spirit, and a thick and heavy oil, they may be
rectified thus, viz. by putting them into a Retort, and distilling them in sand
or ashes with a graduall heat: there will come forth the phlegm of some Liquors
first, and then the spirit; and of other some the spirit, and then the phlegm,
but of all these the heavy thick oil at last; which by distilling off becomes
far clearer then before, which may again be rectified by spirit of salt as I
have showed before, and therefore need not here repeat it.

To make an oil of Lapis Calaminaris.
Take of Lapis Calaminaris powdered, as much as you please, pour on it five or
six times as much of rectified spirit of Salt, shake them together continually
or else it will be congealed into a hard mass, which can hardly be mollified
again: when no more will dissolve in frigido, put it in warm sand so long till
the spirit of salt be of a high yellow color; then pour it off and put on more
til all be dissolved that will, cast away the feces, put the solution into a
glass body, and distill it in sand: about the third part of the spirit of Salt
comes over as insipid as common water, though the spirit were well rectified
before, for the dryness of the Lapis Calaminaris (which is the driest of all
Minerals and Metals except Zink) retains the spirit after the phlegm is come
over; let the glass cool, and thou shall find at the bottom a thick red oil
very fat, even as Olive olive, and not very corosive; keep it from the air, or
else it turns into water.

It is of wonderful virtue for inward and outward griefs, for it has in it a
pure golden Sulphur.

Common Sulphur mixed with this oil, and melted in a strong fire swimmeth like
water above, and is transparent.

This oil distilled in a Retort with pure sand in a strong fire, yields a
spirit like fire scarce to be contained in any vessel, and dissolveth all
metals except silver, and reduces pure spirit of Wine into an oil within a few
days.

To make oil of Talk.
Take of the best Talk reduced into very thin flakes, make them red hot, and
then quench them in the strongest Lixivium that Sope-boylers use; do this
fifteen times and it will become as white as snow: then powder it very small
and calcine it by fumigation i. e. by the fume of some very sharp spirit as of
Aqua fortis, or the like: when it has been thus calcined for the space of a
fortnight, it will become somewhat mucilaginous, then set it in any heat of
putrefaction as it is (for it has imbibed enough of the sharp spirit to
moisten and ferment it) for the space of two months in a bolt head nipt up:
then evaporate the acid spirit and dulcifie it with distilled rain water. After
this extract what thou can out of it with the best rectified spirit of Wine,
pour off the solution and evaporate the spirit of Wine, and at the bottom will
be a most beautiful oil.

The oil is the most glorious fucus or paint in the World.

To make oil of Talk another way.
Take of the foresaid powder of Talk after it has been putrefied, and again
dulcified as much as you please, put four times as much of the best circulated
oil of Camphire to it, digest them in Horse dung till all the powder be
dissolved, and the oil become mucilaginous, which will be within two months.

This is for the same use as the former.

There is required a great deal of pains and care and no small cost in the
preparation of these oils.

Oil is made of Bole Armoniack, terra sigillata, and such kind of clay earths,
thus.
Take of either of those earths, as much as you please, break it into small
pieces, and put it into a Retort over a naked fire for the space of 12 hours,
and there will distill into the Receiver (which must be large) the phlegm, then
white Spirits in a little quantity, yet of a grateful taste and smell.

Oil out of these kinds of earth is made better thus.
Take of either of these earths, which you please, as much as you will; pour
upon it distilled rain water, set it in some warm place for a month or more,
and the oyliness will separate from its body, of its own accord, and swim upon
the water. Separate the water by a tunnel, and distill the oil with five parts
of the spirit of Wine well rectified, and there will come forth an oil oil of a
golden color, swimming on the spirit which is a most excellent Balsame.

Spirit of unslaked Lime is made thus.
Take of unslaked Lime as much as thou please; reduce it into a subtle
powder, imbibe it with Spirit of Wine most highly rectified (which must be pure
from all its phlegm, or else you labor in vain) as much as it can imbibe; draw
off the spirit of Wine with a gentle heat, cohobate it 8 or 10 times, so will
the fiery virtue of the Lime be fortified. -- Take of this levigated Lime 10
ounces, pure salt of Tartar one ounce, the feces of Tartar after the salt is
extracted 11 ounces; mix these well together, put them into a glass Retort
coated, see that 2 parts of 3 be empty, distill them into two Receivers, the
phlegm into one, the spirit into the other, which must have a little of
rectified spirit of Wine in it to receive the spirit.

If thou will separate the spirit of Wine, then put fire to it, and the spirit
of Wine will burn away, and the spirit of the Lime stay behind, which is a
kind of a fixed spirit.

This is a very secret for the consuming the Stone in the bladder, and the
curing of the Gout.

Oil made out of Tile-stones, called the Oil of Philosophers.
Take of Bricks or Tiles, as many as you please, break them into small pieces,
make them red fire hot, then quench them in pure old Oil Olive (in which let
them lie till they be cold) then take them out and grind them very small, let
the powder be put in a glass Retort, coated, a fit Receiver being put thereto
and distill off the oil in a naked fire by degrees, which being distilled off
keep in a vial close stopped.

This oil is wonderful penetrating, and is good against all cold distempers
whatsoever.

The Liquor or Water of Coral, is made thus.
Take Salt-Armoniack well purified by sublimation, of red Coral finely
powdered, of each a like quantity; sublime them so often till the Coral will
no more rise up, then take the Calx of Coral that remains in the bottom of
the sublimatory and put it on a marble or glass in the cellar to be dissolved;
that which will not be dissolved sublime again, and do as before till all be
dissolved: and so thou have the Liquor of Coral.

Note that if thou will have the true tincture of Coral, evaporate the humidity
of the foresaid Liquor, then extract the tincture out of the powder with spirit
of Wine, which spirit evaporate to the consistency of honey: and thou have a
most rare medicine.

This medicine strengthens all the parts in the body, and cures all
distempers that arise from the weakness thereof.

To make a Water out of Lapis Armenus that shall have neither taste nor smell,
a few drops whereof shall purge.
Take of Lapis Armenus powdered small, and calcined, as much as you please,
sublime it with salt Armoniack until it will sublime no more but remain in the
bottom of the sublimatory, then take it out, and lay it very thin upon a
marble in a cellar, and there let it lie two months, and it will be almost all
dissolved into a Liquor.

Or thus: Lapis Armenus powdered small and calcined, as much as you please,
pour upon it of distilled Vinegar, as much as will cover it four fingers
breadth, then set it over a gentle heat stirring of it two or three times in an
hour, for the space of six hours or thereabouts; then the spirit being tinged
very blew with the powder, filtre off from the feces, then pour more spirit of
vinegar on the feces and do as before, till the spirit be tinged no more, then
take all the blew spirit and vapor it away, and at the bottom you shall have
a salt, which you must put into a calcining pot, and calcine so long in the
fire till no more vapor will arise, and it become a dark red powder, then put
it upon a marble in the cellar for the space of two months, and it well be
dissolved into a Liquor, a few drops whereof put into a glass of beer will
purge delicately.

How to make a Furnace that shall of it self without any vessels which should
contain the matter, being put into it, sublime Minerals, and distill all manner
of Oils and Spirits out of Minerals, Vegetables, and Animals, and that in a
very great quantity, in a very short time, and with small cost.
THe Furnace is made as follows: It may be made of one piece by a Potter, or
of brick, round, or apiece, greater or lesser as you please: if the inside
be one span broad in the middle, it must be four high: one for the Ash-hole,
another above the grate to the middle Coal-hole, and two above the Pipe; this
pipe being made of earth or iron must be a span long betwixt the Furnace and
the Receiver, and a third part as wide as the Furnace within.

The Recipients must be made of glass, or very good earth well luted together;
the greater the better.



The first Figure.

The second Figure.

A, Signifies the Ash-hole, which must be as wide as the Furnace, and always
open that the fire may burn the stronger.

B, The middle hole of the Furnace for the putting in of coals.

C, The stopple made of stone.

D, The upper hole of the Furnace with a false bottom wherein sand lies,
which is there laid that the cover may lie the closer and keep in the fumes the
better.

E, The Cover, which must presently be clapped on as soon as the matter to be
distilled is put in.

F, The Pipe, which goes out of the Furnace, and to which the Receiver is
fitted.

G, The first Recipient for flowers.

H, The second.

I, The third.

K, A Stool whereon the first Recipient rests, in the midst whereof is a
hole, through which goes the neck of the Recipient, to which another glass is
fitted.

L, The Glass fitted to the Recipient for the uniting the spirits that drop
down.

M, Another Recipient united to the former glass, and into which the united
spirits do run.

N, A Stool through the middle whereof goes a screw for the raising of that
Glass which is set under the first Recipient, higher, or lower.

O,

P, The Grate with two thick iron bars, which lie fast, upon which four or five
thinner are laid, which may be stirred when the Furnace is made clean.

Thus far the first of the figures is explained, by which you may see how
sublimation and distillation is made at one time, viz. of those things which
will yield both flowers, and spirits, (the flowers sticking in the three upper
Recipients, and the spirits dropping down into the lower.)

Now follows the explanation of the second figure, which is the same with the
former in respect of the Furnace it self, but differing in respect of the
Recipients, which serve for the receiving of the spirits and oils of such
things as yield no flowers. Therefore I shall begin with the explanation of the
Receivers.

G, The first crooked pipe as it is fitted to the pipe that comes out of the
Furnace.

H, The-Recipient with its cover, in which is one hole for one crooked pipe to
go through, as you may see in the first H, and two holes for two pipes to go
through, as you may see in the second H, and in H H.

Note that these pipes may either be fastened to the cover being all of one
piece, or they must be well luted, that no vapors may pass through. Now you
must conceive that in the lower Receivers the vapor that goes out of the
first pipe goes first into the Receiver, then out of that into the next pipe,
and so forward till it comes into the last Receiver, by which means it is much
cooled (for indeed such vapors that come out of the Furnace, especially when
some materials are distilled, if there were not some such art to cool them,
would break all Recipients.)

I, A tub of water, wherein the Recipient stands, to cool the vapors and
condense them.

K, The first crooked pipe as it goes into the Recipient.

L, The second crooked pipe, whereof one end goes into one Receiver, and
another end into another.

M, The last crooked pipe to which you must annex a Receiver.

Now the manner of distilling is thus; Let the Furnace be full of coals well
kindled, then cast on your matter, and stop your Furnace close: This Furnace
needs no Retort, or other vessels to set into it, neither can you do any hurt
by too much or too little fire, and you may finish your operation when you
please, and in one hour try diverse experiments. It saves very much time and
cost, and in one hour will do as much as can be done in another Furnace in 24.
In one hour you may make a pound of spirit of Salt with four or five pound of
coals, and as much flower of Antimony in a like space of time, and with as few
coals.

If your materials be vegetables, or horn, or bones, cut them small; If hard
Minerals, let them be powdered very small; if salts, let them first be
dissolved in water, which water must be imbibed with red hot coals until all
the liquor be imbibed: then cast in those coals into the Furnace.

If you would by this means procure the spirit of hard Minerals, as of
Antimony, etc. you must take them as they come from the Mine before they have
passed the fire.

By this Furnace you may make the spirits of such things which will not yield
them in any other way.

Note that such oils and spirits as are drawn by this Furnace must be
rectified in spirit of Salt, as I have above showed.

Ros Vitrioli is made thus.
Take of the best Dansick Vitriall, as much as you please, uncalcined, put it
into a glass gourd and distill it in the sand, and there will come over a water
somewhat sharpish.

This Water or Ros is of greater use then the spirit or oil thereof.

It helps all inward inflammations, as of the Liver, Kidneys, Stomach, helps
the ebullition of blood, and all distempers that come from thence.

This is that phlegm, which most vapor away, but it is because they know not
the virtues thereof.

A sweet green oil of Vitriall is made thus.
Take as many Copperas stones as you please, beat them small, and lay them in a
cool cellar, and in twenty or thirty days they will attract the air, and look
black, and after fourteen days become whitish and sweetish, then dissolve them
in distilled rain water, then filter and evaporate the water, and they will
shoot into green Crystals, which you may dissolve in a Cellar per deliquium,
being first beaten small, and laid on a marble stone.

This liquor is that famous medicine of Paracelsus for the falling sickness, a
few drops thereof being taken in any appropriated liquor.

Take heed that it come at no strong fire, for then says Paracelsus it loses
its greenness, and as much as it loses of that, so much also of its virtue.

A spirit may be drawn from hence by an ingenious Artist, that will smell like
Musk, or Amber.

The Sulphur of Vitriall may with spirit of wine be extracted thus.
Take of the best Dansick Vitriall half a pound, dry it by a gentle fire till
it be whitish, then pour on it of the best rectified spirit of Wine thirty
ounces: (Note that there must come to it no other moisture then the spirit of
Wine, the glass also must be very dry, else you labor in vain) then digest it
in horse dung the space of a month, then decant from the feces the spirit of
Wine without any troubling of it, then in Balneo evaporate the spirit, and at
the bottom you will have a yellow liquor of a most wonderful stipticity.

This liquor is a famous Anodynum, suppressing all noxious vapors whatsoever
and causing rest.

A few drops there may be taken in any specifical Liquor.

A Sudorificall Water to be used outwardly.
Take of sublimed Mercury very finely powdered an ounce and half, of Euphorbium
powdered a scruple, spirit of Wine well rectified, and Rosewater, of each a
pound, digest them two or three hours in a gentle Balneo, the neck of the
vessel which must be very long being well stopped, then let them boll a quarter
of an hour: when the liquor is cold pour it from the feces, and keep it in a
glass.

If the back bone be bathed with this Water, or the wrist of those that be
weak, it causes sweat presently, if it be done in the bed. By which means
diseases that require sweat may be cured. Also any pained place by being bathed
with this Water is in a little time eased.

Note that you must not bathe any place above three or four times with it, for
by being too often used it contracts the skin.

How to rectify Oils and Spirits of Minerals.
Put the Liquor that is distilled from Minerals into the Retort, to which give
fire by degrees, and the spirit will rise up into the upper Receiver, and the
heavy oil will go into the middle Receiver which is the biggest of all; and into
the little Receiver annexed to the end of the middle, will pass some of the
spirit, which though it passes into the middle Receiver, will not stay there,
but goes beyond it because it finds vent.

Of ANIMALS. BOOK IV.
Waters, Spirits, and Oils, simple and compound out of Animals.
Oil and Water out of Blood is made tbus.
TAke of blood as much as you please, let it stand in putrefaction in a glass
vessel close covered the space of forty days, then distill it in ashes, and
there will come forth a water and oil; extract the salt out of the feces with
the said water, calcine the salt in a crucible, and then dissolve it in the
said water, and then distill off the water (which will be a good rectifying of
the water) and dry the salt very well, which then mix with the foresaid oil
being first rectified, and digest them both together for the space of a month.

To make the Magistery of blood.
Take of the purest blood as much as you please, put it into a Pelican, that
three parts of four may be empty, and digest it a month in horse dung (in which
time it will swell and become as much more as it was when it was put in) then
distill off the phlegm in Balneo, and in the bottom will remain the magistery of
blood, which must be distilled, and cohobated nine times in a Retort in ashes,
and then it is perfected.

This Magistery is of excellent virtue, which being taken inwardly and applied
outwardly, cures most diseases, and eases pain, being very balsamicall.

E^ixir of Mummie is made thus.
Take of Mummy ( viz. of man's flesh hardened) cut small four ounces, spirit of
wine terebinthinated ten ounces, put them into a glazed vessel, (three parts
of four being empty) which set in horse dung to digest for the space of a
month, then take it out and express it, let the expression be circulated a
month, then let it run through Manica Hippocratis, then evaporate the spirit
till that which remains in the bottom be like an oil, which is the true Elixir
of Mummy.

This Elixir is a wonderful preservative against all infections, also very
balsamicall.

The essence of man's brains.
Take the brains of a young man that has dyed a violent death, together with
the membranes, arteries, veins, nerves, all the pith of the back, bruise these
in a stone mortar til they become a kind of pap, then put as much of the spirit
of wine, as will cover it three or four fingers breadth: then put it into a
large glass that three parts of four be empty, being hermetically closed, then
digest it half a year in horse dung, then take it out and distill it in Balneo,
and cohobate the water til the greatest part of the brains be distilled off.

A scruple or two of this essence taken in some specificall water once in a
day, is a most infallible medicine against the falling sickness.

A famous spirit made out of Cranium humanum.
Take of Crannium humanum as much as you please, break it into small pieces,
which put into a glass. Retort well coated, with a large Receiver well luted,
then put a strong fire to it by degrees continuing of it till you see no more
fumes comes forth; and you shall have a yellowish spirit, a red oil, and a
volatile salt.

Take this salt and the yellow spirit and digest them by circulation two or
three months in Balneo, and thou shall have a most excellent spirit.

This spirit is of affinity with, if not the same as that famous spirit of Dr.
Goddards in Holborn.

It helps the falling sickness, gout, dropsy, infirm stomach, and indeed
strengthens all weak parts, and opens all obstructions, and is a kind of
Panacea.

Another excellent spirit made out of Cranium, Hearts horn, or Ivory.
Take of either of these, (if you take Cranium it need not be bruised at all,
only broke into little pieces; if Hearts horn or Ivory, you must cut them in
thin pieces) lay it piece by piece upon a net spread upon any vessel being
almost full of water, cover this net with another vessel very close, then make
the water boil, and keep it boiling three days and three nights, and in that
time the bones or horns, will be as soft as cheese; then pound them, and to
every pound thereof put half a pound of Hungarian vitrial uncalcined, and as
much spirit of wine as will make them into a thin paste. This paste digest in a
vessel hermetically sealed the space of a month in Balneo, then distill it in a
Retort in sand till all be dry, and you shall have a most excellent spirit.

This spirit is of wonderful use in the Epilepsie, Convulsions, all Fevers
putrid or pestilential, passions of the heart, and is a very excellent
Sudorifick.

This spirit may be taken from the quantity of half an ounce to an ounce in
some specificall liquor.

A Water and Oil made out of Hair.
Fill an earthen Retort with hair cut small, set it over the fire, and fit a
Receiver to it, and there will come over a very stinking Water and Oil.

This water and Oil is used in Germany to be sprinkled upon fences and hedges
to keep wild and hurtful Cattle from coming to do harm in any place, for such
is the stink of this liquor that it does affright them from coming to any place
near it.

Water of Milk is made thus.
Take of what Milk thou please a gallon, in it dissolve half a pound of salt,
and put to it two handful of Plantain, and an ounce of Licorish sliced, then
distill it in a hot Still with a gentle fire.

This water is of excellent use in hot distempers of the Lungs and Kidneys.

You may put in other ingredients according to the use you would have it for.

An excellent compound water of Milk for any inflammations in the eyes.
Take of woman's milk a pint, of white Copperas a pound; distill them in ashes.
Note that as soon as thou perceivest any sharp spirit to come off, then cease.

Let inflamed eyes be washed three or four times in a day with this water, and
it helps them wonderfully.

Spirit of Urine is made thus.
Take of the Urine of a young man drinking much wine, as much as you please,
let it stand in glass vessels in putrefaction 40 days, then pouring it from
its feces distill it in a glass gourd in sand, til all be dry, then cohobate the
said spirit on the Caput Mortuum three times, then distill it in a gourd of a
long neck, and there will ascend besides the spirit a crystalline salt, which
thou may either keep by it self, being called the volatile salt of Urine, or
mix it with its spirit which will thereby become very penetrating, if they be
digested for some days together.

Note that the pipe of the head must be wide, or else the volatile salt will
soon stop it.

Note that this salt is so penetrating that it penetrateth the body of the
glass.

This Spirit by rectification may be made so pure and subtle, that it will burn
as fire, and dissolve gold and precious stones.

This being often applied to any place pained with the gout, eases it
presently, it also quickens any part that is benumbed.

The salt volatile is Helmonts famous Medicine for the Jaundies.

A compound Spirit of Urine.
Take of Hungarian Vitriall a pound, the Urine of a Boy that is healthy, four
pints: put these into a glass vessel well closed that three parts of four may
be empty; digest them in Balneo for the space of a month, then distill them in
ashes til all be dry.

This spirit is of great virtue in the Epilepsie, Gout, Dropsy, Convulsions,
being taken from two drams to half an ounce in some specifical Liquor.

To make a spirit of Honey.
Take good strong stale Mead, otherwise called Metheglin, as much as thou
please, distill it in a Copper Still or Alembick, with its refrigeratory, and
it will yield a spirit like Aqua vitae.

The quintessence of honey is made thus.
Take of the purest Honey two pound, of Fountain water one pound; boil these
together til the water be boiled away, taking off all the scum that rises,
then take the Honey and put it into a glass, four parts of five being empty,
close it well, and set in digestion a whole year, and thou shall have the
essence of Honey swimming on the top in form of an Oil, being of as fragrant
smell as any thing in the World; the phlegm will be in the middle, and the
feculent matter in the bottom, of a dark color, and stinking smell.

Some make the quintessence of Honey after this manner.
Take as much Honey as thou please, of the best, put it into a gourd of
glass, first distill off the phlegm in Balneo, then extract the tincture out from
what remains, with the said water, then calcine the remaining feces and extract
from thence the salt with the foresaid water being distilled off from the
tincture, calcine the salt and melt it in a crucible, then let it dissolve in a
cellar; then again evaporate it away, and thou shall have a most white salt,
which let imbibe as much of the tincture as it will; digest them for three
months, and thou shall have an essence of Honey.

An essence of Honey may be made thus.
Take of Honey well despumated as much as you please, pour upon it as much of
the best rectified spirit of Wine as will cover it five or six fingers breadth,
digest them in a glass vessel well closed (the fourth part only being full) in a
temperate Balneo the space of a fortnight, or til the spirit be very well
tinged, then decant off the spirit and put on more til all the tincture be
extracted, then put all these tinctures together, and evaporate the spirit till
what remains begin to be thickish at the bottom and of a golden color.

This is a very excellent essence of Honey, and is of so pleasant an odor that
scarce any thing is like to it.

It is so cordial that it even revives the dying if two or three drops thereof
be taken in some cordial water.

A most strong Spirit of the Vinegar of Honey.
Take a pound of Honey, put to it of the best White wine vinegar six pints, an
ounce of white Pepper bruised small, of the strongest Mustard Seed bruised three
ounces, put these into a glass vessel that three parts of four may be empty,
digest them in a temperate Balneo, or set the vessel in the sun for the
space of a fortnight, then distill them in Balneo, and thou shall have a spirit
far sharper then the common spirit of Vinegar.

This spirit is stronger, and better then any common distilled Vinegar for the
dissolving of hard things, and extracting the tinctures out of things.

Oil or quintessence of Wax.
Take of the best Wax a pound, as much of pure sand well washed from al its
impurity, and again dried; First melt the wax, and then mix the sand with it
very exactly, then put them into a glass Retort well coated, fit a strong
Receiver to it, and set it in sand, give it fire by degrees, continuing it four
days, which at last must be very strong, and there will come off a spirituous
oil, which must be rectified seven times in a glass Retort, every time changing
the Retort, and you shall have a subtle oil of a golden color.

This oil extracts the virtues out of all flowers presently, being set in the
sun, it is wonderful Balsamical for the cure of wounds or ulcers both inward
and outward, it also being applied outwardly eases all pains, quickens any
deaded member, as in the palfie.

Water is made out of any flesh thus.
Take what flesh you please, the bloudiest part thereof, unwashed, being cut
very small, and then bruised (or if it be a feathered fowl, take it being chased
up and down until it be wearyed, and then suddenly strangled, the feathers
being plucked off without out putting of it into water; and being thus plucked
bare, and the bowels taken out, cut the flesh, bones, gizard, liver, heart,)
and pour upon it as much water as will be sufficient, with what spices and
herbs thou please, then set it over a gentle fire in an earthen vessel
glazed the space of 24 hours, then put the head upon it and lute it close, and
there will distill off a comfortable restorative water.

Water or Liquor is made out of flesh thus.
Take of what flesh you please, or feathered fowl prepared as before, bruise it
small, and put it into a copper vessel tinned within side, without any water
being put to it, put a cover to it and lute it close, and set it in Balneo, or
over the vapor of seething water, and if the flesh be tender it will be turned
into a clear liquor the space of 12 hours, if harder it will require a longer
time: You may put in what spices or herbs you please to give it a good relish
and odor; after all is done you may strain it and keep it for use being very
restaurative and good for weak stomachs that cannot concoct hard meat.

If this be digested in a Pelican, or bolt head a fortnight, it will be far
better.

After this manner may be preserved Snails Worms, and such like:
which are very medicinable.

A very excellent restorative Liquor.
Take of the heart, lungs, and liver of a Calf, the same parts of a Fox new
killed, cut them small, put to them a quart of Shel Snails well scoured in salt
water; let them be put into a copper vessel tinned within side, and covered
close that no vapor come forth, set this vessel over the vapor of seething
water, and in 24 hours or thereabouts, they will be for the most part of them
turned into a Liquor of themselves; then take out this Liquor and put it into a
large Pelican, or Bolt-head, putting to them a quart of old Mallago wine,
Rosemary flowers, Betony flowers, Marygold flowers, Marsh wallow-flowers, of
each a handful, half a pound of Raisins of the Sun stoned, Mace and Nutmeg of
each two drams: digest all these together the space of a fortnight, then pour
off that which is clear from the feces and sweeten it with sugar, or syrup of
Gilly flowers, and let the Patient thereof five or fix spoonfuls, three or four
times in a day.

This Liquor recovereth the decaying strength wonderfully; they that by reason
of their weakness, can neither eat or digest any manner of common meat, will in
a short time be sensibly strengthened if they drink a quarter of a pint of this
morning and evening.

It is very good in consumptions, and repairs the radical moisture marvellously.

A Balsame made of Bears fat.
Take of Bears fat a pound, distill it in a Retort, and rectify it three or
four times: to this thus rectified put the tincture of Rosemary and Sage made
with spirit of Wine, of each three ounces, mix them well together, in these
infuse Cloves, Cinnamon, Saffron, Nutmegs, of each three drams, in warm ashes
the space of a night, then strain them and put to the oil four ounces of the
best wax melted, and mingled well together.

This is a most incomparable balsame for the Gout, and Palsy.

The Oil of Snakes and Adders.
Take Snakes or Adders when they are fat, which will be in June or July, cut
off their heads and take off their skins, and unbowel them, and put them into a
glass gourd; and pour on so much of the pure spirit of Wine well rectified, that
it may cover them four or five fingers breadth; stop the glass well, and set it
in Balneo til all their substance be turned into an oil, which keep well stopped
for your use.

This oil does wonderful cures in recovering hearing in those that be deaf, if
a few drops thereof be put warm into the ears.

A Noble man of Germany that was famous for curing the deaf used this as his
chiefest medicine, by which they say he cured those that were born deaf.

The Quintessence of Snakes, Adders, or Vipers.
Take of the biggest and fattest Snakes, Adders, or Vipers, which you can get
in June or July, cut off their heads, take off their skins, and unbowel them,
then cut them into small pieces, and put them into a glass of a wide mouth, and
set them in a warm Balneo, that they may be well dried, which will be done in
three or four days. Then take them out, and put them into a bolt head, and pour
on them of the best alcolizated Wine as much as will cover them six or eight
fingers breadth. Stop the glass hermetically, and digest them fifteen days in
Balneo, or so long til the Wine be sufficiently covered, which pour forth; then
pour on more of the foresaid spirit of Wine til all the quintessence be
extracted: Then put all the tinged spirits together: and draw off the spirit in
a gentle Balneo, til it be thick at the bottom, on this pour spirit of Wine
Caryophyllated, and stir them well together, and digest them in a Circulatory
ten days, then abstract the spirit of Wine, and the quintessence remains at
the bottom perfect.

This quintessence is of extraordinary virtue for the purifying of the blood,
flesh, and skin, and consequently of all diseases therein. It cures also the
Falling Sickness, and strengthens the brain, sight, and hearing, and preserves
from Gray hairs, renews Youth, preserves Women from Abortion, cures the
Gout, Consumption, causes sweat, is very good in, and against pestilential
infections.

Viper wine is made thus.
Take the best fat Vipers, cut off their heads, take off their skins, and
unbowel them, then put them into the best Canary Sack; four or six according to
their bigness, into a gallon: Let them stand two or three months, then draw off
your wine as you drink it.

Some put them alive into the Wine, and there suffocate them, and afterward
take them out, and cut off their heads, take off their skins, and unbowel them,
and then put them into the said Wine again, and do as before.

This Wine has the same virtue as the foregoing quintessence, it also
provokes to Venery, and cures the Leprosy, and such like corruption of blood.

Kunrath's famous Water, called Aqua Magnanimitatis.
Take of Pismires or Ants (the biggest, that have a sowrish smell, are the best)
two handsuls, spirit of wine a gallon, digest them in a glass vessel close shut
the space of a month, in which time they will be dissolved into a Liquor, then
distill them in Balneo til all be dry. Then put the same quantity of Ants as
before, digest and distill them in the said Liquor as before: do this three
times, then aromatize the spirit with some Cinnamon.

Note that upon the spirit will float an oil, which must be separated.

This spirit is of excellent use to stir up the Animal spirit: in so much that
John Casimire Palsgrave of the Rhene and Seyfrie of Collen, General against
the Turks, did always drink of it when they went to fight, to increase
magnanimity and courage, which it did even to admiration.

This spirit does also wonderfully irritate them that are slothful to Venery.

It also provokes Urine even to admiration.

It does also wonderfully irritate the spirits that are dulled, and deaded with
any cold distemper.

This oil does the same effects, and indeed more powerfully.

This oil does besides what is spoken of the spirit, help deafness exceedingly,
two or three drops being dropped into the ear after it is well syringed, once in
a day, for a week together.

It helps also the Eyes that have any film growing on them, being now and
then dropped into them.

Another-Aqua Magnanimitatis is made thus.
Take of Ants or Pismires a handful, of their Eggs two hundred, of Millepedes
i. e. Wood lice one hundred, of Bees one hundred and fifty, digest all these in
two pints of spirit of wine being very well impregnated with the brightest
Soot. Digest them together the space of a month, then pour of the clear Spirit,
and keep it safe.

This water or spirit is of the same virtue as the former.

Water of Dung is made thus.
Take of any dung as much as thou please, whilst it is fresh, put it into a
common cold Still, and with a soft fire distill it off; it will be best if the
bottom of the Still be set over a vapor; if thou would have it be stronger,
cohobate the said water over its feces several times: for we see there is great
virtue in dung, it makes ground fertile, and many sorts thereof are very
medicinable.

A water of Doves dung is made thus.
Take of Doves dung dried as much as you please, to every pound put a pint of
Rhenish wine, in which let it steep all night in a gentle Balneo, then distill
it in a glass gourd in ashes: Cohobate this Liquor three times, if there be any
volatile salt mix it with the water.

This water is very excellent against all obstructions of the kidneys, bladder,
it helps the Jaundies presently, two or three spoonful thereof being drank
once every morning and evening.

A Water made of Horse dung.
Take of the dung of a horse that is fed in the stable as much as you please,
let it stand two days out of the Sun, and out of the wet, to every pound of
this pour a pint of white wine, let them stand in a warm Balneo a fortnight;
then distill them in a glass gourd in sand, cohobate this three or four times;
if there be any volatile salt, mix it with the water.

This Water is very excellent against the bastard pleurisy, stitches, wind,
obstruction of the reins, bladder, very good in a dropsy, jaundies, scurvy,
etc. If three or four spoonfuls be taken every morning in the water of Juniper
berries, it also causes sweat.

A Water smelling like Amber, made by Paracelsus out of Cow dung.
Take of Cow dung and distill it in Balneo, and the water thereof will have the
smell of Amber gryse.

This water is very excellent in all inward inflammations.

An excellent Sudorifick made of the young buds of Hearts horn.
Take of the young buds of Hearts horn, whilst they are full of blood and moist;
bruise them into a paste, then mix as much Canary wine as will make a very thin
paste, distill them in ashes till they be very dry.

This is an excellent Sudorifick in all burning Fevers and Epidemical
diseases; if a spoonful be taken by it self, or in any appropriated Liquor.

Oil out of Bones and Horns, is made thus.
Take of what bones you please, reduce them to a gross powder, put them into a
Retort, putting a strong fire by degrees thereunto; and there will come forth
an oil, and volatile salt, both which thou may mix together, and digest them
into an essence, the oil being first rectified with spirit of wine.

The Water of Swallows against the Falling sickness.
Take of Swallows, cut them into pieces without separating any thing from them,
six ounces, of Castoreum cut small an ounce, mix them together, infuse them 12
hours in half a pin^ of Canary wine, then put them into a glass gourd and
distill them in sand till all be dry, then cohobate the Liquor three times.

This water being drank to the quantity of two spoonful every morning, cures
them that have the Falling sickness.

Oil out of Eggs is made thus.
Take of the yelks of eggs boiled very hard, rub them in pieces with your
fingers, then fry them in a pan over a gentle fire, continually stirring them
with a spoon til they become red, and the oil be resolved, and flow from them;
then put them into a hair cloth, and so press forth the oil.

This oil cleanses the skin from any filthiness contracted by heat; it cures
pustles, chaps, excoriations, ring-worms, but especially all burnings.

A Water of the whites of Eggs that will cure a wound without any visible
scarre.
Take as many eggs as you please, boil them very hard, then cut them in the
middle and take out the yelks, filling up the cavities with some of those
whites being first bruised into a paste, then put both sides of the egg
together as before, and tie them together with a thread, and with a string hang
them in the middle of a gourd glass that they touch not the sides, stop this
glass very close and set it in Balneo, and you shall see those whites which
were bruised drop down into a Liquor: which you must gather up out of the
bottom of the glass, and keep.

You will have very little of this Liquor.

This Liquor applied to any green wound with a feather cures it presently
wheresoever it be, without any visible scar. It cures most wonderfully all
wounds in the eyes.

A Water of Crabs is made thus.
Take Crabs or Craw-fish, as many as you please, break them to pieces, then
macerate them in water of Sengreen for the space of a day, then distill them,
cohobate the water three times.

This Water is of singular virtue in all manner of inflammations inward and
outward.

An Oylor Liquor is made out of Crabs eyes thus.
Take of Crabs eyes very finely powdered five parts, oil of Tartar Per
Deliquium six parts (This oil of Tartar must be made of salt of Tartar after it
has flowed in the fire) digest them in horse dung the space of a month, then
coagulate the Liquor and make an extraction with the best rectified spirit of
Wine that can be made (or else you lose your labor) then evaporate the spirit
of Wine, and there remains an oil at the bottom.

This oil is of wonderful virtue in all putrid Fevers, and such like
distempers, also in all obstructions, especially of the Kidneys.

Water of Spawn of Frogs is made thus.
Take of the Spawn of Frogs gathered in March, as much as you please, put a
handful of Salt to every quart, and put them into a common cold Still and with
a gentle fire distill off the water till no more will distill.

A compound water of the Sperm of Frogs.
Take of the sperm of Frogs gathered in March about the new of the Moon, four
pound, of Cow dung fresh, six pound, mix them well together, and let them stand
the space of a day, then distill them in ashes.

This water allays all hot pains both inward, and outward, especially of the
Gout.

Another compound water of the sperm of Frogs.
Take of the Sperm of Frogs gathered in March, two pound, and half, the Urine
of a young man three pints, new Treacle two ounces and a half, white Vitrial,
Salt, Alum, of each four ounces, then distill them, and put to the water an
ounce and half of the Salt of Vitriall, Camphire, and Saffron, of each an ounce.

This water being applied outwardly helps all pains, especially of the Gout,
and such like, also allayeth hot or cold swellings; It also stancheth bleeding.

A Miscellany of Spagyricall Experiments and Curiosities.
BOOK V.
The Spagyricall Anatomy of Water.
WAter seems to be a body so very Homogeneall, as if neither Nature or Art
could discover any Heterogeneity in the parts thereof: thus indeed it seems to
the eye of the vulgar, but to that of a Philosopher far otherwise, as I shall
endeavor to make credible by presenting to your consideration a twofold process
of the discovering the dissimilary parts thereof; whereof the one is natural
only, and the other artificial; But before I speak of either, it must be
premised, that in the element of Water there is great plenty of the spirit of
the World, which is more predominant in it then in any other element, for the
use and benefit of universal nature; and that this spirit has three distinct
substances, viz. Salt, Sulphur, and Mercury. Now by salt we must understand a
substance very dry, vital, and radical, having in it the beginning of
corporisication, as I may so call it: by Sulphur, a substance full of light and
vital heat, or vivifying fire, containing in it self the beginning of motion:
by Mercury, a substance abounding with radical moisture, with which the Sulphur
of life, or vital fire, is cherished and preserved. Now these substances which
are in the Spirit of the World make all Fountains, and Waters, but with some
difference, according to the predominancy of either. This several predominancy
therefore is the ground of the variety of productions; I say, of productions,
because all things are produced out of Water: for Water is both the Sperme, and
the Menstruum of the World; the former, because it includes the seed of every
thing; the latter, because the Sperme of Nature is put refied in it, that the
seed included in it should be actuated, and take upon it the diverse Forms of
things; and because by it the seed it self, and all things produced of seed
grow, and are increased: Now this being premised, I shall show you what the
natural process is, which I shall make plain by instancing in three several
productions, viz. of the spawn of Frogs, of Stones, and of Vegetables.

The Spawne of Frogs is produced after this manner, viz. The Sulphur which is
in the Water, being by the heat of the Sun resolved, and dissolved, is
greedily, and with delight conceived by the Element of Water, even as the
Sperme of a Male is by the Matrix of the Female, and that upon this account.
The Water wants siccity, which the Sulphur has, and therefore exceedingly
desiring it, does greedily attract it to it self: Sulphur also wants humidity,
and therefore attracts the humidity of the Water: Moreover the humidity of the
Water has the humidity of the Salt laid up occultly in it: also the Sulphur
cherishes the humidity of the fire, and desires nothing more then the humidity
of the Salt, that is in the Water. Sulphur also contains the siccity of the
Salt, whence it is that Salt requires a siccity from the Sulphur. And thus do
these attractive virtues mutually act upon each others subject. Now by this
means there is a conception made in the water which now begins to be turgid,
puffed up, and troubled, as also to be grosser, and more slimie, until out of
the spermatick vessels the spermes be cast upward, in which spermes after a
while appear black specks, which are the seed of the Frogs, and by the heat of
the Sun, are in a short time turned into the same; by which it appears there
are dissimilary parts in Water.

2 Stones are produced out of Water that has a Mucilaginous Mercury, which the
Salt, with which it also abounds, fixes into Stones. This you may see cleared
by putting stones into the water, for they will after a time contract a
mucilaginous slimy matter, which being taken out of the water and set in the
Sun, becomes to be of a stony nature. And whence come those stones, gravel, and
sand which we see in Springs? they are not washed down out of the Mountains and
Hills (as some think) from whence the waters spring, neither were they in the
earth before the Springs brake forth, (as some imagine) and now appear by
washing away of the earth from them; for if you dig round about the springs,
even beyond the heads of them, you shall find no stones at all in the earth,
only in the veins thereof through which the water runs; Now the reason of the
smalnesse of these stones, is the continual motion of the water, which hinders
them from being united into a continued bigness. I shall make a further
confirmation of this in the artificial process of manifesting the
Heterogeneity of Water. I shall here only add the assertion of He^^ont, saying
that with his Altahest all stones, and indeed all things may be turned into
Water? If so, then you know what the Maxim is, viz. All things may be resolved
into that from whence they had their beginning.

3 Vegetables are produced out of Water, as you may clearly see by the Waters
sending forth Plants that have no roots fixed in the bottom; of which sort is
the Heart called Duck-weed, which puts forth a little string into the Water,
which is as it were the root thereof. For the confirmation of this, that this
Heart may be produced out of mere Water, there is a Gentleman at this time in
the City, of no small worth, that says he had fair water standing in a glass
diverse years, and at last a Plant sprang out of it. Also if you put some
Plants, as Water-mint, etc. into a glass of fair water, it will germinate, and
shoot out into a great length, and also take root in the Water, which root will
in a short time be so increased, and extended, as to fill up the glass: but you
must remember that you put fresh water into the glass once in two or three
days. Hereunto also may be added the experiment of Helmont, concerning the
growth of a tree; For (says he) I took two hundred pound weight of earth dried
in an oven, and put it into a vessel, in which I set a Willow tree which
weighed five pound, which by the addition of water to the earth, did in five
years time grow to such a bigness, as that it weighed one hundred sixty nine
pound; at which time I also dried and weighed the earth, and within two ounces
it retained its former weight. Besides, the ancients have observed that some
Herbs have grown out of snow being putrefied: and do not we see that all
Vegetables are nourished, and increased with an insipid water, for what else is
their juice? If you cut a Vine in the month of March, it will drop diverse
gallons of insipid water, which water if it had remained in the trunk of the
Vine, would in a little time have been digested into leaves, stalks, and
grapes, which grapes also by a further maturation would have yielded a Wine,
out of which you might have extracted a burning spirit; Now I say although this
insipid water be by the specificall Sulphur and Salt of the Vine fixed into the
stalks, leaves, and grapes of the vine, yet these give it not a corporificative
matter, for that it had before, and an aptitude and potentiality to become what
afterward it proves to be: for indeed stalks, leaves, and grapes were
potentially in it before, all which now it becomes to be actually, by virtue of
the Sun, and of the aforesaid Sulphur and Salt, whereof the two latter were
originally in the small seed, and therefore as I said could not add any bulk to
them.

Moreover do not we see that when things are burnt and putrefied, they ascend
up into the air by way of vapor, and fume, and then descend by way of insipid
dew, or rain? Now what do all these signify but that from water are all things
produced, and in it are dissimilary parts?

2 The artificial process is this: take of what water you please, whether
Well water, Fountain, River, or Rain water, as much as you please, let it
settle three or four hours, until the slime thereof separates it self: then
digest it the space of a month; after which time evaporate the fourth part, by
a very gentle heat, and cast it away being but the phlegm, then distill off the
remainder of the water till the feces only be left, which feces will be a slimy
saltish substance: this middle substance distill again as before, casting away
every time the fourth part, as phlegm, and keeping the feces by themselves for
a further use; and this do seven times. Note that after the fourth or fifth
distillation the water will distill over like milk, coloring the head of your
Still so that it can hardly be washed or scoured off. This pure water after the
seventh distillation will leave no feces behind: and if you digest it three
months it will be coagulated into Stones and Crystals, which some magnify very
much for the cure of inward, and outward putrefactions, out of which also may
be made a dissolving spirit. Note that as this water stands in digestion you
may see diverse curious colors. Now as for the feces which I spoke of (which
indeed all waters even the sweetest leave at the bottom) being as I said a
saltish slime, and in taste as it were a Medium betwixt Salt, and Nitre; take
them and distill them in a Retort in sand, and there will first come forth a
white fume, which being condensed descends in a straight line to the bottom,
next will come over a red Oil of great efficacy, exceeding the virtues of the
spirit of Salt or Nitre. For confirmation of part of this process, take May
dew gathered in a morning (when it has not rained the night before) and put it
into a glass vessel, covered with a parchment pricked full of holes, and set it
in the heat of the Sun for the space of four months, and there will store of
green feces fall to the bottom, the residue of the water being white and
clear. Now by all this you may conclude what manner of dissimilarity there is
in the parts of water. I shall add but one observation more, and so conclude
this subject.

Take a slint out of River water, and put it into a gourd glass, pour upon it
as much River Water as will fill the glass, evaporate this water till the
flint be dry, then pour on more fresh water, do this so long till the flint
will fill up the glass, (for in a little time it will fill it up, and become to
be of the form or figure of the glass) for it attracts to it self the
mucilaginousnesse of the water, which indeed is a slimy saltish matter, and the
true matter of Stones. And thus thou shall have that done by Art in few days,
which Nature would have been perfecting many years, and indeed just such a
flint as is produced in the Rivers. Any one that should see this flint in the
glass would wonder how it should come in there. You may break your glass and
take out the flint.

There are diverse such processes which may be used, but in effect they
demonstrate but little more concerning the potentiall Heterogeneity of water,
and therefore to avoid tediousness, I shall here end with the Anatomy of
Water, concerning which if any one can make a further illustration, let him be
candid and impart it, and I shall be glad to learn of him, and in the mean
time let him accept of these my endeavors.

The Spagyricall Anatomy of Wine.
I Shall not speak here of the juice of grapes as being naturally divided into
Wine, Tartar, and Lees, but of Wine as artificially divided into pure Spirit,
Phlegm, and Feces.

1 The spirit is that hot, subtle, pure, clear, cordial, and balsamicall
substance, which arises with a small heat after four or five distillations,
being indeed but the twentieth part of the Wine. This spirit is not that
inebriating substance of the Wine as most think, for a man may drink the spirit
that is extracted out of ten pints of Wine without distempering of his br^in at
all, when as perhaps he would be distempered with drinking a pint or two of the
Wine.

Now this spirit contains in it a subtle Armoniack, and essential Sulphur
inseparably conjoined, which indeed are the life of the spirit, and may be
separated from the Mercuriall or watery part thereof, which after separation of
them remains inspid, but yet of wonderful subtility. They may be separated
thus: First rectify the spirit as high as you can the ordinary way: then
rectify it once or twice in th^se following vessels.

Note that if there be any phlegm remaining in the spirit, it will go no further
then the middle Receiver, especially the second time. By this means thou shall
have so subtle a spirit, that unless it be kept in a vessel close stopped, it
will fly away in the air. Then take of this spirit two ounces, and pour it
upon six ounces of calcined Tartar before the salt be extracted, and mingle
them well together; then distill it in Balneo, and there will ^^me over an
insipid water, which as I said before is very subtle, then put on a like
quantity of the said spirit, as before, and distill it off, and thus do so long
til the water that comes over is not insipid, but the spirit comes over again
hot as it was poured on: for by this time the fixed matter is glutted with the
salt Armoniack, and Sulphur of the spirit. Then put this dried matter into a
glass sublimatory, and put fire to it, and there will sublime a Salt from
thence even as Camphire is sublimed. This salt is the true essence of Wine
indeed, and its virtues are wonderful, for there is no disease whether inward
or outward that can withstand it. This is that essence of Wine of the
Philosophers, which is so penetrating, so wonderful cordial and balsamical,
which if thou do once obtain, thou shall need but few other medicines.

Now this spirit or Aqua vitae, is in all Vegetables, as you may see in Malt,
and Vegetables that are put refied before they be distilled, which then yield a
burning spirit; yet it is in Wine more then in any other Liquors: I say
Liquors, for if you take eight gallons of Sack, and as much Wheat, which is a
solid body, the Wheat being malted, will yield more Aqua vitae then the Sack.

2 The phlegm is that which remains after the spirit is distilled off, and is a
putrid, insipid, cold, narcotick, and inebriating Liquor, debilitating the
stomach and offending the head. A few spoonfuls of this will presently make a
man drunk, nay the phlegm of half a pint of Wine will make a man drunk, when as
two pints of Wine it self would hardly do it: whence you may collect what a
great corrector of Malignant spirits, and vapors the spirit of Wine is; which,
whilst it is mixed with the phlegm before distillation, does temper and correct
this inebriating quality thereof, and as it does thus, so also being given (I
mean the pure deflegmated spirit) to them that are already inebriated, does
much allay their distemper. This phlegm therefore being of so narcotick a
quality is the cause of Palsies, and such like distempers.

Moreover it is to be observed that when this phlegm is to be distilled off,
there remains at the bottom a viscous corrosive matter, which by reason of its
viscosity is the cause of obstructions, and by reason of its corrosivenesse the
cause of the gout, colic, stone, etc.

3 This feces being distilled yields a sharp spirit, and fetid oil, which leave
behind them a saltish substance, out of which when the salt is extracted, there
remains an insipid earth.

Now if any shall object against what I have asserted, and say that Aqua vitae,
or spirit of Wine are inebriating, the causes of Palfie, stone, gout, colic,
weak stomachs, and such like: as we see by daily experience in those that are
given to the drinking of these Liquors: to which I answer it is true: but then
I must distinguish of Aqua vitae, and spirit of Wine, for there is a common
Aqua vitae, and spirit of Wine, of which also they make Aniseed water by
putting a few Aniseeds thereunto, and other such like waters, as Clove,
Angelica, Lemmon, etc. With which this Nation is most abominably cheated, and
their health impaired. But these are not rectified thoroughly, but three parts
of four of them are an insipid Narcotick phlegm, containing in it the feces I
spoke of, all which I can in a day separate from the true pure spirit, which
spirit rather prevents then causes such distempers: And the truth is, all the
goodness of the Wine is from this pure spirit.

The famous Arcanum, or restorative Medicament of Paracelsus, called his
Homunculus.
FIrst we must understand that there are three acceptions of the word
Homunculus in Paracelsus, which are these.

1 Homunculus is a superstitious image made in the place or name of any one,
that it may contain an Astrall and invisible man; wherefore it was made for a
superstitious use.

2 Homunculus is taken for an artificial man, made of Sperm^a humamum
Masculinum, digested into the shape of a man, and then nourished and increased
with the essence of man's blood; and this is not repugnant to the possibility of
Nature and Art. But is one of the greatest wonders of God which he ever did
suffer mortal man to know. I shall not here set down the full process because
I think it unfit to be done, at least to be divulged: besides, neither this nor
the former is for my present purpose.

3 Homuncu^us is taken for a most excellent Arcanum or Medicament extracted by
the spagyricall Art, from the chiefest staff of the natural life in man, and
according to this acception I shall here speak of it: But before I show you the
process I shall give you an account why this Medicament is called Homunculus;
and it is this.

No wise man will deny that the staff of life is the nutriment thereof, and
that the chiefest nutriment is Bread and Wine, being ordained by God and Nature
above all other things for the sustentation thereof. Besides Paracelsus
preferred this nutriment for the generation of the blood and spirits, and the
forming thence the Sperm of this Homunculus. Now by a suitable allusion the
nutriment is taken for the life of man, and especially because it is transmuted
into life: and again the life is taken for the man, for unless a man be alive
he is not a man, but the carcass only of a man, and the basest part thereof,
which cannot perfectly be taken for the whole man, as the noblest part may. In
as much therefore as the nutriment, or aliment of life may be called the life
of man, and the life of man be called man; this nutriment extracted out of
Bread and Wine, and being by digestion exalted into the highest purity of a
nutritive substance, and consequently becoming the life of man, being so
potentially, may Metaphorically be called Homunculus.

The process, which in part shall be set down allegorically is thus: Take the
best Wheat and the best Wine, of each a like quantity, put them into a glass,
which you must hermetically close: then let them putrefie in horse dung three
days, or until the Wheat begin to germinate, or to sprout forth, which then
must be taken forth and bruised in a Mortar, and be pressed through a linen
cloth, and there will come forth a white juice like milk; you must cast away
the feces: Let this juice be put into a glass, which must not be above half
full; stop it close and set it in horse dung as before, for the space of fifty
days. If the heat be temperate, and not exceeding the natural heat of a man,
the matter will be turned into a spagyricall blood, and flesh, like an Embryo.
This is the principal, and next matter, out of which is generated a twofold
sperm, viz. of the father and mother, generating the Homunculus, without which
there can be made no generation, whether humane, or animal.

From the blood, and flesh of this Embryo let the water be separated in Balneo,
and the air in ashes, and both be kept by themselves. Then to the feces of the
latter distillation let the water of the former distillation be added, both
which must (the glass being close stopped) putrefie in Balneo the space of ten
days, after this distill the water the second time, (which is then the
vehiculum of the first) together with the fire, in ashes, then distill off this
water in a gentle Balneo, and in the bottom remains the fire which must be
distilled in ashes. Keep both these a part. And thus you have the four Elements
separated from the Chaos of the Embryo.

The feculent earth is to be reverberated in a close vessel for the space of
four days: In the interim distill off the fourth part of the first distillation
in Balneo, and cast it away; the other three parts distill in ashes, and pour
it upon the reverberated earth, and distill it in a strong fire; cohobate it
four times, and so you shall have a very clear water, which you must keep by it
self: Then pour the air on the same earth, and distill it in a strong fire, and
there will come over a clear, splendid, odoriferous water, which must be kept
apart: After this pour the fire upon the first water, and putrefie them
together in Balneo the space of three days, then put them into a Retort and
distill them in sand, and there will come over a water tasting of the fire: let
this water be distilled in Balneo, and what distills off keep by it self, as
also what remains in the bottom, which is the fire, keep by it self. This last
distilled water pour again upon its earth, and let them be macerated together
in Balneo for the space of three days, and then let all the water be distilled
in sand, and let what will arise be separated in Balneo, and the residence
remaining in the bottom be reserved with the former residence. Let the water
be again poured upon the earth, be abstracted, and separated as before, until
nothing remain in the bottom, which is not separated in Balneo. This being
done, let the water which was last separated be mixed with the residue of its
fire, and be macerated in Balneo three or four days, and all be distilled in
Balneo, that can ascend with that heat, and let what remains be distilled in
ashes from the fire, and what shall be elevated is aeriall; and what remains in
the bottom is fiery. These two last Liquors are ascribed to the two first
principles, the former to Mercury, and the latter to Sulphur, and are accounted
by Paracelsus, not as Elements, but their vital parts, being as it were the
natural spirits and soul, which are in them by nature. Now both are to be
rectified, and reflected into their center with a circular motion, that this
Mercury may be prepared with its water being kept clear, and odoriferous in the
upper place, but the Sulphur by it self. Now it remains that we look into the
third principle: let the reverberated earth being ground upon a marble imbibe
its own water, which did above remain after the last separation of the Liquors
made in Balneo, so that this be the fourth part of the weight of its earth, and
be congealed by the heat of ashes into its earth, and let this be done so often,
the proportion being observed, until the earth has drunk up all its water.
And lastly let this earth be sublimed into a white powder, as white as snow,
the feces being cast away. This earth being sublimed and freed from its
obscurity is the true Chaos of the Elements, for it contains those things
occult, seeing it is the salt of nature, in which they lie hid, being as it
were reflected in their center. This is the third principle of Paracelsus, and
the salt, which is the matrix, in which the two former sperms, viz. of the man
and woman, the parents of the Homunculus, viz. of Mercury and Sulphur, are to
be put, and to be closed up together in a glazen womb sealed with Hermes seals
for the true generation of the Homunculus produced from the spagyricall Embryo:
and this is the Homunculus or great Arcanum, otherwise called the nutritive
Medicament of Paracelsus.

This Homunculus or nutritive Medicament, is of such virtue that presently
after it is taken into the body, it is turned into blood, and spirits. If then
diseases prove mortal because they destroy the spirits, what mortal disease
can withstand such a medicine, that does so soon repair, and so strongly
fortify the spirits as this Homunculus being as the oil to the flame, into
which it is immediately turned, thereby renewing the same? By this Medicament
therefore, as diseases are overcome, and expelled, so also youth is renewed,
and gray hairs prevented.

An Artificial way to make Flesh.
TAke of the crumbs of the best wheaten bread as soon as it comes forth out of
the Oven being very hot, as much as you please, put it into a glass vessel,
which you must presently hermetically close. Then set it in digestion in a
temperate Balneo, the space of two months, and it will be turned into a fibrous
flesh.

If any Artist please to exalt it to a higher perfection according to the Rules
of Art, he may find out, how great a nourisher, and restorative Wheat is, and
what an excellent medicine it may make.

Note that there must be no other moisture put into the glass besides what is
in the bread it self.

Paracelsus his way for the raising of a dead bird to life, and for the
generating many Serpents of one, both which are performed by putrefaction.
A Bird is restored to life thus, viz. Take a Bird, put it alive into a gourd
glass, and seal it up hermetically, burn it to ashes in the third degree of
fire, then putrefie it in horse dung into a mucilaginous phlegm, and so by a
continued digestion that phlegm must be brought to a further maturity (being
taken out, and put into an ovall vessel of a just bigness to hold it) by an
exact digestion, and will so become a renewed bird: which says Pa^acelsus is
one of the greatest wonders in Nature, and shows the great virtue of
putrefaction.

2 Cut a Serpent into small pieces, which put into a gourd glass which you
must Hermetically seal up, then putrefie them in horse dung, and the whole
Serpent will become living again in the glass, in the form either of worms or
spawne of fishes; Now if these worms be in a fitting manner, brought out of
putrefaction, and nourished; many hundred Serpents will be bred out of one
Serpent, whereof every one will be as big as the first. And as it is said of
the Serpent, so also many other living creatures may be raised, and restored
again.

To make an artificial Mallago Wine.
First take a wine barrel well hooped and dressed, with one end being open, to
which a close cover must be well fitted, which must be to take off and put on
at pleasure. Set it in a warm place Winter or Summer, and fill it full with
clear and pure water, to each three gallons, put six pound of the best Mallago
Raisins, which you must bruise in a stone Mortar, and then strew upon the
water, upon each twenty gallons of which you must cast a handful of Calxvive,
then cover the vessel close with the cover, and cast clothes upon it to keep
it warm, and let it stand four or five days to work as Wine or Beer do when
they be new: then see if the Raisins be risen up to the top of the Water; if
so, then put them down again, and cover it again as before; let them thus stand
three weeks or a month together, the Raisins being every fourth or fifth day
put down in case they rise up. Then put a tap into the vessel three or four
fingers above the bottom, and try if it be good, and taste like Wine; if not,
let it stand a while longer, but if so, draw it off into another wine vessel,
and to every twenty gallons that you have drawn off, put a pint of the best
Aqua vitae, two new laid Hen-egs, and a quart of Alligant beaten well together,
and let it stand in a cellar as other wine does, till it be clear and fit to be
drunk.

To make an artificial Claret wine.
Take six gallons of water, two gallons of the best Cidar, put thereunto eight
pound of the best. Mallago Raisins bruised in a Mortar, let them stand close
covered in a warm place the space of a fortnight, every two days stirring them
well together, then press out the Raisins and put the Liquor into the said
vessel again: to which add a quart of the juice of Rasp-berries, and a pint
of the juice of Black cherries, cover this Liquor with Bread spread thick with
strong Mustard, the Mustard side being downward, and so let it work by the fire
side three or four days, then tun it up, and let it stand a week, and then
bottle it up. And it will taste as quick as bottle-beer, and indeed become a
very pleasant drink, and indeed far better, and wholsomer then our common
Claret.

An artificial Malmsey.
Take two gallons of English honey, put it into eight gallons of the best
Spring water, set these in a vessel over a gentle fire, when they have boiled
gently an hour take them off, and when they be cold put them into a small
barrel or run let, hanging in the vessel a bag of spices and set it in the
cellar, and in half a year you may drink thereof.

To make an excellent aromaticall Hyppocras.
Take of Cinnamon two ounces, Ginger an ounce, Cloves and Nutmegs of each two
drams, of white Pepper half a dram, of Cardamums two drams; of Musk Mallow
seed, three ounces. Let all these be bruised, and put into a bag and hanged in
six gallons of Wine. Note that you must put a weight in the bag to make it fink.

Some boil these spices in Wine, which they then sweeten with sugar, and then
let run through a Hyppocras bag, and afterward bottle it up, and use when they
please.

A single Hypocras bag, or Manica Hippocratis.
When you would have this or any other Liquor to be very clear, you may use the
triple Hypocras bag, for what feces passes the first will stay in the second,
and what in the second will stay in the last.

Note that these bags must be made of white Cotton.

A triple Hypocras bag is only one hanging above another after this manner.


To make an excellent Hypocras Wine in an instant.
Take of Cinnamon two ounces, Nurmegs, Ginger, of each half an ounce, Cloves
two drams bruise these small, then mix them with as as much Spirit of Wine as
will make them into a paste, let them stand close covered in a glass the space
of six days in a cold place then press ou^ the Liquor, and keep it in a glass.

A few drops of this Liquor put into any Wine gives it a gallant relish, and
odor, and makes it as good as any Hypocras whatsoever, and that in an instant.

Note that if the Wine be of it self harsh, it will not be amiss to sweeten
it with Sugar, for thereby it is made far more grateful.

This also being put into Beer will make it very pleasant, and aromaticall.

Another way to make Hypocras, or to make any Wine to taste of any vegetable in
an instant.
Take what Wine you please, and according as you would have it taste of this or
that spice, or any other vegetable, of one or more together, you may drop a few
drops of the distilled oil of the said spices, or vegetables into the Wine, and
brew them well together, and you may make in an instant all sorts of Hypocras
or other Wines: as for example, if you would have Wormwood Wine, two or three
drops of oil of Wormwood put into good Rhenish-wine, being well brewed
together, will make a Wormword Wine exceeding any that you shall meet withal
in the Rhenish-wine houses.

To make a good Rasberry-wine.
Take a gallon of Sack, in which let two gallons of Raspberries stand steeping
the space of twenty four hours; then strain them, and put to the Liquor three
pound of Raisins of the sun stoned; let them stand together four or five days,
bring sometimes stirred together: Then pour off the clearest, and put it up in
bottles, and set it in a cold place, If it be not sweet enough you may add
some Sugar to it.

Two other ways to make it all the year at an instant.
Take of the juice of Raspberries, put it into a bottle, which you must stop
close, and set in a cellar, and it will become clear, and keep all the year,
and become very fragrant.

A few sponfulls of this put into a pint of Wine sweetened well with Sugar gives
it an excellent and full taste of the Raspes.

If you put two or three ounces of the Syrup of Raspes to a pint of Wine it
will do as well, but then you need use no other Sugar, for that will sweeteen
it sufficiently.

To make Mead or Metheglin that it shall taste stale and quick within a
fortnight and be fit to drink.
To every three gallons of water, put one gallon of the purest Honey, put what
herbs and spices you please, boil it, and skim it well, now and then putting
in some water. When it is sufficiently boiled take it off, and when it is
almost cold, put it into a wooden vessel, and set it by the sire side, cover
it over with Bread spread thick with the strongest Mustard, the Mustard side
being downwards, and so let it stand three days, and it will work, only put a
cloth over it: Then tun it up, and after a week draw it forth into bottles,
and set it into a cellar, and after a week more you may drink of it, for it
will taste as quick as bottle beer that is a fortnight old, and indeed as stale
as other Mead will in half a year.

To make a Spirit of Amber-gryse that a few drops thereof shall perfume a pint
of Wine most richly.
Take of Amber-gryse 2. drams, of Musk a dram, cut them small, and put them
into a pint of the b^st rectified Spirit of Wine, close up the glass
Hermetically, and digest them in a very gentle heat till you perceive they are
dissolved. Then you may make use of it.

Two or three drops or more if you please of this Spirit put into a pint of
Wine, gives it a rich odor.

Or if you put 2. or 3. drops round the brimmes of the glass it will do as
well.

Half a spoonful of it taken either of it self, or mixed with some special
Liquor, is a most rich Cordial.

An excellent sweet Water.
Take a quart of Orenge-flower water, as much Rose Water, add thereto of
Musk-mallow seeds grossly bruised four ounces, of B^njamin two ounces, of
Storax an ounce, of Labdanum six drams, of Lavender flowers two pugills, of
sweet Marjoram as much, of Calamus Aromaticus a dram, distill all these in a
Glass Still in Balneo, the vessels being very well closed that no vapor
breath forth.

Note that you may make a sweet water in an instant by putting a few drops of
some distilled oils together into some Rose Water, and brewing them well
together.

To purify and give an excellent smell, and taste unto oil Olive that they that
loath it may delight to eat it.
Take of a good sort of oil Olive though not of the best, put the same into a
vessel of earth or copper, that has a little hole in the bottom thereof,
which you may stop with wax or a cork to open at your pleasure. In this vessel
for every quart of oil add four quarts of fair water, and with a wood^n spatle
or spoon, beat them well together for a quarter of an hours space, and when
you have so done, op^n the hole in the bottom, and let out the water, for the
oil does naturally fleet above, as being the lighter body* and as soon as the
water is pass^d away, stop the hole, and put in other cold water, and begin a
new agitation as before, and work in the like manner diverse times as you did
at the first, till in the end the oil be well cleansed and clarified. If the
last time you work it with Rose Water it will be so much the better then hang
in the midst of the oil a course bag full of Nutmegs sliced, and Cloves
bruised, and the rinds of Orenges and Lemons cut small, and set the vessel in
Balneo for two or three hou^es, and I suppose he that loathes oil will be easily
by this means drawn to a liking of it.

Another way.
Set oil Olive in the sun in summertime until there settle good store of
foul, and gross Lees, from the which by declination pour out the clear oil,
and keep it till the next winter, and after the same has been congealed with
some frosty weather, the oil will be most sweet, and delectable to the taste.

After this manner you may clarify all thick oils, and all kinds of grease,
but then you must use warm water in stead of cold.

To purify Butter that it shall keep fresh and sweet a long time, and be most
wonderful sweet in taste.
Dissolve butter in a clean glazed or silver vessel and in a pan or kettle of
water with a slow, and gentle fire, then pour the same so dissolved into a
basin that has some fair water therein, and when it is cold, take away the
curds, and the whay that remain in the bottom. And if you will be at the
charge thereof, you may the second time for it must be twice dissolved)
dissolve the Butter in Rose Water, working them well together: the Butter thus
clarified will be as swe^t in taste as the marrow of any beast, by reason of the
great impurity that is removed by this manner of handling the fifth part thereof
being dross, which makes the Butter many times offensive to the stomach.

To make Butter taste of any vegetable without altering the color thereof.
When the Butter is taken out of the cherne and well worked from the ser^us
part thereof, mix with the said Butter as much of the oil o^ that vegetable
which you like best, till the same be strong enough in taste to your liking,
then temper them well together.

If you do in the month of May mix some oil of Sage with your B^tter it may
excuse you from eating Sage with your butter.

If you mix the oil with the aforesaid clarified Butter, it will be far
better, and serve for a most dainty dish, and indeed a great rarity.

To make Cheese taste strong of any vegetable without discoloring of it.
You may mix the distilled oil of what vegetable you would have the Cheese taste
of, with the curd, before the whay be pressed out; but be sure you mix them
very well that all places may taste alike of it; you may make it taste stronger,
or weaker of it as you please by putting in more or less of the oil.

To purify and refine Sugar.
Make a strong Lixiuium of Calx vive, whereing dissolve as much course Sugar as
the Livivium will bear, then put in the white of Eggs (of 2 to every part of
the Liquor) being beaten into an oil, stir them well together, and let them
boil a little, and there will arise a scum which must be taken off as long as
any will arise, then pour all the Liquor through a great Woollen cloth bag, and
so the feces will remain behind in the bag, then boil the Liquor again so long
till some drops of it being put upon a cold plate will, when they be cold, be
congealed as hard as salt. Then pour out the Liquor into pots, or moulds made
for that purpose, having a hole in the narrower end thereof, which must be
stopped for one night after, and after that night be opened, and there will a
moist substance drop forth which is called Molosses, or Treakle, then with
potters clay cover the ends of the pot, and as that clay sinketh down by reason
of the sinking of the Sugar, fill them up with more clay, repeating the doing
thereof till the Sugar shrink no more. Then take it out till it be hard, and
dried, then bind it up in papers.

To make a vegetabl^ grow and become more glorious then any of its species.
Reduce any vagetable into its three first principles, and then join them
together again being well purified, and put the same into a rich earth, and you
shall have it produce a vegetable far more glorious then any of its species.

Note how to make such an essence, look into the first book, and there you
shall see the process thereof.

To make a Plant grow in two or three hours.
Take the ashes of Moss, moisten them with the juice of an old dunghill being
first pressed forth, and streined, then dry them a little, and moisten them as
before, do this four or five times, put this mixture being neither very dry,
nor very moist, into some earthen, or metalline vessel; and in it set the
seeds of Lettice, Purslain or Parsley (because they will grow sooner then other
Plants) being first in pregnated with the essence of a vegetable of its own
species, (the process whereof you shall find Book 1. page 32, 33.) till they
begin to sprout forth, then I say, put them in the said earth with that end
upwards which sprouts forth: Then put the vessel into a gentle heat, and when
it begins to dry, moisten it with some of the said joyce of dung.

Thou may by this means have a Sallet grow whilst supper is making ready.

To make the Idea of any Plant appear in a glass, as if the very plant it
self were there.
The process of this thou may see, page 32. and therefore I need not here
again repeat it, only remember that if you put the flame of a candle to the
bo^tome of the glass where the essence is, by which it may be made hot, you
will see that thin substance which is like impalpable ashes or salt send forth
from the bottom of the glass the manifest form of a vegetable, vegetating
and growing by little, and little, and putting on so fully the form of
stalks, leaves, and flowers in such perfect, and natural wise in apparent
show, that any one would believe verily the same to be naturally corporal,
when as in truth it is the spiritual Idea, endued with a spiritual essence;
which serves for no other purpose, but to be matched with its fitting earth,
that so it may take unto it self a more solid body. This shadowed figure as soon
as the vess^ll is taken from the fire, returns to its ashes again and
vanishes away, becoming a Chaos, and confused matter.

To make Firre-trees appear in Turpentine.
Take as much Turpentine as you please, put it into a Retort, distill it by
degrees, when all is distilled off* keep the Retort still in a reasonable heat,
that what humidity is still remaining may be evaporated, and it become dry:
Then take this off from the fire and hold your hand to the bottom of the
Retort, and the Turpentine that is dried (which is called Colophonia) will
crack asunder in several places, and in those crackes or chaps you shall see
the perfect effigies or Firre-trees which will there continue many months.

To make Hartshorn seemingly to grow in a glass.
Take Hartshorn broken into small pieces, and put them into a glass Retort to
be distilled, and you shall see the glass to be seemingly full of horns, which
will continue there so long till the volatile salt come over.

To make golden mountains as it were appear in a glass.
Take of Adders eggs half a pound, put them into a glass Retort, distill them
by degrees, when all is dry, you shall see the feces at the bottom turgid, and
puffed up, and seem to be as it were golden mountains, being very glorious to
behold.

To make the representation of the whole World in a Class.
Take of the purest salt Nitre as much as you please, of Tin half so much, mix
them together, and calcine them Hermetically, then put them into a Retort, to
which ann^x a glass receiver, and l^^e them well together, let there be leaves
of gold put into the bottom thereof, then put fire to the R^tort, until
vapors arise that will cleave to the gold: a^gment the fire till no more fumes
ascend, then take away the Receiver, and close it Hermetically, and make a lamp
fire under it, and you will see presented in it the Sun, Moon, Stars,
Fountains Flowers, Trees, fruits, and indeed even all things, which is a
glorious sight to behold.

To make four Elements appear in a glass.
Take of the subtle powder of Jet an ounce and half, of the oil of Tartar made
per Deliquium (in which there is not one drop of water besides what the Tartar
it self contracted) two ounces, which you must color with a light green with
Vardegrease, of the purest Spirit of Wine ringed with a light blew with Indico,
2. ounces of the best rectified Spirit of Turpentine colored with a light red
with Madder 2. ounces. Put all these into a glass, and shake them together,
and you shall see the Jet which is heavy and black fall to the bottom and
represent the earth; next, the oil of Tartar made green representing the
element of water, falls: upon that swims the blew spirit of Wine which will not
mix with the oil of Tartar; and represents the element of air: uppermost will
swim the subtle red oil of Turpentine which represents the element of fire.

It is strange to see how after shaking all these together they will be
distinctly separated the one from the other. If it be well done, as it is easy
enough to do, it is a most glorious ^ight.

To make a perpetual motion in a glass.
Take seven ounces of Quicksilver, as much Tin, grind them well together with
fourteen ounces of Sublimate dissolved in a cellar upon a Marble the space of
four days, and it will become like oil Olive, which distill in sand, and
there will sublime a dry substance, then put the water which distills off back
upon the earth, in the bottom of the Still, and dissolve what you can, filter
it, and distill it again, and thi^ do four or five times, and then that earth
will be so subtle, that being put into a vial the subtle atoms ^hereof will
move up and down for ever.

Note that the vial or glass must be close stopped, and kept in a dry place.

To make a Luminous Water that shall give light by night.
Take the tails of Glo-wormes, put them into a glass Still, and distill them
in Balneo, pour the said water upon more fresh tails of Glo-wormes, do this
four or five times, and thou shall have a most Luminous Water, by which thou
may see to read in the dark night.

Some say this Water may be made of the Skins of Herring; and for ought I know
it may be probable enough: for I have heard that a shole of Herrings coming by
a ship in the night have given a great light to all the ship.

It were worth the while to know the true reason why Glowormes, and Herring and
some other such like things should be luminous in the night.

To make a vapor in a chamber that he that enters into it with a candle shall
think the room to be on fire.
Dissolve Camphire in rectified Aqua vitae, and evaporate them in a very close
chamber where no air can get in, and he that first enters the chamber with a
lighted candle will be much astonished, for the chamber will seem to be full of
fire, very subtle, but it will be of little continuance.

You must note that it is the combustible vapor, with which the chamber is
filled, that takes flame from the candle.

Diverse such like experiments as this may be done, by putting such a
combustible vapor into a box, or cubboard or such like, which will* as soon as
any one shall open them having a candle in his hand, take fire, and burn.

To make a powder that by spitting upon shall be inflamed.
Take a Lodestone, powder it, and put it into a strong calcining pot, cover it
all over with a powder made of Calx vive, and Colophonia, of each a like
quantity, put also some of this powder under it: when the pot is full cover it,
and lute the closures with potters earth, put them into a furnace, and there
let them boil, then take them out and put them into another pot, and set them
in the furnace again, and this do till they become a very white and dry Calx.
Take of this Calx one part, of salt Nitre being very well purified four parts,
and as much Camphire, Sulphur vivum, the oil of Turpentine, and Tartar, grind
all these to a subtle powder and searse them, and put them into a glass
vessel, then put as much Spirit of wine well rectified, as will cover them two
fingers breadth, then close them up and set the vessel in horsedung three
months, and in that time they will all become an uniforme paste: evaporate all
the humidity, until the whole mass become a very dry stone: then take it out
and powder it, and keep it very dry.

If you take a little of this powder and spit upon it, or pour some water upon
it, it will take fire presently, so that thou may light a match, or any such
thing by it.

To fortify a Lodestone that it shall be able to draw a nail out of a piece
of wood.
Take a Lodestone, and heat it very hot in coals, but so that it be not
fired, then presently quench it in the Oil of Crocus Martis made of the best
steel, that it may imbibe as much as it can.

Thou shall by this means make the Lodestone so very strong and powerful,
that thou may pull out nails out of a piece of wood with it, and do such
wonderful things with it that the common Lodestone can never do.

Now the reason of this (as Paracelsus says) is because the Spirit of Iron is
the life of the Lodestone, and this may be extracted from, or increased in the
Lodestone.

To make Quicksilver Malleable in seven hours.
Take of the best lead, and melt it, and pour it into a hole, and when it is
almost congealed make a hole in it, and presently fill up the hole with
quicksilver, and it will presently be congelated into a friable substance,
then beat it into a powder, and put it again into a hole of fresh melted lead
as before, do this 3, or 4, times, then boil it being all in a piece in Linseed
oil the space of six hours; then take it out and it will become malleable.

Note that after this, it may by being melted over the fire be reduced into
quicksilver again.

A thin plate of the said Mercury laid upon an inveterate Ulter takes away the
malignity of it in a great measure, and renders it more curable then before.

A plate of the said Mercury laid upon tumors would be a great deal better
repercu^^ive then plates of lead, which Surgeons use in such cases.

The powder of the friable substance of Mercury before it be boiled in the oil
is very good to be strewed upon old ulcers, for it does much correct the
virulency of them.

To reduce Glass into its first principles, viz. sand and salt.
Take bits or powder of Glass as much as you please, as much of the Salt which
Glassemen use in the making of Glasses: melt these together in a strong fire:
Then dissolve all the melted mass in warm water, then pour off the water and
you shall see no Glass, but only sand in the bottom, which sand was that
which was in the glass before.

This con^utes the vulgar opinion, viz. that the fusion of Glass is the last
fusion, and beyond all reduction.

To write or engrave upon an egg, or peble, with wax or grease.
Make what letters or figures you please with wax, or grease, upon an egg or
peble, put them into the strongest Spirit of Vinegar, and there let them lie 2.
or 3. days, and you shall see every place about the letters or figures eaten
or consumed away with the said Spirit, but the place where the wax or grease
was, not at all touched: the reason whereof is because that the Spirit would
not operate upon the said oleaginous matter.

To make artificial Pearl, as glorious as any oriental.
Dissolve mother of Pearl in Spirit of vinegar, then precipitate it with Oil
of Sulphur per Campanam, (and not with Oil of Tartar, for that takes away the
splendor of it) which adds a luster to it: when it is thus precipitated, dry
it, and mix it with whites of eggs, and of this mass you may make Pearls of
what ^ignesse or fashion you please: before they be dried you may make holes
through them, and when they be dried they will not at all, or very hardly be
discerned from true, and natural Pearls.

To make a Mineral perfume.
Dissolve Antomony, or Sulphur in the Liquor or Oil of flints or pebles, or
Crystalls, or sand, coagulate the solution into a red mass, pour thereon the
Spirit of urine, and digest them till the Spirit be tinged, then pour it off,
and pour more on, till all the tincture be extracted, put all the tinctures
together, and evaporate the Spirit of urine in Balneo, and there will remain a
blood red Liquor at the bottom, upon which pour Spirit of wine, and you shall
extract a purer tincture, which smeleth like garlic, digest it three or four
weeks, and it will smell like balm, digest it longer, and it will smell like
Musk or Amber-gryse.

Besides the smell that it has, it is an excellent Sudorifick, and cures all
diseases that require sweat, as the plague, putrid fevers, lues venerea, and
such like.

The Oil or Liquor of sand, flints, pebles, or Crystalls, for the aforesaid
preparation is thus made.
Take of the best salt of Tartar being very well, by two or three dissolutions,
and coagulations, purified, and powdered in a hot mortar, one part, of flints,
pebles, or crystals being powdered, or small sand well washed, the fourth part,
mingle them well together, put as much of this composition as will fill an
eggeshell into a Crucible set in the earthen Furnace, (expressed page 83.) and
made red hot, and presently there will come over a thick, and white spirit,
this do till you have enough, then take out of the Crucible whilst it is
glowing hot, and that which is in it is like transparent glass, which keep
from the air.

The Spirit may be rectified by ^and in a glass Retort.

This Spirit is of excellent use in the gou^, stone, ptisick, and indeed in all
obstructions, provokes ^weat, and urine, and cleanses the stomach, and by
consequence effectual in most diseases.

It being applied externally clears the skin, and makes it look very fair.

Take that which remains at the bottom in the crucible, and beat it to
powder, and lay it in a moist place, and so it dissolveth into a thick fat Oil:
and this is that which is called the Oil of sand, of flints, pebles, or
crystalls.

This Oil is of wonderful use in medicine, as also in the preparation of all
sorts of Mineralls.

This oil being taken inwdarly in some appropriated Liquor dissolves tartarous
coagulations in the body, and so opens all obstructions.

It precipitates metals, and makes the calx thereof more weighty, then oil of
Tartar does.

It is of a golden nature: it extracts colors from all metals, is fixed in all
fires, makes fine Crystals, and Borax, and maturifieth imperfect metals into
gold.

If you put it into water there will precipitate a most fine white earth, of
which you may make as clear vessels as are China-dishes.

Note that all sand, flints, and pebles, even the whitest, have in them a
golden sulphur, or tincture, and if a prepared lead be for a time digested in
this oil it will seem as it were gilded, because of the gold that will hang
upon it, which may be washed away in water. Gold also is found in sand and
flints, etc. and if you put Gold into this oil it will become more ponderous
thereby.

To make Steel grow in a glass like a tree.
Dissolve Steel in a rectified Spirit of salt, so shall you have a green and
sweet solution, which smells like brimstone, filter it, and abstract all the
moisture in sand with a gentle heat, and there will distill over a Liquor as
sweet as rainwater (for Steel by reason of its dryness detaines the
corosivenesse of the Spirit of salt, which remains in the bottom like a
blood red mass, which is as hot on the tongue as fire, dissolve this red mass
in oil of flints, or of sand, and you shall see it grow up in two or three
hours, like a tree with a stemm, and branches; prove this tree at the test,
and it yields good gold, which this tree has drawn from the aforesaid oil of
sand, or flints, which has a golden sulphur in it.

To melt any metal in ones hand without burning of the hand.
Take a little calcining pot in your hand, make in it a lane or course of the
powder of any metal, then upon it lay a lane of Sulphur, Saltpeter and
Saw-dust, of each a like quantity, mixed together, put a coal of fire to it,
and forthwith the metal will be melted into a mass.

An observation upon the beams of the Sun and heat of the fire, how they add
weight to Mineral, and Metalline bodies.
1. Take any Mineral Liquor and set it in an open vessel in the sun for a
good space, and it will be augmented in quantity, and weight. But some will say
that this proceeds from the air: to the which I answer and demand, whether
the air had not this impregnation from the sun, and what the air has in it
self that proceeds not from the sun and stars.

2. Put this liquor in a cold cellar, or in a moist air, and you shall find
that it increases not in weight, as it does in the sun, or in the fire (which
has in this respect some analogy with the sun) I do not say but happily it
might attract some little moisture which is soon exhaled by any small heat:

3. Dissolve any sulphurous, and imperfect metal, as Iron, Copper, or Zinke,
in Aqua fortis, or any other acid spirit, then abstract the Spirit from it,
make it glowing hot, yet not too hot, that the Spirit may only vapor away,
then weigh this metalline Calx, and set it in a crucible over the fire, but
melt it not, only let it darkly glow, let it stand so 3, or 4, weeks, then take
it off, and weigh it again, and you shall find it heavier then before.

4. Set any sulphurous metal, as Iron, or Copper, with sixteen or eighteen
parts of Lead on a test made with ashes of wood, or bones in a probatory
furnace: first weigh the test, copper and lead before you put them into the
furnace, let the iron or copper fly away with the lead, yet not with too strong
a heat, then take the test out, and weigh it, and you shall find it (though
the metals are gone) when it is cold to be heavier then it was when it was put
into the furnace with the metals. The question is now whence this heaviness of
all the aforesaid Minerals and metals proceeded, if that the heat of the fun,
and fire through the help of the Mineralls and metals be not fixed into a
palpable Mineral, and Metalline body?

5. Set a test with lead, or copper in the sun, and with a concave glass unite
the beams of the sun, and let them fall on the center of the metal, hold the
concave glass in your hand, and let your test never be cold, and this will be
as well done in the sun, as in the fire. But this concave must be two foot in
Diameter, and not too hollow or deep, but about the eighteenth or twentieth
part of the circle, that it may the better cast its beams forth, and it must be
very well polished.

6. Calcine Antimony with a burning glass, and you shall see it smoke, and
fume, and be made dryer then before, yet weigh it and it will be heavier then
before.

I shall take in, for the confirmation of all this, a relation of Sir Kenelme
Digby concerning the precipitating of the sun beams. I remember (says he) a
rare experiment that a Noble man of much sincerity, and a singular friend of
mine, told me he had seen, which. was, that by means of glasses made in a very
particular manner, and artificially placed one by another, he had seen the sun
beams gathered together, and precipitated down into a brownish, or purplish
red powder. There (says he) could be no fallacy in this operation. For nothing
whatsoever, was in the glass, when they were placed, and disposed for this
intent; and it must be in the hot time of the year, else the effect would not
follow. And of this magistery he could gather some days near 2. ounces in a
day, and it was of a strong volatile virtue, and would impresse it spiritual
quality into gold it self (the heaviest and most fixed body we converse
withal) in a very short time.

I leave it now to the reader to judge whether the beams of the sun, and heat
of the fire add weight to Minerals, and Metals.

To extract a white Milkie substance from the rays of the Moon.
Take a concave glass and hold it against the Moon when she is at the full in
a clear evening, and let the rays thereof being united fall upon a sponge,
and the sponge will be full of a cold Milkie substance, which you may press
out with your hand, and gather more. De-La-Brosse is of opinion that this
substance is of the substance of the Moon: but I cannot assent to him in that,
only this I say, if this experiment were well prosecuted, it might produce for
ought I know, such a discovery which might be the key to no small secrets.

To condense the air in the heat of smmer and in the heat of the day, into
water.
Fill an earthen vessel unglazed, made pointed downward, and fill it with
snow-water (which must be kept all the year) in which is dissolved as much
Nitre as the water would dissolve: Let the vessel be close stopped. Hold this
vessel against the sun and the air will be so condensed by the coldness of
the vessel that it will drop down by the sides thereof.

How two sorts of volatile salts will be fixed by joining them together.
Take a strong Lixivium made of unslaked lime, and evaporate it, and whereas
you would expect to find a salt at the bottom there is none, for all the salt
in the Lixivium is vapored away, and the more the Liquor is evaporated the
weaker the Lixivium becomes, which is contrary to other Lixiviums: Also if you
take Spirit of vinegar, and evaporate it, you shall find no salt at the
bottom. Now if you take the clear Lixivium of Lime, and Spirit of vinegar, of
each a like quantity, and mix them together, and evaporate the humidity
thereof, you shall find a good quantity of salt at the bottom, which tastes
partly hot, and partly acid.

This salt being set in a cold cellar on a marble stone, and dissolved into an
oil, is as good as any Lac virginis to clear, and smooth the face, and dry up
any hot pustles in the skin, as also against the Itch, and old ulcers to dry
them up.

To make an unguent that a few grains thereof being applied outwardly will
cause vomiting or loosnesse as you please.
Take Lapis infernalis, mix therewith of distilled oil of Tobacco as much as
will make an ointment: Keep it in a dry place.

If you would provoke vomiting, anoint the pit of the stomach with five or six
grains thereof, and the party will presently vomit, and as much as with taking
of a vomit.

If you would provoke to loosnesse anoint about the navell therewith, and the
patient will presently fall into a loosnesse.

Note that you must give the patient some warm suppings all the time this
medicine is working.

Note also, and that especially, that you let not the ointment lie so long as
to cauterize the part to which it is applied.

To make a medicine that half a grain thereof being taken every morning will
keep the body soluble.
Take of the distilled oil of Tobacco, of which let the essential salt of
Tobacco imbibe as much as it can. Then with this composition make some Lozenges
by adding such things as are fitting for such a form of medicine: Note that
you put but such a quantity of this oily salt as half a grain only may be in
one Lozenge.

One of these Lozenges being taken every morning, or every other morning,
keeps the body soluble, and is good for them as are apt to be very costive in
their bodies.

Note that you may put some aromaticall ingredient into the Lozenges that may
qualify the offensive odor of the oil, if there shall be any.

To make a Cordial, stomachicall, and purgative tincture.
Make a tincture of Hiera picra with Spirit of wine well rectified, and
aromatized with Cinnamon or Cloves.

Two or three spoonfulls of this tincture being taken in a morning twice in a
week wonderfully helps those that have weak and foul stomachs, it opens
obstructions, and purges viscosities of the stomach and bowels, cures all
inveterate headache kills worms, and indeed leaves no impurities in the
body, and is very cordial: for it exceedingly helps them that are troubled
with faintings. There is nothing offensive in this medicine but the bitterness
thereof, which the other extraordinary virtues will more then balance.

Another.
Dissolve Scammony in Spirit of Wine, evaporate the one moity, then precipitate
it by putting Rose Water to it: and it will become most white, for the black
and fetid matter will lie on the top of the precipitated matter which you must
wash away with Rose Water. Then take that white gum being very well washed, and
dry it (if you please you may powder it and so use it, for indeed it has
neither smell nor taste, and purges without any offense, and may be given to
children or to any that distaste physic, in their milk or broth without any
discerning of it, and indeed it does purge without any manner of gripings. I
was wont to make it up into pills with oil of Cinnamon or Cloves which gave it a
gallant smell, and of which I gave a scruple which wrought moderately and
without any manner of gripings) then dissolve it again in Spirit of Wine being
aromatized with what spices you please, and this keep.

This tincture is so pleasant, so gentle, so noble a purgative that there is
scarce the like in the world, for it purges without any offense, is taken
without any nauseating, and purges all manner of humors, especially choler,
and melancholy, and is very Cordial.

It may be given to those that abhor any medicine, as to children or those that
are of a nauseous stomach.

The dose is from half a spoonful to two or three.

Note it must be taken of it self, for if it be put into any other Liquor, the
Scammony will precipitate and fall to the bottom.

After this manner you may prepare Jollap by extracting the gum therefore, and
then dissolving it in Spirit of wine.

By this means Jollap would not be so offensive to the stomach, as usually it
is, for it is the gum that is purgative, and the earthlinesse that is so
nauseous.

Jollap being thus prepared is a most excellent medicine against all hydropick
diseases, for it purges water away without any nauseousnesse or griping at all.

To reduce distilled Turpentine into its body again.
Take the oil of Turpentine, and the Colophonia thereof (which is that
substance which remains in the bottom after distillation) which you must beat
to powder. Mix these together and digest them, and you shall have a Turpentine
of the same consistency as before, but of a fiery subtle nature.

Pills made of this Turpentine, are of excellent use in obstructions of the
breast, kidneyes and the like.

To make the distilled Oil out of any herb, seed or flower in an instant
without any furnace.
You must have a long pipe made of tin, which must have a bowl in the middle
with a hole in it as big as you can put your finger into it: by which you must
put your matter that you would have the Oil of. Set this matter on fire with a
candle or coal of fire, then put one end of the pipe into a basin of fair
water, and blow at the other end, and the smoke will come into the water, and
there will an oil swim upon the water: which you may separate with a tunnell.

To make water, and the tincture of any vegetable at the same time, which is an
excellent way to draw out the virtue thereof.
This must be performed by these following vessels.



A, Signifies the Furnace it self.

B, The Retort which stands in water or sand, wherein the matter to be
distilled is put, instead whereof, if you please you may put a gourd glass
with a head to it.

C, The pipe.

D, Another vessel where is more fresh matter out of which the tincture is to
be drawn, and which stands upon ashes with a fire under it.

E, The furnace with a pan of ashes.

F, The receiver.

G, The hole of the furnace to put in coals, to heat the second matter.

A way to separate fresh water from salt without a furnace or much trouble.
Take a Caldron with a great and high cover having a beak or nose, set it upon
a trefoot, and under it put fire: let this be filled with salt water, and there
will presently distill off a good quantity of fresh water into a receiver,
which must be joined to the nose of the aforesaid cover.

This is of good use for Seamen that want fresh water, for by this means they
may distill a good quantity in 24. hours, especially if they have any
considerable number of the aforesaid vessels, a figure whereof is this which
follows.

A way to purge and purify troubled and muddie waters.
Fill a great pot with pudled water, put a soft and gentle fire under it, lay
some sticks acrosse on the pot brims, and upon the sticks lay clean wool or a
sponge well washed: Now the wool drinks up the vapors that ascend, which then
you must wring out, and lay on the wool again, and this you may do till you
have as much clean water as you desire. The manner of this distillation is
described thus.



A, Signifies the pot.

B, The fire.

C, The sticks.

D, The wool.

This is of use for them that can come at no other waters but what are
troubled, as it falls out many times in some places.

Another way to purify any thick, muddie or feculent Liquor.
This is performed by shreds of any white woollen cloth in vessels as you see
hereafter expressed.



A, Signifies the vessels.

B, The shreds.

Note that the shreds must be first wet in fair water, and the feculent matter
be put into the uppermost vessel.

Note also whereas here be two receivers, that in many cases one may be
sufficient.

This way serves for the purifying of decoctions, juices, or dissolutions of
salts from their feculency, for that which is distilled by the shreds is as
clear as Crystal, when what remains is very feculent.

To keep fire in a glass, that whilst the glass is shut will not burn, but
as soon as it is opened will be inflamed.
First extract the burning spirit of the salt of tin in a glass Retort well
coated; when the Retort is cold, take it out and break it, and as soon as the
matter in it, which remains in the bottom thereof after distillation, comes
into the air, it will presently be inflamed. Put this matter into a glass
vial, and keep it close stopped.

This fire will keep many thousand years and not burn unless the glass be
opened: but at what time soever that is opened it will burn.

It is conceived that such a kind of fire as this was found in vaults when they
were opened, which many conceived to be a perpetual burning Lamp, when as
indeed it was inflamed at the opening the vault, and the letting in air thereby
which before it lacked, and therefore could not burn. For it is to be conceived
that there is no fire burns longer then its matter endures, and there is no
combustible matter can endure for ever.

There may be many uses of such a fire as this, for any man may carry it about
him, and let it burn on a sudden when he has any occasion for fire.

A Lamp Furnace is made thus.


A, Signifies the Candlestick, which must be hollow, and full of water.

B, The top of the candlestick which must he wide to contain good store of
water for to fill up the Candlestick as the candle rises up.

C, The candle, which must be as long as the Candlestick.

D, The vessel that contains either wat^r, sand, or ashes for any vessel to
be set into; also to contain any matter it self that is to be distilled, or
digested.

E, A glass vessel standing in digestion.

F, A narrow mouthed stopple to be put into the candlestick to keep the candle
upright, and that must be made of tin, with holes in it.

G, The cover for the vessel D, which is to be put upon it when any thing is
decocted, or kept warm in it.

H, A Still head to put upon the vessel D, when you would distill any thing in
it.

Note that if you make all these vessels large you may do many considerable
things without much labor, or trouble.

In the vessel D, if it be large, you may stew meat, which if you put in at
night and cover it close, you may have it ready for your breakfast in the
morning, and so according to the time you put it in you may have it for dinner
or supper. Also you may keep any thing warm in the night, and at all times,
and diverse such uses as these it may be used for.

Note that the candle will still rise up till it be quite burned out, and an
ordinary candle will last twice as long this way as it will out of the water.

If you would have one candle last a long time as twelve or twenty hours, you
must either make your candlestick very long that it may contain a long candle,
or make your candle big and the wiek small, or make your candle of such matter
as will not presently be consumed.

Note also that if you would have a great heat, your candle must be great, and
also the wiek thereof great; but if gentle, let your candle be small.

Another Lamp furnace.
There is another sort of Lamp furnaces with three candles after this manner.

The use of this is when you would have a constant fire that should give a
stronger heat then one candle in the former furnace. And the truth is, that if
your candles be big (as you may make them as big as you will) you may have as
strong a heat this way as by ashes in an ordinary furnace.

To make a Candle that shall last long.
Take unslaked lime, powder it and mix it with your tallow, and so make your
candle of that, or else you may make candles of Castle-sope which will serve
for such uses as these, viz. to burn in such a Lamp furnace.

Note that it is the salt that is in the lime, and soap that preserves the
tallow from burning out so fast as otherwise it would.

To make a lasting and durable Oil.
Take unslaked lime, Bay Salt, oil Olive of each a like quantity, mix them well
together, and distill them in sand, cohobate the oil upon the same quantity of
fresh lime, and salt: and this do four or five times. By this means will the
oil be clear and impregnated with what salt was volatile in the lime, and salt.

Now that saline impregnation is that which gives a durablenesse to the oil.

Note that this oil whilst it is distilling is of a most fragrant smell: I
have some of it which I distilled seven times, and it is as pure, subtle and
odoriserous as many common distilled oiles of vegetables.

This oil besides the durablenesse of it is also good against any inveterate
ach in the limbs.

A Lamp made with this oil will continue burning six times as long as a Lamp
made of other oil, as also it burns very sweet.

There must be a great deal of care used in making of it, or else you will
quickly break your glasses: also you must take very strong lime, such as the
dyers use, and call cauke.

Philosophical Bellows.
There be here set down three figures of these kinds of instruments, which
belong to several uses.

A, Signifies that which blows a fire for the melting of any metal or such
like operation, and it blows most forcibly with a terrible noise.

B, That which blows a Candle to make the flame thereof very strong for the
melting of glasses, and nipping them up.

C, That which any one may hold in his hand to blow the fire strongly upon any
occasion.

Now the manner of the using them in this: you must first heat them very hot,
then put the noses thereof (which must have a very small hole in them, no
bigger then that a pins head may go in) into a vessel of cold water, and they
will presently suck in the water, of which then being full turn the noses
thereof toward the candle or fire which you would have blown. As for the figure
C, it must have a mouth drawn up round and hanging out an inch from the face,
which mouth (the whole compass of the face being heated first) you must dip in
cold water, and it will suck in water as the noses of the former did. This then
you must hold-close to the fire that it may be heated, and it will blow
exceedingly, as otherwise it will not, viz. if it be cold.

If you put sweet water into such a vessel you may perfume a chamber
exceedingly, for a little quantity thereof will be a long time breathing forth.

Note that these kinds of vessels must be made of copper, and be exceeding
well closed, that they may have no vent but by their noses.

An excellent invention to make a fire.
Take three parts of the best New Castle coals beaten small, one part of
loame, mix these well together into a mass with water, make thereof balls,
which you must dry very well.

This fire is durable, sweet, not offensive by reason of the smoke or cinder
as other coal fires are, beautiful in shape, and is not so costly as other
fire, burns as well in a chamber even as Char-coal.

This fire may either serve for such distillations as require a strong, and
lasting heat, or for ordinary uses either in the Kitchen, or chambers.

A new invention for Bathes.
Seeing by bathing and sweating most diseases are cured, especially such as
proceed from wind, hot and distempered humors or cold and congealed humors;
because all these are rarefied, and evaporated by transpiration in sweating, or
bathing, I thought it a thing much conducing to man's health to set down such a
way of bathing and sweating that might be very effectual, and appropriated to
any particular disease or distemper.

I shall therefore here commend to you a way of bathing by distillation, the
manner of which you may see by these ensuing vessels.



A, Signifies a hot still with two pipes going into two wooden vessels; In this
Still you may put either herbs, spices, with water, or with Spirits, and
distill them, by which means they that are in the vessels will presently be
forced into a sweat by virtue of the subtlety of the vapors. And this indeed
is as good and effectual a way for sweating as any can be invented: You may by
this means appropriate your ingredients to the nature of the diseases.

B, A vessel wherein a man sits in the bath. Now this vessel has in it a
door for the easier going into it, which fashion is far better, and more
convenient, then to be open only at the top.

C, A long vessel where a man that is weak, and not able to fit up, lies and
is bathed.

Now you must note that these vapors most not be hotter then the patient can
beer: also if the vapor come forth too hot upon the body of the patient, he
may by putting a pipe upon the end of the pipe that comes into the vessel,
divert the hot vapor from his body, and so it will not offend him that way.

Note that the patient, as soon as he begins to be faint, must come forth or
else he will suffer more prejudice, then good by his bathing; and also to
prevent him from fainting let him take some Cordial, or cold Beer, which will
much revive him, and make him endure his bathing longer, as also make him sweat
the more.

As Soon as the patient comes forth, let him go into a warm bed, and sweat as
he is able to bear it, and take some posset drink, or broth or such like warm
suppings, as also some good Cordial if he be very faint.

The patient may according as his strength will bear, and his disease require,
bathe, more seldom or oftener.

An artificial hot Bath, from the same principles as the natural Bath is.
Before I set down the process of making an artificial hot Bath, I shall
premise some things concerning the true nature and original of a hot Bath. Now
the clearest and best account that I ever heard or read, of the cause of the
heat in Bathes is that which is given by Mounsier de Rochas, and that in a
demonstrative way; His words are these. As I was (says he) with some of my
companions wandering in Savoy, I found in the valley of Luzerne betwixt the Alps
a hot spring; I began to consider the cause of this heat, and whereas the
vulgar opinion is, that the heat of fountains is from mountains fired within, I
saw reason to think the contrary, because I saw snow upon a mountain from
whence this hot spring came, unmelted, which could not possibly but have been
dissolved by the hot fumes of the mountains, had they been fired. Whereupon
being unsatisfied I with my companions and other laborers (whom I could very
hardly persuade to undertake such a business by reason they were afraid that
fire would thereupon break forth out of the ground and consume us) got tools
and set upon digging to find out the true cause of the heat of this fountain.
After we had dug 15. days (having before perceived the water to be hotter
and hotter by degrees as we came nearer to the source) we came to the original
of the heat, where was a great ebullition: In three hours more we dug
beyond this place of ebullition and perceived the water to be cold, yet in the
same continued stream with the other that was hot: upon this I began to wonder
much at the reason of these things. Then I carried to my lodging some of this
hot water (which was both saltish and acid) and evaporated it, and of forty
ounces I had in the bottom five drams of saltish matter, which I then yet
farther purified, and extracted thence three drams of pure nitrous Hermetick
salt; the other two ounces being a slimie sulphurous substance. Yet with this I
was not satisfied, but with my laborers went again to the place, and dug
twelve days more, and then we came to a water which was insipid as ordinary
fountain Water, yet still in a continued stream with the saltish and hot water.
At this I wondered much, whereupon I dug up some of the earth where the
cold, and saltish stream runned, and carried it home with me, and our of a
hundred weight thereof, I extracted a good quantity of nitrous salt, which was
almost fluxile. When I had extracted as much as I could, I laid the earth
aside, and in 24. hours it was all covered over with salt, which I extracted,
and out of a hundred weight of this earth which I call virgin earth, I had four
pound of this kind of salt which is contracted in the aforesaid 24. hours: and
so it would do constantly. Now this satisfied me concerning one doubt: for
before I was unsatisfied how there could be a constant supply of that salt
which made the water saltish, seeing there was but a little distance betwixt
the insipid water and the hot water, and the constant stream of water washed
away the salt which was in that little space: for I perceived that this kind of
earth attracts this universal salt of the world partly from the air in the
cavities of the earth, and partly from the vapors that constantly pass
through the earth. After this I took some of that earth where the ebullition
was, and carried it home, and proved it, and I perceived it to be a sulphur
mine, into which the former acid saltish water penetrating caused an
ebullition, as do salt of Tartar, and Spirit of Vitriall being mixed together,
and also water poured on unslaked lime. After this I began to question how it
was that this sulphur mine was not consumed, seeing so much matter passes from
it daily: but when I began to understand how all things in the earth did
assimilate to themselves whatsoever was of any kind of affinity to them, as
Mines convert the tools of miners into their own substance in a little time,
and such like experiments of that nature, I was satisfied. And after all this I
understood how this universal salt of the world was to be had, and I could at
any time mix it with water, and pour that water upon sulphur, and so make an
artificial hot bath as good as any natural bath whatsoever. Note that no salt
in the world but this nitrous salt will do it, as I often tried: And this salt
is to be found in all hot bathes, and to be prepared artificially. Thus far
Mounseur de Rochas. Something like unto this Helmont seems to hold forth,
saying that there is a Primum ens salium, or semina salium, which are all
seated in waters and vapors and give them an acidity, but as yet have no
saline taste, until they meet with such principles, and be received into
certain matrixes in the earth which may make them put forth this potentiall
saltness into act: and according to this diversity of places that this water
or vapors, being impregnated with those seeds of salt, go through, arises
the diversity of salts, as Alum, sea salt, Nitre, etc. Then upon this account
the earth through which the cold, acid, saltish water abovesaid run through,
did specificate that potentiall salt which was both in the water, and vapors,
into a nitrous salt, (by which means was that kind of salt in that place) but
whether this primum ens salium be so unspecificated, or quid Hermaphroditicum
as he asserts, or no, it matters not much to my purpose; it suffices if that
earth through which that acid nitrous water runs, attracts and multiplies an
acid nitrous salt, with which the water being impregnated, and running through
a sulphurous mine causes an ebullition. All this being premised, I shall now
endeavor to illustrate how nature may in this be imitated, as that an
artificial hot bath may be made by such like principles, as the natural hot
bath consists of, being artificially prepared.

Now these principles are the sulphur mine, and the acid nitrous salt; the
former requires no further preparation (as says Mounseur de Rochas,) if it be
pure: the latter is to be prepared two manner of ways: for either it is to be
extracted, as says the aforesaid author, out of the waters of the bath by
evaporating them away, or by condensing the nitrous air (for indeed as many
judicious philosophers are of opinion, the air is wholly nitrous, as it appears
by the condensation of it in cold places into Nitre) which his virgins earth
did do, into a salt, which was acid, and almost fluxil. Now when I say that
the nitrous salt is to be thus prepared, I do not say that this is the full
preparation thereof, for indeed it is yet further to be prepared, and that is
by giving it a greater acidity. I question much whether or no the salt being
prepared after the aforesaid ways do retain that acidity which is required
for that ebullition I spoke of, and which the nitrous acid water had before it
came to the Mine of Sulphur. For indeed the aforesaid author when he affirmed
that he could at any time make an artificial hot bath, did not say he used the
salt prepared only after the 2. former ways, viz. by extracting it out of the
waters of the bath, and making it with his virgin earth which did attract, and
condense the nitrousnesse of the air, but withal by making it so acid that it
might cause an ebullition when it came to be joined with a sulphur Mine. Now
then how to give this Nitre a sufficient acidity is the great question. For the
better effecting of this we must consider whence that nitrous water (above
mentioned) in the earth had the greatest part of its acidity. As to that, it
must be remembered that the virgin earth through which the acid nitrous water
did run, did condense the nitrous air or vapors into a nitrous salt, and
withal it is to be considered that before this nitrous air or vapor, before
it be condensed, even when it is near unto condensation is acid, and part of it
before condensation is mixed with the water, and so renders it acid. Now that
waters have great part of their acidity from the acid vapors of acid Mineralls
both Henricus ab Heers, and Jordan upon Mineral waters affirm: and that salts
unbodied, are far more acid then when they have assumed a body, is clearly
manifest in this, viz. that spirits of salts, which I call salts unbodied
because they have lost their body, are become very acid because unbodied; if so
in Spirits that have lost their bodies, why not after some proportion in those
that have not yet assumed a body, as vapors of Nitre, or nitrous air being
near to congelation, and bodying, and impregnant with Spirits of Nitre?

Now I say that nitrous vapors, or nitrous air being a salt unbodied, are not
so acid as Spirits of Nitre, because they are more phlegmatic and crude, which
phlegm they lose by being congealed into a salt: yet for all this, they are far
more acid then the body of salt: and this is that which Helmont understands,
when he says that the esurine salt being incorporificated is far more active,
in giving taste and odor then when it has received its body by becoming a
specificated salt. Furthermore how Nitre shall become sufficiently acid for the
aforesaid operation is the great matter to be required into. We must therefore
consider which way we may unbody Nitre (seeing it is scarce possible to get it
before it has received its body) and that is done two ways, either by forcing
of it into a most sharp Spirit, which is too acid for our intension, or by
digesting the whole substance of Nitre into a Liquor moderately acid, which
indeed serves for our purpose, and the process is this.

Take the purest Nitre you can get, dissolve it in rain water so as that the
water imbibe as much of it as it can. Then put this nitrous water into a common
earthen vessel unglazed, which you must set in a cellar. You shall see this
vessel in a short time to be white all over on the outside as with a hoar
frost, which whiteness is partly the flowers of the Nitre being the purest
part thereof penetrating the vessel, and partly the nitrous air condensed
into Nitre by the coldness of the vessel, as also assimilated to the Nitre
that penetrated the vessel. I said by the coldness of the vessel, because
such is the coldness of an earthen vessel wherein is Nitre, dissolved in
water, that it will being set in snow by the fire side forthwith be freezed.
This Nitre you must strike off with a feather, and when you have a sufficient
quantity thereof, as three or four pound, put this, or the nitrous salt
extracted from bath-waters into a bolt head of glass, (a pound in each bolt
head) that two parts of three be empty, nip it up, and set it in ashes, and
give it a reasonable strong fire, viz. that the upper part of the boul of the
bolt head be as hot, as that you can but well suffer your hand upon it, and you
shall see that the Nitre will be dissolved every day a little, and in 2. or 3.
months time be wholly dissolved, and become acid, but not so acid as the
Spirit thereof; then put it into a glass gourd with a head, and distill it
off, and in the bottom you shall find an acid nitrous salt almost fluxil, not
unlike the salt which Mounseur de Rochas found in the evaporating of this
water. Then pour the distilled Nitre water upon the said salt, and then it is
for your use.

The use of these principles or ingredients is this, viz. make fountain water
sufficiently acid with this nitrous Liquor, then pour it upon a sufficient
quantity of the best Sulphur Mine, or Sulphur vivum in a large wooden vessel
where the patient is to be bathed, and you will see the water presently heated
so hot as the patient is able to bear.

The inward use of these bath-waters is by reason of the Nitre in them, to
dissolve gross humors, open obstructions, cleanse the kidneys and bladder,
and by reason of the sulphur to dry, mollify, discuss, and glutinate, and to
help all uterine effects proceeding from cold and windy humors.

Note that they must be drunk warm, and in a good quantity, or else they will
do more hurt then good.

The outward use of this is for such ill effects as are in the habit of the
body, and out of the veins, as of palsies, contractions, rheumes, cold humors,
affects of the skin and aches, for they resolve, discuss, cleanse, mollify,
etc.

Now for the manner of bathing I shall not prescribe any thing, but leave this
to the discretion of the physician, who is to give order and directions for all
the circumstances about it: for indeed every one is not to bath when, and how
he pleases, but must apply himself to an able physician, and submit himself
to his judgment and experience, or else may receive either prejudice, or no
benefit thereby.

An artificial Tunbridge, and Epsa me Water.
It is granted by all, that Tunbridge Water proceeds from an iron mine, but how
it attracts that acidity and that ironish and vitriolated taste and odor,
seeing upon evaporation thereof, there remains little or no vitriall or salt of
iron at the bottom, is the great question; Now for the solution of this, we
must consider how many ways a subterraneall mineral, or metal may
communicate its acidity to waters, and that says Henricus ab Heers, upon
Spaw-waters, it does three ways: one, when the water passing through the
mines, carries along with it some of the dissoluble parts of the mine, to
which is consonant the saying of Aristotle: Such are waters, as is the nature
of those Mines through which they pass, as also of Galen when he says, that
pure water passing through Mineral Mines carry with them some of the substance
of the Mines. The second way is when the vapors arising from sermented
Mineralls and Metalls, are mixed with waters. Now that vapors retain the
odor, and taste of those things, from whence they are raised, Aristotle in his
fourth Book Sublimium affirms, and also Helmont when he says that some parts
of the iron Mines being by fermentation turned into a vapor retain the odor
and taste of the Mine by virtue of the acid esurine salt, and are not presently
reduced into a body, and also artificial vapors of the iron Mines have more
virtue, and activity, (I mean those parts that are raised by a strong fire in a
furnace from the Mine of iron) then iron it self when it is melted. The third
is, when a great quantity of vapors arising from the aforesaid fermented Mines
is elevated, and by the coldness of the ambient earth is turned into an acid
water, which as it passes through the earth meets with some springs of
water, and mixing with them gives them a pleasant acidity. And this is the best
of all acid wtaers being clear and very pure.

This being premised I shall now proceed to the process of making artificial
waters like to those of Tunbridge and Epsome: of the former viz. Tunbridge thus;

Take of the Mine, or ore of iron, beat it very small, and put it into the
furnace expressed page 83. and there will come forth an acid Spirit, and
flowers, which you must mix together till the acid Spirit extracts the salt out
of the flowers, then decant off the clear liquor which will have a strong taste
and smell of iron.

A few drops of this Liquor put into a glass full of fountain water give it
the odor and taste of Tunbridge water, and communicates the same operations to
it.

It opens all obstructions, purges by urine, cleanses the kidneys, and
bladder, helps the pissing of blood, the stopping of the urine, and
difficulty of making water, it allayeth all sharp humors, cures inward ulcers,
and impostumes, cleanses and strengthens the stomach, and liver etc.

Note that fountain water being made moderately acid with this acid ironish
Liquor may be taken from a pint to six pints, but by degrees, and after the
taking of it moderate exercise is to be used, and fasting to be observed till
all the water be gone out of the body, which will be in seven or eight hours.

Epsome water is made artificially thus. Take of the mine of allom, or allom
stones, powder it very small, and distill it in the furnace expressed page 83.
and there will distill over a certain acid alluminish water, which must be
mixed with a double quantity of Niter water (the preparation whereof is set
down in the process of making the artificial hot bath). Now you must know
that Epsome water has a certain kind of acid taste which is partly alluminous
and partly nitrous; which proceeds from nitrous air, and vapors arising from
the fermentation of alluminous Mines, being first mixed together, and then
mixed with the fountains passing through the earth.

If you put a few drops of this Liquor into a glass full of fountain water it
will give it the odor, and taste of Epsome water, that you shall scarce
discern them asunder either by that odor, or operation.

This water is purgative, and indeed purges especially all sharp burning
humors, cools an inflamed, and opens an obstructed body; cleanses the kidneys
and bladder, cures inward ulcers, and impostumes, is a very good preservative
against the consumption, etc.

Fountain water made acid with this Liquor may be taken from a pint to six or
eight, but by degrees, and after it moderate exercise must be used, and fasting
till the water be out of the body, only some thin warm suppings may be taken
to help the working thereof. Some take this water warm.

To make artificial precious stones of all sorts of colors.
Take Crystalline white pibble-stones that are very white throughout and have
no mixture of any other color, which you shall find in fountains and on the
sands of the sea. Put them into a crucible, make them glowing hot (covering the
crucible) then cast them into cold water, by which means they will crack, and
be easily reduced into a powder; Take the powder thereof, and put the like
quantity of pure salt of Tartar thereto, which salt must not be made in any
metalline but glass vessels, that it may have no mixture of any other color.
To this mixture you may add what color you please, which must be of a
mineral or a metalline nature, then put them into a very strong crucible which
must be but half full, and then covered, and there melt them in a strong fire
till they become like glass. Note that when this mixture is in melting you
must put an iron rod into it and take up some of it, and if there appear no
corns of gravel in it, it is enough; If otherwise, you must melt it longer.
The especial mineralls and metalls that give colors are these, viz. Copper,
iron, silver, gold, Wismut, Magnesia, and granats.

Common copper makes a seagreen; copper made out of iron a grasse-green;
granats, a smaragdine-green; iron yellow, or a Hyacinth color; silver, white,
yellow, green, and granat color; gold a fine sky color; Wismut common blew;
magnesia, an amethyst color: And if you will mix two or three of these
together, they will give other colous. For copper and silver mixed together
give an amethyst color: copper, and iron a pale green; Wismut, and magnesia, a
purple color; silver and magnesia diverse colors like as an Opall. If you
would have this mass not to be transparent but opac, you may add the calx of
tin to it when it is in melting: as if you would make Lapis lazuli; then ^o
your mixture colored with Wismut add the calx of tin, and this mixture when
it is almost ready to congeal cast into a mould where some powder of gold has
been scattered, and by this means it will become full of golden veins very like
true lapis lazuli, which is very pleasant to behold. You may by these foresaid
preparations cast what forms or figures you please, of what color you please.

The Metals, and Minerals for the making of colors ought to be thus prepared,
viz.

Plates of copper must be made red hot, and then quenched in cold water, of
which then take five or six grains, and mix them with an ounce of the
aforesaid mixture, and melt them all together, and they will color it
seagreen.

Iron must be made into a Crocus in a reverberatory fire, and then eight or ten
grains thereof will tinge the mixture into a yellow, or hyacinth color.

Silver is to be dissolved in Aqua fortis and precipitated with Oil of flints,
then dulcified with water, and afterward dried, of this five or six grains
give a mingled color.

Gold must be dissolved in Aqua regis, and precipitated with the Liquor of
flints, then sweetened, and dried, and five or six grains thereof gives the
finest saphir color to an ounce of the mixture

If gold be melted with regulus martis nitrosus, five or six grains thereof
give to an ounce of the mass a most incomparable rubine color.

Magnesia may be powdered only, and then ten or twelve grains thereof make an
amethyst color.

Wismut must be dissolved in Aqua regis, and precipitated with Liquor of
flints, then sweetened, and dried; and then of this four or five grains turn
an ounce of the mass into a saphir color, but not so natural as gold does.

Granata may be powder only, and then ten or fifteen grains thereof tinge an
ounce of the mass into a fine green color not unlike to the natural
Smaragdine.

To prove what kind of metal there is in any Ore, although you have but a
very few grains thereof, so as that you cannot make proof thereof the
ordinary way with lead.
Take two or four grains (if you have no greater quantity) of any Ore that
you have, put it to half an ounce of Venice-glasse, and melt them together in
a crucible, (the crucible being covered) and according to the tincture that the
glass receives from the Ore, so may you judge what kind of metal there is
in the Ore; for if it be a copper Ore, then the glass will be tinged with a
seagreen color.

If copper and iron, a glasse-green.

If iron, a dark yellow.

If tin, a pale yellow.

If silver, a whitish yellow.

If gold, a fine sky color.

If gold and silver together, a Smaragdine color.

If gold, silver, copper, and iron together, an amethyst color.

A pretty observation upon the melting of Copper and Tin together.
First make two bullets of red copper of the same magnitude, make also two
bullets of the purest tin in the same mould, as the others were made: weigh all
four bullets, and observe the weight well: then melt the copper bullets first,
upon them being melted put the two tin bullets, and melt them together, but
have a care that the tin fume not away. Then cast this molten mixture in the
same moulds as before, and it will scarce make three bullets, but yet they
weigh as heavy as they did before they were melted together.

I suppose the copper condenseth the body of the tin, which before was very
porous, which condensation rather adds then diminishes the weight thereof.

A remarkable observation upon the melting of Salt Armoniack, and Calx vive
together.
Take Salt armoniack, and Calx vive, of each a like quantity, mix, and melt
them together. Note that Calx of it self will not melt in less then eight
hours with the strongest fire that can be made, but being mixed with this salt
melts in half an hour, and less, like a metal, with an indifferent fire.

This mixture being thus melted becomes a hard stone, out of which you may
strike fire as out of a flint, which if you dissolve again in water, you shall
have the Salt armoniack in the same quantity as before, but fixed.

Note that hard things have their congelation from Salt armoniack, as horns,
bones and such like; for little fixed salt can be extracted from them, only
volatile and armoniack.

An ounce of any of these volatile salts, (as of horns, bones, amber, and such
like) reduced into an acid Liquor by distillation, condenseth, and indurateth a
pound of Oily matter.

An easy and cheap powder like unto aurum fulminans.
Take of salt Tartar one part, Saltpeter three parts, Sulphur a third part,
grind these well together, and dry them. A few grains of this powder being
fired will give as great a clap as a musket when it is discharged.

To make an Antimoniall cup, and to cast diverse figures of Antimony.
Take the best crude antimony very well powdered, Nitre, of each a po^nd, of
crude Tartar finely powdered two pound, mix them well together, and put them
into a crucible, cover the crucible, and melt them, and the regulus will fall
to the bottom, and be like a melted metal, then pour it forth into a brass
mortar, being first smeared over with Oil.

Or,

This regulus you may (when you have made enough of it) melt again and cast it
into what moulds you please, you may either make cups, or what pictures you
please, and of what figures you please. You may cast it into forms of
shillings or halfe-crowns, either of which if you put it into two or three
ounces of wine in an earthen glazed vessel, or glass, and infuse in a
moderate heat all night, you may have a Liquor in the morning which will cause
vomit: of which the dose is from two drams to two ounces and half.

Note that in the Wine you may put a little Cinnamon to correct and give a more
grateful relish to it.

It is the custom to fill the Antimoniall cup with Wine, and to put as much
Wine round about betwixt that and the little earthen cup where it stands, and
so infuse it all night, and then drink up all that Wine: but I fear, that so
much Wine will be too much as being three or four ounces when as we seldom
exceed the quantity of two ounces of the infusion of Antimony.

These cups, or pictures will last for ever, and be as effectual after a
thousand times infusion as at first: and if they be broken at any time, (as
easily they may being as brittle as glass) they may be cast again into what
forms you please.

Note that he that casts them must be skillful in making his spawde, as also in
scouring of them, and making them bright afterward: for if they be carefully
handled they will look even as bright as silver.

BOOK VI.
The Spagyricall Anatomy of Gold, and Silver, together with the Curiosities
therein, and chiefest preparations thereof.
I Shall first endeavor to show whence Gold had its original, and what the
matter thereof is. As Nature (says Sandivogius) is in the will of God, and God
created her: so nature made for her self a seed, ( i.) her will in the
elements. Now she indeed is one, yet she brings forth diverse things; but she
operates nothing without a Sperme: whatsoever the Sperme will, nature operates,
for she is as it were the instrument of any artificers. The Sperme therefore of
every thing is better, and more profitable then nature her self: for thou shall
from nature without a Sperme, do as much as a goldsmith without fire, or a
husband without grain or seed. Now the Sperme of any thing is the Elixir, the
balsame of sulphur, and the same as Humidum Radicale is in metalls: but to
proceed to what concerns our purpose. Four elements generate a Sperme, by the
will of God, and imagination of nature: For as the Sperme of a man has its
center, or the vessel of its seed in the kidneys: so the four elements by
their indesinent motion (every one according to its quality) cast forth a
Sperme into the center of the earth, where it is digested, and by motion is
sent abroad. Now the center of the earth is a certain empty place, where
nothing can rest: and the four elements send forth their qualities into the
circumference of the center. As a male sends forth his seed into the womb of
the female, which after it has received a due portion casts out the rest, so
it happens in the center of the earth, that the magnetic powder of a part of
any place attracts something convenient to it self for the bringing forth of
something, and the rest is cast forth into stones and other excrements. For
every thing has its original from this fountain, and there is nothing in the
world produced but by this fountain: as for example, set upon an even table a
vessel of water, which may be placed in the middle thereof, and round about it
set diverse things, and diverse colors, also salt, etc. every thing by it self:
then pour the water into the middle; and you shall see the water to run every
way, and when any stream touches the red color, it will be made red by it,
if the salt, it will contract the taste of salt from it, and so of the rest; Now
the water does not change the places, but the diversity of places changes the
water. In like manner the seed or sperme being cast forth by the four elements
from the center of the earth unto the superficies thereof passes through
various places, and according to the nature of the place is any thing produced:
if it come to a pure place of earth, and water, a pure thing is made.

The seed, and sperme of all things is but one, and yet it generates diverse
things, as it appears by the former example. The sperme whilst it is in the
center is indifferent to all forms, but when it is come into any determinate
place, it changes no more its form. The sperme whilst it is in the center
can as easily produce a tree, as a metal, and an herb as a stone, and one
more precious then another according to the purity of the place. Now this
sperme is produced of elements thus. These four elements are never quiet but
by reason of their contrariety mutually act one upon another; and every one of
its self sends forth its own subtilty, and they agree in the center. Now in
this center is the Archaeus, the servant of nature, which mixing those spermes
together sends them abroad, and by distillation sublimes them by the heat of a
continual motion unto the superficies of the earth: For the earth is porous,
and this vapor (or wind, as the philosophers call it) is by distilling through
the pores of the earth resolved into water, of which all things are produced.
Let therefore as I said before, all sons of Art know that the sperme of metals
is not different from the sperme of all things being, viz. a humid vapor.
Therefore in vain do Artists endeavor the reduction of metals into their first
matter, which is only a vapor. Now says Bernard Trevisan when philosophers
speak of a first matter they did not mean this vapor, but the second matter
which is an unctuous water, which to us is the first, because we never find the
former. Now the specification of this vapor into distinct metals is thus. This
vapor passes in its distillation through the earth, through places either
cold, or hot; if through hot, and pure where the fatness of sulphur sticks to
the sides thereof, then that vapor (which philosophers call the Mercury of
philosophers) mixeth, and joyneth it self unto that fatness, which afterward
it sublimes with it self, and then it becomes, leaving the name of a vapor,
and unctuosity, which afterward coming by sublimation into other places, which
the antecedent vapor did purge, where the earth is subtle, pure, and humid,
fills the pores thereof, and is joined to it; and so it becomes gold: and where
it is hot, and something impure, silver. But if that fatness come to impure
places, which are cold, it is made lead: and if that place be pure and mixed
with sulphur, it becomes copper: for by how much the more pure and warm the
place is, so much the more excellent does it make the metalls.

Now this first matter of metals is a humid, viscous, incombustible, subtle
substance, incorporated with an earthy subtilty, being equally, and strongly
mixed per minima in the caverns of the earth. But as in many things there is a
twofold unctuosity (whereof one is as it were internal, retained in the center
of the thing lest it should be destroyed by fire, which cannot be without the
destruction of the substance it self wherein it is: the other as it were
external, feculent and combustible) so in all metalls except gold, there is a
twofold unctuosity: the one which is external, sulphurous, and inflamable,
which is joined to it by accident, and does not belong to the total union with
the terrestrial parts of the thing: the other is internal, and very subtle,
incombustible, because it is of the substantial composition of Argent vive,
and therefore cannot be destroyed by fire, unless with the destruction of the
whole substance, whence it appears what the cause is that metalls are more or
less durable in the fire: For those which abound with that internal
unctuosity are less consumed, as it appears in silver, and especially in gold.
Hence Rosarius says, the philosophers could never by any means find out any
thing that could endure the fire; but that unctuous humidity only which is
perfect, and incombustible. Geber also asserts the same, when he says that
imperfect bodies have superfluous humidities, and sulphureity generating a
combustible blackness in them, and corrupting them; they have also an impure,
feculent and combustible terestriety so gross, as that it hinders ingression,
and fusion: but a perfect metal, as gold, has neither this sulphurous or
terrestrial impurity; I mean when it is fully maturated and melted, for
whilst it is in concoction it has both joined to it, as you may see in the
golden Ore, but when they do not adhere to it so, but that it may be purified
from them, which other metalls cannot, but are both destroyed together if you
attempt to separate the one from the other: Besides gold has so little of
these corruptible principles mixed with it, that the inward sulphur or
metalline spirit does sometimes and in some places overcome them of it self,
as we may see in the gold which is found very pure sometimes in the superficies
of the earth, and in the sea sands, and is many times as pure as any refined
gold.

Now this gold which is found in sands and rivers, is not generated there, as
says Gregorius Agricola in his third book de Re Metallica, but is washed down
from the mountains with fountains that run from thence. There is also a
flaming gold found (as Paracelsus says) in the tops of mountains, which is
indeed separated of it self from all impurities, and is as pure as any refined
gold whatsoever. So that you see, that gold although it had an extrinsecall
sulphur and earth mixed with it, yet it is sometimes separated from it of it
self, viz. by that fiery spirit that is in it. Now this pure gold (as says
Sandivogius) nature would have perfected into an elixir but was hindered by the
crude air, which crude air is indeed nothing else but that extrinsecall sulphur
which it meets with and is joined to in the earth, and which fills with its
violence the pores thereof, and hinders the activity of the Spirit thereof; and
this is that prison which the sulphur (as says the aforesaid author) is locked
up in, so that it cannot act upon its body, viz. Mercury, and concoct it into
the seed of gold; as otherwise it would do: and this is that dark body (as
faith Penotus) that is interposed betwixt the philosophical Sun and Moon,
and keeps off the influences of the one from the other. Now if any skillful
philosopher could wittily separate this adventitious impurity from gold whilst
it is yet living, he would set sulphur at liberty, and for this his service he
would be gratified with three kingdoms, viz. Vegetable, Animal, and Mineral,
I mean he could remove that great obstruction which hinders gold from being
digested into the Elixir. For, as says Sandivogius, the Elixir, or Tincture of
philosophers, is nothing else but gold digested into the highest degree: for
the gold of the vulgar is as an herb without seed, but when gold ( i.) living
gold (for common gold never can by reason that the Spirits are bound up, and
indeed as good as dead and not possibly to be reduced to that activity which is
required for the producing of the sperme of gold) is ripened it gives a seed,
which multiplies even ad infinitum. Now the reason of this barrenness of gold
that it produces not a seed is the aforesaid crude air, viz. impurities: You
may see this illustrated by this example.

We see that Orenge-trees in Polonia do grow like other trees, also in Italy,
and elsewhere, where their native soil is, and yield fruit, because they have
sufficient heat, but in these colder colder countries they are barren and never
yield any fruit, because they are oppressed with cold: but if at any time
nature be wittily and sweetly helped, then Art can perfect what nature could
not. After the same manner it is in metalls; for gold would yield fruit, and
seed in which it might multiply it self, if it were helped by the industry of
the skillful artist, who knew how to promote nature, ( i.) to separate these
sulphurous and earthly impurities from gold. For there is a sufficient heat in
living gold, which if it were stirred up by extrinsecall heat, to digest it
into a seed. By extrinsecall heat I do not mean the heat of the celestial
Sun, but that heat which is in the earth and stirs up the seed, ( i.) the
living spirit that is in all subteraneall sperms to multiply, and indeed makes
gold become gold. Now this is a heat of putrefaction occasioned by acid spirits
fermenting in the earth, as you may see by this example related by Albertus
Magnus, but to which the reason was given by Sandivogius. There was says the
former author, certain grains of gold found betwixt the teeth of a dead man
in the grave: wherefore he conceived there was a power in the body of man to
make and ^ixe gold: but the reason is far otherwise, as says the latter
author: for says he, Argent vive was by some physician conveyed into the body
of this man when he was alive, either by unction, or by turbith, or some such
way, as the custom was; and it is the nature of Mercury to ascend to the mouth
of the patient, and through the excoriation of the mouth to be avoided with the
phlegm. Now then if in such a cure the sickman dyed, that Mercury not having
passage out remained betwixt the teeth in the mouth, and that carcass became
the natural vessel of Mercury, and so for a long time being shut up was
congealed by its proper sulphur into gold by the natural heat of putrefaction,
being purified by the corrosive phlegm of the carcass, but if the mineral
Mercury had not been brought in thither, gold had never been produced there:
And this is a most true example that as mercury is by the proper sulphur that
is in it self, being stirred up and helped by an extrinsecall heat, coagulated
into gold, unless it be hindered by any accident, or have not a requisite
extrinsecall heat, or convenient place, so also that nature does in the bowels
of the earth produce of Mercury only gold and silver, and other metalls
according to the disposition of the place, and matrix; which assertion is
further cleared by the rule of reduction, for if it be true that all things
consist of that which they may be reduced into, then gold consists of Mercury,
because (as most grant, Paracelsus affirms, and many at this day profess they
can do) it may be reduced into it. There is a way by which the tincture of
gold which is the soul thereof, and fixes it, may be so fully extracted that
the remaining substance will be sublimed like Arsenick, and may be as easily
reduced into Mercury as Sublimate. If so, and if all Mercury may be reduced
into a transparent water, as it may (according to the process set down page
75. and as I know how another better and easier way to turn a pound of Mercury
of it self into a clear water in half an hour, which is one of the greatest
secrets I know, or care to know, together with what may be produced thence, and
shall crave leave to be silent in) why may not that water in some sense, if it
be well rectified, be called a kind of living gold out of which you may
perhaps make a medicine, and a menstruum unfit for the vulgar to know. It
appears now from what is premised that the immediate matter of gold is probably
Mercury, and not certain salts and I know not what as many dream of, and that
the extrinsecall heat is from within the earth, and not the heat of the sun, as
some imagine (because in the hottest countries there is all, or almost all gold
generated) who if they considered that in cold countries also are, and as in
Scotland were gold mines in King James his time, would be of another mind then
to think that the celestial sun could penetrate, so as to heat the earth so
deep as most gold lies.

I now having in some measure discovered what the intrins^call, and
extrinsecall heat, and the matter of gold is, I shall next endeavor to
explain what those three principles are, viz. Salt, Sulphur, and Mercury, of
which Argent vive, and gold consist: Know therefore that after Nature had
received from the most High God the privilege of all things upon the Monarchy
of this wourld, she began to distribute places, and provinces to every thing,
according to its dignity; and in the first place did constitute the four
elements to be the princes of the world, and that the will of the most High (in
whose will Nature is placed) might be fulfilled, ordained that they should act
upon one another incessantly. The fire therefore began to act upon the air,
and produced sulphur: The air also began to act upon the water, and produced
Mercury: the water also began to act upon the earth, and produced salt. Now the
earth not having whereo^ to act produced nothing, but became the subject of
what was produced. So then there were produced three principles, but our
ancient philosophers not so strictly considering the matter described only two
acts of the elements, and so named but two principles, viz. Sulphur and
Mercury: or else they were willing to be silent in the other, speaking only to
the son of Art.

The Sulphur therefore of philosophers, (which indeed is the sulphur of
metalls, and of all things) is not, as many think, that common combustible
sulphur which is sold in shops, but is another thing far differing from that,
and is incombustible, not burning, nor heating, but preserving, and restoring
all things which it is in, and it is the Calidum Innatum of every thing, the
fire of nature, the created light, and of the nature of the fun, and is called
the Sun; so that whatsoever in any thing is fiery, and airy, is sulphur, not
that any thing is wholly sulphurous, but what in it is most thin, and subtle,
having the essence of the natural fire, and the nature of the created light,
which indeed is that sulphur which wise philosophers have in all ages with
great diligence endeavored to extract, and with its proper Mercury to fix, and
so to perfect the great Magistery of nature. Now of all things in the world
there is nothing has more of this sulphur in it then gold and silver, but
especially gold, insomuch that oftentimes it is called sulphur, ( i.) because
sulphur is the most predominant, and excellent principle in it, and being in it
more then in all things besides.

Mercury is not here taken for common Argent vive; but it is the Humidum
Radicale of every thing, that pure aqueous, unctuous, and viscous humidity of
the matter, and it is of the nature of the Moon, and it is called the Moon,
and that for this reason, viz. because it is humid, as also because it is
capable of receiving the influence and light of the Sun, viz. sulphur.

Salt is that fixed permanent earth which is in the center of every thing that
is incorruptible, and inalterable, and it is the supporter and nourse of the
Humidum Radicale, with which it is strongly mixed. Now this salt has in it a
seed, viz. its Calidum Innatum, which is Sulphur, and its Humidum Radicale
which is Mercury; and yet these three are not distinct or to be separated, but
are one homogeneall thing, having upon a different account diverse names: for in
respect of its heat, and fiery substance it is called Sulphur, in respect of
its humidity, it is called Mercury, and in respect of its terrestrial siccity
it is called salt, all which are in gold perfectly united, depurated, and fixed.

Gold therefore is most noble, and solid of all metalls, of a yellow color,
compacted of principles digested to the utmost hight, and therefore fixed.

Silver is in the next place of dignity to Gold, and differs from it in
digestion chiefly, I said chiefly, because there is some small impurity
besides, adhering to silver.

Now having given some small account of the original matter, first, and
second, and manner of the growth of gold, I shall in the next place set down
some curiosities therein, and preparation thereof. The preparations are chiefly
three, viz. Aurum potabile, which is the mixtion thereof with other Liquors:
Oil of gold, which is gold liquid by it self without the mixture of any other
Liquor: and the tincture, which is the extraction of the color thereof.

Dr. Anthony's famous Aurum potabile, and Oil of gold.
Dissolve pure fine gold in Aqua regis according to art (the Aqua regis being
made of a pound of Aqua fortis, and four ounces of salt Armo niack distilled
together by Retort in sand) which clear folution put into a large glass of a
wide neck, and upon it pour drop by drop Oil of Tartar made per deliquium,
until the Aqua regis which before was yellow become clear, and white, for that
is a sign that all calx of gold is settled to the bottom: then let it stand
all night, and in the morning pour off the clear Liquor, and wash the calx four
or five times with common spring water, being warmed, and dry it with a most
gentle heat.

Note, and that well, that if the heat be too great, the calx takes fire
presently like Gunpowder and flies away to thy danger and loss, therefore it
is best to dry it in the sun, or on a stone, stirring it diligently with a
wooden spatle. To this calx add half a part of the powder of sulphur, mix
them together and in an open crucible let the sulphur burn away in the fire,
putting a gentle fire to it at the first, and in the end a most strong fire for
the space of an hour, that the calx may in some manner be reverberated, and
become most subtle, which keep in a vial close stopped for your use.

Then make a Spirit of urine after this manner, viz. Take the urine of a
healthy man drinking Wine moderately, put it into a gourd, which you must stop
close, and set in horsedung for the space of forty days, then distill it by
Alembick in sand into a large receiver, until all the humidity be distilled
off. Rectify this Spirit by cohobation three times, that the Spirit only may
rise. Then distill it in sand by a glass with a long neck, having a large
receiver annexed, and closed very well to it, and the Spirit will be elevated
into the top of the vessel like crystal without any aqueous humidity
accompanying of it. Let this distillation be continued, until all the Spirits
be risen. These crystalls must be dissolved in distilled rainwater, and be
distilled as before, this must be done six times, and every time you must take
fresh rainwater distilled. Then put these crystalls into a glass bolthead,
which close Hermetically, and set in the moderate heat of a Balneum for the
space of fifteen days, that they may be reduced into a most clear Liquor. To
this Liquor add an equal weight of Spirit of Wine, very well rectified, and
let them be digested in Balneo the space of twelve days, in which time they
will be united.

Then take the calx of gold abovesaid, and pour upon it of these united
Spirits as much as will cover them three fingers breadth, and digest them in a
gentle heat, until the Liquor be tinged as red as blood; decant off the
tincture, and put on more of the aforesaid Spirits, and do as before till all
the tincture be extracted, then put all the tincted Spirits together, and
digest them ten or twelve days, after which time abstract the Spirit with a
gentle heat, and cohobate it once; and then the calx will remain in the bottom
like an Oil as red as blood, and of a pleasant odor, and which will be
dissolved in any Liquor. Whereof this Oil may be the Succedaneum of true gold.
If you distill the same solution by Retort in sand there will come over after
the first part of the menstruum, the tincture with the other part thereof; as
red as blood, the earth which is left in the bottom of the vessel being
black, dry, spongious and light. The menstruum must be vapoured away, and the
Oil of gold will remain by it self, which must be kept as a great treasure: and
this is Dr. Anthony's Aurum potabile.

Four or eight grains of this Oil taken in what manner soever wonderfully
refreshes the Spirits, and works several ways, especially by sweat.

The true Oil of Gold.
Take an ounce of leafe-gold, dissolve it in four ounces of the rectified
water of Mercury expressed page 75. digest them in horse-dung the space of two
months, then evaporate the Mercuriall water, and at the bottom you shall have
the true Oil of gold, which is radically dissolved.

Another process hereof you may see page 71.

A Tincture of Gold.
Dissolve pure gold in Aqua regis, precipitate it with the Oil of sand into a
yellow powder, which you must dulcifie with warm water, and then dry it (this
will not be fired as Aurum fulminans) This powder is twice as heavy as the
gold that was put in, the cause of which is the salt of the flints
precipitating it self with the gold. Put this yellow powder into a crucible,
and make it glow a little, and it will be turned into the highest, and fairest
purple that ever you saw, but if it stand longer it will be brown. Then pour
upon it the strongest Spirit of salt (for it will dissolve it better then any
Aqua regis) on which dissolution pour on the best rectified Spirit of Wine,
and digest them together, and by a long digestion, some part of the gold will
fall to the bottom like a white snow, and may with Borax, Tartar and salt
Nitre be melted into a white metal as heavy as gold, and afterward with
Antimony may recover its yellow color again, then evaporate the Spirit of
salt, and of Wine, and the gold Tincture remains at the bottom and is of
great virtue.

Another Tincture of Gold.
Take of the aforesaid yellow Calx of gold precipitated with Oil of sand, one
part, and three or four parts of the Liquor of sand, or of crystalls; mix them
well together, and put them into a crucible in a gentle heat at first, that the
moisture of the Oil may vapor away (which it will not do easily because the
dryness of the sand retains the moisture thereof, so that it flies away like
molten alum, or borax) when no more will vapor away, increase your fire, till
the crucible be red hot, and the mixture cease bubling: then put it into a wind
furnace and cover it that no ashes fall into it, and make a strong fire about
it for the space of an hour, and the mixture will be turned into a transparent
Rubie. Then take it out, and beat it, and extract the tincture with Spirit of
wine, which will become like thin blood, and that which remains undissolved
may be melted into a white metal as the former.

Another tincture of Gold.
Hang plates of gold over the fume of Argent vive, and they will become white,
friable, and fluxil as wax. This is called the Magnesia of gold, as says
Paracelsus, in finding out of which (says he) philosophers, as Thomas Aquinas,
and Rupescissa with their followers took a great deal of pains, but in vain,
and it is a memorable secret and indeed very singular for the melting of metals
that are not easily fluxil. Now then gold being thus prepared, and melted
together with the Mercury, is become a brittle substance, which must be
powdered and out of it a tincture may be drawn for the transmuting of metals.

Another Tincture.
Take half an ounce of pure gold, dissolve it in Aqua regis, precipitate it
with Oil of flints, dulcifie the calx with warm water and dry it, and so it is
prepared for your work. Then take Regulus Martis powdered, and mix it with
three parts of salt Nitre, both which put into a crucible and make them glow
gently at first, then give a strong melting fire, and then this mixture will
become to be of a purple color, which then take out, and beat to powder, and
add to three parts of this, one part of the calx of gold prepared as before,
put them into a wine furnace in a strong crucible, and make them melt as a
metal, so will the Nitrum antimoniatum in the melting take the calx of gold to
it self, and dissolve it, and the mixture will become to be of an Amethyst
color. Let this stand flowing in the fire till the whole mass be as
transparent as a Rubine, which you may try by taking a little out and cooling
of it. If the mixture do not flow well, cast in some more salt Nitre. When it
is completely done cast it forth being flowing into a brazen mortar, and it will
be like to an oriental Rubine; then powder it before it be cold, then put it
into a vial and with the Spirit of Wine extract the tincture.

This is one of the best preparations of gold, and of most excellent use in
medicine.

Another Tincture.
First make a furnace fit for the purpose, which must be close at the top and
have a pipe to which a recipient with a flat bottom must be fitted: When this
furnace is thus fitted, put in three or four grains, not above at once, of
Aurum fulminans, which as soon as the furnace is hot, flies away into the
recipient through the pipe like a purple colored fume, and is turned into a
purple colored powder, then put in three or four grains more, and do as
before, till you have enough flowers of gold (that which flies not away but
remains at the bottom, may with borax be melted into good gold) then take
them out and pour upon them rectified Spirit of Wine tartarizated, and digest
them in ashes till the spirit be colored blood red, which you must then
evaporate and at the bottom will be a blood red tincture of no small virtue.

Aurum fulminans.
Take the purest gold you can get, pour on it four times as much Aqua regia,
stop your glass with a paper, and set it in warm ashes, so will the Aqua
regia in an hour or two take up the gold, and become a yellow water, if it be
strong enough: (be sure that your gold has no copper in it, for then your
labor will be lost) because the copper will be precipitated with the gold, and
hinder the firing thereof) then pour on this yellow water drop by drop pure Oil
of Tartar made per deliquium, so will the gold be precipitated into a dark
yellow powder, and the water be clear. Note that you pour not on more Oil of
Tartar then is sufficient for the precipitation, otherwise it will dissolve
part of the precipitated gold to thy prejudice. Pour off the clear Liquor by
inclination, and dulcifie the calx with distilled rainwater warmed. Then set
this calx in the sun, or some warm place to dry, but take great heed, and
especial care that you set it not in a place too hot, for it will presently
take fire, and fly away like thunder, not without ^reat danger to the standers
by, if the quantity be great. This is the common way to make Aurum fulminans,
and it has considerable difficulties in the preparation. But the best way is
to precipitate gold dissolved in Aqua regis by the Spirit of salt Armoniack or
of urine, for by this way the gold is made purer then by the other, and gives
a far greater crack and sound. Note that the salt of the Spirits which is
precipitated with the gold must be washed away, and the gold dulcified as
before.

A few grains of this being fired give a crack and sound as great as a musket
when it is discharged, and will blow up any thing more forcibly, far then
gunpowder, and it is a powder that will quickly and easily be fired.

This is of use for physic as it is in powder, but especially it is used in
making the foregoing tincture.

To make gold grow in a glass like a tree, which is called the golden tree of
the Philosophers.
Take of Oil of sand as much as you please, pour upon it the same quantity of
Oil of Tartar per deliquium, shake them well together that they be incorporated
and become as one Liquor of a thin consistence, then is your Menstruum or
Liquor prepared. Then dissolve gold in Aqua regia, and evaporate the Menstruum
and dry the Calx in the fire, but make it not too hot, for it will thereby lose
its growing quality, then take it out and break it into little bits, not into
powder, put those bits into the aforesaid Liquor (that they may lie a fingers
breadth the one from the other) in a very clear glass. Keep the Liquor from
the air, and you shall see that those bits of the calx will presently begin to
grow; first they will swell, then they will put forth one or two stems, then
diverse branches and twigs so exactly, as that you can not choose but exceedingly
to wonder. This growing is real, and not imaginary only. Note that the glass
must stand still, and not be moved.

Another way.
Calcine fine gold in Aqua regis, that it become a calx, which put into a gourd
glass, and pour upon it good and fresh Aqua regia, and the water of gradation,
so that they cover the calx four fingers breadth, this Menstruum abstract in
the third degree of fire until no more will ascend. This distilled water pour
on it again and abstract it as before, and this do so often till you see the
gold rise in the glass, and grow in the form of a tree having many boughs and
leaves.

To make-Gold grow and be increased in the earth.
Take leaves of gold, and bury them in the earth which looks toward the East,
and let it be often soiled with man's urine, and doves dung, and you shall see
that in a short time they will be increased.

The reason of this growth I conceive may be the golds attracting that
universal vapor and sperme that comes from the center through the earth (as
has been spoken in the anatomy of gold) and by the heat of putrefaction of the
dung purifying and assimilating it to it self.

A remarkable observation upon a golden Marcasite.
There is found a certain stone in Bononia, which some call a golden
Marcasite, some a solarie Magnes, that receives light from the sun in the day
time, and gives it forth in the dark. About this there have been much reasoning
amongst Philosophers, as whether light be really a body, or any kind of
substance, or any accident only, and whether this stone had any gold in it or
no, and what it did consist of. He that first discovered it thought that he
had found a thing that would transmute metals into gold, (by which it appears
that there seemed to be something of gold in it or something more glorious then
gold) but his hopes were frustrated by a fruitless labor, notwithstanding
which I conceive there might be some immature or crude gold in it; for crude
gold is a subject (being there is some life in it) that is most fit to receive
the influences of the sun according to the unanimous consent of all
Philosophers, and therefore is by them not only called Solary but Sol ( i.) the
Sun it self.

It is prepared for the receiving of light thus, it is calcined two ways,
first it is brought into a most subtle powder with a very strong fire in a
crucible; secondly, being thus brought into a powder, is made up into cakes as
big as a doller, or a piece of eight, either with common water alone, or with
the white of an egg, put those cakes being dried by themselves into a Wind
Furnace S S S, with coals, and calcine them in a most strong fire for the
space of four or five hours. When the furnace is cold take them out, and if
they be not sufficiently calcined the first time, (which is known by their
giving but little light,) then reiterate the calcination after the same manner
as before, which is sometimes to be done thrice. That is the best which is made
with the choicest stones that are clean, pure, and diaphanous, and gives the
best light. With this being powdered you may make the forms of diverse animalls
of what shapes you please, which you must keep in boxes, and they will receive
light from the sun in the day time, give light in the night, or in a dark
place, which light will vanish by degrees.

The virtues of the aforesaid preparations of Gold.
With the aforesaid preparations the Ancients did not only preserve the health
and strength of their bodies, but also prolong their lives to a very old age,
and not that only, but cured thoroughly the Epilepsie, Apoplexy, Elephantia^ts,
Leprosy, Melancholy, Madness, the Quartain, the Gout, Dropsue, Pluri^y, all
manner of Fevers, the Jaundise, Lues venerea, the Wolf, Cancer, Noli ne
tangere, Asthma, Consumption, the Stone, stopping of Urine, inward Impostumes,
and such like diseases, which most men account incurable. For there is such a
potent fire lying in prepared gold, which does not only consume deadly humors,
but also renews the very marrow of the bones, and raises up the whole body of
man being half dead.

They that use any of these preparations for any of the foregoing diseases,
must be take themselves to their bed for the space of two or three hours, and
expect sweating to ensue, for indeed it will send forth sweat plentifully, and
with ease, and leave no impurity or superfluity in the whole body. Note that
they must take it for ten days together in appropriated Liquors.

Let young men that expect long life, take any of the aforesaid preparations
once in a month, and in the morning; but they must abstain from meat and
drink, till the evening of the same day, for in that time that matter will be
dig^sted into the radical humor; whereby the strength of the body is
wonderfully increased, beauty does flourish most wonderfully, and continues
till extreme old age.

Let old men take it twice in a month, for by this means will their old age
be fresh till the appointed time of death.

Let young women and maids take it once in a month after their menstrua, for
by this means they will look fresh and beautiful.

Let women that are in travel take it, and it will help and strengthen them to
bring forth without much pain, notwithstanding many difficulties.

Let it be given to women that have past the years of their menstrua once or
twice in a month, and it will preserve them very fresh, and many times cause
their menstrua to return, and make them capable again of bearing children.

It cures the plague, and expells the matter of a carbuncle by sweat most
potently.

Whn I say that this, or it will do thus or thus, I mean any one of the
forenamed preparations, viz. Aurum potabile, Oils, or Tincture of gold.

The preparations of Silver in general.
All the several preparations of gold may, except that of Aurum fulminans, be
applied to silver, of which being thus prepared the virtues are inferior to
those of gold, yet come nearer to them then those of any other matter
whatsoever, or howsoever prepared.

Note that silver has some peculiar preparations which neither gold or any
other metalls are capable of.

A green Tincture of Silver.
Take fine silver, and dissolve it in twice so much rectified Spirit of Nitre,
then abstract half of the said Spirit in sand, let it stand a day or two in a
cold place, and much of the silver will shoot into Crystals, and in often doing
most of it.

These Crystals are very bitter, yet may be made into pills, and taken inwardly
from three grains to twelve; they purge very securely, and gently, and color
the lips, tongue, and mouth, black. If in this dissolution of silver before it
be brought to crystals, half so much Mercury be dissolved and both shoot
together into crystalls, you shall have a stone not much unlike to alum. This
purges sooner, and better, and is not so bitter; It colors the nails, hair,
skin, if it be dissolved in rainwater; with a lovely brown, red, or black,
according as you put more or less thereof.

Take of the aforesaid crystalls of silver, mix with them a like quantity of
pure Saltpeter well powdered, then put this mixture into the distilling
vessel expressed page 76. at the bottom of which must be powdered coals to
the thickness of two fingers breadth, then make a strong fire that the vessel
and coals be red hot, put in a dram of the aforesaid mixture, and it will
presently sublime in a silver fume, into the recipient, which being settled, put
in more, and so do till you have enough Take out the flowers, and digest them
in the best alcholizated Spirit of Wine, that thereby the tincture may be
extracted, which will be green.

A green Oil of Silver.
Take of the abovesaid crystals of silver one part, of Spirit of salt armoniack
two or three parts, digest them together in a glass with a long neck, well
stopped, twelve or fourteen days, so will the spirit of salt armoniack be
colored with a very specious blew color, pour it off, and filter it, then put
it into a small Retort, and draw off most of the Spirit of armoniack, and there
will remain in the bottom a grass-green Liquor. Then draw off all the Spirit,
and there will remain in the bottom a salt, which may be purified with Spirit
of Wine, or be put into a Retort, and then there will distill off a subtle
Spirit, and a sharp Oil.

This green Liquor is of great use for the gilding of all things presently.

If you take common rainwater distilled, and dissolve, and digest the
aforesaid crystals of silver for a few days, you shall after the appearance of
diverse colors find an essence at the bottom, not so bitter as the former, but
sweet, and in this Liquor may all metals in a gentle heat by long digestion be
maturated, and made fit for medicine; but note that they must first be reduced
into salts, for then they are no more dead bodies, but by this preparation have
obtained a new life, and are the metals of Philosophers.

To make Oil of Silver per deliquium.
Take of the aforesaid salts, or crystals of silver, and reverberate them in a
very gentle fire, then put them into a cellar on a marble stone, and they will
in two months time be resolved into a Liquor.

To make a Liquor of Silver, that shall make the glass wherein it is so
exceeding cold, that no man is able for the coldness thereof to hold it in bis
hand any long time.
Take the aforesaid salt of silver, pour upon it the spirit of salt armoniack
and dissolve it thoroughly, and it will do as abovesaid.

With a glass being full of this Liquor you may condense the air into water
in the h^at of the summer, as also freeze water.

To make silver as white as snow.
Take of the calx of silver made by the dissolution of it in aqua fortis,
dulcifie it, and boil it in a Lixivium made of sopeashes, and it will be as
white as any snow.

To make the silver tree of the Philosophers.
Take four ounces of aqua fortis; in which dissolve an ounce of fine silver,
then take two ounces of aqua fortis in which is dissolved half an ounce of
argent vive, mix these two Liquors together in a clear glass with a pint of
pure water, stop the glass very close, and you shall see day after day a tree
to grow by little and little, which is wonderful pleasant to behold.

I Have set down several vulgar preparations of gold and silver, and of almost
all things else, I shall now crave leave to give an account of some
philosophical preparations of the Philosophers gold and silver. For indeed the
Art of preparing of them is the true Alchymie, in comparison of which all the
Chymicall discoveries are but abortives, and found out by accident, viz. by
endeavoring after this. I would not have the world believe that I pretend to
the understanding of them, yet I would have them know that I am not incredulous
as touching the possibility of that great philosophical work which many have
so much labored after, and many have found. To me there is nothing in the
world seems more possible, and whosoever shall without prejudice read over the
Book entitled the New Light of Alchymie, shall almost whether he will or no
(unless he resolves not to believe any thing though never so credible) be
convinced of the possibility of it. What unworthiness God saw in gold more
then in other things, that he should deny the seed of multiplication (which is
the perfection of the creatures) to it, and give it to all things besides,
seems to me to be a question as hard to be resolved, yea, and harder then the
finding out the Elixir it self, in the discovering of which the great^st
difficulty is, not to be convinced of the easiness thereof. If the
preparations were difficult many more would find it out then do (says
Sandiv^gius) for they cast themselves upon most difficult operations and are
very ^ubtle in difficult discoveries which the Philosophers never dr^a^ed of.
Nay says the aforesaid author, if Herme^ himself were now living, together
with the ^ubtle-witted Geb^n, and most pro^ound Fa^mund Lullie, the would be
accounted by our Chemists not for Philosophers, but rather for learners. They
were ignorant of those so many distillations, so many circulations, so many
calcinations, and so many other innumerable operations of Artists now a days
used, which indeed men of this age did find out and inve^^ed out of their
books. Yet there is one thing wanting to us which they did, viz. to know how to
make the philosophers stone, or physical tincture, the processes of which
according to some philosophers are these.

The process of the Elixir according to Paracelsus.
TAke the mineral Electrum being immature, and made very subtle, put it into
its own sphere, that the impurities, and superfluiries may be washed away,
then purge it as much as possibly you can with Stibium after the Alchymisticall
way, lest by its impurity thou suffer prejudice. Then resolve it in the stomach
of an Estridge, which is brought forth in the earth, and through the sharpness
of the Eagle is confortated in its virtue.

Now when the Electrum is consumed, and has after its solution received the
color of a Mary-gold, do not forget to reduce it into a spiritual
transparent essence, which is like to true Amber, then add half so much, as
the Electrum did weigh before its preparation, of the extended Eagle, and
oftentimes abstract from it the stomach of the Estridge, and by this means the
Electrum will be made more spiritual. Now when the stomach of the Estridge is
wearied with labor, it will be necessary to refresh it and always to abstract
it. Lastly, when it has again lost its sharpness add the tartarizated
qu^ntessence, yet so that it be spoiled of its redness the height of four
fingers, and that pass over with it. This do so often till it be of it self
white, and when it is enough, and thou see that sign, sublime it. So will
the Electrum be converted into the whiteness of an exalted Eagle, and with a
little more labor be transmuted into deep redness, and then it is fit for
medicine.

The process of the Elixir according to Divi Leschi Genus Amo.
TAke of o^r earth through eleaven degrees, eleaven grains, of our gold, and
not of the vulgar, one grain, of our lune, not of the vulgar, grains two; but
be thou admonished that thou take not the gold, and silver of the vulgar, for
they are dead, but take ours which are living, then put them into our fire, and
there will thence be made a dry Liquor: First the earth will be resolved into
water, which is called the Mercury of Philosophers, and in that water it will
resolve the bodies of the Sun, and Moon, and consume them that there remain
but the tenth part, with one part, and this will be the Humidum Radicale
Metallicum. Then take the water of the salt Nitre of our earth, in which there
is a living stream if thou diggest the pit knee deep, take therefore the water
of it, but take it clear, and set over it that Humidum Radicale, and put it
over the fire of putrefaction and generation, but not such as was that in the
first operation. Govern all things with a great deal of discretion, until
there appear colors like to the tail of a Peacock, govern it by digesting of
it, and be not weary, till these colors cease, and there appear throughout
the whole, a green color, and so of the rest, and when thou shall see in the
bottom, ashes of a fiery color, and the water almost red, open the vessel,
dip in a feather, and smeere over some iron with it, if it tinge, have in
readiness that water which is the menstruum of the world (out of the sphere of
the Moon so often rectified, until it can calcine gold) put in so much of
that water as was the cold air, which went in, boil it again with the former
fire until it tinge again.

The process of the Philosophers stone according to Pontanus.
TAke the matter, and grind it with a physical contrition, as diligently as
may be, then set it upon the fire* and let the proportion of fire be known,
viz. that it only stir up the ma^ter, and in a short time, that fire without
any other laying on of hands, will accomplish the whole work, because it will
putrefie, corrupt, generate, and perfect, and make to appear the three
principal colors, black, white, and red: And by the means of our fire, the
medicine will be multiplied, if it be joined with the crude matter, not only in
quantity but also in virtue. Withal they might therefore search out this fire
(which is mineral, equal, continual, vapors not away, except it be too much
stirred up; partakes of sulphur, is taken from elsewhere then from the matter;
pulle^h down all things, dissolveth, congealeth, and calcines, and is
artificial to find out, and that by a compendious, and near way, without any
cost, at least very small, is not transmuted with the matter, because it is not
of the matter) and thou shall attain thy wish, because it does the whole work,
and is the key of the Philosophers, which they never revealed.

The Smaragdine table of Hermes from whence all Alchymie did arise.
TRue, without all falsity; certain, and most true. That which is inferior is
as that which is superior; and that which is superior is as that which is
inferior, for the accomplishing of the miracles of one thing. And as all
things were from one, by the mediation of one, so all things have proceeded
from this one thing by adaptation. The Father therefore is the Sun, and the
Mother thereof the Moon; the wind carried it in its belly; The Nurse thereof is
the earth.

The father of all the perfection of the whole world is this: The virtue
thereof is entire, if it be turned into earth. Thou shall separate the earth
from the fire, the subtle from the thick, sweetly, with a great deal of
judgment. It ascends from the earth up to heaven, and again descends down to
the earth, and receives the powers of superiors, and inferiors. So thou have
the glory of the whole world: Therefore let all obscurity fly from thee. This
is the strong fortitude of the whole fortitude, because it shall overcome every
thing that is subtle, and penetrate every solid thing, as the world is created:
Hence shall wonderful adaptations be, whereof this is the manner, wherefore I
am called Hermes Trismegistus, having three parts of the philosophy of the
whole world. It is complete, what I have spoken of the operation of the Sun.

FINIS.
THE London-Distiller, Exactly and truly showing the way (in words at length
and not in mystesterious CHARACTERS and FIGURES) to draw all SORTS OF SPIRITS
AND STRONG WATER: To which is added their Virtues, with Additions of many
Excellent WATERS.

LONDON, Printed by E. Cotes, for Thomas Williams, at the Sign of the Bible in
Little-Britain, 1652.

THE DISTILLER OF LONDON: OR, Rules and Directions for extracting and drawing
of Low-Wines and Spirits, to be redistilled into Rich-Spirits, Strong Water,
or Aqua-vitae.
WHereas some of the Professors of Distillation, in and about London, have
heretofore usually drawn Strong waters, and Aqua vitae, etc. out of Wines, Low
wines, and Small Spirits, etc. by one alone immediate extraction, operation, or
distillation, (contrary to the most approved form of working in this our Art)
and have been so opinionated of their own hereditary erroneous ways, that they
have esteemed the manner and order here taught, to be altogether unnecessary
and improvident, in that there is here required Redistillation, which they have
ever thought to be superfluous: Not considering, that what they save by their
seeming thrift, they lose double in the excellency of their Wares, and
otherwise. Wherefore that such may not only acquit themselves of an aspersion
of ignorance (not undeservedly cast upon them) but also vindicate both their
own, and the Companies reputation, for time to come: The directions following
are henceforth by them and every Member of the Company, and their Successors,
duly and exactly to be observed and practiced from time to time for ever
hereafter.

That all Wines, Lees of Wines, Low Wines, and Spirits, under proof whatsoever
(intended for making of rich or high Spirits, Strong Waters, or Aqua vitae,
etc.) be first distilled, extracted, or drawn into strong Proof-Spirit, where^y
they may be corrected and cured of their natural, harsh, distasteful, unsavory,
or evil qualities, before they be compounded with ingredients, or extracted and
drawn into rich or high Spirits, Strong waters, or Aqua vitae; according to
Art, and as is required in the ensuing Rules.

And because many gross absurdities have been frequently practiced in
adulterating some, and abusing others, of the materials used in Distillation,
and otherwise by Distillers, by such as only respect their own particular gain
regarding neither the profit or credit of Distillers that have been
necessitated to make use of such their il-conditioned Wares: Wherefore that
these grievances may be removed for time to come, the Directions following are
strictly to be observed and practiced by all the Members of this Company and
their Successors, from time to time for ever.

That no Afterworts or Wash (made by Brewers, etc.) called Blew John, nor
musty, unsavory, or unwholesome Tilts, or Dregs of Beer or Ale; nor unwholesome
or adulterated Wines, or Lees of Wines; nor unwholesome Sugar waters; musty,
unsavory, or unwholesome returned Beer or Ale; nor rotten, corrupt, or unsavory
Fruits, Drugs, Spices, Herbs, Seeds, nor any other il-conditioned materials of
what kind soever, shall henceforth be distilled, extracted, or drawn into Small
Spirits, or Low Wines, or be any other ways used, directly or indirectly, by
any the Members of this Company, or their Successors, at any time hereafter for
ever.

And whereas of late times the Small Spirits or Low Wines, made and sold, as
well in and about London, as elsewhere in this Commonwealth, have been
generally complained of, for their mean, weak, and poor condition; whereby many
inconveniences have fallen upon most of the Distillers in general; And that not
through the alone practices of such, as have no just title to, or interest in
this incorporation; but even by some of the Distillers themselves, who
(notwithstanding their pretenses of being necessitated thereunto) have justly
deserved reproof, for yielding to be Actors in a thing of such ill consequence
to Distillers in general. Wherefore, that those abuses and disorders may now be
taken away, and the like prevented for time to come, the ensuing Rule is duly
to be observed and practiced.

That no Small spirits, or Low wines, shall henceforth be distilled, extracted,
or made, and be allowed to be sold, put to sale, or used by any of the Members
of the Company, or their Successors: but such only, as out of which, by one
alone redistillation, extraction, or operation, may be produced in quantity, at
least one third part thereof, of good strong Proof-spirit, such as is required
in the Rules ensuing, for making rich, or high Spirits, Strong waters, or Aqua
vitae, etc. under such pains, penalties, and punishments, as by the Laws of the
Commonwealth, Ordinances, or Orders of the Company, or otherwise, may be
imposed or inflicted on the contemners, neglecters, or opposers of these
Directions.

Rules and Directions for THE COMPANY OF DISTILLERS OF LONDON, in general.
But more especially for such of them, as now do, or hereafter shall make
VINEGARS, etc.
WHereas upon due examination it has plainly appeared, That many insufferable
inconveniences have of late-faln upon this Company, and their Trade, in
general; by reason of the disorderly and abusive expense and employment of
Brewers Afterworts (called Wash;) Insomuch, that thereby not only those of
this Company that have had no hand herein, but even the Distillers themselves
that have been the Delinquents, have intolerably suffered both in their
Reputation and great decay of their Trades, by these their alone inconsiderate
practices. For Reformation of the present disorders and abuses, and future
prevention of the like, these ensuing Admonitions and directions are strictly
to be observed and practiced, viz.

That no Member or Members of this Company, or their Successors, nor any of
them, at any time hereafter, for ever, by any way or means whatsoever (directly
or indirrectly) shall or may, use, dispose, convert or employ, any After-worts
(or Wash, made by the Brewers or others) into Vinegar, Bear-eager, or
Ale-eager, or either of them; or to or for any other use or employment
whatsoever, except only to distill the same into Low wines or Spirits, to be
^edistilled into Proof-spirit for the uses aforesaid, according to the true
intent and meaning of these Directions, as they and every of them respect their
Oaths by them taken (when they were made free, and received into this
Incorporation:) And will undergo the penalties provided, or to be provided, by
the Ordinances of this Company, or otherwise, to be imposed or inflicted on the
Contemners, Neglecters, or Opposers hereof.

Rule I.
PRovide three sweet Tuns (or smaller Casks) place them orderly on Scantlings;
provide good sound white Rape, and such well conditioned liquid Materials as
are proper for this use, what suff^ceth (not musty in any case.) Then number
your Tuns, 1, 2, 3. Fill Tun 1, with Rape within six inches of the Bungue stop
the Bungue with Cork or Wood very close, and let it stand, and in few days it
will gather heat, then being conveniently hot, fill up the vessel within three
inches of top full, with your liquid Materials without Dr^gs: stop it close
again: And at that instant, in like manner as before, fill Tun 2, with Rape,
after a few days, that will be hot as the former was, then finding it
conveniently hot, draw off Tun 1, and put it into Tun 2, and stop both close:
At the present fill Tun 3, with Rape, and order it in every respect, as you did
the former. And when Tuns, 1 and 3, have gathered he^t sufficient, fill up Tun
1, with fresh Liquor (as at first) and draw off Tun 2, and put it into Tun 3,
and so let Tun 2, gather sufficient heat again; Then draw off Tun 1, and put it
into Tun 2. And at that present, you may draw off Tun 3, and put it into a
store Cask; for having passed three times through the Rape, it is thereby
become to be good merchantable Ware.

And so in like order, supply one Vessel from another, till you have finished
your work according to Art.

When all your liquid Materials are spent, so that you have no more to continue
your work, then be sure your Tuns stand near full, til you are provided of more
Liquor, to put upon your Rape; for if your Rape (standing dry) should wax hot,
you having nothing proper to supply the same, your Rape will soon decay, and be
utterly spoiled.

In Summer or warm weather, the Rape will gather sufficient heat in two or
three days; but in Winter it will require more time.

Rule II.
TAke 20 Quarters of good sound Malt, convert it into 100 Barrels of good
serviceable Ware (at the most) you must allow to this quantity, good sweet Hops
at least 56 pound. And being well wrought according to Art, put it into sweet
Cask (Sweet-Oyl-Buts are best) fill them within 8 inches of the Bungues (being
laid upon Scantlings in the Sun) let not the Head work over at the Bungues, and
it will sink to the bottom. Prepare little covers of wood fit to cover the
Bungues, and larger covers to lay over them, to defend it from Rain falling
into the Cask. Let the Bungues stand open only, when the Sun shines hot upon
the Cask; but in close or wet weather and nights, let both covers be always
kept on.

When the first Head of the Liquor is fallen, then draw it from the Lee, into
another clean sweet Cask; and so afterward from Cask to Cask, as there shall be
cause, till it come to perfection: Then draw it off into another sound Cask,
and so house it for use.

The largest Cask are the fittest to house, and keep Wares in for store.

If your Wares grow long and ropy, then put a fit quantity of Alum into it,
work it well together according to Art, and it will grow short again.

THE DISTILLER OF LONDON: OR, Rules and Directions for Preparing, Composing,
Distilling, Extracting, and making of rich Spirits, Strong Water, Aqua Vitaes,
etc.
CHAP. I.
Of Aqua vitae, the first sort,
The greater quantity.
TAke strong Proof spirit 10 Gallons, Aniseeds bruised 1 pound, Distill them
into strong Proof Spirit according to Art.

The lesser quantity.
Take strong Proof spirit 1 gallon, Aniseeds bruised 1 ounce 4 drams, distill
them into strong Proof spirit according to Art.

CHAP. II.
Aqua vitae, the second sort.
The greater quantity.
Take strong Proof spirit what suffices, Aniseeds 2 pound, Carraway seeds
Coriander seeds and 4 ounces. Distill them into strong Proof spirit according to
Art.

The lesser quantity.
Take strong Proof spirit 1 gallon, Aniseeds 3 ounces and a quarter, Caraway
seeds Coriander seeds three drams. distill them into strong Proof spirit
according to Art.

CHAP. III.
Of Aniseed Water.
The greater quantity.
Take strong Proof spirit 10 gallons, Aniseeds the best bruised five pound,
distill them into strong Proof spirit; dulcifie it according to Art with five
pound of white Sugar.

The lesser quantity.
Take strong Proof spirit what suffices, Aniseeds the best bruised 8 ounces,
distill them into strong Proof spirit, dulcifie it according to Art with 8
ounces of white Sugar.

Aniseed water strengthens the Stomach, breaks phlegm, and helps digestion.

It is also excellent agaiust the Tisick, and shortness of breath; and against
wind in the Stomach and Body.

CHAP. IV.
Of Angelica Water.
The greater quantity.
Take strong Proof spirit what suffices; Angelica roots a pound and a half or
Angelica herb green 7 pound and a half, Aniseeds 16 ounces, flice the roots
thin, or bruise them and the seeds, distill them into strong Proof spirit;
dulcifie with 5 pound of white Sugar.

The lesser quantity.
Take strong Proof spirit 8 pound, Angelica roots 2 ounces and a quarter; or
Angelica herb green 12 ounces, Aniseeds 1 ounce 5 drams, Slice the roots thin,
or bruise them and the seeds, distill them into strong Proof spirit, dulcifie
with 8 ounces of Sugar.

Angelica water is very cordial, strengthens the Stomach and inw^rd parts:
and is a good Preservative against the plague and other infections.

CHAP. V.
Of Wormwood Water.
The greater quantity.
Take strong Proof spirit 10 gallons, Aniseeds bruised one pound, Wormwood
common, leaves and seeds, stripped, and dry 2 pound, distill them into strong
Proof spirit according to Art; dulcifie with white Sugar 5 pound.

The lesser quantity.
Take strong Proof spirit what suffices, Aniseeds bruised 1 ounce and 5 drams,
Wormwood common, leaves and seeds stripped, and dry 3 ounces and an half, distill
them into strong Proof spirit according to Art, dulcifie with white Sugar half
a pound.

Wormwood water consumes and breaks Windel, kills Worms, hinders
Vomiting, provokes appetite, and strengthens the stomach.

It is also a great Cordial, and is very good against pains of the head
proceeding of a cold cause.

CHAP. VI.
Of Balm Water.
The greater quantity.
Take strong Proof spirit what suffices, Herb balm dry ^3 pound, Aniseeds 1
pound; distill them into strong Proof spirit according to Art; dulcifie with
white sugar what suffices.

The lesser quantity.
Take strong Proof spirit 8 pound Herb, balm dry 4 ounces and an half,
Aniseeds 1 ounce 5 drams, distill them into strong Proof spirit according to
Art, dulcifie with white Sugar eight ounces.

Balm water is good against the infirmities of the Mother, and is very
comfortable for women in the time of their pains to take a little of it, for
the sooner and safer provoking of a speedy delivery.

It is also a Cordial and strengthens the heart.

CHAP. VII.
Of Mint Water.
The greater quantity.
Take strong Proof spirit 10 gallons, Spear Mint dry 3 pound, Aniseeds best 1
pound, distill them into strong Proof spirit; dulcifie with white Sugar 5 pound.

The lesser quantity.
Take strong Proof spirit what suffices, Spear Mint dry 4 ounces and 3
quarters, Aniseed 1 ounce and 5 drams, distill them into strong Proof spirit,
dulcifie with white sugar what suffices.

Mint water comferteth and strengthens the Stomach, Heart, Liver, and Spleen,
helps coneoction and is good against vomiting.

CHAP. VIII.
Of Rosemary Water.
The greater quantity.
Take strong Proof spirit what suffices, Rosemary stripped and dry 30 ounces,
Aniseeds of the best 16 ounces, distill them in to strong Proof spirit, dulcifie
with white Sugar what suffices.

The lesser quantity.
Take strong Proof spirit 8 pound, Rosemary stripped and dry 3 ounces, Aniseeds
of the best 1 ounce 5 drams, distill them into strong Proof spirit, dulcifie
with white Sugar 8 ounces.

Rosemary water is very good against Dys^ntery or Bloody Flux, proceeding of a
cold cause, either drunk or three spoonfuls thereof administered in a convenient
Glister.

It also preserves from vomiting, strengthens the Stomach, quickneth the
Sight, and comfort the Brain.

CHAP. IX.
Of Limon, or Orange Water.
The greater quantity.
Take strong Proof spirit what suffices, Limon or Orange pills dry 30 ounces,
Aniseeds of the best 16 ounces, bruise the pills and seeds; distill them into
strong Proof spirit according to Art, dulcifie with white Sugar 5 pound.

The lesser quantity.
Take strong Proof spirit 1 gallon, Limon or Orange pills dry 3 ounces, Aniseeds
of the best 1 ounce 5 drams, bruise the pills and seeds, distill them into strong
Proof spirit according to Art, dulcifie with white Sugar 8 ounces.

Limon watter strengthens and reviveth the feeble Spirits aromatizeth the
Stomach, and is a great Cordial.

It also opens obstructions, exceedingly breaks wind in the Stomach, is as
an healing Balsam to all the inward parts, and is a great Restorative to man's
Nature.

CHAP. X.
Of Stomach Water the less.
The greater quantity.
Take strong Proof spirit what suffices, Spear Mint, dry, Lovage roots dry,
Aniseeds of each 1 pound, Calamus Aromaticus, Ginger, Sweet Fennel seeds,
Imperatoria roots, Wormwood dry and stripped, of each 8 ounces, Carraway
Coriander seeds, of each 6 ounces.
Cummin seeds Cloves of each three ounces,

Bruise them that are to be bruised; distill them into strong Proof spirit
according to Art; dulcifie with white sugar 5 pound.

The lesser quantity.
Take strong Proof spirit 8 pound, Spear Mints dry, Lovage roots dry, Aniseeds,
of each 1 ounce 5 drams; Calamus Aromaticus, Ginger, Sweet Fennel seeds,
Imperatoria roots, Wormwood dry and stripped, of each 7 drams, Caraway Coriander
seeds of each 5 drams,
Cummin seeds Cloves of each 2 drams and an half,

Bruise them that are to be bruised, distill them into strong Proof spirit
according to Art, dulcifie with white Sugar 8 ounces.

CHAP. XI.
Stomach Water the greater.
The greater quantity.
Take strong Proof spirit 10 gallons, Calamus Aromaticus 6 ounces, Guaiacum
green Bark, Avens Roots dry, Galingale of each 4 ounces, Citron pills dry,
Orange pills dry, White Cinnamon of each 3 ounces; Wormwood Common dry, Wormwood
Roman dry, Spear Mint, Rosemary tops, Costmary, Sweet Marjoram, Wild Thyme, all
dry of each 2 ounces.

Nutmegs Cinnamon of each 2 ounces and an half.
Cubebs Cardamums of each 1 ounce and an half.

Sweet Fennel seeds, Coriander seeds, of each 5 ounces; Aniseeds a pound and
half; bruise them all that are to be bruised; Distill them into strong Proof
spirit, Dulcifie with white Sugar ten pound according to Art.

The lesser quantity.
Take strong Proof spirit what suffices, Calamus Aromaticus 5 drams, Guaiacum,
green Bark, Avens roots dry, Galingale of each 4 ounces, Citron pills dry,
Orange pills dry, White Cinnamon of each 3 drams and a quarter, Wormwood Common
dry, Wormwood Roman dry, Spear Mint Rosemary tops, Costmary, Sweet Marjoram,
Wild Thyme, all dry, of each a dram and half, Nutmegs Cinnamon of each 2 drams,
Cubebs Cardamums of each a dram and a quarter,

sweet Fennel seeds, Coriander seeds, of each half an ounce, Aniseeds 2 ounces
3 drams, Bruise them all that are to be bruised, distill them into strong Proof
spirit, Dulcifie with white Sugar 16 ounces, according to Art.

CHAP. XII.
Marjoram Water.
The greater quantity.
Take strong Proof spirit what suffices, Sweet Marjoram dry 3 pound, Aniseeds
16 ounces, Caraway 4 ounces, Calamus Aromaticus 6 ounces, bruise them, distill
and dulcifie with white Sugar what suffices according to Art.

The lesser quantity.
Take strong Proof spirit 1 gallon, Sweet Marjoram dry 5 ounces, Aniseeds 1
ounce 5 drams, Caraway 3 drams and a quarter, Calamus Aromaticus 5 drams,
bruise them, distill and dulcifie with white Sugar 8 ounces according to Art.

Marjoram water is good against the infirmities of the Liver and Spleen,
causes freeness of breathing, and strengthens the Stomach and inward parts.

CHAP. XIII.
Vsquebach.
The greater quantity.
Take strong Proof spirit 10 gallons, Aniseeds 1 pound, Cloves 2 ounces,
Nutmeg, Ginger, Caraway seeds of each four ounces: distill them into strong
proof Spirit according to Art. Then add to the distilled water Licorice
Spanish, Raifins solis of each 2 pound, bruise the Licorice and Raisins;
dulcifie with brown Sugar 5 pound, stir them well together, and so let it stand
ten days, and then (being fine) draw it off and keep it for use.

The lesser quantity.
Take strong Proof spirit what suffices, Aniseeds 1 ounce 5 drams, Cloves a
dram and half, Nutmeg, Ginger, Caraway seeds of each 3 drams, distill them into
strong Proof spirit according to Art; then add to the distilled water Licorice
Spanish, Raisins solis, of each 3 ounces a dram and half, bruise the Licorice
and Raisins, dulcifie with brown Sugar 8 ounces, stir them well together, and
so let it stand ten days, and then (being fine) draw it off and keep it for
use.

Vsquebach cures the infirmities of the lungs, warmerh the Stomach, and
causes expectoration.

CHAP. XIV.
Balsamint Water.
The greater quantity.
Take strong proof Spirit what suffices, Balsamint dry two pound, Aniseeds
best 1 pound, Caraway seeds 4 ounc^s, Limon pills dry 8 ounces, bruise them that
are to be bruised, distill them into Proof spirit, Dulcifie with white Sugar 5
pound according to Art.

The lesser quantity.
Take strong Proof spirit 1 gallon, Balsamint dry 3 ounces a dram and half,
Aniseeds best one ounce 5 drams, Caraway seeds 3 drams, Limon pills dry 6 drams
and an half, bruise them that are to be bruised, distill them into Proof spirit,
dulcifie with white Sugar 8 ounces according to Art.

Balsamint water comfort the Stomach and expels wind.

CHAP. XV.
Rosa solis.
The greater quantity.
Take strong Proof spirit 10 gallons, Cinnamon of the best 8 ounces, Cloves 2
ounces, Nutmegs, Ginger, Caraway seeds, of each 4 ounces, Marigold flowers,
Aniseeds, of each 16 ounces, bruise them, distill them into strong Proof spirit
according to Art; then add to the distilled water Licorice Spanish 1 pound,
Raisins solis, Brown Sugar, of each 5 pound, Red Sanders four ounces, bruise
che Licorice and Raisins, stir them well together, and let them stand 12 days,
then being clear it may be drawn for use.

The lesser quantity.
Take strong Proof spirit what suffices, Cinnamon of the best 6 drams and an
half, Cloves a dram and half, Nutmegs, Ginger, Caraway seeds of each 3 drams,
Marigold flowers, Aniseeds, of each 1 ounce and 5 drams, bruise them, distill
them into strong Proof spirit according to Art, then add to the distilled
water Licorice Spanish an ounce 5 drams, Raisins solis, Brown Sugar, of each 8
ounces, Red Sanders 3 drams, bruise the Licorice and Raisins, stir them well
together, and let them stand twelve days, then being clear it may be drawn
for use.

This Rosasolis is good against cold infirmities of the Stomach, helps
digestion and expels wind.

CHAP. XVI.
Clove Water.
The greater quantity.
Take strong Proof spirit what suffices, Cloves of the best 10 ounces,
Aniseeds 16 ounces, distill them into strong Proof spirit, dulcifie with white
Sugar 5 pound.

The lesser quantity.
Take strong Proof spirit 1 gallon, Cloves of the best 1 ounce Aniseeds 1 ounce
and 5 drams, distill them into strong Proof spirit, dulcifie with white Sugar 8
ounces.

Clove water helps digestion, breaks wind, provokes Urine, comfort the
Heart, and strengthens the Stomach, Liver and all the inward parts.

CHAP. XVII.
Cinnamon Water Common.
The greater quantity.
Take strong Proof spirit 10 gallons, Cinnamon of the best 5 pound, Aniseeds 10
ounces, distill them into Proof spirit according to Art, dulcifie with white
Sugar 7 pound and a half.

The lesser quantity.
Take strong Proof spirit what suffices, Cinnamon of the best 8 ounces,
Aniseeds 1 ounce, distill them into Proof spirit according to Art, dulcifie with
white Sugar 12 ounces.

CHAP. XVIII.
Cinnamon water Proper.
The greater quantity.
Take strong Proof spirit what suffices, Cinnamon best large ten pounds, distill
them into Proof spirit according to Art, take white Sugar 12 pound and an half,
Rose water four pound, make them into a Syrup, and dulcifie therewith according
to Art.

The lesser quantity.
Take strong Proof spirit 1 gallon, Cinnamon best large 16 ounces, distill them
into Proof spirit according to Art, take white Sugar 20 ounces, Rose water 6
ounces 3 drams, make them into Syrup, and dulcifie therewith according Art.

Cinnamon water is good against loathing of the Stomach, and a stinking breath.

It also strengthens the Heart, Liver, Lungs, and Spleen, and comfort the
Brain and Sinews.

CHAP. XIX.
Sweet Fennel seed Water.
The greater quantity.
Take strong Proof spirit 10 gallons, sweet Fennel seeds five pound, Caraway
seeds 4 ounces, Aniseeds 16 ounces, distill them into Proof spirit, dulcifie
with white Sugar 5 pound.

The lesser quantity.
Take strong Proof spirit what suffices, Sweet Fennel seeds 8 ounces, Caraway
seeds 3 drams, Aniseeds an ounce and five drams, distill them into Proof spirit,
dulcifie with white Sugar 8 ounces.

Fennel water is good against the naseousnesse of the Stomach, and eases the
pain thereof; digesteth Phlegm and expels Wind.

CHAP. XX.
Marigold Water.
The greater quantity.
Take strong Proof spirit what suffices, Marigold flowers new gathered, picked
clean, 2 pecks heaped, bruise them, Sweet Fennel seeds, Aniseeds, of each 10
ounces, distill them into strong Proof spirit, dulcifie with white Sugar five
pound.

The lesser quantity.
Take strong Proof spirit 1 gallon, Marigold flowers new gathered, picked clean,
what suffices, bruise them, Sweet Fennel seeds, Aniseeds of each 1 ounce,
distill them into strong Proof spirit, dulcifie with white Sugar 8 ounces.

Marigold water comfort the inward parts, and is good against infection.

CHAP. XXI.
Caraway Water.
The greater quantity.
Take strong Proof spirit 10 gallons, Caraway seeds 30 ounces, Aniseeds 10
ounces, Rosemary dry 4 ounces, Limon pills dry, Cloves of each 3 ounces, distill
them into Proof spirit according to Art, dulcifie with white Sugar five pound.

The lesser quantity.
Take strong Proof spirit what suffices, Caraway seeds three ounces, Aniseeds
1 ounce, Rosemary dry 3 drams, Limon pills dry, Cloves of each 2 drams and an
half, distill them into Proof spirit according to Art, dulcifie with white Sugar
8 ounces.

Caraway water is profitable against the cold grief of the Stomach, and Bowels,
comfort them and breaks wind.

CHAP. XXII.
Nutmeg Water.
The greater quantity.
Take strong Proof spirit what suffices, Nutmeg 20 ounces, Aniseeds 10 ounces,
bruise them, distill them into Proof spirit according to Art, dulcifie with
white Sugar 5 pound.

The lesser quantity.
Take strong Proof spirit 1 gallon, Nutmegs best 2 ounces, Aniseeds 1 ounce;
bruise them, distill them into Proof spirit according to Art, dulcifie with
white Sugar 8 ounces.

Nutmeg water comfort the Spirits, discusseth wind, Aromatizeth the Stomach,
causes a sweet breath, and provokes Urine.

CHAP. XXIII.
Precious Water.
The greater quantity.
Take strong Proof spirit ten gallons, Enula Campana Avens Angelica Cyprus
Calamus Aromaticus Sassafras Roots of each 5 ounces.
Zedoary, Galingale, of each 4 ounces, Cassia lignea, Lignum Rhodium, Yellow
Sander of each 3 ounces, Citron Orange pills dry, of each 6 ounces,

Cinnamon White, Nutmegs, Maces, Ginger, of each 5 oun. Cinnamon best 20 ounces,
Cloves, Cardamums, Cubebs, of each 2 ounces, and an half, Sweet Chervile seeds,
Basil seeds, of each 3 ounces and an half, Coriander seeds, Sweet Fennel seeds
of each ten ounces, Aniseeds 20 ounces, bruise them, distill them into Proof
spirit, and dulcifie with fine Sugar 15 pound according to Art; Let it stand
till it be fine, then draw it off, and add Musk one dram: Ambergreese 4 drams;
then let it clear and draw it for use.

The lesser quantity.
Take strong Proof spirit what suffices, Enula Campana Avens Angelica Cyprus
Calamus Aromaticus Sassafras Roots, of each half an ounce.
Zedoary, Galingale, of each 3 drams, Cassia lignea, Lignum Rhodium, Yellow
Sanders, of each 2 drams and an half, Citron Orange pills dry of each 4 drams
and 3 quarters;

Cinamons White, Nutmegs, Maces, Ginger, of each half an ounce, Cinnamon best 2
ounces, Cloves, Cardamums, Cubebs of each 2 drams, Sweet Chervile seeds, Basil
seeds of each three drams, Coriander seeds, Sweet Fennel seeds, of each 1
ounce, Aniseeds 2 ounces, bruise them, distill them into Proof spirit, and
dulcifie with fine Sugar 24 ounces according to Art, let it stand till it be
fine; then draw it off and add Musk 6 grains, Ambergreese 24 grains; then let
it clear and draw it for use.

Precious water is good against the Plague and Malignant ^eavers: It also
comfort the Spirit, strengthens the Heart preserves the Senses, and
relieveth languishing Nature.

CHAP. XXIV.
Wind Water.
The greater quantity.
Take strong Proof spirit what suffices, Enula Campana roots dry, Aniseeds of
each 1 pound, Cyprus roots, Bark of the roots of Bay tree, or as much leaves,
Sassafras with the Bark, Cinnamon white, of each 6 ounces, Calamus Aromaticus,
Orange pills, dry of each 4 ounces, Clary, Red Mints, Calamint, Elder flowers,
Camomile flowers, of each 5 ounces, Sweet Fennel seeds, Caraway seeds, Angelica
seeds of each 3 ounces and an half, Coriander seeds, Cardamums, Cubebs, Grains
of Paradise, Cloves, Ginger of each 2 ounces and a half, Pepper long and white
of each 10 drams, bruise them all grossly, distill them into strong Proof
spirit according to Art, dulcifie with white Sugar 10 pound, draw it for use
when it is perfectly clear.

The lesser quantity.
Take strong Proof spirit 1 gallon, Enula Campana roots dry, Aniseeds, of each
1 ounce 5 drams, Cyprus roots, Barks of the root of Bay tree, or as much
leaves, Sassafras with the Bark, Cinnamon white, of each 4 drams and 3 quarters,
Calamus Aromaticus, Orange pills dry, of each 3 drams, Clary, Red Mints,
Calamint, Elder flowers, Camomile flowers, of each half an ounce, Sweet Fennel
seeds, Caraway seeds, Angelica seeds, of each 3 drams, Coriander seeds,
Cardamums, Cubebs, Grains of Paradise, Cloves, Ginger, of each 2 drams, Pepper
long and white, of each 1 dram, bruise them all grossly, distill them into
strong Proof spirit according to Art, dulcifie with white Sugar 16 ounces, draw
it for use when it is perfectly clear.

CHAP. XXV.
Water to procure Sweat.
The greater quantity.
Take strong Proof spirit 10 gallons, Butter-bur-roots dry, 2 pound, Valerian,
(common) Roots, Aniseeds, of each one pound, Vincetoxicum roots, Sassafras
roots, with the Bark of each 8 ounces, Angelica herb dry, Carduus Benedictus,
Great Valerian Herb and Roots, all dry; Scordium, of each twelve ounces,
Cowslip

Marigold flowers, of each 10 ounces.
Juniper Berries 20 ounces, bruise them all, distill them into Proof spirit
according to Art; dulcifie with white Sugar ten pound.

The lesser quantity.
Take strong Proof spirit what suffices, Butter-bur-roots dry, 3 ounces a dram
and half, Valerian (common) Roots, Aniseeds, of each 1 ounce 5 drams,
Vincetoxicum roots, Sassafras roots with the Bark, of each 6 drams and a half;
Angelica Herb dry, Carduus Benedictus, Great Valerian Herb and Roots, all
dry, Scordium of each, one ounce a dram and half, Cowslip Marigold flowers, of
each 1 ounce,

Juniper Berries 2 ounces, bruise them all, distill them into Proof spirit
according to Art; dulcifie with white Sugar 16 ounces.

CHAP. XXVI.
Surfeit Water.
The greater quantity.
Take strong Proof spirit what suffices, Juniper berries two pound, Enula
Campana Roots dry 1 pound, Calamus Aromaticus, Galingale, of each 4 ounces,
Wormwood, Spear Mint, Red Mint, all dry, of each 2 ounces and an half, Caraway
seeds, Angelica seeds, of each 2 ounces, Sassafras Roots with the Bark, White
Cinnamon, of each 3 ounces, Nutmegs, Mace, Cloves, Ginger, of each 1 ounce, Red
Ropy flower 4 pound, Aniseeds 2 pound and an half, bruise them all, distill them
into strong Proof spirit, dulcifie with white Sugar 10 pound.

The lesser quantity.
Take strong Proof spirit 1 gallon, Juniper berries 3 ounces a dram and half,
Enula Campana Roots dry 1 ounce 5 drams, Calamus Aromaticus, Galingale, of each
3 drams, Wormwood, Spear Mint, Red Mint, all dry, of each 2 drams; Caraway
seeds, Angelica seeds, of each a dram and a half, Sassafras Roots with the
Bark, White Cinnamon, of each 2 drams and a half, Nutmegs, Mace, Ginger, Cloves,
of each 3 quarters of a dram, Red Poppy flower 6 ounces and a half, Aniseeds 4
ounces, bruise them all, distill them into strong Proof spirit, dulcifie with
white Sugar 16 ounces.

CHAP. XXVII.
Scorbuticall Water.
The greater quantity.
Take strong Proof spirit 10 gallons, Horse Reddish roots dry 2 pound, Enula
Campana roots dry, Aniseeds, of each 1 pound, Water Winter Garden Cresses

Taragon, Balsamint, Scurvigrasse (Garden) Wormwood, Brookelime, Trefoile
(Water) Sweet Chervile, of each 6 ounces, Arsmart 8 ounces, Mustard Bank-cresse
Rocket Reddish seed, of each 3 ounces.
Citron Orange pills dry,

Cinnamon White, Mace, of each 4 ounces: Bruise them all, distill them into
strong Proof spirit according to Art, Dulcifie with white Sugar what suffices;
for use take 7 parts of this Spirit, and 1 part of juice of Limons, (or more)
mingle them together, and dulcifie with white Sugar what suffices.

The lesser quantity.
Take strong Proof spirit what suffices, Horse Reddish roots dry, 3 ounces a
dram and half, Enula Campana roots dry, Aniseeds, of each 1 ounce 5 drams,
Water Winter Garden Cresses,

Tarragon, Balsamint, Scurvygrasse (Garden) Wormwood, Brookelime, Trefoile
(Water) Sweet Chervile, of each half an ounce and three quarters of a dram,
Arsmart three quarters of an ounce and half a dram, Mustard Bank-cresse Rocket
Reddish seeds, of each 2 drams and an half,
Citron Orange pills dry,

Cinnamon White, Mace, of each 3 drams and a quarter, bruise them all, distill
them into strong Proof spirit, according to art, dulcifie with white Sugar 1
pound; for use take 7 parts of this spirit, and 1 part of juice of Limons (or
more) mingle them together, and dulcifie with white Sugar what suffices.

CHAP. XXVIII.
Plague Water.
The greater quantity.
Take strong Proof spirit what suffices, Butter-bur-roots

dry 1 pound, Garden Common Valerian roots dry,
Angelica roots, Imperatoria, Gentian, Enula Campana, Snakegrasse roots, of
each 6 ounces, Contra Yarva, Zedoary, Galingale, of each 4 ounces, Rue leaves
dry, White Horehound, Scordium, Carduus Benedictus, of each 5 ounces, Elder
flowers, Lavender, Maces of each 3 ounces, Citron pills dry, Juniper berries, of
each 8 ounces, Green Walnuts with the husks 1 pound, Venus Triacle, Mithridate,
of each 2 ounces, Aniseeds best a pound and half; Camphire 1 ounce; distill them
into strong Proof spirit according to Art, dulcifie with white Sugar 10 pound;
For use, let the party infected take of this water 1 ounce, mingled with warm
Posset drink (or any water proper in that case) and be kept very warm and sweat
well thereon.

The lesser quantity.
Take strong Proof spirit 1 gallon, Butterbur roots dry 1 ounce and 5 drams,
Garden Common Valerian roots dry,

Angelica roots, Imperatoria, Gentian, Enula Campana, Snakegrasse roots, of
each half an ounce and 3 quarters of a dram, Contra Yarva, Zedoary, Galingale,
of each 3 drams and a quarter, Rue leaves dry, White Horehound, Scordium,
Carduus Benedictus, of each half an ounce, Elder flowers, Lavender, Mace, of
each 2 drams and a half, Citron pills dry, Juniper berries, of each 6 drams and
a half, Green Walnuts with the husks 1 ounce 5 drams, Venus Triacle,
Mithridate, of each a dram and half, Aniseeds best 2 ounces 3 drams and a half,
Camphire 3 quarters of a dram, distill them into strong Proof spirit according
to Art, dulcifie with white Sugar what suffices; For use, let the party
infected take of this water 1 ounce mingled with warm posset drink (or any
water proper in that case) and be kept very warm, and sweat well thereon.

CHAP. XXIX.
Lavender Water.
The greater quantity.
Take strong Proof spirit 10 gallons, Lavender leaves dry three pound, Lavender
flowerrs dry 2 pound, Maces half a pound, or Nutmegs 1 pound, Lavender Coffen
dry 2 pound, Stoechados half a pound, bruise them that are to be bruised,
distill them into Proof spirit according to Art, dulcifie with white Sugar what
suffices.

The lesser quantity.
Take strong Proof spirit what suffices, Lavender leaves dry, 4 ounces 3
quarters and half a dram, Lavender flowers dry, 3 ounces a dram and half, Mace
6 drams and a half, Nutmeg one ounce, 5 drams, Lavender Cotton dry 3 ounces a
dram and half, Stoechados 6 drams and a half, bruise them that are to be
bruised, distill them into proof Spirit according to Art, dulcifie with white
Sugar 16 ounces.

Lavender water helps the passions of the Heart, Palsies, Cramps, Apoplexies,
and restores the speech lost.

CHAP. XXX.
Sage Water.
The greater quantity.
Take strong Proof spirit what suffices, Great Sage dry 3 pound, Red Sage dry
2 pound, Lavender flowers, Sage flowers, of each 1 pound, Lavender Cotton dry,
Southernwood dry, of each 8 ounces, Nutmegs ten ounces; Bruise or beat them as
is most proper, distill them into Proof spirit according to Art, dulcifie with
white Sugar what suffices.

The lesser quantity.
Take strong Proof spirit 1 gallon, Great Sage dry 4 ounces 3 quarters and half
a dram, Red Sage dry 3 ounces a dram and a half, Lavender flowers, Sage
flowers, of each 1 ounce a half and 1 dram, Lavender Cotton dry, Southern wood
dry, of each 6 drams and a half, Nutmegs what suffices; Bruise or beat them as
is most proper, distill them into Proof spirit according to Art, dulcifie with
white Sugar 16 ounces.

Sage wattr is good for such as are of a cold and phlegmatic constitution, and
for such as are heavy and dull of spirit.

CHAP. XXXI.
Ros solis Proper.
The greater quantity.
Take strong Proof spirit 10 gallons, Ros solis gathered in due season, and
clean picked, 4 pound, Juniper berries 3 pound, Sassafras rooted with the Bark,
Caraway seeds, of each four ounces, Marigold flowers 1 pound, Aniseeds 1 pound
and an half, Bruise them that are to be bruised, distill them into strong Proof
spirit according to Art; Take hereof 7 pound, add thereto 1 pound of water
treated of in the 23 Chapter dulcified Licorice bruised one pound, dulcifie
with white Sugar ten pound: If you add none of the aforesaid water, then in
stead thereof take Musk 1 dram, Ambergreese 3 drams, color it with the
tincture of July flower, or Roses what suffices according to Art.

The lesser quantity.
Take strong Proof spirit what suffices, Ros solis gathered in due season, and
clean picked, six ounces 3 drams and a quarter, Juniper berries 4 ounces 6 drams
and a half, Sassafras roots with the Bark, Caraway seeds, of each 3 drams and a
quarter, Marigold flowers 1 ounce a half and 1 dram, Aniseeds 2 ounces 3 drams
and a half, Bruise them that are to be bruised, distill them into strong Proof
spirit according to Art; Take hereof ten ounces 1 dram and a half, add thereto
1 ounce 5 drams of water treated of in the 23 Chapter dulcified. Licorice
bruised 1 ounce 5 drams, dulcifie with white sugar what suffices, If you add
none of the aforesaid water, then in stead thereof, take Musk six grains,
Ambergreese 18 grains; color it with the tincture of July flower, or Roses
what suffices, according to Art.

Ros so^^s proper, opens obstruction, relieveth decaying Nature, comfort
the Stomach, quickneth Appetite, and is good against the Falling sickness.

CHAP. XXXII.
Water of Flower.
The great quantity.
Take strong Proof spirit what suffices, and put it into a wide mouthed Pot,
(or other Vessel) stopped very close; Take those several flowers following in
their seasons, and being clean picked, put them to the spirit in the Pot, viz.
Cowslips, Wood bine, Stock gilly flower of all three sorts, Damask Musk Roses,
Sweet Brier flowers, Clove July flowers, Llilium Convallium, Jasmine, Citron
Orange flowers, or pills dry,
Tillia Flowers, Garden Limon Wild Thyme flowers,
Lavender Marigold Chamomile Mellilot Elder Flowers, of each half a pound,

Being furnished with all your flowers as above, when you would distill them,
add to them Aniseeds 2 pound, Coriander 1 pound, bruise the seeds, It were
best to bruise all the flowers, as you put them up into the spirit, for their
more orderly working, distill them into strong Proof spirit according to Art,
then add to the distilled water Roses, July flowers, Elder flowers of each 1
pound, after twelve days infusion it may be drawn off; then dulcifie it with
white Sugar 10 pound, and being fine it may be drawn for use.

The lesser quantity.
Take strong Proof spirit, 1 gallon; and put it into a wide mouthed pot (or
other vessel) stopped very close; take those several flowers following in their
seasons, and being clean picked, put them to the spirit in the pot: viz.
Cowslips, Wood bine, Stock Gilly flower of the 3 sorts, Damask Musk Roses,
Sweet Brier flowers, Clove July flowers, Lilium Convallium, Jasmine, Citron
Orange flowers, or pills dry,
Tillia flowers, Garden Limon Wild Thyme flowers,
Lavender Marigold Chamomile Mellilot Elder Flowers, of each 6 drams and a half,

Being furnished with all your flowers as above, when you would distill them,
add to them Aniseeds 3 ounces a dram and half, Coriander 1 ounce 5 drams,
bruise the seeds, it were best to bruise all the flowers, as you put them up
into the spirit, for their more orderly working, distill them into strong Proof
spirit according to Art; Then add to the distilled water Roses, July flowers,
Elder flowers, of each 1 ounce 5 drams, after 12 days infusion it may be drawn
off; then dulcifie it with white Sugar 1 pound, and being fine it may be drawn
for use.

CHAP. XXXIII.
Water of Fruits.
The greater quantity.
Take strong Proof spirit 10 gallons, Juniper berries 4 pound, Quince Pipping
parings dry, of each 2 pound,

Limon pills, Orange pills dry, of each 1 pound, Nutmegs four ounces, Aniseeds 2
pound, Cloves 2 ounces, distill them into Proof spirit according to Art, to the
spirit add Strawberries, Raspisses bruised, of each 5 pound, stir them well
together, and after ten days it being clear, may be drawn off; then dulcifie
with syrup made as is hereafter taught, and so let it stand till it be clear,
and then draw it off for use.

The lesser quantity.
Take strong Proof spirit 1 gallon, Juniper berries 6 ounces 3 drams and a
quarter, Quince Pipping parings dry, of each 3 ounces a dram and half,

Limon pills, Orange pills dry, of each 1 ounce 5 drams, Nutmegs 3 drams and a
quarter, Aniseeds 3 ounces a dram and half, Cloves 1 dram and a half, distill
them into Proof spirit according to Art, to the spirit add Strawberries,
Raspisses bruised of each 8 ounces, stir them well together, and after 10
days, it being clear, may be dawn off; then dulcifie it with syrup made as is
hereafter taught, and so let it stand till it be clear, and then draw it off
for use.

CHAP. XXXIV.
Avens Water.
The greater quantity.
Take strong Proof spirit what suffices, Avens roots 4 pound, Orris roots,
Nutmeg Yellow Sanders, Mace, of each 2 ounces, Lignum Rhodium, Saffron, Storax,
Benjamine, of each 1 ounce, Angelica roots 3 ounces, Limon pills green half a
pound, Sweet Fennel seed, Aniseeds, of each 1 pound, Cloves 10 drams, Roman
Wormwood, Mint dry, of each 3 handfuls, Red Roses, Stoechas flowers, of each 4
handfuls, Sweet Marjoram, Balm, Burnet, Thyme, all dry of each 6 handfuls,
Alkermes berries 2 ounces, Bruise them all that are to be bruised, distill them
into Proof spirit according to Art, dulcifie with Syrup^ thus made; Take Rose
water 4 pound, white sugar 10 pound, boil it to a syrup hight, then strain it,
and put it to the fire again, add thereto confection of Alkerms 4 ounces,
Syrup of Gilly flowers 1 pound, Ambergreese (dissolved in Rose water) 1 dram;
and so let these boil a little, till they be incorporated with the Syrup, and
so keep it for use.

The lesser quantity.
Take strong Proof spirit 1 gal. Avens roots 6 ounces 3 drams and a quarter,
Orris roots, Nutmeg Yellow Sanders, Mace of each a dram and half, Lignum
Rhodium, Saffron, Storax, Benjamine of each 3 quarters of a dram, Angelica
roots 2 drams and a half; Limon pills green 6 drams and a half, Sweet Fennel
seeds, Aniseeds, of each 1 ounce 5 drams, Cloves 1 dram, Roman Wormwood, Mint
dry, of each what snfficeth, Red Roses, Stoechas flowers, of each what
suffices, Sweet Marjoram, Balm, Barnet, Thyme, all dry, of each what
suffices, Alkermes berries a dram and half, Bruise them all that are to be
bruised, distill them into Proof spirit according to Art, dulcifie with Syrups
thus made; Take Rose water 6 ouuces 3 drams and quarter White Sugar 1 pound,
boil it to a Syrup hight, then strain it, and put it to the fire again, add
thereto Confection of Alkerms 3 drams and a half, Syrup of Gilly flowers 1
ounce 5 drams, Ambergreese (dissolved in Rose water) 6 grains; and so let these
boil a-little, till they be incorporated with the Syrup, and so keep it for use.

Avens water is a great Cordial, strengthens the Spirit, comfort all the
inward parts, and preserves from Consumptions, and Mesadnesse.

Additions to enrich these precedent Chapters, to which (by Numbers) these are
referred.
Additions to the first and second Chapters.
TAke July flowers, Roses, Poppy and Sanders, or any of them severally, what
suffices; and in^use them in Aqua vitae, or Proof spirit, till the tincture be
be drawn out; then draw off the spirit, and reserve it (close stopped) for use.
When you have occasion to use it, take 8 ounces thereof to 7 pound and a half
of this water, and you will give it a sufficient color, or you may take more
at pleasure without inconveniency.

Additions to the third Chapter.
The greater quantity.
Take Aniseeds, White Sugar, according to Art. of each five pound, or what
suffices.

The lesser quantity.
Take Aniseeds, White Sugar, according to Art. 8 ounces.

Additions to the fourth Chapter.
The greater quantity.
Take Caraway seeds, Coriander seeds, of each 3 ounces, Calamus Aromaticus,
Zedoary, of each 4 ounces, Aniseeds, Cassia lignea, of each 8 ounces, Angelica
Roots 8 ounces, (or Herb Angelica 2 pound) white Sugar 2 pound and half, or
what suffices.

The lesser quantity.
Take Caroway seeds, Coriander seeds, of each 2 drams and a half, Calamus
Aromaticus, Zedoary, of each 3 drams and 3 quarters, Aniseeds, Cassia lignea,
of each 6 drams and a half, Angelica roots 6 drams and a half, or Herb
Angelica 3 ounces a dram and half, White Sugar 4 ounces, or what suffices.

Additions to the fifth Chapter.
The greater quantity.
Take Cinnamon, Cubebs of each 4 ounces, Sweet Fennel seeds, Aniseeds of each 8
ounces, Cloves, Caraway seeds, Nutmegs, of each 3 ounces, Wormwood dry 10
ounces, White Sugar, 2 pound and a half, (or what suffices).

The lesser quantity.
Take Cinnamon, Cubebs, of each three drams and a quarter, Sweet Fennel seeds,
Aniseeds, of each 6 drams and a half, Cloves, Caraway seeds, Nutmegs, of each 2
drams and a half, Wormwood dry 1 ounce, white Sugar 4 ounces, (or what
suffices.)

Additions to the sixth Chapter.
The greater quantity.
Take Garden Thyme, Penny royal, of each 3 handfuls, Cardamums 2 ounces, Sweet
Fennel feeds, Aniseeds, of each eight ounces, Balm dry 1 pound, Nutmeg,
Ginger, Calamus Aromaticus, Galingale, Cinnamon, of each 4 ounces.

The lesser quantity.
Take Garden Thym, Penny royal, of each what suffices, Cardamums a dram and
half, Sweet Fennel seeds, Aniseeds, of each 6 drams and an half, Balm dry 1
ounce 4 drams, Nutmeg, Ginger, Calamus Aromaticus, Galingale, Cinnamon, of each
3 drams and a quarter.

Additions to the seventh Chapter.
The greater quantity.
Take Spear Mint dry, Aniseeds, of each one pound, Calamus Aromaticus 4 ounces,
White Sugar 2 pound and a half.

The lesser quantity.
Take Spear Mint dry, Aniseeds, of each 1 ounce 5 drams, Calamus Aromaticus 3
drams and a quarter, White Sugar 4 ounces.

Additions to the eight Chapter.
The greater quantity.
Take Sweet Fennel seeds, Cinnamon, of each 8 ounces, A^^seeds, Rosemary dry of
each 1 pound, Caraway 2 ounces, Spear Mint dry, 2 handfuls, White Sugar 2 pound
and a half.

The lesser quantity.
Take Sweet Fennel seeds, Cinnamon of each 6 drams and a half, Aniseeds,
Rosemary dry, of each 1 ounce five drams, Caraway 1 dram and a half, Spear Mint
dry what suffices, White Sugar 4 ounces.

Additions to the ninth Chapter.
The greater quantity.
Take Caraway seeds 4 ounces, Aniseeds, Limon pills dry, of each 1 pound, White
Sugar 2 pound and a half, in like manner and quantity make your Composition,
with Orange pills dry according to Art.

The lesser quantity.
Take Caraway seeds 3 drams and 3 quarters, Aniseeds, Limon pills dry, of each 1
ounce 5 drams, White Sugar 4 ounces; In like manner and quantity make your
Composition with Orange pills dry according to Art.

Additions to the twelfth Chapter.
The greater quantity.
Take Cinnamon 5 ounces, Cloves 2 ounces, Limon pills dry 3 ounces, Sugar 2 pound
and a half.

The lesser quantity.
Take Cinnamon half an ounce, Cloves a dram and half, Limon pills dry, 2 drams
and a half, Sugar 4 ounces.

Addition to the fourteenth Chapter.
The greater quantity.
Take Sweet Fennel, Cinnamon, of each 5 ounces, Nutmeg 3 ounces, Sugar 2 pound
and a half.

The lesser quantity.
Take Sweet Fennel, Cinnamon, of each 4 drams, Nutmegs 2 drams and a half,
Sugar 4 ounces.

Additions to the fifteenth Chapter.
Take and add to the spirit half as much as the rule of every particular
Ingredient therein expressed, and in stead of Sanders give it the tincture of
Roses, July flowers, or Poppy, what suffices according to Art.

Additions to the eighteenth Chapter.
The greater quantity.
Take Musk, Ambergreese, of each half a dram, White Sugar candy in stead of
common white Sugar, what suffices according to Art. In respect that Musk in
some cause, may give offense to the receiver: it is requisite to omit the use
there of in some of your water of this kind, to serve for such special uses.

The lesser quantity.
Take Musk, Ambergreese of each 3 grains, White Sugar Candy in stead of Common
white Sugar, what suffices according to Art. In respect that Musk for some
causes may give offense to the receiver, it is requisite to omit the use
thereof in some of your water of this kind to serve for such special uses.

Additions to the ninteenth Chapter.
The greater quantity.
Take Sweet Fennel seeds 5 pound, Caraway seeds four ounces, Aniseeds 1 pound,
Cinnamon eight ounces, Cloves 2 ounces, Sugar 2 pound and a half.

The lesser quantity.
Take Sweet Fennel seeds 8 ounces, Caraway seeds three drams and a quarter,
Aniseeds 1 ounce 5 drams, Cinnamon 6 drams and a half, Cloves a dram and half,
Sugar 4 ounces.

Additions to the twentieth Chapter.
The greater quantity.
Take Cinnamon, Sweet Fennel of each 5 ounces, Caraway, Cloves of each 2
ounces, Marigolds 2 gallons, Sugar 2 pound and a half.

The lesser quantity.
Take Cinnamon, Sweet Fennel, of each 4 drams, Caraway, Cloves of each a dram
and half, Marigolds what suffices, Sugar 4 ounces.

Additions to the twenty third Chapter.
[The Syrup for dulcifying the water is thus to be made.
Take Apricots, Quinces, Cherries, English Currants, of each what suffices,
all full ripe, and of equal weight, when they are thus prepared as follows;

Prepare the Quinces and Apricots, and take out the stones and kernels, and
slice them very thin, stone the Cherries and bruise them and the Currants; then
lay them into a flat Basin or Pan thus: a lane of fruit of a fingers
thickness, and then a lane of White powder Sugar of like thickness, and so
proceed in order lane upon lane till all be be laid into the Basin: then pour
on good Aqua vitae gently, till all be covered therewith; and so let it stand 2
hours; then bruise or posh them all together, and press out the juice as dry
as possibly you can through a thick linen bag: Then take the juice, and let it
stand till it be settled clear, which juice by a gentle exhalation in a hot
bath, boil up to a syrup hight according to Art, and keep it for use. To every
eight pound of the Spirit, put a pound of this Syrup, and when it is clear draw
it off for use.

The Furnace used in the drawing of the preceding Spirits and waters.

A, Shows the bottom which ought to be of Copper.

C, The barrel filled with cold water to refrigerate and condensate the water
and oil that run through it.

D, A pipe of brass or pewter, or rather a worm of Tin running through the
barrel.

E, The Alembick set in the furnace with the fire under it.

Excellent Waters for several uses.
CHAP. I.
A water to cause Hair fallen to grow again.
TAke Mountain Hysop, Mountain Calamint, leaves of Southernwood, of each two
handfuls, Canary Wine Urine Honey Milk of each two pound.

Mustard seed half a ponud, bruife what is to be bruised, Macerate them three
days, then distill them in Balneo.

CHAP. II.
A water to cause hair taken off never to grow again.
Take seeds of Henbane bruised 2 pound, lay it a while in some moist place,
then add great stone-crop half a pound, distill it according to Art.

Another.
Take blood of Frogs Terrae Sigillatae Sumach Roses Sorrel Housleeks what is
sufficient.

Macerate them together 24 hours, then distill them in Balneo.

CHAP. III.
A water to take away spots in the Face.
Take Asses Milk four pound, White wine 1 pound, the inside of two new loaves,
12 Eggs with the shells, Sugar Candy 3 drams, Mix them well together and distill
them.

CHAP. IV.
A water against Scabs.
Take Sorrel water 2 pound, Juice of Plaintane, Rose water, of each 4 ounces,
Juice of Limons 2 ounces, Lytharge 6 ounces, Ceruse, Sublimate, of each half an
ounce, Sulphur vive 3 drams, bruise them that are to be bruised; then infuse
them 24 hours, and after distill them according to Art.

CHAP. V.
A water to preserve the Sight.
Take Fennel Vervains Eyebright Endive Betonies Red Roses Venus Hair of each
three handfuls.

Bruise the Herbs and macerate them 24 hours in white wine, (as much as is
sufficient) then distill them in a limbeck in Balneo.

Another.
Take Fennel Celandine Sage Rosemary Vervain Rue of each equal parts.
Prepare as it before.
CHAP. VI.
A water to restore the sight decayed.
Take Fennel Celandine Vervaine Rue Leaves of Enula Fullers Teesell Milfoile
of each one handful.
Camphire half a dram.
Bruise them and distill them in an Alembick.

CHAP. VII.
A water against the Gout.
Take Licorice half a pound, Aniseeds 1 pound, Cinnamon 3 ounces, Galingale
Ginger Roots of Iroes Enula Campana Seeds of Fennel Caraway Amomum Ammi Piony
Basil Savory Marjoram of each one ounce.

Juniper Berries 2 ounces, Ground Ivy half a handful, Long Pepper, Calamus,
Spikenard, Mace, of each 3 drams, Valerian 1 dram, Roots of Angelica half an
ounce, Cyprus 4 ounces, Lignum Aloes half an ounce, Sugar 4 ounces, Maliga
Wine, or strong Ale 32 pound, Prepare and distill them according to Art.

This water taken inwardly strengthens cold and weak Stomachs and breaks the
Stone.

Outwardly applied it eases the Gout, enlarges Sinews that are shrunk, and is
good against all aches and passion proceeding from melancholy and cold.

CHAP. VIII.
A Water for the Web and spots in the Eyes.
Take Rue Plantaine Red roses Red Poppies Vervaine Celandine leaves of each 1
ounce.

Red rose water 1 pound, Rich white wine 1 pound and an half, Tutia prepared 1
dram, Aloes Hepatick an ounce and a half, Cloves 1 ounce, Powder, prepare and
distill them according to Art. Drop the water into the Eyes morning and evening.

CHAP. IX.
A water for Tetters, Fistulas, Cankers, etc.
Take strong white Wine Vinegar 8 pound, Wood Ashes 1 pound, Infuse them 3
days natural, and stir them twice a day, then put thereto unslaked lime 1
pound, let it stand other three days, and stir it as before, when it is well
settled, Filtre off the clear Lee, and put thereto Sal Gemme Salt Alkali Salis
Vitae Salt Ammoniac Salt of Tartar of each one dram.

Calx of Egg shells, and Calx vive, of each 1 dram, Grind all these together,
and temper them with the said Lee; put them into a Glass lembick and distill
them in Balneo; give it the first 24 hours no more heat then will make it, and
keep it warm: after that distill it off according to Art.

CHAP. X.
A water agoinst redness of the Face and to beautify the Skin.
Take Wild Purslaine Mallows Nightshade Plantain with the seeds of each three
handfuls.

The Whites of 12 Eggs, Limons number 12, Roch Alum, 4 ounces, prepair and
distill them according to Art.

Another.
Take Calx of Egg shells, White Coral pulverized, of each 2 ounces, Salt
calcinated, and Borax, of each 6 ounces, Gum Tragagant 5 ounces, Roots of white
Lillies, number 6, White Soap 8 pound, Styrax, Calamita, Belzoin, of each 4
ounces, Mix and distill them by Alembick.

Another of the same virtue.
Take Wine Vinegar half a pound, Lytharge of gold 1 ounce and a half, Ceruse 1
ounce, Sal Gem 6 drams, Roch Alum half an ounce, Borax, Sulphur vive, Salt
Nitre, of each three drams, Camphire half a dram, prepare and distill them
according to Art.

CHAP. XI.
A water against the inordinate Flux of Tears.
Take ripe Strawberries as many as you please, set them to digest in Horse dung
15 days, then distill them in Balneo.

Or thus,
Take Flowers of the white Thorn, Leaves or tops of the Willow, Eyebright, of
each what suffices, distill them as before.

CHAP. XII.
A water against redness of the Eyes.
Take juice of Celandine Rue Vervaine Fennel of each three ounces.

Tops and leaves of Roses of each what suffices* Sugar Candy 3 ounces, of the
best Tutia Sanguis Drac^nis of each four ounces.

Bruise them that are to be bruised, and distill them according to Art.

CHAP. XIII.
A Water to cleanse and dry a sharp Ulcer.
Take Crude Alum 2 ounces, white of Eggs, number 15. Juice of Purslaine
Plantaine Nightshade Nicotian Houseleek Water of Meadsweet Trinity grass Roses
of each 4 ounces.

Labor them well together and draw off the Water by an Alembick of Glass in
Balneo.

CHAP. XIV.
A water to make the Teeth white.
Take Alum 6 ounces, Common Salt 3 ounces, Myrrh Mastick Cloves of each 6
drams.

Mix, bruise and distill them according to Art.

CHAP. XV.
A Water to take away the marks of the Small Pox.
Take Mastick Myrrh Aloes Hepatick Nard Sanguis Draconis Olibanum Opopanax
Bdelium Carpobal samum Saffron Gum Arabic Liquid Storax of each 2 drams and a
handful

Beat what is to be beaten, then add thereto of clear Turpentine equal
weight: distill them according to Art.

CHAP. XVI.
A Water to Cicatrize Ulcers.
Take red Wine 2 pound, Plantaine water half a pound, Rose water four ounces,
Juice of Plantaine Vervaine Shepherds Purse Knotgrasse Centaury the less
Comfery the greater and lesser of each 2 ounces.

Crude Alum 1 pound, Cypress Nuts 3 ounces, Pomgranate flowers half an ounce,
Pomgranate pills 3 ounces, Gals half an ounce, Bark of the Oak, Sumach, of each
five drams, Turpentine 3 ounces, Crude Honey half a pound, Mastick, Olibanum,
of each ten drams, Sarcocoll 2 ounces, Burnt Vitriol, Burnt lead, of each 1
dram, Bole Armoniack 3 ounces, Cassia lignea halfan ounce, Round Birtwort 3
ounces.

Powder what is to be powdered, then mix and distill them.

Another.
Take Mastick Myrrh Olibanum Sarcocoll Mummie of each 3 drams.
Frankincense 1 ounce, Nutmegs Cinnamon Cloves Cubebs of each 2 drams.
Cyprus Nuts half an ounce. Flowers Barks of Pomgranates, of each 1 dram.
Bole Armoniack 1 ounce, Sanguis Draconis half an ounce, Red Roses 3 drams,
Roch Alum 1 pound, Vitriol 7 drams, Clarifi^d Honey 1 ounce, Aqua vitae a
pound and half, White Wine 1 pound, Juice of Plantaine Nightshade Comfery of
the greater and lesser of each 4 ounces,

Water wherein iron has been quenched 4 pound, Powder what is to be powdered;
and infuse them all night in Aqua vitae, in the morning draw forth the water by
Alembick.

CHAP. XVII.
A Water for Ulcers.
Take White Wine 4 pound, Plantain water 2 pound, Alum half a pound, White
Copperas 5 ounces, Crude Honey 1 pound, Licorice Rasped 1 pound, Bole Armoniack
5 ounces, Camphire an ounce and half, Mercury sublimated 2 drams, Bruise what
is to be bruised, and distill them by Alembick.

CHAP. XVIII.
A Water for hollow Ulcers.
Take Fountain water, Red Wine, of each 2 pound and a halt, Red Roses four
ounces;

Flowers Rindes of Pomgranates, of each 2 ounces and a half. Sumach 2 ounces
Sage a handful Comfery the greater and lesser of each half a handful.
Sarcocoll 3 ounces, Mastick 2 ounces, Olibanum 1 ounce, Honey 1 pound, water
of Turpentine a pound and a half, bruise what is to be bruised, and distill them
through a lembick of Glass with a gentle fire.

CHAP. XIX.
A Cicatrizing Water.
Take water wherein Iron has been quenched four pound, Aqua Balsami very four
pound, Turpentine a pound and half, Crude Honey 1 pound, Alum 10 ounces, white
Copperas five ounces, Bole Armoniack 7 ounces, Mercury sublimated half a dram,
leaves of Plantain, Comfery the greater, middle and lesser, Teasill,
Knotgrasse, St. John's Wort, of each a handful and a half, Frankincense 2
ounces, Olibanum, White Sanders, of each half an ounce, Red Roses, a handful
and a half, Cassia Lignea, Cinnamon, of each 3 drams; for the first
distillation; then take Turpentine 1 pound, Mastick 3 drams, pure Rozen 6
ounces, Cinnamon, Cloves, of each 2 drams; Pomgranate rinds half an ounce,
Cyprus Nuts 1 ounce and a half, White Copperas two ounces, Alum 3 ounces,
Olibanum 4 ounces, Sanguis draconis an ounce and a half, Aqua Balsam. very 1
pound for the second distillation: Afterward,

Take Flowers of St. John's Wort, Sage, Rosemary, Carduus Benedictus, Centaury,
of each 1 ounce, Mastick, Red Sanders, of each 3 drams, Wood of Aloes 2
scruples, Cubebs one dram, Aqua vitae half a pound, Burnt Alum, White Tartar,
of each an ounce and a half, Myrrh half an ounce, Earth Worms in powder 1
dram, the middle Bark of the Oak 6 ounces, Cassia lignea three drams, White
Copperas 1 ounce, Rindes of Pomgranates half an ounce, Cinnamon 2 drams, Flowers
of Pomgranates 1 dram, Guaiacum four ounces, Carpobalsamum, Xylobalsamum, of
each 1 dram, Myrtles, Mummie, of each 2 drams, Borax half an ounce, Cloves 2
drams,

Tormentill Gentian of each 2 drams and a half, Round Birt-wort
This is for the last distillation, afterward add

Burnt Alum half an ounce, White Copperas 2 drams, Mastick 1 ounce in fine
powder, and then keep it for use.

CHAP. XX.
A water for hollow Wounds.
Take Fountain water, Red Wine, of each 2 ounces and an half, Red Roses 4
ounces, Pomgranat flowers, Pomgranate rindes, of each 2 ounces and a half,
Sumach 2 ounces, Sage 1 handful, both the Co^feries, of each a handful, Alum
half a pound, Sarcocoll 3 ounces, Mastick 2 ounces Olibanum 1 ounce, Honey 1
pound, water of Turpentine a pound and a half.

Prepare the Ingredients according to Art, and then distill them all together in
a glass lembick with a gentle fire.

CHAP. XXI.
A water for Wounds and Ulcers.
Take Calx vive extinct in Fountain water 8 pound, Plantain water four ounces,
Rose water 2 pound.

Heat all these together, afterward let them stand and clear, pour forth all
the clear to the lembick, and put to it Honey 2 pound,

Alum 1 ounce, Borax Mastick of each three ounces.
Olibanum four ounces, the middle Bark of the Oak dried 3 ounces, powder what
is to be powdered, and distill them according to Art.

CHAP. XXII.
A water to make the Teeth white.
Take the first distilled water of Honey which is white, one pound, Alum half
a pound,

Sal Nitre White Salt of each one ounce. Water of Lentisk leaves 1 pound,
Mastick two ounces, White Vinegar White Wine of each 2 ounces.
Mix and distill them according to Art, and reserve the water.

CHAP. XXIII.
A water against the Colic.
Take Muscadell, or Malmsey four pound, Nutmegs, Galls, of each 1 dram.

Cinnamon Cloves Grains of each two drams.
Powder the ingredients grossly, and infuse them in the wine 24 hours, then
with a soft fire draw off the water according to Art.

CHAP. XXIV.
A water for a cold Stomach.
Take Citron and Orange pills dried, of each 2 ounces, Rosemary, Mints, of each
one handful.

Cinnamon Cloves Cubebs Cardamums Nutmegs Ginger of each a dram and a half.
Sage, Pennyroyall, Thyme, of each one handful, Caraway seeds Aniseeds Fennel
seeds of each four drams.
Bruise what is to be bruised, and infuse them all the space of 24 hours in
Canary wine four pints, then distill them in Balneo according to Art.

CHAP. XXV.
Water of Sage Compound.
Take Sage Marjoram Thyme Lavender Epith^^um Bet^^ of each 1 ounce. Cinnamon
half an ounce, Ireos Roots of Cyprus Calamus Aromaticus of each 1 ounce.
Storax, Benjamin, of each a dram and a half, Infuse them four days in four
pound of spirit of Wine; then distill them in Balneo.

CHAP. XXVI.
Lavender water Compound.
Take flowers of Lavender, Lilly of the Valley, of each 24 handfuls, Piony
Tillia Flowers of Rosemary Sage of each half a handful. Cinnamon Ginger Cloves
Cubebs Galingale Calamus Aromaticus Mace Messelto of the Oak of each a dram and
a half.
Piony roots one ounce and a half, of the best Wine what suffices, infuse them
in the Wine two days, then distill them in Balneo Mariae.

This water is good against the Falling sickness, Convulsion fits, and the
infirmities of the Brain.

CHAP. XXVII.
A Pectorall Water.
Take the Liver of a Calf, the Lungs of a Fox, of each number 1,

Liverwort Longwort Sage Rue Hyssop of each one handful. Roots of Enula
Gladiol of each half an ounce. Seeds of Anise Caraway Fennel of each half an
ounce.
Flowers of Borage and Buglosse, of each two drams; infuse them the space of 24
hours in rich old Wine what suffices.

Water of Scabius Carduus Benedictus of each four ounces. Hysop 2 ounces; then
distill it in Balneo Mariae.
Another.
Take leaves of Scabius, Veronica, of each two handfuls,

Venus Hair Sage Hysop Horehound Liverwort Licorice of each one handful.
Flowers of Borage Buglosse Violets of each half a handful. Roots of Enula
Campana Licorice Flowers of Ireos of each half an ounce. Aniseeds Fennel seeds
of each one dram.
Choice Cinnamon, oriental Saffron, of each half a dram, let them be bruised
and cut, be digested in water of Scabius Veronica, of each one pound, water of
Hysop half a pound, white Wine 3 pound, let them digested two days be distilled
in Balneo Mariae; add Sugar Candy what suffices.

This water opens the obstructions of the Liver and Lungs, and strengthens
them.

CHAP. XXVIII.
Aqua Splenetica.
Take roots of Fern 2 ounces, roots of Parsley, Polypody, of each an ounce and
a half, roots of Round Birt wort, Lovage, Calamus Aromaticus, Acorns of the
water, of each 1 ounce, chosen Rubarb; barks of Tamarisk, Copperas, Ash, of
each half an ounce,

Lovage Seeds of Caraway Cummin Anise of each two drams.
Scolopendria, tops of Wormwood, Fumiterre, Dodder, leaves of Agrimony,
Ceterach, of each a handful and a half: Rich Wine 8 pound; let them be
digested two days, and then distill them in Balneo Mariae.

This water strengthens the Spleen, opens and provokes Urine.

CHAP. XXIX.
Aqua Febrifuga.
Take roots of Vipers grass, Cinquefoil, Tormentill, Dictamum, of each 6
drams, Seeds of Citron, excorticated, Carduus Benedictus, Carduus Mariae,
Sorrel, of each half an ounce, of all the Sanders of each 1 dram, of the
Cordial flowers of each 1 handful, Goats Rue one handful, Hearts horn rasped
half an ounce, pour upon them bruised water of Tormentill, Cychorie, Carduus
Benedictus, Carduus Mariae, Wild Poppy, of each what suffices; let them be
macerated three days in a glass close shut, afterward add Citrons bruised
number six, Juice of Endive, Carduus Benedictus, Plantain, of each one pound,
Borage, Scordium, of each half a pound; let them be distilled in Balneo Mariae.

This water is convenient in Fevers, especially malignant Fevers; because it
drives away the malignity, and resists putrefaction.

CHAP. XXX.
Aqua Damascena Odorifera.
Take Ireos Flowers Cloves Cubebs Cinnamon Grains of Paradise Calamus Aromaticus
of each one ounce. Marjoram Thyme Bay leaves Rosemary Flowers Red Roses of each
a handful.
Lavender flowers three drams, of the best Wine 3 measures; let them be
macerated and distilled: to the distilled liquor add Musk half a scruple, Civet
6 grains.

This water beats, dries, cutteth, discusseth, and chiefly strengthens the
Heart and Head.

CHAP. XXXI.
Aqua Hysterica.
Take roots of Dictamnum seeds of Daucus, of each one ounce, Cinnamon, Cassia
lignea, Balm, of each two scruples, Oriental Saffron 1 scruple, New Castorium
1 scruple and a half, of all these mixed make a powder, to which let be poured
water of Rue two pound and a half: let them stand in infusion four days, and
then distill them in Balneo Mariae.

CHAP. XXXII.
Aqua Nephretica.
Take roots of Enula Campa^a, Cammock, Pimpernell, Radish of each one ounce,
Parsley, Lovage, of each 7 drams, leaves of Lovage, Parsley, of each one
handful, Saxifrage cum toto two ounces, Flowers of Broom, Balm, Rosemary, of
each half a handful, Elder one handful, Berries of Juniper, Myrtle,
Alcakengie, Anifeeds, of each 2 ounces, cut them and infuse them the space of 8
days in 12 pound of the best white Wine, then let them be distilled.

This water opens and provokes Urine: the dose is one spoonful.

CHAP. XXXII.
Aqua Aperitiva.
Take roots of Eringo, Vipers graffe, Fern, the greater Centaury, of each half
an ounce roots of Fennel, Banks of Capp^ris, Tamarisk, Ash, of each three
drams, Barks of Citrons two drams and a half; Seeds of Carduus Benedictus,
Cichorie, of each half an ounce, Seeds of Endive, Cresses, Citrons, Scariol, of
each two drams,

Polytricon Adianthum Ceterach Dodder Scolopendria Betony Endive of each a
handful and a half. Tops of Thyme Epithymum Hops Flowers of St. John's Wort
Broom Borage Balm of each 1 handful.
Small Raisins 1 ounce: Cinnamon 1 dram, and a half, Spec. Dialace. half a dram,

Carduus Benedictus Water of Hops Scolopendria Paul's Betony of each one pound.
Rhenish Wine two pound and a half, let them stand two days in a warm place in
a vessel close stopped: afterward distill them in Balneo.

This water opens the obstructions of the whole body, but especially of the
Liver, Spleen, and Mesentery.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of the Materials and Ingredients used in the precedent Rules.
ROOTS.
ANgelica Avens Butter-Bur Calamus Ar^maticus Cyperus, long Contra-yerva
Enula-campana Galingal Gentian Ginger Horse Radish Imperitoria Licorice Lovage
Orris Sassafras Scordium Snake-grasse Valerian Common Garden Great Vincetoxicum
Zedoary
WOODS.
LIgnum Rhodium Sanders Red Yellow.
BARKS and PILLS.
Bay Tree Roots Cassia Lignea Cinnamon Common White Citron Guaiacum Limon Orange
Pippins Quinces Sassafras.
HERBS.
ANgelica Arsmart Bay Leaves Balm or Bawm Burnet Brooklime Balsamint or
Costmary Carduus Benedictus Chervile, sweet Clary Calamint Cresses Water Garden
Winter Bank Costmary or Balsamint Horehound, white Lavender leaves Lavender
Cotton Mint Speir Red Marjoram, Summer Penny Royal Rosemary Rocket Ros sol^s Rue
Sage Red Great Scurvygrasse Common Garden Stoechados Southernwood Scordium
Thyme Wild Garden Limon Tarragon Trefoil, Water Valerian, great Wormwood
Common Roman
FLOWERS.
COwslip Citron Camomile Elder Gilliflowers, Clove Gi^iflowers, Stock, three
sorts Jasmine Lavender Lillium Convallium Marygold Melilot Orange Poppy, Red
Roses Red Damask Musk Bryer Saffron Sage Stoechas Tillia or Lindentree Thyme
Garden Limon Wild Woodbine ( or Honey-suckle.)
SEEDS.
ANise Angelica Basil Caroway Cardamums Cresse, Bank Chervile, sweet Coriander
Cummin Fennel, sweet Grains of Paradise Mustard Radish Rocket Scurvy-grasse
Garden Wormwood; common.
FRUITS.
APricotes Alkerms Berries Barley, Maulted Barley, Maulted Cardamums Cherries
Currants Forain English Cubebs Cloves Grapes Hops Juniper Berries Maces Nutmegs
Pepper White Long Quinces Raspis, Red Raysins, sol. Strawberries Saffron
Walnuts green with husks Zedoary.
JUICES.
LImons Walnuts green with the Husks
Others of diverse kinds.
AMbergreese Alum Benjamin Camphire Confection of Alkermes Mithridate Musk
Treakle, Venice Syrup of Gilliflowers Storax Sugar of diverse sorts.
Liquid Materials.
WInes of all kinds Beer and Ale After-Worts, or Wash Sugar-Waters Tilts,
Dregs, Lees, or Grounds of Beer or Ale. Lees of Wines Spirits of Wine
Rose Water.
FINIS.
An Alphabeticall Table of all the Oils, Waters, Experiments, and Curiosities
contained in the six foregoing Books.
A.
Oil of Adders, 97 Quintessence of Adders, 98 Air in the heat of the summer,
and the heat of the day to condense into water, 137 The form of an Alembick. 31
Oil of Amber, 38 Spirit of Ambergreese, 123 Oil or Butter of Antimony, 70
Water of Antimony, 71 Spirit Essence of Antimony. 72 An Antimoniall Cup to make
165 Water of rotten Apples, 24 Aqua vitae of Wine, 24 Aqua vitae of Beer, 25
Aqua vitae to rectify 26 Aqua vitae Irish, 45 Aqua fortis, 69 Another, 70 Aqua
Regia, Another, 69 Terms of Art Explained, 8 Oil of Arsenick, 68 Aurum
Po^abile of Doctor Anthony, 175 Aurum Fulm^nans, 180
B.
THe Delineation of a Balneum Mariae, 21 Another, 22 Another, 23 A Balneum of
Wood, 29 Balsam of Bears Fat, 97 For Baths a new Invention, 152 A Hot Bath
Artificial from the same principles as the Natural Bath is, 154 Bellows
Philosophical, 150 Water of Berries, 21 Oil of Berries, 35 Bezoard Water, 58
Bezoard Extract, 59 A dead Bird to raise to life, 118 Oil Water Magistery of
Blood. 89 Oil of Bole Armoniack, 79 Oil of Bones, 101 Essence of man's Brains,
90 Doctor Burgess Plvgue Water, 53 Burnt-root water compound, 52 To purify
Butter, And to make Butter taste of any Vegetable without altering its color,
125
C.
Oil of Camphire several ways to make, 37 A Candle that shall last long, 148
Spirit of Castor, 58 To make Cheese taste strong of any vegetable without
discoloring it, 125 Aqua Coelestis, 46 Water against the Col^ck, 51 Water
against Convulsions, 50. 51 Water of Coral, 81 Water of Crabs, 102 Oil of
Crabs Eyes, 103 Spirit of Cranium Humanum, 91
D.
DIstillation, and its kinds, 1 Vessels for Distillation, 3 Rules for
Distillation, 12 Common distilled Waters, 17 Distilling in wooden Vessels, 29
To Distill Spirits of Minerals, Vegetables, Bones, Horns, etc. 76 Water of Dung
Doves Dung Cow Dung Horse Dung 100. 101.
E.
Oil Water of Eggs, 102 To engrave upon an Egg or Peble with wax or Grease,
132 The four Elements to make appear in a Glass, 128 Water of Elder Berries,
21 Elixir Subtilitatus of Paracelsus, 45 The Process of the Elixir according
to Paracelsus, 188 according to Divi leschi Genus Amo, 189
F.
FIre; to keep Fire in a Glass that whilst the Glass is shut will not burn
but as soon as it is opened, will be enflamed, 144 For Fire an excellent
invention, 151 To make Fur trees appear in Turpentine 127 Water of Flesh, 95.
96 Flesh to make Artificially, 118 Water of the Spawn of Frogs: simple and
compound, 103. 104 Furnaces the Matter and Form, 2 A Furnace to distill liquor
with the steam of Boiling water, 20 Furnaces for four rectifications at once,
28 A Furnace to distill per descensum, 41 A Furnace for Reverberation, 71 A
Furnace that shall of it self (without any vessels to contain the matter being
put into it) sublime Minerals, and distill all manner of Oils and Spirits, 82 A
lamp Furnace. 146. 148
G.
GLasses to nip or seal Hermetically, 7 A Glass Gourd, 44 To reduce Glass
into Sand and Salt, 132 Oil Tincture of Gold, 166. 167. 178. 179. To make Gold
grow in a Glass, 181. 182. To make Gold increase in the Earth Observations
upon a Golden Marchasite 182 The virtues of the preparations of Gold, 183 Oil
of Gums, 36. 37.
H.
WAter and Oil of Hair, 92 Spirit of Hartshorn, 91 A sudorifick of the young
buds of Hartshorn, 101 Hearts horn seemingly to grow in a Glass, 128 To reduce
the whole Herb into a liquor, 32 To make the Idea of any Herb appear in a
Glass, 32 To make the Quint^ssence of any Herb, 32 Homunculus of Paracelsus,
114 Water Quintessence of Honey, 93 Essence of Honey, 94 Vinegar of Honey, 95
An Hydropicall water, 50 Hypocras Aromaticall, 120 A Triple Hypocras bag
Hypocras Wine made in an instant 121. 122 Hystericall water; 61
I.
OIl of Jasmine, 40 Aqua Imperialis, 47 Spirit of Ivory, 91
K.
Kunraths Aqua Magnanimitatis, 99
L.
WAter of Lapis Armenus, 81 Oil of Lapis Calaminaris, 79 Spirit of Lead, 72
Spirit of Lime unstaked, 80 Liquor restorative, 96 Liquor thick and muddy to
purify, 143 To fortify a Loadstone that it shall be able to draw a Nail out
of a piece of Wood, 131 Lutes for Glasses, 4
M.
A Qua Magnanimitalis of Kunrath, 99 Aqua Magnanimitatis another, 100 Malmsey
Artificial, 120 Spirit of Manna, 33 Aqua Mariae, 60 Mead, or Metheglin to make
Stale in a Fortnight, 123 A Medicine that half a grain taken every morning,
will keep the body soluble, 138 Dissolving Menstruums, 44, 45 Oil of Mercury,
To turn Mercury into water 74 Oil of Metals, 71 Any Metal to melt in ones hand
without burning of the hand, 134 To prove what kind of Metal is in any Ore by
a few grains of it, 164 Water of Milk, 92 Aqua Mirabilis, 48 From the rays of
the Moon to extract a Milkie substance, 136 Mother water, 61 A perpetual
Motion in a Glass, 129 Golden Mountain to make appear in a Glass, 128 Elixir
of Mummie, 90 Oil of Myrrh, 38 Oil of Myrrh per deliquium, 39
O.
OIls by expression Oils vomitive and purging 39 Oil per descensum 40 O^ls
thick, black, and stinking to rectify, 43 Oils of minerals to rectify, 88 Oil
Olive to make smell and taste sweet, 124 Oils to distill out of any Herb, Seed,
etc. in an instant without a Furnace, 140 Oil lasting and durable, 149
P.
Palsy water of Matthias, 56 Pearl Artificial, 132 Pectorall water, 49 The
form of a Pelican, 27 A Perfume mineral 132 Plague water, 52 To make a Plant
grow in two or three Hours, 126 To make the Idea of a Plant appear in a
Glass, 127 A Powder that by spitting upon shall be inflamed, 130 A cheap
Powder like unto Aurum Fulminans, 165 Purging water operating without pain, 62
Q
TO turn Quicksilver into water without mixing any thing with^t, 73 To make
Quick silver Malleable in 7 hours, 131
R.
OIl of Rosins, etc. 37 Retorts, 64 Spirit of Roses, 34
S.
SPirit of Salt, 63 Another. 64 Salt Peter water, Spirit of Salt Ammoniac 65
Spirit of Salt to dulcifie, 66 How two volatile Salts will be fired by joining
them together, 137 An observation upon the melting of Salt Armoniack, and Calx
vive together, 165 Oil of Sand, Flints, etc. 132 Scorbuticall water, 57 Oil of
Seeds, 35 The preparation of Silver, A green Tincture of Silver, 185 A green
oil of Silver, Oil of Silver per deliquium, A liquor of Silver that shall make
the glass where in it is so cold, that no man is able to hold his hand on it
any long time 186
S.
TO make Silver as white as Snow The Silver tree of Philosophers 187 A Cold
Still, 17 A Hot Still, 25 The Smaragdine table of Hermes from whence all
Alchimy did arise, 191 Oil of Snakes, 97 Quintessence of Snakes, 98 Oil of Soot
Water of Soot 41 Spirits to rectify, 42. 88. To make Steel grow in a Glass
like a Tree, 134 Doctor Stephens water, 48 Stone in the Kidneys, a water
against, 54. 55. Precious Stones Artificial of all sorts and colors, 162 The
process of the Philosophers Stone according to Pontanus, 190 A specificall
Sudorifick, 59 A Sudorificall water, 87 Oil of Sugar, 38 Sugar to refine, 126
Oil of Sulphur per Campanum, 67 Oil of Sulphur Essence of Sulphur 68 An
observation upon the heat of the Sun, and heat of the fire how they add weight
to the Metalline and Mineral bodies, 135 Surfeit water, 48 Water of Swallows,
101
T.
OIl of Talk 78. 79 Oil of Tartar per deliquium, 39 Spirit of Turpentine, 36
Oil of Tile stones, 80 A Tincture Cordial, Stomachicall, and purgative, 138.
139 An observation upon the melting of Tin and Copper together, 164 Liquor
against the Tooth ach, 62 Treacle water, 60 Treacle water Camphorated of
Crollius, 53 Treacle Vinegar, 54 To reduce distilled Turpentine into its body
again, 140
V.
TO make a Vapor in a Chamber that he that enters into it with a Candle shall
think the room on fire, 130 Any Vegetable spirit to make, 30 Spirit of
Vegetables to make suddenly at any time of the year, To make a Vegetable yield
his Spirit quickly, 31 Essence Quintessence of any Vegetable, 33 Chymicall oil
of any Vegetable, 34 To make Vegetables yield their Oiles easily, 36 To make a
Vegetable become more glorious then any of its species, 126 Water and Tincture
of any Vegetable to make at the same time, 141 Water against the Vertigo, 51
Quintessence of Vipers Viper Wine 98 Oil or Spirit of Vitrioll, 65 Oil of
Vitriol, 66 Spirit of Vitrioll to dulcifie, 66 Liquor of Vitrioll vomitive, 66
Ros Vitrioli, 86 Green Oil of Vitrioll, 86 Sulphur of Vitrioll, 87 An Unguent
that outwardly applied will cause vomiting or looseness, which you please, 137
Vomiting water Vomiting water of Platerus 61 Spirit of Urine simple, 92 Spirit
of Urine compound, 93 Usquebath. 45
W.
TO make Water in a cold Still which shall have the smell and virtue of the
vegetable, 17 Anotherway Another 18 To make Water at any time of the year in a
cold* Still without green Herbs, so that the Water shall smell strong of the
Herb, 18 To make Water of Jasmine, Violets, etc. retain the smell of the
Flower, 19 Water per descensum, 40 Water against worms, 50 Water for wounds,
55 Anatomy of Water Spagyricall, 105 Sweet Water, 123 Luminous Water to give
light by night, 129 To separate fresh Water from Salt, 141 To purify muddy
Water, 142 Tumbridge and Epsome Water Artificial, 160 Oil of Wax, 95 Spirit of
Wine to rectify Magistery of Wine 26 Another Oil of Wine 27 Spirit of Wine to
extract by Spirit of Wine Spirit of Wine very subtle at the first distilling 28
Anatomy of Wine Spagyricall, 111 Malego Claret Wine Artificial, 119 Raspberry
Wine, 122 Oil of any solid Wood, 33 To make oil of any Wood without much cost,
36 The Representation of the whole World in a Glass, 128
An Alphabeticall Table of the Diseases and Infirmities for which Cures or
Remedies are prescribed in the foregoing Books.
A.
Abortion to preserve from 98 Ague quartaine 183 Apoplexi^ 183 As^hma 183
B.
Beauty to continue till extreme old age, 184 Belly to loosen 40 Against
gripings of the Belly 51 Birds dead to raise to life 118 Obstructious of the
Bladder 100. 101 Bleeding to stanch 104 Blood, to purify 74. 99 ^^ullition of
Blood 86 Blood to increase 117 Body to keep soluble 138 Brain to strengthen 98
Obstructions of the Breast 140 Burnings 102
C.
Cancer 183 Carbuncle 184 Chops to cure 102 Choler to purge 139 Cold distempers
80 Colic a causer of 140 Consumption 97. 98. 183 Convulsions 91. 93 Cordials
24. 28. 47. 59. 123. 138. 139
D.
Deafness 97. 99 Digestion to help 49 Dropsy 40. 51. 91. 93. 101. 183.
E.
Elephantiasis 183 Epilepsie 91. 93. 183 Excorato^ns 102 Eye inflammation of 24.
92 Film in the Eye 99
F.
Face a paint for 79 Face to clear and smooth 137 Fainting 47. 138 Falling
sickness 90. 91. 98. 102 Fever 65. 66. 63. 101. 103. 133. 183. Phlegm thick to
at^nuate 49
G.
Gold to dissolve 69. 91 Gout 40 Gout a causer of 113. 133. 183
H.
Gray Hairs to preserve from 98. 107 Head wind in 48. 52 Head scurf thereof to
take away 66 Head pain of 66. 138 Heart passions of 38. 58 Hearing to
strengthen 98 Hydropicall diseases 20. 24. 50. 139 Hystoricall passions 50. 66
I.
Jaundies 100. 101. 183 Infection preservatives against 47. 53. 54. 59. 90
Inflammations inward 101. 183 Inflammation inward and outward 103 Itch 137
K.
Kidneys Inflammation of 86 Kidneys distemper of 92 Kidneys obstruction of 100.
103. 140.
L.
Leprosy 99. 183 Liver to strengthen 51 Liver inflamed 86 Long life to cause
184 Looseness to cause 138 Lungs distempered 38. 68. 92 Lungs to strengthen 49
M.
Madness 183 Maids to make look beautiful 184 Measles 52 Melancholy 183
Melancholy to purge 139 Members dead to quicken 95 Mother fits 38. 58
N.
Noli me tangere 183
O.
Obstructions to open 49. 62. 91. 138 Obstructions a causer of 113
P.
Pains ^ot to ease 103. 104 Palsy 56. 95. 97 Palsy a causer of 113 Plague 53.
68. 133. 1^4 Pleurisy 49. 183 Bastard plewisie 101 Pex 53 Ptisick 49. 133
Purging medicines 71. 81 To purge away water 139 To purge without griping 139
Pustles 102 Putrefaction preservatives against 38. 65
R.
Reins obstructions of 101 Rest to cause 49 Ring worms 102
S.
Scurvy 51. 58. 101 Many Serpents to generate of one, 118 Sight to strengthen
98 Sinews to strengthen 52 Skin to purify 98 Skin to cleanse 102. 133 Skin to
make look fair 133 Skin hot pustles of 137 Sores old and new 66 The spirits to
compose 48 The spirits to refresh 177 Stomach things good for 46. 49. 50
Stomach wind of 48. 50. 52 Stomach gripings of 51 Stomach inflammation of 86
Stomach to strengthen 91 Stomach to cleanse 133 Stomach to purge 138 Stomach
nouseousnesse of 139 Stones precious, to dissolve 93 Stones hard, to dissolve
44, 45 Stone 51. 133 183 Stone in the kidneys 55 Stone in the Bladder 80 Stone
a causer of 13 Stitches 101 Strength decayed 97 Surfeit 46. 49. 53 Sweat to
cause 52. 53. 59. 71. 87. 91. 98. 101 133. 177. 184 Swelling hot or cold 104
T.
Toothach 62
U.
Venery to provoke 99 Lues Venerca 133. 183 Vertigo 50. 52. 66 Ulcers 68. 9. 5
Old Ulcers to dry up 177 Noxious vapors 87 Vomiting to cause 66. 70. 137. 166
Urine to provoke 55. 99, 133. 183 Urine stopped 183
W.
Wind 100 Wolf 183 Women in travel to cause to be delivered without great
pain 184 Worms 50. 65. 66. 138 Wounds 26. 55. 56. 68. 95 Green wounds 102
Wounds in the Eye 102
Y.
Youth to renew 117
An Alphabeticall Table of the Waters and Spirits treated of in the
LONDON-DISTILLER.
A.
A Niseed water 10 Angelica water 11 Aqua Aperitiva 60 Aqua vitae 9 Avens water
34
B.
Balm water 12 Balmsamint water 17
C.
Caraway water 21 Cicairizing water 52 Cinnamon water common 19 Cinnamon proper
20 Clove water 16 Colic water 54
D.
Aqua Damasena odorifera 59
E.
Eye waters 45. 46. 48.
F.
Face water for 44. 47 Aqua Febrifuga 58 Fennel seed water 20 Flowers water of
32 Fruits water of 33
G.
Gout a water for 46
H.
Hair waters for 43. 44 Aqua Hysterica 59
L.
Lavender water 29 Lavender water another 56 Limon water 14
M.
Marjoram water 16 Marigold water 21 Mint water 12
N.
Aqua Nephretica 60 Nutmeg water 22
O.
Limon and Orange water 14
P.
Pectorall water 56. 57 Plague water 28 Marks of the Small Pox a water for, 50
Precious water 23
R.
Ros solis proper 31 Rosa solis 81 Rosemary water 13
S.
Sage water 30 Sage water another 55 Scabs a water for 44 Scorbuticall water 27
Aqua Splenetica 58 Stomach water 15. 16 Stomach water another 55 Surfeit water
26 Sweat to cause a water 25
T.
Teeth waters for 49. 54 Tetters a water for 49
U.
Ulcers waters for 49. 50. 51 Vsque bath 17
W.
Wind water 24 Wormwood water 11 Wound waters 53. 54
An Alphabeticall Table of the Diseases for which Cures or remedies are
prescribed in the foregoing Treatise.
A:
APoplexy 30 Appetite to provoke 12. 31
B.
Bloody Flux 13 Body wind in 10 Bowels cold grief of 22 Brain to comfort 13.
20 Brain infirmities of 56 Breath shortness of 10. 16 Breath stinking to help
20 Breath sweet to make 22
C.
Cankers 47 Colic 54 Concoction to help 13 Consumption to preserve from 35
Convulsion fits 56 Cordials 11. 12. 14. 35. Cramp 30
D.
Digestion to help 10. 19 Dysentery 13
E.
Eye spots in them 46 Eye web of them 46 Eye redness of 48
F.
Face spots there of to take away 44 Face redness of it 47 Falling sickness
31. 56 Fevers 24 Fistula 47 Phlegm to break 10 Phlegm to digest 21
G.
Gout 46
H.
Hair fallen to cause to grow again, 43 Hair taken off to cause never to grow
again 43. 44. Head pain of 12 Head to strengthen 59 Heart to strengthen 12. 13.
20. 24. 59 Heart to comfort 19 Heart passions of 30
I.
Infection preservatives against 11. 20 Inward parts to strength. n 11. 16. 19.
21. 35.
L.
Liver to strengthen 13. 19. 20. 57 Liver Infirmities of 16 Liver obstructions
of 61 Lungs infirm to cure 17 Lungs to strengthen 20. 57
M.
Melancholic sadness 35 Mesentery obstructions 61 Mother infirmities of 12
N.
Nature to restore 14 Nature languishing to relieve 24. 32.
O.
Obstructions to open 14. 31
P.
Palsy 30 Plague 28 Plague preservatives against 11. 24 Small Pox marks to
take away 50
S.
Scab^ 44 S^^rey 28 Senses to preserve 24 Sight to preserve 45 Sight to quicken
13 Sight dec^ied to restore 45 Sinews to comfort 20 Skin to beautify 47 Speech
lost to restore 30 Spirits infeebled to revive 14 Spirits to comfort 24. 35
Spleen to comfort 13 Spleen infirmities of 16. 61 Spleen to strengthen 20. 58.
Stomach to strengthen 11. 12. 13. 14. 15. 16. Stomach wind of 10 Stomach to
Aromatize 14. 22 Stomach to warm 17. 55 Stomach to comfort 18. 19. 31 Stomach
loathing of 20 Stomach pain of 21 Stomach Nauseousnesse of 21 Stomach cold
grief of 22 Surfeit 26 Sweat to procure 25
T.
Tears inordinate flux of 48 Teeth to make white 49. 54 Tetters 47 Tisick 10
U.
Ulcers 51. 54 Ulcers to cleanse 49 Ulcers to Cicatrize 50. 51 Ulcers hollow 52
Vomiting to stay 12. 13 Urine to provoke 19. 22. 58. 60.
W.
Wind to break 12. 18. 19. 21, etc. Women in labor to cause easily to be
delivered 12 Worms 12 Wounds 54 Wounds hollow 53
FINIS.

