Die Sabbathi; 20, Januarii. 1649.
LIeutenant General Hammond, Colonel Okey, and other Officers of the Army, this
day presented a Petition to the House, with a Draught of The Agreement of the
People: The Petitioners being called in, Mr Speaker, by Command of the House,
gave them this Answer.
GENTLEMEN,
YOu the Officers of the Army, sent by the Lord General, and the Officers of
the Army, unto this House with this Petition: The House has read your
Petition; and for the Agreement, presented therewith, the House has commanded
me to tell you, They have resolved to take the same into their Consideration,
with what possible speed the necessity of the present weighty and urgent
affairs will permit. They have commanded me likewise to tell you, they find
these good Affections and serious Representations made in your Petition, that
they have Ordered it to be printed. I am likewise commanded to tell you, That
this House does take notice of your faithful and great Services to the Kingdom,
in standing in the Gap for their Preservation; and commanded me to give hearty
Thanks to the Lord General, and the Officers of the Army, for these good
Services, and the good Affections you have herein expressed; And I do, in their
name, give the hearty Thanks of this House to the Lord General, and to you, and
the rest of the Officers of the Army, for their good Affections, great
Services, and cordial Expressions.

Hen: Scobel, Cler. Parl. Dom. Com.

A PETITION FROM His Excellency Thomas Lord Fairfax And the General Council of
Officers of the ARMY, To the Honorable the COMMONS of ENGLAND in PARLIAMENT
assembled, Concerning the Draught of An AGREEMENT of the PEOPLE For a secure
and present PEACE, by them framed and prepared. Together with the said
AGREEMENT presented Saturday, Jan. 20. And a DECLARATION of his Excellency and
the said General Council, concerning the same. Tendered to the Consideration of
the PEOPLE.

BY the Appointment of the General Council of Officers of the Army. Signed,
JOHN RUSHVVORTH, Sec'

LONDON, Printed for John Partridge, R. Harford, G. Calvert, and G.
Whittington. MDCXLIX.

To the honorable the Commons of ENGLAND in Parliament assembled; The humble
Petition of his Excellency Thomas Lord Fairfax, and the General Council of
Officers of the Army under his Command, concerning the Draught of An Agreement
of the People, by them framed and prepared.
IN our late Remonstrance of the 18 of November last, we propounded (next after
the matters of public Justice) some Foundations for a general settlement of
Peace in the Nation, which we therein desired might be formed and Established
in the nature of a general Contract or Agreement of the People; and since
then, the matters so propounded be wholly rejected, or no consideration of them
admitted in Parliament (though visibly of highest Moment to the Public) and
all ordinary Remedies being denied, we were necessitated to an extraordinary
way of Remedy; whereby to avoid the mischiefs then at hand, and set you in a
condition (without such obstructions or diversions by corrupt Members) to
proceed to matters of public Justice and general Settlement. Now as nothing
did in our own hearts more justify our late undertakings toward many Members
in this Parliament, then the necessity thereof in order to a sound Settlement
in the Kingdom, and the integrity of our intentions to make use of it only to
that end: so we hold our selves obliged to give the People all assurance
possible, That our opposing the corrupt closure endeavored with the King, was
not in design to hinder Peace or Settlement, (thereby to render our
employments, as Soldiers, necessary to be continued,) and that neither that
extraordinary course we have taken, nor any other proceedings of ours, have
been intended for the setting up of any particular Party or Interest, by or
with which to uphold our selves in Power and Dominion over the Nation, but that
it was and is the desire of our hearts, in all we have done, (with the
hindering of that imminent evil, and destructive conjunction with the King) to
make way for the settlement of a Peace and Government of the Kingdom upon
Grounds of common Freedom and Safety: And therefore because ou^ former
Overtures for that purpose (being only in general terms, and not reduced to a
certainty of particulars fit for practice) might possibly be understood but as
plausible pretenses, not intended really to be be put into effect, We have
thought it our duty to draw out these generals into an entire frame of
particulars, ascertained with such circumstances as may make it effectively
practicable. And for that end, while your time has been taken up in other
matters of high and present Importance, we have spent much of ours in preparing
and perfecting such a draught of Agreement, and in all things so
circumstantiated, as to render it ripe for your speedier consideration, and the
Kingdoms acceptance and practice (if approved,) and so we do herewith humbly
present it to you. Now to prevent misunderstanding of our intentions therein,
We have but this to say, That we are far from such a Spirit, as positively to
impose our private apprehensions upon the judgments of any in the Kingdom, that
have not forfeited their Freedom, and much less upon your selves: Neither are
we apt in any wise to insist upon circumstantial things, or ought that is not
evidently fundamental to that public Interest for which You and We have
declared and engaged; But in this Tender of it we humbly desire,

1. That whether it shall be fully approved by You and received by the People
(as it now stands) or not, it may yet remain upon Record, before you, a
perpetual witness of our real intentions and utmost endeavors for a sound and
equal Settlement, and as a testimony whereby all men may be assured, what we
are willing and ready to acquiesce in; and their jealousies satisfied or mouths
stopped, who are apt to think or say, we have no bottom.

2. That (with all expedition which the immediate and pressing great affairs
will admit) it may receive your most mature Consideration and Resolutions upon
it, not that we desire either the whole, or what you shall like in it, should
be by your Authority imposed as a Law upon the Kingdom, (for so it would lose
the intended nature of An Agreement of the People,) but that (so far as it
concurs with your own judgments) it may receive Your Seal of Approbation only.

3. That (according to the method propounded therein) it may be tendered to the
People in all parts, to be subscribed by those that are willing, (as Petitions,
and other things of a voluntary nature, are;) and that meanwhile, the
ascertaining of those circumstances, which it refers to Commissioners in the
several Counties, may be proceeded upon in a way preparatory to the practice of
it: And if upon the Account of subscriptions (to be returned by those
Commissioners in April next) there appear to be a general or common Reception
of it amongst the People, or by the well affected of them, and such as are not
obnoxious for Delinquency: it may then take place, and effect according to the
Tenor and Substance of it. And Your Petitioners shall pray, etc.

WHITEHALL Jan. 15. 1649. By the Appointment of his Excellency, and the general
Council of Officers of the Army. Jo: RUSHVVORTH Secr'.

AN AGREEMENT OF THE PEOPLE OF ENGLAND, And the places therewith INCORPORATED,
For a secure and present Peace, upon Grounds of Common Right, Freedom and
Safety.
HAving by our late labors and hazards made it appear to the world at how high
a rate we value our Just Freedom, And God having so far owned our cause as to
deliver the Enemies thereof into our hands, We do now hold our selves bound in
mutual duty to each other to take the best care we can for the future, to
avoid both the danger of returning into a slavish condition, and the chargeable
remedy of another War: For as it cannot be imagined, That so many of our
Country men would have opposed us in this Quarrel, if they had understood
their own good, so may we hopefully promise to our selves, That when our Common
Right and Liberties shall be cleared, their endeavors will be disappointed,
that seek to make themselves our Masters, since therefore our former
oppressions, and not yet ended troubles, have been occasioned, either by want
of frequent National Meetings in Council, or by the undue or unequal
Constitution thereof, or by rendering those meetings ^neffectual. We are fully
agreed and resolved (God willing) to provide, That hereafter our
Representatives be neither left to an uncertainty for time, nor be unequally
constituted, nor made useless to the ends for which they are intended.

In Order whereunto We Declare and Agree;

1. That to prevent the many inconveniences, apparently arising from the long
continuance of the same persons in supreme Authority, this Present Parliament
end and disolve upon, or before the last day of April, in the year of our Lord.
1649.

2. That the People of England (being at this day very unequally distributed,
by Counties, Cities and Buroughs, for the Election of their Representatives)
be indifferently proportioned: And to this end, That the Representative of the
whole Nation shall consist of four hundred persons, or not above; and in each
County, and the places thereto subjoyned, there shall be chosen, to make up the
said Representative at all times, the several numbers here mentioned; VIZ.

In the County of Kent, with the Buroughs, Towns, and Parishes therein (except
such as are hereunder particularly named) ten. 10 The City of Canterbury, with
the Suburbs adjoining, and Liberties thereof, two. 2 The City of Rochester,
with the Parishes of Chatham and Strowd, one. 1 The Cinque Ports in Kent and
Sussex, viz. Dover, Rumney, Hyde, Sandwich, Hastings, with the towns of Rye
and Winchelsey, three. 3 The County of Sussex, with the Buroughs, Towns and
Parishes therein (except Chichester and the Cinque Ports) eight. 8 The City of
Chichester, with the Suburbs and Liberties thereof, one. 1 The County of
Southampton, with the Buroughs, Towns and Parishes therein, except such as are
hereunder named, eight. 8 The City of Winchester, with the Suburbs and
Liberties thereof, one. 1 The County of the town of Southampton, one 1 The
County of Dorset, with the Buroughs, Towns and Parishes therein (except
Dorchester) seven. 7 The Town of Dorchester, one. 1 The County of Devon, with
the Buroughs, Towns and Parishes therein, except such as are hereunder
particularly named, twelve. 12 The City of Excester, two. 2 The Town of
Plymonth, two. 2 The Town of Barnstaple, one. 1 The County of Cornwall, with
the Buroughs, Towns, and Parishes therein, eight. 8 The County of Somerset,
with the Buroughs, Towns and Parishes therein, except such as are hereunder
named, eight. 8 The City of Bristoll, three. 3 The Town of Taunton-Deane, one.
1 The County of Wilts, with the Buroughs, Towns and Parishes therein (except
Salisbury, seven. 7 The City of Salisbury, one. 1 The County of Berks, with the
Buroughs, Towns and Parishes therein, except Reading, five. 5 The Town of
Reading, one. 1 The County of Surrey, with the Buroughs, Towns, and Parishes
therein, except Southwarke, five. 5 The Borough of Southwarke, two. 2 The
County of Middlesex, with the Buroughs, Towns, and Parishes therein, except
such as are hereunder named, four. 4 The City of London, eight. 8 The City of
Westminster, and the Duchy, two. 2 The County of Hartford, with the
Buroughs, Towns, and Parishes therein, six. 6 The County of Buckingham with
the Buroughs, Towns and Parishes therein, six. 6 The County of Oxon, with the
Buroughs, Towns, and Parishes therein (except such as are here undernamed)
four. 4 The City of Oxon, two. 2 The University of Oxon, two. 2 The County of
Gloucester, with the Buroughs, towns and Parishes therein (except Gloucester)
seven. 7 The City of Gloucester, two. 2 The County of Hereford, with the
Buroughs, towns, and Parishes therein (except Hereford) four. 4 The City of
Hereford, one. 1 The County of Worcester, with the Buroughs, towns, and
Parishes therein (except Worcester) four. 4 The City of Worcester, two. 2 The
County of Warwick, with the Buroughs, towns, and Parishes therein (except
Coventrey) five. 5 The City of Coventrey, two. 2 The County of Northampton,
with the Buroughs, towns and Parishes therein (except Northampton) five. 5 The
Town of Northampton, one. 1 The County of Bedford, with the Buroughs, towns,
and Parishes therein, four. 4 The County of Cambridge, with the Buroughs,
towns, and Parishes therein (except such as are here under particularly named)
four. 4 The University of Cambridge, two. 2 The Town of Cambridge, two. 2 The
County of Essex, with the Buroughs, towns, and Parishes therein (except
Colchester) eleven. 11 The Town of Colchester, two. 2 The County of Suffolk,
with the Buroughs, Towns, and Parishes therein (except such as are hereunder
named) ten. 10 The Town of Ipswich, two. 2 The Town of S. Edmonds Bury, one. 1
The County of Norfolk, with the Buroughs, Towns, and Parishes therein (except
such as are hereunder named) nine. 9 The City of Norwich, three. 3 The Town of
Lynne, one. 1 The Town of Yarmouth, one. 1 The County of Lincoln, with the
Buroughs, Towns, and Parishes therein (except the City of Lincoln, and the
town of Boston) eleven. 11 The City of Lincoln, one. 1 The Town of Boston, one.
1 The County of Rutland, with the Buroughs, Towns, and Parishes therein, one.
1 The County of Huntington, with the Buroughs, Towns and Parishes therein,
three. 3 The County of Leicester, with the Buroughs, Towns and Parishes
therein (except Leicester) five. 5 The Town of Leicester, one. 1 The County of
Nottingham, with the Buroughs, Towns and Parishes therein (except Nottingham)
four. 4 The Town of Nottingham, one. 1 The County of Derby, with the
Buroughs, Towns, and Parishes therein (except Derby) five. 5 The Town of
Derby, one. 1 The County of Stafford, with the City of Lichfield, the
Buroughs, town and Parishes therein, six. 6 The County of Salop, with the
Buroughs, towns, and Parishes therein (except Shrewsbury) six. 6 The Town of
Shrewesbury, one. 1 The County of Chester, with the Buroughs, towns, and
Parishes therein (except Chestor) five. 5 The City of Chester, two. 2 The
County of Lancaster, with the Buroughs, towns, and Parishes therein (except
Manchester) six. 6 The town of Manchester, and the Parish, one. 1 The County of
York, with the Buroughs, towns, and Parishes, therein, except such as are
here under named, fifteen. 15 The City and County of the City of York, three.
3 The Town and County of Kingston upon Hull, one. 1 The town and Parish of
Leeds, one. 1 The County Palatine of Duresme, with the Buroughs, towns, and
Parishes therein, except Duresme and Gateside, three. 3 The City of Duresme,
one. 1 The County of Northumberland, with the Buroughs, towns and Parishes
therein, except such as are here under named, three. 3 The Town and County of
Newcastle upon Tyne, with Gateside, two. 2 The Town of Berwicke, one. 1 The
County of Cumberland, with the Buroughs, towns, and Parishes therein, three. 3
The County of Westmerland, with the Buroughs, towns and Parishes therein,
two. 2 The Isle of Anglesey (with the Parishes therein) two. 2 The County of
Brecknock, with the Buroughs, towns, and Parishes therein, three. 3 The County
of Cardigan, with the Buroughs and Parishes therein, three. 3 The County of
Caermarthen, with the Buroughs and Parishes therein, three. 3 The County of
Carnarvon, with the Buroughs and Parishes therein, two. 2 The County of
Denbigh, with the Buroughs and Parishes therein, two. 2 The County of Flint,
with the Buroughs and Parishes therein, one. 1 The County of Monmouth, with
the Buroughs and Parishes therein, four. 4 The County of Glamorgan, with the
Buroughs and Parishes therein, four. 4 The County of Merioneth, with the
Buroughs and Parishes therein, two. 2 The County of Mountgomery, with the
Buroughs and Parishes therein, three. 3 The County of Radnor, with the
Buroughs and Parishes therein, two. 2 The County of Pembroke, with the
Buroughs, Towns and Parishes therein, four. 4

Provided, That the first or second Representative may (if they see cause)
assign the remainder of the four hundred Representors, (not hereby assigned)
or so many of them as they shall see cause for, unto such Counties as shall
appear in this present distribution to have less then their due proportion.
Provided also, That where any City or Borough to which one Representor or
more is assigned shall be found in a due proportion, not competent alone to
elect a Representor, or the number of Representors assigned thereto, it is left
to future Representatives to assign such a number of Parishes or Villages
near adjoining to such City, or Borough, to be joined therewith in the
Elections, as may make the same proportionable.

3. That the people do of course choose themselves a Representative once in two
years, and shall meet for that purpose upon the first Thursday in every second
May be eleven of of Clock in the morning, and the Representatives so chosen to
meet upon the second Thursday in June following at the usual place in
Westminster, or such other place as by the foregoing Representative, or the
Council of State in the intervall, shall be from time to time appointed and
published to the People, at the least twenty days before the time of Election.
And to continue their Session there or elsewhere until the second Thursday in
December following, unless they shall adjourne, or dissolve themselves sooner,
but not to continue longer. The Election of the first Representative to be on
the first Thursday in May, 1649. And that, and all future Elections to be
according to the rules prescribed for the same purpose in this Agreement, viz.

1. That the Electors in every Division, shall be Natives, or Denizons of
England, not persons receiving Alms, but such as are assessed ordinarily,
toward the relief of the poor; not servants to, and receiving wages from any
particular person. And in all Elections, (except for the Universities,) they
shall be men of one and twenty years old, or upwards, and housekeepers,
dwelling within the Devision for which the Election is provided, That until
the end of seven years next ensuing the time herein limited for the end of
this present Parliament, no person shall be admitted to, or have any hand or
voice in such Elections, who has adhered unto, or assisted the King against
the Parliament, in any the late Wars, or Insurrections, or who shall make, or
join in, or abet any forcible opposition against this Agreement.

2. That such persons and such only, may be elected to be of the
Representative, who by the rule aforesaid are to have voice in Elections in one
place or other; provided, That of those, none shall be eligible for the first
or second Representatives, who have not voluntarily assisted the Parliament
against the King, either in person before the 14th. of June 1645. or else in
Money, Plate, Horse, or Arms, lent upon the Propositions before the end of May
1643. or who have joined in, or abetted the treasonable Engagement in London,
in the year 1647. or who declared or engaged themselves for a Cessation of
Arms with the Scots, that invaded this Nation, the last Summer, or for
compliance with the Actors in any the insurrections, of the same Summer, or
with the Prince of Wales, or his accomplices in the Revolted Fleet. And also
provided, That such persons as by the rules in the preceding Article are not
capable of electing until the end of seven years, shall not be capable to be
elected until the end of foureteen years, next ensuing. And we do desire and
recommend it to all men, that in all times the persons to be chosen for this
great trust, may be men of courage, fearing God, and hating covetousness, and
that our Representatives would make the best Provisions for that end.

3. That who ever, by the two rules in the next preceding Articles, are
incapable of Election, or to be elected, shall assume to vote in, or be present
at such Elections for the first or second Representative, or being elected
shall presume to sit or vote in either of the said Representatives, shall incur
the pain of confiscation of the moiety of his Estate, to the use of the
public, in case he have any Estate visible, to the value of fifty pounds. And
if he have not such an Estate, then shall incur the pain of imprisonment, for
three months; And if any person shall forcibly oppose, molest, or hinder the
people, (capable of electing as aforesaid) in their quiet and free Election of
Representors, for the first Representative, then each person so offending shall
incur the penalty of confiscation of his whole Estate, both real and
personal; and (if he have not an Estate to the value of fifty pounds,) shall
suffer imprisonment during one whole year without Bail, or mainprize.
Provided, That the Offender in each such case, be convicted within three Months
next after the committing of his offense, And the first Representative is to
make further provision for the avoiding of these evils in after Elections.

4 That to the end, all Officers of State may be certainly accomptable, and no
factions made to maintain corrupt interests, no Member of a Council of State,
nor any Officer of any salary forces in Army, or Garrison, nor any Treasurer or
Receiver of public moneys, shall (while such) be elected to be of a
Representative. And in case any such Election shall be, the same to be void.
And in case any Lawyer shall be chosen of any Representative, or Council of
State, then he shall be incapable of practice as a Lawyer, during thattrust.

5 For the more convenient Election of Representatives, each County wherein
more then three Representors are to be chosen, with the Towns Corporate and
Cities, (if there be any) lying within the compass thereof, to which no
Representors are herein assigned, shall be divided by a due proportion into so
many, and such parts, as each part may elect two, and no part above three
Representors; For the setting forth of which Divisions, and the ascertaining of
other circumstances hereafter expressed, so as to make the Elections less
subject to confusion, or mistake, in order to the next Representative, Thomas
Lord Gray of Grooby, Sir John Danvers, Sir Henry Holcraft, Knights; Moses Wall
Gentleman, Samuel Moyer, John Langley, William Hawkins, Abraham Babington,
Daniel Tailor, Mark Hilsley, Richard Price, and Col. John White, Citizens of
London, or any five, or more of them are entrusted to nominate and appoint
under their Hands and Seals, three or more fit persons in each County, and in
each City, and Borough, to which one Representor or more is assigned to be as
Commissioners for the ends aforesaid, in the respective Counties, Cities, and
Buroughs, and by like writing under their Hands and Seals shall certify into
the Parliament Records, before the fourteenth day of February next, the names
of the Commissioners so appointed for the respective Counties, Cities, and
Buroughs, which Commissioners or any three, or more of them, for the
respective Counties, Cities, and Buroughs, shall before the end of February
next, by writing under their Hands and Seals, appoint two fit and faithful
persons, or more in each Hundred, Lath, or Wapentake, within the respective
Counties, and in each Ward, within the City of London, to take care for the
orderly taking of all voluntary subscriptions to this Agreement by fit persons
to be employed for that purpose in every Perish who are to return the
subscriptions so taken to the persons that employed them, (keeping a transcript
thereof to themselves,) and those persons keeping like Transcripts to return
the Original subscriptions to the respective Commissioners, by whom they were
appointed, at, or before the fourteenth of April next, to be registered and
kept in the County Records, for the said Counties respectively, and the
subscriptions in the City of London, to be kept in the chief Court of Record
for the said City. And the Commissioners for the other Cities and Borroughs
respectively, are to appoint two or more fit persons in every Parish within
their Precincts to take such subscriptions, and (keeping transcripts thereof)
to return the Originalls to the respective Commissioners by the said fourteenth
of April next, to be registered and kept in the chief Court within the
respecrive Cities and Buroughs. And the same Commissioners, or any three, or
more of them, for the several Counties, Cities, and Boroughs, respectively,
shall, where more then three Representors are to be chosen, divide such
Counties (as also the City of London) into so many, and such parts as are
aforementioned, and shall set forth the bounds of such divisions, and shall in
every County, City, and Borough (where any Representors are to be chosen) and
in every such division as aforesaid within the City of London, and within the
several Counties so divided, respectively, appoint one certain place wherein
the people shall meet for the choice of their Representors, and some one fit
Person or more inhabiting within each Borough, City, County, or Division,
respectively, to be present at the time and place of Election, in the nature of
Sheriffs to regulate the Elections, and by Pole, or otherwise, clearly to
distinguish and judge thereof, and to make return of the Person or Persons
Elected as is hereafter expressed, and shall likewise in writing under their
hands and Seals, make Certificates of the several Divisions (with the bounds
thereof) by them set forth, and of the certain places of meeting, and Persons,
in the nature of Sheriffs appointed in them respectively as aforesaid,
Memorandum, That the Commissioners for the respective Counties, Cities, and
Boroughs, are to return a Computation of the number of Subscribers in the
several Parishes unto the Trustees herein named before the end of April next,
at such place, and in such form as the said Trustees, or any five or more of
them shall direct.
and cause such Certificates to be returned into the Parliament Records before
the end of April next, and before that time shall also cause the same to be
published in every Parish within the Counties, Cities, and Boroughs
respectively, and shall in every such Parish likewise nominate and appoint (by
Warrant under their hands and Seals) one Trusty person, or more, inhabiting
therein, to make a true list of all the Persons within their respective
Parishes, who according to the rules aforegoing are to have voice in the
Elections, and expressing, who amongst them are by the same rules capable of
being Elected, and such List (with the said Warrant) to bring in, and return
at the time and place of Election, unto the Person appointed in the nature of
Sheriff, as aforesaid, for that Borough, City, County, or Division
respectively; which Person so appointed as Sheriff being present at the time
and place of Election; or in case of his absence by the space-of one hour
after the time limited for the peoples meeting, then any Person present that is
eligible, as aforesaid, whom the people then and there assembled shall choose
for that end, shall receive and keep the said Lists, and admit the Persons
therein contained, or so many of them as are present unto a free Vote in the
said Election, and having first caused this Agreement to be publicly read in
the audience of the people, shall proceed unto, and regulate and keep peace and
order in the Elections, and by Pole, or otherwise, openly distinguish and judge
of the same: And thereof by Certificate, or writing under the hands and Seals
of himself, and six or more of the Electors (nominating the Person or Persons
duly Elected) shall make a true return into the Parliament Records, within one
and twenty days after the Election (under pain for default thereof, or for
making any false Return to forfeit one hundred pounds to the Public use*)
And shall also cause Indentures to be made, and interchangeably sealed and
delivered betwixt himself, and six or more of the said Electors on the one
part, and the Persons, or each Person Elected severally on the other part,
expressing their Election of him as a Representor of them, according to this
Agreement, and his acceptance of that trust, and his promise accordingly to
perform the same with faithfulness, to the best of his understanding and
ability, for the glory of God, and good of the people.

This course is to hold for the first Representative, which is to provide for
the ascertaining of these Circumstances in order to future Representatives.

4. That one hundred and fifty Members at least be always present in each
sitting of the Representative, at the passing of any Law, or doing of any Act,
whereby the people are to be bound; saving, That the number of sixty may make
an House for Debates, or Resolutions that are preparatory thereunto.

5 That each Representative shall within twenty days after their first meeting
appoint a Council of State for the managing of Public Affairs, until the
tenth day after the meeting of the next Representative, unless that next
Representative think fit to put an end to that trust sooner. And the same
Council to Act, and proceed therein, according to such Instructions and
limitations as the Representative shall give, and not otherwise.

6 That in each intervall betwixt Bienniall Representatives, the Council of
State (in case of imminent danger, or extreme necessity) may summon a
Representative to be forthwith chosen, and to meet; so as the Session thereof
continue not above fourscore days, and so as it dissolve, at least, fifty
days before the appointed time for the next Bienniall Representative, and upon
the fiftyeth day so preceding it shall dissolve of course, if not otherwise
dissolved sooner.

7 That no Member of any Representative be made either Receiver, Treasurer, or
other Officer, during that employment, saving to be a Member of the Council of
State.

8 That the Representatives have, and shall be understood, to have, the
Supreme trust in order to the preservation and Government of the whole, and
that their power extend, without the consent or concurrence of any other Person
or Persons, to the erecting and abolishing of Courts of Justice, and public
Offices, and to the enacting, altering, repealing, and declaring of Laws, and
the highest and final Judgment, concerning all Natural or Civil things, but
not concerning things Spiritual or Evangelicall; Provided, that even in things
Natural and Civil these six particulars next following, are, and shall be
understood to be excepted, and reserved from our Representatives, viz.

1 We do not empower them to impressed or constrain any Person to serve in
Foreign War either by Sea or Land, nor for any Millitary Service within the
KINGDOM, save that they may take order for the the forming, training and
exercising of the people in a Military way to be in readiness for resisting of
Foreign Invasions, suppressing of sudden Insurrections, or for assisting in
execution of Law; and may take order for the employing and conducting of them
for those ends; provided, That even in such cases none be compellable to go
out of the County he lives in, if he procure another to serve in his room. 2.
That after the time herein limited for the commencement of the first
Representative, none of the people may be at any time questioned for any thing
said or done in relation to the late Wars, or public differences, otherwise
then in execution or pursuance of the determinations of the present House of
Commons against such as have adhered to the King, or his interest against the
people: And saving that Accomptants for public moneys received, shall remain
accomptable for the same. 3. That no securities given, or to be given by the
Public Faith of the Nation, nor any engagement of the Public Faith for
satisfaction of debts and damages, shall be made void or invalid by the next,
or any future Representatives; except to such Creditors, as have, or shall have
justly forfeited the same; and saving, That the next Representative may
confirm or make null, in part, or in whole, all gifts of Lands, Moneys,
Offices, or otherwise, made by the present Parliament to any Member or
Attendant of either House. 4. That in any Laws hereafter to be made, no
person, by virtue of any tenure, grant, Charter, patent, degree or birth, shall
be privileged from subjection thereto, or from being bound thereby, as well as
others. 5. That the Representative may not give judgment upon any man's person
or estate, where no Law has before provided; save only in calling to Account,
and punishing public Officers for abusing or failing their trust. 6. That no
Representative may in any wise render up, or give, or take away any the
Foundations of common Right, Liberty and Safety contained in this Agreement;
nor level men's Estates, destroy Propriety, or make all things common: And that
in all matters of such fundamental concernment, there shall be a liberty to
particular Members of the said Representatives to enter their dissents from the
major vote.
9. Concerning Religion, we agree as follows: 1. It is intended, That
Christian Religion be held forth and recommended, as the public Profession in
this Nation (which we desire may by the grace of God be reformed to the
greatest purity in Doctrine, Worship and Discipline, according to the Word of
God.) The instructing of the People whereunto in a public way (so it be not
compulsive) as also the maintaining of able Teachers for that end, and for the
confutation or discovery of Heresy, Error, and whatsoever is contrary to
sound Doctrine, is allowed to be provided for by our Representatives; the
maintenance of which Teachers may be out of a public Treasury, and we desire
not by tithes. Provided, That Popery or Prelacy be not held forth as the
public way or profession in this Nation. 2. That to the public Profession so
held forth none be compelled by penalties or otherwise; but only may be
endeavored to be won by sound Doctrine, and the Example of a good
Conversation. 3. That such as profess Faith in God by Jesus Christ (however
differing in judgment from the Doctrine, Worship or Discipline publicly held
forth, as aforesaid) shall not be restrained from, but shall be protected in
the profession of their Faith and exercise of Religion according to their
Consciences in any place (except such as shall be set apart for the public
Worship, where we provide not for them, unless they have leave) so as they
abuse not this liberty to the civil injury of others, or to actual disturbance
of the public peace on their parts; nevertheless it is not intended to be
hereby provided, That this liberty shall necessarily extend to Popery or
Prelacy. 4. That all Laws, Ordinances, Statutes, and clauses in any Law,
Statute, or Ordinance to the contrary of the liberty provided for in the two
particulars next preceding concerning Religion be and are hereby repealed and
made void.


10. It is agreed, That whosoever shall by Force of Arms, resist the Orders of
the next or any future Representative (except in case where such Representative
shall evidently render up, or give, or take away the Foundations of common
Right, Liberty and Safety contained in this Agreement) shall forthwith after
his or their such Resistance lose the benefit and protection of the Laws, and
shall be punishable with Death, as an Enemy and Traitor to the Nation.

The form of subscription for the Officers of the Army.

Of the things expressed in this Agreement, The certain ending of this Parliament
(as in the first Article) The equal or proportionable distribution of the
number of the Representators to be elected (as in the second) The certainty of
the peoples meeting to elect for Representatives Bienniall, and their freedom
in Elections with the certainty of meeting, sitting and ending of
Representatives so elected (which are provided for in the third Article) as
also the Qualifications of Persons to elect or be elected (as in the first and
second particulars under the third Article) Also the certainty of a number for
passing a Law or preparatory debates (provided for in the fourth Article) The
matter of the fifth Article, concerning the Council of State, and the sixth
concerning the calling, sitting and ending of Representatives extraordinary;
Also the power of Representatives, to be, as in the eighth Article, and
limited, as in the six reserves next following the same; Likewise the second
and third particulars under the ninth Article concerning Religion, and the
whole matter of the tenth Article; (All those) we do account and declare to be
Fundamental to our common Right, Liberty, and Safety; And therefore do both
agree thereunto, and resolve to maintain the same, as God shall enable us. The
rest of the matters in this Agreement, we account to be useful and good for
the Public, and the particular circumstances of Numbers, Times and Places
expressed in the several Articles, we account not Fundamental, but we find
them necessary to be here determined for the making the Agreement certain and
practicable, and do hold those most convenient that are here set down, and
therefore do positively agree thereunto.

A Declaration of the General Council of Officers of the Army: Concerning the
Agreement by them framed in order to peace, and from them tendered to the People
of England.
HAVING ever since the end of the first War longingly waited for some such
settlement of the Peace and Government of this Nation, whereby the Common
Rights, Liberties and safety thereof, might in future be more hopefully
provided for, and therein something gained, which might be accounted to the
present age and posterity (through the mercy of God) as a fruit of their
labors, hazards and sufferings, that have engaged in the common cause, as some
price of the blood spilt, and balance to the public expense and damage
sustained in the War, and as some due improvement of that success, and
blessing God has pleased to give therein: And having not found any such
Establishment assayed or endeavored by those whose proper work it was, but
the many addresses and desires of our selves, and others, in that behalf,
rejected, discounte^nanced and opposed, and only a corrupt closure endeavored
with the King, on terms, serving only to his interest, and theirs that
promoted the same; And being thereupon (for the avoidance of the evil thereof,
and to make way for some better settlement) necessitated to take extraordinary
ways of remedy (when the ordinary were denied;) Now to exhibit our utmost
endeavors for such a settlement, whereupon we, and other Forces, (with which
the Kingdom has so long been burdened above measure, and whose continuance
shall not be necessary for the immediate safety and quiet thereof) may with
comfort to our selves, and honesty toward the public, disband, and return
to our homes and callings; and to the end men's jealousies and fears may be
removed concerning any intentions in us to hold up our selves in power, to
oppress or domineer over the people by the sword; And that all men may fully
understand those grounds of Peace and Government whereupon (they may rest
assured) We shall for our parts acquiesce; We have spent much time to prepare,
and have at last (through the blessing of God) finished a Draught of such a
settlement, in the nature of an Agreement of the People for Peace amongst
themselves; Which we have lately presented to the Honorable the Commons now
assembled in Parliament, and do herewith tender to the people of this Nation.

We shall not otherwise commend it, then to say, It contains the best and most
hopeful Foundations for the Peace, and future well Government of this Nation,
that we can devise or think on, within the line of humane power, and such,
wherein all the people interessed in this Land (that have not particular
interests of advantage and power over others, divided from that which is common
and public) are indifferently and equally provided for, save where any have
justly forfeited their share in that common interest by opposing it, and so
rendered themselves incapable thereof (at least) for some time: And we call the
Consciences of all that read or hear it, to witness, whether we have therein
provided or propounded any thing of advantage to our selves in any capacity
above others, or ought, but what is as good for one as for another: And
therefore as we doubt not but that (the Parliament being now freed from the
obstructing and perverting Councels of such Members, by many of whom a corrupt
compliance with the Kings Interest has been driven on, and all settlement
otherwise has hitherto been hindered) Those remaining worthy Patriots to whom
we have presented the Agreement, will for the maine allow thereof, and give
their seal of Approbation thereby; So we desire and hope, That all good People
of England whose heart God shall make sensible of their, and our common
concernment therein, and of the usefulness and sutablenesse thereof to the
public ends it holds forth, will cordially embrace it, and by subscription
declare their concurrence, and accord thereto, when it shall be tendered to
them, as is directed therein; wherein, if it please God we shall find a good
Reception of it with the people of the Nation, or the Well-affected therein, We
shall rejoice at the hoped good to the Commonwealth, which (through Gods mercy)
may redound therefrom, and that God has vouchsafed thereby to make us
isntrumental for any good settlement to this poor distracted Country, as he
has formerly made us for the avoiding of evil. But if God shall (in his
Righteous Judgment toward this Land) suffer the people to be so blinded as
not to see their own common good and freedom, endeavored to be provided for
therein, or any to be so deluded (to their own and the public prejudice) as
to make opposition thereto, whereby the effect of it be hindered, we have, yet,
by the preparation and tender of it discharged our Consciences to God, and duty
to our native Country in our utmost endeavors for a settlement, (to the best
of our understandings) unto a just public interest; And hope we shall be
acquitted before God and good men, from the blame of any further troubles,
distractions, or miseries to the Kingdom, which may arise through the neglect
or rejection thereof, or opposition thereto.

Now whereas there are many good things in particular ters which our own
Reasons and observations or the Petitions of others have suggested, and which
we hold requisite to be provided for in their proper time and way (as the
setting of moderate Fines upon such of the Kings party, as shall not be excepted
for life, with a certain day for their coming in and submitting, and an Act of
pardon to such as shall come in and submit accordingly, or have already
compounded, The settling of a Revenue for all necessary public uses, in such a
way as the people may be most eased, The assigning and ascertayning of
securities for Soldiers Arrears, and for public Debts and Damages. The
taking away of Tithes, and putting that maintenance which shall be thought
competent for able Teachers to instruct the people, into some other way, less
subject to scruple or contention, the clearing and perfecting of Accounts for
all public Moneys, the relieving of prisoners for Debt; the removing or
reforming of other evils or inconveniences in the present Laws, and
Administrations thereof, the redress of abuses, and supplying of Defects
therein, the putting of all the Laws and proceedings thereof into the English
tongue, the reducing of the course of Law to more brevity and less charge, the
settling of Courts of Justice and Record in each County or less Divisions of
the Kingdom, and the erecting of Courts of Merchants for controversies in
trading, and the like.) These and many other things of like sort being of a
particular nature, and requiring very particular and mature consideration, with
larger experience in the particular matters then we have, and much Caution,
that by taking away of present Evils greater inconveniences may not ensue for
want of other provisions in the room thereof, where it is necessary; and we
(for our parts) being far from any Desire or thought to assume or exercise a
Law-giving, or Judicial power over the Kingdom, or to meddle in any thing
save the fundamental settling of that power in the most equal and hopeful way
for Common Right, Freedom, and Safety (as in this Agreement) and having not
means nor time for, nor the necessity of some present general settlement
admitting the delay of, such a consideration, as seems requisite in relation to
such numerous particulars, we have purposely declined the inserting of such
things into this Agreement. But (as we have formerly expressed our desires that
way, so) when the matters of public Justice, and general settlement are
over, we shall not be wanting (if needful) humbly to recommend such
particulars to the Parliament, by whom they may more properly, safely, and
satisfactorily be provided for, and we doubt not but they will be so, such of
them, at least, as are of more near and present concernment, by this
Parliament, and the rest by future Representatives in due time.

And thus we recommend for present the business of this Agreement without
further addition to the best consideration of all indifferent and equal minded
men, and commit the issue thereof (as of all our ways and concernments) to the
good pleasure of the Lord, whose will is better to us then our own, or any
inventions of ours, who has decreed and promised better things then we can
wish or imagine, and who is most faithful to accomplish them in the best way
and season.

By the appointment of the General Council of Officers. John Rushworth
Secretary.

FINIS.

