The Israelite Indeed.

A SERMON Preached at the FUNERAL OF MARK COTTLE Esquire LATE Register of the
Prerogative-Office, on Thursday, Jan. 5. 1681.

By SAM. FREEMAN, M. A. and Rector of St. Ann's Aldersgate, London.

LONDON, Printed for Edward Gellibrand at the Golden Ball in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1682.

To the deservedly honored Mrs. Alice Cottle, late Wife of Mark Cottle Esquire;
deceased.
Madam,
BEing much importuned by some Friends that were present at the Preaching of
this Sermon, to make it public, I have at last, not without a great deal of
reluctance, yielded to it. I confess, the Arguments they used were not
inconsiderable, (viz.) that, 'twas fit the memory of so excellent a Person
should be transmitted to Posterity, and that I ought to contribute what I could
to the reformation of this loose and vicious Age, by setting before them so
rare an Example of Virtue and Goodness; But being conscious of my own inability
so lively to draw his Picture, as to make it fully to represent him, or in any
tolerable degree be useful to others, I had withstood their Arguments as well
as their Request, but that I was informed the thing would be acceptable to you
also, to whom I must acknowledge my Obligations to be so great, that I am put
beyond the possibility of declining any thing that may be grateful to you; such
therefore as it is I present it to you; I know the hearty love you bear to the
Subject will be inducement enough to you to excuse the meaness of the Dress it
comes in, and if it proves of any advantage, to the Interest of Religion, to
promote Truth and Righteousness amongst men, I shall not repent the Publication
of it. I am ever,

Madam, Your most humble and most obliged Servant, Sam. Freeman.

The Israelite Indeed.
St. JOHN I. 47. Behold an Israelite indeed, in whom is no guile.
COncerning Nathanael, the Subject of what is here said in the Text, these Four
things may be considered by us, Who he was? What was his Country and
Profession? What the manner of his Conversion? And what is the sense and meaning
of this Character here given him by our Savior?

1. For his Person. Several Learned men have concluded that this holy man and
St. Bartholomew were one and the same Person, it being usual with the Jews to
be called by two Names, their own, and that of their Fathers; So Peter is
called Barjona, Joseph, Barsabas; Joses, Barnabas; and Nathanael, Bartholomew;
that is, the Son of Tholmai: And that which gives credit to this Opinion, is
first, That Nathanael is reckoned up with the other Apostles, to whom our Lord
appeared at the Sea of Tiberias after his Resurrection; There were together,
says the Text, John 21. ver. 2.
Simon Peter, and Thomas and Nathanael of Cana in Galilee, and the Sons of
Zebedee, and two other of his Disciples. It Is also observed, that, as our
Evangelist St. John never sets down Bartholomew in the number of the Apostles,
so the other three take as little notice of Nathanael; and as in this Chapter,
Phillip and Nathanael are joined together in coming to Christ, so the rest of
the Evangelists have Phillip and Bartholomew.

2. For his Country. And that we are told plainly in the fore-quoted place, was
Cana in Galilee: What his Profession was, is not so certain; Tract. 7. in Joan.
St. Augustine tells us that he was a Civilian, a learned Doctor of the Law;
But, if we take him to be the same with Bartholomew, that, which Theodoret, and
some other of the Fathers affirm, is the more likely, viz. that not only he,
but all the Apostles in general, were Fishermen. God making choice of such mean
Instruments to propagate the Gospel, that so his power in carrying it on might
be made the more conspicuous through their weakness.

3. For the manner of his Conversion. We have that in the 45th Verse of this
Chapter; he was first brought to Christ by Phillip, who told him, That they had
found him, of whom Moses in the Law and the Prophets did write, Jesus of
Nazareth the Son of Joseph. And when he alleged that no good thing could come
out of Nazareth, and consequently that the Messiah could not be born there (as
indeed he was not, but at Bethlehem, but only supposed to be of Nazareth,
because he was educated there) Phillip bids him come and see the Person, and
satisfy himself: At his first approach our Savior welcomes him with this high
Encomium in the Text, Behold an Israelite indeed, in whom there is no guile.
Nathanael wondering at the Salutation, asks our Savior, how he came to know him
so well, since he had had hitherto no acquaintance with him; Our Savior
answered him, Before that Phillip called thee, when thou wast under the
Fig Tree, I saw thee. Convinced with this instance of our Lords Divinity,
forthwith he makes this Confession, Rabbi, thou art the Son of God, thou art
the King of Israel. As if he had said, I do now believe, not because of
Phillips saying, but because I have heard thee my self, and know that thou art
indeed the promised Messiah, the Person ordained by God to be the King and
Governor of his Church.

4. We are now come to consider the Character here given him by our Savior. An
Israelite indeed, in whom there is no guile; that is, he was a true honest
hearted man; a person of great simplicity and integrity; An Israelite indeed,
like Jaacob the Father of them, Genesis 25. 27.
a plain man.

For the better and more useful understanding of this Particular, I shall do
these two things. 1. Show you what it is to be an Israelite indeed, A person
without guile. 2. What are some of those Considerations that may engage us to
be so. For therefore does our Lord call upon us to behold Nathanael, that so we
might endeavor to be like him, and to imitate his Example.


1. To show you what it is to be an Israelite indeed -- etc. In general he is
one, whose Principles are right, and whose Actions are conformable to his
Principles; who in every case does that, which upon mature deliberation appears
most just and fit to him; who squares all his projects and practices by the
sure rule of Gods Law and sound Reason, and, whom, it is not in the power of
temptation, passion or prejudice, to warp from truth, or to bend into any
sinful complyances: In our Saviors words, he is one Matthew. 22. 37^ 39.
who loves God with all his heart, and loves his Neighbor as himself; In St.
Paul's language, one, whose greatest care Acts 24. 16.
and exercise it is, to keep a Conscience void of offense toward God and
toward Men.

But that I may give you the more lively Portraiture of him, and thereby
propose him with the greater advantage to your imitation, I shall be a little
more particular; and, first, give you an account of his Religious deportment
toward God; and, secondly, of his Civil conversation with men.

I. For his Religious Deportment toward God; and so he is one,

1. Who is Religious out of good Principles; such as these, that there is an
eternal God, infinitely good, wise land powerful, who is in every place, sees
every thing, and not only takes notice of our actions, but knows our very
hearts, and the most inward thoughts and intentions of them. That this God, as
Governor of the World, and Judge of men, concerns himself in all humane
affairs, disposes of all events, requires punctual obedience to his Laws, and
will justly reward every man according as their hearts and practices bear a
conformity to them. By such Principles as these, he is influenced on all
occasions; here he begins and here he ends all his actions; thus he considers
and proposes to himself; Verily there is a Reward for the Righteous, therefore
I Will be just and righteous in all my Dealings; the Poor in Spirit shall inherit
Heaven, therefore I Will labor to subdue my Pride; I Will forgive the Injuries that
are done to me, because he that forgives, shall be forgiven; I Will be merciful to
them in misery, because the merciful shall obtain mercy; I Will love my Enemies,
because this makes me like to God and fit for Heaven; I Will bless them that curse
me, because they that bless shall at last be most certainly blessed.

2. Whose Religion is inward, in the heart and soul, and not only in the
outward Action; whose Religion consists not merely in External Services, or
Bodily Exercises, but in an inward good complexion and virtuous disposition of
Soul. This is that our Savior told his Disciples, and in them us, Matthew. 5. 20.
Except your Righteousness shall exceed the Righteousness of the Scribes and
Pharisees, ye shall in no case enter into the Kingdom of Heaven: The
Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees was an External Righteousness,
consisting of External Rites, as Circumcision and Sacrifices; depending upon
External Privileges, as being of the Seed of Abram and Stock of Israel;
pretending to an external Sanctity and blamelesness of Conversation; These were
the great Doctors of the Jewish Church, and they Expounded the Law no farther;
with them no man was a Murderer, but he that sheathed his Sword in his Brothers
bowels; no man, an Adulterer, but he that actually lay with his Neighbors
Wife; they thought it no Injustice or Irreligion to return an Eye for an Eye,
and a Tooth for a Tooth, to retaliate and revenge in the highest degree; so
that, at the same time, their outward man might keep the Law, whilst their
inward man brake it. But the Religion of a true Israelite sinks deeper, enters
into his Soul, renews his Nature, curbing every exorbitant desire, and
suppressing every irregular motion and affection of the Heart; hence, he is
said to be Gal. 6. 15.
a new Creature, John 3. 3.
to be born again, Ephesians. 4. 23.
to be renewed in the spirit of his mind: and to this purpose are those words
of St. Paul applicable, He is not a Jew that is one outwardly, neither is that
Circumcision which is outward in the Flesh, Romans 2. 28.
but he is a Jew that is one inwardly; and Circumcision is that of the heart,
in the spirit, and not in the letter, whose praise is not of men, but of God.

3. Whose Religion is regular and peaceable as well as pure; he never runs away
with Objections upon hearsay, nor bespatters any legal Constitutions before he
examines them; he scruples not the use of some things that seem inconvenient to
him, provided they are not sinful, (there being no Church under Heaven free
from all exceptions as to matters of Discipline and Worship) and quietly and
prudently submits to the lawful, nay, doubtful appointments of men, rather than
the Bonds of Peace and Unity should be broken. He very well knows what a mortal
Enemy all Factions and Divisions are to Religion, how, like a Canker, they eat
out the Soul and Life of it, and therefore he sets himself with all his might
and skill to compose and suppress all religious Differences, and like that
brave Roman, is ready to Sacrifice himself to fill up the wide Gulf that men's
Contentions have made in the World. All separating Principles he abominates,
and thinks nothing too dear a price to be laid down for Peace but Truth and
Holiness.

4. He never takes up a Religion to serve a turn, to make it an Art to thrive
by, or a Footstool to climb up to his affected Greatness. He hates nothing more
than to see men make Religion a Pander to Vice, and an Engine to give credit to
their unwarrantable Undertakings; than to see them entitle God to their
Villainies, and father their Pride and their Passion, their Enthusiastic Freaks
and Delusions upon his Holy Spirit; such are they, who personate the Saint that
they may with less suspicion play the Devil; that prostitute Religion to bad
purposes, and use it as a paint to make ugly Designs look well-favour'd. 2 Samuel
15. 7.
Such an one was Absalom, who under the pretense of Devotion, and paying his
Vows to God, designed and plotted Rebellion against his Prince and Father; such
an one was Ahab, 1 Kings 21. 9.
who proclaimed a Fast that he might kill Naboth, and take possession of his
Vineyard; such were the Pharisees of old, Matthew. 6. 16.
what heavenly looks, what devout gestures, what long prayers, what frequent
fastings, had they more than other men? you might have found them praying in
every corner of the Street, and some of them did almost nothing else but pray;
and yet all this did these demure Hypocrites make use of but as a Cloak to
cover their Malice and ill Nature, their Rapine and Violence.

5. As he does not take up Religion out of any worldly ends and designs, so
neither does he lay it down upon such. As he despises the flatteries of the
World, so he is not afraid of its frowns; he fears not them that can kill the
body, and chooses rather to loose all, than to let go his Integrity. How
yielding and complying soever he may be in all matters of an indifferent
nature, yet in a matter of plain Duty, when the honor of God and the interest
of Religion is at stake, he is a man of the most steady and unshaken
Principles, whom not all the terrors of his Adversaries can make to flinch or
give way. How easily might Daniel, by omitting his Devotions to the God of
Israel but thirty days, Dan. 6. 7.
have outwitted his Enemies Malice, and disappointed the Law, that he knew was
contrived on purpose against him, viz. That whosoever should ask a Petition of
any God or Man for thirty days, save of the King, should be cast into the Den
of Lions; yet, what does he? he was neither afraid of theirs, nor the Lions
rage, but although Dan. 6. 10.
he knew the Writing was signed, went into his House, opened his windows, and
prayed three times a day to his God as before time. What a little measure of
cunning and policy would many times have served to have brought off the
primitive Christians, Eusebius. l. 8. c. 3.
when they were apprehended and arraigned at the bar of their bloody
Persecutors? when with money they might either have been excused from
sacrificing, or suborned Witnesses that they had done it, though they did it
not; when by making Friends, or complying in any the least particular with
their Idolatrous Worship, they might have escaped; they chose rather to dye,
than to be guilty in any degree of dissembling their holy Religion. The time
would fail me, should I speak of the unbended Constancy (or as the Heathens
styled it,) obstinacy of Ignatius, Policarp, Justine, and those innumerable
Armies of holy Martyrs, who, with one word (Christiani sumus) tired out the
Cruelties, and vanquished the Tyrannies of their proudest Persecutors.

Having thus given you an Account of the true Israelite's religious Deportment
toward God; I proceed

II. To represent to you his Civil conversation with men. As he thoroughly
understands his Relations, Duties and Concernments in respect of men, so he is
careful to discharge them with no less uprightness and integrity. But here,
that I may not be tedious, I must crowd up many Particulars in a little room;
He is one,

Who is immoveably Loyal to his Prince, and thinks himself bound to be so by
the same Principles, as he is, to be Religious, namely, of Conscience and the
highest fear. Wherefore ye must needs be subject, Romans 13. 2, 5.
not only for wrath, but for conscience sake: They that resist, receive to
themselves damnation.

Who is sincere in his words, and whenever he speaks, takes care that his words
truly express the thoughts and intentions of his mind. And though sometimes,
for good reasons he may conceal his mind, and not at every turn shoot his Bolt,
and satisfy every impertinent Enquirer, yet he never denies or minces the
Truth when he ought, and is called to declare it. His mind and his tongue ever
go together, and without the help of an equivocation or mental reservation, are
always found at a perfect agreement with one another. This is that simplicity
of Conversation our Savior requires,when he says, Matthew. 5. 37.
Let your Communication be Yea, yea; Nay, nay.

Who is faithful in his Promises, and never fails to make them good, although
it be to his own prejudice; as he is careful not to run himself into
Inconveniences by hasty Promises, so he is as sollicitous to crown them with
honest performance; choosing rather to keep his word with loss, than to break
it for his advantage. Remembering that Gods Promises are Yea and Amen; he is
never at ease till his are so too, and it can be nothing but an utter
disability in him, if at any time he proves worse than his word. This the
Psalmist makes one chief ingredient in the true Israelite, Psalm 15. 4.
He that swears to his own hurt, and changes not.

Who is upright in his Dealings; whom no temptations of profit, nor freedon
from the fears of discovery can entice, either by fraud or violence, to do the
least wrong or injury to his Neighbor; He takes advantage of no man's ignorance
or unskilfulness to outwit or overreach him; of no man's oversight or mistake,
to turn it to his own benefit; of no man's easiness or confidence in him, to
beguile or betray him: The more likely he is to be believed, the more careful
he is what he speaks; the less liable to be suspected, the closer he keeps to
the Rules of Honesty: So exact is he in his Trading, and so afraid of the
unclean portion of Injustice, that he studiously declines all those ways of
gaining that have but a bad name, and are only suspected to be evil, choosing
rather to be poor, Jer. 17. 11.
than to get riches, and not by right.

Who is above all flattery and dissimulation; he never fawns upon any man's
person to gain his favor, nor complies with any man's humor by speaking or
acting against the sense of his mind; and although he be a man of great Candor
and Ingenuity, of great sweetness and obligingness in his Discourse and
Conversation, yet he never speaks, only to please, but to edify, and cares not
much what offense his Discourse gives, Ephesians. 4. 29.
so it be useful and according to Truth.

Who perfectly hates all Slander and Calumny; who is so far from inventing evil
things, and falsely imputing them to his Neighbor, that he always thinks and
speaks the best of men, puts the most favorable construction on their words
and actions, and when an evil Report is brought to him, chooses rather to let
it dye in his hands, than to add to it, or make it worse in the telling of it.
Psalm 15. 3.
He backbiteth not with his tongue, nor does evil to his Neighbor, nor takes
up a reproach against his Neighbor.

Who is of a tender heart and open hand to the poor and needy: whose Charity
consists not in empty good will and good wishes, in unprofitable good words and
fair promises without performance, like that mentioned in St. James, James 2.
16.
Depart in peace, be warmed, be filled, but giving nothing; but, in good Deeds,
in free and liberal Contributions, in an active, 1 Thessalonians. 1. 3.
expensive, indefatigable Beneficence, called by the Apostle, Heb. 6. 10.
a work and labor of love.

To name no more: Who is true to his trust, and if by the Providence of God he
comes to be raised to the Office of a Magistrate, he considers more the duty of
his place than the honor and dignity of it; and laying aside all by-ends of
popular applause and worldly advantages, not regarding the smiles or the frowns
of men, their dislikes or their approbations, sets himself to do that, which in
his Conscience he thinks to be just and fit, most conducive to the Glory of
God and the public Good.

Having thus shown you what it is to be an Israelite indeed, I come now to set
before you those Considerations that may engage you to be so. To this purpose

1. This is the best and most honorable Character that can be given of a man.
Therefore it is that our Savior calls us to behold Nathanael, as a rare and
excellent Person. Behold an Israelite indeed. After the same manner does God
speak of Job, he brings him in, (if the expression may be pardoned) as it were
in a boasting manner, Job 1. 8.
Have thou considered my servant Job, that there is none like him in the Earth,
a perfect and an upright man, one that fears God, and escheweth evil? This is
the Character of a man that is blessed, and to whom God imputes no sin: Psalm
32. 2.
Blessed is the man to whom the Lord imputes no sin, and in whose spirit there
is no guile. The Character of a man that is fit to approach the Glory and
Presence of God; Lord, who shall dwell in thy Tabernacle? who shall rest upon
thy holy Hill? he that walks uprightly and works righteousness, and
speaks the Truth in his heart. This is the Character, that is given of Christ
himself, 1 Pet. 2. 22.
who did no sin, neither was guile found in his mouth.

2. The upright man is most likely to find safety and protection in this World.
He designing only that which is fair and reasonable, he giving no just occasion
of offense or provocation to any, is not likely to meet with many Adversaries,
at least not with many such as will prove very mischievous and mortal to him.
No Wise man will trouble him, all good men will love him, and so prudently does
he manage himself and his Affairs, that those that love him not, cannot easily
find an occasion to do him much hurt; Who is he that will harm you, says the
Apostle, if ye be followers of that which is good? 1 Pet. 3. 13.
To this we may add, that his integrity entitles him to the promise of God, and
the care of his particular Providence. Righteousness being the Glory of Gods
own Nature, and that for which he infinitely loves and esteems himself, cannot,
wheresoever it resides, but engage God for its protection: There is a near
resemblance, and consequently a kind of friendship between God and all good
men, so that it is not in his power not to be good to the good. Psalm 11. 7.
The righteous Lord loves righteousness, his countenance beholds the upright.
God is the Governor of all men in general, says Salvian, but especially of
those that deserve to be governed; that is, that deserve better than other men.
Great was that saying of Hermogenes in Plutarch, The Gods that know all things,
and can do all things, are so much my Friends, and so highly concerned for my
welfare, that I am never night nor day out of their watchful Providence;
whatever I do I have their assistance; whatever I design I have their
direction; wherever I go I am under their wing and protection. Now the
protection God affords good men is usually by the Ministry of holy Angels. The
Platonists tell us, That as men change their Natures, and grow either better or
worse, they have the higher or lower Genij or Angels to attend upon them. And
so much is said of Socrates's Genius, that it has filled the Ancients with
matter of Discourse and Writing too: This is certain, that all good men are the
particular charge of holy Angels; for them do those morning Stars rise and set;
for them do those winged Messengers of Heaven go forth and return. Psalm. 34. 7.
The Angel of the Lord pitcheth his Tents about those that fear him, and
delivers them. Heb. 1. 14.
Are they not all Ministering Spirits, sent forth to minister for them who shall
be heirs of Salvation?

3. The Upright man is most certain to find comfort and support in the midst of
all those Troubles and Calamities that befall him in this World. Integrity
indeed is the best Security that can be against them; but so bad is the World,
that sometimes an Upright man suffers in it, and that too, for his uprightness;
but then his uprightness fills him with joy and peace unspeakable in the midst
of them. Psalm 119. 16*
Great peace have they who love thy Law, says the Psalmist, and nothing shall
offend them: Not, but that the Winds may blow as fiercely, and the Storm fall
as heavily upon them as upon others; but then, they have that within, which
others want, a good Conscience and a sense of the Divine Favor, to bear them
up from fainting under them. A strong high wind may shake his Branches, and
cause his Leaves to fall, may strip him of all his outward Beauty and Glory,
but it can never pull him up by the Roots, and make him fall. A violent Storm
and a raging Sea may tare his Tackling, and rend his Mast, but he shall escape
with little or no damage whilst he sees others sink down and perish. Isa. 43.
2.
When thou passest through the Waters I will be with thee, and through the
Rivers, they shall not overflow thee. Well might the Apostle call it the Ephesians.
6. 14*
Breast Plate of Righteousness. So long as he is at peace with his own Mind, he
has such a Castle of Defense to fly to, when he is beaten out of all other
Holds, which no Violence nor Malice can storm and batter; what cares he for all
the Threatenings of his Adversaries, who knows that his heavenly Father holds
their Malice in a Chain, and how fiercely soever they may bark, will not suffer
them to bite him, but when it is for his good, for his Spiritual Improvement
and Advantage.

4. The Upright man is in the direct way to Eternal Happiness: At that great
and last Day of Reckoning, when all the deceitful Works of Darkness shall be
discovered, and all mysterious Wickedness shall have its Masks pulled off; when
persons and things shall appear, as they are, without any Varnish or Paint to
set them off; when all perverse Intrigues shall be unravelled, and all
practices of unjust and malicious Guile be exposed to shame; when no man shall
deceive God, as he did Men, with a disguise of Piety, nor no Wolf in Sheep's
clothing steal on his right hand; then shall the Righteous man stand forth in
great boldness, his Case shall be rightly stated, his Person fully cleared from
all slanderous Aspersions; what he has done shall be approved; what he has
lost shall be repaid; his Mistakes and Infirmities shall be overlook't and
pardoned; his Alms and good Works shall be remembered and abundantly rewarded. 1
Cor. 4. 5.
God will judge the secrets of men, and make manifest the hidden counsels of
the heart, and then shall every man have praise of God. Psalm 37. 37.
Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright, for the end of that man is peace.

What I have here said of the Upright man in general; it is most easy to Apply.
I believe it has been done all this while by them that knew the Virtuous and
Generous Mind that lately inhabited this Body. They know the truth of all I
shall say, and much more that might be justly said in his Praise and
Commendation.

To pass over the Quality of his Birth and Extraction, although he had the
Blessing to be descended from a Worthy and Ancient Family, whose Zeal for God
and his Church, as well as the Advantages of Birth and Estate made them eminent
in their Country.

Not to mention likewise the Natural Endowments of his Mind, though they were
much above the rate of ordinary men's; in whom was found so happy a Conjunction
of a tenacious Memory and strong Judgment, of a sharp Wit and piercing
Understanding, that it made him excellent in his Profession, admirably
accomplished for a discreet dispatch of Business, and a most useful Member to
the Public in his Generation.

Not to insist on these, I choose to speak of his Moral qualifications, and
these the rather, as being in the Judgment of Christ himself, most deserving
our notice and observation: Here then also you may behold an Israelite indeed,
in whom there was no guile.

I need not tell you, that His Profession was that of the Reformed Religion, as
the Doctrine and Discipline of it is established by Law in the Church of
England; and indeed, if a constant and devout attendance on the Worship and
Service of God, a passionate Zeal for his Church, an uncessant Care for it is
Prosperity, an universal love and concern for all that owned it, be any
convincing Arguments of a man's Sincerity in his Religion, never was there any
Person who gave a clearer testimony of it, than he did. Such was his love to
all public Solemnities of Worship, that he seldom fai'd (unless prevented by
Sickness or most indispensable Occasions) to be present at them; and so humble
and devout was his Carriage and Demeanor in them, that 'twas hard for any
person to observe it, and not to be warmed and excited by his Flames. So steady
and devoted a Member was he to this Church, that he could not speak of its
Dangers without some disturbance to himself, nor mention its Divisions without
tears; How unwearied was he in his Endeavors to promote its Interest, to win
upon its Enemies, and to encourage its Friends? Amongst others, the Clergy and
Ministers of it had not the least share in his esteem and affection; he never
seemed more cheerful than when he was in their Company; never better pleased
than when they were at his Table: To all men he was very Courteous and
Obliging; but 'twas here that he showed his respects with delight and
complacency.

Answerable to this his Behavior toward God, was his Conversation with Men.
It would be too tedious to name all Particulars; therefore not to mention the
Virtues that are more common, those that shone brightest in him, were such as
in this loose and distracted Age, are not to be found in many, I mean, his
Loyalty to his Prince, and his Charity to all that stood in need of it.

His was true primitive Loyalty, without any Roman Shifts or Jesuitical
Evasions or Fanatical Distinctions, holding himself obliged in all Cases that
are not sinful, actively and cheerfully to obey, but in no case and for no
reason whatsoever, to resist, Authority. He was the man, that instead of
finding fault with Governors, sought God for them; instead of scanning and
censuring Acts of State, earnestly implored Gods direction of them; instead of
venting complaints about the state of things, daily petitioned God for the
Setlement of of them in good order.

And of the same genuin stamp was his Benevolence and Charity to his
Fellow Subjects, which he on all occasions manifested, by composing their
Differences and relieving their Necessities. These were more than any thing his
daily business, his Meat and Drink, his Pleasure and Recreation: In his younger
years, when he practiced, what pains would he take to loose a Client, and to
prevent a Law Suit? How ready was he at all times to take up Quarrels, and how
unwearied, till he had put an end to them, never meddling with other men's
business, but only when 'twas to oblige them, or to make them Friends?

To this blessed work of making Peace, did he add that other of showing Mercy.
His Charity was very large and diffusive, not confined to his Kindred and
Relations, but flowing in several Channels, to all that needed it, to more than
ask't it, most of all to the Widows and Orphans of such, especially Churchmen,
whose narrow Fortunes, or untimely deaths, whose Fidelity to the Crown, or
Sufferings for the Church, had disabled them to make any better provision for
them; a considerable number whereof, as I am credibly informed, had the
greatest part of their Livelihood, if not their total Subsistence from him. And
as he lived daily doing good, so was he not unmindful to leave sufficient
Evidences of his kind and charitable Disposition at his Death, having
bequeathed, almost to all the places where he had spent any considerable part
of his Life, several large Legacies either for the Poor's Relief, or other
pious and public Uses. In sum, such was his uniforme and comely Demeanor,
such his complyant and inoffensive Conversation, such his fair and punctual
Dealing, such his universally-loving and benign temper of Mind, that they
deservedly begat in all that observed him, a very great esteem and veneration
for him, insomuch, that its not easy to name the Person, that had more Friends
or fewer Enemies.

I have but one thing more to add, which yet gives a farther luster to this
excellent Person, and that is, the admirable Patience and great constancy of
Mind, wherewith he endured his Disease, encountered Death, and triumphed over it.
For any man to bear misery well, has been ever accounted so great an honor,
that some of the Ancient Heathens have too extravagantly thought, it equaled
men to God himself, who is not capable of Misery; That (says one of them) is
truly Divine, to have the frailties of a man, the security of a God. Now in all
the time of his long and painful Sickness; who ever saw him discomposed? who
ever heard an impatient or discontented word from him? It was my happiness to
be frequently with him, (I call it so, there being very much to be learned from
his example) at all times I saw great cause to admire his Faith toward God,
his Zeal for his Church, his constancy of Mind, his contempt of the World, his
willingness to dye, and his cheerful hopes of Eternity. And in this serene and
undisturbed temper of Soul, full of Faith and Hope, he fell asleep, and
exchanged this Life for a better. Now farewell pious and virtuous Soul, the
Poor's Relief, the Widow's Patron, the Church's Friend, the King's Loyal
Subject, and Gods most faithful Servant. May thy Name and Memory ever live in
our breasts! And may thy Virtues and Example be ever fruitful in our Lives!
That so at the great and last day we may meet together again in unspeakable
Joy, where Sin and Sorrow and Death shall be no more. Which God of his infinite
Mercy grant, etc.

Page 8. line 3. r. pretending only.

FINIS.

