THE CASE OF Mixed Communion.

Whether it be lawful to Separate from a Church upon the Account of promiscuous
Congregations and mixed Communions?

They are not all Israel, that are of Israel, Romans 9. 6.
Many are called, but few chosen, Matthew. 20. 16.
LONDON: Printed for T. Basset, at the George in Fleet Street; B. Took, at the
Ship in St. Paul's Churchyard; and F. Gardener, at the White Horse in
Ludgate Street. 1683.

THE CASE OF Mixed Communion.
Whether it be lawful to Separate from a Church upon the Account of promiscuous
Congregations and mixed Communions?
THE Foundation of this Pretense seems to be the great mistake of some men
concerning the matter whereof the Church of Christ is to be composed, which
they will have to be, only real Saints and persons endowed with inherent and
substantial holiness; Accordingly finding in the Communion of our Church many
corrupt Members, who lived not answerably to their Holy Vocation, they, for
that reason, amongst some others alleged by them, cry her down as no true
Church, or, which is all one, deal by her as if she was so, totally separating
from her Communion and setting up Churches of their own, consisting wholly of
persons, in their judgment, far more pure, that is, really holy and sanctified.
Into this most false and dangerous conceit concerning the matter of the
Christian Church, I cannot tell what it is that should mislead them, unless it
be,

The not rightly understanding the notion of that holiness that so often in
Scripture is applied to the visible Church of God. There is a twofold holiness
in Scripture, Inherent and Relative.

Inherent holiness, and that can be in none properly but God, Angels and Men;
In God essentially and originally, as he is the most perfect Being, in whom all
excellencies do possess infinite perfection; As it is applied to God, it does
not only signify a perfect freedom in him from all those sinful impurities,
wherewith the sons of men are tainted, but all the excellencies of the divine
nature, as wisdom, goodness, and power, and a super-eminent and incommunicable
greatness in them all; hence he is called Psalm 89. 18.
the holy One of Israel, Amos 8. 7.
the excellency of Jacob, Psalm 89. 35.
said to swear by his holiness, that is, by himself, and 1 Samuel 2. 2.
there is none holy as the Lord, said Hannah, for there is none besides thee,
none holy besides thee, as the Septuagint renders it, none comparable to thee
in the height and greatness of all thy excellencies. In Angels and men by way
of participation and as far as their natures are capable, hence there are holy
Angels and holy men.

Relative holiness, which when it is applied to persons, may be more properly
called foederal, and this is founded in the relation persons and things have to
God, and the nature of it consists in a separation of them from common uses,
and in appropriating of them to the peculiar use and service of God: hence the
Sabbath is called an holy Day, Judea an holy Land, Jerusalem an holy City, and
the Church and People of God an holy Church, that is, a Body or Society of men
called and separated from the rest of the World to God, to worship him in a way
distinguished from the rest of the World, having Laws and Promises and Rites of
Worship peculiar and appropriate to themselves; This account God himself gives
of it, I have separated you, Levit. 20. 24.
says he to the Israelites, from other people, that you should be mine, and ye
shall be an holy people unto me. For the same reason do we find the whole
Church of the Jews, even then when its members had generally Deuteronomy. 9. 12. Deuteronomy.
9. 7. Deuteronomy. 32. 5.
very much corrupted themselves, were a rebellious people, a crooked generation,
yet upon the account of their being separated to God and in covenant with him,
styled by Moses and other inspired men, Deuteronomy. 7. 6. Psalm. 135. 4.
his saints, his holy people, his peculiar treasure. For the same reason also
did the Apostles dignifie those Churches to whom they wrote, with those great
and glorious titles, (...)
of saints, the sanctified, the called and chosen in Christ Jesus; because
they, as of old the Jews, had entertained the profession of a Religion,
distinct from others of the World, whereby they might be excited to the
attainment of those excellencies, which in the object of their Worship they did
admire and adore; and those Names being of as large a meaning as that of
Christian, show rather what they ought to have been, than assure us what they
really were; for amongst those Saints were found strange immoralities
altogether contradictory to the sacredness of their Vocation.

Ephesians. 5. 25.
But does not the Apostle say, Christ loved the Church and gave himself for it,
that he might sanctify and cleanse it by the washing of water by the Word,
that he might present it to himself a glorious Church, not having spot or
wrinkle, or any such thing, but that it should be holy and without blemish?

I answer; Holiness in this place must be confessed to be meant a real and inward
holiness; but then by Church is not to be understood the whole complex Body of
the universal Church in this World, but either that part of it that in this
World is really, though imperfectly, holy, and is every day pressing forwards to
higher degrees of it, or else that Church which shall be in the future state,
when all the corrupt and unsound Members shall be by death and the final
decision of God, for ever excommunicated out of it, and all the Members that
remain in it, only such as were in some acceptable degrees holy here, and shall
then be perfected in holiness. Neither is this to make two Churches of Christ,
as the Donatists objected, one, in which good and bad are mingled together, and
another, in which there are good alone; but only to assign two different states
of the same Church, the one in this World, composed of good and bad, externally
holy in respect of all by vocation, and internally holy in respect of some in
it by sanctification; the other in the next World, where there shall be a
separation made betwixt the Sheep and the Goats, and all remaining in the
Church, such, as shall at once be perfectly holy and completely happy: This is
that Church which Christ shall present to himself, glorious, not having spot or
wrinkle or any such thing, but holy and without blemish.

This being supposed, all that will be needful to say in answer to this
Question may be comprehended under these three Propositions:

1. That an external Profession of the Christian Faith is enough to qualify a
person to be admitted a Member of Christ's Church. 2. That every such Member
has a right to all the external Privileges of the Church, till by his
continuance in some notorious and scandalous sins he has forfeited that right,
and by the just censures of the Church he be for such behavior actually
excluded from those Privileges. 3. That some corrupt and scandalous Members
remaining in the Communion, through the want of the due exercise of discipline
in it, or the negligence and connivance of the Governors and Pastors of it,
gives no just cause to any to Separate from her.
I begin with the first; That an external Profession of the Christian Faith,
etc.

This Profession in grown and adult persons is to be made by themselves; Thus
it was at the first erection of the Christian Church, when Persons by the
Preaching and Miracles of the Apostles were converted from the Pagan
Superstition and Jewish Religion to the Christian Faith; they were to believe,
and with the Eunuch to declare their belief, Acts 8. 27.
I believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God.

In Infants and Children not grown up to years of discretion, by their Parents
and those who at the request of their Parents do together with them undertake
for them. So great an interest and propriety have Parents in their Children, so
entire an affection and concern for their good and happiness, so unquestionable
an authority over them, so binding and obligatory are all their reasonable
commands upon them, that we have good grounds to believe, that they that are
born of Christian Parents will be brought up in the Christian Religion, and at
years of understanding take upon themselves what their Parents and Sureties
promised for them; and upon this account that profession of Faith made by
others at their Baptism in their behalf may in a favorable sense be reckoned
as made by themselves; so God accounted it in the Jewish Church, upon the
account of their Parents being in covenant with God, were the Children of the
Jews esteemed an holy Seed, and at eight days old admitted by Circumcision into
the same Church and Covenant with them; And the same reason holds for admitting
Children born of Christian Parents into the Christian Church by the Rite of
Baptism, which is the Sign and Seal of the Covenant under the Gospel, as
Circumcision was of that under the Law. Now that this external profession
without any farther signs of saving grace is ground sufficient for those with
whom God has entrusted the Keys and Government of his Church to admit persons
into it, will appear from these particulars:

1. This is the qualification prescribed by our Lord: he is the Head and
Founder of his Church, to him therefore does it appertain to appoint the terms
and conditions of admission into it, and what these are, we may learn from that
commission he gave his Apostles when he sent them out to gather a Church under
him, viz. the becoming his Disciples; Go ye therefore and teach all Nations,
baptizing them in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost. Matthew. 28. 19.
Teach all Nations, (...), Disciple all Nations; Now a Disciple is properly one,
not that has already attained to the full knowledge and saving effects of the
Gospel, but only understands so much of it as to be willing to be admitted into
the Christian Church, in order to his being farther taught the one, and to have
the other more thoroughly wrought in him. Whether men are sincere in their
profession of the Christian Faith and in their desires to be admitted Members
of Christ's Church, and whether this great Privilege and Blessing of
Churchmembership will be effectual to produce in them that regeneration and new
creature for which it was designed, the Pastors and Governors of the Church
cannot know; This their bare profession and desire is enough to give them a
title to it and qualification for it. By this rule the Apostles of Christ walked
as to this particular, even when they lived with him here on earth and were
under his immediate direction: John 4. 2.
The Pharisees heard that Jesus made and baptized more Disciples than John,
though Jesus himself did not baptize, but his Disciples. Now if, as it was famed
abroad, and is not in the Text contradicted, Jesus's Disciples baptized more
than John, it follows that he baptized more than were sincere, when we read
that so few, not above an hundred and twenty continued with him to the last.
Acts 1. 15.


2. It appears from the Apostles practice afterward in admitting persons into
the Church. Nothing but a professed willingness to receive the Gospel, though
they received it not from the heart, was required by them, in order to it: The
Text tells us, Acts 2. 41.
that they that gladly received St. Peter 's words were baptized, and the same
day were added to the Cburch about 3000 souls; It Is true, St. Peter exhorted
them all to repent in order to it, but whether they did so or no, he stayed not
for proof, from their bringing forth fruits worthy of repentance, but presently
upon their professed willing reception of the Word they were baptized and added
to the Church. One might have been apt to suspect, that amongst so great a
number, all would not prove sincere converts, and so it fell out; Ananias and
Saphira Acts 4. 34. Acts 5. 1, 2, 3.
were two of the number, in whom ye know, that glad reception of the Gospel was
found to be but gross hypocrisy. By the same rule St. Philip proceeded in
planting the Church at Samaria; Acts 8. 12*
when the people seeing the miracles he did, gave heed to the doctrine he
taught, concerning the Kingdom of Heaven, and the Name of Jesus, and declared
their belief of it, without any farther examination they were baptized both men
and women: And amongst them was Simon Magus, whose former notorious Crimes of
Sorcery, Witchcraft and Blasphemy, might have given just grounds of fear to the
holy Deacon, that his Faith was but Acts 8. 20.
hypocritical and his Heart not right in the sight of God, as appeared
afterward, yet upon his believing, ver. 13.
he was baptized; such other Members of Christ's Church were Demas, Hymeneus,
and Alexander, they had nothing, it seems, but a bare outward profession of the
Faith, to entitle them to that Privilege, since afterward, as we read, the
one embraced this present World, and the other two made shipwreck of Faith and
a good Conscience. 2 Timothy 4. 10. 1 Timothy 1. 19.


3. This appears from the representation Christ has made of his Church in the
Gospel, fore-instructing his Disciples by many Parables, that it should consist
of a mixture of good and bad. It is a field wherein wheat Mat. 13, 24, 25.
and tares grow up together; A net wherein are fishes ver. 47.
of all sorts; A floor in which is laid up solid corn and Matthew. 3. 12.
light chaff; A vine on which are fruitful and barren John 15. 1.
branches; A great house wherein are vessels of gold 2 Timothy 2. 20.
and silver, and vessels of lesser value, wood and earth; A marriage feast,
where are wise and foolish virgins, Matthew. 25.
some with wedding garments and some without, some had oil and some but empty
lamps; St. Hierome St. Hier. dial. con. Lucifer. Arca Noae Ecclesiae typus.
compares it to Noah's Ark, wherein were preserved beasts clean and unclean;
when the Apostle said, They are not all Israel, that are of Israel, his meaning
was, that in the Jewish Church many more were circumcised in the flesh, than
what were circumcised in heart; and when our Savior said, Romans 9, 6.
many are called, but few chosen, he declared the same thing, that in his
Church many more were called and admitted into it by Baptism than what were
sanctified by his Spirit or should be admitted into his Heaven.

4. The many corrupt and vicious Members in the Churches, which the Apostles
themselves had planted, is another proof of this; The number whereof, in all
likelihood, could not have been so great, had they been so cautious and
scrupulous as to admit none into them, but whom in their judgments they thought
to be really holy. In the Church of Corinth 1 Cor. 15. 34. ver. 12. 2 Cor. 12.
20, 21. 1 Cor. 7.
there were many, that had not the knowledge of God, that denied the
Resurrection of the Dead, that came drunk to the Lord's Table, that were
Fornicators, unclean and contentious Persons. In the Church of Galatia there
were many that nauseated the Bread of Life, and made it their choice to pick
and eat the rubbish of the partition wall, which Christ had demolisht; The
Rites of the Law which expired at the death of Christ, they attempted to pull
out of their graves, and to give a resurrection to them; They were so much gone
off from the Doctrine of Christianity, to weak and beggarly Rudiments,
observing days and months, and Gal. 3. 7, 10, 11.
times and years, that by reason of this their superstition, St. Paul signified
his fears of quite losing them, and that his labor was bestowed upon them in
vain.

Amongst all the seven Churches in Asia there was not one but what had received
such Members into it, that were either very cold and lukewarm in their
Religion, or by their vicious lives proved a reproach and scandal to it; The
Church of Sardis so swarmed with these, that St. John tells us, that there were
but Rev. 3. 1, 4.
a few names in Sardis that had not defiled their garments. Now if the Apostles
of our Lord, who had the extraordinary assistances of the Holy Ghost, for the
discerning of Spirits at that time, and were thereby enabled far beyond what
any of their Successors can pretend to, to distinguish betwixt the good and the
bad, did notwithstanding admit many mere formal Professors into the Church of
Christ, we may conclude that they apprehended that 'twas the will of Christ it
should be so.

5. No other rule in admitting persons into the Church is practicable. Whether
Persons are really holy and truly regenerate or no, the Officers of Christ who
know not the hearts of men, cannot make a certain judgment of, they may through
want of judgment be deceived, through the subtilty of hypocrites be imposed
upon, through humane frailty, passion or prejudice be misguided, and by this
means many times the door may be opened to the bad, and shut against the good;
Now that cannot be supposed to be a rule of Christ's appointment, which is
either impossible to be observed, or in observing which the Governors of his
Church cannot be secured from acting wrongfully and injuriously to men.

In sum, Christ has entrusted the power of the Keys into the hands of an Order
of Men whom he has set over his Church, and who, under him, are to manage the
Affairs of it, but these being but 2 Cor. 4. 7.
earthen vessels, of short and fallible understandings, he has not left the
execution of their Office to be managed solely by their own prudence and
discretion, but has given them a certain public Rule to go by, both in
admitting persons into his Church, and in excluding them out of it; for the
one, the Rule is, open and solemn profession of the Christian Faith; for the
other, open and scandalous Offenses, proved by witnesses.

2. The second Proposition is, That every such Member has a right to all the
external Privileges of the Church, till by his continuance in some notorious
and scandalous sins he forfeits that right, and by the just censures of the
Church for such behavior he be actually excluded from those Privileges.

For the explanation and proof of this Proposition, these three particulars are
to be done: (1.) What Is meant by external Privileges? (2.) What kind of
Offenders those are that forfeit their right to them, and ought by the Censures
of the Church to be excluded from them? (3.) Upon what the right of those
Members that have not so offended, is grounded?

1. What Is meant by external Privileges? As there are two sorts of Members in
Christ's visible Church, so there are two sorts of Privileges that belong to
them; each sort having those that are proper and peculiar to it, according to
the nature of that relation they bear to the Head and their fellow Members.

1. There are Members only by foederal or covenantholiness, such as are only
born of water, when by Baptism they were united to Christ and the Church, and
took upon them the Profession and Practice of the Christian Religion; Now the
Privileges that belong to these are of the same make with their
Churchmembership, external, and consisting only in an outward and public
Communion with the Church in the Word and Ordinances.

2. There are Members by real and inherent holiness, such as are not only born
of Water, but of the Spirit also, when by the inward operations of the Holy
Ghost their Souls are renewed after the Image of God, and made partakers of a
Divine Nature; And the Privileges that belong to these, are not only the
forementioned ones, but together with them, others that are suitable to their
more spiritual relation, inward, and such as consist in the especial and
particular care and protection of God, the pardon and remission of their sins
by the Blood of Christ, and the gracious influences and comforts of the Holy
Ghost; All comprehended in that Prayer of the Apostle for his Corinthians, 2
Cor. 13. 14.
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the communion of
the Holy Ghost be with you all. Amen.

Now it is of the first sort of Members, and that sort of Privileges that
belong to them, that the Proposition is to be understood.

2. What kind of Offenders those are that have forfeited their right to, and
ought by the Censures of the Church to be excluded from those Privileges? This
the Apostle has plainly told us, and our own Church in its Exhortation to the
Sacrament fairly intimates: 1 Cor. 5. 11.
I have wrote unto you, says St. Paul, not to keep company, if any man that is
called a Brother, be a Fornicator, or Covetous, or an Idolater, or a Railer, or
a Drunkard, or an Extortioner, no, not to eat; Not only, as ver. 10.
much as can be, to have no familiar conversation with him in civil matters
(though some must be had whilst we are in this World) but also, and more
especially to avoid communion with him in religious exercises; and how that is
to be done, the Apostle tells us, viz. not by forsaking the Church our selves,
but by doing our utmost endeavors to have him cast out of it: So it follows,
ver. 13.
Therefore put away from among your selves that wicked person. And, In the Name
of our Lord Jesus Christ, ver. 4, 5.
when ye are gathered together, and my spirit, with the power of our Lord Jesus
Christ, to deliver such an one unto Satan for the destruction of the flesh,
that the spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus. Agreeable hereunto
are the words of the Exhortation, If any of you be a blasphemer of God, a
hinderer and slanderer of his Word, an Adulterer, or be in malice or envy, or
in any other grievous crime, repent you of your sins, or come not to that holy
Table. Such sinners as these have in a manner undone and made void what was
done in their behalf in Baptism; They, by not performing what was then promised
for them, but living directly contrary to it, do virtually renounce that
Covenant they then entered into with God in Christ, and fall back again into the
state of Pagans and Infidels; Their Sureties engaged for them, that they should
believe the Christian Faith, keep God's Commandments, and renounce the World,
the Flesh and the Devil; But such habitual notorious Offenders as these say by
their practice, what had they to do to undertake such things for us, we will
stand to no such engagements, but we will be at large, to believe what we
please, and to practice what we fancy, and to worship whom we think fit; And
thus as it were breaking off from being in Covenant with God, and virtually
renouncing their Church Membership, they at the same time lose all right and
title to those Blessings and Privileges that were due to them upon the account
thereof; and in this sad state and condition did the Primitive Christians
reckon all, that had highly and notoriously sinned, amongst whom especially
were the lapsed that had offered Sacrifice; they staid not for a formal
Sentence to be pronounced against them by the Church, but looked upon them as
ipso facto excommunicate; and though till that was past they could not actually
be shut out, yet they began before to avoid their company, and to forbear all
religious commerce toward them. But so long as men keep in covenant with God,
and abide in his Church, which may be done by holding that profession of Faith
that they made at their first entrance into it, their right to the external
franchises of it remains inviolable, and their title without question. As may
appear from these particulars,

1. From the Tenor of that Covenant they in their Baptism entered into with
God; which consists of Promises on God's part, as well as Conditions on man's.
The Promises on God's part, are expressed in these general words, 2 Cor. 6. 61.
I will be their God; The Conditions on man's, in those, and they shall be my
People: Now so far as men perform the Conditions, so far will God make good his
Promises; In what sense they are People to God, in the same he will be a God unto
them. If a bare faederal holiness can give men a relation to God, and God upon
that account owns them to be a people unto him, the same gives them some kind
of interest in God, and a claim to the blessings that belong to that relation;
Not, that such Members as these are to expect those special and particular
favors that are the portion of those that are more nearly and by a kind of
spiritual consanguinity allied to God in Christ, but yet being of God's
household, are to be allowed the liberty to partake of those external blessings
which he in common bestows upon the whole family.

2. From the nature of Church Membership. Church Membership necessarily implies
Church Communion, or else it signifies nothing; for to be admitted a Member of
the Church, and not to have a right in common with the rest to
Church Priviledges, is to be taken in with one hand, and to be thrown out with
the other, it is to be put back into the state of those that are no Members, and
virtually to be cut off from the Body, by being denied all communications with
it; Should a man be admitted a Member of any City or Corporation, and yet at
the same time be denied the privilege of his freedom, and not be permitted to
set up a Trade, to give a Vote, or to act in any other case, as other Members
do, what would be the difference betwixt him and a Foreigner? unless it be,
that his condition is the worse, by being mocked, and abused, and cheated with
the Name, whilst he has nothing of the Privileges of a Freeman.

3. We have the Practice of the Church of God in the Old Testament for this;
The whole Nation of the Jews were not only permittted, but commanded by God,
except in cases of legal uncleanness and those notorious crimes for which they
were to be cast out of the Congregation, to observe his Ordinances and to join
in the celebration of his public Worship, and we know they were not all
Israel, that were of Israel; Three times a year were Exodus 23. 14, 17.
all their males to appear before the Lord, to keep three solemn appointed
feasts unto him; many of which, it is to be feared, had no other qualification,
than what they were beholden to their birth and the loss of their foreskin
for; Again, All the Exodus 12. 44.
congregation of Israel were to keep the passover, none were denied it but
foreigners and hired servants, and they too no longer but till they were
circumcised, and thereby admitted into covenant with God, which shows that mere
circumcision was enough to put a man into a capacity of communicating with the
Jewish Church in its most solemn and sacred Mysteries.

4. This was also the Practice of the Christian Church in the Apostolic Age;
as is plainly intimated unto us from many Scriptures; St. Paul tells us, 1 Cor.
12. 13.
by one spirit we are all baptized into one body, whether Jews or Gentiles,
bond or free, and have been all made to drink into one spirit. To drink into
one spirit, particularly relates to the Cup in the Lord's Supper, and by a
figure of the part for the whole, it is put to signify the whole Communion; but
the thing here especially to be taken notice of, is, that the Apostle makes the
number of those that received the Lord's Supper to be as comprehensive and
universal, as that of those that were received into the Church by Baptism; As
by one spirit all were baptized into one body, so all were made to drink into
one spirit. The Apostle speaks the same thing again in another place, alluding
to the other part of the Sacrament, 1 Cor. 10, 17.
We being many* are one bread and one body, for we are all partakers of one
bread; all the members that conspired to make up the one body, did partake of
the one bread; But if any thing yet can be clearer, it is that account St. Luke
gives us of the practice of the first Christian Church at Jerusalem, where it is
said of the three thousand that gladly received St. Peter's words, and were by
Baptism added to the Church, they, all the three thousand, Ananias and Saphira
being of the number, continued in the Apostles doctrine, and in breaking of
bread, and in prayers.

5. From the end of Church Membership; which is not only for the more solemn
Worship of God, and the public profession of Religion, but also for the more
effectual edification and salvation of men's souls; By Baptism we were admitted
into the Church, incorporated into that Divine Society, and entitled to all the
Privileges of the Gospel, to the end, Ephesians. 4. 13.
that in the unity of the faith, and the knowledge of the Son of God, we might
come to a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of
Christ; But how this is to be attained without being admitted to all the Acts
and Offices of Communion with the Church, to the Communion of Prayers and
Sacraments and the Word, and all other Privileges and Duties, is not easily to
be understood; hence, we may observe, that edification in Scripture is usually
applied to the Church, and though the edification of the Church consists in the
edification of the particular Members of it, yet because that is not to be had
but in the Unity and Communion of the Church, it is usually styled, the Ephesians. 4.
12.
edifying of the Church, and the edifying the body of Christ; hence Faith is
said to come by hearing, and hearing by the Word of God; Hence we are said Romans
10. 17. 1 Pet. 1. 23.
to be born again, not of corruptible seed, but of incorruptible, by the Word
of God, which lives and abides for ever; The same is expressed in those words
of our Savior's Prayer for his Disciples, John 17. 17.
Sanctify them through thy truth, thy Word is truth. God's Church is his
Family, which he especially takes care of and provides for, he that is of it is
under the Schechina, the wing of the Divine Majesty and his special grace and
providence; It cannot but be of mighty advantage toward our growth and
improvement in all Christian graces and virtues, to have therein dispens't to
us the lively Oracles of God, and provision made for a constant succession of
dispensers of the Bread of Life, to fit it to all needs and all capacities; Not
to be left to the deceits and whispers of a private spirit, to personal
conjectures or secret insinuations, but to have the public Doctrine of the
Church, to be our Guide and Leader; to have our Devotions mingled with the
concurrent Prayers of all God's people, and so by their joint forces, after an
Coimus in caetum and ad Deum quasi manufact a precationibus ambiamus orantes,
Tertul.
humble, but powerful manner, to besiege and beleaguer Heaven; to have before
our eyes all the great Examples in God's Church, to have our Faith
strengthened, our Repentance heightened, our Love inflamed, our Hopes and our
Comforts raised by the Holy Communion; Will not the flame of others kindle our
zeal and affections? and will it not put us into a transport of devotion, to
see therein Christ crucified before our eyes, pouring out his Blood for us,
bowing his Head as it were to kiss, and stretching out his Arms as it were to
embrace all that are penitent and return to him? These are some of the great
Blessings and Advantages that cannot be had but in Church Communion; To which,
if we shall add* that our improvement in holiness and virtue is more to be
ascribed to the internal operations of God's spirit, than any virtue or
efficacy there can be in those external administrations, that God is pleased to
promise his spirit to believers only as they are Members of his Church, and no
otherwise than by the use and ministry of his Word and Sacraments, we shall
farther see the necessity of men's holding actual Communion with the Church in
order to their sanctification and salvation.

We are not now discoursing what God can or will do in some extraordinary
cases, when Communion with a true visible Church cannot be had, as in a general
Apostasy of the Church, or Persecution for Religion, or unjust Excommunication;
but what is God's ordinary method and means of bringing men to salvation, and
that he himself tells us is by adding them to the Church; Acts 2. 47.
and the Lord added to the Church daily such as should be saved; To this
purpose we may observe not only in general, that whatever Christ did and
suffered for Mankind, 'twas for them as incorporated into a Church; Ephesians. 5. 25.
Christ loved his Church and gave himselffor it; Acts 26. 28.
Christ redeemed his Church with his ownblood; Ephesians. 5. 23.
Christ is the savior of the body, that is, the Church; But also in
particular, that the Apostle confines the influences and operations of the
spirit to the unity of the Church, Ephesians. 4. 4.
there is one body and one spirit; Upon this account, viz. the efficacy of the
means afforded in Christ's Church, and the necessity of keeping in communion
with it in order to salvation, was it that the Primitive Christians looked upon
it as so dreadful a thing to be shut or cast out of it; as laughing a matter as
some now adays make it, as much as they slight the privilege and benefit to be
of Christ's Church, and count it their glory and saintship voluntarily to cut
off themselves from it, I am sure, the Primitive Christians had a far different
opinion of it; with them to be cast Nam judicatur magno cum pondere ut apud
certos, etc. Tert. Apol.
out of the Church, and to be delivered up to Satan, signified the same thing,
and the one accounted full as dreadful a doom as the other; hence was it that
this sentence was rarely past against an offender, but with 1 Cor. 5. 2.
grief and sorrow in him that was forced to do it; and that those against whom
it was past, used the most ardent importunities, and were willing to undergo
the severest penances in order to be restored into the bosom of it; you might
have beheld them kissing the chains of imprisoned Martyrs, washing the feet of
Lazars, Nazian. 12. Or.
wallowing at the Temple-doors, on their knees begging the Prayers of Saints;
you might have seen them stripped and naked, their hair neglected, their bodies
withered, their eyes dejected, and sometimes crying out in the words of David,
as the great Theodosius Theod. H. Eccl. 5. c. 15.
in the state of penance, My soul cleaves to the dust, quicken thou me, O Lord,
according to thy Word.

Thus much seems to be enough to be said on the Second Proposition; but that
our passage to the Third may be the clearer, I shall add a little by way of
Answer to an Objection or two that lies in our way. And the first is,

Obj. Do not all the Members of Christ's Church that come to the blessed
Sacrament, having not the power of Godliness, as well as the Form, come
unworthily and to their own great sin and danger, no less than 1 Cor. 11. 27,
29.
being guilty of the Body and Blood of Christ, and eating and drinking their
own damnation? And can they have a right to that they are so unworthy of? In
doing which they sin so hainously? and for doing which they shall be punished
so severely?

Answ. I Answer these two things:

1. All, even the best men, in a strict, legal sense, are unworthy, and that
even of common mercies from God, much more of this prime Duty and Privilege of
Christianity. Psalm. 39. 5.
Every man in his best estate is altogethervanity: Isa. 39. 5.
We are all an unclean thing, and our righteousness is as filthy rags: The
meaning is, all men are sinners, and their best services imperfect and impure;
But then, the right they have to this Privilege does not depend on their own
merit and worth, but, as was said before, on the promise of God, when they
entered at first into covenant with him, whereby he was pleased to oblige
himself to be their God so far, and so long, as they continued to be his people.

2. Those Members that we have asserted to have a right to the external
Privileges of Christ's Church are not guilty of that unworthiness St. Paul
speaks of, the sin and danger whereof is so great; and this will appear by the
description he gives of those unworthy Communicants:

(...), S. Chrysostom.

1 Cor. 11. 27. Dr. Lightf. in loc.


1. They discerned not the Lord's body; he that eats this bread, and drinks
this cup of the Lord unworthily, is guilty of the body and blood of Christ;
how? not discerning the Lord's body. It may be, they did eat it still, as a
part of the Jewish Passover, they understood not the nature of it* what it did
represent, or for what end it was instituted, being ignorant of the infinite
value and merit of Christ's blood, not at all affected with the greatness of
his love, nor wrought upon by the infiniteness of his mercy, and altogether as
void of any sincere affection and gratitude to Christ for that mighty
redemption he wrought for mankind, as the Jew and Pagan, that neither know nor
believe in him.

2. They were open and scandalous sinners; The Apostle charges them with
Schisms and Divisions, 18, 21, 22, ver.
pride and contempt of their brethren, sensuality and drunkenness; In those
early days of Christianity, the Lord's Supper was usually ushered in with a
Love-feast that was eaten just before it, but so unchristian were these
Corinthians, that every one took before other his own Supper, they run into
parties, and though they had not yet left the place, they refused to communicate
at the same time with their brethren, The rich despised and excluded the poor,
that came not so well provided as they, from their feast, and that which was
yet an higher aggravation of their sin, the poor were hungry, whilst the rich
fed and pampered their bodies to excess and luxury: When ye come together, says
he, this is not to eat the Lord's Supper, this is no fit preparation for it,
for in eating every one takes before other his own supper, and one is hungry,
and another is drunken: such Swine as these ought not indeed to come to the
Holy Table of our Lord, and such as these, as I said, in the beginning of my
Discourse on this Proposition, have forfeited their right to it, and ought by
the Censures of the Church, to be excluded; This indeed is to be unworthy with
a witness, to be guilty of the body and blood of Christ, or as St. Paul
sometimes words it in the case of Apostasy and other heinous sins, Heb. 6. 6.
Heb. 10. 16.
to crucify afresh the Lord of life, to tread under foot the Son of God, and
to count the blood of the Covenant an unholy thing; that is, in an high degree
to despise and vilify the person and sufferings of the most holy Jesus, his
person, as one not worthy to be obeyed and followed, his blood, as a thing of
no value and merit; And what could such persons expect, but that God would
vindicate the honor of his own Son and the infinitely wise contrivance of the
redemption of the World by his great undertaking in some remarkable way upon
them, either in this World, by Temporal Judgments, 1 Cor. 11. 30.
for this cause many are weak and sickly amongst you, and many sleep; or in the
next, without repentance, by their Eternal Damnation?

Obj. But the Members of Christ's Body that come to this blessed Sacrament and
are destitute of saving grace, though they make a fair profession and are free
from scandalous sins, are yet in an unconverted condition; and this Sacrament
is not a converting, but a confirming Ordinance.

Answ. Conversion may be taken in a twofold sense.

1. For turning men from a state of open infidelity to the profession of the
Christian Faith, and indeed till men are in this sense converted, they are not
to be admitted to the Sacrament; neither Jews nor Turks, nor any others in a
state of Gentilism, till by Baptism they are received into Christ's Church and
make profession of his Name, can come to it.

2. Taking conversion, for the turning of those who are already baptized and do
profess Christ's Religion, from the evil of their ways to a serious and hearty
practice of holiness and virtue, and so this Sacrament is a converting
Ordinance. And indeed I do not know any more forceable Arguments to an holy
life than what are therein represented to us: What can more work upon ingenuous
spirits, than the discovery of such undeserved love and kindness? Is it not
enough to melt the most frozen heart into floods of tears and joy, to behold
therein the blessed Jesus shedding his blood to reconcile sinners unto God?
What can more powerfully captivate the most rebellious spirits into obedience,
than the assurance of a pardon of their past transgressions by that full
propitiatory Sacrifice of the Son of God? What can more effectually fright men
from sin and folly, than the infinite displeasure of God declared therein
against all iniquity? How accursed a thing is sin, will the considering
Communicant say, that the blessed Jesus, who did but take sin upon him, was
made a Curse for it! What a mighty evil must sin needs be, when nothing could
be sufficient to expiate it, but the Blood of God! What an unspeakable
malignity must sin have in it, when it laid on the shoulders of Omnipotency
such a load of wrath, as made him complain and sweat and groan and die! Again,
Here we repeat our baptismal Vow to God, solemnly engage our selves afresh to
be his faithful servants, and bind our selves by a new Oath, to be true to the
Covenant we have made with him, and certainly that man must have a mighty love
for Sin and Death, that can break through all these Bonds and Obligations to
come at it.

3. The third Proposition; That some corrupt and scandalous Members remaining
in the Communion of the Church, through the want of the due exercise of
Discipline in it, or the negligence and connivance of the Pastors and
Governors of it, gives no just Cause for any to separate from her.

Gives no just Cause; That which is chiefly pretended, is, That the viciousness
of those Members do derive a stain and defilement on the whole Assembly, and
pollute the Worship of God to others, as well as to themselves. Here therefore
I shall show what is to be done by us that we be no way accessory to others
sins, and then, upon that condition, that we cannot be polluted by their sinful
company. Now many things are to be done by good men who are to join in mixed
Assemblies that the Communion receive no prejudice by the corruption of some of
its Members.

They are frequently to exhort and advise them; for this end are we placed in
the communion of Saints, and though to instruct the Flock God has appointed a
whole Order of Men on purpose, yet is it also the Duty of every private
Christian in his place and calling, Heb. 3. 13. Heb. 10. 24.
to exhort one another daily, whilst it is called to day; to consider one
another, to provoke unto love and to good works.

They are prudently and with much affection to admonish and reprove them; we
must not be so rudely civil as to suffer sin to lie upon them without
disturbance;so runs the Precept, Lev. 19. 17.
Thou shall not hate thy Brother in thy heart, but thou shall rebuke thy
Brother, and not suffer sin to be upon him: and if any man be overtaken in a
fault, says the Apostle, Gal. 6. 1.
ye that are spiritual, restore such an one in the spirit of meekness,
considering that thou also may be tempted.

They are to bewail their sins, and to pray for their reformation; this is the
true spirit and temper of a good man, he cannot see God dishonored, his Laws
trampled upon, his Brother wilfully undoing himself, but he must be deeply
touched and affected with it; Rivers of water run down my eyes, says the
Psalmist, because men keep not thy law; And when in Ezekiel's time the Jewish
Church, both Priests and People, were very much corrupted, the Holy Ghost gives
it as the particular mark of the faithful and upright, not that they separated,
Ezekiel. 9. 4.
but sighed and cried for all the abominations that were done in her. Of the
same holy frame and disposition of mind was St. Paul, he could not mention
those in the Church at Philippi, who, whilst they professed Christianity, showed
themselves by their sensuality and earthly-mindedness to be enemies to the
Cross of Christ, without sorrow and tears; Of whom, says he, Phil. 3. 18.
I have told you often, and now tell you weeping, that they are enemies to the
Cross of Christ, whose God is their belly, etc.

They are to avoid, as much as they can, their company, especially all
familiarity with them; and though in order to their conviction and reformation,
and in such cases where necessary business requires it, and the public Worship
of God cannot be performed but in conjunction with such persons, I may be in
their company without blame; yet in all other cases, I am to show my dislike
and abhorrence of their sins, by shunning their society. 2 Thessalonians. 3. 14.
If any man obey not our Word by this Epistle, note that man, and have no
company with him, that he may be ashamed. Again says the same Apostle, I wrote
to you in an Epistle, not to keep company, if any man be a fornicator, or an
idolater -- or, etc. with such an one, no, not to eat.

If private and often repeated Admonitions by himself, or before one or two
more, will not do, they are then to tell the Church of them, that by its more
public Reproofs the scandalous Member may be reclaimed, or by its just
Censures be cut off from the Communion. Matthew. 18. 17.
If he shall neglect to hear them, tell it to the Church. Our Church has given
every Minister of a Parish Rubr. before the Commun.
power to refuse all scandalous and notorious sinners from the Lord's Supper,
and as slack and as much disused as Discipline is amongst us, were such persons
more generally informed against and complained of, they would not find it so
easy a matter to continue in their offenses and the Church together.

You see by what means the Church may either be cleared in some measure of such
public Offenders, or the Members of it, together with the Ordinances of God
secured from infection by their fellowship. By this did the Primitive
Christians show their Zeal for their Religion, as well as by suffering for it;
They were infinitely careful to keep the honor of their Religion unspotted,
and the Communion of the Church as much out of danger, as they could, from the
malignant influence of bad examples; for this reason they watched over one
another, told them privately of their faults, and when that would not do,
brought them before the cognizance of the Church; And though lapsing into
Idolatry in times of persecution was the common sin that for some Ages chiefly
exerciz'd the Discipline of the Church, yet all Offenses against the Christian
Law, all Vices and Immoralities that were either public in themselves, or made
known and proved to the Church, came also under the Ecclesiastical Rod, and
were put to open shame and penance; this was that Discipline that preserved
their Manners so incorrupt, and made their Religion so renowned and triumphant
Preface to the Comminat.
in the World; and how happy would it be for us in this loose and degenerate
Age, (as our own Church expresses her wishes and desires) were it again in its
due force and vigor restored and resettled amongst us.

But, if after all imaginable care and endeavor by private Christians, some
scandalous Members, through the defects of Power in the Discipline, or of Care
and Watchfulness in Governors, should remain in the Church, whatever pollution
those whose Office it is Tit. 3. last.
to rebuke with all Authority, may draw on themselves by suffering it, private
Members, that are no way, neither by consent, nor council, nor excuse,
accessory to their sin, can receive none; for sin no otherwise pollutes, than
as it is in the will, not as it is in the understanding, as it is chose and
embraced, and not as it is known; I may know Adultery and yet be chaste, see
Strife and Debate in the City and yet be peaceable, hear Oaths and Curses and
yet tremble at God's Name; Noah was a good Man in an evil World, Lot a
righteous person amongst the conversation of the wicked; neither is there any
more fear of pollution from wicked men in Sacred than in Civil Society; Our
Savior and his Apostles were not the least defiled by that society they had
with Scribes and Pharisees, nor by that familiarity they had with the accursed
Judas, though he eat the Passover with them and they kept him company after they
knew him to be a Traitor; What pollution did Abel receive from Cain when they
sacrificed together? Or Elkanah and Hannah from Eli's debauched Sons when at
Shilo they worshipped together? The good and bad indeed communicate together, but
in what? not in sin, but in their common duty; and though to communicate with sin
is sin, yet to communicate with a sinner in that which is not sin can be none;
Communion is a common union, many partaking of one thing wherein they do agree,
now the common union of the good and bad in the Church is not in evil, but in
hearing of the Word, in receiving of the Sacrament and in other holy Ordinances
and Exercises; when therefore some do evil, the communion in spiritual things
is not polluted, because evil is no part of the union in common one with
another, but the error of man by himself, out of the Communion, which he
himself, and they only that have been partakers with him in it, shall answer
for.

Obj. But does not the Apostle say, 1 Cor. 5. 6.
A little leaven leaveneth the whole lump?

Ans. This is a proverbial speech, and shows only that sin, like leaven, is of
a very spreading and diffusive nature, not that it actually defiles where it is
not admitted: A People in one Assembly are as a lump, and a wicked person
amongst them is as leaven, but now, although the leaven is apt to conveigh it
self through the whole lump, yet only are those parts actually leavened with it
that take the leaven; so it is with the Church, the sinner by his bad example
is apt to spread the infection through the whole body, but only such as allow
or any way communicate with him in his sin, 1 Cor. 1. 11.
are actually infected; such as Chloe, that reprove the offender and present
him, doing their utmost endeavor in their place to reform him, remain in
spite of its malignity, unpolluted: Beware of the leaven of the Pharisees,
says our Savior, he advises not his Disciples to leave their Assemblies, but
to beware that they take no leaven of them; showing thereby, that a good man
that stands upon his guard may be where leaven is and yet not be leavened; The
incestuous person was not cast out of the Church of Corinth, and yet the
Apostle says, at least of some of them, ver. 7.
ye are unleavened: And why may not the joint Prayers of the Church and the
Examples of Pious and Devout Men in the Communion, be as sovereign an antidote
against the infection, as the bare company of wicked men is of power to convey
it? Why should not the holy Ordinances of God and the presence of holy men at
them be of as much virtue and efficacy to purge and sanctify the whole body,
as the impurities of the bad are to stain and 2 Cor. 30. 18.
pollute it; especially considering that the sins of the wicked shall never be
imputed to the righteous, but the Prayers of the righteous have obtained pardon
for the wicked.

Obj. Numb. 19. 13, 20.
But were not the pollutions of sin typified by the legal uncleanness? And
was not every thing that the unclean person touched, made unclean?

Ans. Those legal and ceremonial pollutions concern not us under the Gospel; we
may touch a grave, a dead person, a leper, and not at all be the less clean;
it is not any outward uncleanness, but the corruption and depravity of the inner
man that incapacitates men for the Worship of God and Communion with him.

2. Those legal pollutions did not defile the whole communion, but only those
particular persons whom the unclean person touched, for (1.) there was no
sacrifice appointed for any such pollution as came upon all for the sin of some
few. (2.) Though the Prophets many times reproved the Priests for not separating
Jer. 15. 10. Ezekiel. 22. 26.
the clean from the unclean, the precious from the vile, the holy from the
profane, yet did they never teach, that because the unclean came into the
Congregation through the neglect of their duty, the whole Communion was
polluted by it; but as many as touched the unclean person were unclean, so as
many as have fellowship with the wicked in their sins are polluted by it; to
partake with men in their sins in a moral sense answers to the legal touching
an unclean thing.

3. When it is said that the unclean person, that did not purify himself,
defiled the Tabernacle and polluted the Sanctuary, the meaning is, that he did
so to himself, but not to others; so does a wicked man, the Ordinances of God,
in respect of himself, but not of others: The Prayers of the wicked, though
joined with those of the Church, are an abomination unto God, whilst at the
same time the Prayers of good men go up as a sweet smelling savor and are
accepted by him; The person that comes unworthily to the Sacrament of the
Lord's Supper, eats and drinks judgment to himself, but that hinders not but
that those who at the same time come better prepared may do it to their own
eternal comfort and salvation: Tit. 1. 15.
To the pure all things are pure, but to them that are defiled and unbelieving
is nothing pure, but even their mind and conscience is defiled.

The weakness of this suggestion, that the whole Communion and the Ordinances
of God are polluted by the wicked man's company at and among them, being laid
open; The truth of the Proposition may be sarther evinced from these
particulars:

1. From the example of God's People in the Church of the Jews; We do not find
that the sins either of the Priests or the People became at any time an
occasion of separation to them; What sins could be greater than those of Eli'*s
Sons? What higher aggravations could there be of sin? Whether we consider the
quality of the persons that sinned, being the Highpriests Sons, or the public
scandal and impudence of the sin, Lying with the women before the door of the
Tabernacle; yet did not the People of God, not Elkanah and Hannah by name,
refrain to come up to Shilo and to join with them in the public Worship: nay,
they are said to transgress who refused to come, though they refused out of
abhorrence and detestation to the wickedness of those men; 1 Samuel 2. 17, 24.
They abhorred the sacrifices of the Lord; ye make the Lord's people to
transgress: In Ahab's time, when almost all Israel were Idolaters and halted
betwixt God and Baal, yet then did the Prophet Elijah summon all Israel to
appear on Mount Carmel, and held a religious communion with them in Preaching
and Praying and offering a miraculous Sacrifice; neither did the seven thousand
that had kept themselves upright and not bowed their knee to Baal, absent
themselves because of the Idolatry of the rest, but they all came and joined in
that public Worship performed by the Prophet: 1 King. 18. 39.
All the people fell on their faces, saying, the Lord he is God, the Lord he is
God. All along the Old Testament, when both Prince and Priests and People were
very much depraved and debauched in their manners, we do not find that the
Prophets at any time exhorted the faithful and sincere to separate, or that
they themselves set up any separate meetings, but continued in communion with
the Church, preaching to them and exhorting them to repentance.

2. From the example of God's People in the New Testament; In the Apostolic
Churches of Corinth, Galatia, and the seven Churches in Asia, many of the
Members were grown very bad and scandalous, yet do we not read of the example
of any good man separating from the Church, or any such Precept from the
Apostles so to do; They do not tell them that the whole body was polluted by
those filthy Members, and that, if they would be safe themselves, they must
withdraw from their communion, but exhort them to use all means to reclaim
them, and if neither private nor public Admonitions and Reproofs would do,
then to suspend them from the Communion of the Church, till by repentance and
amendment they rendered themselves capable of being restored to peace and
pardon; The Spirit of God in the Second of the Revelation, sends his
Instructions to the Angels, that is, to the Bishops of those seven Churches in
Asia, (whose Office it was) to Preach repentance to them, and by their
authority, to reform abuses, but gives them no command to cease the public
Administrations, or to advise the unpolluted part to separate from the rest;
nay, although those Candlesticks were very foul, yet was our Lord pleased still
to bear with them, and Rev. 2. 1.
to walk in the midst of them; and certainly so long as Christ affords his
presence in a Church, none of its Members ought to withdraw theirs.

3. From our Savior's own example, who, notwithstanding the Church of the Jews
in his time was a most corrupt Church, and the Members of it very lewd and
vicious, yet kept in communion with it, and commanded his Disciples so to do:
We read that the Scribes and Pharisees, who ruled the Ecclesiastical Chair at
that time, Mat. 15. 6, 7, 8.
had perverted the law, corrupted the worship of God, were blind guides,
devoured widows houses, were hypocrites and such as only had a form of
godliness, yet did not our Savior separate from their Communion; but was made
under the Law, freely subjected himself to all the Rites and Ceremonies of it,
he was circumcised on the eighth Luke 2. 22.
day, redeemed by a certain price, being a Son and a Firstborn, observed their
Passover and other Feasts enjoined Matthew. 26.
by their Law, yea, and that of the dedication too, though but of humane
institution, was baptized amongst them, John 17. 37.
preached in their Temples and Synagogues, reasoned with them about Religion,
exhorted his Disciples to John 10. 24. Mat. 10. 6, 7.
hear their Doctrine, though not to follow their Practice; What greater cause on
the account of corruption in manners could be given to separate from a Church,
than was here? yet how careful was our Savior both by his Example and Precept,
to forbid and discountenance it; Mat. 6. 7.
They sit in Moses 's chair, hear them.

4. From the Apostle's express command to hold communion with the Church of
Corinth, notwithstanding the many and great immoralities that were amongst the
Members of it; 1 Cor. 1. 12, 13. 1 Cor. 3. 3. 1 Cor. 5. 1.
There were Schisms and contentions amongst them, strifes and envyings,
fornication and incest, eating at the Idols table, and coming not so soberly as
became them to the table of our Lord; yet does the Apostle not only not command
them to separate, but approves their meeting together, and exhorts them to
continue it, 1 Cor. 5. 4. 1 Cor. 11. 18.
But let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of that bread, and drink of
that cup; In which words the Apostle plainly solves the Case I am discoursing
on, and shows what private Christians, in whose power it is not judicially to
correct Vice, are to do, when they see so many vicious Members intruding to the
blessed Sacrament; viz. not to abstain from it, but by preparation and
examination of themselves to take care that they be not of their number; If to
separate, had been the way, the Apostle would then have managed his Discourse
after this manner, There are many Schisms and Strifes in the Church, there is
an incestuous person not cast out, many proud contemners of their Brethren, men
of strange opinions, of untamed appetites, and unbridled passions, and
therefore I advise you not to come amongst them, nor to partake of the holy
Sacrament with them, lest you be infected with their Sores, and partake of
their Judgments; But advising men to examine themselves, and then to come, he
plainly intimates, that 'twas their duty to continue in the Communion of the
Church notwithstanding these; as if he had said, I do not mention the foul
Enormities of some that come to this holy Table, to discourage you from coming,
lest ye should be polluted by their sins, but to excite you to a due care and
examination of your selves, that you be not polluted by any sinful acts and
compliances of your own, and then there is no danger of being defiled by theirs.

But as clear and satisfactory as this Proposition seems to be, it yet suffers
very much from the Exceptions of some weak understandings, who meeting often in
Scripture with such Commands and Exhortations as these, to separate, to come
out, not to touch, to have no fellowship with, and the like, presently, without
staying to examine the sense of the Texts, conclude, that it is the duty and
character of good men to be always separating; and though wherever those places
of Scripture are found, they are for the most part to be understood with
relation to Idolaters and Idolatrous Practices, either amongst Jews or
Gentiles, yet will they have them extended to every thing and person that
either really is, or they think fit to call, a corruption or a corrupt Member
in the Church of God.

Many Texts of Scripture are misunderstood and misappli'd by them to this
purpose; I shall instance only in two as the chief, and hope in rescuing them
from the false glosses they labor under, to give a deliverance to all the
rest. The first is,

Obj. 1. Those words of the Apostle, 2 Cor. 6. 17.
Wherefore come out from among them, and be ye separate, says the Lord, and
touch not the unclean thing.

Ans. This being the main place to which they fly upon all occasions as their
strongest hold, I shall give it a more particular consideration, and that by
showing these three things; (1.) The occasion of this Apostolical admonition.
(2.) What were the persons the converted Corinthians were to separate from.
(3.) What was the unclean thing they were not to touch.

1. What was the occasion of this Apostolical Exhortation. To this purpose you
must know that the converted Corinthians lived in civil Society amongst the
unbelieving Gentiles, by whom many of them being their kinsfolk and friends
after the flesh, were often 1 Cor. 10. 27.
invited to their Idol-feasts, to which some of them did not scruple to go and
eat of the things sacrificed to 1 Cor. 8. 10.
Idols, even in the Idol's Temple, thinking it not unlawful to do so, so long as
they knew that an Idol was nothing, and did not intentionally go and eat in any
honor to the Idol. Now from this Practice the 1 Cor. 8. 4.
Apostle dissuades them by these two Arguments; (1.) Upon the account of scandal
to their weak brethren, telling them that though they that were strong, knew that
an Idol was nothing in the World, and that there was but one God, and so could
not be supposed to worship the Idol when they eat of the Idol's sacrifice; yet
some other weak Christians and new Converts might not know so much, and
consequently by their practice might be drawn into sin, not only to go to those
Feasts, but to do it in honor to the Idol. (2.) As 1 Cor. 8. 7.
harmless an action as they esteemed it, that 'twas plain Idolatry; 1 Cor. 10.
14.
Be not ye Idolaters, as were some of them, as it is written, they sat down to
eat and to drink, and rose up to play; that is, they eat of those Exodus 32. 6.
Sacrifices that had been offered up to the golden Calf; and that this Action
was idolatrous, he proves by an Analogy it bears to a Rite of the same nature,
both amongst Jews and Christians, for as the Jews, when they feasted on the
Sacrifices, did it in honor 1 Cor. 10. 18.
to God, to whom the Sacrifices were offered, and as the Christians, when they
partake of the Lord's ver. 16.
Supper, do it in honor to Christ, whose Death and Passion is therein
commemorated, so when they did eat of the Idols Sacrifices, they must have been
thought to do it in honor to the Idol, because to ver. 20.
the Idol was the Sacrifice offered. But, blessed be God, we have not the like
occasion for such an Exhortation, we live not in a civil society with
Idolaters, but under a Christian Prince, and with a People professing the
Christian Religion; Here are no public Idols set up, nor any Feasts kept in
honor of them; Had the Case been thus with us, we had been as much concerned
in the Text as the Corinthians were, but being far otherwise, not the least aid
can be fetched from hence, to defend Separation from our Public Assemblies.

2. Who were the persons the Christian Corinthians were required to separate
from: They were no better than Unbelievers, than Infidels, than Idolaters; 2
Cor. 6. 14. ver. 15. ver. 16.
What fellowship has righteousness with unrighteousness? And what communion
has light with darkness? And what concord has Christ with Belial? Or what
part has he that believes with an Infidel? And what agreement has the Temple
of God with Idols? And then it follows, ver. 17.
wherefore come out from amongst them, etc. But now because Christians, by the
Apostles command were to separate from the Assemblies of Heathen Idolaters,
does it therefore follow that they must separate from the Assemblies of
Christians, because some, who while they profess Christ, do not live like
Christians, afford their presence at them? Is there no difference betwixt a
Pagan and an Infidel, that denies Christ and worships Devils, and an immoral
Christian, who yet outwardly owns Christ and worships the true God? Betwixt a
Church wholly made up of Heathens and Idolaters, and a Church made up of a
mixture of good and bad Christians together?

3. What is the unclean thing they are not to touch; viz. the unclean and
abominable Practices that were used by the Heathens in the Worship of their
Gods. It Is called by the Apostle in another place, Ephesians. 4. 11.
the unfruitful works of darkness; and again, thus described by him, it is a
shame to speak of those things that are done of them in secret; These they were
not to touch, to have no followship with them in, but rather to reprove them,
that is, in judgment to condemn them, by words to reprove them, in conversation
to avoid them. But now because Christians are not to communicate with Heathens
in their filthy mysteries, nor to partake with any sort of wicked men in any
action that is immoral, does it therefore follow, that they must not do their
duty, because sometimes it cannot be done but in their company? Must they
abstain from the Public Worship of God and their Lord's Table, to which they
are commanded, because evil men, who, till they repent, have nothing to do
there, rudely intrude themselves? May they not join with bad men in some cases,
where it cannot be well avoided, in doing a good action? because they must in
no case and on no account join with them in doing a sinful one? Because they
have omitted their duty, must I neglect mine? Because they sin in coming
unpreparedly, must I sin in not coming at all? Will their sin be any plea or
excuse for mine? If I communicate with them, will their unworthiness be laid at
my door? If I separate because of that, shall they answer for my contempt, as
well as for their own profanation of it? No surely, every man shall bear his
own Ezekiel. 18. 20.
burden. The soul that sins, it shall die. The second is, that Text,

Obj. 2. In the Revelation, 18. c. 4.
Come out of her my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye
receive not of her plagues.

Answ. This place is most certainly to be understood of Idolaters, and
according to most Interpreters, of the Roman Idolatrous Polity, and is a
command to all Christians to forsake the Communion of that Church, lest they
endanger their own salvation by communicating with her in Masses and other
idolatrous Worship. And if this be the true sense of the words, it abundantly
justifies our Separation from the Roman Church, but affords not the least plea
for Dissenters to separate from ours, unless any of them are so hardy as to
say, that there is none, or but little difference betwixt the Church of Rome
and the Church of England. But blessed be God, we have a Church reformed from
all her Superstitions, that retains nothing of hers, but what she retains of
the Gospel and the Primitive Church.

Here Is no drowning Religion in shadow and formality, nor burying her under a
load of ritual and ceremonial Rubbish, no dressing up Religion in a flanting
pomp to set her off, or a gaudy garb to recommend her, much less in such
fantastical Rites, such antic Vestments and Gesticulations that may justly
render her ridiculous and contemptible; but her Ceremonies are few and decent,
countenanced by Primitive Antiquity, and very much becoming the gravity and
sobriety of Religion.

Here are no Half-Communions; no more Sacraments thrust upon us than our Lord
himself instituted, and yet those left whole and entire, for our use and
comfort, that he did; no Prayers in an unknown Tongue, which the votary neither
minds nor understands; no praying to Saints or Angels; no adoring Images,
Pictures, and Relics; no worshipping the Creature besides or more than the
Creator, which (...)
they do, who in all their public Offices of Devotion, for one Prayer to God,
have ordered ten to be made to the blessed Virgin.

Here Is no Doctrine obtruded on our Faith that is contrary to reason, nay, to
sense, to all our senses, no Practices allowed that are forbidden by God, no
Pardons to be bought, no Indulgences to be purchased, no expunging any one
Commandment out of the Decalogue, or contriving arts and devices to make void
the rest; but as her Devotions are pure and spiritual, having God, and him
only, for their object, so her Doctrine is sound and orthodox, having Christ
for its Cornerstone, and the Prophets and Apostles for its Foundation.

A Church that needs no counterfeit Legends, no incredible Miracles, no
ridiculous Fables to promote her veneration, whose security lies not in the
Peoples ignorance, but in their enlightened understandings, that can defend it
self without the help of spurious Authors, or corrupting the words and sense of
Authentic ones, a Church that dares to be understood, and is sure, the more
she is looked into, the more to be embraced and admired.

And I would to God, 'twas as easy a matter to clear every one of her Members
from Vice, as it is her Constitution from Corruption; But let those that stand,
take heed lest they fall, and be sure to sweep their own door clean, who are so
apt to throw dirt in the faces of their Fellow Christians; St. Paul's advice
is, that every man should examine himself, and I am much mistaken, if spiritual
pride, a rash and censorious judging of our Brethren, be not as great a crime,
as some of those that are looked upon to be of so polluting and infectious a
nature in other men; I need not say, how directly opposite this Pharisaical
humor is to that humility, meekness and self-denial that the Gospel of our
Savior injoyns? how unsuitable to the temper of all good men, who are more apt
to suspect and accuse themselves, than others, who, the more holy they are, the
more sensible of their own imperfections? How contrary to the example of our
blessed Lord; who balkt not at any time the society of Publicans and sinners,
who when he knew what was in man, and who it was that should betray him, yet
admitted Judas into the number of his Disciples, and familiarly converst with
him? And yet, how fully it answers to the Spirit and Genius of those ancient
Schismatics, the Novatians and the Donatists? Might I stay to run the
parallel, both those Schisms, and this amongst us, would be found to begin on
the same Principles, slackness of Discipline in the Church, and corruption in
Manners; To be carried on by the same pretenses, zeal for purity, and fear of
pollution; to spring from the same bitter fountain, pride and arrogance; But I
speak not this to excuse our selves, or to recriminate them; My hearty Prayer
to God is, that all Israel may be saved; that they, who dissent from us, would
now, at last, lay aside all passion and prejudice, all groundless scruples and
pretenses, and come in and join their forces with our Church against the common
Adversary; And that we, who profess our selves Members of the Church of
England, would be extremely careful, for the honor of our Religion, for the
preservation of our Church, for the recovery of our straying Brethren, (for
whose sakes, in some cases, we are bound to lay down our lives) to lay down our
sins, and, instead of blocking up the way against any, by scandalous living,
invite and allure them all in, by exemplary Holiness and Purity, and this I am
sure, how short soever my Discourse comes of it, would be a full Answer to, and
a perfect Confutation of this Objection.

FINIS.
Books Printed by FINCHAM GARDENER.
A Continuation and Vindication of the Defense of Dr. Stillingfleets
Unreasonableness of Separation, in Answer to Mr. Baxter, and Mr. Lob, etc.

Considerations of present use, considering the Danger Resulting from the
Change of our Church Government.

1. A Persuasion to Communion with the Church of England.

2. A Resolution of some Cases of Conscience, which Respect Church Communion.

3. The Case of indifferent things, used in the Worship of God, Proposed and
Stated by considering these Questions, etc.

4. A Discourse about Edification.

5. The Resolution of this Case of Conscience, Whether the Church of England's
Symbolizing so far as it does with the Church of Rome, makes it Unlawful to
hold Communion with the Church of England?

6. A Letter to Anonymus, in Answer to his Three Letters to Dr. Sherlock about
Church Communion.

7. Certain Cases of Conscience resolved, concerning the Lawfulness of Joining
with Forms of Prayer in Public Worship. The first Part.


