THE UNKIND DESERTOR OF LOYAL MEN AND TRUE FRINDS.

Jn the land of the holy he has don wicked things, and he shall not see the
glory of our Lord. Isai cap. 26. verse. 10. Superiorum permissu, An^o 1676.

CENSURA.
SAnctis eremi incolis, strenuisque Christi athletis non immerito annumerandus
venit venerabilis ille solitarius and fidelis Christ^ famulus Dominus S. E. qui
ab hinc anni^, (vt fertur) viginti tribus spreto hominum Commercio, ad
Medirerranei maris littus a Narb^nensi ^ivitate, non procul dissitum seder. Vir
hic sane, si animum exscriptis spectes, Candidus and lustus apparet; si
doctrinam, ^ruditissimus; si facundiam, ornatissimus; quem insuper Corporis
pudicitia, animae Castitas, morum Comitas, and quod caput est, veritatis amor,
quae Sacrorum hominum parts effe debent, ab adolescentia, (nisi fama mendax
sit) eximie decorarunt, sed has hominum invidia sprevit virtutes, eumque opimo,
quo gaudebat in patria, sacerdorio spoliavit, Quid fecit vir optimus in exilium
relegatus? velut alter Arsenius pulsante ad cordis aurem voce Angelica Fuge,
late, tace. Continuo acquiescens oraculo, Fugit, latuit, tacuit; Damnatisque
Babylonis plateis faciem ad Sanctam Jerusalem, aeternam quaesiturus pacem,
convertit. Enixius quaerebat Dominum, and quem, diligebat animus, in crepidine
maris invenit, nec dimisit; ratus venenata (quibus in hoc mundo omnes
configimur) invidiae spicula, neminem nisi eo protegente, declinare valere.
Fidam igitur stationem nactus, and ab omni prorsus hominum consuetudine tutam,
vt cum solo liberatore liberius colloqueretur, diu multumque conticuit. Tandem
tamen aliquando divina dispensante voluntate, ruptis importuni nobis silentij
repagulis, vox ejus altius intonuit; nostrasque ad aures a solitudinis antro
allapsa non inutile eum semper otio torpuisse indicat: aureum enim hunc
libellum, cui Titulus (The Unkind desertor of loyal men and true Frinds) mole
licet exiguum and tamen ipsa re^magnis voluminibus comparandum a silentiarij
ore patriae tam faede proditae miseratio, vel potius ipsa extorsit veritas.
Iliadem, vt aiunt, seu heu; malorum nostrorum in nuce habes; Gentem Hibernicam
Catholice semper Religionis non citra miraculum tenacissimam, veteris
nobilitatis insignem, scelerate modo profligatam, funditusque nefariorum
hominum dolo, furore, and gladio eversam commemorat, plangendamque docet.
Iacobum Butlerum Ormondiae Ducem, ipsumque longa claraque Catholicorum majorum
serie in ipso licet Hiberniae regno conspicue oriundum, malorum omnium fontem
ac^originem probat; Tantorumque criminum reum invictis peragit documentis: cum
enim Hiberniam prorex aliquando gubernasset, eique, ut prese ferebat, and ipsa
revera exigebat patriae charitas, consulturus crederetur, ita omnes suis
circumsepsit infatuavitque praestigiis incautos, ut omnes perdiderit,
patriaeque statum omnino subverterit. Hanc illius tam insignem numquamque
expiandam perfidiam auctor, execrandosque dolos barbarico indignos animo
detegit, palamque orbi facit; quid vero indignius, quid scelerarius, quam
Hibernos qua religione in Deum, qua in regem fide inconcussos turpiter
deserere, ac Cromwelli Trium nationum praedatoris satellitibus, and sicariis ad
haerere? Hoc inauditum scelus molitus est Ormonius, idque nescio quo inveterato
in nationem suam paternamque fidem odio correptus, ac velut oestro percitus;
huc accessit opum, dignitatumque sitis inexplebilis, atque effrene desiderium.

Auctoris, (scriptis and fama mihi tantummodo noti) mentem amo, animi candorem
amplector, virtutes veneror, acrem nitidumque stylum satis laudare nequeo, par
sibi in omnibus judicium admiror, ardentemque in patriam, gentemque suam amorem
vehementer suspicio. Quamobrem praeclarum hoc opus, and numeris omnibus
^bsolutum, erudito certe dignum auctore publica luce dignissimum judico. Idque
vel maxim, cum nihil omnino complecti videatur, quod orthodoxae fidei,
Canonicis Sanctionibus, aut morum honestati adversetur. Quin imo Apostolicae
Sedis decus, atque honorem, ubicumque^se ingerit occasio, egregrie tueatur.
Quod testatum facio veritatis promulgandae gratis ductus, and amore; cum
exact, nec non vigili cur^ omni^ perlegerim, aequaque lance trutinaverim.
Signatum Parisiis 12. Februarij 1676.

A. I. S. T. Professor.

THE PREFACE
BAnished for Religion, and Loyalty to my Prince (in the year 1652.) by
Cromwelians then bearing sway, (we were some fifteen of us ship'tin one bottom)
landing in Britain in France, I took my way to this Province not far from
Narbon, where I had frinds having lived there before: And here I have been
about 24. years very solitary, seeing rarly any of my Countrymen. Thus far
from Labans house and noys, I find great tranquillity and case of mind in
Magdalens silent contemplation.

When I have been forced a way, the Land was possessed by Philistym, they had
the Arck captive, and under them my country was turned to a Babylon of sin and
vice: Nothing was to be seen in the Streets of this City but oppression of
the Just, jniquity, rage, and fury against Roman piety; the Altars fallen down,
and the Priests bitterly persecuted, some of them consuming a way in prisons,
some cast into exile, and others chased in wods and mountains, like wyld beasts,
all of them charged with two great crimes; To be Catholic Priests, and Loyal
to their king. All the Catholics true to God and Prince, transplanted into a
corner of the Kingdom. And this calamity they suffered with the rest, that
Royal authority was laid a sid, and a Dagon set up (The tyranny of the
usurping Parliament) and reverenced.

This was the face then of that enchanted Island: and they say things are noe
way amended (as to Catholic natives) since the kings going home^, that change
having noe ways bettered their fortunes, but that their calamities and
miseries (so it is written from many hand's) are daily increased, so as men
beaten with Scourges in Crumwells time, cry out they are now beaten with
Scorpions.

Often have I lamented all a lone for my dear Countries desolation, and found
my grief inconsolable, because I saw noe end of their sufferings: Somtym it
came to my mind, that if a sincere relation of our hard servitude and
extremities were given to Catholic Princes with humble prayers, this would do
us good; but a gain when I called to mind that this had been don already,
and that able and noble personages had said these things in significant
language, and that they had in all Courts but cold and delaying answers, I
dispair'd of all relief that way. One of our Bishops having been in Rome Anno
1652. Ad visitanda limina Apostolica, had conferrence with the then Cardinal
Secretary (after Alexander Septimus) his Eminency said to the Bishop, it was a
sensible grief to his Holiness to see his Children of Irland a constant
people in Catholic Religion so sorly afflicted, and cast down, and holy
faith almost extinguished, and that there was noe way possible to releeve
them; the Prelate replied our wound is now indeed so wide and feastered, as is
very hard to heal it, but when it was fresh, not so wide, and as yet curable,
our Nation found no Samaritan that would power oil and wine into it.

One thing I shall say; worthy to be written in Characters of gold, that a
Catholic Prince driven out of his own Dominions, was he that offered fairest
Ad rem Catholicorum in Hibernia restituendam; Charles P. M. late Duke of
Loraine a Caesar in fortitude and Resolution, one of the greatest Captains
Europ had seen for some ages, a Prince, that by long experience of crosses and
Calamities made the world know, Quod sciveri^ fortia agere, and fortia pati.

To this Duke were sent from Irland Anno 1651. Stilo veteri a Bishop and a
Cheralier of high quality from the Clergy; and from the then Visroy or Lord
Deputy and the people a Visc^u^^ and two noble Che^aliers, all able men and
fit to manage so Important a business, as that was. The Duke received them
with all afability, and after a deliberation, and debate of some months, they
proceeded to an agreement very advantageous to Catholic Religion, the king,
and Nation; the sum of this capitulation was, that his highness undertook to
war upon the Rebelling Parliament, to pay the Army and to furnish Canon and all
warlike. Ammunition until the Kingdom were recovered; and those undertook in
behalf of the Nation to reimbours his highness, and to give him for Caution
some towns; his Highness meddled not at all with the civil government of the
Kingdom, but only with the Militia, and was engaged to restore the Cautionary
towns, his disboursments being paid. The Duke advanced twenty thousand pistols
in ready money, six thousand thereof went over with his Envoy the Abbot of S.
Catharin, who took up fourteen thousand more of the Merchants in Irland,
which some was paid them in Antwerp by the Dukes order.

His Highness sent over two little vessels with Ammunition and Arms, which
arrived, and two other little vessels were taken upon the Coast of Britanie:
The whole came to some thirty thousand pistols; and was not this a Princly and
mag^ificent liberality of a Duke then out of his own Country? But let noe man
wonder at this, it being natural to the great Dukes of Loraine to fight
Battles for holy Religion, and the house of God in all extremities; and what
other can be expected from Princes descending from Gode^ry king of Jerusalem?
I should fill a vollume, if I should speak at large of his warlike feats and
valor, let the day and Battle of Norlingham alone speak, wherein were slain
18000. Swedes; to his valor and conduct was attributed a great share of this
victory: V^o verb^ in all encounters, he played a soldiers part as well as
that of a Captain; Et licet fuerit maximus Imperio militars, fuit tamen major
exempl^ fortitudinis. This digression, and mention of his high exploits and
fortitude, is a gratitude due from me to his highness, who has been a patron
and father to my Countrymen in their exile; and confident I am God will pour
blessings aboundantlv upon his gallant Child Prince de Vaudemont, and noe less
on his Nephew present Duke Charles of Lorain^ a Prince of great expectation,
and on the whole family a most glorious house, that has evermore defended and
protected the Catholic Church.

To speak of the greatness, antiquity* and splendour of the house of Loraine is
but to hold a candle to the sun; All Europ knows the puissance and piety of
the house of Guise (a branch of Loraine) which gave a Queen to Sco^tland Mary
second wife to King James the fifth^, mother to Queen Mary of Scotts (put to
death in England by Cruel Elizabeth) great Grandmother To King Charles the
second, by her right he is true Heir and King of the three Kingdoms. There
are other noble F^^ilies in France, as D'^^ouf, Maine, Joys, Harcour, and many
more, golden streams flowing from their fountain the house of Guis^, (as
that from Loraine) those houses have also given most Excellent Heroes and
Captains, all of them ever true to the holy Church, and Loyal to their
Princes, the most Christian Kings.

Soon after the a forsaid Capitulation was perfected, our King arriving at
Paris, (after the defeat and Root of his army at Worcester) the Duke demanded
his Royal assent to the agreement he had made with his Catholic subjects:
the King heervpon called together his counsel, (Ormond was one of them) for
giving answer; they Judged it noe way expedient, that the King should agree to
what had past between the Duke and his subjects at Brusells; Which seemed
strange to all that heard it, seeing noe Prince in Europ took part with our
King, but the Duke a lone. It seems this Counsel, (all composed of
Protestants) would not have Irland recovered by a Catholic Prince, they could
by noe means agree with two Articles of the Capitulation, the one; that the
Duke had been accepted by those contracted with him, for Protector Royal of
the Nation, they were less troubled that Crumwell, who had murdered one King,
and forced another (the Present King) out of his Dominions, should take all,
then a most ancient Catholic Duke and his Majestyes ^insman should be styled
Royal Protector of the Catholics of Irland, whereas soon after Crumwell was
over all Europ called Protector of the three Kingdoms.

The other displeasing Article was, that his Highness engaged himself to
restore Catholic Religion in Irland in its splendour, and so Catholic was the
Duke, as he chiefly took in hand our quarrel for making good this Article.

The Capitulation (from which we hoped for preservation) being blasted in this
Kind^, his Majestey Employed two Envoyes to the Duke, an English Protestant
Lord, and Sr. Henry de Visque his Majesty's then R^^ide^^ in Brussell, with
those the King returned the Duke thanks by a Kind letter for his care of his
intrest, and desired him to treat with these new men; who were courteously
received by his Highness; but at the second conference he told them he did
not know what matter of Capitulation could pass between him and their master,
who had not at that time in his own possession as much as one City,
wal'd-towne, fort, or Port in his three Kingdoms; yet not withstanding if his
Majesty would be pleased to consent to the Articles he had perfected with the
aforesaid Catholic commissioners, he would perform all of his part; which
answer being not accepted by the Kings counsel, the Duke by a handsome manifest
soon after, discharged his own honor from all blame and Imputation touching
the forementioned Capitulation and agreement.

Be pleased my civil reader to consider the deplorable and sadd condition of
the Catholics of Irland at that time. Their spiritual fathers, the Bishops,
and their Lower Past^rs and the Religious men assisting them in the vyn-yard,
were many of them sent into exile, (in one year fourten Bishops) the Noblemen
and all the Catholic gentry haled violently out of their own houses, and
lands, and shutt up in a corner of a Province (naked and disarmed) either to be
all murdered in one day, (there was a consultation of officers to that
purpose, but they agreed not, God would not have so many Innocents Massacred
at one time) or to perish in many days in famine, miseries, and servitude as
many of them ended afterward: The laws prescribed to them, were cruel and
Barbarous; if-any of them went to a seaport or to any other Province without
express order and license, it was lawful to kill them whersoever they were
found; to keep a Musquett, sword, or any other weapon, or powder in a
Catholics house, was present death; to receive or harbor a priest, was also
death; and there was a another thing as yet more bloody* They framed an
engagement to be taken by all sorts of men upon oath, to obey the Parliament,
and renounce the King and the family of the Stuarts for ever, and all took a
ticket of having taken that engagement, and poor men, that had not their
tickets about them, were killd upon the high way by the soldiers for not
having it; these were the execrable Laws the Catholics then lived under. The
Lord of Ormond had governed the Catholics as the Kings Lord Lieutenant about
those times, but when Crumwell came over, and like a lightning passed through
the Land, taking in Provinces, walled Towns, and Cittys; he never appeared,
never fought the Enemy, nor releeved any place beseeged; (truly we found
nothing in him of Counsel or fortitude) and when all was lost but two Towns
and one Province, (which were soon after taken) he past into France, and left
the Catholics to the butchery.

The counsel by this means destroyed the contract. And were not these
Counselors well affected to Catholics, that upon a serious deliberation would
not have the Catholics preserved, and protected by a Catholic Prince, but
left to the mercy of Crumwell a bloody tyrant? The forwardest of all in doing
this Mischief was Ormond; this was the Kindness to us of that man ever fatal
to Catholics:

An Italian gave to a great person, whose qualitys he knew well, this
Character. Inimicus gravissimus, and amicus levissimus. Which may be well
applied to Ormond in relation to Catholics; his anger to them was still
inplacable, and his Kindness slight and uncertain, his frindship, was a Court
frindship, much like those druggs of Apothicaries, that are hott in the mouth,
and cold in operation; what good and fair words did this Nobleman give to the
Catholics of Irland when he came from the Queen and Prince in the year 1648.
To conclude a peace with them? the words in his mouth then, were hott and
comfortable, but when they came to operation, they were indeed but rotten
druggs.

After this feat he had don in Paris, (the casting a way the Duke of Lora^^s
Protection) he was with the King in the low countries, and there he dilsembled
and tampered with the good plain Irish, and gave them good words and frindly
promises of doing them great good, if God restored the King; the King was
restored, and Ormond turned his sails and played another game, and stuck close
to Clarindon, that studied our Ruin, he then made a stepp further, and closed
in great Kindness with Orery and the Crumwelians; the Catholics claiming
their own lands and estates produced good Evidences, Justice and their
Innocence; (but those were of little value with Ormond, and Clarindon;) Orrery
with his band of Crumwelians showed gold and pretio^s gifts, and those proved
strong Evidences: Ormond then fell of clearly from us, and injured us without
all sear, and commonly where there is noe fear of revenge, ill given men have
noe conscience or fear of offending others; with Clarindon all things were
vendible, and with Ormond all was lawful, that was not unprofitable.

I present you with a wise fable, and I think to my purpose. Aesop says.
Aesop says. He^ ^^h^ (inquit vulpes rubo) conf^gi ad te tanquam ad
a^xiliatorem, sed tu pejus me tract^sti* heus tu (inquit rubus) errasti, quae
me apprehendere voluist^, qui omnes apprehendere soleo. A lass (said the fox to
the great bramble) I come flying to the as to a shelter and frind: but thou
have handled me worss then I was before: but the bramble said, a lass poor fox
thou art a stray in taking gripe of me, for thou know I scrarch all that
Handels me.

My courteous reader, that Ormond has allways been a great bramble cruelly
scratching and tormenting the Catholics of Irland, this little book, I put in
your hand, will show evidently. I have spent some hours of Leisure, God was
pleased to afford me about this little work, wherein I set down sincerly the
malice, craft, luglings, and slights, of those, that have contrived our ruin;
noe man will appear upon the stage so often and frequently as Ormond, in
acting his part in our Tragedy; this is the best account I can give to my
Countrymen of my long silence in my solitude.

I know my own weakness, and the flowness of my tallent, but I had time at
will for helping this; the sncile coms to the topp of the hill in her due time,
as well as the Eagle, and with time and straw (as they use to speak) men ripen
medlers, and so do men their affairs with leisure and means, and who will
do a thing well, must have patience to tarry till it may be well don; I had
patience and leisure enough, and at length I have brought my design to an end,
whether it be well don or not, I leave to the judgment of the impartial
reader. I gave notice of what was don to a Doctor of devinity, a person of
Emminent Learning, and to other frinds in Paris, they urged me with strong
lines, to print all was don without delay: I also writ to a venerable Prelate
then living in Flanders, whose judgment I much esteemed, and the inviolable
Amity between us of a bove 45. years; he quite beyond my expectation
dissuaded the printing, and gave reasons that seemed sound, he would not blame
those pressed me to the printing, nor judge ill of their intentions, but was
of opinion, they had not rightly considered the more substantial circumstances
of the matter, and said, dear frind my advice in this point is. Festina Lent,
he suggested that regard should be had of Ormonas noble Catholic Ancestors,
and specially of his Grandfather Walter Earl of Ormond, and of his own pious
parents, and of his Brother Mr. Richard Butler a Chavaliere of great devotion,
and yet valliant in the face of his Enemy, and of his sisters, all of them
virtuous Catholic Ladys; he knew them all, and was well known to some of
them: certainly I did not think this very reverend churchman had been so
kind to Ormond, his letter he ended with these lines.

My worthy frind, I beseech you be as kind to Ormond, as the overseer of the
vyn-yard was to the figgtree in his charge, who, (when the Lord of the vyn-yard
finding noe fruict in the tree as he expected said in anger Succide ^rgo illam
etc. Cut down this unprofitable tree, why does it stand here and ocupy the
ground for nothing?) Answered (grieving the tree should be fallne,) I pray let
the tree alone for another year, until I shall digg about it, and dung it, if
it shall happily yield fruit, if not you shall c^tt it down. What can we
tell (said my frind) if Ormond may not as yet yield fruicte, and comfort all
those he has afflicted. Have therefore patience with him for a while, even for
the virtue and piety of his very noble Catholic forefathers.

I yielded to this venerable persons Judgment, and suspended the printing from
the year 1668. to this 1676. Waiting still what Ormond would do, and if he
would relent, and become frindly to his Country; but all this time nothing is
done: The great Lord of the vyn-yard finds noe Charity in him, he is allways
the same, a hard harted-man, and our unplacable enemy. He is still a high
fig tree, bearing great leaves of vanity, (but noe fruicte) sucking up the fatt
and sapp of the earth, and thereby starving all the plants round about him,
thousands of widows, Orphans and Innocent souls: he kept the heat of the
sune from us all, (the kings mercy,) he barred all Justice to be don us, and
the general pardon to be extended to us, (we only have been excepted and
excluded from that Grace by this Noble man's cunning cruelty.) We have dig'd
about him to long, and spent our dung in vain, Ormond will yield noe fruicte;
(he is a Babylon will not be cured.) God has borne long with his doing
evil, he has long held his peace, but he will not hold his peace still;
he will in the end cut down in his anger this high sterrill tree, unworthy
to stand any longer upon earth; and for his sin and cruelty against his country
and nation, will likely pull down his house and generation, which we noe way
desire.

I make here a sincere protestation before God and men, that I contend not
against this Noblemans person or dignity, I honor his noble Catholic house,
and so much care I have of his soul, as I am ready to shed my blood for doing
him good that way; my mind therefore is, to deliver his artifices, perfidie,
revenging mind, and rankor against my Nation, which I will do plainly and
faithfully, without art and passion; thinking in my mind it will redound to
Gods glory to vex this Child of pride, that has vexed and persecuted so
long, and so sharply thousands of Gods humble Children, and brought them to
destruction. I put an end to this preface letting fly an arrow at Ormond (a
sharp-ended one) out of the Prophets Quiver, Isai cap. 26.
In the land of the holy he has done wicked things, and he shall not see the
glory of our Lord.

The Advertisment, of a true patriot to the Reader.
My father (well known in the county he liud in) was pleased to send me a
broad Anno 1637. (three years before the Irish war) to be bred up in virtue
and learning, and I made by Gods blessing that progress in my studies, as I
came to a convenient fortune, which I am to Enjoy all my life: so as I never
intend to return to my country, and yet I cannot in nature but love the
people, and heartily lamen^ their woes, calamitys, and vnsuportable servitude.
Demanding from those exiled the present state of the Nation, they all told
me, there was nothing to be seen at home, but Luctus and pavor, men women,
infants, widows, and orphans, all squallid, naked, languishing and even dying
with famine; Proh dolor: denigrata est super carbones facies eorum and non sunt
cogniti in plateis, adhaesit cutis ossibus eorum. And all this time I saw none
would speak the horrid injurys the Nation suffered. At lenght I saw a small
book bearing this title. A narative of the settlement and sale of the Kingdom
of Ireland by the Earl of Clarindon printed An^o 1660. There came out Anno
1674. a little treatis styled. The Bleeding I phigenia, an excellent piece,
chiefly against Clarindon and Orrery our capital Enemies. But this last
discourse called. The unkind desertor of Loyal men and true frinds. (The
Auther I have never seen nor known) proving clearly Ormond to have been the
greatest Enemy the Nation ever had, (all men say the same) is the most
excellent thing of all I saw, sound and well ordered, full of truth, strong in
sense, and containing fair and Christian documents; by which the author has
for ever obliged the whole Nation. This man tells the King freely, that
suffering himself to be deluded by ministers of Ill meaning, (chiefly
Clarindon and Ormond) they took the o pertunity like two whales and monsters of
Avarice and cruelty to devour his faithful subjects; wherefore he pitifully
complains, that justice was not don ^o the oppressed.

Even with Pagans the opinion of sanctity and Justice in their King was great.
Magnus Cyrus non censebat convenire cuiquam jmperium, qui non melior esset
eijs, quibus imperarit. Mexicanorum autem mos erat, qui quoties regem aliquem
novum inaugurarent, Iusjurandum ab illo postulabant, quod Iustitiam effet
administraturus, non oppressurus subditos; futurus in bello fortis ac strenuus:
curaturusque de nique, vt sol cursum suum a^ splendorem retineret, nubes
largirentur pluvias, fluvij manarent aquis; and terra suos proferret fructus.
And a another Author says. Annus bonus non tam de bonis fructibus, quam de just
regnantibus est existimandus. God grant to all Christian Kings to rule with
Justice and peace, Amen.

THE FIRST CHAPTER The long silence the Irish Catholics had with Ormond (Since
the king's coming in) did redound much to their loss.
TO know when to speak, and when to be silent, is a commendable virtue:
Solomon the wifest of men, taught this lesson to men in these words. Tempus est
tacendi, and tempu^ loquendi he begun with tempu^ tacendi, and his reason was,
quia veritas (inquit legis lator) primo tacendo discitur, postea docendo
praedicatur, truth is first learned by silence, next published by teaching.
Socrates that famous Grecian, sapientissimus hominum pronunced by the Oracle,
did much commend Silence unto his disciples, and with great reason, in as much
as there is greater wisdom, and less danger in being silent, then in speaking;
wherefore Symonides one of the wisest men of his own time, was often heard to
say, loqutum me esse dolui saepe, tacuisse nunquam, often have I repented to
have spoken, never for having held my peace; notwithstanding all these great
encomis of Silence, celebrated by so many wise Sages in all times,
nevertheless a long and unseasonable Silence, is, and may be as blameable, as
the other is recommendable.

To be Silent and hold my peace when an open injury is don to my Religion,
country and Parents, is neither wisdom piety, nor virtue to be commended;
this is, and has been (as I perceave) the long Silence the Catholics of
Irland, had with the Lord Duke of Ormond giving him both time and leisure, to
work their ruin and downfall, without preventing the fame (in a just form
and seasonable time) by their instant adresses, to the king, council, or any
else.

We have kept a longer Silence (to our great detriment) then Pythagoras his
scholars have don, their Silence was limited to five years only, before their
public Tentamens in school, for the performance of which Magister dixit, was
sufficient to them; but we, poor souls! have been silent near now upon
thirteen years, suffering with all patience the open wrongs, and manifest
Detriments this Nobleman have don us, so that under the notion of a friend,
we discovered him at long-running to be our open enemy.

The same Ormond's speech (soon after the kings happy restoration) to
Orrery, Monthrath, Clothworthy, Mervin, and such others of that fortunat tribe,
have been in this nature, Omnes bestia agri venite ad devorandum (nempe
Iberniam) Vniversae bestiae salt^s. All ye beasts of the sield come to devour
(he means Irland) All ye beasts of the forest. What were we doing? Where have
we been? Or what became of our senses at that time when Ormond convoked those
men to devour us? We were all of us in a deep Silence, much like men in a
fatal lethargy, so as the words of the same prophet may be properly said of
us Speculatores ejus (id est Iberniae) ^oeri omnes, nes^ierunt Vnirersi, canes
muti non valentes latrare, videntes vana, dormientes, and amantes somnia, her
watchmen all blind have been ignorant: dumb dogs not able to bark seeing
vain things, sleeping and loving dreams: truly we were all much like bewitched
people, dotinge upon a man, that loved us not, and like men dreaming vain
dreams; our Bishops, and churchmen (let these venerable persons give me leave
to speak my sentiment) our Bishops I say, and Cleargymen, were but canes muti
non valentes latrare. J did not see, nor hear of any in that numerous
congregation (a monghst whom there have been several learned and wise men) that
have written any thing to this purpose, in characterizing (as they should have
don) this great man, and his crafty designs to the public ruin, exceptinge
one of the divines (that then attended upon the Ecclesiastical congregation of
whom mention was made in our preface) who composed a substantial, and solid
piece replenished with uncontrollable reasons, justifijng, the just rejection
of that peace, made and agreed, in the kingdom's behalf (by certain
Commissioners) with Ormond in the year 1646. this rejection of that peace
Ormond takes for petra scandali, and as a dishonor (forsooth) to his person,
so that, from that day to this hour he has been, and is still an open enemy
to the Bishops of Irland and Clergy; this divine that I speak off, did in a
sober and modest style plainly set forth what Ormond did intend, and said
nothing in all that piece but what was just and reasonable as now more clearly
we see; this work came to my hands, and have perused it with much attention,
out of which I have collected partly some light for my furtherance in this
present tractat, and now behold the Bishops (at that time exiled in this
Kingdom, to whose Judgment he submitted that work) would not have this well
studied piece to see either press, or light, in so much, that those
elucubrations, and labors were set a side and rendered useless and fruitless
to the Nation.

I doubt not but the prelates intended well, though otherwise fell out, for they
were still in a charitable hope and expectation that Ormond in time would
Relent, and do the nation good, but they, and millions besides their
Lordships, have been mistaken in Ormond, whose indignation more and more daily
increasing (not satisfied in the extremities of our woes and calamities) seems
rather to rejoice in the continuation of our afflictions, and annihilation of
our persons, then to give any sign of relentment or hopes of any good; a
glory without honnour.

Never did any Magician charm with spells, or philters any sort of men, more
then this Ormond did that harmless people, by what art, or fascination is to
me unknown.

In Londen so wounderfull was the veneration my Countre-men had to this great
man's person, and so great was their zeal to please, and loath in the least
to displease him, as even when some begun to apprehend fears and jelousies of
his sinistrous proceedings, perceaving things not to go as they expected, yet
not with standing they scarce durst mutter their to well grounded fears and
fuspitions each long time, every man was, sicut mutus non aperiens os suum in
the cause of Religion and country, though they have seen evidently his daily
heapinge of injuries upon the nation: nay some were so starck blind, and
slumbred upon this fatal Duke, as even after he possessed wroungfully their
estates and fortunes, they were construing all to the best, and supposing some
deep m^sterie of piety in the man, and yet could give noe reason for such
their vain conjectures and hopes; some in their private discourses (as if they
were deluded by fiends and specters) wid imagine some future good Ormond would
do the nation, this epidemical dimnis and stupiditie attached the judgment and
brains so firmly of many, that several of them could not be persuaded but
Ormond would as yet give them a day of rejoycement and happiness; I have been
much amazed, and noe less perplexst, after seeing and hearing some of their
silly and simple expressions, pronunced in their private confabulations in
London, and letter's from that city to these parts much to this effect, Ormond
(said one) will never betray us, he'il never shrink from us, he is our own,
his intentions are good; an other said. Ormond is to Noble to do so base an
act, it is not his Kind to do unworthie things, his father and Mother, (quoth
the third man) were constant true Catholics, (that is indeed true) was not I
beseech you, his grandfather (said the fourth man) walter earl of Ormond, for
his devotion styled walter of the beads and rosarie? will the child of so
good, so godly, and virtuous progenitors, deceave the confidence, we his
countremen do place in him? noe, it cannot be; happy are we that he is so
great with his Majesty, for though he seems at present some what could toward
us, and to shake hands with Orrery and the rest of the Cromwelian faction, yet
his heart howeuer is with us, and for us, he may for a time favor their ways,
but to stick for good and all to such men, rebellious enimie^ to the King, and
to him self, is a thing I can not believe, for you must know that Ormond is a
wise man, a great politician, you shall see in time how handsomely he will wind
himself out of their claws.

These and such like idle Sermocinations was their discourse, but alack! these
wise men did but flatter them selves and the time with such frivolous thoughts
and conjectures, grounding the fundation of their future prosperity in
Ormond's affection to the nation, and his special care of their preservation,
which was in good earnest but to raise their building upon a fundation of
sands, or as Jmay say to build castles in the air; but sero sapiunt Phryges,
the web is dispelled that covered over our eyes, we can, tandem, see something,
and much like those that rested long under the Juniper tree (whose shadow is
both noxious and grivous to nature) when they a wake, feel a violent headache;
so we, having slept and slumbred long (without due care to our own
preservation) under the noxious shadow of Ormond's apparent affections, at last
experected, and having opned our eyes, we find our head, heart, and whole body
in a far worse distemper then they that laid under the Juniper tree; our fever
is mounted to a hectical height, partly by our own carelessness, and chiefly
by the improper administration of our physician Ormond, who instead of
salutiferous potions, deluded us with poison; This Noble man have poisoned (as
I may say) the heart of us all (I mean of his Majesty) with toxical councels,
and fallacious informations against us, so as this poison possessing the
vitals, we are faintinge and must of need perish, if the antidot cordials of
his Majesty's goodness, in whom, next to god as the fontaine of mercy and
justice, we place all trust and hope, will not afford us life and comfort,
which antidot cordials have been hitherto (as is evidently Known) unjustly
detained from us, by the suggestions of Ormond and Clarindon.

CHAPTER II. A diligent Search off the motifs and reasons, induced Ormond to
forsake (since the kings restoration) the Catholics of Irland, and to stick
to the Cromwelians.
WE are now to search out the motifs induced Ormond to abandon the Catholics,
and cause moved him to this sudden separation; whether by ill chance, the
catholics plotted against his life; person, liberty, or fortunes? or whether
they withdrew first from him, or have given any occasion or offense sufficient
to compel him to such a repentinous mutation? or whether it was the king's
interest (for the better settlement of that kingdom under the crown) made him
fasten hands with them new men, and forsake the old stead-fast friends?

There is noe man will believe that so noble a person, so complete a
statesman, so much esteemed in court and city for gallantrie, and honor, a
man so much cried up for his integrity, and good nature, to be the paramount
of thousand, as all his frinds (in the beginning of his power) gave out of him,
then when he begun to have dealing with the confederat catholics; there is not
a man, I say would believe that a person of such unparalelled parts, would
deflect foe nastilie in that nature from them without some efficatious ground,
and reason.

This unexpected catastrophe, as it suggested matter of admiration to all sort
of people, so it has struken even dumb his nearest relations, and these his
friends, that most dearly respected him, in so much as they durst not speak
one word in deffence of this his instabilitie; I am confident his grace wanted
not such persons, his close sticklers, men skilled both in the english and
lattin letters (which formerly with heat and zeal were in a readiness to
maintain, by hook, or crook, with apparent and seeming ratiocinations his
sinistrous doeyngs, faults, and faylings) now in this matter they dare not
appear to justify his running a way from the camp of israel, to the
phylistin's field, from the association and amity of honorable and honestly
true men (the kings good subjects, and his own steadfast frinds) to a
cromwelian faction, that heald out so long in bloody rebellion against the
crown and royal family; even father VVaylsh himself (who beyound all mortals
Sacrifices himself to Ormond, and who have written so much of that Noble man's
constancy, virtues, and supereminent talents) sits now mute, and silent, he
says nothing, gives not a word in vindication of his great patron's defection
from his friends, alliances, and countriemen; I perceave the fathers mind and
the cause of his silence in this matter, he knows it is hard for him, invita
Minerva, and pessima existente causa to lay hand to his pen.

His Grace, the duke himself is sensible, there are several inducing and
obliginge reasons, for continuing his affection (if he had been so pleased)
and association with the catholics of Irland; as may be, the antiquity,
greatness, and Catholic piety of his family, and renowned Ancestors for so
many hundred years in that Kingdom of Irland his vast patrimony, the Noble
houses of two Viscounts, three Barrons, and great number of rich, and worthy
families of Knights, and Esquires descended lineally from his pedigree, that
his Noble brother Mr. Richard Buttler, his virtuous sisters, gallant Ladies,
were borne in that land, and have their estates and being therein, add to this
the alliance of several other peers of the land to his family; all which are
undeniable and strong inducements, powerful to move, and bind such a person,
or any other to love the Catholics of Irland and closely fasten unto them, in
all their just concernments, and undertakings.

In this place I would feign Know, what had Orrery, Monthrath, and the rest of
that crew to do with the house of Ormond? did there by good luck intervene at
any time tuixt their families and his, any concatenation of marriages? any
relation of consanguinitie? any firm connection of unstained friendship? not
that ever I could hear off; but all to the contrary, well Known they were
his deadly enemies, and stared with an envious eye upon his Luster and
Splendor, who like unto a procerous Cedar they perce^aved did overtopp them
selves.

His Grace (I suppose) will not say he deserted the Catholics (whose loyalty
to the crown of England have been sufficiently Known, even to the very
rebels themselves) to join in friendship, with these freash men (but stale
rebels) for better advancing and securi^ his Majesty's interest? certainly a
man of my lord's Judgment (as I am confident) wid blush to pretend any such
excuse, or to say so: my lord of right should a gone with more moderation in
foe weighty a matter, and nicely ponder (before pacting friendship with them)
whether or not (they that have been for so many years, fyrie and sworn
enemies to the King and crown) would at long trial prove worthy of his
amity, or of any other man's else, that had been still faithful and loyal to
the King and crown; this my lord neglected to have don, but rather, by his
repentinous conjunction of friendship with those well approved and trusty
ministers of Cromwell, gave occasion to several wise men to suspect, and think
that Ormond did not much in heart averse Cromwell, nor dislike of his
proceedings, and that which we do wonder at, is, that all this while we could
not see, nor hear by mouth or pen any apology from this good duke, that may
give the world satisfaction for his so doing.

In my opinion his Grace had good reason to be silent in this matter, and to
conceal from the eyes, and ears of men, the cunning motifs, slights, and
arcana's that pusshed him on: for to manifest his reasons, were manifestare
errores inexcusabiles suos. Seeing then that heerin my lord duke is pleased to
be silent; J hope his Grace will give the looser leave to speak, and discover
to the world the reasons deduced his Grace from the right road of virtue,
justice, piety, and honnour, (deserting his trusty old friends) to kint
unexpected new sudden friendship, with his old enemies; it is to well Known to
our woe-full experience, he made the worst use a christian noble man could have
don, of the power he had from his majesty, in order to the catholic interest
of Irland striving; constantly and musing how to subvert, and suppress equity
and justice to our destruction, which have been the cheifest ground induced him
to this association, with the Cromwelians, that at once, and along with them he
may plunder our houses, fortunes, and estates; and so really it fell out, for
of all men he had the fattest, fairest, and greatest share.

The greatness of his person cannot terrify me from apearing for my country,
and countrie-men, nor from speaking clearly, freely, and plainy the truth, if
in case I shall speak, or write any thing ungroundedly I shall desire some of
his learned sticklers take the pains to answer for him, and confute me, if he
can; (we know his lordship has more Hierelings, parasits, and flaterers, then
true friends, and I believe his Grace will find my saying to be true, affore he
dies; for it will be but the just judgment of god, that he, who deserted his
honest and true friends, should be deserted by all, I could heartily wish in the
mean time he had in him these true virtues, that would both merit, and deserve
truefriends.

For compassing what I have taken in hand, the right door and ingresse to my
discourse, must be a true and naked relation of Ormonds dealings and
transactions, with the Catholics of Irland since the first unfortunate day they
Knew him; this will make the reader Know what manner of man he was, and is,
whether of virtue, or vice, love or hatred to the Catholics of Irland; all which
I will endeavor Succinctly, with candid verity (so save me God) to perform,
craving from my benevolous reader the patience off perusing all with attention,
and to Suspend his Judgment till Fully instructed of all that past.

It is not my present intent to stand upon iustifyng the revolution and war of
that Kingdom, begun the year 1641. to which they were forcibly compelled; I
have understood that matter is performed ala re^dy and soundly purpose, by a
skilfuller quil then mine: my present scope is, and will be, to have the reader
Know what Ormond did in that war, and afther the war, and so I dout not but
the reader will be able to pass a free and impartial Judgment upon his Grace,
and me; and next whether his desertinge of the catholics, and combining with
the new men, is or can be Justifiable and excusable:

To this therefore effect, the reader may understand, that the now duke, (then
Earl) of Ormond, at the beginning of this war, was leutenant General of the
Kings forces under the lords justices, Sr. william parsons and Sr. John
Burlace; I pass by how he demeaned him self in that high post, either showing
enimitie to the Catholics, or desiring the revolution should be suppressed:
(some say he was for the suppressing off it) let us suppose he did what became
a man placed in that office he had, and leave that so:

CHAPTER III. Here is shown how Ormond was chosen lord lieutenant, and his
several cessations made with the confederat catholics, and vast sums of
monys received to transport over soldiers for his majesty's; service.
This Sr. William parsons a could, rigid, and wiseman, but an inveterat
enemy to the catholic religion and Catholics, at once with Sr. Adam Loftus,
Sr. Robert Merideth, Sr. John Temple, and others of the council became much
addicted to the House of commons in England (which house began at that time to
contest and be at variance with the King) and in good faith made noe other use
of his Majesty's power and Sword of Justice in that Kingdom, then to increase
and kendle (rather then quench) the flame of that revolution, which they caled
a rebellion: here you are to observe, that the said lords Justices and above
specified councillors, though they were disloyal and perfidious to the King,
yet the false and pernicious relations these knaves gave, and divulged by
proclamations of the Irish, that the universality of the Catholics of Irland
got up into a new rebellion (whereas for one Catholic that was engaged in that
revolution, there were thousands in the nation knew nothing off it, even the
nobility, cities* and gentry of the nation were so) they were easily
believed in that their false and Malicious aspersion; so that his Majesty did
noe less call and esteem us rebels, then the House of commons in England
did; these men's disaffection to the King, and their Treachery, being at
lenght discovered, his Majesty recalled their commissions, and appointed
Ormond lord lieutenant of the Kingdom: after his Excellency was invested with
this new commission and power, the parliament of England more and more growing
stroung in hostility against the King, and declaring open war to his
Majesty, (which was plain rebellion, not like the painted rebellion of Irland
(his Excellency, who had at that timo trusty friends in the Council of the
confederat Catholics, treated with the assembly of said Catholics, and in
their absence, with the foresaid Council for a Cessation of arms between his
Party and theirs; to which the Catholics did Freely and willingly consent,
and to that effect granted and paid over to my lord Lieutenant thirty
thousand and eight hundred pounds sterling for to transport over into England
some of the Kings Forces, to Supresse the rebellion in that Kingdom; this free
speedy, and loyal contribution of so vast a sum of moneys, in so
seasonable a time, to furnish and pay the Kings soldier against the rebels of
England, was noe sign of rebellious hearts in the Catholics. As for what
these forces ferried over did there, whether they beat the rebels, or were
beaten, is not my subject in hand; I come to my lord of Ormond, who for some
years continued his capitulations, and treatings with the Catholics of
Irland, and did indeed wijre-drawe them to their great loss, both to the
dishartning of their soldiers, consumption of their treasures, and letting
slip great advantages of service; great matters we expected from Ormond, and
noe less did our Commissioners tell us; that he was ready to condescend to our
demands, and grant us good things, but in the end little or nothing was don;
not withstanding all this, any thing that seemed to be with the Kings interest,
or for the Kings service did much relish with the Catholics, and so desirous
and forward we were to make peace with any party the King owned to be his own,
as we omitted to pursue vigorously a good war, and at long running we made
noe good peace for liberty, Religion, Fortunes, or honor of the Nation.

CHAP. IIII. Glanmorgans peace rendered void by the Kings disavoving any
authority given to that effect
Twice we concluded peace by our Commissioners, the one off which have been
with the Earl of Glanmorgan, and the other with Ormond: and in fin we had
neither peace, nor the assurance of a peace; the said Earl of Glanmorgan,
showed us under the private signet a fair and large commission he had from the
King, authorizing him to conclude a peace with us, and to grant us such
favorable concessions for religion, as Ormond the Kings Lieutenant (who also
had a commission under the great seal) could not Publicly grant, or be seen
in; this peace made with Glanmorgan became void and of noe force, the King
disavowing any power given to that effect unto Glanmorgan: you shall find the
Kings disavowing of any such power in his book, commonly caled, Reliquiae
Sacrae Carolinae, page: the 29: * in a message given (as it is written) in our
court at Oxford the 29 lanu: 1645. to the speaker of the house of Peers pro
tempore, to be communicated to the two houses of Parliament at westminster, and
to the commissioners of the Parliament in Scotland.

His Majesty's message of January 29. 1645. about Irland, and his Majesty's
further Concessions, and desire of a personal treaty; Oxford.
C: R:
His Majesty having received information from the lord Leutenant and Council
in Irland, that the Earl of Glanmorgan has, without his or their orders or
priuitie, entered into a treaty with some Commissioners on the Roman Catholic
party there, and also drawn up and agreed unto certain articles with the
said Commissioners highly derogatory to his Majesty's honor, and royal
dignity, and most prejudicial unto the protestant religion and church there in
Irland: whereupon the said Earl of Glanmorgan is arrested upon suspicion of
high treason, and imprisoned by the said lord Leutenant and Council, at the
instance and by the impeachment of the lord Digby, who (by reason of his place
and former employment in these affairs) does best know how contrary that
proceeding of the said Earl has been to his Majesty's intentions and
directions, what great prejudice it might bring to his affairs, if those
proceedings of the Earl of Glanmorgan should ^e any way understood to have
been done by directions, liking or approbation of his Majesty having in his
former messages for a personal treaty offered to give contentment to his two
Houses in the business of Irland, has now thought fitting, the better to show
his clearer intentions, and to give satisfaction to his two Houses of
Parliament, and the rest of his subjects in all his Kingdoms, to send his
declarations, to his said houses, containing the whole truth of the business
which is.

That the Earl of Glanmorgan having made offer unto his Majesty to raise
forces in the Kingdom of Irland, and to conduct them into England for his
Majesty's service, had a commission to that purpose, and to that purpose only.

That he had noe commission at all to treat of any thing else, without the
privitie, and direction of the lord Leutenant, much less to Capitulat any
thing concerning religion; or any property belonging either to Church or Laity.

That it clearly appears by the lord Leutenants procedings with the said
Earl, that he had noe notice at all of what the said Earl had treated, and
pretended to have capitulated with the Irish, until by accident it came to his
knowledge.

And his Majesty does protest, that until such time, as he had advertisment,
that the person of the said Earl of Glanmorgan was arrested, and restrained
(as is above said) he never heard, nor had any kind of notice, that the said
Earl had entered into any kind of treaty or capitulation with the Irish
commissioners: much less that he had concluded or signed these articles so
destructive both to Church and State, and so repugnant to his Majesty's
public professions, and known resolution.

And for the further vindication of his Majesty's honor and integrity heerin,
he does declare, that he is so far from considering any thing contained in
those papers, or writings framed by the said Earl, and those commissioners
with whom he treated, as he does absolutely disavow him therein, and has given
commandments to the lord Leutenant and the Council there, to proceed against
the said Earl, as one, who either out of falseness, presumption, or folly, had
so hazarded the blemishing of his Majesty's reputation, with his good
subjects, and so impertinently framed those articles of his own head, without
the consent, privitie or directions of his Majesty, or the lord Leutenant, or
any of his Majesty's Council there; but true it is, that for the necessary
preservation of his Majesty's protestant subjects in Irland, whose case was
daily represented unto him to be so desperate, his Majesty have given
commission to the lord Leutenant to treat and conclude such a peace there, as
might be for safty of that Crown, the preservation of the protestant religion,
and noe way der^gatery to his own honor and public professions.


You see plainly by this his Majesty's disavowig letter of any power given to
Glanmorgan, as to the effect of peace to be concluded with the confederat
Catholics, how Glanmorgans peace came to nothing, and of noe validity, though
much labor, pains and monnies it cost to the confederat Catholics; and not
without great discredit to the said Earl. As for the peace made with Ormond
year 1646. (who had the Kings commission under the great seal) it had noe
better issue then the former, as shall be made clear out of the above specified
divine his writings, reasons, arguments, and words as they are put down.

And in as much as the Bishops and Clergy their opposition to that peace, has
drawn upon them the implacable anger of Ormond; pervsing what I shall write,
you shall be able to judge the reasons given by the Prelates were valid, and
themselves honest in their intentions, and upright in their proceedings, and
that they have done nothing but what piety, and the obligation of their
pastoral care did require; consequently yon will grant that the dukes anger,
and rancour came by noe offense given by the Bishops, but through his own
heightie mind, which in all matters, and in all occasions must rule and
domineere, or will have peace, nor quietness with any man; this matter
comprehending many parts, arguments, and circumstances, I shall be forced to
bestow more time about it.

It fell out so, that the confederat Catholics appointed certain persons of
quality as Commissioners of treaty (they appointed others for preparing
instructions for those that were to treat, whom they named commissioners of
instructions) to treat and conclude a peace with Ormond then lord Leutenant;
this was done in the year 1644. the names of those appointed, were Richard
lord viscount of Mongaret, Donogh lord viscount of Musgrie, Sr. Robert Talbot
Barronet, Dermot o Brien, Patrick Darcy, Geffery Brouwne, and John Dillon
Esquires. After a long debate upon near two years, a peace was at lenght
concluded between them and his Excellency the lord Leutenant, consisting of
thirty articles, which articles (after being perfected, duly and maturely
examined by understanding and learned men) were suspected unsafe for the
Chatholicks; this is the subject the mentioned divine handled and soundly
Proved, and upon the same occasion learnedly justified the rejection of that
peace out of the arguments, and decrees of the Ecclesiastical congregation.

CHAP: V. The rejection of the peace of 1646, made by the Bishops and Clergy
at Waterford maintained and justified; which peace was also void for being
perfected without authority of Ormond' s part.
THis author says, the Bishops and Clergy allarmed at the publication of the
said peace in Dublin, and Kilkenme, and obedience the Citizens and other
natives gave thereunto, (they saw the Gouverment was devolved, the supreme
Council of the Nation dissolved, and the forces and armies, and all to be put
into the hands of said Ormond lord Leutenant; the peace (as above was said)
being not secure for the cheifest concernements of the Catholics) convened and
came together at Waterford (a noble and Catholic City) the sixth of August
1466. the zeal of Gods house, and of their flocks so requiring, to consider
seriously the contents of the Articles of said peace, and ackordingly to
determine, as piety and the saftye of Religion, and their flocks would require
at their hands.

The method (said the Author) the Eishops and Clergy observed in rejecting
said Peace, and the order of their consultations, was grave, and yet free,
giving every divine license to argue, discourse, and deliver his opinion as to
the question proposed; the Chancelour of the congregation taking in the mean
time his notes in writing of every man's sense and sentence of the question
ventilated, and after a full debate, repeting viva voce, the substance of the
arguments; they voted with much tranquillity a result or conclusion, and indeed
so much was said to every of these articles that came under debate as nothing
was left unsaid, that could be pertinent.

A love Principium was the beginning of this Congregation, they publicly
sacrificed and prayed with flamming Charity, and profound humility, demanding
from God light and wisdom in this most important affair that so touched holy
Religion and his divine worship; that he would be pleased to give a blessing to
their work there: and for the better guiding their Consciences, they seriously
perused.

First the oath of association (the rule of war and peace with the confederat
Catholics,) which could not be contravened by any without perfidiousness, and
impiety.

2. The model of Gouvernement.

3. Several remonst rances printed in France, the year 1642. Fourthly, our
grevances presented at Tryme, March, the 17. 1642. Fifthly, the several acts
and protestations made by the Kingdom in open assembly at Kilkennie in the
mounths Iuli^ and August 1645. for the liberties and splendor of Religion, and
for the Churches. Sixthly, the 17. propositions exhibited to his Majesty, year
1644. Seaventhly, the further addition and propositions after propounded to the
lord Marquis of Ormond.

All these things (...) examened with great deliberation, and attention, being
the rules laid down by the whole Kingdom for regulating the committie of
treaty, as also the committie of instructions for the said treaty, and all
others to whom any charge was entrusted.

They began with the important propositions the committie of treaty for the
peace, were to present unto the Lord Marquez of Ormond Leutenant Generael of
Irland, sor and in behalf of the confederat Catholics of Irland, for
concluding a peace: those propositions were the chief rules they were bound to
observe in that treaty.

1. One proposition was, ^that the Roman Catholics both Clergy and Laity have
and enjoy the free and public exercise of the Roman Catholic Religion through
out that Kingdom, as it was in the reign of Henry the 7. or any other
Catholic King his ptedecessours Kings of England, and Lords of Irland, had
either in England or Irland.

2. That the secular roman Clergy of irland, viz: Primats, Archbishops,
Bishops, Ordinaries, Deans, and Chapters, Archideakens, and other dignitaries,
Persons, Vicars, and all other Pastors of the secular Clergy, and their
respective successors, shall have and enjoy all and every of them all manner
of jurisdictions, privileges, and immunites in as full and ample manner as the
Roman Catholic Clergy had or enjoyed within this Realm at any time during
the reign of the late King Henry the 7. of England and Lord of Irland, any
declaration of law, laws, statute, power or any authority to the contrary not
with standing.

3. That all laws and statutes made since the time of King Henry the 8. whereby
any restreinght, penalty, mulct, or incapacitie, or other restriction
what-soever is or may be laid upon any of the Roman Catholics, either of the
Clergy, or laity, for such the said exercise of the Roman Catholic Religion
within this Kingdom, and of their several functions, jurisdictions, and
Privileges, may be repealed, revoked, and declared void in the next Parliament
by one or more acts of parliament to be passed therein.

4. That the Primats, Bishops, Archbishops, Ordinaries, Deans, and Chapters,
Archdeakens, Chancelours, Treasurers, Chanters, prevosts, Guardians of
Collegial Churches, Prebendaries, and other dignitaries Persons, Vicars, and
other Pastors of the Roman Catholic Clergy and their respective ^uccessours
shall have, hold, and enjoy all the Churches and Church livings ^as large and
ample manner as the late Potestant Clergy respectively enjoyed the same in the
first day of Septem. 1641, together with all their rights, profits, emoluments,
perquisits, liberties to their respective Seas, and Churches belonging as well
in all places now in the possession of the confederat Catholics, as also all
other places that shall be recovered by the confederat Catholics, from the
adverse party within this Kingdom saving to the Roman Catholic Laity, and
their respective rights ackording to the laws of the land.

The Roman Catholic Regular Clergy of the Kingdom were to have and hold the
Bodies, sites, and precincts of their Abbeys, Monasteries, and churches etc.

These four propositions were sworn by the Confederat Catholics in a general
Assembly to be insisted upon, and obtained upon any treaty of peace, otherwise
that they would not lay down their arms while they had power and ability to
maintain the war. Now said four Propositions or matters (so sworn to be
insisted upon) were not granted in the 30 Articles of 1646. (as above is clear
and manifest) nor as much as presented or urged, as the Commissioners
themselves did confess, which seems a breach of trust in those of the Commitie
of Treaty, who were obliged to present and urge said propositions; certain I
am that one of the most understanding of that Committie told me, it was but
mere folly to present and offer them, for that Ormond was noe way content to
consent, o give way to them, nor even to Glanmorgan's concessions it self,
which were of far lesser importance for Religion ad Nation, then the above four
propositions; and that for this reason they said nothing of foresaid
propositions, nor of Glanmorgan's concessions until after signature of the 30
Articles; they then desired Glanmorgan's confessions should be at once printed
and published with the 30. Articles as contained and comprised in one of them,
to wit, the Article of his Majesty's gracious favor and further concessions,
(which is as I remember the first Article of all) but my lord of Ormond
abfolutly denied said concessions of Glanmorgan should be published at once
with the 30 Articles, and that he had nothing to do with Glanmorgan's treaty
or concessions. Of the above four propositions the cheifest things to be urged
and insisted upon, ackording the instructions they had, they said nothing to
Ormond. After this follows a title of the author in haec verba.

How the commitie of treaty demeaned themselves in concluding the peace of 1646
with Ormond.
THe Commitie (says this Divin) confessed, they upon concluding the peace of
thirty Articles relejed principally upon Glanmorgan's concessions, as to the
liberty and exercise of Religion, and as to the establishement and
securitie^therof, and they conceaved the benefit of Glanmorgan's concessions
were included in these Articles of 1646, and made of equal force with them;
whereas the benefit of said Glanmorgan'^ concessions is rather waved and
renonced in said Articles of 1646: those Commissioners of Treaty says
Glanmorgan's concessions are included under these words of the first of the 30.
Articles, furthe^ coucessions gr^nted, or to be granted by his Majesty. But
you are to observe that all a long upon the debate of the peace of 46. they
never made (as above said) as much as mention to my lord of Ormond of
Glanmorgan's concessions to be included and to be of equal force with the 30.
Articles; it is true after signature of said 30. Articles they moved his
Excellency of Glanmorgan's concessions, but he told them plainly he never
meant by the Article of further concessions, that the Catholics thereby should
have the benefit of Glanmorgan's concessions.

Behold how the greatest matter, that could concern the Catholics, (the
matter of Religion) was handled by the Commitie of Treaty, to wit, the four
propositions above mentioned, and Glanmorgan's concessions, (the basis upon
which the Catholics relied for Religion, and splendour thereof, immunities,
liberties, Churches, and church livings) committed to them to be insisted upon;
now in all the time of said treaty, and debate with his Excellency about the
^0. Articles, not one word was spoken of said proposition^ and concessions nor
at the very time of signature and perfection of the 30. Articles: as if they
had been of so little worth as they merited not to be moved once, being not
withstanding the principal part o^f their trust. Did they think by silencing
them in time of Treaty to steal them upon my lord of Ormond? he was to wise to
be so gulled, or did they mean by not moving them, to leave them for a seed
of a new war when the King in Parliament should deny us the benefit of
Glanmorgan's concessions, and of those other propositions and things, as in my
opinion he could rationally do, they being not articled and agreed upon in the
30. Articles perfected by Ormond, by virtue of his commission under the great
seal, and consequently not obliging the King as a matter contained included,
and perfected in the said 30. Articles? what answer then can the commitie make
for themselves as to the four propositions and Glanmorgan's concessions not
spoken of in the time of treaty? how could the benefit of them be obtained in
Parliament, when the peace of 46. should be ratifyed and made good to the
Nation? Ormond would deny in open Parliament any consent given by him to such
concessions or propositions, or that they had been as much as moved to him or
proposed upon time of treaty, or perfecting the 30. Articles; now it is clear
that in contracts nothing can be claimed, but what is don by the consent of the
parties contracting.

Here our Commitie of treaty is in a labirinth for obtaining the four
propositions and Glanmorgan's concessions in Parliament, what they affirm,
Ormond stiffly denies, (and groundedly) for who will say he consented to
concessions or propositions never mentioned or urged during the treaty, nor at
the time of perfecting the 30. Articles? what shall the King determine in this
dispute and difference? what other but deny the benefit of said propositions
and Glanmorgan's concessions for not being consented unto by his commissioner
Ormond? what then will the Catholics of Irland do? either they must content
themselves with Ormond's peace of 30. Articles, and go without the benefit of
both the propositions and said concessions (the best and principal ground and
security for Religion) or else they must make war with the king for obtaining
them, whereas until then they have never warred against his Majesty.

Here have I given you nakedly the deportment of the commitie of Treaty, with
the nature, substance, and quality of that peace of 46 altogether vnsecure and
unsafe for Catholic religion, and all the interrest of the Nation.

Now if in case that said Commitie of treaty for concluding of peace swarued
from any of the rules and instructions given them (as indeed they have don)
what they acted can noe way oblige either the Clergy or the people to their
own overthrow and destruction; it were a hard case for a commonwealth, if
persons by her empowered, with trust, and not performing the same trust, could
bind the commonwealth to Acts prejudicial and destructive both to their
pres^rvation, interrest and liberty, as many of those 30. Articles were to do.

CHAP: VI. The opinion of two famous lawyers upon the peace of Glanmorgan, and
that of Ormond, with the final result and judgment of the Prelates after
examening the said peace of 30. Articles.
We are in this place to see what the Congregation did, with their divins.
After making a sound ponderation upon the above four Propositions, and other
Acts and Ordinances of the several assemblys of that Kingdom, they came to a
mature examination of the 30. Articles, above mentioned, and for their surer
conduct and better understanding of all, made use of the advice and counsel of
the two eminentest, and famous lawyers of the land, who made certain sound
observations upon that peace and concessions of Glanmorgan, the substance of
those observations is digested into four Articles

1. That the Committie of treaty waved the the benefit of Glanmorgan's
concessions, by not only not insisting upon them, but not so much as
proposing them, during the treaty with my lord Leutenant, which was contrary
to the trust and charge laid upon them by the Kingdom.

2. A public faith given by the Kingdom to the lord Nuntio and Clergy to make
Glanmorgan's concessions, and all conditions for Churches and Religion, as
public, as valid, and of as much force as that of the temporal, was not
performed.

3. That the king did disavow Glanmormorgan's concessions, so as they became
utterly thereby void, for which reasons the Clergy were to provide for
themselves by other ways.

4. Upon the perclosing of those observations, the said lawyers has this
ensueing language. If the case of reference to further concessions, granted in
the agreement of said 30. Articles can not extend to what the lord Leutenant
publicly disauoued, and as we understand (on the very perfection of said 30.
Arucles) he before witnesses, expressed, to wit that the said clause of
further concessions in his peace was not meant by him to extend to Glanmorgan's
concessions, shall then the security of Religion and Churches in all the
Kingdom depend on a matter that has so many doubts in it?

Besides if those 30. Articles concluded with Ormond had any matter of moment
in them for Religion, before perfection of them, the King revoked the lord
Leutenant's commission, and by this all goes to ground, for without authority
he could not perfect articles. This revocation is in print and expressed in a
letter from his Majesty to the Marquez of Ormond the 11. 1646. as follows.

C. R.
RIght trusty etc. having long with much grief looked upon the sad condition
our Kingdom of Irland has been in these diverse years, through the wicked and
desperate rebellion there, and the bloody effects have insued there-vpon. For
the settling where-of we would have wholly applied our selves, if the difference
betwixt us and our subjects here, had not diverted, and withdrawn us, and not
having been able by force (for that respect) to reduce them, we were
necessitated for the present saf^y of our protestant subjects there, to give
you power and authority to treat with them, upon such pious, honorable, and
safe grounds as that our kingdom did then reqiure; but for many reasons to long
for a letter we thimke fit to require you to proceed noe further in treaty
with the rebels, nor to engage us upon any condition with them after sight
hereof. And having formerly found such real proofs of your ready obedience to
our commands, we doubt not of your care in this wherein our service and the
good of our protestant subjects in Irland is so much concerned.

from Newcastle June the 11. 1646.

This letter was received by Ormed before perfecting of the 30. Articles, where
fore said articles can be of noe force. what remedy then can be had ^ what
healp to make the 30. Articles valid? they said Digby brought some thing in
Cipher to incourrage the Lord Leutenant, and what then? shall we rely upon a
cipher, and get noe better security for our Religion, and Churches, for our
lives, fortunes and estates, then the relying upon a cipher? this were in good
earnest to make a peace in Cipher.

Here I have given you the sense of the two famous lawyers upon the 30.
articles; one of those for his abilities was well known to the learnedest juges
of England and Irland, was a Counselor to Ormonds family, and one that knew
as much of the ground and cause of our quarrel and of all that passed in the
Assembly, Council and several commities as any who somever in the Kingdom.

By what is said you see Ormonds commission was revoked before perfecting the
said peace of 30. Articles (which shall be more expressly made clear
hereafter) and did not his Excellency knowing this, play fooly with the
confederat catholics? what then did he intend by intruding this peace upon us?
what other but to cheat and deceave us by getting from us upon considerat^^n of
such a peace (as in effect he did) all our forts, cities, towns, arms,
armies, and navy under his own command, and by dissoluing our association and
gouvemement; was not this a handsome trick and plott for vndoeing us taking
away all our defense for noe other consideration then that of those plaistred
articles perfected without any commission, that could and lightly would be
disavoued in Parliament by his Majesty, as concluded without his authority,
and consequently we should gain noe grace nor pardon by them.

After the Bishops and other ordinaries, and diuins, had well considered these
things, and more particularly the result of the two renowned lawyers, who were
especial leading-men in the commonwealth; after long debate, and learned
arguments, great diligence, search and pains, they found it evident, that
Religion, estates, lives, liberties, and saftie of the Catholics, lay open to
danger, notwithstanding the 30. articles agreed upon with Ormond by the
commitie of treaty (who discharging not the trust laid upon them by failing to
pursue the instructions given them, as above was said) and finding all the
cities, towns, forts Garrisons, army ships, magazins., and the strenght of
the Catholics to be rendered up to the lord Leutenant (as some of them already
was) and the supreme Council had by that time ^eded their authority, and
submitted to the said peace, which had been (as was said) proclaimed and
published solemnly by the Kings-at-armes in Dublin and Kilkennie, and that the
lord Leutenant come from Dublin gallantly attended by many hundreds of prime
Gentlemen, was then at Kelkenny and began to gouverne acccording the articles
of the peace; the Bishops (I say) and Clergy naked and without any guard other
then the protection of God, and affection of good Catholics, after invoking
the name of the most high, came to a final result, which was the insueing
decree, which they put forth, and caused to be published to the Catholics
over the Kingdom.

Per congregationem Ecclesiasticam vtriusque cleri hibernici, in Spiritu Sancto
congregatam Waterfordiae coram Illustrissimo D: Archiespiscopo, FIRMANO Nuntio
Apostolico extraordinario in Iberniam.
SVper quastione inter nos orta, and per multos dies exagitata, an perjuri
declarandi essent, qui pacem contentam triginta articulis ad nos ^ supremo
Concilio transmissis, acceptarent, and successiue, an tanquam perjuri forent
excommunicandi? auditis prius singulorum sententijs, and rationibus, lectisque
aliquorum sacrae theologiae doctorum scriptis, decretum est vnanimi consensu,
and singulorum votis nemine contradicente, quod omnes and singuli confaederati
Catholici, qui simili pa^i adhaerebunt, vel ejus fautoribus consentient, aut
alio modo illam amplectentur, perjuri absolute habendi sint, ea praecipue de
causa, quod in ijs articulis nulla facta est mentio Catholicae Religionis,
ejusque securitatis, nec vlla habita ratio conseruanis priuilegiorum Patriae,
sicuti juramento legitur promissum, sed potius omnia referantur ad arbitrium
Serenissimi Regis, a quo in presenti rerum statu nihil certi potest haberi, and
interim subijciantur exercitus, arma, and munimenta, ipsumque supremum
Concilium confederatorum Catholicorum, authoritati and dominio Concilij status
suae Majestatis and officialium protestantium, a quibus, vt securi fieremus,
Iuramentum illud suscepimus. Ex quibus and ex pluribus alijs causis sola nostra
conscientia moti, solumque Deum prae oculis habentes, vt notum sit vniversis
and singulis tum Ibernis, tum exteris, tali pace nos non dedisse, nec daturos
consensum, nisi pro Religione, Rege and patria juxta nostrum juramentum securae
conditiones apponantur; and vt Greges nostri confaederatique omnes Catholici,
qui in generalibus comitijs aliquando in hoc Spirituali negotio, velut ad
Ecclesiasticum judicem vnice spectante, sententiam nostram rogauerunt, certo
sciant quod a nobis determinatum fuerit, vt in eum sensum tanquam pij and
sideles Catholici pastoribus suis obedientes concurrant. Hoc decretum scribi,
and vbique locorum anglica vel etiam Ibernica lingua publicari juss^mus, and
manibus ac sigillis nostris firmauimus. Alteram vero quaestionem de
Excommunicatione ad proximas sessiones reseruamus.

Datum Waterfodiae die 12, Aug: anno 1646. Ioannes Baptista Archiespiscopus
FIRMANVS and Nuntius Apostolicus. Fr. Thomas Archiepiscopus Dublin: Hiberniae
Primas. Thomas Archiepiscopus Casseliensis Fr. Boethius Episcopus Elphin:
Ioannes Episcopus Loanensis Franciscus Episcopus Aladensis Nicolaus Episcopus
Fernensis Fr. Patricius Episcop. Waterford: and Lismor: Ioannes Clonsertensis
Episcopus^: Fr. Edmundus Episcopus Lacklin: Richardus Adfertensis and Accadem:
Episcop: Edmundus Episcop: Limericensis Emerus Episcop: Clocheren: Fr. Iacobus
Abbas Benchorensis Fr. Patricius Abbas B. M. Dublin Fr. Laurentius Abbas de
surio, Fr. Iacobus Abbas de S. Cruce, Fr. Iacobus Tobin Abbas de Kilcoole;
Robertus vicarius Apostol: Rossen: Donaldus Vicarius Funiborensis Fr. Gregor:
Prior Prouinc: Ord: Praedicat: Fr. Diomsius Prior Prouinc: Erim: S. Aug.
Edmundus o Theige Procur: Illustriss: D. Armach: VValterus Vicar: Apost:
Tuamens: Guilelmus Vicar: Apost: Imolacen: Iacobus Vicar: Generael: Kildar:
Cornelius Vicar: General: Ardensis Oliverius Vicar: general: Meden: Dominicus
Vicar: General: Corcagien: Simon Vicar: General: Cluanensis Edmundus Vicar:
General: Clowensis Cornelius Vicar: general: Cluan: Robertus Superior Societ:
Jesus Fr. Antonius Procurator Provinc: FF: Minorum Fr. Barnabas Commiss: Gener:
Capuci:


These are the names of such as sat in the Ecclesiastical congregation of both
the Irish clergy secular and regular in true spirit of the holy Ghost conuened
at Waterford before the most Illustrious and most Reverend Archbishop Firmanus
Nuntio Apostolical in Irland.

The decree is thus Englished.

As to the question betwixt us moved, and for many days discussed whether such
as would accept of that peace contained in the 30. articles, remitted unto us
from the supreme Council, are to be declared perjurious, and consequently
whether as perjurious they are to be excommunicated: we having first given
ear to each ones opinion and sentiment in this matter, as also having read
the writings of some doctors of Divinity, it is decreed, and by each ones vote
in particular (none contradicting) that all and every one of the confederat
Catholics, that will adhere to such a peace, or consent to the furtherers
thereof, or in any other manner or way will embrace the same, shall be absolutely
as perjurions esteemed, chiefly in as much, as there is noe mention made in
them 30 articles, nor provision for the Catholic Religion, or safty thereof,
nor any respect had for the preservation of the Kingdom's privileges, as were
promised in the oath of association, but to the contrary all remitted and
referred to the Kings will and pleasure, from whom (as the case stands at
present with his Majesty) noe certainty of things can be had or expected, ye^
in the mean time all the arms, armies, fortifications, even the very supreme
Council of the confederat Catholics are and is to be subjected to the
authority and ^ule of his Majesty's Council of State, and protestant officers;
from whom that we may be safe and secure, we have taken that oath.

Out of which and several other reasons we (moved thereunto by our only
conscience, having God before our eyes) would have it known to all, and to each
person, and persons as well of the Irish natives, as to foreign nations, that
we gave noe consent, nor will any to such a peace, if they will not grant us
further, surer and safer conditions for our Religion, our King and Country
according to our oath of association; and to the end our flocks (all the
confederat Catholics) who in their general assemblies required our sentence,
in this spiritual matter appertaining to us only as Ecclesiastical Judges, may
know for certain what is by us determined herein, and as godly and faithful
Catholics obeyng their Pastors, may concur with us: we have ordered this
decree to be written and published each where both in the English and Irish
tongue.

Given under our hands, and sealed with our proper seals. The other question
of Excommunication we reserve to next sessions. Given at Waterford the 21. of
August 1646.
This Decree was the principal work of the Congregation, after which they writ
to the Cities and towns in the Catholic quarters, to the Generals of the
Armies, and some other principal officers, and to several other noble men,
warning them of the danger and insecuritie of said peace, adhorting all to
concur and join with them in rejecting the same peace, and at the same time
they writ the ensueing letter to the lord president and members of the late
supreme Council residing at Kelkennie.

Right honorable after a serious debate with Mr. Plunket and Mr. Darcy desiring
and hoping for a good understanding between us (whereby the union and true
peace of the Kingdom may be preserved) we conceived and drew up the enclosed
declaration and propositions containing our tru^ sense of the late peace, and
our just demands for a sufficient provision, and security for the Catholic
Religion, churches, lives, liberties and estates of the confederat Catholics
of this^ Kingdom, praying we may with all conuenien speed receive your answers
(which if not timely returned, we shall find our selves obliged in conscience
to let our declaration and propositions be made public) with our best wishes,
we rest your Honnours loving frinds.

Waterford. 24. August 1646. by command of the lord Renuccini Archbishop and
Prince of Fermo, Apostolical Nuncio, and of the Ecclesiastical Congregation of
both the secular and Regular Clergy of Irland. Nicolaus Episcopus Fernensis
Cancellarius Congregationis.
The supersciption was. For the Right Honnorable the lord Mongarret and the
rest of the late supreme Council.

The declaration mentionned in the above letter (which was printed) does
manifest what past upon the examination of the peace of 30. Articles, and of
the above mentioned matters, with our sense and judgment upon all, our prayers
and fatherly commands to our flocks over the Kingdom, and to the Generals and
other officers and soldiers to have nothing to do with that peace; the
propositions mentioned in said letter were expedients offered by the
Congregation for securing the Catholic Religion, lives liberties and estates
of the Catholics.

One (and that a principal proposition) that Glanmorgans concessions upon which
the comitie of Treaty relied as to Religion) should be made as valid and
pudlick as the 30. articles, and of the same force with them for the benefit
and satisfaction of the Catholics. Ormond, (who was then in Kelkennie when the
mentioned letter was received by the supreme Council) answered he had noe power
to consent to such consessions, nor as much as to add any article to the 30.
articles, his Commission (by virtue of which he had concluded said 30. articles
with them) being expired, yet he promised all the frindly offices that lay in
his power, and all mediation with the king for the satisfaction of the
Catholics, which was noe security nor satisfaction to the Catholic Prelates.

The supreme Council, after receiving the mentioned declaration and
propositions, employed Sr. Lucas Dillon knight and Gerrat Finnel Esquire (both
of the Council) with Thomas Tirel and Laurence Dudal esquires, adding to them
Nicolas Plunket and Patrick Darcy esquires (who were in Waterford before) both
members of the Council, to offer certain proposals for satisfying the Bishops,
and clergy, to the end sorsaid peace of 30. Articles might be unanimously by
them and the rest accepted; these gentlemen were humanly received and listened
unto by the lord Nuncio and Bishops of Clonferty and Fernes, (which two were
chosen by the congregation to attend on the lord Nunci^ in that affair) after
all was heard and considered of, and all they said represented to the
Congregation, there was nothing of security found as to Religion and churches.

Here it is to be particularly observed, that the Lord Leutenant Ormond upon a
sudden departed from Kelkennie to Dublin like a man possessed by some fear,
when Sir Luke and the rest were upon their way to Waterford, which departure
of his prescinded all expectation of giving such security and satisfaction as
the Bishops and Clergy exspected. Here upon the Congregation told Sir Lucas
and the rest of the Gentlemen, there was noe other way remaining for satisfying
all good men, then to summon of new a General Assembly of the confederat
Catholics, and there and then to have the 30. Articles of 46. more nicely
examened, and by them to be recepted, or rejected as pleased the prudency of
the whole Catholic Assembly.

This is a candid and ample accoumpt I give you out of the mentioned divin of
the propositions and procedings of the Bishops and Clergy assembled in
Waterford, to the end (that all their transactions there and then rightly
pondered and understood) they may appear to the world (as really they are)
innocent and blameless as acting nothing therein, but what the dictamen of
their conscience led them unto, touching the 30. Articles.

It is by this manifestly known how Ormonds mercenarie pens, and others upon
their suggestions (without any search or examination) have both bitterly spoken
and written of these Bishops, and of all the clergy for putting a side that
peace; one of which (and that wrote bitterly) was F. Peeter VVailsh, who
censured them griuously for so doing, thought at the same time, this
Congregation sat, this friar was as much against the said 30. Articles and
Ormond, as another; how he came to Change his mind, and writ for Ormond against
the Bishops and Clergy, I know not, neither to this day has he given any
ground or reason, nor is able to do, for that his instabilitie; and if in case
he had apparently given, yet noe regard ought to be had by any good and Zealous
Catholic, of what he says, in as much as he lies under the curse of an
excommunication major (as I have said in the Preface) prononced against him by
a general Chapter of his own order, against whom he most rebelliously stands
out refusing submission to them.

I hope these things well considered the Bishops and Clergy assembled in
Waterford will loose noe esteem in the sight of good impartial Christians, but
rather be commended for their zeal vnd fortitude in Gods cause; we are not to
fear fire nor sword, nor the graetness of men, when we speak for God and his
glory. Loquebar (says the divin psalmist) de testimonijs tuis in conspectu
regum and non confundebar.

The divine by me above cited protested before God and his Angels, that the
Bishops and clergy had noe intention to offend Ormond in that proceeding, or
to blemish his honor in the least, but they were much unsatisfied with the
Comitie of Treaty, for neglecting and not performing the trust laid unto their
charge; by which protestation you see the Bishops gave noe cause to Ormond to
depart Kelkennie for Dublin, nor as much as thought of his goeing, or suspected
in the least that he would be gone, but his own conscience why spered various
thoughts unto him: so that vere trepidabat timore vbi non erat timor. He
trembled with fear where there was noe occasion of fear: howeuer since this
great man departed for Dublin, he fostered an inveterat odium against the
Bishops and Clergy swearing and protesting he will be avenged of that stinking
creuw (so he is heard to call them); which unusual form of speech to an
entire, and of an entire body of Bishops, virtuous, learned, and honorable men,
(diverse of them being nobly descended.) If this be I say a language beseeming
a noble man of Ormonds quality, or rather the language of a rash, profane, and
insolent person, let any discreet man judge.

CHAP. VII. The Calumnies and aspersions cast by Fa. Wailsh upon the
Congregation of Iamestowne, and especially that of forcing the Lord Leutenant
out of the Kingdom, confuted; and their proceedings justified.
FOur years after this Congregation of Waterford, an other convened in
Iamestowne (a little town in Conaght) two years after the second peace
concluded with Ormond in the year 1648, by the unanimous consent of the
Kingdom: Ormond keapt a great stir with this Congregation, and Fa: VVailsh
(who busied himself still and always in verifying of Ormonds doeings) must
needs write vnhandsomly of that venerable congregation, saying (in his little
printed book, he calls by the name of the more ample account. page: 105) that
unfortunate and fatal Congregation gave a scandal which aspersed them, and
aspersed not them, and the whole Irish Clergy alone, but even their Communion
and Religion in its total extent, specially through these Nations. Further he
says, they rendered the Catholics incapable of any mercy intended by the King
for tender consciences; that great argument being (says he) the Irish
rebellion in 41, the opposition and reiection of the peace of 46. with all the
circumstances and consequents of ever since the fatal work of Waterford
Congregation: the opposition likewise made by a very considerable part of the
Clergy and people to the peace of 48, and the Cleargy's rendering it at last
fruitless (even I say after a general reception of, and submission to it) by
the declaration made, and censure issued at lamestowne, and by the endeavors
before and afther that last unfortunate meeting of the Bishops; finally their
twice forcing, or at least putting a necessity on his Majesty's Leutenant to
depart the Kingdom.

The divine (who justified the casting away of the peace of 46) answered VVailsh
in this kind. This fa: showed himself presumptuous and to buisie in censuring
the Cedars and Pillars of the Church, to whom he ought to bow his head for
reverence, and would have done so, had he been a true and humble child of S.
Francis, all he have said, or can say, will come to nothing, and his arguments
will be found of noe more strenght then a wavering reed, (such a thing he is)
for having played Jack on both sides; will he dare say he had more piety then
all the Bishops and Clergy of the Kingdom? more learning then they all in one
body? more love to the flocks and people? more fidelity to the King? more
interrest in the nation? or had he better knowledge of what past since the
making the peace of 48, till the meeting of Iamestowne, then they all? what
authority, power or commission had he to judge the decrees of Bishops and
Clergy? he should rather have listened to Seneca's advise, si judicas,
coonosce, know affore you judge, he knew not the grounds the Bishops went upon,
and consequently gave an erroneous judgment; there needs noe other reasons, or
arguments for convincing him then the view of the acts and Decrees of the said
congregation: in calling the Congregation fatal and unfortunate, he shows
neither education or breeding toward these two venerable meetings.

He is erroniously mistaken in saying they gave cause of scandal to the
people; as for the revolution of 41. it has been justified a holy and lawful
war, by a skillful and learned pen: the Acts of the Congregation of Iamestowne
also have been made good and maintained by what I have written, and was not yet
answered by Fa: VVailsh; the peace of 48 was not rendered (as he pretends
maliciously) fruitless by those of Iamestowne, or the people: the Irish
Comissioners have sufficiently proved this in London before his Majesty and
Counsel. Besides the Bishops never intermedled in that peace, having still
esteemed the same as a precious jewel of the Kingdom dearly bought, and such as
every man desired to perform, it has been already sufficiently proved that
they did not render these Articles fruitless; but Fa: VVailsh says, they
rendered them fruitless by putting a necessity (which is the second
proposition objected against them) upon the Lord Leutenant to part the Kingdom,
and this we also deny; Fa: VVailsh will find noe such decree of ours to that
purpose: if his Excellency was able to do any good in the extreme condition
we were in, why did not he stay? the obligation of being Lord Leutenant would
have him stay, and this was not taken from him, the truth is he was not able by
his staying to face the enemy, or defend what as yet was in the King^
possession, and this is it made him go away, ashamed and confounded to have
lost us all we had in our possession, when he made the peace with us, and that
he saw noe way of regaining the places lost, this made him leave the Government
with the Lord Marquis of Clanricard, when he saw evidently all was goeing to
wrack; they say it is a secret instinct of ratts to leave houses that are like
to go to ruin, or vessels that are to be drowned: this truth we have found
by experience; the Lord Leutenant had a stronger ground for leaving Irland,
then the secret instinct of these small beasts, reason made him evidently know
that Irland was to be soon lost, (his coming to us was a great, if not the only
cause of this unrecoverable loss) and that destruction was approaching their
doors: shall I make this manifest? First there was noe money, nor treasure to
pay the soldiers, which did not use to fight without good pay, though our cause
for fighting was the best in the world, for lives, liberties, fortunes,
estates, and religion; we had good experience of this, and we never saw in
any country soldiers so well paid; now clear it is, there was noe way for
paying, ergo noe fighting to be expected; secondly there was noe ammunition of
powder for defending the places we had, nor for field service; would men
(think you) expose themselves as marks to the enemy, expressly to be killed
without any defense? Thirdly there was noe revenue, or rents to be had for
supporting in the future the souldrie, officers, train of Artillery, pensions
for Commissioners of trust, and other necessary Comissioners attending the
Army and public: this truth is clear out of the Gentlemen Commissioners at
London, to wit, that there was noe town or considerable place when his
Excellency did depart, in his Majesty's hands, but Limerick and Galway, and the
Counties of Galway and Clare, the other parts of connaght being wast, and the
rest of the Kingdom lost; all which (as they auerre) happened before the
proceedings of that part of the Clergy met at Iamestowne, as was said before.
Fourthly there was noe expectation of aid from any part of the world.

In this place I shall desire my Lord of Ormond or Fa: VVailsh for him to name
me any person, Lord, Gentleman, Citizen, marchand or yeoman, that would give
at that time by way of lone, or gift unto the public any thing? what hopes
then had my Lord Leutenant of any substance to maintain the war? they will say
there remained as yet the Cities Limerick and Galway, and in these were many
rich men; but let him tell me who was able to get these riches; the Lord Bishop
of Limerick? noe; the Archbishop of Tuame ordinary of Galway? noe; the
Comissioners of trust? nor those, noe nor all the Bishops and Clergy of the
Kingdom with them; nor my Lord Leutenant himself; in whose face they shut
their gates: I confess my Lord Leutenant had his faction in Limerick (though
the mayor and honnester part were against him) the recorder stackpole a rotten
fellow, his creaghs, whites, macnemarras and Fenells, all these did not provide
the least in way of loan or otherwise: they painted honnest men in ill
colors, and told his excellency under hand, they were to be suspected, and
feared; but at last they them selves proved traitors and knaves, and these
they would have suspected, proved honnest men, true to God, king and country;
tell me (I beseech) who where they, who foully betrayed Limerick to Irton, after
many months noble resistance, were they of the lord Leutenants faction; or of
those adhered to the clergy? they were the lord Leutenants people, the above
named, who betrayed the town and blood of innocents: who were they Ir^on put
to death? they were those adhered to the clergy and Kingdom, Terence o Brien
Bishop of Emilie (the Bishop of the town escaped narrowly) Sr. Geffery
Galloway, Geffery Barron, an ornament to his country; Mr. Dominick Faunin
Alderman, Mr. Thomas stritch Alderman a right honnest man; Mr. Higgens Doctor
in physic, and fa: Laurence VVailsh priest, these were all put to death by
Irton: Hugo Neale a man nobly borne, and who stoutly before defended Clonmel,
taken prisoner was sent to London, committed to the tower, and had suffered but
that he proved himself Alien born in Flanders, though of Irish parents: did
any Creagh or White or stackpole etc. dye or suffer that day? noe, but Irton
one of the kings great murderers struck dead those he thought loved the King.
what noise then does this giddy friar keape about Ormonds departing the
Kingdom, and must stone to death all the Bishops and clergy for having (as he
says, but falsely) forced Ormond away? and if he had stayed, let him tell me,
what could he do more then the marquez of Clanricard have done, whom he left
in trust with the Government? he was not able to do so much, and this father,
and all the Kingdom knew it, and this indeed made him part the Kingdom: let
then any tell me does not Fa: VVailsh speak against his conscience, when he
pretends the Bishops did force the Lord Leutenant away; again let this father
tell me would not the people that obeyed his excellency's orders, commands, and
letters at Loaghreagh, and who vexed much for his sake the Bishops and Clergy
for what was done at Iamestowne, and for having indeauoured to do them all
good: did not these in that Assembly disclaim in, and seem to detest the
proceedings at Iamestowne to pleasure his excellency (I mean the major part,
but not the sounder part of them) would not these people keep him, if he had
been pleased to stay? nor did the Prelates intend to cross there the major vote
of the Assembly, for all their decrees, and excommunications were made with
this limitation, that the Assembly whenever they were pleased to meet, could
dispose of all things in order to their own preservation; and consequently
could of the matter of the Lord Leutenant's goeing or staying: and would not
they who so adhered to him, stand or fall with his excellency? to fall they
were sure had he stayed* and some of them knew he went expressly away that he
might not be spectatour of so great a fall and ruin, as that of a Kingdom.

I confess ingeniously the Bishops and clergy at Lamestowne wished my lord
would go away, and why? for grudg or spleen to his person? certainly they had
noe such thoughts, but they foresaw the ruin and destruction of the people
could not be avoided he staying with them, and this before God was their fear
and judgment of him, and there could not be in the world a more evident
presumption for judging and fearing, as they did, and for this reason (though
not certain his departure would cure the dangerous distemper of the Kingdom)
some hopes they had, that the union of the People would be greater, and
courrage, and more cheerfully contribut to their own preservation; this was
really the intention and mind of that congregation, which I knowingly do
speak; let Fa: VVailsh put in print what propositions or dreams he pleases,
or build castles in the air for excusing Ormond. This well grounded fear of
theirs, and the desire they had of the Peoples preservation, moved them to
write to his Excellency in an humble manner that he would be pleased to take a
viage for France to the Queen and Prince (now King whom God preserve) for to
get aids and succor, and to leave the Government in some trusty hand; with
this letter they sent the Bishop of Drommore (a great frind of Ormond's) and
Charles kelly Dean of Tuame to express their intentions to his Excellency.

Here I set you down the letter and instructions, that you may pass your
judgment on them, and first I give you this notice that in that grave
Congregation was not a word spoken of his Excellency other then with respect
due to his person, qualite, and greatness, though there were then persons
present several Bishops and other Cleargymen turned out of their Churches, and
homes, not well knowing which way to turn themselves, which cala^^itie befell
them in time of his government.

The letter of Iamestowne Congregation to the Lord Leutenant.
MAY it please your excellency we* received your letter of the second
current, wherein to our admiration we saw some expressions that seems meant for
casting the blame upon us of the present sad condition of the Kingdom, which
we h^ve in good time to answer to the satisfaction of the whole world and
Nation, in the mean time we premit this protestati^n as we are Christian
Catholic Prelates that we have don our endeavors with all earnestness and
^andor for taking away from the hearts of all, jealousies, and diffidences
occasioned (as we conceave) by so many disasters that befell the Nation of
late, and that in all occasions we were reddy to accompany all your
Excellencies designs for preservation of all his Ma^esties interests in this
Kingdom, whose state being for the present desperate, we thought it fit and our
d^ry to offer unto your Excellency our sense of the one only possibility and
means we could divise for its preservation, and that by the intervention and
expression of my Lord of Drommore and Doctor Kelly dean of Tuame; they will
clearly deliver our thoughts, and good intentions as to this effect: we pray
your Excellency to give full credit to what they shall say in our name in this
business, which will be still owned as our commands laid on them, and the
expression of the sincere hearts of your Excellencies very loving servants
etc.......

Iames^owne 10. Aug: 1650.

This letter was signed by all the Bishops sitting in the Congregation The
instructions that accompanied this letter, were as follows.

First ye are to present unto his Excellency the ^ast destructions, and
desol^tions of the Kingdom. the Ci^ties, towns, places, etc. that we have
lost in the space of few months, especially Wex^ord, Ross, Kilkennie, Clonmel,
Cashel, Carrick, the jo^^ of Tiecrohan, Car^ow, etc. almost the whole Provinces
of Munster and Linster, with the churches and church livings in them, and that
the City of Waterfoord and the sort of Dunkanan blockt up by the enemy (noe
army being to releeve them) are in danger to be soon lost, as also the rest
of the kingdom not yet lost, which is but this Province of Connaght, and the
county of Clare.

2. That the People seeing noe visible army for their deffence to oppose the
enemy, are come to despair of recovering what is lost, or deffending what we
should; and in^lining (for the safty of their lives and estates) to compound
with the Parliament, by which agreement the Kings authority will be infallibly
cast off, the Catholic faith (so we fear) with the time exstinguished, and
the Nation first enslaved, will perhaps in the end be plucked up root and branch^

3. Ye shall protest before God, Angels and men, in the name and behalf of
the Congregation, that the Prelars of this Kingdom have employed their earnest
and ^est endeavor for removing the fears and jealousies of the people, and
that they have noe power to do it, finding the universal sense of the people
to be, that fate does wait upon these times.

4. Ye shall present to his excellency how we finding noe other human
expedient remedy for the preservation of this Nation, and his Majesty's
interest therin^ then the speedy repiare of his Excellency to the Queen and
Prince in France, for preventing the destruction of all, do humbly pray he
leave the Kings authority in the hands of trusty persons to his Majesty, and
faithful to the nation, and to such as the affection and confidence of the
people will follow, by which the rage and fury of the enemy may with Gods
grace receave some interruption; we humbly offer this important matter of
safty or destruction of the Nation, and the Kings interest to his wisdom and
consideration, and ye shall as^^^^ his Excellency, we shall in the mean time
do what lies in our power to assist the persons entrusted by his Excellency.

Ye are also to pray his Excellency will be pleased to give ye an answer
within few days, for that we are not in a condition to continue long together.

I ask, if there be any thing in this letter, message, or instructions, but
what is humain, civil, and with great respect to his Excellency? In this
nature the Bishops so demeaned themselves, even then when the greatest danger
of destruction was over them, yea when most of them were destroyed already, and
reduced to extreme poverty, through the loss of the kingdom in the short time
of his government.

I further demand is there any thing in this that savors of treason or
disaffection to his Majesty, or of opposing or destroying of the peace, or of
desire to put aside the kings authority and government? was there any thing in
all these proceedings could offend this noble man? or could any man draw out of
this an occasion of carping or reprehending the Prelates? certainly noe man,
excepting this father, or some other Ormenian flatterer: was it I pray you, so
haighnous a crime to desire the lord Lutenant to take a viadge to the Queen and
Prince, for to seek supplies to support the war' and leave the kings
authority behind him, in hope we might do some thing against the enemy in
his absence by these entrusted by him, in as much as he himself did nothing
all that time, but lost us all we had as likewise what was gained from the
enemy in the beginning of his own Government? great Generals have been
displaced for want of success, though valorous soever; this have been don in
the Roman and Atthenian commo^wealths the most flourishing in the world

An ancient old woman came to Philip king of Macedo in presence of all his
Grandes, beseeching his Majesty to give ear to her complaints, and do her
justice, the king replied, he had noe leisure to attend her, at which answer
the bold poor woman said in presence of them all, igitur ne sis Rex? what are
you King for, but to do us justice? if you will not hear me lay down your
crown, which you got to do me justice; immediately this great king stood up
gave her audience, did her justice: would it not, I pray, well become my lord
of Ormond to listen to the just and reasonable request of so many Bishops,
spiritual fathers of the people, while they humbly prayed him to take in hand a
viadge? certainly I am confident that the great Monarchs of Spain and France
would give care to what so many Bishops would say, and take it much to their
serious consideration, and I doubt not but our own King would have don it,
though of a different religion.

It has been said by some of his own frinds, that he himself desired to take
such a viadge in hand, but in as much as the Bishops desired him, he went back
from his own resolution, what the reason is I know not, if not to crose their
desire.

CHAP: VIII. The true Iealousies of the Irish Catholics at London, that Ormond
was to desert them, wellset forth by F: Wailsh in a letter to Ormond, with
certain observations made upon the same letter.
NOw we come to the jealousies and fears of the Catholic nobility and
Gentry in London, year ^660. well set forth in a letter from F. VVailsh unto
Ormond, who, not-with^standing all the rest did fear, yet the F. did not, nor
as much as suspect of Ormonds disaffection and realtie to his country, and
catholic frinds; wherefore Ormond may say to him, what our savior said to the
centurian Math. c. 8. Non inveni tantam fide^^ in Israel. Here I give you the
fathers letter.

A letter from Peeter Wailsh to the marquez now duke of Ormond and second time
lord leutenant of Irland, desiring a Just and merciful regard may he had of
the Roman Catholics of Irland, written October: 1660.
SInce I had the honor of speaking last to your Excellency, I reflected (by
reason of several discourses had this week with persons of quality) on the
daily increase of the fears and jealousies of my countriemen, which is the
reason that instead of waiting upon you this morning about private concernments,
(as I intended) I chose rather out of my unalterable affection to your self,
to give first this paper, and therein my thoughts, and my desires relating to
the public that is, to vour self, to his Majesty, and his Kingdom of Irland.

My lord I thought fit to tell you that considering the general fear seized
alreddy almost on all the Nobility, and Gentry, and others here of that
nation, and reflecting on the vast difference to wixt my own belief, and
th^irs, it seems unto me I behold in us all (particularly who have relied for
so many years on your virtue) somewhat fulfilled not unlike the misterious
extinction of all the lights to one in the ceremony of Tenebrae in holy week:
for my lord I observe in the generality of the Catholics of Irland here, even
(I say) of those, who have been s^e long your constant believers, your
passionat frinds, a dimness and darkness seazing their judgment, even your
fastest sticklers heretofore, loosing at present their expectation of your
future appearance for them, and hopes of their delivery by you at any time
evermore: some through ignorance of states affairs, and intrigues obstructing
as yet; others through inconsideration of these ways to you known, much
wiser, though slower then folly and rashness could chalk out: and some out of
prejudice, or an evil will, which blinds them, and makes them abuse the
timorousness and credulity of all they can to lessen your esteem and your
dependence, all they are able.

My lord, these thoughts, which more and more tr^oubled me daily, because I
have daily new occasions ^o reflect on them, and therefore would noe longer but
give them your Excellency even in this method and writing, that they may take
the deeper impression, as evry much concerning you, since your one welfare, and
the kings and peoples, (in my jugment) very much depend on a good esteem of
so great a minister as your great deserts have made you.

But with all my lord I will give your Excellency my most earnest and most
hearty desire, that you delay noe longer then shall be necessary to clear these
clouds of darkness, and clear them in this present conjuncture by an
effectual demonstration of the justice and favor you intend the Catholics in
your Articles of 48. when they so freely put themselves, and their power into
your hands.


Father VVailsh your letter is well penned expressing ex^^llently the general
fear that seized upon all the Catholics of our nation in London; a truer
expression could not be. I observe you say in the generality of Irland here,
even I say of those, who have been so long as well your constant believers,
as your steadfast frinds ^ dimness etc. And for the better persuading him to
show his virtue and affection to his Catholic frinds, you tell him, his own
webfare, the kings etc. did much depend on a great esteem of so great a
minister as his great deserts have made him: Nothing can be said in reason to
move a gallant man more then what you have said. In the end of your letter you
press him closely to do the Catholics justice by virtue of the Articles of
48. saying when they put themselves and their power into your hands so freely.

Certainly good fa: had Ormond loved you and the Catholics of Irland (those
you name his fastest frinds and sticklers) as much as you and they loved him,
would he have give^ a good answer to your rational lines, but you tell nothing
of his answer, if good or bad, if it were good, I am sure you would have
published it amongst the rest of his great virtues, so as your silence in this
argues noe good answer: all your prayers good fa: to Ormond are in vain, you
have cast your seed in a barren land, Hoc est supra Petram, and your prayers
withered and shrank.

Had Ormond been a worthy man and lover of his country, he had dispersed those
clouds of darkness as you desired him, taking away those fears of his true
frinds by appearing for the nation as behoved a just man, and as he was bound
by virtue of the articles of 48. himself being the kings commissioner upon
concluding that peace. These are the affections and duties required at his
hands by the Catholics.

Does his greatness (think you) give him a Privilege that the Catholics
should love him, and he hate them; that men nobly borne and many other worthy
persons should for so many years rely upon him putting great trust in him, and
he in the end should betray them in the greatest concernment they had in the
world? if he has in this done like a true Chri^^ia^ or gallant nobleman head
of so a^cient a family, judge you and all others?

You speak^ after of Ceremonies and Tenebrae * all we had from Ormond were but
Tenebrae and Darkness, nor did your glorious light in the Triangle ever shine
propitious to the Catholics: his trusty frinds and sticklers have too long
relied upon a reed of Egijpt, a reed without stay or virtue, such as your
Ormond was and is. Such in London of our Nation (as you say) that feared he
would prove, as he showed himself, I see were wiser then you, that trusted so
much in him, and could not be persuaded he would play booty in the end and
abandon the Catholi^ks, their fear was grounded in good reason, and your
confidence in him was vain, and you remain still deceaved in that your
confidence; oh! would to God the Catholics had feared him in good time, if
so, Ormond had never come to the power of annoying them, or to loose them; but
Sero sapiunt phrijges: he deceaved the person most trusted in him, and did
believe (as you do) that he would prove the deliverer of his country; I mean
the Earl of Clancarty (then lord viscont Musgry) his brother in law, who
seemed sore vexed in his dying bed for having placed trust in Ormond, (an
error destructive to his Nation) and could his Excellency (then was the time
not to dissemble) the heauyest fear that p^ssessed his soul goeing unto an
other world was for confiding so much in him, who deceaved them all, and lost
his poor country and countrymen.

It is plain truth (and F. VVailsh you know it to be so) the great opinion
very many of the assembly had of the sound jugement of my lord Clancarty
(speaking nothing of his high descent an fortune) made many of the nobles and
gentry follow him, and in the end they all found themselves deluded.

You know well that young Musgry (Clan^arty his heir) who was Collonell in
France, a stout and valiant person, one of the hopefullest men of his Nation,
(who was killed in the first war at sea against the Hollanders) could never
endure his uncle Ormond after seeing his finistrous ways, his cunning artices,
and his deserting the Catholics so foully.

You have indeed F: earnestly prayed Ormond and conjured him to appear for the
Nation, and to obtain for them the benefit of the Articles of the peace of 48.
(which he himself was bound in honor and conscience to do) and you
constantly exspected their delivery by him; and when shall that be think you?
even then, when the Jews shall see their Messiah long waited for.

Honest friar, Ormond has deceaved you, and took a course to increase and
secure his own fortunes, he collogued with your countrymen; and in the end
stuck to that side, that preyed and robbed them of their estates, and amongst
all he had the greatest share, as is well known to all; yet not a word of
this in your writings, of the high elogies you give of his wisdom, virtue, and
most precious qualities that can adorn a statesman.

CHAPT: IX. In this Chapter is clearly set down Ormonds wrongful in vasion
and possession of several IIrish Catholic gentlemen's estates, well expressed
in the case of Sr. Robert Lyunch Knight and Barronet.
ORmond has invaded against conscience justice and honor the estates of
hundreds of poor innocent Catholics: I beseech you, what title or right had
his Grace to the estate of Sr. Robert Lynch knight? (whom I do instance for a
thousandmore, not for any acquaintance with him) what right I say had he to
this knight's estate? upon what account did he invade the islands of Aaron this
gentleman's inheritance, and had his son Richard created earl of that place
and estate? it is manifestly known that Domimum perfectum and plenum of said
estate was in Sr. Robert Lynch and his heirs, and yet my lord took those
lands from him, quo titulo quo iure is the question; deffend F. VVailsh if you
can in this place your great patron; ipsa synderesis told Ormond, that he was
doing wrong and robbery the lands appertaning to Sr Robert, that judicium
natural quo (as S. Basil speaks) ab iniquis, bona facile discernere postumus,
clearly convinced Ormond that he was doing a robbery; that law of nature, quod
tibi non vis fieri alteri ne feceris, that light of which holy David speaks,
signatum est super nos lumen vultus tui domine: all those sacred laws cried
out the depriving of Sr. Robert Lynch of his estate, was factum contra legem
dei aternam: all those lights of God and nature condemns this fact, so that
finis operis and finis operantis, objecctum circumstantiae, and omma qua agebat
Ormonius erant contralegem Dei; what then can he say or plead for himself? or
you for him? he cannot allege that he acquired that Dominium by any pact,
stipulation, donation, permutation or prescription; what then will men say in
this case? noe other then that Ormonds invading that gentleman's lands was
apertum latr^cin^um.

Likely you may tell me the King made a grant to Ormond of the said knights
estate; you know well that in lege naturae noe human power can di^pense, and it
is certain that the law of nature does bind all kind of men, and that none can
pretend exemption from the force of that law, the impression thereof being a
light made in every man's haert, so that this law binds as well the prince as
the lowest man: legi naturae (says lactantius) net praerogari fas est, nec
derogare ex hoc aliquid licet, neque tota abrogari potest, nec vero aut per
senatum, aut per populum hac lege liberari possumus: shall I say more? probable
it is that God himself: cannot dispense in the law of nature, take S. Thomas
his authority for it, quia id sapientiae divinae omnino repugnat, proendeque
fieri non potest 1. 2. quaest. 100. ar. 8. and ratio est (says the saint) quia
lex naturalis nihil aliud est, vt docet S. Aug: quam ipsius aternae legis and
incommut abilis rattonis ipsius divinae sapientiae in mentibus hominum facta
transcriptio. Now it is evidently clear a man's life, liberty, fame, lands,
estates and fortunes are his own by the law of nature, and that by force of
the same law quisuis potest se defendendo and sua, vine vi. repelsere; and so
could Sr. Robert against Ormond invading his estate had he been, able to do
so.

But you will say the landsand estates of subjects forfeited to the king for
treason, rebellion, and other like crimes by way of attaindeur may be disposed
of by the king: I grant that, but this authority for taking away from such men
their lands and estates, the prince has from the law of nature, which does not
protect any private man to do against the public good, wherefore the
commonwealth can take away the life of a man and his estate, (though both are
his by the law of nature) when he transgresses against the prince or public
good; to whom by pact or law of nature he should oboy: this the prince can do
for justice sake, but not for convenience, or at his will and pleasure; for the
bonds prescribed to the jurisdiction of a prince, are justice, law, and reason,
and not to do his own pleasure. Now I would know from you what crime has Sr.
Robert committed? was he convinced of any crime against the king before any
bench of justice? what has he don? who charged him? the law of England (a good
law) says noe man can be condemned but by course of law, that is the subjects
birthright, and to that effect are laws made, that justice may be don to all
men: princes are obliged in conscience to administer justice ackording the law.

I demand again, what has Sr. Robert Lynch don? you will say he was engaged
in the ^rish rebellion, (for so you still call that just war, which you could
never as yet prove nor never shall) but grant it has been a rebellion, Sr.
Robert Lynch, as all the confederat catholics had an act of oblivion from the
king, in the peace of 48. ergo your rebellion was pardonned, ergo Sr. Robert
Lynch cannot loose his estate for that, nor has he since that time entered into
a new rebellion, or committed any act of ^reason; Ormond cannot say he broake
the Articles of peace of 48. for he still observed them, and adhered to the
gouverment and to Ormond, and had nothinh to do with the congregation of
Iamestowne whose acts were by Ormond esteemed or reputed treasonable ^ tell me
then what right had Ormond to that noble gentleman's estate? you see the King's
grant (if any he gave) being against the law of nature and the law of the land
is void, and cannot excuse Ormond's consc^ience, and if the king by a wrong
information, had granted one man's estate to an other, that other cannot
prescribe, quia numquam erat in bona fide, and consequently in conscience he is
bound to restore the said estate, because he houlds it malafide: and the prince
himself rightly informed is obliged in conscience to have the estate restored
to the right owner.

But now let u^ return to the other part of the F: letter, wherein he uses a
christian freedom of minding the king and Ormond how dangerous a thing is the
violation of public faith, and how such transgressors have been severly
punished in all ages; but above all he brings down a formidable example of
public faith broken with the Gabionites, and how King David fir appeasing the
great famine, and the anger of God come upon the people, delivered to said
Gabionits seven children and nephews of Saul, who crucified them alive upon a
montaine to expiat this public horrid sin even in the face of sun. Lib. 2.
Reg. c. 21. he ends his letter to Ormond thus.

My lord! conclude here but with my hearty wil^es, that in the house, and at the
Counsels of our great king, your Excellency may both appear, and prove your
self hereafter, what you are in part already, an other Joseph, that by the
best advises you may preserve the best of Princes and all his people of so
many different n^tions of the british monarchy; may it be so my lord and may
the catholics of Irland in particular own you a great deliverance; as I can
not but confidently exspect from you in due time, for my light in the triangle
cannot be exstinguished. But my lord may not innocent benjamen alone, nor
frindly Ruben only, but even Symeon and Levi, and their accomplices against you
heretofore have cause to bless God for you here after; may they all find in
effect, that you have the bowels of Joseph to forgive and compassion at them,
and his power to deliver them, and his faith to believe that God permitted
their evil against you even in for^ing you twice away from them of purpose to
preserve you for their good, and that you might return even this second time
their great deliverer Prop^tious heaven and your own good Genius (my lord)
second my wis^es, and may your faith-full believer see with his own eyes the
full accomplishment; that ^ may employ all his days after and all his labors
in consecratnig to posterity your name, with this Flogium of Joseph, the
savior of his brethren, and of his country, and of all the People, and these
are the hearty wishes of my lord

your Exc^llencies most humble and most devoted servant P. VV.


Here is a glorious perciose of that famous letter; good God what a fair
flourish we have here of magnificent words, and even nothing but words
vows, and dreaming wishes, that will take effect at once with the Velleities
of the damned souls of hell: first he infinuats the great wisdom of Ormond in
the house and counsels of the king, and would make us believe he will appear
like an other Joseph, and by the best of advises preserve the best of Princes
our gracious king and all his people of so many different nations of the
British monarchy; so as the very British crown is again like to suffer an
other fatal knock, i^ Ormond's divine counsels and adviles do not prevent it;
what man can read these Magnalia without gearing at this fryar's folly? he then
says, may the catholics of Irland in particular owe you a great diliverance,
as I can not but confidently exspect from you in good time, for my light in the
triangle can not be exstinguished Certainly the man have been in a pleasant
humor and some jouiall exstasie when he wro^e these things, but I see the
spirit of prophecy forsook this friar long ago, and nothing (I am sorry for
it) fell out according his proguostication, for Ormond did quite deceave him in
his hopes, and astrean predictions, and his false light in the triangle (if
ever it was in the triangle) is shamefully put out; for the people of Irland in
stead of this hopeful deliverance owe to Ormond their downfall and utter
destruction. He then speaks of beloved Benjamen, of frindly Ruben, as likewise
of Symeon and Levi and their accomplices against Joseph giving thereby to
understand that the Catholics sold Ormond as Ioseph'^ brethren sold him to
the Egyptians, which is as great a lie as could be framed by a diabolick mind,
whereas Ormond, if he did not sell the nation (as Clarendo the Chanchelour did)
he has at leastwise betrayed them in trust, pray good F: name the marchand to
whom we sold your Ormond? tell the price we had for selling him? name the
country he was transported unto.

Now he comes to the bowels of Joseph in Ormond, O the merciful bowels of
Ormond in compassionating his countrymen! It is true he had great power to do
us good, but turned that power to destruction, carried away by a spirit of
rancor and revenge: whereas you say we forced Ormond away out of the country,
it is a shamfull lie; but he himself withdrew, in as much as he could do noe
good to the country (as above said) next you tell us he will become the great
deliverer of his country: O the great deliverer Ormond of his country and
countriemen! of the Catholics of Irland, noble Ormond! that brought them out
of chains and bondage, that defended them faith-fully against Orery, Montrath,
and the rest of that rabelment of rebels when they had a contest before king
and counsel; that consoled them in their extremities, delivered them from
hunger and famine, that represented to the king their loyalty and affection, and
made good to them the Articles of 48. O wonderful deliverer of the nation
Ormond! the lying friar perclosed his letter with this great elogium and
prayer. That Ormond may prove a Joseph and savior of his brethren, and of his
Country and of all the people.

Change your style idle and vain friar, writ truth once in your life, and tell
^he world that thy Ormond has not been a Joseph, nor savior, but the ruin,
looser, and destroyer of his brethren, and country and of all the people. You
may as well prove cruelty to be mercy, Hehogahalus was a Cato ^ticensis, or a
Pho^ion of Athens, and that Messalina wife to Cla^dius was a vestal nun, as
that Ormond was a Joseph to the Irish.

Let who please compare Ormond with Joseph, and then judge this friar
apostatizing from all piety and his order, a liar in calling Ormond a Joseph.

Joseph in Putiphar's house was faithful to his master, contenent and
virtuous; Joseph in prilon was patient, obedient to Gods will and beloved of
all; Joseph in the court and government of Egypt was wise, just, humble, and
in noe way proud or arrogant; if Ormond has those virtues, let those that know
him tell us. Joseph was of so great wisdom and providence, as he prevented
seven years famine by gathering corn in time of plenty, and selling it in
time of scarsity and hunger to the people, thereby preserving them all from
starving, wherefore Pharo called Joseph the savior of the world: surely the
friar cannot style Ormond savior of Irland or of the Irish in this sense; he
preserved none of them from famine, but starved thousands of them, by taking
away their lands, estates, and bread: this his crvel tyranny and oppression of
the poor makes them strick the gates of heaven with groans and ^ighes and
cries, they all say aloud O Ormond cruel man! thou have taken away the pleadge
of thy brethren without cause, and the naked thou has^ spoiled of clothes,
widows thou ha^^ sent away ^mp^ie, and the arms of pupills thou have broken
in pieces. Job. ^. 22.

Those are flatering friar the works of mercy Ormond thy Joseph have done the
Catholics of Irland; this is the tenderness of his merciful bowels toward
them, those are the effects of his great affection and care of them; and all
this being so, speak fa: VVailsh truth and shame the devil, what has thy
Ormond to do with Joseph? thy Ormond (I say) a man, (of whom it is generally
spoken and believed) could never forgiven any thing that looked like an
offense, or injury done him, whereas mercy was the greatest virtue in Joseph,
and his remitting and forgiving the injuries done him by his brethren who sold
him over to the Egyptians.

CHAPTER X. Evident proofs of Ormonds deserting the Catholics chiefly drawn
out of his own letter to Orery.
FRom the fears of the Catholics of our nation in London, that Ormond was to
desert them, and their good cause, let us pass o clear arguments fully
convincing that noble man of this his mind and determination to abandon said
catholics and join with Orery and the rest of that tribe, as really he did.

God said to the Prophet. Ezeciehl. Son of man dig the wall, and when I had
aigg'd the wall there appeared one door, and he says to me, go in and see
the most wicked abominations, which they do here. I am now coming to digg the
wall, where you shall see the abominations Ormond was doing even about the
time the credulous friar wrote him the above letter; what I am to say here will
appear evidently by Ormond's own letter to Orery, which is in this form.

Ormond's letter to Orery.
My Lord agreeable to the particular frindship I desire to have inviolably with
your Lordship, that upon oc^asion, the King's naming me to the gouvernement of
Irland, I should have written particularly to you, but I held it not so
particularly necessary, because I understood a principal condition is that noe
change should be made in that, hoever it may make me more or less able to serve
you, so that I presume on the oldfoot, and lay asside all ceremonies: I hope
you will find, that since I had some title to make it my business, the maine
dispaches in order to the setlement of that Kingdom, h^ve not gone on slower
then before, which with some thristy alterations has past hi^ Majesty's
approbation in full counsel, and will speedy^y be transmitted, and if it be
possible, the great act of setlement with it, that with the retrenchements, the
security as well of their possessions, as of a constant payement, of what is
left of pay, may be secured unto them; I assure you noe diligence nor ^^anes
shall be wanting or omitted on my side to hast^n both to you. I thank your
Idsp. for general Preston's pious oath, I neav^r saw it before, but the fruits
of it, and of an other p^rjurie soon after I found; and in truth found nothing
but direct treachery and disobedience from the generality of that people,
governed by the worst spiritual guides, that ever lead a poor people to
destruction, but they do, and it is just they should, find the smart of it: I
have a design to make that smart wh^re it is reason it should, it is to
execute the act in all the fundation of it, which must be immovable by way of
plantation, and transplatation (I mean of the Irish) for it must be laid as a
ground, that no^ adventurer or soldier shall be removed from his lot, by which
all the ends of satisfaction and security, I think will be met; which my
conceptions are in the hands of your frind, and tells me he likes them well;
when they are brought to form you shall have them sent you.

I am yours etc. Ormond.


CHAPTER XI. A paraphrase upon the misterious meaning of this letter.
IN this letter a blind man may parceaue the great affection Ormond bears to
the Cromwelians, and his longing desire to see them paid and satisfied of all
their challenge and demands; more could not be desired by them, then what is
promised by Ormonds letter (the 12. Counties in Irland that Cromwell and the
then parliament allotted them) the same affection and care he hase of the
adventurers of London, as deeply in rebellion as the rest Understood here; for
it must be (said Ormond) laid as a ground, that noe adventurer nor soldier
shall be removed from his lot, by which all the ends of satisfaction and
security, I think will be met; which my conceptions are in the hands of your
frind, and tells me he likes them well: this frind he means is Clarendon, who
sold away Irland and the catholics of Irland; Ormonds conceptions ran upon the
satisfaction and security of the Cromwelians, that they should not be removed
from their lot, neither the adventurers; in manner that by this frindly
distribution, there was nothing left to the Catholics, for what the
Cromwel^ans and adventurers possessed, were 22. countyes of thirty two in a^l
Irland.

If Cromwell were but alive again, and having an act of grace from his majesty
for himself, he could not demand nor desire more for his close Sticklers, then
what Ormond assures them of. Good friar trouble your brains noe more with
these Strained letters of yours unto Ormond as for favor to the Catholics,
conclusum est contra ipsos: all is disposed of, and to the very rebels: your
Ormond have stopped his ears to your flattering eloquence, and left nothing to
the poor innocent Catholics, an eternal stain and blemish to his name and
family: and this he was plotting (to your confusion friar be this spoken) this
he was plotting I say, even then, and at the same time you strained your wit
to pen him that learned letter: it is much, that for the confidence he placed
in you his prone Orator, and affection he bore to his noble brother in law
Clancarty, and Kindness to his gallant n^phew young Musgry, that he concealed
all these his hidden straragems from you all, even from his intimat old frind
Mr. Bel^ng.

This letter is replenished with tender love and affection to Orery; my lord
(said Ormond) agreeable to the particular fri^ds^ip I desire to have inviolably
with your lordship: what a sudden alteration (if they be sincerely spoken) is
this, a noble man held still to be a royalist, to become so vnexspectedly a
fautor of Cromwelians, a man as Ormond, who stuck so closely to the king in
his royal banishment, and vnparalel misfortunes, the kings cabinet counselor,
to desire and insinuate freely (without solicitations from the other side)
frindship and particular amity, inviolably to be observed and performed with
the kings mortal enemy, not long ago, with Orery I mean, whose wit was
brewing to crown Cromwell king of the three kingdoms; Ormond tells this Orery.
I hope you will find that since I had some title to make it my business, the
maine dispaches in order to the setlement of that kingdom, have not gone on
slower then before, which with some thrifty alterations has past his Majesty's
approbation in full counsel, and will speedyly be transmitted, and if it be
possible the great act of setlement with it etc. Ormonds business here (which
he made his maine work) was to undermine and destroy the Irish intrest his
settlement, (as he means) is to see all disposed of to the Cromwelians,
Adventurers and Soldiers, not forgetting himself, and some others, as
treacherous to Irclaud, as he himself, or Orrery; ^eere you may take notice
of his godly conscience in having a special care to see a constant payment (of
what is unpaid,) secured for the ungodly crew: tell me Ormond, Sautour and
Joseph of your Countremen, what is your meaning by a constant payment to those
who fought so vigorously against the Crown and Royal Blood? is this the
Crowns Interest? will you have reconciled Enemies constantly in pay, and
service? is this Loyalty or love to the King, to turn out true, and faithful
men to the Crown, and confirm bloody Traitors in their place? How many be
there, that wonders as well abroad as at home, his Majesty takes noe notice of
these proceedings? certainly there can be noe great argument of love to the
King, in forsaking his constant and faithful subjects and making new frindship
with his approved enemies, thy affection to Ortery and others do sound some
misterious policy, as men of weak capacity cannot reach unto, howeuer,
there be those, that say that the root of all this proceeds from an insatiable
desire of (auri sacra fames) and willingness to be revenged on the poor
catholics of the Nation.

He then thanks Orrery in his letter for an oath he sent him that General
Preston made, and says he never saw it before, but found the fruits of it, and
of another perjurie soon after. I need not in this place make mention of the
ancient and noble family of General Preston (Viscount of Taro) cadett to the
most noble house of Gormanstowne the eldest and first house of vis counts in
Irland, a family always true and faithful to the crown, and of great
piety and deserts; that the said General ever showed ^hemselfe a gallant and
valiant man in all dangers, is well known, and though Ormond and Ortery both
have been Commanders of Armies, the first under his Majeste, and the other
under Cromwell, I can scarce believe either of them, gained (by, or in any
expidition) as mu^ honor and applause as Preston had at the seege of lovain
(where beseged by the French in the year 1634.) by a sallie made in the head of
300. of his own regiment, upon S. Peter's day early in the morning breaking
upon the French quarters, routing and Killing all Opposed or Resisted him, to
the loss of 200 and eighty French soldiers, returning victorius sound and
safe without loosing a man and was received with triumph and Joy of all the
people of Louain, which noble exploit of his is celebrated by the famousest
writers of those days, as Vernuleus, and Puteaus. There was in General preston
another thing of greater praise then all this, true Virtue and piety, being a
man that feared God, and loathed to do against his Commandments, so that it
is a calumny to call him perjured; but if Orrery and Ormond shall be admitted
to judge honest upright people, many will be by them censured as Noble preston
is, for perfidious, and perjured men: But, pray why may not Preston and others
say to this O^mond, Quis te Constituit Iudicem? I will conclude with General
Preston, for whom I do say, that his life being sifted out from his childhood,
he will not be found to have done any base or vile action.

Here Ormond is not resolved to stopp, but passes on further and says to his
new molded Friend Orrery: and in truth I found nothing but direct treachery
and disobedience from the Generality of that people: it is true, Quod ex
abundantia cordis os loquitur, in this place; but I would have his grace know
(in a frindly manner I speak) that there is nere a Butler a live, nor have been
in times past, noe, nor of the Geraldins nor Bourkes (families renounced as any
of the Butlers) nor even of the old princly blood of that Nation, as your o
Brian, o Nealls, o Mourchoes, o Donells, Macharties, O Connors etc. whose word,
or testimony would be esteemed, as to the blemishing of the generality of a
nation, to make them treacherus and perfidious: Father walsh harken and take
notice of this splendid attestation your great Mecaenas Ormond gives of the
Catholic people of Irland, that in truth he found nothing but direct
Treachery and disobedience from the Generality of that people: what man so
impudent would maintain so notorious a reproach and infamy cast upon a sound
body of men, a whole nation faithful and loyal ever and all ways to the
King: in this place good Father I discover, that (notwithstanding your intimacy
with Ormond) it does not stopp him from giving you the lie, who in several
places of your writings do prove the Generality of the nation (though you
writ against some particulars) to have been loyal and faithful to the King,
now Ormond does blemish the Generality of the nation, with a stayne of of
treachery, what say you to this? Having aspersed the Nation by the
forementioned spott, he turns to the Bishops, Pastors, and Fathers of the
people, and tells his loving Orrery, the people were governed by the worst
Spiritual guids, that ever lead a poor people to destruction, and says
further, they do it, and it is fit they should find the smart of it, and that
he has a design to make the smart where it is most reason it should be.

(Here my Lord Duke vsurps a great presumption in saying the Bishops were
dismal guides to the people: he is far mistaken in his false Suppositions, the
Bishops were not they that misguided the people, and lead them a stray, he is
mistaken I say again, Vox populi says it is he, and he alone, (Ormond I mean)
that lead them blind fould, deluded, and trapan'd them to their destruction,
downfall and rvine, Seazing upon all they had, Fortunes, Liberty, and
Estates, with the rest of his Accomplices, and not the Bishops,

This good Duke seems to have a strange antipathie to these venerable Bishops,
for each where he affronts them, an (argument of an ignominious mind,) he will
have noe peace with them. Though his Grace a while after the Kings restoration
was created Duke, and Lord Steward of the Kings house, and Lord Leutenant of
Irland, and one of his Majesty's privy Counsel in England and Earl of
Brecknocke (in wales) created, that he might sit in the Parliament of England;
to be short he attained to that hight of favor with our good King, as none in
the three Kingsdoms did reach unto; yet all this signified little or nothing to
him, till he had seen those catholic Bishops (alliedy much afflicted) trampled
under his feet, their sufferings could not appease his wrath, their Innocence
could not satisfy his conscience, nor their integrity rectify his erroneous
Judgment; but must needs write to his beloved Orrery, his new friend, saying
that these Bishops were the worst Spiritual guids that ever lead a poor
people to destruction. this is Ormonds testimony to the King of the good
Bishops, he said they were Traitors and disaffected to his Majesty and
Crown, (and says the same still) all this to kindle his Majesty's indignation
against them, and by that way to see himself revenged of an Injury (he
imagined) don him by those of the congregation of watersord and Iamestowne, of
which we have said enough above.

Saint Paul himself (divine trumpet of the word of God,) though he suffered
cheerfully and innocently many reproaches, contumelies, and imprisonments for
Gods cause and sake, yet he would not have his same to be taken away or
stained Bonum est enim (says the Apostle) mihi magis mori quam ut Gloriam meam
Quis evacuet: Saint Jerome, in Imitation of Saint Paul, says Ad Silentiam:
Apostolici et Exempli, et Praecepti est, ut Habeamus rationem non conscientiae
tantum, sed etiam famae; Finally Saint Augustine Sermon tertio de vita
Clericorum, has these words, tenete quod dixi atque distinguite, duae res
sunt, Conscientia, et famae, Conscientia Necessaria est tibi, fama Proximo tuo,
qui fidens Conscientiae suae, negligit famam suam, credulis est. The Bishops
being innocent are to follow Saint Paul's Example, to defend their fame
against Ormond, and a greater man then he, and their Innocence, Piety; and
known integrity will thoroughly defend then. My opinion is that Ormonds
unquietness coms from the hight of his spirit: for that the appetite of
ambitious men is commonly so inordinate, and their will s^e unbridled, that
they cannot endure to see themselves thwarted in the least, or crossed, so
that, though they possess never so much contentment in all things, yet if in
the least they find themselves opposed, all the rest seems noisome unto them:
an Example of which we have in Holy Scripture, (in the book of Hester,) of
Aman. who abounding in wealth and honor, Pleasures, and glories, seeing that
Mardochaus the poor Jew, let him pass without doing him any reverence, (which
Mardochans did out of fear of offending God, knowing well Aman was a deadly
enemy to God, and to the Jews,) was so vexed therewith, that he assembled
his wife, Children, and frinds, having told them of all his Glories, and
Familiarity with the King Assuerus, and how he alone was invited a long with
the King, to Queen Hesters banquet, he said and for all I have this pomp,
magnificence and Glory, I think I have nothing, as long as I see Mardochaeus
sitting before the Kings door, and performing me noe reverence (Even so
Ormond, having all Glory, and prosperity, yett think^ he has nothing, while
the Catholic Bishops (that offended him not) do not prostrate themselves at
his feet, and submitt to his blindly trausported Judgment.) Then Zares Amans
wife and his frinds answered him, saying, comm^und a beam to be raised of
sixty cubits high, and speak to the King on the morning, that Mardochaeus may
be hanged thereon, and so thou shall go Joyful and merrily to the feast, but
all went quite to the contrary, and to Amans expectation, and to the
expectation of all his frinds; the Gibbet rai^ed by Aaman, for Mardochaeus, was
turned to Aamons own destruction.

That he (as I said before) for his great ambition, accompanied with a
revenging mind, can have but little ease or rest; The Prophet says, Impius
quasi mare servens, quod quiescere non potest The wicked man is like a Isa. cap
57.
swelling Sea, which cannot rest; there can be noe greater executioners or
torments to the mind of man, then ambition, envy, and anger, this made Horace
say, Invidia sicult non invenere tyranni tormentum majus. The tyrants of
Cicilie never found agreater torment then envy.

Seneca tells us the ambitious man receives not so much contentement by
seeing many behind him, as discontent by seeing any before him; there are many
great men in this age sick of this disease, such as cannot know when they are
well, and though great they be, will strive still to be greater, so that they
can at noe time be at ease or at quietness, much like that Italian, who being
well, must needs take physic, and dyed thereof, upon whose sepulcher this
Epitaphe was engraved, I was well: and would be better, I took physic, and
came to the phereter.

Plutharch expresses naturally this unquietness of ambitious minds in Pyrrhus
King of Epirot, who having greatly enlarged his Dominions with the conquest of
the great Kingdom of Macedonia, began also to design with himself the
conquest of Italy, and having Communicated his deliberation with his great
counselour Cineas, he demanded his advice, whertoe Cineas answered, that he
greatly desired to know what he meant t do when he had conquered Italy? Sir
quoth Pyrrhus, the Kingdom of Cisilie is then near at hand, and deserves to
be had in consideration, as well for the fertility, as for the riches, and
power of the Island, well quoth Cineas, and when you have gotten Cicily, what
will you then do? Quoth Pyrrhus, Africa is not far of where there are diverse
goodly Kingdoms, which partly by the fame of my former eonquests, and partly by
the valor of my soldiers, may easily be subdued, I grant it quoth Cineas, but
when all Asrick is yours, what mean you then to do? when Pyrrhus saw that he
urged him still with that question; then quoth Pyrrhus, thou and I will be
merry, and make good cheer; whereunto Cineas replied, if this shall be the end
of your adventures and labors, what hinders you from doing the same now,
will not your Kingdoms of Epyras and Macedonia suffice you to be merry, and
make good cheer? and if you had Italy, Cicily, Africa, and all the World,
could you and I be merrier then we are, or make better cheer then we do?
will you therefore venture your Kingdoms, Person, Life, Honor, and all you have
to purchase that which you have already? Thus said wise Cineas to Pyrrhus,
reprehending his Immoderate ambition, who knew not when he was well, neither
yet what he would have, seeing he desired noe more then that which he had
alleready, which in the end cost him dear; for following his own ambition,
and unbridled appetite, to amplify his Dominions; as he got much; so he
lost much being able to conserve nothing any time, and at length having entered
the town of Agros by force, he was killed with a brick batt thrown down by
a woeman from the top of a house; here you see the wretched end of Pyrr^us his
ambition.

Had Ormond such a Counselor by him, as Cineas was, and heard unto him, he
had lickly been happier then he is at present, such a Counselor I mean as
would say unto him intrepidly, when he took the course of stripping honest
Gentlemen of their estates; my Lord I would desire to know what you resolve to
do, when you have by hook and Crook engrossed the lands, and inheritances of
Innocent persons, poor widows and Orphans unto your self, when you have
obtained all, is the thing you aim at, only to make good cheer and be merry
if this be your design, you need not trouble your self so much, nor expose
your conscience to danger, nor your honor to such an Ignominious shame and
infamy, (which shall endure to all ages,) in taking away that which is not your
own? far better content your self as you are, and feast upon that great
patrimony your Predecessors left, cannot that estate which maintained them
honorably (without damaging any other) maintain and content you? but I see
this is an evil familiar, those exalted to the height of greatness and favor
in the Princes eye have noe Counselors that will speak freely the ttuth, as
worthy Cineas did to Pyrrhus; few are near Kings and Princes, can say that
which Sene^a requires to be said by Just upright men, Loquimur quod Sentimus,
et Sentimus quod Loquimur, this is a thing wanting in Court, Homo qut dicat
veritatem, which Seneca excellently expressed to his frind, Lucilius, thus,
Monstraho tibi cuius rei inopia laborant magna fastigia, quod ^mnia
possidentibus, desit unum, Scilicet qui verum dicit; They live not in Courts
and the houses of Kings that will severly speak, and sincerely the truth,
what man can without tears behold so many great personages, even Christians
in this age, that live, and do far wickeder things, then Gentiles or pagans
have don, or does, which had more respect and regard to their Idols (in whom
they apprehended some dietie) then those to the true and living God.

CHAPTER 12. If Ormonds attendance, and service upon the King in his
baniishment, met with sufficient recompense and reward;
THis querie you may take to be something extravagant, such another, as if one
had doubted whether it be day, even when the sun shines, and is scorching of
the earth, putting men into such heat and sweat, as they must of all necessity
put of their Clothes; however this querie is quickly resolved, by calculating
the yearly rents Ormond had before the war, and conferring the same with this
his present estate, in doing of this, the work is don, and your question
resolved; what rent say you had he Immediately before the war? 7000. pound
sterling noe more? in as much, as that vast estate of his was engaged to men in
long Leases, Morgaged, and encumbered with Annuitys; what then is his present
rent and estate? near upon eighty thousand pound starling annual rent (and I
doubt whether any subject in Europe have the like estate, some say he has
more,) but how coms it that a man, that came home naked and bare after so many
years toe and froe in the World, (as several other noble men in poverty and
need) came so suddenly by such vast acquisitions? This is quickly answered;
all was made over to him by the kings grant, as for Example, Six Corporations,
(which his Ancestors never had) all the estates of his house leased, so that
the leasors are constrained to beg, he had also conferred upon him the
estates and lands of many honest faithful subjects; all this and more bestowed
upon him by his Majestyes free grant; now see you whether his service and
attendance upon his Majesty, be plentifully requited or not? My Sentiment of
Ormonds acquisitions I delivered in the case of Sir Robert Lynch as above, now
whether the King has duly and legally bestowed other men's estates upon his
Grace, is left to every man's thought, to think what he will; however I am of
this opinion, that (all being well considered by his Majesty, and this
portentous liberality to that noble man, well examined,) his Majesty will find
but little content or joy therein, nay to the contrary, his Royal heart will be
in an ocean of unquietness, seeing so many deserving families numberless
widows, Innocents and orphans, deprived of their propper right, forced both
at home and abroad to unspeakable wants, consumed by hunger, vermin, and
miseries, and all this, to raise up the greatness of one man's family, that
was great enough of it self; If the Law of God or nature will allow of so
many thousand Innocents to perish and be destroyed, by depriving them of their
rights and livelihood, is a maxim that touches much his Royal wisdom, for it
is written, that God will have a care of the widows and fatherless, and in
due time will cha^^ife and oppress the oppressors of those; thousands of
Innocents are sacrificed in this our age, to increase the estate of one man,
can Justice suffer this? can the merciful breast of a merciful King endure to
see so many specktacles of woes and miseries without relief? will not God at
long running look down upon these unlawful proceedings? certainly he will,
and to the confusion of the possessors.

But Let us grant the parents of those Innocent creatures ran into a Rebellion,
(as Ormond, Clarindon, and others falsely suggested to the King) have the little
babes, (not borne at that time) been rebels? What have they don against the
Crown? Must they all perish and suffer for their Parents crimes? (crimes only
Imputed to them, but never proved;) God himself says, Filius non portabit
iniquitatem patri^. The child shall not bear the iniquity of his Father; but
Ormond says the contrary, let them suffer and perish for the errors of their
Parents, so that I may be thereby both great and wealthy; Iustitia Iusti
(says the Holy Ghost) super eum, et impietas i^^pij super eum, The Justice of
the Just fall upon him, and the Impiety of the Impious upon him; the quite
contrary is in this case, for the Just have not found Justice, nor mercy, the
Innocent children (of the supposed rebels) are punished as Impious, left naked
and to noe mercy. Saint Jerome his saying is not regarded in this place, Not
virtutes, nec vitia parentam liberis Imputentur, Let not the virtues, or vices
of the parents be Imposed to the Children; there is a God above all, when he
comes to examine those open injustices, Clarindon Ormond and others and the
rest (instruments of the ruin of so many thousand honest families) will not
appear, all will be made more clear to their confusion; but we must leave
the Innocent to God, who though he is pleased to Chastise them with the Rod of
his anger (out of his secret and Just Judgments, the which we must adore) yet
the cruelty of those afflicters, (who plunged as in an ocean of Calamities)
will not escape his seveare sentence and Justice. What a ridiculus conceit is
it, of some of Ormonds flatterers, who tell the World, Ormond waited on the
King out of mere affection, and thereby lost his estate and fortunes at home:
truly noe man has bine wiser (if it be wisdom to deuest and robb honest men
of their estates,) then Ormond in his a^quisitions, which as the World sees,
are great, but the Malediction of God does follow things unjustly aquired, and
likely the bread he now eats dipped in the tears of widows, and blood of
the Innocent does not taste sweetly:

I could not hear of any had the fortune that Ormond had in the time of the
Kings exile, he was still near the King, knew all his Arcana, had the comfort
and honor to suffer with his King, (a sufficient recompense for all his
attendance) and at the same time his Lady (a wise woeman) was honored and
comforted by Crumwell; and her Ghildren much carressed by his Children, so
Gracious was this Lady in Crumwells time, and in his eyes, that she obtained
three thousand pound or more for her Ioynter per Annum; who more inward with
the King then Ormond? who more respected by Crumwell then the Lady of Ormond?
and she well requited Crumwels kindness, to his relations, chiefly to his
son Harry, upon the Kings restoration, who obtained upon her knees from the
King (as we have been informed) that Harry Crumwell might enjoy the estate
given him in Ireland by his Father in the time of his Protectourship, among
other lands he had that of Mr, Sedgrave of killeglan a good and ancient
family, which estate he sold to one Sir Patrick Moledy knight, who possesses
it to this day, and the relict of said Sedra^es Mistress Jane N^ttingam (a good
and virtuous Lady) lives very poorly and in a sad condition with her Children,
without Ioynter or relief; and so my Lady Duchess of Ormonds solicitations for
Harry Crumwell, wear for the Child of him that murdered the Kings Father and
against a poor widow and her babes, a wedow whose Father and Kindred were ever
faithful to the Crown, and were not these think you Godly, and misterious
prayers and intercessions?

CHAPTER 13'th. How the frugality, and laudable husbandry of the ancient
Renowned Heroes, did content it self, and have bine satisfied with small
rewards given them, for their rate services by the common wealth.
GReat reason, that deserving men should be looked upon, and requited according
the service don to their country or Prince; this custom has been exercised
in the best, and most flourishing common wealths of Rome, Athens, Carthage, and
Lacedemonia, who reflecting upon the deserts of their people, and services don
the common wealth at home and a broad, did by statutes express eternize their
names, and families unto Posterity, as also by gifts and rewards, And these
(so collated) munificencies, were by distinct names called, as some, by the
name of Adorea, martial praise, another was called Corona aurea, a gold
Cro^ne, Nava^^ a sea fight Crown, so Castrensis, and Obsi^iona^^, a field and
siege Crown, etc. now and then they gave your Hostas Deauratas gilded speres,
and some times they gave certain Akers of ground and measures of Corn, more
or less as they deserved, and such measures were called Heminae which in
physical measure is not three gallons: here it is to be noted how great
Heroes, and Champions anciently were recompensed: for their extraordinary
services don to the (commonwealth) with small presents, and, well contented
were they with the same, so great have been their frugal husbandry, and
parcemonie in all their life, that hardly we can give Creditt to what
historians write of their wonderful moderation in their public expenses, of
Pompes, feastings, and shows; Great men were sober in those ages. Titus Liuius
tells us Quintus Cin^inatus was carried from the plough, to the dignity of a
dictator; which war being ended, he returned cheerfully to the plough
again; he relates also how the Ambassadors of the Samnites found Curious
Dentatus, another Dictaror, making ready, and cleansing of roots for his
supper, and even at that time he says, there were noe more in all the Roman
Armies of waiting men (such as we call calones) but two: Mar^us Anthontus, not
he (that fatal man to Cicero, and to the Commonwealth,) but another Chosen
Consul of a great Army designed in to spaigne, had but eight servants; so
Carbo in the same dignity placed, (as we read) had but seven; what shall I say
of Cato the senior, who in the same Employment, power and commission for
Spaigne, had but three; however this Cato named the censor (though contented
wisely with such a small retennue) was Captain General in their Army, a
famous orator, and a prudent counselour reputed by the Common wealth, (in the
Commonwealth,) and by all Rome for his sober life, was called a good father to
his children, a good husband to his wife, a frugall houskeeper, and a man (a
great praise in those days) well skilled in the plough.

Epaminondas a famous Captain, Protector, and flower of the Thebans, who
fought so many battaills valiantly, nevertheless it is written, he had but
one suit of Clothes, which, when required reparation, he was forced to keep
house, till mended and brought unto him; This Epaminond^ I speak of, dyed so
poor, as not so much in his house could be had, as to pay his funerals,
which was performed by the Commonwealth.

What need I speak in this place of Phocion, Socrates, and Iphaltes, Miracles
of nature, and wisest of Athens? This Phocion, who fought 26. battaills,
victorious allways, and triumphant over his enemies, yet a greater dispiser of
riches, honors, and titles, (as histories do testify,) refused one hundred
talents, sent unto him by Alexander the great as a Present, demanding of those
brought the Present, what was Alexanders meaning in, sending to him alone, and
only, that Present, they replied, for as much as he takes you to be the only
man of honor, and merit amongst the Athenians: to this he answered briefly,
why then let Alexander leave me so during my life, which is a thing I cannot
be, if I receive and accept of his talents of gould; upon the same Phocion,
alexander offered to bestow several Cities, but he answered the Messenger,
go, return, and tell thy Master Alexander, that I took him to be of so
noble a spirit, as he would do nothing that might render himself and me in
famous, which is like to follow if I accept of his gift, for he will be
esteemed a bryber and I taken for a corrupt man, and traitor, to my Country, in
this place I could make mention of Cato Junior, Glory of Rome, a man did hate
to flatter any body, this Cato bravely opposed Pompeius the great in some
things, and denied him is Daughter in Marriage, saying I will not give my
Daughter in hostage to Pompeius, for fear that he himself, (by that action)
should be against the Commonwealth: yet after Julius Caesar became Tyrant,
this Cato rancked himself on Pompeius his side, so much was this Cato adicted
to poverty, and all sort of hard sufferings, that it is written of him, and of
Phocion, that they went a great part of the year bare foot, and bare headed.

These profane examples of those Heroic Champions, I have brought here
expressly to the great confusion of our Christian dissolut great personages,
that they may see how these rare virtues shined, and were Embraced by Pagans,
which they abhor to exercise, or have seen in themselves, Frugality, Humility,
honest and diseret poverty, zeal to their Country, contempt of wealth and
honors, moderation in their pomps, shows, and, feastings. These are the
virtues, and the weapons with which those ancient Heroes kept their,
commonwealth in peace and Concord, Glory, Wealth, and Prosperity, with these I
say they have eternised their fame to future ages, not with Pride, Ambition,
Extortion, Emulation, Deceits, vain Assentations, Gluttonies, and the like
vices familiare to Christian personages.

Certainly there is nothing procures in a Common Wealth sooner, Envy, and
Discord, betwixt person and person, then to see some very rich, and others very
poor, (equality among fellow subjects is a precious pearl in a Commonwealth)
for Commonly wealth puf^s men up to such a height of pride, as to contemn and
despise other beneath them, and they so despised, can not but bear envy, and
hatred to those dispises them Omne pomum habet suvm vermem, vermus autem
diuitiarum superbia est, every apple have its own worm, the worm of wealth
is pride; This age we live in is mounted to the height of ambition and pride,
we are all going, or would feign go beyond our reach, pride in our eyes, and
pride in our thoughts, pride and ambition in all our actions, now a days
forsooth to set forth an Ambassador, we must have a whole legion of servants
in their retennue, as if his embassy could bear noe force otherwise unless
the wealth of a Commonwealth must be exhausted to support those
Extravagancies, Retennues, and needless traynes: whereas honest Cato the Consul
(agreater man then they for dignity) contented himself with three servants.

lib. 18.
The Historian Justinius gives us a rare Example of this. After a peace had bine
concluded between the Romans and King Pyrrhus, Cineas was sent by him to the
Romans for better confi^ming that agreement. Ad pacem Confirmandam Cineas Romam
cum ingentibus a pyrrho donis missus neminem, cuius domus muneribus pateret,
invenit. That is. For better confirming a peace with the Romans Cineas being
sent to Rome with great presents found noe house open to receive those gifts.
O rare contempt of gould and gifts in Rome that in so vast a City noe house
was found, would receive gifts, noe door open to Cineas with his gold, Alas
there is noe such City now in rerum Natura: It was Impossible such a City as
Rome was then could be taken or betrayed. We have in England a rare Example of
integrity in Sir Thomas More Chancellor of that Kingdom, A Lady presented him a
cupp of gold, a while after a sentence was given for her in a just cause, Sir
Thomas received the same; and much commended the workmanship and value thereof,
and then had it filled with spanish wine, and drank to the Lady, saying, Madam
you gave me a cupp of gold, but empty, be hold I bestow on you a cupp of gold
filled with good wine and so dismis'd her. O when shall England see again
such a Chancellor! certainly Chancellor Hyde was not such a man.

CHAPTER 14'th The rewards given by the Commonwealth of Rome unto two noble
Romans Horatius Cocles and Cajus Musius for their rare services don to their
Country.
THe right order is to begin with the exployts of the two noble Romans, and
after to com unto the rewards and remunerations given them for their
stupendous service; Titus Livius the fluentest of historians Libro Secundo
Romanae Hustoriae setts forth these gallant men's services in this nature;
having Porsenae King of Etrurians beseiged Rome (says Livius) non unquam alias
ante talis terror Senatum invasit, adeo ualida tum clufina erat, magnumque
Porsenae nomen, nec hosts modo timebat sed suos met cives, ne Romana plebs
metu perculsa receptis in vrbem regibus, vel cum servitute pacem acciperet; At
noe time have such fear ceased the Senate, so strong a thing then Clusina was,
and the great name of Porsena, which did not only fear the enemies but even
their own Citizens, for apprehention the people of Rome stricken with fear
of King's again received into the City, and would accept of a peace with
slavery:

Porsena made war with the Romans, to have proved Tarquin their King
admitted once again, whom the same people banished a way with all that race,
for the foul rape of chaste Lucretie and other Tyrannies, at this time there was
a wooden bridge that crossed over the River Tyber supported by many pyles
fastened in the ground, through this Bridge, Po^sena's men thought it easy to
make their way into the City, Horatius Cocles a noble Roman, (a man worthy of
perpetual praises) had the keeping of this bridge, when he saw all his men
fall back and retire, he obtested and prayed them by all that is, or can be
dear to the Gods Immortal, and by the sacred liberty they were fighting for,
to stick to him, and defend the Bridge, otherwise that the Enemies would
quickly master the Bridge, and disperss themselves in the Capital, and heart of
Rome, insulting over the Circumscript Fathers, killing and putting all to the
sword, men women and Children, he Further desired and would have them stay,
at least to cast and break down the Bridge by all possible means, and that
he himself in the mean time would put a stopp to the Enemies, rushing in
upon them; this would not do, they must away, two only of the number remaining
by him; Duos tamen (says Livius) cum eo pudor tenuit, ambos claros genere
factisque S. P. Lacrium, ac, T. Hermanium. The rest at length by great entreaty
Fell upon breaking the Bridge, and while they were in that work, he prayed
those two worthy men to go back unto their Fellows, and he alone stood
looking upon the Etrurians with flaming eyes, daring them to com, and try
battle with him, upbraiding them with the name of slaves to Tyrants, that came
to invade the Roman liberty; the Army stood amazed, beholding this unspeakable
wonde^, to see one man daring a whole Army, having made a loud cry, they let
fly their darts at him, the which this gallant Roman received undaunted with
his shield, drawing near they endeavored to fling him down from the Bridge,
but the Romans having brooken down the Bridge by this time, gave great
outcryes of joy; at this Horace being armed leapt into the river, (Saying)
Tiberine pater, te Sancte precor haec arma et hunc militem propitio flumine
accipias, notwithstanding the store of darts they flung at him in the river,
he got a way safe, Swimming over to his own people, who was very Joyfully
received: The Historian concludes, Rem ausus est plus famae habituram, ad
posteros quam fidei; He attempted a thing that is to have more fame by
posterity, then Cre^itt; In the mean time Porsena notwithstanding that this
attempt of the Bridge had noe success, kept his close siege to the City, in
manner that they were in evident danger to be at long running, overcome by his
Army; Here Succeeded a noble action, a gallant man Caius Mutius by name
appeared to free the City from this Fear, a resolute young Gentleman, fervent
in afection to his Country, as Co^hles was, Cajus Muti^ his design was to kill
Porsena, the great enemy of Rome; resolving in his mind this great enterprise,
he came to the Senate and said, Transire tiberim patres, and intrare si
possim, castra Hostium volo, non proed^ nec populationum invicem ultor, maj^ si
dij Iuvant in animo est Facinus; Fathers conscript, my resolution is to pass
over Tiber, and so rush into the enemies Camp, not to plunder, or to do any
devastation, For, if the Gods will but help me, I have a greater matter in my
mind; Of these expressions the Senators approved much, he departed, and soon
came into their Camp, having a knife or dagger under his coat to kill
Porsena, and having aproached the place the King was, it fell out, that it was
a pay-dey with the Soldiers, drawing near he killed* Commissioner or
Secretary near the King, thinking him to be the King, and so got a way,
making place for himself with his sword brandishing before him, till at last
overlaid by the multitude, he was taken, and brought before the King, being
questioned who he was, and from whence he came, he answered more like unto a
man to be feared, then a man in fear; saying to the King, Romanus sum ciuis,
C. Musium vocant, host is hostem occidere volui, nec ad mortem minus animi est
quam fuit ad caedem, et facere, et pati fortia Romanum est; A Citizen of Rome
I am, by name C. musius, I thought as an enemy, to Kill an enemy, neither is my
heart backwarder to dye, then it has bine forward to kill you, to do, and
suffer strong things is the part of a Roman. At which undaunted Expressions the
King amaized and troubled, commanded to inuiron him round about with fire, but
the Courageous young man putting his right hand in the fire, and there holding
it, as not feeling the fire, (said generously,) En tibi! ut Sentias quam vile
corpus sit ijs, qui magnam Gloriam vident; Behold! that you may know how vile
is the body to those who sees great glory; The King astonished at the hand
burning without any regard of pain, leap't out of his chair and commanded
the young man to be removed from the Altar, and then said to him these Kingly
words, Tu ver^ abi in te maju^, quam in me hostilia ausus, juberem macta
virtu^e esse, si pro mea patria ista virt^ staret, nunc jure belli liberum te,
intactum, inviolatumque dimitto: tum Musius, quasi romunerans meritum;
quandoquidem inquit est apud to virtuti ^onos, ut beneficio tuleris a me, quod
minis nequisti. Trecenti conjuravim^^ principei Iuventutis Roman, ut in te hac
via grassaremur, mea prima sors fuit, cateri, ut cuique ceciderit, primo, quo
ad te opportunum fortuna dederit; suo quisque tempore aderunt Be you gone, more
Cruel to your self then to me, I would wish you to be of good courrage, if
that virtue had been for my Country, by the Law of war, I now dismiss you
untouched, unviolated, to whom Mutius said, as if to recompense the favor
don, in as much as you regard valor, and virtue, you get that from me by
the benefitt you do, which you could not by threats. 300. Of the Chiefest
youths of Rome, we have conspired to invde you in this nature,, It fell out I
should be the first, the rest each one in his own turn, as it will fall out
will perform their duty. Mutius being sent to the Romans (after this was
called Scavola, for the burnings and wounds of his right hand,) Porssena seeing
his life was saved by chance that time, and that there were as yet 200. and
ninty nine more of the Primest of Roman youth designed to the same expedition;
of his own accord he offered the Romans apeace, and upon honorable
conditions; one of them being (that which they desired above all) that he
would have noe more to do with with Tarquin, or his people; Ali^ (said the
King) Hinc sen bello opus est, seu quiet exilio querant locum, nequi^ mean
vobiscum pacem destineat, dictis facta meliora adjecit.

Could there be more or nobler services don for a man's Country, then these
Horatius Cochles and C. Mutius attempted? it is not easy to be desided, which
of these two showed greatest valor and affection to Rome; Cochles he alone
fought a whole Army and freed the Senate; the people from Massacres, and Rome
from being taken; Mutius terrifyed King Porssenae, contemned the force of fire
and removed the siege by his strange example of fortitude upon most honorable
conditions for the Romans: Oh two Glorious Champions of Rome^ O Immortal
Heroes! O Patriots flaming with charity and affection! when shall we find in
this age such unspeakable services? Now as to the rewards given them.

What rewards think you had Horace, and Scavola given them? as to Horace (as
Livius says) Grata erga tantam virtutem Civitas fuit, statua in comitijs
posita: The City was kind and gratfull toward such meritts and virtues,
there was by order an image errected in the Senate house for him; I must
confess that! was honorably don, but what more? What other recompense and
remuneration have they given? Agri quantum vno die Circumaravit datum, As much
ground as he could in one day plough; What have they lotted for Mutius? Patres
(said Livius) Caio Mutio virtutis Causa, trans tiberem agrum done dedere; to
Muti^^ the Senate for his rare virtue has given beyond the River Tiber a platt
of ground as a gift, Qui postea Mutia prata appellata, which afterward was
called by the name of the Mutian Green; Here you may see the recompense given
to these incomporable men was but a few akers of ground, with which their
Sobriety remained satisfied, having don all they did out of mere affection to
their Country, not for self end or hope of remuneration.

Having spooken of the rewards given by Rome to Horatius Cochles, and to Mutius
for unparalled services, let us consider with stupefaction the rewards and
recompenses the Duke of Ormond had for his services and attending upon the King
in time of his exile; I dare say, in the first place, there is none of the
adorers of Ormonds virtues, (not one,) will presume to say, that the greatest
of all his services he did the King, came; or could com near, those of the
foresaid Romans; yet if we compare both their remunerations together, theires
will appear like a grain of sand, compared with Mons Olympus, as for the
lands given him, hundred thousand of Akers, is the meanest gift of all; but
what do I speak of Ormond, Lord of a most ancient family of Earls of above
300. Years (The first Earl of that family John Butler by name, was created in
the Reign of Edward the third, anno. 1328.) When George Lane his recompenses
are mounted to an unreasonable measure, a man inferior to thousands, both for
his birth, and service to the King, Ormonds secretary now Sir George Lane? this
Lane, by the Kings grant of other men's estates enjoys many thousand Akers of
ground, far more then Cochles, or Mutt^^, the deliverers of Rome had, this
new knight had conferred upon him, the estates of two worshipful esquires,
that of Mr. Thomas wading of waterford, and that of Mr. Phillip Hoar of
Kilshalchan; the seat of K^lbarry near waterford he has from the former,,
adelicious place, with the whole estate upon a thousand pound a year, and
Kilshalchon within seven miles of Dublin, a fair seat with the livings of
eight hundred pound yearly, these Gentlemen's Children (which were many in
number) by this munificencie, are to shift for themselves in great misery, the
Lord knows in whar condition they are in, and this befalls them and several
others, that Ceorge Lane should be gratifyed (an unknown man) For writing for
Ormond, he has had conferred upon him, other estates, in all near upon four
thousand pound annual rent, (this we are informed) brave rewards for a
Secretary; I dare confidently say stout and valiant Collonells, Officers, and
Gentlemen of quality, which firmly adhered to the King, Fought stoutly for him,
and lost both life in the bed of honor, and estates in his service, have not,
nor any of theires, in reeompence received the least provision, reward, or
comfort: in this I may say that George Lane, his penn has been more Fortunate
and profitable to him, then these noble Gentlemen's swords have been unto them:
a sad incourragement, and cold Satisfaction to worthy Royalists to see this
little Lane and such like night-sprungmus heroms to have sucked the Fattness of
the earth from far better plants then themselves, and perhaps the hands of as
low men as themselves, will be ready to pluck them up root and branch, when the
season shall serve, to clear the Land of such weeds; by what means this will
com to pass I am quite Ignorant, but I think the Justice of God will make way
for it, and take, not only from Ceorge Lane, and men of that rank, but even
from Ormond, and the greatest of them all, the conferred estates of honest men,
for seldom the blessing of God does accompany unjust plunderes and Robbers. And
it is the opinion of several true hearted subjects to his Majesty, that things
are not like to prosper with himself, until this be don.

But I hear sum body say, Ormond has don the King great service, though he
has not preserved the Monarchy of Britain, as Cochles and Musius did that
of Rome, and that his affection to King and Country have been as great as
theires to the Senate, and common wealth of Rome, occation being only wanting:
as For his affection to King and Crown, I believe he had as much as another
noble man, (but to his Country, where he has his estate and lands he had
none at all.) If affection to the king can draw rewards, and Remunerations,
there be thousands loved the King, and the intrest of the Crown of England as
much as Ormond ever did, and appeared undoubtedly in all occations, against the
Kings enemies, nevertheless thousands of them never had an Aker of ground, nor a
Cottage to shelter themselves in, in frosty weather, in recompensation of such
affection: therefore I do heir conclude that Ormond was happily Fortunate in
his affections to the King, and Crown, and others were not, having obtained
those Evtraordinary rewards from his Royal Majesty, which in the ensuing
Chapter I do resolve more amply to discover, and speak of.

CHAPTER 15'th The Remunerations the Duke of Ormond had from the King after his
Restoration
These remunerations will be found so great, that you must needs confess
Ormond was not Loyal gratis; neither do I in any way doubt but there be some
Bassa's of the great Turck, and some of the chiefest of them would come and
serve our King, and serve him Loyally for so incredible a recompense as Ormond
had; Let us now speak of the quantity and quality thereof according the best
notice we have received. We have said above his Annual rents before the
war was but seven thousand pound starling (his ancient estate being then
encumbered with Annuitys, and Leases, which otherwise was worth forty thousand
pound starling per Annum) and at present it is upon Eighty thousand, now the
first part of his new great revennues is the Kings grant of all those lands of
his own estate which were leased, and morgaged; the rest were grants of other
men's Estates, and other gifts of his Majesty; for avoiding the trouble of
searching after all his particulare gettings, (many there are without doubt
unknown to me) I will here put down certain Quaeres in number 29. Out of
which, he, that will, may take notice of these Immense recompenses given him.

Quaeres touching the Present Condition of his Majesty's Kingdom of IRELAND
1. WHether it be not demonstrable by search made into the Records of his
Majestys Auditor General of Ireland, that had his Majestys Revenue of that
Kingdom been well managed, there had been money enough to answer the necessary
Charge of that Kingdom?

2. Whether upon search made of his Majestyes Exchequer in England, there does
not appear upwards of 200000 l. Sent out of England into Ireland since the Duke
of Ormonds last Government there?

3. Whether there does not appear that there were twenty four subsidies
amounting to 360000 l. Assessed by the late Parliament of Ireland?

4. Whether there was not 50000 l. advanced out of the Soldiers and Adventurers
Rents?

5. Whether the aforesaid Sums thus extraordinarily raised, do not amount to
abve six hundred thousand, pounds?

6. Whether the aforesaid extraordinary Sums would not discharge near Four
Years of his Majesty's Establishment both in the Civil and Martial List,
Independently of the Revenue of that Kingdom?

7. Though the aforesaid Sums Extraordinarily raised would have paid near Four
Years Establishment, yet whether the Martial and Civil Lists be not a Year and
half in arrear?

8. Whether his Majestyes Ordinary, certain and Casual Revenue, which if well
managed, might have fully paid his Majesty's necessary Charge, whether upon the
aforesaid Principles it is not demonstrable, that the said revenue harh not
discharged more then one year and a halfs Establishment in six years time?

9. Whether it be not demonstrable then, that there has been more then Four
years and a half Revenue embesled in six years time: and whether the chief
Governor be not more Faulty in this great miscarriag; then the Earl of
Anglesy.

Quaeres in Relation to the Lord Duke of Ormond.
1. WHether by sales of Offices, as Lord Steward and receipts out of his
Majesty's Exchequer of England, the Lord Duke of Ormond has not raised upwards
of 30000 l?

2. Whether he did not receive by one Act of Parliament of Ireland as a gift,
30000 l?

3. Whether it does not appear by the Records of his Majesty's Tresurie in
Ireland, that his Grace did receive 12000 l. Before his being last Levtenant?

4. Whether he did not receive 12000. l. Per Annum as Lord Levtenant, which was
a Moyetie more than any Lord Levtenant received; and that Moyetie amounts in
six years to 36000 l?

5. Whether it does not appear that his Grace has released by the Act of
Sentlement 60000 l? due to honest men and good Subjects, upon his Estate before
the Rebellion?

6. Whether his Grace has not received 30000 l. out of Soldiers and
Adventurers Lands, which he invaded and entered upon without any Title, as
appears by the Records of the Court of Claymes in Ireland, which has decreed
the Lands from him?

7. Whether by the Act of Explanation he has not got the City of Kilkenny,
and six other* Corporat Towns, together with their Lands and Liberties, valved
by himself and his friends of the Council but at 60000l. though they are well
worth 120000 l?

8. Whether he did not obtain by a special warrant from his Majesty 72000 l.
out of the Soldiers and Adventurers half year Revenue?

9 Whether there is not confirmed to him 50000 l. More by the Explanatory Act,
for waving a grant which he got by the Act of Settlement?

10. Whether he had not got as many Gentlemen's Estates, upon the pretense of a
grant of enjoying all Lands that he could prove (by witnesses) to have paid
him any Chiefrey, as is worth at least 150000 l. and whether also, he has not
obtained that for the said Lands, no quitt Rent be paid to the King, which
grant at 3d. An Acre per annum amounts to 26000 l?

11. Whether he has not abitrarily laid upon the Inhabitants of the City of
Dublin 8000 l. Per Annum, amounting (for these six years past of his
Government) to 48000 l?

12. Whether he has not against the Fvndamental Laws and Magna Charta,
enclosed diverse parcells of Land belonging to the kings good subjects without
their consent, to the value of 1500 l. per Annum at the very gates of Dublin,
to the great prejudice of that City and the Country; the profit of which Land
and Park, he has bestowed upon the Lord of Dungannon and Colonel Cook?

13. Whether it be credible, that his Grace is zealous for the English and
Protestant Interest, seeing it is not possible for the Soldiers and Adventurers
to be reprized according to his Majesty's gracious Declaration, when his Grace
has swallowed up in gifts and grants the best part of the Stock of Reprizalls,
and has made or permitted such Embeslements of his Majesty's revenue, and
applied the Royal authority, wholly to gain vast advantages to himself, and
whether by preferring his own private gains and grants, before the Public
good and the Just right of the Adventurers and Soldiers, he has not unsettled
the Kingdom of Ireland, and unsatisfied the two main interests of Protestants
(the Soldiers and Adventurers) to such a degree, that it is to be feared, it
will be a continual charge to England, to keep to the rules of the Acts of
Settlement and Explanation so destroyed and desperate a people: and whether all
this expense, trouble and danger, for preserving the Duke of Ormond and his
Family (that is as much Irish as any can be) in other men's Inheritances, and
Rights, be the interest of England or agreeable to the Maxims of sound Policy or
of Christian piety?

14. Whether such of his Majesty's Protestant Subjects of Ireland, as have
escaped the Duke of Ormonds Proviso have not Just grounds to fear that if the
same Duke of Ormond should continue in his Gouvernment, and press, as now he
does, the Paymeut of 100000 l. they will not be in a condition to live, or to
pay his Majesty's quit Rents, and the necessary charges of the Kingdom?

15. Whether after the Prohibition of transporting Cattle, and so much
oppression, by the Lord Lieutenant and his Creatures, it be possible For his
Majesty's impoverished subjects of Ireland, to pay the 300000 l. assessed by
the Explanatory Act, whereof the First 100000 l. is for his Grace?

16. Whether his Grace had not a great regard For his Majesty's service, when
he lately pressed the King and Council to call a Parliament in Ireland, For
imposing new Taxes upon that miserable people, and For confirming all his own
new acquisitions, whereby the Soldiers, Advenrurers and Nominees are defrauded
of his Majesty's intended Favors, and the English interest utterly destroyed?

17, Whether the Duke of Ormonds gifts and grandis amount not unto 630000 l.
and whether this Sum would not have satisfied all the English Interest of
Ireland, and have settled the Protestants and well meriting Natives Natives of
that Kingdom in peace; whereas now his Majesty and all Christendom is troubled
with their Clamours against the breach of Public Faith; and all this stir,
destruction of the people, and discredit of the Government, to humor one
particular man, whose merit is not so extraordinary, ^s his management has
been vnsuccesful.

18. Whether not only some of the Nobility of Ireland but very many of the
Nobi-, lity, Knights and Gentry of England have not lost greater revenues, and
richer movables for being Cavaliers, then the Duke of Ormond, whose Estate was
much incumbered, and his rents before the rebellion exceeding not 7000 l. per
Annum, and during the War, got more by his Government of Ireland, and giving
up Dublin, then he could it he were in possession of his Estate?

19. Whether such as endeavored to conceal these miscarriages and miseries of
the Kingdom of Ireland From his Majesty's and the Parliaments knowledge, and yet
strive to have the Duke of Ormonds distructive Government continue, deserve not
to be questioned by the Parliament, as betrayers of the Public good, and of
the Laws and Liberties of England?

20. Whether it be fit, that the Government of Ireland should continue so long
in one person, as it has in the Duke of Ormond, though he were not an Irish
man, and all his relations were not Papists, and very great Enemies of the
English and Protestant interest?

What man can apprehend or read these incredible gettings, and recompenses
(given Ormond) without amaizment? By the nine first Quaeries you see his grace
is as yet countable for many thousands, of thousands of the two hundred thousnd
pound, sent out of England into Ireland, since his last government there; and of
the three hundred and sixty thousand pounds assessed by the Parliament of
Ireland; and fifty thousand pound advanced out of the Soldiers and Adventerours
Rents: and that notwithstanding those vast Sums, the Marshall, and Civil
listes were a year and half in arrears; Let his Majesty call him to question,
or Forgive him, both is in his Royal breast to do; in the 20. Quaeries in
relation to the Lord Duke of Ormond himself, you will find that he received
in all, as in gifts, and grants, that amounted to six hundred and sixty
thousand pound starling: if this wonderful and strange mass of treasures be
not a sufficient Recompense and reward, Let the reader Judge; For this amounts
(according to Merchants rating a Tunn of gould) to sixty three tunns of gould;
one Tunn of gould only makes a great noise, and surely is a vast sum of monys;
What then shall we say of sixty three Tunns? We find in the Cronicles of
England that thirty thousand marks, or Forty thousand, to have been a Queens
Dote in Marriage, Elleoner Daughter to Knig Edward the second, married to the
Earl of Gelders, (after made Duke) had but fiftien thousand pound portion,
Queen Isabell Dowager to said Edward the second and mother to Edward the third
(most Glorious of English Kings) daughter and Heir to Phillip the Fair of
France, (by whose title the Kings of England makes Claim to the Kingdom of
France) had allowed her by her son but a thousnd pound Ioynter a year,
several such passages we may find in the Cronicles of England, and others;
yet the Duke of Ormond, as is to be seen in the 12'th Quaerie of those in
Relation to Ormond, granted the profitt of a rent of one thousand five hundred
pounds a year (of the park he has near the Gates of Dublin,) to the Lord
of Donga^non, and to Colonel Cook a Kingly Liberality.

If Father walsh or any other will say, that these Quaeries are Idle,
Frivolous, needless, and of noe regard, I would ask of the same, and know
whether matters of Fact, and Propositiones sensu notae (as are the Estates and
lands of other men, and the Corporations now actually in Ormonds possession,
things that cannot be hidden From the Eyes of men) are Idle, needless, and
Frivolous dreams and Fables? noe, but Foul, and unhandsom things against
Justice, honor, trust committed unto him, and Government of that Kingdom of
Ireland, conferred by his Majesty upon Ormond:

If his grace or any for him, can answer the said Quaeries, why is he, or they
so long mute and silent? they strick home to the quick, they render his
integrity suspected, they wound his Fame and honor; certainly if there were
any way to answer them, and to prove them False, Father Walsh had long before
now spaken Loudly to the World; If Ormonds integrity and virtues be Calumniated
by these Quaeries, I wonder there is nothing said in his vindication; none
appears for him; but what? in a matter that cannot be defended, it is but
wisdom to be silent; the whole Country knows, that Father walsh, of all men is
most concerned to appear for Ormond, and vindicate his integrity the best he
can, having in his several writings described him for a virtuous, upright,
Just, Iuditious, and most rare statesman, now is the time good Friar to prove
this, you see to what puzle he is brought unto, by these Quaeries? you see how
guilty he is on all sides? stretch him now your hand if you can, and bring him
of clearly and unspottedly from all these blemishes, that staynes his person
so deeply, now is the time, I say, to prove him to the world, what you gave in
paper of him, and make us all sensible that he is deserving of those
Epithites, you are pleased to confer upon him, in the little book called the.
Irish colors Foulded, you have put down a Fair method, and good documents I
must confess, for guiding of Ormond in the Charge of Lord Lieutenant of Irland,
where you bid him by all means to be ware of the man of sin, (Meaning Orrery)
who would have his Grace ^uoy up one interest wholly, that is the stronger, and
more prevalent, of Orrery and his accomplices; and sinck utterly the other
interest; that of the Catholics, against all devine and human Laws; many
rediculous things of this nature has this Friar said about his Ormond, and
this was one; but Ormond contrary to his desire and Counsel buoyed up Orrery's
intrest, and sunck the Intrest of the innocent party, because it was the
weakest; For which he had a notable share of the grants, and estates he now
Enjoys.

I see good Father you are very unfortunate in your conceits of Ormond; who
grants nothing of these things you demanded; I have a mind to produce in this
place, other lines of this Friar (unto Ormond) out of the same Foulded Colors;
My Lord (Quoth he) I shall mind your Grace of what you know your self
already, that you shall behold under your Government a very great number of
simple poor Innocents and most afflicted Creaturs, if any such be in the
world, and that you think that God has Principally created you, and hithertoe
preserved you amidst so many dangers, and now at last inspired our gracious
King to send you for them, and therefore that your greatest care must be to open
to them your breast with an amorous compassion, extend to them the ^owells of
your Charity, streatch to them affectionatly your helpful hands, take their
requests, l^nd care to their cries, cause their affairs to be speedily
dispatched, not drawing them along in delays, which may devour them, strengthen
your Arm against those that oppressed them, ^edeem the prey out of the lions
throat, and the Harpi's talons. By these expresions one would have thought
Ormond to be aman, like to do great things, but here we have much smooke, and
noe fire, fair blossoms, and noe Fruit, excellent documents given, and yet
nothing done; take the pains Father to go up and down Ireland, and hear
afflicted Innocent people, and make a list) of those, to whom Ormond in time
of his Government Opened his heart with an amorous compassion, to whom he did
extend the ^^wells of his charity, to whom he did streatch out his helpful
hands, those whom he preserved out of the Lions throat, or the Harpies Talon.
You will com to short of your vaticinations, and hopes, nothing like this, but
rather he was the Lion preyed on them, and did noe Justice to the Orphans as
you desired, N^r ^yp^ a way the tears of a forelorne widow^ be steeped not in
oil the yoak^ of a people, which lived on gale and wormwood, and who, sighel
under unsupportable necessityes, He has don nothing in his Government for the
ease of that people, but along with Orrery and the rest pild, and pulled them of
all: truly good Father you seem to me a man much enchanted, and indeed to be
in a state of blyndness ^ to your understanding, that Harpaste was in her
corporal sight, of whom Seneca, Epist: quinquagessima ad lucilium writes in
this form, Harpastem uxoris meae fatuam sc^ hereditarium donum in dom^ meae,
remansisse, haec fatua subito desijt videre, incredibilem tibi narro rem, sed
veram, nescit esse se cacam, subinde padagogam suam rogat ut migret, ais domum
renebrosam esse; Harpastes, you know, the changling of my wife is a Hereditary
legacy in my house, this changling suddenly lost her sight, I tell you an
incredible thing, but true; she does not believe that she is blind, now and
then she desires of her guide to remove from thence, she says the house is
dark and obsure.

I am much of opinion Father walsh, that this is your condition, in relation to
what you say, or write of Ormonds affairs, and person; and so I take my leave
in this place of both, leaving you in your manyfold blindness in as much, as
you will not see; and leaving your Ormond to the Fruition of these vast
recompenses, or as rather I shonld say, Robberys of poor orphans and widows,
which will have noe good end; so much be said of his recompenses, received,
and rewards; in the next Chapter I shall give a distinct, and the briefest
account I can of the manifest Iniurys he has don to his Country, and
Countrymen.

CHHPTER. 16'th. A Relation of some particular Injuries the Duke of Ormond has
don his Countrymen
His subuerting our union with Vlyssean practizes.
NOt withstanding all the trust and confidence the generality of that people
placed in Ormond, both great and small, yet little affection did he show to
his country, or Countrymen; the first Injury and stratagemme have bine to work
a diuition amongst them, he was the man let fall the venomous apple of discord
in the middle of that united body; their union, (the basis of all prosperity)
continuing, noe power, noe enemy was able to prevail against them, this union
was our onlyest bulwark, and would prove (if not subverted,) Formidable to our
Enemies at home, and a broad: that Commonwealth does prosper, whose Citizens
are of one accord; Concordia res paerua crescunt, discordia res magnae
dilabuntur. Ormond his chief Imagnation has bin to take away this union, the
life of our confederacy; what people, commonwealth, or nation more knitt in
mutual Charity, (at the first beginning of the war) then we? The Bishops,
Clergy, Noblemen, Gentry, towns and Cittys, and the common people looked all
one way, all possessed with the same flame of Religious zeal to preserve, and
recover our libertys, Country, and religion, all were Cor unum, et anima vna,
whilst Paersons, and Burlace did govern in Dubblin, and so had we still
continued if Ormond had not been chosen Lord Lieutenant; by whose influence
upon the people all was lost, subverted, and supplanted.

If you demand how could Ormond destroy this union, and would his relations,
even and dearest frinds, which took the oath of association, become perjurous,
and perfidious for Ormonds sake? Would they Forsake the sacred confederacy, and
the best quarrel in the world for his respect? I do not mean to say, these
affected him most were, perfidious and perjourous to the country, yea I hold
his relations and friends to have been good catholics, how then say you could
Ormond debauch them from their union and confederacy? his Excellency, you
must understand, had a great number of his relations among us, and many more
persons of good quality, that had nothing to do with him, held him for a man
of great integrity and affection to his country, and took him for a man of
virtue, Justice, and sound Judgment, a man that had power to do us good, and a
good willingness thereunto, and hoped that he would represent unto the king our
oppressions and burdens under cruel statesmen, that destroyed and enslaued the
subjects by their sleights and cunning artifices, and in fine that he would
prove the deliverer of this conceit, which proved bu adreame, conferred all
men's affection upon him, receaving and embracing all the reasons, and such
sentiments as he pleased to infuse unto them, and ordered all their course (in
all wisdom, as they thought) by his ways, and dictamen, by this means were
undermined our union, and our quarrel destroyed, Ormonds persuasions prevailing
in court and country, his reasons were esteemed the best and wisest; his
friends and Faction cries Ormond is a wise man he loves our interest,
understands our cause rightly; this public confidence well known, has been
no small means for him to deceave his Friends, and they deceaved the
Generality, possessing them with such and such imaginations, till at last we
grew in good earnest could in our proceedings; dissentions sprung up, and our
union (the life, and strengh of our country) dissolved and broaken, desolation
and destruction run over all places, we then began to disagree in our
consultations and debates about the public; ^alousies invaded our assemblies,
difference rose between such and such Families, between Noble men, Gentry, and
even amoung the Bishops and clergy, some speaking high of the british
interest, others of the interest of religion, and country: in the conclusion
we came to be regn^m in se divisun: in the mean time Ormond, who had acted his
part soidly, said to his counsel, and accomplices, Divisum est cor Catholicorum,
jam interibunt my work is don, they are broaken, they are at variance one with
an other, they sprosper noe more. That you may more plainly see the influence
this great man had over the confederat Catholics in the supreme counsel, who
gouverned all (consisting of 12.) You may know he had usually six of that
number, for his trusty friends, the first was Richard Lord Viscount Mongret (at
the beginning of the war, and for a great while President of the counsel) this
Lord was Brother to Ormonds grandmother, the second was donogh Lord Viscount
Musgue (after Earl of Clancartie) who married Ormonds eldest sister, Mr.
Richard Bealings Secretary to the counsel and a member thereof, married to
^said Viscount Mountgarets Daughter, Mr. Great fenel Doctor physic, intimat do
mistick counselour to Ormond for some years, Mr. Patricke Darcy a Famous
lawy^r, counsel in law to the house Ormond, Mr. Gessery. Brown a sound and
good lawyer, and Sr. Lucas Dillon knight an able personage, both much addicted
to Ormonds Ways esteeming them the best: as for the Lord of Mountgaret, he was
a plain simple man, but the other five were substantial Pieces as the land
could afford, Ormond was their delight and Joy, and though they had wit
sufficient to understand his ways, and ponder his evil designs, this they
have not don, but rather gave him full scope to work what he pleased out of
the fore-spooken confidence placed in him; by this means these wisemen were
deceived, deluded, and inueagled away, and we with them; our repentance is to
late, and without remedy, and we find our error Fatal and irrecoverable, and
we have lived to see Ormond close with our deadly enemies, and himself the
greatest enemy of them all Sed sero Sapiunt phriges.

This Lethean cupp ministered by Ormond unto us, the confederates, stupifyed our
will so much, as we could neither understand nor perceive one another, we
became much like to the confusion of Babell, when one sought for stone, the
other gave him sand, when sand, he brought him stones,

But the first stepp to our confusion was treaties of cessations, by those
conferrences he deceived our people, who went still upon the opinion of his
affection, he spunn us out with new devices, and delays, and in the Intrim we
omitted the opertunity of doing service, waiting daily for apeace, for Ormond
had brought us to that fools paradise, as we neglected our own preservation;
great matters he promised to our committie of treaty, a good peace, the which
when we had, was worth nothing, as formerly said, where I advertised you how
the Committie of treaty failed to perform the instructions given them, and to
conclude noe peace without insisting on them, but clear sighted men, that
trusted not in Ormond as those men did, found those articles to be a plaistered
bussiness, as a boue said. If Ormond had power from the King to grant better
Articles, then the thirty Articles; will not your understanding be convinced,
that he played foully with the confederate Catholics, and that his intention
was not frindly nor honest, and that his only design has bine to deceive us?
his Majesty in a letter to Ormond december the fiftienth 1644. Oxford has
these words.

Ormond.
I am sorry to find from Colonel Barry the sad condition of your particular
fortune, for which I cannot find so good and speedy remedy as the peace of
Irland, it being likewise to redress most necessary affai^es here, wherefore
I command you to dispatch it out of hand, for the doing of which* I hope my
public dispatch will give you sufficient instructions and power etc. Some what
lower down he has these Words, and to show this is more then words, I do
hierby promise them, and command you to see it don, that the penal statutes
against Roman Catholics shall not be put in execution etc. and concluds the
letter thus, so recommending to your care the speedy dispatch of the peace of
Irland and my necessary supply from thence, as I wrote you in my last private
letter, I rest. Of an other letter to the Marquis of Ormond Feb: 1644. Oxford
are these words. And now again I can not but mention unto you the necessity of
hastening of the Irish peace, for which I. hope: you are allredy sufficiently
furnished from me of materials, but in case peace cannot be had upon those
terms you must not by any means fall to a new rupture with them but continue
the cessation, according to ^^ postscript in a letter by lack Barrys, a coppie
of which dispatch I. Here with send you, So^ I rest.

POSTCRIPT
IN case upon particular men's fancies, the Irish peace should not be procured,
upon powers I have already given you, I have thought good to give you this
further order (which I hope will prove needless) to seek to renew the
cessation for a year, for which you shall promise the Irish (if you can have
it noe cheaper) to join with them against the Scot and Insiquin etc.




Those Letters are to be seen in the Kings book styled Reliquiae scarae
Carolinae. By these lines you see how clearly his Majesty insisted upon a peace
with the Irish, and failed not to that effect to send Ormond materials
sufficient to satisfy the Irish catholics, having heard their complaints and
their reasonable articls, for they demanded no other then the liberty of their
religion, benefit of their estates and privileges, yet Ormond in his peace of
30. Articles granted not these things, nor was it in his thought to join with
us against the Scot and Insiquin the Kings professed enemies, who owned for
their master the usurping power, and parliament of England, and there were
reports grounded upon very good presumptions, that he sent some of his forces
to asist the Scots in the North against us.

3 'Injury.
we come now to a third and maine agrivance and injury done the confederat
Catholics, which was the yealding up of Dublin castle, sword and all to the
Parliament, not withstanding that the Queen and Prince sent from Paris a
gentleman expressly instructed to his excellency, to prevent the giving up of
these places to the Kings enemies and rather to close up a peace with the
Catholics (the only way then appearing for settling the Kings affairs) this
action has been one of the vglyest things Ormond ever did, to render therefore
my reader fully capable of this perfidious proceeding, I shall be forced to
enlarge my self thereupon, this will be made clear out of a discource of the
Journey that the Agent sent from the Queen and Prince (Mr. Wintergrant a
Catholic Gentleman) made himself, who came to Ormond with his letters and
instructions before he had given up the castle of Dublin; (the city was
rendered before to the parliament) the cheifest part of the discource runs
thus, his Majesty being a prisoner at homby, and all negotiation for his
deliverance and restablishment rendered frvitless, it was thought fit by the
Queen and Prince of wales with their counsel, that some body should be sent to
Irland with letters and instrustions to my Lord of Ormond for settling of a
peace in that Kingdom, for that purposse said Mr. Wintergrant was chosen, and
accordingly received certain instructions sent by the Queen? all these
instructions tended to the settlement of peace between the confederat
Catholics and the Kings party, as appears by the express words of the
second instruction: you shall inform the said Lord Lieutenant how sensible we
and the Prince are, of the present troubles, of the Kingdom, as well in
consideration of the Kings affairs in general, as Particularly out of the
apprehension of the great and imminent danger that may thereby happen to those
which yet remain under the obedience of him the said Lord Lieutenant, and how
desirous we and the Prince are to contribut all that is in our power to
reconsile the things in question between the said Lord Lieutenant and the
consederat Catholics of Irland, whereby all of them may be firmly United
under the authority of our dearest Lord the King and thereby enabled to defend
themselves against the common enemy, and seasonably assist the King in his
other dominions: he also brought letters to the Lord Nun^io and Romain clergy
and to several noble men, and to certain corporations and cities to be first
showed to Ormond and as he pleased to be delivered or not deliverod, all was
left to Otrmonds breast, and this Mr. Wintergrant was to pursue all his
instructions in such manner as the Lord Lieutenant shall think fit, and in
all other things you shall says the instruction govern your self according
to the advice and orders of the said Lord Lieutenant, In the sixst instruction
are these words; If he the said Lord Lieutenant shall direct you to repa^re to
the Lord Nuncio, Assembly, Clergy, or supreme counsel of the Irish nation, or
to the General assembly now met at Kilkennie, you shall upon all occations,
when your discretion shall think fit, publish a vow and declare the great
inclination which we and the Prince have to contribut effectually all that
shall be proper for us and him, to the speedy concluding a happy peace in Irland

These were one sort of instructions I received says Mr. Wintergrant, which
were not to be kept so private but that they were in some cases comunicable,
but these that follow not so.

Private instructions.
YOu shall deliver to the Lord Lieutenant of Ireland fourtien blanks now given
to your possession by us, and the Prince, two whereof were Jointly signed by us,
and the Prince, six other signed by us alone, and the other six by the Prince
alone.

You shall acquaint the Lord Lieutenant that we and the Prince do authoriz
and apoint him to fill up all the said blanks in such manner, and to such
purpose, and with such contents, as he shall think most proper for the service
of our dearest Lord the King in his Irish affairs, and you shall assure him
the said Lord Lieutenant that as we and the Prince repose this trust and
confidence in him, that he shall make use of them as he shall think fit, for
the advancement of the peace in Ireland; so will both of us at all times auow,
and Justify those Instruments so to be filled up by him as our own acts, and
as don by our own particular directions, and command: you shall more
particularly acquaint the Lord Lieutenant from us, and the Prince, that if in
the treaty of peace, or in the conclusion thereof, he desires to be assisted
with any further Authority grounded upon any letters sent to him from the King
or otherwise in our power, then we desire him the said Lord Lieutenant to fill
up the blanks signed by us, or the Prince with such authority from us, or from
us and the Prince, or from the Prince only in such manner as he shall find
most proper, and conducing to such a peace.

You shall likewise particularly acquaint him the Lord Lieutenant, that if he
shall find it proper for the advancement of the peace there, that your self,
or your self with any others now in Ireland should in our name, and authorized
by us, repair to the assembly General now held at Kilkennie, or the supreme
Counsel of the Irish, or to any other body or persons with the overtures of a
treaty or any particular, in order to, concerning or conducing to the same; our
desire is, and we hierby authorize him the said Lord Lieutenant accordingly
that he should fill up one or more of the said blancks, signed by us in the
nature of a commission letter, or instructions with such authority from us, and
in such manner, as he shall think fit, and that he would accordingly insert
the name of such person or persons as he shall think fit to be Joined with
you in this Employment from us.

These particulares you are to communicate to none but the Lord Digby, and Lord
Clanrikard, unless the Lord Luetenant shall think fit to give you other orders
concerning the same.

Then follows the Princes approbation of all the instructions of both sorts,
with his command to put them in execution in these words. Charles Prince.
We have perused and do fully approve of your instructions bearing date
herwith, and Signed by our Royal Mother; and do appoint and authorize you so
far as you shall find us named therein to put the same in execution.

Charles Prince,
We have perused, and do fully approve of your private instructions bearing
date herewith, signed by our Royal Mother, and hierby appoint and authorize
you so far as you shall find us named therein to put the same in execution.

With these instructions and many letters not only to my Lord Lieutenant Lord
Clanrikard, and Lord Digby, but also from the Queen to the Nuncio and
Clergy, to O Nelle and Preston, with all the considerable persons then a
among the Irish, I parted from Paris a bout the 16. of march 1647. in Companic
of my Lord Crafford etc.

From Nantes I landed at Waterford the 6'th. or 7'th. of April, and yet so
vnluckely as the assembly at Kilkennie had brook up that night at ten of the
Clock, which they would not have done had they first heard of my landing, for
so Mr. Barron, (who has been an Agent hier in France for the confederat
Irish) and to whom I sent a post so soon as I was in waterford, writ back to
me; indeed I was very unfortunat for the Assembly had both power and means,
to do or undo* what they had don in order to a treaty, which the supreme
Counsel limited within bounds by the Assembly, afterward had not.

Being com^to Kilkennie I was by Mr. Barron brought to the Counsel, to whom
(after they had caused me to sit in a Chair not far from my Lord of Antrim
their President nor would they hear me till I had don so) I delivered the
cause of my coming thither, which was the Queen and Prince his desire of peace
in that Kingdom, and for the Queen she was not only moved unto it for the
Kings intrest, but also by a zeal to the Catholic Religion and good of the
People.

The day I came to Dublin I was that night brought to my Lord of Ormond, to
whom I delivered such letters as were for him, and then said, that he was
sure those letters expressed civilitys from the Queen and Prince; much better
then I could; and that therefore I had nothing more now to say until I had such
instructions disiphered as I had, which were many, and would take up some good
time, and by which his Lordship would find the confidence her Majesty and the
Prince had in him, which was so great, as noe reports could shake, though we
had weekly news, of his treaty with the Parliament for delivery of those places
under his command, to which his Lordship replied, that confidence shall never
deceive them, and that he who had ventured himself, his wife, and all his
Children in the Kings service, would make noe sample of venturing or casting
away one scruple when there shall be cause, (this he spook because one of his
sons was then hostage with the Parliament,) yet if there be necessity he should
give up those places under his command, he would rather give them to the
English Rebels, then to the Irish Rebels, of which opinion he thought every
good Englishman was; to this I replied nothing.

Ormond having seen and perused these premises, and now spooken of
instructions, I demand in this place, what his grace can aleage for himself,
that can excuse his backwardness in satisfying the reasonable and Just demands
of the confederat Catholics? He cannot say he wanted power and authority for
concluding a peace with them, seeing he might insert in the papers of 14.
blancks what conditions, what Articles he pleased for himself, the Queen and
Prince being resolved To own and Justify the same as their Royal act and
deed; Further, he had from his Majesty a great latitude of power, to compass
such a peace as the Queen and Prince (then) desired, (notwitstanding the
rejection of the peace, of 46.) as is to be seen, by the Kings Letter to Ormond
Februarij 27'th 1647. in these words, page 258. of Reliquiae Carolinae.

ORMOND.
THe Impossibility of preserving my Protestant subjects in Irland, by a
continuation of war, having moved me to give you the powers and directions;
which I have formerly done for the concluding of a peace there, and the same
growing daily much more Evident, that alone were reason Enough for me, to
enlarge your powes, and to make my commands in the point more positive, but
besides these considerations, being now manifest that the English rebels have
(as far as in them lies) given the command of Irland to the Scotts, that
their aim is at a total subversion, of Religion, and real power, and that
nothing less will content them, or purchase peace. Here I think my self bound
in conscience, not to let slip the means of settling that Kingdom (if it may
be) fully under my obedience; nor to loose that assistance, which I may hope
from my Irish subjects for such scrupels as in a less pressing condition might
reasonably be struck at by me for their satisfaction; I do therefore command
you to conclude a peace, with the Irish, whatever it cost, so that my
Protstant subjects there may be secured, and my regal authority preserved; but
for all this you are to make for me the best hargain you can, and not discover
your enlargment of power, till you needs must, and though I leave the
management of this great matter, and necessary work entirely unto you, yet I
cannot but tell you, that if the suspension of Poynings act for such bills as
shall be agreed upon between you there, and the present taking away the penal
laws against Papists, by a law, will do it; I shall not think it a hard
bargine, so that freely and vigorously they engage themselves in my assistance
against my rebels of England and Scotland, for which noe conditions can be to
hard, not being against conscience or honor.


Can there be any thing clearer then these expressions? can there be a larger
commission given, or more streighter command laid on Ormond for compassing
speedily a peace with the Irish Catholics, then what is repeated here? can
Ormond pretend he wanted power to conclude a peace, or the King a willingness
to have it don? his Majestyes intentions desires, and solicitations to that*
effect, are urged in these words, what ever it cost so my protestant subjects
may be secure, and Royal authority; there is nothing so certain (securing
Catholics Religion) then that we desired, and unanimously minded to ^^^ure
the Kings intrest and prerogative and to help him to our power, and not to
molest or trouble any of his protestant subjects, if not provoked by themselves
thereunto; take notice in this place of his royal assent, to a Suspension of
Poynings act for such bills as should be agreed upon betwixt Ormond and us, and
the taking away the penal Laws against us, neither did he think it a hard
bargin so we freely and vigorously engaged our selves in his Royal service
against his Rebels of England and Scotland, and says, noe conditions can be to
hard, so this be don, and that in performing it nothing is against conscience,
and honor; here you may observe the distinction his Majesty makes at that time
betwixt his Catholic subjects of Irland, and those his Protestant Rebels of
England, and Scotland, his Majesty, (whose intrest it was, and the only Judge
of that fact, to aprove, or disaprove us as such,) gave each according his
desert, calling us his Irish subjects, and those of England and Scotland his
Rebels, yet Ormond in his conference with Mr. Wintergr^nt calls us otherwise,
(even Rebels as those of England and Scotland were,) adding thereunto that if
there were necessity to give up those places under his command, unto any of
the three Nations, he would rather make them over to his English rebels then
to his Majestys faithful Irish subjects, of which opinion he thought every
good Englishman was: to which expression. Mr. Wintergrant (a Roman Catholic
and a person who had a better opinion of their conscience, then Ormond)
replied nothing.

By the prefated expressions of Ormond, you see how he declared himself for
an Englishman, and being the Kings Lieutenant in that Kingdom, he showed
himself only exteriourly for the King, but interiourly a right Parlamentier,
as by his several open disobediences and distructive delays to the King,
Queen, and Princes orders and instructions, (as to the hastening of the Irish
peace) is manifested; such a one in effect I must confess, his darling Orrery
would have him to be, by all attributes, of Religion, breeding, person, speech,
dispossitions, by his Lady and children, and predecessors (though Irish, and
well skild in the Irish speech, and of 480. years and more standing in that
Country) would to God Orrery had gotten his wish in this, and that his Ormond
had been of two sides an Englishman, and that our Country, and Countrymen had
never known Ormond, Orrery, or Orrerys father: were it so, things had gone far
better with us, and with the Country; you see how this Statsman makes noe
difference between the confederate Catholics, and the Rebels of Scotland, and
England, who got up in actual Arms against the King, who bought, and sold
him and had him close Prisoner at the same time, these words were spoken by
Ormond: can Ormond produce such an oath of association (made, and agreed upon
by the Parlimentary party) to maintain the Kings prorogatives, rights, person
and Royal interest, as we have made and set forth unto the world? upon all
occations, and in all places, even in the lowest ebb of his Majestys affairs,
we spoke with veneration and respect of his sacred person, when they in
pulpits, streets, banks, and theaters, in their private meetings and Counsels
disdainfully violated his sacred person, and persued him even in their news
books, as you may see in the Heu! and Cry! of Mercurius Britantcus,
ridiculously set forth in this form.

If any man can bring tale or tyding of a wilful King, which has, wilfully
gone a stray from his Parliment with a guilty conscience, bloody hands, a heart
full of broaken vows, and protestations, if these marks be not sufficient,
there is another in the mouth, for bid him speak and you will soon know him,
then give notice to Britanicus, and you shall be well paid for your pains; god
save the Parliment.

These and such like scurrilous disrespects, to his Royaell person would be
their quotidian pastime, yet our good Ormond was pleased to list us in the
rank and cathalogue of those rediculous prophaine Rebels. His Vn^e, and his
Brother-inlaw, the two prefated Viscounts, and the rest of his affected frinds,
would hardly believe (had an Angel affirmd it) that Ormond would harbor so
hard a thought of the confederate Catholics, whom he knew full well in his
^art to be good, faithful, and Zealous subjects. Now notwithstanding all these
instructions, and the Kings letters before mentioned, with all the instances
Mr. Win ergrant could make, (which were done with a great deal of care and
Judgment) notwithstanding the accommodation (which I shall insert here) sent by
the confederate Catholics to Ormond, notwithstanding all this I say, he
yielded up to the Kings enemies the Castle of Dublin, the Sword, and all, in
which and by which action, he discovered his hatred to the confederate
Catholics, his affection to the Parliment, his disrespect, and manifest
disobedience to the Kings orders and commands, and to those of the Queen and
Prince. Neither wanted Ormond (as some men did think) his hidden reasons that
moved him to neglect so much, and slight the Royal Authority.

His Logick^ made him discourse thus secretly with himself: the King is
prisoner to his Parliment, and noe hopes left for his redemption, he is like
to perish there; the Queen also and the young Prince they are exiled, what can
they do? They are not able to help themselves, much less to procure any
foreign assistance for his Majesty: the Parliment of England with Crumwell
have drawn all England to their own side with Scotland, and a great part of
Irland, as the large Province of V^ster, where the Scot insulted, and that part
of Munster, where Insequin with his Army remained under obedience of the
Parliment: my best way then will be (quoth Ormond) to play my own game the
best, and make good use of the times; I will therefore apeare exteriourly for
his Majesty, and yet oblige the Parliment in yielding up to them the Castle of
Dublin, with the Kings sword and all the fair County of Dublin, rather then
keep it and take part with the Irish, (and this I will do notwithstanding the
Queen and Princes orders and commands to the contrary) for I may well fear,
the Irish Catholics and I (though Joined with them) will be at long running
mastered by the Parliment; who will be min^full of me in due time for so
necessary and frindly an action. And truly it fell. out so, for though they
showed noe personal favor to Ormond, they showed great kindness to his Lady
allowing her three thousand pound starling for her Ioynter (as a bove said,)
and Crum^^^lls Children wear not less frindly to her Children, and all this
kindness has been done them, by all liklyhood in recompensation of Ormonds
giving up the City, Castle, and County of Dublin to the Parliment.

Projects of Policy are deep and secret, and likly this act of Ormond was the
Policy and Wisdom the Lord Digby meant, when he said to Mr. Wintergrant, that
the Lord of Ormond was wiser, then to unite with the Irish Catholics But in
the mean time what became of his Loyalty? Of his great zeal to his Majestys
interest? Of his obedience to the Royal Commands, and to the orders, and
instructions of the Queen and Prince? Herein the King was slighted, the Queen
and Prince put by, who as they held the preserving of Dublin, the Castle thereof
and County about it, to be the Kings great intrest, and beneficial for his
Majesty, so also they did think the delivering up of all to the Parliment
would prove a very great loss, and distructive to his Royal intrest; for
preventing of which loss, and mischief, orders, commands, instructions, and
all power were sent from Queen and Prince by Mr. Wintergrant to Ormond to
perclose a peace with the Confederate Catholics at what price soever.

If the neglect committed heerin by Ormond (sleighting the Royal powers and
Authority, a clear Argument of disobedience in him to both) has redounded to
the utter overthrow of the Catholics, and Kingdom, and consequently of his
Majestys intrest therein; you my reader may Judge, or any other Impartial
Judgment?

CHAPTER 17'th. The accommodation sent by the confederat Catholics to Ormond
Lord Lieutenant for preserving of the City, and Castle of Dublin with the
lands about it, rejected by him, and the reasons given by him for such
rejection.
GEntle Reader, here before I give you the accommodation presented, and offered
by the Confederate Catholics, unto Ormond, I think it necessary to give you
first, the sound observation of an understanding and discret Member (made upon
the same accommodation) of the said confederate Counsel of Catholics, which
shall serve you as a guiding light to the clearer understanding how the matter
was carried on, which was word to word as follovveth.

That the late Articles of pacification concluded with the Lord Marqnis of
Ormond Anno 1646. Being rejected by the general assembly with an unanimous
consent, by reason the Lord Marquis of Ormond did not grant those conditions
unto which he was authorized by his Majesty, and for that the King was
brought unto a condition incapable at present to perform any thing that was
granted, and for that there was noe security in them for Religion or Nation,
and the insecurity not com knowledge of the confederats, until after the late
pacification was published; the late general assembly in the beginning of
March last, Employed Mr. Giffery Barron some time before Employed in France, and
Mr. Gerrald Fennel, both persons of great trust, unto the said Marqnis with
the enclosed heads or Overtures of an accommodation to continue until his
Majesty were in a free condition to grant honorable and safe conditions unto
the consederats, and the said Marquis after receiving the said Overtures by
virtue of a letter of Credence from the said Mr. Barron and Mr. Fennel
returned answer to the assembly, that he would send his answers by
messengers of his own, first giving great hopes unto those Employed by the
assembly, that he would never Join with the Parliment.

The assembly expecting this answer for one and twenty days received it not to
the hazard, and very great charge of the Kingdom; his Lordship in the interim
treated with the Parliment Commissioners, and the assembly fully possessed with
a belief that his Lordship would never conclude with the Parliment, a few days
days before the adjournment sent Theobala Butler Major of Horss in the
Catholic Army to his Lordship, to know the cause which might retard or stay
his Lordships answer so long, and so much expected; at whose coming thither
the said Marquis (having as it seems concluded with the Parliment, delivered
hostages unto their Gommissioners, Viz: his son the Lord Richard Butler, and
the Lord Dyllon, the Earl of Res^omon a considerable Peer, and native of this
Kingdom, Collonell Arthur Chischester son and hair of the Lord Viscount
Chischester, and Sr. lames Ware Knight, a person of consideration with him, and
of the Privy Counsel) hier upon the said Lord Marquis told the said Major
Buttler, that he would never propound any thing to the consederate Catholics
that was in their power to deny him.

The Assembly receiving this answer so much tending to the Kings disservice,
by which the hopes of an accommodation was frustrated, they being sol^mnly
sworn to endeavor an accommodation with him, (which were consistent with
Loyalty and Catholic Religion) on the fourth current adjourned it self until
the 12'th of November next; soon after Monsieur Tallone, and Monsieur Munnery
Residents to the King of France arrived here, and being with us at the Counsel
declared that most of their bussiness hither was to solicit an accommodation
tending Chiefly to the preservation of the Catholic Religion, and we did on
all occations declare our willingness and rediness to effectuate the same, and
after several Iourneys made by the said Monsieur Tallent to Dublin, we did
condescend to enlarge the Cessation at first agreed upon to the 17'th of
April, which was performed. And after condescended, that incase good and
particulare hopes were demonstrated unto us, we would out of zeal to our liege
Lord the King, and in our great expectation of the interposition by them
promised of the Crown of France, embrace a Cessation for six months, so that
in the interval the Lord Marquis would accept noe Parliment forces into any of
the Garrisons under his comm^und, and give good assurance for his performance
therein; where upon Monsieur Tallone repaired to Dublin, and brought unto us
his Lordships absolute denial of Cessation for more then three weeks, unto
which we could not condescend, in regard we had Just and pregnant causes of
fears, that the said Lord Marquis did but seek that short Cessation in
expectation of forces from the Parliment, (whereof we had well grounded
intelligence from London and otherwise;) and his Lordship having during the
treaty with us received men from the Parliment into Dublin, and other his
Garrisons, and we having understood that his Lordships reason for not granting
a Cessation for the six months propounded, was that thereby all hopes of his
agreement with the Parliment had bin taken away, and that then of necessity he
must throw himself on our party, before he could fairly fall of from the
Parliment, which, whether he can do or not, the delivery of the hostages and
their quality, and the forces by him already received, and the daily
expectation he has of more, and the late propositions by him sent to the
Parliment (which if assented unto by the Parliment, he declared himself to
stick unto them) being considered it may be easily Judged wherein the Impediment
to an accommodation lies.

Adding to the premises for the more Clear understanding of our real desires
to entertain an accommodation wit the Lord Marquis of Ormond, for preserving
and continuing the places under his Majestys obedience, which his Lordship
holds; that since our propositions sent him, to put his Lordship in mind of
an accommodation, he did neither by message or otherwise authorize any to
treat further with us there upon, but utterly slighted that treaty, by which
we had noe encourragment given us to listen to a cessation, which in it self
was noe way profitable to the affairs of the Confederate Catholics, for the
reasons afforesaid, other then in order to the hopes we might have of an
accommodation, the Copy of which propossitions is hierwith sent.

Besides the motives afforesaid, we have it by assured and certain
intelligence, that the Lord Marquis of Ormond has already concluded with the
Parliment, and has upon confidence of prevailing for a short Cessation with
us, assured them that he would hold what he enjoys until the month of
May, expecting then the Parliment of England their Supplys.

Overtures for an accommodation delivered by Doctor Gerrald Fennel, and
Geffrie Brron Esquires from the General assembly of the confederat Catholics
to the Lord Marquess of Ormond in March 1647.
1. THat each party should continue their respective government independent of
each other, within such quarters, as by the accommodation shall be agreed on,
until a peace.

2. That both should join in a war, both by sea and land against the Enemies
of his Majesty, and this Nation, and that neither party shall make Peace,
Cessation, or other Agreement, or ntertaine any Commerce or Trafick with the
said Enemies without the consent of each other until a peace.

3. That Dublin and other Garrisons your Lordships quarters may be secured
against the said Enemy.

4. That the Confederat Catholics within the quarters, that by this
accommodation shall be agreed upon to be left to your Lordship, shall be secured
of the free Enjoying of their Religion Lives, Estates, and libertys.

5. The like for all other Catholics in the said quarters.

6. That your Lordship shall permit none to live within your quarters, but
such as shall swear to the performance and accommodation.

7. That your Lordship shall enjoy the profitts of your Estates in the quarters
of the Confederate Catholics, paying such contributions out of it, as the said
Confederats shall do out of theires.

8. That the Confederats will contribut to the maintenance of your Lordships
Charge, by reason of your place in a Competent way.

Could there be any accommodation thought on, more profitable to the King, more
considerable to the Queen and Prince his expectation, and more advantageous to
Ormond himself, (who thereby had the rents of a great part of his Estate, of
that I mean, that laid within the Catholic quarters) then this? Let any
indifferrent conscientious man tell me if any thing could be more Loyal, or
laying forth our great affection to our King in the distressed state he then
was in, then this? Here you have Ormonds answer to said accommodation, sent by
Mr. Wintergrant unto the supreme Counsel the 10'th of may 1647.

The answers were as follows.
THe two first propositions are such, as apeare fitter to be treated in a
League offensive and defensive between neighboring Princes, then between his
Majestys governor of a Kingdom, and his subjects of the same declined from
their obedience, with whom it is inconsistent with his Majestys Lieutenant to
Join otherwise, then by their return to their obedience, and submission to
his Majestys Authority.

2. To, the third. When they are thus returned to their obedience, and have
submitted to his Majestys Authority, it will then be seasonable, to consider of
securing the Garrisons.

3. The five other propositions are such as may be fit to be considered in
case of a sessation, which, when they shall propose unto us, we shall take it
into consideration, and give such answers thereunto as shall be reasonable.

You see the nature and condition of this answer. Ormond would not com to any
accommodation with the Confederate Catholics, because they were (as he says)
declined from their obedience, until they had returned again to their
former obedience and submission to his Majestys Authority; yet the very same
time the same Ormond treated publicly of a peace with the Parliment party (a
peace is of a higher nature then an accommodation) open and known Rebels to
the King, and who had his Majesty at the very same time their close prisoner,
and not only treated with those Rebels, but even yielded up to them the City
of Dublin, the Castle, sword, and all appertaining thereunto.

Ormond gave to the confederate Catholics and their propositions of an
accommodation the answer, he should have given to the Parliment party, he
should have said to their commissioners (with whom he then treated) that it
was not consistent with his Majestys Lieutenant to treat with them, until they
had set his Majesty at full liberty, laid down Arms, restored to the King his
Towns, Forts, and Navy, acknowledging their obedience and sworn aleageance
unto him. This he did not, but perclosed a peace with them as above was said.
If this his acting, (when he could have preserved the Kings City and intrest
from his enemies by an accommodation with the Confederate Catholics, as the
King had commanded and the Queen and Prince ordered by their express
instructions sent to him by Mr. Wintergrant) can b^ excused from treason, let
any indifferent man Judge.

So much I thought fit to mention of Mr. Wintergrant his Employment, of the
Queen and Princes orders and instructions for concluding a peace with the Irish
Catholics, and of the Kings express commands to Ormond to the same purpose,
of the diligence of Monsieur la Monnerie, and Monsieur Tallone to that effect
in the mame of the French King their Master, as also of the Articles of the
aforesaid accommodation most advantageous to the Kings intrest offered by his
subjects the Confederate Catholics.

Put all these together my gentle reader, and then Judge if Ormond has not
showed himself (transacting with the Parliment) disobedient to the Kings
Commands, and to those of the Queen and Prince, an Enemy to the Catholics of
Irland, and a frind to the usurping Parliment.

I now pass to a great and Irreparable Injury don to the whole Nation by his
Grace (a graceless action) the excluding of all the Catholics of Irland from
the benefitt of the general pardon and indemnity, granted to all his other
subjects, of what Religion soever.

CHAPTER 18'th. How, and by whom, were the Catholics of Irland excluded from
the benefitt of general pardon.
Certain it is, that the King intended the pardon and act of Indemnity as well
for the Catholics of Irland, as for those of England, and thee rest of his
subjects, which is made clear and evident by his Majestys speech in favor of
the Irish Catholics, in the house of Peers, July the 27'th 1660. I hope (said
the King) I need not put you in mind of Irland, and that they alone shall not
be without the benefitt of my merey, they have shown much affection to me a
broad, and you will have a care of my honor, and what I have promised to them.

Could the Kings intention of the benefitt of pardon and his mercy to the Irish
Catholics be spooken in more clear and noble expressions? But this Ormond (to
his Eternal infamy be it said) has cruelly opposed, in propounding a wicked
and cunning prouizo in the house of Peers, which their Lordships thought
would have satisfied us, and so have past it by: by this perfidious fraud of
Ormond, we have been exempted from the benefitt of the Indemnity, This is the
grace Ormond (Peter Walsh his savior of the Irish Nation) has don us, for
which the Mallediction of God will likely fall upon him and his posterity.

After being excluded from the general pardon, Ormond, Clarindon, Orrery,
Cloathworthy, and the rest of that holy Synagog put their heads together for
drawing up a Bill of Settlement of the Kingdoms of Irland, (so powerful they
wear in Cheating his Majesty as he gave them his ordinance for conceiving
said Bill of Settlement, and their own Secretary had the penning of it.) By
the artifice of those great men, and force of that Bill we have lost for ever
our Lands, Estates, and the liberty of free borne subjects. This Bill is of an
Immens Bulck, fraght with fair Language and barbarous contents and
proceedings, (They call it the Kings most gracious Declaration for the
settlement of Irland:) This monstrous Bulck with all the substance therein, has
bine reduced into few heads by a learned Laeyer as follows.

The substance and sens of the vast bill of settlement.
1. BY the late act of Parliment made for the settlement of Irland, all that
might pretend to be free from the guilt of the late Commotion are concluded
from being heard, and their estates disposed for the most part, to such of the
English as served the Usurper Crumwell against his late and now Majesty.

2. Those, who submitted to the peace concluded by his late Majestys Authority
in the yevre 1648. are by the said act debarred from the benefitt of the
articles concluded in, and by the same peace, and the public faith then given
denied them, as has bine already decreed.

3. Innocents are secluded from being restored to their houses in
Corporations, a few excepted, who were restored to their houses by his
Majestyes Letters.

4. Catholics are not suffered to have their freedom in Corporations, or
liberty of traficke.

5. The Lords ad other Catholics, who had presentations of benefices, are
secluded from the benefit of their said Privileges, except they become
Protestants.

6 All the Nobility and gentry, that submitted to said Peace of 48. and put
themselves to vast charges and expenses in raising troops, and Regiments of
Horss and foot to serve his Majesty against the Usurper, have lost their
Estates, and their Lands settled upon those, who made the Usurpers quarrel
their own, and fought under him against the King and his Catholic subjects
of Irland; and not only that, but are also excluded from all Employments in
the Kings service, or Common wealth, except they renounce their Faith.

By these means they are brought to great distress, want of Creditt,
Livelihood, and relief, Nil nisi vota supersunt.

A short Ponderation upon these Branches.
1. NEver was pronounced from the beginning of Christianity, to this day, a more
unjust and wicked sentence against Christians then have been by this act, which
bears the name of the Kings most gracious Declaration, for the settlement of
Irland.

2. What can there be more cruel, mor unjust, more Impious, then to hinder one
to answer for himself, and prove himself Innocent; what more against the law
of nature? What can there be more iniquous, and unworthy of kingly piety, then
to confer the loyal subjects Estates upon open known Rebels? What more
sacred then public Faith? What more infamous then the violation of the same?
For which in all times, dreadful punishments have befalne the Violatours.

3. Can there be any thing more Barbarous and against Justice, then to turn an
Innocent out of his own house and right Inheritance?

4. The Christians in Constantinople, and other the Dominions of the Turck; are
dealt with far better, and with more moderation, then the Catholics of
Irland, whom those Statsmen, have excluded from all Commerte; which the very
Turcks do grant unto their Christians.

5. Men must renounce their Religion, the Basis of salvation, or loose their
Advousins, a cruel Impious Tie upon Catholic patrons, but each of them will
answer, Non Emam tanti panitere.

6 Here you see Rebellion rewarded, and Loyalty punished, a preposterous and
monstrous kind of Justice; Behold O bountiful God this their portentous and
Impious iniquity. Now I see afflicted Countrymen you may ramble up and down
the world, and loudly raise your voice and say Spectaculum facti sumus mundo
and Angelis, and hominibus. We are made a spectacle to the world, to Angels,
and to men. Could there be more formal Iniquity, then to divest Innocent true
subjects of their estates and liberty, and confer the same upon those fought
against the King and Crown? was it not a precious knavery of these Statsmen,
to persuade the King to such Impiety as this?

What shall I think or say of these Statsman, contrivers of this great
wickedness? Even that which Salvianus the good Bishop of Missilia, said of the
Lieutenants and Prefests of the Provinces. Magistra^us, (quoth he) Et
Provindiarum praefecti Statuunt non furandum, et agunt ipsi latrocinia, puniunt
rapinam cum ipsi sint Maximi raptores; puniunt expoliatores domorum, cum ipsi
sint expoliatores provinciarum; tantum ijs adeptus honor dat benefic^j, vt
semper habeant Ius latrocinandi. The rulers and commanders of Cittys and
Provinces, ordaines a Law that none shall steal, and yet they themselves play
the thief; they punish rapine and yet they themselves are great snatchers;
they punish plunderers of houses, and themselves are the Robbers and plunderers
of intyre Provinces; for this they have of benefitt by the honor obtained,
that they can allways robb and plunder with Authority. This have bine the
liberty our praefated Statsmen have assumed to themselves, and without question
their malice must be deeply pollished, when they could persuade, deceive and
delude a King styled (the King of mercy and pardons) to give his Royal assent
and approbation to the forementioned Act of settlement, an unspeakable, and an
unheard Justice, Matthew. cap. 3. v. 8.
Pregenies viperarum quis demonstravit vohis fugere a ventura Ioa facite ergo
fructum dignum panitentiae Ye breed of vipers who has showed you to fly from
the wrath to com, yield therefore fruict-worthy of Penance. I am hiere compelled
to Cry with the Prophet Jeremy with tears and sighs to God Lament. cap. 5.
Remember o Lord wha^ is fallen to us, behold and regard our reproach, our
inheritance is turned to Aliens, our houses to strangers.

CHAPTER 19'th. of all these Usurpers who has used most Artifice and Perfidie?
IT is by this made evident, that all of them used much cuning and cruelty in
compassing the work of Catholic Irlands destruction: but Ormoud has
surpassed them all; take my reason.

Orrery, Cloathworthy, and all of the holy Crumwelian crew have don noe less
^or more, then we expected from them, when they should be able to do us a
mischief; at long running they had power to do it; and they have egrediously
don it, and boasting in that sin, they tell us, they have in our Tragedy acted
their own part, that of enemies: and we must confess they have not deceived
us in trust, having never trusted them.

Clarmdon has been but a stranger to our Nation, we first knew this Crooked
man in his, and our exile, and though we have don him good service, he was
evermore our Enemy, and paid benefitts don him with Injurys, as men of his
nature use to do; in a word he was a man (as all that knew him will say)
would for gold sell away the son of God himself, and for gold he has sold
us and Justice.

But Ormond the greatest Nobleman now of our Nation, in whom all the Nobility
in general, and the generality of the people reposed (a special confidence
has betrayed that trust, a black stain of infamy upon a great Peer descended
from so Catholic and Noble Ancesters.) He has not proved (as we expected)
a pillare and prop to his Nation, but a bruised rotten Reed of Egypt, deserting
us in time of trial, and Joining with all our Enemies, that thirsted after our
lives and possessions. It is true, we are not our selves without some blame in
the ruins of our Fortunes and Country, our sin is our unadvised trust in
Ormond, which made the way easy for him to deceive us; we have not bine wary,
and mischief enters at the open gates of security, Ormond came upon us in that
kind; we had most of us frindly hearts for him, and we took his heart to be
such to us. Salust. Iugurth.
Per maximam amicitiam maxima fallendi copia. Infine we have bine lost,
because we did not fear his crafty ways and dealings: but let him consider
well, what Annalls and Posterity will say of him for having betrayed us in this
nature: certainly he has don more unworthily then if he had oppressed us by
open violence: Quia fraus faedior quam aperta riolentia.

After this feate of destruction don upon us, at which Nations abroad are
amaized, and abhor the actors, (and wonder much our King that spoke so much
good of us In facie solis, gave us up sacrifices to our Enemies without all
protection of our Innocence,) what do these gallant Usurpers? Do they relent,
or do they fear the revenging hand of God? it seems noe: but that they rather
look like men left only to make up the number of those, the Holy Ghost speaks
of. Wisdom the 2. Cap^
Cum (said they) and let us enjoy the good things that are, let us fill our
selves with precious wine, and Ointments, and let not the flower of the time
pass us, let us Crown our selves with Roses before they wither; Every where
let us leave signs of loy, because this is our portion, and lot; let us
opress the poor lust man, and not spare the Widow, but let our strength be the
law of Justice, for that which is weak is found unprofitable. Have not I
beseech you the doeings of those oppressed the afflicted Innocent Irish, been
the very same doeings of those the Holy Ghost speaks of, living and pampering
themselves in great feastings, sensuality, pomps, vanitys, pride, and
pleasures? They seem by their life and manners to be Athists, (of that Tribe
many these days live in Courts) and if they are realy so, they will Enjoy the
purchases they have made by Robbery, without any unquietness of mind, for what
should they fear, that own noe God or puissance to punnish, and reward, sin
and virtue. But if they truly believe in God, it is Impossible they can Enjoy
wrongfully the Lands and livings of the Innocent, that perrish for want of
them, without some disquietness of Conscience, and ap^ ^hensions of the Just
Judgments of God to fall upon them. Thosemen cannot want some of Caine's
fears, who after having killed his brother Abel had never quietness or rest of
mind, but was still tormented with several fears in heart and tremblings in
his head, so that this unfortunate bloody man terrefy'd and frighted at his
own^ acti^n, cried out a lowed to God. * Ecce Eijcis me hodie a facie terrae,
and a facie tua abs^^^^ar, Et ero vagus and profugus in terra, omnis tgitur,
qui me invenerit, occidet me. Lo then does cast me out this day from the face
of the earth, and from thy face shall I be hid; and shall be a vagabond, and
fugitive on earth, every one therefore that finds me, shall kill me. The
spilling of Innocent Abels blood made him fear all would kill him, and
therefore allways trembling, he feared men, and fled from men, and though the
Lord have putt a mark on Caine, that whosoever found him, should not kill him,
(a trembling in his head as many hold) Caine was allways frighted, and so
distracted, as to hold that trembing of his head, for a sign given by God that
he should be killd. You see by this how great is the fear and frightning of a
guilty Conscience. And can these men live without being frightened after killing
so many Innocent Abels by nakedness, vermin, famine, and all kind of miserys,
having taken from them all they had in the world. There have been many opulent
persons and of great quallity, Tea and some of them Peers and Lords of the
Realm have bin lodged in small smooking Hutts and Cabins, and as I may well
say buried there, and starued to death with the^re wives and Children. Can the
Cruel Robbers of these men live without the fear of Gods anger? If they have
not a trembling in the head as Caine had, likely they will have a trembling in
their hearts.

CHAPTER 20'th. The Author speaks to Ormond a lone.
But my Lord that I may return to your Grace (whose house I have ever
honored,) and spend a few words with you alone. Amongst Birds and Beasts (you
know full well) some are Noble, and some Ignoble; Lions begett Ly^ns, and Eagels
engender Eagels; your ancient house has given of both Lions, and Eagels. Your
Noble progenitors, nobly minded did worthy things, and performed great matters,
the poorest neighbor lived safly near them, possessing quietly what was his
own, they succored the distressed, and far it was from them to oppress the
weakest; but have been a propp to such as could not stand by themselves; and
for such worthy doings, the afection and blessing of those releeved by them,
and supported by them in their right and Just causes, have followed your
Ancestors: But my Lord the world speaks otherwise of your Grace, that being
extolled to the title of Duke (that your house had not before) you digenerate
from the true piety and greatness of your brave Ancestors, for the natives over
all the Kingdom complain that your power is Employed to the opression of all,
wherefore they all cry out, can not the Duke of Ormonds greatness stand without
our fall and Ruin. Is it possible my Lord that the title of greatness is so
much inereased in you, and that of virtue deminished?

My Lord the Lions of your house (I mean the noble Earls) did pray openly
and fairly, but your game is of a new form; you are a Lion of another nature,
then was one of the greatest Earls) of your house (by name black Thomas
Grandfather to your Lady) a person highly esteemad by Queen Elizabeth, King
James and the Counsels of England and Irland, and of the people of both
Kingdoms, he made noe purchases by distroying the natives of the Kingdom, as
yours are, yet he was both a happy and glorious Earl, hospiciously noble, and
had many depending of his bounty and good nature, who made noe small fortune by
him.

Nahum cap. 2.
Nahum the Prophet, if you will take the pains to read him, will tell you what
kind of Lion you are; Where is (says he) the habitation of Lions? and the
pasture of Lions whelps? The Lion has caught (says he) sufficiently for his
whelps, and has killed for his Lyoness, and has filled his Denns with pray
and his Couc'h with Ravening o Ormond? Ormond thou have caught sufficiently for
thy Whelps, thou have filled thy Denns with pray, and thy Couch with Ravening,
thou have made the noble house of Ormond an Infamous Denn and Couch of Rapine;
thy whelps are made fatt with Pray and booty made upon thy neighbors.

My Lord, there is a another Prophet speaks to your Grace, and to Orrery, and
the rest of the usurpers, in words able to make you tremble: Woe to him (said
Habacuc cap. 2.
Habacuc) that gathers naughty Avarice to his house that his nest may be on
high, and thinks he is delivered out of the hand of Evil thou have thought
confusion to the house, thou have cut in sunder many people, and thy soul
has sinned, because the stone out of the wale shall cry, and the T^mber that
is between the Iuncturs of the buildings, shall answer. Woe to him that builds
a City in bloods, and prepares a City in Iniquitys. A dreadful expression.

Have not you my Lord and the rest of your Accomplices cut insunder many
familys; most of them Er this consumed with hunger and miserys are gone into the
other world, and for such of them that live as yet, they are miserably
perishing at home and abroad, will not the blood of those be laid at your
door? You^ ambition have built nestes in a high place from the reach of human
hands, but not from the hand of God, who with the breath of his Indignation
will cast them all down in his good time; ye have houses and magnificent
palaces for your posterity in Bloods, and the stone out of the wale shall cry
out against you, and the Timber between the Iunctures of your buildings shall
answer, Woe to them that builded Cittys in blood prepared houses in Iniquitys;
God in a moment (though at present ye glory and triumph in your greatness and
pleasures) can fill your houses with dissolations, mournings, Ignominy, death,
fear, and trembling: And perhaps will do it, when you least think of it.

When Sr. Ralph Fan was condemned to dye by the practices of the Duke of
Northumberland, and brought to the place of Exccution, in protestation of his
Innocence, spook only these two words, My blood shall be the Dukes bolster as
long as he shall live.

My Lord you may have (I fear) many of these uneasy bolsters; cast therefore an
eye upon the other world (whilst God mercifully gives you time to do it) and
take that care now for your self, that noe other will, once you are gone, and
perswad^ your self, that without this care all is lost and gone for all
Eternity.

CHAPTER 21'th. Ormond Seriously advised to think of long Eternity.
MY Lord, God did forbid the Hebrews to mingel honny in the oblations, but
commanded the^ to use salt in every sacrifice. Levit. cap. 2.
What sacrifice soever thou offerest, thou shall season it with salt, neither
shall thou take a way the salt of the Covenant of the God from thy Sacrifice.
In every oblation thou shall offer salt. What mystery does this signify to
banish honny from the Sacrifice and make use of salt? Why salt in Sacrifice and
not honny? This is to tell us that sweet things deceive us, and that flatterer^
betray us, but sharp things cure us, and mortify the body and mind when we
are to Sacrifice both to God, and that we are to hear patiently and willingly
those, that speak truth without assentation, and with the salt of sencerity.
Isai. cap. 3.
God himself said. My people they that the blessed, the same deceive thee. But
a lass it is now in fashon that Princes and great men are deceived, because
those about them will not speak a truth, that their Masters will not
willingly hear. It is a great question with me, if any one of your numerous
family, or of all those that depend upon you, and gain much by you, or of all
those, that seem to be your frinds, will say to your Grace the language and
words of the Prophet Isai. Isai. cap. 3.
Our Lord shall com to Judgment with the Ancients of his people, and his
Princes, for you have destroyed the vynyard, and the spoil of the poor is in
your house. Why do you consume my people, and gryn'd the faces of the poor,
says our Lord the God of Hosts? I do not think any of them has spooken to
your Grace in this kind, though they know well the spoil of the poor is in
your house, and that you and many more powerful men have Grynded the faces of
the poor and destroyed and consumed them; wherefore you and they have reason to
fear, that God will soon com to Judgment with you, unless you will tymly
prevent it.

Wise men should chase away from them flatterers, as we do swallows for
making nests of dung in our dwellings. My Lord flatter not your self with the
great contentments of this world you Enjoy, vast revenues, great pomp, Copious
Retenue, the veneration and low bowing of the people unto you, Gorgious, atyre,
magnificent feastings, all your Iolitys and pleasures; they will all pass a way
like smook, and that soon, for they say you being to be old: those that tells
your Grace these things can make you happy, do but delude you, and you can
carry away of all noe more then a winding sheet: it were therefore wisely don to
forsake tymly those things, that will forsake and undo us. And I think truly
it would be a great blessing to a person of your greatness and Employments,
that God would stricke you with some great affliction and Cross, for it is not
easy for those to be wise and holy, who see nothing round about them but
prosperity, delights, the aplause of men, and all sort of pleasures and
sensualitys, and that noe man tells them they are in danger. Alexander the
great, in the height of his Glory and victorys suffered men to call him the
son of Jupiter (it was not Enough for his ambition to be the son of Phillip
of Massedon a wise and great King) but wounded with an Arrow in the siege of a
City he said to his courtiers and flatterers round about him Senec. Epist. 45.
Ecce omnes jurant me esse ^lium Io^s: sed vulnus hoc me esse ho^^num clamat.
Behold all swear I am the son of Jupiter: but this wound proclaims me to
be a man. Vexation makes us know Gods greatness and our own weakness.

When the people of Israel murmoured seditiously against Moses and Aaron for
want of water, God commanded them both to take the Rodd, and stricke a Rock
therewith, and it should give them water. All the time Moses held the Rodd
lifted over the Rock and did not stricke, there came noe water, but the Rock
being twice stricken with the Rod water flowed out abundantly, and the people
and their Cattle did drinck plentifully. The heart of a man is a h^rd Rock, and
will yield noe water of compunction until stricken by the hand of God, but
when man is smartingly afflicted in his fortunes or health, then he can weep,
and know God and himself; it were therefore wholesome and good for your Lordship
to receive a great vexation, cross, and contradiction in this world, and so I
confess it should be to me, that have nothing of contentations and worldly
pleasures as you have.

Remember my good Lord in what a trembling was Ezeshiat, when the Prophet said
to him. Isat. cap. 38.
Take order with thy house for thou shall dye, and thou shlt not live. Then
Ez^thi^^ though a holy King in fear cried out. Qui^ est hic, qui fic humiliat
su^limes reges terre? God has already given your grace, a sensible and
gracious a-larum, when those desperate Ruffians set upon you by night and
wounded you, haling and abusing you most Ignominiously: God in his mercy
brought you of from those bloody men and would not permit you to be murdered
by them, but gave you time to do penance and dispose your self well for the
hour of death; you can never thank his devine goodness enough for this
deliverance: make good use my Lord of this great mercy in duly preparing your
self for the next world. We go to bed sound and well, and yet we are not
certain to live till the morning following, many were found dead in their
bed that parted the night before merrily and sound from their frinds; it may
be your case my Lord as well as theires, and mine also, and to what Eternity
we shall com God alone knows: o Eternity! o Eternity! how little art thou in
the hearts of men! o fire burning for all Eternity how little art thou feared!

My Lord I present to your Grace a short but horrible Meditation of Eternity,
as this. If the damned souls could be persuaded that after a hunderd thousand
millions of years their torments should have an end, that very perswation
alone would be a great comfort to them, for then their sufferings (albeit very
long) at lenght would com to an end, but otherwise they ^re persuaded, and
assured the revolutio^ of their pains and flames shall never have an end;
(this makes them despair and blaspheme the goodness of God) if this we
believe not, where is our faith? And if we believe it, where is our Judgment
and heart? What madness is it to neglect so Important a matter, as the Eternal
Salvation of our soul? (without this a thousand worlds are worth nothing) this
is the great matter of state, on which we ought to bestow day and night, all
care and deliberation, what rest can we take by night or by day when this we
slight?

Harken as yet my Lord (with this I make an end) to the fearful words
afflicted Iob^ spoke to those came to visit him. Job. 21.
Why then (quoth this holy man) Do the Impious live? Are they advanced, and
strengt hened with riches? their seed continues before them, a multitud of
kinsmen and Nephews in their sight, their houses be secure and peaceable, and
the Rod of God is not upon them. But did Job make an end hier? noe, but a
little after he says. Where is the house of the Prince? and where are the
Tabernacles of the Impious? Ask any of the wayfaring men, and you shall
understand, that he knows the selfsame things, because the wicked man is
kept unto the day of perdition, and he shall be ledd to the day of fury. My
Lord, I say, ponder well in your mind these dreadful speeches of holy and
patient Job, and prepare your self in time (I conjoure you) against this day
of Fury and perdition.

O Great and grarious God Grant to me, and this Nobleman, (grant I beg by
the precious Blood and Sacred wounds of thy dear Son Jesus) that we may in
Humility, in Tears, and true Contrition of heart return to the, whose
greatness, and goodness we have so often and grivously offended, (our great
misery falls prostrate at the feet of thy great mercy,) Grant to us I beseech
thee going out of this miserable and wicked world a Happy, and Holy hour, and
that when the Veil of the Temple shall be lifted up, we may see you face to
face for all Eternity, Amen.

FINIS.
The contents of this little book, And.
First those of the Preface which Contains 19. page FIRST.
THe Author banished for Religion and Loyalty. page 1. The Land possessed by
Philistime, and the Arck Captive. Catholics beaten with Scourges, and with
scorpions. page 2. An Irish Bishops answer to Cardinal Secretary. page 3.
Charles Duke of Loraine, he that offered fairest Ad rem Catholicorum in
Hybernia restituendam. His highness advanced thirty thousand pistols in the
Irish quarrel. page 5. Greatness of the house of Guise. page 6. Our Kings
Counsel at Paris, would not have Irland recovered by a Catholic Prince. p. 7.
The Dukes answer to our Kings new Commissioners. page 8. Bloody barbarous Laws
of Crumwelians against Catholics. page 9. A horrible ingageme^t of Crumwelians
against the family of Stuarts. page 10* When Crumwell took in cities and
towns, Ormond showed nothing of fortitude* or counsel. Ormond the forwardest
of the Kings Counce^ in Paris, in doing mischief to Catholics. page 11. His
Frindship to Catholics like a Kind of Dr^gges hott in the mouth, and cold in
operation. With Clarindon all was vendible, and with Ormond all was lawful,
that was not unprofitable. page 12. A wise fable of the Fox and great bramble.
page 13. Ormond a bramble, allways scratching Catholics. Ormond a hard hearted
man, and unplacable enemy to Catholics. page 16. A high fig tree bearing
leaves of vanity, and noe fruicte* sucking the sapp of the earth, and starving
all the plants round a bout him. page 17. Little books in defense of Catholics
and the Nation, as a Narative of Clarindons settlement and sale of Irland, the
bleeding Iphigenia, etc. page 18. Clarindon and Ormond, two monsters of Avarice
and Cruelty. page 19. Great Cyrus his Judgment, what man ^ King should be. An
excellent oath taken by the Kings of the Mexicans.
The Contents of the work it self as follows.
I. CHAP. Long silence Catholics had with Ormond, a great prejudice to the
Nation. page 22. The Bishops of Irland and Clergy men, Canes muti non valentes
Latrare. page 25. Ormond poisoned the heart of the people (the King) with Ill
Counsel page 30. II. CHAP. A search of Ormonds motives for deserting
Catholics, and adhering to Crumwelians page 31. III. CHAP. The Catholics upon
making a sessatio^ with Ormond gave thirty thousand and eight hundred pound
starling, an argument of hearty Loyalty page 41. IV. CHAP. Clamorgans peace made
void, with the Kings declaration: the Catholics thereby deluded page 42. 44.
45. 46. 47. V. CHAP. The rejection of the peace of 1646 with Ormond fully
Justified page 49. The same was void for want of Authority of Ormonds part at
the time of contracting. How the Committie of treaty for the peace demeaned
themselves page 56. Committie of treaty in a Laberinth page 59. VI CHAP.
Opinions of two famons Laeyers upon Clamorgans peace, and that of Ormond page
61. Result of the Waterfords congregation upon the peace of 1646. page 68. A
Letter of the Congregation to the late Suprem Counsel. page 73. Ormonds
Sudden departure from Ki^kenni^ page 76. Ormond vncivilly called all the
Bishops and Clergy a stinking Crew page 79. VII. CHAP. Calumnies and
aspertions cast by Father Peter walsh upon the congregation of Iamesstone page
80. Rattes by an instinct of nature forsake veslells that are to be drowned
page 84. Those Ormond trusted in Limmerick proved knaves, and those that stuck
to the Clergy proved true to the King; Ierton that murdered the Kings Father,
murdered also the Kings frinds in that City, and Spared those of Ormonds
faction page 87. Those betrayed that City, were of Ormonds faction page 89.
The Letter of Congregation of Iames-stone to Ormond. page 91. VIII. CHAP. Peter
walsh his letter to Ormond page 97. The words of the Earl Clancarty dying, to
Ormond page 102. IX. CHAP. Ormonds wrongful invations of Catholic estates
page 104. The King can for Justice but not for conuenience, take a way the life
and estate of a subject. page 107, Laws are made that Justice may be don to
men, and Princes are obliged to administer Justice according to law. page 108.
A Rebellion once pardoned, cannot be punished. A Grant made by the King of
another man's estate against the law of nature, and of the land is void.
Clarindon sold the Irish nation, and Ormond betrayed them in trust. page 112.
The Friars dream, that Ormond has been a Joseph and Savior to the
Catholics: he was in deed the ruin, and looser of his b^etheren, Country, and
all the people page 113. Joseph sedd the Egyptians in the time of famine,
Ormond starved thousands of the Irish. page 114. Mercy was Joseph's Chiefest
virtue* Ormonds sin to forgive noe man. page 115. X. CHAP. Ormonds infamous
Letter to Or^ery. page 116. XI. CHAP. A paraphras upon that letter page 118.
119. 120. 121. 122. 123. Cynias good Counsel to Pirbus of Epire p. 130 XII.
CHAP. Ormonds good fortune in exile, himself being gracious with the King and
his Lady at the same time respected by Crumwell. page 139. His Lady's good
prayers to the King against widows and Orphans, to have Harry Crumwells son
favored page 140. XIII. CHAP. The moderation and sobriety of ancient Heroes
very commendable page 141. 142. 143. 144. 145. 146. Noe house in Rome would
receive gold from Cyneas Per^us Ambassador page 147. XIV. CHAP. Sir Thomas
Moors in tegrity* page 148. What rewards had Horatius Chocles and Cajus Mutius
from the Senate for preserving and saving the City and people of Rome P. 156.
What reward had George Lane a low man for his service. page 158. XV. CHAP. What
reward had Ormond for his atending on the King* in time of his exile. page 161.
The queries page 162. And the queries. page 164. 165. 166. 167. 168. 169.
Ormond received in gifts, and grants above six hundred sixty thousand pound
sterling. 171 The Frayer gave Ormond good Documents, and he kept none of them.
page 175. Peter Walsh as blind in his understanding as Harpastes in her bodily
sight. page 176. XVI. CHAP. A Relation of particular Injuries Ormond has don
the Catholics of Irland. page 177. He Let fall the venomous Apple of discord
a mong them; before that, they were Co^ vnum anima vna. page 178. Ormonds
frinds in the Government and Counsel of the confederate Catholics p. 181 182.
The Kings Letter to Ormond from Oxford to make peace with the Catholics. p.
184 185. He yielded up the Castle of Dubblin sword and all, notwithstanding
the Queen and Princes orders to him to the contrary by Mr. Wintergrant. page
186. Said Wintersgrants message to Ormond from Queen and Prince, and his
instructions public and private. page 187. 188. 189. 190. 191. Relation of
Wintergrants negotiation p. 192. 193. 194. 195. The Kings letter to Ormond.
page 196. Ormonds words to Wintergrant to what Rebels he would deliver the
Castle of Dubblin if necessity should force him to give it up. page 200.
Consequently Ormonds discourse with himself resolving to give up the Castle of
Dubblin to the Parliament and not to the Catholics. XVII. CHAP. The
accommodation sent by the confederate Catholics to Ormond, and rejected by him
and the reasons given for such rejection. XVIII. CHAP. How and by whom were
the Catholics of Irland excluded from the benefitt of general pardon.
Substance of the vast bill of settlement. A short ponderation upon the branches
of that bill. XIX. CHAP. Who used most artifice and persidie against the
Catholics of Irland, Clarindon sold them a way for Gold, Ortery and his
Companions paid the gold, and Ormond in trust deceived them. XX. CHAP. The
Author speaks to Ormond alone, and tells him the house of Ormond bred
magnanimous Lions, and what Kind of Lion he is himself, and how he has
made the house of Ormond an infamous denn, and Couch of Rapine. He tells him
further the speech of sir Ralph Fan dying by the practices of the Duke of
Northumberland. XXI CHAP. The Author seriously advises Ormond to think of long
Eternity, and especially desires him to consider well two passages of the
Prophet Isae in the third, and thirty eight Chapter. And a sentence of Job in
the 21. Chapter, and concludes this little book with a hearty prayer for the
Duke and himself.
FINIS.

