A Friendly Dialogue BETWEEN TWO London-Apprentices, The One a WHIGG, The Other
a TORY: Concerning the late ADDRESS to my Lord MAYOR.
To which is added a LETTER that was sent (by an unknown hand) to the Principal
Managers of it.
WHIGG. FOrtunately met, Sir! I remember formerly amongst all the privileges
of nature there was none sweeter to me than the fruition of your Society; come
Countryman, shall we go and divert our selves for an hour in yonder green
Arbor?


Tory. Done! for your company will afford me more pleasure than a pleasant
spring can give.


Whigg. Then (...), let us hasten thither, for the day will steal away
insensibly in the sweet entertainment your good company will afford me; here
time is not felt, nor hours numbered; and we being both Apprentices, the winged
moments should be so husbanded by us, that one be not lost.


Tory. Then without any further loss of precious time, which glides away with
undiscovered haste, Prithee Countryman tell me how your late Address goes on?


VVhigg. Sir, I Will freely do it. But stay! stay! hearken! methinks I hear some
body speaking by piece-meals behind this Arbor, as if the Tempest of passion
disordealy blowed out his words; who is it? another Tory! Therefore let us not
proceed to discourse any further, till we can be sure we are free from all men's
superintendency, and the bold intrusion of any man's eye.


Tory. No, no, it is no Tory, you may proceed, it is Mr. Joshua Evans (your
truest Champion), reporting to the principal Managers of your Address, that
Hodge, Thompson, and Benskins's Mother, was certainty delivered of them
backwards, their reflections upon it being so stinking, and nasty, and full of
untruths.


Whigg. Sir, Then correspondent to your desire, I Will proceed to give you an
impartial account, how our late Address has been received in the World.


Tory. Sir, I will lend a willing attention, and could wish every Sense of
mine, an Ear to hear you.


Whigg. Sir, I begin then -- Our truly Loyal Address was most bravely received
indeed, almost transcending the power of a strong belief; for within about
three days time after 'twas Printed, there was above Ten thousand truly Loyal
Apprentices of London had Signed it, notwithstanding those three Monopolizers
of Lies, Benskins, Thompson and Hodge, had misrepresented this Modest Address
to the whole World, designing to obstruct it, though they will be sooner able
to put the Universe in their Poke, than to get any Loyal and honest heart to
belive them, in their scurrilous reflections; For who does regard them, but
those that are heaved off from the Hindg of Right-reason, and have given their
Understanding and Senses, a Lease of Ejectment.


Tory. Oh Noble Pack of industrious striplings indeed (if your Tongue has
spoke truth)! But we will anticipate the progress of this affair, if we can; and
were it it not for the sweet thoughts of nipping your Address in the Bud,
before it be blossomed into maturity (or presenting), our hearts would be
wholly dejected, to think that the whole World will visibly see that the far
greater part of the Apprentices of London, dare not but dread the taking upon
them the aspersing of Parliaments. Ah Whigg! Millions of thoughts and cares
therefore are hourly buzzing in our zealous and envious mind, to prevent you.
And our Club, that meet every night at the Crown-Tavern in Ivy Lane, are
resolved to tare all the Addresses they can meet with throughout the whole City
of London.


Whigg. Pray, Sir, what number of Hands have they already sacrificed to their
malice and envy?


Tory. Fifteen hundred, and upwards.


Whigg. What then, is the taring our Papers, and the expectation your hopes are
fed with, to stifle our Address, all the Pullies they have left to draw up
their Spirits?


Tory. Ay: and a golden Cordial it is.


Whigg. I hear Capt. Tom, Capt. Rump, are of their Club; I pray, Sir, are you
(for you are as good a Tory-Rory as the best)? Which if you are, I must needs
say, if want of brains be a sign of long life, your Tory-Club certainly must be
the men that must write Mankinds Epitaph, to admit such Members as those.


Tory. Whether we are, or are not, I must not divulge; for being obliged to
secrecy, the Arcana Naturae cannot have a greater gift of silence then I; but I
will make bold now to ask you a question, or Two.

First, Whether or no you know not the Barber that was to have a Pot of Ale,
for every 20. Hands he got to our late Address to his Majesty, for which
purpose he traveled the whole space that interveneth between two Suns, from
house to house; which having done, he sits him down to enumerate his
Subscribers, and finding the Total but Seven, he considers, his labor in two
days would not pay for one supper at night, and therefore by the help of his
pregnant fancy, and more tempting invention, he writes in his Paper Threescore
Names, and carried it into the Club, and had Three Pots of Ale for his pains: A
noble stipend, was it not Whigg, for two days labor and pains?

My other Question is this, whether or no you are not acquainted with the
Printers Boy that had 2 d. a dozen for as many Names as ever he could possibly
produce, and he produced abundance, and is now ready to attest that the greater
part of them were Names of his own invention. But pray Countryman lock these
things as a secret within your own breast, for fear of public reflections.


Whigg. Sir, there is no need of secrecy here, for (were there, my tongue should
be close Prisoner to my heart) alas this deceitful manner of proceeding of
yours was publicly known; and likewise 'twas as openly known, that to augment
the number of your Subscribers, you got all the Journeymen, Carmen, Porters,
Tapsters, you could procure in Town, with many others of a far more inferior
degree: Quae nune prescribere longum est.


Tory. This Stratagem we took, as very well knowing that all persons of such an
inferior rank and profession, would easily be bribed to set there hands to that
which their judgments approved not of.


Whigg. Well then, with all your slights and stratagems, how many real
Subscribers had you, with Apprentices, Journey men, etc. and others, when your
Address was presented? Come, Sir, tell me, and be ingenuous for once, and let
your tongue and conscience keep the same tune.


Tory. I heard one of the Stewards of our Feast say, the number we had was but
four thousand at most, (which man I could name, VVhigg, only it is not good to
be quoting of Authors), but I have heard others say (who dread an untruth)
there was but five thousand.


Whigg. And I pray, Sir, is it true (as is reported) that the grand promoters
and presenters of this Address were not Apprentices, but persons that live
idly out of a Calling, that feed on sloth, as Beetles in the dung they breed
in, not caring how the metal of their mind is eaten with the rust of idleness?


Tory. That Is an undoubted verity (and no Chimera of a restless brain, as some
of our Tories assert) for some of them to me did declare, That the world could
not go worse with them than it did, let it go how it will.


Whigg. Sir, then I perceive your underhand proceedings you cannot deny; but
Tory, I Will tell you, they have writ such a deformity upon the fairest brow of
that undertaking, that Hodg, Thompson, and Benskins can never wipe off.


Tory. What then! would you have me deny a plain truth? I cannot (I will not
give my conscience the lie.) And I know as for Hodge, Thompson and Benskins,
and all their Abettors, they may as soon kindle fire with snow, as prove me a
liar in what I have said.


VVhigg. I confess the truth is the truth, be it on which side it will, and at
last Truths heart will shine through its breast.


Tory. I cannot deny what you assert; but I pray, Sir, remember that an ill
Comment may mar a good Text, and a misinterpretation of our proceedings (if
publicly known) may mar our good meaning. I would therefore injoin you to
conceal all I have told you since we came into this Arbor.


Whigg. Sir, I shall not be unmindful of your desire, and do confess that the
swiftest wing of recompense is too slow to overtake those civilities and
favors that now I have received from you. But, Sir, now our Masters business
calling us at home, we will now lovingly part, and so for the present adjourn
our Discourse till fortune favor us with another fair opportunity. Only I pray
resolve me in one particular before we go, which is, Whether or no he was not
the man that first set afoot your Address to the King, that went down on his
marrow-bones before Sir George Waterman, and there humbly asked Mrs. S --
forgiveness?


Tory. Rem acu tetigisti. And so adieu.


A LETTER sent Aug. 19th, 1681, thus Superscribed, To the truly Loyal, and
Protestant Apprentices of London, that were the principal Managers of the late
Address to my Lord Mayor.
GO on Heroic Souls, and faithful be
Unto your God, your King, your Liberty.
Let your unbyast actions give the Lie
To such as scandalize your Loyalty.
To Caesar render what is to Caesar due:
Earth merits, Heaven expects no more from you.
Those Rights defend, which your brave Sires sent down,
Inviolable as the Throne or Crown.
Tell supple Parasites, and treacherous Knaves,
You Are humble Subjects, not degenerate Slaves.
Bow low, but scorn to creep (for that is as well).
Nor for a Mess of Broth your Birthrights sell.
Pass by th'affronts that Hell and Rome can send;
Comfort your selves, When it is at worst 'twill mend.
But when the Church is shook by potent foes,
For her defense your Bodies interpose.
Of Popish mercy never run the risque:
A Crowned Serpent grows a Basilisk.
Vindicate then the Gospel and the Laws;
The Cause is Heaven's, Heaven will espouse the Cause.
Undauntedly prop up your Churches Walls,
And joy to fall beneath it, if it falls.
To perish thus, who would not be content,
When mouldring Temples are his Monument?
LONDON: Printed for Richard Janeway, in Queens-Head-Alley in Paternoster Row.
1681.


