FREEDOM of ELECTIONS TO PARLIAMENT, A Fundamental Law and Liberty OF THE
English Subject; AND SOME PRESIDENTS Showing the Power of the House of Commons
To inflict Punishments on Those who have been Guilty of Misdemeanors either in
Elections or Returns. In a Letter to a Member of PARLIAMENT. According to the
Constitution of the English Government, and Immemorial Custom, All Elections of
Parliament Men ought to be made with an Entire Liberty, without any sort of
Force, or requiring the Electors to choose such Persons as shall be named to
them; and the Persons thus freely Elected, ought to give their Opinions freely
upon all matters that are brought before them, having the Good of the Nation
ever before their eyes, and following in all things the Dictates of their
Conscience. P. of Orange's Declaration.

London: Printed for Dan. Brown, at the Black-Swan and Bible without
Temple Bar; and Tim. Goodwin, at the Maidenhead over against St. Dunstan's
Church in Fleet Street. 1690.

SIR,
ACcording to your Commands, I have now sent you, out of my little reading, a
true Information of what Punishments the House of Commons have inflicted upon
such Persons, who by fraud, force, or bribery, have violated the Ancient
Liberties and Freedoms of the Commons of England, in making undue Returns of
Members to serve in Parliament: And what I have here done in pure Obedience, I
hope you will receive with all friendly Candor and Benignity; but you will give
me leave first, I hope, to say something concerning our undoubted Right to the
Freedom of Elections.

I find it, Sir, very clear, that it has been accustomed of old times to have
Free Elections; and that this was a Fundamental Law and Liberty of England. For
the Statute of Westminster the first (which was made above four hundred years
ago, by the Assent An. Dom. 1274.
of the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors, Earls, Barons, and all the
Comminalty of the Realm thither summoned) provideth, That Elections should be
freely and duly made, without any disturbance whatsoever; but I will give it
you in its own words.

Because Elections ought to be Free, the King Rastall's Stat. fol. 15. 3 E. 1.
cap. 5.
commands upon great Forfeiture, That no Great Man, nor Other, by force of
Arms, nor by malice or menacing, shall disturb any to make Free Election.

For it was a Right and Liberty which the good People of England had confirmed
to them fifty years An. Dom. 1224.
before, as appears by the 9th Chapter of the Statute of Magna Charta, Anno 9.
Hen. 3. which says, That the City of LONDON shall have ALL the Old Magna Charta
9 H. 3. cap. 9.
Liberties and Customs which it has been used to have. And then it does
immediately follow, Moreover, We will and grant, That ALL other Cities,
Buroughs, Towns, and the Barons of the Five Ports, and all other Ports, shall
have all their Liberties and Free Customs.

Liberties are here taken for Privileges, such as (my Lord Coke says) of Right
the People had before.

And in his Comment upon the abovementioned 2. Inst. fol. 168, 169.
Chapter of Westminster 1. he bids us see the Statute of 7 H. 4. which says,
That for Knights of the Shires 7 H. 4. cap. 15.
for the Parliament in full County, a free and indifferent Election shall be
made, notwithstanding any Prayer or Commandment to the contrary.

This Statute was made at the grievous Complaint of the Commons, being
interrupted of their Free Election 4 Inst. fol. 10.
by the King's Letters Patents, by pretext of an Ordinance in the Lords House
in 46 Edw. 3. but for Rot. Parl. 46 E. 3. n. 13.
the future it was to be sine prece, without any Prayer, or Gift; and sine
proecepto, without Commandment of the King, by Writ, or otherwise, or of any
other. And, he says, this was an Act but declaratory of the Ancient Law, and
Custom of Parliament.

There were two Mischiefs before the making of this 2. Inst. 169.
Statute, as my Lord Coke observes.

1. For that Elections were not duly made. 2. That Elections were not freely
made.
And both these were against the ancient Maxim of the Law, Fiant Electiones
rite and libere sine interruptione aliqua; And again, Electio libera est; for
before Regula. 7 H. 6. 12. ^.
this Act, in the irregular Reign of H. 3. the Electors had neither their free
nor their due Elections; for sometimes by force, sometimes by menaces, and
sometimes by malice, the Electors were framed, or wrought to make Election of
Men Unworthy, and not Eligible, so as their Election was neither due nor free.
This Act briefly rehearses the Old Rule of the Note, Common Law is general
Prescription; and that Prescription is before 1 R. 1. who was elder Brother to
King John, Father to H. 3.
Common Law (for that Elections ought to to be free) wherein both the said
Points are included. 1. It must be a due Election; and 2. It must be a free
Election.

This Statute does enact, That no Man, upon grievous Forfeiture, shall disturb
any to make free Election, and is excellently penned in two respects.

First, For that generally it extends to all Elections; that is to say, to
every Dignity, Office, or Place elective, be it Ecclesiastical or Temporal, of
what kind or quality soever.

The Act is penned in the Name of the King, viz. The King commands; and
therefore the King binds himself not to disturb any Electors to make free
Election, as in the like Case upon a Statute made in the Reign of the said
King; the Act saying, Rex Westminster. 2. 13 E. 1. cap. 1. 2 Inst. 332.
perpendens, etc. the same bound the King.

Now that Electors might make free and due Elections without displeasure or
fear thereof, by this Act of Parliament, as a sure defenee, the King commands
the same upon grievous forfeiture.

And this Act extends to All Elections, as well by those that at the making of
this Act had Power to make them, as by those whose Power was raised or created
since this Act.

Grievous Forfeiture.] That is, the Disturbers Nota been.
to be punished by grievous Fines and Imprisonments. Thus far the Learned
Chief Justice Coke.

And it is observed, says the same Great Man, that 4 Inst. 1.
when there is best Appearance, there is the best Success in Parliament.

Therefore there was a special Act of Parliament made on purpose in the 5th R.
2. to command all Rast. Stat. 140. 5 R. 2. cap. 4.
and singular Persons and Communalties, which from thenceforth should have the
Summons of the Parliament, to come to the Parliament in the manner as they were
bounden to do, and had been accustomed within the Realm of England of old
times. And if any person so summoned (be he Archbishop, Bishop, Abbot, Prior,
Duke, Earl, Baron, Banneret, Knight of the Shire, Citizen of City, Burgess of
Burgh, or other singular Person or Communalty) should absent himself, and come
not at the said Summons (except he could reasonably and honestly excuse
himself) he should be amerced, and otherwise punished, according as of old
times had been used to be done within the Realm.

And if any Sheriff should from thenceforth be Sheriffs negligence in making
Returns.
negligent in making his Returns of Writs of the Parliament, or leave out of
the said Returns Or Omission.
any Cities or Buroughs, which were bound, and of old times wont to come to
Parliament, he should be punished in the manner as was accustomed to be done in
the said Case in time past.

The Parliament was anciently Adjourned of course till a Further day, because
that several of the Lords and Commons were not come up, nor their Writs
returned: and the declaring the Causes of calling it, was usually deferred till
they were all come up, and appeared, as you may see in several places of
Cotton's Abridgment of Records: For instance, 6 E. 3. n. 5. 13 E. 3. Cotton's
Abridg. Sparsim.
n. 5. 15 E. 3. n. 4, 5. 17 E. 3. n. 2. 20 E. 3. n. 5, 6. 21 E. 3. n. 4. 22 E.
3. n. 1. 25 E. 3. n. 1. 42 E. 3. n. 1. 51 E. 3. n. 3. 2 R. 2. n. 1. 4 R. 2. n.
1, 2. 5 R. 2. n. 65. 6 R. 2. n. 1. 9 R. 2. n. 1. 9 H. 4. n. 1, 2. The
Parliament was adjourned, because sundry of the Commons House made default, and
were absent. So careful were our Prudent Ancestors to have a Full
Representative of the whole Kingdom, whenever a Parliament was to meet, before
they would proceed to act in any public business, to prevent all Surprises
that might be feared from any Party whatsoever, but especially in the making
and enacting of public and general Laws, and giving of Subsidies and Aids to
the Crown; for they well remembered the good old Rule of their Predecessors,
quod omnes tangit, ab omnibus approbetur.

King James the First, in a Message sent down to the Journ. Dom Com. Die
Veneris 27 Feb. 4. Jac. 1. An. Dom. 1606.
House of Commons, said to this effect, That every Member who did serve for a
Town or a Shire, his Attendance and Service in the House was a very great Duty;
and that the Departure or Absence of Any Member of the House of Commons, was a
greater Contempt, than Any Nobleman's Departure, who served only for himself.

And the Reason is very plain and obvious; for it was not only necessary that
Both Houses should be full at their first Meeting, but that they should
continue so to be, as long as the Parliament it self continued; and this
appears by a Declarative Statute, made in the 6th Hen. 8. which says, that
Forasmuch as commonly 6 H. 8. cap. 16.
in the end of Every Parliament, diverse and many great and weighty Matters, as
well touching the Pleasure, Weal, and Surety of the King, as the Commonweal of
the Realm, and Subjects thereof, are to be Treated, Communed of, and by
Authority of Parliament to be Concluded; so it is, that diverse Knights of
Shires, Citizens for Cities, Burgesses for Buroughs, and Barons for the
Cinque Ports, long time before the end of the Parliament, of their own
Authorities depart, and go home into their Countries, whereby the said great
and weighty matters are many times greatly delayed. Therefore it was provided
by the said Act, That Rast. Statutes 429. 6 H. 8. cap. 16.
no Knight, Citizen, Burgess, or Barons of the Cinque Ports, that for the
future should be Elected to come, or be in any Parliament, should depart from
the Parliament, nor absent themselves from the same, without the License of the
Speaker and Commons in Parliament assembled, to be entered upon Record in the
Book of the Clerk of the Parliament, upon pain to lose all those Sums of Money,
which he or they should or ought to have had for his or their Wages. And that
all the Counties, Cities, and Buroughs, whereof any such Person should be
Elected, and the Inhabitants of the same, should be clearly discharged of the
said Wages against the said Person and Persons, and their Executors for
evermore.

But to return to what this may seem to be a digression from.

King Richard the Second, through the unconfined Flattery of his Ambitious
Favorites, being driven on to fierce and violent Ruptures with the other Great
Men of the Land, who opposed the Maladministration of those Public Enemies
to the King and Kingdom's Peace Tho. Walsing. Histor. Angl. fol. 329.
and Happiness; and being to call a Parliament in the Eleventh Year of his
Reign, was advised to Summon all the Sheriffs of England unto
Nottingham-Castle, and to enquire of them what Power they could raise for him
in every County, against those Great Men that Closetting advised by the Kings
Chief Ministers.
did so oppose both him and his beloved Minions; and charged them, ut Ipsi
nullum Militem de pago vel Schira permitterent eligi, nisi quem Rex, and ejus
Concilium elegissent. Whereunto the Sheriffs answered, That all the Commons
favored those Great Men; neither was it in Mr. Prinns Plea for the Lords, and
House of Peers, p. 384, 385.
their Power to raise any Army or Force in that Cause: De Militibus eligendis
dixerunt, Communes velle tenere consuetudines Vsitatas, quae volunt, quod a
communibus Milites eligantur. Whereupon they were dismissed.

Upon that the King soon after issuing out Writs to the Sheriffs to elect
Knights and Burgesses for the Parliament, inserted this strange and unusual
Clause into Rot. Claus. 11 R. 2. m 24. dorso.
them, that they should choose such men as were in debatis modernis magis
indifferentes.

But the King being quickly after informed by his Council, that that Clause in
those Writs was an illegal Clause, sent out New Writs to supersede those other,
wherein it was declared by him, Dictam Clausulam [viz. in Debatis modernis
magis indifferentes] contra formam Electionis antiquitus usitatae ac contra
Libertatem Dominorum Rot. Claus. 11 R. 2. m 23. dorso.
and Communitatis Regni Angliae eatenus obtentam existere.

But notwithstanding all this, his Favorites, suae pelii timentes (as Tho.
Walsingham's words are) to protect and cover themselves from the common and
deserved Justice of the Nation, persuaded him so highly to invade the Ancient
Form of Elections, and the Liberties of the Lords and Commons, (and you know,
Sir, that the People of England have in all Ages been celebrated for their firm
Adherence to their good Old Liberties and Privileges) that at last it became
one of the Vide Cotton's Abridg. of Rec. 1 H. 4. fo. 386. n. 18.
33 Articles for which he was Deposed. It begins thus;

Artic. 19. Item, licet de Statuto and Consuetudine Regni, Although by the
Statute and Custom of the Realm, Prin's Plea for the Lords, p. 438.
in the calling together of every Parliament, the People [in singulis
Comitatibus Regni debeat esse Liber ad eligendum and deputandum Milites pro
hujusmodi Comitatibus ad interestendum Parliamento] ought to be free in choosing
and deputing Knights to be present in such Parliaments for each respective
County, and to declare their Grievances, and to prosecute such Remedies
thereupon, prout eis videretur expedire; as to them should seem expedient. Yet
the King, ut in Parliamentis suis liberius consequi valeat suae temerariae
Voluntatis effectum, that he might in his Parliaments be able more arbitrarily
to accomplish the effects of his headstrong will, did very often direct his
commands to his Sheriffs, ut certas personas per ipsum Regem nominatas, ut
Milites Comitatuum, venire faciant ad Parliamenta sua, that they should cause
to come to his Parliaments, as Knights of the Shire, certain Persons named by
the King; which Knights being his Favorites, he might lead, as often he had
done, quandoque per minas varias and terrores, quandoque per Munera, sometimes
by various Menaces and Terrors, and sometimes by Gifts, to consent to those
things as were prejudicial to the Kingdom, and exceeding burdensome to the
People; and especially to grant to the King a Subsidy on Wool for the term of
his Life, and another Subsidy for certain Years, thereby too grievously
oppressing his People.

I shall descend from that unfortunate Prince, to King 23 H. 6. cap. 15.
Hen. 6. and there in the 23d year of his Reign, (almost 256 years ago) a
Statute was made, entitled, Who shall be Knights for the Parliament. The
manner of their Election. The Remedy where one is chosen, and Pulton's Stat.
fol. 349.
another returned. In the Body of which we read, That every Sheriff, after the
delivery of the Writ to him made, shall make and deliver without fraud a
Precept under his Seal, to every Mayor, and Bailiff or Bailiffs, or Bailiff,
where no Mayor is, of the Cities and Buroughs within his County, reciting the
Writ, commanding them, if it be a City, to choose by Citizens of the same City,
Citizens; and if a Burough, Burgesses, to come to the Parliament; and such
Officers as aforesaid shall return Lawfully such Precept to the same Sheriff,
by Indentures between them, of such Elections, and the Names of the Citizens
and Burgesses so chosen, and thereupon every Sheriff shall make a good and
Rightful Return of every such Writ, and of every Return by such Officers as
aforesaid.

And every Sheriff, at every time that he does contrary to this Statute, or any
3 E. 1.
other Statutes for the Election of Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, shall
incur the pain contained in the Statute of 8 H. 6. (which is to 8 H. 6. cap. 7.
forfeit 100 l. to the King, and suffer Note The difference of the Value of 100
l. then, and 100 l. now, for K. H. 8. left to his Two Daughters by his Will no
more than 10000 l. a piece, who were afterward Queens of England.
a Years Imprisonment, without Bail or Mainprize) and moreover shall forfeit
and pay to every Person so chosen, Knight, Citizen, or Burgess, and not duly
returned, or to any other Person, who in default of any such Knight, Citizen,
or Burgess, will sue, 100 l. more, to be recovered by Action of Debt against
the said Sheriff, or his Executors, The public Detestation and Abhorrence of
packed Returns of Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses to Parliament.
or Administrators, with his or their Costs in such case dispended, inwhich
Action the Defendant shall not wage his Law, nor have any Essoign allowed.

And in the same manner, at every time that any Mayor and Bailiffs, or Bailiff,
or Bailiffs where no Mayor is, shall return other than those who be chosen by
the Citizens and Burgesses, of the Cities or Buroughs, where such Elections
shall be made, they shall incur and forfeit to the King 40 l. and moreover 40
l. to the Person so chosen and not returned, to be recovered in manner as
aforesaid, by such Person chosen, or any other who in their Default will sue
for the same.

One would imagine that after such an Act as this was made, it should scarce
ever be attempted by any to invade our Liberties, especially in a point that so
nearly concerns the Salvation of all our Interests: For as the old Lord
Treasurer Burleigh (who was accounted the greatest Statesman that ever this
Nation had) was often heard to say, That England could hardly ever be ruined,
unless it were by her own Parliaments; so we need never to fear that
Parliaments will undo us, unless we suffer ourselves to be cozened into Slavery
by being cheated out of our Best and Highest Rights, I mean Prince of Orange's
Declaration.
our Entire Freedoms of Electing such for our Representatives, with whom we can
with confidence trust our Religion, Lives, Honors, Liberties, Estates, and
Posterity: But if the Nation shall at any time hereafter be so careless as to
permit a packed House of Commons to be put upon her, she may then indeed be
given up as an easy Prey to the Arbitrary Pleasure and Lust of those
contriving Managers of her Ruin, and (what will still add Weight and
Aggravation to her Misery) as she falls with Scorn, so she will fall unpitied
to all Christendom.

Thus was that weak Prince, King Henry the Sixth, 23 H. 6. 38 H. 6. called the
Coventry Parliament.
imposed upon by his evil Counselors and Favorites, but fifteen years after
the making of this last mentioned Statute, and what were the miserable Effects
thereof; you shall hear the Parliament of the next Year following at
Westminster declare, in these words, That diverse seditious and evil disposed
Persons, having no regard 39. H. 6. cap 1. Rastalls Stat. fol. 287.
to the Dread of God, nor to the Damage of the prosperous Estate of the King,
nor his Realm, sinisterly and importunely did labor with the King to summon a
Parliament to be holden at his City of Coventry, the 20th day of the Month of
November, the 38th year of his Reign, only to destroy certain of the great
Nobles, faithful and lawful Lords and Estates of the King's Blood, and other of
the faithful Liege-people of the Realm of England, for the great Rancour,
Hatred, and Malice, which the said Seditious Persons of long time have had
against them: And of their greedy and insatiable Covetousness to have the
Lands, Hereditaments, Possessions, Offices, and Goods of the said Lords and
faithful Liege-people; by which sinister labor certain Acts, Statutes, and
Ordinances, against all good Faith and Conscience, in the said Parliament were
made, finally to destroy the said lawful Lords, Estates, and Liege-people, and
their Issues, as well Innocents as other, and their Heirs, for ever; which
Parliament was unduly summoned, and a great part of the Knights for diverse
Counties of this Realm, and many Burgesses and Citizens, for diverse Buroughs
and Cities in the same appearing were named, Returned and accepted, some of
them without due and free Election, some of them without any Election, against
the All Kings that are not Tyrants, or perjured, will be glad to bound
themselves within the limits of their Laws; and they that persuade them the
contrary, are Vipers, and Pests, both against them and the Commonwealth. K.
James 1. Speech to his Parl. 1609. in his Works, fol. 531.
Course of the King's Laws, and the Liberties of the Commons of this Realm, by
the means and labors of the said seditious Persons, whereby many great
Ieopardies, Enormities, and Inconveniences, well nigh to the Ruin, Decay, and
Universal Subversion of the said Realm have ensued.

And therefore the King, considering the premises, and that the said Lords,
Estates, and other his Leige-people, against whom the said Acts, Statutes and
Ordinances were made, had always had great and faithful Love to the Preferment
and Surety of the King's Person, according to their Duty: and that few of the
Acts made in the said Parliament holden at Coventry, were made for the Weal of
the King, nor of his said Realm, but the greater part of the Acts, Statutes,
and Ordinances there made, were labored by the Conspiracy, Procurement, and
Excitation of the said evil disposed persons, for the introduction and
accomplishment of their Rancour and inordinate Covetise: It was Ordained and
Established by the Authority of the then Parliament, That the said Parliament
holden at the said City of Coventry, be void, and holden for no Parliament. The
King, Lords, and Commons, in 39 H. 6. declare the whole Parliament of Coventry,
An. 38 H. 6. to be void, and holden for no Parliament; and all the Acts of it
are repealed, and made void, because of the undue and unfree Election of
Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses to that Parliament.
And that all Acts, Statutes, and Ordinanres, by the Authority of the same
made, be reversed, adnulled, undone, repealed, revoked, void, and of no force
nor effect.

And although those Acts were repealed upon the justest Grounds and Reason in
the world; yet so great and powerful was the Coventry-Faction, that it raised
such a Fermentation throughout the whole Kingdom, as never left working, till
it had effectually wrought the utter Ruin of Henry VI. and his Son Prince
Edward, as the * Historians, joind with our Cotton's Rec. Speed's History.
Records, do fully show, and make manifest.

But now it will not be horse de propos to examine the Writ of Summons it self;
for therein we shall find several Observables worth our taking notice of: As,

1. That it plainly directs to, and enjoins an entire Freedom in the Election
of all those that are to be sent up to serve in Parliament. The words are, Tibi
praecipimus Crompton's Jurisd. p. 1, b.
firmi er injungentes, quod, etc. Duos milites gladiis cinctos magis Idoneos
and Discretos Comitat' prae dicti, and de qualibet Civitate Duos Cives, and de
quolibet Burgo Duos Burgenses de Discretioribus and magis sufficientibus libere
and indifferentor Eligi fac, etc. And this is commanded to be done juxta formam
Statutorum inde edit. and provis'; that is, That they be freely and
indifferently chosen, according to the Tenor of the Statutes in that Case made
and provided.

2. And the Writ does proceed further, and says, Ita quod iidem Milites plenam
and sufficientem potestatem pro se and Commanitate Comit', etc. ac dict' Cives
and Burgenses pro se and Communitat'. Civitatum and Burgorum divisim ab ipsis
habeant, ad faciendum and consentiendum his quae tunc ibidem de Communi
Concilio Regni contigerint ordinari super quibusdam Arduis and Vrgentibus
Negotiis, Regem, Statum and Defensionem Regni Angliae, and Ecclesiae Anglicanae
concernen': That the said Knights, for themselves, and for their County; and
the said Citizens and Burgesses, for themselves, and the Commonalty of their
Cities and Buroughs, may have severally from them full and sufficient Power to
perform and to consent to those things which shall there happen to be ordained
by the Common Council of the Kingdom, concerning the arduous and urgent
Businesses of the King, the State, and Defense of the Kingdom of England, and
the English Church.

3. But this is not all yet we shall observe from the Writ; there is another
Clause that carries a great weight along with it, and that is this, viz.

Ita quod pro defectu Potestatis hujusmodi, seu propter improvidam Electionem
Militum, Civium, aut Burgensium, dicta Negotia infecta non remaneant quovis
modo; i. e.

So that the business may not by any means remain undone for want of such
power, or by reason of the improvident Election of the Knights, Citizens, or
Burgesses.

One would think, there needed no more than this very Writ, to convince and
satisfy all men, that our Choice of Representatives to serve us in Parliament,
ought to be with all the Freedom, Fairness, and Impartiality that can be; and
that all vile Tricks and Artifices should be abhorred: For how can those be
fully and sufficiently authorized and empowered to act for the Good and Safety
of the King and Kingdom, that have not been freely elected by the People, who
must give them that Power, which is absolutely necessary to make what they do
to become valid, and to be accounted the Statutes of the Realm?

But notwithstanding these good and wholesome Laws to secure the Freedom of
Elections, and the plain form of the Writ of Summons pursuant to these
Statutes, and the ancient Custom of the Kingdom; yet some Men we have read of,
have been so bold and daring in their attempts, as to bid open defiance to them.

And although every Parliament almost since H. 6.'s time, has heard loud
Complaints against the dangerous Consequences of illegal Elections, yet no
Parliament (though many good Men have, by bringing Bills into the House of
Commons, designed to prevent undue Elections) has had the happiness, for the
general Peace and Quiet of the Nation, to regulate and amend that which so
bare-facedly tended to the * Traitorous Subversion The 5th Article of
High Treason against the five Members in K. Charles I.'s time, says, That they
had traitorously endeavored to subvert the very Rights and Beings of
Parliaments. Husbands Collect. 4to. p. 35 Sanderson's Hist. 473.
of the very Rights and Beings of Parliament.

I shall therefore here in the next place subjoin some few Precedents, to show
you how Misdemeanors in Elections have been formerly punished by the House of
Commons, in the Reigns of Queen Elizabeth, King James, and King Charles I. But
one word first, concerning Violent and Irregular Elections and Returns.

In an Oration (made by a Worthy Gentleman, viz. Mr. John Hales, whom I take by
the Contexture of it Fox's Book of Martyrs, last Edit. 3. Vol. fol. 819. Col. 1.
to be one of the Long Robe) to Queen Elizabeth, and which was delivered to Her
Majesty by a certain Nobleman, at her first entrance to her Reign; he tells
her, That Queen Mary's first Parliament, wherein She and Idem fol. 820. Col. 2.
her Council grounded and wrought a great part of their Tyranny, and wherein
they meant to overthrow whatsoever King Edward had for the Advancement of God's
Glory brought to pass, was of no force or Authority: For she perceiving her
Enemies stomach could not be emptied, nor Her malice spewed on the People by
any good Order, she committed a great Disorder. She by Force and Violence took
from the Commons their Liberty, that according to the Ancient Laws and Customs
of the Realm, they could not have
their Free Election of Knights and Burgesses for the Parliament; for she well
knew, that if either Christian-men or true English men should be elected, it
was not possible that to succeed which she intended. And therefore in many
places diverse were chosen by force of her Threats, meet to serve her malicious
Affections; wherefore that Parliament was no Parliament, but may be justly
called a Conspiracy of Tyrants and Traitors; for the Great Part, by whose
Authority and Voices things proceeded in that Court, by their Acts most
manifestly declared themselves so; the rest being both Christians and true
Englishmen, although they had good wills, yet were not able to resist or
prevail against the multitude of Voices and Suffrages of so many evil, false to
God, and Enemies to their Country. Also diverse Burgesses being orderly chosen,
and lawfully returned, as in some places the people did what they could to
resist her purposes, were disorderly and unlawfully put out, and others,
without any Order of Law, in their places placed.

But it was meant at the first, and First Constitution Sir Simonds D'Ewe's
Journ. fol. 170. Col. 2. 13 Eliz. 1571.
of Parliament, (as is observed by a Learned Member in Sir Simonds D'Ewes
Journal), That Men of every Quarter, and of all sorts, should come to the
Commons House; and that they should be Freely Chosen.

And therefore he says, In Queen Mary's time, a Idem Ibid. Col. 2.
Council of this Realm (not the Queens Privy Council) did write to a Town, to
choose a Bishop's Brother, (and a great Bishop's Brother he was indeed), whom
they assured to be a good Catholic Man; and willed them to choose to the like
of him some other fit Man. The Council was answered, That they were prohibited
by Law. And then he goes on, 'If all Towns in England had done the like in
their Choice, the Crown had not been so wronged, and the Realm so robbed, with
such ease, at that Parliament of Queen Mary's, and Truth banished as it was.
And he adds, What has been, may be, there is no impossibility.

And accordingly it happened in the same 13th year of Queen Elizabeth, that a
Burgess by Bribery had got to be Elected: but what His and the Corporations
Punishments were for such foul dealings, I will now set down, as the first
Precedent.

1. Forasmuch as Thomas Long, Gentleman, returned one of the Burgesses for the
Borough of Westbury Sir Sim. ut sup. fol. 182. Col. 2.
in the County of Wilts for that present Parliament, being a very simple Man,
and of small Capacity to serve in that Place, did in open Court confess, That
10 May 13 Eliz. 1571. Vid. 4 Inst. 23.
he did give to Anthony Garland, Mayor of the said Town of Westbury, and unto
one -- Wats of the same Town, the Sum of Four Pounds, for that place and room
of Burgesship.

It was Ordered by the House, That the said Anthony Garland and the said Wats
should forthwith repay unto the said Thomas Long the same Sum of Four Pounds,

And also that a Fine of Twenty Pounds be assessed upon the said Corporation,
or Inhabitants of the said Town of Westbury, for the Queens Majesty's Use, for
their said lewd and slanderous Attempt.

And that the said Thomas Long, his Executors and Administrators, should be
discharged against the said Anthony Garland, and -- Wats, their Heirs,
Executors, and Administrators, of and from all Bonds made by the said Thomas
Long, to any person or persons, touching the discharge of the exercise of the
said room or place of Burgesship in any wise.

And on the 11th of May, it was Ordered, That a Pursuivant be sent with Letters
from the House to Anthony Garland, Mayor of the Town of Westbury in the County
of Wilts, and -- Wats of the same Id. Ibid.
Town, for their personal appearance forthwith to be made in the House; and
also to bring with them all such Bonds, as Thomas Long Gentleman, lately
returned one of the Burgesses for the same Town, stands bound in unto Them,
or either of them, or unto any Other to their Use. And also to answer unto such
Matters as at their coming shall be objected against them by the House.

2. In the Parliament of the 18th Jacobi primi, the 2. The Mayor of
Winchelsea's Case, Journ. Dom. Com. 18 Jac. 1.
Mayor of Winchelsea, for misbehaving of himself at the Election of
Parliament Men for that Town, and for making a False Return, was complained of;
and therefore it was, upon the Question,

Resolved,

That the Mayor of Winchelsea had committed a The Judgment of the House against
him.
Contempt and Misdemeanour against that House, and therefore shall stand
committed to the Sergeant till Saturday morning; then making his Submission
there at the Bar, to be discharged of any further Punishment there.

But he was to make his further Acknowledgment in N. B.
the Town before the New Election.

3. Anno 20o of King James the First, Dr. Harris, Minister of Blechingly, who
had misbehaved himself by 3. Dr. Harris' s Case, Journ. Dom. Com. 20 Jac. 1.
Preaching, and otherwise with respect to Election of Members of Parliament
there, and being complained of in the House, and referred to a Committee; The
Committee was clearly satisfied, That it was a High and Great Offense; and they
are of Opinion he should be called to the Bar as a Delinquent, to be
admonished, and to confess his Fault there, and in the Country, and in the
Pulpit of his Parish Church, on Sunday seven-night before the Sermon.

The Doctor was brought to the Bar, and kneeled; the House agreed with the
Committee, and Mr. Speaker pronounced Judgment upon him accordingly.

4. In the same year of the same King, upon the 4. The Mayor of Arundel' s
Case, Journ. Dom. Com. 20 Jac. 1.
Report of Mr. Glanville, concerning the Borough of Arundel, because the Mayor
had misbehaved himself in the Election, by putting the Town to a great deal of
Charge, not giving a due and general warning, but packed a number of Electors;
It was

Resolved,

1. That a Warrant be sent for the Mayor, he not being then in Town; And

2. That three Members shall set down the Charges, and the Mayor shall pay them.

5. Anno 20o King James the First, Mr. Glanville 5. The Case of Ingray, the
Undersheriff of Cambridgshire Journ. Dom. Com. 21 Jac. 1.
reports the Misdemeanour of the Undersheriff of Cambridgeshire, who refused
the Poll, declaring Sir Thomas Steward promised him to defend him against Sir
John Cutts, and told him he should have no wrong nor damage.

Resolved upon the Question,

1. That this Undersheriff shall be committed to the Sergeants Custody till
Thursday next.

2. That making his Submission at the Bar, and acknowledging his Offense, he
shall be discharged from any further Punishment in this place.

3. That the Undersheriff shall make a further submission openly at the next
Quarter Sessions to be holden in the County, and acknowledge his faults.

Edward Ingry was brought to the Bar, and kneeling upon his knees, Mr. Speaker
denounced the Judgment of the House upon him.

6. In the Parliament Anno 3 Caroli 1. (Wherein 6. The Case of Sir W. Wray, Mr.
Langton, Mr. J. Trelawny, and Mr. E. Trelawny. Journ. Dom. Com. 3 Car. 1.
the excellent Petition of Right, or rather a Comment, or Explanation of
several Branches of Magna Charta was made) Sir William Wray, Mr. Langton, Mr.
John Trelawny, and Mr. Edward Trelawny, being Deputy Lieutenants of the County
of Cornwall, assumed to themselves a Power to make whom They only pleased,
Knights of the Shire, defamed Sir John Elliot, and Mr. Coryton; who stood to be
chosen, sent up and down the Country, Letters for the Trained-Bands, to appear
at the day of Election; menaced the Country under the Title of His Majesty's
Pleasure.

It was Ordered,

1. That Mr. Langton, and Mr. John Trelawny, be committed to the Tower, for
their Offense done to the House, there to remain during the Pleasure of the
House, and that they make a submissive acknowledgment of their Offenses.

2. And Sir William Wray, and Mr. Edward Trelawny, be committed to the
Sergeant, and so to remain, till they make their Recognition in the House.

After all which, the Question was, Whether the Gentlemen should make the
Recognition at the Assizes in Cornwall, or No? And it was Ordered,

That the Recognition and Submission should be made in the Country; and a
Committee was appointed to draw the Recognition, and they were sent to the
Tower.

The Four Gentlemen were called in to the Bar, and the Speaker pronounced the
Judgment upon them, they kneeling all that time.

7. Mr. Hackwell reports from the Committee about 7. The Case of the Sheriffs
of York and others. Journ. Dom. Com. 3 and 4 Car. 1. Tuesday April 29. Sher.
Thompson' s Two Offenses.
the Sheriffs of York, and others, for the Election of Sir Thomas Savill.

The Two Sheriffs and the Two Aldermen are Delinquents; one of the Sheriffs,
and one of the Aldermen are most faulty; Sheriff Thompson had committed Two
Offenses.

1. His hasty and precipitate Judgment of the Election, His First.
to prevent the Election of Hoy.

2. In denying the Poll, being required. His Second.


First, his hasty and precipitate Judgment was done without acquainting his
Fellow-Sheriff, and it was within a quarter of an hour after the reading of the
Writs, and half an hour after nine a Clock; and while he was doing of it, he
was admonished, and told that he could not answer it, and that he might defer
it; yet he did obstinately proceed, and answered them frowardly, and said he
would do it, and that he would justify it.

His Excuse was, That it was indeed suddenly done, His Excuse.
but it was done so formerly: But to that it was replied, that never before
above two were in Election.

Secondly, he answered, That it was not of his own head, but some Aldermen
advised it; but that was Alderman Cooper, a Delinquent for that Offense.

For the other Offense; in denying the Poll, after it His 2d Offense.
was demanded, and that was before he had pronounced any Judgment, but he was
willing that Robinson should have the Poll, for he knew he could not carry it;
but he refused Hoy, and he was required ten times, but His Impudent Behavior.
gave no answer at all. His Behavior before the Committee was impudent, and he
would answer nothing directly.

The Committee found this man to be an engaged man, and that he was promised to
be saved harmless.

For Alderman Henlow, he procured the Company of Ald. Henlow.
Tailors, two days before the Election, and published Sir John Savill's Letter,
and pressed it; and upon some he pressed it so much, that they should elect Sir
Thomas Savill; and said the Parliament will not hold.

He dealt with the Sheriffs also, and told them diverse words of Sir John Savil,
that he would take it very ill; and, said he, if you will choose Sir Thomas
Savill, you shall be saved harmless.

Also he endeavored to procure a Certificate, that Sir Thomas Savill was duly
elected; when any refused, he said they were factious fellows, and otherwise
threatened.

The Committee censured Sheriff Thomson, and this The Committees Censure.
Alderman Henlow.

First, That they should stand committed to the Sergeant, during pleasure.

Secondly, That they should acknowledge their Offenses at the Bar in the Full
House, and pay all due Fees, before they be discharged.

Thirdly, Also they should defray all the Charges of the Witnesses of Alderman
Hoy, to be assessed by Four of the Committee.

Lastly, And that they should make acknowledgment of their Fault, before the
Court of Aldermen at York, and that the Mayor should certisie the Submission to
the House.

As for Alderman Cooper, he assembled the Company Ald. Cooper.
of Merchants, and read Sir John Savil's Letter for the Election of his Son,
and also he at the Election persuaded the Sheriff to give Judgment.

Sheriff Atkins was only passive, and did not refuse Sher. Atkins.
to join with the other Sheriff.

As for the point of Charges given to the Witnesses of Hoy, it was doubtful,
and objected against by some, whether in the Power of the House; but it was
replied, That in every Court it is necessary to have Power to impose Fines, and
why we should want Power for Offenses that lie in our cognizance, is not to be
questioned; else the Party that is duly Elected, and that justifies the Free
Election, and maintains the Freedom and Liberty of the Commonwealth, shall be
more punished than the Delinquent; also we have power to imprison, which is
more than a Fine; also we have as much as the Lords House in those things that
lie in our Jurisdiction. Several Instances were here given of Fining persons,
which I omit.

I shall observe as to their Power of Imprisoning, that Crompton's Jurisdict.
p. 8, 9, 10, 11.
in the 34 H. 8. almost 150 years ago, for Breach of Privilege, the Sheriffs of
London, in Ferrers case, were committed to the Tower of London, and the Clerk
(who Crompton was a Learned Lawyer of the Middle Temple, and Reader in 1573.
the 15th year of the Queen's Reign; he dedicated his Book to Sir John
Puckering, Knt. Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England, in the year 1594.
almost 100 years ago.
was the occasion of the Fray) to a place there called Little-Ease? and Officer
of London which did the Arrest, called Tailor, with Four Officers, to Newgate,
where they remained Three Days, and then delivered, not without humble Suit of
the Mayor of London, and other their Friends. And the Proceedings of the
Commons in this case of Ferrers, in maintaining the Privileges (...).
Hollinsh. Chron. ^ 1584.
of their House was not only commended even by King Henry the Eighth himself,
but was also confirmed by diverse Reasons, by the Lord Chief Justice Mountague,
and assented unto by all the rest of the Judges.

But to return to the Case before us, of the Sheriffs of York, and Others.

It was upon that whole matter Ordered,

That Thompson and Henlow pay the Charges of Witnesses, brought up about the
Proof of the said Election; and that shall not be discharged from the Sergeant,
till they pay their Fees; and Four Gentlemen of the House are to moderate, and
set down the Charges in certain.

And it is Ordered, That they shall be committed to the Sergeant till they make
their Submission at the Bar, and acknowledge their faults on their Knees, and
read a Submission.

As for the Submission to be made at York, it was through great Favor remitted
by the House.

To these few Instances (out of several others which might be collected from
the Journals of the Commons House) give me leave to superadd the Case of the
Borough of Stochbridge, which happened in the last Parliament; and I find it
thus set down in their Printed Votes.

8. Mr. Gray reports from the Committee of Privileges 8. Votes of the H. of
Commons, Primo. Will. and Mariae, no. 19. Veneris 15 die Nov. 1689.
and Elections, the Case touching the Election of a Member to serve in this
present Parliament, for the Borough of Stockbridge, in the County of
Southampton; that there had appeared very undue practices in giving and
promising several Sums of Money for procuring Voices at the said Election;
whereupon the said Committee had come to Three Resolutions, viz.

Resolved,

1. That William Mountague, Esquire, is not duly Elected a Burgess to serve in
this present Parliament, for the said Borough.

2. That William Strode Esquire, is not duly elected a Burgess, to serve in
this present Parliament for the said Borough.

3. That the said Election is a void Election.

To all which Resolves, the House agreed.

Ordered,

That Richard Hewes (Bailiff of Stockbridge in the County of Southampton) Page
Robinson, -- Gatehouse, and Samuel Hall of Stockbridge aforesaid, be sent for
in Custody of the Sergeant at Arms, attending this House, for giving and taking
Bribes at the said Election.

Resolved,

That William Mountague Esquire, be disabled from being Elected a Burgess to
serve in this present Parliament, for the said Borough of Stockbridge.

The Question being put, That William Strode, Esquire, be disabled in like
manner, it passed in the Negative.

A Debate arising touching the Disfranchising of the said Borough for ever
hereafter, from sending Burgesses to Parliament: and instead thereof, that Two
more Knights of the Shire be chosen for the County of Southampton.

Resolved,

That the Debate be adjourned.

A Petition of Hewes and other Inhabitants of Stockbridge, in Custody of the
Sergeant at Arms, attending Idem no. 29. Mercurii 27 die Nov. 1689.
the House, was read; wherein they acknowledge their Offense, in promising
several sums of Money for Votes, and other undue practices at the late Election
there, and crave Pardon of the House for the same.

And the Petitioners being called in, and severely reproved by Mr. Speaker for
their said Offenses, were discharged, paying their Fees.

The next day a Petition of Page Robinson, in Idem, No 30.
Custody of the Sergeant at Arms attending this House, was read; wherein he
acknowledged his Offense in giving Bribes for procuring Voices at the late
Election at Stockbridge, and craved the Pardon of the House for it: And he
being called in, and severely reproved by Mr. Speaker for his said Offense, was
discharged, paying his Fees.

And it was Ordered,

That Mr. Speaker issue his Warrant to the Clerk Idem, No. 44. die Sabbati, 14.
Decembris.
of the Crown, for a New Writ for electing a Burgess for Stockbridge in the
County of Southampton, in the room of Mr. Mountague.

Thus, Sir, you see, though our Parliaments have not yet sufficiently provided
for the Regulating Elections by a General and Public Law; yet the House of
Commons, as an Ancient Right of their very Essence and Being, from which they
cannot depart, have still, upon Complaints made to them of foul Practices in
getting the Returns of Members to serve in Parliament, that have not been duly
chosen, always taken care to inflict suitable Punishments upon the Offenders,
to show their Dislike and Abhorrence of their Crimes.

And, I hope, if it shall be proved, that any notorious and scandalous Pranks
have been played, to get a Party of Men into your House, either by Fraud, or
Force, or whatever other unwarrantable Pretense, not allowed by the Laws of
this Realm, that shall be ready to foment Differences, create Disagreements
K.'s Sp. to both Houses of Parl. 21 March, 1689/90.
in your Councels, and disturb, or delay your speedy and unanimous Proceedings
upon the necessary Matters before you, for the Peace and Settlement of the
Nation, you will make it your special Care to summon all such Criminals to your
Bar, and upon Conviction, to give them the Justice due to their Demerits; that
the Acknowledgement of their Faults, the Repentance for them, and humble
Submission to the Righteousness of your Censures, may be as public in their
respective Counties, Cities, and Buroughs, as their bold Invasions have been
upon the Indubitable Rights and Privileges of the Subject, contrary to the
Tenor Mag. Chart. 9 H 3. cap. 9. Spelm. Glossar. i^. Magna Charta, fol. 374.
of the Great Charter of the Liberties of England, (Augustissimum Anglicarum
Libertatum Diploma, and Sacra Anchora, as Sir Henry Spelman justly calls it)
which says, That the City of London shall have All the Old Liberties and
Customs, which it has been used to have. Moreover, We will and grant, That ALL
OTHER Cities, Buroughs, Towns, and the Barons of the Five Ports, and all other
Ports, shall have All their Liberties and Free Customs.

There is a very useful Treatise lately published, called, Lex Parliamentaria,
in the Appendix whereof we read Lex Parliam. page 319.
this remarkable Note, That the Chancellor cannot examine Returns to
Parliament; and the Reason is, because thereby the County may lose the Freedom
of their Elections; And the Book says, That by such means the King with his
Council might make any Man whom they would, to be of the Parliament House,
against the Great Charter, and the Liberties of England.

Now, Sir, as that can never be too often inculcated, which ought never to be
forgotten, I must beg the favor to re-mind you of one thing, which You and I
have several times discoursed of formerly, because it equally concerns the
Ancient Rights of both Lords and Commons, in giving their concurring Assents to
the Making and Enacting of Statutes, which some Sycophanting Scriblers have in
this last Age been industriously laboring to deprive and rob them both of, for
the Advance of an Absolute and Despotick Monarchy; And that is,

1. That this Great Charter was not purely and merely an Emanation of Royal
Grace and Bounty, which the People of England could not pretend any Right unto
before; but it was a restoring to them such Liberties as had been ravished from
them by an usurped and encroached Power, as you may observe by several
Expressions in this Charter, viz. Sua Jura, their Rights; Libertates suas,
their Liberties, which shows plainly, That they were possessed of them before;
and that therefore this was but a Restitution or Confirmation of them; For
which (as my L. Coke's words 2 Inst. fol. 77.
are) the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors, Earls, Barons, Knights,
Freeholders, and other the King's Subjects, Citizens, and Burgesses (assembled
in Parliament) gave unto the King one fifteenth part of all their Movable
Goods; which proves, That as the Fifteenth was granted by Parliament, so was
this Great Charter also granted by Authority of the same.

2. And that this was a 28 E. 3. cap. 1. 36 E. 3. cap. 1. Littleton, sect. 108.
12 E. 4. cap. 7. Rot. Stat. 25 E. 1. m. 38. vid. 2. Instit. 525. Idem, 526.
Statute, and made,

1. Per Commune Assent de tut le Roialme en temps le Roy Henry nostre Piere, by
the common Assent of all the Realm in the time of King Hen. 3. that is, says
my Lord Coke, by Authority of Parliament. Or,

2. As the Statute of the 15 Edw. 3. more particularly Rot. Parl. 15 E. 3. n.
50. dorso.
expresses the constituent Parts of the Makers of it; scilicet, that it was
made par Seignieur le Roy, Piers, and la Commune de la terre; by the King,
Peers, and Commons of the Land.

I will give you at present no further trouble, but only assure you, That in
whatsoever you shall please to command, according to the utmost extent of my
Capacity, you shall always find me,

SIR, Your most Obedient Servant, etc.


