THE BLEEDING IPHIGENIA OR An excellent Preface of a Work unfinished, published
by the Authors frind, with the Reasons of publishing it.
THe picture of Iphigenia (one of the rarest pieces of antiquity) goeing to be
sacrifised for appeasing the anger of Diana offended with her Father King
Agamemnon for killing a stagg consecrated to that Goddess, made Timanthes the
Author thereof very famous. He placed in lively colors, round about this fair
Princes, her Kinsmen, Frinds, Allies, and suite in great Consternation, all
drowned in lamentations and tears; but the gallant Lady (nothing in nature
appeared more comely) smiled, bearing in her countenance a Majesty, and contempt
of death: so charming was the art of this picture, that few could view it
without tears.

Courteous Reader, the Author of this Preface has drawn another Iphigenia of
the body of a noble, ancient Catholic Nation cla'd all in redd Robes, not to
be now offered up as victime; but already sacrificed, not to a profane Deity,
but to the living God for holy Religion: look but on this our bleeding
Iphigenia, and I dare say you will lament her Tragedy.

1. In the first place the Author sets down his own fear and care about long
Eternity (which should be the chiefest care of a Christian) confessing with
grief and compunction of heart, that he had walked in danger, even to the age
of 71. years, and at length found himself touched with that dreadful theme:
Aut paenitendum aut ardendum. That is: Either we must do penance, or burn.
This drove him to a resolution of laying aside all wordly intanglements, and
conversations, for obtaining the Kingdom of heaven and taking order with the
house of his Soul, for that he was sure to dye, and could not live long.

2. He expresses a Godly anger against his frind Sall an Apostata. Sancte
Irascitur qui pro Deo Irascitur. hat is: THee is justly Angry, that is angry
for Gods Cause.

3. He delivers in sencible Language the slavery* ruin, and destruction of
his dear Country.

4. He presents to the view of our gracious King Charles the second a
Catholic People, his faithful subjects wounded by thieves, and left half
dead, like the miserable man, that went from Jerusalem to Ierico; desiring his
Majesty with prayres, and tears to com near and bind up the wounds of the
afflicted, pouring in Oil and Wine, as did de Godly Semaritane. His Language
to the King is with submissive duty, and yet with a Priestly freedom Judging
with Saint Ambrose. Neque imperiale est libertatem dicendi denegare, neque
Sacerdotale, quod sentiat, non dicere. That is: It is neither Kingly to deny
the freedom of speaking, nor Priestly, not to speak what he thinks.

5. He names in particulare certain Capital, Implacable, blooddy Enemies of
his Country, and gives them the Caracters, they deserve: and to justify this,
says with Tertuliane, In hostem Patriae, omnis homo miles est. That is: Every
man is a Soldier against the enemy of his Country.

The subject of his writing was to reprove Sall a Jesuit of the Fourth Vow, for
abjuring the Catholic Faith, and leaving his holy Order: In the work he
proceeded to 8. or 9. Chapters, and went noe further; but I hope some zealous
Israelite will build upon the foundation he has laid, a handsome structure.

You will perhaps inquire who he is that began, and did not finish a good
work; he is a learned worthy Priest, of whom, all that know him, will say,
(his modesty may not be offended with the trueth's I utter) he has been all
his life time, sincere in all his writings, ways, and conversation; (He is
truly one of those can say with Seneca: Quod sentimus loquimur, and quod
loquimur sentimus. That is: I think what I speak, and speak what I think.)
Ever Loyal to his Prince, faithful to his Country, and true to his frind; and
so hearty a lover of peace, with all kind of men; that he never engaged in
any contention, but what was pious for defending Religion, and the Jurisdection
of the holy Sea: in quarrels of this nature he was still fervent, and feared
noe man, and used to say with great Ambrose in such incounters. Nemini facio
injuriam, si omnibus Deum praefero. That is: I injure noe man by praeferring
God before all.

Having considered with attention this sound Preface, and finding the contents
sollid, well ordered, and such as may be useful to my poor Country, I thought
it my duty to make all public to the World; hoping that pious Christians
beholding the grievous wounds we have received for God, and Religion, from the
Enemies of both, will open the bowels of mercy to us so sorely oppressed.

I conclude with a word or two to my dear Countrymen, recommending seriously
to them all, at home and a broad, to humble themselves under the Judgments of
God, and power forth their hearts like Water upon the Earth, in contrition,
tears, and prayrs; which is the only way left for asswaging the anger of God,
come upon us, for our own sins, and those of our Forefathers; Initium salutis
(says holy Hierome) est nostra intelligere, and flere peccata. That is: To
understand and deplore our sins is the beginning of Salvation; and because a
disease deeply rooted (as ours) needs a strong and long cure, it is fitting we
call to mind that saying of Saint Ambrose. Grandi plagae, alta, and problixa
est opus medicina; and apply the same.

I beseech you, gentle Reader, pray to God for my afflicted Country, and for
the Catholic Religion therein persecuted, that it be not wholly extinguished,
and so commending you to the tuition of the Almighty, I remain

Your humble servant in Christ Jesus N. N.

AMICUS ANONIMUS ad AUTHOREM ANONIMUM.
QVam been Magnates stringis: tibi dicere verum
Innatum est: aliis dissimurare placet.
Fallacias Mundi, Scriptor venerande, nec arts;
Tu curas, ut Mundum falsa docere probes.
ERRATA.
Faults. Corrected. Page 5. discere dicere* scilentio silentio Page 7. Syrus
Cyrus Page 27. indigint indigent Page 40. repelere repellere Page 46.
defensiones defensionis Page 52. contumiles contumelies Page 55. tili tell Page
60. extorpated extirpated Page 70. place peace Page 76. weddower widdow's Page
79. erat erant Page 83. furoro furore Page 85. dissoluite dissolute.

The Censurs of a venerable and learned Prelate, and three Professors of
Divinity given of the Bleeding Iphigenia, in their Letters written to the
publisher thereof.
The first.
AS for the Bleeding Iphigenia I perused it sencibly, and according to my
sentiment, it is the best I perused yet upon that subject, and I am sure the
fittest for the gain of the Nation, and therefore the more welcome that ever
since their Misery I have seen. I would all our writers had contained
themselves Intra istos limits for the greater Satisfaction of poor Souls,
Qui persecutionem patiuntur propter justitiam. If I had the tree of life in my
Custody, I would give of the fruit to the Author, Vt deponeret senectam,
aeternumque Patriae viveret. I have noe more to say, but remain your own for
ever.

Tertio Februarii, 1675.
The second.
Gratias humillime ago pro Iphigenia mihi nuper transmissa, quae vere
Sanguinolentam Hiberniae faciem vivis coloribus adumbrat: opus est peridoneum,
ut afflictis Catholicis non parum suppeditet solatii, atque animorum, ut laeto
vultu tristes casus, and erecta front iniqua persequentium tela excipiant.
Scenam quoque sat apertam adversantium oculis proponit, in qua sua delicta sine
fuco agnoscant, agnita plangant, ac laesam aequitatem resarciant, nisi velint
supremi Tribunalis feralem catastrophen experiri; quando scilicet in scenam
prodibit laesa Metanaea, ac mucronem Iphigeniae cervicibus incumbentem ipsa
arripiet, ad sumendam de iniquis ultionem. Gratulor ego hujus operis Authori,
in quo agnosco singularem eruditionem, cum sincero Patriae a more decertantem,
utraque apud aequum Lectorem palmam feret. Utinam in aliis tantum valeat
Religio and aequitas, quantum in Authore scientia and charitas.

27 Februarii, 1675.
The third.
I have exacttly perused the Preface or Bleeding Iphigenia, and read it twice
over, it is full of sollid truths, excellently well expressed. For my own part
I never took it into my hands, but I found my self moved to a tender
compassion upon the account of those distressed fuffering Catholics in
Ireland. Our good God the Father of mercy, be to them a merciful comforter, I
think morouer that those, who shall read this Preface and feel not themselves
moved to pity the affliction of those distressed, and now violently oppressed
servants of Almighty God, have hearts harder then stones, and that God will show
his Just Judgment upon them, even in this world. Much more I could say in
commendation of this little book, but am loath togive you the trouble of so
long a letter. The prefiged Title pleases me extremely. And shall not the
Bleeding Iphigenia make the most obdurate to relent? I am sure the whole
learned, and well pondered discourse will draw tears from Innumerable. My
cordial wish is that it draw compassion from those that have Massacred
Iphigenia, and should before all others shed tears with repentance.

13'th Februarii 1675.
The Bleeding Iphigenia deserves a Virgil or Homer to commend it. No such Poets
now living, be pleased to receive my judgment of that discourse in the ensuing
Verse.

I am ever your own.
23'th Ian. 1675.
Iphigenia Sanguinans.
SAnguinat ante aras hoc Iphigenia libello,
Quis nisi praedurus temperet a lacrimis?
Magnates, duros magnetes innuit esse,
Quos non confringit, non movet iste cruor.
Transit levites plangens; quid Samaritanus?
Durus percussam morte perire sinit:
Sic gentem superis fidam, and te semper amantem
Rex das mactandam? Regis an iste amor est?
Insontem perimunt amente furore Rebels;
Te Regem ostende, and ne patiare mori:
Lex naturalis, lex hoc divina reposcit,
Sunt jura haec Regi non violanda pio.
Parcito subjectis, and debellato superbos;
In te ne justi saeviat ira Dei.
Tandem Levites Vinumque Oleumque puellae
Infundit plagis, and ducit in stabulum.
Est medicus Levita pius; nec dicere verum
Principibus trepidat; totus amat Patriam.
Vive diu Levita precor, quo fcribere possis,
Omnes o mecum dicite, vive diu.
THE PREFACE TO THE STUDIOUS READER.
AFter a toylsome peregrination for the space of full seaventy years in this
Babylon of confusion and miseryes, (wherein men are so strangely tormoyl'd,
that the pleasures they enjoy, often become their greatest torments.) I began
at length with a sencible care to consider of Long Eternity, purposing, to lay
aside all false contentment, deceiving Illusions, and prophaine conversations,
heavy Chains I have carried to long with small pleasure, and great fear* and
although I found great danger in carrying them, yet I had not courage enough to
shake them of for good and all. Vere trahebam catenam meam (to use S. Augustins
Language) solui timens.

My declining age forewarning me the downfall of my decaying body would be
soon, and perhaps sudden, bid me prepare for a surer, and a more durable
habitation; and it seemed to me my Guardian Angel whispered to my disquieted
soul even the same words the Prophet Isaie uttered to King Ezechias when
dangerously sick. Isa. Cap. 38,
Thus says our Lord: take order with thy house, for thou shall dye, and shall
not live.

This inevitable alarm of dying raising a high storm within me, I concluded
without further fluctuation to spend the short remnant of time I have to live,
in penance, Holy contemplation, prayers, and Mortification for schanselling
with tears (if God would be so pleased) the sins and vanitys of my former
life.

I had hardly begun to settle my mind in this devine meditation, when behold a
printed paper from London came to hand, of a public abjuration of the Roman
Catholic faith made by Andrew Sall a Jesuit of the fourth Vow. This paper
indeed gave me a great heaviness of heart, for I loved the man dearly for his
amiable nature, and excellent parts, and esteemed him both a pious person and
Learned, and so did all that knew him, but I see we were all deceived in him.
However this sudden change of him made me say with a sad attention those
words of Saint Paul. 1. Cor. Cap. 10.
He that thinks himself to stand, let him take heed least he fall. For God
knows I noe way feared this man would have falen into herisy.

As I was Reading with great attention Sall's Abjuration I called to mind that
great read Dragon, Apoc. Cap. 12.
whose tail drew the third part of the stars of heaven, and cast them to the
earth. And then said to my self, the tail of an infernal beast had cast this
Sall to the Earth out of a little heaven: (The state of Religion) wherein for a
time, he shined like a small starr in virtue, and learning.

After deserting the Socitey of Jesus and running away with infamy and shame,
out of the whole House of God I could not Endure him, and therefore resolved to
give him a sharp reprehension: at which if he shall repine, and fall into
Choler for my indevouring to do him good, I shall hold that for an ill
Symptom of his disease qui corripientem Eum contemnit (says Solomon) non
sequetur Eum Sanitas. Some sick men there are, that now and then think
themselves sound and well, when they are most sick, all those can not abide the
sight of a Doctor, which is a Kind of madness: if Sall be one of those, his
cure will be the harder; however for Charity-sake, and for the ancient amity
we had, I will Employ all pains, and diligence for healing him, but the cure
must come from above, Dictum S. Ambrosy.
Ab illo medico in caelis, qui spargit medicamentae in terris. Far it is (God
knows) from my mind to add affliction to his afflictions, sufficiat Diei
malitia sua: nec unquam fuit mea consuetudo lacerato animo discere vitia
amicorum, talem zelum (ut cum S. Augustino Loquar) semper fensui magis impetum
punientis, quam caritatem corrigentis. The same Saint tells me how to handle
Sall. Dilige, (says he) and dic quod voles.

But what shall I do to a man, that has stained his soul with the spott of
herisy? with what waters shall I wash him for wyping away the stain, with
those of Siloe, Isa. Cap. 8.
quae fluunt cum scilentio, or those of Rasin quae transeunt cum tumultu? The
last seem the more natural for purifying him* though my inclination is more
for the soft running waters of Siloe.

Had Sall's sin been noe more then a slipp of Ignorance, or frailty, we
could have covered him with a Mantle of Charity; but the abominable abjuration
of faith being a sin of a high nature, and full of Impiety against God,
against Christ and his unspotted spouse, against Charity and the Holy Ghost, I
can not be silent, but must openly rebuke his wickedness, and maintain truth
against him before all the world: can I see aman dear to me, vaunting and so
desperately defying the Hosts of the living God, and say nothing? that cannot
be: Silence here were a great sin being the true time of taking up David's
Sling and stone and throwing at this Giant dominering and vaporing against the
camp of Israel. I am not to power oil upon the head of such a sinner,
flattery will not cure him, I must then in charity chide him and Exprobrat his
deserting the Catholic faith; and if he is wise and penitent, he will say
with repenting David. Psalm. 140.
The Just shall rebuke me in mercy, and shall reprehend me: but let not the
oil of a sinner fat my head.

After lamenting Sall's woeful perversion, I begin to think of my dear
Contry's affliction, and with fear, and amazement to inquire the ground and
cause of persecution there and in Enland.

Nothing was less feared (I am confident) by the Catholics of both Kingdoms
then a tempest of this nature to come upon them, lying safe (as they conceived)
under the wings of so great and merciful a Monarck, as Charles the second, a
King of pardons. How then say men came this about? how could so clement a King
be induced to afflict so loyal a people, as the Catholics of England, and
Ireland? I see noe Mystery in this business, all is clear: their affliction,
and cause thereof is well known over all Europ, and is (as I may say) even the
same with that of innocent Daniell, whose Loyal fidelity to Syrus King of
Babylon, was so clear, as his malignant Enemies said expressly of him, we
shall not find against this Daniell any occasion unless perhaps in the Law of
his God; the Crime then against Daniell and all the Jews was their Religion:
upon this ground the Counselors and great men of the Kingdom got the King to
set forth an Edict against the Jews for professing their Religion, and by
this means Daniell was cast into the lake of the Lions by a King that loved
him. The King loved Daniell but he feared the great men, who pressed the Law
to be executed against Daniell, and this fear more strong in the King then
love, made poor Daniell Companion to the Lions.

Your Religion noble Contry-men, your Religion is the sole Crime, for which you
suffer: (Blessed for ever be the name of God for this) your Religion has
stirred up this tempest, which ought not to terrifye you over much, seeing the
Apostles our first Captains and Leaders in this holy cause, those darlings of
God, endured hard things for Religion: Prisons, whippings, contumilies, and all
sorts of vexations were to them delights, and consolations: Act. Apl. cap. 5.
they after being scurged went from the sight of the Council rejoicing,
because they were accounted worthy to suffer reproach for the name of Jesus.

Do not therefore fear all that men can do against you, while with tears and
patience you march under the purple Standart of Crucified Jesus, for in the
end, the day, and victory will be yours: fear not the power of men in this
glorious trial, there be more with you, then against you, (Legions of Angels
though you see them not) those heavenly hosts are pitching their tents round
about you. He that Led the Children of Israel out of Egypt in wonders through
the redd Sea, never wants power to deliver you: wait for his good time, for
he will come.

A Table of sage Counsels, that hung by the bed of Ptolomeus Arsacides King of
Egypt, (by him Religiously observed all the time of his reign,) was delivered
by a Priest of the Idols to the wise Emperor Marcus Aurelius, who dying gave
it to his son with this short speech. My son leaving you Emperor of many
Kingdoms, I presume you will with that great power be feared of all, and if you
will faithfully Keep the Godly Counsels in this Table, you shall be infalibly
beloved of all.

The Table of Counsels.
1. I Never denied (said the virtuous King Ptolomeus) justice to a poor man,
for being poor; nor pardoned a rich man for being rich.

2. I never loved a rich wicked man; nor hated a poor just man.

3. I never granted favors to men for affection; nor distroy'd men to satisfy
my passion.

4. I never denied Justice to any demanding Justice; nor mercy to the afflicted
and miserable.

5. I never passed by Evil without punishing it; nor good without rewarding it.

6. I never did Evil to any man out of Malice; nor villainy for avarice,

7. I was never without fear in prosperity; nor without courage in adversity.

8. My door was never open to a flatterer; nor my ear to a murmuring detractor.

9. I endeavored still to make my self beloved of the good; and feared of the
Evil.

10. I ever favored the poor that were able to do little for themselves; and
I was evermore favored by the Gods, that were able to do much for all.

Those rare Counsels should be exposed in the houses of Kings and all puplick
places to the view of men, to be known of all in their respective dignitys
and callings: and it would be a pious and noble action, if our gracious
souveraigne would be pleased to consider seriously with himself, how far
these just and Laudable Counsels have been regarded during the time of his
reign, especially in conferring of estates and lands from one part of his
subjects, to another part of them contrary to all due course of Law, and
without hearing of the partys oppressed, which has been procured to be done by
the undue information, and perswation of certain of his Councellers, and
Ministers of State, and chiefly of the Chancellor the Earl of Clarindon.

If his Majesty shall do this grace, and justice to his Catholic subjects of
Ireland, thousands of Widow's and Orphans will be eased and relieved, who now
sit down in great poverty, Lamenting extremely their Lands, Houses and all
they had wrongfully taken from them, and this day possessed and enjoyed by
those invaders.

God binds all Kings, and Judges by this commandment: Levit. cap. 19.
Thou shall not do that which is unjust nor Judge uniustly. Consider not the
person of a poor man, neither honor thou the countenance of him that is
mighty. Judge justly to thy Neighbor. God also forbids to give away one
subjects bread to another; reason, virtue, and the laws of God, Nature and
Nations are the rules that ought to guide all Princes and Magistrates in the
government of the people under them. Did not God himself complain of Evell
Judges in this Kind.

How is the faithful City, full of Judgment, become an harlott? Justice has
dwelled in it, Isa. Cap. ^.
but now man-killers. The Princes are unfaithful, Companions of thieves* al
love gifts, follow rewards. They Judge not for the pupil: and the widows
cause goes not in to them. And again our Lord says. Ierem. Cap. 6.
They are made gross and fatt: and have tranegressed my words most wickedly.
The cause of the widow they have not Judged; the cause of the pupil they have
not directed, and the Judgment of the Poor they have not Judged. Shall I not
vissite upon these things, says our Lord? or upon such a Nation shall not my
soul take revenge? Certainly it is against Gods just Judgment to omit such
things, and crimes unpunished. There are thousands of distressed Catholic
Pupils, and wedowes (his Majesty cannot choose but know it) that have not got
Justice; whose cause and complaint had noe Entrance into his Courts; they
cried out for Justice, and were not heard, they Cried for mercy, and found it
not; and such as live of those oppressed souls are still crying to heaven, and
the King for remedy; Poor desolate and dejected, they are waiting at the door
of the Kings palace and noe regard is had of their tears, prayres, and
petitions.

We are indeed become the reproach of all Nations round about us, by the craft
and iniquity of States men, that have poisoned the Fountain of Justice, It is
said of some of those that their vices have far exceeded their virtues, and
that in all their proccedings against our Nation, there was found in them noe
truth, noe integrity, noe Religion, noe shame; but an insatiable covetousness,
and a flameing ambition of making themselves great and powerful: and are not
such men say you able to poysen the Fountain of Justice (and mercy toe) in a
Kingdom.

This sore oppression, and our necessitys every day growing greater, forces us
to implore Justice and mercy, and to mind the King of what the Apostle says
to a King. Ad Rom Cap. 13.
Non enim sine causa gladium portat. If the Law of God will allow of so many
thousands of innocents to be destroyed, is a maxim, that touches much his
Royal Wisdom, and to be distroy'd and sacrificed to augment the estates of
men, that were great and rich enough before: can Justice suffer this? can the
merciful breast of a Clement King endure to see so many sad spectacles of
woes, and miserys without all relief? will not God at long running look down,
and examine these cruel proceedings? It has been a principal care, and study
of some statesmen near the King, to oppress and overthrow the Catholics of
Ireland, and at the same time to persuade his Majesty, that we ought to be
destroyed by Justice and Law.

Their Malice they have evidenced in their language, and viperous writings.
Of this stuff you have enough in the Earl of Orerys answer to Peter Welsh his
letter to the then Marquis, now Duke of Ormond desiring ajust and merciful
regard of the Reman Catholics of Ireland: what could be more rational then
such a demand? yet Orery must quarrel with the contents of said letter, and
beleh out poison against the whole* Nation and their Religion. To this answer
P. W. replied and solidly confuted Orery: let the indifferent Reader after
deliberation Judge of which side truth, sollid reason, and learning is in the
writings of both.

It vexed Orery above all measure that P. W. advanced these two propositions.
1. That the worst of the Irish Papists were no Regicids, 2. That the Irish
Papists fought against such men, when England, Scotland, and the Protestants of
Ireland deserted the Royal cause.

To the first Orery makes this pitiful answer. That the Irish Papists are no
Regicids; let it be considered, that the Doctrine of Regicids is common in
Romish Schools, and the practice in their courts. This is a false Calamny,
tell us Orery in what Romish University or School is this Doctrine Common? in
what Catholic Court is this practice? you can not tell us, and therefore you
are convinced of Calumniating Catholic Schools, and Courts, which is no
creditt for you.

In the mean time we demand Orery in what School was the Doctrine had, by
which Crumwell and the rabble of blooddy Rebels murdered the good King
Charles the first, in the School of Geneve or Rome? Speak freely your mind,
and tell us on what side were you when the King was murdered, of Crumwells
party or the Kings? of Crumwells party you were then, and had you been then in
London likely (this is the opinion of many) you had been a high man in that
blooddy jury; and after that Kings death noe man desired more (as was generally
spoken of you) to King Crumwell, and unKing our present sovereign then you.

To P. W. his second proposition you answer thus. That to touch the annoynting,
is virtually to touch the anointed, take away the regalia, and in effect you
take away the King. Orery all this is true, but what Illation make you of this?
who I pray are those that touched the annoyntings, and the anointed, the
Catholics of Ireland; or Cromwells party? (whose faithful Ianniser you have
been.) The annoyntings you have touched formally, all the Regalia, the Kings
Cittys, Towns, Forts, Militia, and for addition to your treason you made open
war against the Crown and King, (it was Crumwell and you all touched then
the anointed virtually) and here you stayed not, but touched the anointed
formally, when you put him to death by an unheard and most blooddy solemnity,
and as it were by Justice or course of law, an asacinate, that has
contaminated the glory of the English Nation, though the best and most of the
Peers and good people of England abhorred it. Your answer to this second
proposition you conclude thus. Had the Devil had leave to touch Jobs person,
he would not have spared him, when he touched all that was his. You say right
Orery; but what say you to this; that you and your Companions after touching
all that was the Kings, have touched his sacred person, and Barbarously killed
him. See and reckon among your selves, what Kind of Devils you were then, and
if you have not gone a stepp farther against your own King, then the Devil did
against Job.

Orery you might take us for men of short memory, if we should forgett, how
you by a way of rallery said of 54. Catholic Gentlemen Nominees, that were to
be restored, (and made account they should be so) to their chief houses, and
2000. Akers of ground, that it was intended by the act, they should be only
Nominees, Nomine restorable, but not re. You have played the Prophett Orery
(though you spoke in a leering way) for as yet none of them have been restored,
(as we are informed) nor likely shall; yett at that time you abused the Kings
goodness and credulity, assuring his Majesty, there was a sufficient stock of
reprisalls to satisfy all.

After taking some pains, in reading over the hott (papering) contention
between the Earl of Orery, and Father Peter Welsh Friar Minor Lector of
Divinity, I found Orery's answer to P. W. his letter to the then Marquis now
Duke of Ormond, to be an Eloquent, Pollished, Elaborated piece, but full of
Cavills, artifice, fallacies, untruths, and sophistry; all his study and pains
tend to render the Catholics of Ireland odious, and infamous, and their peace
of 1648. void: (Rem non bonam facis Orere, ultra vires tuas est negotium) he
shows in his writings a bitter soul, and a great pride and presumption, (I
owe not so much to his degree as to spare telling him truth, nor want I
confidence to defend truth, and my Country, against a person of higher quality
then he is.) Never came in my way an Author, that writes of a whole Nation,
and their Religion, less Christianly, less nobly, and less truly; and for his
pains he is worthy of the praise S. Angustin gives to such aman, as this:
Ingenium in malo venenum in auro.

Upon a Bull of Vrbanus 8. to the confederate Catholics of Ireland Anno 1643.
he makes a mocking malicious coment. This Bull imports noe more then an
exhortation to the Catholics to free themselves from the oppressions, and
grivous Injuries, their fellow subjects the Protestants did them, who had
designed to pull them up root and bransh, (as was evidently made appear) he
also praised the Catholics for indevouring to defend themselves, and their
Religion, and gave them Indulgences in so just and good a quarrel; his
Holliness speaks not a word in all against the King, nor obedience due to the
King; Richard Belings esquire Agent to that Pope from the confederate
Catholics has atested, that his Holliness commanded him to tell his Children
the Catholic Confederats, that he would have them in defending themselves,
and Religion, to continue constantly obedient to their King, and after his
Holliness sent an excellent and pious letter to the suprem Council of the
confederate Catholics, of which I shall speak more hierafter. Will not the
world rather believe his Holliness own Letters, and the Messenger we sent
him, in declaring his sense in the aforsaid Bull, then Orery the Popes enemy?
What I pray is contained in that Bull, that an honest man can reprehend? would
Orery have the Pope be so madd, as to forbid his Children to defend themselves
and Religion against him, and his Companions?

Good God how this man does abuse this Popes pious and good meaning expressed
in foresaid Bull, which Orery tells the world was a Cherishing of the
Catholics in Rebellion, as if our taking up arms for our necessary defense of
lives, and Religion against the Protestants our fellow subjects could have been
a rebellion, as he would feign persuade his reader, and that the Popes
aforsaid Bull was a Cherishing of the Catholics in a Rebellion: to which
purpose he speaks thus. If the Popes power over the Irish be so great, their
obedience to the King must be little: as if the Religion of the Catholics had
an inconsistency with their duty and obedience to the King, which is most
false. The Popes power over the people is in spiritualibus; the Kings power in
temporalibus; and those powers do well agree (as is evidently known over all
the world) in the power of Catholic Princes over their subjects, and in the
Popes power over the same people; those powers, and Juridictions in Catholic
times in England did not Clash, nor do they now in their nature, the
Catholic people paying their duty to both; it is true the Luminare Majus (the
Pope) Catholics venerate more, then Luminare minus (the King) because Luminare
Majus has the greater light and influence; yet they do not therefore omit to
pay due veneration to the King. Orery brings noe proof, or sound argument, to
prove what he assumed, (that the Pope's Bull was sent for Cherishing a
Rebellion,) but his own authority, which with us has little creditt, and will
so with any, that shall know his ways and dealings.

I pray Orery to make this reflection, whether there have ever been in the
world more execrable and blooddy Rebels then himself and Companions* who had
noe dependence upon the Pope, but quite contemned his authority, and his person
hated. He will not (I hope) say the Pope Cheris'd their Rebellion.

The man has much strained his brains in impugning the mentioned Bull; and as
if he had done a great bussiness, says thus of the Irish Catholics. If they
succeed, heaven and Ireland is theirs; if they succeed not, heaven is theirs.
Orery by the quarrel, we intended to hold what of Ireland was ours, against
invaders; who can blame us for this? and fighting for Religion, we had a good
claim to heaven; and though we succeeded not in fighting, our claim to
heaven is still good by our faith and good works; this claim all our Enemies,
with the Protestant Parlaments of England, and Ireland are not able to take
from us. Orery and all of his band, and Combination has dealt with us as the
Divill did with Job; the Divill touched all that was Job's, except his life;
Orery and his people have touched all that was ours except our souls, which
we hope in his Devine mercy God will preserve for his own Worship and glory,
so as we have still title to say, heaven is ours: but he and his cannot say
for themselves, heaven is ours, until they shall change, their Religion into
a true faith, do good worcks, and restore what they have uniustly taken from
us.

I will here set down a few of Orerys propossitions, let the reader after
perusing them, Judge of them.

In his auswere to P. W. his Letter to the Marquis of Ormond he calls the
Irish Nation a beast, the Country a very pesthouse, and the Religion of the
Catholics something that pinns them upon the sleeve of the Pope. Was ever such
a diffinition given of Religion? Ad Hebr. cap. 11.
S. Paul defines faith thus. Est fides sperendarum substantia rerum, argumentum
non apparentium. The Apostle speaks nothing here of pinning, or of the Popes
sleeve. Orery this kind of scoffing rallery in holy things is ignoble, and
better becoming Comedians then Counselors. We owe the Pope and his sacred
Dignity due obedience, which we will with Gods blessing Religiously pay all
our lives, fremant, frendeant, rumpantur invidia Oreri and mill impij
nugatores; and this obedience did never take away, obedience due to our King,
nor ever will. Who but a beast would call a noble and ancient Nation a beaest?
sum will tell him he kicks against the whole Nation, because he is a beast,
highly pampered, and fed with honors, lands, and Riches. Did ever any call the
fair Country of Ireland a Pesthouse but this man? why came so many poor
indigint men out of England this age into this Pesthouse to make their
fortunes? why came his Father thither (likely he has herd, in what state, and
plight his Father then was) he found himself very well for many years in
this Pesthouse.

In his answer to P. W. he speaks these Godly words. Let it not seem strange
or hard, at least to P. W. and his Countrymen, if a continued Series of
Covenant-breaches, rapines, Murders, Massacres, Crueltys, perfidies, treasons,
and Rebellions, exercised against the Crown, and Protestant Religion, raise
jealousies in the hearts of all Judicious Protestants.

Is not this a pious gloss of a Geneua Presbiterian upon a wicked theme? does
not he show the spleen, and rancor of a cankered heart, in this high tone, and
storm of Language against a whole Catholic Nation? Orery it is a great
Callumnie, that the body of the confederat Catholics exercised, Rapins,
Murders and those other abominations, or acted any thing against King and
Crown. To the contrary in their oath of association you will find an express
branch of defending the Crown, King, and Royal Family. We are not
accountable for what Murders, some of the common people at the first rising in
the North, committed against poor Protestants, with the taking away of their
cattle and goods; which we pitied with all our hearts: the body of the
Catholics were not, as yet com into the quarrel (but awhile after were forced
to take Arms to avoid their own Destruction which could not be otherwise
avoided) and since taking Arms they have done all a long what the laws of a
just war allowed. But when you have your self commanded a part of the
Parlaments Rebellious Army have you contained your common soldiers from
Murdering, and Robbing the innocent common people? we found the contrary by
experience.

Orery Pagina 28. of his answer to P. W. plays the Hypocrite with a great show
of holiness. However (says he) the once seduced Protestants of Ireland are
willing to take shame to themselves, and give glory to God in confessing their
guilt such, (though not by causing, yet by complying wtth the late usurpation,
though to a good end) that they redily acknowledge, they owe their lives and
estates to his Majesty's grace and Indulgence. This is humble and dutiful
language, and such as should be spoken to a King, but all is spoken to a King
coming home with triumph, and entering, into Jerusalem with Osanna in excelsis,
Benedictus qui venit in Nomine Domine: But to this Kings Father, a King and the
Fountain of Justice, as well as the Royal Son, sorely afflicted, what were
the Salutations, and cry's of Orerys Companions? Toll, toll, Crucifige: some
men have wit to change their dialect of speaking according to the change of
times, and fortune, Orery is said to be one of these.

I pray you hear the scurrill impudency of this people in time of their
Rebellion, sending in a derisory manner Huae and cry after his Majesty, when
they could not light on his Royal person.

If any man can bring any tale, or tidings of a wilful King, In Merc.
Britanicus.
who had gone a stray these four years from his Parliament, with a guilty
Conscience, bloody hands, a heart full of brooken vows, and protestations: if
these marcks be not sufficient, there is another in the Bos in Lingua.
Mouth, for bid him speak and you will soon know him: then give notice to
Britanicus, and you shall be well paid for your pains. God save the Parliament.
Who may not doubt but these kind of men are those crept in unawarrs, who (as
the Apostle Jude tells us) despise dominion, Iudae Epist.
and speak evil of dignities: did not the same Apostle foretell, that there
should be such mockers in the last time, who should walk after their own
ungodly Lusts.

I hope Orery will not say the great Rebels, the Irish Catholics (such he
would have them be) did ever revile afflicted Majesty in such a scoffing way:
truly they did not, but at all times, and upon all occations in their
Pulpitts, their congregrations, and public assemblyes they spoke of the King
with all veneration, and Compassion.

Now his Majesty coming home in prosperity, those mockers of his Father are all
become purified Musaellmans and speak nothing but Magnalia of the King. For all
this, there are thousands of good true Protestants, Royallists in England that
still fear, those new penitents, for abusing Royal Authority (or at least
faigne themselves so to be) would be glad to hear once more that millitary
word as you were, and if this shall com about, the King will not have so
dutiful language from them.

That Orery says he and other Protestants complied with the usurpation to a
good end, is a strange expression, he needs explain himself. They invaded
all the regalia, that is, they took away the Kings Navy, Forts, Towns,
Militia, and in the end they Murdered the King himself. Does Orery call this
a good end of complying with the usurpation.

The truth is, Orery and his Companions in Ireland came home, when they could
noe longer stand of; the King may thank General Muncks ingenious stratagem for
their coming in, their intention and ways were well known. Now the Kings
work being don by Munck with all wished success (so as those in Ireland had
noe power to hinder it) then Orery and the rest thought fit to cry out let the
King live; and as he and his trusty comrades syding with the usurpation, had
government and places of trust and profitt (they then all danced to Crumwells
pype) so now they court the King returning home, and show themselves great
penitents, taking shame to themselves of their guilt, and giving Glory to God.
Is not this a great glory to God, to confess a rebellion, they could noe more
deny, then we can deny its day when the Son is shining and scorching the
earth. That which much troubles Orery, is, that the Irish Catholics do not
acknowledge themselves guilty of a rebellion with him, and give glory to God
that way, but they being, not guilty of such rebellion and treason against the
Crown answer with S. Augustine, Praestat magis innocentem esse quam
poenitentem.

Orery engaged (as above was said) in a horrid rebellion, if he could make the
Catholics confess themselves to have been Rebels, if this he could compass,
he would indeed triumph, and say in a leering way: behold the Irish Catholics
Confess they have been rebels as well as we; but we have obtained pardon,
which was denied them, and have got their estates and lands to boot; let them
now walk through out the world like poor and naked rebels.

But of our side some will say, that at the time Orery and his people had
pardon, and the Catholics not: Non erat Rex Jupiter omnibus idem. And that his
Majesty's censure in the case between us was that the Poet speaks of. Dat
veniam coruis, vexai censura columbas. Certainly his Majesty, in our, and your
case, Orery, has not walked according to Plato his excellent rule: Plato legum
2. lib.
Non infaelix, sed malus semper castigandus est, ut fiat melior. Not the
unlucky, but the wicked man, is allways to be Chastysed, that he may be
amended. The Royal Judgment went quite another way, for the unfortunate Irish
Catholics were severly punished, and the wicked Crumwelian people have bin
pardoned, and rewarded with the estates of the Irish Catholics. Kingdoms a
broad can hardly believe matters were so carried. Likely these people are now
contented, having their hearts desire in this world, so as they may say
without fear Ireland is ours. But their memory will perish, and themselves,
or their posterity will be distroyd by as wicked men as themselves that
distroy'd us. Solomon said well: Prove. cap. 10.
The memory of the just is with praises: and the name of the Impious shall
rott. I will give Orery and his frinds a good counsel out of the wise man*
Eccles. cap. 21.
Stuppa collecta Synagoga potententium, and consumatio illorum flamma ignis.
The Sinagog of sinners is as tow gathered together, and their consummation a
flame of fire.

This man for wounding Catholics makes arrows of all wood, and frequently
brings out this expression of the King against them. We do extremely detest
the odious Rebellion, which the recusants of Ireland have without ground or
color, raised against us, our Crown, and Dignity. He further says: These
words of the King were not spoken in a corner but under the great seal, and
were worthy to be written with a beam of the son. All this is but an
exaggeration to render us more odious. But will Orery tell us, with what Beam
would he have the blooddy Rebellion of Crumwell, of himself and the rest
written? if there be any brighter then that of the son we are to seek out
for it.

Orery knows well there is noe fouler stain, (except Heresy which is a
spiritual Rebellion) then that of Rebellion, and therefore leaves noe stone
unmou'd to make our war such: the name is execrable and ignominious, and the
marks of reproach inflicted upon Rebels, are full of disgrace. The Civilians
speak much of them, as thus.

Rebellis, incurrit, ipso jure paenam mortis.

Rebellis, perdit ipso jure dominium bonorum

Rebellis, potest a quolibet impune occidi.

Rebelli, nec jus reddi debet.

Rebels, subditi, tanquam piratae and latrones tractari solebant.

Rebellium domus solo aequari debent and sale spargi.

Rebellium legati possunt occidi.

Rebels perdunt privilegia, and pro mortuis habentur, non habent Civitatum
beneficia, non jus azili, neque servanda est eijs fides.

Rebels non debent in Iudicium citari, sed celeri vindicta puniri; and
Rebellionis factum fufficit absque sententia declaratoria.

Seeing Rebels are so odious and execrable persons, Orery is to make in this
place a dubble reflection; the first, how infamous and wicked men they have
been, whose guilt was a confessed Rebellion; secondly they are for ever to
praise the Kings Clemency, who pardoned so wicked a crime.

The Judgment of Civilians, of Rebels being as above specifyed noe greater
injury can be done to the Irish Catholics, who have been still Loyal to the
King, then to tell the world, their just war was a Rebellion.

However it imports not much, that our enemies call us so, for an Enemies
testimony against another Enemy, is of small force: my possitive denial of
what he affirms is a Justification good enough; if he brings not against
me, Tabulas, testes and great Evidences, he does nothing.

My present subject of writing is not to Justify the Irish war of 1641.
which, I hear, is already don by a learned penn; yet something I will say for
confuting Orery's ill affected Judgment of us and our quarrel.

That a defenfive war can be raised without the consent and Authority of any
Prince is a Common Doctrine of Divines, Canonistes, and Civilians, and that it
may somtymes extend it self in effect to the nature of an offensive war.
This Doctrine is warranted by the Law of Nature, (a more binding law then are
the possitive law's of men, (which if repugne to that of nature are noe law'
s;) for by this law, aman can defend himself against violence with out
recurring to the Prince. The Law of God is also for the like defense. Exodus
cap. 22.
Si effringens vir domum sive effodiens fuerit inventus, and accepto vulnere
mortutus fuerit, percussor non erit reus sanguinis. If the tbiefe be found
breaking up the house or undermining, and receiving a wound dye, the stricker
shall not be guilty of blood. By this divine precept, as also by the Law of
Nature, it is clear and evident a private man may kill another in defense of
his household goods. S. To. 2a. 2ae. q. 6. A. 7.
Sed multo magis (says S. Thomas) Licitum est defendere propriam vitam, quam
propriam domum. That is to say' it is much more lawful for aman to defend his
life then his house. Ergo if aman kills another in defense of his own life,
he shall not be guilty of Murder: which case is to be understood, that he
intends not to kill the other man but in defense of his own life; and though
some hold; the man defending himself may not intend the killing of that other
man, but only the preservation of his own life, yet the more Common opinion
is, he can, and any other thing else that tends, to the preservation of his
life.

The sacred Canons also subscribe to this Doctrine in this Dialect. De grafys
ex cap. significasti, desce: 36. M. 35,
Sine principis authoritate per aliquod particulare bellum Licitum est alicui
injuriam repelere. That is: It is lawful without the authority of the Prince,
for any man by a particular war to repel injuries. If you question by what
Authority is such a war legitimated, answer is given out of the Cannons.
Authoritate Iuris: which warranteth all men to prosecute their right, and
defend themselves; In 2a. 2ae. q. 40. and q. 64. and the interpriters of holy
writ in Romans 13.
see the Divines.

By the Laws of the Kingdom of Ireland, if a private man kills another se
defendendo, he is quitt, because the action is judged lawful, and yet to
Legitemat such an act the Princes Authority interuenes not, the reason is
evident, because: Id licitum est jure naturali, Divino, and Civili, and
Canonico: by the Law of Nature, Devine, Civil, and Cannon, it is lawful by
force, to repel force. 3a. part. lib. 2. cap, 1.
Azor.

It is here to be observed that this inculpable defense has so large an
extent, that it reaches to the defense not only of every private man's life, but
also of his goods, Chastity, honor, if such things can not be otherways
preserved. In 2a. 2ae. q. 64. a 7.
So S. Thomas. Now if such defense is lawful for private men, how much more
for a Common wealth or Nation? Bonum enim commune excellentius, universalius ac
subende Divinius est. In 2a. 2ae. q. 40. a 1. dub: 2. con. 1.
Bannez. For that a Common good is more exellent, more universal, and somtymes
more Devine then a private good. And if it be lawful to wage war upon such
inferior motives, as is the preservation, or recovery of temporal goods,
honor and the like, how much more lawful is it to manage war upon that
supreme motive of defending, and preserving, the Catholic faith, without which
there is noe Salvation.

This was the Judgment the pious and valiant Machabees made of the war they
undertook, and nobly persued for their Religion and Laws, which they preferred
before their wives and Children, and all temporal things most dear unto
them. Mac. l. 2. cap. 15.
The Machabees being exhorted with the words of Judas exceeding good, etc. they
resolved to fight and to encounter manfully: because the holy City, and the
Temple were in-danger. For there was less care for their wives, and Children,
and also for their Brethren, and Kindsmen: but the greatest and principal
fear was for the Holiness of the Temple.

How far a defensive war may extend, the Schoolmen tell us, and say that by
accident, it may be somtyms lawful for the Common wealth to do, and offer all
such damages and Evil, as may be done and offered in a just offensive war.
Aliqnando (says Bannez) contingere potest, 2a. 2ae. q. 40. a. 1. d. 10, con. 1.
ut liceat illis, infer hostibus omnia illa mala, que possunt in bello justo
aggresivo. It may happen somtymes, to be lawful for those ingaded in a
defensive war, to do all Evils and Damages which can be offered or don in a
just offensive war. Which happens when the agressors are public Enemies, and
when there is noe recourse to the Prince, and that those defending themselves
can noe otherwise avoid the violence offered by the Assailants.

This was truly the case of the confederate Catholics as will clearly appear
to such as will be pleased to examine it. Moreover the case then stood so with
his Majesty that he was not able to redress the injuries don us, nor did our
Enemies then obey his commands, (I mean a little after the war begunn) but the
Parliament, that fell from the King.

For the better and clearer understanding the nature of a defenfive war, those
therein engaged hold not themselves passively, but actively, so do the words
repel or beat back signify: if the end it be lawful, then are the necessary
means to compass that end also lawful: if the defense of on's self be
lawful, then is the killing of the invader (without which the life of the
invaded cannot be preserved) Lawful, so as to kill is involued in the act of
defense, and the lawfullness of the one inferrs the lawfullness of the other..
ad L Aquill: L scientiam
Si vis (says the civil Law) fiat personae, tunc licitum est se defend^re,
and defendendo percutere, imo etiam occidere, si aliter non potest quis evadere
manus ejus.. qui cum aliter.
If violence is don to a person, it is then lawfnll for him to defend himself,
and defending himself to strick, and also to kill, if he cannot otherwise
escape the hands, of his Enemies. Thus stood the case with the Irish Catholics,
that they must have killed, or have been killed. Yea so great is the Justice
of a defensive war, that devines teach, it is lawful for the Son to defend
himself against his Father, the wife against her husband, the servant against
his Master, the subjest against his Superior, Instit: Moral: P. 3. l. 3. q. 6.
and the vassal against his Prince or King. So Azor: Nempe, Licitum esse
Filio contra Patrem, uxori contra Maritum, subdito contra Superiorem, vassallo
contra Principem sive Regem se desendere. If it be lawful for the Subject or
vassal in a just cause to defend himself against the Prince, it must be
lawful to defend himself against his fellow subject,

Here I meet with an objection in which our adversarys put great force. The
Irish Catholics (say they) were the first aggressors. The objection is easily
answered, as thus. It is a Common Doctrine of the Devines, that it is lawful to
prevent an Evil that can not be otherways avoided then by preventing it, E. G.
I see you take your pistol in your hand cocking it to shoot at me, in that
case it is lawful for me to discharge my pistol and kill you, otherwise I
should be killed by you: will any law punish me for killing you so, would the
Law of God or nature have me stay my hand until I am killed by you. Tannerus
a good Devine teaches so. Licitum est etiam praevinire injustum aggressorem,
si alia via commodae defensiones non supetat, and is jam aliqualiter est in
culpae, sive in proposito aggressionis injustae versetur. It is lawful to
prevent an unjust invader, if there is noe other way of defense, and that
astually the invavader is in fault or in a purpose of an unjust invation. q. 6.
n. 7. de Iustitia and Iure.
Becanus does declare (examining this question) an aliquando liceat invasorem
praevenire and illum occidere antequam nos actu invadat? he answers. Licere in
his casibus, primo, si accedat ad invadendum, nec evadere possum, nisi illum
preveniam: Secuudo, si nondum accedat, tamen instructus sit ad invadendum, nec
possum effugere nisi priveniam. Whether somtyms it is lawful for us to prevent
the invader, and kill him, before he actually invad's us? he answers that it
is, in these cases: first if he coms to invade me, and that I cannot escape
but by preventing; secondly if he does not as yet invade me, but is ready and
prepared for that invation, and that I cannot avoid him but by preventing: in
this case if I kill him I do it me defendendo, and consequently (though I
struck first) I am the defender, and he the aggressor. Sotus Navar Corduba
Covar: and many houlds this Doctrine, and Navar gives this example, of a Married
man who has a dagger under his pillow, to kill his wife withal, which she
discovering and knowing may prevent by killing her husband, if there is noe
other remedy; the reason is, though actually he has not done the execution,
however he is in a radiness to perform it, for which end he kept her so
boulted up, and environed, as she cannot otherwise escape.

This was truly the case of the confederate Catholics at the beginning of the
war, they were boulted up in an Island, as that woeman in the Chamber; there
was noe door open for them, then by preventing the Presbiterians blooddy
design; if this they had not done, there had been an end of them all.

Richard Bealings Esquire to Vrbanus 8s; from the body of the Irish Catholics,
and the Lord Bishop of Fernes, and Sir Nicholas Pluncket sent to Innocentius X.
did not tell those Popes they came from a body of Rebels, but from a people
Catholic the King of England's Subjects, and for such they were respected, and
vissited by the greatest Princes, and Cardinals in the City: and four of the
gravest Cardinaells were deputed by Pope Innocentius to hear the two last, as
Caponi, Spada, Carassa, and Pansirolli Cardinal Secretari, and the afforsaid
Bishop and noble Gentlemen, were esteemed over all the City for good
Catholics, good Subjects, and able men; and with other instructions received
commands from their Holliness to the people of Ireland, to continue constant
in the Catholic Religion, and Loyalty to their King.

Thus much I thought fit to say by way of digression for Justifying our war
that it was noe Rebellion, and that this Argument of Orery, the King called the
war of the Irish Catholics a Rebellion, ergo it is a Rebellion does not hold;

It is true, it is a received maxim, that the King can wrong noe man. The
reason is, because the King is the Fountain of Justice, and must be supposed
not to have a will to wrong or offend any of his people. But there is noe maxim
that the King may not be informed by Evil men or Counsels, to the Destruction
of his People, which has been often done by statesmen, and Counselors, who
seek after their own interest more then the preservation of the people, which
is and ought to be the Kings principal care: in this kind the Lord Justices in
Ireland, Persons and Burlase with a malignant part of the Kings Counselors in
the year 1641. informed his Majesty that the Catholics of Ireland without
discrimination had entered into a Rebellion, when only some discontented men
began a Revolution in the North, and those (as was generally spoken) men of
small estates, and broken fortunes, the Lords and Gentlemen of the other three
Provinces, and all the Catholic towns, and Corporations having not taken
arms, until forced thereunto for the necessary defense of their estates, and
Religion, (as above has been said.) I do not here accuse, or excuse the
first rising in the North, but I confidently affirm, the nobles, and Catholic
Gentlemen in the other three Provinces (and some of those in the North to, that
did not join with the first Rising in that Province) and all the Catholic
Towns, and Corporations, lived in so happy a state and so opulent and rich,
that they would never abett a Revolution for gaining other men's estates; it is
also well known, that all those have bin still faithful to the Crown, and
their Fathers before them, as was well tried in the wars of Desmon, Tyron,
and other smaller Revolutions. Thus it happend, that his Majesty grounded his
opinion upon the information of foresaid Parsons Bnrlays, and a mallignant part
of the Counsel, corrupt men, (who after fell from the King and adhered to the
Kings Enemies, the Rebellious Parliament.) Those represented the body of the
Irish Catholic Rebels; and the King deceived, and deluded by this
information, called us Rebels, and our just war a Rebellion, and to this day
we were not heard to speak for our selves, and being unheard* ought to be
reputed innocent. It is to be observed, that the first flame of the rising in
the Noth, had been soon quenched, had Parsons and those of the Council given
a Commission to the Marquis Of Ormond now Duke, to raise five thousand men, as
he demanded for that effect, with him had gone alonge, the Catholic Nobility
and Gentlemen, and so they had made a speedy work of it: But the plott of
those Crooked Ministers of state was to involue all the Catholics in the
Bussiness, and there by to find a Cullor of confiscating their estates.

Orery stays not here, but puffed up with his great Fortune and a gall in Pupe
tells the world in a supersilious manner. That the birds of the air; noe, nor
the flies contributed less to his Majestys restoration, then the Roman
Catholics in Ireland. Orery this is to much, this great contempt of the
Catholics, coms from a great pride in you, and what you say is very false, for
the hearty prayres of the Catholics (though with steel they could contribute
nothing, being then unarmed, and closed up in prisons by you and your
Companions,) have more contributed to the Kings restoration then birds and
fly's that want reason could.

Are we bound to suffer this and other great contumiles from a man so lowly
descended, as to tell us, the whole Nation is a beast, our Country a
Pesthouse, and our Religion something that pinns us upon the Popes sleeve?
Shall we endure all this from a man that has bin esteemed one of Crumwells
spies, (to be a spy, is an infamous office.) Orery if you are an Englishman (as
you would have your self to be, and likewise the Duke of Ormond,) it is true
the Duke was born in England, and of an English Lady (some say, had he bin born
in Ireland, he had been kinder to the Nation and favored them more then he
did upon the last settlement) but his Forefathers have all of them been borne
in Ireland about four hundred and sixty years, and the house had the Creation
of Earl in King Edward the third's time anno Domini 1332. Orery you cannot say
so much for your self in the rank of Nobility but be what you will, English
or Irish, I will tell you what an English Gentlemen writes of you, (I have my
self seen the man) disguised under the name of William Allen, in a most
excellent piece, styled killing is noe Murder, speaking therein of the
quality's of a tyrant applying all to Crumwell, of the fifth quality he speaks
thus. In all places they have their spies, and delators, that is, they have
Fleetwoods; their Broughalls, their S. John's, (besides innumerable small
spies) to appear discontented, and not to side with them; that under that
guise, they may get trust, and make discoverys, Orery in Crumwells time was
Lord Broughalls.

This noble man has used still against us, his sword and penn; but the latter
has made the deeper wound, if men creditt his writings: cannot he live
contented with a good patrimony, his Father provided for him, and agreat lump
of Catholics lands the King conferred upon him, at once with the place of Lord
President of the fair and goodly Province of Munster (a dignity his Fathers
Child did little think to obtain, and a reward his perfidy against the Crown
did not meritt) cannot all these great Honors, Estates, and Riches satisfy the
man, unless he see's innocent Maerdochaeus hanged on a high gibbet? The
goodness of God (we hope) will not allow, what he desires, the exterpation of
a Nation.

Noble minds ordinarily esteem the place where they, or their parents have
gained agreat Fortune and Settlement: Orery's Father (it is well known) from a
lowstate came to one of the greatest Estates in the three Kingdoms, he was
neither Sword-man, nor Gown-man, nor favoritt in Court, and yet purchased a
prodigious estate, came to the Dignity of an Earl, High treasurer, of the
Kingdom of Ireland, marched two of his Daughters, one to great Geraldin Earl of
Killdare (first Earl of Ireland,) another to the Lord Barry Viscount of
Barremore; he used for his Motto in this his great prosperity. Gods providence
is my in heritance, a Christian, and modest one, which for all that signified
he had nothing left him by his parents. These things I utter not by way of
reproach, for we are all the Children of Adam, but to mind Orery a little of
the low and small nest, in which his Father was hatched, that he should not
so far forgett himself, as to contemn and trample under foot a whole
Nation, wherein are so many ancient and noble Familyes: and let him give me
leave to till him, it is agreat and an unwary Impertinency for guilty and
contaminated men to reproach the Innocent.

He that says much, or displeases others, must hear something will displease
himself, as also he that goes armed against many, expects many armed against
him. In time of usurpation those that commanded were very insolent; it was
then indeed men could say of England, what was said of Athens: that there only
small thieves were hanged, but the great ones were free, and condemned the
rest; we hope it is not now so in England: however Orery for one man has had
the good Fortune to escape in all times, and on all sides, and to have a good
post and place in Every government. It is commonly said, that against a
mischief, badd parents do to their Children, there is noe other cure then
patience, but Orery being noe Parent, but an Enemy to our Nation, is not to be
borne with, and it is more reasonable his own confusion should be his cure,
then our patience. The Catholics of Ireland, look upon him as a great beast
making a prey of all that is weaker, and realy he has so dealt with us,
wherefore we may deal with him in the same way according to our strength, and
if he is so strong and in court so much favored as we may not have him
cited to make answer, the court will give us leave to expose his virtues or
vices as we find them written by others. In what I have writ, I have but
done my duty, in strycking him that stryck's my Country, for as Tertulean says.
In hostem Patriae omnis homo miles est.

I will here take my leave of Count Orery, minding him of what P. W. in his
little book styled the Irish Colors foulded, printed at London Anno Domini
1662. in page 20. thereof he speaks of Orery to the Duke of Ormond as follows.

For indeed my Lord he appears to me all a long his writings, of the number
of those, who see heaven, and all the hopes of the other life, as
Mathematitians make us behold in a dark Chamber, what soever passes a broad,
through a little Crany, in such a manner, that all things we see, appear like
shaddows and landsckips turned topsceturvy, Verily, I take this Gentleman to be
abused so by himself. And that after he has stopped up all the windows and
accesses to heavenly Ray's, he has made a little hole for the Moon, and all
the blessings of the other life have seemed very slender to his distrustful
spirit: and that he has put on a Resolution to make a Fortune at what price
soever, and to build on earth like Caine, after he has almost renounced the
hopes of heaven. If Orery be such a man as P. W. discribes him; if he has not
a trembling in the head, as old Cain the Murderer had, he cannot Choose but
have a trembling and great heavenisse at the heart.

After ending with Orery I sinde a another Kind of snake in the grass latet
anguis in herba full of poison, this man conceals his name, wherefore I know not
(for he needed not fear to write any thing against the Catholics, when all
things runn against them.) Likely his fancy was to throw the stone, and hide
his hand. He writ at London Anno 1664. a Book full of vennime with this
title, Horae Subcesiva.In page 83. he affirms that Charles the second is not
obliged in the least by any Law of God or man, of war or Nations to keep any
one particle of the Irish Articles made or granted by King Charles his Father
in the year 1648. to this purpose he setts down formally these words in page
81. King Charles the second, May Iure Belli and gentium, and lege talionis,
without breatch of faith or Articles (not excepting those of 1648. so much
insisted on, and so mightily pleaded for by P. W. by that just Law (so often
used, and prescribed by God himself) take the lives, and fortunes of all
bloodd-thirsty Popish Rebels, and their confederats, and assotiats.M

This Godly man does not cite in what Code or Book this Law often used and
prescribed by God himself is to be had, nor can he, nor does he give any
other reason or proof for his assertion then his own Authority; which can be
of noe vallue with any pious man. I appeal to all the noblemen and the worthy
Protestant People of England if this is not rather the proposition of a
Murderer then of a Christian Gentleman, This man's Book (Hor^ Subcesivae) P. W.
did learnedly confute in an Appendix he added to his reply to Orerys answer,
and so confounded him, that he never writ word after in his own defense. I
remitt the Reader to what he shall find in said Appendix of this Matter, and
after reading all let him Judge as he shall find fitting and reasonable.

Can we forgit to list in the number of our Enemies the Earl of Clarendon
Chancellor of England, (he deserves to head the first rank of them) a man of
Ruin and Destruction, Out of the Narrative of the Earl of Clarindons
Settlement and Sale of Ireland
a Pest to Catholics, and Ireland. Was not this Clarendon, this blooddy and
covetous Statesmaen heard often to say with a fierce countenanc and passionat
tone, the Irish deserve to be exterpated, and then he would after his usual
manner com out with a great oath, and swear they shall be extirpated. Good God
what a heathnish Expression is this in the Mouth of a Christian Statesman, a
Chancellor of Engelland. (Is not a Christian King well Counseled in having
near him for chief Minister of State such a blooddy man void of all Justice
and mercy.) But did this Athist (so great an Enemy to Godliness can not be a
Christian) think that God, that has appointed an Angel for the Guard of Every
indivtduall person, would take noe care to preserve the body of an intyre
Nation, but let them all be destroyed to satisfy the mind and anger of a
blooddy man.

Clarendon was in this Bussiness like that Astronomer, or Philosopher, who
looked upon the stars, and fell into a well before his feet: he had then
designed in his own mind the ruin of the Catholics of Ireland, and very
soon after, he stole out of England, with a Guilty Conscience and Baggs of
Gold in great fear, and left behind him his stately buildings, places of
pleasure, great Riches, and the veneration of many that adored this man like an
Idol, (the glory of the man is gone away like smooke and his name rotten, and
hated in England) and flying into France, walked over some Provinces of that
Kingdom in trembling, like another Cain before any Settlement of himself.
Iustum O Domine est Iudicium tuum. And we are poor souls as yet living as
we can, and hopeing for Gods mercy.

I am here to advertise my Reader of an abominable ingagment agreed upon in
the time of usurpation against the Royal Family; the contents will teach you
how good frinds they were to the King that conceived this engagement. P. W.
has this oath page 74. of his reply to Orery's answer, and aptly terms it one
of the oaths taken by the Saints themselves the fautors of Crumwells Tyranny,
and the wellwishers of his Kings-ship. Which ruuneth thus.

I. A. B. do hereby declare that I renounce the pretended title of Charles
Stuart, and the whole line of late King James, and of every other person
pretending to the Government of the Nations of England, Scotland, and Ireland,
and the Dominions, and Territorys thereunto belonging, and that Iwill by the
grace and assistance of the Allmighty, be true and faithful to this Common
Wealth against any King, single Person, and House of Peers, and Every of them,
and here unto I subscribe my name. Can any oath be more horrid, or can any
written wickedness ascend higher? and consequently can any mercy be greater
then the pardon his Majesty has granted to the men that heartily took this oath?

This Ingagment was forced upon the Irish Catholics in so high a Nature, Out
of Clarendons Settleement and Sale of Ireland page 8.
that those who would not take it, were debarred not only from the benefitt of
law, but also exposed to an inevitable danger of death, the Soldiers of
Crumwells Army, being commanded by public Proclamation, to kill any man they
met on the highway, who carried not a Certificate about him of having taken
that ingagment: Commands which were Cruelly executed on silly Pesants, who out
of Ignorance, or want of care, having left their ticketts at home, were
Barbarously Murdered by the mercyless Soldiers. Make now a serious reflextion
upon said ingagment out of the same Author.

It is very remarkable, (says he) that they who devised this ingagment, who
heartily subscribed, and forced others to take it, shall not be questioned, or
held Criminal, and that those, who never saw it, before it was administrated
to them, who abbor'd it in their hearts, and were forced to sign it to avoid a
blooddy, and violent death, shall be declared nocents and an irecoverable
Sentence of Loosing their estates given against them, and their estates so
forfeted, to be confirmed on those very persons, who compelled the proprietors
to that forfeitur. Obstupescite Caeli super hoc and portae ejus desolamini
vehementer. I defy all the Annalls, and the Histories, of Tartars, Turcks,
Scithians, or of what People soever to produce so horrible an injustice as
this, or a more wicked, and Barbarous pranck of knavery, then those our Enemies
have contrived.

King Charles our Sovereign your Royal Authority in England maintains the
Peer in his splendour and Dignity, the Commoner in his birth right and liberty,
you protect the weak from the oppression of the mighty, secure the Nobility
from the insolence of the people, and by this Equal, and impartial Justice is
indifferrently distributed to all the inhabitants of that great and flourishing
Realm: And at the same time use is made of the same Royal Authority in your
Kingdom of Ireland, to condemn innocents, before they are heard; to destroy
so many hundred Widdow's and Orphans; to confirm so many unlawful usurped
possessions; to violate the public faith, to punish virtue, to countenance
vice, to hold loyalty a Crime, and treason worthy of reward.

These are verities not to be doubted of in our days, we feel them by sore
trial: but after-ages will hardly admit them, and it must be avery difficult
matter to persuade those now, that have not been eye-wittnesses, that the fact
ever happened.

Now things being carried in this nature, let your Majesty seriously consider,
of whom shall God take account of our Destruction; of those wicked statesmen
who abused your Authority; or of your Royal Person, for not bringing those men
(after our humble and public prayres and petitions to your Majesty for
redress) to the test and trial of Justice for having oppressed us.

Consider great King the prayer of King David to God.

O God give the Judgment to the King: Psalm. 71.


And the Justice to the Son of the King.

Why so King David?

To Judge (says David) thy people in Justice, and thy poor in Judgment.

The Royal Prophet here gives the reason, wherefore the power of Judging, and
Sword of Justice is given to a King: to wit, that he Judge the people in
Justice, and the Poor in Judgment. Which was not done; so complains, the
Widdow's and Orphans in Ireland perishing in poverty and famine, and the world
abroad is in amazement, that this was not done, Wonders (they say) were done
after his Majestys restoration, Rebels made honest men, and honest men made
Rebels by the Kings Royal pleasure, and all this brought about, by the
cunning and wickedness of certain Statsmen, whereby the King was cheated, and
betrayed, the innocent People ruined and impious Statsmen enricht and magnified.
so that thee. Poor Catholcck People have nothing left them, but to cry to
thee O Lord.

Tibi deretictus est pauper Orphano tu eris adjutor. Psalm. non^^.


Contere Brachium peccatoris and maligni.

To thee is the poor left, to the Orphan thou will be a helper.

Break the arm of the sinner and malignant.

Our Eyes and hearts O God are turned upon thee, seeing men have abandoned us; O
Lord when will the day come of our Happiness? when shall we with thankfullness
say to all the world.

Our Lord has heard the desire of the Poor, and Judged for the People, and
the humble.

Kings are more obliged to commiserat the calamity's of the afflicted rhen
private men, because they are the Fathers of the People: Job a holy Prince in
the land of Hus (some hold he was an absolute King) did this. Hear him speak
King Charles.

I was an eye to the blind, Job. cap. 29.
and a foot to the lame.

I was the Father of the Poor;

I brake the Jaws of the wicked man, and out of his teeth I took away the prey.

This is it the poor Catholics most need to have done for them, that the
Royal hand will break the jaws of wicked men, and take the prey out of their
teeth.

Job says further.

The ear hearing counted me blessed, for that I had delivered the poor man
crying out, and the people that had noe help.

The blessing sf him that was ready to perrish came upon me, and I comforted
the heart of the Widow.

There are thousands of these wedows and people crying out, comfort their
hearts for they are perrishing, and let it be done (as God would have it to be
done) by your Majesty, that the blessings of the poor may fale upon you as
they did upon Job, and all the blessings of heaven.

But why great King (give me pardon for speaking to you) why have we, your
Catholic subjects of Ireland been neglected, even to ruin and Destruction?
what did your Majesty see in us, that could render us in capable of the pardon
granted to the Rebels in general? if our rising in arms (which was against
our fellow subjects, for our own defense, and not against the Crown) has bin
Judged a Rebellion by your Royal Father and your self, I hope you hold us
far smaller Rebbels then those that made open war against the Crown and
your Majest'ys, and in fine Murdered your Father; why then are they pardoned,
and we not? but incase our Revolution has bin Judged a Rebellion (and in case
it had bine truly so) upon the place made and concluded Anno 1648. (The
Marquis of Ormond having bin your Royal Fathers Commissioner to that Effest.)
We had an act of Oblivion from your Father of blessed Memory for all that had
passed, and after confirmed by your Majesty: this Act of Oblivion has wyp't
away the Rebellion, ergo it can not rise, again in Judgment against us, nor
can we be punished for a Crime already forgiven: this being so, why are we
cast of? why left under a stain of Rebellion, the true Rebels being forgiven?
why being Innocent do we suffer this contumely? why are we stricken down as
dead men by your Royal Hand, Lands, Houses, Estates, and all we had, being
conferred on men, which have noe right to them, our Enemy's, and one time your
own: they pretend noe claim to our estates and livings, noe pack't,
stipulation or convieance: by your Majesty's pleasure only (that's their sole
title) they hold all, and we have lost all. By what Law are we thus treated,
and destroyed, by that of God, or Nature, or Nations? all done against us, is
against all those Laws, and against the Law of Englaend, to, a good Law, by
which noe man is to be deprived of his lands and goods, but by a due course of
Law, the benefitt of this Law was denied us.

Wither then shall we turn, what are we able to do for our selves: the
Father is not able to help the Child, nor the Child the Father, Mothers are
weeping over their little ones languishing in want and hunger.

If we are Innocent, (the Act of Oblivion has made us so, though we had bin
guilty before) why are we cast out of our Houses, despoyl'd of our Lands, and
Estates, that our Forefathers have possessed so many ages? If we have
committed any Crime or treason against the Crown, your Royal Father, or your
self, (that was not remitted) it were a greater mercy, to hasten us into the
other world, by a short and violent death, then to condemn us to a lingering
one, to be consumed, in coldness, hungar, and nakedness, and a shameful
slavery at home and in all the Regions of Europ.

Your Majesty has been pleased to tell publicly the Peers, and People of
England. That we abroad have followed your Majesty from Kingdom, to Kingdom,
and that with all cheerfullness and obedience; that we received and submitted
to your Royal Orders, and betook our selves to what fervice your Majesty
directed, at that time most convenient, and behooffull to your Majesty, though
attended with inconveniences enough to our felves, and your Majesty Judged this
our demeaniour very worthy of Protection, Justice, and favor. Your Kingly
Language the 27. July 1660. to the House of Peers touching the Act of
indemnity, was this. I hope I need say nothing of Irelande and that they alone
shall not want the benefitt of my mercy: they have showed much affection to me
a broad, and you will have a care of my honor, and what I have promised to
them. These veritys uttered by your Majesty are owned by our greatest Enemies;
for such, and that we sacrifised our selves and all we had faithfully, and
heartily in your Majestys service.

Let me demand here, where then have been Braghall, Coot, Cloathworthy, and
others of that band, those Grandees your Majesty has been pleased to honor
with great titles; the two first were made Earls of Orery, and Montrath and the
last (Cloathworthy, that known plunderer of the Queens Chapel, and
summersett House an infamous man) created viscount Massaren? where I say
again, have these men been in the dark day of your Callamitys, and adversitys?
what were they then doing?

They were then stiffly struggling against your Crown and person, and Laying
about them with maine endeavors, that the Royal Family of the Stuarts should
never return to their own Dominions; (to which purpose they contrived the
forementioned horrid engagement.) In those days they styled your Majesty only
Charles Stuart, to call you King was a treason among them. And what is don in
the end?

After all their villanys, contempt of Royal Family, open Rebellion and war
against the Crown, and after putting the good King to death: after our
fidelity, obedience, and hearty affection to your Majesty, and after your own
Kingly Testimonys, and expressions of the same: the matter has been strangly
carried. How?

The known Rebels had your Majestys pardon, they were magnified, had places
of trust and profitt in the cammon wealth, and to boot they carried away our
Houses, Lands, and Estates, by your Majestys Grant under the great Seal. O
tempora! O mores! O Laceratam Iustitiam! And what is our lot, and share of
this Tragical play, after your Royal promisees of all favor and Protection?
we are left naked and desolate, crying to God as those of Jerusalem did
distroyed by their Enemies.

Remember O Lord what is fallne unto us, Ierem. Thren^ cap. 5.
behold and regard our reproath: Our inheritance is turned to Aliens, and our
Houses to strangers. We are Pupills without Fathers, the joy of our heart has
failed, our quire is turned to mourning. This is our deplorable state: what
your Majesty will do with us, or for us, is only known to God and your self,
and we are to pray that God will be pleased to incline your heart to such a
resolution, as may bring us some comfort, which we much need; Cor Regis in
manu Domini, quocunque voluerit, inclinubit illud.

Give freedom great King to a poor Priest, to speak truth to your Majesty, it
is noe new thing that good Priests speak to Kings, and God himself says, he
will curse the blessings of those Priests, that will not speak truth, and give
glory to his holy Name; And the Prophet Malachias tells your Majesty, that
regard is to be had of what the Priest says. Malac. cap. 2.
For the lips of the Priest (says that Prophet) shall keep knowledge, and the
Law they shall require out of his Mouth: because he is the Angel of the Lord
of hosts. The truth I presume to speak to you my King with all submission and
sincerity is this. That your Majesty has great cause to fear the heavy
Judgments God for so many thousands of Wedow's and Orphans perrishing for want
in the view of the world, by that fatal sentence called the Bill of
Settlement. Job tells us God has, and does sometime punnish Kings. Job. cap. 12.
Balteum Regum dissoluit, and cinget fune renes eorum. He Loses the Belt of
Kings, and girdeth their reins with a cord.

He Loosed the Belt from your Fathers side, and girded his Reins with a cord
of sore affliction: and yet he was esteemed a sober, just, chaste King.

God, is a God of Justice holding an Iron Rod in his hand stretched over the
heads of all Kings, Emperors, and Popes, and tells them. Potentes, Potenter
tormenta patientur* Ezechias, the holy King, when the Prophet told him he
should die, turning his face to the Temple said. Quis est qui sic humiliat
sublimes reges terrae? Examen my Sovereign, and ponderwell the words of that
good King, and how he was frighted, hearing from the Prophet that he should
die. Die you must great King, when that shall be God alone knows, Et post mortem
sequiter Iuditium. Those men that abused your Authority on Earth will make noe
answer for you; your self must before that Tribunal, receive (as the meanest
of your subjects) according to what you have done in this life. Many men use to
speak to Kings. Omnia placentia. But those will be found in the end flatterers,
and false Prophets; I speak to your Majesty as a Priest of God should speak,)
naked truth, and sic liberavi animam meam. Your Majesty will do well to sit
down, and deeply Meditate upon this weighty point, and theme, of eternal
Damnation, or salvation.

Having exposed to my Sovereign our calamity's, ruin and miserys, and offered
humble prayers, for ease and mercy. I now turn my speech to you my most dear
and honorable Countrymen, for your sake I have spoken noe way minding redress,
for what I my selve have lost, which was something.

If Justice shall be don you, and cause of joy come from the Kings good
pleasure and determination, prays God and the King for that Happiness, and pray
to God for his long and prosperous Reign. But if this shall not be done (God
permitting things to go on as they do, either for punnishing ours, and our
Fathers sins, or for trying our patience in this world.) Let his holy Name be
ever blessed: bear patiently your poverty, and you shall find poverty a great
blessing, S. John Chrysostom compares it with Martyrdom. Egestas (says the
Saint) been tollerata facit Martirium. I do not think there can hardly be any
found in the world, that have come to a greater distress, and poverty, then
that you endure, suffer all willingly for God's sake and you are sure of a
Crown: mind often that excellent sentence of S. Augustine. Saeculi homines,
infaeliciter faelices sunt, Martyrs autem faeliciter infaelices erat. The men
of this world, are unhappily happy, but the Martyrs have been happily unhappy.

This is your case, or very like it, so as in your nakedness, your are
happier, then those that have all that was yours, living in pleasurs, and
plenty, Let this also be some comfort to you, that you have but lost, those
things you could not long hold, nor shall the present possessors long enjoy
them. Though they think their fortuns in that Land surely settled, they are
but Pilgrims in the way as you are, and must part as you shall (and with more
greef, and fear, for having more then you have) and then they shall know and
feel Gods Judgment for what they have done to you.

In all your afflictions, I shall pray and conjure you, to demean your selves
like good Christians, paying faithfully to God his due, and to the King his; to
the King Fidelity and Obedience in Civilibus, and that for Conscience sake; to
God Veneration and highest Worship, which can not be performed without
professing a true Rcligion, the same you are of: wherefore let noe wordly
preferments, or comodity's, that men can conferr on you; nor punishments they
can inflict, shake your Religion, but hold the same constantly in all tempests
and storms, for of it depends eternal salvation.

And to speak at the present time of your great afflictions, imitate I pray
you, the three Isralites cast into the furnase of Babylon, and you shall find,
as they did, an Angel to comfort you. They in the fire blessed the name of
God, when Azarias standing in the flame said.

Blessed art thou O Lord, the God of our Fathers, and laudable and glorious is
thy Name for ever, Dan. cap. 3.
because thou art just in all things which thou have don to us, and all thy
works are true and thy ways righteous, and thy Judgments true, for we have
sinned, and done unjustly, revolting from thee, and and now we follow in all
our hearts; and fear thee, and seek thy face, confound us not, but do with us
according thy meekness, and according to the multitude of thy mercy deliver us
in thy mervells, and give glory to thy name O Lord. None of you have suffered
so much as innocent Job, set him before your Eyes, environed with the
messingers of all his disasters. One of them said to him. The Sabean^ took
away the Oxes and Asses, and killed thy servants. A another said, a fire from
heaven struck thy sheep, and thy servants, and consumed them all. The third;
The Chaldeans made three troops and invaded the Cammels. The last told him. A
vehement wind came from the Country of the desert, and shook the four Corners
of the House, wherein thy Children were feasting, and falling oppressed them,
and they are all dead. Job hearing all this sad news, blamed not the Sabeans,
Chaldeans, fire from heaven, or wind coming from the Country of the Desert,
nor did so much as mention them.

But he rose up, and faling on the ground adored, Job. cap. 1.
and said. Naked I came out of my Mothers Womb, and naked shall I return
thither, our Lord gave, our Lord has taken away, as it pleased our Lord, so
it is done, the name of our Lord he blessed. Bless you likewise the the name of
our Lord for all that has befalen you, offering all up purely to his holy will.

One thing my honored dear Countrymen I seriously commend to your pious
Considerations, the ensuing weighty golden sentence of S. Cyprian.

Deus unus est, (says he) Christus unus est, S. Cyprianus Epist. 40.
and una Ecclesia, and Cathedra una, supra Petrum Domini voce fundata: aliud
Altar constitui, aut sacerdotium novum fieri prater unum Altar, and unum
Sacerdotium, non potest. Qnisquis alibi collegerit, spargit. Adulterum est,
impium est, sacrilegum est, quodcunque humano fur^ro Institutitur, ut
dispositio Divina violetur. Let the words of this most holy Bishop and Martyr
go to the heart of every one of you.

This one God has created you. This one Christ has redeemed you. This one
Church has baptized you, and imbued you with the Elements of faith, and
Christian Rules of living well: This one and holy Chair (of Peter) has
governed you, and all the Christian world in verity, and sanctity all a long
from the Apostles time. There is but one Altar, and one Priesthood (and this
only in the Roman Catholic Church:) he that gathers out of this
congregation, disperseth. This Church only has the keys of heaven, and true
Commission to save souls; any power on Earth, that seeks to pull down this
Altar, to Abolish this Priesthood, to distroy this Church, is Impious,
Adulterous, Profane, and Sacrilegious. The holy Doctor gives another Devine
Counsel to his people. Nemo vos fratres errare a Domini viis faciat; Nemo
filios Ecciesiae de Ecclesia tollat; pereant sibi soli qui perire voluerint.
That is to say, let noe man bring you into error from the paths of our Lord;
let none take out of the Church, Children of the Church; those that have a
mind to perrish and be lost, let them be lost alone. Let Egan (a lost
dissolaite Friar that latly fell) and this Sall, and all such profane men,
that will not remain In Gods House, let them perrish alone, seeing they will
have it so: do not you follow their evil example, Impiety and maddness, but
wisely stay within the Ribbs of the Ark, the holy Roman Catholic Church (Ad
quam (test Cypriano) perfidia non habet accessum, And out of which great
Augustine assures us there is noe hopes of salvation:) And be constantly, and
Religiously obedient to the Apostolic Sea, and to the man, that stands upon
the Rock Clement the X. conspicuous for his Zeal and Piety, on earth the prime
Lord of the House of God, with full power to guide and govern all souls in
the way of salvation.

Praying God of his infinite goodness to grant you in your great afflictions
fortitude; patience, and comfort; to his holy Protection I commend heartily you
and my self
, this 23th. December, 1674.


