The French man gulled of his Gold OR A warning for whore-hunters.
Showing how a French man newly come into England, to see the fashion of our
country, fell in Love with a Night walking Lady, saying he had two hundred
pieces in gold about him, which rejoiced this Ladies heart to hear, so after
some words between them he gives her the gold in her Lap, she promises to have
him to her Chamber, has him to a Tavern door on the street side and bids him
stay there while she went in to c^ear her Chamber which he willing too, she
marches through the house at a back door into an Alley where she left the
French man to shift for himself, which was but a sorry shift, which is as
follows.

To the Tune of a Fig for France,


COme all you gallants listen well
A merry jest I will you tell
It Is of a Frenchman and a whore
The like you never heard before,
The jest was acted so complete
'Twill make you l^u^h till you do sweat
Then French men take a special care
How you do trade with English ware.
A French man as it does appear
Did come to try his fortune here
And with his brags he did unfold
He had two hundred pound in gold
With flaxen Periwig did he
Walk through the streets most gallantly
With a Muffe and Rapier by his side
As if he were a God of pride,
Then in a rage he deeply swore
He would go see an Engli^h whore
The Moon it seemed to shine bright
Which made him walk with great delight
Into Moor-fields he took his way
Where he espied a Lady gay,
They say the English hates the French
But i will know that by th^s same wench.
Then unto her he stepped strait
And these same words he did relate
Madame quoth he and please your will
To let me have of you my fill
And if to me you will agree
I will be bountiful and free,
I Would have you know the Lady said
I am no whore but still a maid.


EXcuse me Madam in this case
My thoughts don't judge as you are base
For out of France I lately came
To get a wife that is my aim,
And if that you can fancy me
Two hundred pound I will give thee,
Then prethy Lady fancy me
And i will maintain thee gallantly.
With that this Whore she did reply
A Frenchman will both swear and lie
You talk of hundreds where you go
But not a penny for to show
She with such speeches was so bold
That he to her did show his Gold,
Nay then thought she Gold out of France
Will make me play an English Dance.
What is your will with me she said
Since I so long have lived a Maid,
It Is not your glistering Gold so bright
Shall tempt me with you to delight,
Except that you will strait agree
When you have done to marry me,
I that I will the French man said,
Then prethy dearest ben't afraid.
I w^ll not take your word quoth she
For when you have done away you will flee
O no my sweeting understand
My Gold thou shall h^ld in thy hand
For I am in a mighty heat
Here take it till I have done the feat
She takes his Gold and then said here
Go with me to my Lodging sure.
He took her by the hand and went
With her be seemed to be content,
And as in hand in hand they go
Whether she led him he did not know,
For she did lead him up a Lane
That he forgot from whence he came
The Frenchman swore all is not well
For thou will lead me into hell.
O no my Dear the Lady said
Of this same place be not afraid
But stand thee here at thi^ same door
While I do step thee in before
To see where there my Chambers clear
And then i will call thee in my Dear:
But now to see it is cunning Whore
She slipped out at the back door.
And there the French man staid in vain
For not his Lady came again
When his patience no longer would proceed
He knocked at the door with speed
The Maid of the house asked who was there
Quoth he I am your only Dear,
Then with a Mopstick in her hand
She knocked him down where he did stand
And then she hid him for to go
Unto his Whore as he did know
And then the Frenchman up and told
He Would lost two hundred pound in Go^d
Which when the people his tale heard
They told ^im he was tightly served
Which made him with his French tongue yal
And Rogues and Whores he did them call.
The Frenchman he did look as pale
Just like Dog without his tail
The loss of his Money put him in fears
He wished in the Room he had lost his Ears
He with the stones did nigh enclose
For he fell down and broke his Nose
Which made him for to curse and swear
He Would nere trade more with English Ware.
Printed for John Clarke at the Harp and Bible in West-Smith-field.


