The Frenchmens VVonder, OR, The Battle of the Birds,
Relating that on the 26th. of Feb. last, about 9 in the morning were seen
between Dole and Salins in France, a most incredible number of Birds, who by
their multitude darkened the Sky; after having for some time, as it were
skirmished together in great confusion, they separated into two bodies; and
after most horrible cries, they engaged against each other with such fury, that
several thousands were fallen dead to the Earth; some smothered with most of
their feathers off, and others all bloody and torn; These Birds were of a
hundred several sorts, of several sizes, and several colors. Those which were
most Numerous weighed four or five pounds a piece; their claws were like those
of Indian Hens, Nibs crooked like Parrots, and their feathers of an Ash color;
about 500 Paces of Ground were covered with these dead carcasses to a man's
height. Besides several Thousands that were found dispersed here and there:
Insomuch that it being seared that Air might be infected by them, Pioneers were
sent from Dole to bury them.

To the Tune of, In Summer time.
With Allowance, Roger L'Estrange*



COme give attention young and old,
whilst in my story I proceed,
Strange wonders daily we behold,
yet pass them over without heed.
From places strange, by Sea and Land,
and from all parts beneath the Sun;
Of wonders great we understand,
which by the Lord on high are done.
Yet few does lay it unto heart,
nor to themselves the same apply,
Or from their sins strive to depart,
though threatened judgments are so nigh
But at the same they make a scoff,
which are for warnings daily sent,
To tell them they shall be cut off,
except they of their sins repent.
It Is known that pride, and drunkeness,
and swearing, does so much abound,
Men are so bent to wickedness,
that soul and body they confound.
Whick makes the Lord above to send
such signs our spirits to abate;
That we our lives may all amend,
by what has happened of late.
Near unto Dole in firtile France,
a wonder strange was lately seen,
Which does fames Trumpet so advance,
because the like has never been.
Great multitudes of Birds appeared,
one morning being clear and fair,
The like whereof was never heard,
for why they darkened all the air.
The second Part,
to the same Tune.


THe people stood amazed to see,
that wondrous sight which did appear,
Or what the sad event might be,
why such strange Fowls was gathered there.
For sometimes they were seen to fight,
and skirmish in confused wise,
To tug and pull, to claw and bite,
sometimes to fall, and sometimes rise.
At length as it were by consent,
into two parties they devide;
As if it were two Armies bent,
to fight it out on either side.
And then with fearful hideous cries,
each party did the other dare,
The like was never seen with eyes,
how they proclaimed open war.
At last each other did engage,
with fury great on either side,
Both parties being in a rage,
like two brave armies in their pride.
Most fiercely they did fight it out,
whilst thousands to the ground did fall;
They were so furious and so stout,
they freely ventured life and all.
Their bodies mangled, rent, and torn,
upon the earth most thick did lie,
So that the child that is yet unborn;
may wonder at this prodigy.
At length their forces being spent,
those that were left, away did fly,
But whence they came, or whither went,
there is no one ever could descry.
These birds which did the battle fight,
were of a hundred sundry sorts,
Of several colors and of shape,
as does appear by all reports.
The greatest of their bodies were,
of four or five pounds weight each one;
As to the people did appear,
which viewed them over as it is known.
Their claws like those of Indian hens,
their crooked nibs, like Parrots just;
Their feathers of an Ash color,
if we may the relation trust.
Five hundred paces, as it is said,
of ground were covered with the dead,
Unto the height of any man,
besides some thousands scattered.
The people being sore afraid,
their bodies should infect the air,
Sent Pioneers to bury them,
which is a thing most strange and rare.
Thus was this bloody combat past,
within the sight of many a one;
Who at the wonder stood aghast,
for to behold what there was shown.
What is the meaning of the same,
there is none does know but God above,
Then let us fear his holy name,
and live in concord, peace and love.
For cruel wars, and bloody strife,
does cause great ruin at the last:
Then let us lead a holy life,
and pardon crave for what is past.
FINIS.
Prnted for F. Coals, T. Vere, I. Wright, and I. Clarke.


