THE WICKEDNESS and PUNISHMENT OF REBELLION, A SERMON Preached the 26. July S.
V. 1685.

(Being the Day of Thanksgiveing appointed by his Majesty for the DEFEAT of
the REBELS) before the Right Worshipful the FELLOWSHIP OF MERCHANTS
ADVENTURERS OF ENGLAND resideing at DORDRECHT.

By AUG. FREZER, M. A. of St. Edmunds Hall in Oxford, Preacher to the said
Society.

2 King. 9: 31. Had Zimri Peace? Romans 13: 2. They that resist shall receive to
themselves Damnation.

ROTTERDAM, Printed by REINIER LEERS, M.DC.LXXXVI.

To the Honorable BEVIL SKELETON Esquire, Envoy Extraordinary from the most
Mighty and Victorious PRINCE JAMES II. King of Great Britain, France and
Ireland, etc. to the STATES GENERAL of the United Provinces.
HONORABLE SIR,
TO still the rageing of the sea, and the madness of the People, is observed by
the Royal Prophet to be the Work of God, and the Effect of an Almighty Power;
which never appeared more visibly than in favor of his Majesty for these
several years past. First by a miraculous revolution of Affairs to make way
for his Accession to the Crown, some time before the death of the late King of
blessed memory: then by his peaceable and quiet entrance upon his Government:
and lastly by the sudden dissipation of the late Rebellion contrary to all
humane Appearance and Expectation.

Never was any people, since the time of Pontius Pilate, arrived to that height
of unaccountable Madness against a Prince who had often ventured his life for
their defense and preservation, and had never given them any provocation, that
like the Jews against our Savior, nothing would serve their turns but
Crucify him, Crucify him: and when they were asked why, what evil has he
don? They cried out the more, Let him be Crucified.

A Bill is drawn up, passes the House of Commons, and all sorts of endeavors
used to extort the Royal assent and to get it passed into a Law, for the
Exclusion of the right Heir, for casting him out of his Inheritance, and for
putting him to death too as a Traitor and Common Enemy if he offered to
return from his Banishment, and did not patiently submit to the Iniquity of
their sentence.

And this Fit of Madness after id had bin a little quieted by a Dissolution and
Change of air, is revived again by the VOX POPULI or a Cry of importunate and
unmannerly Petitioners from almost all parts of the Nation for another
Excludeing House of Commons, which is succeeded by another, who are Resolved
not to be satisfied with the most Gracious Offers that were ever made by any
Prince to any People, but only at the expense of the Justice, Honor and
Conscience of their Sovereign; till they had renderd themselves useless and
dangerous; and the Leading Men among them against the Duke of York are found
guilty by a Cloud of Witnesses and their own Confession of a Conspiracy against
the King, whereof part are brought to condign Punishment, and the rest forced
to save themselves by flight from the hands of Justice: that it was now high
time for the Government to consider of some more effectual Remedy than had
formerly bin used to cure the People of their Frenzy, and to keep them,
whether they will or no, from undoing themselves, in making choice of such
Patriots, as under the pretense of secureing their Religion and Property by
excludeing the Duke of York from his Right of succession, would have
infaillibly destroyed both. In order whereunto an enquiry is made whether such
Corporations as had showed themselves most factious and disaffected to the
Government, had not abused the Royal Bounty, by which they held their Charters,
and are found to have incurred a forfieture, and so partly by due Course of
Law, and partly by voluntary resignations such Elections are regulated, and
care taken, that only persons of known Loyalty, and well affected to the
Government both in Church and State as by Law established should be capable to
serve in Parliament. In the mean time the Fever begins to abate, and the People
to recover their right senses again. The Duke is sent for Scotland, and by the
way suffers Shipwreck, and by a wonderful Providence escapes; and now instead
of Crucify him, Away with him, there is nothing but Hosannas, and joyful
Acclamations from all Parts and Quarters of the Kingdom for his happy Escape
and Deliverance; together with Protestations, and offers of Lives and Fortunes
to live and die in defense of the King and his Lawful Successors.

Thus did God by a series of Miracles both preserve our present Sovereign, and
prepare his way to the Throne, by turning the hearts and stilling the madness
of the people, that there was not a sword drawn, nor the least Opposition made
to hinder, or so much as question his Rightful Succession to the Government
upon the Decease of his dear and most entirely beloved Brother. Which whoever
duly considers, will be forced to confess, that it was the hand of the Lord
only that could bring such mighty things to pass. That be stone which the
Builders refused should become the headstone in the Corner! this was certainly
the Lords doing, and it is mavelous in our Eyes.

The late Rebellion may be said to be some remainder or dregs of the former fit
of Madness, which (by the Blessing of God upon his Majesty's Arms) is so
totally extinguishd, that so long as it shall please God to continue his happy
Reign over us, we have no reason to fear any disturbance for the future. For
which unspeakable mercy every true English man that loves his King, or has any
kindness for his native Country ought to have kept a day of solemn
Thanksgiveing, if there had bin none appointed by Authority: which has bin the
Occasion of preaching the following Sermon; and which I have made public for
the sake of such of my Countrymen in these Provinces especially as lie under
the Imputation and guilt of assisting the late Rebels, and of contributeing to
the carrying on of so impious and diabolical a design: Of whom I do not
altogether despair but that by their own and other men's Misfortunes they may be
persuaded at length to see and to acknowledge their Error, and not any longer
suffer themselves to be deceived to their eternal as well as temporal Ruin and
Destruction.

Having resolved to appear a second time in defense of the Royal Cause, I have
presumed, Honorable Sir, to put my self under your Honors Patronage and
Protection, and so guarded I shall not be afraid to bid defiance to all
Traitors and Parricides whatsoever, who are confounded with terror, when they
hear your very name; nor shall I need to value any man's Censure, which I never
thought so considerable as to come in competition with the service of my King
or the interest of my Country: which (next to the Glory of God) being the sole
ends both of preaching and publishing this discourse, I hope may make some
Compensation for the defects that may be in it, and in some measure excuse this
Address to a Person, whose study as well as Character is to encourage any
thing of Loyalty, and of whose indefatigable pains and diligence in
endeavoring by the most prudent and effectual means to stifle the late
Rebellion in its birth, and to hinder it from ever breaking forth, there are
sufficient Witnesses; whose eminent services upon this, as upon many other
Occasions, and rare Accomplishments both natural and acquired, have justly
raisd you to that place you enjoy in the Esteem and Favor of the most admired
and accomplished Prince in the World. Which that you may continually more
improve, and find the Effects of it in your Increase of Honor, and of all
manner of Felicity, there is no man desires or wishes more than.

Honorable SIR, Your Honors most Humble and most Obedient Servant A. FREZER.

Pr. 24. 21. 22. My son, fear thou the Lord, and the King, and meddle not with
them that are given to change. For their Calamity shall rise suddenly, and who
knows the Ruin of them both?
Public mercies and Deliverances call for public Acknowledgments, and
Thanksgiveings; and the mercies are so much the greater in proportion to the
miseries and calamities from which we are delivered; which, if God had suffered
the late Rebellion to succeed, you of this place who now hear me must have
expected to have felt as much and perhaps as soon too as any others, by how
much your loyalty and adherence to your lawful sovereign has bin the more
renowned and spoaken of. And therefore you have all the reason in the world to
comply with the commands of your Prince in bearing a part with the rest of his
Majesty's Loyal subjects in the devotions of this day, who equally share with
them in the joys and blessings for which it is appointed. And next to the just
tribute of praise and thanks giving which is to be offered up to almighty God
for so singular a mercy, I presume it is intended by authority, you should be
put in mind of that duty the neglect of which has been the unhappy occasion of
involving so many of our fellow subjects inguilt, and misery. In order
whereunto I have made choice, of the words that have bin read to you, My son
fear thou the Lord and the King, and meddle not with them that are given to
change, etc.

The Argument of this book of proverbs is wisdom, or the design of it (as it is
proposed in the beginning) is to know Wisdom and Instruction, to perceave the
words of understanding, i. e. to teach men their duty in all capacities wherein
they stand related to one another, or in any condition wherein their present or
future happiness may be any way concerned, whether as private persons or
public. And the foundation of this wisdom or knowledge, and of all the blessed
effects of it, which are security from evil, and the acquisition of every
thing that is good for us, we are told by the wise man is the fear of God,
without which we are fools, and miserable. Pr. 1. 7.
The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom, but fools despise wisdom and
Instruction. And because the peace of the world, and the welfare of the Public
(upon which depends the happiness of particular persons) are so greatly
concernd in the duty which subjects ow their Rulers, therefore what our divine
Author supposes in giueing Rules for our practice in other cases where the
duty is of less consideration, here he expressly sets down: and that the duty
which he would especially recommend to us might be taken the more notice of,
and make the deeper impression upon us (which is the duty of subjects to Kings)
he joins it with the fear of God, and seems to lay the same stresse upon it,
by making use of the same word to express it, as is commonly made use of, to
express our duty to God, and threatening the same Calamity and Ruin to those
who neglect the one as well as the other. My son fear thou the Lord, and the
King and meddle not with them that are given to change; for their Calamity
shall rise suddenly, and who knows the Ruin of them both?

The words consist of 2 general parts, 1. Here is a command or a duty enjoynd.
2. Here is the reason of the command or a punishment annexed to the breach or
neglect of it. The command or the duty enjoined is the duty of subjects to
their rulers, which is expressed 2 manner of ways. 1 Positively. Fear God and
the King, and then negatively, meddle not with them that are given to change.
The former or positive part of the duty seems to relate to God as well as to
the King: but tho God be the object of our fear, and the whole duty we ow him
be comprehended in that word, yet I have already showed you, and the following
words make it plain, that the duty which subbjects ow their King is principally
intended by it, when we are commanded not to meddle with them that are given to
change, which are to be understood in a civil or political sense, with relation
to those who out of a love of change or novelty, or to gratify their ambition,
Revenge, covetousness, or any other passion, rise up against, or refuse to
obey, or to be subject to their lawful sovereign, which is inconsistent with
the fear and duty which they ow him. And the reason (besides that which has
been al ready mentioned) why we are commanded to fear God, at the same time we
are bid to fear, honor and obey the King, and when this latter is the thing
chiefly designed, is to put us in mind of the inseparable connection that there
is between these 2 duties, the fear of God, and the fear or obedience we ow the
King: and of the ground or and quality of our obedience to the latter: and
therefore the doctrine or observation from the plain sense of the words may be
this.

That there can be no true fear of God, where there is not a just reverence,
and obedience paid to the King. This is a doctrine so plain, and so clearly set
down in scripture, that it might seem needless to insist upon the proof of it,
if the secret plots, and conspiracies which are daily formed, and the open
Rebellions which we see raisd and carried on against the lives of Princes, and
their Government, and all this under the pretense of Religion, did not make it
necessary at some times, and upon some occasions (such as this is) to put men
in mind of so important a truth.

The fear of God then you must know consists in a sincere, and universal
obedience to al his comands: so that he who wilfully Ja. 2. 10.
offends in one point is by interpretation guilty of all; and cannot properly
be said to fear God at all, because the fear of God does equally oblige to the
observation of one command as well as of another, and the same penalty is
annexed to one as to another; and therefore he who does not fear to offend God
in breaking any one of his comandments, (tho he keeps all the rest,) cannot be
supposed to keep the rest out of any principle of conscience or the fear of
God, but for some other consideration, and will make no conscience to break all
the rest, whenever he shall have the same occasion or temptation to break them,
that he has for the breaking of any one.

Now it is notoriously known to any one that has read the scripture, that
nothing is or can be more expressly commanded by God, than the Honor,
obedience, and subjection which is due to Kings. And all this is not only
comprehended in the fifth commandment by the honor due to parents, but there
are several other more particular commands about it, to teach us how we are to
regulate our very thoughts, our words, our actions, and our whole deportment
toward them. We must not entertain a dishonorable thought of our Prince,
employed in the prohibition, ( a) Eccl. 10. 20.
not to curse the King in our thought.( b) Exo. 22. 28.
We must not revile him or speak evil of him.( c) 1 Samuel 26. 9.
We must not lift up a hand against him or resist him,( d) 1. K. 1. 23.
We must behave our selves reverently in his presence. We must obey his
commands, and give him that To. 13. 6.
tribute, or custom which belongs to him, which is necessary for the support
of his rule and dignity, and which is but a small recompense for the benefits,
we receive by his Government. And all this is no more than what is particularly
commanded by God in the old Testament, and by our savior and his Apostles in
the new, and has bin taught and practiced by holy men, and by the church of God
in all ages: which is all comprehended under the word fear or honor which is
so often mentioned and commanded with relation to Kings as their Right and Due,
and which cannot be denied them without sacrilege, and disobedience to God
himself? To. 13. 7.
Render therefore to all their Due, Tribute to whom tribute is due, custom to
whom custom, fear to whom fear, and honor to whom honor.

But not to insist at present any further upon other particulars of the duty
which subjects ow their King. I shall only speak a few words concerning
resistance, and the nature or quality of our obedience, the wilful
misunderstanding whereof is the cause of all our troubles and of all our
divisions.

1. Concerning the lawfullnesse of resistance, (which some of our late Rebels
have been so far deserted by God as to assert, not only in words, and with
their pens, but with their blood, and their last breath) there need no other
arguments be used to confute it, and for ever to stop the mouths of all
rebellious gainsayers, (if any thing could convince them,) than the Testimonies
of David and St. Paul, whose authority I am sure is indisputable, and not to be
questioned by any that own the scriptures to be the word of God. 1 Sa. 26. 9.
Who can stretch forth his haud against the Lords anointed and be guiltless?
was the Amulet or charm (if I may so call it) which the man after God's own
heart, had bin taught by the spirit of God, to make use of upon any occasion or
temptation that he had to revenge himself of his greatest enemy, to curb his
own passion, and to restrain others from offering the least violence to their
lawful sovereign. The other Testimony is of St. Paul. To. 13. 5. Wherefore
you must needs be subject not only for wrath but conscience sake. In the former
passage David lays it down as a principle of the law of nature acknowledged by
all the world, that it is impossible for any man that is a subject to resist
his prince, and be Innocent: Who can stretch forth his hand against the Lords
Anointed and be guiltless? In the latter, the Apostle asserts the necessity
of subjection (in opposition to resistance, which is forbidden condemned and
threatened with damnation Romans 13. 1. 2.) upon the score of conscience, that if
there were no other reasons to oblige men to be subject drawn from hope of
reward or fear of punishment, yet they were bound to be so out of conscience,
and they might with as safe a conscience break any of the Comands of God as
resist. Which two testimonies against the lawfulness of resistance will never
be answered, or evaded by those who are so audacious and impious as to speak or
write in favor of such as take up arms against their lawful Prince upon the
account of conscience, and Religion (as is pretended;) who may as well hope to
reconcile light and darkness; or God and Belial, as the principles and
practices of such Persons with the scriptures, and the fear of God.

2. Concerning the nature or quality of that obedience which is due to Kings.
We must obey them in all things, except where a superior command has already
engaged our obedience, to the contrary. The commands of a superior are still
to be obeyed before the commands of an Inferior; and therefore if the King, who
is only God's Vicegerent or deputy shall command any thing that is contrary to
what God has commanded us before: in all such cases the Rule of the Apostles is
to take place, that it is better to obey God than man. Acts. 4. 19.

In all other things which are left undetermind by God, and are not contrary to
his will, when they are commanded by those who are set in authority over us, our
obedience is necessary and indispensable. And therefore to secure us from
transgressing our duty to God and our superiors, we must endeavor to acquaint
our selves with the whole will of God reveald to us in scripture, that so we
may know wherein it is lawful for us to obey our superiors, and wherein we
may lawfully refuse to comply with them. Where our obedience is lawful, it is
always necessary, and it is always lawful where the thing commanded us is
not forbidden by God, tho it may happen to be contrary to our interests or
Inclinations. We must be subject and obedient as well to froward and severe
Masters, as to the good and gentle, 1 Pet. 2. 13.
for this is thanks worthy if a man for conscience toward God endure grief,
suffering wrongfully. And from hence I shall take the liberty to infer, that
where the matter of the Command is of a doubtful nature, or when we doubt of
the lawfulness of it, our obedience is still necessary, because the thing
commanded is not for bidden by God, at least not directly or expressly
forbidden, for if it were there could be no doubt of the unlawfulneste of it;
and if it be doubtful we have as much reason to think it may be lawful as
unlawful, and the presumption of its lawfullnesse ought to be for the
Magistrate, who is supposed to be better able (as having greater helps) to
judge of what is agreeable to the will of God: and then besides all this we have
the Commands of our superiors, and the necessity of our obedience, if the
thing we are commanded be not apparently sinful to justify or at least to
excuse our compliance. As for that objection which I foresee may be brought
against what has bin said from To. 14. 23. where the Apostle speaking of
eating some sorts of meats with a doubting conscience, when the persons who did
eat of such meats as had bin for bidden by God doubted whether they were not
still forbidden, and yet would venture to eat of them. He that thus doubts
(says the Apostle) is damned if he eat because he eats not of faith, for
whatsoever is not of faith is sin. But this objection does not reach the case
we are speaking of, because the Apostles doubting person was at liberty not to
eat of the things whereof he doubted, and in all cases of the like nature where
men are at liberty, it is safest to forbear a doubtful action, as for example
it is doubtful whether it be lawful to practice usury, and every man is at
liberty whether he will practice it or no, and therefore it is safest not to
practice it: but obedience to Magistrates is no such arbitrary matter, but is a
duty laid upon the conscience, and if we are not well assured that the thing
commanded is sinful, it is certain we sin, if we refuse to yield obedience to
it; which I conceive to be the case of those who refuse to conform to the
public worship and service of God, as it is enjoined by Authority and
established in the Church of England.

For the further confirmation of what has bin said I shall ad one Argument
more drawn from the nature and well being of all Government, that if a scruple
concerning the lawfulness of a command from our superiors be allowed to be of
equal weight with the duty of obedience, then the obedience of subjects will
be arbitary, because it is impossible to see into men's hearts, and when they
have no mind to obey, it is but pretending a scruple of conscience for their
disobedience: for if they may lawfully scruple, so as to be excused from their
obedience, then it is unlawful for the Magistrate to punish them for not
obeying; and it will be all one as to the exercise of the Magistrates power
whether the scruple be real or pretended: and how can any government subsist
which is thus precarious and made to depend upon the pleasure or humor of the
people? And therefore the Principles which draw such consequences after them
cannot be true or agreeable to the will of God; and by consequence the contrary
which I have asserted and explaind to you must be true, because according to
the command of our savior it renders unto God, the things that are Gods, and
unto Caesar the things that are Cesars: It gives God all that honor and
obedience which himself requires of us, and it tends most to promote and
preserve that Order and Peace, which God has instituted and established in the
world.

To conclude this particular, they who scruple to comply with the commands of
their Prince, or the laws of the Government where they live, without being
convinced by clear and sufficient reasons of their unlawfulness, do plainly
show, that they are weary, and dissatisfied both with their Prince and with
their Government: and when people come once to be weary of a thing, they begin
to wish they were rid of it, and would be willing to exchange it for something
which they fancy to be better; and from wishes they proceed to words, and must
be laying open the faults they discover either in the Government it self or in
the Governors, which they would have redressed; and the next step is to
action, to take the Government into their own hands, and to reform it as they
think fit themselves; and this cannot be accomplished without a Rebellion,
which the Authors and Contrivers endeavor to palliate with the mask of
Religion, or of a Godly, through Reformation. And by these footsteps you may be
able to trace all the Rebellions that have bin fomented and carried on among
our selves more then among any other people in the world, from their Infancy
and Original to their full Growth; and who have bin the men in all of them,
that have most contributed toward them, and have bin most active in them; and
to whom the Character which is given by the wise man to some persons in the
Text does most fitly agree, of such as are given to change, which brings me to
the negative part of the Duty enjoined in the words. And meddle not with them
that are given to change.

2. To fear God then, and to be given to change, it seems in the Judgment of
Solomon (whatever the Doctrine of our modern casuists may be) are things of a
quite different, and inconsistent nature. He that fears God is not given to
change, and he that is given to change does not fear God; which is a farther
confirmation of the Doctrine or observation from the former part of the words,
where God and the King are joined together as partners of the same duty, of the
same Fear and Reverence which is due to both.

We must fear God, and we must fear the King; we must honor God and we must
honor the King; and we must obey God, and we must obey the King; where this
fear, honor, and obedience, which we are commanded to give to the King, does
not interfere with that fear, honor and obedience which belongs to God: but to
be given to change is inconsistent with both, nor does he either fear God or
the King, who lies under that Charge or Imputation.

If we would therefore fear God and the King as we ought and as we are commanded
to do. We must neither be given to change our selves, nor have any thing to do
with those that are.

1. If we would fear God and the King, as it is our duty to do, We our selves
must not be given to change. To be given to change is to endeavor the
Alteration or Reformation of the Government under which we live, without the
leave, and against the will of those that are in Authority, which is a
resisting the higher powers, which I have irrefragablie proved to you, it is
not lawful for subjects to do, upon any pretense or provocation whatsoever,
which may incline or dispose us to endeavor or to attempt a change.

Now the usual Pretenses or Provocations which hurry men into Rebellion against
their Prince, and to endeavor the change and the subversion of the Government
under which they live may be reckoned these four especially. Ambition,
covetousness, Revenge, and Religion or Reformation; Against all which, and
whatever other passion or pretense may excite or provoake us to cast off the
fear and reverence, which we ow our Prince, the wise man gives us his advice.
Eccl. 8. 2. 3. 4. I counsel thee to keep the Kings commandment and that in
regard of the Oath of God. Be not hasty to go out of his sight; stand not in
any evil thing, for he does whatsoever pleases him. These words, be not hasty
to go out of his sight, are generally interpreted to signify, that we should
not suffer our passion so far to prevail over our reason, as to withdraw our
selves from the service and obedience of our Prince, as discontented persons
use to do, which will both provoak him against us, and lead us by degrees into
sedition and Rebellion: so that there was never any man who has thrown off his
Allegiance, but it was by giveing way to some one or other of the forementioned
Provocations.

1. Ambition and a desire of Rule is some time that Passion, which stirs up
men to throw off the bonds of duty and allegiance to their lawful sovereign,
that so they may get into the Throne themselves, which passion is observed by
Cicero to reign most in Persons of a great soul (the Effect for the most part
of a noble Extract,) who are commonly the Heads, and Ringleaders of a
Rebellion. Vt quisque animi magnitudine excellit, ita maxim vult Princeps
omnium esse etc. by how much any man excells others in greatness of mind, so
much the more he desires to be above all; and then he further observes, that
his Ambition quickly degerates into Tyranny, difficile autem est ne cum
praestare omnibus concupiveris, servare aequitatem quae est Justitiae maxim
propria. But it is a very difficult matter for any man who desires to be above
others, to observe the Rules of Equity and Moderation, which is the Essential
Property of Justice. The former part of the Observation is plain from the
Examples of Absolon, Adonijah and the unfortunate Author of the late Rebellion
in our own Nation, who were as Great and as Happy as a Generous and Indulgent
Prince, such a Prince as David was, or as Charles the second could make them,
and might have lived more Happy than either, if they had bin but as sensible of
the Weight and Cares of a Crown, as they were dazzled with the splendor of it.
Nor is the latter part of the observation less true concerning the degeneracy
of Ambition into Tyranny and all manner of Injustice, as might be made appear
from innumerable Examples both in our own and other Nations, when ever God has
sufferd a Rebellion to succeed for the sin; of a People, Tyranny, Cruelty and
Oppression have bin the unavoidable effects and consequences of it.

2. Another Passion which may excite men to desire and to attempt a Change of
the Government where they live is Covetousness, or the hopes of bettering
their condition under a new Master. With this Saul upbraids his servants, when
he suspected they had a greater kindness for David than for himself. 1 Sa. 22.
7. Then Saul said unto his servants that stood about him. Hear now ye
Benjamites. Will the son of Iesse give every one of you fields and Vineyards,
and make you all Captains of Thousands, and Captains of Hundreds, that all of
you have conspired against me? And who were the People that followed David, who
for ought they knew had justly fallen under his Princes displesure, and did
intend to make himself King? 1 Samuel 22. 2.
They were such as were in distress, and in debt, and every one that was
discontented. Semper in civitate quibus opes nullae sunt bonis invident malos
extollunt; vetera odere; nova ex optant; dio suarum rerum mutari omnia student,
rurbaatque seditionibus sine cura aluntur, quoniam Egestas facile habetur sine
damno. Salust. Bellum Catil.
They who have profusely spent their Estates, and are so much in debt, that
they see no way or possibility ever to get out of it, or who never had any
thing to lose, are the only persons that are most likely to get by a Rebellion,
and therefore most apt to desire one and to be engaged in it. They care not
what becomes either of their King or Country, or who gets into the Throne, so
they may but raise their Fortunes, or better their present circumstances by the
Ruin and Destruction of both. This we find to have bin the Case of Catiline
that famous or rather infamous Conspiratour and Rebel, and of his accomplices
Catilinam luxuria primum, tum hinc conflata egestas rei familiaris in nefaria
consilia opprimendae patriae suae compulere* salust.
as the Historian observes of him and them, that they had consumed their
Estates by their Luxury and Extravagancie, and could think of no other way to
retrieve them but by a Rebellion, Which has bin the case no doubt of most of
our late Rebels, who had all bin promised, or at least had promisd themselves,
besides all the profitable and honorable Employments in the Kingdom an equal
share in all the Crown and Church Lands, and in the Estates of those they
called Papists (as heretofore Malignants) for no other reason but only for
adhereing to their lawful King if this Rebellion had succeeded; as had bin
practiced in a former. Not a Plowman but must have bin at least a Justice of
Peace who thought with themselves, like those other Rebellious Husbandmen in
the Gospel. Mar. 12. 7.
This is the Heir, come let us kill him, and not only his Inheritance, but the
Inheritance of all that depend on him or that side with him shall be ours.

3. A third exciteing cause of Rebellion, and which is apt to put men upon
desireing, and attempting a Change is Revenge. When men think they have not bin
sufficiently rewarded for their services; or when they see others less
deserving preferred before them, or when they have received any particular
injury either in their own Persons or in their Relations, they begin to be
uneasy and discontented, and study all the ways imaginable how to be
revenged, and to do themselves Justice, and are glad of any Opportunity, either
to be the Heads, or at least the Partners in a Rebellion. When Joab saw he was
like to be supplanted by Abner and Amasa, to whom David had designd to give the
Command of his Army, and whom therefore Joab thought it convenient to dispatch
out of the way: and when he understood that David upon his death bed, had given
Solomon a charge concerning 1 K. 2. 6.
him not to suffer his hoar head to go down to the grave in peace; upon the
death of David he refuses to own Solomon for King, but goes over to Adonijah
who pretended a right to the Crown, and joins with a Usurper against his
lawful sovereign. The Conquest of Spain by the Moors owes it self merely to
a Transport of this Passion; Count Julian General of the Spanish Forces under
Rodericus King of Spain, being sent with the Army under his Command to fight
against the Moors, and having having heard that the Chastity of his wife had
bin violated in his Absence, he was so incensed at it, that he presently goes
over to the Enemy, brings them to invade his own Country, who make an absolute
Conquest, after the flaughter of many thousands on both sides together with the
King and all the nobility, and they keep it for above 700 years in their
possession. Such an influence has Revenge when it is let loose over men's minds,
that they resolve to leave nothing unattempted, tho it cost the utter ruin and
destruction of their country to accomplish it.

4. Another exciteing cause which is apt to stir men up to resist and to take
up arms against their lawful sovereign, is Per illa tempora quicunque Remp
agita vere honestis nominibus alii sicuti jura Populi defenderent, pars, quo
senatus auctoritas maxuma foret, bonum publicum simulantes etc Salust. Beilum
Catil.
Religion and Reformation. What ever the secret and Impulsive causes of all
civil Commotions have bin, Whether Ambition, Covetousness or Revenge, the open
and the most plausible pretense, which the Authors and Abetters of such
Commotions have ever had the confidence publicly to own (except when they have
pretended a Title to the Crown) has still bin Religion and Reformation: There
being no other way to engage such as are simple and well meaning people to be
of their party; while they are secure of others who have no sense of Conscience
or Religion, that they will come in fast enough, and join with them for their
own private ends and interest. And this stratagem has bin so universally
practiced, and found to be so useful and necessary for the carrying on of a
Rebellion, that I believe there are not many examples to be met with in the
Histories of all times and places from the beginning of the world, that have bin
begun without it. If we look back as far as the times of Moses, Nu. 16. 3.
we find Corah, Dathan and Abiram with their Confederates, murmuring against
Moses and Aaron, and endeavoring to make a Rebellion. upon a pretense of
greater holiness, So like wise 2 Samuel 15. 11.
the want or the Corruption of Justice, and the necessity of a Reformation is
pretended by Absalom, and this gets him the hearts of the people, and two
hundred of them follow him, presently in their simplicity. The very same
Pretensions have bin made use of in all the Rebellions that have happened in
our own Nation, (at least since the Reformation,) which will furnish us with
matter enough, without being obliged to our Neighbors or to more remote
countries for Examples. Cum alii aliter sentirent, dicerentque consultias sibi
videriut non Catholica fides, verum alia quaepiam belli causa obtendiretur,
tunc Norhumbriae Gomes, at Ego (inquit) aliam nullam aut scio aut agnosco,
neque hominum (opinor sed Dei Gloriam quaerimus. Concer^atie Eccles. Cathol. in
Angl. p. 46.
The frequent Conspiracies laid against the life of that Incomparable Princess
of glorious memory Queen Elizabeth were all contrived upon the score of
Religion. The Design of blowing up the King and Parliament upon a fifth of
November was a Design of Religion. It was Religion and the Extirpation of
Popery, and the Reformation of the Church according to the Examples of the best
Reformed Churches, that inspired the Pen men of the solemn League and Covenant
that set the three Kingdoms in a flame, and destroyed the best Prince that
ever wore a Crown, and the best established Government in the world. The
Association a few years ago was contrived and entered into for the sake of
Religion: and it was the same spirit of Religion that actuated the Authors of
the late Traitorous Declarations, which were published to justify the two
Rebellions, which are so very lately extinguishd, and for which we are now met
to bless God, in putting a stop to the miseries that do accompany an intestine
and unnatural war in our own Bowels. Tantum Religio potuit suadere malorum.
Nothing but Religion (as the Poet well observes) could be the cause of so much
evil.

Now the advice of the wise man in relation to all these causes or Impulsives
to Rebellion, whether secret or avowed, whether real or pretended, is that we
should not be hasty to go out of the Kings sight. i. e. We must not give way to
any of our Passions: we must not suffer our selves to be overcome or
transported with any the greatest Provocation or Temptation to withdraw our
selves from the service of our Prince, to deny him our obedience, to throw off
our allegiance to him, or to rise in Rebellion against him. Let not the Glories
of a Crown, nor the hopes of making thy Fortune, nor the greatest Injuries and
desire of Revenge, nor the pretense of Religion ever tempt or provoak thee to
be a Rebel. Ambition, Covetousness and Revenge are sins in their own Nature,
and become more exceeding sinful, when they are varnishd over with the
specious show of Religion, and made the Instruments of stirring up of a
Rebellion because simulata sanctitas est duplex Iniquitas, Counterfiet
Religion' or Holiness is complicated iniquity, and 1 Samuel 15. 23.
Rebellion is as the sin of VVitchraft: and if it be not the sin against the
holy ghost, it is very near a kin to that sin which in all probability comes
nearest it, which is the sin of witchcraft, which is a Renunciation of God, and
a listing our selves in the service of the Devil: and therefore Rebellion is
fitly compared to Witchcraft because as Witchcraft is a renunciation of that
duty and service we ow to God, so Rebellion is the same in relation to his
Vicegerent. They are both sins of the first magnitude, and very rarely admit of
or leave a place for Repentance: which is all that is affirmed of the sin
against the holy Ghost, when it is said, that it shall never be for given
neither in this life, nor in that which is to come.

2. As our first and chiefest care should be not to give way to any of those
passions which may be apt to stir us up to rebel, or to desire and attempt a
change, so that we may preserve our Loyalty and our Innocence untainted and
free from suspicion as well as guilt: we are advisd or commanded in the next
place, not to meddle with them that are given to change. We must have nothing
to do with those we know to be of factious and rebellious Principles. And the
reasons which may be given for this are not of the least importance, which are
these two.

1. Because the very Conversation of some persons breaths infection, and by
keeping them Company, we shall come at length to have a better opinion of their
Principles, and a worse opinion of our Governors than either of them deserve.
The poison of their discourse will insensibly insinuate it self into our souls,
and we shall be corrupted, we shall be undon before we are aware. And therefore
the reason which the Wise man gives why we should not keep Company with angry
men, is no less true of seditious persons, and of all other sinners
whatsoever. Pr. 22. 24.
Make no friendship with an angry man, and with a furious man thou shall not
go, lest thou learn his ways, and get a snare to thy soul.

2. The other reason against keeping company or having any thing to do with
persons of disloyal principles, may be taken from the suspicion and
disreputation that is contracted by it. A man is said to be known by the
Company he keeps, and such as his Company is known to be, such he is supposed
to be himself: and when he is once suspected to be disaffected, to the
Government, it will be no easy matter for him ever after to wipe off the
suspicion. And from hence some men merely by being reputed to be disaffected
have come to be really so; supposeing it one and the same thing to be an ill
man as to be thought one. Indeed a good man who is conscious of his own
Innocence ought to be satisfied from himself, and with the Testimony of his own
Conscience and not to value the Opinion of the World, if he have given no just
cause for its ill Opinion. But there are few men in love with Virtue for its
own sake, or would be virtuous if they thought they should not be taken notice
of: and therefore when once they come to be suspected, and find how hard, if
not impossible it is to regain their former reputation, they resolve never to
attempt it, and care not if they are altogether as bad as they are supposd and
represented: besides all this, the very suspicion may sometimes be of as ill
consequence to a man as if he was really guilty: which may suffice to let you
see what great reason every man has who values either his Innocence or
Reputation to avoid the Company of those who are known to be men of seditious
and Rebellious Principles; if they would avoid the guilt or the Imputation of
being given to change, and the ill Consequences of it, which brings me to the,

2. General part of the words, viz the Punishment threatend to all those, who
are given to Change or who rebel against their lawful Prince, set down in the
latter part of the words, for their Calamity shall rise suddenly and who
knows the Ruin of them both?

As God is pleased to express the Duty he requires of us himself, and the Duty
which subjects ow their Kings, by one and the same word, to signify the great
Concern he has for them, and for the peace and welfare of the world, which
depends upon the preservation of their persons, and the Obedience which is due
to them from their subjects; so the better to secure their persons from
violence and to keep their subjects in their Obedience, he threatens the same
punishment to those who shall violate their Duty to the King, as to himself;
For their Calamity shall rise suddenly, and who knows the ruin of them both?
And the reason is, because he who is a Traitor, and a Rebel to his King is at
the same time a Traitor and a Rebel to God. This God himself tells Samuel when
the People refused any longer to be governd by him. 1 Samuel 8. 7.
They have not rejected thee (says God) but they have rejected me that I
should not reign over them which is more fully expressed by St. Paul. To. 13. 1.
Let every soul be subject to the higher Powers, for there is no Power but of
God: the Powers that be are ordained of God, whosoever therefore resists the
Power resists the Ordinance of God, and they that resist shall receive to
themselves Damnation.

The Damnation here spoaken of by St. Paul includes both the Calamity and Ruin
that is threatend to Rebels in the text, and that more severe Punishment or
Damnation which is reserved for them in the other world.

1. The Temporal Punishment which is here threatened to Rebels is expresd after
such a manner as to denote both the Nature, the Certainty and the Suddenness
of it.

The Nature of their Punishment is expressed 1. by the Calamity or miseries
they bring upon them selves and then by their final Ruin and Destruction. The
Certainty of their Punishment is signified by the reduplication of the
threatening expresd by Calamity and Ruin; and the suddenness of it as it is
expressly set down, for their Calamity shall rise suddenly and who knows the
Ruin of them both?

This, as all other temporal threatenings in scripture, is to be understood as
generally and for the most part true.

Tho God has threatened the wicked with Temporal as well as Eternal misery, yet
we see many times, Jer. 12 1:
that the way of the Wicked prospers, and they are happy that deal very
treacherously. P. 1. 73.
They are not in trouble as other men, neither are they plagued like other men,
nay they have no pangs in their death neither, but their strength continues
firm to the last. So it may, and so it does sometimes fare with Rebels, they may
for a time prosper in their Rebellion, and God may suffer his People for the
punishment of their sins and for their Amendment and Reformation to groan under
a long and prosperous Usurpation. But when any thing of this nature happens, it
is beside the common method of Gods Providence, and all such persons have reason
to expect the contrary, and if they do not meet with their Punishment in this
world, they may be sure it will light so much the heavier upon them in the
next. Ps. 92. 7.
When all the wicked spring as the Grass and when all the Workers of
Iniquity do flourish: it is that they may be destroyed for ever.

But the Rule both of our Judgment and of our Practice is not to be borrowed
from Extraordinary Occurrences, but from the common and usual proceedings of
God, and the known declarations of his will in scripture: And according to both
these ways of Judging, the fate of Rebels as to this world may be concluded to
be such as it is represented to us, both as to the Nature, the Certainty, and
the Suddenness of their Calamity and Ruin. They are generally reduced to
great want and misery in their life time; they come to an untimely end, and
their Destruction very often befalls them upon a sudden, as might be easily
made appear by innumerable Examples both in sacred and profane story, of which
I shall only instance in afew.

Corah, Dathan and Abiram (whom I have already mentioned) were the first Rebels
that we have any account of in scripture; and because Rebellion was till then a
new and unheard of sin, God resolves to punish them after a new and
extraordinary manner. The Earth is made to open her mouth, and Nu. 16
to swallow them up alive with all that belongd to them. The next Rebel of any
note or consideration that we read of was 2 Samuel 15.
Absalom, who contrary to all the ties of Nature, Duty and Gratitude raisd a
Rebellion against his father, which was quickly dissipated, and the General
himself in his flight, rideing under an Oak caught up by the hair of the head,
where he hung till he was struck through the heart by Joab; which put an end to
that Rebellion; which is no sooner over, but 2 Samuel 20.
Sheba the son of Bichri a man of Belial, sounds a trumpet, and issues out a
Declaration, saying, we have no part in David neither have we Inheritance in
the Son of Iesse, Every man to his Tents o Israel: and he draws all Israel
after him; but is presently pursued by Joab, and loses his head as the reward
of his Treason and Rebellion. After this we read of nothing almost but Treasons
and Rebellions in the Kingdom of Israel, (which was at first founded in a
Rebellion) from the time of its Revolt from the house of David till it was
carried away Captive; and of the slaughter and destruction of those that had a
hand in them, that it was become a Proverb, Had Zimri Peace, who slew his
Master? He conspired against Elah his Master, and slew him, 1 K. 16.
and the whole time of his Reign was seven days in Tirzah, and when the People
heard say, Zimri has conspired and has also slain the King, they made Omri
Captain of the Host King in the Camp, and he went up and all Israel with him,
and they besieged Tirzah: and it came to pass when Zimri saw that the City was
taken, that he went into the Palace of the Kings house, and burnt the Kings
house over him with fire, and he died. And some such miserable fate may be
observed to have attended the Authors, of almost all the Parricides and all
the Rebellions that have happend in any part of the world from that time to
this. Percussorum autem fere neque trienaio quisquam amplius super vixit, neque
sua morte defunctus est etc. Sueton. inuita Caes. sic Capitol. de Gordiani
caede.
Of those that murderd Julius Caesar not a man of them died a natural death.
All of them stood condemned, some perished by shipwreck, others by war, and
some killd them selves with the same dagger they stabbed their Master. And did
not the same Vengeance overtake the murderers of our late Blessed sovereign
King Chapter the Martyr? And what is become of the two last Rebellions that have
bin' raisd in these Nations to which we belong, and of their Leaders? In the
space of less than two months, we have seen two Rebel Armies in the field
breathing out nothing but destruction to their natural and lawful sovereign,
and to all that adhered to him, animated with the great numbers that at first
came flocking into them, and with the certain hopes of success and Victory; we
have seen them I say contrary to their own and the Expectation of all their
Friends, and Confederates both at home and abroad, totally routed by a small
number of the Kings Forces, a great part of them slain upon the place, and the
rest dispersed, and left without all hopes or a possibility of making an
escape: Their General himself reduced to the utmost Extremity and a want of
all things, so as to be ready to perish with hunger, and then taken alive, and
brought to suffer death by the hands of a common Executioner. To whom and to
all such perfidious Traitors as they were, the Prophetical Observation of the
Psalmist may be applied, and will be verified at one time or other Ps. 7. 14.
Behold he travaileth with Iniquity and has conceived mischief, and brought
forth falsehood; he made a pit and dug it, and is fallen into the ditch which
he made; his mischief shall return upon his own head, and his violent dealing
shall come down upon his own pate. For which every good man will join with the
same Royal Prophet in the next verse, and say, I will praise the Lord according
to his Righteousness, and will sing praise to the name of the Lord most high.
All which may be sufficient to justify the Assertion of the wise man in the
words, concerning the punishment of Rebels, and and such as are given to change
as to this life; That their Calamity shall rise suddenly and who knows the
ruin of them both?

But yet this Calamity and Ruin which is threatend to Rebels in this life is
but part of their punishment: and tho one would think might be enough to
terifie any man from such practices, as may render him liable to it, yet it is
nothing to that other severer punishment which is reserved for them in the
other world, and which without Repentance they shall not be able to escape.
There is a possibility (as I have observed to you) that a Rebellion (by the
just permission of God for the sin's of a People) may succeed, and that the
Authors of it may go down to the Grave in peace: but whether they do or do not
escape in this life, there will be no hopes or possibility of their escapeing
in the next; I mean without Repentance, and there is the less hopes of their
Escape, because there is so little hopes of their Repentance. Then they will be
convinced to their eternal Confusion, that it was no such light or trivial
matter (as it is now generally made) to revile the Gods, or to speak evil of
the Ruler of our People; to curse the King in our thought, or to stretch forth
our hand against the Lords Anointed. And Iud. 8. 13
if the Blackness of Darkness be reserved for those who despise Dominions,
and speak evil of Dignities; what degree of Punishment shall be thought great
enough? what Flames of eternal fire shall be kindled for those who delight to
wash their hands in the blood of Princes, and to involve their Dominions in
Misery and Confusion, and to turn the whole world (if it were in their Power)
into one Aceldama or field of blood? Certainly such men must expect to receive
to themselves a Damnation above that which belongs to the ordinary rank of
sinners, and proportionable to the greatness and heinousness of their
Impieties. Their sin seems to be of the same nature with that of Lucifer, and
his Rebellious Apostate Angels, and in some respect may be said to be more
criminal, as being actually attended with a greater train of evils, and
therefore it is but reasonable they should partake of the same punishment,
which is, Iud. 6.
to be reserved in everlasting chains, under Darkness unto the Judgment of
the great day. And then they shall receive their final and irrevocable
sentence, of Go ye Cursed into Everlasting lasting fire prepared for the Devil
and his Angels.

Thus you have heard what is the Duty which God requires of subjects toward
their King and Sovereign, and what is the Punishment due to Rebels. We are
commanded to fear and honor the King; we must not revile him nor speak evil
of him, we must not curse him no not in our thought, nor much less lift up a
hand against him. We must not suffer any passion, or temptation or provocation
to transport us beyond our duty, so as to withdraw our Obedience from him. We
must neither be given to change our selves, nor have any thing to do with those
that are; both for fear of being infected with their pernicious principles or
at least of being suspected; which may both do us an injury, and perhaps
involue us in the real guilt of those principles and practices whereof at first
we were only suspected to be guilty. You have heard likewise the Punishment
which belongs to Rebels both as to this life, and to that which is to come; and
tho the former seems to be only expressed, yet the latter is always supposed;
and is likewise expressed by the Apostle that they receive to them selves
Damnation. Their punishment as to this life is both certain, and sudden, their
Calamity shall rise suddenly and who knows the ruin of them both? which by
the great Mercy of God, we have seen verified in the sudden and unexpected
period that has bin put to two Rebellions in our own Island; for which we have
great reason (as we are commanded by Authority) to offer up our public as well
as private Thanksgiveings to our great Sovereign the King of Heaven and Earth,
for delivering us from the Miseries and Calamities which our sins had most
justly deserved, and which we have bin taught by sad Experience to be the
constant Attendants upon an unnatural and succesfull Rebellion. Nor must our
Thanksgiveing only be verbal, and with our lips, but we are called upon to set
forth the praises of our Great Deliverer with our lives (which is the most
acceptable way of praising him) by endeavoring to improve this and all other
his Mercies to the Glory of his Great Name, the Honor, Peace, and Benefit of
our Sovereign and his Kingdoms, and as much as in us lies to the good of all
mankind; all which we shall be the better enabled to do if we are careful to
transcribe the Duty in the text according to its litteral meaning into our
hearts and lives, by adding the true fear of God, to the Loyalty we profess to
have for our King: which will afford us these two Inferences by way of
Application, with which I shall conclude.

1. That without Piety or the Fear of God, our greatest Professions of Loyalty,
will be but like a house built by a fool without a faundation upon the sand;
and the rain descended, and the Winds blew, and beat upon it and it fell. So
long as it was fair Weather and no Wind stirring it seems the house stood, but
the first blustering storm blew it over; so it is with all those that are
disloyal to God, and yet pretend Loyalty to their King. It is no wonder if they
love their King, when Loyalty is in fashion and they know it to be their
Interest as well as Duty. But when ever the scene comes to be alterd, and that
the Royal Interest declines, and they are like to be sufferers by their
Loyalty, they are the most likely Persons to turn Apostates, because their
Loyalty had no sure Foundation it was founded upon the sand. But where a man's
Loyalty proceeds from the Fear of God and a sense of Duty, it may fitly be
compared to a house built upon a Rock, and the rain descended and the flood
came, and the winds blew, and beat upon that house, and it fell not, for it was
founded upon a Rock. A truly pious and good man will be Loyal in foul weather
as well as in fair. Let the Sun shine or let it rain, he is still the same. He
will love, honor and stick to his Prince as well in Adversity as Prosperity,
and he will think it as great an honor to suffer as so reign with him.

2. As Piety and the Fear of God is the only security we can give of our
Loyalty (it being impossible there can be any firm and unshaken Loyalty without
it;) so without Loyalty it is as certain there can be no true Piety. All the
noise and fair speeches about Religion that have bin made by Rebels in their
Covenants and Declarations, and all the outward shows of Godliness, which
they have put on, have bin nothing but Hypocrisy, and Traps to deceive the
simple. There have no men ever known so well how to counterfiet a Form of
Godliness; or who have known so little what belonged to the Power of it.
(...). upon the Covent.
While the breath of Religion fills the sails (as our late Royal Martyr speaks
in his incomparable book) Profit is the Compass by which Factious men steer
their Course in all seditious Commotions. And as the same Eccellent Prince
speaks in another place against our late hypocritical Reformers; Id. c. 20
Iam sure the right methods of reforming the Church, cannot consist with that
of perturbing the Civil state: nor can Religion be justly advanced by
depressing Loyalty, which is one of the chiefest Ingredients and Ornaments of
true Religion, for next to Fear God is Honor the King. Nor will any men in
Impartial times appear good Christians, that approve not themselves good
subjects. And therefore you may take this for a Certain and infallible Rule,
that he who Fears, Honors, and Obeys God, will Fear, Honor, and Obey his King
likewise. Which God grant we may all do, for the honor of Jesus Christ, to
whom with the Father, and the holy Spirit. as for all other mercies, so more
especially for that we now celebrate, be ascribed (as is most due) all Praise
Majesty and Dominion now and for ever. Amen.

FINIS.

