THE FRENCH Way of Exercizing THE INFANTRY: As it is now practiced in the
ARMIES OF HIS MOST Christian Majesty.

Translated from the French, October the 31, 1672.

LONDON, Printed for Dorman Newman at the Kings Arms in the Poultry, and
Jonathan Edwin at the Three Roses in Ludgate Street, 1672.

THE GENERAL Way of Exercize FOR THE INFANTRY.
The manner of possessing the Ground, and forming a Battalion.
THe Major takes the Colonel and his Adjutant, or whoever acts in that charge,
and attends them in the Field which he has pitched upon.

The Major takes the Muskets, and forms the front of a Battalion.

The Adjatant ought to be at the head of the Pikes, which he draws up in the
same manner in the rere of the Maskets, at twenty spaces distance, if he have
ground sufficient.

The Major or Adjatant must observe that the due distance of Files (when they
are not Exercizing) is only half a space distance: but when they come to
handling their arms or doublings, they must open to a whole pace.

No Company must enter into the field but in its order, and six deep in file.

The Captains or Officers must lead their Companies with a Pike in their hand,
the Lieutenants must be at the rere of the Pikes, when there are Ensigns; and
when there is none, they are to place themselves at the head of the Pikes when
they are drawn into battalia.

The Companies being come to the designed ground, shall file off one after
another, and pass upon the left wing of the Pikes; and in the first place they
shall leave their pikes in the field of the battle, and the Muskets shall
pursue their march till they have joined the front of their Muskets.

So soon as the last Company has joined the Battalion, the Adjutant shall file
off the Pikes by quarter Ranks to go join the Battalion; on the same front of
Muskets on the left wing, and without losing time, as soon as the last quarter
Rank is arrived, he shall face them to the left in demi-rank, to the left the
Muskets, and to the right the Pikes; and by a word of Command, [March,] the
Pikes and the Muskets shall possess the same ground: after which he shall give
command, [As you were,] taking care that in these movings, a Sergeant be st^ll
at the wing of each Division, to prevent their falsifying.

No Officer shall leave the head of his Company, nor his pike, till the
battalion be formed.

When a battalion is formed, the first Lieutenant shall take his stand in the
rere of the first division of Muskets, and the last in the rere of the last
division; an Ensign in the rere of the pikes, with one half of the Sergeants to
hinder the Soldiers from dispersing or breaking their ranks.

When the Major gives any command, the Officers and Sergeants are to cause a
profound silence to be kept, and none but he is to give any command, unless he
that commands the Regiment.

The Captains and Officers are to be employed in the putting in execution all
Commands according as they shall be disposed by the Major.

The Drums shall be placed on the right hand and the left.

The General Exercize for the INFANTRY.
AFter having drawn the Regiment into Battalia, they draw out the Files of
Halberteers which are placed on the wings of the Battalion by the following
Commands.

Take care Halberteers to form your Files on the wings of the battalion. To the
right and left by half rank, draw your files on the wings of the battalion.
March.
Then they open the Files of the Battalion.

Take heed to your selves in opening your files, that the right hand file stir
not. To the left open your files to three foot distance. March. Halt. To the
right.
The Exercize of the Musket.
Take heed to your selves there in the exercizing your Muskets.

Lay your right hand on your musket. Poyze your musket, Join your left hand to
your musket. Handle your match. Blow your match. Cock your match. Try your
match. Lay your two fingers on the pan. Blow your match. Open your pan.
Present.
At this command the Pikes charge.

Give fire. Withdraw your arms.
At this command the Pikes advance.

Take out your match. Return it to its place. Blow your pan. Take your primer.
Prime your pan. Shut your pan. Blow your pan. Pass your musket to the sword
side. Take your charger. Open your charger with your teeth. Put the powder into
the barrel. Draw your Rammer. Advance your Rammer. Shorten your Rammer against
your breast. Put in your Rammer into your gun. Ramm hard. Withdraw your Rammer.
Advance your Rammer. Shorten your Rammer against your breast. Return your
Rammer. Join your right hand to your musket. Poyz your musket. Shoulder your
musket.
Exercize of the Pike.
Take heed to your selves there, Pikemen.

Lay down your Pike To the right, to the right, to the right, to the right.
Half turn to the right. as you were: To the left, to the left, to the left, to
the left. Half turn to the left. as you were.
Advance your Pike.

Charge to the front, To the right, to the right, to the right, to the right,
Half faced to the right, as you were: To the left, to the left, to the left, to
the left, Half faced to the left, as you were. Advance your Pike, Charge to
your proper front, as you were: To the right charge your Pike, as you were. To
the right half turned charge, as you were; To the left charge your Pike, as you
were; Half turn to the left charge, as you were,
Port your Pike.

Charge to the front, as you were; To the right charge your pike, as you were;
Half turn to the right charge, as you were: To the left charge your pike, as
you were; Half turn to the left charge, as you were.
Comport your pike the head foremost.

Charge to the front, as you were; To the right hand about charge, as you were;
Half turn to the right charge, as you were: To the left hand about charge, as
you were: Half turn to the left charge, as you were.
Dart your pike.

Charge to the front, as you were: To the right hand about charge, as you were;
Half turn to the right charge, as you were: To the left hand about charge, as
you were: Half turn to the left charge, as you were.
Order your pike.

Charge to horse, Draw your sword, Return your sword, Order your pike, Charge
to the front; March, Halt, Cast off your pike, Trail your pike the head
downwards, March, Halt, as you were, Order your pike.
Take heed there the whole battalion to present your arms.

Musketeers make ready, The pikes charge at the same time, To the right, to the
right, to the right, to the right: Half turn to the right, as you were: To the
left, to the left, to the left, to the ^^ft, H^^^ (...) to the left, as you
were. Take your match, Return your match, Shoulder your Musket.
Here they advance their pikes.

Take care there the whole Battalion. To the right, to the right, to the right,
to the right, Half turn to the right, as you were: To the left, to the left, to
the left, to the left, Half turned to the left, as you were.
Ranks that are to double take heed there.

To the right double your ranks in front. March. Ranks as you were, March, To
the left double your ranks in front. March, Ranks as you were, March.
Ranks which have not yet doubled, take heed there.

To the right double your ranks in the rere, March, Ranks as you were, March. To
the left double your ranks in the rere, March, Ranks as you were, March.
Half-file-leaders take heed there.

To the right half-file-leaders double your ranks in front, March, Bringers up
as you were, March, To the left half-file-leaders double your ranks in front,
March, Bringers up as you were, March.
Half file bringers up take heed there.

To the right half file bringers up double your ranks in the rere, March, File
leaders make good your ranks as you were, To the left half file bringers up
double your ranks in the rere, March, File leaders make good your ranks as
before, March.
Bringers up take heed there.

To the right bringers up double your ranks in front, March, march, march, Half
file leaders make good your ranks as before, March, To the left bringers up
double your ranks in front, March, march, march, Half file leaders make good
your ranks as you were, March.
File leaders take care there.

To the right file leaders double your ranks in the rere, March, Half turned to
the right, march; Half turned to the right, march; Half file bringers up make
good your ranks as you were, March, To the left file leaders double your ranks
in the rere, March, Half turn to the left, march; Half turn to the left, march;
Half file bringers up make good your ranks as you were, March.
Half ranks take care to close with your files.

To the right and left demi-ranks close to your files, March.
Half file-leaders take care to double your ranks on the wings in front.

To the right and left half file-leaders double your ranks on the wings in
front. March, march Bringers up make good your files as you were, March, march,
Half bringers up take heed there, To the right and the left half file bringers
up double your ranks on the wings in the rere, March, march File leaders make
good your ranks as you were, March, march.
Half file leaders take heed there.

To the right and left half file leaders double your ranks in front inward,
March, march, Bringers up make good your ranks as you were March, march,
Half file bringers up take heed there.

To the right and left half file bringers up double your ranks in the rere
inwards, March, march, File leaders make good your ranks as you were, March,
march,
Demi ranks take heed there.

To the right and left by demi ranks regain your distances, march, Halt, To the
right and left,
Files that are to double take care there.

To the right double your files, march: To the right treble your files: march:
Untreble your files: march: Files as you were: march,
Files which have not doubled take heed to your selves.

To the left double your files: march: To the left treble your files: march:
Untreble your files: march: Files as you were: march. Demi ranks take heed to
the doubling of your files. To the right by Demi ranks double your files,
March, Demi ranks make good your files as they were, March.
Demi ranks that have not doubled take heed there.

To the left by demi ranks double your files, March, Demi ranks make good your
files as they were, March.
Demi ranks take heed to the doubling your files in front and rere.

To the right by demi ranks double your files in front and rere, March, march:
Demi ranks make good your files as they were. March, march.
Demi ranks which have not doubled, take heed there.

To the left demi ranks double your files in front and rere. March, march: Demi
ranks make good your files as they were, march, march.
Demi ranks take care to double your files inwards.

To the right, demi ranks double your files inwards: march, march: Demi ranks
make good your files as they were: march, march:
Demi ranks which have not yet doubled take heed there.

To the left by demi Ranks double your files inwards: march, march: Demi Ranks
make good your files as they were: march.
Quarter Ranks take care to the doubling your files.

To the right by quarter Ranks double your files: march: Quarter Ranks make
good your files as they were: march.
Quarter Ranks that have not doubled, take heed there.

To the left by quarter Ranks double your files: march: Quarter Ranks make good
your files as they were: march.
Quarter Ranks of the wings take heed in doubling your files with the quarter
Ranks in the center.

To the right and left quarter ranks of the wings double your files with the
quarter Ranks of the center: march: Quarter Ranks make good your files as you
were: march.
Quarter Ranks in the center take care of doubling your files with the quarter
Ranks of the wings.

To the right and left quarter Ranks of the center double your files with the
quarter Ranks of the wings: march: Quarter Ranks make good your files as
before: march:
Quarter ranks take care to double your files by front and rere.

To the right quarter ranks double your files in front and rere. March, march:
Quarter ranks return your files as they were: March, march:
Quarter ranks which have not doubled take heed there.

To the left, quarter ranks double your files in front and rere, March, march:
Quarter ranks return your files as they were, March, march.
Quarter ranks on the wings take heed to double your files on the quarter ranks
of the Center by front and rere.

To the right and left quarter ranks on the wings double your files on the
quarter ranks of the center by front and rere. March, march. Quarter ranks,
return your files as they were, March, march:
Quarter ranks of the center take heed to double your files, on the quarter
ranks of the wings by front and rere.

To the right and left quarter ranks in the center double your files on the
quarter ranks of the wings by front and rere, March, march: Quarter ranks
return your files as you were. March, march.
Quarter ranks take care to double your files inwards.

To the right by quarter ranks double your files inwards. March, march: Quarter
ranks remit your files as they were, March: march:
Quarter ranks which have not doubled take care there.

To the left quarter ranks double your files inwards, March, march. Quarter
ranks make good your files as you were, March, march:
Quarter ranks on the wings take care to double your files on the quarter ranks
of the center inwards.

To the right and left quarter ranks on the wings double your files on the
quarter ranks of the Center inwards, March, march. Quarter ranks make good your
files as you were, March, march:
Quarter ranks in the center take care to double your files on the quarter
ranks of the wings inwards.

To the right and left quarter ranks in the center double your files on the
quarter ranks of the wings inwards, March, march: Quarter ranks make good your
files as they were.
Take care how you countermarch.

To the right by ranks make your countermarch: March. Halt. To the right. To
the left by ranks make your countermarch: March. Halt. To the left. To the
right and left by demy-ranks make your countermarch. March. Halt. To the right
and left. To the right and left by demy-ranks make your countermarch. March.
Halt. To the right and left. To the right and left by quarter ranks make a
countermarch. March. Halt. To the right and left. To right and left by quarter
ranks make a countermarch. March. Halt. To right and left. To the right by file
countermarch. March. Halt. Half to the right. To the left by file countermarch.
March. Halt. Half turn to the left.
Take heed to make a quarter conversion

To the right a quarter conversion. March. Halt. To the left a quarter
conversion. March. Halt.
Take notice what you do.

Order your arms. the pikemen set their pikes to ground. Lay down your arms.
the pikemen lay their pikes upon the ground between their two feet. To the
right and left by demy-ranks break the battalion. March. To your arms. Handle
your arms. Shoulder your muskets.
Exercize by Quarter-files.
The Battalia must be drawn eight deep and these words of command follow.
Quarter files take care in doubling your ranks to the front.

To the right by quarter files double your ranks in the front: march: Quarter
files make good your Ranks as you were. March. To the left by quarter files
double your Ranks in the front, March, Quarter files make good your Ranks as
you were, March,
Quarter files take care in doubling your Ranks to the rere.

To the right by quarter files double your Ranks in the rere. March. Quarter
files make good your Ranks as you were. March. To the left by quarter files
double your Ranks in the rere. March. Quarter files make good your Ranks as you
were: March:
Half file leaders take heed there.

To the right half file leaders double your Ranks in front. March. Bringers up
make good your Ranks as you were, March. To the left half file leaders double
your Ranks in front. March. Bringers up make good your Ranks as you were,
March,
Bringers up take care there.

To the right half file bringers up double your Ranks in the rere, March. File
leaders make good your Ranks as you were, March, To the left half file bringer
up double your Ranks in the rere. File leaders make good your Ranks as you
were. March.
Quarter files in the front and rere, look about you there.

To the right quarter files of the front and rere, double your Ranks in front
and rere on the quarter files of the center: march: Quarter files make good
your Ranks as you were; To the left quarter files of the front and rere, double
your Ranks in front and rere on the quarter files of the center; march: Quarter
files make good your Ranks as you were; march.
Quarter files of the center, take heed there.

To the right quarter files of the center, double your Ranks before and behind
on the quarter Ranks of the front and rere. Quarter files make good your ranks
as you were: To the left quarter files in the Center double your ranks before
and behind on the Quarter files of the front and rear, march: Quarter files
make good your ranks as you were, march:
Demi ranks take heed there:

To the Right and left by Demi rank close your files, march:
Take care to double your ranks in front on the wings.

To the right and left by Quarter files double your ranks in front on the
wings, march, march: Quarter files make good your ranks as you were, march,
march: To the right and left quarter files double your ranks in the rear on the
wings march, march: Quarter-files make good your ranks as you were, march: To
the right and left quarter files double your ranks in front inwards, march,
march: Quarter files make good your ranks as you were, march, march: To the
right and left Quarter files double your ranks in the rear inwards, march,
march: Quarter files make good your ranks as you were, march:
Half file leaders take care:

To the right and left half file leaders double your ranks in front on the
wings, march, march: Bringers up make good your ranks as you were, march,
march:
Half file bringers up take care:

To the right and left half file bringer up double your ranks in the rear on
the wings, march, march: File leaders make good your ranks as you were, march,
march:
Half file leaders take heed there:

To the right and left half file leaders, double your ranks in front inwards,
march, march: Bringers up make good your ranks as you were, march, march:
Half file bringers up take care:

To the right and left half file bringers up double your ranks in the rear
inwards, march, march: File-leaders make good your ranks as you were, march:
Quarter files in front and rear take care.

To the right and left quarter files of the front and rear double your ranks in
front and rear upon the quarter files of the Center on the wings, march,
march: Quarter files make good your ranks as you were, march, march:
Quarter files of the Center take heed there.

To the right and left quarter files of the Center double your ranks in front
and rear on the quarter files of the front and rear on the wings, march,
march: Quarter files make good your ranks as you were, march, march:
Quarter files of the front and rear take care to your selves.

To the right and left by quarter files of the front and rear double your
ranks in the rear on the quarter files of the Center inwards, march, march:
Quarter files make good your ranks as you were.
Quarter files in the Center take heed to your selves.

To the right and left quarter files in the Center double your ranks in front
and rear on the quarter files of the front and rear inwards, march, march:
Quarter files make good your ranks as you were, march, march: To the right and
left by demi ranks regain your distances, march:
Take care Pikemen to line the Battalia.

To the right and left by entire Ranks of Pikes line the Battalia front and
rear. March. Halt. To the right and left. March. Halt. To the right and left.
Take care to be as you were.

To the right and left regain your ranks. March. Halt. To the right and left.
March. Halt. As you were.
The Halbertiers with the Officers are placed on the wings of the Battle to
cover the Flanks, and files of Muskets are drawn from the right and left for
firings.

Particular Exercize for the FOOT. In things most necessary and ordinarily used
in Encounters.
AFter the Regiment is drawn into a Body, draw out the Files of Halberteers
which are placed on the wings by the following Commands.

Take care Halberteers to form Files on the wings of the body. To the right and
left by half ranks draw out your files on the wings of the body. March.
Then cause the Files in the Body to open.

Take heed in opening your files, that the right hand file stir not. To the
left open your files to three foot distance. March. Halt. To the right.
Exercize of the Musket.
Take heed in the exercizing your Musket.

Lay your right hand on your musket. Poyze your musket, Join your left hand to
your musket. Take your match. Blow your match. Cook your match. Try your match.
Lay your two singers on the pan. Blow your match. Open your pan. Present.
At this command the Pikes charge in front.

Give fire. Withdraw your arms.
Here the Pikes advance.

Take out your match. Return it to its place. Blow your pan. Take your primer.
Prime your pan. Shut your pan. Blow your pan. Pass your musket to the sword
side. Take your charger. Open it with your teeth. Put in your powder. Draw your
Rammer. Advance your Rammer. Shorten it against your breast. Put it into your
bore. Ramm. Withdraw your Rammer. Advance your Rammer. Shorten it against your
breast. Return your Rammer. Join your right hand to your musket. Poyz your
musket. Shoulder your musket.
Exercize of the Pike.
Look to your selves, Pikemen.

Lay down your Pike To the right, to the right, to the right, to the right.
Half turn to the right. as you were: To the left, to the left, to the left, to
the left. Half turn to the left. as you were.
Advance your Pike.

Charge to the front, To the right, to the right, to the right, to the right,
Half turn to the right, as you were: To the left, to the left, to the left, to
the left, Half turn to the left, as you were. Advance your Pike, Port your
pike, Charge to the front, as you were: To the right charge, as you were. Half
turned to the right charge, as you were; To the left charge, as you were; Half
turn to the left charge, as you were.
Comport your pike the head foremost.

Charge to the front. Trail your pike the head downwards, as you were, Cast off
your pike, Order your pike. Charge to horse, Draw your sword, Return your
sword, Order your pike,
Take heed the whole body to present your arms.

Musketeers make ready, The pikes charge at the same time, and the command
following serve as well for the pikes as the Muskets. To the right, to the
right, to the right, to the right: Half turn to the right, as you were: To the
left, to the left, to the left, to the left, Half turn to the left, as you
were. Handle your match, Return it to its place, Shoulder your Musket.
At the same time they order their pikes. Take heed there the whole Battalion.

To the right, to the right, to the right, to the right, Half turn to the
right, as you were: To the left, to the left, to the left, to the left, Half
turned to the left, as you were.
Ranks that are to double look to it.

To the right double your ranks in front. March. Ranks as you were, March, To
the left double your ranks in front. March, Ranks as you were, March
Ranks that have not doubled, look to it.

To the right double your ranks in the rere March, Ranks as you were, March, To
the left double your ranks in the rere, March, Ranks as you were, March.
Demi ranks of the wing take care.

To the right by demi Ranks of the wing double your files, March, Demi Ranks
make good your files as you were, March, Demi Ranks that have not doubled, take
care. To the left by Demi Ranks of the wings double your files, March, Demi
Ranks make good your files as you were, March.
Demi Ranks of the body take care.

To the right by Demi Ranks double your files, March, Demi Ranks make good your
files as you were, March, To the left by Demi Ranks double your files, March,
Demi Ranks make good your files as you were, March.
The whole body take care to countermarch.

To the right by Ranks countermarch, March. Halt. To the right. To the left by
Ranks countermarch, March. Halt. To the left.
Take heed to make a quarter conversion.

To the right a quarter conversion, March. Halt, To the left a quarter
conversion, March. Halt.
Take notice all.

Order your arms,
The Pike-men rest their pikes on the ground.

Lay down your arms,
The Pike-men stick their pikes between their two legs.

Be ready to go A la Paille.

A la Paille; [Which they are to do when the drum beats a charge, and to return
on its second beating, with their swords in their hands, and holding them above
their head, when every one is returned to his place.

And when they are returned,

Return your swords, Handle your arms,
The Pike-men take their Pikes out of the ground.

Shoulder your musket,
The pikes advance.

All sorts of change of Filings.
Take care in all changes of fillings, that the files be of even number, and if
there be found any supernumerary files, let them be formed into ranks in the
rere of the Division.

Observe that when the Divisions file off in the places where they turn by a
quarterly conversion, all the Ranks turn toward the place they first turned
to, taking care to follow the file-leader step by step.

For this purpose the Sergeants of the Division shall stand still in the place
it ought to turn to, until the last Rank be passed and filed off.

When they file off on a bridge before an Enemy, after the loose men have
passed, the body must be filed off by Rank by the center.

They must make quarter conversions and half conversions.

Manner of Firing.
The best way of firing is by Rank, when you would fire in a parallel line with
the Enemy.

For this purpose to fire with less trouble, it is good to do it standing firm
your ground, without any motion save that of making the five first Ranks kneel,
and let the sixth be the first that fires, then the fifth rising up does the
like, and so the rest in order.

All the Ranks before the skirmish renews must be closed up to six foot
distance.

When a firing is to be maintained by a loose body, either at the passage of a
River, a narrow way, or a Retreat, files of musketeers must be drawn off from
the right and left, who are always to be commanded by Officers thereto
appointed.

And till they come to be returned to their body, they are still to be lead by
those Officers.

When you march in Division, the easier to draw into a body, as you march you
must divide into three bodies, two of muskets and that of pikes, and so without
losing time the three may join together.

In these motions the fronts must march slowly, to give leisure to those that
double to join without hurry.

They may likewise file off in marching in the same manner, observing likewise
that the front mends its pace, and the body still slacken theirs, but without
halting.

When the Regiment is embatteled, and that you would draw off the Companies to
lay down their arms, or return to their quarters, you must cause the two wings
of muskets to move, and the pikes remain behind, till those bodies of muskets
still inclining close to the right and left, and are joined in convenient
ground, that the pikes of each Company are in the rere of their muskets, and
then they may march off without losing time, each Officer being in his post.

FINIS.

